THE Sound Believer. OR, A TREATISE OF Evangelicall Conversion.

DISCOVERING The work of Christ's Spirit, in reconciling of a sinner to God.

By THO: SHEPARD, sometimes of Emmanuel College in Cambridge, Now Preacher of
Gods Word in NEW ENGLAND.

MAT. 18.11. I came to save that which was lost.

LONDON, Printed for R. Dawlman. 1645.

To his dear Friend, Mr W. Greenhill.
Sir,
MAny struglings I have had about publishing these Notes: I have looked up to
God, and at last been persuaded upon these grounds:

1. The many desires both of friends and strangers, both by private speeches
and Letters, which I thought might be the voice of Christ.

2. Some good (as I hear) those which are already out have done, and which the
rest might do, which I have looked on as a testimony of the Lords acceptance
of them.

3. I knew not what the Lords meaning should be to bring to light by his
providence without my privity, knowledge, or will, the former part, unless it
was to awaken and enforce me (being desired) to publish the rest; our works I
thought should resemble Gods works, not be left imperfect.

4. I considered my weak body, and my short time of sojourning here, and that
I shall not speak long to children, friends, or Gods precious people, I am sure
not to many in England, to whom I owe almost my whole self, whom I shall see
in this world no more; I have been therefore willing to get the wind, and take
the season, that I might leave some part of Gods precious truth on record, that
it might speak (oh that it might be to the heart) among whom I cannot (and when
I shall not) be. I account it a part of Gods infinite grace to make me an
instrument of the least good to any. If the Lord shall so far accept of me in
publishing these things, it is all that I would desire; if not, yet I have
desired forgiveness in the blood of his Son, for what ever errors or
weaknesses may be in it, or are in my self, which may hinder success, and
frustrate its end; only what I have in much weakness believed, I have written,
and sent it unto you, leaving it wholly with your self, whom I much love and
honor, that you would add or detract any thing you see meet, (so as it be not
cross to what I have writ) and if you then think it meet for public view, you
see upon what grounds I am content with it; but if you shall bury it, and put
it to perpetual silence, it shall be most pleasing to him who thinks more
meanly of it then others can,

Tho: Shepard.

THE SOUND BELIEVER.
CHAP. I. As the great cause of the eternal perdition of men is of themselves;
so the only cause of the actual deliverance and salvation of man, is JESUS
CHRIST: view this text, Hoseah 13.9. Oh Israel, thou have destroyed thy self,
but in me is thy help.
SECT. I.
THese words as they are set down in the Hebrew are (according to the style of
this Prophet) very short and sententious, and therefore difficult to translate
into English without some Periphrasis, but the sense is here truly expressed, In
me is thy help; which you may see confirmed from v. 4. There is no Savior
beside me, and verse (...) I will ransom them from the power of the grave, Oh
death I will be thy plague, O grave I will be thy destruction; Suppose the
Prophet should speak here of temporal salvation, help and ransom, (which he
does not) yet the argument is strong; if there be no Savior from temporal woe
and misery but only the Lord Jesus, how much more is he from woes eternal?
only understand me here aright; I am not now speaking of man's deliverance and
salvation by price in way of satisfaction of Justice (for that I have already
handled) but of his deliverance and salvation, See the Sincere Convert.
by power; not of man's purchased deliverance, which is by the blood of Christ,
but of man's actual deliverance, which is by the efficacy and power of the
spirit of Christ. Some captives among men are redeemed by price only, some by
power without price; but such is the lamentable captivity of all men, under the
severity of justice, and the power of sin, that without the price of Christ's
blood, Ephesians. 1.7. and the power of Christ's spirit, John 8.36. there is no
deliverance; the Lord JESUS having paid the price for our deliverance. Yet it
is with us as with a company of captives in prison; our sins like strong
chains hold us, Satan our keeper will not let us go, the prison doors
through unbeleefe are shut upon us, Romans 11.32. and thereby God and Christ are
kept out from us; what power now can rescue us, that are held fast under such a
power, even after the price is paid? truly it can be no other but that in my
text, In me is thy help; when our ransom is paid, the Lord must come himself
and fetch us out by strong hand. Isay 53.1. To whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? truly to very few, yet to some it is; and certainly, look as they
make Christ no Savior indeed who deny his salvation by price and satisfaction,
so those also make him an imperfect Savior who deny salvation and actual
deliverance of man to be only by the Almighty arm and efficacy of his spirit
and power: excellent therefore is the speech of the Apostle, Acts 5.30.30. God
has exalted Jesus to give repentance and remission of sins to Israel; Look as
Jesus was abased to purchase repentance and remission, so he is now exalted
actually to give and apply repentance and remission of sins; Whose glory is
it to remit sins, but God in Christ and by Christ only? whose glory is it to
give repentance (which in this place comprehends the work of conversion and
faith, as Beza observes) whereby we apply remission, but the same God only? the
one is as difficult to be conveyed as the other, and we stand in as much need
of Christ to do the one as the other; all the power of Christ exalted, is
little enough to give us repentance and remission, the condition of the
Covenant expressed in repentance, and the blessings in the Covenant summed up in
forgiveness of sins; the Socinians deny redemption and salvation by price; the
Arminians by Christ's power, leaving suasion only to him, but power of
conversion to the power and liberty of the will of man; Oh adulterous
generation that are thus hacking at and cutting the cords of their own
salvation! I shall here speak only to one question, which is the principal
and most profitable, Quest.
and that is this, How does Christ redeem and save thus by his power, out of
that miserable estate, and consequently what is the way for us to seek, and so
to find and feel deliverance by the hand of Christ's power?

Answ.
As there are four principal means and causes, or ways, whereby man ruins
himself, 1. Ignorance of their own misery; 2. Security and unsensiblenesse of
it; 3. Carnal confidence in their own duties; 4. Presumption or resting upon
the mercy of God by a Faith of their own forging: so on the contrary, there is
a fourefold act of Christ's power whereby he rescues and delivers all his out of
their miserable estate.

The first act or stroke is Conviction of sin. The second is Compunction for
sin. The third is Humiliation or self-abasement. The fourth is Faith: all which
are distinctly put forth (when he cease extraordinarily to work) in the day
of Christ's power, and who ever look for actual salvation and redemption from
Christ, let them seek for mercy and deliverance in this way, out of which they
shall never find it; let them begin at conviction, and desire the Lord to let
them see their sins, that so being affected with them and humbled under them,
they may by faith be enabled to receive Jesus Christ, and so be blessed in him.
It is true, Christ is applied to us nextly by Faith, but Faith is wrought in
us in that way of conviction and sorrow for sin, no man can or will come by
faith to Christ to take away his sins, unless he first see, be convicted of,
and laden with them. I confess the manner of the Spirits work in the
conversion of a sinner unto God is exceeding secret, and in many things very
various; and therefore it is too great boldness to mark out all Gods footsteps
herein, yet so far forth as the Lord himself tells us his work and the manner
of it in all his, we may safely resolve our selves, and so far, and no
farther shall we proceed in the explication of these things. It is great
profaneness not to search into the works of common providence, though secret
and hidden* Psalm. 28.5. and 92.6. much greater it is not to do thus into Gods
works of special favor and grace upon his chosen. I shall therefore begin
with the first stroke of Christ's power which is conviction of sin.

SECT. II. First Act of Christ's power, which is Conviction of sin.
NOw for the more distinct explication of this, I shall open to you these 4
things.

1. I shall prove that the Lord Christ by his Spirit begins the actual
deliverance of his elect here. 2. What is that sin the Lord convinces the
soul thus first of. 3. How the Lord does it. 4. What measure and degree of
conviction he works thus in all his.
1. For the first, it is said, John 16.8, 9. that the first thing that the
Spirit does when he comes to make the Apostles Ministry effectual is this, it
shall reprove, or convince the world of sin; it does not first work faith,
but convinces them that they have no faith, as in verse 9. and consequently
under the guilt and dominion of their sin; and after this, he convinces of
righteousness, which faith apprehends, verse 10. It is true that the word
conviction here, is of a large extent, and includes compunction and humiliation
for sin, yet our Savior wraps them up in this word; because conviction is the
first, and therefore the chief in order here: the Lord not speaking now of
ineffectuall, but effectual and through conviction expressed in deep sorrow and
humiliation. Now the Text says, the Lord begins thus not with some one or two,
but with the world of Gods elect, who are to be called home by the Ministry of
the word; which our Savior speaks (as any may see who consider the scope)
purposely to comfort the hearts of his Disciples, that their Ministry shall be
thus effectual to the world of Jews and Gentiles; and therefore cannot speak
of such conviction as serves only for to leave men without excuse for greater
condemnation; (as some understand the place) for that is a poor ground of
consolation to their sad hearts. Secondly, I shall hereafter prove that there
can be no faith without sense of sin and misery, and now there can be no
sense of sin without a precedent sight or conviction of sin; no man can feel
sin, unless he does first see it; what the ey sees not, the heart rues not.
Let the greatest evil befall a man, suppose the burning of his house, the
death of his children, if he does not first know, see, and hear of it, he will
never take it to heart, it will never trouble him; so let a poor sinner lie
under the greatest guilt, the sorest wrath of God, it will never trouble him
until h^ sees it and be convinced of it, Act. 2.37. When they heard this, they
were pricked; but first they heard it and saw their sin, before their hearts
were wounded for it; Genesis 3.7. they first saw saw their nakedness before they
were ashamed of it. Thirdly, the maine end of the law is to drive us to Christ
Romans 10.4. if Christ be the end of the law, then the law is the means
subservient to that end, and that not to some, but to all that believe, now the
law though it drive to Christ by condemnation, yet in order it begins with
accusation. It first accuses, and so convinces of sin, To. 3.20. and then
condemns: it is folly and injustice for a Judge to condemn and bring a sinner
out to his execution before accusation and conviction; and is it wisdom or
justice in the Lord or his law to do otherwise? and therefore the Spirit in
making use of the law for this end first convinces as it first accuses, and
lays our sins to our charge. Lastly, look as Satan when he binds up a sinner
in his sin, he first keeps him (if possible) from the very sight and knowledge
of it; because so long as they see it not, this ignorance is the cause of all
their woe; why they feel it not, why they desire not to come out of it; the
Lord Jesus (who came to unty the knots of ^atan, 1 John 3.8.) begins here, and
first convinces his, and makes them see their sin; that so they may feel it,
and come to him for deliverance out of it. Oh consider this all you that dream
out your time in minding only things before your feet, never thinking on the
evils of your own hearts; you that heed not, you that will not see your sins,
nor so much as ask this question, What have I done? what do I do? how do I
live? what will become of me? what will be the end of these my foolish courses?
I tell you, if ever the Lord save you, he will make you see what now you
cannot, what now you will not, he will not only make you to confess you are
sinners, but he will convince you of sin, this shall be the first thing the
Lord will do with thee.

But you will say, Quest.
what is that sin which the Lord first convinces of? which is the second thing
to be opened.

I answer in these three Conclusions. Ans. Con. 1.


1 The Lord Jesus by his Spirit does not only convince the soul in general,
that it is a sinner and sinful; but the Lord brings in a convicting evidence
of the particulars; the first is learnt more by tradition (in these days) by
the report and acknowledgement of every man, rather then by any special act of
conviction of the spirit of Christ; for what man is there almost but lies under
this confession, that he is a sinner? the best say they are sinners; and if we
say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and I know I am a sinner; but that
which the Spirit principally convinces of, is some sin or sins in
particular: the Spirit does not arrest men for offenses in general, but opens
the writ, and shows the particular cause, the particular sins; Romans 3.9. we
have proved, says the Apostle, that Jews and Gentiles are under sin, but
how does the Apostle (being now the instrument of the Spirit in this work of
conviction) convince them of this? mark his method, verse 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18. wherein you you shall see it is done by enumeration of
particulars; sins of their natures, there is none righteous; sins of their
minds, none understands; Romans 3.
sins in their wills and affections, none seek after God; sins in their lives,
all gone out of the way; sins of omission of good duties, there is none that
does good; their throats, tongues, lips, are Sepulchers, deceitful,
poysonfull; their mouths full of cursing, their feet swift to shed blood, etc.
And this is the state of you Jews, ( verse 19.) as well as of the Gentiles;
Quest. Answ. What those particular sins are, which the Lord convinces men of
in their conversio^^
that all flesh may stand convinced as guilty before God. If it be here
demanded, What are those particular sins which the Lord convinces men of? I
answer, in variety of men there is much va^iety of special sins, as there is
of dispositions, tempers, and temptations; and therefore the Lord does not
convince one man at first of the same sins of which he does another man, yet
this we may safely say, usually (though not always) the Lord begins with the
remembrance and consideration of some one great, if not a man's special and
most beloved sin; and thereby the spirit discovers gradually all the rest: that
arrow which wounds the heart of Christ most, the Lord makes it fall first
upon, the head of the sinner that did shoot it against heaven, and convinces,
and as it were hits him first with that: How did the Spirit convince those
3000, those patterns of Gods converting grace? Acts 2.37. did not the Lord
begin with them for one principal sin, viz. their murder and contempt of
Christ by embruing their hands in his blood? there is no question but now they
remembered other sinful practices, but this was the Imprimis, which is ever
accompanied with many other Items which are then read in Gods bill of
reckonings where the first is set down: Israel would have a King, 1 Samuel 8.19.
Samuel for a time could not convince them of their sin, herein, what does the
Lord do? surely he will convince them of sin before he leaves them, and this
he does by such a terrible thunder as made all their hearts ache; and how is it
now? what sin do they now see? they first see the greatness of that
particular sin, but this came not to mind alone, but they cried out, 1 Samuel
12.19. We have added unto all our evils this, in asking to our selves a King.
Look upon the woman of Samaria, John 4. the Lord Christ indeed spoke first unto
her about himself the substance of the Gospel, about the worth of this water
of life; but what good did she get until the Lord began to convince her of
sin, and how does he that? he tells her of her secret whoredom she lived in,
the man that now she had was not her husband; and upon the discovery of this,
she saw many more sins; and hence verse 29. she cries out, Come see the man
that has told me all that ever I did in my life. And thus the Lord deals at
this day; the Minister preaches against one sin, it may be whoredom,
ignorance, contempt of the Gospel, neglect of secret duties, lying,
Sabbath-breaking, etc. This is thy case, says the Spirit unto the soul,
remember the time, the place, the persons with whom you lived in this sinful
condition; and now a man begins to go alone, and to think of all his former
courses, how exceeding evil they have been; it may be the Lord brings upon a
man a sore affliction, and when he is in chains crying out of that, the Lord
says to him as to those, Ier. 30.15. Why criest thou for thy affliction? for
the multitude of thine iniquities I have done this; it may be the Lord
sometimes strikes a man's companion in sin dead, by some fearful judgment:
and then that particular sin comes to mind, and the Lord reveals it, armed
with multitudes of many other sins; the causes of it, the fruits and effects of
it; as a father whips his child upon occasion of one special fault, but then
tells him of many more which he winked at before this, and says, Now sirrah
remember such a time, such a froward fit, such undutifull behavior, such a
reviling word you spoke, such a time I called, and you ran away and would not
hear me; and you thought I liked well enough of these ways, but now know that
I will not pass them by, etc. Thus the Lord deals with his; and hence it is
many times, that the elect of God civilly brought up, do hereupon think well
of themselves, and so remain long unconvinced of their woeful estates, the
Lord suffers them to fall into some foul, secret, or open sin; and by this the
Lord takes special occasion of working conviction and sorrow for sin, the
Lord hereby makes them hang down the head and cry unclean, unclean; Paul was
civilly educated, he turned at last a hot persecutor, oppressor, blasphemer;
the Lord first convinced him of his persecution and cried out from heaven to
him, Paul, Paul, why persecutest thou me? this struck him to the heart, and
then sin revived, Romans 7.9. many secret sins of his heart were discovered,
which I take to begin and continue in special in those three days, Acts 9.9.
wherein he was blind and did (through sight of sin and sorrow of heart) neither
eat nor drink. As a man that has the plague not knowing the disease, he hopes
to live; but when he sees the spots and tokens of death upon his wrist, now he
cries out, because convinced that the plague of the Lord is upon him; so when
men see some one or more special sins break out, now they are convinced of
their lamentable condition: yet it is not always, (though usually thus) for some
men the Lord may first convince of sin by showing them the sinfulness of
their own hearts and ways; the Lord may let a man see his blindness, his
extreme hardness of heart, his weakness, his wilfulness, his heartlesnesse;
he cannot pray, or look up to God, and this may first convince him; or that all
that he does is sinful, being out of Christ: the Lord may suddenly let him see
the deceipts of his own heart, and the secret sinful practices of his life;
as if some had told the Minister, or as if he spoke to none but him; that he
is forced to fall down being thus convinced, and to confess, God is in this
man: 1 Cor. 14.25. Nicodemus ^^ay first see and be convinced of the want of
regeneration, and thereby feel his need of Christ; the Lord may set a man upon
the consideration of all his life past, how wickedly it has been spent; and so
not one, but a multitude of iniquities compass him about: a man may see the
godly examples of his parents, or other godly Christians in the family or town
where he dwells, and by this be convinced; that if their state and way be good,
his own (so far unlike it) must needs be stark naught: the Lord ever
convinces the soul of sins in particular, but he does not always convince one
man of the same particular sins at first as he does another; whether the
Lord convinces all the elect at first of the sin of their nature, and shows
them their original sin in and about this first stroke of conviction, I doubt
not of it; Paul would have been alive, and a proud Pharisee still, if the Lord
had not let him by the law see this sin, Romans 7.9. and so would all men in the
world, if this should not be revealed first or last, in a lesser or greater
measure, under a distinct or more indistinct notion: and hence arise those
confessions of the Saints, I never thought I had had such a vile heart; if all
the world had told me, I could not have believed them; but that the Lord has
made me feel it, and see it at last; was there ever such a sinner (at least in
heart, which is continually opposing of him) whom the Lord at any time received
to mercy, as I am?

2 The Lord Jesus by his Spirit does not only ^on. 2.^
convince the soul of its sin in particular, but also of the evil, even the
exceeding great evil of those particular sins. The Lord Jesus does not only
convince of the evil sin, but of the great evil of sin. Oh thou wretch,
says the Spirit, (as the Lord to Cain, Genesis 4.10.) what have thou done, whose
sins cry to heaven, who have thus long lived without God, and done this
infinite wrong to an infinite God, for which thou can never make him amends?
That God who could have long since cut thee off in the midst of thy sins and
wickedness, and crushed thee like a moth, and sent thee down to those eternal
flames where thou now see some better then thy self mourning day and night,
but yet has spared thee out of his mere pity to thee, That God have thou
resisted and forsaken all thy life time; and therefore now see and consider
what an evil and bitter thing it is thus to live as thou have done, Ier. 2.19.
Look as it is in the ways of holiness, many a man void of the Spirit may see
and know them in the literal expressions of them, but cannot see the glory of
them but by the Spirit, and hence it is he does not esteem and prize them and
the knowledge of them above gold; So in the ways of unholinesse, many a man
void of the spirit of conviction of sin, may and does see many particular sins
and confess them, but he does not, cannot see the exceeding evil of them, and
thence it is though he does see them, yet he does not much dislike them,
because he sees no great hurt or evil in them, but makes a light matter of
them; and therefore when the Spirit comes, it lets him see and stand convinced
of the exceeding greatness of the evil that is in them, Ioh. 36.8, 9. In the
time of affliction (which is usually the time of conviction of a wild unruly
sinner) he shows them their transgressions, but how? that they have exceeded,
that they have been exceeding many and exceeding vile. Oh beloved, before the
Lord Jesus comes to convince, we have cause to pray for a pity every poor
sinner, as the Lord Jesus did, saying, Lord forgive them, they know not what
they do. You godly parents, masters, how often do you instruct your children,
servants, and convince them of their sinfulness, until they confess their
faults? yet you see no amendment, but they go on still; what should you now
do? oh cry out for them, and say, Lord forgive them, for they know not what
they do. Their sins they know, but what the evil of them is, alas! they know
not; but when the Spirit comes to convince, he makes them see what they do,
and what is the exceeding evil of those sins they made light of before; like
mad men that have sworn, and cursed, and struck their friends, when they come
to be sober again, and remember their mischievous ways and words, now they
see what they have done, and how abominable their courses then were. Oh you
that walk on in the madness of your minds now, in all manner of sin, if ever
the Lord do good to you, you shall account your ways madness and folly, and
cry out, Oh Lord, what have I done in kicking thus long against the pricks?

Con. 3.
The Lord Jesus by his Spirit does not only convince the soul of the evil of
sin, but of the evil after sin, I mean of the just punishment which does
follow sin, and that is this, viz. that it must dye, and that eternally for
sin, if it remains in this estate it is now in. Romans 4.15. The Law works
wrath, i. e. sight and sense of wrath, Romans 7.9. When the Law came, sin
revived, and I dyed: i. e. I saw my self a dead man by it; so the soul sees
clearly God has said, The soul that sins shall dye: I have sinned, and
therefore if the Lord be true I shall dye, to hell I shall, if now the Lord stop
my breath and cut off my life, which he might justly and may easily do. Death
is the wages of sin, even of any one sin, though never so little; when then
will become of me who stand guilty of so many, exceeding the number of the
hairs on my head, or the stars in heaven? Whoremongers and adulterers God will
judge, the Minister has said so, the Lord himself has told me so, Heb. 13.4.
I am the man, my conscience now tears me and tells me so, what will become of
me? The Lord Jesus will come in flaming fire to render vengeance against all
that know not God; and that obey not the Gospel. This I believe, for God has
said it, 2 These. 2.7, 8* 9. and now I see I am he that has lived long in
ignorance, and know not God; I have had the Gospel of grace thus long wooing
and persuading my heart, and oftentimes it has affected me, but yet I have
resisted God and his Gospel, and have set my filthy lusts, my vain sports, my
companions cups and queanes at a higher price then Christ, and have loved them
more then him; and therefore though I may be spared for a while, yet there is a
time wherein Christ himself will come out against me in flaming fire. To this
purpose does the Spirit work; for beloved, the great means whereby Satan
overthrew Man at first in his innocence, was this principle, although thou
do eat, and so sin against God, yet thou shall not dye. Genesis 3.4. Ye shall
not surely die; the Serpent does not say, Ye shall not die, for that is too
gross an out-facing of the Word, Genesis 2.17. but he says, Ye shall not surely
die: that is, there is not such absolute certainty o^ it; it may be you shall
live, God loves you better then so, and is a more merciful Father then to be at
a word and a blow. Now look as Satan deceived and brought our first parents to
ruin by suggesting this principle; so at this day he does sow this accursed
seed, and plant this very principle in the soil of every man's heart by nature,
they do not think, they cannot believe that they are dead men, and condemned to
dye, and that they shall dye eternally for the least sin committed by them.
Men nor Angels cannot persuade them of it, they cannot see the equity of it,
that God so merciful will be so severe, for so small a matter; nor yet the
truth of it, for then they think no flesh should be saved. And thus when the
old Serpent has spit this poison before them, they sup it up, and drink it in,
and so thousands, nay millions of men and women are utterly undone. The Lord
Christ therefore when he comes to save a poor sinner, and raise him up out of
his fall, convinces the soul by his Spirit, and that with full and mighty
evidence, that it shall dye for the least sin, and tells him as the Lord told
Abimelech in another case, Genesis 20.3. Thou art but a dead man for this; and if
the Spirit set on this, let who can claw it off. I tell you beloved, never did
poor condemned Malefactor more certainly know and hear the sentence of
condemnation past upon him by a mortal man, then the guilty sinner does his,
by an immortal and displeased God: and therefore those three thousand cry out,
Act. 2.37. Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? We are condemned to
dye, what shall we do now to be saved from death? Now the soul is glad to
enquire of the Minister, Oh tell me, what shall I do? I once thought my self
in a safe and good condition as any in the Town or Country I lived in, but now
the Lord has let me hear of other news; dye I must in this estate, and it is a
wonder of mercies I am spared alive to this day. There is not only some blind
fea^es and suspicions that it may possibly be so, but full persuasions of
heart, dye I must, dye I shall in this estate; for if the Spirit reveal sin,
and convi^ce not of death for sin, the soul under this work of conviction
being as yet rather s^nsuall then spiritual, will make a light matter of it,
when it sees no sensible danger in it; but when it sees the bottomless pit
before it, everlasting fire before it, for the least sin, now it sees the
heinous evil of sin; the way of sin though never so peaceable before, is
full of d^nger now, wherein it sees there are endless woes and everlasting
deaths that lie in wait for it, Romans 6.21. And now says the Spirit, you may
go on in these sinful courses as others do, if you see meet, but oh consider
what will be the end of them; what it is to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, and to be tormented for ever for them in the conclusion, for be assured
that will be the end: and hence the soul seeing it self thus set apart for
death, looks upon it self in a far worse estate then the bruit beasts, or
vil^st worm upon the earth; for it thinks when they dye there is an end of
their misery; but oh then is the beginning of mine for ever: hence also arise
those fears of death and of being suddenly cut off, that when it lies down,
it trembles to think I may never rise again, because it is convinced, not only
that it deserves to dye, but that it is already sentenced for to dye: hence
also the soul justifies God, if he had cut him off in his sin; and wonders
what kept him from it, there being nothing else due from God unto it: hence
lastly, the soul is stopped and stands still, goes not on in sin as before; or
if it does, the Lord gives it no peace: Ier. 8.6. Why does the horse go on in
the battle? because it sees not death before it; but now the soul sees death,
and therefore stops: oh remember this all you that never could believe that you
are dead condemned men, and therefore are never troubled with any such thoughts
in your mind; I tell you, that you are far from conviction, and therefore far
from salvation: if God should send some from the dead to bear witness against
this secure world concerning this truth, yet you will not believe it, for his
messengers sent from heaven are not believed herein; woe be to you if you
remain unconvinced of this point.

But you will say, how does the Lord thus

All knowledge of sin is not conviction of sin, Answ.
all confession of sin is not conviction; there is a conviction merely
rational, which is not spiritual; there are three things in spiritual
conviction.

There is a clear, certain, and manifest Ioh. 16.9. (...) signifies to
evidence a thing by way of argumentation, nay demonstration; the Spirit so
demonstrates these things as that it has nothing to object, a man's mouth is
stopped, he has nothing to say but this; behold I am vile, I am a dead man:
for if a man have many strong arguments given him to confirm a truth, yet if
he have but one objection or doubtful scruple not answered, he is not fully as
yet convinced, because full conviction by a clear sun-light scatters all dark
objections; and hence our Savior Jude 15. will one day convince the wicked of
all their hard speeches against him, which will chiefly be done by manifesting
the evil of such ways, and taking a way all those colors and defenses men
have made for such language: before the Spirit of Christ comes, man cannot see,
will not see his sin nor punishment; nay, he has many things to say for
himself as excuses and extenuations of his sin; One says, I was drawn unto
it, ( the woman that thou gave me) and so lays the blame on others: Another
says, It is my nature; Others say, All are sinners, the godly sin as well as
others; and yet are saved at last, and so I hope shall I: Others profess they
cannot part with sin, they would be better but they cannot, and God requires no
more then they are able to perform; Another says, I will continue in sin but
a little while, and purpose hereafter to leave it; Others say, We are sinners,
but yet God is merciful and will forgive it; Another says, Though I have
sinned, yet I have some good, and am not so bad as other men; endless are
these excuses for sin. In one word, I know no man, though never so bad, though
his sin be never so grievous, but he has something to say for himself, and
something in his mind to lessen and extenuate sin; but beloved when the Spirit
comes to convince, he so convinces as that he answers all these, pulls down
all these fences, tears off all these fig leaves, scatters all these mists,
and pulls off all these s^ales from the eyes, stops a man's mouth, that the
soul stands before God, crying, oh Lord guilty, guilty; as the Prophet Jeremy
told them, Ier. 2.23. Why do thou say, I am innocent? look upon thy way,
etc. so the Spirit says, why do thou say thy sin is small? it is
disobedience, (as Samuel said to Saul, 1 Samuel 15.) 23. which is rebellion, and
as the sin of witchcraft; and is that a small matter? the Spirit of
conviction by the clear evidence of the truth, binds the understanding that it
cannot struggle against God any more; and hence let all the world plead to the
contrary, nay let the godly come to comfort them in this estate, and think and
speak well of them; yet they cannot believe them, because they are certain
their estates are woeful: hence also we shall observe the soul under
conviction, instead of excusing sin, it aggravates sin, and studies to
aggravate sin; did ever any deal thus wickedly, walk thus sinfully, so
long, against so many checks and chidings, light and love, means and mercies,
as I have done? And it is wonderful to observe that those things which made it
once account sin light, make it therefore to think sin great: ex. gr. my sin is
little; the more unkind thou (says the Spirit) that wilt not do a small
matter for the Lord: my sin is common; the more sinful thou that in those
things wherein all the world rise up in arms against God, thou joynest with
them: God spares me after sin; the greater is thy sin therefore that thou have
continued so long in, against a God so pitiful to thee; the dearest sins are
now the vilest sins, because though they were most sweet to him, yet the Spirit
convinces him, they were therefore the more grievous unto the soul of God;
you poor creatures may now hide, and color, and excuse your sins before men,
but when the Lord comes to convince, you cannot lie hid; then your consciences
(when Jesus Christ the Lord comes to convince) shall not be like the Steward in
the Gospel that set down 50. for a 100 l. no, the Lord will force it to bring
in a true and clear account at that day.

John 3.20, 21. It was Ierusalems misery, she heard the words of Christ, and
they were not hid from them, but the things of her peace shut up in those words
were hid from her eyes. Luke 19.4^.
Discourse with many a man about his sin and misery, he will grant all that you
say, and he is convinced, that his estate is most wretched, and yet still lives
in all manner of sin; what is the reason of it? truly he sees his sin only by
discourse, but he does not, nay cannot see the thing sin, death, wrath of God,
until the Spirit come; which only convinces or shows that really. A man
will not be afraid of a Lion when it is painted only upon the wall, why?
because therein he does not see the living Lion: when he sees that, he
trembles. So men hear of sin, and talk of sin and death, and say they are
most miserable in regard of both; yet their hearts tremble not, are not amazed
at these evils; because sin is not seen alive, death is not presented alive
before them, which is done by the Spirit of conviction only, revealing these
really to the soul; and hence it is that many men in seeing see not, Esaias* 6.9.
How can that be? thus, in seeing things notionally, they see them not really.
And hence many that know most of sin, know least of sin, because in seeing it
notionally, they see it not really* And therefore happy were it for some men,
Scholars and others, that they had no notionall knowledge ^f sin, for this
light is their darkness, and makes them more incapable of spiritual
conviction: the first act of spiritual conviction is to let a man see clearly
that he is sinful and most miserable; the second act is to let the soul see
really what this sin and death is. Oh consider of this, many of you know that
you are sinful, and that you shall dye; but do thou know what sin is, and
what it is to dye? If thou did, I dare say thy heart would sink; if thou
do not, thou art a condemned man, because not yet a convinced man. How God
gives a real sight of sins
If you here ask, how the Lord makes sin real? I answer. By making God real,
the real greatness of sin is seen by beholding really the greatness of God
who is smitten by sin; sin is not seen because God is not seen, John 3. ep. v.
11. He that does evil has not seen God. No knowledge of God is the cause why
blood touches blood: H^s. 4.4
the Spirit casts out all other company of vain and foolish thoughts, and then
God comes in and appears immediately to the soul in his greatness and glory,
and then the Spirit says, Lo, this is that God thy sins have provoked. And now
sin appears as it is, and together with this real sight of sin, the soul
does not see painted fire, but sees the fire of Gods wrath really, whither now
it is leading, that never can be quenched but by Christ's blood: and when the
Spirit has thus convinced, now a man begins to see his madness and folly in
times past, saying, I know not what I did. And hence questions, Can the Lord
pardon such a wretch as I, whose sins are so great? Hence also the heart
begins to be affected with sin and death, because it sees them now as they
are indeed, and not by report only. A man accounts it a matter of nothing to
tread upon a worm, wherein there is nothing seen worthy either to be loved or
feared; and hence a man's heart is not affected with it: before the Spirit of
conviction comes, God is more vile in man's eye then any worm; as Christ said
in another case of himself, Psalm. 22. I am a worm and no man; so may the Lord
complain, I am viler in such a ones eyes then any worm, and no God: and hence
a man makes it a matter of nothing to tread upon the glorious Majesty of God,
and hence is not affected with it; but when God is seen by the Spirit of
conviction, in his great glory; then as he is great, sin is seen great; as his
glory affects and astonisheth the soul, so sin affects the heart.

There is a constant light; the soul sees Gods arrows stick fast in the
soul, and cannot be plucked out; My sin is ever before me, Psalm. 51.3.
said David, (in his renewing of the work of conversion.) For in effectual
conviction, the mind is not only bound to see the misery lying upon it, but it
is held bound; it is such a Sun light as never can be quenched, though it may
be clouded. When the Spirit of Christ darts in any light to see sin, the soul
would turn away from looking upon it, would not hear on that ear,
Felix-like. But the Spirit of Conviction sent to make through work on the hearts
of all the Elect, follows them, meets them at every turn, forces them to see
and remember what they have done, the least sin now is like a moath in the
eye, its ever troubling. Those ghastly, dreadful objects of sin, death,
wrath, being presented by the Spirit near unto the soul, fix the eye to
fasten here; they that can cast off at their pleasure the remembrance and
thoughts of sin and death, never prove sound, until the Lord does make them
stay their thoughts, and muse deeply on what they have done, and whither they
are going. And hence the soul in lying down, rising up, lies down and rises
up with perplexed thoughts, What will become of me? The Lord sometimes keeps it
waking in the night season, when others are asleep, and then it is haunted with
those thoughts, it cannot sleep; it looks back upon every day, and week,
Sabbath, Sermon, Prayer, speeches, and thinks all this day, this week, etc. the
goodness of the Lord and his patience to a wretch has been continued, but my
sins also are continued; I sin in all I do, in all my prayers, in all I think,
the same heart remains still not humbled, not yet changed.

And hence you shall observe, that word which discovered sin at first to it, it
never goes out of the mind; I think says the soul I shall never forget such a
man, nor such a truth. Hence also if the soul grow light and careless at some
time, and casts off the thoughts of these things, the Spirit returns again,
and falls a reasoning with the soul, Why have thou done this? what hurt has
the Lord done thee? will there never be an end? have not thou gone on long
enough in thy le^d courses against God, but that thou should still add unto
the heap? have thou not wrath enough upon thee already? how soon may the Lord
stop thy breath? and then thou know thou had better never to have been
borne; was there ever any that thus resisted grace, that thus adventured upon
the swords point? have thou but one friend, a patient, long-suffering God, that
has left thy conscience without excuse long ago, and therefore could have cut
thee off, and do thou thus forsake him, thus abuse him? Thus the Spirit
follows; and hence the soul comes to some measure of confession of sin; Oh
Lord I have done exceeding wickedly; I have been worse then the horse that
rusheth into the battle, because it sees not death before it; but I have seen
death before me in these ways, and yet go on, and still ^inne, and cannot but
sin: Behold me, Lord, for I am very vile. When thus the Spirit has let into
the soul a clear, real, constant light, to see sin and death, now there is
a through conviction.

But you will say, In what measure does the Spirit communicate this light?

viz. The measure of spiritual conviction in all the elect, viz.

So much conviction of sin as may bring in and work compunction for sin, so
much sight of sin as may bring in sense of sin, so much is necessary and no
more. Every one has not the same measure of conviction, yet all the elect have
and must have so much: for so much conviction is necessary as may attain the
end of conviction. Now the finis proximus, or next end of conviction in the
elect, is compunction, or sense of sin; for what good can it do unto them to
see sin, and not to be affected with it? What greater mercy does the Lord show
to the elect herein, then unto the Devils and Reprobates, who stand convinced,
and know they are wicked and condemned; but yet their hearts altogether
unaffected with any true remorse for sin? Lam. 3.51.
Mine eye, says Jeremy, affects my heart. The Lord opens the ears of his to
instruction, Job 33.16, 17.
that he might humble. Some think that there is no through conviction, without
some affection. I dare not say so, nor will I now dispute whether there is not
something in the nature and essence of that conviction the elect have different
from that conviction in reprobates and devils; it is sufficient now; and that
which reaches the end of this question, to know what in asure of conviction is
necessary, I conceive the clear discerning of it is by the immediate and
sensible effect of it, viz. So much as affects the heart truly with sin.

But if you ask, What is that sense of sin, and what measure of this is
necessary? that I shall answer in the doctrine of companction.

Let not therefore any soul be discouraged, and say, I was never yet
convinced, because I have not felt such a clear, real, constant light to see
sin and death as others have done: consider thou, if the end of conviction be
attained, which is a true sense and feeling of sin, thou have then that measure
which is most meet for thee, more then which the Lord regards not in any of
his; but you that walk up and down with convinced consciences, and know your
states are miserable and sinful, and that you perish if you dye in that
condition, and yet have no sense nor feeling; no sorrow nor affliction of
spirit for those evils. I tell you the very devils are in some respect nearer
the Kingdom of God then you be, who see, and feel, and tremble; woe, woe to
thousands that live under convicting Ministeries whom the word often hits, and
the Lord by the Spirit often meets, and they hear and know their sins are
many, their estates bad, and that iniquity will be there ruin, if thus they
continue, yet all Gods light is without heat, and it is but the shining of it
upon rocks, and cold stones; they are frozen in their dregs: be it known to
you, you have not one drop of that conviction which begins salvation. Before I
pass from this to the second work of compunction, let me make a word of
application.

Use 1.
If the Spirit begins thus with conviction of sin, then let all the Ministers of
Christ co-work with Christ, and begin with their people here; be faithful
witnesses unto Gods truth, and give warning to this secure world, that the
sentence of death is past, and the curse of God lies upon every man for the
least sin; Lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, was the Lords words to Isaiah.
Isay 58.1. and tell them of their sin; Those Bees we call drones that have
lost their sting. When the salt of the earth (the Ministers of Christ, Matthew.
5.) have lost their acrimony and sharpness, or saltness, What is it good for
but to be cast out? your hearers will putrify and corrupt, by hearing such
doctrines only, as never search. When the Lord inflicted a grievous curse upon
the people, Ezekiel. 3.26. the Lord made Ezekiel dumb that he should not be a
reprover to them; What was the lamentation of Jeremy? Lam. 2.14.
thy Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee, and have not
discovered thine iniquity: how would you have the Lord Jesus by his Spirit to
convince men? must it not be by his word? verily you keep the Spirit of Christ
from falling down upon the people, if you refuse to endeavor to convince the
people by your word. Prove. 1.23
Other doctrines are sweet and necessary; but this is in the first place most
necessary. Beware of personating, beware of bitterness and passion, but oh
convince with a spirit of power and compassion; and he that shall be
isntrumental unto Christ in this or any other work for Christ's sake, unto him
the Lord will be the principal agent, and by him will attain his own ends,
finish his great work, gather in his scattered sheep, who are in great
multitudes throughout the Kingdom scattered from him; if once they be
thoroughly convinced, that they are utterly lost, and gone out of the way.

May not this also be sad reproof and terror Use 2.
to them that stand it out against all means of conviction, and will not see
their sin, nor believe the fearful wrath of God due to them for sin; not a man
scarce can be found, that will come to this conclusion; I am a sinful man, and
therefore I am a dead, I am a condemned man: but like wild beasts fly from
their pursuers into their holes, and thickets, and dens; their sinful
extenuations, excuses, and apologies for sin, and for themselves; and if they
be hunted thither, and found out there, then they resist, and article against
that truth which troubles them; They flatter themselves in their own eyes,
Psalm. 36.2.
until their iniquities be found most hateful. Many a man dislikes the text,
the use, especially the long use wherein his sin is touched, and his
conscience tossed; especially if it be his darling sin, his Herodias, his Rimmon;
especially, if withal he thinks that the Minister means him, he will not see
it nor confeste it; especially if he apprehends he shall lose his honor, or
his silver shrines and profit by it; he will not see his ^in, that he may not
be troubled in conscience for his sin, that so he may not be forced to confess
and forsake his sin, and condemn himself for it before God and men. Oh
Lord, I mourn that I can scarce meet with a man that either cares to be, or
will be convinced; but has something always to say for himself, their sins are
not so great, they are not so bad, but have some good, and therefore have some
hope; and if God be merciful, it is no great matter though they be exceeding
sinful, or some such thing; their mouths are not stopped to say nothing for
themselves, but guilty. There is less conviction in the world in this age,
then many are aware of. For I believe that all the powers of hell conspire
together to blind men's eyes and darken men's minds in this great work of Christ:
Principiis obsta, it is policy to stop Christ in his entrance, in this first
streake upon the soul; but oh, little do you think what you do herein, and
what woe you work to your selves hereby; do thou stifle and resist the first
breathings of Christ's Spirit when he comes to save thee? what hurt will it be
to know the worst of thy condition now, when there is hope hereby of coming
out of it; who must else one day see all thy sins in order before thee to thy
eternal anguish and terror? Ps. 50.21. When the Lord shall say to thee as
unto Dives, Remember in thy life time thou had thy good things; remember such
a time, such a place, such a sin; which then you would not see. But now thou
shall see what it is to strike an infinite God. Remember thou wast forewarned
of wrath to come, but thou would not believe thy self accursed, that so
thou might have felt thy need of him that was made a curse to bless thee;
and therefore feel it now: oh you will wish then that you had known this
evil in that your day. What do thou talk of grace? thou think thou have
grace, when as thou have not the first beginning, nay not the most remote
preparation for it in this work of conviction; what should we do for such as
these, but with Jeremy Ier. 13.17. if you will not hear, my soul shall weep
in secret for your pride?

Use 3.
Oh be persuaded therefore to remember your sins past, and to consider of your
ways now. All the profaneness of thy heart, and life, all the vanity of thy
youth, Eccles. 11.9. all your secret sins, all your sins against light and
love, checks and vows; all that time wherein thou did nothing else but live
in sin; thus Gods people have done, Ezekiel 6.9. thus all the elect shall do; oh
consider the Lord remembers them all, and that with grief of heart against
thee, because thou forgettest them, Hos. 2.7. He that numbers thy hairs, and
tells the sparrowes that fall, numbers much more thy sins that fall from thee;
they are written down in his black book. They are not trifles, for he minds
not toys; the books must be opened: oh reckon now, you have yet time to call
them to mind, which it may be shall not continue long; it is the Lords
complaint, Ier. 8.6. of a wicked generation, that he could hear no man say,
What have I done? Winnow your selves, (as the word is, Ephesians. 2.1.) Oh people not
worthy to be beloved. I pronounce unto you from the eternal God, that ere long
the Lord will search our Jerusalem with candles, he will come with a sword in
his hand to search for all secure sinners in city and country, unless you
awaken; he will make inquisition for blood, for oaths, for whoredoms which
grow common; for all secret sins we are frozen up in; oh be willing, be but
willing that the Lord should search you and convince you, now in this evening
time of the day, before the night come, wherein it will be too late to say, I
wish I had considered of my ways in time; of all sins, none can so hardly
stand with uprightness, as a secret unwillingnesse to see and be convinced of
sin, John 3.20.21. The helps and means for attaining hereunto are these.

Bring thy soul to the light; 1. Help.
desire the Lord in prayer as Job did, What I see not, oh Lord, show me, Job.
34.32. Set the glass of Gods law before thee, look up in the ministry of the
word unto the Lord, and say, Oh Lord search me: the Sun of this holy word
discovers motes: on the Sabbath day attend to all that which is spoken, as
spoken unto thee, then examine thy self when thou have leisure. When David saw
( Psalm. 19.) how pure the law was, he cries out, Who knows his errors?

2. Help.
Look upon every conviction of thy conscience for sin, as an arrest and warning
given from the Lord himself; for sometimes the word hits, and conscience
startles, and says, This is my sin, my condition; yet how usual is it then
for a man to put a merry face upon a foul conscience? how often do men think
this is but the word of a man who has a latitude given him of reproving sin in
the Pulpit, and we must give way to them therein? or else their hearts rise
and swell against the man and word also; and why is it thus? because he thinks
it is man only that speaks; whereas did he see and believe that this was a
stroke, a warning, an arrest, a check from the omnipotent God, would he then
grapple think you with him? would it pass lightly by him then? When Eli heard
Samuel denounce sad things against his house, It is the Lord said Eli, 1 Samuel
3.18. when Paul saw Jesus speaking, Why pers^cutest thou me? Acts 9. he falls
down astonished, and dares not kick against the pricks any longer: An arrest
in the Kings name comes with authority, and awes the heart of the man in debt.

3. Help.
Do not judge of sin by any other rule, but as God judges of it according to
the rule of the word by which all men's ways shall be judged at the last day:
what made Saul, 1 Samuel 15. extenuate his sin to Samuel? he judged not of it as
the Lord in his word did: For had he done so, he would have seen disobedience
to a command as bad as witchcraft, as Samuel told him; which also made his
proud heart sink, and say, I have sinned: remember for this end these
Scriptures, Romans 1.18. Romans 2.9. Romans 6.23. Gal. 3.10. by which thou may see,
either I must dye, (in the state I am) or God himself must lie. Remember that
an angry look, or word is murder in Gods account; a wanton eye, an unchaste
thought is Adultery before a holy God; before whose Tribunal thou must give an
account of every vain thought and word. 2 Cor. 5.10.
And therefore do not judge of sin by the present pleasure, gain, honor,
or ease in it; for this is a false rule: Moses forsook the pleasures of sin for
a season, Heb. 11.25. Nor yet by not feeling any punishment for it, for God
reserves wrath, Nahum 1.2. till the day of reckoning; Nor yet by the esteem
that others generally have of it, who make no more of wounding the Son of God
by sin, then they do of crushing vermin under their feet: Nor yet by the
practice of others, Every man sins, and therefore I hope I shall do as well as
others: Nor yet by seeing thy self better, and thanking God thou art not as
other men; it may be so, thou did never steal, nor whore, nor murder as yet;
that is not the question, but have thou had any one vain thought in prayer?
have thou heard one Sermon unprofitably? have thou sinned? then know God spared
not the Angels that sinned, and how will thou escape, unless the Lord dye for
thee? Nor yet lastly judge of it by thy own opinion of God, in thinking God is
like unto thee, that as thou make light of it, so he makes less; Psalm.
50.21. Oh take heed of judging the evil of sin by any of these rules: oh
remember all men are apt to think of themselves better then they are, Are we
also blind? say the Pharisees: take heed that by judging of sin by these false
rules, you deceive not your selves.

Use 4.
Let this lastly be a use of thankfulness, to all those whose eyes the Lord
has opened to see, and so convinced you of your sins. When David was going
in the heat of his Spirit to kill Nabal, and Abigail met him and stopped him,
what said he? Oh blessed be the Lord for thy counsel; 1 Samuel 25.32, 33.
so when thou were going on in the heat and pursuit of thy sin, toward
eternal death; that the Lord should now meet thee in thy way, and convince
thee of thy folly, and so stop thee; what a world of sin else would thou have
committed, how vile would thou have bin? oh say therefore, Blessed be that
Minister of the Lord, and blessed for ever be the name of the Lord that gave me
that counsel. It is said, Christ will send the Comforter to convince of sin;
Joh. 16.7.
is it a comfortable thing to see sin? yes, it shall one day be matter of
unspeakable comfort to you that ever you saw sin; that ever he showed thee that
mystery of iniquity in thy heart and life, those arcana imperii, those secrets
of the power and dominion of sin over thee: Levit. 19.17.
Thou shall not hate, but reprove thy brother. If the Lord should secretly keep
thy sin glowing in his own bosom against thee, and never reprove thee for
it, nor convince thee of it; no greater sign of Gods everlasting hatred
against thee. Oh it is infinite love that he has called thee aside and dealt
plainly and secretly with thee, and will you not be thankful for this? The
Lord might have left thee in thy brutish estate, and never made known thy
latter end; never have told thee of thy sin or stood before it comes.

It may be you will say, Obj.
If I felt my sin, and were deeply humbled for it, I could then be thankful
that ever I saw it; what is it to see sin?

This is a favor the Lord shows not to all mankind, Ans. 1.
many have no means to bring them to the knowledge of it, and those that have
yet are smitten with a deep sleep under those means that they know not when
death is at their doors, nor what sin means; and this it may be is the
condition of some of thy poor friends and aquaintance, that think it strange
that thou runnest not with them in the same way as they do.

2.
Suppose some Reprobates do see sin, yet the Lord puts a secret virtue in that
work of conviction upon thee, which makes thee cry to heaven for a Spirit of
brokennesse for sin; which without this sight of sin, thou would never so
much as have desired; and this they have not.

3.
However, conviction is a work of the Spirit, though it should be but common;
and wilt not be thankful for common mercy, suppose it be but outward? how much
more for this that is spiritual, though it should be common? especially
considering that it is the first fundamental work of the Spirit, and is
seminally all. Sense of sin begins here, and arises hence; as ignorance of sin
is seminally all sin: Remember that the discovery of Faux in the Vault, was the
preservation of England; we use to remember the day and hour of the beginning
of some great and notable deliverance; oh remember this time wherein the love
of Christ first brake out in convincing thee of thy sin, who else had
certainly perished in it; And thus much of this first work of Conviction; now
the second follows, Compunction.

SECT. III. The second Act of Christ's power, in working Compunction or sense of
sin.
COmpunction pricking at the heart or sense and feeling of sin, is different
from conviction of sin; the latter is the work of the understanding, and seated
in that principally; the other is in the affections and will, and seated
therein principally: a man may have sight of sin, without sorrow and sense of
it; Dan 5.22. with 20.21. James 1.24. Romans 2.20, 21. Yet that conviction which
the Spirit works in the Elect is ever accompanied with compunction, first or
last. For the better unfolding of this point, let me open these four things to
you.

1. That compunction or sense of sin, immediately follows conviction of sin in
the day of Christ's power. 2. The necessity of this work to succeed the other.
3. Wherein it consists. 4. The measure of it in all the Elect.
That compunction follows conviction, Acts 2.37. When they heard this, that
is, when they saw and were convinced of their sin in crucifying the Lord of
life, which they did not imagine to be a sin before, what follows next? it
is said, They were pricked at the heart; Lo, here is compunction. Ephraim also
in turning unto God, Ier. 31.19. has these words, After that I was instructed,
I smote upon my thigh; (as men in great calamity befallen (...) use to do) I
was ashamed, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.
^onah 3.5.
The men of Nineveh hearing by the Prophet they were all to dye within forty
days, it is said, they believed God, (in the work of conviction) and then fell
to sackcloth and ashes (in the work of compunction) which did immediately
follow. Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. in his renewed return unto God, after he
heard the words of the law, his heart melted, and he wept before the Lord. For
what is the end of conviction? is it not compunction? for if the Lord should
let a man see his sin, and death for sin, and yet suffer the heart to remain
hard and unaffected, the Lord did but leave him without excuse, nay the Lord
should but leave him under greater misery, and under a more fearful judgment;
viz. for a man to see and know his sin, and yet unaffected with it, and hardened
under it; hardness of heart is one of the greatest judgments; to see sin
and not to be affected with it, argues greater hardness. For it is no wonder
if they that see not and know not sin, remain senseless of sin; alas! they
know not what they do; but for a man to be enlightened, and see his sin, and
yet unaffected; Lord, how great is this hardness, and how unexcusable will
such a man be left before God, when the Lord shall reckon with him for his
hardness of heart ^ What is the end of that light the Lord lets into the
understanding in other things? is it not that thereby the heart might be
affected thoroughly with it? Why does the Lord let in the light of the knowledge
of Christ and of his will? Is it that this knowledge should like froth float in
the understanding, and be imprisoned there? No verily, but that the heart might
be thoroughly and deeply affected therewith. And do you think the Lord will in
the light of conviction imprison it up in the mind? is there not a farther end
that by this light the heart might be deeply affected with sin? if any say
that the end of conviction is to drive the soul to Christ, I grant that is the
remote and last end of it, but the next end is compunction. For if the
understanding be convinced of misery, and the heart remain hard, the mind may
see indeed that righteousness and life only is to be had in Christ, yet the
heart remaining hard, the will and affections will never stir toward Christ, its
impossible a hard heart remaining such wholly unaffe^ted with sin or misery,
should be truly affected with Jesus Christ; but of this more hereafter.



Answ.
I speak now of necessity in way of ordinary dispensation, not of Gods unusual
and extraordinary way of working, where he uses neither Law nor Gospel (as
ordina^rily he does) to work by. Many have been nibling lately at this
doctrine, and demand, What need is there of sorrow and compunction of heart? A
man may be converted only by the Gospel, and God may let in sweetness and joy
without any sense of sin or misery, and in my experience I have found it so;
others godly and gracious also feel it so; why therefore do any press such a
necessity of coming in by this back-doore unto Christ? This point I conceive
is very weighty, and much danger in denying the truth of it; yet withal, there
needs much tenderness in handling of it, lest any stumble; and therefore
before I lay down the reasons to show the necessity of it; give me leave to
propound these rules both for the clearing of the point, and answering sundry
objections usually made about this point.

1. Rule.
In this work of compunction, do not think that the Lord has not wrought any
true sense of sin, because you find it not in such a measure as you imagine
you should, desire to have, and that others feel; sense of sin admits degrees.
I doubt not but Joseph's brethren were humbled, yet Joseph must be more, he must
be cast into the ditch, and into the prison, and the iron must enter not only
into his legs, but into his soul; Psalm. 105.18. He must be more afflicted in
spirit, because he was to do greater work for God, and was to be raised up
higher then the rest, and therefore did need the more ballast; some are
educated more civilly then others, and thereby have contracted less guilt and
stoutnesse of heart against God and his ways, therefore these have not such
cause of trouble; and being less rugged, have less need of axes to hew them:
some men's sorrow breaks in upon them more suddenly, like storms and breaches of
the sea, and the Lord is resolved to hasten and finish his work in them more
speedily, and it may be more exemplarily; (for every Christian is not a fair
copy) as in those Acts 2.37. In others their sorrows soake in by degrees,
Gutta cavat lapidem, the Lord empties them by continual droppings, and hence
feel not that measure of sorrow that others do: every Christian is not a
Heman, Psalm. 88. who suffers distracting fears and terrors from his youth up,
ver. 15 who is afflicted with all Gods waves, ver. 7. for he was a man of
exceeding high parts and gifts, as you may see, 1 King. 4.31. and therefore the
Lord had need of hanging some special plummets on his heart to keep it ever
low, lest it should be lifted up above measure. Some sense of sin the Lord will
work in all he says, but not the same measure; the Lord gives not always unto
his, that which is good in it self, (its good I confess to be deeply affected
and humbled) but that which is fit, and therefore best for thee.

2. Rule.
Do not think there is no compunction or sense of sin wrought in the soul,
because you cannot so clearly discern and feel it, nor the time of the working
and first beginning of it. I have known many that have come with complaints,
they were never humbled, they never felt it so, nor yet could tell the time
when it was so, yet there it has been and many times they have seen it by the
help of others spectacles, and blessed God for it. When they in Esaias 63.17.
complained, Lord why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear; do you think
there was no softness, nor sensiblenesse indeed? Yes verily, but they felt
nothing but a hard heart, nay such hardness as if the Lord had plagued them
with it by his own immediate hand, and not borne and bred with them only, as
with other men. Many a soul may think the Lord has left it, nay smitten it
with a hard heart, and so make his moan of it, yet the Lord has wrought real
softness, under felt-hardnesse; as many times in Reprobates there is felt
softness, when within there is real hardness. The stony-ground-hearers were
plowed and broken on the top, but were stony at the bottom. Some men may be
wounded outwardly and mortally, this may easily be discerned. The Lord may
wound others and they may bleed out, their sorrow is more inwardly and
secretly, and therefore cannot point with their finger to their wound as others
can.

Do not think the Lord works compunction in all the Elect in the same
circumstantiall work of the Spirit, 3. Rule.
but only in the same substantial work: the Lord works a true sense of sin
for the substance and truth of it, yet there are many circumstantiall works,
like so many inlargements and comments upon one and the same Text. Ex. gratia.
The same sin that affects Paul, it may be does not affect Lydia or Apollos. The
same notions for the aggravation of sin in one, do not come into the mind of
the other; the same complaints, and prayers, and turnings of spirit in the one,
may not be in the same circumstances, and with the like effects as in the
other, and yet both of them feel sin, and therefore complain; they both feel
sin, yet by means of various apprehensions and aggravations. This I speak,
because you may the better understand the meaning of Gods servants i^ opening
the work of humiliation. You may hear them say, the soul does this, and
thinks that, and speaks another thing; it may be every one do not so think in
the same individual circumstances, and therefore are to be understood as
producing only exemplum in re simili, something like this or for the substance
of this is there wrought.

4. Rule.
In this work of compunction we must not bring rules unto men, but men to rules;
Crook not Gods rules to the experience of men, (which is fallible, and many
times corrupt) but bring men unto the rule, and try men's estates herein by
that: For many will say, Some men are not humbled at all, never had any
precedent sorrow for sin, Gods mercy only has melted their hearts, and
experience proves this, and many find this, who are sincere and gracious
Christians.

I answer, we are not in this or any other point to be guided by the experience
of men only, but attend the rule; if it be proved that according to the rule
men must be broken and affected with their sin and misery before mercy can be
truly apprehended or Christ accepted, what tell you me of such or such men? let
the rule stand, but let men stand or fall according to the rule: many are
accounted godly and gracious for a time* much affected with mercy and Christ
Jesus; yet afterward fall or wizen into nothing, and prove very unsound. What
is the reason? Truly the cause was here, their first wound and sorrow for sin
was not right, as hereafter shall be made good; many thousands are miserably
deceived about their estates, by this one thing, of crooking and wresting Gods
rules to Christians experiences; let all Gods servants tremble and be wary
here; wrack not the holy Scriptures, nor force them to speak as thou feel,
but try all things by them, 1 These. 5.21.

Do not make the examples of converted persons in Scripture patterns in all
things of persons unconverted: 5. Rule.
do not make Gods work upon the one, run parallel with Gods work upon the other.

Some say, that many in Scripture are converted to Christ without any sorrow
for sin, and produce the example of Lydia, whose heart God sweetly opened to
receive Christ; and the Eunuch, Acts 8. converted in the same manner.

I answer, these are examples of persons converted to God before, who did
believe in the Messiah, but did not know that this Jesus was the Messiah, which
they soon did when the Lord sent the means to reveal Christ; and therefore
Lydia, a Jewish proselyte, is called a worshipper of God, Act. 16.14. and so
was the Eunuch, Act. 8.27. and in the same condition as the Centurion, Act.
10.2. who feared God, and whose prayers were accepted, ver. 4. (which cannot be
without faith) yet did not know that this Jesus crucified was the Messiah,
until Peter came unto him. So that suppose here was no sense or sorrow for
sin, at this time; does it therefore follow they never had any when the Lord
at first wrought upon them? are these examples in persons converted, fit to
show forth Gods work in persons unconverted? in some things indeed they are
examples, in others not so: their examples of believing in Christ are not in
that act examples of sorrow for want of Christ. And yet let me add, to say
that God opened Lydia's heart to believe in Christ, and yet opened not her
heart to lament her sin and misery in her estate without Christ, (suppose she
were without Christ) is more then can be proved from the Text; for it is said,
Her heart was opened to attend unto the things that were spoken by Paul; and
can any think that Paul, or any Apostle, ever preached Christ without preaching
the need men had of him? and could any preach their need of Christ, without
preaching men's undone and sinful estate without Christ? and do you think that
Lydiae was not made to attend unto this? do you think that when Philip came to
open the 53. of Esaias to the Eunuch, that Christ was bruised for our iniquities;
that he did not let him understand the infinite evil of sin and misery of
all sinners, and of him in special, unless the Lord Jesus was bruised for him?

In examples recorded in the Scripture of Gods converting grace, 6. Rule.
do not think they had no sorrow for sin, because it is not distinctly and
expressly set down in all places: for the Scripture usually sets down matters
very briefly, it oftentimes supposes many things, and refers us to judge of
some by other places; as Acts 6.7. it is said, Many of the Priests were
obedient to the faith; does it therefore follow that they did immediately
believe without any sense of sin? Look to a fuller example, Acts 2. and then
we may see, as the one were converted to the faith, so were the other, having a
hand in the same sin. 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. Paul, he was a persecuter, but the Lord
received him to mercy, and that Gods grace was abundant in faith and love; does
it hence follow that Paul had no castings down, because not mentioned here? If
we look upon Acts 9. we shall see it otherwise.

7. Rule.
Do not judge of general and common workings of the Spirit upon the souls of
any to be the beginnings of effectual and special conversion; for a man may
have some inward and yet common knowledge of the Gospel and of Christ in it,
before there be any sorrow for sin; yet it does not hence follow that the
Lord begins not with compunction and sorrow, because common work is not
special and effectual work; when the Spirit thus comes, he first begins here,
as we shall prove.

8. Rule.
The terrors, and fears, and sense of sin and death, be in themselves
afflictions of soul, and of themselves drive from Christ; yet in the hand of
Christ, by the power of the Spirit, they are made to lead, or rather drive unto
Christ, which is able to turn mourning into joy, as well as after mourning to
give joy: Joh. 16.20
and therefore it is a vain thing to think there is no need of such sorrows
which drive from Christ; and that Christ can work well enough therefore without
them; when as by the mighty power and riches of mercy in Christ, the Lord by
wounding, nay killing his of all their carnal security and self-confidence,
saves all his alive, Hos. 6.1, 2, 3.
and drives them to seek for life in his Son.

These things thus premised, let us now hear of the necessity of this work to
succeed conviction.

Else a sinner will never part with his sin; Reas. 1.
a bare conviction of sin does but light the candle to see sin; compunction
burns his fingers, and that only makes him dread the fire. Cleanse your
hearts ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double minded men, (says the
Apostle James, Chap. 4.8.) But how should this be done? He answers, verse 9. Be
afflicted, and mourn, and weep, turn your laughter into mourning. So Joel
2.12. the Prophet calls upon his hearers to turn from their sin unto the Lord;
but how? Rend your hearts, and not your garments. Not that they were able to do
this, but by what sorrow he requires of all in general, he thereby effectually
works in the hearts of all the elect in particular; for every man naturally
takes pleasure, nay all his delight and pleasure is in nothing else but sin;
for God he has none, but that. Now so long as he takes pleasure in sin, and
finds contentment by sin, he cannot but cleave inseparably to it: Oh it is
sweet, and it only is sweet; for so long the soul is dead in sin. Pleasure
in sin is death in sin, 1 Timothy 5.6. So long as it is dead in sin, it is
impossible it should part with sin; no more then a dead man can break the
bonds of death. And therefore it undenyably follows, that the Lord must first
put gall and wormwood to these dugs, before the soul will cease sucking, or be
weaned from them; the Lord must first make sin bitter, before it will part
with it; load it with sin, before it will sit down and desire ease; And look
as the pleasure in sin is exceeding sweet to a sinner, so the sorrow for it
must be exceeding bitter, before the soul will part from it.

It Is true, I confess a man sometime may part with sin without sorrow, the
unclean spirit may go out for a time, before he is taken, bound and slain by
the power of Christ. But such a kind of parting is but the washing of the cup,
it is unsafe and unsound, and the end of such a Christian will be miserable; for a
man to hear of his sin, and then to say, I Will do no more so, without any
sense or sorrow for it, would not have been approved by Paul, if he had seen no
more in the careless Corinthians, in tolerating the incestuous person; 2 Cor.
7.10
but their sorrow wrought this repentance. No, the Lord abhors such whorish
wiping the lips; and therefore the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.2.
when he reproves them for not separating the sinner, and so the sin from them,
he sums it up in one word, You have not mourned, that such a one might be
taken from you: because then sin is severed truly from the soul, when sorrow
or shame, some sense and feeling of the evil of it, begins it. Not only sin
is opposite to God, but when the Lord Jesus first comes near his elect in
their sinful estate, they are then enemies themselves by sin unto God. And
hence it is they will never part with their weapons, until themselves be
thoroughly wounded: and therefore the Lord must wound their consciences, minds
and hearts, before they will cast them by. Now if there be no parting with, no
separation from sin, but sin is as strong, and the sinners as vile as ever
before, has Christ (who now comes to save his elect from sin) the end of his
work? what is the man the better for conviction, affection to Christ, name what
you can, that remains still in his sins? When the Apostle would sum up all
the misery of men, he does it in those words, 1 Cor. 15.17.
Ye are yet in your sin: So I say, thou art convicted, but art yet in thy
sin; art affected with Christ, and take hold of Christ, but art yet in thy
sin: He that confesses and forsakes his sin, shall find mercy. Pro. 28.13


You will say, Obj.
May not the sweetness of Christ in the Gospel, and sense of mercy, separate
from sin, without any compunction?

I answer, Ans. 1.
1. Sense of mercy and Christ's sweetness (I conceive) serve principally to
draw the soul unto Christ. Ier. 31.3. With loving kindness have I drawn thee.
But compunction or sense of ^inne principally serves in the hand of Christ, to
turn the soul from sin. Aversion from sin is distinct from, and in order goes
before our conversion unto God.

2. Sense of the sweetness of Gods grace in Christ keeps out sin, but it does
not thrust out sin at first. 2. Cor. 7.1, 2.


3. Christ cannot be effectually sweet, unless sin be first made bitter;
there may be some general notice of Christ's excellency, and some thirty pieces
given for him; some esteem of his grace, and hope of his mercy, which may
occasion sorrow; but I dare not say that this is any sound or through work, till
after sorrow. Esaias 50.4. Christ has the tongue of the learned given him to
speak a word in season; Unto whom? It is added, unto the weary. They are the
men that will prize mercy, and they only to purpose; they that have felt the
bitterness of sin and wrath, find it exceeding hard to prize Christ, and to
taste his sweetness; how shall they do it indeed that find none at all?
Sweetness before sense of sin, is like Cordials before purging of a foul
stomach, which usually strengthen the humor, but recover not the man.

Reas. 2.
Because without this, no man will either care for Christ, or feel a need of
Christ; a man may see a want of Christ by the power of conviction, but he will
never feel a need of Christ, but by the spirit of compunction. The whole need
not the Physician, Mat. 9.21.
but they that are sick. A whole man may see his want of a Physician, but a
sick man only feels his need of him, will prize him, send for him. By the
whole you are not to understand such as have no need indeed of Christ (for what
sinner but has need of him?) but such as feel no need of him: as by sick
cannot be meant such as are sinful and miserable, for then Christ should come
actually to save all men; but those that did feel themselves so, as a sick man
that feels his sickness; these only are the men that feel a need and
necessity of Christ; these only will come to Christ, and be glad of Christ,
and be truly thankful for their recovery of Christ. And hence arises the
great sin of the world in despising the Gospel, not at all affected with the
glad tidings of it, because they are not affected with their sin and misery;
or if they be affected but in part with the Gospel, it is because they are not
thoroughly affected with their misery before.

And hence it is, that when the Lord called his people to him, Jer. 2.31.
yet they would not come to him, because they were Lords, and well enough
without him. Why did not they come to the Supper, Luke 14.
being invited? it was because they had farms, and oxen, and wives to attend
unto; they felt no need of coming, as the poor, lame, blind, and halt did.
The Prodigal cares not for father nor fathers house, Luke 15.17.
until he come to see, Here I dye.

It is true, the grace of the Gospel draws men unto Christ; but it is very
observable, that the Gospel reveals no grace, but with respect and in
reference unto sinners, and men in extreme misery; the Gospel says not that
Christ is come to save, but to save sinners, and to save his people from their
sins. It reveals not this, that God justifies men, but he justifies the
ungodly; it reveals not this, that Christ dyed for us, but that he dyed for
them that were weak, Ram. 5.6, 7, 8.
for sinners, for enemies. And if so, can any man imagine that this news will
be sweet, unless men see and feel the infinite misery of sin, and the fruits
of it? will not men say or think, What great matter is there in that? Suppose
we be sinners and enemies, yet we are well enough; before Christ come a man's
life lies in his sin. Col. 3.7.
Now suppose any should proclaim to a company of men the great favor of their
Prince toward them, that he is such a gracious Prince, as will take away all
their lives; will this be glad tidings? Gospel Grace cannot be set out, much
less felt, but in reference to sin and misery, which must be first felt, 2
Cor. 5.14
before it can be sweet.

Reas. 3.
Because Christ will never come but only unto such as feel their misery; for
you will say, A man may come to Christ without it: I say again, if he does (as
he has many followers) yet Christ will not come to him, nor commit himself
to him; Mat. 9.13.
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance; in which place
note that as by the righteous is not meant such as are sincerely so, but such
as think and find themselves so; so by sinners, is not meant all manner of
impenitent and hard hearted sinners, but such as think and feel themselves
such; and lament under it: now God the Father sent him only unto such; he is
sent not to heal the hard hearted, Luke 4.18.
but the broken hearted; indeed he is sent to make men broken hearted, who have
hard hearts; but he is not sent to heal them until then; the Lord leaves the
ninety nine that need no repentance to wilder for ever; the one lost sheep, who
feels it self so, and ^eeles a need of a Savior to come and find it out; who
cannot come and find out him: the Lord Jesus will come unto, and unto him only,
leaving all the ninety nine. Luke 15 7.


This may lastly appear by considering the end of man's fall into sin, Reas. 4.
and the publishing of the Law to reveal sin; and of the Gospel also in
reference unto sin; and misery; why did the Lord suffer the fall of man? what
was his great plot in it? it is apparent this, that thereby way might be made
for the greater manifestation of Gods grace in Christ. The Serpent poisons all
mankind, that the seed of the woman might have the glory of recovering some;
This was Gods last end: The perdition of some (of themselves) being but
subordinate unto this, Romans 9.22, 23. Surely Adam might have glorified grace if
he had stood, and God had revealed his grace in preserving him (made mutable)
from falling. But the Lord saw grace should not be sufficiently advanced to its
highest dignity by this, and therefore suffers him actually to fall, and that
into an extreme depth of misery: Now consider man's fall in it self cannot be
a mean of glorifying grace, but rather obscures all the glory of God; how
shall the Lord attain his end then hereby? truly if the Lord let men see and
feel their fall and misery by it, now grace offered will ^e accepted and
glorified. And therefore the Lord sends the law to reveal sin, and make it
exceeding sinful; and death for sin; that this end might be attained. Gal.
3.22. And therefore feeling of sin, and death and misery being the means, must
precede the other as the end; and therefore as grace may be seen by conviction
of misery, so the sweetness of it only can be felt, by feeling misery in this
work of compunction.

Quest.
But you will say, What is this compunction, and wherein does it consist?

This is the third particular to be opened; Answ.
in general it is, whereby the soul is affected with sin, and made sensible
of sin; but more particularly, compunction is nothing else but the pricking of
the heart, or the wounding of the soul with such fear and sorrow for sin and
misery, as severs the soul from sin, and from going on toward its eternal
misery: so that it consists in three things.

1. Fear. 2. Sorrow. 3. Separation from sin.
The Lord Jesus, when he comes to rescue his elect, look as Satan held them in
their misery; First, by blinding their eyes from seeing of it; Secondly, by
hardening their hearts from feeling of it: So the Lord Jesus having cut asunder
the first cord of Satan by conviction, breaks asunder the second by
compunction, and causing the soul to feel and be aff^cted with its misery;
and as the whole soul is unaffected before he comes, so he makes the whole
soul sensible when he comes, and therefore he sils the conscience with
fear, and the heart with sorrow, and mourning, so as now the will of sin is
broken, which was hardened before these fears and sorrows seized upon it. Let
me open these particularly, that you may taste and try the truth of what now I
deliver.

their hearts are set to sin, Eccles. 8.11.

The Lord Christ therefore lets in this fear, that look as the Lord when he
came to conquer the Canaanites, Exodus 23.27, 28. He sent his hornets before
him, which were certain fears, which made their hearts faint in the day of
battle, and by this subdued them; so the Lord Christ when he comes to conquer
a poor sinner that has long resisted him, and would go on to his own
perdition, lets in these fears, that the soul shrinkes in with the thoughts
of its woeful estate, and cries out secretly, Lord what will become of me if I
dye in this condition? Acts 9.6.
Paul trembles astonished at his misery and wickedness, and now he begins to
cry out; Acts 16.
the Jay^^ur was very cruel against Paul, but when the Lord Jesus comes to
rescue him from this condition, you shall see him trembling. The Lord had let
in that fear, that now he is content to do any thing to be saved from the
danger he saw he was now in; when a man sees danger and great danger near and
imminent, now man naturally fears it: before Christ come, the soul may see
its misery, but it apprehends it far off, and hoping to escape it, and hence
does not fear it; Psalm. 10.5.
but when the Lord Jesus comes, he presents a man's danger, death, wrath, and
eternity near unto him, and hence has no hope to escape it, as now he is, and
therefore does fear; and seeing the misery exceeding great, he has an
exceeding great (though often times deep) fear of it; as men near death and
apprehending it so, begin then to be troubled, and cry out when it is too late.
The Lord Jesus deals more mercifully with the elect, and brings death and
eternity near them before they draw near to it; whiles it is called to day:
Acts 16.
the poor Jailer began to think of killing himself when fears were upon him,
and so many under this stroke of Christ, have the same thoughts, because they
see no hope; but this measure is not in all, Psalm. 9.20.
this work is in all, Put them in fear oh Lord that they may know they be but
men; before this fear comes, men are above God, and think they can stand it
out against him; the Lord therefore lets in this fear to make them know they
be but men, and that as proud, and stout, and great as they are, yet tha^ they
are not above God, and that it is in vain to kick against the pricks, and go^
on as they have done; for if they do, he will not endure it long. Romans 8.15.
The spirit of Bondage makes makes men fear, before the spirit of Adoption
comes; these fears therefore are such, as the regenerate after they have
received the spirit of Adoption never have; and therefore they are such as
pursue the soul with some threatening of the word, pronouncing death and
perdition to him in that estate: Ex. gr. He that believes not is condemned
already, thus the word speaks to conscience, John 3.17. Thou beleevest not
says a man's own conscience, the Spirit witnessing with it, therefore thou art
condemned says conscience; now the spirit of Bondage, is the testimony of Gods
Spirit witnessing to both the premises and conclusion: now this Spirit no
regenerate man indeed ever has after this time, but the fears he has arise
from another principle of corruption of conscience, and malice of Satan through
the present desertion of the Spirit leaving him; not from any positive witness
of the Spirit of any such untruth, which yet is truth, while the soul is under
this str^ake and not regen^^ate: mark therefore diligently that this ^eare is
the work of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, and hence it follows,

1. That these Fears are not merely natural (as those Romans 2.15.) arising from
natural conscience only, which only accuse of sin, but never affect; but
they are supernatural, they are arrows shot into the conscience by the arm
of the Spirit; so dreadful that no word nor meditation of death and eternity
can beget such fears, but creates them.

2. Hence it follows, that they are clear fears, (for the Spirits work is
ever clear before he leaves it, Ephesians. 5.13.) they are not blind confused
fears, and suspicious and sad conjectures, whereby many a man is afraid and
much afraid and affrighted like men in a dream, that think they are in hell,
yet cannot tell what that evil is which they fear; but they are clear fears
whereby they distinctly know and see that they are miserable, and what that
misery is.

3. Hence it follows that they are strong fears, because the almighty hand of
the Spirit sets them on, and shakes the soul; they are not weak fears which a
man can shake off, or cure by weak hopes, sleep or business, etc. like some
winds that shake the tree, but never blow it down: but these fears cast down
the tallest Cedar, and appall the heart, and cool the courage and boldness of
the most impenitent and audacious sinner. The Spirit presenting the greatest
evil in eternal separation from God: hence no evil in this world is so
dreadful as this, I had better never been borne then to bear it (says the
soul) and hence casts off all other thoughts, Amos 3.8.
and cannot be quiet; and hence it is that these fears force a man to fly and
seek out for a better condition. A man like Lot lingers in his sin, but these
fears like the Angel, drive him violently out, the Lord saying to him, A way
for thy life, lest thou perish with the world, for thy sins are come up to
heaven, thou may dye before one day be at an end, and then what will become
of thee? Ah thou sinful wretched man! may not the Lord justly do it? are not
thy sins grown so great and many, that they are an intolerable burden for the
soul of God to bear any longer? and hence you shall observe, if the soul
after sad fears grows bold and carel^sse again, the Spirit pursues it with
more cause of fear, and now the soul cries out, Did the Lord ever elect thee?
Christ shed his blood to save his people from their sins, thou live yet in
thy sins, did he ever shed his blood for thee? thou have sinned against
conscience, after thou have been enlightened and fallen back again, have not
thou therefore committed the impardonable sin? thou have had many a fair
season of seeking God, but have dallyed and dreamt away thy time; is not the
day of grace therefore now past? it is true, the Lord is yet patient and
bountiful, and lets thee live on common mercy, but is not all this to
aggravate thy condemnation against that great and terrible day of the Lord
which is at hand? are there not better men in hell then thou art that never
committed the like sin? thus the Spirit pursues with strong fears, till proud
man falls down to the dust before God. The soul is now under fears, not above
them; and therefore cannot come out of these chains by the most comfortable
doctrine it hears, nor particular application of it by the most merciful
Ministers in the world, until the Lord say, as La^. 3.57. fear not: the Lord
only can assuage these strong winds, and raging waters, in which there is no
other cry heard of this soul tossed thus with tempests, but Oh I perish I only
the Lord making way for the spirit of Adoption by these in his elect; drives
them out to seek if there be any hope, and so they are not properly desperate
fears; yet as I say, strong fears, not alike extensively, yet alike
intensively strong in all; a small evil when tidings is brought of it does not
fear, but if the evil be apprehended great and near too, the very suspicion
of it makes the heart tremble; when a house is on fire, or a mighty Army entered
the land and near the city, children that know not the greatness of the evil
fear them not; but men that know the danger are full of fear. The wrath of
the Lord that fire those armies of everlasting woes, are great evils, the blind
world may not much fear them, but all the elect whose minds are convinced to
see the greatness of them, cannot but fear, and that with strong and constant
fears; nor is it cowardice, but duty to fear these everlasting burnings. And
hence the soul in this case wonders at the security of the world, dreads the
terrors of the Lord that are near them, and usually seeks to awaken all its
poor friends. I once thought my self well, and was quiet as you be, but the
Lord has let me see my woe, which I cannot but fear; Luke 23.40.
oh look you to it.

Thus the Lord works this fear in some in a greater, in others in a lesser
measure. Oh consider whether the Lord has thus affected your hearts with
fear; oh secure times what will God do with us! many of you having heard the
voice of the lion roaring, and yet you tremble not. The Lord has foretold you
of death and eternal woe for the least sin, do you believe it, and yet fear
it not? how art thou then forsaken of God? Many of you that like old Mariners
can laugh at all foul weather, and like Weather-cocks set your faces against
all winds; and if you be damned at last you cannot help it, you must bear it
as well as you can, and you hope to do it as well as others shall do; Oh! how
far are such from the Kingdom of God, the Lord not yet working nor pricking
thy heart so much as with fear?

2. Sorrow and mourning for sin is the Judge. 2.1.
the Israelites in making a league with the Canaanites, and told them that they
should be thorns in their sides, they sat down, ver. 4. and lift up their
voice, and wept: so it is with a contrite sinner. Note narrowly that eminent
place of Scripture, Esaias 61.3. the Lord Christ is sent to appoint beauty for
ashes, and the oil of joy for the spirit of heaviness to them that mourn.
Out of which, note these four things for the explication of this sorrow or
mourning.

First, It is such a mourning as is precedent unto spiritual joy. And hence it
is not said, I will give the spirit of gladness to beget mourning, (though the
Lord does so after conversion) but this goes in order before that. Jer. 31.18
Ephraim-like, who seeing what an unruly beast he had been, unaccustomed to
Gods yoke, smites upon his thigh, and bemoans himself. It is Gods method
(after Gods people have sinned) to sad their hearts, and then to turn mourning
into joy; much more at first beginning of Gods work upon the soul, they shall
first mourn, and lament, and smite upon the thigh; If God wounds the soul for
sin, it shall smart, and bleed too, before God will heal. Hos. 6.1, 2.


Secondly, It is a great mourning, because it is called a spirit of mourning;
As a spirit of slumber is a deep slumber. When the poor Jews shall be
converted, their great sin shall then be presented before them of cursing and
crucifying the Lord of life; as it was to those Acts 2.36. And by reason of
this, there shall be a great mourning, Zach. 12.11.
that they shall desire to go alone in secret every one apart, and take their
fill of mourning, before the Lord open the fountain of grace. Cap. 13.1.
It is not a summer cloud, or an April shower, that is soon spent, but a great
mourning. For,

1. Before this spirit of sorrow come, a man's heart takes great delight in his
sin, it is his God, his life, and sweeter then Christ, and all the joys of
heaven; and therefore there must be great sorrow, sin must be made exceeding
bitter. A man that is very hungry and thirsty after his lust, must find such
meat and drink exceeding bitter, else he will feed on it. Solomon took great
content in women, but what says he when the Lord humbled him? I find a woman
more bitter then death. Eccles. 7.26.
Hear this you harlots, and you that live in your wanton lusts, the Lord will
make your sweet morsels more bitter then death to you, if the Lord saves you.

2. Because the greatest evils are the objects of this sorrow, viz. Sin and
death. It is true, a man may mourn for smaller evils sooner; but when the
Spirit sets on the greatest evils, Psalm. 38.1, ^.
then they sad much more. Mine iniquities are too heavy to bear: Why so? Many
a man can bear them without sinking. True, but in the Elect the Spirit sets on,
loads the soul herewith. Prove. 18.14.
A wounded spirit who can bear? Because the greatest evils lie upon the most
tender part of a tender soul, pressed down by the omnipotent hand of Christ's
Spirit. Psalm. 32.2, 3. Psalm. 40.12.
For now the multitude of sins more then the hairs on the head come now to
mind; as also the long continuance in them, cradle sins. No sooner, says the
soul, did I begin to live, but I began to sin. Obstinacy also in them lies
very heavy; I have had warnings, checks, resolutions against them, and yet have
gone on. Jer. 31.19.
The power of sin also sads it; that as it is said, Prove. 21.9. When the
wicked reign, the people mourn; so does the soul when it feels sin reign.
I cannot subdue it, nay the Lord will not, that I fear the Lord has left me
over to it. The increase of sin it feels, makes it mourn also; I grow worse
and worse, says the soul; the leake comes in faster then he can cast it out;
Da^. 9.12.
the greatness of sin makes it mourn. Was there ever such a sinner as I? And
lastly, the sense of condemnation for sin lies upon him; Jer. 3. ult.
this is the fruit of your evil ways, says the Spirit. The soul does not
let sin pass by it now as water down the mill, but being stopped by
conviction and fear of the evil of it, it swells very high, and fills the
heart full of grief and sorrow, that many times it is overwhelmed therewith.

3. Because Christ will not be very sweet, unless this mourning under misery be
very great; the healing of a cut finger is sweet, but of a mortal wound is
exceeding sweet; a little sorrow will make Christ sweet, but great sorrow under
sense of deadly wounds is exceeding sweet; and without this Christ has not his
honor due to him, if he be not only sweet, Matthew. 10.37.
but also exceeding sweet and precious.

4. Because it is such a sorrow, as nothing but that that has wounded the
soul can heal it. Let men have the greatest outward troubles, outward things
can cure them; or else they will wear away. As if a man be sick, or in debt,
physic and money can cure these; but this wound, neither can, or over shall be
healed but by the hand that wounded it. Hos. 6.1, 2.
And hence a man can take no comfort in meat, drink, sleep, friends, mirth, nor
pastime, while this wound, this sorrow lasts; for if any thing else can heal
it, it is not the right wound, or sorrow the Lord breeds in his elect. An
adulterous heart indeed may be quieted with other lovers, Cain can build away
his sorrow. Nay, I Will say more, this wounded soul cannot comfort it self by
any promises, till the Lord come. David had a promise of pardon from Nathan,
Psalm. 51.8.
yet he cries out to the Lord to make him hear the voice of joy and gladness,
that his broken bones might rejoice. Did not the Lord make him hear the voice
of joy by Nathan? Yes, outwardly, but the Lord that had broke his bones, must
make him hear inwardly. Nay, when the Lord comes himself to comfort, much
ado the Lord has to make him hear it; as the Israelites, that hearkened not
to Moses voice, because of their hard bondage, that unless the Lord did
invincibly comfort, it would lie bleeding to death, and never live. It must
needs therefore be great sorrow, which all the world, men nor Angels can remove.

5. You may be confirmed in this, if lastly you consider the many ways the
Lord takes to beget great mourning, if the soul will not be sorrowful: as,
sometimes great afflictions; Manasseh must be taken in the bushes, 2 Chronicles.
53.11, 12.
and cast into chains. Sometimes strange temptations, hellish blasphemies, Is
there a God? Are the Scriptures his Word? Why should the Lord be so cruel as
to reprobate any of his creatures, to torment it so long? etc. Sometimes long
eclipsing of the light of Gods countenance; no prayers answered, Lam. 3.44
but daily bills of indictment; And sometimes it thinks it hears and feels a
secret testimony from God, that he never had thought of peace toward it, and
that his purpose is immutable. Sometimes it questions, Can God forgive sins
so great? Can it stand with his honor to put up so much wrong? Sometimes it
feels its heart so extremely hard and dedolent, that it thinks the Lord has
sealed it up under this plague till the judgment of the great day. And
sometimes the Lord makes melancholy a good servant to him to further this work
of sorrow. But thus the Lord rebukes many a hard hearted sinner, that will not
bear the yoke, nor feel the load; and now the Lord turns the beauty of the
proudest into ashes, and withers the glory of all flesh. Nay sometimes you
shall observe the Lord though he comes not out as a Lion to rend, yet as a moth
he frets out by secret pinings and languishings; the senseless security of
man, that he shall mourn to purpose before he leave him. Psalm. 39.10, 11.


I do not mean by this, as if all men had the like measure of sorrow; but a
great sorrow it is in all. Every child is delivered by some throws; those that
stick long in the birth may feel them longer and very many. Nor yet do I
press a necessity of tears, or violent and tumultuous complaints; the deepest
sorrows run with least noise. If a man can have tears for outward losses, and
none for sins, it is very suspicious whether he was ever truly sorrowful for
sin; Otherwise as the greatest joys are not always expressed in laughter, so
the greatest sorrows are not always expressed in shedding of tears; what the
measure of this great sorrow is, we shall hear hereafter.

Thirdly, it is a constant mourning, for so it is here called, a spirit of
heaviness; as that woman that had a spirit of infirmity, and was bowed down
many years: Hannah constantly troubled, is called a woman of a sorrowful
spirit, 1 Samuel 1.12.15. As the spirit of pride and whoredom, Hos. 4.12. ^is a
constant frame, where though the acts be sometime suspended, yet the spirit
remains; so a spirit of mourning, is such sorrow, as though the acts of
mourning be sometime hindered, yet the spirit and spring remains; Hypocrites
will mourn under sin and misery, but what is it? Esaias. 5.8.5.
it is the hanging down the head like a bull-rush in bad weather for a day. Oh
how many have pangs and gripes of sorrow, and can quickly ease themselves
again! these mourners come to nothing in the conclusion; I grant the sorrow and
sadness of spirit may be interrupted, but it returns again, and never leaves
the soul until the Lord look down from heaven, Lam. 3.48, 49, 50. The cause
continues, guilt and strength of sin, and therefore this effect continues.

Fourthly, it is such a sorrow as makes way for gladness, for so it is here
said, the Lord gives beauty for these ashes, and hence it is no desperate
hellish sorrow, but usually mixed with sense of some mercy, at least common, and
some hope; not that which apprehends the object of hope particulary (which is
done in vocation) but that the Lord may find out some way of saving it, Jonah
3.9. Acts 2.37. which hope with sense of mercy waiting so long, preserving from
hell and death so often, etc. does not harden the heart, (as in reprobates) but
serve to break the more, and to load it with greater sorrow; thus the Lord
works this sorrow in all his elect, I know it is in a greater measure, and from
some other grounds after the soul is in Christ; but this sorrow there is for
substance, mentioned for the reasons given; if Christ hate you you shall
mourn, but never till it be too late; if he love you, you must mourn now; how
great and many are many of your sins, how near is your doom, the Lord only
knows how fearful your condemnation will be, you have often heard, but yet how
few of your hearts are sad and very heavy for these things? sin is your
pleasure, not your sorrow; you fly from sorrow as from a temptation of Satan
who comes to trouble you, and to lead you to despair: David's eyes ran down
with rivers of waters, because others brake Gods law, and Jeremy wished he had a
cottage in the wilderness to mourn in, and yet you do not, you cannot power
out one drop, nor yet wish you had hearts to lament your own sins: but oh
know it, that when the Lord Christ comes, he will sad thy soul when he comes
to search thy old sores by the spirit of conviction, he will make them smart
and bleed abundantly, by the spirit of compunction.

sin and the soul: and hence it is that the Lord abhorres all fastings,
humiliations, prayers, tears, unless they be of this stamp, and are
accompanied with this effect. The Lord flings the dung of their fastings and
sorrows in their faces, Esaias. 58.5.
because they did not break the bonds of wickedness; to mourno for sin and
misery, and yet to be in thy sin, is the work of justice on the damned in
hell, and all the Devils at this day, that are pincht with their black chains
not loosened from them; and not the work of the grace of Christ in the day of
his power: He that confesses his sins shall have mercy; that is true, but
remember the meaning of that confession in the next words, Prove. 28.13.
and forsakes, he shall find mercy. What is the end of the mother in laying
worme-wood and gall upon her breast, but that the child by tasting the
bitterness of it might be weaned and have his stomach and will turned from it?
what is the end of fear and sorrow, but by this to turn away the soul from
sin? This point is weighty and full of difficulty, J^b 33.15, 16, 17.
of great use, and worthy of deep meditation. For as the first wound and
stroke of the Spirit is, so it is in all other after-works of it, both of
faith and holiness in the soul; if this be right, faith is right, holiness
is right; if this be imperfect, or naught, all is according to it afterward:
the greatest difficulty lies h^re to know what measure of separation from sin
the Spirit makes here, for after we are in Christ, then sin is mortified;
how then is there any separation of the heart from it, before it does fully
believe; or what measure is there necessary? here therefore I shall answer to
the fourth and last particular. viz.



Answ.
So much compunction or sense of sin is necessary as attaines the end of it:
now what is the end of it? no other but that the soul being humbled might go
to Christ (by faith) to take away his sin; the finis proximus or next end of
compunction is humiliation, that the soul may be so severed from sin, as to
renounce it self for it; the finis remotus, or last end is, that being thus
humbled, it might go unto Christ to take away sin: for beloved, the
condemnation of the world lies not so much in being sinful under guilt and
power of sin, as in being unwilling the Lord Jesus should take it away: this I
say is the greatest hinderance of salvation, John 3.19. John 5.40. Oh Jerusalem
will thou not be made clean? Ier. 13.27. that was their great evil, they were
not only polluted, but they would not be made clean: the Lord Jesus therefore
rolls away this stone from the Sepulcher, beats down this mountain; and
because it must first believe in Christ before it can receive Grace from
Christ, it must come to Christ to take away sin, before the Lord will do it.
Hence, so much loosening from sin as makes the soul thus to come, is
necessary. So much fear and sorrow as loosens from sin, and so much
loosening from sin as makes the soul willing, or at least not unwilling that
the Lord JESUS should take it away, is necessary: For who ever comes to Christ,
or is not unwilling Christ should come to him to take away all his sin, has
(what ever he thinks) some antecedent loosning and separation from sin.

Oh says a poor sinner, when the Lord has struck his heart, and he feels
guilt, and terror, and mighty strength of corruption, If the Lord Jesus would
take away these evils from me, though I cannot, means cannot; that will be
exceeding rich mercy. The Lord does not wound the heart to this end, that the
soul should first heal it self, before it come to the Physician, but that it
might seek out, or feeling its need, be willing and desirous of a Physician,
the Lord Jesus, to come and heal it. It is the great fault of many Christians,
either their wounds and sorrows are so little, they desire not to be healed;
or if they do, they labor to heal themselves first, before they come to the
Physician for it; they will first make themselves holy, and put on their
jewels, and then believe in Christ. And hence are those many complaints, What
have I to do with Christ? Why should he have to do with me that have such an
unholy, vile, hard, blind, and most wicked heart? If I were more humbled, and
more holy, then I would go to him, and think he would come to me. Oh for the
Lords sake, dishonor not the grace of Christ. It is true, thou can not come
to Christ, till thou art laden, and humbled, and separated from thy sin.
Thou can not be ingrafted into this Olive, unless thou be cut, and cut
off too from thy old root. Yet remember for ever, that no more sorrow for
sin, no more separation from sin is necessary to thy closing with Christ,
then so much as makes thee willing, or rather not unwilling that the Lord
should take it away. And know it, if thou seek for a greater measure of
humiliation antecedent to thy closing with Christ then this, thou show the
more pride: therein, who wilt rather go in to thy self to make thy self holy
and humble, that then might be worthy of Christ, then go out of thy self,
unto the Lord Jesus, to take thy sin away. In a word, who think Christ
cannot love thee, until thou make thy self fair, and when thou think
thy self so (which is pride) wilt then think otherwise of Christ. The Lord
therefore when he teaches his people how to return unto him after grievous
sins, directs them to this course, not to go about the bush to remove their
iniquities themselves, or to stay and live securely in their sins, until the
Lord did it himself; but bids them come to him, and say, Take away (Lord) all
iniquities, Hos. 14.1, 2, 3. You shall see Ephraim bemoaning himself, Ier.
31.18. But how? Does he say he feels his sins now all removed? No, but he
desires the Lord to turn him, and then (says he) I shall be turned.

As if he should say, Lord, I shall never turn from this stubborn vile heart,
nor so much as turn to thee, to take it away, unless thou do turn me, and
then I shall be turned to purpose. What says the penitent Church? Hos 6.1.
Come, say they, let us go unto the Lord. They might object, and say, Alas,
the Lord is our enemy, and wounds us, and has broken us to pieces, we are not
yet healed, but lie dead as well as wounded; shall such dead spirits live? Mark
what follows, True indeed, He has wounded us, let us therefore go to him,
that he may heal us, and after two days he will revive us. The Lord requires
no more of us then thus to come to him. Indeed after a Christian is in Christ,
labor for more and more sense of sin, that may drive you nearer and nearer
unto Christ. Yet know before you come to him, the Lord requires no more then
this; and as he requires no more then this, so it is his own Spirit (not our
abilities) that must also work this; and thus much he will work, and does
require of all whom he purposes to save. If thou will not come to Christ to
take away thy sins, thou shall undoubtedly perish in them. If the Lord work
that sorrow, so as to be willing the Lord should take them away, thou shall be
undoubtedly saved from them. Joh. 5.40.


If you would know what measure of willingness to have Christ take away sin
is required; You shall hear when we come to open the fourth particular in the
doctrine of Faith.

Quest.
If you further ask, How the Spirit works this loosening from sin in the work
of compunction?

Answ.
I answer, the Spirit of Christ works this by a double act, 1. Moral. 2.
Physical.


As in the conversion of the soul by faith unto God, the Spirit is not only a
moral agent p^^swading, but also a supernatural agent physically working the
heart to believe, by a divine and immediate act; so in the aversion of the
soul from sin, the Spirit does affect the heart with fear and sorrow
morally, but this can never take away sin, as we see in Judas and Cain,
deeply affected and afflicted in spirit, and yet in their sin. And therefore
the Spirit puts forth its own hand physically or immediately, and his own
arm brings salvation to us, by a further secret immediate stroke, turning the
iron neck, cutting the iron sinews of sin, and so makes this disunion or
separation. You think it easy to be willing that Christ should come and take
away all your sins; I tell you, the omnipotent arm of the Lord that
instructed Jeremy in a smaller matter, Jer. 8.11.
can only instruct you here; both these acts ever go together according to
the measure mentioned; the latter cannot be without the first, the first is in
vain without the latter.

But what evil in sin does the Spirit morally affect the heart with, Quest.
and so physically turn it from sin?

He affects the soul with it as the greatest evil; Answ.
by sin I mean not as considered without death, (for at this time the soul
is not so spiritual, as that sin without consideration of death and wrath due
to it should affect it) but sin and death, sin armed with wrath, sin
working death, pricks the heart as the greatest evil, and so lets out that
core at the bottom, as may fit the soul for healing. For,

1. If the Spirit make a man feel sin truly, the soul feels it as it is; it
is not the name, and talk of the danger of sin that troubles it, but the Spirit
(ever making things real) loads the soul with it indeed, and as it is; now it
is the greatest evil, and therefore so it feels sin. Believe it, you never
felt sin indeed as it is, if you have not felt it thus.

2. Else no man will prize Christ as the greatest good, without which no man
shall have him. Mat. 10.37


3. Else a man will live and continue in sin. If sin had been a greater
evil to Pilate then the loss of Caesar's friendship, he would never have
crucified Christ. If sin had been a greater evil to Iehu then the loss of
his Kingdom, he had never kept up the two calves. If sin were a greater
evil then poverty, shame, grief in this world, many a Professor would never
lose Christ and a good conscience too, for a little gain, profit or honor.
Beloved, the great curse and wrath of the Lord upon all men in the world almost
is this, that the greatest evils should be least of all felt; and the smallest
evils most of all complained of. What is death that only separates thy soul
from thy body, to sin that separates God blessed for ever from thy soul? and
therefore the Lord Jesus will remove this curse from those he saves. Acts 3.26.


Quest.
But you will say, What is that evil the soul sees at this time in sin, that
thus affects the heart with it, as the greatest evil? This is the last
difficulty here.

There is a threefold evil especially seen in sin: Answ.
1. The evil of torment and anguish. 2. The evil of wrong and injury to God.
3. The evil of separation of the soul from God.


The first may affect Reprobates, as Saul and Judas, who were sore distressed
when they felt the anguish of conscience by sin.

The second is only in those that are actually justified, called and
sanctified, who lament sin as it is against God, and a God reconciled to
them, and as it is against the life of God begun in them: and hence they cry
out of it as a body of death.

The third the elect feel at this first stroke and wound which the Spirit
gives them; the anguish of sin indeed lies sore upon them, Luke 15.7.
but this much more. Christ is come to seek that which is lost. The sheep is
lost, when First it is separated and gone from the owner; Secondly, when it
knows not how to return again, unless the Shepherd find it and carry it
home: so that soul is properly and truly lost, that feels it self separated
and gone from God, Esaias 33.6.
knowing not how to return to him again, unless the Lord come and take it
upon his shoulders, and carry it in his arms; this lies heavy upon it, viz.
that it is gone from God, and wholly separated from all union to him, and
communion with him. You may observe, John 16.9. that the Spirit convinces of
sin, how? because they believe not in me. i. Because they shall see and feel
themselves quite separated from me, they shall hear of my glory and riches of
mercy, and that happiness which all that have me, shall and do enjoy, but
they shall mourn that they have no part nor portion in these things, they shall
mourn that they live without me, and that they have lived so long without me.

I confess many other considerations of the evil of sin come now in, but this
is the maine channel where all the other rivelets empty themselves. And hence
it is that the soul under this stroke is in a state of seeking only, yet
finds nothing; it seeks God and Christ, and therefore feels a want, a loss of
both by sin; for the end of all the fears, terrors, sorrows, etc. upon the
elect, is to bring them back again to God, and into fellowship with God, the
only blessedness of man. Now if the soul ordained and made for this end
should not feel its present separation from God by sin, and the bitterness of
the evil of it; it would never seek to return again to him as to his greatest
good, nor desire ever to come into his bosom again; for look as sin wounds
the soul, so the soul seeks for healing of it; if only the torment of sin
wound, ease of conscience from that anguish will heal it: So if separation
from God wound the heart, only union and communion with God will heal it, and
comfort it again. The Lord Christ therefore having laid his hand upon the
soul to bring it back to himself first, Heb 7.25.
and so to the Father, being designed to gather in all the outcasts of Israel,
Esaias 56.8.
those he ever makes to feel themselves outcasts, as cast away out of Gods
blessed sight and presence, that so they may desire at last to come home
again: Reprobates not made for this end, have not this sense of sin, the means
of their return. And hence it is that the souls of those God saves, are never
quiet until they come to God, and communion with him; but they mourn for their
distance from him, and the hiding of his face, until the Lord shine forth
again: Whereas every one else though much troubled, yet sit down contented
with any little odd thing that serves to quiet them for the time, before the
Lord return to them, or they enter into their rest, in that ineffable communion
with him.

Let me now make Application of this, before I proceed to open the next
particular of Humiliation.

This may show us the great mistake of two sorts: Use 1.


1. Such as think there is no necessity of any sense of misery before the
application of the remedy or their closing with Christ; because say they, where
there is sense there is life; (all sense and feeling arising from life) and
where there is life, there is Christ already. And hence it is that they would
not have the Law first preached in these days, but the Gospel; the other is
to go round about the bush.

I answer, that for my own part this doctrine (of seeing and feeling our
misery before the remedy) is so universally received by all solid Divines both
at home and abroad, that I meet with; and the contrary opinion so cross to the
holy Scriptures, and general experience of the Saints, and the preaching of
the other so abundantly sealed to be Gods own way by his rich blessings on the
labors of his servants faithful to him herein; that were it not for the sake
of some weak and misled, I should not dare to question it; the Lord himself
so expressly speaking, that he came not to call the righteous, but on the
contrary only to heal the sick, who know and feel their sickness chiefly by
the Law, Romans 3.20. Do thou think therefore, that there is spiritual life
where ever there is any sense? Then I say, the devils and damned in hell have
much spiritual life, for they feel their misery with a witness. As for the
preaching of the Gospel before the Law to show our misery; it is true, that the
Gospel is to be looked at, as the maine end; yet you must use the means, before
you can come to the end, by the preaching of the Law, or misery in despising
the Gospel. End and Means have been ever good friends, and you may join them
well together, you cannot sever them without danger. I do observe that the
Apostles ever used this method: Paul first proves Jews and Gentiles to be
under sin, in almost the three first Chapters of the Romans, before he opens
the doctrine of Justification by faith in Christ. I do not observe that ever
there was so clear and manifest opening of Man's misery, as by Christ and his
Apostles, who brought in the clearest revelations of the Remedy. I do not read
in Moses, or in all the Prophets, such full and plain expressions of our
misery as in the New Testament: The worm that never dies; The fire that never
goes out; The wrath to come, etc. and therefore assuredly they thought this no
back-doore, but faith the door to Christ, and this the way to faith. To say
that a man must first have Christ and life, before he feel any spiritual
misery, is to say that a Christian must first be healed, that he may be sick;
cured, that he may be wounded; receive the spirit of adoption, before he
receive, and that he may receive the spirit of bondage to fear again.

If Ministers shall preach the remedy before they show misery, woe to this age,
that shall be deprived of those blessings, which the former gloried in, and
blessed the Lord for. Mark those men that deny the use of the Law to lead unto
Christ, if they do not fall in time to oppose some maine point of the Gospel.
For it is a righteous thing, but a heavy plague, for the Lord to suffer such
men to obscure the Gospel, that in their judgments zealously dislike this use
of the Law. You must preach the remedy; that is true: but you must also first
preach the woe and misery of men, or rather so mix them together, as the hearts
of hearers may be deeply affected with both; but first with their misery. It
argues a great consumption of the Spirit of grace, when Christians lives are
preserved only by Alchermys and choice Cordials, notions about Christ, nay
choice ones too, or else the old and ordinary food of the country will not
down. I tell you, the maine wound of Christians is want of deep humiliations
and castings down; and if you believe it not now, it may be, pestilence, sword
and famine shall teach you this doctrine, when the Lord shall make these things
wound you to the very heart, and put you to your wits end, that were not, that
would not in season be wounded at the heart with sin.

Are we troubled with too many wounded consciences in these times, that we are
so solicitous of coining new principles of peace? what is every man by nature,
but a kind of an infinite evil? all the sins that fill earth and hell, are in
every one man's heart, for sin in man is endless; and can not thou endure
to be cast down? Nothing is so vile as Christ to a man unhumbled, and can you
so easily prize him, and taste him, without any casting down?

2. Such as think there is a necessity of sense of misery, by the work of the
Law, before Christ can be received; but they think there is no such feeling of
misery, as has been mentioned; but that it is common to the reprobate as to
the elect, and consequently that in sense of sin there is no such special
work of the Spirit as separates the soul from sin before it comes unto
Christ, but that this is done after the soul is in Christ by faith, viz. in
Sanctification, being first justified by faith.

This is the judgment of many holy and learned; and therefore so long as there
is no disagreement in the substance of this doctrine, it should not trouble us;
only let it be considered, whether what is said, is not the truth of Christ;
and if it be, let us not cast it aside. The Jewish Rabbis have a speech at
this day very frequent in their writings, Non est in lege unica literula, a qua
non magni suspensi sunt montes: It is much more true of every truth; and if I
much mistake not, much depends upon the right understanding of this point.

That therefore 1. there must be some sense of misery, before the application
of the remedy.

2. That this compunction or sense of misery is wrought by the Spirit of
Christ, not the power of man to prepare himself thereby for further grace.

3. That these terrors and sorrows in the elect do virtually differ from
those in the reprobate, the one driving the soul to Christ, the other not;
these are agreed on all hands. The question only is, Whether there is this
farther stroke of severing the soul from sin, conjoined with the terrors and
sorrows in the elect before their closing with Christ, which is not in the
reprobate; or in one word, whether there is not a special work of the Spirit,
turning (at least in order of nature) the soul from sin, before the soul
returns by faith unto Christ. For the affirmative I leave these several
Considerations.

1. Cons.
That there is gratia actualis, or actual grace, as well as habitualis, or
habitual grace. Scho. orth. Spec. cap. 30, 31, 32.
Learned Ferrius makes a vast difference between them; and therefore to think
that there can be no power of sin removed but by habitual or sanctifying
grace, is unsound; for actual grace may do it, the Spirit may take away sin
mediately by habitual grace, and yet it can do it immediately also by an
omnipotent act, by that which is called actual actuating, or moving grace*
Christ can and must first bind the strong man, and cast him out by this working
or actual grace, before he dwells in the house of man's heart, by habitual and
sanctifying grace. The Gardners knife may immediately cut off a cyen from a
tree, thereby taking away all its power to grow there any more, before it has
a power to bring forth any fruit, which is wrought only by implanting it into
another stock: New creation (which is at first conversion) may well be without
habitual graces that are but creatures.

Whether any man since the fall is a subject immediately capable of sanctifying
or habitual grace; 2. Cons.
or whether any unregenerate man is in a next disposition to receive such
grace; as the air is immediately of light, out of which the darkness is
expelled by light, and so the habits of grace do expel the habits and power
of sin, (say some.) I suppose the affirmative is most false, and in near
affinity with some gross points of Arminianisme. Adam, in his pure naturals,
and considered merely as a living soul, was such a subject; like a white
paper, fitted immediately to take the impression of Gods image; but since, by
his fall, Sin is fallen like a mighty blot upon the soul, whereby a man not
only wants grace, as the dark air does light, but also resists grace, John
14.17. Hence this resistance must be first taken away, before the Lord
introduce his image again. To say that a man can of himself dispose himself
unto grace, was Pelagianisme in Aquinas his time: yet some disposition is
necessary, says Ferrius; not unto actual grace, or that which is wrought upon
a man, per modum actus, (as he says) but unto the reception of habitual or
sanctifying grace, it being in the soul per modum formae, no form being
introduced but into materiam dispositam, i. matter fitted or prepared, or into
such a vessel which is immediately capable of it.

There is in man a double resistance against grace.

1. Of a holy frame of grace by original corruption, which is opposite to
original and renewed holiness, or to this holy frame. 2. Of the God of grace
himself when he comes to work it, Job 21.14. Ezekiel. 24.13.
The first is taken away in that which we call the spirit of sanctification,
after faith; the second is taken away not only in the act of it, (as by
terrors it may be in reprobates, Psalm. 66.2.) but in some measure in the
inward ^oot and disposition of it, (only in the elect) there being (as has
been said) no more separation from sin, at this time required, then so much
as may make the soul come to the Lord to take it away, or at least not
unwilling, nor resisting the Lord, when he comes to do it himself.

Whether does not the work of union unto Christ, 3. Cons.
go before our communion with Christ? I suppose it is undeniable, that union
must be before communion; and that union to Christ is a work of grace as
peculiar to the elect, as communion with him. Now justification and
sanctification are two parts of our communion with him, and follow our union,
Romans 8.1. Our union therefore must be before these, of which there are two
parts, or rather two things on our part, necessarily required to it: 1. Cutting
off from the wild olive tree, the old Adam; 2. Implanting into the good olive
tree, the second Adam. The first must go before the second; for where there is
perfect resistance, there can be no perfect union. But take a man growing upon
his old root of nature, there is nothing but perfect resistance, Romans 8.7. and
therefore that resistance must first be taken away, before the Lord draw the
soul to Christ, and by faith implant it into Christ. In a word, I see not how
a man can wholly resist God and Christ, and yet be united unto him at the same
instant: and therefore the one (in order of nature at least) goes before the
other: and therefore let any man living prove his union to Christ, and to his
lust also, if he can. You will believe in Christ, many of you, and yet you will
have your whores, and cups, and lusts, and pride, and world too, and oppose all
the means that would have you from these also. I tell you, you shall find one
day how miserably deceived you have been herein. You cannot serve God and
Mammon. How can ye believe, says Christ, John 5.44. that seek honor one of
another? If you can have Christ, and be ambitious too, take him; but how can
you believe till the Lord has broken you off from thence?

4. Cons.
Whether vocation (as peculiar to the elect as sanctification) does not go
before justification and glorification, Romans 8.30. Whether also there are not
two things in effectual vocation; 1.. Is not Christ, that good, the term to
which the soul is firstly called? 2. Is not sin and world, that evil, the t^
arm from which the soul is called?


I suppose it is evident, that the soul is effectually called, and therefore
actually and firstly turned from darkness to light, from the power of Satan
unto God. First from darkness, then unto light; first from the power of Satan,
then unto God; as is evident by the Apostles own words, Act. 26.18. where he
methodically sets down the wonderful works of Christ's grace by his ministry:
the first is to turn them from darkness to light, and from Satan's power unto
God, which are the two parts of vocation, that they may receive forgiveness of
sins in justification, (vocation being a means to this end) that they may
receive an inheritance in glorification among such as being justified are
sanctified also by faith in his name. The Apostle does not say, that he was to
return men to light and unto God, and so turn them from darkness, and from the
power (...) Satan, (though this is true in some sense) but he was first to
turn from darkness and Satan, and so to return them unto light, and God in
Christ. For how is it possible to be turned unto Christ, and yet then also to
be turned to sin and Satan? Does it not imply a contradiction, to be turned
toward sin, (which is ever from Christ) and yet to be turned toward Christ
together? All Divines affirm generally, that in the working of ^aith, the Lord
makes the soul willing to have Christ, Psalm. 110.2, 3. but withal they
affirm, that of unwilling he makes willing; and therefore it follows, that
the Lord must first remove that unwillingnesse, before it can be willing, it
being impossible to be both willing and unwilling together.

5. Cons.
Whether the cause of all that counterfeit coin and hypocrisy in this
professing age, does not arise from this root, viz. not having this wound at
first, but only some trouble for sin without separation from it, sore
throws without deliverance from sin? is not this the death of most, if not
all wicked men living? how many are there that claspe about Christ, and yet
prove enemies to the cross of Christ; fall from Christ scandalously or
secretly afterward? what is the reason of it? Certainly if the Lord had cut
them off from their sin, they had never fallen to everlasting bondage in sin
again; but there the Spirit of God forsook them, the Lord not owing so much
love to them. Consider seriously why the stony and thorny-ground-hearers, Mat.
13. came to nothing in their growth of seeming faith and sanctification; was
the fault in the seed? No verily, but only in the ground; the one was broken,
but not deep enough, the other was broken deep, but not through enough, the
roots of thorns choked them, the lusts and cares of the world were not
destroyed first, and therefore they destroyed that ground.

Jer. 4.3, 4.
I conclude therefore with that of Jeremy, Break up your fallow grounds, seek to
the Lord to break them for you, and sow not among thorns, take heed of such
brokennesse which removes not the thorns of sinful secret stubbornness, lest
the wrath of the Lord break out against you, and burn that none can quench it.
Do not cut off John Baptists head, you that can be content to hear him
gladly, and do many things, but he must not touch your Herodias, and make a
divorce there, but suffer him to come in the spirit and power of Eliah, nay of
Christ Jesus, to beat down your mountains, fill up your valleys, make your
crooked rough ways smooth, that you may see the glory of the Lord Jesus,
without which he shall be ever hid from you. Cry you faithful servants of the
Lord, that All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man, of sin, of world, is
a withering flower; that the Lord Jesus may be revealed ever fresh, and sweet,
and precious, in the eyes of the Saints.

The evidence of this truth in the general, put blessed and learned Pemble
upon another way; Vind. great. p. 7, 11, 13
for when he perceived (as himself confesses) that it is the general
doctrine of all Orthodox Divines, viz. that actual faith is never wrought in
the soul, till beside the supernatural illumination of the mind, the will be
also first freed in part from its natural perverseness, (God making all men
of unwilling, willing) hereupon he concludes that this is done by the spirit of
Sanctification, and one supernatural quality of holiness universally infused in
all the powers of the soul at once; so that the Spirit instantly first
sanctifies us, and puts life in us; then it acts in sorrow for, and detestation
of sin, and so we come actually to believe. And because he foresaw the blow,
viz. that in this way, Christians are sanctified before they be justified; he
answers, Yes, we are justified declaratively after this.

Others (who follow him) answer more roundly, viz. that we are sanctified
before we are really and actually justified, and herein differ from him.

Now when it is objected against this, viz. that our vocation is that which
goes before our justification, sanctification being part of glorification
following after, Romans 8.30. Hereupon some others (treading in his steps)
affirm, that vocation is the same with sanctification, and not comprehended
under glorification.

Others perceiving the evil of this error, viz. to place sanctification
before justification, good fruits before a good tree, they do therefore deny
any saving work, whether of vocation or sanctification, before justification.
And hence on the other extreme, they do place a Christians justification,
before his faith in vocation, or holiness in his sanctification: so that by
this last opinion a Christian is not justified by faith, (which was Paul's
phrase) but rather (as he said wittily and wisely) faithed by his justification.

Before I come to clear the truth in these spiritual mysteries, let this
only be remembered, viz. That Sanctification, which Pemble calls out spiritual
life, may be taken two ways: 1. Largely. 2. Strictly.


1. Largely, for any awakenings of conscience, or acts of the Spirit of life,
and so it is true, we are quickened by these acts, and so in a large sense
sanctified first.

2. Strictly, for those habits of the life of holiness which are opposite to
the body of death in us; and that we are not first sanctified before we are
justified, in this sense, we shall manifest by and by. Only let me begin to
show the error of the last opinion first, viz.

1. That a Christian is not first justified, before faith, or vocation, may
appear thus.

1. It is professedly* cross to the whole current of Scripture, which says,
We are justified by faith, and therefore not before faith; and to say that the
meaning of such phrases is, that we are justified declaratively by faith, or to
our sense and feeling in foro conscientiae, is a mere device; for our
justification is opposed to the state of unrighteousness and condemnation
going before, which condemnation is not only declarative and in the court of
Conscience, but real, and in the court of Heaven: For so says the Scripture
expressly, John 3.18. He that believes not, is condemned already: and verse 36.
The wrath of God abides on him: and Gal. 3.22. The Scripture (which is the
sentence in Gods Court) has concluded all under sin. Hence a second Argument
arises,

2. If a man be justified before faith, then an actual unbeleever is subject
to no condemnation; but this is expressly cross to the letter of the Text, He
that believes not, is condemned already, John 3.18. and the wrath of God does
lie upon him. The subjects of non-condemnation are those that be in Christ, by
faith, Romans 8.1. not out of Christ by unbelief, Romans 11.20. There is indeed a
merited justification by Christ's death, and a virtuall or exemplary
justification in Christ's resurrection, as in our Head and Surety; and both
these were before not only our faith, but our very being; but to say that we
are therefore actually justified before faith, because our justification was
merited before we had faith, gives as just a ground of affirming that we are
actually sanctified whiles we are in the state of nature unsanctified, Ephesians.
2.1. because our sanctification was merited by Christ before we had any being
in him.

We must indeed be first made good trees by faith in Christ's righteousness,
before we can bring forth any good fruits of holiness. John 14.3, 4, 5.
God makes us not good trees without being in Christ by faith, no more then we
are bad trees, in contracting Adams guilt without our being first in him; God
gives us first his Son (offered in the Gospel, and received by faith) and
then gives us all other things with him; he does not justify us without giving
us his Son; but having first given him, gives us this also.

2. That sanctification does not go before

1. If guilt of Adams sin go before original pollution, Romans 5.12. then
imputation of Christ's righteousness before renewed sanctification.

2. To place sanctification before justification, is quite cross to the
Apostles practice, (which is our pattern) who first sought to be found in
Christ, Phil. 3.9. (in the work of union) not having his own righteousness in
the work of justification (which in order follows that) that he may then know
him in the power of his death and resurrection in sanctification (here comes in
sanctification) if by any means he might attain to the resurrection of the
dead in glorification, (the last of all.)

3. This is quite cross to the Apostles doctrine which makes justification the
cause of sanctification, and therefore must needs go before it, Romans 5. as sin
goes before spiritual and eternal death, so righteousness goes before
spiritual life in sanctification, and eternal life in glory: the Lord holds
forth Christ in the Gospel first as our propitiation, Romans 3.24. and then it
comes dying to sin, and living to God in sanctification, chap. 6.1. Holiness
is the end of our actual reconciliation, Col. 1.21, 22.

4. If sanctification go before justification by faith, then a Christians
communion with Christ, goes before his union to him by faith; but our union is
the foundation of communion, and it is impossible there should be communion
without some precedent union. 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is made righteousness and
sanctification, unto whom? read the beginning of the verse, and you shall see,
it is only to those that be in Christ, which is by faith.

Let none say here (as some do) that we have union to Christ, first by the
Spirit, without faith, in order going before faith: For understanding of which,
let us a little consider of our union unto Christ; Our union to Christ is not
by the essential presence of the Spirit, for that is in every man, as the
Godhead is every where, in whom we live and move. This is common to the most
wicked man, nay to the vilest creature in the world. Hence it follows that our
union is by some act of the Spirit peculiar to the elect (who only shall have
communion with Christ) working some real change in the soul, (for of real,
not relative union I now speak) this act cannot be those first acts of the
spirit of bondage, (for they are common unto reprobates) they are therefore
such acts as are essential unto the nature of union. Now look as disunion, is
the disjunction or separation of diverse things one from another; so union is
the conjunction or joining of them together, that were before severed. Hence
that act of the Spirit in uniting us to Christ, can be nothing else but the
bringing back the soul unto Christ, or the conjunction of the soul unto
Christ, and into Christ, by bringing it back to him, that before this lay like
a dry bone in the valley separated from him. Thus 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is
joined, or (as the word signifies) glewed to the Lord, is one spirit with him.
The Spirit therefore brings us to the Lord Christ, and so we are in him. Now
the coming of the soul to Christ, what is it but faith? John 6.35. Our union
therefore is by faith, not without it: for by it only we that were once
separated from him by sin, and especially by unbelief, Heb. 3.12. are now
come not only unto him, as iron unto the lodestone, John 6.37. out (which is
most near) into him, as branches into the vine, and so grow one with him; and
hence those phrases in Scripture, to believe in Christ, or into Christ. I speak
not this as if we were united to Christ without the Spirit on his part; (for
the conjunction of things severed must be mutual, if it be firm) I only show
that we are not united before faith by the Spirit unto Christ; but that we are
by faith (wrought by the Spirit) whereby on our part we are first conjoined
unto him; and then on his part he by the person of the Spirit is most
wonderfully united unto us. The Spirit puts forth variety of acts in the soul;
as it acts us to good works, it is the spirit of obedience; as it infuseth habits
of grace, so it is the spirit of sanctification; as it assists us continually,
and guides us to our end, and witnesses favor, it is the spirit of adoption; as
it works fears of death and hell, it is the spirit of bondage; but as it draws
us from sin to Christ, so it is the spirit of union: and therefore to imagine
union before and without faith by the Spirit, is but a spirit indeed, which
when you come to feel it, you shall find it a nothing, without flesh, or
bones, or sinews. As our marriage union to Christ must have consent of faith
on our part, wrought by the Spirit, or else the Lord Jesus is a vain suitor to
us; so now the Spirit on Christ's part must apprehend our faith, and dwell in
us, who otherwise shall suddenly go a whoring from him: 1 Pet. 1.5. Ephesians. 3.17.

3. That Vocation is not all one with

1. Vocation is before Justification, Romans 8.30. But Sanctification is not
before Justification, as we have proved, and therefore they are not the same.

2. Sanctification is the end of Vocation, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. therefore it is not
the same with it.

3. Faith is the principal thing in Vocation: The first part of it being Gods
call, the second part being our answer to that call, or in coming at that
call; Ier. 3.22. Now faith is no part of Sanctification strictly taken, because
it is the means and instrument of our Justification and Sanctification. Acts
26.18. Our hearts are said to be purified by faith; Acts 15.9. not our lives
only in the acts of holiness and purity, but our hearts in the habitual
frame of them. I live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20.
says Paul, We pass from death to life by faith, John 5.24. therefore it is
no part of our spiritual life; You will not come to me (which is faith) that
you may have life; John 5.40. John 6.50.51. therefore faith is the
isntrumental means of life, and therefore no part of our life: as faith comes
by hearing, and therefore hearing is no part of faith; so Justification comes
by faith, and therefore is no part of Sanctification: all our life both of
Justification and Sanctification is laid up in Christ our head; this life
according to Gods great plot shall never be had but by coming to Christ for it,
Heb. 7.25. else grace and Christ should not be so much honored, Romans 4.16. it
is of Faith, that it might be of Grace; Sanctification therefore is the grace
applied by faith, faith the grace applying; by coming to Christ for it, we have
it; and therefore have it not, when first we come.

I am sorry to be thus large in less practical matters; yet I have thought it
not unusefull, but very comfortable to a poor passenger, not only to know his
journies end, and the way in general to it, but also the several Stadia or
Towns he is orderly to pass through; there is much wisdom of God to be seen
not only in his work, but in his manner and order of working; for want of
which, I see many Christians in these days fall very foulely into erroneous
apprehensions in their judgments, the immediate ground of many errors in
practice; the objections made against what has been delivered, are for the
principal of them answered; the maine end, (my beloved) of propounding these
things is, that you would look narrowly to your union, oh take heed you miss
not there; if you close with Christ, believe in Christ, and yet not cut off
from your sin, viz. that spirit of resistance of Christ, you are utterly and
eternally undone: this is the condemnation of the world, not that men love
darkness wholly, and hate light, but that they love darkness more then
light; not that the unclean spirit is not gone out, but that he is not so cast
out, as never to return again; the wound of all men, yea the best of men that
profess Christ, and yet indeed out of Christ, lies in this: they were never
severed from their sin by all their prayers, tears, fears, sorrows; and
hence they never truly come to Christ: and hence perish in their sin.

Trouble me no more therefore in asking, Whether a Christian is in a state of
happiness or misery in this condition? I answer, he is preparatively happy, he
is now passing from death to life, though not as yet wholly passed: Nor yet,
whether there is any saving work before union? I answer, No, for what is said
is one necessary ingredient to the working up of our union, as cutting off the
branch from the old stock, is necessary to the ingrafting it into the new;
indeed, without faith it is impossible to please God; nor do I say that this
work does please: i. e. it does not pacify God, (for that is proper to Christ's
perfect righteousness received by Faith) yet as it is a work of his own
Spirit upon us, it is pleasing to him; (as the after-worke of Sanctification
is) though it neither does pacify him; nor do I see how this doctrine is any
way opposite to the free offer of grace, and Christ, because it requires no
more separation from sin, then that which drives them unto Christ; nay which is
less, that makes them (by the power of the Spirit) not resist, but yield to
Christ; that he may come unto them and draw them: you cannot repent nor convert
your selves; Be converted therefore, says Peter, Acts 3.19. that you may
receive remission of sins, and in this offer the Spirit works; and verily he
that can truly receive Christ without that sense of misery as separates him
from his sin, (as explained to you) let him believe notwithstanding all that
which is said; and the God of heaven speaks peace to him; his Faith shall not
trouble me, if he be sure it shall not one day deceive himself.

Use 2.
Of lamentation for the hardness of men's hearts in these times: as it is said
the Lord Jesus mourned when he saw the hardness of the peoples hearts, Mark
3.5. are there not some so far from this, as that they take pleasure in their
sins, they are sugar under their tongues, as sweet as sleep, nay as their
lives? and you come to pull away their limbs when you come to pluck away their
sins: though they have broke Sabbaths, neglected prayer, despised the word,
hated and mocked at the Saints, been stubborn to their parents, cursed and
swore, (which made Peter go out and weep bitterly) though lustful and wanton,
(which broke David's bones) though guilty of more sins then there be moates
in the Sun or Stars in heaven, though their sins be crimson, and fill
heaven with their cry, and all the earth with their burden, yet they mourn
not; never did it one hour together: nay they cannot do it, because they will
not; if you are weary and laden, where are your unutterable groans? if
wounded and bruised, where are your dolorous complaints? if sick, where is your
enquiry for a Physician? if sad, where are your tears, in the day, in the
night, morning and evening alone by your selves, and in company with others? Oh
how great is the wrath of God, hardening so many thousands at this day! whence
comes it that Christ is not prized, but from this senselessness? name any
reason why the blessed Gospel of peace, and all the sweet promises of life are
undervalued, but from hence: and what do you hereby poor creatures, but only
aggravate your sins, and make those that are little, exceeding great in the
eyes of God? whence it is that you treasure up wrath against the day of wrath,
Romans 2.2, 3, 4, 5. This hardness is that which blunts the edge of all Gods
ordinances, whence Gods poor Ministers sit sorrowful in their closets, seeing
all Gods seed lost upon bare rocks; oh this is the condition of many a man, and
which is most fearful, the means which should make the heart sensible, make
it more proud and unsensible. Tire and Sydon, and Sodom, are more fit to
mourn, then Chorasin, and Capernaum, that have enjoyed humbling means long.
Nay how many be there that mourn out their mournings, confess out their
confessions, and by their own humiliations grow more senseless afterward? did
we ever live in a more impenitent secure age? we shall seldom meet with one
broken with sin, but how few are broken from sin also? and hence it is many a
tall Cedar that were set down in the Table Book for converted men, once much
humbled, and now comforted; stay but a few years, you shall see more dangerous
sins of a second growth; one turns drunkard, another covetous, another proud,
another a Sectary, another a very dry leaf, a very formalist; another full of
humerous opinions, another laden with scandalous lusts: woe to you that lament
not now; for you shall mourn. Do thou think that Christ should ever wipe off
thy tears that sheddest none at all? do thou think to reap in joy, that
sowest not with these showers? verily God will make his word good, Prove. 29.1.
He that hardens his own heart, shall perish suddenly; hear this you secure
sorrowlesse sinners, if ever Gods hand be stretched out suddenly against thee,
in blasting thy estate, snatching away thy children, the wife of thy bosom,
the husband of thy delight; in staining thy name, vexing thee with debts and
crosses, short and sore, or lingering sicknesses; know that all this comes upon
thee for a hard heart: but oh mourn for it now you parents, children,
servants, the tokens of death are upon you; desire the Lord to break your
hearts for you: lie under Gods hammer, be not above the word, and suffer the
Lord to take away that which grieves him most, even thy stony heart; because it
grieves thee least: meditate much of thy woeful condition, chew that bitter
pill; remember death and rotting in the grave, that many are now in hell for
thy sins, that Christ must dye, or thou dye for the least sin; remember how
patient and long suffering the Lord has bin to thee, and how long he has
groaned under thy burden, that it may be, though he would, yet he cannot
bear thy load long; let these things be mused on, that thy heart may be at
last sorrowful before it be too late. But oh the sad estate of many with us,
that can mourn for any evil, except it be for the greatest, sin and death,
and wrath that lie upon them.

Use 3.
Of exhortation; Labor for this sense of misery, this spirit of compunction:
how can you believe in Christ, that feel not your misery without him? a broken
Christ cannot do thee good without a broken heart; be afflicted and mourn
ye sinners, turn your laughter into mourning, tremble to think of that wrath,
which burns down to the bottom of hell, and under which the eternal Son
of God sweat drops of blood: great sins which thou know thou art guilty of,
cause great guilt, and great hardness of heart, and therefore are seldom
forgiven or subdued without great affliction of spirit; they have loaded the
Lord long, they must load thee. Little sins are usually slighted, and
extenuated, and therefore the Lord accounts them great; and therefore thy soul
must be in bitterness for them, before the Lord will pass them by: it is not
every trouble that will serve the turn; look that it be such as separates thy
soul from thy sin, or else it will separate between thy soul and God. I know
it is not in your power to break your own hearts, no more then to make the
rocks to bleed; yet remember he that bids thee cast up and prepare the way of
the Lord, Esa. 43.4.
he has promised that every mountain shall be brought low, and the crooked
ways made plain, and the rough smooth, and the valleys filled: He only can
do it for thee, and will do it for some, it may be for thee; he that broke
the heart of Manasseh and Paul after their blood and blasphemies, when they
never desired any such thing, he can break thine much more when thou art
desiring him to do it for thee; here are many of you that fear you were never
humbled nor burdened enough; I say fear it still, fear lest there be a stone
in the bottom, not so as to discourage and drive thy heart from Christ, but so
as to feel a greater need of his grace to soften thy heart, and to take thy
senslesnesse away: the Lord does purposely command thee to plough up thy fallow
ground, that thou might feel thy impotency so to do, and come to him to take
it away: every thing will harden thee more and more, until the Lord come and
take thy stony heart away by his own hand: all Gods kindnesses will make thee
more bold to sin, and all Gods judgments more fierce and obstinate in sin,
unless the Lord put to his hand; if Pharaohs heart be softened for a time, it
will grow hard again, if the Lord take it not away: The means therefore for
thee to get this compunction, is, 1. To feel the evil of thy hard heart; no
surer token of Reprobation then hardness, if continued in; especially for thy
heart to grow hard under or after softning means, as it was in Pharaoh. 2. To
look up to the Lord in all ordinances, that he would take it away.

Use. 4
Have not you great cause of abundant thankfulness, into whose hearts the Lord
has let in fears and sorrows, concerning your estates? the blind world
looks upon all troubles of conscience as temptations of the devil to
despair, and the very way to run mad; but consider what the Lord has done for
you that have such: what if the Lord had left you without all feeling, as those
in Ephesians. 4.19. what if the Lord had smitten you with a spirit of slumber, as
those, Romans 11.8. would not your estate have been then lamentable? and have
you no hearts to acknowledge his unspeakable goodness in awakening of you; in
shaking thy very foundations? do thou think that any ever had such a hard
heart as thou have? do not say so in secret before the Lord sometimes? oh
then what rich grace is this to give thee any sense and feeling of thy sin and
danger by it, though it be never so little in thine eyes! some think these
terrors are a judgment; it is true, if they were merely imaginary, or worldly
and desperate; but says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.7. I thank God I made you
sorry. Suppose thy sorrow should be only in regard of the punishment of sin,
yet this is the Lords goodness to make thy heart so far sensible; that once
did go like a beast to the slaughter, fearing no danger at all; the very
means to prize favor from God, is to feel wrath, (as well as sin) and the
very reason why the Lord has let thee feel thy punishment heavy, is, that thy
soul might feel the evil of sin, by considering that if the fruits be so
bitter, Jer. 30.15.
what is then the cause? be not therefore weary of thy burden, so as to think
the Lord powers out his vengeance on thee while thy trouble remains; oh
consider that this is the hand of the Lord Jesus, and that he is now about to
save thee, when he comes to work any compunction in thee; especially such, as
whereby he does not only cut thy heart with fears and sorrows, but cut thee
off from thy sin; so far only as humbles thee and drives thee to the Lord
Christ to take them away. And so I come to the third particular of Humiliation.

SECT. IV. The third Act of Christ's power, which is Humiliation.
THe Lord Jesus having thus broken the heart by compunction, is not like a
foolish builder that leaves off his work before he has fully finished it, and
therefore having thus wounded a poor sinner, he goes on to humble him also;
for though in a large sense a wounded contrite sinner is an humble sinner, yet
strictly taken there is a great difference between them; and therefore, he is
said to dwell with the contrite and humble, Esaias 57.16.
i. e. not only with those that be wounded with sin, but humbled for sin;
although it is certain the soul is seldom or never effectually wounded, but
it is also humbled at the same time. A man may be wounded sore even unto
death, and yet the pride of the man is such that he will not fall down before
him that smites him: so it is with many a poor sinner, the Lord has sorely
wounded him that he will resist no more, yet he will rather fly to his duties
to heal him, or dye alone and sink under his discouragements, then stoop. Oh
beloved, man must down, before the Lord Christ will take him up: and therefore
in Isay 40.5, 6, 7. the glory of the Lord is promised to be revealed; but what
means must be used for this end? Cry, says the Lord; what should I cry?
says he; the Lord answers that all flesh is grass, and that the glory of it
fades, and that the people are this grass; i. e. not only that men's sins are
vile, but that themselves also are grass, nay their glory and excellency is
withering and fading; and therefore not only mountains must be pulled down,
but all flesh, and the glory of it wither, before the Lord shall be revealed.

I shall briefly open these four things: 1. What is this humiliation. 2. What
need there is of it. 3. What means the Lord uses to work it. 4. What measure
of it is here required.


What is this humiliation?

Look as pride is that sin, Answ.
whereby a man conceited of some good in himself, and seeking some excellency
to himself, exalts himself above God; so Humiliation (in this place) is that
work of the Spirit, whereby the soul being broken off from self-conceit, and
selfe-confidence in any good it has or does, submits unto, or lies under
God, to be disposed of as he pleases. 1 Pet. 5.6. Levit. 26.41. That look as
compunction cuts the sinner off from that evil that is in him, so humiliation
cuts it off from all high conceits, and self-confidence, of that good which is
in him, or which he seeks might be in him, and so the soul is abased before
God.

What need or necessity is there of this?

Because Answ.


1. When the Lord has wounded the hearts of his elect, this is the immediate
work of their hearts, (if the Lord prevent them not by his grace, as many times
he does) they look to what good they have, or if they find little or none,
they then seek for some in themselves, that thereby they may heal their wound,
because they think thus, that as their sins have provoked God to anger
against them, so if now they can reform and leave those sins, or if not,
repent and be sorry for them; if now they pray, and hear, and do as others
do, they have some hope that this will heal their wound, and pacify the Lord
toward them; when they see there is no peace in a sinful course, they will
therefore try if there be any to be found in a good course: And look as Adam
when he saw his own shame and nakedness, hid himself from God in the bushes,
and covered his nakedness with fig leaves; so the soul not being able to
endure to see its own nakedness and vileness, not knowing Christ Jesus, and
he being far to seek, does therefore labor to cover his wickedness and
sinfulness which now he feels by some of these fig leaves. And hence Micah
6.7. they enquire wherewith they should come before the Lord, should they bring
rivers of oil, or thousands of lambs, or the first borne of their body to
remove the sin of their soul? Paul did account these duties gain, Phil. 3.7.
and set them at a high rate, because he thought that God did so himself: When
the Lord has wounded the soul, the first voice it speaks, is, What shall I
do? Do? says Conscience, leave thy sins, do as well as others, do with all
thy might, and strength, pray, hear, and confer, God accepts of good desires,
and requires no more of any man but to do what he can. Hence the soul plyes
both oars, though against wind and tide, and strives, and wrastles with his
sins, and hopes one day to be better, and here he rests. And observe it, look
as sin is his greatest evil, so the casting away of his sins, and seeking to
be better, is very sweet to him; and being so sweet, rests in what he has,
and seeks for what he wants, and so hopes all will be well one day, and so
stays here; although (God knows) it be without Christ, nor cannot rest on
him, though he has heard of him a thousand times. And hence it is if they
cannot do any thing to ease themselves, then their hearts ^ink, or it may be
quarrel with God, that he makes them not better. But beloved, it is wonderful
to see how many times men rest in a little they have, and do.

2. But whiles it is thus with the soul, he is incapable of Christ; for he
that trusts to other things to save him, or makes himself his own Savior, or
rests in his duties without a Savior, he can never have Christ to save him.
Romans 9.32. it is said, the Jews lost Christ's righteousness, because they
sought it not by faith, but ^ought salvation by their own righteousness. He
that makes flesh his arm, (as all duties and endeavors of man be, when
trusted to) the Lord says, Cursed be that man, Ier. 17.5, 6. Only the Lord
does not leave his Elect here; he that is married unto the Law, Romans 7. cannot
be matched unto Christ, till he be first divorced, not from the duties
themselves, but from trusting to them, and resting in them. And therefore says
Paul, Gal. 2.19.
I through the Law am dead to it, that I might live unto God. He that trusts
to riches cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, no more then a Camel
through a needles eye, because it is too big for so narrow a room: so he that
trusts to his duties and abilities, is too big to enter in by Christ, the
Lord must cut off this spirit, and lay it low, and make it stoop as vile before
God, before it can have Christ in this estate; the Lord must not only cut it
off from this selfe-confidence in duties, but also so far forth as that the
soul may lie under God, to be disposed of as he pleases. And the reason is,
because such a soul as is unwilling to stoop, is unhumbled; and he that is so,
does not only on his part resist God, but the Lord also resists him, James
4.7, 8. And hence you shall observe, many a one has lain long under distress
of conscience, because they have either rested in their duties which could not
quiet, or because they have not so cast off their confidence in them, so as to
lie down quietly before God, that he may do what he will with them; being so
long objects of Gods resistance, not of his grace.

By what means does the Lord work this?

In general, Answ.
by the Spirit, immediately acting upon the soul; for after a Christian is in
Christ, he has by the habit of humility, and the virtue of faith, some power
to humble himself; but now the Spirit of Christ does it immediately by its own
omnipotent hand; else the proud heart would never down: For we are first
created in Christ (which is by Gods omnipotent immediate act) unto good works,
before we do from our selves, or by the power of Faith, put forth good works,
Ephesians. 2.10. These acts of self-confidence may not be stirring in all Christians;
but in all men there is this frame of spirit, never to come to Christ, if they
can make any thing else serve to heal them or save them; and therefore the
Spirit cuts off this sinful frame in part in all the elect; he hewes the
roughness and pride of spirit off, that it may lie still upon the foundation
it is now preparing for. Now though the Spirit works this, yet it is not without
the Word; the Word it works chiefly by, is the Law, Gal. 3.19. I through the
Law am dead to it, (i. e. from seeking any life or help from it) that I might
live unto God. Now the Law does this by a fourfold act.

1. By discovering the secret corruptions of the soul in every duty, which it
never saw before; It once thought, I shall perish for my sin, if I continue
therein, without confession of them, or sorrow for them; but it also did think
that this confession, sorrow, and trouble for sin will serve to save it, and
make God to accept of it; but the Law (while the soul is earnestly striving
against his sin) discovering that in all these there is nothing but sin,
even secret sins it did never see before, hereupon it begins thus to think,
Can these be the means of saving of me, which being so sinful, cannot but be
the very causes of condemning of me? I know I must perish for the least sin,
and now I see that in all I do, I can do nothing else but sin. What made
Paul alive without the Law? You shall find, Romans 7.7. it was because he did
not know that lust, or the secret concupiscences and first risings of the soul
to sin, were sin; he saw not these secret evils in all that which he did:
and ^ence he rested in his duties, as one alive without Christ; but the Lord by
discovering this, let him see what little cause he had to lift up his hand, for
any good he did: So it is here, when the soul sees that all its righteousness
is a menstruous cloth, polluted with sin; now those duties which like reeds it
trusted to before, run into the hand, nay heart of a poor sinner; and therefore
now it sees little cause of resting on them any longer: now it sees the
infinite holiness of God by the exceeding spiritualnesse of the law, it begins
to cry out, How can I stand or appear before him with such continual
pollutions?

2. By irritating or stirring up of original corruption, in making more of
that to appear then ever before; that if the soul thinks, all I do is
defiled with sin, yet my heart is good, and so it rests there; the Lord
therefore stirs that dunghill, and lets it see a more hellish nature then
ever before, in that the holy and blessed command of God (to its feeling) makes
it worse, more rebellious, more averse from God; Romans 7.9, 10, 11.
When the commandment came sin revived, says Paul, and that which was for
life was death to him, sin taking occasion by the law; and hence Paul came to
be slain and dye to all his selfe-confidence. It was one of Luthers first
positions in opposing the Popes indulgences, that Lex and voluntas sunt duo
adversarii sine gratiae irreconciliabiles; for the law and man's will meeting
together, the one holy, the other corrupt, make fierce opposition when the
soul is under any lively work of the law; and by this irritation of the law,
the Lord has this end in his elect, to make them feel what wretched hearts
they have, because that which is in it self a means of good, makes them
(through man's corruption) more vile to their feeling then ever before; and
hence come those sad complaints on a soul under the humbling hand of Christ, I
am now worse then ever I was, I grow every day worse and worse, I have lost
what once I had, I could once pray, and seek God with delight, and never well
but when one duty was done, to be in another; but now, I am worse, all that joy
and sweetness in seeking of him, and in holy walking is gone; I could once
mourn for sin, but now a hard heart takes hold of me, that I have not so much
as a heart to any thing that is good, nor to shed a tear for the greatest
evil. It is true, I confess you may grow (to your feeling) worse and wor^,
and it is fit you should feel it; that the Lord hereby might pull down your
proud heart, and make you lie low; it is the Lords glorious wisdom to wither
all your flowers, which refreshed you without Christ, that you might feel a
need of him; and therefore I say the Lord pulls away all those broken planks
the soul once floated and rested upon, that the soul may sink in a holy
despair of any help from any good it has; the Lord shakes down all building
on a sandy foundation: and then the soul cries out, It is ill resting here.

3. By loading, tyring and wearying the soul by its own endeavors, until it
can stir no more; for this is in every man by nature; when he sees that all he
does is sinful, and all he has, his heart and nature to be most sinful; yet
he will not yet come out of himself, because he hopes though he be for the
present thus vile, yet he hopes for future time his heart may grow better, and
himself do better then now; and hence it is that he strives, and seeks, and
endeavors to his utmost to set up himself again, and to gain cure to all his
troubles by his duties: now the law whose office is to command but not to give
strength, and the Spirit that should give strength withdrawing it self,
because it knows the soul would rest therein without Christ; hence it comes
to pass that the soul feeling it self to labor only in the fire, and
smoke, and to be still as miserable and sinful as ever before, hereupon it is
quite tired out, and sits down weary, not only of its sin, but of its work, and
now cries out, I see now what a vile undone wretch I am, I can do nothing for
God or for my self, only I can sin and destroy my self; all that I am is
vile, and all that I do is vile, I now see that I am indeed poor, and blind,
and miserable, and naked; and the truth is, beloved, here comes in the greatest
dejections of spirit, for when the Lord smites the soul for sin, it hopes that
by leaving of sin and doing better it may do well; but when it sees that
there is no hope here of healing the breach between God and it self, now it
falls low indeed: and I take this to be the true meaning of Mat. 11.28. Ye that
labor, i. e. You that are wearied in your own way, in seeking rest to your
souls by your own hard labor or works (as the word (...) signifies) and are
tired out therein, and so are now laden indeed with sin and the heavy
pressure of that, finding no ease by all that which you do; come to me, says
Christ, and you shall then find rest unto your souls: the Jews seeking to
establish their own righteousness, seeking I say if by any means they might
establish it, lost Christ; the Lord therefore will make his elect know they
shall seek here for ease in vain: and therefore tyres them out.

4. By clearing up the equity and justice of God in the law, if the Lord should
never pity nor pardon it, nor show any respect or favor to it; for this is the
frame of every man's heart, if he cannot find rest in his duties, and
endeavors, as he once expected he should, but sees sin and weakness, death
and condemnation wrapping him about (like Ionahs weeds) in all he does, then
his heart sinkes, and quarrels, and falls off farther from Christ by
discouragement, and grows secretly impatient that there should be no mercy
left for him, because it thinks now the Lords eternal purpose is to exclude
him; for if there were any thoughts of peace toward him, he should have found
peace before now, having so earnestly and frequently sought the Lord, and
having done so much, and forsaken his sinful ways, according to his own
commandment from him; and hence it is, you shall find it a certain truth,
that the soul is turned back as far from God by sinking discouraging sorrows
for sin, Lam 1.16.
as ever it was in a state of security by the pleasures of sin; and hence
sometime it thinks it is in vain to seek any more, and hence leaves off
duties; and if conscience force it to them, yet it sinkes again because its
foot is not stablisht upon the rock Christ, but upon the weakness of the
waters of its own abilities and endeavors; what therefore should the soul
do in this case, to come to God? it knows not, it cannot; ^ly from him it
dare not, it shall not; the spirit therefore by revealing how equal and just
it is for the Lord never to regard or look after it more, because it has
sinned and is still so sinful, makes it hereby to fall down prostrate in the
dust before the Lord, as worthy of nothing but shame and confusion, and so
kisseth the rod, and turns the other cheek unto the Lord even smiting of him,
acknowledging if the Lord show mercy it will be wonderful, if not, yet the
Lord is righteous, and therefore has no cause to quarrel against him for
denying special mercy to him, to whom he does not owe a bit of bread. And now
the soul is indeed humbled, because it submits to be disposed of, as God
pleases; thus the Church in her humiliation, Lam. 3.22. having in the former
part of the Chapter drunk the wormwood and the gall, at last lies down and
professes, it is the Lords mercy it is not consumed; and verse 29. he puts his
mouth to the dust if there may be any hope: and verse 39. why should a living
man complain for the punishment of his sin? You think the Lord does you
wrong, and neglects your good and his own glory too, if he does not give you
peace and pardon, grace and mercy, even to the utmost of your asking, and then
think you have hence good cause to ^ret, and sink, and be discouraged; No,
no, the Lord will pull down those mountains, those high thoughts, and make you
lie low at his feet, and acknowledge that it is infinite mercy you are alive,
and not consumed; and that there is any hope or possibility of mercy, and that
you are out of the nethermost pit: and that if he should never pity you, yet he
does you no wrong, but that which is equal and just, and that it is fit your
sinful froward wills should stoop to his holy, righteous, and good will,
rather then that it should stoop and be crooked according unto yours. Believe
it brethren, 1 Cor. 11.31.
he that judges not himself thus, shall be judged of the Lord, how can you
have mercy that will set your selves up in Gods Sovereign Throne to dispose of
it, and will not lie down humbly under it, that it may dispose of you? for are
you worthy of it? has the Lord any need of you? have you not provoked him
exceedingly? was there ever any that dealt worse with him then you? Oh beloved
lie low here; and learn of the Church, Micah 7.9. I will bear the indignation
of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. It was a most blessed frame of
spirit in Aaron, Levit. 10.3.
when he saw Gods hand against him in cutting off his children, and Aaron held
his peace; so if the Lord should cast thee off, or cut thee off, never take
pleasure in such a polluted broken vessel unfit for any use for him, hold thou
thy peace; quarrel not, be silent before him, and say as they did, 2 Chronicles.
12.5. The Lord is righteous, but I am vile; let him do with me what seems good
in his own eyes: and thus the Lord Jesus by the law does dead the soul to the
law, until it be made to submit like wax, or like clay to the hand of the
potter, to frame it a vessel to what use he pleases; and as the Apostle most
excellently Romans 7. diverceth it from its first husband, ( i. e. Sin and the
Law) that it may be married unto Jesus Christ. In a word, when the Lord Christ
has made the soul feel not only its inability to help it self, and so
says as Paul, Gal. 2.20. It is not I, but also its own unworthiness, that
the Lord should help it, and so cries out with Job, Behold, I am vile; now at
this instant, it is vas capax, a vessel capable (though unworthy) of any grace,
Iam. 4.6.



Answ.
Look as so much conviction is necessary which begets compunction, and so much
compunction as breeds humiliation; so, so much humiliation is necessary as
introduces faith, or as drives the soul out of it self unto Christ: for as
the next end of conviction is compunction, and that of compunction is
humiliation; so the next end of humiliation is faith, or coming to Christ,
which we shall next speak unto. And hence it is that the Lord calls unto the
weary and heavy laden to come unto him, Mat. 11.27. So much as makes you come
for rest in Christ, so much is necessary, and no more. If any can come without
being thus laden and weary in some measure, let them come and drink of the
water of life freely; but a proud heart that will make it self its own
Savior, will not come to the Lord Jesus to be his Savior; he that will be his
own Physician, so long cannot send out for another. Nay let me fall one degree
lower, if the soul cannot come to Christ, (as who feel not themselves unable
when the Lord comes to draw?) and find not the Lord Jesus coming unto them, to
draw them and compel them in; yet if the soul be so far humbled, as not to
resist the Lord, by quarrelling with him, and at him, for not coming to him,
as unworthy of the least smile, as worthy of all frowns; verily the Lord will
come to it, and no more is requisite then this, and thus much certainly is: For
thus the whole Scripture runs, He gives grace to the humble, James 4.6. I dwell
with the contrite and humble, Esaias 57.16. The poor afflicted shall not always
be forgotten, Psalm. 9.12, 18. When their uncircumcised hearts are humbled, so
as to accept of the punishment of their iniquity, the Lord then remembers his
Covenant, Lev. 26.41, 42. Conceive it thus: There can be no union to Christ,
while there is a power of resistance and opposition against Christ. The Lord
Christ must therefore in order of nature (for I now speak not of order of time)
first removere prohibens, remove this resistance before he can, and that he
may, unite. I do not mean resistance of the frame of grace, but (as was said)
of the Lord of grace, when he comes to work it.

Now there is a double resistance, or two parts of this resistance, like a
knife with two edges.

1. A resistance of the Lord, by a secret unwillingnesse that the Lord should
work grace: Now this the Lord removes in compunction, and no more brokennesse
for sin or from sin is necessary there then that.

2. A resistance of the Lord by sinking discouragements, and a secret
quarrelling with him, in case the soul imagines he will not come to work
grace, or manifest grace. Now this the Lord takes away in humiliation; and no
more is necessary here, then the removal of the power of this which makes the
soul in the sense of its own infinite vileness and unworthiness not to
quarrel at the Lord, and devil-like grow fierce and impatient before and
against the Lord, in case he should never help it, never pity it, never
succor it; the Lord will not forsake for ever, if the soul thus lies down,
and puts its mouth in the dust, Lam. 3.30, 31. Which consideration is of
unspeakable use and consolation, to every poor empty nothing, that feels it
self unable to believe, and the Lord forsaking it, from helping it to believe.
And I have seen it constantly, that many a chosen vessel never has been
comforted till now, and ever comforted when now; they never knew what hurt them
till they saw this, and they have immediately felt their hurt healed, when this
has been removed. In comforting Christians under deep distress, tell them of
Gods grace and mercy, and the riches of both, you do but torment them the
more, that there should be so much, and they have no part, nor share in it, and
think they never shall, because this is not the immediate way of cure; tell
them rather when they are full of these complaints, that they are as they
speak, vile and sinful, and therefore worthy never to be accepted of God, and
that they have cause to wonder that they have their lives, and are on this side
hell, and so turn all that they say to humiliation and selfe-loathing; verily
you shall then see, if the Lord intends good, he will by this do them good, and
the weakest Christian that cannot come to Christ, you shall see first or last
shall see cause to lie down, and be silent, and not quarrel, though the Lord
should never come to him. And that this is necessary, may appear thus:
Otherwise,

1. The Lord should not advance the riches of his grace; the advancement of
grace cannot possibly be without the humiliation and abasement of the creature;
the Lord not only saves, but calls things that are not, that no flesh might
glory, 1 Cor. 1.28, 29.

2. Otherwise the Lord should not be Lord and disposer of his own grace, but a
sinful creature who quarrels against God, if it be not disposed of, not as
the Lord will, but as the creature will. If a stranger comes to our house, and
will have what he wants, and if he has not, he quarrels and contends with the
master of the house, what would he say? Away proud beggar, do think to be
lord of what I have? do draw thy knife to stab me, if I do not please thee
and give thee thy asking? no, thou shall know that I will do with my own as I
see good, thou shall lie down on the dust of my threshold before I give thee
any thing. So it is with the Lord. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but in God that shows mercy. It is his principal name, I will be
merciful to whom I will be merciful; and therefore if you will not believe
me, yet believe the Lords oath, Esaias 45.23. Unto me shall every knee bow: and
do you come to lord it over him, and quarrel, and fret, and sink, and grow
sullen, and vex, if the Lord stoop not unto your desires? No, no, you must and
shall lie upon his threshold, nay he will make thee lay thy neck upon the block,
as worthy of nothing but cutting off, and then when this valley is filled, all
flesh shall see the glory of the Lord, Esaias 40.5.

Thus humiliation is necessary in this measure mentioned. Not that I deny any
subsequent humiliation, after a Christian is in Christ, arising from the sense
of Gods favor in Christ, then which nothing makes a Christian of an
evangelicall spirit more ashamed of himself, yet I dare not exclude this which
is antecedent, arising from the spirit of power immediately subduing the soul
to Christ, that it may be exalted by Christ, 1 Pet. 5.6. It is true, all things
that pertain to life and godliness are received by faith, 2 Pet. 1.3. yet
faith it self is a saving work, which is not received by another precedent
faith. Faith therefore is to be excepted, not only as begotten in us, but as
it is in the bege^ting of it in the conviction and humiliation of every sinner.

Hence see what is the great hindrance between the mercy of God, Use. 1
and the soul of many a man; if it be not some sin and hardness of heart
under it, whereby he cares not for Christ, to deliver him, then it is some pride
of spirit arising from some good he has, whereby he feels no need of Christ,
hoping his own duties shall save him, or else is above Christ, and not under
him, willing to be disposed of by him. And hence the Lord makes this the high
way to mercy, Levit. 26.40. if first they shall confess their sin, secondly,
humble themselves, (both which I know the Lord must work) then he will
remember his Covenant. Look as it is with a vessel before it can be fit for
use, it must first pass through fire, and the earth and dross severed from
it, then it must be made hollow and empty, which makes it vas capax, a vessel
capable of receiving that which shall be powered out into it; if, (O Brethren)
the Lord has some vessels of glory which he prepares beforehand, and makes
capable of glory, Romans 9.21, 22. if the Lord does does not sever you from sin
in compunction, and empty you of your selves in humiliation, you cannot receive
Christ, nor mercy, you cannot hold them; and if ever you miss of Christ by
faith, your wound lies here. How many be there at this day, that were once
profane and wicked, but now by some terrors and outward restraints upon them,
they leave their sins, and say they loathe them, and purpose never to run
riot as they have done, and hence because they think themselves very good, or
to have some good, they fall short of Christ, and are still in the gall of
bitterness, in the midst of all evil? It were the happiness of some men, if they
did not think themselves to have some good, because this is their Christ. Oh
you that live under precious means, and have many fears, you may perish and
be deceived at the last; But why do you fear? I know you will answer, Oh some
secret unknown sin may be my ruin; It is true, and you do well to have a godly
jealousy thereof. But remember this also, not only some sin, but some good
thou think thou have, and restest in without Christ, and lifting thee up
above Christ, may as easily prove thy ruin, because a man's own righteousness
rested in, does not only hide men's sins, but strengthens them in some sin
by which men perish; Trusting to ones own righteousness, and committing
iniquity are couples, Ezekiel. 33.13. Nor do I hereby run into the trenches of
that wretched generation of the Familists, denying all inherent graces,
evidence of favor from any Christian obedience, or sanctification in holy
duties; or that a Christian should profanely cast off all duties, because they
cannot save themselves by them; No, no, the Lord will search with candles one
day for such sons of darkness, and exclude such foolish virgins that have
neither oil in their vessels nor light in their lamps: I only speak of that
good, that righteousness which is rested in without Christ, and lifts up men
above Christ, which in deed and in truth is not true righteousness, but only a
true shadow of it. And therefore as Beza well observes from Romans 9.32. Why did
not Israel, that followed after righteousness attain it? Because they sought
it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law: they were not fruits
of sincere obedience to the Law, but as it were the works of the Law; now this,
says the Apostle, verse 33. is the stumbling stone in Sion. Christ will have
all flesh veil, and be stripped naked, and made nothing before him, before they
shall ever be built upon him; now this men stumble at, they must bring
something to him, they will not be vile, emptiness, and nothingnesse, that he
may be all to them; verily observe your selves and you shall find, if there be
little humiliation, there is little of Christ; if much humiliation, much of
Christ; if unconstant humiliation, uncertain fruition of Christ; if real
humiliation, real possession of Christ; if false humiliation, imaginary
fruition of Christ. Know it, you cannot perish if you fall not short here, you
must perish if you do.

Use 2.
Be exhorted therefore to lie down in the dust before the Lord, and under the
Lord; nay entreat the Lord that he would put thee upon his wheel, and mould
thy heart to his will; why will you rest in any good you have? Oh remember thy
father was a Syrian ready to perish; and thy self polluted, an infinite
endless evil. What ever good thou do, is it not a polluted stream, of a
more polluted spring? Nay, suppose the Spirit works any good in thee, yet is it
not polluted by thy unclean heart? Nay, suppose any actions should be perfect,
yet remember the Lord spared not the Angels that sinned; perfection present
cannot satisfy Justice for pollution past. Cry out therefore, and say, Oh
Lord, now I see not only that my sin is vile, but that my self and all my
righteousness is vile also; and now though the Lord stands at a distance,
speaks no peace, hears no prayers, yet because thou art very vile, lie down
under him, that if he will he may tread upon thee, and thereby exalt himself,
as well as lift thee up, and exalt thee. Be not careless whether the Lord help
or no, but be humble, not to quarrel in case he should not: For,

1. Suppose thou art not only miserable, but sinful, and the Lord (thou
say) takes it not away, yet remember that to quarrel with God for
withdrawing his hand, is a sin also, Lam. 3.39. and will thou add sin to
sin?

2. Why art thou quiet and still when the Lord denies thee any common mercy? Is
it not because the Lord will have it so? Now look as we say of him that hates
sin as sin, that he hates all sin; so he that is meekned with Gods good
pleasure in any one thing, because of his good pleasure in it, upon the same
ground will at least desire to stoop in every thing. Suppose therefore it be
the Lords good pleasure to deny thee mercy, I grant you must pray for it, yet
with submission to the good will of the Lord, saying, The Lords will is good,
but mine is evil; otherwise, thou have no meekness in any thing, that art not
meekly subject to his will in every thing.

3. The greatest pride that is in man, appears here; for suppose the Lord
should deny thee bread, or water, or clothes, was it your duty to murmur now?
nay, was it not pride, if the heart would not lie down, and say, Lord I am
worthy to have my bread plucked from my mouth, and my clothes from my back. Now
if it be pride to murmur in case the Lord denies you smaller matters, the
offals of this life, do not thou see that its far greater pride for thee to
sink and quarrel with him, if he denies thee greater, and the things of
another life? is he bound to give thee greater, that does not owe thee the
least? Suppose a beggar murmur at thy door, if thou do deny him bread, or a
cup of drink, will thou not account him a proud stout beggar? but if thou
give him that, and then he quarrel and murmur at thee because thou do not
give him a thousand pound, or thy whole estate when he asks it, will you not
say, I never met with the like insolency? the Lord gives you your lives,
blessed be his name, but you ask for treasures of grace and mercy, thousands
of pounds, Christ himself, and all that he is worth, and the Lord seems to deny
you, and now you sink, and grow sullen, and discontent, and quarrel, and
murmur at God, not directly, but secretly, and slily; may not the Lord now say;
Was there ever such pride and insolency? And therefore as Christ spoke of
himself, John 12.24, 25. A corn of wheat cannot live unless it die first; so
know it, you shall never live with Christ, unless you die and perish in your
selves, unless you be sown and lie under the clods of your own
wretchedness, faith will never spring up in such a soul. As it is in burnings,
the fire must be first taken out, before there can be any healing; so this
impatient spirit which torments the soul, must first be removed, before the
Lord will heal thee.

4. Consider the approaching times; I do believe the Lord at this day is
coming out to shake all nations, all hearts, all consciences, all conditions,
and to tear and rend from you your choicest blessings, peace and plenty, both
external and internal also; for there is need of it, our age grows full, and
proud, and wanton, a man's price is fallen in the market, unless his locks and
new fashions commend him to the world. Oh consider when God comes to ^end all
from you, then you may find a need of the exercise of this duty; it may be the
time is coming wherein you shall have nothing to support your hearts, you
shall find rest in no way but this; I know assurance of Gods love may quiet
you, but what if the Lord shake all your foundations and deprive you of that?
what will you do then? and therefore as Zephany cap. 2.3. having foretold of
the evil day, cries unto his hearers, Seek meekness ye meek of the earth;
seek meekness, so say I to you: for you will find all little enough. Come
down from thy throne and be the footstool and threshold of Christ Jesus,
before the days of darkness come upon you; be content to be a cipher, a
steppingstone, the very offall of the world.

Quest.
But you will say, Wherein should I express this humiliation and subjection?

Answ. 1.
Be highly thankful for any little the Lord gives, Lam. 3.22, 23.

2.
Be humble and judge thy self worthy of nothing when the Lord denies; and
verily you shall find the Lord Jesus ere long speaking peace unto you, and
giving you rest in his bosom, that now art quietly contented to lie still at
his feet.

For some helps thereunto.

1. Remember whose thou art, viz. the Lords clay, and he thy Potter, and
therefore may do with thee what he will. Romans 9.20.

2. Remember what thou art; viz. a polluted vessel, a kind of infinite
endless evil, as I have often said; see the picture of thy own vileness in the
damned in hell who are full, and shall through all eternity power out all
manner of evil. Job 40.3, 4.

3. Remember what thou have been, and how long thou have made war against
Christ with all thy might, and heart, and strength; why should the Lord
therefore choose thee before others; Ier. 3.5. when as, (ask thy conscience)
was there ever such a wretch since the world began as thou have been?

4. Remember what thou will be; fit for no use to Jesus Christ, good for
nothing, but to pollute his holy name when thou medlest with it; and why should
the Lord take up such a dry leaf, Isay 64.6. and breath upon such a dry bone?

5. Remember how good the Lords will is, even when it crosses thine; he shall
have infinite glory by all his denials to thee of what thou would, he shall
gain that, though thou losest thy peace and quietness, that good which thy
foolish sinful will desires at his hand; John 12.27, 28. and if so, blessed be
his name, let God live, but let man dye and perish, that he may be exalted of
vile man.

6. Remember the sweet rest thou shall have by this subjection to the Lord,
nothing is man's cross, but man's will; a stubborn will like a stubborn heifer
in the yoke galls and frets the soul; Learn meekness, says our Savior, of
me in taking my yoke on you, and then you shall find rest. Hell would not be
hell, to a heart truly humbled. Sometimes you find inlargements, then you are
glad; sometime none, then you sink; sometimes you have hope of mercy, then you
are calm; sometimes you lose your hopes, then the Sea works; when the Lord
pleases you, then you are well, but if a little cross befall you, then your
spring is muddy, and a little thing troubles; Oh be humble and vile in thine
own eyes, and verily such uncertain fits of peace and trouble are done, and
the days of all your mourning are now ended.

Use 3.
Of thankfulness, to all those whom the Lord has truly humbled; Time was, when
the Lord first convinced you, that so long as you could make any shift, find
rest in any duties, you would never lie down at Christ's feet, now the Lord
might have left you to have stumbled at that stumbling-stone, and to have stuck
in those bushes, but you may see that the Lord will save you even then when you
would not be saved by him; and especially take notice of two passages of Gods
dealings with you, wherein usually you find matter of discouragement, rather
then of acknowledgment of Gods goodness to you therein.

1. That the Lord has withdrawn all feeling of any good, which it may be once
you felt, and that the Lord has let out more of the evil of your hearts then
ever you imagined was in them, nay so much evil that you think there is none
like unto you, who have now no heart nor power to stir, think, defire, will,
or do any thing that is good: oh bless the Lord for this, for this is Gods
way to humble, and empty, and make thee poor; the Lord saw (though it may be
you did not) that you rested in that good you felt, and was or would be lifted
up by these, and therefore the Lord has broke those crazy cr^tches, famisht
now, brought you down to nothing, made you like dry deserts; all the hurt the
Lord aims at in this, being only to humble you, and though these desertions
be bitter for the present, yet that by these he might do you good in your
latter end: Deuteronomy. 6.19.
Oh brethren the Apostle stands at a stay and desires the Corinthians to
consider, You see your calling, says he, 1 Cor. 1. Not many mighty, not many
wise, but things that are not does he call, that no flesh might glory: The
Lord, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 8.2, 3. suffered thee to want, (that was the first)
and then fed thee, that he might prove thee and humble thee; remember this,
says he: So say I to you; remember this mercy, that when the Lord makes you
worst of all (not really, but) in your own eyes, that then the Lord is about
this glorious work.

2. That the Lord has kept you (it may be a long time too) from sight and
sense of his peculiar love; one would wonder why the Lord should hide his love
so much, so long, from those to whom he does intend it; the great reason is,
because there is in many a one, a heart desirous of his love, and this would
quiet them, if they were sure of it; but they never came to be quieted with
Gods will, in case they think they shall never partake of his love: but are
above that, oppose and resist and quarrel with that, unhumbled under that; the
Lord therefore intending to bestow his favor only upon a humbled sinner, he
will therefore hide his face until they lie low, and acknowledge themselves
worthy of nothing but extremity of misery; unworthy of the least mercy: The
people of God Lam. 1.16. cry out that the comforter which should refresh their
soul was far from them; what was Gods end in this? you shall see the end of
it, verse 18. the Lord is righteous, (here the Church is humbled) for I have
rebelled; or (as Sanctius reads it) I have made his mouth bitter, that the Lord
speaks no peace to me, but bitter things. The cause is in my own self, and
therefore if he never comfort me, nor speak good word unto me, yet he is
righteous, but I am vile: and you will find this certain, that as the Lord
therefore humbles that he may exalt, so the Lord never refuses to exalt (in
hiding his face) but it is to humble. And is this the worst the Lord aims at,
and will you not be thankful? why are you then discouraged when you find it
thus with you? do not say the Lord never dealt thus with any as with me;
suppose that, the reason then is, because the Lord sees, never had any such a
high heart as thou have; but oh be thankful, that notwithstanding this, he
will take the pains to take it down.

Thus much for humiliation, 4.
I come now to the fourth and last, which is Faith.

SECT. 5. The fourth and last act of Christ's power, is the work of Faith.
THe Lord having wounded and humbled his elect and laid them down dead at his
feet, they are now as unable to believe as they were to humble their own
souls, and therefore now the Lord takes them up into his own arms, that they
lean and rest on the bosom of their beloved by faith. After Joseph had spoken
roughly to his brethren, and thereby brought the blood of their brother to
remembrance, and so had humbled them; then he can contain no longer, but
discovers himself to them, and tells them, I am Joseph whom you wickedly sold,
yet fear not; so does our Savior carry it toward his elect, when he laid
them low: now is the very season for him to advance the glory of his grace, he
cannot now contain himself any longer; but having torn and taken away that
veil of sin and of the law from off their hearts, now they see the Lord with
open face, even the end of that which was to be abolished, 2 Cor. 3. The
explication of this great work, is of exceeding great difficulty; nothing more
stirring then faith in a true Christian, because he lives by it, yet it is
very little known; as children in the womb, that know not that navill-string
by which they principally live: I shall therefore be wary, and leaving larger
explications, acquaint you with the nature of Faith, in this brief descrip^ion
of it. Faith is that gracious work of the Spirit, whereby an humbled sinner
receives Christ; or whereby the whole soul comes out of it self to Christ,
for Christ and all his benefits, upon the call of Christ in his word.

Before I open this particularly, give me leave to premise some general
considerations; Faith is the complement of effectual vocation, which begins in
Gods call, and ends in this answer to that call; the Lord prevents a poor
humbled soul, with his call, either not knowing how, or not able, or not
daring to come; and then the soul comes, and hence men called, and believing
are all one, Romans 9.24. with 33. Many a wounded sinner will be scrambling after
Christ from some general reports of him, before the day and hour of Gods
glorious and gracious call. Now for any to receive Christ, or come to Christ,
before he is called, is presumption; to refuse Christ when called, is
rebellion; to come and receive when called, is properly and formally Faith, and
that which the Scripture styles, the obedience of Faith, Romans 1.5. And now
Christ at this instant is fully and freely given, on Gods part, when really and
freely come unto and taken on our part.

This receiving of Christ or coming to Christ are for substance the same,
though the words be diverse; the holy Ghost uses to express one and the same
thing in variety of words, that our feebleness might the better understand
what he means. And hence in Scripture, believing, coming, receiving Christ,
rolling, trusting, cleaving to the Lord, etc. set out one and the same thing;
and therefore it is no wonder if our Divines have different descriptions of
faith in variety of words, which if well considered d^e but set out one and the
same thing: and I do conceive they do all agree in this description I have
now mentioned; I know there are some who tread awry here, whom I shall briefly
note out, and so pass on to what we intend.

1. The Papists, with some others of corrupt judgments, at least of weak
apprehensions among our selves, describe Faith to be nothing else but a
supernatural assent to a divine truth, because of a divine testimony: Ex. gr.
to assent to this truth, that Christ is come, that he is the Son of God; that
he was dead and is risen again, that he is the Savior of the world, etc. and
to confirm this they produce, Mat. 16.16. 1 Ioh. 4.3.

Answ.
It is granted that this assent is in Faith, for Faith always has respect to
some testimony, for man by his fall has lost all knowledge of divine and
supernatural truths; hence God reveals them in his word; hence faith sees
them and assents to them, because God has spoken them: to see and know things
by vision, is to see things in themselves intuitively and immediately; but to
see things by Faith is to see them by and in a testimony given of them. John
20.20. Blessed is he that has not seen, ( i. e. Christ immediately) but
believed, i. e. his testimony, and on him in it; this assent therefore is in
Faith (for we must believe Christ before we can believe in him) but this
comprehends not the whole nature of faith, I mean of that faith we are now
speaking of, viz. a^ it unites us to Christ, and possesses us with Christ. For,

1. This description places Faith only in the understanding, whereas it is also
in the will, as the words trusting, rolling, etc. intimate.

2. This assent is merely general, without particular application, which is
ever in true faith, Gal. 2.20.

3. This is such a faith, as the devils may have, James 2.19. and reprobate men
may have, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. Heb. 10.26. There is a wilful refusing of the known
truth.

4. It is the Papists aim to vilify faith hereby, by describing it by that
which is one ingredient in it, but excluding that which is principal; those
phrases therefore of believing Christ to be come in the flesh, 1 John 4.3. and
that he is the Son of God, Mat. 16.16. as if this were the only object of
faith, are not to be understood exclusively, excluding other acts of faith,
which the Scripture in other places sets down clearly; but inclusively, as
supposing them to be contained herein: for as we in our times describing faith
by relying upon Christ for salvation, do not exclude hereby our believing that
he is the Messiah; but we include it, or suppose it, because that is not now
questioned, the truth of the Gospel being so abundantly cleared; so in those
times, they described Faith by one principal act, to believe that he was the
Son of God, and come into the flesh, because this was the maine and
principal thing in question then: and if the Lord had not set out faith by
other acts in Scripture, we should not vary from our compass in such
expressions in the Word in these days, for their faith then, is exemplary to
us now; but because the Word does more fully set it out in more special acts,
hence we set it out also by them; for it is evident, as the Jews did believe in a
Messiah to come, so they did also believe, and look for all good from him, John
4.25. He will teach us all things when he comes; and therefore their faith did
not confine it self to that historical act that a Messiah should come, or
that this was the Messiah, but they did expect and look for all good from him;
And hence the Apostle expounding this saying, viz. believing that Christ is
dead and risen again, we shall hereby be saved: Romans 10.9, 10.
If thou beleevest (says he) with thine heart this truth, thou shall be saved.
Now to believe with the heart as it does not exclude assent, so it necessarily
includes the acts of the will and affections in relying upon him, and coming
to him. And hence, when Peter had made that confession, Acts 16.16. Christ
tells him Thou art Peter; i. e. a stone resting upon the rock, (as some good
Interpreters expound it) and therefore Peter's faith did not exclude these
principal acts of resting on Christ, cleaving to Christ, but did include and
suppose them.

2. Some run into another extreme, and make faith nothing else, but a
persuasion or assurance that Christ dyed for me in particular, or that he is
mine. That which moves some thus to think, is the universal redemption by the
death of Christ, they know no ground or bottom for faith but this Proposition,
Christ dyed for thee, and hence make Redemption universal: And hence the
Arminians boast so much of their Quod unusquisque tenetur credere, etc. But

1. This is a false bottom, for Christ has not dyed for all, because he has
not prayed for all, John 17.

2. It Is a sandy bottom and foundation, which when a Christian rests upon, it
shakes under him, when the soul shall think, though Christ has dyed for me,
yet no more for me then for Judas, or thousands of reprobates now in hell.
Indeed after faith, a Christian is bound to believe it, as Paul did, Gal* 2.20.
1 Cor. 15.1, 2.

I conceive therefore those holy men of ours who have described Faith by
Assurance, have not so much aimed at a description of what Faith is in it
self, as it possesses us with Christ; but of what degree and extent it may
be, and should be in us; they describe it therefore by the most eminent act of
it, in full assurance: and therefore consult with the Authors of this
description, and enquire of them, Is there no doubting mixed with faith? Yes,
say they, man's doubtings sometimes are even unto a kind of despair, but then
(say they) it should not be thus. The Papists commend doubtings, and deny
assurance, place faith in a general assent; our champions that were to wrestle
with them, maintained it to be a particular application, (and not only a
general assent) and that with a full assurance of persuasion, which being the
most eminent act of faith, excludes not other inferior acts of it, which as
they are before it, so may possess the soul with Christ without it. Although
withal, it is certain, that there is no true faith, but it has some
assurance of which afterward.

Let me now come to the explication of the description given, where note these
five things.

1. The efficient cause of Faith, it is a work of the Spirit. 2. The subject,
or matter in which it is seated, viz. the soul of an humble sinner. 3. The
form of it, viz. the coming of the whole soul to Christ. 4. The end of it,
viz. for Christ and all his benefits. 5. The special ground and means of it,
viz. the Call of Christ in his Word.
1. The efficient cause of Faith.

Faith is a gracious work of the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit therefore is the
efficient cause or principal workman of faith; the Spirit does not believe,
but causes us to believe; it is not principium quod, the principle which does
believe, but principium quo, the principle by which we do: the souls of all
the elect (especially when humbled) are, of all other things, most unable to
believe: nay look as before compunction and humiliation, Satan held the soul
captive chiefly by its lusts and sins; so now when the Lord has burnt those
cords, and broken those chains, all the powers of darkness strengthen
themselves, and keep the soul under mightily, by unbelief; What do you tell
me of mercy? (says the soul) it is mercy which I have continually resisted,
desperately despised; why do you persuade me to believe? Alas! I cannot; it is
true, all that which you say is true, if I could believe, but I cannot see
Christ, I cannot come at Christ, I seek him in the means, but he forsakes me
there, and I am left of God desolate: and here beloved, the soul had not
formerly so many excuses for its sin, as now it has clouds of objections
against believing; the Spirit therefore takes fast hold of the souls of all
the elect, draws them unto Christ; and therefore it is called the spirit of
faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. and that by an omnipotent and irresistible power. Esaias
53.1. Who has believed? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? that the
soul must and shall believe now. Compel them to come in, says the Lord of
the Supper, Luke 14.23. This the Arminians will not believe, for (say they) the
Question is not, Whether we are enabled to believe by grace? but, Whether it be
after this manner, and by this means, viz. modo irresistibile? Consider
therefore these Reasons, to clear this point.

1. Whence does our call, and coming to Christ arise, but from Gods immovable
and unchangeable purpose? Romans 8.28.
the Lord therefore must either alter his purpose, or prevail with the soul to
believe, and overpower the heart thereunto.

2. Is not Christ Jesus bound by office and promise to his Father to bring in
all his lost scattered sheep, that so the Father and he may be glorified in
them? John 10.16. Other sheep I have, those I must bring home, and they shall
hear my voice. You that complain you cannot believe, nay that you have no
heart to believe, the Lord must fetch you in; and you shall hear the
Bride-groomes voice with joy.

3. Is not the act of believing wrought by a creating power? Ephesians. 1.9. Ephesians.
2.10. Esaias 57.18, 19. I create the fruit of the lips peace, peace to him that
is near, and a far off: and is not a creating voice irresistible, though there
be nothing for it to work upon? so though you have no ability, heart, head, or
strength to believe, yet the Lord will create the fruit of the lips of Gods
messengers Peace, Peace.

4. Does not the Lord let in that infinite and surpassing sweetness of grace,
when he works the soul to believe, standing in extreme need of that grace,
that it cannot but come and cleave to it? Psalm. 63.2, 3. I long to see thee,
says David, for thy loving kindness is better then life; is it possible for a
man not to cleave to his life? much more to that which is better then life: the
light is so clear, it cannot but see and wonder at grace, the good is so
sweet, it cannot but taste and accept what God so freely offers; Ps. 36.7.
and therefore the poor Canaanitish woman, Mat. 15. could not be driven away,
though Christ bid her in a manner be gone; but she made all the objections
against her arguments for her (as usually faith does, when under this stroke
of the Spirit) The violent take the Kingdom of heaven by force; the Spirit
puts a necessity upon them, and irresistibly overpowers them, and this is the
cause of it.

And is not this matter of great consolation to all those who feel themselves
utterly unable to believe? you think the Lord would give peace and pardon, life
and mercy, if I could believe; oh consider the Lord has undertaken in the
Covenant of Grace to work in all his the condition of the Covenant, as well as
to convey the good of it. Ier. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. He has done this for others
by an irresistible power, Heb. 12.1, 2. Look up to Jesus the author and
finisher of your faith, he came out of his Fathers bosom not only to give
life by his death, but to enable his to eat and close with him by Faith, that
they might never dye, John 6.50. so that the Lord may work it in thee; it is
true also, he may not, yet it is unspeakable comfort to consider, that if the
Lord had put it over unto thee to believe, it is certain, thou should never
have believed, but now the work is put into the hand of Christ; that which is
impossible to thee, is possible, nay easy, with him; he can comprehend thee,
when thou can not apprehend him: this is exceeding sweet when thy body is
sick* and soul is deserted, incredible things to be believed are propounded,
an impossible work to thy weakness urged, upon pain of Gods sorest and most
unappeasable wrath; to consider it is not in me, but in the Lords own hand,
and it is his office, his glory to work faith, and as the Apostle speaks, to
show mercy unto them that are shut up, not only under sin, but also
unbeleefe; Romans 11.32. But why has the Lord made thee feel thy inability to
believe? truly the end of our wants is not to make us sin and shift for our
selves, but to ask and seek for supply, and the end of the continuance of
those wants is, that we should continue to ask and seek. And do thou think
thou shall seek to the Lord by his own hand to create faith and fetch thee in,
and will not the Lord take his time to work it? He that believes, says the
Apostle, Romans 10.11. shall not be ashamed; why so? because the Lord, says he,
who is over all, is rich unto all that call upon him, verse 12. If thou have
not a heart shut up from asking of it; the Lord who has power, has not a
heart shut up toward thee from working it.

But withal be thankful exceedingly, all you whose hearts the Lord has
drawn and overcome; he came to his own people the Jews, and would often have
gathered them, but they would not, and therefore he forsook them, and left
their habitations desolate; oh how often would the Lord have gathered you, and
you would not! yet the Lord has not forsaken you, but called you in whether
you would or no; the Lord has taken many a man at his first word, and left him
at the first repulse, shaken off the dust of his feet against him presently,
Mat. 10.14. without any more entreaties to accept of him; yet though thou have
not only refused, but even crucified the Son of God, yet he has not been
driven from thee, but his bowels have been often kindled together, when he has
been ready to give thee up: when thou have been under the hedges, and in the
highways that lead to death, and did never think of him, nor did desire
him, yet he has compelled thee to come in; he has made thee feel such an
extreme need of him, and made himself so exceeding sweet, that thou have not
been able to resist his love, but to cry out, Lord thou have overcome me with
mercy, I am not able to resist any more; nay which is more wonderful, when
thou have been gathered, and gone from him, and lost thy self and him also
again, and it may be have bin offended at him; yet he has gone before thee
into Galilee, and gathered thee up when thou have been as water spilt upon the
ground; what should be the cause of this, but only this? the work of faith lies
upon him, both to begin and finish; he must gather in all his lost sheep, and
therefore he has put forth an irresistible power of his Spirit upon thy
heart, which must carry thee captive after him.

I am afraid my faith has been rather presumption, Object.
a work of my own power, then faith wrought by the Spirits power; how may I
discern that?

If you are wrapped up in Gods Covenant, Answ. 1.
if any promise be actually yours, it is no presumption to take possession by
faith of what is your own; do thou seriously will Christ, and resolve never
to give the Lord rest, until he give thee rest in him* then see, Rev. 22.17.
Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life. Do thou thirst after
Christ? then read Esaias 55.1, (...) John 7.37. If any man thirst, let him come
unto me and drink. When Christ saw their faith* Mat. 9.1, 2. what said he?
Son, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven, the word signifies, be
confident. It is no presumption to believe pardon of sins now thou art come
unto me, not only for the healing of thy body, but especially for pardon of
sin. It is the great sin of many Saints, when they do thirst, and believe,
and come to Christ, and so are under the promise of grace; yet they think it
presumption now to believe and take possession of all those treasures that be
in Christ, but look that the Lord should first make them feel, and then they
will believe; whereas faith should now receive and drink in abundantly of the
fullness of Christ: shall it be accounted presumption for any man to eat his
own bread, and drink his own drink, and put on his own clothes? the promise
makes Christ and all his benefits your own, therefore it is no presumption to
apply them.

2.
Suppose you cannot find your self within any promise, and you see no reason to
believe, only you have the Lords call and command to believe* do you now in
conscience and obedience to this command, or to Gods invitation and entreaty in
the Gospel, believe, because thou ^^rest not dishonor God by refusing his
(...)? thou do therefore accept o^ it, this is no presumption, unless
obedience be presumption; nay the most acceptable obedience, which is the
obedience of Faith, John 6.38. For what was the ground on which those 3000
believed? Acts 2.38, 39. etc. Peter said, Repent that you may receive remission
of sins; now what follows? they that gladly received the word, were
baptized: Oh that word, repent, i. e. as Beza expounds it, return to God and
come in, was a most sweet word to them, and therefore they received it; this
was no presumption, either for Peter to exhort them to repent, or for them to
take the Lord (as that godly man said) at his first word. I know there is a
subjection to the Gospel arising only from slavish fear and carnal hopes,
Psalm. 66.3. Psalm. 18.44. this may be in presumptuous reprobates, but there is
a subjection arising from the sense of the sweetness and exceeding goodness
of Gods call and promise, Psalm. 110.2, 3. As a woman that is overcome with the
words of her loving suitor, the man is precious, and hence his words are very
sweet, and overcome her heart to think, why should such a one as I be looked
upon, by one of such a place? it is no presumption now, but duty to give her
consent: so it is here; when the Lord is precious and his words [oh accept me,
oh come to me] are exceeding sweet; and hereupon out of obedience gladly yields
up it self to the Lord, takes possession of the Lord, this is no more
presumption, then to sanctify a Sabbath, or to pray, or hear the word,
because the Lords commands are herein very sweet.

If Repentance accompanies Faith, 3
it is no presumption to believe; Many know they sin, and hence believe in
Christ, trust to Christ, and there is an end of their faith; but what
confession and sorrow for sin, what more love to Christ follows this faith?
truly none; nay their faith is the cause why they have none; for they think, If
I trust to Christ to forgive them, he will do it, and there is an end of the
business. Verily this hedge faith, this bramble ^aith that catches hold on
Christ, and pricks and scratches Christ by more impenitency, more contempt of
him, is mere presumption, which shall one day be burnt up, and destroyed by
the fire of Gods jealousy. Fie upon that faith that serves only to keep a man
from being tormented before his time. Your sins would be your sorrows, but
that your faith quiets you. But if faith be accompanied with repentance,
mourning for sin, more esteem of Gods grace in Christ, so that nothing breaks
thy heart more then the thoughts of Christ's unchangeable love to one so vile,
and this love makes thee love much, and love him the more; as thy sin
increases, so thou desire that thy love may increase, and now the stream of
thy thoughts run, how thou may live to him that dyed for thee. This was
Mary's faith, who sat at Christ's feer weeping, washing them with her tears,
and loving him much, because much was forgiven; who though she was accounted a
presumptuous woman by Simon, and Christ himself suffered in his thoughts, for
suffering of her to come so near unto him; yet the Lord himself cleares her
herein, and justifies her before God and men: many a poor believer thinks, if I
should believe, I should but presume, and spin a spiders web of Faith out of my
own bowels: and hence you shall observe, this not believing stops up the work
of repentance, mourning and love, and all cheerful obedience in them; and on
the contrary, if they did believe, it would be with them as themselves think
many times, if I knew the Lord was mine, and my sins pardoned, oh how should I
then bless him, and love him, and wonder at him! how would this break my heart
before him! etc. now I say, let all the world judge, if that which thou think
would be presumption, be not rebellion, because it makes thee worse; and stops
up the Spirit of grace in thee. Whereas that Faith which lets out those blessed
springs of sorrow, love, thankfulness, humbleness, etc. what can it be else
but such a saving faith as is wrought by the Spirit, because it lets in the
Spirit more abundantly into a dry and desolate heart?

2. The subject or matter of Faith.

This is the second thing in the description of Faith, the soul of an humbled
sinner is the subject or matter of Faith. I do not mean the matter out of
which Faith is wrought, (for there is nothing in man out of which the Spirit
begets it) but that wherein Faith is seated; I mean also the habit of Faith,
not the principle of it; for that is out of man in the Lord Jesus, who is
therefore called our hope, as well as our strength; the soul therefore is the
subject of Faith, called the heart, Romans 10.9. compared with Mat. 6.21. for we
cannot go or come to Christ in this life with our bodies, we are here absent
from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. but the soul can go to him, the heart can be with
him, as the eye can see a 1000 miles off, and receive the species or image of
the things it sees into it, so the soul enlightened by faith, can see Christ a
far off, it can long for, choose, and rest upon the Lord of life, and receive
the lively image of Christ's glory in it; 2 Cor. 3. ult. If Christ were present
upon earth, the soul (not the body) only could truly receive him; Christ
comes to his elect only by his Spirit, and hence our spirits only are fit to
receive him and close with him; thousands hear Christ outwardly, that inwardly
are deaf to all Gods calls, their spirits see not, taste not, feel not; it is
therefore the soul that is the subject of Faith: and I say it is an humbled
empty soul which is the subject; for a full, proud, nbroken spirit cannot, nay
will not receive Christ, as we have proved; and therefore Luke 14. the servant
is commanded to bid the poor, halt, and blind, and lame, to come in; they
would not make excuses as others did: they that were stung to death with fiery
Serpents, were the only men that the brazen Serpent was lifted up for them to
look upon, and so be healed, John 3.14. and therefore the promise does not run,
If any man have wisdom let him ask it, but if any man want wisdom, James 1.5.
so if any man want light, life, want peace, pardon, want Christ and his Spirit,
let them ask and the Lord will give, away with your money if you come to these
waters to buy, and take freely; If any man would be wise, let him be a fool,
(says the blessed Apostle) an empty nothing; a soul in a perishing,
helpless, hopeless condition, is the subject of faith; such only feel their
need of Christ, are glad at the offer of Christ, and therefore such only can
and will receive Christ, and come unto Christ by faith: and truly if we had but
hearts, the consideration of this might be ground of great comfort and
confidence unto all Gods people, whose souls come unto Jesus Christ; for that
which was in Thomas, John 21. is in all men naturally, if we could see Christ
with our eyes, and feel him with our hands, and embrace him (as Mary did) with
our arms, if we could hear himself speak, we could then believe; as they
said, if he will come from the Cross, so we say, if he will come down from
heaven thus unto us, we will then believe; if we want this we fear we may be at
last deceived, because we want sense, and cannot come to close with our eyes
and hands the objects of our faith; but oh consider this point, we are made
partakers of Christ's life, Acts 10.43.
and salvation by him, only yet certainly by faith. Now this faith is not by
seeing him with our eyes, coming near to him with our bodies, but coming to
him with our souls; the soul is the seat of faith. Now this you may do
though you never thus saw him, whom though you see not, yet believing you
rejoice: 1 Pet. 1.8.
this coming of the soul to Christ, does make a firmer union between thee and
Christ, then if thou were bodily present with him in heaven. For many touched
and crowded him, that never were truly united to him, or received virtue from
him. If our souls were in the third heaven with Christ, John 6.64.65.
who of us would then doubt of our portion in him? I tell you if your souls
go out of sin and self, unto Christ Jesus, and there rest, this makes you
nearer to him, then if your souls were under his wing in the highest heavens.
The poor Seaman when he is near dangerous shores, when he cannot go down
to the depth of the Sea to fasten his ship, yet if he can cast his anchor
twenty or forty fathom deep, and if that holds, this quiets him in the sorest
storms; when we are tossed and cannot come to Christ with our bodily presence,
yet if our souls can come, if our faith our anchor can reach him, and knit us
to him, Heb. 4.18, 19, 20.
this should exceedingly comfort our hearts.

How, Object.
and where should my soul come to Christ, who is now absent from me?

Christ comes to you in his Word and Covenant of Grace, Answ.
there is his Spirit, his truth, goodness, love, faithfulness; receive this,
you receive him; embrace this, you embrace him; as among our selves, we see
great estates are conveyed and surrendered by Bond and Writings. Act. 2.41. When
they received the Word, they received Christ. Ioh. 15.7. If my words abide in
you, i. e. if I abide in you by my words, you shall be fruitful.

By the Word let thine eye pitch upon the person; do not only account the
Promise true, but with Sarah, Heb. 11.11.
account him faithful who has promised, and then let thy heart roll it self
upon that grace and faithfulness revealed in this word; lean upon the breast
of this beloved: and thus the soul by the chariot wheels and wings of the
Word, is possessor of Christ in it, and carried up to Christ's cross, as dying,
Gal. 3.1. and from thence to his glory in his Kingdom by it, Heb. 10.19, 22. As
a man that gives a great estate by some writing to us, we believe it as if he
were present; and by this we do not only believe the writing to ^e true, but
the man to be be faithful and loving to us; and hereupon our hearts are
carried after the man himself, though afar off from us. Thus we ascend to
Christ in the cloud of faith; as Jacob, though he could hardly believe, yet as
soon as he was persuaded Joseph was yet alive, his spirit presently revived,
and it was immediately with him, before his body came to him: so it is with
faith; the soul goes unto Christ, before our bodies and souls both together
shall have immediate communion with him.

3. The form of Faith.

This is the third thing in the description of Faith; the coming of the whole
soul out of it self unto Christ, is the form of Faith, and that wherein the
life and essence of it consists, and which does difference it from all other
graces of the Spirit. The first act of Faith, as it unites us to Christ, is not
assurance that he is mine, but a coming to him with assurance, that hereby he
is become mine. Esaias 55.1, 2.
Come unto the waters, and so buy wine and milk, i. e. now make them your
own. Mat. 21.28
The weary and heavy laden shall not have rest, unless they come to Christ for
it. Faith does nothing for life, (for that is the Law of Works) it only
receives him who has done all for it, it comes out of all it has or does,
(like Abraham, that left his servants behind him, when he went up to God in the
mount) unto Christ for life. Conceive it thus; Adam had a principle and stock
of life in himself, in his own hand, and therefore was to live by this, to
live of himself, and from himself, and therefore had no need nor use of
faith; he lived by the law of works, which the Apostle sets in a direct
opposition to the Law of Faith; but Adam being now fallen, has lost his life,
and became not like the man that fell among thieves betwixt Jerusalem and
Jericho, stripped, wounded, and half dead, but wholly dead, Ephesians. 2.1. so that
let any man seek life from himself, its impossible he should live: for if
there had been a Law that could have given life, our righteousness should have
been thereby, Gal. 3.21. Hence it follows, if any man will have life, he must
go out of himself unto another, viz. the Lord of life for it, John 5.40. John
6.27, 28, 29.

Now observe it, this very coming, this very motion of the soul to Christ, (a
grace which Adam neither had, nor had power to use) is Faith; the Spirit of
Christ moving or drawing the soul, the soul is thence moved, and so comes to
Christ, John 6.64, 65. The soul by sin is averted from God, and turns his
back upon God; the turning or coming of the soul (not unto duties of
holiness, for that is obedience properly, but) unto God in Christ again, is
properly and formally Faith. All evil is in man's self, and from himself; all
man's good is in Christ, and from Christ. The souls of all Gods elect, seeing
these things, forsake and renounce themselves, in whom and for whom is all
their evil, and come unto Christ, in whom and from whom is all their good.
This motion of the soul between these extremes, through that vast and
infinite distance that is between a sinful wretched man, and a blessed
Savior, is faith; for by faith principally we pass from death to life, John
5.24. The soul of a poor sinner wounded and humbled, sometime knows not
Christ, and then cries out as those, Act. 2.37. What shall I do? Whither shall
I go? sometimes dares not, sometimes cannot, it has no heart to stir or come;
it therefore looks up, and longs, and goes unto the Lord to draw it, like poor
Ephraim, Ier. 31.18. Oh turn me Lord, and then I shall be turned. Lam. 5.21.
and this is the lowest and least degree of faith. But at some other time, the
soul mourning for want of the Lord, the Lord comes unto it with great
clearness, glory, and sweetness of grace and peace; and hence the soul
cannot but come and close with him, and cry Rabboni, and say, Oh Lord, is it
thy good pleasure to have respect to such a clod of earth, to tender such
riches of grace to one so unworthy, and to bid, nay to beseech me to come and
take? Lord behold I come: This is faith. Would you have proof of it? Consider
therefore these particulars.

1. Consider these Scriptures: John 6.35. I am the bread of life, he that
comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes in me shall never
thirst. Where you see coming to Christ and believing in Christ are all one. So
John 7.37. In the last day of the feast the Lord Christ cryrs out with much
vehemency, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. Now in the next
ver. 38. our Savior expounds this coming; for, says he, He that believes on
me, out of his belly, etc. So to come to Christ, as upon this to drink in of
Christ's fullness, is believing in Christ. So Heb. 11.6. the Apostle says,
Without faith it is impossible to please God; and then in rendering the reason
of this, explaines what he meant by faith, viz. to be our coming unto God,
upon a double testimony, believing f^^st that he is, secondly, that he is a
rewarder of them that seek him diligently: or (which is all one) who do come
unto him. So John 1.12. So many as received him, (which is all one with
coming) he adopted them as sons, even to them that believe in his Name. And
hence we shall observe, that the Scripture does not attribute our
righteousness and life to our believing of Christ, but to our believing on
Christ in Christ, (a phrase peculiar to heavenly language, and therefore not
found in any Humane Writer) because it is not the bare believing of a testimony
that save thus, unless we so believe it, as to believe in Christ, which cannot
be but by coming to him, and as it were in him, or into him, our union with
Christ being made complete hereby.

2. That upon which the Lord promises life, and salvation, and mercy, cannot
be works, but faith, Gal. 3.21. Heb. 11.6. but throughout all the Old and New
Testament, the Lord promises life and salvation to comers, or to them that
return, Ier. 3.12. Ezekiel. 33, 10. Joel 2.12, 13. Heb. 7.25. John 5.40.

3. If unbelief be nothing else but a departing from God, faith can be nothing
else but a coming unto God, but that is the nature of unbelief, Heb. 3.12.
Heb. 10.38. John 6.64, 65, 66, 68, 69. John 12.37, 38, 39, 40. The Lords great
plot is to gather all his elect under the wings of Christ, Mat. 23.37. Ephesians.
1.9, 10. and therefore calls them to come under them by the voice of the
Gospel. The coming under them therefore can be nothing else but faith, the
proper obedience to the Gospel, as works are unto the voice of the Law.

Thus faith is the coming of the soul to Christ. But you will say, Did not
many come to Christ that were never saved by him?

Yes, many came to him with their bodily presence, that were excluded from him,
John 6.36.

But you will say, Do not many men's souls come, are not many men's hearts
moving toward Christ, and yet excluded from Christ? do not many cry Lord,
Lord? are not many enlightened and taste of this heavenly gift, and yet fall away?

I confess it is very true; and therefore it is set down in this description of
Faith, that it is the coming of the whole soul unto Christ. Never did any yet
come to Christ and receive him with their whole souls, with all their hearts,
but they had fruition of him, and blessedness by him; faith therefore is not
the coming of the soul, but the coming of the whole soul unto Jesus Christ: and
this you may be established in upon these grounds.

1. The Scripture expressly calls for this, Prove. 3.5. Trust in the Lord with
all thy heart, Act. 8.37. If thou believe with all thy heart thou shall be
saved, Joel, 3.13. Turn unto the Lord with all your hearts, Ier. 29.13. You
shall find the Lord when you seek him with your whole hearts. As when we have
a great gift to bestow, and we ask a poor man to whom we intend to give it,
whether he will accept of it or no? Yes, says he, with all my heart; so it is
here, the Lord asks those he intends to bestow his Son upon, and says to
them, You have lived thus long without him, and thus long abused him, will you
now have him, and accept of him? Yes Lord, with all my heart; This is all the
Lord requires. Does the Lord require no more of me, but to come? Lord, this
voice is most sweet to me, I come, with all my heart I come.

2. Because Christ is worthy of the whole heart; all must be sold away to buy
this field, this treasure, Mat. 13.44. He that loves father or mother more
then me, is not worthy of me. A filthy lust, a base harlot has had thy whole
heart, and do thou think the Lord Christ will have it divided? is not one
heart too little for him? are not ten thousand souls too few to embrace him, or
cleave to him?

3. Because without this your coming to him is but feigned. Ier. 3.10. They
return to me not with their whole heart, but faignedly. To cleave to Christ and
a lust, to Christ and a proud heart, cannot be unfaigned faith; to go to your
lusts in time of peace, and fly to Christ in times of extremity, is damnable
hypocrisy. When conscience troubles you, you then go to Christ to ease you;
and when your unruly wills and lusts trouble you, you go to the world to ease
you, and so your hearts are divided, and you come not wholly and only unto
Christ for rest. Believe it, it is such a faith by which you may as Samuel did
on Saul's garment, take hold of him, but the Lord will never take hold of you.
Set a branch in the stock, if it stays loosely in it, and is not set very
near to it, it will wither in time; and this is the great cause of withering
Christians, and of so many Apostates in these evil times. Those that came to
Christ, John 6. and followed him for a time, but afterward fell away, v^^se 66.
what was the reason of their fall? viz. when they were offended at Christ, they
knew whither to go from Christ; but what says Peter? Lord, Whither should we
go? ver. 68. If you lay the pipes that are to convey water from a full
fountain, but one foot or one inch short of it, there cannot be any water
derived from thence. Oh beloved, what is the reason that many a man's faith does
him no good, derives no life, spirit, blood, efficacy, peace, power from the
Lord Jesus? is it because Christ is a dry Christ, and unwilling to communicate?
No, no, the wound is in their faith, that pipe is laid but half way to him,
they fall one foot short of him, their souls come, but their whole souls do
not come to him, and hence they never reach Christ, they lie not in Christ, and
therefore receive not from Christ. Christ is precious, (here their soul comes)
but not exceeding precious, preciousnesse it self, as the word is, 1 Pet. 2.7.
(here the whole soul does not come) they cleave to Christ, and rest upon
Christ, (here their souls come) but they cleave not to Christ only, Psalm.
62.5.
(thus their whole souls do not come.)

4. If the whole soul by unbelief departs from God, then the whole soul must
return and come again unto God.

5. If the want of this be the great cause why men are rejected of God, then
the whole soul must return to him: but this is the cause why all men under
the means are rejected of God. Psalm. 81.12, 13.
Israel would none of me, i. e. would not be content alone with me, would not
take quiet contentment in me, (as the Hebrew word signifies) the Lord was not
good enough for them; but their hearts went out from him to other things, and
therefore the Lord gave them up to their own hearts lust, and they walked in
their own counsels. The woman that forsakes the guide of her youth, and sets
her heart as much upon other men as her husband, is an Adulteress, for which
only she shall have a bill of divorce.

6. Because as the Gospel first reveals Christ to the mind, and then offers
him to the will; so Faith which runs parallel with the Gospel, first sees
Christ, (there the mind, one part of the soul, goes out) then receives Christ
gladly, (there the other part, the will, goes out) and so the whole soul comes
to Christ. The Gospel comes to all the elect, first, in great clearness and
evidence of the truth of it, 1 These. 1.5. to which the understanding assents,
and is persuaded of; secondly, in great grace and goodness, surpassing beauty
and sweetness, Lam. 3.24. with which the will is drawn, and so the whole soul
comes unto Christ: for the Gospel is not only true, but glad tidings to all
the elect, especial when humbled at Gods feet, 1 Timothy 1.15. in whom, says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1.12, 13. you believed, after that ye heard the word of truth,
(there is the object of the understanding) the Gospel of your salvation, (there
is the goodness of it, the object of the will) so that the whole soul is
drawn to Christ in the work of faith. He that understands how liberum
arbitrium may be in two faculties, must not wonder, if one grace be seated in
both faculties of understanding and will; no grace can be completely seated in
diverse faculties, but gradually and imperfectly it may; the work of faith is
not complete, when the understanding is opened only to see and wonder at the
mystery of mercy in the Gospel; but when the will adheres and claspes about
that infinite and surpassing good it sees; then it is perfected and not before,
John 6.40. And this is the reason why saving Faith (as it is called) does not
look only to a bare testimony and assent unto it, as humane faith does; because
in the Gospel not only divine truth is propounded to the mind to assent unto;
but an infinite and eternal good is offered to the heart and will of man to
embrace, and thence it is that it is not sufficient for a christian to believe
God or to believe Christ, but he must also believe in him, or else he cannot be
saved; the object of believing of him being verum, or truth; the object of the
second, bonum, or good: take heed therefore a poor lost sinner, undone in its
own eyes for ever, not knowing what to do, unless it be to lie down, and
lie still at Gods feet as worthy of nothing but hell; what does the Lord now
do? the Lord Christ by his Gospel first lets in a new light, and it sees the
Lord Jesus there bleeding before its eyes, and held forth as a propitiation to
all that believe, to all that come to him; the mind sees this mystery, this
exceeding rich grace and free mercy, and thinks happy are they that share in
this mercy, but will the Lord look upon such a nothing as I? can such infinite
treasures be my portion? the Lord therefore calls and bids him come away and
enter into the possession of it: Thy sins indeed are great, says the Lord, yet
remember blood-thirsty Manasseh, persecuting Paul was pardoned; nay remember my
grace is free, for whose sake I invite thee; I beseech thee to come in, thy
wants indeed are many, yet remember that thou have therefore the more need and
more cause to come, and that it is I that have made thee empty and poor on
purpose, that thou might come: it is true, I have an eternal purpose to
exclude many thousands from mercy, yet my purpose is unchangeable, never to
cast off any that do come for it; I never did it yet, I will not do it unto
thee, if thou do come: it is true, many may presume, yet it is no
presumption, but duty to obey my great command; and it is the greatest sin that
ever thou did, or can commit, now to reject it, and refuse this grace; come
therefore poor, weary, lost, undone creature. Hereupon the heart and will
come, and rest, and roll themselves upon these bowels, and there rest; thus the
whole soul comes, and this I say again is Faith. Just as it is with the
loadstone drawing the iron, who would think that iron should be drawn by it?
but there is a secret virtue coming from the stone which draws it, and so it
comes and is united to it; so who would think that ever such an iron, heavy,
earthy heart should be drawn unto Christ? yet the Lord lets out a secret
virtue of truth and sweetness from himself, which draws the soul to Christ,
and so it comes.

May not the consideration of this be of great consolation to those that want
assurance, and therefore think they have no faith? oh remember that if thou
come unto Christ, as that poor woman of Canaan, she had no assurance she
should be helped of Christ, nay Christ tells her to her teeth, that he would
not cast childrens bread to such dogs, yet she came to him, and looked up to
free mercy, and claspt about him and would not away; you will say, Was this
faith? yes, our Savior himself professes it before men and Angels, Oh woman,
great is thy faith, Mat. 15.28. So I say unto all you poor creatures whom the
Lord has humbled, and made vile in our own eyes, unworthy of childrens bread
as dogs; yet you look up unto, and rest upon mercy wi^h your whole heart; this
is precious faith in the account of Christ.

Quest.
But how shall I know when the whole soul comes to Christ?

Answ.
When the eye of the soul so sees Christ, and the heart so embraces and
rests upon Christ, as that it rests in Christ, as in its portion and all
sufficient good: many rest upon Christ that do not rest in him, that is, that
are not abundantly satisfied with him; and hence their souls go out of Christ
to other things to perfect their rest, and so their hearts are divided between
Christ and other things; Heb. 4.1.
oh fear this, says the Apostle, lest there being a promise left us of
entering into his rest, any of you fall short of it; for (says he) we that have
believed do enter into rest, verse 3. so say I to you; of all delusions, fear
this, lest when you come to Christ, and rest upon Christ for life and
salvation, that you rest not in Christ: I tell you, says Christ to those that
came to him, and were constant followers of him, John 6.53. except you eat the
flesh and drink the blood of the Son of God, you have no life in you; what
is this eating and drinking? verily, sipping and tasting is not properly eating
and drinking, tasting your meat will not satisfy you, and therefore will not
nourish life in you; to eat and drink Christ is so to receive him, as to
satiate and satisfy the soul with him: to quench all your desires, your
hungring and thirsting in him; until thy soul says, as he said in another
case, it is enough that Joseph lives, so Lord I have enough now I have this
love, this grace of Christ to be my portion; now you rest in Christ. For if
there be some great good a man enjoyes, if there be any good wanting in it, it
is not possible that his whole heart should be set upon it: Ex. gr. a man has
food, but if he wants clothes, and his bread will not cloth him, his whole
heart will not be set upon his food, but upon that which may cloth him also:
so on the contrary if there be an eminent good, wherein he finds all in one,
no good out of it, that is wanting in it; it is certain that the whole soul is
carried after this good: so it is here, when the soul so comes to Christ, as
that it comes for all good to him, and so finds all good in him, that he now
only supports the sinking soul, verily the whole soul is now come, because as
it felt before it came all wants and evils out of him, so now it finds all
fullness in him, and whither should the whole soul be carried but after such a
good? when the Lord calls to the soul to come and take all with nothing, take
all or nothing. And hereupon it comes and drinks, as it is John 7.37.
satisfying it self there, and professing, Lord I now desire no more, I have
enough. Oh brethren, what faith there is among men at this day I cannot tell,
but this I am sure was Abraham's faith, Genesis 17.1. and David's faith, 2 Samuel
23.5. and Peter's faith, John 6.68. and Paul's faith, Phil. 3.8, 9. Gal. 6.14.
When the soul thus rests upon the rock Christ, the gates of hell may avail,
but never prevail against such a one: he that has set the whole world at his
heels, and sold himself out of all for this pearl, and this abundantly
recompenceth all his losses, such a one has Christ his own, and shall never
be deprived of him again; the Lord never gives his elect any rest out of
Christ, that they may find rest at last in Christ. When thus the soul is
entered into rest, the whole soul is drawn here, and this is the great reason
why many men famous in their generations and times in the eyes of others for
Faith; yet rotten at the heart and thence turn Apostates, one proves covetous,
another ambitious, another voluptuous, another grows conceipted, another
grows contentious, another grows formal. What is the reason of this? verily,
they did rest upon Christ, but did never find rest in Christ, and therefore
their whole soul never came to him; Christ after some time of profession grew
a dry and common Christ unto them, though at first they wondered at him, and he
was very sweet unto them; and hence they departed from him, as from an empty
dry pit in Summer time where they found nothing to refresh them: but the Lord
Jesus carries it toward all the faithful, as Elkanah did toward Hannah;
though she was in a fit, much vexed and troubled for want of children, yet
because he loved her exceeding dearly, he quiets her again with this, Am not I
better unto thee then ten sons? so though they may be unquiet for some odd
fits for want of many things, yet because Christ loves them, he brings them
back unto their rest, saying, Am not I better then then all friends, all
creatures, all abilities, all spiritual created excellencies? and hereby they
find rest to their souls, in him again.

Object.
But is there any believers heart so knit unto Christ, but that there is a heart
also after other vanities? do they find such rest in him, as that they find no
disquietnesse? is there not an unregenerate part and much unbelief, remaining?
is any man's faith made perfect that the whole soul must come, or else there is
no true faith?

Answ.
It is true, there is an unregenerate and a regenerate part in a godly man, but
not a heart and a heart (the note of a wicked man in Scripture phrase) there
are disquietings in the hearts of Saints after that they be in Christ, even
Solomon himself may sometime seek out of Christ for rest in his orchards and
gardens, knowledge and wisdom; yet there is a great difference between these
that are in the Saints, arising from the unregenerate part, and those that be
in the wicked, arising from a heart and a heart, or a double heart: and this
difference is chiefly seen in two things.

heart which carries him away from resting only in Christ: for Christ quiets
his conscience, and the world comforts his heart. Christ gives him some rest;
and because this is not full, his heart runs out to the creature, and to his
lusts for more; and so between them both he has rest, and he is quieted
with this, because he feels what he sought for: and therefore he must needs
have Christ, else his conscience cannot be quiet, and he must needs have his
lusts, his ease, and this world too, else his heart is most unquiet; but let
him have both, he is now quiet. Micah 3.11. The Priests teach for hire, (there
the world quiets them) yet they will lean upon the Lord too, because this also
comfo^ts them; what do they now? do they make war against this woeful frame?
No, no, but ^lesse themselves in it, saying, No evil shall come to us; but a
poor bel^^ver whose heart is upright, it is true, there are many runnings out
of his heart after other vaniti^^, and much unquietness of spirit, yet the
regen^rate part makes war against these, (...) Gods enemies, and the
disturbers of the peace of Christ's Kingdom; Psalm 42. David professes, his
tears were his meat day and night, verse 3. and his heart was woefully sunk
and fallen, yet what does he? first he chides himself, Why art thou cast
down, oh my soul? and then secondly he makes his moan to the Lord of it, verse
5, 6. Lord my soul is cast down, oh Lord pity me; you shall see also, Psalm.
73.2. his eyes were dazzled with the glory of the world, and the wicked in it,
that he had almost forsaken God; yet within a little while after he gets into
the Sanctuary of God, and then loathes himself for such foolish and bru^ish
thoughts; and closes with God again, saying, Whom have I in heaven or earth
but thee? verse 25.

Ps. 116.7.
David was a Bird out of his nest for a time, and therefore when he considered
how the Lord had saved his eyes from tears, his soul from hell, returns
again, and says, Return to thy rest oh my soul; Psalm. 25.13. it is said, his
soul shall dwell at ease, or (as the word signifies) shall lodge in goodness;
some hard work full of trouble, some strong lust, or sad temptation, desertion,
affliction, the Lord exercises the soul withal for some time, and so long
the soul is in heaviness and much weariness of spirit, as it is 1 Pet. 1.6.
yet when this days work is done, when the sin is subdued, and the temptation
has humbled him, then a believers soul shall lodge in goodness; he shall
have an easy bed, and a soft pillow to rest on at night; When have the
faithful sweeter naps in Christ's bosom then after sorest troubles, longest
eclipses of Gods pleased face? when do their souls cleave closer to the Lord,
then when they are ready to forsake the Lord, and the Lord them? Certainly fire
is wholly carried upward, when that which suppresseth it, makes it at last
break out into greater flame; Peter falls from Christ, yet he is Peter, a stone
cleaving most close unto Christ, above all other the Apostles; because his fall
being greater, his faith clave the closer to the Lord Christ for ever after it:
Solomon's heart certainly never clave so unseparably unto the Lord, as after
his fall, wherein he did more experimentally find and feel the emptiness and
vanity of those things, wherein he did imagine before something was to be
found; but he that has a double heart, never enters into rest, but the longer
he lives the more common Christ, his truth, and promises grow; they are but
fading flowers, whose beauty and sweetness affect him for a time; but they
wither before the Sun set: and therefore the longer he lives, the less savor
he finds in these things, and therefore takes less contentment therein; the
Lord Jesus and all his ordinances grow more flat and dry things to him, and
therefore though at first he might rejoice (as John's hearers, John 5 35.) in
these burning and shining lights, yet it is but for a season; at last he
discovers himself, not by a renewed returning to his rest, but by a wearyish
forsaking of it. The Raven never returned to the Arc again, because it could
live upon the floating carrion on the waters; whereas the Dove finding no rest
there, returns again.

Fourthly, the end of Faith.

This is the fourth particular in the description of Faith: The whole soul
comes to Christ, For Christ and all his benefits; and this is the end of
Faith, or of a believers coming unto Christ: the end of faith is sometimes
expressed by a general word Life, John 5.40. but you must remember that hereby
is meant the Lord of life first, and so all the blessings of life. The
falsnesse and hypocrisy of Christ's followers appeared in this, John 6.26. you
seek me, says Christ, for loaves, that was their end; as many a one in these
days if they be in outward misery seek unto Christ for outward mercy, corn in
time of famine, health in time of sickness, peace upon any terms in time of
war; and if they be in any inward distress, now they seek to Christ for
comfort and quiet, and so like many sick patients desire the Physician, not to
have him married to them, but for some of his physic only, to be healed by
him; but what says our Savior to these persons? verse 27. Labor not for the
meat that perishes, what should be the end of their labor then? he tells
them, but for that bread that endures to everlasting life; what is this bread?
see the 33. and 35. and 48. verses, he tells them, I am the bread of life; seek
for me therefore, come for me; and look as none can have life from the bread,
unless he first feed upon the bread it self, so none can have any life or
benefit from Christ that comes not first to Christ for Christ. Conceive of this
thus: God in Christ is the complete object of faith under a double notion;
First as sufficient, in being all we want unto us; Secondly, as efficient, in
communicating all to us, and doing all for us. In the first respect, he is
Elshaddai, in his promis^; in the second respect he is Jehovah, Exodus 6.3. in
making good his all-sufficient promise; hence faith comes to him for a double
end, first that he would give himself and be all to it, Secondly, that he
would communicate all his blessings and benefits also, and so do all for it.
For in the covenant of Grace, the Lord does not only promise a new heart,
pardon of sin, with the rest of those spiritual benefits, but, also
himself, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. H^nce Faith comes
first for that which the Lord principally promises, viz. God himself, and
then for all the rest of those heavenly and glorious benefits; and hence it is,
if any man come for Christ himself without his benefits, and regard not the
conveyance of them, as the Familists at this day do, who abolish all inherent
graces, and some of them all ordinances because Christ is all to them; or if
any come for the benefits of Christ without Christ himself, as many among our
selves do, who never account themselves happy in him, but only by some
abilities they receive from him; neither of these come with a single eye, nor
fix a right end in their closing with Christ: you must first come for Christ
himself, and so for all his benefits.

For establishing your hearts in which truth, consider these things.

1. Consider what drives any man to Christ. Is not sense of wants one main
thing? now what are a christians wants, when the Lord has humbled him? are
they not, first, want of Christ; and secondly, of all the benefits of Christ?
viz. righteousness, peace, pardon, grace glory, John 16.9. If therefore the
souls of all the elect feel a want of both, does not Faith come to Christ for
both? John 4.10. If thou knew the gift of God, ( i. e. the worth of him, and
thy want of him) thou would ask, and he would give thee water of life.

2. What does the Lord offer in the Gospel? is it not first Christ himself,
and then all the benefits of Christ? Isay 9.6, 7. To us a Son is borne, to us
a Son is given; in the receiving therefore of Christ by faith, what should
the soul aim at, but that it may have the Son himself, and so all his
benefits with him?

3. Can any man have eternal life, that not only has not the benefits flowing
from the Son, but that wants the Son himself? I am sure the Apostle
expressly affirms it, 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son has life, he that
has not the Son has not life; Faith therefore must come for Christ himself:
as in marriage the woman consents first to have the man, and so to have all
other benefits that will necessarily follow upon this.

4. The happiness of all the Saints consists in two things: First, union to
Christ; Secondly, communion with Christ. Faith therefore pitcheth first upon
Christ himself, that it may have sure and certain union to him (for our union
is not unto any of the benefits flowing to us from Christ; we are not united
unto forgiveness of sins, nor peace of conscience, nor holiness, etc. but
unto the person of the Son of God himself) and then secondly comes, for the
communication of all the benefits arising only from union; as Paul, Phil. 3.9,
10. esteems all things dung and loss, first, to be found in him, that so he
might have his righteousness in justification, and feel the power of his
death and resurrection in sanctification, etc. in one word, Faith first buys
the pearl it self, and then seeks to be enriched by it; it finds the treasure
of grace, glory, peace, mercy, favor, reconciliation in Christ, but then buys
the field it self, that it may have the treasure also, Mat. 13.44. the Lord
Christ's great desire is, that all his might be with him to see his glory, John
17.24. and Faith desires first to have him, and be for ever with him, and so to
partake of that glory: the Lords great plot is first to perfect the Saints in
Christ, Col. 2.10. ye are complete in him; then to make them like to Christ by
communicating life, grace, peace, glory from him: Col. 3.3, 4. 1 John 3.1, 2.
Faith therefore first quiets it self in him, then seeks for life from him; it
comes first for Christ, and then for all the benefits of Christ.

Oh that this truth were well considered, how would it discover abundance of
rotten counterf^it faith in the world, some seeking for peace and comfort, and
ca^ching at promises without seeking first to have the person of Christ
himself, in whom only all the promises are Yea and Amen. Others despising the
benefits of Christ, especially grace, holiness, and life from him; because
(say they) Christ is all in all to them. Ask them, Have you any grace, change
of heart, etc.? tush! what do you tell them of repentance, and faith, and
holiness? they have Christ, and that is sufficient; they have the substance,
what should they do now with shadows of Ordinances, Ministeries, or
Sacraments? they have all graces in Christ, why should they look either for
being of, or evidence from any grace inherent in themselves? they have a living
holy head, but Christ's body they say is a dry Skeleton, a dead carcass, and
they are but dry bones: and is it so indeed? then look that God should shortly
bury thee out of his sight, assuredly you that want and d^spise the b^n^fits
coming from him, shall never have part nor portion in him at the great day of
Account; Christ is a Savior to save men from their sins, not to save men and
their sins; Christ is King and Priest of his Church, holy and separated from
sinners, Heb. 7.26. and if you have any part or portion in him, he has made
you Kings and Priests also to God and his Father, and has not left you in your
pollution, but washed you from it in his own blood: Rev. 1.5, 6. The law of God
is written on the heart of Christ, Psalm. 40.8. with Heb. 10.5, 6, 7. and if
ever he wraps you up in the covenant of grace, he will write his law in your
hearts also, Heb. 8.10.

Let all deluded Familists tremble at this, that in advancing Christ himself,
and free grace, abolish and despise those heavenly benefits which flow from him
unto all the elect. Let others also mourn over themselves that have with much
affection been seeking after Christ's benefits, peace of conscience, holiness
of heart and life, promises to assure them of eternal glory, but have not
sought first to embrace and have the person of the Lord Jesus himself.

Oh come, come therefore unto the Lord Jesus for Christ himself, and for all
his benefits; I say for All his benefits. This is that which the Apostle prays
for with bended knees for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.14, 18.
that they might (not take in a little, but) comprehend the height, depth,
length, breadth of Christ's love, that so they might be filled with all the
fullness of God. This is that which our Savior expressly with much vehemence
calls for, John 7.37. Let all that thirst come unto me, and drink; not sip and
taste a little, as Reprobates and Apostates do, Heb. 6.4, 5. but drink, and
drink abundantly, as it is Cant. 5.1. And observe it, that upon these very
terms the Lord tenders grace and mercy, Romans 5.17. the Apostle does not say,
They that receive alittle, but abundance of grace, shall reign by
righteousness unto eternal life. Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it,
Psalm. 81.11, 12. And most certainly this is one principal difference between
the faith of the Elect and Reprobates, (and if I mistake not, the principal)
the elect close with Christ for that end, for which the Father offers him,
which is, that they might possess his Son, and all his benefits, and
therefore come poor and empty, for all; the reprobate come not for all, but
for so much and no more then will serve their own turn; in misery they would
have Christ to deliver them, but what care they for spiritual mercies? in
trouble of conscience, or after their foul falls into filthy lusts and sins,
they come to Christ to forgive them and comfort them, but what care they for
holiness and a new nature? some sins they would have Christ save them from,
but they regard not redemption from all; they cannot come to Christ, that all
the powers of darkness may be perfectly subdued, that their own sins, and
selves, conceits, and wills, may be led away captive by this mighty Conqueror;
that Christ in all his authority, grace, peace, life, glory, might be for ever
advanced in them and by them.

It was Austins complaint in his time of many of his hearers, that Christum
assequi, to have Christ was pleasing to them; but sequi Christum, to follow
Christ, this was heavy. To close with Christ's person, is sweet to many; but to
close with his will, and to come to him that he would give them a heart to lie
under it, this benefit they desire not. All Christ is useless and needless;
but something from Christ is precious to them: for the Lord Jesus sake beloved
take heed of this delusion; if any thing has been bought for us at a dear
rate, and cost much; if the man should offer to hold any part of it back, we
will not abate him any thing, we will have it all, because it cost dear; I
tell you pardon of sin, peace with God, the adoption of sons, the spirit of
grace, perseverance to the end, the kingdom of glory, the riches of mercy,
have been bought for you by a dear and great price, the precious blood of
Christ; and therefore if the justice of God should hold back any thing, or thy
own unbelief tell thee these are too great and many for so vile a creature as
thou art to enjoy, yet abate the Lord nothing; say thou art vile, yet Christ's
blood that bought not some, but all these, is very precious, and therefore take
them all to thy self, as thy portion for ever, and bless the Lord, as David
does, Psalm. 16.7. that gave thee this counsel. Whiles you are in peace, it may
be you may neglect so great salvation; but the time of distress and anguish
may come wherein you may feel a need of all, even of those hidden depths of
mercy above your reach and reason; and therefore, as bees, gather in your honey
in summer time, and with Joseph lay up in these times of plenty, wherein the
exceeding riches of grace is opened, and poured out at your heels, for those
times of approaching famine, and for those many years of spiritual desertion
and distress, wherein you may think, Can it stand with the honor of God to
save such a poor sinful creature as I am? what iron heart is not drawn by
this love, for the Lord to invite you to possess (...) or nothing? Dives in
hell was desirous of a drop to cool his tongue, and behold the very depths and
seas of grace are opened for thee to come in and partake of, if the Lord Jesus
should be offered unto thee to pardon some sins, but not all; to pardon all
sins, but not to heal thy nature also; or to heal some backslidings, but
not all; to supply thy spiritual wants, but not outward also, as may be best
for thee; or to supply outward, but not inward and spiritual; if he should
offer to do thee good in this life, but not in death nor after death, you
might refuse to come in; but when all is offered, all that mercy, which no eye
ever saw to pity thee; all that love, wherewith Abraham, David, Paul, etc.
were embraced, now to refuse to come up and possess these; how can you escape
the sorest vengeance of a jealous God, that neglect so great salvation? Oh
Lord! what extremity of anguish and bitterness will thou one day be in, when
the contempt of this grace, glowing upon thy conscience, shall press thee
down with these thoughts; I am now under all misery, but I might have had all
Gods grace, all Christ's glory, but wretch that I am I would not? Me thinks if
your own good hereby should not draw you, yet the exceeding great glory the
Lord shall have hereby, should force you to accept of all this grace; for if
thou did receive a little grace, believe a little mercy toward thee, this
makes thee sometime exceeding thankful, does it not? and the very hope of more
makes thy heart break forth into a holy boasting and glorying in Christ, Who is
a God like unto thee? Suppose therefore you drank in all, and received all that
which the Lord freely offers, should not the Lord be exceedingly magnified
then? could thou contain thy self then, without crying out, Oh Lord now let
thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen, and my soul has now
possession of thy salvation? would not call to the hills, and seas, and
earth, and heavens, and Saints, and Angels, to break forth into glorious
praises, and bless this God?

Object.
But what have I to do to come, that am so poor, and empty, and full of woes,
and wants, and sins? never was any so miserable, and blind, and naked as I.

If Faith comes for all to Christ, Answ.
and fetches all from him, then never be discouraged because thou have nothing
to bring unto him; let all thy wants and miseries be arguments and motives
therefore to come unto him, Revel. 3.17, 18. Because thou art poor and naked,
nay because thou know it not, and art not affected with it, therefore come
unto me, and buy eye salve, and gold, and white raiment. Lord pardon my sin,
says David, Ps. 25.11. and 31.9.
because it is great: have mercy upon me, for I am consumed with grief, and am
in trouble. Psalm. 40.11, 12.
Let mercy and truth continually preserve me, for innumerable evils have
compassed me round about. Hos. 6.1, 2
Let us return unto the Lord, because he has wounded us. I am a dog,
therefore let me have crumbs, said the woman of Canaan: oh this is cross to
sense and reason, and we cannot believe while we are so exceeding poor, empty,
vile, that the Lord should look upon us; but beloved, you little think what
wrong you do to your selves, and the Lord Jesus hereby: for by this means
Christ is not so much exalted, nor the creature humbled, both which concurring
in faith, make those acts of faith most precious; for while you stand upon
something, and would have something to bring to Christ, you hereby exalt your
selves; but when you come with sense of nothing else but woes and wants, and
see Christ now making of you welcome, oh this is not only mercy, but ravishing
mercy. If you should come with sense of somewhat to Christ, and to see his love
to you; you might glorify mercy in the height, and length, and breadth of it,
but not in the depth of it, unless you see it reaching its hand to you, when
you are fallen into so low and poor a condition as nothingnesse and emptiness,
and misery it self. And therefore do not come to Christ only for the benefits
of the covenant, but for the condition of it also, when you feel a want of
faith it self; as Hezekiah did, Isay 38.14. Lord I am oppressed, undertake for
me. 1 Kings 8.57, 58. Do not undertake to fulfill any part of the covenant or
any condition in it, or any duty required of thee, of thy self, but go empty
to Christ, and say as David, Lord I will run the ways of thy salvation, if
thou will set my heart at liberty. Psalm. 119.32, 33. Quicken me, and I will
call upon thy name. Psalm. 80.18. Be strong in the Lord, and the power of his
might, but not of thine own.

Obj. 1.
But I come for all, and am never a whit the better, but as poor and miserable
still as ever I was.

Answ.
If the Lord keeps you poor and low, yet the same motive that made thee come,
let it make thee stay; it may be the Lord sees thou would grow full and
lifted up if he should give thee a little, and therefore keeps thee low; better
be humble, Hos. 6.2, 3.
then full and proud. Let us go unto the Lord, because he has wounded,
broken, and slain us. But they might object, we do come, but find no help, no
cure. It may be so; yet it is said, After two days he will revive us, and the
third day we shall live in his sight, and we shall know him, if we follow on
to know him, verse 6. His goings forth are prepared as the morning, it may be
night for a time, but the Sun of righteousness will arise gradually and
gloriously upon thy soul.

Truly brethren, when I see the curse of God upon many christians that are now
grown full of their parts, gifts, peace, comforts, abilities, duties; I stand
adoring the riches of the Lords mercy to a little handful of poor believers,
not only in making them empty, but in keeping of them so, all their days; and
therefore come to the Lord, poor, empty, naked, nothing, cursed, in the sense
of thy want of all things, for all things, and then receive with gladness, yet
boldness and holy confidence, not only pardon of some sins, but of all;
believe, answer not to some prayers, but all. Embrace in thy bosom not some
few promises, but all. It is a great case of conscience, When may a christian
take a promise without presumption, as spoken to him, and given to him in
particular; and the rule is very sweet, but certain: when he takes all the
Scripture and embraces it as spoken unto him, he may then take any particular
proper promise boldly; my meaning is, when a Christian takes hold and wrastles
with God for the accomplishment of all the promises of the New Testament, when
he sets all the commands before him, as his rule and compass and guide to
walk after; when he applies all the threatenings to drive him nearer unto
Christ the end of them; this no hypocrite can do, this the Saints should do,
and by this may know, when the Lord speaks in any particular unto them; go I
say again therefore unto the Lord for all, and in the sense of all your
emptiness be abundantly comforted, that though you do not find supply from
Christ, yet you come unto the Lord Christ for it: it is a certain rule, you
shall not always want that good which you come to Christ to supply, nor always be
mastered with that sin which you come to Christ with, to take away: only then
be sure you come for all; otherwise you do not come truly: come first for
Christ himself, and then (as I said) for all his benefits.

To conclude; this is the direct and compendious way of living by Faith, so
much urged and pressed of Gods servants, for to live by faith properly is to
live upon the promise in the want of the thing, or to apprehend the thing in
the promise, Heb. 11.1. now the promises are not given to the elect immediately
without Christ, but first Christ is given, i. e. offered in the Gospel and
received by Faith, and then with him all things also; and therefore the
Scripture runs thus, Isay 55.1, 2, 3, 4. Come unto the waters and drink, and
then, I will make an everlasting Covenant, (which contains all the promises)
even the sure mercies of David: the Apostle expressly disputes the case, and
says, Where there is a Testament, (containing Evangelicall promises) there
must first be the death of the Testator, Heb. 9.15, 16. to whom we must first
come by Faith, before we can have right to any promise; Heb. 7. 22.25. and
10.16, 17, 18.22. Being justified by Faith, now we have peace with God, nay, we
have access to God, nay now we are sure of standing, now we hope in God, and
glory to come; Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4. all follows the first.

How shall a Christian therefore live by Faith? truly, first receive Christ and
come to him for the end I mention; and then thou may be sure all other things
shall be given to thee. As for example: do want any temporal blessing?
suppose it be payment of debts, thy daily bread, provision for thy family, a
comfortable yoake-fellow, etc. look now through the Scripture for promises of
these things, and let thy faith act thus; If God has given me Christ, the
greatest blessing, then certainly he will give me all these smaller matters as
may be good for me; but the Lord has given me Christ, and therefore I shall not
want: Psalm. 23.1. The Lord is my shepherd, says David, what follows? I shall
not want; there is the like reason in all other things, suppose it be in case
of protection from enemies, if the Lord has given me Christ to save me from
hell, then he will save me from these fleshly enemies much more: you shall see,
Isa. 7. a promise given that Syria should not prevail against Judah: they
doubted of this, how does the Lord seek to assure them? you shall see, verse
14. it is by promising a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and his name
shall be Emmanuell; this is a strange reason, (yet you may see the reason of it
if you consider this point) so Isay 9.5 6. The oppressors rod shall be broken.
For unto us a Son is borne, a Son is given. By Faith they put to flight the
Armies of Alients, brake down the walls of Jericho, did wonders in the world.
What did they chiefly look to in this their faith? you shall see, Heb. 11.39,
40. it was by respecting the promise to come, and that better thing Christ
Jesus himself, which we now see with open face, and therefore he concludes,
Heb. 12.1, 2, 3. Having such a cloud of witnesses, that thus lived and dyed by
faith, let us look unto Jesus the Author and finisher of ours. The Prophet
Habbakuk, Hab. 2.5. affirms, that the just shall live by Faith; What faith is
that? consult with the place, you shall see it was in the promise of
deliverance from the Chaldean tyranny, yet the Apostle Paul applies it to faith
in Christ's righteousness, Romans 1.17.
and that truly, because if their faith had not respected Christ himself, in
the first place, they could never have expected any deliverance by the promise
of deliverance from the Caldeans, but thus they might.

5. The special ground of Faith.

The last thing in the description of Faith is, that the soul thus comes upon
the call of Christ in his word, and this is the special ground of Faith;
wherefore the soul comes to Christ: take a sinner humbled and broken for sin,
he cannot prevent the Lord by coming of himself unto Christ, and therefore
the Lord prevents him, by his gracious call and invitation to come in; Rom 8.30.
Whom God has predestined, them has he called; our translation from
darkness into Gods mavelous light is by being called. 1 Pet. 2.9.
The soul is lost in humiliation, the Lord Jesus who is come to save that
which is lost, seeks it out in vocation, or calling: Sanctification is the
restoring of us to the image of God we once had in Adam, as corruption is the
defacing of that image; Vocation is the calling of the soul unto Christ, this
voice Adam never heard of; he did not need any call to come to Christ, and
therefore was immediately sanctified, as soon as he was made: but we need
Vocation unto Christ, before we can be sanctified by Christ; we need this call
to make us come to Christ, to put us into Christ, and therefore much more
before we can receive any holiness from Christ; the ground of our coming by
faith is Gods call, 2 These. 2.13, 14. chosen to salvation through
sanctification (the remote end of Vocation) and belief of the truth, (the next
end of it) whereunto he has called you; there is the ground of it. The
explication of this call is a point full of many spiritual difficulties; but
of singular use, and comfort to them that are faithful and called; I shall
omit many things, and explicate only those things which serve our purpose here
in these three particulars.

1. I shall show you what this call is, or the nature of it. 2. The necessity
of it. 3. How it is a ground of coming, and what kind of ground for Faith.
1. The nature of this Call I shall open for your more distinct understanding
in several Propositions, or Theses.

Our Vocation or Calling is ever by some word or voice, either outward, or
inward, or both; either ordinary or extraordinary; by the ministry of men, or
by immediate visions and inspirations of God. I speak not now of extraordinary
call, by dreams and visions, and immediate inspirations, as in Abraham, and
others, before the Scriptures were penned and published; nor of extraordinary
call, by the immediate voice of Christ: as in Paul and some other of the
Apostles: for these are ceased now, Heb. 1.1. unless it be among people that
want ordinary means, and elect infants, etc. whose call must be more then by
ordinary means, because they want such means; we speak now of ordinary call by
the ministry of men.

2. This voice in ordinary calling home of the elect to Christ, is not by the
voice of the Law, (for the proper end of that is to reveal sin and death,
and to cast down a sinner) but by the voice of the Gospel bringing glad
tidings; written by the Apostles, and preached to the world. 2 These. 2.14. Joh.
20.31. 1 Cor. 1.21. with 26
He has called you by our Gospel. These things are written that you might
believe. By the foolishness of preaching, the Lord saves them that believe. I
mean, preaching at the first or second rebound, by lively voice, or printed
Sermons at the time of hearing, or in the time of deep meditation, concerning
things heard; the Spirit indeed inwardly accompanies the voice of the Gospel,
but no man's call is by the immediate voice of the Spirit without the Gospel,
or the immediate testimony of the Spirit breathed out of free grace, without
the word. Ephesians. 1.12, 13. And therefore, that a Christian should be immediately
called without the Scripture, and the Scripture only given to confirm Gods
immediate promise, as a Prince gives his letter to confirm his promise made to
a man before; (as Valdesso would have it,) is both a false and dangerous
assertion.

Romans 1.6. it is certain some of the messengers of Christ called the Romans by
the Gospel, yet Paul says, they were called of Christ Jesus, the dead hear
his voice and arise and live; Joh. 5.29.
and when the time of calling comes, they listen to it as his call: 2 Thessalonians.
2.12, 13.
and hence it is styled, Heb. 3.1. because the Lord Christ from heaven speaks,
takes the written word into his own lips, as it were Cant. 1.1, 2. and thereby
pi^rc^th through the ears, to the heart, through all the noise of fears,
sorrows, objections against believing, and makes it to be heard as his voice;
the bowels of Christ now yerne toward an humbled lost sinner bleeding at his
feet, therefore can contain no longer, but speaks and calls, and makes the
soul understand his voice: so that this call is not a mean business, because
the Lord Jesus himself now speaks, whose voice is glorious.

The substance of this call, or the thing the come unto him: for there is a
more common calling (or as some term it, a particular calling) of men, as
some to be Masters or Servants, 1 Cor. 7.24.20, 21. or to office in Church or
Commonwealth, as Aaron, Heb 5.4. and the voice there is to attend unto their
work to which they are called. There is also a remote end of vocation, which is
to holiness, 1 These. 4.7. and unto glory also, 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. Phil. 3.14. but
we now speak of more special calling, the next end of which is to come unto
Christ, the soul has lived many years without him, the Lord Jesus will now
have the lost prodigal to come home, to come to him; the soul is weary and
heavy laden, and the Lord Jesus could easily ease it without its coming to
him: but this is his will, he must come to him for it: Mat. 11.27. Ier. 3.7.22.
I said after she had done these things turn unto me; come unto me ye
backsliding children, I Will heal your backslidings, Jer. 4.1. If thou
returnest, return unto me. This voice, Come unto me, is one of the sweetest
words that Christ can speak, or man can hear, full of Majesty, mercy, grace,
and peace; a poor sinner thinks* Will the Lord ever put up such wrongs I have
offered him, heal such a nature, take such a viper into his bosom; do any
thing for me? if there be but one in the world to be forsaken, is it not I? the
Lord therefore comes and calls, Come unto me and I will pardon all thy sins, I
will heal all thy backslidings; I will be angry no more. Jer. 3.12.13. Though
thou have committed whoredom with many lovers, yet return unto me says the
Lord. Ier. 3.1. Though thou have resisted my Spirit, refused my grace, wearied
me with thine iniquities, yet come unto me, and this will make me amends; I
require nothing of thee else but to come: Isay 55.1, 2.
for Gods call is out of free grace, Gal. 1.6. and therefore calls for no more
but only to come up and possess the Lords fullness, Luke 14.17. 1 Cor. 1.9.

to come, is for substance all one with the offer of Christ; which consists in
three things.

1. Commandment to receive Christ as present and ready to be given to it: as
when we offer any thing to another, it is by commanding them to take it: 1 John
4.23. and this binds conscience to believe, as you will answer for the contempt
of this rich grace, at the great day of account. 2. Persuasion and entreaty to
come and receive what we offer: 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.
for in such an offer wherein the person is unwilling to receive, and we are
exceedingly desirous to give, we then persuade; so does Christ with us. 3.
Promise: to offer a thing without a promise of having it, if we receive it, is
but a mock-offer; and hence you shall find in Scripture some promise ever
annexed unto Gods offer, which is the ground of faith, Ier. 3.22.
This call or offer has three special qualifications: He that has heard and
learned (not of man only, but) of the Father comes unto me, John 6.45. The
Lord does not stand at the outward door only and call to open, but the Lord
Jesus comes in, he comes near unto the very heart of a poor sinner and makes
that understand, Hos. 2.14. and the Lord makes his grace glorious, and his
mercy sweet unto the hearts of his Elect; Look (says the Lord Jesus) how I
have left thousand thousands in the world, and have had greater cause so to
have left thee; but behold I am come unto thee, oh come thou now unto me.

2. It is a particular call; for there is a general call and offer of grace to
every one. Now though this be a means to make it particular, Mark. 16.15.
yet the Spirit of Christ which is wont to apply generals unto particulars
particularly, makes the call particular, that the soul sees that the Lord in
special means me, singles out me in special to believe; otherwise the souls
of the elect will not be much moved with the call of God, so long as they think
the Lord offers no more mercy to me then to any reprobate; and therefore the
Spirit of Christ makes the call particular. Esaias 43.1. I have called thee by
name: John 10.5. He calls all his sheep by name; not that the Lord calls any
by their christen name (as we say) as the Lord did extraordinarily call Samuel,
Samuel, and Paul, Paul; but the meaning is, look as the Lord from before all
worlds writ down their names in the book of life, and loves them in special,
so in Vocation, (the first opening of Election) the Lord makes his offer and
call special, and so special as if it were by name; for the soul at this
instant feels such a special stirring of the spirit upon it which it feels
now, and never felt before; as also its particular case so spoken unto, and its
particular objections so answered, and the grievousnesse of its sin in
refusing grace so particularly applied, as if God the only searcher of hearts
only spoke unto it, and so dares not but think and believe that the Lord
means me.

3. It is effectual as well as inward, and particular. Luke 14.23. Compel
them to come in. John 10.16. Christ's other sheep shall hear Christ's voice, and
those he must bring home; for every inward call is not effectual. There came a
man in without his wedding garment, Mat. 22.6, 7, 8. whence our Savior says,
Many are called, but few chosen; but this I now speak of, is a calling out of
purpose, Romans 8.28. and therefore never leaves the soul, until it has real
possession of Christ, and rests there; this call falls upon a sinner humbled,
not hard hearted; and hence the call is effectual, Mat. 9.12, 13. 2 Chronicles.
30.10, 11. it is such a call as was in creation, Romans 4.17. And hence the soul
cannot but come, and when it is come it cannot depart, like Peter, Lord, whither
should we go? and therefore though it has never so many objections in coming
to Christ, never so much weakness or heartlesnesse to close with Christ, yet
the Lord brings it home, and there keeps it, and now it infinitely blesses God
that ever the Lord gave it an eye to see, an heart to come and seek after Jesus
Christ.



1. No man should come unless first called; as it is in calling to an ordinary
office, so it is in our calling much more unto special grace; the Apostle says,
Heb. 5.4. that No man takes this honor, but he that is called of God; so what
has any man to do with Christ, to make himself a son of God, and heir of
glory thereby, but he that is called of God? what have we to do to take other
men's goods, unless called thereto? what have we to do to take the riches of
grace and peace, if not called thereto? it is presumption to take Christ whiles
uncalled, but not when you are called thereunto.

2. Because no man would come without the Lords call. Mat. 20.6, 7. Why stand
you here all the day idle? The answer was, No man has hired, or called us
thereto. When there is an outward call only, yet men will not come in, Mat.
23.37. and therefore there must be an effectual call to bring men home, Esaias
55.5. and therefore you shall see many, let there be a legal command, suppose
to sanctify a Sabbath, or to speak the truth; they have no objections against
obedience unto this: but press them to believe, show them Gods call for it,
they have more fears and objections rising against this then there be hairs
on their head, because the soul would not close with this.

3. Because no man could come unless called. John 6.44. No man can come to me,
unless the Father draw him; and how does the Father draw any man, but by this
call? if the Lord should not come and speak himself, and make his call the
most joyful tidings and the sweetest message that ever came to it, it would
say, I have no heart, I cannot, I am not able, for Romans 11.32. we are shut up
under unbelief; and therefore the Lord Jesus, Luke 15.5. must bring his sheep
home upon his shoulders, else it will dye in the wilderness of its own
droopings; whereas when the Lord effectually speaks, the soul cannot but come.

Lastly, how this call is a ground of faith,

For answer hereunto, I do not make this call considered without the promise,
the ground on which Faith rests, (for that is Gods free grace in the promise)
but the ground by which it rests, or wherefore it rests upon the promise. The
mind sees (1.) the freeness of mercy to a poor sinner in misery, and this
breeds some hope the Lord may pity it. (2.) The fullness and plenteous riches
of mercy, and this gives very great encouragement to the soul to think, The
Lord (if I come to him) surely will not deny me a drop, Psalm. 130.7, 8. The
Prodigal comes home because of bread enough in his fathers house, though he
was not certain he should have any. (3.) The preciousnesse and sweetness of
mercy makes the soul long vehemently for it, Psalm. 36.6, 7. and makes it set
all other things at a low rate, to enjoy it; but when unto all this the Lord
sends a special commandment, a special message on purpose, and calls it to
come in, and accept of it, and take mercy as its own, and that for no other
reason, but because it is commanded and called to accept of it; this puts an
end unto all doubts, all fears, all discouragements, and the soul answers as
those, Ier. 3.22. Behold, we come, for thou art the Lord our God. As a man in
great want of bread, one comes and freely offers him bread to preserve his
life, the man takes it; if you ask him, Why do you take it? you are a poor
fellow, unworthy of it, never did yet one hours work for it: he answers, It Is
true, I am unworthy, but yet because it is offered to me to preserve life, I
gladly take it; the man does not promise absolutely to me, that this bread is
mine, and shall feed me; but he tells me, if I do receive it, it shall
certainly be mine to feed me; and this is the main ground of his receiving of
it. Just so it is in Faith; Ask an humbled sinner, Why do you believe? Why
do you take Christ as your own? Has the Lord said absolutely that he is
yours? No, says the soul, but the Lord freely offers himself unto me, who am
undone without him, and says, if I do receive him, he shall be for ever mine,
to give life to me, and therefore I thankfully accept of him; this is the
ground of Faith. The Scripture sets out this in a lively similitude of a great
Supper, to which many were invited; what was the ground of their coming to it?
Behold, all things are ready if you come and eat, they are not yours if you
do not come; but if you come at my call and invitation, then all things shall
be yours. Luc. 14 17
And hence it is that they that came not, were excluded; they that came were
received with welcome.

I know it is a question of some difficulty among some, viz. Whether an absolute
testimony of actual favor and justification be not the first ground of Faith?
They that make Faith to be an absolute assurance of Gods favor, must of
necessity maintain this assertion, and then these things will follow.

1. That a Christian must be justified before he believe; for the cause of
Faith must go before Faith. This proposition, Thou art justified, reconciled,
is according to this assertion the cause of faith; for no proposition can
therefore be true, because we are persuaded that it is true; but it must be
first true, before I am persuaded of it; the wall is not white, because my eye
sees it so, but it must first be white, and then I see it so. Now to make
actual justification before faith, is cross to the whole current of
Scripture. We believe that we might be justified, Gal. 2.16. we are not
justified that we might believe. We pass from death to life by faith, John
5.24. we are not in a state of life before faith. When the Lord Jesus saw their
faith, Mat. 9.2. he then said, Be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven
thee. The Word says, He that believes not, is condemned already, John 3.18.
and therefore (unless the Spirits witness be cross to the Word) it does not
say to one that believes not, that he is absolved already. To be justified by
faith, and to be justified by Christ's righteousness is all one in the
Scriptures phrase and meaning, Gal. 2.16, 17. Add therefore we may as well say
that we are justified before and without Christ, as before and without faith.
And indeed this doctrine of being justified by faith, and by this means to
have remission of sins, the Apostle Peter affirms to be the doctrine of all
the Prophets, Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that whosoever
believe in him, shall receive remission of sins: not that they had remission
of sins before they did believe. I know not any one Protestant Writer that
maintains our justification before and without faith, except learned Chamier;
who not knowing how to avoid the blow of Bellarmines horned argument, that if
Faith be an assurance of our actual justification, then we are first justified
before we believe; he affirms we are justified before faith: and therefore
that when the Scripture says we are justified by faith, the reason of that
(says he) is not because our faith does efficere justificationem, i. e. is a
cause (meaning isntrumental) of our justification; but because efficitur in
justificato, i. e. is wrought in a justified person: but if that be the reason
of the phrase, we may affirm our justification to be as well by love, and
sanctification, and holy obedience, as by faith, because these are wrought in a
justified person also.

Then no man's ministry nor the doctrine delivered to them, that what they bind
on earth, is bound in heaven; what they loose on earth, is loosed in heaven;
whose sins they remit, they are forgiven, whose sins they retain, they are
retained. Mat. 16.16. Ioh. 20.23. Most excellent for this purpose is the
Apostles dispute, Romans 10. You need not go up to heaven, nor down to hell, to
fetch Christ himself to tell you whether you shall be justified and saved.
ver. 6, 7. For the word is nigh them, verse 8. that opens Christ's heart unto
thy heart. But what word might some say is this? Is it not the internal word
of the Spirit only? The Apostle answers, It is that word which we preach:
hereby you shall know whether you shall live or no; but what is that word Paul
preached? is it not an absolute testimony that all your sins are already
pardoned by Christ, and therefore believe it? No, but If thou beleevest with
thine heart that God raised up Christ from the dead, thou shall be saved, verse.
9.11, 12. What can be more full? yet consider that one place more, John 17.20.
I pray for all them that shall believe on me, through their word. What is the
ground or means of believing in Christ? It is said here expressly, Their word:
Is it not the word of Christ, rather then the word of the Apostles and of their
successors, in the doctrine they delivered, is it their word? Truly that which
they delivered, was the word of Christ, and that which is opened from their
doctrine in the Scriptures is the word of Christ, yet as they open it, and
apply it, so it is their word: and this Word is the ground by which all that
Christ prays for, do believe in Christ; the bare Word I grant cannot persuade
without the Spirit, yet the Spirit will not give ground to Faith without the
Word, but as by it, so upon it, will build the souls of all the elect, who are
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the
chief cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20. How can they believe without a Preacher? Romans
10.14.

3. Then when wicked men and reprobates are commanded to believe, (as they are
commanded, John 3.19. Luke 14.17. John 6.38. Heb. 4.2.) they are commanded to
believe a lie, viz. that their sins are pardoned, and they actually
justified; for if this testimony be the ground of faith, then when they are
commanded to believe, they are commanded to be persuaded of this testimony. But
the sins of wicked men, especially Reprobates, are not nor never shall be
forgiven, and therefore this cannot be the ground of Faith.

4. Then the Spirit of adoption, which witnesses that God is our Father, and
that we are his sons reconciled to him, goes before faith; but the Apostle
expressly denies this, Ye are the children of God by faith, Gal. 3.26. And
because ye are sons, he has sent unto you the spirit of sons, crying Abba,
Father, Gal. 4.6.

5. If such a testimony should be the first ground of faith, then no man should
believe but he that has such a testimony antecedent to his faith; but this is
cross to the Scripture; Esaias 50.10. He that sits in darkness, and sees no
light, let him stay himself upon his God. When Jonah is cast out of Gods sight
to his own feeling, yet he is bound to look again unto the Temple.

6. This absolute testimony is either the testimony of the Word, or of the
Spirit; Not of the Word, as is proved; If of the Spirit, then let it be
considered, whether that can be the testimony of the Spirit which is not
according to the Word, nay cont^ary to the Word, for the Word to say none are
justified before faith; for the Spirit to testify some are justified before
faith. If it be said, that the Spirit does not witness these to any man before
and without faith; but yet it is without respect unto, or showing a man his
faith, (for those that exclude Sanctification from being any evidence, they
mean Faith as well as any other renewed work of holiness, and so exclude that
also) then I say the testimony of the Spirit (which of it self is exceeding
clear) is an obscure and dark testimony, because it cleares up the praedicate
of this Proposition, thou believer art justified, it witnesses to a man thou
art justified; but cleares not up the subject of it: viz. thou believer, it
makes a man believe a testimony without understanding the full meaning of it;
for the Spirit testifying to any man thou art justified; his meaning is, thou
believer art justified: and I do beseech the God and Father of all lights,
that his poor people may be led into the truth in this particular; for want of
establishment here, you little think how many delusions you may fall into about
your spiritual condition; I remember that when Satan came to overthrow the
Faith of Christ in his second temptation, Mat. 4.6. he brought a promise out of
the Scriptures to him, because he saw he held close to them, verse 4. and by
this promise sought to lead him into temptation, how so? observe the text, and
see if it was not by hiding part of the meaning of the promise from him, and in
special, that very condition required in the person to whom the promise is
made; for he tells him, that if he cast himself down headlong, the Lord has
not only said it, but writ it; He shall give his Angels charge over him, to
keep him from dashing his foot against a stone: whereas if you consult with the
place whence it is cited, viz. Psalm 91.11. The condition is set down, in all
thy ways, which he purposely hides from our Savior as much as in him lay.

Oh take heed therefore of receiving any testimony from Word or Spirit without
the meaning of it, without knowing the person thus and thus qualified, to whom
it belongs; otherwise Satan will hurry you headlong to a world of delusions;
and you shall find the word of God appointed to direct you, (through your
mis-application of it) the word of Satan, to deceive and damn you: do not
think that this is building faith upon works; but to believe, that they that
believe in Christ are justified, reconciled, and saved, is building faith upon
Gods promise; yea, and his free promise too: for says the Apostle, It is of
faith that it might be of grace, Romans 4.16. It is believing to have the end by
the means, not the end without the mean of Faith. It is true, we may see Gods
favor and love to us in the cause as well as in the effects of sanctification;
but what is that cause? the meritorious cause is Christ's righteousness, and
the isntrumental cause of applying this, is our Faith; so that as we are
justified by faith, so seeing this, we may say assuredly with Paul, Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God. Romans 5.1. It is true, we cannot
see our justification by says, nor the work of Faith, without the shining of
the Spirit into our hearts; but the question is not whether the Spirit helps us
to see our justified estate, but by what means; by what Proposition in the
word we come to see it; which we say is not by any such absolute testimony:
thou art justified already, and therefore believe; but if thou believe and come
to Christ, here is then pardon of sin, peace with God, yea all the blessings
of Christ ready for thee, which God intends to give and never to take away, if
thou thankfully receive what God freely offers, and as it were lays down at
thy feet. The call of Christ therefore is the ground by which we first
believe; and that you may be confirmed farther herein, do but consider the
glory and excellency of this ground.

It is a constant ground of faith, for if you oh come, not only because thou
feel holiness in thee, but come, because poor, hungry, empty, naked, lost,
blind, cursed, forsaken, full of sin; there is not one moment of the day of
grace, but the Lord beseeches thee to receive his grace, 2 Cor. 6.1, 2, 3.
this is an open door to Christ at all times, an open harbor to put in at in
all storms, a heartbreaking word; oh thou tossed with tempests and not
comforted, come unto me and thou shall find rest to thy soul. Many ask, how
should I come to Christ, seeing that I have no promise belonging to me? what
have dogs to do with childrens bread? be it so, yet Gods call, command,
beseechings, to come in, should be ground unto thee, to come; as a poor
beggar, that has no promise absolutely given him of relief, yet if a rich man
sends to him, and bids him come to his door and wait, he thinks he has good
ground and warrant to come.

to come and take, come and drink: this forces the soul to confess, I am
sure it is no presumption to obey the call of Christ; and what though I am
unworthy, and this good is exceeding great and precious, yet if it be the Lords
grace to call such a poor wretch to receive and accept of it, why should I not
rather thankfully receive it, then out of my own head superstitiously refuse
it? but this I am sure and certain of, the Lord calls me, thus to do; if God
should speak from heaven to you to come unto his Son, it is not so sure a
ground as the call of God from out of the Ora^le of his word, in the blessed
Gospel of his dear Son.

It is a strong ground, and of great power Ier. 3.22. when the Lord said,
Return ye backsliding children, they presently answered, Lord we come, the
dead shall hear this voice of the Son of God, and live; John 5.25. thou
said, Seek ye my face, my heart answered, Lord thy face will I seek. Oh
iron, stony, Adamantine heart, that can hear so sweet a voice as this word
come, and yet not be overcome!

This call honors grace most, for what more free then for the Lord to say,
Come and take of the water of life freely? what more free, then for a rich man
to require of his debtor only to receive so many thousands of him to pay his
debts, and to set him up again? Verily brethren, as the Lord honors his grace
by commanding us to come, so we honor it, when through the mighty power of the
same call we do come.

Thus much for Explication of this call, now let me put an end to it in a word
of Application.

Use.
Let this persuade all sorts of persons, young and old, one and another to whom
the Gospel is sent, to come in to Jesus Christ; for those that God calls
should come: but the Lord calls (at least outwardly) all sorts of persons; nay
every individual person to come in: Mark 16.15, 16. Paul told the stout
Jailer, If thou beleevest thou shall be saved: and look as the Law speaks
particularly to every man, Thou shall have no other Gods, etc. so does the
Gospel also, Romans 10.9. that so every man might look upon himself as spoken
to in particular. And indeed if there were not such a particular call, then men
should not sin by refusing the Gospel, nor should the Lord be angry for so
doing, but their sin and condemnation is great that so do, John 3.19. And the
Lord is more wroth for this sin then any other; Ps. 2.12. Luke 14.18. Heb.
3.10.11.19 In one word, either the Lord would have thee (who ^ver thou art) to
receive Christ, or to reject, and so despise Christ; and if the Lord would have
you reject him, he would then have you sin, and continue in it, which cannot
stand either with the honor of Gods holiness, or of his rich grace; I shall
here therefore open two things.

1. Set down means to enable you to come. 2. Show you how and in what manner
you should come.
The means.

1. Consider, who it is that does call you; is it Man or Ministers think you?
you might never come then; no, it is Jesus Christ himself that calls you by
them: Why do many discouraged Spirits refuse to come? it is because they think
deceitful man, or charitable men call them, but the Lord has no respect unto
them; Oh foolish conceit! I tell you their Ministry is not an act of their
charity, wishing well to the salvation of all, but it is an act of Christ's love
and sovereign authority: Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. So that what they do, it is in
Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. if Christ was present, he would call thee to
him with more bowels then any compassionate Minister can: and I assure you, to
receive them, is to receive Christ; to despise them, is to despise Christ, John
13.20. and therefore Ephesians. 2.14. although the Apostles preached to the
Ephesians, yet it is said, that Christ came and preached to them. If any
Minister preaches any other doctrine of grace then what Christ has delivered,
let him be accursed: But if they publish his mind and his call, look upon them
as if the Lord himself called unto you, lest the Lord accurse you, and all
their Ministry to you: the Lord Jesus did not cast off the Jews for
crucifying of him and shedding his blood, until the Gospel of grace published
by his messengers, came to them, and that was rejected; then Paul waxed bold,
and said, because you put away the word from you, we leave you; Acts 13.46.

Oh beloved, if you did believe Christ called you poor prodigalls (that have
run riot, and sinned against him as much as you could) home unto him; suppose
Christ was present, would it not draw you in? suppose he was with thee in the
chamber, where thou art crying after him, or in the Church, where thou art
waiting for him, and he should appear visibly before thine eyes, opening his
bosom, and bowels, and blood before thee, and calling unto thee to this
purpose, I do beseech thee and entreat thee by all these tears I have shed
for thee in the days of my flesh, by all those bitter agonies I have suffered
for thee, by all these tender bowels which have been rolled together toward
thee, come unto me, embrace me, lay thy wearied head in this blessed bosom of
mine, crucify me no longer by thy sins, tre^d me not under foot by thy
unbeleef any more; and I will pardon all thy sins though as red as crimson, I
will heal thy cursed nature, I will carry thee in my own bowels up to glory
with me, where all si^s and tears and sorrows shall be abolished, etc. who
would not now come in to him? let me see the man that has a heart of Adamant
that would not melt and come in at this; Oh my beloved, this very call is done
as really by Christ in his Ministers now, though not so visibly and immediately
as I now describe: and therefore take heed how you refuse to hear him that
speaks from heaven, Heb. 12.25.

Consider whom the Lord calls, and that is thee in particular, who ever thou
art, to whom the Gospel of Christ is sent: for if you think Christ calls some
only that are so and so deeply humbled only to come, and not unto you in
particular, you will never come in; but we have proved this, that the Lord
calls all in general, and consequently each man in particular; the
consideration of this may bring you in; Men fear to commit murder and steal,
etc. but you fear not unbeleefe; but the Apostle bids you fear that; for the
Gospel is preached (says he) unto you, as well as unto those that fell by
unbelief: Heb. 4.1, 2. do not say, he calls me indeed, but it is no more then
what he does to reprobates; true, in the outward call it is so, yet upon this
ground you may think the Lord commands not, calls not you, to sanctify a
Sabbath, or to honor Gods name, because this is as common to reprobates as
unto you; do not say, I am not able to come, and therefore I am not called; no
more are you able to attend the rules of the moral Law: yet you look upon them
as appertaining to you, and because you cannot do them, you entreat the Lord
to enable you, and so because you cannot come, you should look up to the Lord
to draw you: and verily many times the great reason why the Lord does not draw
you, is, because you do not deeply consider that he does really and
affectionately call you: do not say, I am a dry tree, the Lord cannot look
upon me, whose condition is worse then ever I heard or read of, yet remember
what the Lord speaks to such; Isay 56.3, 4, 6, 7. Look not thou to thy barren
and dead heart, but give glory unto God, as Abraham did, Romans 4.19, 20. and
receive his grace with more thankfulness then any else, because none ever so
miserable as thy self; you young men hear this, though you have spent the
flower of your years in vanity, madness, and filthy lusts, yet the Lord calls
you in to him; you old men grown gray headed in wickedness, though it be the
last hour in the day of your life, yet behold the Lord would hire you, and
calls you to come in, before the ^orest wrath of a long provoked God break out
upon you; you that have despised Gods messengers, crucified the Lord Jesus
afresh, embrued your hands in his blood, scorned and hated the Saints, and the
word of Gods grace; hear what wisdom says, Prove. 1.22, 23. Return ye
scorners; oh consider, you that are ignorant of Christ, that never sought after
Christ many a year together, that have continually provoked him to his face,
how the Lord calls you, Isay 65.1, 2, 3. you, even you, are those the Lord
calls, and will you not come?

Consider why the Lord calls thee, is it because he has any need of you to
honor nothing by thee neither: he could have been blessed without you in the
bosom of his Father; or is it because thou have done any thing for him? alas!
thou have not returned him thy nutshells, thou have not had so much as a form
of Religion, thou have done as much mischief to him as thou could, Ier. 3.5.
thou have wearied him with thine iniquities, and made him serve with thy sins,
and have sadded his heart exceedingly by strange impenitency; Isay 43.24. The
only reason that has moved him to call to thee, has been pity to thee, seeing
thee running to the fire that never can be quenched, without stop or stay; 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. and because thou art fallen by thine iniquities, Hos. 14.1.
And shall not this bring you home?

grace of Christ, Gal. 1.6. nay of all the glory of Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. nay
to a most near, sweet, and everlasting fellowship with Christ himself? 1 Cor.
1.9. and can I say any more? can you desire any more then this? if the Lord
should say unto any of us, Come into the garden, and there watch and pray with
me, sorrow and suffer with me; who of us would not account our selves unworthy
of such honor? but for the Lord to say, Come and enter into your rest, the
land, the kingdom of grace and glory is before you, go up and possess it, oh
where are our hearts, if this call will not draw? if the Lord should say at the
day of judgment, when the heavens and earth shall be on a light fire, and the
Lord Jesus set upon the throne of his glory, admired of all his Saints and
Angels; Come you blessed and take the kingdom prepared for you, would you not
gladly come at that call? oh beloved, the Lord Jesus now in the throne of his
glory in heaven, behold he calls you unto a better good then that kingdom; he
calls you to come and take himself and all his precious benefits, prepared for
you, though in thy self accursed; and would he have you take possession of all
this? is it not the praise of the riches of his grace? Ephesians. 1. If this be his
end, then if thou will not come for thy own good, yet for his sake, his grace
sake come in.

How long the Lord has called thee, how stood so long until his locks are wet
with dew of the night: Cant. 5.1, 2. It may be you are afraid, it has been so
long, that now time is past; oh no, for whiles the Lord calls by his word and
spirit, now is the acceptable time, 2 Cor. 6.2. I confess there is a time
wherein the Lord will not be found, but whiles the Lord is near unto thee by
his Ministry, by his Spirit, convincing, affecting, stirring, knocking at thy
heart, the time is not yet past, the Sun is not yet set, so long as those
beams appear, Isay 55.6. those thoughts which discourage thee from coming to
Christ, whiles the voice of his call is heard, cannot be of Christ but Satan,
whose principal work is to lay such stumbling blocks in our way to him.



1. This is the condemning sin; for no sin should condemn thee, if thou did
come to him, John 3.17, 18, 19. thou should please him, and as it were make
him amends for all the wrongs thou have done him, by coming to him; Heb. 11.5,
6, 7.

2. This aggravates all other sins; If I had not spoke to them, (says Christ)
they had had no sin; Joh. 1^.22.
i. e. comparatively; but now they have no cloak for their sin: can the sin of
devils be so great as thine, that never had a Savior sent unto them? yet thou
have one sent and come out of heaven to thee, calling to thee from heaven, and
yet thou despisest him.

3. This provokes the Lord to most unappeasable and unquenchable wrath, Heb.
3.11. I swear in my wrath they should not enter into my rest; after sins
against the Law, the Lord did not swear that man should dye, (for that notes
an unchangeable purpose) but let Christ be despised, the Lord now swears in
his wrath against such a one: he that draws back, my soul shall take no
pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. after sin against the law, the Lord took pleasure
in glorifying his grace upon man fallen, but if you draw back from the grace of
Christ in the Gospel, the Lord will take no pleasure in you.

4. It provokes the sorest and most unsupportable wrath, Take heed you despise
not him that speaks, for if they did not escape who refused him that spoke on
earth, much less shall we that despise him that speaks from heaven; Heb.
12.25. Take heed therefore you despise not him that speaks; the word despise
signifies in the original to despise or refuse upon some color of reason:
every man has some seeming reason against believing; one thinks time is past,
another thinks he is excluded by some antecedent d^cree of election, another
thinks he is not humbled, nor holy enough, another makes excuse not by
pretending his Alehouse and Whore-house, but his Farm and Merchandise, Mat.
22. another thinks he is well enough without Christ, etc. Oh take heed, for the
wrath of God most intolerable is your portion, the lowest dungeon of darkness
is t^y place in hell for this sin; Hear ye despisers and wonder, for I will
work (says the Lord) a work in your days, which you shall not believe
though it be told you, Acts 13.41. I pray you what is this work? certainly a
work of wrath and vengeance; but what is it? you will not believe though you be
told of it, oh you secure sinners; but what is it that they will not believe?
nay truly the Lord himself is silent there, and says nothing, as if it was so
great and dreadful, that the glorious Lord himself is not able to express
it; and truly no more am I: oh therefore, be not worse then that generation of
Vipers that cam^ in to John because some had forwarnd them to escape the wrath
to come, Mat. 3. but come unto a Savior, that you may be ever blessed with
him. But you will say,



Answ. 1.
Come to him mourning and loathing your selves for your long continuance in
refusing of him, Ier. 31.9. Ezekiel. 6.9. come mourning for all thy sins, but
especially for this, that thou have slighted him and not sought him, shed his
blood, rent his bowels; and if thou can not come, yet come to him and make
thy moan to him of thy unbeleefe and inability to come.

2.
Come with confidence that they that do come he will never cast away, and that
thou being come he will never cast thee away, John 6.37. Heb. 10.22.

3.
Come gladly and willingly, glorifying his grace, Act. 2.39. and 13.47.
but abasing thy self, With gladness shall they be brought and enter into the
Kings presence, Psalm. 45.15. do not receive Gods grace as a common thing, but
thankfully and with all thy heart: for the end why the Lord gives Christ to any
man is the glory of his grace, if the Lord attaines this end, he desires no
more, for why should he, when he has his end?

Do not come and taste, 4.
but come and drink; John 7.37. you may famish to death and pine away in your
iniquities, and prove Apostates, even to commit the impardonable sin, if you
do but taste of him, as those did, Heb. 6.4, 5. but drink abundantly, Oh ye
beloved of the Lord, Cant. 5.1. If you cannot satisfy your souls by what you
feel already received from him, then satiate your souls by what you may find
in him; Isay 45.24. take possession of all the grace, glory, peace, promises of
the Lord Jesus, and leave not a hoof behind thee; and be for ever refreshed
and comforted therein.

So come to him, 5.
as that you keep your confidence, and keep your savor of him and joy in him,
Heb. 3.14. with 6. let the word that called you be ever sweet and precious, as
David said, Psalm. 119.53. I will never forget thy Precepts, for by them thou
have quickened me. Let the Lord Jesus be ever fresh, Heb. 3.6. and as an
ointment powered out; take ^eed that the blood wherewith you are sanctified, do
not grow a common thing, and promises withered flowers, and Sermons of Christ
and his grace (unless there be some new notions about them) as dead drink,
for this is the great sin of this age; the old truths about the grace of
Christ, and the simplicity of the Gospel is as water in men's shoes; Ministers
must preach novelties, and make quintessentiall extracts out of the Scriptures,
and it may be, press blood out of them sometime rather then milk, or else
their doctrines are to many as Almanacks out of date, or as news they heard
seven years since; and they knew this before: Oh the wrath of God upon this
God-glutted, Christ-glutted, Gospell-glutted age; unless it be among a very
few poor believers, whose souls are kept empty, poor, and hungry by some
continual temptations or afflictions, and they are indeed glad of any thing,
if it be any thing of Christ! Verily I am afraid such a dismal night is toward
of spiritual desertions, and of outward, but sore afflictions of famine, war,
blood, mortality, deaths of Gods precious servants especially; that the Lord
will fill the hearts of all Churches, families, Christians, that shall be saved
in those times, with such rendings, tearings, shakings, anguish of spirit, as
scarce never more in the worst days of our forefathers; and that this shall
continue, until the remnant that escape shall say, Blessed be he that comes
in the name of the Lord; bessed be the face and feet of that Minister, that
shall come unto us in Christ's name, and tell us, that there is a Savior for
sinners, and that he calls us for to come.

And thus I have done with this Divine truth, viz. That the Lord Jesus in the
day of his power, saves us out of our wretched and sinful estate; by so much
conviction, as begets compunction; so much compunction, as brings in
humiliation; so much humiliation, as makes us to come to Christ by Faith.

CHAP. 2. That every sinner thus believing in Christ, is at that instant
translated into a most blessed and happy estate: John 5.24. Psalm. 2. ult.
IF the Question be, Quest.
What is that happy condition they are made partakers of?

I answer, Answ.
this appears in these six privileges or benefits, principally.

1. Justification, all their sins are pardoned. 2. Reconciliation, peace with
God. 3. Adoption, they are made the Sons of God. 4. Sanctification, they are
restored to the Image of God. 5. Audience of all their prayers to God. 6.
Glorification, in the Kingdom of heaven, in eternal Communion with God.
SECT. I. First, Justification.
THis is the first benefit which immediately follows our union unto Christ by
Faith, that look as we are no sooner children of Adam, and branches of that
root by natural generation, but we immediately contract the guilt of his sin,
and so original pollution; so we are no sooner made branches of the second
Adam by vocation, and so united unto Christ by Faith, but immediately we have
the imputation of his righteousness to our justification, after which we
receive in order of nature (not time) our sanctification; There is no truth
more necessary to be known then this, it being the principal thing contained
in the Gospel, Romans 1.17. the Law showing how a man may be just and live; but
it has not the least word how a sinful man may be just and not dye, this is
proper to the revelation of the Gospel: let me therefore give you a taste of
the nature of it.

Our Justification is wrought by a double act, 1. on God the Fathers part, he
by a gracious sentence absolves and acquits a sinner, and accepts of him as
righteous; 2. on God the Sons part, procuring the passing of this sentence by
his satisfaction imputed and applied: the Father being the person principally
wronged has chief power to forgive, yet in justice he cannot acquit, nor in
truth account a man unrighteous as righteous, unless the Son step in and
satisfy; for whose sake he forgives: as the Apostle expressly says, Ephesians. 4.
ult. so that our Justification is wholly out of our selves, and we are merely
passive in it. Justification is not to make us inwardly just, as the Papists
dream; but it is a Law-tearme, and is opposed against condemnation, Romans 8.33.
now look as condemnation is the sentence of the Judge condemning a man to dye
for his offense or sin; so Justification is the sentence of God the Father,
absolving a man from the guilt and punishment of sin for the sake of the
righteousness of Christ: That you may more particularly understand me, take
this description of it.

Justification is the gracious Sentence of God the Father, whereby for the
satisfaction of Christ, apprehended by faith, and imputed to the faithful, he
absolves them from the guilt and condemnation of all sin, and accepts them as
perfectly righteous to eternal life.

Let me open the particulars herein briefly in several queries.

Quest. 1
What it is in general, to justify.

Answ.
It Is to pass sentence of absolution, to pronounce a sinner righteous; it is Gods
pardon, remission of sins; this appears from the opposition mentioned it
stands in unto condemnation, as a Judge pardons a man when he says he shall
live; or as a man manifestly forgives another when he gives him a promise, or a
bill of discharge: so that (note this by the way that) our Justification is not
Gods eternal purpose to forgive, but it is Gods sentence published, a sinner
is justified intentionally in election, but not actually till this sentence be
past and published; The difficulty only here is, where this sentence is
pronounced; for answer where of note, that there is but a double Court wherein
it is passed: 1. Publicly in the Court of Heaven, or in the Court-rolls of the
Word; (for there is no other Court of Heaven where God speaks, but this.) 2.
Privately, in the Court of Conscience. By the first we are justified indeed
from personal guilt; by the second we feel our selves justified by the
removal of conscience guilt. The first is expressly mentioned, Act. 10.43. and
Romans 1.17. the second is expressly set down also, Psalm. 32.4. The first is the
cause and foundation of this second; the second arises from the first:
otherwise peace of conscience is a mere delusion: the first is sometimes long
before the second, Psalm. 88.15. as the sentence of condemnation in the Word is
sometimes long before a man feels that sentence in his own conscience; the
second comes in a long time after in some Christians: The first is constant and
unchangeable; the second very changeable: he that has peace in his conscience
to day, may lost it by to morrow. So that you are not (in seeking the testimony
of your justification) to look for a sentence from heaven immediately
pronounced of God, but look for it in the Court of his Word, (the Court of
Heaven) which though we hear not, sometime, yet it rings and fills heaven and
earth with the sound of it, viz. There is no condemnation to them that believe:
for hereby the Lord mercifully provideth for the peace of his people more
abundantly. As when a poor Creditor is acquitted, or a malefactor pardoned, I
beseech you (says he) let me have an acquitance, a discharge, a pardon under
your own hand, and this quiets him against all accusers: so it is here; the Lord
gives us an Acquitance in his Word under his own hand and seal, and so gives
us peace, Heb. 6.18.

Who is it that justifies? 2.


It Is God the Father. Answ.
Romans 8.34. Father forgive them, says Christ. And hence Christ is an Advocate
with the Father, 1 John 2.2. All the three Persons were wronged by sin; yet the
wrong was chiefly against the Father, because his manner of working appeared
chiefly in creation, from the righteousness of which, man fell by sin. The
Father forgives primarily by Sovereign authority; the Son of Man Christ Jesus
forgives by immediate dispensation and commission from the Father, John 5.22.
Mat. 9.6. the Apostles and their successors forgive ministerially, John 21.23.
The Father forgives by granting pardon, the Son by procuring, the Ministers
(where the Spirit also is) by publishing or applying pardon: so that this is
great consolation, that God the Father the party chiefly incensed, it is he that
justifies, it is he that passes this gracious sentence, and then who can
condemn?

3.
Why does the Father thus justify?

Answ.
It Is merely his grace, and out of grace. And hence I call it his gracious
sentence, Romans 3.24. justified freely by his grace. What is his grace? The
Prophet Esaias expounds it to be not our grace, or works of grace, (although
wrought by grace) but his own name sake. Esaias. 43.25.
In some respect indeed it is just for God to forgive, viz. in regard of
Christ's satisfaction. 1 Ioh. 1.7. Romans 3.20. The Mercy-seat and the Tables of
the Law in the Ark, may well stand together; but that Christ was sent to
satisfy justice, and that thy sins were satisfied for, and not another:
thus its wholly of grace. If therefore you think the Lord pardons your sins
because you have been less sinners then others; or if you think the Lord will
not pardon your sins, because you are greater sinners then any else, you sin
exceedingly against the riches of Gods grace in this point.

What is the mean by which the Father does thus justify? 4.


It Is for the satisfaction or by the price of the redemption of Christ, Answ.
Romans 3.25. Romans 5.10. Ephesians. 1.7. for Mercy would, but Justice could not
forgive, without satisfaction for the wrong done; Hence Christ satisfies, that
Grace and mercy might have their full scope of forgiving. So that, neither
works before conversion, which are but glistering sins, Romans 1.18. nor works of
grace in us after conversion, can be causes of our Justification: for Abraham
when he was justified and sanctified, yet had not whereof to boast, but
believed in him that justified the ungodly, Romans 4.5. And the Apostle Paul
says expressly, We that believe have believed, that we might be justified, Gal.
2.16. it is therefore the price of Christ's redemption which does procure our
justification. But understand this aright, for this price is not applied to
each particular man as the common price, redeeming all, (for then every
Believer should be accounted a savior, and redeemer of all) but as the price
of those souls in particular, to whom it is specially intended, and
particularly applied. Christ's righteousness is sufficient to justify all to
whom it is imputed, but it is no further imputed then to the attaining the end
of imputation, viz. to justify and save me in particular, not to make me a
head of the Church or a common Savior: it argues a man weakly principled, that
denies the necessity of Christ's satisfaction to our Justification, because
forsooth every Believer should then be a Redeemer.

By Satisfaction I understand, the whole obedience of Christ unto the very
death, which is both active and passive, by which we are justified; Heb. 10.10.
Phil. 2.8. that righteousness of Christ (wrought in his satisfaction) is
imputed, which satisfies the Law and divine Justice, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. which
is both active and passive: the very reason why the Law requires perfect
obedience of us, which we cannot possibly bring before God; is, that we might
seek for it in Christ, that fulfilled all righteousness: and therefore he is
called the end of the Law for righteousness, Romans 10.3, 4. And it is strange
that any should deny Justification by Christ's active obedience, upon this
ground; viz. because that by the works of the Law (which satisfy the Law) shall
no sinner be justified; and yet withal, say that we are justified by that
which satisfies the Law.

This righteousness of Christ is not that of the Godhead, (for then what need
was there for Christ to do or suffer?) but that which was wrought in the
Manhood. And hence it is finite in it self, though infinite in value, in that
it was the righteousness of such a person. This righteousness of Godman may
be considered two ways; First, absolutely in it self; Secondly, respectively,
as done for us.

1. Christ's absolute righteousness is not imputed to us, viz. as he is
Mediator, Head of the Church, having the Spirit without measure (which is next
to infinite) etc. for though these things are applied for our good, yet they
are not imputed as our righteousness; and therefore the objection vanishes,
which says we cannot be justified by Christ's righteousness, because it is of
such infinite perfection.

2. The respective or dispensative righteousness which some call justitia
fidejussoria, is that whereby Christ is just for us in fulfilling the Law, in
bearing Gods Image, we once had, and have now lost by sin; and thus we are
truly said to be as righteous as Christ by imputation, because he kept the Law
for us: and here observe that the question is not whether all that Christ did
and had is imputed to us as our righteousness, but whether all that he did pro
nobis, for us, as a surety in fulfilling the Law, be not for substance, our
righteousness; and therefore to think that we are not justified by Christ's
righteousness, because then we are justified by his working of miracles,
preaching of Sermons, which women are not regularly capable of, is but to cast
blocks before the blind; so that though Christ does not bestow his personal
wisdom and justice upon another, yet what hinders, but that that which Christ
does by his wisdom and righteousness for another, the same should stand good
for him for whom it is done? for thus it is in sundry cases among men; Christ's
essential righteousness, infinite wisdom, fullness of spirit without
measure, etc. is not imputed to us; yet these have conspired together to do
that for us, and suffer that for us, by which we come to be accounted
righteous before God, he shall be called the Lord our righteousness, Ier.
23.6. This righteousness therefore imputed to us justifies us, Romans 5.18. we
are said to be made the righteousness of God in him: 2 Cor. 5.20.
not the righteousness of God whereby he is just, but whereby we are just;
opposed to the righteousness of man which is called our own righteousness.
Romans 10.3. Romans 1.17. Not righteousness from him (as the Papists dream) but
righteousness in him; nor remission by Christ only, but righteousness in
Christ; this imputed justifies, as sin imputed condemns.

Who are the persons the Lord does justify? 5.


They are believers, Answ.
we are justified by faith, Romans 5. or for Christ's righteousness apprehended
by faith, Phil. 3.9. it is by faith not as a work of grace, but as by an
instrument appointed of God for this end. Christ did not dye that our sins
should be actually and immediately pardoned, but mediately by Faith, John 3.16.
John 17.20. and the Lord in wisdom has appointed this as the only means of
applying righteousness, because this above all other graces cast down all the
righteousness of man in point of justification, and so all cause of boasting,
and advances grace and mercy only, Romans 3.27. Romans 4.16. Romans 4.5. Romans 9.30,
31, 32. the faithful account themselves ungodly in the business of
justification, and thence it is said that Abraham (though a godly man in
himself, yet) believed in him that justifies the ungodly: he only is righteous
whom God pronounces and says is righteous. Now Faith above all other graces
believes the word; and a Believer says, I believe I am righteous, before God,
not because I feel it so in my self, but because God says I am so in his
Son, so that you are not justified before you believe; nor then only, when you
have performed many holy duties, but at the first instant of your closing with
Christ, you are then to see it, and by Faith to admire Gods rich grace for it.

6.
What is the extent of this sentenc^?

Answ.
The description says, that Christ's satisfaction thus applied, the Father does
two things.

1. He absolves them from all guilt and condemnation of sin; so that in this
sense, he sees no iniquity in Jacob; chastisements they may now have after
justification, but no punishments; crosses, not curses; such as destroy their
sins, no punishments to destroy their souls: hence those phrases in Scripture,
scattering sins as a mist, blotting them out, remembering them no more, setting
them as far as East is from the West: for Christ being made sin for his
people, and this being imputed, he abolishing all sin, by ox offering, Heb.
10. hence all are forgiven; and hence it is that there can be no suit in Law
against a sinner, the Law being satisfied, and the sinner absolved; nay hence
sin is condemned, and the sinner spared, Romans 8.3. as Christ dyed for us, so he
was acquitted for us, and we in him; we in him in redemption, we by him in
actual faith and application.

Whether all sins, past, present, and to come, are actually forgiven at the
first instant of believing, I will not, dare not determine; this is safe to
say, 1. That the sentence of pardon of all thy sins, is at an instant, Romans
8.1. but not the sense, nor execution of pardon: Actual sentence of pardon,
not actual application of pardon, till they be actually committed, Col. 2.13.
Heb. 9.12. Heb. 10.1, 2. Romans 3.25. There is a pardon of course (some say) for
sins of infirmities, I say there is also a pardon of course for sins of
wilfulness, all manner of sins; but not sense of pardon always.

He accepts and accounts as perfectly Romans 4.3. Faith is accounted for
righteousness, not the act of Faith, as the Arminians would, but the object of
it apprehended by faith, Romans 5.17. The Lord accounts us as righteous, through
Christ's righteousness, as if we had kept all the Law, suffered all the
punishments for the breach of it; Who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect, whom God has justified? says the Apostle, Romans 8. Satan may answer,
Yes, I can, for the Law says, The soul that sins must dye: Christ answers, but
I have dyed for him, and satisfied the utmost farthing to justice in that
point: True, may Satan say, here is satisfaction for the offense, but the Law
must be kept also; the Lord Christ answers, I am the end of the Law for
righteousness, I am perfectly holy and righteous, not for my self, (for I am
common person) but for this poor sinner who in himself is exceedingly and
wholly polluted, and hence the Lord covers sins, as well as pardons sins;
clothes us with Christ, as well as remits sin for Christ's sake; and as we are
accounted sinners by imputation of Adams legal unrighteousness, so are we
accounted righteous by the second Adams legal righteousness, and that unto
eternal life: Romans 5.17, 18.

Thus you see the nature, now the Lord open your eyes to see the glory of this
privilege: you that never felt the heavy load of sin, the terrors of a
distrested conscience arising from the sense of an angry God, cannot prize this
privilege; but if you have, you cannot but say as he did, Oh blessed are they
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sin is covered; and again, Blessed is
the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin: Psalm. 32.12. The Lord pity us; how
many be there in these times, that know there is no justification but by
Christ's righteousness, and yet esteem it not? let me therefore give you one
glimpse of the glory of it in these particulars.

1. This is the righteousness by which a sinner is righteous, the Law shows you
how a man may be righteous, but there is not the least tittle of the Law, which
shows you how a sinner may become righteous, this never could have entered
into the thoughts of Angels how this could be; it is cross to sense and
reason, for a man accursed and sinful in himself, to be at that very time
blessed and righteous in another; to say, Lord depart from me for I am a
sinful man, Luke 5.8. is the voice of natural conscience awakened, not only
concerning God out of Christ, but even when God appears in Christ as he did
then to Peter; but that the Lord should become our righteousness, when we
think no sinners like our selves: no cases, no afflictions, no desertions like
ours, who can believe this? yet thus it is; the very scope of the fourth
Chapter to the Romans, is not to show how a just man may be made righteous,
Romans 4.5.
but how a sinner may; our own duties, works, and reformation, may make us at
the best but less sinful, but this righteousness makes a sinner sinlesse.

2. By this a sinner is righteous before the judgment seat of God: what man
that has awakenings of conscience, but trembles exceedingly when he considers
of the judgment seat of God, and of his strict account there? but by this we
can look upon the face of the Judge himself with boldness. It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? Romans 8.32. can Christ condemn? he is our
Advocate. Can sin condemn? why did Christ dye and was made sin then? can Satan
condemn, if God himself justify us? if the Judge acquit us, what can the
Jailer do? can the Law condemn? no, the Lord Christ has fulfilled it for us,
to the utmost; Oh the stings that many have, saying, what shall I do when I
dye and go down to the dust? may not the Lord have something against me at the
day of reckoning that I never saw, nor got cancelled? oh poor creatures! is
Christ now before God without spot? has he cleared all reckonings? verily as
he is before him, so are you, through that righteousness which is in him for
you.

the righteous, 1 John 2.1, 2. and 3.7. All your own righteousness though it
be the fruit of the Spirit of grace, is a blotted, stained righteousness,
very imperfect and little; but by this, the faith of David, Peter, Paul was not
more precious then thine is, because thou have the same righteousness as they
had. 2 Pet. 1, 2. What sincere soul but esteems of perfect holiness more then
of heaven it self? oh consider thou have it (in this sense I now speak of) in
the Lord Jesus.

By this you have continual righteousness; a fountain opened, Zach. 13.1.
for thee to wash in; as sin abounds, so grace in this gift of righteousness
abounds much more; the Lord has changes of garments for thee: Zach. 3.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7. by means of which, there shall never enter into the Lords heart,
one hard thought toward thee of casting thee off, or of taking revenge, upon
any new occasion or fall unto sin.

By this you have eternal righteousness, Adam was, or Angels in heaven are,
and put on thy royal apparel again, thou wast in danger of losing this, and
of being stripped naked again; but now the Lord has put your righteousness
into a safer hand which never shall be lost, Heb. 9.12. Dan. 9.24.

By this you please God, and are more which is thus out of my self in another;
why do you think righteousness in your self would be best? is it not because
hereby you think you shall please God? Suppose thou had it, yet thy
righteousness should be at the best but man's righteousness, but this is called
the righteousness of God, which cannot but be more pleasing to him, then that
in thy self, 2 Cor. 5.20. what is Angelical righteousness to the
righteous-of God? it is but a glowworm before the Sun: the smell of Esaus
garments, the robes of this righteousness of the Son of God, are of sweeter
odor then thine can be, or ever shall be, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. it is said By faith Abel,
Enoch, etc. pleased God: their persons were sinful, their own duties were
weak, yet by faith in this they pleased God: thou think when thou go to
Prayer, if I had no sin but perfect holiness in me, surely God would hear
me. I tell you when you bring this offering of Christ's righteousness, the Lord
had rather have that, then all you can do, you bring that which pleases him
more, then if you brought your own. For ask thy own conscience if it be
possible for the righteousness which is done by thy self to be more pleasing
to God, then the righteousness of the Son of God, the Lord of Glory
himself, done and perfected for thee.

7. By this you glorify God exceedingly, as Abraham believed, Romans 4. and gave
glory unto God. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and
shall glory, Esaias 45.25. For,

1. By this you glorify him perfectly in an instant, for you continue to do
all that the Law requires that instant you believe. The Apostle propounds the
Question, Romans 3.21. whether a Christian by faith does make void the Law? No,
says the Apostle, but we establish the Law. How is that? Paraeus shows three
ways: One is this, because that perfect righteousness which the Law requires
of us, we perform it in Christ, by faith. So that in one instant thou
continuest to do all that the Law requires, and hence arises the
impossibility of a true Believers apostacy, as from one principal cause: They
that deny satisfaction by Christ's doing of the Law, because by our own works
and doings we cannot be justified before God, may as well deny satisfaction by
Christ's sufferings, because by our own sufferings we cannot be justified; our
obedience to the Law in way of suffering, is as truly the works of the Law, as
our obedience in way of doing.

2. By this you glorify Gods justice; what ever Justice requires to be done or
suffered, you give it unto God, by faith in Christ.

3. By this you glorify grace and mercy, Ephesians. 1.7. for by this means mercy
may over-abound toward you, and you may triumph in it as sure and certain to
you. What a blessed mystery is this! Does it not grieve you that you cannot
glorify God in your times and places? Behold the way, if thou can not do it
by obedience, thou may by faith: and thereby make restitution of all Gods
glory lost and stolen from him by thy disobedience to him.

Romans 5.1. The comers unto the Leviticall sacrifices and washings, (types of
this offering of Christ) could not thereby be perfected and be without the
guilty conscience of sin, none of your duties can pacify conscience, but as
they carry you hither to this righteousness, but the comers to this have no
more terrors of conscience for sin, I mean they have no just cause to have
any; this Rainbow appearing over your heads, is a certain sign of fair
weather, and that there shall be no more deluge of wrath to overwhelme thee.

Isay 33. ult. There shall be none sick among them; why so? because they shall
be forgiven their iniquities: It Is no sicknessse in a manner, no sorrow, no
affliction, if the venom, sting, and curse be taken away by pardon of sin;
thy sickness, sorrow, losses, death it self is better now then health, joy,
abundance life; you may here see death, hell, grave, swallowed up in victory,
and now tread upon the necks of them, 1 Cor. 15. You may see life in death,
heaven in the deepest hell, glory in shame: when thou see all thy sins done
away in the blood of Christ Jesus. This is the blessedness of all you poor
believers and comers to the Lord Jesus: what should you do but believe it,
and rejoice in it? If the wicked that apply this righteousness presumptuously
say, Let us sin that grace may abound, and make no other use of forgiveness,
but to run in debt, and sin with a license: Why should not you say, on the
other side, Let me believe and own my portion in this righteousness, that as
my sins have abounded, so my love may abound; as my sins have been
exceeding great, so the Lord may be exceeding sweet; as my sins continue and
increase, so my thankfulness, glory in God, triumph over death, grave, sin,
through Christ, may also increase; as you see righteousness in Christ for ever
yours, so you may from thence expect from him such a righteousness as may make
you righteous also as he is righteous. Tremble thou hard-hearted impenitent
wretch, that did never yet come to Christ, nor feel thy need of him, or
prize his blood; this is none of thy portion, all thy sins are yet upon thee,
and shall one day meet thee in the day of the Lords fierce wrath, when he shall
appear as an everlasting burning before thine eyes, and thou stand guilty
before him as chafe and stubble.

SECT. 2. Secondly, Reconciliation.
This is the second benefit which in order of nature follows our
Justification, although sometime in a large sense it is taken for the whole
work of Justification; strictly taken, it follows it, Romans 5.1. Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God, i. e. not only peace from God in
our consciences, but peace with God in our reconcilement to him, and his favor
toward us: Being justified, we shall be saved from wrath, i. e. not only the
outward fruits of wrath, but wrath from whence those come; Christ is first King
of Righteousness, then King of Peace, Heb. 7.2. for is not finne the cause of
Gods anger? must not sin therefore be first removed in our justification,
before we can have Gods anger allayed in our reconciliation? so that as in our
justification the Lord accounts us just, so in our reconciliation (himself
being at peace with us) he accounts us friends; indeed our meritorious
reconciliation is by Christ's death; as the Kings son who procures his fathers
favor toward a Malefactor, who yet lies in cold irons and knows it not; and
this is before our justification or being, Romans 5.9. but actual and
efficacious reconciliation, whereby we come to the fruition and possession of
it, is after our justification, Romans 3.24, 25. Christ is a propitiation by
faith, and here the Malefactor has tidings of favor, if he will accept of it,
Ephesians. 2.15, 17. and of this I now speak: God and man were once friends, but
by finne a great breach is made, the Lord only bearing the wrong is justly
provoked, Isa. 65.2, 3. man that only does the wrong, is notwithstanding at
enmity with him, and will not be entreated to accept of favor, much less to
repent of his wrong, Ier. 8.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. the Lord Jesus therefore heales this
breach by being mediator between both; he takes up the quarrel, and first
reconciles God to man, and man to God, in himself in redemption, and after
this reconciles God and man by himself in (or immediately upon) our
justification.

This Reconciliation consists in two things chiefly: 1. In our peace with God,
whereby the Lord lays by all acts of hostility against us, Romans 5.1. 2. In
love and favor of God, I do not mean Gods love of good will, for this is in
election, but his love of complacencie and delight, for till we are justified,
the Lord behaves himself as an enemy and stranger to us who are polluted
before him, but then he begins thus to l^ve us, 1 Ioh. 4.10, 16. Col. 1.21, 22.
A Gardener may intend to turn a Crab-tree stock into an an Apple Tree, his
intention does not alter the nature of it, until it actually be ingraffed
upon: so we are by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 1.3. The in^ention of
God the Father, or his love of good will does not make us children of favor
and sons of peace, until the Lord actually call us to and ingraffe us into
Christ, and then as Christ is the delight of God; Esa. 4.1, 2.
so we in him are loved with the same love of delight. Peace with God and love
of God are different degrees of our reconciliation: A Prince is at peace or
cease war against a rebel, yet he may not bring the Rebel before him,
into his bosom of special favor, delight, and love; but the Lord does both,
toward us enemies, strangers, Rebels, devils, in our reconciliation with him.


Oh consider what a blessed estate this is to Abraham to be the friend of God,
Isa. 41.8. I am not able to express what a privilege this is, it is better felt
then spoken of; as Moses said, Psalm. 90. Who knows the greatness of his
wrath? So I may say, who knows the greatness of this favor and love?

1. That God should be pacified with thee after anger, this is exceeding
glorious, Isa. 12.1, 2. What is man that the Lord should visit him, or look
upon him, though he never had sinned? but to look upon thee, nay to love thee,
after provocation by sin, after such wrath, which like fire has consumed
thousand thousands, and burnt down to the bottom of hell, and is now and ever
shall be burning upon them; Oh blessed are they that find this favor.

2. That the Lord should be pacified wholly and thoroughly, that there should be
no anger left ^or you to feel. The poor afflicted Church might object against
those sweet promises made her, Isa. 27.1, 2, 3. that she felt no love: You are
mistaken, says the Lord, Fury is not in me, verse. 4. Indeed against briars and
thorns, and obstinate sinners that prick and cut me to the very heart by their
impenitencie, I have, but none against you: Out of Christ, God is a consuming
fire, but in Christ he is nothing else but love, 1 John 4.16. and though there
may be fatherly frowns, chastisements, reproves, and rods, though he may
for a time hide his face, shut out thy prayers, defer to fulfill promises,
etc. yet all th^se are out of pure love to thee, and thou shall see it, and
feel it so in thy latter end, Heb. 12.8, 9. Never did David love Jonathan
(whose love exceeded) as the Lord loves thee from his very heart: Now thou art
in Christ by faith.

3. That the Lord should be pacified eternally, never to cast thee off again
for any sins or miseries thou fallest into; this is wonderful: Those whom
men love they forsake, if their love be a^used; or if their friends be in
affliction, they then bid them good night; but the Lords love and favor is
everlasting, Isa. 9.7. The mountains may depart out of their places, and the
hills cast down to valleys, but the Lords kindness never shall, never can;
Isa. 54.10.
He has hid his face a little moment whiles thou did live in thy sin and
unbeleefe, but now with everlasting mercy he will embrace thee; nay which is
more, the abounding of thy sin is now the occasion of the abounding of his
grace, Romans 5.20. thy very wants and miseries are the very causes of his bowels
and tender mercies, Heb. 4.15, 16. Oh what a privilege is this? Did the Lord
ever show mercy or favor to the Angels that sinned? Did not one sin cast
them out of favor utterly? Oh infinite grace, that so many thousand thousands
every day gushing out of thy heart, against kindness and love, nay the
greatest, dearest love of God, should not incense his sorest displeasure
against thee I the Lord that powered out all his anger upon his own Son for
thee, and for all thy sins, cannot now pour out, nay he has not one drop
left (though he would) to pour out upon thee for any one sin.

4. That the Lord should be thus pacified with enemies; a man may be easily
pacified with one that offends him a little, but with an enemy that strikes at
his life (as by every sin you do) this is wonderful, yet this is the case
here, Romans 5.7, 8.

5. That the Lord should be pacified, even with enemies, by such a wonderful
way as the blood of Jesus Christ, Romans 5.7, 8. this is such love, as one would
think the infinite wisdom of a blessed God could have devised no greater; by
this ( v. 6.) he commanded and set out his love, which though now it grow a
stale and common thing in our days, yet this is that which is enough to burst
the heart with astonishment and amazement, to think that the party offended,
(who therefore had no cause to seek peace with us again) should find out
such a way of peace as this is; woe to the world that despise this peace.

6. That being thus pacified, you may come into Gods presence with boldness at
any time, and ask what you will: I wonder what he can deny you if he loves
you, Romans 5.2. and which is yet more, that now all creatures are at peace with
you, Job 5.23. as when the Captain of the Army is pacified, none of his
soldiers must hurt or strike that man; nay, that hereby all your enemies
should be forced to do good to you; Oh death where is now thy sting?

I have often wondered, if Christ has borne all our miseries and suffered death
for us, why then should we feel any miseries or see death any more? and I could
never satisfy my own heart by many answers given, better then by this, viz.
that if the Lord should abolish the very being of our miseries, they should
indeed then do us no hurt; but neither could they then do us any good: for if
they were not at all, how could they do us good? now the Lord Jesus has made
such a peace for us, as that our enemies shall not only not hurt us, but they
shall be forced (himself ordering of them) to do much good unto us; all your
wants shall but make you pray the more, all you sorrows shall but humble you
the more, all your temptations shall but exercise your graces the more; all
your spiritual desertions shall but make you long for heaven, and to be with
Christ the more: it is now part of your portion, not only to have Paul, and
Apollos, and world, 1 Cor. 3.22.
but death it self, to do you good: Oh Lord what a blessed estate is this;
which, though thousands living under the Gospel of peace hear of, yet they
regard not; they can strain their consciences in a restless pursuit of the
favor of men, and in seeking worldly; yet peace to this day (though born
enemies to God) never spent one day, it may be not one hour, in mourning after
the Lord for favor from him, nor care not for it, unless it be upon their
own terms, viz. that God would be at peace with them, but they may still
remain quietly in their sins and war against God; and thence it is, that the
Lord will shortly take away peace from the whole earth, and plague the world
with war and bloodshed: and as it is in Zach. 11.6. deliver every man into the
hand of his neighbor, and into the hand of his King, and they shall smite the
Land; even for this very cause, for despising the peace and reconciliation with
God, you might and should have accepted in the Gospel of peace.

SECT. III. Thirdly, Adoption.
This is the third benefit, which in order of nature follows our
reconciliation, whereby the Lord accounts us Sons, and gives us the Spirit and
privileges of Sons: for in order, we must be first beloved before we can be
loved so as to be accounted Sons; 1 John 3.1, 2. for the Lord of unjust to
account us just in our justification is much; but for the Lord to account us
hereby as friends, this is more: but to account us Sons also, this is a higher
degree and a farther privilege; and hence, our Adoption follows our Faith;
John 1.12, Gal. 3.26. and if Adoption, then the Spirit of Adoption much less
does not precede Faith. By Christ's active obedience (our Divines say) we have
right unto life; by Adoption we have a farther right; the one destroys not
the other; for a man may have right unto the same thing upon sundry grounds: we
know there are 2 sorts of Sons: 1. Some by nature, borne of our own bodies, and
thus we are not Sons of God, but children of wrath. 2. Some by Adoption
which are taken out of another family, and accounted freely of us as our Sons;
and thus Moses was for a time the son of Pharao^s daughter, and of this
Sonship by Adoption I now speak, the Lord taking us out of the family of hell
to be his adopted Sons, Christ is Gods Son by eternal generation, Adam by
creation; all believers are Sons by Adoption. Now Adoption is twofold,

1. External, whereby the Lord takes a people by outward covenant and
dispensation to be his Sons, and thus all the Jews were Gods firstborn,
Exodus 4.22. and unto them did belong the Adoption, Romans 9.4, 5. And hence their
children were accounted Sons, as well as Saints, and holy: 1 Cor. 7.14. Ezech.
16.20, 21. but many fall from this Adoption, as the Jews did.

2. Internal, whereby the Lord out of everlasting love, to particular persons
in special, he takes them out of the family of Satan, and by internal love
and special account reckons them in the number of Sons; makes them indeed
Sons, Isa. 56.5.
as well as calls them so: Isaac by special promise was accounted for the
seed, Romans 9.8. and of this we now speak. Now this is double.

1. Adoption begun, 1 John 3.1, 2. ^OW we are the Sons of God. To some of
which, (though Sons indeed) yet the Lord behaves himself toward them for some
time, and for special reasons; as unto servants, exercising them with many
fears: Gal. 4.1, 2. some spirits will not be the better for the love of their
father, but worse; and therefore the Lord keeps a hard hand over them: to
others, the Lord behaves himself with more special respect, in making them cry
with more boldness, Abba Father, Romans 8.15, 16, who will be more easily
overcome, and bent to his will by love.

2. Adoption perfected, when we shall receive all the privileges of sons, not
one excepted, Romans 8.23. where we are said to wait for our Adoption, the
Redemption of our bodies; By the first we are sons, but not seen nor known
such, 1 John 3.1, 2. By the second, we shall be known before all the world to
be such: we now speak principally of Adoption begun, whereby we are sons in
Gods account, and by real reception of the Spirit of Sons: the manner of this
Adoption is thus.

1. God loves Jesus Christ with an unspeakable love, as his only Son, and as
our elder brother. 2. Hence when we are in Christ his Son, he loves us with the
same love, as he does his own Son. 3. Hence the Lord accounts us sons, Ephesians.
1.5, 6. Gods love is not now toward us as to Adam his son by creation, viz.
immediately diffused upon us; but in loving his own Son immediately, hence he
loves us, and hence adopts us, and accounts us children.
Oh that the Lord would open our eyes to see this privilege; Behold it, says
John, 1 John 3.1. stand amazed at it, that children of wrath should become the
Sons of the most high God; for a beggar on the dunghill, a vagabond,
runnagate from God, a prodigal, a stranger to God, whom the Lord had no cause
to think on; to be made a Son of God Almighty.

If Sons, then the Lord does prize and esteem you as Sons: if a man has
twenty sons, he esteems the poor^st, least, sick child he has, more then all
his goods and servants, unless he be an unnatural father; I tell you that the
least of you, the poorest and most ^eeble believer, is accounted of God, and
more esteemed then all his household stuff; then heaven, earth, and all the
glory in it, and all the Kings, and great men in the world: Isay 43.4, 5, 6.
not because thou have done any thing worthy of this, but only because he
accounts thee freely as his Son.

If Sons, then the Lord surely will take care for you as for sons; a godly
father has a double care of his children. First, of their temporal; Secondly,
and chiefly of their eternal estate; we are ready to question in times of
want, what we shall eat, drink, how we shall live; oh consider, art thou a Son
of God, and will not he that feeds the Ravens, and clothes the Lillies, Mat.
6.31, 32.
provide for thee? yes verily, he will take care for thy temporal good. It is
true you may be brought into outward straits, wants, miseries, yet then the
Lord is thereby plotting for thy eternal good, for hence come all Gods
corrections, Deuteronomy. 8.5. Heb. 12.8. the Lord took all they had from them by
their enemies in war, and carried them away captive into a strange land, yet
ler. 24.5. this was for their good; we think the Lord many times takes no care
for us, and so make him of a worse nature then the savage beasts, or bloody men
toward their young, but this is certain, he never denies any thing to us in
outward things, but it is to further our eternal bliss with him, to do us
good in our latter end: what say godly parents? it is no matter what becomes of
my children, when I am dead, if the Lord would but give them himself to be
their portion; if at last they may see the Lord in glory: do not wonder then
if the Lord keeps you short sometimes.

If Sons, then he loves you as Sons, as a father does his sons; you think the
Lord loves you not, because you do not always feel his love, nor know his love;
is thy son not thy child, because whiles it is young, it kno was not the father
that begot it, or because thou art some time departed from it, and have it not
always in thy own arm^^? Israel says, my God has forsaken me and forgotten
me, Isa. 49.14. and yet no mother tenders her child, as the Lord did them; you
think because you have so many sins and afflictions one upon another, that the
Lord loves you not: judge righteously, has thy child no father because it is
sick long together, and therefore kept under unto a spare diet? no, he knows
our mould, and that we are but dust, and freely chose us to be his Sons, and
hence loves notwithstanding all our sins: Psalm. 89.32, 33. if he sees Ephraim
bemo^ning his stubbornness, as well as his sickness and weakness, Ier. 31.20.
does not the Lord profess, Is he not my only Son?

If Sons, then we are heirs and co-heires says the Apostle, Romans 8.17. sons
by nature are not always heirs, but all sons by Adoption are: we are heirs
with Christ, the Lord Christ as our elder brother managing all our estate for
us, because unable to do it our selves; we are heirs 1. of the Kingdom of
glory, 1 Pet. 1.4, 5.2. Heirs of all this visible world, 1 Cor. 3.22. not that
we have the whole world in our own hand (it would be too cumbersome to us to
manage,) but the Lord gives us the rent of it, the blessing and good of it,
though it be possessed by others. Thirdly, we are heirs of the promise: Heb.
11.9. Heb. 6.17. whereby Jehovah himself comes to be our inheritance and
portion for ever; and look as Christ was in the world an heir of all, though
trod under foot by all, so are we; what can we desire more?

Romans 8.15, 16. and what are we the better for this Spirit? truly hereby,
First, we cry unto him, we are enabled to pray who could not pray before,
because guilt stopped our mouths. Secondly, We cry Abba Father, and this Spirit
witnesses that we are Sons of this Father: it is not said that it witnesses
to our spirits, but (...), it witnesses with our spirits; i. our renewed
conscience, thus; All believers called and justified of God are Sons, but I am
such a believer, therefore I am a Son; now the Spirit bears witness with us
in every part, both premises and conclusion only, it being the clearest and
strongest witness, it testifies the same thing our consciences do, but yet
more clearly, more certainly, more comfortably and sweetly, ravishing the soul
with most unspeakable peace and joy, especially in the conclusion. I know there
is a Noetick testimony, but it is lastly resolved into this; I Will not now
dispute it, only this is certain; that this testimony all the Sons of God
have by means of their Adoption. They may not indeed sometime hear it; if
they do, they may object against it through the unbeleef in part remaining in
them; or if it be sometimes suspended, what you want in the witness and
comfort of it, you have it in the holiness of it; and therefore the Spirit
sealing is called the holy Spirit: Ephesians. 4.30. 1 Pet. 1.6, 7, 8. and is not this
a great privilege? Thirdly, hereby you are led and guided, and that
continually toward your last end. Romans 8.14
For as if Adam had stood, he should have had the Spirit of God, this very
Spirit to have kept him and all his posterity from falling at any time from
God, so Christ having stood for us, justified us before God; sends the
immutable constant assistance of the Spirit in Adoption, which though it does
not always quicken us, nor comfort us, nor assure us, etc. yet it is every
moment guiding and leading of us unto our utmost end. From hence it is, that
the same sins which harden others, at last humble us, the same temptations by
which others fall and perish, serve at last to purify us; hence our decay in
grace leads us to growth at last, hence our fears and doubts serve to stablish
us at last, hence ou^ wildrings from God, for a time, make us esteem more of
the presence and ways of God at last; because this Spirit of Adoption is that
by which we are led, and constantly assisted and carried toward our latret end:
oh mourn thou that art as yet no Son, but a slave to Satan, and unto thy
filthy lusts; a servant at best, working for wages only, and fear of the whip,
who shall not always abide in Gods house as Sons shall do: nay it may be ^ast
hated and reviled the Sons of God; time shall come that you shall wonder at
their glory, who are not known now.

SECT. 4. Fourthly, Sanctification.
This is the fourth benefit which follows in order of nature, our
justification, reconciliation, and adoption, for upon our being Sons in
Adoption, we receive the image of our heavenly Father in Sanctification;
because we are under grace. Hence it comes to pass that we are freed from the
reigning power of sin, Romans 6.14. so that our Sanctification follows our
Justification, and Adoption goes not before it. In justification, we have the
love and righteousness of the Son; in reconciliation, the love of the Father;
in Adoption, the love of a Father and presence of the Spirit assisting,
witnessing; in Sanctification, the image of our Father by the same spirit: and
this I conceive with submission is the seal of the Spirit mentioned, Ephesians.
1.13. the seal sealing, is the Spirit it self; the seal sealed, consists
first in the expression of it in Adoption, Secondly, in the impression of it in
Sanctification, and that he only shall pass as current coin, that has both
these; I know the most full and clear expression and testimony of the Spirit
is after all Gods work is finished in glorification, but the beginning of it is
here in Adoption, a fuller measure of it in Sanctification; Gods seal is ever
set to some promise (as men's seals to some bond, not to blanks) the Lords
promise of actual justification, and reconciliation, pertaines only to men
sanctified or called: in Adoption therefore we receive the Spirit, which looks
both ways; testifying either thou sanctified, art justified, or thou called,
art justified and reconciled.

I speak not now of external sanctification by outward show and profession,
and common illumination and operation of the Spirit upon men, from which many
fall away. Heb. 10.29. but of internal and special; the nature of which, you
may best conceive in these three degrees.

1. It is the renewing of a man. Tit. 3.5.
So that by it a man is morally made a new man, another man; 2 Cor. 5.17.
All things are become new: he has new thoughts, new opinions of things, new
desires, new prayers, and praises, new dispositions; regeneration not differing
from it.

2. It is a renewing of the whole man. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. for as every part and
faculty of man is corrupt by the first Adam, so they are renewed by the second
Adam; not that we are perfectly renewed in this life by Christ, as we are
corrupt by Adam, but in part in every faculty, Romans 6.19. and from hence
arises our spiritual combat and warfare with sin, yea with all sin; it is not
because of our sanctification simply (for if it were perfect, we should war
and wrestle no more;) but from the imperfection of it. And this renewall in
part, is in every part, even in the whole man: and as the first Adam propagates
sin chiefly and radically in the soul, especially into the heart of man; and
from thence it diffuseth it self like leven into the whole lump of our lives,
so the Lord Jesus chiefly communicates this renewall into our hearts, and
thence it sweetens our lives; and hence it is called the inner man; Romans 2.28,
2.
Romans 7.22. Ephesians. 3.16. You see a little holiness in a Christian; I tell you,
if he be of the right make, there is a kind of infinite endless holiness
within him from whence it springs, as there is a kind of infinite endless
wickedness in a wicked man, from whence his sins spring: if a man be
outwardly holy, but not within, he is not sanctified, no more then the painted
Sepulchers of the proud Pharisees; if any man say his heart is good, though he
makes no show in his life, he speaks not the truth, if the Apostle may be
believed, 1 John 1.6. for sanctification is a renewall of the whole man, within
and without; it is not for a man to have his teeth white, and his tongue tipped,
and his nails pared; No, no, the Lord makes all new where he comes.

3. It is a renewall unto the Image of God, or of God in Christ; an
unsanctified man may be after a sort renewed in the whole man, his outward
conversation may be fair, his mind may be enlightened, his heart may taste of
the heavenly gift, etc Heb. 6.4, 5. he may have a form of godliness, 2 Timothy
3.5. he may have strong resolutions within him unto godliness, Deuteronomy. 5.29. and
hence with the five foolish V^rgins may be received into the fellowship of the
wise, and not discerned of them neither, till the gate is shut; but they are
never renewed in their whole man after the Image of God: i. they do not know
things, and judge of them as God does, they do not love and will holiness and
the means thereto, as God does; they hate not sin, as God does; they do not
delight in the whole Law of God, it is not writ in their hearts, and hence they
love it not as God does: and this is the cut of the thread between a sanctified
and unsanctified Spirit; by sanctification a man is renewed unto Gods Image,
once lost, but here again restored; Ephesians. 4.24. John 1.16. we receive from
Christ grace for grace, as the seal on the wax has tittle for tittle, to that
in the seal it self, we are changed into the same Image of Christ by
beholding him, in the gloss of the Gospel, by Faith; 2 Cor. 3.18. I delight
in the Law of God in my inward man, Romans 7.23. and hence a Christian by the
life of sanctification, lives like unto God; at least has a holy disposition
and inclination (the habits of holiness) so to do; Gal. 2.19. I live unto
God, he calls us from darkness into his mavelous light, that we might show
forth his virtues; and that this is true sanctification, may thus appear;
because our sanctification is opposed to our original corruption, as our
justification to our original and contracted guilt of sin: now as original
corruption is the defacing of Gods Image by contrary dispositions to
sinfulness, so our sanctification can be nothing else but the removal of this
pollution, by the contrary habits and dispositions to be like unto God again:
our sanctification is to be holy, Levit. 20.7. our holiness has no other
primary pattern but Gods holiness, 1 Pet. 1.14.15.16.
so that our sanctification is not the righteousness and holiness in as it is
inherent in Christ, for that is the matter of our justification, and therefore
sanctification must be that holiness which is derived unto us from Christ,
whereby we are made like unto him; and thus Christ is made sanctification unto
us, 1 Cor. 1.30. There should be no difference between Christ our
righteousness and sanctification, if that holiness which is in Christ should
be both unto us. Hence also Sanctification is not the immediate operation of
the Spirit upon us, without created habits of grace abiding in us, as the
spirit that came upon Balaam, and mightily affected him for a time, but left
him as destitute of any grace or change of his nature as the Ass he rode on;
No, no, it renewes you unto the image of God himself, if you be truly
sanctified. And therefore let all those dreams of the Familists, (denying all
inherent graces, but only those which are in Christ, to be in the Saints) let
them vanish and perish from under the sun, and the good Lord reduce all such
who in simplicity are misled from this blessed truth of God. I will not now
enter into that depth concerning the means of our sanctification in
mortification by Christ's death and vivification by the resurrection of Christ:
this may suffice for explication of the nature of it.

Only see and for ever prize this privilege, all you blessed souls, whom the
Lord has justified; thou have many sad complaints, what is it to me, if I be
justified in Christ, and be saved at last by Christ, and my heart remain all
this while unholy and unsubdued unto the will of Christ; that he should
comfort me, and my holy heart be always grieving of him; what though the Lord
save me from misery, but saves me not from my sin? oh consider this benefit.
It is true, thou find a woeful, sinful nature within thee, cross and
contrary unto holiness, and leading thee daily in captivity; yet remember the
Lord has given thee another nature, a new nature; there is something else
within thee, which makes thee wrestle against sin, and shall in time prevail
over all sin, Mat. 12.20. this is the Lords grace sanctifying of thee. Oh be
thankful that the Lord has not left thee wholly corrupt, but has begun to
glorify himself in thee, and to bless thee, in turning thee from thine
iniquities.

1. By this thou have a most sweet and comfortable evidence of thy
justification and favor with God; he that denies this, must (what ever
distinctions he has) abolish many places of Scripture, especially the epistles
of James and John, who had to do with some spirits, that pretended faith and
union to Christ, and communion with him, and so long as it was thus, this was
evidence sufficient to them of their justified estates. What faith James? Thou
say thou have faith, show it me then; prove it for my part, says he: I Will
prove by the blessed fruits and works which flow from it, as Abraham manifested
his, Iam. 2.18, 22. What says John? You talk (says he) of fellowship and
communion with Christ, and yet what holiness is there in your hearts or lives?
If you say you have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do
not the truth; but if you walk in the light, then although your holiness, and
confession, and daily repentance for sin does not wash away sin, yet the
blood of Christ does wash us, 1 John 1.6, 7. Again, you say you know Christ,
and the love and good will of Christ toward you, and that he is the
propitiation for your sins: how do you know this? says he: He that says; I
know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, 1 John 2.4. True, might
some reply, he that keeps not the commands of Christ, has hereby a sure
evidence that he knows him not, and that he is not united unto him; but is
this any evidence that we do know him, and that we are united to him, if we
do keep his commandments? yes verily, says the Apostle, hereby we do know
that we know him, if we keep his commandments, verse 3. and again, verse 5.
Hereby know we that we are in him. What can be more plain? What a vanity is
this to say that this is running upon a covenant of works? Is not
sanctification the writing of the Law in our hearts, a special benefit of the
covenant of grace as well as justification? Heb. 8.10.12. and can the
evidencing then of one benefit of such a covenant by another, be a running upon
the covenant of works? is it a truth contained in the covenant of grace, viz.
that he that is justified is also sanctified, and he that is sanctified is also
justified? And is an error against grace to see this truth, that he that is
sanctified is certainly justified; and that therefore he that knows himself
sanctified, may also know thereby that he is justified: Tell me how will you
know that you are justified? You will say, by the testimony of the spirit; and
cannot the same spirit shine upon your graces and witness that you are
sanctified as well? 1 Ioh 4.13, 24. 1 Cor. 2.12. Can the Spirit make the one
clear to you, and not the other?

Oh beloved its a sad thing to hear such questions and such cold answers, also
that sanctification possibly may be an evidence; may be? is it not certain?
Assuredly, to deny it is as bad as to affirm that Gods own promises of favor
are true evidences thereof, and consequently, that they are lies and untruths;
for search the Scripture, and consider sadly, how many Evangelicall promises
are made unto several graces, i. e. unto such persons as are invested with
them; you may only take a taste from Mat. 5.3, 4, etc. where our Savior (who
was no legal Preacher) pronounces, and consequently evidenceth blessedness
by eight or nine promises, expressly made to such persons as had inherent graces
of poverty, mourning, meekness, etc. there mentioned; the Lord Jesus leaving
those precious Legacies of his promises unto his children that are called by
those names of Mourners, poor in spirit, pure in heart, etc. that so every one
may take, and be assured of his portion manifested particularly therein: That
I many times wonder how it comes to pass, that this so plain and ancient
principle of Catechism (for so it was among the Waldenses many 100, years
since) grounded on so many pregnant Scriptures, should come to be so much as
questioned in our days; sometimes I think it arises from some wretched lusts
men have a mind to live quietly in; desirous to keep their peace, and yet
unwilling to forsake their lusts; and hence they exclude this witness of
water, the witness of sanctification to testify in the Court of conscience,
whether they are beloved of God and sincere hearted or no, because this is a
full witness against them, and tells them to their faces, that there is no
peace to the wicked, Isa. 57. ult. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. and that they have nothing
to do to take Gods name into their lips, that secretly hate to be reformed,
Psalm. 50.16.

In others I think it does not arise from want of grace, but because the Spirit
of grace and sanctification runs very low in them; it is so little that they can
scarce see it by the help of spectacles; or if they do, they doubt continually
of the truth of it; and hence, because it can speak little, and that little
very darkly and obscurely for them, they have no great mind that it should be
brought in as any witness for them. Others I think may have much grace and
holiness, yet for a time cast it by as an evidence unto them, because they
have experience how difficult and troublesome it is to find this evidence; and
when it is found, how troublesome to read it, and keep it fair, and thereby have
constant peace and quietness; and hence arise those speeches, why do you
look to your sanctification, a blotted evidence? you may have it to day, and
lose it to morrow, and then where is your peace? and I do believe the LORD
deprives many of his precious SAINTS from the comfort of this evidence; either
because they look only to this, and not unto Christ, and their Justification
by faith, Romans 5.1. or else because there is some secret lust or guile of
spirit, Psalm. 32.1, 2. which the Lord by sore and long shakings about their
calling and sanctification, would first winnow out, or because there is a
perverse frowardness of spirit, whereby because they feel not that measure of
sanctification which they would, do therefore vilify and so come to deny what
indeed they have; because they feel a law of sin in their members, leading
them away captive; will not, with Paul, take notice of the Law of their minds,
whereby that inner man delights in the Law of God, and mournes bitterly under
the body of death, by which they might see with Paul, that there is no
condemnation to such, Romans 8.1. To conclude, what ever is the cause of this
crookedness of judgment, I do believe that the general cause is, want of
attendance and standing unto the judgment of the Scriptures in this
controversy: for if this was stood unto, men would not produce their own
experience; viz. that they could never find any evidence from sanctification,
but they have met with it in another way, by the immediate witness of the
spirit only; nor would men cry it down, because grace being mixed with so much
corruption, it can hardly be discerned, and so will be always lest in doubts,
and that the heart is deceitful, and many that have evidenced their estates,
hereby have been deceived: I confess thus the Popish Doctors argue against
assurance of faith from the Scriptures without special and extraordinary
rev^lation; but what is all this to the purpose if the Scriptures make it an
evidence? away then with thy corrupt experience, shall this be judge, or the
Scriptures rather? what though many judging of themselves by marks and signs
have been deceived; yet if the Scripture make it an evidence, (as we have
proved) then, though men through their own weakness or wickedness have been
deceived in misapplying promises; yet the Scriptures cannot deceive you: What
though it be difficult to discern Christ's grace in us? yet if the Scriptures
will have us try our estates by that rule, which in it self in easy, but to
our blindness and weakness, difficult many times to see; who shall, who dares
condemn the holy Scriptures? which as they shall judge us at last day should
judge us now. Suppose that diverse books, and many Ministers sometimes give
false signs of grace and Gods favor, yet does the Scriptures give any? I
shall propose one thing to conscience, as the conclusion of this discourse:
Suppose thou were now lying on thy deathbed, comforting thy self in thy
elected and justified estate; suppose the Spirit of God should now grapple with
thy conscience, and tell thee, if thou art justified, then thou art called and
sanctified, 2 These. 2.13, 14. Is it thus with thee? what will thou answer? if
thou say thou art not sanctified, the word and spirit will bear witness
then against thee, and say, then thou art not elected nor justified; if thou
say thou know not, thou look not to sanctification, or fruits of the
spirit, they will then reply, how then can thou say that thou art elected or
justified? for it is a truth as clear as the Sun, and as immovable as heaven
and earth; None are elected and justified, but they are also sanctified, and
they that are not sanctified are not justified, Romans 8.1, 13. And now tell me,
how can you have peace, unless you make your faces like slint before the face
of Gods eternal truth, or heal your consciences by such a plaster as will
not stick? If therefore the Lord ever made sin bitter to thee, let holiness
be sweet; if continuance in sin has been an evidence unto thee of thy
condemnation, Oh let the riches of the grace of Christ in redeeming thee from
the lamentable bondage and power of sin, be an evidence to thee of thy
salvation; Oh bless God for any little measure of sanctification; do not
scorn or secretly despise this spirit of grace, as many in this degenerate age
begin to do, saying, You look to graces and fruits, and marks, and signs,
and a holy frame of heart and sanctification; what is your sanctification? Oh
let it be the more precious to thee, mourning that thou have so little, and
blessing the God and Father of all grace for what little thou have, wearing it
as a bracelet of gold about thy neck, knowing hereby that thou art borne of
God, and that the whole world lies in wickedness, and shall perish without
this, 1 Ioh. 5.18, 19.

2. This is your glory and beauty, this is glorification begun; what greater
glory then to be like unto God? to be like unto God is to be next to God: and
therefore this is called glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. we are changed into the same image
from glory to glory. Every degree of grace is glory, and the perfection of
glory in heaven consists chiefly in the perfection of grace; what is the work
of some men at this day but to cast reproach upon sanctification our glory?

3. This will give you abundance of sweet peace, and therefore, Heb. 12.11. it
is called the quiet fruit of righteousness; for from whence comes the sore
troubles and continual doubts of Gods favor in many men's consciences? Is it
not some decay or guile here? Psalm. 32.1, 2. Is it not some boldness to sin;
that they walk not in fear, and therefore not in the consolation of the Holy
Ghost? Act. 9.31.
Is it not their secret dalliance with some known sin, continued in with
secret impenitencie? Is it not because they labou^ with some strong unmortified
corruption, pride, or passions, that they are in daily pangs and throws of
conscience for? Psalm. 32.1, 2, 3, 4. what was the rejoicing of Paul? was it not
that in all sincerity and simplicity he had his conversation among men? 2 Cor.
1.12. What was Hezekiahs peace when dying as he thought? was it not this, Lord
remember I have walked before thee uprightly? Isa. 38.2, 3. not that this was
the ground of their peace, for that only is free grace in Christ, but this is
the means of your peace, Ioh. 14.22, 23. its a cursed peace which is kept by
looking to Christ, yet loving thy lust.

4. This is that which will make you sit for Gods use, 2 Timothy 2.20, 21. a
filthy unclean clean vessel is good for nothing till cleansed; God will not
delight to glorify himself much by an unsanctified person; what is thy wife,
children, friends, family, the better for thee, if thy heart remain
unsanctified?

5. A little holiness is eminently all, springing up to eternal life; this
little spring shall never cease running, but it shall fill Heaven it self, and
thy soul in it with abundance of glory, Ioh. 4.14. and 7.38. You despise it
because it is but little; I tell you this little is eminently all, and
contains as much as shall be powered out by thee so long as God is God: It Is
true, thou say its weak, and often foiled, and gives thee not complete power
and victory over all sin, yet know that this shall (like the house of David)
grow stronger and stronger, and it shall at last prevail, and the Lord will
not break thee though thou art bruised by sin daily, until judgment come
to victory; and the Prince of this world be judged, and thy soul perfected in
the day of the Lord Jesus.

SEC. 5. Fifthly, Audience of all Prayers.
This is the fifth benefit, which though it be a fruit of other benefits, yet I
name it in special, because I desire it might be especially observed; and I
place it after our sanctification, because of David's speech, If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer, Psalm. 66.18. and that
of the Apostle, 1 John 3.22. We believe what ever we ask we receive, because
we keep his Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his
sight. As the Lord has respect to the prayers of his people, not only in
regard of their justification, but in some sense in regard of their
sanctification also; a justified person polluted with some personal or common
sins of the times, may want that audience and acceptance of his prayers I am
now speaking of.

That God will hear all the petitions of his people, can there be a greater
privilege then this? yet this our Savior affirms twice together, because it
is so great a promise, that we can hardly believe it, John 14.13, 14.
Whatsoever you ask the Father in my name, that will I do; mark the scope of
the words our Savior had promised, that he that believes in me, shall do
greater works then I have done; now because this might seem strange and
impossible, the Lord in those verses tells them how, for (says he) Whatsoever
you ask in my name I will do for you, I will do indeed all that is to be
done, but yet, it shall be by means of your prayers; Christ did great works
when he was upon the earth, but for him to do what ever a poor sinful
creature shall desire him to do; what greater work of wonder can there be then
this? This is our confidence (says the Apostle) That what ever we ask
according to his will, he hears us: 1 John 5.15.

The greatest question here will be, What are those prayers the Lord Jesus will
hear? I confess many things are excellently spoken this way, yet I conceive
the meaning of this great Charter is fully expressed in those words, In my name.
If they be prayers in Christ's name, they shall be heard; and it contains these
three things.

1. To pray in Christ's name, is to pray with relyance upon the grace, favor,
and worthiness of the merits of Christ, thus this phrase is used, Mic. 4.5.
to walk in the name of their Gods, is in confidence of the authority, and
excellency, and favor of their Gods, that they will bear them out in it; so
to pray in Christ's name, is to pray for Christ's sake thus; Ephesians. 2.18. through
him ( i. through his death and satisfaction rested upon) we have access with
confidence unto the Father, Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have believed, and access
with confidence by the Faith of him. There are three evils that commonly
attend our prayers, when we see God indeed. 1. Shame and flight from God, the
Apostle says therefore, that by Faith in Christ we have access: 2. If we do
accede and draw near to him, there is a secret fear and straitness of spirit
to open all your minds; therefore says he, we have boldness, the word
signifies liberty of speech to open all our minds without fear or
discouragement. 3. After we have thus drawn near, and opened all our desires
and mones before God, we have many doubts, viz. will the Lord hear such a
sinner, and such weak, and imperfect, and sinful prayers? and therefore he
also affirms, that we have confidence and assurance of being heard; but all
this is by Faith in him: for look as Christ has purchased all blessing for us
by his death, and hence makes his intercession for those things daily according
to our need: So we are much more to rest upon, and make that satisfaction, the
ground of our intercession; because Christ's blood purchased this, therefore oh
Lord grant this.

2. To pray in his name, is to pray from his command, and according to his
will; as when we send another in our name, we wish him to say thus, Tell him
that I desire such a thing of him, and that I sent you; so it is here, and thus
the phrase signifies: John 5.43. I am come in my Fathers name, i. By his
authority and command. Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19.
To pray in Christ's name therefore, is to pray according to the will of Christ,
and from the will of Christ; when we take those words the Lord puts into our
mouths, Hos. 14.1, 2, 3. and desire those things only that the Lord commands
us to seek, whether absolutely or conditionally; according to his will
revealed, and with submission to his will concealed: 1 John 5.14. what ever we
ask according to his will, he hears us; Psalm. 27.8. Romans 8.26. If you ask
any thing not according to Gods will, you come in your own name, he sent you
not with any such ^^essage to the Father.

3. To pray in his name, is to pray for his ends; for the sake and use of
Christ, and glory of Christ, thus the phrase is used? Mat. 10.41, 42. To
receive a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, i. for this end and reason, because
he is a Prophet. A servant comes in his Masters name to ask something of
another, when he comes, as from his command; so also for his Masters use: So
when we pray for Christ's sake, i. for his ends, not our own; these ever
prevail. James 4.3. You ask and have not, because you ask amiss, to spend
it on your lusts; Ioh. 12.27, 28. Ps. 145.18. this is to ask in truth, to act
for a spiritual end; to make it our utmost end, arises from a special,
peculiar, supernatural presence of the Spirit of life: and consequently a
Spirit of prayer which is ever heard. And hence you shall observe, the least
groan for Christ's ends is ever heard; because it is the groaning of the Spirit,
because it is an act of spiritual life, the formality of which consists in
this, that it is for God: Gal. 2.19. the Lord cannot deny what we pray for
Christ's ends, because then he should crush Christ's glory: and therefore let a
Christian observe, when he would have any thing of God that concerns himself,
not be sollicitous so much for the thing, as to gain favor and nearness to
God, and a heart subject unto God in a humble contentedness, to be denied as
well as to be heard, and he shall undoubtedly find the thing it self; a lust
is properly such a desire (though for lawful things) wherein a man must have
the thing because it pleases him, as when Rachell asked for children, she must
have them, else she must needs dye: Give us water that we may drink, was
their brutish cry, Exodus 17.1, 2. not that we may live to him that give^ it:
holy prayers or desires (opposed unto lusts) are such desires of the soul,
left with God, with submission to his will, as may best please him: now the
Lord will hear the desires indeed of all that fear him, but not fulfill their
lusts.

These three are the essential properties of such prayer as is heard, or if
you will, of that which is properly or spiritually prayer, f^rvency, and
assurance, etc. are excellent ingredients; but yet the Lord may hear prayer
without them: it is true, the Lord may sometimes not hear us presently, for
our praying time is our sowing time, we must not look presently for the
harvest. The Lord hears the prayer of the destitute, Psalm. 102.17. the
original word is, of the shrub, or naked place of the desert, which the
Prophet says, Ier. 17.6. sees no good when good comes, yet such as feel
themselves such, the Lord does regard them; and will have a time to answer
them: and though the Lord may not give us the thing we pray for, nor as good a
thing of the same kind, yet he ever gives us the end of our prayers; he that
is at sea and wants stiff winds to carry him to his port, yet has no cause to
complain, if the Lord secretly carries him in by a strong current of the sea
it self; and it is certain at the end of all Gods dealing with you, you shall
then see how the Lord has not failed to answer you in any one particular, Ios.
23.14.

Oh therefore see and be persuaded of this your privilege, that God will now
hear every prayer; many make a question, How may we know when the Lord grants
out any blessing as an answer to prayer? many things are said to this purpose;
but the simplicity and plainness of the answer li^s in this, viz. if it be a
prayer, God hears it; if it be put up in Christ's name, it is then a prayer:
and that you may believe this, and glory in this, consider these reasons only,
to confirm this truth.

John. 14.13, 14. which was a promise in special to be accomplished when he
came to his kingdom; and therefore, though it is true, Gods grace is free, and
therefore you think the Lord may as well refuse to hear you, as hear; yet
consider that by his promise, he has bound himself to hear.

From the Fatherly disposition that is in John 16.26, 27. and hece he loves us,
and hence cannot but hear us.

Because all prayers put up in Christ's name, makes intercession that they may
be heard, Heb. 7.25. he has laid down his blood, that all our prayers might
be heard, (as we have proved) and indeed, hence arises the infinite ef^icacie
of prayer, because it is built upon that which is infinitely and eternally
worthy.

Because all prayers of the faithful arise the Spirit of prayer, Romans 8.26.
because as that which is for the flesh, is of the flesh; so that which is for
the Spirit, or for the sake of Christ, for spiritual ends, is ever of the
Spirit, John 7.18.

Because of the glory of Christ, that the is able, without the least dishonor
to himself thus to do.

Oh be persuaded of this, how should your joy then be full, how should you then
delight to be often with him, how would you then encourage all to come unto him,
how would you then be constrained to do any thing for him, who is ready to do
all for you? but oh, woe unto our unbeleefe, for that which (the Apostle says,
1 John 5.14.) was ground of his confidence, viz. that what ever we ask
according to his will, he hears us, is no ground to us, and we may say, and
mourn to think, this is our diffidence, that what ever I ask according to
Christ's will, he hears me not: but oh recover from such a distrustful frame,
and from all dead-heartednesse in this duty with all, lest the Lord send
taskmasters and double our bricks, and then we groan, and sigh, and cry, and
learn to pray that way, that will not pray nor believe now. If the Lord would
but give us hearts, assuredly you might not only rule your selves and families,
but by the power of prayer pull down, and raise up Kingdoms, dispose of the
greatest affairs of the Church, nay of the world, you might hereby work
wonders, by means of him who ruling all things yet is overcome by prayer, Hos.
12.4, 5.

SECT. VI. Sixthly, Glorification.
This is the sixth and last privilege and benefit, and you all know is the
last thing in the execution of Gods eternal purpose toward all his beloved and
chosen ones; whom he has predestined, called, justified, them he has also
glorified, Romans 8.30. hereby we are made perfect in holiness, no more sin
shall stir in us, perfect also in happiness; no more tears, nor sorrows,
nor temptations, nor fears, shall ever molest us: Heb. 12.23. Revel. 14.13.
and all this shall be in our immediate communion with God in Christ, Col.
1.28. John 17.23, 24. we shall be then, says Paul, for ever with the Lord: if
the Lord would but open our eyes, and give us one glimpse of this, what manner
of persons should we be? how would we then live? how willingly then should we
embrace faggots and flames, prisons and penury? the light afflictions here,
would not they work for us glory? nay the Apostle uses such a phrase which I
believe may pose the most curious orator in the world to express to the life
of it, an exceeding weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.17. What is our life now but a
continual dying, carrying daily about us that which is more bitter then a
thousand deaths; Col. 3.3.
what faith the Apostle to us, You are dead, yet when Christ shall appear, you
shall appear with him also in glory; the general security of these times
foretold by Christ, (especially when Churches become Virgins, and People are
seeking after purity of Ordinances) it shall not be in a want of watchfulness
against the present corruptiions of the times so much, as in a careless want
of expectation of the coming o^ Christ in glory, not having our loins girt,
and lamps burning, nor readiness to meet the Lord in glory, Mat. 25.1, 2, 3,
4, 5. etc. oh that I were able therefore to give you a blush and a dark view of
this glory, that might raise up our hearts to this work.

Messiah; the Lord dasheth those dreams, and tells them, His Kingdom is not
of this world, and that he went away to prepare a place for them, that where he
is, they might be, John 14.2, 3. and be with him to see his glory, John 17.23,
24. the place shall be the third heaven, called our Fathers house; built by his
own hand with most exquisite wisdom, fit for so great a God to appear in his
glory ( John 14.2, 3.) to all his dear children; called also a Kingdom: Mat.
25.31. Come ye blessed inherit the Kingdom prepared for you; which is the top
of all the worldly excellency, called also an inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4. which
the holy Apostle infinitely blesses God for as being our own and freely given
to us, being our Fathers inheritance divided among his sons, which is a
greater privilege then to be borne an heir to all the richest inheritances
on this earth, or to be Lord of all this visible world; for this inheritance
he tells us is 1. incorruptible, whereas all this world waxes old as a
garment: 2. It Is undefiled, never yet polluted with any sin, no not by the
Angels that fell, for they fell in parad^^^, when Guardians to man, whereas
this whole creation groaneth under the burden and bondage of corruption, Romans 8.

3. This never fades away; it is not like flowers, whose glory and beauty soon
withe^s, but this shall be most pleasant, sweet, and ever delightsome, after we
have been ten thousand years in it, as it was the first day we entered into it,
(for this is the meaning of the word, and so it differs from incorruptible)
whereas in this world (suppose a man should ever enjoy it, yet) there grows a
secret satiety and fullness upon our hearts, and it grows common, and
blessings of greatest price are not so sweet, as the first time we enjoy them;
they clog the stomach, and glut the soul: but here our eyes, ears, minds,
hearts shall be ever ravished with that admirable glory which shines brighter
then ten thousand suns, the very fabric of it being Gods needle work, (if I
may so say) quilted with variety of all flowers in diverse colors, by the
exactest art of God himself, as the Apostle intimates, Heb. 11.10.

Secondly, consider of the glory of the bodies of the Saints in this place; the
Lord shall change our vile bodies, which are but as dirt upon our wings, and
clogs at our feet, as the Apostle express^th it, Phil. 3. ult. Paul was in the
third heaven, and saw the glory doubtless of some there; see what he says of
them, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.

1. It shall be an incorruptible body; it shall never dye, nor ^ot again, no
not in the least degree tending that way, it shall never grow weary, (as now
it is by hard labor, and some time by holy duties) nor faint, nor grow wrinkled
and withered. Adams body in innocence potuit non mori, we say truly; but this
non potest mori, it cannot dye: and hence it is, that there shall be no more
sickness, pains, griefs, fainting fits, etc. when it comes there.

2. It shall be a glorious body, it shall rise in honor, says Paul; and what
glory shall it have? verily it shall be like unto Christ's glorious body, Phil.
3. ult. which when Paul saw, Acts 9. did shine brighter then the sun: and
therefore here shall be no imperfection of limbs, scars, or maimes, natural
or accidental deformities; but as the third heaven it self is most lightsome,
Genesis 1.1, 2. so their bodies that inhabit that place shall exceed the light and
glory thereof, these being more compacted, and thence shining out in greater
luster, that the eyes of all beholders shall be infinitely ravished to see such
clods of earth as now we are, advanced to such incomparable beauty and
amiablenesse of heavenly glory.

3. It shall be a powerful, strong body; It is sown in weakness, says Paul,
it shall rise in power; it shall be able to help forward the divine operations
of the soul, which are now clogged by a feeble body; it shall be able to bear
the weight of glory, the joy unspeakable, and full of glory, which our weak
bodies cannot long endure here, but we begin to burst and break in pieces
(like vessels full of strong spirits) with the weight and working of them; and
therefore the Lord in mercy keeps us short now of what else we should feel; it
shall be able to sing Hallelu-jahs, and give honor, glory, power, to the Lamb
that fits upon the Throne for evermore without the least weariness.

4. It shall be a spiritual body, our bodies now are acted by animal spirits,
and being earthy and natural, grows, feeds, eats, drinks, sleeps, and has
natural affections and desires after these things, and ^is troubled if it
wants them; but then these same bodies shall live by the indwelling of the
Spirit of God powered out abundantly in us, and upon us, and so acting our
bodies, and swallowing up all such natural affections and motions as those be
here; as Moses being with God in the Mount forty days and nights, did not need
any meat or drink, the Lord and his glory being all unto him; how much more
shall it be thus then? I do not say we shall be spirits like the Angels, but
our bodies shall be spiritual, having no natural desires after any earthly
blessing, food, raiment, etc. nor troubled with the want of them: and hence*
also the body shall be able as well to ascend up, as now it is to descend down;
as Austin shows by a similitude of lead, which some artists can beat so small
as to make it swim; we are now earthly, and made to live on this earth, and
hence fall down to the center; but we are made then to be above for ever with
the Lord, the Lord proceeding from imperfection to perfection, as the Apostle
here shows; not first spiritual, and then natural; but first that which is
natural, (in this life) and then that which is spiritual.

3. Consider the glory of the soul; now we know but in part, and see but in
part; now we have joy at some times, and then eclipses befall us on a sudden;
but then the Lord shall be our everlasting light, Isa. 60.19. then we shall see
God face to face, 1 Ioh. 3.1, 2. we shall then know and see those things that
have been hid, not only from the wicked, but from the deepest thoughts of the
Saints themselves in this world, 2 Cor. 12.4. Paul saw some things not fit to
be uttered, or that he could not utter: we shall be swallowed up in those
depths of grace, glory, immediate vision, God shall be all in all.

The soul shall now enjoy* 1. The accomplishment of all promises which we see
not here made good unto us, 1 Cor. 15.24. then you shall have restitution of
all these at times of refreshing wherein your sins shall be publicly blotted
out from the presence of the Lord, Act. 3.19. If Iosuah said, Ios. 23.14. when
the peoples warfare was ended, See if the Lord has been wanting in one word to
you: Much more will the Lord Jesus say unto you then.

2. Then you shall receive a full answer to all your prayers, all that grace,
holiness, power over sin, Satan, fellowship with God, life of Christ,
blessing of God which you sought for, and wept for, and suffered, for here, you
shall then see all answered.

3. Then you shall find the comfort of all that you have done for God, Revel.
14.13. you works in this sense shall follow you, you shall then infinitely
rejoice, that ever you did any thing for God, that ever you thought of him,
spoke to him, and spoke for him, that ever you gave any one blow to your pride,
passions, lusts, natural concupiscence, etc. you shall then enjoy the reward
of all your sufferings, cares, sorrows, for Gods Church, fastings* and days
of mourning, whether publicly, or secretly for Gods people, 2 Cor. 4.17. the
same glory God has given Christ, the Lord shall at that time give unto you,
Ioh. 17.22. it shall not be with us there as it was with the wicked Israelites,
who when they came into the good land of rest, they then forgot the Lord and
all his works past; no, no, all that which GOD has done for you in this
world, you shall then look back, and see, and wonder, and love, and bless,
and suck the sweet of, for evermore; its a fond weak question to think
whether we shall know one another in heaven; verily you shall remember the good
the Lord did you here, by what means the Lord humbled you, by what ministry
the Lord called you, by what friends the Lord comforted and refreshed you; and
there you shall see them with you; do you think you shall forget the Lord and
his works in heaven, which (it may be) you took little notice of, and the
Lord had little glory for here?

Fourthly, consider the glory of the company and fellowship you shall have
here; 1. Angels, Heb. 12.23, 24. they will love you and comfort you, and
rejoice with you, and speak of the great things the Lord has done for you, as
they did on earth to the Shepherds, Luke 2.10. Be not afraid, said the Angel,
Mat. 28.5. I know ye seek Jesus: So will they say then, be ever comforted you
blessed servants of the Lord, for we know you are loved of the Lord Jesus. 2.
Saints, you shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of
God, be taken into the bosom of Abraham, into the bosoms of all the children
of Abraham, and there we shall speak with them of the Lords wonders, of his
Christ and Kingdom, Psalm. 145.11. and every sentence and word shall be milk
and honey, sweeter then thy life now can be unto thee; we shall know, and love,
and honor one another exceedingly. 3. The man Christ Jesus, when Mary cla^pt
about him, 1 Ioh. 20.17. Let me alone, said he, touch me not, I am not yet
ascended to my Father. As if he had said, (says Austin) then shall be the
place and time wherein we shall embrace one another for evermore. Never was
husband and loving wife so familiar one with another, as the Lord Jesus will
be (not carnally and in an earthly manner) but, in a most heavenly, glorious,
yet gracious manner with all his Saints; Come ye blessed will he then say to
them; we shall then ever be, not only in the Lord, but with the Lord, says
Paul, 1 These. 4. ult. 1 These. 5.10. Just as Moses and Elias in his
transfiguration, that talked with him, (which was a glimpse of our future
glory) so shall we then, Luke 12.37. and you shall then see that love of his,
that blessed bosom of love opened fully, which the Apostle says, passes
knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. I need not tell you of our fellowship with the Father,
also when the Son shall give up the Kingdom to him that he may be all in all.

Fifthly, consider the glory of your work there; Rev. 4.10, 11.
which is only to glorify this God.

1. You shall then live like Christ in glory, we shall speak and think all with
glory, 1 John 3.1, 2. our strings shall be then raised up to the highest
strain of sweet melody and glory.

2. You shall then bless him, Ephesians. 1.6. Ephesians. 4.13. and that with ravishment;
you shall come then to the full acknowledgement of the Son of God; you shall
see and say all this is the work and grace of Christ, and then shall cry out,
Oh let all Angels, Saints, ever bless him for this. What should I speak any
more? You will say, Is this certain? Can this be so? Yes assuredly, for Christ
is gone to prepare this place and glory for you, Ioh. 14.2, 3. We have also the
first fruits of this glory which we feel sometimes, whereby we see, and taste,
and drink, and long for more of that joy unspeakable, and peace that passes
understanding, that triumph over the rage and working power of remaining
corruption, that dark vision of God, and holy glorying and boasting in him as
our everlasting portion, etc. which cannot be delusions and dreams which never
feed, but ever leave the deceived soul hungry, but are realities and things
indeed, which satiate the weary soul, and fill it up with the very fullness of
God himself, Ephesians. 3.19. and therefore it is certain that we shall have the
harvest that thus taste of the first fruits, and the whole sum paid us
faithfully that have already the earnest penny. The Lord also sits us for this,
as the Apostle disputes, 2 Cor. 5.4* 5. What means the Lord to deny our
requests in many things as long as we live? what is his meaning not to let us
see the accomplishment of many of his promises? is it because he is
unfaithful? or because he would let us know there is a day of refreshing he
has reserved for us, and would have us look for, wherein we shall see it has
not been a vain thing for us to pray, ^ or him to promise? why does he afflict
us, and keep us more miserable both by outward sorrows and inward miseries,
then any other people in the world? does he not hereby humble us, empty us,
weane us from hence, and make us as it were vessels big enough to hold glory,
which we hope for in another world?

But you will say, Can this glory be thus great? We see it is certain it shall
be so; but shall it be so exceeding great and endless? Yes verily, because

1. The price is great which is paid for it, Ephesians. 1.14. it is a purchased
possession, (by the blood of Christ we enter into the holy of holies) a price
of infinite value must bring a kind of infinite glory.

2. We are by Christ nearer to God then Angels are, whose glory we see is very
great.

3. Shall not our glory be to s^t out the glory of Christ? 2 These. 1.10. and if
so, then it his glory be exceeding great, ours must bear a due proportion, and
be very very great also.

4. Does not God pick out the poor and vile things of the world, to be vessels
of glory? 1 Cor. 1.27. and is not that an argument that he intends exceedingly
to glorify himself on such, to raise up a most glorious building, where he
lays so low a foundation?

5. Are not we loved with the same love as he has loved Christ? John 17. ult.
and shall not our glory abound then exceedingly?

6. Is not the torment and shame of the Reprobates to be exceeding great and
grievous? does not God raise them up to make his power known? Romans 9.23. What
then shall we think on the contrary of the glory of the Saints, wherein the
Lord shall set forth his power in glorifying them as he does the glory of his
power in punishing others? and therefore 2 These. 1.9. the punishment of the
wicked is expressed by separation of them from the glory of the Lords power;
because that in the glory of the Saints, the Lord will (as I may so say) make
them as glorious as by his power ruled by wisdom he is able to make them.

This is therefore the great glory of all those whom God has called to the
fellowship of his dear Son; and which is yet more, blessed be God the time
is not long, but that we shall feel what now we do but hear of, and see but
a little of, as we use to do of things afar off: We are here but strangers,
and have no abiding city, we look for this that has foundations; and therefore
let sin press us down, and weary us out with wrestling with it; let Satan
tempt, and cast his da^ts at us; let our drink be our tears day and night, and
our meat gall and worm wood; let us be shut up in choking prisons, and cast
out for dead in the streets, nay upon dung-hils, and none to bury us; let us
live alone as Pelicans in the wilderness, and be driven among wild beasts into
deserts; let us be scourged, and disgraced, stoned, sawn asunder, and burned;
let us live in sheepskins, and goat skins, destitute, afflicted, tor^ented,
(as who looks not for such days shortly?) yet oh brethren, the time is not
long, but when we are at the worst, and death ready to swallow us up, we shall
cry out, Oh glory, glory, oh welcome glory. If our miseries here be long, they
shall be light; if very bitter, they shall be short; however, long or short,
they cannot be to us long, who look for an eternal weight of glory. Who would
not (that considers of these things) despise this world, and set it at his
heels, who has all these privileges and benefits with Christ in his eye? who
would not abhor a filthy lust, to enjoy such a Christ? who would ever look back
unto his fleshpots, or fathers house, that has such welcome made him the
first moment he comes to the Lord Jesus, in having present fruition of some of
these benefits, but present right unto all; fruition of some by feeling, of all
by faith. But oh the wrath of God upon these times, that either see not this
glory, or if they do, despise so great salvation! Christ, and pardon, and
peace, adoption, grace, and glory, is brought home to our doors, but their
price is fallen in our market, and we think it better to be without Christ with
our lusts, then to be in Christ with his benefits. The reproach of Christ was
dearer to Moses (as great a Courtier, and as strong a headpiece as our times
can afford) then all the riches and honors of Egypt, but the grace, and peace,
and life, and glory of Jesus Christ, is viler to us, then the very onyons, and
leeks, and fleshpots of Egypt; if you had but naked Christ (our life) for a
prey in these evil times, you had no cause to complain, but infinitely to
rejoice in your portion; but when with Christ you shall find all these benefits
and privileges coming in as to your portion, and yet to despise him:?
Assuredly the Lord will not bear with this contempt always: Away to the
mountains, and hasten from the towns and cities of your habitation, where the
grace of Christ is published, but universally despised, you blessed called ones
of the Lord Jesus; for the days are coming, wherein for this sin, the
heavens and earth shall shake, the sun shall be turned into darkness, and
the moon into blood, and men's hearts failing for fear of the horrible plagues
which are coming upon the face of the earth. Dream not of fair weather,
expect not better days, till you hear men say, Blessed is he that comes in
the name of the Lord, who thus blesses his with all spiritual blessings in
Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. I now proceed to the last.

CHAP. III. All those that are translated into this blessed estate, are bound
to live the life of love in all fruitful and thankful obedience unto him
that has called them, according to the rule of the moral Law. Psalm. 40.7, 8.
THe Lord does no sooner call his people to himself, but as soon as ever he
has thus crowned them with these glorious privileges, and given them any
sense and feeling of them, but they immediately cry out, Oh Lord, what shall I
now do for thee? how shall I now live to thee? they know now they are no more
their own, but his; and therefore should now live to him.

If you ask Moses, after all the love and kindness the Lord had shown
Israel, what Israel should do for him? you shall see his answer full, Deuteronomy.
10.12, 13. And now, O Israel, what does the Lord require of thee, but to fear
the Lord thy God, and to love him and serve him with all thy heart, and to
keep his Commandments which I command thee this day for thy good?

If you ask Paul (as Evangelicall a Christian as ever lived) what now we are
to do when we are in Christ? he answers punctually, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. The love
of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that Christ dying for those
that were dead, they that live should not live unto themselves, but unto him
that dyed for them and rose again.

If we ask Peter the question, to what end the Lord has called us out of
darkness into his marvelous light? he expressly tells you, it is to show forth
the virtues of him that has so called, 1 Pet. 2.9.

If we be doubtful whether this be the Lords mind, the Lord himself
resolves it by Zachary, Luke 1.74. and tells us, that it is his oath, That we
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we should serve him without
fear in holiness (in all the rules of the first Table) and righteousness (in
all duties of the second Table) all the days of our life, and that all this
should not be out of a spirit of bondage and slavish fear, but without fear;
i. e. Fear of our enemies, sin, death, wrath, and so consequently out of love,
to him that has delivered us; that one would wonder it should ever enter into
the heart of any Christian man that has tasted the love of Christ, as to think
that there is no use of the Law to one in Christ; and that because they are to
live the life of love to Christ, that therefore they are not to look to the
Law as the rule of their love, expressly cross to the letter of the Text, Ioh.
14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments; which Commandments are not only
faith and love to the Saints; but love to enemies, and spiritual obedience
unto the moral Law, in a far different manner and measure then as the
Pharisees instructed the people in those days, as you may see, Matthew. 5.17.
It Is true indeed, obedience to the Law is not required of us now as it was of
Adam; it was required of him as a condition antecedent to life, but of those
that be in Christ it is required only as a duty consequent to life, or as a
rule of life, that seeing he has purchased our lives in redemption, and
actually given us life in vocation and sanctification, we should now live unto
him, in all thankful and fruitful obedience according to his will revealed in
the moral Law. It Is a vain thing to imagine that our obedience is to have no
other rule but the Spirit, without any attendance to the Law; the Spirit indeed
is the efficient cause of our obedience, and hence we are said to be led by the
Spirit, Romans 8.14. but it is not properly the rule of our obedience, but the
will of God revealed in his word, especially in the Law is the rule: the Spirit
is the wind that drives us in our obedience, the Law is our compass, according
to which it steares our course for us: the Spirit and the Law, the wind and the
compass, can stand well together, Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will O
God, (there is David's rule, viz. Gods will revealed) thy spirit is good (there
is David's mind, that enabled him to steare his course according to it) the
Spirit of life does free us from the law of sin and of death, but not from the
holy, and pure, and good, and righteous Law of God, Romans 8.1, 2, 3. The blood
of Christ by the Spirit cleanses us from dead works, to serve the living God,
Heb. 9.14. not to serve our own selves, or lusts, or wills, to do what we
please: the law indeed is not a rule of that by which we are to obey, viz. of
our faith, yet it is the only rule of what we are to obey: we are not to
perform acts of obedience now as Adam was to do, viz. by the sole power of
inherent grace, but we are to live by faith, and act by faith (for without me
you can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5.) we are not united to Christ our life by
obedience as Adam was to God by it, but by faith: and therefore as all action
(in living things) comes from union, so all our acts of obedience are to come
from faith, from the Spirit on Christ's part, and from faith on our part, which
make our union: Noah built by faith, Enoch walked with God by faith, Iosuah and
his Soldiers fought by faith. Abraham traveled, dwelt in his tents, lived and
dyed by faith; they acted according to the rule, but all by the power of faith.
It is a weak reasoning to imagine a man is not bound to pay his debts, because
he is to go unto another for the money: Obedience is our debt we owe to
Christ, Luke 17.10. though we are to go to Christ poor, and weak, and
feeble, to enable us to pay: It Is true, Christ has kept the law for us, and are
we therefore free from it as our rule? No verily, Christ kept the law for
satisfaction to justice, and so we are not bound to keep the Law; he kept the
Law also for imitation, to give us a copy and an example of all holiness and
glorifying God in our obedience; and thus Christ's obedience is so far from
exempting us from the Law, as that it ingageth us the more, having both rule
and example before us, 1 Ioh. 2.6. He that says he abides in him ought to
walk as he walked, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. It Is true, the Law is writ in a
believers heart, and if he has a Law within, what need he (say some) look to
the Law without? when as our Savior and David argued quite contrary, Psalm.
40.7, 8. I come, I delight to do thy will, it being written of me that I
should do it, because thy Law is within my heart; this argues, that you are
not to attend the Law unwillingly as bondmen and slaves, but willingly and
gladly, because the Law, even the Law of love is in your hearts, 1 Ioh. 5.3.

The place alleged by some for this liberty from the Law, viz. the Law is not
made for a righteous man, 1 Timothy 1.9. if well considered, fully dasheth this
dream in pieces; for there were diverse Jewish Preachers of Moses Law, and they
had a world of scruples and questions about it, verse 4. and Paul and others
were accounted of, as men less zealous, because they did not sound upon that
string so much; away (says Paul) with those contentions, questions; for the
end of the commandment is not scruples and questions, but charity and love (
i. e. both to God and men) out of a pure heart and faith unfeigned, verse. 5. and
says he, The Law is very good, when used lawfully, that is, for this end, and
out of these principles, verse. 8. it is not talking, but doing, and that out of
love, which is the end and scope of the Law; so that note by the way, you may
as well abolish love as abolish the Law, love being the end and scope of the
Law. But to proceed; The Law is not made (says he) for the righteous, i. e.
for the condemnation of the righteous, i. e. of such as out of a pure heart and
faith unfeined love God in the first Table, love to show all duties of respect
to man in the second Table; and therefore they of all other men have no cause
to abolish the Law, as if it was a bug-beare, or a thing that could hurt them,
but its made for the comdemnation of the Lawless, Anomians, (as the original
word is) or if you will, Antinomians, (transgressors of the first command.) and
disobedient (transgressors of the second command.) for ungodly and sinners
(transgressors of the third command.) for unholy and profane (transgressors
of the fourth command.) for murderers of fathers and mothers (of the fifth
command.) for man-slavers (of the 6.) for whoremongers and defilers of mankind
(of the 7.) for men-stealers (of the 8.) for Liars (of the 9.) and for those
that in any thing walk contrary to sound doctrine, the purity of the Law and
will of God (of the 10.) So that this place is far from favoring any of
those that run in this channel of abolishing the Law as our rule; No beloved,
the love of Christ will constrain you to embrace it as a most precious
treasure. It is the observation of some, that in the Preface to the Moral Law,
Exodus 20.1, 2. the Lord reveals himself to be the Lord their God that
brought them out of the Land of Egypt; the very scope of which words, is to
persuade to a reverend receiving and keeping of that good Law: this Law all
nations are bound to observe, because he is Jehovah, the Lord; but to be thy
God in special Covenant, and that redeemed thee from Egypt, and from that
which was typified by it, this belongs to none but unto them especially, that
are already the people of God; and therefore of all other people in the world;
they are bound to receive it as their rule; for obedience does not make us Gods
people* or God our God: but he is first our God, (which is only by the
Covenant of grace) and thence it is, that being ours, and we his, we of all
others, are most bound to obey.

To conclude, they that stick in these briars, therefore cry down the law as a
Christians rule, because by this means a Christian shall find no peace; because
he is continually sinning against this Law: the Law therefore say they, will be
always troubling of him.

I answer, first a corrupt heart and putrid conscience, can have no peace by
the Law; Isa. 57.21. there is no peace to the wicked, and it is good it should
be so.

2. A watchful Christian may, Psalm. 119.15. Great peace have they that keep
thy Law. Hezekiah had it, when he desired the Lord to remember how he had
walked before him with a perfect heart, Isa. 58.1, 2, 3. Paul found it the
testimony of his conscience bearing him witness, was his rejoicing herein; 2
Cor. 1.12.

3. If a Christian ignorant of maintaining his peace with God by faith in his
justification, notwithstanding all the errors in his obedience and
sanctification; if I say he wants his peace, shall we therefore break the Law
in pieces? if a secure Christian that walks loosely want peace, by the
accusations of the Law; it is Gods mercy to him to give him no peace in himself,
while he is at truce with his lust.

4. That peace will end in dismal sorrow which is got by kicking against the
Law, it is but dawbing for a man to keep his peace by shutting his eyes against
the way of peace; a servant may have peace in his idleness by thinking that
his Master requires no work from him, and by hiding his talent, yet what will
his Lord say to him when his day is ended, and he comes to reckon with him at
Sunset? bring the Law into thy conscience in point of justification, it will
trouble conscience: for there only Christ's righteousness, Gods grace, and the
promise are to be looked on, and our own obedience and holiness laid by in the
dust; but bring it before thee as a rule of thy sanctification, and as thy copy
to write after, and to imitate, and aspire after that perfection it requires,
it will then trouble thee no more, then it does a child, who having a fair
copy set him to write after, and knowing that he is a son, is not therefore
troubled, because he cannot write as fair as his copy; he knows if he
imitates it, his scribbling shall be accepted: howsoever though his Father may
chastise him with rods, if he be careless to imitate; yet he will never cast
him therefore off from being his son. The truth is this, it argues a most
graceless, carnal, wretched heart, for a man to cast by Gods rules, because
attendance to them is his trouble and torment, which unto a gracious heart are
life, Prove. 3.17.
and peace, and sweetness; All the ways of wisdom to him, are ways of
pleasantness, and her paths peace: And it is Gods common curse upon them that
love not the truth in these days, that because sin is not their sorrow, nor
breach of rules their trouble; that therefore, the observance of the Law, and
attendance unto rules shall be their burden and trouble; they feel not the
plague in their own hearts, and therefore reproves plague them, and commands
are a plague and a torment to them: crooked feet, and crooked wills, make men
tread awry in such corrupt opinions.

All the called ones of God are therefore to live this life of obedience, and
that out of love, which I call the life of love, Gal. 5.6. for else
circumcision availes nothing, nor uncircumcision, no nor faith it self;
unless it be of this nature, as that it works by love: there is much obedience
and external conformity to the Law in many men, but the principal difference
between these formalities, and the obedience of the Saints, is love; the
obedience of the one arises from self-love, because it pleases themselves,
and suits with their own ends; the other from the love of Christ, because it
pleases him, and suits with his ends: 1 Cor. 13.4. etc. 1 John 5.3.

Quest.
Wherein does and should this life of love appear? Answ.


In these five particulars.

loving kindness of God was better then life unto David; hence he did
remember him upon his bed, and meditate on him in the very night: Psalm. 63.3.6.
they that fear the Lord, i. with a sonne-like fear; where love is chiefly
predominant, are such as think upon his name: Mal. 3.16. We have thought of thy
loving kindesse oh Lord in thy Temple, Psalm. 48.9. Thou that can spend days,
nights, weeks, months, years; and have thy head all this time swarming with
vain thoughts, and scarce one living thought of Christ, and his love, that
did never beat thy head, nor trouble thy self in musing, oh what shall I do
for him, nor in condemning thy self because thou do so little, verily thou
have not the least degree of this life of love.

In speaking and commending of him: is it Cant 5.9.16. when she was asked what
her beloved was above others? she s^ts him out in every part of him, and
concludes with this, he is altogether lovely, because thy loving kindness
(says David) is better then life, my lips shall praise thee, and I will bless
thee whiles I live; Psalm. 63.3, 4. can it stand with this life of love, to be
always speaking about worldly affairs, or news at the best; both weekday and
Sabbath day, in bed and at board, in good company and in bad, at home and
abroad? I tell you it will be one maine reason why you desire to live, that you
may make the Lord Jesus known to your children, friends, acquaintance, that so
in the ages to come his name might ring, and his memorial might be of sweet
odor, from generation to generation; Psalm. 71.18. if before thy conversion
especially thou have poisoned others by thy vain and corrupt speeches; after
thy conversion thou will seek to season the hearts of others by a gracious,
sweet, and wise communication of savory and blessed speeches; what the Lord
has taught thee thou will talk of it unto others, for the sake of him whom
thou love.

those two ways, in his Ordinances, or Providence, by his holy Spirit,) Lord
(says David) I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where
thine honor dwells, Psalm. 26.8. The ground of which is set down, verse. 3.
Thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, my soul longs for thee as in a
land where no water is, that I might see thee, as I have seen thee in the
Sanctuary; the reason of it was, because thy loving kindness is better then
life: Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3.

In doing much for him, and that willingly; Rachel? how did he express it?
his seven years service, in frost and snow, in heat and cold, by day and
night, were nothing to him, for her sake whom he loved: Shall I serve the Lord
(says David) of what cost me nothing? And when he had prepared many millions
for the building of the Temple, yet he accounted it a small thing for his sake
whom he loved; 1 Chronicles. 29.3. he gave it out of his poverty, as he speaks;
this is love, to keep his Commandments, and those are not grievous: 1 John 5.3.

In suffering and enduring any evil for his for a good man one may be willing
to dye; Romans 5.7. assuredly if there be any love to Christ, it will in time
increase to this measure; it will think ten thousand lives too little to lay
down for Christ's sake, that laid down his precious life for him: What tell you
me, says Paul, of bonds and imprisonments? I am ready not only to be bound,
but to dye for the sake of Christ at Jerusalem; my life is not dear to me, no
more then a rush at my foot, that I may finish my course with joy: for thy sake
we are killed all the day long. Romans 8.36. I tell you the love of Christ will
make you fall down upon your knees, and bless the Lord, that he will accept of
such a poor sacrifice as thy body is, though it be burnt to ashes; and thou will bless him again and again, that whereas he might have left thee in thy
sins to have trodden him and his glory and grace under foot, as he has done
thousands in the world; yet that he should call thee to share in this honor
not only to do, but to suffer for his sake.

Now the good Lord persuade all our hearts unto this fruitful obedience and
life of love. Oh you young men, you have a fair time before you to do much
for Christ in; how pleasing will it be to him to see such young trees hang
full of fruit! You aged men have now one foot in your grave, and you have
forgotten the Lord Jesus most of your time, and your time which now remains is
very little, and then your lamp is out, your Sun is almost set, and all your
work is yet to be done for Christ, oh therefore awaken now at last, before you
awaken when it is too late; you rich men have abilities and wherewithal to set
forward Christ's Kingdom in the Towns and Villages where you live; you poor
men may do much by ardent and instant prayers day and night, for the
advancement of the Lord Jesus. You Husbands, Wives, Masters, Servants, remember
if you are not good in your places, you are not good at all, what ever your
profession be; a good woman, but a froward wife: a good man, but a haire-braind
cursed husband: a good servant, but a very sore tongue; these cannot well stand
together. If you have any love to Christ, the life of love will make you move
best in your proper place: oh therefore love much, and so think much and speak
much of, and converse much with, and do much, and suffer much for the Lord
Jesus Christ; content not your selves with doing small things for him, that
has done and suffered much for you; if you can do but little, yet set God on
work by being fervent and frequent in prayer, not only that Christ may be
honored in your selves, but also in your families, and in all Churches and
Kingdoms of the world. If you cannot do much, yet maintain alive a will to
do much, which is accepted as if you did, 2 Cor. 8.12. If thou art a poor
man, and have nothing to give, yet keep a heart as liberal as a Prince; if you
can do but little your selves, yet encourage others that may, thou art not a
Preacher called to convert souls, yet do thou encourage the messengers of
Christ in their work, by thy prayers, counsel, help, and at last day the
conversion of souls shall be attributed unto thee, as well as unto them; if
thou can not do any good, yet prevent what evil thou can in thy place; to
keep often judgments, at least to delay them; mourn thou for other men's sins, as
if they were thine own, that so the Lord may pity and pardon them, and it may
be convert them, who shall do more good it may be, then ever thou can do:
let the Lord Jesus be in thy thoughts the first in the morning, and the last at
night; do what thou can, nay, go continually to him to enable thee to do
more then thou of thy self can; and mourn bitterly, and lament daily what
thou have not done, either through want of ability or will: remembering his love
to thee, that he came out of h^s Fathers bosom for thee, wept for thee, bled
for thee, powered out his life, nay, his soul to death for thee, is now risen
for thee, gone to heaven for thee, sits at Gods right hand, and rules all the
world for thee, makes intercession continually for thee, and at the end of the
world will come again for thee, who have loved him here, that thou might
live for ever with him then.

But is this our life, in these evil and lukewarm times? How many be there
that believe in Christ, that they may live as they list? If to drink, and
whore, and scoff, and blaspheme; if to shake a lock, and follow every fond
fashion; if to cross and cringe before a piece of wood; if to be weary of the
Word, and outwardly zealous for long prayers; if to seek for purity of
ordinances in Churches, and to maintain impurity in hearts, in shops, in
families; if to set our hearts upon Farms and Merchandises, and so to be
covetous; if to set up our own selves, and parts, and gifts, with a secret
disdain of Gods Ministers; if to cry down learning, and set up ignorance; if
to set up Christ, and destroy sanctification and obedience; if to be a
sect-master of some odd opinions; if to crack the nut of some superlunary and
Monkish notions, and high-flown speculations; if to hear much, and do little;
if to have a name to (...), and yet dead at the heart; if this be to li^e the
life of love, we have many that live this life; the Lord Jesus wants not love,
if this be to love: But oh woe unto you, if you thus requite the Lord, foolish
people and unwise! The Lord knows we may complain as Paul did, Every man
minds his own things, and none the things of Jesus Christ; none in comparison
of that huge number that think they are religious enough, if they be baptized,
and say that they believe in Jesus Christ: verily the time draws near wherein
the Lord will come for fruits from his Vineyard; and if he finds it not,
assuredly he will not be beholding to us for obedience, he can raise his glory
out of other people, and there carry his Gospel to them who shall bring forth
the fruits of it; the Lord will shortly lay his axe unto the root of our tree,
and if we will not serve the Lord in this good Land in the abundance of peace
and mercy, we shall serve our enemies in hunger, cold, and nakedness; if we
will not serve him in love, we must serve our enemies in fear; do not think
that the Lord will be put off with venerable names and titles, shadows, and
pictures; what is most men's profession at this day but a mere paint? which may
serve to color them while they live, but will never comfort them (unless
conscience be asleep) when they come to dye. Oh ^y^e heed of such formality; I
can never think enough of David's expression, Psalm. 119.167. I have kept thy
Commandments, and I love them exceedingly; should he not have said first, I
have loved thy Commandments, and so have kept them? Doubtless he did so; but
he ran here in a holy and most heavenly circle, I have kept them and loved
them, and loved them and kept them; if we love Christ we also shall live such a
life of love in our measure; and his Commandments will be most dear, when
himself is most precious.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF the principal Contents.
A.
ADoption, what it is. page 280 The manner thereof. 282
B.
Believers in a blessed condition. 251
C.
Conviction of sin wrought in every Believer. 6 What that sin is which the
Lord first convinces of. 9 How the Lord does convince the soul of sin. 23
What measure and degree of conviction God works in all his. 32 Conviction of
sin to be first preached. 34, 96 A sad thing to stand out against conviction.
36 Means of conviction. 39 Compunction immediately follows conviction. 45 The
Necessity thereof. 48 Rules observable about compunction. 49 Wherein it does
consist. 65
What measure of compunction God works in the Elect. 84 How and where the
Soul should come to Christ. 177 Means of enabling the Soul to come to
Christ. 239 In what manner we should come to him. 248
E.
What evil in sin God most affects the heart withal. 89 A threefold evil
of sin. 91
F.
Fear of Gods displeasure necessary to conversion, and wherein it consists. 66
The nature of Faith. 156 The efficient cause thereof. 163 The subject matter of
Faith. 173 The Form thereof. 178 The end of Faith. 198 The ground and means
of Faith. 215 How to discern Faith from presumption. 169 Whether an absolute
testimony of actual favor and justification be not the first ground of Faith.
227
G.
Glorification, what it is. 313 Greatness of men's sin in not coming to
Christ. 246
H.
Humiliation for sin, what it is. 125 What need there is of it. 126 What
means the Lord uses to work this. 129
What measure of Humiliation is necessary. 138 Wherein to express Humiliation.
150
I.
A Christian is not justified before faith is sought. 107 Sanctification does
not go before justification. 109 What true justification is. 253 Who is it
that justifies, and why. 256 The means whereby the Father justifies. 257 Who
are the persons the Lord does justify. 261
L.
Loosening from sin, how wrought in the soul. 88 A life of Love requisite in
believers. 328 The life of Love appears in 5. things. 338 The Law not to be
slighted. 334
P.
How Christ does save by his Power. 4 Audience of Prayers, a special
privilege. 305 What are those Prayers, that Christ will hear. 306 Why God
hears Prayers. 311
R.
A double Resistance of grace in men. 100 Regenerate and unregenerate, how
differenced. 194 Reconciliation with God, wherein it consists. 274
S.
What is it to see sin. 43 Sense of Mercy cannot turn a soul to Christ,
without the Sight of sin. 59 Sorrow for sin accompanies Conversion, wherein
it consists. 73 Separation from sin, wrought in Believers. 82 What true
Sanctification is. 289 The benefits thereof. 294
V.
Union unto Christ, goes before Communion with him. 101 Whether Vocation does
not go before Justification. 102 Vocation is not all one with Sanctification.
113 The nature of true Vocation. 217 The necessity thereof. 224 How it is a
ground of Faith. 225
W.
The Whole soul goes to Christ in conversion. 183 How to know when the Whole
soul comes to Christ. 190
FINIS.

