THE PARABLE OF THE Ten Virgins OPENED and APPLIED: Being the Substance of
diverse SERMONS on Matthew. 25. 1, -- 13. Wherein, the Difference between the
Sincere Christian and the most Refined Hypocrite, the Nature and Characters of
Saving and of Common Grace, the Dangers and Diseases incident to most
flourishing Churches or Christians, and other Spiritual TRUTHS of greatest
importance, are clearly discovered, and practically Improved,

BY THOMAS SHEPARD late Worthy and Faithful Pastor of the Church of Christ at
Cambridge in NEW ENGLAND.

Now Published from the Authors own Notes, at the desires of many, for the
common Benefit of the Lords people, BY Jonathan Mitchell Minister at Cambridge,
in NEW ENGLAND. The Shepard, Son to the Reverend Author, now Minister at
Charlestown in NEW ENGLAND.


LUKE 21. 36. Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted
worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before
the Son of man. LONDON, Printed by I. Hayes for John Rothwell, at the Sign of
the Fountain in Gold smiths-Row in Cheap Side. 1660.

TO THE READER, And Especially to the Inhabitants of CAMBRIDGE IN NEW ENGLAND.
THat to make sure of Life Eternal, is the one necessary Business, that we
Sons of death have to do in this world, and without which, all our time here is
worse than lost, every enlightened mind will easily acknowledge. This present
life being by the Rule of it, appointed but to this end, to be
preparation-time, spent in a continual care to make ready, that we might have a
good meeting with him who shall be seen in this Air one day. And whether we
look up to Heaven, or down to Hell; whether we reflect upon our own immortal
souls, or turn our eyes toward the Greatness and Goodness of that God in
Christ with whom we have to do; whether we pace over the time between this and
Judgment-day, or send our thoughts to view the Eternity that is to follow
after. All things put a Necessity, a Solemnity, a Glory upon this work.

But, Difficilia quae Pulchra: It is one of the Oracles uttered by our Lord
with his own mouth, Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto
life, and few there be that find it. It is not so easy a thing to get to
Heaven, nor so broad a way thither, as the slight and loose Opinions of some,
and Practices of more would make it, nor as the carnal hearts of all would have
it. Though that (if it be examined) is the common Scope of all Erroneous
Conceits (and how restlesly have the corrupt minds of men labored therein in
all ages, and do in these our days) to widen the way to Life, to break down
the Boundaries of this narrow Path, and make it broader than ever God made it.
Man's carnal heart finds it self pinioned and straightened in the way (the good old
way of effectual Faith and obedience) that God has laid out; hence it breaks
out on this hand and on that, and will rather pluck up the ancient Landmarks
of Gods Truth, than not make it broader. The Gospel will not afford men a way
broad enough, unless the Law be quite removed (not only as a Covenant, but as
a commanding Rule of Life too) and laid flat like an old Hedge, that they may
go over it at pleasure, and not attend it any further than their spirit
lists. Justification by Faith is too narrow a path, unless they may be
justified before and without Faith, it is not free enough; they complain of it
as if it laid them under a Covenant of works. Conditional Promises are of too
straight a size, they must be all absolute, and give us peace without any
qualification in us, or else they are not large enough. To be solicitous about
Sanctification and inherent Grace, is too troublesome; to seek God diligently in
the use of all means, in a daily and hearty performance of holy Duties, in a
strict Sanctifying of Sabbaths, in constant watchfulness, etc. this must be
laid by, as a Legal Business. And if the Spirit immediately will act us and
carry us in a Bed of ease to Heaven, without troubling us to act and strive,
well and good; otherwise men will shake hands with the power of Godliness, and
run a drift before their own Corruptions. But when all Stones are turned, the
way to Heaven is and will be found to be a straight way: Truth has said, it is
so, God has laid it out so; and it is not all the Notions of men that will
make it otherwise. And hence those solemn Counsels of the Scripture, Work out
your salvation with fear and trembling, Give all diligence to make all sure,
Str^ve to enter in at the Straight Gate, So run that you may obtain, etc.
though they be little attended by the looseness of these times, yet they are
of endless Moment and use, and had need be awfully regarded by all that love
their everlasting peace.

He therefore that is in earnest about this great business, will be glad of
any good help to guide him in this way, this straight way to Life. And though
there be many choice helps herein already extant, in the precious Labors of
sundry of the Lords Faithful Servants, for which this Age has cause on bended
Knees to bless the Lord, and which will be such a testimony against the
wantonness thereof, as it will never be able to answer: Yet of those that do
clearly, particularly, livelily and searchingly discover and mark out this
straight way, with the several practical turns thereof, and show where they
that miss of the end at last, do turn out of it, although they go far therein;
of those that Pilot us, when we come into the narrow Channel, unto the very
point of entrance into life, and show us the Rocks and Shoals on either hand
distinctly; of these (I say) there is not too great a number. For to speak any
good and useful Truths, is good and commendable; but yet it is another and a
further matter to hold the Candle to the poor people of God (even to the
meanest) to light them to Heaven, or to take the soul by the hand, and lead if
from step to step through all the difficulties, deceits and turnings at which
the closest Hypocrites do miss their way and lose themselves; and to do this
so convincingly, thoroughly and distinctly, as that the secrets of hearts may be
made manifest, the secure self-deceiver discovered and awakened, and yet the
humble upright Christian confirmed and encouraged.

In this Skill and Work, as the Author of the following Sermous, was known to
be among the first Three; so these Lectures of his, up on the Parable of the
Virgins, have been esteemed to excel in this kind; having left such a relish
upon the Hearers, as that they have not forgotten the Ta^t of them to this day.
It has therefore been the instant desire of many that heard them, and of some
that have but heard of them, that they might be imparted to the Public. And
surely both the Subject and the manner of handling it is such, being wholly
upon those things wherein the heart and life of Religion lies, that we cannot
disapprove of their Opinions, who have so earnestly desired it. All the Sermons
and Books that speak to the heart of Religion are little enough to feed that,
and keep life there, especially in this languishing and dying Age; wherein
though there wants not common light and outward Profession, yet loss of Love
and inward deadness are as common. The work being somewhat lengthy; and fitting
Scribes not easily attainable in this Wilderness, it has occasioned this
delay hitherto. But we hope it will now be neither unacceptable nor
unseasonable.

These Sermons are now transcribed by industrious and intelligent persons, and
have been carefully reviewed and corrected. They are written out of the Authors
own Notes, which he prepared for preaching (only about a Sheet himself wrote
out in his lifetime, having thoughts it seems of yielding to their desires who
were earnest for their publishing) by means whereof, though the Reader will
often meet with Curtnesse of expression, and though some lively passages that
were uttered in preaching may be wanting, yet you will have this benefit to
have much in a little room. It may also easily be observed that nor curiosity
of words, but weight of things was here studied by, and flowed from the heart
and pen of the Author, which yet produces the best and truest, i. e. a real
Rhetoric. In sum, although many imperfections incident to such post-humous
Editions cannot be wanting, yet we doubt not but the work will speak for it
self, to the intelligent and serious Reader.

We are not ignorant that there be some who somewhat differ from this our Author
in the accommodation of this Parable, and Analysis of some part of the Context,
referring it to the times about the expected calling of the Jews (and if so,
the substance of the work may be accounted to be in a more than ordinary manner
proper and seasonable for these times) But therein every man is left free to
his own further disquisitions. Neither is it for the sake of the bare
exposition (much less Chronical Accommodation) of the Text so much, that we
publish these things (in that kind the Labors of others do abound) but for the
spiritual, practical, lively, soul-searching truths and applications thereof
that are therein contained, the substance of which Truths the impartial Reader
will easily acknowledge to be clear both from this and from other Scriptures.

These Sermons preached by the Author, in a weekly Lecture, were begun in June
1636. and ended in May 1640. In which time there was a Leaven of Antinomian and
Familistical opinions stirring in the Country, as the world has already in
Print been informed: By occasion whereof of the Reader will meet with sundry
passages tending to reprove and refute some of those conceits and to establish
the contrary truth; which we have not expunged, but let them pass mostly as we
found them; seeing it is no more then the world already knows that there were
such things then among us; and though that storm be (as to it is open influence)
comfortably blown over with us, yet the like errors are (if not latent among
some here) spread elsewhere by the New Lights of these times, whence these
helps against them are still needful. And we doubt not but the substance of the
Truth here defended by our Author will stand and abide the Trial. Yea I suppose
I may freely take liberty to say, that among the many excellencies wherewith
the Lord endowed this precious instrument of his, this was none of the least,
that God taught him, and helped him to teach others the ture middle way of the
Gospel between the Legalist on the one hand, and the Antinomian (or loose
Gospeller) on the other, with much and sweet clearness, as was evident in the
whole course and way of his preaching, and may in some measure appear both in
his Books formerly printed, and in the following Sermons. Other passages also
of special application to this Country and to those first times of it, we
willingly permit to pass the Press, because they may be profitable to others
in like cases elsewhere, and of special benefit to the New-English Reader, For
why should we not desire and hope that the suitable solemn counsels and warnings
here given to these Churches by this Seer in Israel, in reference to the main
matters of life and godliness, may now be of living, awakening and
soul-instructing use to them (Oh that it may be!) unto many Generations!

Reader, if thou come ^ither to carp and cavil, or to criticize upon each
circumstantial imperfection, this work is not for thy turn; but if thou
bring with thee a serious and humble heart, desirous to have thy soul
searched to the quick, the sores thereof lanced, thy spiritual work and way
directed, and the interest of thy eternal peace furthered; if thou desire to
walk with God in good earnest, and escaping all the snares of a slight and
slumbring Generation, to stand before the Son of man with comfort in the day of
his Glory, then may thou here find that that will suit thee, and which thou will bless the Lord for, even words that are as Goads and Nails fastened by
this Master of Assemblies, given from that one and chief Shepherd. The Lord fix
and fasten them in all our hearts, that abiding and being engrafted there, they
may be instrumental to further our Salvation, that neither deficiency in the
main, nor sloathful security, may hinder us from our desired end; but when that
chief Shepherd and that Heavenly Bridegroom, who now sends to us by so many
Servants and Messages of his, both in Word and Writing, shall appear himself in
the Glory of his Father, and of all his holy Angels, we also may receive a
Crown of Glory that fades not away, and (for the last consummation of this
happy Marriage) may go home with him to his Fathers House, there to abide in
his Rest, in the Fullness of his joy, and drink down his Pleasures for evermore.

And you that sometimes were the Flock of this Shepherd, and have heard these
things from the lively voice of this Soul^ melting Preacher, whom you never can
forget; let it be a welcome Providence to have these Truths thus revived to you,
and put into your hands, that he who is dead, may yet speak to you and yours.
Get them into your Houses to read, nay, into your Hearts to feed upon, as a
choice and precious Treasure. And let them still be a living and continual
warning to you to watch and keep alive the power of Godliness, the daily
practice of working out your Salvation with fear and trembling, the love of the
Truth, the hatred of every false way, the esteem and improvement of Gods
Ordinances, and the true, humble, heavenly Life of Faith in Christ Jesus.

Jonathan Mitchel.

To the READER.
IF thou art one who know what it is to be serious in the great business of
providing for Eternity, it is very probable thou may be no stranger to the
Name of this Reverend Author, now with God, whose Name in both the Englands is
as an ointment poured forth; and then thou will be eagerly desirous to peruse
these following Sermons, in tendency to the further increasing thy stock of
spiritual oil, and when thou have read them, and sucked forth the sweetness and
nourishment contained in them, and by the assistance of the holy Spirit turned
them into good and healthful nutriment to thy soul, we question not but it
will inhance the Authors worth in thy thoughts and estimation. But perhaps thou
have never lighted on any of those Flowers which this Holy man has planted in
Gods garden, and then we are confident thou will meet with such savoury
sweetness in this Discourse, as will make thee wish Christ's Church had longer
enjoyed so choice and skillful a Workman. If thou be one who has hitherto
little considered of God and thy soul, and the concernments of Eternity, or
only now and then had some morning dew thoughts of that which deserves and
requires the choicest and most vigorous workings of thy soul, we wish thou
would so far comply with Gods goodness in bringing this Book to thy hand, and
gratific thy self, (we mean thy Soul, thy better self,) as to read over this
Treatise, in which thou will meet with those serious and soul-piercing Truths,
which by Gods blessing may be as poison to thy lusts, and awaken thee to a
serious and hearty engaging in that work which none ever yet repented of. For
the occasion of publishing this Piece, we refer thee to the larger Epistle of
our Reverend Brother, and only add, that though a vein of serious, solid and
hearty piety run through all this Authors Works, yet he has reserved the best
wine till the last. The Lord help thee and us so to read and improve these and
such like labors of Gods Harvest men, that we way with the Wise Virgins have
the Lamps of our souls trimed and furnished with oil, that when the Bridegroom
shall come we may be ready to enter with him into his Kingdom. Which is and
shall be the prayer of us, who are hearty well-wishers to thy Soul,

December. 24. 1659. William Greenhill, Edmund Calamy, John Jackson, Simeon Ash,
William Tailor.


THE PARABLE of the TEN VIRGINS UNFOLDED; Out of MATTHEW. 25. from the Is It Verse.
to the 14th.
1. Then shall the Kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten Virgins, which took
their Lamps, and went forth to meet the Bridegroom.

2. And five of them were wise, and five were foolish.

3. They that were foolish took their Lamps, and took no oil with them.

4. But the wise ^ook oil in their vessels with their Lamps.

5. While the Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbred and slept.

6. And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye
out to meet him.

7. Then all those Virgins arose and trimmed their Lamps.

8. And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil, for our Lamps are
gone out.

9. But the wise answered saying, not so, lest there be not enough for us and
you, but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.

10. And while they went to buy, the Bridegroom came, and they that were ready
(...) in with him to the marriage, and the door was shut.

11. Afterward came also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.

12. But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.

13. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day, nor the hour wherein the Son
of man comes.

CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
THese words are part of our Saviors Answer unto two solemn questions which
his Disciples propounded unto him, Chap. 24. v. 3. The first was concerning the
destruction of the Temple at Jerusalem. The second concerning the sign of his
coming, and so of the end of the world. The first seems to be occasioned by our
Saviors speech, c. 24. v. 2. The second from his speech, c. 23. v. 39. To the
first therefore he answers, from the 4th v. of the 24th chapter to the 23d v. of
it. To the second he answers from the 23d v. of the same chap. to end of this
25th chap. Wherein he acquaints them,

1. With some things which shall be before his coming, viz. subtle and strong
delusions, mixed with sore tribulations and oppressions, especially in the time
of Antichrist's reign, as also great confusions, in all hearts and Churches,
if not throughout all the world after the tribulation of those days; And then
(says he) v. 30. shall appear the sign of the Son of man, and he shall be seen
coming in power and great Glory; but if you desire farther to know the day and
hour when this shall be, it is such a secret as my Father reveals not to any,
no, not to the very Angels in Heaven, and therefore you need not know it, nor
yet should seek to know it; it is sufficient for you to know that before my
coming there shall be lamentable and sad times, and that when they are at their
worst, that the Sun and the Moon (through the horrors of men's hearts, and the
universal confusions in the world) shall seem to be darkened, etc. that then it
is time for me to come, and set all in order again, then the time of my coming
draws nigh: Now this Christ does from v. 23. of the 24th chap. to v. 37.

2. Having thus spoken concerning his coming, he breaks off his speech in
describing his coming, and falls to discovering the state of the times toward,
and about the days of his coming, and this he does from c. 24. v. 37. to c. 25.
v. 31. by the consideration of which he persuades to watchfulness against his
coming. 1. Either (says he) the times will be very sensual and degenerate, as
in the days of Noah, in some places of the world, c. 24. v. 38. which he
illustrates from two Parables, persuading therefore to watchfulness, to the
end of the 24th chap. 2. Or there will be great security in other places, and
among other persons (not given up to sensuality as in the days of Noah, but)
who are the chaste, Virgin, pure Churches of the world, not defiled with the
whoredoms in the world; and this our Savior unfolds in this Parable. 3. Or if
any be awakened (as some shall) to look for Christ's coming, yet among these,
some through hard conceits of the Lord Jesus, shall be wilfully careless, and
not improve their Talents for the sake and use of the Lord Jesus, and this is
set down in the next Parable of the ten Talents, from v. 14. to v. 31. You see
therefore where this Parable stands, and to what purpose it is brought in. In
which are two things.

SECT. II.
1. THe Parable it self, concerning the ten Virgins, from v. 1. to v. 13.

2. The scope of the Parable, v. 13. which is to persuade not simply to
watchfulness, but to continuance and perseverance in it from a prudent
foresight of the coming of Christ.

1. The Parable it self is set down, agreeable to the custom of those times
wherein our Savior lived, wherein their Marriages were usually celebrated in
the night time, she that was the Bride was attended with sundry Virgins to meet
the Bridegroom; these Virgins (it being night season) took therefore their
Lamps with them; those that were ready, and met the Bridegroom, were admitted
to the Marriage-Room and Supper; those that came after that time, if once the
doors were shut, weresurely kept out, though they knocked hard to come in. All
this, those who are acquainted with Jewish Histories and customs know to be
true, which we are to attend, because it gives not a little light to the true
and genuine explication of this Parable.

In which Parable note these two parts.

1. The Churches preparation to meet with Christ (called here the Bridegroom)
from the 1 to the 5 verse.

2. The Bridegroom's coming forth to meet them, from the 5 to the 12 verse.

SECT. III.
The first part of the Parable.
FIrst, I shall speak of the preparation made by the Church to meet with Christ
Jesus. Wherein also note these three things.

1. The place where this preparation is made, viz. in the Kingdom of Heaven,
verse. 1.

2. The time when it shall be made, set down in the first word, Then, v. 1.

3. The persons that shall make this preparation, they shall not be corrupted
Members of degenerate Churches, where men's profession is grown foul through
length of wearing; but they are Professors of some eminent strain, some whereof
are truly sincere, others secretly unsound. And there is a double desription of
them. 1. From some things wherein they all agree. 2. From some other
particulars wherein they manifestly differ;

First, Those things wherein they all agree are three.

1. They are all Virgins; Virgin-Professors.

2. They were all awake and watchful for some time, ready to meet the
Bridegroom, and hence it it is said, They took their Lamps.

3. They all had so much Faith as to go out to meet the Bridegroom. Secondly,
Those things wherein they did differ, are,

1. Generally, five were wise, and five were foolish, v. 2.

2. Specially, the foolish took Lamps but no Oil, the wise did both, v. 3, 4.

This is the rude draught of this first part of the Parable, the sum whereof is
this, That the state of the Members of some Churches about the time of Christ's
coming, shall be this, they shall not be openly profane, corrupt and
scandalous, but Virgin-Professors, awakened (for some season) out of carnal
security, stirring, lively Christians, not preserving their Chastity and Purity
merely in a way of works, but waiting for Christin a Covenant of Grace, only
some of these, and a good part of these, shall be indeed wise, stored with
spiritual wisdom, fil^'d with the power of Grace; but others of them, and a
great part of them too, shall be found foolish at the coming of the Lord Jesus.

I come therefore to handle the first Particular in this first Part, viz.

CHAP. II.
Of the Visible Church of God.
SECT. I.
1. THE place where this preparation to meet Christ shall be made, and that is
not in the Kingdoms of this world (earthy Kingdoms) but in the Kingdom of
Heaven, and therefore'tis said, The Kingdom of Heaven shall be like, etc.

I will not trouble you with telling you how many ways the Kingdom of Heaven
is taken in Scripture; by Kingdom of Heaven here, is not meant the Kingdom of
Glory in the third Heaven, for there shall be no foolish Virgins at all there,
no unclean thing shall enter thither; nor by it is meant the head of this
Kingdom, viz. Christ Jesus, for how can he be like to ten Virgins; nor by it is
meant the Gospel of the Kingdom, (which Mat. 13. is called the Kingdom of
Heaven, and compared to a draw-net) for how can it be like unto ten Virgins?
nor yet the internal Kingdom of grace set up in the heart of every believer
(which is called a grain of Mustardseed, Mat. 13.) for how can any foolish
Virgins be there? or what share have they in that? Therefore I conceive it is
clear, that by the Kingdom of Heaven here, is meant the external Kingdom of
Christ in this world: that is, the visible Church, or the estate of the visible
Church, which is frequently called in Scripture, the Kingdom of Heaven, as,
Mat. 8. 12. and 21. 43. In which Kingdom some are wise, some foolish, all
profess Christ, look for the coming of Christ, for salvation from Christ, the
estate of this visible Church shall be like ten Virgins.

SECT. II.
AND hence I shall note this one thing.

That the visible Church of God on earth, Doct. 1.
especially in the times of the Gospel, is the Kingdom of Heaven upon earth.

For look upon the face of the whole earth, there you may see the Kingdoms of
men, and the Kingdom of Satan, sin and death, which the Apostle says, Romans 5.
reig^eth over all men; here is only the Kingdom of Heaven, upon earth, viz. in
the visible Church; it is not the place only which makes either Heaven or Hell,
(though there is a place for both) but the state principally makes both, one
may be in Hell upon earth, as Christ was in his bitter agony, and a man may be
in a kind of Heaven upon earth, as Christ tells his hearers, that the Kingdom of
Heaven was at hand; a man may be under the Kingdom of Satan and darkness upon
earth, Col. 1. 13. which is a kind of Hell; and why not as well under the
Kingdom of God on earth, which is a kind of Heaven, especially (I say) now
under the Gospel, wherein the Lord has begun to fulfill, that which was but
only promised under the Old Testament to be fulfilled in the fourth and last
Monarchy, ( Dan. 2. 44) in the time of the New: In the state of Christ's
visible Church, which should by little and little beat down all other Kingdoms
of the world.

SECT. III.
1. BEcause the same King that is reigning in Heaven, Reas. 1.
is reigning here, is present here, Psa. 2. 6. And here the Saints are
commanded to rejoice, to shout, and to be glad with all their hearts, because
of the presence of this their King among them, Zeph. 3. 14, 15. It Is true
indeed he is King over all the world; the immediate execution of all Gods
common, as well as special providence, is put into the hand of this King, the
Lord Jesus. But as for his Enemies, and other creatures, he reigns over them
as a King of power, but he reigns not for them also as a King of Grace and
love, for thus he reigns among his people in his Church, Deuteronomy. 33. 26, 27. The
Lord is present with every one of his people, severally, but much more jointly,
when two or three of them are met together in his Name.

2. Because here are the Laws of Heaven, Reas. 2.
Heb. 12. 25. Take heed (speaking of the Ministry of the Gospel in the
Churches) that ye refuse not to hear him who speaks from Heaven, which Laws
are not only here promulgated (as they be among the enemies of this Kingdom)
but accepted and received also, without which Laws what Kingdom could there
be? Christ's Kingdom in this world is neither tyrannical, nor arbitrary, to
govern without Law; no, no, but if he be our King, he is our Lawgiver also,
Isa. 33. 22. Nay the same Laws by which we shall be ruled in Heaven, we have
here, and we are now under: That as our Divines say against the Papists, though
before Moses his time, there was not scriptio verbi, yet there was verbum
scriptum, which the Patriarchs had before the Flood, and afterward until Moses
his time: So I say here, though in Heaven the external Letter and scription
both of Law and Gospel, shall be abolished, because they need the^ not when the
day star is risen, 2 Pet. 1. 19. Yet the living Rules of both for substance,
shall remain; the end of the Ministry is to bring us to the unity of Faith in a
perfect estate. Ephesians. 4. 13. Therefore Faith shall not cease, when Ministers
shall, and that perfect man shall come. Our Faith indeed shall not then by such
glasses see Christ, nor adhere unto Christ, by such means of Promises and
Ordinances as we do now, but without them we shall both see, and for ever
adhere to him who is our King at that day; and though indeed the Law is now
abolished, as a Covenant of life, yet it shall ever remain as a Rule of life;
perfect subjection to it, is the happiness of Saints in Heaven, 1 Ioh. 1. as a
heart contrary to it is the greatest misery of the Saints on earth, Romans 7. 24.

3. Because here are the Subjects of Heaven, Reason 3.
Ephesians. 2. 19. Fellow-Citizens of the Saints, not only on earth, but as Paul
speaks, Phil. 3. 20. Our conversation (or, as it may be rendered, our free
Burgesse-ship) is in Heaven. God himself has canonized all the true Members of
visible Churches with the name of Saints, throughout the who^e new Testament,
here are the great heirs of Heaven, nay, possessours of Heaven by Faith, as
others are by feeling, as near and dear to God (in some respect) as those that
be in Heaven already; because the same motive which makes him love them, makes
him love these, though poor abjects, and our-casts of the world; there is but a
paper-wall of their bodies between them and Heaven, only here is the
difference, they there, are Subjects in their own country; these here, are the
same Countrymen, only strangers for a time here upon earth: Some define a
Kingdom to be dominatus regis in populum subjectum. If Christ (the King) was
present, and his Laws published, but there were no people to be subject to him,
there could be no Kingdom; but when the King, Laws, and Subjects of Heaven are
here met together in the visible Church, here is now the Kingdom of Heaven.

4. Because here is the very Glory of Heaven begun, Reason 4.
that look as the same Sun which fills the Stars with Glory, the very same beams
touch the earth also, so the same Glory which shines in Heaven, shines into the
poor Church here, 1 Pet. 5. 10. God has called his people into his eternal
Glory. And (...) 30. whom Christ has justified, them he has glorified, i. e.
he has begun it here; (...) in a special manner is the presence of the Angels
in Heaven, Ephesians. 3. 10. Here the pure in heart see God, and that after another
manner, than many times they can in their solitary condition, Psalm. 63. 1, 2,
3. And what is this but Heaven?

SECT. IV.
1. SEE therefore hence their happiness and honor, Use 1.
whom God has called out of the world, and planted in his Church: What has
the Lord done, but opened the way to the Tree of life, and let you into
Paradise again? Nay (which is more) What has he done but taken you up into the
very Kingdom of Heaven it self? where you have the Lord of glory to be your
King, the Laws of Heaven made known, his heart opened, where you have the heirs
of Heaven your companions, and the Angels of Heaven your guard, desiring to
look into those things which your eyes see, and your hearts feel, 1 Pet. 1. 12.
Where you have the love of a Father appearing, the Son of God inhabiting, and
the Spirit of Heaven comforting. Lord what is man that thou art thus mindful of
him! That when the Lord sees it unmeet to take you out of this world up unto
Heaven, that Heaven should come down into this world unto you, who were once
enemies to this Kingdom, shut up under the Kingdom of death and darkness,
strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, without God and Christ in the world,
without promise, without hope. I do not cry the Temple of the Lord, nor Idolize
Order and Churches, but I tell you what your privilege is, and thereby what
Gods goodness is: I know the world neither sees not feels any such Heaven
on earth, but soon grow despisers secretly of all Ordinances, who if they were
in Heaven it self with their carnal hearts, they would not abide there with
much contentment, yet verily Heaven has been, and is found here by Gods hidden
one; even such things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, and if it be not
thus with thee, blame thy self, and mourn the more, who in the midst of light
art in utter darkness, and in the place where Heaven is begun to some, it
should be made a little Hell to thee.

2. Take heed of defiling secretly the Church of God: Use. 2.
For what do you do thereby, but pollute the Kingdom of Heaven it self? And the
better any thing is, the greater is the defilement cast upon it. It is said, 1.
Pet. 1. 4. that the Kingdom of Heaven above is an inheritance unde^iled Some
think from thence that the lapsed Angels did not fall in the third Heaven, but
in some place in the earth; for that is an inheritance undefiled.
, never yet the subject place where any sin was committed, and this is one part
of the Glory of it. Take you heed of coming into Church Fellowship with defiled
hearts, and so defiling Gods holy things, for do you know where you are? I know
it is not in that Heaven where you cannot sin, but yet it is in such a Heaven
where you should not sin, much less defile the Church of God. It was one of
Gods heavy inditements against the Church of the Jews, that when the Lord had
brought them out of a land of pits, into a plentiful country, yet they defiled
his Land, neither Priests nor people said, Where is the Lord? Ier. 2. 7, 8. It
will be much more heavy another day with you, that walking in the fellowship of
Gods people, shall be found guilty of defiling the Kingdom of Heaven it self,
which you should be careful to keep as an underfiled inheritance, which (...)
whether spiritual or sensual, as they stain the very glory of Heaven it self,
so they keep you from feeling the Truth of this Doctrine* even of this Heaven
upon earth in your own experience.

3. Let all Members of Churches hence learn to have their conversation in
Heaven, and walk as men come down from Heaven, Use 3.
and returning thither again, and that are as it were already in Heaven. Paul
did thus, and wept to see so many that did not thus, but did mind earthly
things, Phil. 3. 19, 20. Do not only forsake, but even forget your Country,
and your Fathers house, so shall the King of Glory desire your beauty, Psalm.
45. 10, 11, Let the reproach of earthly-mindednesse cast upon the face of
Christians, be wiped off by your carriage, being heavenly, holy, loosened from
things below. Art thou in Heaven with an earthly heart? Is not Heaven good
enough for thee? Cannot that content thee which many have desired to see, and
could not see, even the Lord Jesus, the King of Glory in his beauty, in the
assemblies of his Saints?

4. Take heed of pulling down this Kingdom. Use 4.
Loyal Subjects will rather lose their lives, than their Prince shall lose his
Kingdom. Fear not enemies without, but your selves at home. The enemies of the
Church, did never yet hurt the Church, but the Church's sins, Zach. 7. 14. Oh
consider what mercy the Lord has betrusted us withal, that unless the Lord
should carry us to Heaven it self, immediately on the wings of Angels, he can
show us no greater outward favor, in this world, than to bring us into this
his Kingdom of Heaven on earth. I profess one days fellowship here with a
number of brokenhearted Christians, either mourning together, or rejoicing in
their God and King together, it our-bids the many years Glory of the whole
world, (howsoever it is hidden from the world) And will you betray this Kingdom?

SECT. V.
Quest. What are those things that may pull down this Kingdom?

Answ. 1. Ignorance of those sins which may hurt and ruin it. There are common
infirmities which all the faithful have in common, for which the Lord pities
his, but there are some that are proper and personal to some particular
persons, Psalm. 18. 23. for which the Lord is angry even with his own; so there
are some sins which are common Church-infirmities, for which the Lord will not
cast off his people, but there are sometimes in several Churches proper
Churchsins. Now the Rule here is, if these be not seen and lamented and
removed, if the Lord be angry for these (as verily he will) and yet they do not
so much as know all this while what it is that hurts them, these sins will
canker the roots, and blast the most flourishing Churches. Ephesus, Rev. 1. 4.
had her sin; Sardis, Rev. 2. 1. had her sin. Laodicea had her sins, Rev. 3. 16.
Now what if they never know these, nor repent of these, you know then Ephesus
Candlestick must be removed, and Laodicea shall be spued out of Christ's mouth.
Oh this has been the bane of Churches, while they enjoyed their liberties,
they could not, nay (in truth) would not know their aile, in the day of Christ's
visitation of them, and hence came their ruin, the cause of which they saw
not; only it may be the remnant that escaped, to whom the Lord showed mercy,
could read their sins in their plagues. It is a lamentable spectacle to behold
the ruins of Germany, and that after such great slaughter and effusion of
blood, they cannot tell the thing that has hurt, and does still wast them.

2. Self-seeking, a Spirit of self. Look as it is in a Kingdom, if there be a
common enemy, and the body of the Army which should encounter with them, be
every man taken up, and taking thought how he may preserve his own Tent, and do
not join their forces together for common safety, it must perish, and the
Kingdom will be easily conquered: Or as it is with the body, if every member
seeks to preserve it self alone, and not that which preserves them all, ( viz.
the Head) the body will drop down and die shortly. Christ Jesus is the Head of
this Body [his Church] Now it is certain if ye seek to preserve your own name
more than Christ's, to give more content to your own lusts, then to the will
and heart of Christ, if more careful of fetching feathers to your own nests,
and to shift for your selves, and not to attend (every man in his place) the
public good of the Church, and Christ in it; it is certain God will forsake
you, and all will to ruin quickly, 2 Chronicles. 15. 1, 2.

Church Members of public spirits, are ever prosperous men. They shall prosper
that love thee, Psalm. 122. 6. That say in their hearts out of sense of Christ's
love, Lord, what shall I do for thee? How may I be useful to thy people? But
if back and belly, mine and thine, be chief in request, this will ruin you.

3. League and Amity with the enemies of Christ's Kingdom, or peace with our
lusts; it is not sin, but a privy peace with sin, and a secret quietness in
sin, which overthrowes Christ's Kingdom: The Canaanites that were left alive,
because ('it is said) they could not drive them out, how often did they vex, and
prick, and yoke the Israel of God? Those sins which you say, you cannot part
with, and hence yield unto them, and mourn not under them, those will ruin
Churches: Some sins you have forsaken, and could forsake, the danger lies not
here. Wrath goes out against Iehosaphat because he loved him who hated the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.

4. When the Church lays by her weapons. No Kingdom can be kept safe in an
ordinary way, where all their weapons are taken from them, or not used by them,
when their (...) upon their borders: When the Church hang by, and lay aside
Faith (the shield whereby we defend our selves) and prayer (whereby we offend
our enemies) what safety is to be expected now in Churches? Only be strong
(says the Lord to Ioshuah) when he went out upon that great service of the
Lord, Josh. 1. 7. Ephesians. 6. 13. There is no more fearful sign of ruin to a
Church, than where the Spirit of prayer begins to fail; and verily if any
people under Heaven are ready to miscarry herein, we (that have our fill of
peace, and our yokes broken off from our shoulders) are in most danger; but if
it be so, look for such shakings of all hearts, and Churches also, as shall
make you find your tongues; and knees, and ears, and hearts again, if the Lord
means to dwell with you.

5. Not bringing forth the fruits of the Kingdom, Mat. 21. 43. Cut that Church
down that cumbers the ground, after many years pruning and wetting. That
Kingdom where there is Church-trading, but no considerable gain coming in, will
consume quickly, and die of it self. Fruit is the last end of the tree: All
duties you do, wherein you attain nor, or (at least) aim not at your last and
utmost end, but make your selves your own end, that is not fruit; Fruit
refreshes others that taste it; when a Christian walks so as that another is
not the better, [not much refreshed] by him, but it may be hardened rather, by a
saplesse example, here is no fruit, and this calls for the axe to cut down the
tree.

6. Divisions: This pulls down Kingdoms without help of foreign enemies. If a
Kingdom thrusts swords into each others bellies, this will soon dispatch them.
It Is the Jesuits plot to subdue by private divisions, whom they cannot conquer
by force of Arms: It was most pleasing to Satan to prevail with Christ to cast
himself down headlong from the Pinnacle, rather than to fling him down himself.
It is the delight of Hell to set and see Churches at variance among themselves,
this is the first thing he attempts in the best Churches, and it is commonly
prosperous, if the Lord leaves the watchmen to slumber, and not to be watchful,
and fearful, and sudddenly sensible of the least beginnings herein. It is a
wonderful thing to see what a small occasion of offense will do; a word, a
gesture, a garment, a matter of indifferency, it is strange to see, how such
small matters will gore, if Satan's head be in them, and his Horns be set upon
them, especially in Churches where men are set at liberty, and enjoy it, one
must have liberty to speak one thing, and another, another thing, I am of this
mind says one, I am not of that mind (Brother) says another: It Is wonderful
to see what a fire, a secret smother, and smoke of suspicion will do. But oh
take heed here, Gal. 5. 15. Love the Truth, receive no opinion differing from
the most approved in the Church suddenly, but weep, and pray, and ask council,
and tremble to entertain a thought of contention; The first sin which brake out
in the first Christian Church, was ^urmuring, Acts 6. 1. What follows? Stephen
an earthly Angel, full of the holy Ghost, suffers, and is taken from them, Acts
7. And after this the whole Church scattered, Acts 8. Oh keep the peace of the
Church, and rend it not for small matters, love one another sincerely, and you
cannot but live together quietly.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the Coming of Christ, and the security of Professors.
SECT. I.
THus much of the place; now let us consider of the time when, this preparation
is made, set down in that word Then, which word has reference to the 37th v.
of the 24th chapter viz. to the days of the coming of the Son of man.

Now when are these days? Quest.


We shall read both in Prophetical and Apostolical writings, Answ.
that all the time from the Ascension to the second coming of Christ, is called
the last days, Acts 2. 16, 17. Hence the Primitive Churches did (long since)
and all the Churches at this day ought, to live in a daily expectation of his
coming again, as these Virgins here did. And hence some think, than all this
time may be the days of the coming of Christ, wherein all the Churches either
do, or should look out for the coming of Christ. Now although I dare not
exclude these days (in a large sense) from being the days of Christ's coming,
as being the last days, and it being the duty of all to wait for this coming
of Christ, as well as those who lived long before us, 1 These. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 1.
7. Yet I believe here is meant more particularly the latter part of those last
days: For our Savior having foretold of many things which shall fall out
before his second coming, yet he seems to single out some particular time in
these last days; to which he does annexe this [ then ] and that is evident to
all that view well the Text, that they are the days of his coming, for though
all the days of the Gospel may be called the days of the Son of man, and some
days especially wherein there is some kind of coming of the Son of man, as
when he comes to hear prayers, Luke 18. 8. yet to speak properly, they are not
the days of the coming of the Son of man. And look as the days of Noah were
not all the days from the Creation to the Deluge, but those particular years
before the Flood, so it is here, some special times before his coming, are the
days of his coming.

SECT. II.
BUt what is this Coming of Christ?

There is a double coming of Christ.

1. His coming to call the Jews, and to gather in the fullness of the Gentiles
with them, Quest.
which is called the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2. 8. When there shall
be such a brightness of the Truth shining forth in the world, Answ.
armed with such Instruments as shall utterly destroy Antichrist, long before
his second coming, Rev. 19. 19, 20.

2. His coming to Judgment, Heb. 9. 28. 1 Cor. 15. 23, 24. When there shall be
an universal resurrection of good and bad, 1 These. 4. 15, 16, 17, Now although
it be true, that at the time of the coming of Christ, to call the Jews, the
Churches like chaste Virgins shall wait and make themselves ready for the
marriage of the Lamb, Rev. 19. 7. Yet the second coming of Christ seems to be
the time which is here directly pointed at. Then shall those Churches be
Virgin-Churche; waiting for Christ's coming, both to their particular judgment,
but especially to the general judgment, when he shall appear as a glorious
Bridegroom to the consolation and salvation of those who in truth have waited
for him the second ^ime: For this coming of Christ spoken of in these two
chapters, is that coming which is in power and great Glory (not in the Churches
spiritually) but in the clouds of Heaven, chap. 24. 30. Wherein he shall
separate the sheep from the goats, the one to lie among Devils, the other to
possess (not an earthly Kingdom here for a thousand years, as some from
mistaking the meaning of the 20th chapter of the Revel. imagine) but to inherit the
Kingdom prepared for them from the foundation of the world, Mat. 25. 34. which
cannot be any be ter, not any other, than the third Heaven, where the face of
God is seen, and where he has had an innumerable Host of glorious Angels, his
Subjects to serve him, not only since the first time of man's creation, but the
first foundation of the world, Genesis 1. 1. Which also Christ himself is gone to
prepare for us, John 14. 2, 3. And which Abraham's Faith only expected, even a
City which was not earthly, but heavenly, which has foundations, whose builder
and maker is God, Heb. 11. 10, 11. So that although this Parable looks most
directly unto those times which are yet to come, yet as all examples registered
in holy Scripture for time past, are applicable and useful for us, so these
that are yet to come, are alike instructive to us, especially in these times
and places, wherein the Lord (according to his manner of working great things
usually) gives among us some small, yet lively resemblance of those days.

SECT. III.
That in those days of Christ's coming, Doct.
wherein the Churches of Christ, and Professors of the Gospel shall grow
Virgin-Churches, all visible Saints, when all Members seem to be espoused
Christ, yet there will be found desperate folly in some, and in time great
security will fall upon all.

Some there are who think the days we live in now, are not only the days of
the Son of man, but part of the days of the coming of the Son of man, wherein
the Churches (especially in these places) grow to be Virgin-Professours: Our
judgments hold it, our practice maintains it, all Church Members are and must
be visible Saints, visible Believers, Virgins espoused to Christ, escaping the
pollutions of Idolatry and the world: Take heed the Lord find not many of you
foolish, take heed you that are not so, that in time you grow not secure; you
have the pillow of peace to lie on, and the cares of the world to make you
dream away your time, and you have no pinching persecutions to awaken you, and
if no wrestlings within, look for security there. Folly will be the death and
bane of some, hence boast not. Security, a sleeping sickness will be the
disease of others, if the Lord prevent not: But I intend to anchor here, only
to set up marks at these Flats, that you may avoid them and come not near them.

CHAP. IV.
Shows that the Soul that will enjoy Communion with Christ, must be divorced
from all other Lords, particularly from Lusts, and from the Law. The manner of
its Espousalsunto Christ.
SECT. I.
NOw therefore to come to the Third thing; the persons that make this
preparation are set forth, 1. In what they all agree in, and that is, first in
that they are all Virgins; What are these? Ans. To omit the Popish
Interpretation of their Nuns, and mock-Virgins.

I shall rather make use of Scripture to give light to interpret this place;
for opening of it, know, the whole Church may be called the Spouse of Christ,
and take every member alone, a Virgin attending on this Spouse, Psalm. 45. nay
the Apostle, 2. Cor. 11. 2. calls the whole Church a Virgin, so that by Virgins
are meant whole particular Churches of Christ, together with the several
Members thereof. Now Virgins are such as are fit for marriage, and not defiled
with any man, as it is said of Rebecca: so by Virgins are meant those that are
not polluted within, or without with the evils of the world, Rev. 14. 4. but
more is to be understood here, 2 Cor. 11. 2. when once marriage is come, they
cease to be Virgins, and are Wives; yet when espoused to Christ, now they are
spiritually Virgins; hence these here are only like to Virgins: so that the
meaning of Virgins is this; by Virgins is meant such Churches, or members of
Churches as are divorced from all other Lovers, and matched only to Jesus
Christ: these only look for the coming of Christ, and communion with him, these
only are received into communion.

SECT. II.
WHoever look for everlasting Communion with the Bridegroom of the Church, Obs.
1.
Jesus Christ, must be Virgins Divorced from all others* and Espoused only to
Jesus Christ.

Here were indeed foolish ones among these, yet as foolish and blind as they
were, they saw that this was the way, to be like the wise, to be Virgins as
well as they, Psalm. 45. 10, 11. Ier. 3. 19, 20. as a Wife departs, so ye; but
how shall I put thee among the Children, etc. you shall call me my Father, i.
e. one instead of all other things, and shall not turn aside from me, Hos. 2.
23. there is their communion; Hence the Lord will, 1. take away the names of
Baa^im; 2. Betroth them to himself.

SECT. III.
WHat is it to be divorced from all other Lovers? Quest. 1.


Idolatry is called Whoredom in Scripture, and this is one thing, Answ.
the Soul must be Divorced from, before it can be matched to the Lord, Hos. 2.
2. I shall not need to press this here; but there are two other things which I
shall show, for there are two things that every man does before he is espoused
to the Lord Jesus; either first he departs and goes a whoring by unlawfully
lusting after the creature, Psalm. 73. 27. James 4. 4. Or 2. He is lawfully
married as he thinks unto the Law, Romans 7. 3, 4. the Law is there compared to a
Husband, from which Christ indeed delivers his, yet some will stick to it:
either the Soul takes content in some creature more than in Christ, or in some
righteousness more than in the Lord Jesus; Now to be divorced from all other
things, is for the heart to be taken off from all worldly contentments.
Secondly, from comforting it self in the bosom of its own work and
righteousness, and this must be found in all them that look for communion with
the Lord Jesus.

SECT. IV.
1 THe heart must be divorced from Lusts after, and pleasures in any creature;
for proof, we must know this:

1. The soul of every man must have something to quiet and comfort it like the
stomach, it is death and hell to want it (as the Israelites in the wilderness:)
hence it must have it.

2. That there is nothing that can comfort the thirsty heart, but it is either
in the spring, or cistern, fountain, or bottles, either in God, or in the
creature.

3. Hence man having lost God, and all good there, seeks for it in the
creature, and because he finds not enough in one, digs for it in another, Psalm.
4. Who will show us any good? and hence the Soul because it never found that
infinite sweetness in God himself, hence lusts after, and delights in the
creature for it self, loves pleasure for pleasure, delights in creature for the
creature, not for God, why should he, seeing he never found content there? and
here the soul of man cleaves night and day, committing spiritual whoredom
before the face of God; now if ever any soul has communion with Christ, it
must be divorced from all creatures thus, for Lust is a desire after, and
content in the creature for the creatures sake.

1 Because while the heart is in league with any creature besides the Lord,
it is at deadly enmity with the Lord, Reas. 1.
James 4. 4. If a man has a rich commodity, and one comes and offers half the
worth of it, he takes it as a contempt; if it be not worth this, it is worth
nothing; so the Lord is worthy of all our love, our lives, our souls though we
had a thousand of them, and will a man not part with his lusts for him? I tell
you the Lord takes himself slighted, contemned, and loathed; if not worth all
a man's love, he is worth nothing; now the creature is made a God, because made
a man's last end, which is as proper to God, as to make him the Alpha of all.
Here the greatest wrath is to give a man his fill of the creature.

2 Because so long the soul cannot see, Reas. 2.
nor come by the eye and feer of Faith to the Lord Jesus, John 5. 44. and think
Christ better than all; as Birds in a string may fly high, but when they come
to the end of the line, fall down there; and so though the soul flies to
Christ, yet when indeed it comes to the end of parting withal, it falls down,
and falls off from Christ. Whole men have no heart nor desire after Physicians;
when all limbs are whole and strong, no desire after Plasters: so while any
thing eases and contenteth the heart, there is no desire after Christ, Hos. 4.
11. Whoredom and wine have taken away the heart.

3 Because so long the heart if it do come, cannot stay with Christ to do any
thing for Christ, Reason 3.
Mat. 6. 24. You cannot serve God and riches, i. e. two Masters, who have
constant employment, and Christ has set us such employment. Hence men on
sick-beds are tame as may be, promise any thing, because their joy in the
creature is gone: Hence on the other side many men after many springings of
heart are choked by thorns of the world.

4. From the abundant love that the Lord Jesus shows to them that ever have,
Reason 4.
or look for communion with him. Those to whom we show much love, from those we
expect much again. As a man if taken or cast out to be servant, one looks not
for love from him; but when a man has given himself, and made over all his
estate to another, now all love is too little. So it is with the Lord Jesus,
John 6. Will you also depart?

SECT. V.
2 THE soul must be divorced from the Law, i. e. from comforting it self with
the righteousness thereof: For explication of which we must consider these
things.

1. That the Lord does not ever give a man content in his sins and lusts, but
wounds Conscience for the same.

2. That so long as the Lord wounds a man's Conscience for sin, no creature can
give a man comfort or content. A wounded spirit who can bear? Judas casts away
his silver pieces; and Belshazzar quakes, who was but even now qua^^ing in his
cups. As a man that has an aching tooth, or broken bones, What can comfort him
now?

3. Hereupon the Law falls upon a man, or a man meets with the Law; for as all a
man's sorrow is upon him because the Law is broken, all a man's care is how he
may keep it again. What shall I do? As a man cast in prison for debt, there all
is opened; an the Law like an earnest suitor, 1. Presleth hard for love and
obedience. 2. Promises a rich portion, eternal life, if he can keep it; If not
you must be damned; therefore now forsake your sins, etc.

4. Hence the soul not knowing a better Husband, consents and resolves to
cleave to it, Romans 10. 3. Deuteronomy. 5. Whatever the Lord will have us do, we will
do it; and here it stays, and is comforted, here it rests; as in Asa his time
all rejoiced for the Oath, 2 Chro. 15. Isai. 58. 1, 2. and if it find not
perfect comfort because of imperfect work, it then closes with Christ for to
make up and piece up all, Gal. 5. 1. And now I say it is comforted in what it
has, and does, and here it rests; now from hence it must be divorced: What
need I prove it, when the Apostle has so fully, Galat. per totum, and consider
the young man, Mat. 19. Divorced, I say, the soul must be from this.

1. Because he that does thus, sets up another Christ, and makes himself his
own Savior; can the Lord Jesus take such a soul into communion with him?
Suppose a Prince be pulled by his people from his Throne, and they set up
another pious virtuous Prince to Rule, will this serve the turn to say he is an
honest Prince? so though duties be never so good, yet not to advance Christ, is
to pull down Christ.

2. Because such persons do commonly most oppose the Lord Jesus in a way of
believing, though not in a way of doing; the Lord has more ado if any of these
be brought home, to bring them in, they have somewhat to say for themselves,
they have stronger forts, etc. The Scribes and Pharisees rejected the counsel
of God against themselves, and hence no people lest to such deep desertions as
these; if the Lord intend mercy to them, for they have more need than others.

3. Because hereby a man does but make a conspiracy against Gods greatest plot
that ever he had a foot, viz. to advance his free Grace, Gal. 5. 4. you are
fallen from Grace, for nothing makes a man more fit to boast than works, and
resting in them; sin makes a man ashamed, and therefore if they come to Heaven,
they have laid a foundation to thank themselves for somewhat; hence no
communion with Jesus Christ in this frame; no the Lord will tear down this
foundation, and make the soul cry guilty, and make this Husband, the Law, to be
judge, to examine, and condemn, and now come and ask, what have you to plead
for your life and peace, it has no plea to show but mercy, etc. it has its
duties evidencing against it.

SECT. VI.
2 THe soul now comes to be Espoused to the Lord Jesus. Quest. How?

The soul beholding the glory of the Lord Jesus, Answ. 1.
makes choice of him, as in all Marriage bonds there is a choice made, and if
love be great, there is little standing on terms: let me have him though I beg
with him; so the soul sees such a sutableness in the Lord Jesus, as that it
stands not on terms, let me have him though in prison with him, though in the
Garden in Agonies with him, though in the Cross in desertions with him, he is
enough; as Peter when he saw Christ on the Sea, desired he might come to him
there, Heb. 11. 26. Choosing the reproach of Christ, etc. And look as Christ
chooses the soul, 1. The whole soul. 2. Everlastingly. 3. Above all others: so
it makes choice of Christ, whole Christ, Phil. 3. 9. 2. Everlastingly, The Lord
is my portion for ever, Psalm 73. 26. And before ever you can look for
communion with him, you must make this choice of him, and glad too you may have
him on any terms, nay put it to any soul the Lord has done good to, and ask
it, will you have him? it is such a mercy I cannot conceive how one so vile as I
should have it: have him, the Lord of glory, the Prince of life and peace; O
yes; Hence Peter said, Master, what shall we have that have forsaken all, and
followed thee? you shall sit with me on Thrones; and look as Christ now chooses
the soul above others, as well as in Heaven, John 15. 16. so it now chooses
Christ, Whom have I in Heaven or earth; many when they think of death, or are
dying, then choose him, but not now: or choose him for outward blessings, not
spiritual favor and life, John 6. 26, 27.

2. The soul hence gives it self like one espoused to her Husband to the Lord
Jesus, Cant. 2. 16. I am my beloveds; servants give work for their wages, and
masters give wages for their work, but Husbands and Wives give themselves one
unto another; Suitors also give Tokens to draw on love, not themselves; so
servants in the Church, they do for God in hope of wages, and the Lord blesses
them it may be outwardly, but he that is espoused to Christ, gives himself,
Lord I can do nothing for thee, give nothing to thee, but I give my self to
thee, that thou would work in me, and by me, Romans 6. 13. So the Lord is a
suitor to many a man that never gives himself to him: he gives them some
comforts, some winning, drawing, melting me^cies, but not himself; they give
him some entertainment, and good words, a thousand wishes as Capernaum did, but
not themselves; but this must be, if ever you look for communion with him:
hence David says, I am thine, save me; hence some made shipwreck of Faith,
they were not the Lords; hence the Lord says, he knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.
18, 19. his send their tokens again: for look as it is an evidence of much love
when a man gives the dearest thing he has, viz. his whole self to the Lord
Jesus, so it is also an evidence of little love, when he will not give,
especially another own: thou art none of thine own, thou have but little love
if thou give not thy self to him, without which never look for life and
communion with the Lord.

3. The soul hence takes full contentment in the Lord Jesus, as a Spouse has
enough, would not change for all the world, as Peter when he had a glimpse of
Christ's glory, Lord, let us be here: or as Simeon that had been waiting for the
consolation of Israel, when once he had Christ in his arms, Now let thy servant
depart in peace: I have enough, now let me dye, and not live to sin more; and
it is certain as there (...) in creatures that contents the heart without Christ
in an unregenerate man, so contrary-wise in a regenerate, John 3. 29. if
hearing the Bridegroom is joy, what is h^ving him? indeed they take content in
other things, but as coming from the Husband; and this you must do if ever you
look for communion with him; cannot you be content with the Lord alone in
Heaven? you shall never come there then, lest you quarrel for want of
something. Men make nothing of this, to has their hearts in the sun, and joy
in what they have, and hope to have, but the Lord may be gone, and you grieve
not; why? because o^he^ things ease your hearts; There can be no communion
hereafter if you despite i^ now.

SECT. VII.
THis serves to discover the great error, most common and dangerous of the
whole ch^istian wo^ld, who think that they may love and embrace the world and
the Lord Jesus too, and ^e saved at last by him too, i. e. they may not be
Virgins, Use 1.
but go a whoring from Christ, and yet partake of Christ, and mercy from him:
that look as it was in those sad days, Isai. 4. 1. so in these days many lay
hold on Jesus Christ, they will eat their own b^end, live on their own (...),
and wear their own apparel, their own rags, only let us be called by thy name
Believers ] to take away our reproach, for that is an open shame not to believe
in Christ: For this is the prosessed thought of some; every one is a sin; and
I am one, and a great one too, and who can say his heart is clean, none can
free himself from sin in this life, and I cannot do it if I would: and hence
look on Christ to save them, though sin slee^^ in them: you cannot have both; I
would but enquire, has not every man something that contents him? what is it?
is it the love, the fellowship of Jesus? yet, it may be at a Sacrament, and it
may be not, for thou may say, the Lord never yet revealed his love and self
unto me, never yet assured me, yet somewhat joys thy heart. What think you,
can you have the Lord, and content your selves thus with other things? why? I
trust to him I hope so; it cannot be so. If the Lord Jesus was a Patron of
Brothel-houses, a Protector of Stews, you might think so; some say they cannot
pray to him, nor prize him; why? something else contents then besides him; but
know it cannot be so: I know a Saint may be taken aside, as David with envy at
others prosperity; but when he considers of it, O what a Beast! he returns
again. The Raven and the Dove we sent forth, the one came again and again, the
other not; therefore as Joshua 24. brought the people to these thoughts, you
cannot serve the Lord, and other gods, as Iunius notes, so bring thy self to
that st^ait: O that the Lord would set on this one thing this day; when I sadly
weigh it, it consou^ds me, and makes me say, Lord who then can be saved! I know
with God all things are possible, but this is rare.

SECT. VIII.
HEnce we may learn who they are that never shall have everlasting communion
with the Lord Jesus, Use ^.
viz. those that never were esposed to him, and you may know this, if never yet
divorced from all others besides him, Psalm. 73. 25, 26. I shall stay ^wh^e
here, because there is never an unsound heart in the world, but as they say of
^itches, they have some Familiar that sucks them, so they have some Lust that
is beloved of them, some beloved there is they have given a promise to, never
to forsake; and also because most men do seem and think they are Virgins
espoused to Christ, and look for communion with him, and yet not divorced from
all other besides him. I shall show hence,

1. When the soul is in league with the creature.

2. When married to the Law. I should account it happy if any be found out.

CHAP. V.
Shows the Marks and Signs whereby the Soul may know whether he be in
league or love with any lust or creature, or married to the Law.
SECT. I.
1 THose that never were in bitterness and sorrow of heart for the loss of
God. Sign 1.
For these two things are as clear as the Sun. 1. That the loss of God is the
greatest loss; for it is the utmost and last plague upon the damned in Hell: My
Comforts, my Friends, Means, Heaven is gone, but if God were mine, I could be
comforted; No, God is gone: Hence no sorrow for any loss so much as for this.
Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 15. God is departed from me. Hence sore distressed. Nay, the
Lord Jesus when the Father departed for a time, and he knew he would return and
visit him, cried out, My God why have thou for saken me? 2. That all men living
have lost God, Isa. 59. 1, 2. Psalm. 58. 3. The wicked go astray from their
womb. Now I would demand why men either seel no loss at all, or if they do,
have not so much Grace as the damned in Hell, to mourn bitterly for it, so as
nothing can comfort them, or if they do, they are soon eased and quiered before
the Lord returns? Why surely here is the great cause of it, they have some
other thing to ease their hearts in the want and loss of God, Ier. 2. 13, 14.
Men must have water to drink, why do men live from the fountain, go not to it,
nay not know it? Because they have broken pits, and wels at their own doors: So
here. And hence the damned that have lived at ease here all their life time,
as soon as ever dead, then they cry out of the loss of God, when it is too late,
because while they lived, they had somewhat to ease themselves withal. And
hence many that have lived long with convinced Spirits and guilty Conscienes,
when they come to die, then they are in perplexities of mind, agonies of heart,
insomuch as their sweat trickles like water from them, and their doleful
outcries for loss of time, strike to the hearts of all that come near them.
Oh! God is gone, because now all comforts which were their Gods, and in stead
of God before, have taken their final leave of them. Search your hearts
therefore all you that hear me this day. Wast never troubled yet? Yes, I have
lost my health, my child, my husband, my goods, and this hathtroubled me: But
tell me, Did never feel a loss of God blessed for ever? loss of his light,
his sweetness, his love, his fellowship, his presence, etc. and this has been
thy intolerable load? Or if thou have felt it, have thou sought and found him?
No, but art jocund in that estate, and now and then it troubles thee a little,
then it is certain and as clear as the Sun, there is some creature or content
that thy heart is in league withal, which eases thee in the want of God, and
which is instead of God to thee, and which therefore is thy God. It may be thy
apparel, thy wife, child, etc. and if thou die in this estate, never shall thou
have communion with Jesus Christ, The mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

2. Do find the Lord a stranger to thee in all his Ordinances, wherein it may
be the Lord sweetly and wonderfully and mightily, yet not always, Sign 2.
but seasonably reveals himself to others. Oh but thy heart dries and parches
away, and that without much trouble under them all. If so, suspect it, believe
it that there is some league with a lust. For there is a double life of a
Christian. 1. An outward life, which others see: Men see he comes to Church,
prays in the Family, etc. 2. There is a secret inward life; according to that
of Mat. 6. 6. Thy Father which sees in secret, which none knows but himself,
and the Lord; and this is an ineffable communion with God, vision of God,
delight in God, etc. Psalm. 45. The Kings daughter is all glorious within. There
is an open life of prayer, and hearing, and fasting, and there is an inward,
secret life in all these, wherein the Lord acquaints himself with his people,
Psalm. 63. 1, 2, 3. To see thee as I have seen thee. Now there be diverse have
this open life, yet wanting the secret life. As we love not to live among
Tombs, not to have communion with dead men; so the Lord is a stranger to them.
He may secretly sweeten an Ordinance to them, and move them, and shake and
trouble them, but himself is a stranger, spiritual miseries not removed,
spiritual mercies not conveyed, Isa. 58. 1, 2, 3, 4. Why have we fasted, and
thou regardest not? You took pleasure says the Lord, and break the bonds of
wickedness, etc. I know Saints may be thus denied, and it may be for some
space of time, yet they quarrel not with God for denying them, but are more
taken off from pleasures thereby. Thou hidst thy face, and I was troubled,
though the Mount stood still. But some there be whom neither good day mends
them, not bad day pairs them: Surely there is some content thy heart is
bewitched withal. That look as it is with a suitor to another, let him while he
comes to her, profess never so much love, and desire love, yet if when he goes
from her, commits lewdness with every one, she will lock him out. So it is
here; never did I know any locked out from the power and sweetness of
Ordinances, but because they went a whoring from God out of them. The Lord
knows (though others do not) whether it is so with you. Look therefore upon thy
self, you enjoy great means every where in this place. Is it enough to have
Ordinances? the Ark? No, Do you find the Lord in them? Blessed be God. But tell
me truly, Do you find no want of God? Yes. Do you find him? I find more
knowledge, strength, etc. But do you find no God usually? No. Then either some
creature contents thee, or if the Lord should refresh thee, thou would be
content without him. Man and wife will (if they love) meet at Meals, John 14.
But when no meeting, dead prayers, dry Sermons, saplesse Sacraments, worse then
before. If thou be the Lord's, he will by affictions purge, etc. But if thou
continuest so, look for no communion in Heaven.

3. Do thou find no rest in any thing that thou have? Sign 3.
For this is clear,^nothing can give rest to a man's soul but God: He is big
enough only to fill it, and then a man has it, Isa. 26. 3. Now if no rest,
it is a sign thy heart sticks to the creature, yet thou say I would fain have
the Lord: It may be so; but thou would have creatures too. And hence God will
not, and creatures cannot give the fullness of rest. Thus it was with Solomon,
Eecles. 2. 3. So it is with thee, thou find thy soul delighting it self in
all things; yet vanity and vexation, and withal giving thy self to wisdom too.
It Is true, a Saint feels an emptiness in these things, yet he feels a fullness
in something else. (He has better meat which you know not of) which Solomon did
not for a time, yet afterward he did. But thou find a vanity and trouble,
and art never at peace when all is done; weary of world, But has the Lord
swallowed thee up into himself, in the cloud of his Glory, so that in his
favor and presence thou find life? No, Then there is some lust thou love,
and dying thus, shall never see the face of Christ. Ye^, this will come as a
heavy endi^ement against thee, that God has so wearied thee in thy way. Yet
Ier. 2. 25. There is no hope, after thy Lovers thou will go. You shall scarce
find any but feel the creature vain, and yet get not to rest in God.

SECT. II.
II. DIscoveries whether we are married to the Law or not. And here I shall
stay longer. Where I premise,

1. When I speak of not being married to the Law in stead of Christ, I do not
hereby exempt your selves from obedience to the Law, after you are in Christ.

2. Do not think I speak against all evidencing your estates from conformity to
the Law; though I do from some subjection and obedience performed to the Law.

1. If the Law was never dead in thee, thou art married to the Law, Romans 7. 2.
Now look as it is with a husband, if the wife be sick, and he be at home, whoever
forsakes her, he will comfort her, and support and cheer her; so that if he
cheer her not, its a sign he is dead; if he does, its a sign he is alive; for
the life of the Law, is the comfort and support that the Law does give for a
time. So that if thou were never brought to that sore straight, that thou have
not felt any one duty to cheer or revive thee, and comfort thee, but have found
some little thing or other to do it, its certain you are yet married to the
Law. Ex. gr. It may be thou have been troubled in mind for thy sins, What has
cheared thee? I have forsaken them, and cast out Jonah, and there has been a
calm: Why this forsaking thy sins (which has not been all but some) is not
Christ, but an act of the Law. Oh but I have fallen again into sins, this has
troubled thee: What has cheared thee? I have repented and been sorry for them,
and purposed to do so no more. This is the life of the Law still. Oh but you
find sins prevailing against you, and you cannot part with them; and hence dare
not resolve against them. Oh but my desire is good though, my will has ever
been against them. Oh ignorance! This desire is but a work of the Law, it is not
Christ. Oh but I have found no desire sometime: What has quiered you now? I
have trusted to Christ: You have done it. The Lord never made you feel a need
of the Lord, to draw you to trust; though to be assured of Christ's love. Is
this a legal Act? Ans. As obedience to the Law done by the power of Christ, is
an Evangelical work, so to perform any Evangelical work from a man's self, is a
Legal work; and you are under the life of the Law. So that thou have not been
so often troubled, but the Law has supported thee; thou have not been brought to
that pass as the Church, the Spouse was, Isa. 54. 5, 6. And as one of my best
friends, and best men that lives this day in the world, after many wrestlings
to find somewhat in himself to cheer him, and could not; Now says he, if the
Lord out of his good Nature, etc. do not help me, I am undone for ever; for I
have a heart and a nature against him, and the more I do, the worse I am. And
therefore thither I look. Surely you are under the life of the Law, and are fat
enough off from Christ, if not sensible of this. Not that a man is always thus,
for he that cannot feel afterward the Lord Jesus by the power of his Grace
working in his heart, I would conclude, he never had any at all. But at first
it is so. For these two things man naturally seeks,

1. To have a righteousness in himself that will ease him.

2. To have it from himself: Kitchen Physic is not far to fetch.

Now the Lords plot in saving his, is, 1. To make them seek it out of
themselves in another: Look unto me and be saved, all the ends of the earth. 2.
To have all from another, that so, no flesh night glory before him. And to
doubt of this, is to doubt whether God has plotted the Glory of his Grace or
no. Hence the Lord empties the soul of both, that the soul says, Ashur shall
not save us, Hos. 14. 3, 4. None durst, none can comfort it. And now to the
wonde^ment of Heaven, and everlasting joy of a poor castaway, and the eternal
honor of his free Grace, now, and never till now, does he begin to make the
match between the Lord Jesus and this poor soul: And as the Lord never comes to
him till now, so he never will come to the Lord, while he has the least good;
as it was with the Prodigal, while any husks, or as it was with the woman with
her bloody issue, while any money to spend on other Physicians, never will try
what Christ can do. And therefore those that never yet knew of the death of the
Law, they are yet married to it, Romans 2. 17. I know many a soul grieve; for the
death of this husband, and now thinks it is undone, I cannot do this and that,
though formerly I could indeed; I say if there be any love of Christ, now is
the time of it. Only understand Gods scope here in it.

2. If a man complains more or chiefly for want of grace or righteousness,
Sign 2.
to remove sin, and not so much for want of Jesus Christ: Then in this case
it is as it is with a woman, that man for whose absence she mourns most, that is
her husband: She says the other is, no but he is not. So this is the estate of
many a soul, they have neither Christ not righteousness: Now they complain so
much that their hearts sink and dye away quite within them: And what is it for?
I cannot do this, nor I do not find nor feel such signs and affections within
me. Such a vile heart, I know not the like, such rising in my heart to sin and
thoughts of it; why if you had Christ, all this would be mended. I can do all
through Christ. But you complain not for want of Christ, nor need of him from
these two Arguments.

1. Because the feeling of your sins, does not make you feel a greater need of
Christ, as John, I have need to be baptized, etc. but drive you further from
Christ, and reason it out against him, And why? Because you would have a
righteousness without him which you stand in need of.

2. Because he that seels a need of the Lord Jesus, shall not when he is
offered, need entreating to take him; as you shall not need entreat hungry men
to eat their bread, you shall not need to entreat Zacheus to receive Christ
joyfuly. But no commands, no entreaties can prevail with you to take him when
he is offered, you have no heart to it. Like women that love their own
husbands, grieve so for their absence, that they have no heart to any other
offer. Is it thus with thee? Then it is with thee, as it was with that young
man, that asked Christ what he should do to inherit eternal life; he liked
Christ well, but he did not feel a need of Christ himself so much, as of some
more knowledge of the Law, and ability to do it. Its the great plot of
Arminians, to make Christ a means only, to make every man a first Adam; setting
men to work for their living again; for they grant all Grace is lost, all comes
from Christ, Christ gives all, and to Christ we must look for all; and then
when we have it, use it well, thus you shall have life, else look for death: So
it is a misery many a soul is in. Men will trade in small wares, rather than
live on another Alms. Do you think the Lord takes it well to make him a
Merchant for your ends? Oh no, never look to have communion with him in this
way!

3. Those that close with, but rejoice more in a little Grace they receive from
Christ, Sign 3.
than in all the fullness in Christ, more in a little they do, than in all the
Lord Jesus has done, Phil. 3. 3. That is a woman's husband, in whom she
rejoices most. Do you rejoice more in what you have, and do, than in what the
Lord Jesus has, and has done? more in what you receive from him (for a
hypocrite may receive from Christ, John 15. 2.) than in what there is in him?
It argues a whorish heart. I know a man may rejoice in what Christ works in
him, but 1. not more in this than in Christ himself. 2. A child of God may
while he knows not whether Christ is his do so: but you think the Lord is
yours; well, when you feel affections and life, then you are glad, when that is
lost then sad; why is there no life when thou art dead, no glory when thou art
base, no wisdom, no communion with God when thou have none? Yes, why do thou
not rejoice in this which is here most fully, which Saints presenting, please
the Lord more by, than by giving the glory of Angels infinite millions of
years: Oh thy heart is not in love with Christ, but somewhat else, for here is
the joy of all Saints, In thy seed shall all Nations account themselves
blessed: all Nations, one and another, Isai. 45. 24, 25. shall all the seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory. Consider therefore this, thou art
sometime joyed; why? O I find my heart thus and thus, and is this all? yes, for
when this is gone, all joy dies; and should I not do thus? yes, else you never
felt comfort of it: but not only rejoice here, but when the beam is gone, the
Lord is not gone, Romans 7. ult. when the bottles are spent, the spring is full.

4. He that performs any duty ultimately to ease his conscience, Sign 4.
he is married yet unto the Law, for there are two sorts of duties to the Law.

1. Some are directed to give Christ content to ease his heart, by seeing Gods
love in Christ, then love being shed, the heart sheds it on Christ again: and
thus says the Apostle, I through the Law am dead to it, that I might live to
God, Gal. 2. 19.

2. Some are to give the soul ease, it sees sin, and fears it must dye and the
Devil appears, and when it lies down, it fears it shall never awaken again; and
when it hears, thinks no mercy, but only threats belong to it: and hence having
no peace of conscience to think God will love it, it loves duties, does duties,
and now takes these for good tokens and signs of love, and if it feels a need
of Christ, it is only to ease it. Now a man is married to the Law, when he
crowds for ease into the bosom of it, Deuteronomy. 5. 27. they were in great fear,
Whatever God will have us do, we will do it: is it not thus with many? How
shall we know this?

Answ. Do find this while fears and terrors of conscience are on thee, so
long thou do seek, and pray, and he^r, and call on God, and when they are
worn away by time, or blown over with feeling some good things, and hopes from
them, then thy heart is careless again; it is certain you are yet married to the
Law: as many a man exceeding forward while pressed under sense of sin for a year
or two. Lord! how many hundreds drop away by little and little afterward?
Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Oh that there were such a heart always. Mat. 3. 7. to 13. they saw
a wrath to come, hence feared, and hence came to John's Baptism to repent and
confess him.

5. No man that is married to the Law, Sign 5.
but his fig leaves ever cover some nakedness; all the duties ever broodsome
lust: there is some one sin or other the man lives in, which either the Lord
discovers, and he will not parwith, as the young man, or else is so spiritual
he cannot see all his lifetime; read through the strictest of all, and see
this, Mat. 23. Painted Sepulchers: Paul that was blameless, yet Ephesians. 2. 3.
Tit. 3. 3. served diverse lusts and pleasures, and the reason is, the Law is not
the ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8, 9. which breaks off from every
sin, Isai. 1. 11
there is no saw that can give ^ife, Gal. 3. 21. And hence many men have strong
resolutions, and break all again; hence men sin, and sorrow, and pray again,
and then go with more ease in their sin; examine thy self, is there any living
lust with thy righteousness, it is sure it is a righteousness thou art married
to, and never were yet matched to Christ; hence note thy self, it may be thou
have rested in duties, and since more light came, saw it; and seeing this,
thinking that here is all thy error, thou have labored to see the emptiness
of thy own Righteousness, and the fullness of Christ, and now thou art come to
both, and now well. So then thou have not found out any lust thou live in all
that time; nor the (...) of thy old nature: no; why then I pronounce thou art
yet ma^^ied to the Law, take and trust never so much to Christ's righteousness,
(...) the power of a proud heart, an unclean heart still, never speak of Christ.

6. They that are fearful to be troubled at their estate to have it prove ill,
Sign 6.
which a Saint may do, yet brings it out to the light at last, John 3. 20. When
a Woman is married to a condemned man, guilt being upon him, he loves not to be
seen abroad in the sight of others; thou hear a Sermon, and art loath it
should be found out, loath to be troubled; he that has righteousness in
Christ will not only bring it to trial, before men, but God himself. Now is it
thus with any of you? what shall I say? shall I say that Christ is or may be
thine in this estate ^^uly if I durst I should; bless thy self thou may: but
remember that the Lord will take thee to do for it; and what is it to lose
communion with Christ, I cannot express it. The Disciples were sad when he went
away from them in his abasement, but for the Lord to leave thee, when in his
glory, to stand a far off and see him go, never to see him more, when no tears
shall ever prevail again; Therefore if thou have been found out this day,
confess and give glory to God, and let thine eyes be tears, that Christ would
overcome and draw thy soul with love, and espouse thee to himself for ever.

CHAP. VI.
Containing Motives and Arguments to persuade us unto the Love of Christ, and
to be Espoused to him.
IS there no communion to be had with the Lord Jesus, Use 3.
unless Virgins? unless espoused to him? Oh therefore here is a match for
you, choose him, get your affections, if entangled, to come off if ensnared to
any other thing, and set your hearts, bestow your love upon him. For it is not a
dead Faith, (but such a faith as is animated by love) that does espouse you to
him, Gal. 5. 6. Faith which works by love. And therefore as the love of other
things (not worth looking after) has got the sovereignty and royalty of thy
heart, so this is a conjugal love, when it bears rule in the heart; let Christ
have this love. And as you have loved creatures for themselves, now love the
Lord Jesus for himself. And as they have easily enticed you to set your hearts
upon them, now be persuaded to set your dearest affections on him. Its said of
John Baptist, he was the Bride-groom's Friend, to speak for him, John 3. 29.
And truly it is the main work of the Ministry, to woo for Christ; and so to
present chaste Virgins to Christ. This shall be my work now, which may be
seasonable in this decaying time. Therefore I shall chiefly bend my speech to
three sorts.

1. To them that never yet loved the Lord Jesus, unless it be from the teeth
outward.

2. Those that have been striving for this, yet cannot to their own feeling
come to this.

3. Those that have so, but their affections are dried up, and love is parched
away, iniquity abounds, etc. And my Motives shall be these four,

1. Consider the Glory of the person, whom I shall be a spokes-man for this day.

2. Consider he makes love to thee.

3. Consider that all he seeks for is love.

4. Consider what he will do for thee, how he will love thee, if thou will love
him.

SECT. I.
1. COnsider the Glory of the person, for whom I plead for love. What can you
love besides him? Where can you find any like unto him? I know the Glory of the
Lord is not revealed, because the grass withers not, the flower fades not, the
creature appears not in his withering vanity, Isa. 40. But if the Lord would
but open your eyes, to see him, this would win your hearts alone to him.

Now I shall single out only these five things, to give you a glimpse of his
Glory. Lift up thy heart, and say, Lord hide not now thy face from me.

1. He is the Prince of the Kings of the earth, Rev. 1. 5. The glory of the
world is a Kingdom, the glorious Diamond of that Kingdom is a Prince in his
Glory; now for a poor Beggar to have an offer of love from the greatest Prince
in the world, would it not tempt her? Would she not forsake her lovers, and set
her heart on him? Why look what a distance there is between the poorest Peasant
and the highest Prince, so base, and a thousand times more are all the Princes
of the world to Christ, whose Dominion is from sea to sea, from Sun to Sun, who
sets up and pulls down Kings like Counters, who rules their Courts, their
Kingdoms, their hearts, and they do not do, they cannot do, but what he will.
Other Kings are Princes, are Rulers of men, Christ Prince of Kings. Now who
would not be glad of his love? who having tasted death, is set down on the
right hand of God, on high, clothed with endless Glory, who has Kings in his
chains, whose breath is not in his nostrils, whose favor is not for a day,
but he lives and reigns for ever. Now does Christ reign? Is he a Lord, and in
Glory upon his Throne? Methinks I see Jesus at the right hand of God, your
foolish affections have undone you if you love him not.

2. He is appointed by the Father to be Judge of quick and dead, at the last
day, John 5. 22, 23. as well as to rule all now. So that if you do maintain
enmity against him, he may let you alone, you may live in health, and die in
peace, in the eye of man, and in thine own eyes too: Yet there is a day coming
he will break out of Heaven with a shout, and appear in the clouds in the
amazing Glory of his Father, with all his mighty Angels, and all the dead shall
hear his voice, and you shall appear before him with this body, when the
Heavens shall burn round about him, and the earth shall tremble under him, and
all guilty eyes mourning and wayling because of him. Then you shall know what
it is to despise him, and wish, oh that I had loved him, Rev. 1. 7. You that say
you love him, yet by an im^enitent heart pierce him, you shall wayl, even so,
Amen. Men do not see an end of these things, not the Glory of the Lord another
day. Hence creatures are loved, and the Lord of Glory is loathed. A great
Prince may not be so highly esteemed, until he appears in his state. Prisoners
would give any money, much more love, for the Judges Favor.

3. He only is the procuter and author of all the good that ever thou did
suck out here, though thou have neither known him, not been thankful to him.
For look as it was with Angels, so it should have been with man; the wrath of
God should have been poured out upon him, and on all the world, and creatures
should have been tormentors of him, but that the Lord Jesus begged and bought
the world. And hence, 1 Timothy 4. 10. called Savior of all, but chiefly of the
Elect. Micah 4. 4. In his days men shall sit under Vines and Fig Trees: So
that if ever any creature did thee good, it was Jesus that put that sweetness
in it, out of his fullness, and set it awork, sent it to thee, gave it thee to
do thee good. Thou should never have had win^ of sleep, never restrained from
one sin, but lived in blaspheming God, never have heard of a Gospel but for
Christ: And will you not love him? Oh ungrateful world! unnatural generation of
men! Why do love any creature? It Is for the paint of it and good in it. If
there be so much in it, what is there in Christ that gave it, that dropped it
into it? Never love him if there be any thing good that is not by him, Psalm.
116. 1. The Lord has heard my prayer, I will call on him as long as I live.
Much more when the Lord has delivered, and thou did never seek to him.

4. He is the everlasting wonderment of Saints in Heaven; the Queen of Sheba
heard of Solomon, which made her come to see him, but she before imagined but
that which now she saw with her own eyes, and that wrapped her out of her self.
Here we hear of the Lord Jesus, of his beauty and glory, and this draws Saints
to him, and when come, they see that which they never saw before, especially
when in Heaven: then fall down in everlasting admiration at this mystery, for
the blessedness of Saints is to see Christ in his glory, John 17. 24. Now this
lies in an infinite good, this cannot be seen in a finite time: hence Saints
shall be piercing their eyes deeper and deeper into this mystery, and shall
ever see more and more, but never see all, and this is their joy and glory in
Heaven; Is it so? what think you, is Christ worthy of your love or no? look
upon all the glory of the field of this world, you may see an end of all
perfection, but never here.

5. He is the delights and bosom love of God himself, Prove. 8. 30. Hence John
when he came to set Christ out, John 3. 35. The Father loves the Son. Now is
it so, surely though you see not, taste not this good, yet there it is; now tell
me if this person do not challenge love! would you not be glad to have him? you
will say, can he look upon such a Wretch, embrace such a Leper as I? no surely
he will never do it.

SECT. II.
2. COnsider he makes love to thee, not one soul that hears me this day, but
the Lord Jesus is a Suitor unto, that now you would be espoused to him: He came
unto his own, and they received him not. Whatever the secret purpose of Christ
is, I regard not: In this Evangelical dispensation of Grace, he makes love to
all, John 1. 12. It Is clear, Mat. 22. 2, 3. If there be a Gospel in the world,
there is this love of Christ yearning toward all; especially all that have
this Gospel of peace sent to them, Luke 2. 10. It Is tidings of great joy to all
people, as Law is tidings of great sorrow to all people, Luke 2. 14. Angels
from Heaven preached this good will toward men. For if the challenge of love
from men should be founded on his actual love to some, having died for some,
then the offer would be particular. But it is grounded, 1. On his own worth and
Glory, and hence he challenges love. 2. On this, for ought I know he has
loved me. So that thou art not so vile, but the Lord Jesus his heart is toward
thee, and his eye is upon thee for love. But it is not all love, but only some
that overcomes.

1. Now it is real love. 2. Fervent love, 3. Constant. 4. Pure love he makes to
thee.

1. It Is real love, when the Gospel and Ministers seek for love, the Lord is
real in his desires, there is no collusion or dissembling, 2 Cor. 5. 20. in
Christ's stead, He that receives you, receives me; thou think the Lord
cares not for thee, not does not desire thee though he does others: but

1. Either the Lord would have thee loath him, or love him; what think you?

2. If the Lord did not really make love to thee, he would not be really angry
for rejecting of this love, but the Lord is really angry for rejecting it, and
wroth with nothing so much as that, Psalm. 2. 12. here he swears in his wrath,
Psalm. 95. 11. when he opens his bosom for thee to rest in, and thou will not.

3. Look but upon the dealings of God with thee: 1. Have not often thought some
in Hell better than thee? why the ruin of millions of men is to win love from
thee, Ier. 3. 8, 9, 10. 2. Has not the Lord sent many a mercy to thee, not one
but was to win thee, Psalm. 81. 10, 11, 12. 3. Has not the Lord withheld many
from thee, as here in this wilderness, Ier. 3. 3, 4. 4. Has not the Lord sent
many sorrows, terrors, fears, cares, wearisome businesses that thou have wished
an end of life? this is love, Hos. 2. 6. 5. Has not the Lord moved thy heart
many a time-toward him by persuasions, arguments which have a power to move the
heart, this is love, Hos. 11. 4. Cords of a man. 6. Has not the Lord often
melted thy heart for mercies, as David when he might have killed Saul; truly
you may feel his love which is much toward you; that which keeps off thy heart
from love, is, the Lord intends it not to me, he is not plain with me. But he
sends to thee his plain Gospel which thou art to attend unto; and he takes
fittest seasons to speak to thee now in the time of thy heath: and does he not
often visit thy heart when thou art alone?

2. It Is servent, vehement, earnest love: sometimes a Suitor is real, but he is
not earnest; now thus the Lord is: 1. The Lord longs for this, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. 2.
Pleads for this, Ier. 2. 5. What iniquity, etc. 3. Thinks long for this time,
Ier. 13. 27. Jerusalem will not be made clean when shall it once be? 4. Mourns
when he has not this, Ezekiel. 6. 9. Broken with their whorish heart. 5. Content
to give away any thing for it, all the love of Christ is founded on this. 6. If
thou come not presently, he is content to wait that he may be gracious.

3. It Is constant and continual, there is not a moment, thou do not so often
breath, as thou may see and taste love, Isai. 27. 3. Isai. 65. 2. 1. After
all thy whorish departing from God, that if man should do so, no man would own,
yet he says, Return to me: thou see never a creature but thou have loved
more than Christ, yet return. 2. When God threatens most terribly, and sets his
fury on record, yet then there he minds nothing but love, Ier. 36. 2, 3. 3.
When none else will own and pity thee thou art so vile, yet Ezekiel. 16. 2, 3.
the Lord says live, then is a time of love. 4. Nay when thou have cast away
thy self as a forlorn creature, yet Hos. 14. 3. In thee the Fatherless find
mercy. 5. When he has thee in his arms, ready to give thee up, yet then, How
shall I give thee up O Ephraim, Hos. 11. 8. I tell thee if one sparkle of his
eternal blasting displeasure should fall upon thee, it would be so intolerable
that it would sink thee; his love is as strong as death, no water can quench
it; oh it is not so with man, or great men, once repulsed is enough: why should
the Lord do so here? many think time is past, it is not so, it is the temptation
of them that have time, not of them that want it; take heed this make thee not
despise him.

4. It Is a pure love, others make love for their own ends, but the Lord has no
need of thee, or of thy love: he could raise up of stones children of praise,
he could have gone to others, he could have and can fetch his glory out of thy
ruin: he was blessed before all worlds; and by all thy sins thou do but
throw stones against the wind, or snow-balls against the Sun: why does he do
it? O it is thy good, he pitties thee as once Jerusalem, to look upon thy
destruction and desolation: as it is with the Elect, they have wrath before
their eyes, and hence persuade others, so the Lord Jesus.

SECT. III.
3. COnsider it is nothing else but love the Lord looks for, or cares for. Love
looks for nothing but love, Prove. 8. 17. and this is the end of all Election,
to be holy before him in love: and mark it, if it be a stayed love, that
constrain^ thee to him, you cannot wrong him: As if thou come and persuade one
to murder his Child, he cannot; so if persuaded to despise, oh bowels of
heartbreaking love, 2 Cor. 5. And surely it is admirable love; What if it were
thy Goods; thy Isa^^ to be sacrificed, thy body to be burned, it was nothing,
but he desires only love, only thy heart which has forged so much villainy
against him: let him never be called upon, or professed, if not worthy of this.
After all, is this all? yes, no Portion he cares for, and when he has this he
has all. Wonder at this O Angels!

SECT. IV.
4. COnsider what he will do for thee, how he will love thee, if thou will thus
love him.

1. He will set thee next himself in honor, Psalm 45. 9. that as the Lord
Jesus is next to God, sits at his right hand: so here, which is an honor that
the Angels have not, who are no where called Christ's Spouse: hence never had
such an union, hence never shall partake of that honor of Saints.

2. He will enrich thee, as it is with Man and Wife, all that he has is hers:
so himself, and all his glory, his God, his Father, his Kingdom is thine, Prove.
8. 21. they that love me inherit something, others nothing: no, nothing indeed,
only shows of good, and they find it so when they awake, nothing their own,
nothing long: that let thy outward man, yea thy inward be never so poor, thou
shall by him be heir of all.

3. He will counsel thee: hence David, Psalm. 73. made choice of God, Thou will
guide me by thy counsel; no greater curse than to be left to the guidance of a
man's own counsel: but here there shall not be any strait, but the Lord will
show thee a way out of it, either by his prudence or providence; there shall
not be any secret of Christ that thou desire to know, but as Christ told
them, You are my Friends, so you are my Spouse: hence all his secrets shall be
opened to thee: there shall not be one act of thy life, but ordered by infinite
prudence, and wisdom, and love; sometimes we are befooled in our own counsels,
and left to them to teach us to depend on the Lord the more, yet thereby shall
come out such good, that it shall be among us as with Joseph's Brethren.

4. He will dwell with thee as a man must dwell with his Wife, John 14. 23.
that the great Mediator that passes by Kings and Princes, and will not look on
them, should come and dwell with thee: this is better than to have the presence
of Kings, the guard of Angels, better than Heaven it self, that he should dwell
where is nothing worthy to entertain him, only something to grieve him. Now
this is,

1. A constant assistance of the Spirit, that let the Soul go where he will, be
brought to never so low an ebb, yet Christ will not out, but some stirrings,
sighings, lookings, pantings after Christ; when heart and strength fail, yet
God, etc. when ready to give all for lost, then consider as Psalm. 73. 2. If he
does depart, he will not be loug but return again: and those that know his
affection, know it so to be, Isai. 54. for a little moment, etc. so the Lord
may depart, and when his presence is a little more esteemed, come again with
everlasting mercies: as a man may know many weaknesses by his Wife, yet she
having not bestowed her heart on any other, he will return: so if thou can
say, yet I am the Lords, he will return.

5. He will rejoice in thee and over thee, Zeph. 3. 17. as a Bridegroom does
over the Bride: Not because of any beauty in thee, for there is none, but
because given in marriage of the Father, and for his own sake. This day thou
shall no sooner set thy heart on Christ, but he falls in love with thee, and
will take thee with joy; thou think he will be angry if thou closest with
him and love him, no, it will be the joy of Heaven, of Jesus Christ himself.

6. He will exceedingly comfort thee; and look as it is with tender husbands,
then they comfort most when most sorrows be^ide them, for who could endure his
wife should be always drooping? So even then when nothing does or can comfort
thee, the Lord will, Isa. 54. 6. For the Lord does not always comfort, but when
in need, as it was with the Patriarchs, Then God appeared, when they were at
worst; and these are abundant comforts, 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4, 5. You shall not need
to scramble for it as many do, whose hearts do not love Christ in truth as yet.

7. He will put up all Wrongs, and bear exceedingly with thee Many think even
when God has sealed love to them, if any little sin be committed, then they
are cast off; no, if under the Law so indeed, but when espoused to him, it is
not weaknesses, nor wilfulness can make the Lord cast thee away, but he will
heal the one, and afflict thee for (yet not cast thee off) for the other, Psalm.
89. 33. My loving kindness will I never take away. Yea, he will forgive both,
Luke 7. 47. Much forgiven because she loved much. Nay, thy wrongs shall be an
occasion to make him love thee more, Romans 5. Where sin abounds, Grace abounds.

8. He will never part with thee, Hos. 2. 19. Once love him, and he will never
lose thee.

1. No sin shall part thee and him; for Christ when he enters into marriage
covenant, does not suspend his love on our Grace or Holiness, then he might
leave quickly, but on his own Grace to wash away out filthiness, Ephesians. 5. 25,
26. If a husband marries a woman only for so long as she is in health, then
when sickness comes he may depart. But e contra, if to take away her
sicknesses, then they cannot hinder: Nothing but Adultery can part; Now that
they cannot do, for nothing breaks, till covenant is broken: And the covenant
here is everlasting, and so undertaken for by the Lord that it can never be
broken.

2. No miseries can, Romans 8. 35, 36, 37. Can tribulation? It makes man leave
us, but this is peculiar to Christ, he will not leave.

3. Death cannot, it must part man and wife, though loved never so dearly
before; but here not; but then he will come himself and fetch thee, John 14. 1,
2, 3. Take thy soul to the Bride-chamber, there to be with him for ever and
ever, and he will keep the dust of thy blessed body, and not lose one dust of
it, and at the last day raise it; and then when others shall cry out Yonder is
him whom I have grieved, then shall thou lift up thy head, Yonder comes my
husband to comfort me, to crown me, that I may dwell with him. It shall be the
blessed day to thee. And when judgment is done, thou shall go with thy beloved
from the air up to Hewn with a shout, and live in his love and dearest
embracings of thee, and this he will do for thee so poor and vile in thine own
eyes? Now will you have him? and that now, or no?

SECT. V.
1. IF the Lord be so desirous of me, Object. 1.
why does he not overcome me?

If the Lord does it, Answ.
it is by these cords of love, and if not, the brand of a reprobate is upon thee.

2. But I do love him already. Object. 2.


Is it with such a love as makes you unable to resist him? Answ.
to wrong him? as the Apostle said, We cannot speak against the Truth, but for
it; for if not it is naught. There is a natural love to Christ, as to one that
does thee good, and for thine own ends; and spiritual for himself, whereby the
Lord only is exalted: Have thou this?

3. But I do not have Christ. Object. 3.


If any man do not love him with a positive love, Answ.
let him be Anathema.

4. I cannot love him. Object. 4.


1. What can thou love else? Answ.
2. Thou can not love him so well as thou should, therefore close with him,
and love will follow. 3. Get the Lord to overcome thy heart, Ier. 3. 19.

How shall I do it? Quest.


1. Set him before thee? Who will commit lewdness while her husband look^ on?
Answ.
Psalm. 16. 8.

2. See what content thou give Christ by love: Smallest duties coming from
love are accepted. What makes thee wrong him to please thy self? Let a thing
cross thee, yet it con^ents Christ Jesus.

3. Get him, and wait by Faith on him to overcome thy heart, and the work is
done then. Now will you do this or no? If not say then you have had a fair
offer, and tell the Devils so, when thou go down to Hell, as it may be thou
may ere long. Men talk of terrible Sermons, but these sink deepest. Tell me,
do thou love the lord only? Will It keep lusts or Christ alone? If so, then
look to it. In this Country a woman killed her child, and she said, when she
did it, her child smiled upon her. Will thou kick Christ's love now when he
smiles upon thee. Afterward she repented, but it was too late. Women when they
have a mind to some other, murder their husbands, but if known; burnt they must
be. But wilt have him and love him alone? Oh if persuaded to this, then happy
for ever. Let this day be the beginning of eternal Glory to thy soul, and the
God of peace be with thee.

CHAP. VII.
Shows that a man has no power in himself to do any spiritual work, but that
he must receive all from Christ.
4. HEnce we see a necessity, Use 4.
if ever we look to have communion with Christ, to do all spiritual work, all
we do ( Theologice) from the mighty power of Christ, from the life and Spirit
of Christ. To bring forth no Spiritual Act but from Christ, and for Christ, (I
shall put both in one, and the latter into the first; for none act truly from
him but it is for him) for you know if a woman bring forth children to any
other but her own husband, that woman has lost her chastity: So when men shall
bring forth the fruits of obedience to any other, from any other, but from
Christ, they lose their virginity, their chastity, without which no communion
with Christ. For I have ever made two parts or degrees of Christian chastity,
(as it is in outward chastity.)

1. The soul sets its chief affections on Christ alone, that look as it is with
a woman, though she cannot do much, nor deserve his love, yet her heart is with
him, her self is his, Cant. 6. 3. I am my Beloveds.

2. The soul b^ings forth fruits of love only unto Christ, i. e. from Christ
and for Christ, as in marriage the woman brings forth fruit of her womb to her
Husband; and this is set down plainly, Romans 7. 4. The first we have handled.
Now a little of this. And that I may press this which is of much use to you,
give me leave to express my self in these Conclusions.

SECT. I.
THat all men living nakedly considered in themselves, Concl. 1.
have l^st all power to do any thing that is good, Romans 3. 12. None that does
good, 1. His light is quite extinct, and his eyes quite out: hence said to sit
in darkness, and the shadow of death, Mat. 4* 16. now a shadow is a privation
of some light, this of all light, hence called darkness it self; take the
blindest Indian, he is a witness of this truth, and a right picture of a soul
fallen from God: hence because he cannot see, he cannot do, 1 Cor. 2. 14. 2.
All that life he had to act well is lost too, Ephesians. 2. 1. he is dead in
trespasses and sins: he cannot breath, not speak, nor think, nor do one thing
that is good: I say nakedly considered in himself. And hence look upon a man
quite forsaken of God in Hell, there you may see as in a lively looking-glass
what every man living is when the Lord leaves him: he can blaspheme him, he
cannot love him, he can contemn God, he cannot esteem him: he can wish there
were no God to punish him: he cannot submit unto God, though he leaves the most
heavy load upon him, and you see not your selves until you see your selves
here, and see your selves thus.

SECT. II.
THat unto some men especially, nay unto all men almost, though vile, yet more
or less the Lord gives a power to act, Concl. 2.
and live, and move, and to do many spiritual duties, or good duties from
themselves For as there is a breadth in the ways of Grace, that every Christian
has not the like measure of Grace, so there is a breadth or latitude in the
ways of sin: every sinner breaks not forth into the like measure of sin, but
some are far better than others; as the three grounds that were bad, yet one
better than another. Now how comes this about? why, the Lord gives that power
to act (as all the knowledge of a God) by the light of Nature (falsely so called)
this is the work of God, Romans 1. 19. Hence all terrors, and comforts, and
duties of Conscience are all from God: so the Historical Faith of the Gospel
which many have, and so to confess and profess no salvation but by Christ,
together with a readiness to dye in defense of this truth and Religion, and
joy from this, and reformation of life upon this, none of these are natural to
this soil of a man's soul, but all are planted there by God, 1 Cor. 12. 2, 3.
and so that man can act according to the Law, be strict in Sabbaths, frequent
in Fastings and Prayers, etc. it is from God, Romans 10. 2. And why does the Lord
work this? it is else no living in the world among men, and because Christ is
the politicum caput, and has bought all men in the world to be his servants,
hence gives them gifts which he turns for the good of his people: but yet this
is the nature of all these abilities, that a man acts from the strength and
power of them, not from Christ, Mi^. 4. 5. Other Nations will walk in the name,
etc. and the reason is,

1. Because every man is under the guidance either of the first or second
Covenant, and power of either: now as the power of the second Covenant is to
draw a man out of himself to another, and so to make him act from another: so
the power of the First is to drive a man into himself by terrors, and fears,
and hopes, and rewards, and so to enable him to act from himself; hence it is
impossible but they must act ever from themselves.

And 2. Because though many good Gifts, and moral virtues may be said to be
supernatural, i. e. above the power of Nature to work, yet never above the
improvement of nature: for let God work never so many good things in men,
nature, i e an ill stomach when diseased, is strongest, there Nature turns all
into the humor, and so a man dies at last; so the power of sin in Nature being
more powerful than any Grace which by common work is given it. ever turns that
Grace into it self, and leads it into captivity, bondage, and service of it
self; so that there is never a Grace but it is made to serve some lust, as in
Iehu, in Judas, etc. and God complains, Isai. 43. 24. So this I say is the case
of thousands unregenerate, who can do many good things, but from themselves,
which God (...) wrought to: and hence many a child of God has been long
^indred from conversion, and others not converted at all, because they have
thought wicked mon whom God minds to damn, are such as have no good, nor do no
good, ^^ if they do, they have it not from God; but it is not so with me, for I
have and do many good things, which I acknowledge come from God, and I thank God
I am not as other men. Now mark, it is true, nakedly considered no good could
come from unregenerate men, but yet the Lord gives power to many to do, so the
Lord has done to thee, and thou have been thankful for it. And this is common,
many account themselves great sinners, but yet they can believe: many say they
can do little, but their desire and will at worst is to do: tell them these are
not right, unless they come from the Lord, they will say the Lord does all,
and they acknowledge it, and so I believe, and it is true, but it is not such a
work of the Lord as is peculiar to the Elect, because when the Lord has
wrought these, you act only from them, and hence never feel a want of these,
for the Lord never yet wrought any Grace in his people, but after they have had
it, and tasted of it, he has more or less deserted them, and so has made
them feel a want of it, and made them fetch it again with sighs, and groans,
and tears; now it has never been so with thee.

SECT. III.
THat it is most pleasing to man, and agreeable to his nature to act only from
himself: Concl. 3.
As it was with the Prodigal, he desired his Stock in his own hands, and while
any thing lasted, he would never come home; and hence those, John 6. 28. What
shall we do to work the works of God: and when Christ spoke of Faith, they were
stumbled there, insomuch that diverse did forsake him.

1. Because man's acting from himself is best able to attain his own ends, to
which you know a man is gently and necessarily carried: for no man out of
Christ, but his own ends draw him; now Christ crosses a man's own ends, and to
live on him is to live on him that will confound them of their own ends, or
else no life there: Hence they live from themselves. As it is with a Crafts-man,
or Artificer, propounding the gain or credit they may get by being excellent in
their Trade, may by their own study and frequency of acts, grow dexterous, and
very skilful at last, and hence delight in it, so here, profession and practice
of Religion may be a man's trade which he may drive for his own ends and gain,
and hence may desire to be excellent, and by endeavor be excellent, and profit
exceedingly in many excellent endowments: hence he acts and works for himself,
Romans 1. 14.

2. Because a man naturally knows not how to fetch it from Christ from Heaven,
Romans 10. 3. Hence it is with them as with a Child cast off by the Father, and
put to some hard Master, because they have no Father to maintain them, they
most live as they are, and do as well as they can. A man comes to pray, knows
not how to fetch strength from Christ, and he must pray, and hence prays as
well as he can.

3. Because it is so hard a thing to live upon another, it is easy and sweet to
a spiritual heart, but most difficult to any carnal heart, John 6. Christ tells
them they must eat his flesh, they say, who then can be saved, and many
departed. Men had rather make holes, and keep water in their own house, than
have it far to fetch, and when they come to fetch it, to bestow such strength
in drawing of it.

4. Because every man thinks he loves and care* for himself be ^^, and sees no
God nor Christ caring for or loving of him more than himself; Hence a man plots
for himself, and lives for himself, and all from himself. As when Joseph's
Brethren saw their Brother, then they came down and lived upon him, before they
came to him indeed, but with their money, to live of themselves. And thus it was
with the young man, Sell all and have riches in Heaven: No, he loved himself,
and cared for himself better than so; hence would not commit and give away all
to Christ.

5. Because whatever a man does from himself, either it is good, or he thinks it
so, or hopes if not, God will accept it. Some evil in it perhaps, but he has
his allowances which will make it go, some good desire^ o^ Faith in Christ, and
hence hopes if not thinks God will accept of what comes from himself. As, Prove.
21. 2. All a man's ways are right in his own eyes. And truly Nature and Satan
have ever been Imitators and Ape^ of God, to forge and make Grace like true
Grace, hence deceived. This being pleasing to men, is the practice of most men,
yea, all men out of Christ. And this is one great part of the inward, secret,
subtle, spiritual whoredom of the soul. Thus men may force sorrow, when yet
there is little true sorrow, and so in other cases.

SECT. VII.
THat all these works though good in themselves, Concl. 4.
yet are most vile before the Lord; as Christ speaks of the Pharisees, Its
abomination in the sight of God, which is glorious before man, Luke 16. 15.

1. Because hereby the soul deprives Christ of the end of his coming; for all
men having lost the stock and power to live, the Lord hence will trust no man
with it again; hence puts it into a surer and better hand, that thither poor,
blind, dead creatures might fly for life, and when they are there, live there
like ^ees on their honey, John 6. 27. and 17. 23. He might never have looked
after you, and will you despise him now? What folly and unkindnesse is this,
that when your pits are dry, and bottles empty, and souls miserable here, you
will not (I do not say sip) when water runs by your door, but not live.

2. Because whatever come^ from self, its ever for self. A man can do nothing
from himself, but his last end is self. As it is with waterworks, they rise no
higher than the spring, Genesis 11. 4. This Babel I have built, Dan. 4. 30. And a
man that has but common Grace, look as by virtue of that Grace, or gift of
God, he may act for God, because it came from God; so nature and sin being mo^e
powerful than that Grace, hence he never so acts for God, but in the last place
acts for it self, as in Iehu: And so a man makes himself his own Go^.

3. Because whatever a man does from himself, he will grow proud of it, Romans 4.
Not of works, lest any man should boast. Hence I^ab sent to David to take the
City that he might have the Crown. This robs Christ of the Glory.

4. Because whatever work is not done by virtue of the Lord Jesus, is a dead
work, which a living God, and a living Christ, and a living Spirit lo^th, Heb.
9. 14. Sprinkle your Consciences from dead works. Deadly works are sins, dead
works are good works done, but not from the principle of the life of Faith, but
life of Nature. Now as Conscience is the principle of the life of Nature. So
Christ is the principle of a Christian life, Col. 3. 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12. For
it is not sanctification that is the principle of life, but the life it self
that flows from it, as from union of soul and body, the soul is not the life
but the principle of it, hence as soon as its out, the body is dead: So, etc.
And do you not find it thus, whenas you do many duties, how tedious, wearison
are they? yet must be done, this is a dead work. What comfort, what peace is
there, when you have done them? because not from life.

5. Because what come* from self, comes from all sin, it is dipped and dyed, and
tainted and poisoned with all sin in a manner. Who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean?

6. Because when a man will act from himself, and not suffer Christ to act for
him, he will not have Christ to reign over him, he pu^^ down the Kingdom of God
that should be within him. For when a man professes Christ is King of his
Church, he is now a King in name: When a man feels an impossibility to rule
himself, and hence desires and chooses Christ to rule, now Christ is a King by
choice: When the soul after this choice, depends on Christ for what he chose
him for, and the Lord works, now Christ is a King indeed. Now if you will not
have the Lord to reign over you, you will be found enemies to the Lords Kingdom.

SECT. V.
HEnce it will follow, The soul is to act wholly and only from the Lord Jesus
Christ, Con^l. 5.
and whatever fruits of love it shows to Christ, to bring them forth from
Christ. Which does not only concern them that never yet knew Christ, and yet
pride up themselves in what they have and do, but those that be in Christ in a
special manner. For John 15. 2. Every Branch in me that brings not forth fruit.
It Is not meant of one indeed in Christ, for he shall bring forth fruit, but
every branch, i. e. by outward profession, so that it brings not forth fruit,
but appears fair, and deceives man, God will cast away: And without me, even ye
Disciples can do nothing.

1. How is the soul to act from Christ only, Quest. 1.
when it has life, especially the elect?

2. By what means may this be done, Quest. 2.
to get and keep this chastity?

First, How is the soul to act from Christ alone when there is sanctification
within? Quest. 1.


1. If the soul feel no power to act from Grace received, Answ. 1.
as Saints sometimes do, either after Gods deserting them, or their forsaking
God long, or after some hardening sin; then it is clear the soul in this case is
(though not in a way of carelesseness) to depend upon the Lord Jesus, that he
would quicken and help. As David after his gross fall, Lord create in me a
clean heart. And Isa. 63. 17. Why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear?
Oh return! In this case the soul is not to bring the soul to God, but God to
the soul. As many a Christian cannot prize not love the Lord not his ways, he
is not to say, I will bring my soul and o^fer it to him; but look to the Lord
that he would raise up my dead affections again. As the Centurion of his
Servant, Speak the word, etc. Christ marveiled at his Faith. Men think when
they feel nothing, that they must and can work it out; and hence comes one of
these three things.

1. Either the soul cannot love Christ when it sees such Laws it cannot submit
to. And hence a Christian once said to me, If the least thing was left for me
to do of my self, I could not love Christ; but now that when brought low and
can do nothing, he brings all the help we need. This makes the Spouse go to the
bosom of her Husband, Psalm. 116. 6, 7. Or else,

2. It cannot do it, for corruption in a Saint is too hard for his Grace, I am
but a child, and thy people many, 1 Kings 3. 7. Hence he must be strong in the
Lord.

Or 3. If it do, it never has any peace in what it does, the duties never so
well done. Whereas otherwise the poorest duty done from Christ, witness Heb.
11. 4, 5. as a child bego^ of the Father, he will own, but other children not.
If any poor tired heart that hea^s me this day, thou have been making thy
Brick, and promises and vows will not help, now away to the Lord, if ever help
now it is when most helpless.

2. If you can do any thing savingly good, the soul is bound now (by the power
of Faith) to stir up it self to act, though not to trust to it alone, for
sometimes the soul has the regenerate part uppermost, and the prevailing Spirit
of God, Psalm. 21. 3. which comes to him, and gives it power to act before the
soul come to it. Now a man is bound to act, because it is from Christ now. Hence
Timothy was to stir up the gift, 2 Timothy 1. 6. Hence complained of them Isa. 64.
8. None stir up himself to take hold on the Lord. A man must stir up himself to
believe, as well as other Graces, hence the Kingdom of Heaven is taken with
violence, and though corruption is stronger than Grace, yet Grace assisted with
the Spirit, is stronger than it, which is never quite out of the soul, but it is
in the soul, 1 John 4. 4. Stronger is he that is in you. And it is said
professedly, He purges himself, and keeps himself, the evil one touches him
not, 1 John 5. 18. But mark, trust not barely t^ this, but when you do this,
withal remember, Lord I cannot hold out in this unless thou do help me: But
know, Isa. 26. The Lord is the rock of my strength. And if you by the Spirit
mortify, etc. Romans 8. 13. Therefore ever hold up sails, but look for a wind.
And if a man be not to do this, then when any sinful temptation comes, if a man
do not find the Spirit and strength ready at hand to help, if he be not to stir
up himself against it, he is to suffer himself to be carried down by it. Hence
a man may neglect all duties a long time, if he do not find the Spirit
assisting, if so be a man must not stir himself up, and so (will some say) a
man may. May? What shall I say to such sluggish soul, but sleep on? But know
it, the Lord will awaken thee, when you shall say, Oh that I had improved the
Talent I had! And if you do find Christ in such a condition, know it they be
but the last visits of Christ before he departs. You can do more than you do,
and the Lord will have you do it.

But I cannot do it for good ends without Christ. Obj.


Yet do the thing as far as you can, else if you owe another a debt, Answ.
and will not pay, because not for a good end, that excuse will not serve: So
you owe the Lord your lives, your spirits, your abilities; lay them out for the
Lord, though evil be in them, be humbled for that. Is this good requital to say
you find your hearts dead in prayer, and God must do all, and there leave it?

3. You are to expect and look for power from the Lord Jesus in the use of
means, all known means: For Faith fetches all from Christ, hence we must go
thither where Christ is to be found, and he dwells in his House, in his
Ordinances: Therefore there you must depend upon him. As it is with a Merchant,
he wades not over the Sea for Pearls, but gets into his ship, and there he sits
still, so here, Mat. 13. The Kingdom of Heaven is like a Merchant man. Hence
you that know you can do nothing, being under a spirit of conviction, and hence
do nothing, under a spirit of sloth and neglect of means, by virtue of a spirit
of presumption, and say Christ must do all, I say you take not the right course
for the Lord to help you in. The Lord will never be a slave to thy sloth, but
thou shall be like a shrub, never to see good when it comes, and shall die in
horror with this, Oh I might have done more! Hence you are worse than the
other, that think if a man fasts, prays, watches against his distempers,
mourns for want of Christ and Grace, and follows God hard here, he is a Legal
Christian: Why, these are but his own works, and this is not living on Christ.
I confess bare using them, or trusting to them is not, but he that lives not
on Christ in use of means (these and all other means) to find Christ, or enjoy
more of Christ, shall never have him. Neither do I know what turning Gods Grace
into wantonness is, if this be not; and under a conceit of liberty to be a
servant of corruption. I know not whether it be thus with any, but if I did, I
would pity them.

4. If the soul cannot every moment live on Christ, i. e. for every particular
act, have a distinct act of Faith, for this cannot be, yet every fit season
that it can, it ought to look up to the Lord for life and fresh strength. Pray
as it is (...), every fit season. And as he brings forth fruit, so he goes for
fruit in season, Psalm. 1. 3. And when the soul does this, the Spirit of the
Lord helps, when the act is ceased.

Now the fit seasons are,

1. At beginning of any action, as prayer, hearing, reading: All the time a man
is in his journey, or in his work, he is carried on by the act of Faith at
first setting out: The reach of Faith is long, and continues all prayers, all
the duty throughout, the act of faith is short: Now the Lord looks to his
people according to the first.

2. When our act beigns to die; as Moses lifted up his hands, and when they
were heavy, Aaron and Hur supported them again.

3. When a man feels himself strong, now apt to be self-confident; now Lord for
an humble heart! And thus you are to live on Christ, which if done, would make
a Christians life glorious, and give infinite content to the heart of Christ.
But here is the misery, either hearts are full, and need not, or slothful, and
care not for living so. That truly I do not wonder to hear and see so many
withering trees, as though blasted by wrath, because you fetch not all out of
this stock; and Christ is such a stranger, because you are so seldom with him
to act and bring forth fruit to him.

SECT. VI.
2 COnsider of the means to act from Christ Jesus, and indeed herein lies the
skill and life of a Christian, and this is the complaint of many a Soul, Christ
is full, and he is not for himself, but for those that want, and I come to him
when I want it, and yet I find no help; and hence many are brought to think
either it is in vain to come to Christ, or else I have no Faith in Christ; I
will therefore premise these three things.

1. That a false, double, treacherous, disloyal heart to Christ cannot expect
to receive any thing it comes for unto Christ. As it is with a Woman, that
though others do not, yet her Husband knows she is fallen in league with some
other man, he will be strange to her, and will not do any thing for her. John
2. ult. He knew what was in man; as it is in grafts, James 1. 7, 8. Let not a
double-minded man think to receive any thing at the hands of the Lord, for that
is the nature of man under the power of any lust, it makes all serve it, even
Christ himself, which he will never do, I am weary of your new Moons, says the
Lord, and you fast, and pray, and have no answer, for you fast for Debate: and
therefore I take a man considered as broken off from the power of his lusts,
not one that feels himself under the power of it, for such an one may be
delivered from it, such a soul as can say, much ado have I had to feel my sin,
and to be willing to part with it, but now I am; here is the Soul I speak of.

2. That the Lord in the dispensation of Grace to his people, is wholly free to
give it when he will: for a man that works for his wages, must in justice have
his wages when his work is done: but he that begs for his living must be
content to stay. We live by Faith, and free gift, not by works and deserts, and
hence must wait and stay, Mic. 7. 7. Hence let not any man think sensibly to
receive what he goes for to the Lord Jesus presently, as many feel a want of
Grace, and think the Lord has promised to help, and now how would it make for
his honor to give, but find it not, and hence grow sad or discouraged, and
think it is in vain to seek? no, no, Christ's hour is not yet come, when you
think it is, John 2. My hour is not yet come; and hence many get nothing
because they lie out of the way of the Covenant, viz. to think, oh the Lord
owes me nothing, and I deserve the contrary.

3. That no man is to look to receive all that which he comes to the Lord for,
but only so much as is fit for him: a man feels much straitness, and he would
have many enlargements; he finds much deadness, and he would have deep and
overflowing affections, and he comes to the Lord for it, and the Lord gives
some, Does he ^ot? do you not find it? can you say you seek the Lord, and
attend on the Lord in vain with these Hypocrites, Mat. 3. 14. True, but yet
methinks more would be better. How do you know that? I think so, that it would
be more for his honor: you think so, then it seems you have one eye more than
Christ, and that he is very careless and foolish in raising his own honor: Oh
abhor those thoughts, he gives you such a coat as is fit for you, such a sail
as fits your boat, such shoes as fit your feet, Psalm. 21. 5. Honor and Majesty
have thou fitted for him: therefore do not look to receive any more than is fit
for you, and know it, that is best for you. The Physician prescribes that which
is fit, not that which is most desired of the Patients; if they will not accept
of this, he will not look after them, 1 Cor. 12. 7, 8.

4. Think not to get any thing from the Lord Jesus with ease, I mean to the
fleshly part: it has been an old complaint, I go to Christ, and fish all
night, and can catch nothing: and why? here is the cause, they cannot get it
easily, and therefore they cannot get it at all, yea there it is. Heb. 11. 6.
This is one of the two main handles of Faith, he is a rewarder of all them that
diligently seek him, not negligently: and hence at their first conversion how
does Christ's Fruits overflow, and his Jordan rise above the banks: and what a
deal does a christian gain, yet not afterward: so in time of great trouble, oh
it is because you seek him diligently: Therefore in prescribing means, do not
say this is hard, and so depart as those did upon the very same ground, John 6.
60.

SECT. VII.
The Means are these.
1. Labor for a comprehending knowledge, Means 1.
what is the love of Christ to thee: there is a double knowledge of Christ's love.

1. That he loves me, and this very apprehension fetches in warmth and life
into the heart, In thy favor is life.

2. What that love is, and that in all the dimensions of it: and beloved this
is that which fills a man, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. that as it is with Women when the
fullness of the Husbands love is seen, it knits the heart invincibly to him,
and makes her do any thing for him, so here. And as we say of Trees, if the
Tree begins to wither and dye, the only way is not to cast water on the
branches, or to pray for water and dews from Heaven on them, but water the
root. Love is the next root of all Grace, love Christ, and you will never be
weary of doing for Christ, love him, and he will love you, Prove. 8. 17. Now
what kindles love so much as this comprehending knowledge of the Lord Jesus, and
his love, this will make a man a burning Beacon of love, make a man melt into
love, which is as strong as death, much water cannot quench it, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
Love of Christ constrains, Gal. 5. 6. Faith works by love: Faith is our feet
whereby we come to Christ, Love is our hand whereby we work for Christ: now let
any Surgeons servant come to a Surgeon with a broken arm, and tell him he
can do no work for him, therefore desire him to give him strength to do it,
come says he, let me heal your arm first: no by no means; let me first do your
work, that so you may heal, and I may feel my arm to be whole: It can never be:
So it is many a Christians course, Lord let me do thy work, and hence he cries,
Lord give me strength, and then falls to do it, and cannot without pain,
because his love is broken. Many say, I will go to Christ, and act for Christ,
and then I will think the Lord loves me, but never find it: first see and
comprehend the love of the Lord: And truly this is the reason why no heart, no
strength to act for God, unless it be in a we^risom manner, and why? oh love
is out, and why is that out? why it is not comprehended by the eye of Faith,
it is despised by some, other things are sweet to them, or it is forgotten by
others; men remember not what once they were, and what the Lord has done, it is
seen a little, and hence a little life and strength, but it is comprehended by
few. O sinful times! O unkind world! never was my heart so dead says one,
never so straightened and shut up says another, never so feeble in all duties
says another: why, you see, and taste, and sip of this love, but you feed not
heartily, abundantly on it. Never did thou think so little of this love; for
though Christ will conveigh rich Grace to his people, yet it shall be by love.
Christians will come to Christ, and when they receive and feel the good they
come for, they will think of Christ's love and that he love; them, no first come
unto the Lord Jesus, being once come, know he will not cast thee away, John 6.
37. then think of this love; stay here, first feed here and you may act, and
then the Lord will conveigh strength and power, and enable you hereunto: For
though when a man trusts to his love as Peter without Faith, a man will fall
because he trusts to an arm of flesh: yet when Faith imploies love, the work is
very great. As a Father has a child who must keep at home with him, but he
has never a Steward to lay out that estate for him that he means to give him,
but when an able Steward, now he gives his Son richly. So here:

Quest. How shall I comprehend it?

Answ. First, the Apostle prays for it. Secondly, see what it is by his
description, and meditate on it.

1. The breadth, i. e. the same love wherewith the Lord comprehends all Saints,
as Abraham, etc. thou art as dear to the Lord as he or any in Heaven, nay it
may be did cost more: not a cross, not a mercy, but it is common (for
substance) unto all Saints.

2. The length, from eternity to eternity, nothing can part, nothing shall
part; all other things are but Summer Swallows that build with us for a time.

3. The depth, that the Lord should look upon thee when in thy Pesthouse, when
no eye pitied thee, when as low as the Grave, nay as low as Hell, nay lower,
for they in Hell would come out, thou would not. Never think to see what
infinite love is, till thou see infinite wrath.

4. The height, to be as happy as Angels, and more to, nay to be all one with
Christ, and in Christ, and loved with the same love Christ is, John 17. 23, 26.

5. When thou see it thus, yet it is the love of Christ that passes knowledge:
As children cannot tell how Parents love them, Will you do thus? It Is with many
Christians as it is with many Trees, the Tree is good, and the soil is good, and
rain, dews, sun, Husbandman good, yet it begins to dye, then now nothing is
wanting, but only to be set a little deeper, that it may take more root of the
soil. And so here, there is nothing wanting in many a Christian, but to be set
a little deeper, and to take more rooting in the Lords love. Faith roots it
self in Gods love, and now prospers by love. The eye is but little, yet can
comprehend a mighty world quickly: man's mind is but little, yet can comprehend,
though not the infiniteness, yet an infinite love. If there be this light of
glory, see by it all your poor sad hearts that conceive nothing but terror and
holiness in God; if you see it not, know it here is your work now; for the
first work is to get Faith, then to get love, then to act from Faith by love.
Now the Lord has wrought the first, and thou art busy a doing the third work,
not remembering the second.

2. Content not thy self with feeling a want of supply, Means 2.
but labor to feel a need of supply from the Lord Jesus, for many a Christian
feels a want of Grace from Christ, brokennesse, etc. sees he has nothing, and
is sometime by fits troubled for the want of it: but he can be well content
though he have no supply, having somewhat else to ease and content him, he
feels no need of supply, so as he cannot be without it, that his Spirit fails
unless the Lord Jesus in mercy give it, and therefore must have it, there is a
necessity of it. Hence he never finds supply, and wonders at it why it is so:
and here it is, here is his wound, and so brings up an ill report of the Lord,
saying he is loath to give, and of the Ordinances of the Lord, it is in vain to
seek, and truly so it is to seek so: for let thy condition be never so
miserable, if thou feel a need of supply, the Lord will make bare his arm,
and work wonders, bring Heaven out of Hell, joy out of sorrow, and light out of
the thickest darkness, and floods out of dry ground, Isai. 41. 17, 18. when
the ground is dry and perched away, no moisture left; now the Lord pours out
water on this soul, Isai. 44. 3. Heb. 4. ult. Many come to the Lord for Grace,
and find it not, methinks I hear the Lord speaking thus to his people, I love
you dearly, and I am content to give you any thing you need, but you do not
need my Grace, my Spirit, my presence, i. e. you feel not a need of it, for if
you had it now, you would not prize it much, nor keep it long: my precious
Grace must not be spilt. Many know their wants and distempers, and know there
is no help in themselves, and see all fullness in Christ, and hence come to
him, but find none, because they can be content though the Lord deny: no nor
never shall unless you feel the woe of your wants, that your Spirit fails if
the Lord send not in supply, Isai. 57. 16. I will not contend, lest the Spirit
fail. Hence there God promises to dwell, to send and create peace and comfort:
for what is the reason that Christians at first beginnings ^eek peace and
mercy, and have abundantly then? why truly I was long time before I had any
thing, but when my spirit began to fail, and I gave all for gone, and could
hold out no more, now the Lord helped and pitied me; but where are those
comforts, and that presence of the Lord now? Truly now you think the worst is
past, and would be glad of the life of Christ, and Grace from Christ, but if
not, you have a little, your state is safe, and so can lie without putting your
self to a necessity of it. Is it not thus? is not this your very wound? if it
be, for the Lords sake then get it healed, and do as people in Christ's time,
those that were well, and had not desperate Diseases, commonly came not to him,
but when the Disease was desperate, you know the Fame of Christ being spread
abroad, then they brought their sick and laid them before his merciful eyes,
then they looked for the laying on of his hand, or a word of his mouth, and all
were healed: so do you, you have heard of the Fame of Christ, and seen others
humbled, others par^oned, lay thy ^ick Soul (but look that it be sick) before
his eyes, and so look for one word of his mouth, as the Woman of Canaan, he may
deny for a time, yet she must have it, and the Lord will say, Be it unto thee
according to thy Faith, not according to thy deserts, thou will have it, I must
give it, thou dyest without it, behold I live to revive thee, and therefore to
give it. You come to Prayer, and Word, and want many things, but find them not.
Oh come therefore, Lord I must have, I cannot go without supply. Not but that a
Christian must wait, and be content humbly, but not care^esly: Therefore think
within thy self,

1. What is there that I need but this, the presence of God, the life of God,
etc. Is it not enough in Heaven, where is no wealth nor comforts else? and is it
not suff^cient now?

2. May I have it o^ this condition, [I must have it, I am resolved not to go
without it] Rev. 22. 17. if you will come, take it. Are the terms so sweet?

3. Do wicked men thirst more and more after their lusts, and is Christ, and
his Grace, and his Presence no better, that I have enough of them quickly? God
forbid there should be such a heart.

4. Does the least sin so exceedingly go to the heart of my God, and shall I
suffer it not only to act here, and tempt here, but remain alive here?

5. Is not the Lord after all love shown me, worthy of infinite (not a little)
honor from me? and does he deserve all, and must I not, shall I not give it
him before I dye? it must, it shall be so. Now when here you feel a need, know
it that you are at the very door of relief: I conceive this is the great door
at which Christ enters into the soul. The root of Faith ( i. e. the author,
object, and foundation of Faith) is out of a man's self, the door of Faith which
opens to all treasures is in a man's self: This door is not any good in us, for
then we should have somewhat to boast of, nor sin in us, for that shuts out God
from us; nor knowledge of want, for that the Devils have, but sense of want,
which when the Saints have, now the door is opened for the Lord Jesus in all
his fullness to come in. Now if you know these things, blessed are you if you
do them.

SECT. VIII.
TO all the Churches of the Lord Jesus here planted in these Western parts of
the World, Use 5.
to maintain your Church-chastity and Virginity, you have a name of it abroad,
pure chaste Virgin-churches, not polluted with the mixtures of men's inventions,
not defiled with the company of evil men: pure Ordinances, pure People, pure
Churches, which is the cause of the scoffs and enmity of some, but of the
desire and joy of others. O if there, how happy I? and how blessed they? Take
heed you do not defile your selves again. Open whoredoom is too gross, too
shameful, to yield to man's inventious, to open the door for all comers into the
Church: but take heed of secret whoredoms and departings from Christ, for think
of this speech when you see me dead, that of all Churches in the World, the
Lord Jesus carries a most jealous eye over these for whom he has done such
great things; and I know it, he takes exceeding ill your secret wantonness and
whoredoms of heart; the Lord has kept you hitherto, look you maintain it, for
you may be soon defloured again, few Churches retain their purity long, aged,
gray-haired purity is seldom seen. I will tell you of the several Temptations
(some at least) that may prevail to the defilement of you.

First, Spiritual defilement is forsaking of the Husband, a total secret
forsaking of Christ; for here is the temptation to it, viz. Gods withdrawing
himself in his Ordinances from his Ordinances. For three sorts of Temptations
make men fall back.

1. By Persecution, and there many fall (though some hold out) as in the stony
land.

2. By Peace, and here many fall like the thorny ground; like Saylors that in a
storm at Sea, every man is ready, and will be pulling his rope, but when a
calm, then go to their Cabbins, and there fall asleep, and here many fall in
this place, and others stand it out.

3. By the Lords withdrawing from them, as those, Mal. 3. 14. and here the
great ones fall. Many come to enjoy Ordinances, and persecution vexed them not,
world it is base, it troubles them not, and they think to find much, but do not,
but the Lord withdraws, and they can get no good, hereupon their false hearts
discover themselves, they draw back from God, and lie still, whereas Saints cry
the more after him, and look the more into themselves, and find out the cause
of it, and then the Lord helps them, Isai. 63. 17. Oh take heed of this.

1. Shall I forsake the Lord that has done these great things for my Soul?

2. Shall I now do it after I am so near Heaven?

3. Shall I forsake him when he departs from me but for a time it may be, when
as he followed me when I departed long from him?

4. Is it not Hell to dye without him, and shall it not be Death to live
without him?

5. Does he depart without a cause, he has no cause to follow me, I have all
reason to follow him, the Lord grant you may do so.

Secondly, Secret defilement is by neglect of private communion with him: this
is whorish in a Wife. Here is stronger Temptation to neglect private Prayer and
Meditation, partly by want of room, partly by multitudes of businesses, and
work, and cares hereabout, that being weary in the day, sleepy at night, busy
in the morning, Prayer, Meditation, daily examination are sent away as Paul
from Faelix, we will speak with these at some more convenient season; and hence
straitness of heart toward Christ, and no means do good. Oh Beloved, have you
such a Husband as Christ in Heaven that loves thy looks, thy company, thy
sighs, thy speeches, and will you neglect him thus? what no love? 2. Is he not
broken with this whorish heart? 3. Is that speech worth any thing with you, We
shall ever be with the Lord, does it comfort you to think of being ever with
him, and now neglect him? where are your hearts?

Thirdly, Secret defilement is by bringing other lovers into the same bed, the
same heart with him: and here the Temptation to this is strong, for most men
have lost and sunk in their Estates, and it is hard to live lower than we did,
and this is a grief, and here it is possible to recover estate again, and here
grief for loss has a vent by greediness and pursuit after more. In other
places men had a very comfortable estate, hence rejoiced in what they had, and
did not greedily desire more; but now want makes men hungry and greedy: and now
when a man has thought and looked about him, and seen what he may gain by his
labors of many acres, by his Goats and Cartel in so many year; now he casts
himself into the world, and also will not forsake Christ utterly, but bring
both into the same heart, Christ shall have some love, some desire, but the
world as much, and so the heart is divided: and hence some set high prizes on
their corn, commodities, cattle, others look for large wages, etc. and yet
Christ too. Hence men cry out of the world because it hinders them from Christ,
and yet bring it into, and hugg it in their hearts, because they must have it
in the bed with Christ. It was the speech of one, that he never heard of any
Saint in Scripture given to covetousness, some to one sin, some to another, but
none to that; I have read of Lot, but God fired him out of his estate at last:
and that is all I would say to this.

Fourthly, Secret defilement is by decaying in love to those whom Christ loves,
and those are his Saints, and Temptation is strong in this place to this: 1.
Because we have multitudes of them; Even Gold it self being so common as to
pave our streets, is despised. 2. Because there wants a common enemy to drive
them together. Take several men that never knew one another, yet in time of War
they will love abundantly, and then encourage one another, and can with joy lie
together: so it is here, hence arise your petty Duels and jars in Churches,
surmisings, cens^rings, etc. and the reason is this, there is little love to
Saints, and for want of this, men shall not know whether you be Christ's
Disciples or no. Be thy Brethren Saints or not? bear they the Image of Christ
or no? if they do not, why do not convince them, admonish them? and if they
will not be better, away with them: If they be, Oh bear, Oh love, Oh tender
them, as thou look the Lord Jesus should tender thee. And therefore let the
Image of Christ appear, and then see it, and then love, and then no more
breaches will follow: if not, the Lord can and will soon send Wolves to make
Sheep run more together.

Fifthly, Le^ting a new Generation of Harlots into Christ's bosom, I mean, not
greatly caring for Posterity, that they may know and serve this God, for after
this Generation is past, our children are to follow, and it is very rare that
they prove right, yet it may be so. Hearken therefore you Parents, if God
brought them over for this end, and if they never know God, what a sad thing
would it be? or if they be brought forth to pull down the Temple of God. Oh
therefore, 1. Be careful of a pious education of them in Schools, in private,
and take some course for that end before others come over, this will draw them.
2. Oh make many Prayers for them. 3. Set Faith awork in Gods promise; as he
said, he would not abate the Lord, (though he gave it him in 99) of that one.
Leave in record what the Lord has done for you, that the Lord may be with
them, and that all these Churches may be the glory of Christ, and then you
shall enter into the Bride-chamber of the Lamb at last.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning a Christians Duty of being constantly and continually ready to meet
Christ, and to enjoy Communion with him.
2. Took their Lamps. SECT. I.
MUch dust is raised, and much Dispute is made, especially by Popish
interpreters, What the Lamps, what the Oil, what the Vessels should be? The
gener^l conceit of most of them is: that by Oil is meant good works, and by
Lamps Faith; answerable to their own conceit, that not Faith but good works
chiefly save: Whereas if we consider the thing rather e contra, that by lighted
Lamps are meant good works, or external shining profession, according to that
of Christ, Mat. 5. Let your light so shine before men, etc. and that by Oil
should be me^nt Faith, because it is inward, and is the nourishment of works and
outward profession. And in this sense some of our Divines do take this
Scripture; and the Rhemists likewise, who understand by Lamps lighted, good
works; by Oil a good intention: To which it is answered by Cartwright, (that
burning and shining light of our Times) that rather by Lamps lighted is to be
understood, watchful minds always lifted up in attending for the coming of
Christ, according as it is ver. 13. And I doubt not but this is one thing aimed
at, that they took their Lamps, i. e. were watchful for Christ's coming. But
when I weigh other circumstances, methinks there is somewhat else more plainly
and principally intended, of which I scarce read any Divine, but he gives a
hint of, viz. that by lighted Lamps, and taking of them, is meant nothing else
but the readiness of the Churches to meet and to have fellowship with the Lord
Jesus. And my Reasons are these:

1. Because the Lord Jesus to teach his people watchfulness, and to put them
to a narrow search of themselves, borrows a similitude from the custom of those
Times, wherein their Marriages were celebrated in the Night, and hence the
Virgins (the only children of the Bride-chamber, and some think their number
never exceeded Ten) being to walk out in the Night, took their Lamps: and when
they had kindled their Lamps, (usually the last thing that is done) now they
are ready to go out, and this is that which Christ aims at.

2. From Luke 12. 35. Let your loins be girt, and lamps burning; it is evident
that thereby is meant nothing else but readiness to meet the Lord whenever he
comes; for when loins are girt, then one is fit for travail, but seeing it is in
the Night, hence lamps must be burning too.

3. Because it is said plainly, ver. 10. when their lamps were kindled again,
they that were ready went in; I know the Word is called a lamp for our feet,
Psalm. 119. and so by lamps may be meant minds enlightened and kindled by the
word. The eminent profession and excellencies of the Church is like a lamp,
Isai. 63. 1. and more particularly may be here included and aimed at: but in
this verse lamps are spoken of in general, including light, Oil, Vessels; and
hence I give this general Interpretation here, intending Particulars if need be
afterward: So that now I shall only raise this Point.

SECT. II.
Doct. THat all those that are Espoused unto Christ, ought to be in a constant
or continual readiness to meet Christ, and to have immediate communion with
Christ.

A Woman may be Espoused to another, and yet she may be sometimes not ready to
meet him, her foul apparel is on. So here, therefore it is not enough to be
espoused unto Christ, but being espoused, now you ought to be in a continual
readiness to claspe the Lord in your arms, and to lay your heads in his bosom
in Heaven: this is commanded by Christ, Mat. 24. 44. This was the mighty power
of Gods Grace in Paul, when others were weeping to think of his Bonds, Why do
you break my heart, I am ready not only to be bound, but to dye for Christ, and
so doubtless to be with Christ; much more ready to meet Christ when ever he
shall come, ready to welcome Death, much more ready to welcome Christ, Acts 21.
13. This also is the end of John's Ministry, Luke 1. 17. To make ready a people
prepared for the Lord, to meet with Christ on earth; now he is gone, our work
is to prepare a people to meet the Lord in Heaven. Hence this is put in as the
difference between Vessels of wrath, and Vessels of Glory: the one are fitted
for destruction, the others are fitted, prepared, or made ready for Glory, and
the glory of a christian is chiefly to enjoy fellowship immediately with Jesus
Christ. There is many a soul dear unto Christ, and espoused to him, and has
his heart affected to think of the good time that is coming, when we shall ever
be with the Lord: but ask, are you ready ^yet for to go to him, though it be
through fires, waters, thorns, sorrows, death it self? who can say yes? but
(say men's hearts) shut the Lord out a little longer, let not the door stand
open yet; yet this must be: And therefore for explications sake let me, 1. show
you when the Soul is in a readiness for the Lord Jesus. 2. The reasons why
there must be a continual readiness.

SECT. III.
When is the Soul in a readiness to enjoy Christ?

As there are four things which make a christian unready, Quest.
so this readiness consists in Four things contrary.

Answ,
1. That which makes a christian unready for him, are those strong fears, and
jealousies, and damping doubts of the love of Christ to him. The soul happly
has made choice of him, is content with him, melts into wonderment and love to
think that he should love him: what me? and Christ has writ him on his heart,
and on the palms of his hands; but Israel says, my God has forsaken me, my
God has forgotten me, Isai. 49. 14. Is it possible? is it credible? one that
has been so ville, one that still has such a heart, for him to set his heart
on me? surely no: hence the Soul is afraid to dye, and desires too much to live
still: and the more he thinks of that time, and blessedness of following the
Lamb wherever he goes; the more he sees and fears this may possibly never be
my portion: there may be some falseness in my heart toward him that I never
yet saw, some secret knot that was never yet unlosed: and hence not yet ready.
Hence many a christian says, if I had a little more assurance, let him come
when he will: Thus some think it was with Hezekiah, who though he had walked
before God with a perfect heart, yet bitterly complained that he was cut off,
Isai. 38. per totum. So therefore then the soul is prepared and ready for him,
when he has some comfortable assurance of the love of Christ toward him, that
it can say, if I live he loves me, though he kills me by Death, yet I know that
he loves me: nay, then he loves me most, when he puts an end to my sins, and to
my sorrows too? And therefore now says as one ready to ceive a Prince, now let
him come to me, or send for me when he will: why so? Who can separate me from
the love of Christ? Romans 8. 35. That look as it is with a Soldier that is to go
to war, where many bullets and arrows are like to fall about him, and hit him
while he has no armor on; call him to the Captain, and he will say he is not
ready yet, but when he has his armor on of proof, and such armor that he
knows let him receive never so many wounds, yet he shall escape with his life,
and triumph with his Captain afterward: Now give him but his watchword he is
ready, though never so weak, yet I am sure I shall escape with my life, nay not
so much as hurt. So a christian wanting his assurance, wants his armor; he is
weak, and powers of darkness will assault him, and he is slain by them, now he
is unready: but if assured, though weak and feeble, he is now at Christ's
watchword, I know I shall live, I may fall, but I shall rise again, this puts
courage and spirit into a christian, Dan. 3. 17, 18. Heb. 11. 35. Others were
tormented, (and so ready) not accepting deliverance; why so? to obtain a better
Resurrection, which they are s^id to see by the eye of Faith, and this was by
poor weak Women; therefore labor for this, else not prepared. The Lord would
have his people look death and dangers in the face, and triumph in sorrows, and
not faint-hearted, (which cannot be done without this) that the world may see
that there is more than men in them, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. and 5. 1. who would
be without this? yet may we not complain, as Christ of his Disciples, Oh
foolish and slow of heart to believe all that is written, so many promises yet
not assured, so many experiences yet not established, and therefore not yet
prepared and ready for the coming of the Lord. A man that has a fair estate
and house befallen him, so long as he is in Suit for it, dares not dwell in it,
but makes a shift where he is: but then he is ready when quiet possession is
given him. So get the Lord to pass sentence for assurance of your everlasting
habitation, then are you re^dy to dwell therein.

2. Then a man is unprepared for the Lord Jesus his coming, while he wants
affe^tions suitable to the Majesty, and according to the worth and love of the
Lord Jesus: Suppose a Woman knows her Husbands love, yet if she have lost her
love to him, or if she love him, it is only as she loves another man, not
according to the wo^th of her Husbands person, or the greatness of his love:
Is she fit now to ap^ear before him, when no heart to receive him? so although
you question not Christ's love to you, and thank God you doubt little of it, yet
where is your heart? your love to him? have you not lost your love, your first
love, or second love? if you have love, is it not divided to other things, as
Wife, Child, Friends, hopes of provision for them, and too much care hereupon
for that? or if you do love him, it is with a carnal love, he has no more than
a lust has had, and it may be not so much, it is with a cold love; now you are
unfit for him: hence the Lord, Luke 21. 34. Take heed your hearts be not
overcharged, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Now therefore then the soul is prepared to meet
Christ, when if the soul has lost its affections, it recovers them out of the
hands of all creatures that stole them away from Christ; and hence David
prays, Oh spare that I may recover my strength: and when it breaks out with
such love unto Christ as is fitting for him, 2 Timothy 4. 8. There is the
righteo^s Judge ready to give the Crown, when Christ's appe^ring is loved, i. e.
they are so taken with him, as that they love the looks of him, it would
rejoice my heart to see, which shall make others tremble to behold him; Oh it
must be a dear love, a spring of running love without measure, for this is the
difference between affection^ of Saints and Hypocrites to Christ, the one
arise^h like a morning dew which is soon lickt up by the Sun, Hos. 6. 4. the
heat of affection^ after other things licks it up; but the love of Saints to
Christ is like a spring which rises to everlasting life: a spring is but
little, but yet the f^rther it goes, the wider it is, till at last swallowed up
in the Sun, and there is no measure of water: so Saints have but a little love,
but the longer they live, the more enlarged for Christ, and there is no
measure, but all is too little, they never can, never do love enough, so that
look as it is said in another case, Psalm 102. 13, 14. ' It Is time for thee to
build up Jerusalem, i. e. to return to thy people in thy Ordinances, for they
love the stones; so then it is time for Christ to come, and then the set and fit
time is come for a people to meet with Christ out of Ordinances, when the set
time is come when they love Ordinances, and love Christ much more. When a man
is gone beyond Se^, and all his Friends and estate are at home, they long for
him, and he is left among enemies: why comes he not to them? why send not they
for him? why they know he is sickly, and cannot live on the dyer of the
country; hence he is unfit to come, but when that is once come to pass that he
can live only on it, then he is ready whenever they send: so when men can live
with, and be content alone with Christ and his love, now they are fi. With what
face can a man appear before Christ, when he requires nothing but love, and he
has not that.

3. Then a man is unready for Christ, whiles he neglects the work of Christ,
for suppose a man has some inward love to Christ, yet neglects and has no
heart to do the work of Christ: he is as yet no more fit to meet Christ, than a
Steward who has had much betrusted him, to improve for his Lords use, and he
has let all seasons go wherein he might have traded for him, and gained
somewhat to him. How can he appear before him when no fair accounts to be seen;
so the Lord has betrusted thee with many Talents, time^, strength, means, etc.
and you are not Lords, but Stewards of all these. Now do you not let many fair
season^ and winds blow by, you have (if espoused to Christ) every man some
work. Now how can you stand before Christ if that be neglected. Oh thus it is
with many christians; hence those sad ala^^ms of conscience, and shakings of
Gods Spirit, after many loose d^yes dipped in some good duties. What do thou
that others do not that never shall see Gods face in Heaven?

Now therefore then the soul is ready for the Lord, when it is daily at it,
finishing Gods work: hence John 17. 5. I have finished my work, now glorify
me: Christ has given us our lives, work, dayes-work, every hours work, for
Christ has ever e^ployment; now though a soul may livelong, and cannot finish
its lives work, yet if it finish its days work, or hours work, it may have
comfort then if the Lord should come. That look as it is with a Mariner when he
has his Freight, now let the wind come to drive him out of the Haven, he is
ready to depart: so here, 2 Pet. 1. 8, 9, 10, 11. If ye do these things, and
abound, an open entrance shall be ministered unto you, i. e. when a christian is
ever acting for Christ, and adding one Grace to another in his course, then he
is so ready that an open entrance is made for him: Therefore look after this.
It Is with most Professors commonly, as it is with a Woman that loves her
Husband, and begins to dress her self, but so much business to do, that she
does it but by starts; hence call her never so la^e, she will say she is not
yet ready, she has so much to do she cannot; so it is here: Or as it is in a
house where all things are in a lumber, and many things wrapped up and put into
holes, so long as all things be in a lumber, there is no readiness. So many a
soul has a heart fit to receive Christ, but all things are in a lumber, in a
confusion, out of place and order, and hence not yet ready to entertain Christ,
but when this work is done, then ready. Oh betimes do this work, set things to
rights in your souls.

4. Then a man is unready, when having done his work he grows puffed up with it:
for let all the three former be wrought in the soul, if now the soul be puffed
up, thinks highly of it self, attributes any thing to it self: as he said in
another case, they are too many for the Lord; so he is too big for the Lord.
And truly this we shall find it is pretty easy to be mean in our own eyes,
after we have been indeed careless and vile before the Lord; but when the Lord
has mightily assisted, enlarged, assured, enabled, comforted, quickened, now
to be as nothing, this is difficult. Hence Knox on his deathbed had this
Temptation of Meriting. When Hezekiah was sick, he was cast down, but when
well, and God gave him great Treasures, his heart was lifted up; now he was
unfit. Now therefore when a christian is ready to give all to free Grace, and
to adore that, now he is ready for the Lord, Psalm 108. 1. My heart is
prepared, I will sing (...) give praise. Gods last end is to bring the soul to
the praise of the riches of his Grace, not only to enjoy God as Adam. Now the
great reason why Christ comes not to his people presently after they are
espoused to him, it is to make them ready to attain that end. Hence he leaves
sins, temptations, sorrows, desertions, on purpose that they may at conclusion
look back, and see if ever saved, pardoned, it is Grace. Now therefore when the
soul is brought to do this, when he has this rent in his hand, now the Lord is
ready to receive him, and it too, and he is prepared for the Lord: he that has
not his Rent ready, himself is not as yet at all ready to meet with, and see
his Landlord. So that you think you boast not, Oh the Lord sees you do, or have
not hearts so enlarged toward Grace as you should, it is certain you are yet
unready then, but when empty, and poor, and cast down, and make an infinite
matter of a small sin, and set a high price on a little love much more on
infinite, now you are prepared: Hence David falls a praising when near to
death, and the Lord near to come to him.

SECT. IV.
1. THe law of Respect and Love requires this of us: when Peter would express
his love unto Christ, Reasons.
Luke 22. 33. he professes he was not only ready to go to prison, but to dye
with him. Christ has poor respect and love if men will not so much as be always
ready to receive him: it certainly argues a careless heart that sleights
Christ, that is not ever prepared to receive Christ.

2. Because the time of Christ's coming is then when we least look for him,
verse. 13. Hence a christian ought to be ever ready to receive him. Many of
eminent parts, when the Church had most need of them, then are cut down: Many
at their first conversion, before they or others almost could tell what to make
of them, the Lord has cropped them in the bud. Men find their hearts unfit and
unready, they think hereupon that hereafter they shall get their hearts into
better order and tune, when these businesses are over, but yet will live at
liberty a little while: why then it is most likely is the Lords time of coming,
even now when they think least of it, Luke 12. 40.

3. Because the Lord has set apart every one that is espoused to the Lord
Jesus, only for the fruition of Christ, and use of Christ, 1 Cor. 3. ult. You
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. A Woman that is not chosen, nor set apart for
the fellowship of a Prince, she may go how she will, and do what she will, any
base drudgery work; but she that is chosen to be next unto him, and only to
behold and love him, she is not to plead she has so much business to do, and
so many Friends to speak with, that she cannot make her self ready: she is set
apart for a better person, and for more noble employment. So here men of the
world not loved of God, nor chosen and set apart for him, may do what they
will; but when the Lord has chosen and set you apart of purpose for this end,
Ephesians. 1. 4. Chosen to be holy before him in love, i. e. to stand ever in his
presence before him, with a spirit of dearest love unto him. Hence the Lord
has taken the care of all things else, 1 Pet. 5. 7. that we might mind and do
this thing; It in danger, he will deliver, if in want, he will provi^e, if
weak, he will strengthen, only no^ be ready for the Lord, Psalm 45. 10. Forget
thy Country, and thy Fathers house, so shall the Lord desire thy beauty. You
are not now free to love and follow whom you please, the Lord has bound you to
himself by love, and you have bound your self by promise to the Lord again:
Therefore now a christian after once espoused to Christ, is better than all the
world, being the Bride of the Lamb; and he has a better and greater good for
to enjoy: therefore he should scorn and abhor to march himself to, or to do any
thing for any other creature; and therefore methinks should sit as one upon a
watchtower, looking out, and telling the clock now day is near, waiting only
for Christ, Oh let it be so: If in Heaven, you shall have only Christ* Oh
prepare for him much more now. As a Woman that is Ma^cht to a rich man, all the
servants attend on her, and follow her, she is wholly and only for her Husband:
so it should be here.

4. Because he has prepared and made all things else ready for the soul, it is
hard if he has prepared a place in Heaven, and Grace in Heaven, not to prepare
an heart, and make it ready for him, John 14. 1, 2, 3. his Kingdom was ready
long ago, and his Father ready to accept and entertain thee, and his heart
loves and desires, all are ready after thee: hence be ready to meet with him. I
am my Beloveds.

SECT. V.
HEnce see the great unkindnesse of many a soul immediately after his espousing
to Jesus Christ, Use 1.
who having once given himself to Christ, and received comfort thereby,
presently grows more careless than before he was matched unto the Lord Jesus,
who should now stand in a holy watchfulness and readiness to receive Christ,
as it is Psalm 85. 8. Let them not turn again to folly, because they are very
apt so to do. Many say when in some distress, and after long waiting, if the
Lord would pity once, then happy I; I would give away any thing, all I h^ve
unto him^ ^well, the Lord pitties; the soul when in its low estate, and then it
blesses God, but like the Israelites, soon forgets his works, his love, and
after great peace from God, comes greatest carelessness: can this stand with
Grace, and Christ? very hardly; but yet it may, for there are Two things that
make for it.

1. Because at first conversion there is much see^ing of Christ, for healing
the horror and smart of sin, as well as for the curing of the wound and scar
of sin: hence when espoused, and horror being past, that wheel being broken, a
man draws more heavily now, and neglects seeking; now the Knife is out of his
heart he cries not so earnestly.

2. Because when espoused, and much affected, commonly a man trusts to his
affections, when he has a fullness of them: hence the Lord lets Satan prevail,
Luke 22. 31, 33. Satan has desired to winnow thee as wheat, and I (says
Pe^er) am ready to dye with thee; but you see he fe^l, and then when the Lord
looked upon him, he went out and wept bitterly: How shamefully have thou
fallen, should any love him more than you if ever he pity? well, for his
Namesake he has done it. But how often have thou broken Covenant? how forgetful
of the Lords kindness? The Lord looks upon thee this day, why have thou so
soon forgot me, and forsaken me? have I not took thee from the Dunghill, nay
from Hell? and whereas I had so many thousands to set my love on, I chose thee;
and whereas thou could not love me when I offered my self, thou could not
return me love again, I gave it therefore to thee, yea and have given my self
to thee for ever: Have thou thus forgotten me, when as I take little wrongs
from thee more heavily than great ones from others? Oh that this might make you
go out and mourn bitterly: so if ever you have tasted that love as Peter did,
Christ's looks will humble you.

Hence see the reason why some Godly People dye so uncomfortably, Use 2.
and with such distress of spirit; why they have not lived in an expectation
of Christ, and hence they cry out of themselves, not knowing whither they go,
insomuch as some have not been comforted by all former experiences, and by all
present consolations of Ministers: Oh no, it is now too late to speak, they
thank them for their love, but God has otherwise thought of them; yet if any
hope be given them it is ever picked out from some word, and they cry, Oh I
thirst for a little mercy, and then dye; and what is the reason of it? what
need I speak? Themselves will tell you, and have done it, Oh I have lived thus
and thus before you, but my heart in secret has gone after the world, etc. I
have neglected the Lord secretly, I have seldom thought of, or prepared for
Death, and I had thought to have been better, but the Lord has met with me: I
know violence of Disease may do it sometime, but I s^eak how '^is many times;
whereas otherwise an open entrance should be made, 2 Pet. 1. 8. 9, 10, 11. And
as it has been with some, so take warning lest it be so with you; you may be
saved alive, yet to suffer wrack on the shore is uncomfortable, and know it if
your conscience be awake, it cannot but be so. Therefore do not conclu^e they
were damned without Christ, but they were not made ready for Christ; and it may
be your time draws ^igh, and what have you to say? now a world for half an hour
will a dying distressed man say.

Is of a Fourfold exhortation, Use 3.
to all those especially that the Lord has espoused to himself.

CHAP. VIII.
A Fourfold Exhortation to Believers.
SECT. I.
TO quicken up all those doubting, Exhort. 1.
drooping, yet sincere hearts, that much question the love of Christ to them,
Now to use all diligence to make their Calling, and Election, and the love of
Christ sure to them, not but that it is sure on Christ's part, but make it sure
on your part too; else how can you be in a readiness to meet the Lord Jesus;
while the strong man keeps the Palace, the Goods be in peace; but when Christ
has once driven Satan out of his Throne, ^^en nothing sometimes but war, but
doubts and fears; Satan told God to his face, Job served him for naught, much
more will he accuse the Soul it se^f: and some Divines think the very first
ingredient of Satan's poison, and the first assault on Christ himse^f, Mat. 4.
was by seeking to make him doubt of his Sonship, If thou be the Son of God,
etc. And his wiles are here very great, that hence very few living christians
have any settled comfortable evidence of Gods eternal love to them in his Son:
and hence many sad events follow. How can any bless the Lord for that love
which he knows not of? many times it is with a man's doubts drooping from his
mind, as it is with his continual dropping on his Lungs, there is a daily
consuming of what once was; that many a christian doubts away his life, his
heart, his strength, and when all is wasted, glad now to return to that where
he should at first have begun. And hence in one word, he is made every day
unready for Christ. Oh therefore quiet not your selves in that estate as I fear
too many do (at least for a time) it is one of the most dangerous estates that
can be, to be troubled with weak fears, and yet rest in uncertain hopes; but
bring it to a conclusion, Is the Lord Jesus mine or no? and if he be yours, and
his love yours, see it, that you may trample on the neck of death, and triumph
over hell, and the grave, and long to be with the Lord, and love the appearing
of the Lord, and go away with joy unspeakable and full of glory out of this
world, as to your Wedding, and if there be any hope of getting it, who would be
without it? Some of you it may be have a long time been careless in seeking
for it, hence want it, some of you have been traders with the Lord long, and
yet doubt; some of you have not clear evidence, but content your selves without
being thankful to the Lord for what he has done for you, hence still doubt.
Others have gray hairs on your head, or at least are near your Graves, the
battle is near, your armor is not on, you are not yet ready, and so still
doubt. I remember what Christ said of Mary's Box, she prepared that for his
burial, it may be that these Truths may be prepared for your approaching
departure; and therefore light your Lamps at this fire, and light of the Lords
love to you, and see that indeed he loves thee.

But why do you persuade to this, Object.
till the Spirit comes and speaks it? How can I see it?

1. It Is true the Spirit only can do it, Answ.
but yet the same Spirit that seals the Elect, the same Spirit commands the
Elect not to sit Idle, and dream of the Spirit, but to use all diligence to
make it sure; and you shall never have it (unless you lay hold on a Fancy for
it) on those terms.

2. Though there is an immediate witness of the Spirit, of the love of Christ,
yet it does most usually and firstly witness by means. And hence I shall give
you means looking only to the Spirit of Christ to set them on. Evangelical
Precepts have a power: For Gospel-ministration of the Spirit consists not only
of stories and promises, but commands, and the Elect feel them: Hence carnal
men under the Law, yet pretending Gospel, will profess the Law is preached
when they are pressed to any Evangelical duty, because they feel not the power
of the Gospel, being not yet under it. And the means I shall mention, are only
general to establish the hearts of some.

Make a sad enquiry first of this, Whether the Lord has loved thee for his own
everlasting Names-sake or no, Means 1*
for if the Lord has loved Thee for this cause, then thy great Objection will
be answered, and that deep valley will be filled. How can the Lord love me that
am thus vile before God, and fallen from God? why if the Lord for his own sake
has loved thee, then as no good in thee moved him to love thee, so no sin
which he did know was and would be in thee can quench that love; and if he has
manifested his love to be grounded on this, though but once, that same Name
when thou changest is not changed, but is still as dear to him, and ever before
him to move him to love thee still, Romans 11. 2. The Apostle answers a Cavil,
Will God cast away his people? no says he, none that he foreknew; and who are
these? verse. 5. A remnant according to Grace as with us, i. e. God has for his
Grace-sake chosen and called without respect of any thing else: Hence that is
to be understood, 1 Samuel 12. 21, 22. For there are two sorts of people in the
Church; 1. Servants. 2. Sons, John 8. 35. Hence there is a double love the Lord
manifests to men.

1. Some he loves as servants, that as we hire some men to do our work, and
give them meat and wages, and then turn them out of doors, or let them go: so
God has work to be done, for his Son and Saints, and for many reasons hires
wicked men to it, either by giving them reward in this life, or hopes of reward
hereafter, and when the work is done, and use made of their Gifts, Graces,
Spirits, then turns them out of doors.

But 2. Some he loves as Sons, even the most foolish and weak in the world
sometimes: hence not for any service they can do, but for his own sake he will
give them an Inheritance, and love them as sons, because he will; these abide
ever in the Lords love: Hagar and Is^mael cast out, Sarah and Isaac stay in the
Family.

How shall I know that?

1. If the Lord loves thee for his Namesake, it will draw thee to that
fellowship with it self, Quest.
that whatever thou want, thou will seek for it hence, by presenting that
Name of God, that for his own sake he would supply: Answ.
I know the Lord loves for Christ's sake, but why should Christ help? for his
Namesake: For thus many hypocrites think when they see Gods anger against them
for their sin, they seek to remove that (...), and when that is done, think God
is at peace, and now all is well. They see the Lord is delighted with the
obedience of his people, hence fall to that work, and now thin^ the Lord is
pleased with them. But if ever the Lord loves any man, he will first stop his
mouth, whether Jew or Gentile, Romans 3. 19. and make him on his Knees know there
is no reason for it, nay all reason against it. Now has no^ the Lord brought
thee to this? and hence having nothing to quench Gods anger, but Christ, have
held up him before God, and having nothing to move Christ, have held up his
Name before him, and here have rested thy wearied heart looking to him, if any
Grace be begun in thee, that he would perfect it, i^ none, that he would begin
it; if unfit and unworthy, to prepare thee for it, only for his own good
pleasure: this is one evidence of it. As it is in some Seals, you can hardly
perceive in the Seal what is engraven there, but set it on W^x, you may see it
evidently: so here, hardly can you see the Lords love, look on thy heart if it
loves him; his choice, see if thou chusest him, his love for his own sake; if
thou cleavest with dearest affection to this love for its own sake, there thou
art safe, Prove. 18. 10. The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, etc. and this
not only at first conversion, but ever after all duties, all enlargements,
Ezak. 16. ult. And this does evidence love.

1. Because if thou had the righteousness of Angels thou would think it
a good evidence, but this of Christ is a thousand times dearer.

2. This is a setting of God against himself, i. e. to answer himself, and
hence Saints in all their straights and sorrows, hither had recourse; I speak
not now of Temporal Blessings, but of Everlasting love, and all the Fruits of
it, that here it hangs. Now I say you are built in a Rock higher than all
powers of Darkness; now a Key is put into thy hand to unlock all Gods Treasure;
now thou art in the very lap of love wrapped u^ in it, when here thy heart rests:
and if not Beloved, the Lord would never let thee lean thus in his bosom: and
therefore if this be thus, see it, and wonder his Name has moved him to love
me.

2. You shall find this, if the Lord for his Namesake loves thee, there is no^
any carriage or passage of Providence of him to thee, but he gets himself a
Name first or las^ by it: for if this be Gods end, every passage of Providence
is but a means to this end: hence he will attain this end by every act of his
Providence toward thee: hence you shall find that those very sins that
dishonor his Name, he will even by them (and if by them, by all things else)
get himself a Name: he will be so far from cas^ing thee out of his love, that
he will do thee good by them. Those very sins that God damns others for, he
will make to humble thee, empty thee. Pharisees persecuted Christ, and lost all
for it, Paul was so, and it humbled him all his life, Not worthy to be called
an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God, and it made him lay up all
his wealth in mercy, I was received to mercy, 1 Timothy 1. Mary sins much, and God
forgives much, and she loves much; others sinned much, and God hardened much;
Judas betraies Christ, and repents, and hangs himself, and flies from him;
Peter denies him, and weeps, and hence he is the first that Pre^cheth him. And
this is certain, in the best Hypocrite, sins left in him, either never make him
better, but blind and harden him, and he has his distinctions of infirmity,
etc. that he sleights them day by day, till all his days are run out, or if
any good, it is no more than Judas, or Cain, some legal terrors, or other light
flashes of comfort, but to be more humble indeed, etc. this he finds not. Now
is it not so with thee? Does not thy weakness strengthen thee with Paul? Does
not thy blindness make thee cry for light? and those cries have been he^rd,
out of darkness, God has brought light. Thou have felt venom and risings of
heart against Christ, and do they not make thee loath thy self more? that thou
think never any so beholding to Grace? do not thy falls into sin make thee
more weary of it, watchful against it, long to be rid of it? and so sin
abounds, but Grace abounds: Why should this be so? for his Names-sake, because
he will love thee; hence it is so great and unmatchable, that he will make thy
poison thy Food, thy Death thy Life, thy Damnation Salvation, thy very greatest
Enemies thy greater Friends. And hence Mr. Fox said, he thanked God for his
sins more than for his good works. I have marvailed at Gods dealings with his
people, they depart, and stay long, and care not for returning again; in that
time a mighty power teaches, humbles, brings back, when they never thought of
it. Oh the reason is, God will have his Name: now if thus, your assurance will
be strong and constant, but if you build thus, I have done this, etc. I have
that, your assurance will not stand; Means 2.
therefore look and see if it be not thus with you.

Take heed you do not build your assurance from a mingled Covenant of Works and
Grace, for this is the frame of diverse when they lie under the first Covenant
only of doing, they will not take this as any evidence, as they have no reason
so to do, Romans 9. 31. Nor when a man lies under the Second Covenant of
Believing barely, and if it be a dead Faith, they have no evidence or reason so
to do. Hence they mingle the Covenants, and think thus. If I can believe in
Christ, and perform universal obedience to all the commands of God, I shall be
safe; hence set upon the observance of both, and finding they can never do
them, especially the latter, hence are ever troubled, and never have any settled
peace. Hence those Galatians Paul writes to, perverting and mingling the
Covenants, were troubled, Gal. 1. 7. and 5. 12. Not (beloved) but that whoever
believes and performs universal obedience Evangelically to the whole Law, he
cannot but do well; and he that does it not, but lives in any one sin, let him
evidence his Faith if he can. But I speak when a man submits to it, sub forma
faederis, if I can do it, and because I cannot do it, hence doubt. Hence gather
your evidence of Gods love primarily and chiefly from your subjection to the
Second Covenant, Gal. 6. 16. Peace on them that walk according to this rule;
for Adams righteousness that did tie him to God, it brake; hence no life, nor
evidence from that, but Faith is an everlasting invincible Grace, upheld by the
mighty power of God, and hence here will be everlasting evidence and peace, 1
Pet. 1. 8. Whom though we see not, yet believing we rejoice. Object. Is a
Christian then free from the Law?

Yes, Answ.
he is free from it as from a Covenant: hence though it be broken by him, he is
not cast out of Covenant, or favor, but he is not free from it as a Rule, from
which if he swerves he is to call himself, not Gods love into question: Why?
because it has pleased the Father in another Covenant to offer life, give
life, and hence only to evidence life. Whatever the Law requires I have, at
that instant I did believe, I performed it in a Savior by Faith: and that I my
self may do every tittle of it, I come unto a Savior for it by Faith; so that
when Satan objects you have no Christ, nor love of a Christ, because no Faith,
and no Faith because you cannot do this or that. Answer, I cannot do it indeed,
I never undertook it to have life or love thus, but I have done it in another,
and I can do all things by Christ, if he will help me, under whose Grace I lie,
and hence will be so far from doubting, that I will rejoice in mine
infirmities, that I am a fit subject for the power and Grace of Christ to show
it self upon. Thus retire to the Second Covenant ever if ever you would get any
settled peace. And from neglect of this flows a worl^ of unpeaceablenesse in
many a spirit, ever complaining, and why? I cannot do this or that, never peace
now; but cannot you lie under the Lord that he would help? keep here, and keep
your peace here.

But many a Christian that retires hither has no peace, and so have I done,
yet find none? Object.


It Is then upon a double ground which you are to avoid: Answ.
either, 1. Because you have Faith, but you imprison your Faith, you put out
the eyes, and shackle the feet of Faith, for Faith will conquer and triumph
over all sins, and fears of the world, if at liberty, 1 John 5. 4. like a
Master in a Ship, if he cannot save the Ship one way, let him have liberty, he
will by another. As if it be Objected, You have departed from Christ, what have
you to do with him? I Will return says Faith to my first Husband. Ob. But he is
angry with you. Ans. If he b^ angry for my departure from him, I will not
provoke him more by staying here, who knows but he may repent? Ob. But you
cannot go to him with all your heart. ^ Answ. True, yet I Will look to him to
draw me. Ob. But you feel nothing. Ans. Yet I will wait. Ob. But you will wait
in vain. Ans. Still I Will look he would keep me from that. Now stop at any of
these, trouble comes, suffer it to shift it will find rest. As it is with the
Anchor, let it down but little* ^he ship drives, but let it down at full
length, it will ride in storms; then, it is (...) of Faith that gets the
Blessing, where opposition makes the Soul take faster hold; as it was with
Jacob. The Woman of Canaan got it thus.

Or 2. It Is because they look for another kind of Faith, and hence own not
this, as the Jews the Messiah, they made account to have received him in state,
and he came low; so men look for a superlative Faith, but want it. But thus the
Soul espoused to Christ, so long as Marriage-Covenant lasts, she may conclude
of love.

Do not fear the love of Christ is not toward you, because he hides his face,
and departs some times from you; Husbands remain so when they depart, Means 3.
and leave the house for many a day, and it is simple to say he is not my
Husband now. So here the Lord loves his people, yet departs, Isai. 54. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7. and truly it is very hard when inward blows, and sad desertions, and
outward miseries, and no Christ found, though sought for. But how shall I then
know and discern his love? Answ. Many things might be said this way, only one
thing observe, whether thy love remains still to him for himself; for it is rule
that most commonly a christians purest and dearest love appears in Christ's
absence from him. As it is with Friends, while with us we love them, but when
gone, we feel that love mo^e quick than before. Jerusalem lies in the dust, and
now the very dust is beloved, Psalm. 102. 13, 14. and if it be so, it is certain
we love him because he loved us, and we continue to love him, because he
continues to love us; now look then if thy love do not appear, 1. In mourning
for his absence. 2. In longing for his presence. 3. In blessing him for a
little that is left of himself, as seeing such want of him; and is not this for
himself to have his company again, that though God gives thee all other things,
yet when thou come to consider the Lord is gone, this strikes near, as when
Christ departed away, John 16. 5, 6. But because love may be benumbed, and lie
dead, therefore try it a time of parting, and put thy heart thus to it; if he
be none of thine, then take thy fill in thy sin, and forsake him: no Beloved,
here you shall see the heart will yield and melt, John 13. 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. and
it will say, Lord let me never sin more against thee, though never saved by
thee. And take it for a rule, do not think the Lord has left off his love to
you when you depart from him, and he from you: but lying in your Departures, Oh
that is sad; but return again, it comforts the Lords heart, especially when
it is for himself, not for peace and salvation, but though he never saves me, Oh
yet I will look after him.

Look to the tender-heartednesse of the Lord Jesus, Means 4.
for (Beloved) all the doubts of Christians arise chiefly from this head, from
a hard opinion of Christ, which Satan suggests, as at first, Genesis 3. 5. that so
they might take in his wares. Gods people do not know the tender-heartednesse
of the Lord Jesus; Satan presents him only in wrath, when any threats are
spoken, all these are mine says the soul, etc. And now if any Woman lives with
a man that is of a hoggish churlish disposition, she will be ever doubting of
his love. Men do not know it I say, and hence when any misery or trouble comes,
they grow jealous of him, which the Lord takes exceeding ill, Deuteronomy. 1. 27.

Quest. How shall I know that tender-heartedness of Christ?

Answ. By his carriage toward men when he was here on earth, for now he is in
Heaven in Glory, and we know not what his disposition is: therefore his life on
earth was the living looking-glass of his heart for ever. In Four Things.

1. Never any came to him that he cast away, whatever their sorrows or sins
were, but healed them every one if they came to him with their miseries: for in
healing their miseries, he did but show his readiness to heal them of their
sin; hence Matthew applies that, Mat. 8. 17. He bare our infirmities.

2. When men came to him for by-ends, not for himself chiefly, he rebukes them
for it, and shows he was more ready to give himself, than bread to them, John
6. 27.

3. Those that were lost, and sick, and miserable, and came not to him, he went
up and down to seek and save them, the lost Sheep, Luke 19. 10.

4. Those that would none of his love, he pitied and had compassion on their
misery and sin; as on them that were sheep without a shepherd; he mourned for
the hardness of their hearts: he wept over Jerusalem. Now look upon Christ the
same still: thou come to him in secret to take away all iniquity, to give
thee himself; tell me, do think the Lord if here would reject thee ever. 2.
But I dare not receive him. Ans. Thou will take Bread from him daily, and he is
more willing to give himself. 3. Thou can not come to him, nor find him, but
only sometimes, nor see him; well, but then he will seek thee out. 4. Oh but I
often reject: yet he pitties thee still. O think of this compassion of Christ,
and make him as if present; it is a special means to establish the heart in
Believing.

Learn to know when you are bound not to give way to your fear of Gods love;
Means 5.
for sometime it is the case of many a precious soul, that he has clear
evidence of Gods love to him: and what is there against it? nothing but a fear,
what if I should be deceived when all is done? and hence the heart sinks
exceedingly. As some Women that have special love, if once they take a
jealousy of their Husbands love, it is never removed; So here.

How shall I know this?

First, Quest.
If those fears thou have drive thee farther from Christ, it is clear you are
then to cast them off: Answ.
those fears that cause sin are sinful, but to be driven from Christ is sinful,
Luke 5. 9, 10. Lord depart from me, I am sinful: fear not says Christ, 1 Samuel
12. 20. they were ready to cast off all, Fear not, says he; think of this,
what it is you get by nursing up those fears, they hinder your joy in, and your
love to Christ, your blessing of Christ, cause a dead discouraged heart: nay
though they drive you to Christ one way, if they drive you from Christ another
way by questioning his care; concluding against his Truth, never doubt they are
vile, Mat. 8. 26. Why did ye fear O ye of little Faith. So far therefore as
fear drives us to Christ, it is good, otherwise to be cut off.

2. If the Lord has drawn thy heart to come to Christ, and when undone, every
way secretly persuaded thy heart that thou shall have help if thou come, and by
coming have received healing Virtues of thy lusts and vile affections from the
Lord Jesus, fear not now, it is a sin to fear I shall not have help, as Mark 5.
33. the Woman with the Bloody-issue, she was afraid she had presumed, hence
came trembling, but the Lord told her, Now fear not, be it unto thee according
to thy Faith: only thy Issue is but begun to heal. What say you, have you never
come to him, never received any healing from him? that is hard. Surely it is so,
that I would not be in my lust again for a world.

If none of these prevail, Means 6.
but the Lord follows thee with fears on fears, as wave on wave, then see if
there be not some guile of spirit in thee, i. e. some sin you have or would
give way to if you had assurance of Gods love. It was the speech of one to me,
next to the Donation of Christ, no mercy like this, to deny assurance long; and
why? for if the Lord had not, I should have given way to a loose heart and
life, but, etc. so if the Lord should deal so with thee, it may be thou
would lie in thy sins, if thou had pe^ce there, and it may be you have
had it, but sinned, and not confessed, not lamented, not opposed: Thus it was
with David, Psalm 32. 1, 2, 3, 4. Hence when he confessed, the Lord forgave in
his Conscience his sin. Men will withdraw their love from their Wives if it
make them wanton, and deal sharply with them: so one that never restored, could
never get peace; some ever complaining, never settled, because they have their
Truces with sin, and would have peace with Christ, and it cannot be. And this
is a rule I have long held, in them that have clear light of the Gospel, long
denial of assurance is like fire to burn out some sin, and then the Lord will
speak peace, Judge. 10. 16. And therefore take this counsel, and God will tell
thee thy sin, if thou art desirous that he should find it out, but get this
mercy from him, Zach. 13. 9.

Bring thy heart to a straight, either to reject or receive him to be thine,
Means 7.
he is offered to be King, and Savior, and Lord, and Husband; now thou shall
have his heart, his hand, his Spirit, his Father, his Kingdom, his Ordinances,
his Angels, himself if you receive him, or else if not, you shall lose him, and
then woe to thee when any mercy, any misery, any Ordinance befalls thee, for
all shall suck thy Blood, consume thee, and fit thee for eternal ruin: and
then wish, Oh that I had taken him, but then too late; therefore receive him or
reject him: Oh I cannot; that is another matter: However we propound these
Evangelical commands that may come with power, and therefore know, that if they
do not now, they shall arise again in time.

SECT. II.
THis is not all that which makes you ready for Christ, unless your love is
set and fixed on him: Exhort. 2.
and therefore look that it be ready. I doubt not but that there is glowing in
your hearts, some love to the Lord, it cannot be that all should be quenched,
that all his kindness should be forgotten, but remembered many times with some
affliction: but know it, if it be so, your lamp is not yet in your hand, nor
your Souls ready to meet the Lord: For look as it is with a mighty Prince that
shall set his heart on some poor servant, and he requires no portion but to
love him the more, and she cannot bring her heart to love him more than other
mean Fellows, is she fit or ready to be Matched unto him? So here: hence. Mat.
10. 37. He that loves Father or Mother, etc. then you are ready when your love
is fit for such an Husband; and therefore though you feel some love under the
ashes (when you stir up your hearts) to the Lord Jesus, yet if it be not a fit
love beseeming his Excellency, and the Glory of his Person, when you can draw
out buckets of love, and pour it upon other things, but scarce fetch out a drop
for Christ, and yet you hope that will serve the turn; I tell you no, you are
yet unfit and unready for him. Look as it was with their offering the
Testimonies of love and thankfulness, Mal. 1. 14. so it is here. And therefore
my Exhortation shall be as it is said in that Psalm, Psalm. 86. 7, 8.
Give unto the Lord the kingdoms of the earth. Give unto the Lord the honor
due unto his Name: So give to the Lord the love that is due unto him, that love
that is fit for him.

What is that love the Lord would have, Quest.
which is fit for him?

1. Beloved, I hope if you think not your Blood too dear for Christ, you will
not think any love too much for Christ: Answ.
Yet because I would not have you aim at an uncertain mark, and shoot at a
venture, I shall single out that love which I hope your own Consciences cannot
but say is fit. And,

1. I had thought to have sought for this from you, viz. Give the Lord Jesus
but that love, no more love than thou have given to thy lusts, the Lord will be
contented with it, Romans 6. 19. As ye have yielded, etc. so now; but that it may
be you may think this love too base for him, yet give him but this, and the
Lord would be contented with it, and accept of it; and those that shall not, it
shall be their Torment in Hell to think of this word: Oh that I had given the
Lord Jesus that love I gave to my base lusts, I had had him, and been in Heaven
with him. But I wholly press a Second.

2. Do but love him as he loves thee, i. e. you cannot answer the greatness
of his love, but do it for your measure: If you cannot pay him in pounds, yet
pay him in pence, and this is fit for him: For 1. He is worthy of love, there
is beauty in him why thou should desire him; there is none in thee. 2. Thy
love shall have a recompense, 2 Timothy 4. 8. he never can have recompense from
thee.

3. He loves thee first with his own love, now that is unreasonable not to
reflect his beams, and return him his own again in similitude, if not in parity.

Wherein appears the love of the Lord to me, Quest.
that so I may see how to manifest the like love to him?

He has loved thee more than himself, more than his own honor, for he made
himself of no reputation, Answ.
Phil. 2. 7. more than his own comforts, he left the bosom of a Father, and
bore the wrath of a Father for thee; more than his own life, he saw thy neck
upon the block, and Gods Axe up to give the Bloody Fatal stroke; and he came in
thy room, and loved thy life more than his own, lost his own before one hair of
thy head should perish, though he knew thee a Traitor to God, and an enemy to
himself, Romans 5. 10. Rev. 1. 5, 6. if this be not thus, woe to thee living, woe
to thee dying. What art thou but a sad spectacle hung up in thy chains in this
world for Angels in Heaven to see and tremble at, and for Devils, Sins, and
eternal Sorrows, like Fouls of Heaven to Prey upon. Now is it not fit that thou
should love him more than thy self? his honor more than thine, his
consolations more than thine own, his Person more than thine own, nay more than
thy life? Rev. 12. 11. I have known them whom the Lord has revealed this love
to, that have thought it too little to do, and hence have wished they had been
born in those Times that they might have laid down their lives for him: Where
is now this love? Does not self-love swallow up all? Lord, what self-seeking,
self-serving, self-minding, self-honouring, self-pleasing, and the Lord himself
and his love forgot, as if there were no Christ, or in him no love.

2. He has loved thee when he might have passed by thee, and loved others that
might have wone the Lord toward them (I speak after the manner of men) rather
than thee; men of greater place, greater gifts and parts, greater pomp in the
world, but Romans 9. Jacob shall be loved, Esau hated: he has passed by Kings
with their Crowns, and now set his heart on thee a Babe, when wise ones know
him not; foolish, when prudent ones see him not; weak, when strong and mighty
receive him not. Yea, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1. 28. Base things, and
things which are not. God has made thee nothing in thine own eyes. Behold his
love, and now do the like for him. It may be sometime thy carnal eye sees more
Glory in the creature, than in Christ; more in the honor of man, than in the
honor of a Christ, etc. And hence might set thy heart on them rather than
on Christ, because strongly tempted so to do, and it may after some scourges be
saved at last, yet pass by them, and set thy heart only on him. We judge of a
Friend by the times of trial, and of a Christian, by a time of temptation. Now
a Balaam, a Witch may not dare in time of temptation, to fall into it. Oh get
one strain highe^, and go one step farther than a Witch, though I might let my
heart loose after the world, I will not love it, the love of the Lord deserves
it, the love of the Lord constrains me to give my love to him and not to the
world, though I might hide it, and have pardon for it.

3. He loves thee although thou wrongest him, Isa. 43. 22. to 26. when he is so
wronged that he is ready to give thee up, yet Hos. 11. 8, 9. He is God and not
man, nay, which is more wonderful, where sin there Grace abounds. Hence David
makes this an Argument, Psalm. 25. 11. Forgive because it is great. And hence
Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. Because it is astiffnecked people. Oh therefore love him,
though he smites thee, though he forsakes thee, wherein he may seem, but indeed
does no wrong to thee, but love thee; for chastisement is part of the portion
of sons, not of Bastards, Heb. 12. 6, 8. But do as that woman when she came to
the stake, gave away her clothes, some to one, some to another, Now farewell
friends, and world, welcome Love, welcome Christ. So if the Lord comes to take
away all from thee, the child of thy body, the husband of thy youth, the wife
of thy bosom, the comforts of thy life, provisions from thy family, bread from
thy mouth, bid farewell to them, give them into the Lords hands, and now say,
welcome Christ. Its usual for Christians at first conversion and espousing, the
Lord loves them dearly, and tenders them, shows nothing but love to them, and
then their love is fresh; afterward come hard Frosts, and Winter-storms, and
cold blasts of displeasure: Christ departs from the Soul, withdraws himself,
hides his face, and sends sad afflictions; now the Soul apprehending anger, and
nothing else, it grows discouraged, and so dies: when if it could stay and
wait, it should see all from love, and doing it the greatest good. Oh remember
this: he does afflict me, he does depart from me, he does fear me with Hell,
yet I Will love him never a whit the less: Though the Lord buries all the
Blessings he gives me, yet my love shall live, and if it do fall it shall arise.

4. He loved thee when in thy low estate, Psalm. 136. 23. even when as no eye
pitied thee, Ezekiel. 16. nay when thou were vilest, at the height of thy sin,
under deepest depths of misery, and straightest captivity, after Friends had
almost ceased to counsel, Word and Spirit could do no good, after Conscience
had warned thee. Oh love him when he is in his lowest estate, when his enemies
persecute him, and his seeming Friends forsake him. Before you came to this
Land, you thought Christ and persecution, Christ and the meanest condition, nay
Christ and death would be sweet: the Lord it may be does or will try your love;
and here you find Christ and losses in Estate, Christ and crosses in your
Family, Christ and many fears, and toils, and cares. Do you love him now as
well as ever you did for all this? Oh never was my heart worse! I doubt not but
a discerning Christian may see how all the world is against Christ, nay many
Traitors in his own Family, who love the bagg more than Christ. Many foolish
Virgins who love their sleep and sloth more than Christ; nay the hearts and
Spirits of his own Friends declining, that there is not that life of Christ,
that presence, and savor, and power of Christ in Hearts, in Prayers, in Lives,
and no complaints of this: Now is the fittest time of love, when no eye sees,
when no heart loves him, or cares for him, Psalm 119. 126, 127. Therefore I
love thy commands, when he is shut out of every heart, when none to receive
him, if any love it will appear now.

5. He does love thee constantly every moment, John 13. 1. 2. He has thee
every moment in his own bosom, every moment thou art sinning, and he is
pardoning. Sin, and Satan, and Hell, and wrath are every moment waiting to hurt
thee, and he is every moment watching over thee, redeeming of thee. Every
moment sin and justice cry against thee, and yet he is continually making
intercession for thee, Isai. 27. 2, 3. Every moment he is blessing when thou
art sinning. Oh the unknown love of the Lord Jesus! Oh these fits of love are
not fit for him. Love him every moment, delight in him every moment. When a man
has a fire every moment warming him, but still is cold, it is a sad sign that
Death is near: You can love him sometimes in a Sermon, but soon after cold
again, or in a Sacrament, and presently heart-dead again: or after answer to
Prayers, and some special deliverances, and then the heart is un-affected
again, and so a little pang of love must content Christ: if he cease one
moment to love thee, and to manifest it to thee, then cease to love him; if he
cease not to love thee dearly, never to leave thee, Oh then ever love him.

But we have such distractions and cares?

Men in love will follow their work, Object.
and Women will do the Huswifry of the house, Answ.
and yet love is at notime to seek to their Husbands, and shall the Lord have
less?

6. He loves thee with an unmeasurable love, Romans 5. 20. Where sin, there Grace
has abounded: hence Ephesians. 2. 3, 4. Love, and great love, verse. 7. Exceeding
riches of his Grace: For there is in Christ.

1. A created love. One man loves another exceedingly, as Jonathan did David.
Now he has the perfection of all humane or Angelical love toward his people
put in him.

2. Increated love, infinite love of a God, and hence it is immeasurable. He
thinks nothing he does too much, nothing he gives too dear: hence when world is
slain, Satan cast out, when he is out sin must out; when some sins removed, the
rest must; when they are out, then death must; when Death, then Hell. And when
there is no life, no Grace, he works it; it decaies, he restores it; it cannot
act, he quickens it; it cannot, does not grow, he waters it. He has given thee
the earth, and the days of peace and patience; those are too little: he calls
thee, and when thou can not come, draws thee, and gives thee pardon: that is
too little: he gives earth to thee, that is too little: (world is theirs) he
gives Heaven to thee, that is too little (for they are made Coheirs:) he gives
promise to thee, that is too little: he gives himself, and Spirit, and can he
do more? Yes, we cannot drink in all that goodness and love; hence he gives
eternity to thee, and he shall more and more enlighten thee: not only let thy
Soul live to bless him, but thy poor body, and every dust of it to be raised
up to Glory with him. What the Lord promised to Abraham, In blessing I will
bless, that portion is thine. Oh now love him without measure. Oh how I love
thy law! how did David love it? I cannot tell; but if he loved the word of
Christ, then much more the person of Christ, the presence of Christ,
everlasting fellowship with Christ. Oh take heed of giving Christ, and
measuring out unto Christ his portion, his allowance, that when the Lord comes
to you for more love (as he does daily) you give him that answer which many do
in their practice, you have let him have as much as you can: so that you cannot
spare any more from your selves, from a base world, from Wife, and Child, and
Creature, from a slothful course: you hope the Lord will accept of that little
he has. I confess a little water in a Spring is better than much that comes
by Land-floods, but be sure it be a Spring, else not accepted. Beloved, time
was you lived without Christ, did nothing for him: now you do; and what thou
do this year, did last year, and no more: what love Christ had yesterday,
the same he has to day and no more: Will you thus stint the Lord? Either do
more, give more, or mourn you cannot: Oh one life, one heart is too little for
him. It has put me to sad fears of many men's estates to see this frame, a
world of sin without measure every day: where is the Christian that loves the
Lord the more every day? how can any then say much is forgiven, when they do
not love much.

7. He loves thee now in Glory, there has prepared a place for thee, John 14.
1, 2, 3. where he long^ for thee, John 17. 24. You know Pharaoh's Butler when
exalted to his place, forgot poor Joseph. One would think now the Lord Jesus is
in Glory, and has God, and Angels, and his Kingdom to content him, he should
never look after such a worm, such a poor helpless creature as thee. But as
the High Priest carried the Names on his breast, and precious stones, so the
Lord Jesus has thy Name writ upon his very heart. Oh now love him when he
exalts thee to Glory, to give thee the Kingdom of Heaven on earth, with peace
and quietness. When Germany lies in blood, and Eastern Churches slain by the
Dragon, devoured by the Turk, when Englands lights and lamps are going out, no
people have such peace, such glory in so small a time. Beloved, now where is
love? The Churches of Christ never lost their love so much as when they had
their peace, and have been 1600 years a learning by A^flictions and
Persecutions, h^w to enjoy their peace, and to have their love smell as sweet
then, as when be^^en most, and yet have not, but like the Globe without the
Cross in the Emblem rolling and running farther and fa^ther from God, In Cruce
quies. Oh unreasonable to love him least whom he tenders most. Does not Prayer
grow cold for the Name of Christ, for the Churches of Christ? then love grows
cold. Does not plenty of means make thy soul slight means: when you went many
miles to hear, and had scarce bread at home, Oh you thought if once you had
such liberties! but when they are made yours, now what fruit. Do not fall in
affections to Saints? Oh love dies, Christ deals not so with thee, and who
knows but in Rocks and Mountains of the Wilderness thou may lament these
evils which peace breed now?

8. He loves thee so as when any evil touches thee, he has a feeling of it,
and is grieved at it, Iud. 10. 16. Isai. 63. 9. nay he then comforts thee most,
both in them, and by them, John 14. 27. Not as the world gives peace, so give I
it to you: Oh then grieve thou for those evils that betide him, the wrongs that
others offer him, but especially the unkindnesse thy own Soul shows him, Mark
5. 3. He mourned for the hardness of their heart, Ephesians. 4. 29, 30. Let no
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, and grieve not the Holy Ghost,
Heb. 3. 10. Forty years long was I grieved because they erred; I confess you
will wrong him, but will you, must you be impenitent too? Did his enemies
grieve him on earth, and shall his Friends grieve him in Heaven, and no
sorrows, no secret tears? he has shed his Blood for thy sin, it shall never
condemn, and wilt not thou shed tears? Is there no good Nature? But what is
there no spirit of mourning? It may be many a day and week have thou grieved
him, and not a sigh to any purpose to ease thee of thy sin, but what has eased
thee in thy sin. Oh now comfort his heart again after thou have most grieved
him; comfort his Spirit that is dying sighing in thee; as he comforts thee by
thy troubles, comfort him by making a right use of all thy sins to be more
humble, more vile, to love him the more, and love thy self the less, as the
Prodigal Son, Luke 15. 18, 20, 24.

9. He loves thee so, that though he departs, he will not, does not stay long
from thee, though you may think it long, Isai. 54. 7. Hence it is wonder to see
when heart gone, love lost, life lost, yet suddenly thou art brought down on
thy knees: Oh it is the Lord that does it: Thou wast in sorrow of heart, he did
not stay long, but came and comforted thee; thou wast in thy sins, it was not
long but he delivered thee; thou wast in want of knowledge of him, it has not
been long but that he has revealed the Lord to thee; thou have been in
afflictions and troubles, it has not been long but he has heard thee: So give
him the like love. I know you will fall from him in love, in delight, in care;
but do not stay long from him. Sometime the baits of the world will draw thee
from him when thou have thy ease and peace, Oh think it was better with me once
than now; when fears drive thee from him, yet return, 1 Samuel 12. 21, 22. Oh
here is that which hardens hearts, breaks your peace, and grieves the Lord so
as he is forced to send many sad afflictions, because you lie in your falls: Oh
be not long, no^ far from him. He returns to thee when thou art most unkind to
him: return when he is ever kind. He returns to thee though he has no need of
thee, thou have of him; He will not leave thee: Oh leave not him!

10. He has from before all worlds loved thee, when no reason for it, Ier. 31.
1, 2, 3. Thou have neglected to love him long, all thy youth, nay it may be all
thy life; Oh you beloved of the Lord begin to do it now, when there is all
reason for it, when Heaven calls for it, Earth calls for it, Ordinances plead
for it, Spirit says come, and calls for it too. It may be thy life is not
long. What not yet?

But how shall I come to do this, Quest.
thus to love the Lord?

The Lord only can plant, Answ.
can water this Grace, yet because the Lord does it by means, I will give you
some now.

1. Labor to find out the true sweetness, and to taste the bitterness of the
deceitful sweetness of all Creatures, for this is a rule in reason, a man's
affections like streams must run some way: and it is a rule in Theology, stop
the affections from running to the Creature, and in a sincere heart it will run
unto Christ, Hos. 2. 6, 7. if it be from all creatures: Now then the affection
is turned from the Creature, when it finds the bitterness of the deceiving
sweetness of it: and Secondly finds out the real sweetness of it; for make it
as a rule, when a man's heart cannot love Christ (unless it be when it is
benumbed) it is because he has somewhat else to joy his heart; now let the
Creature yield you no more joy, and Christ has your love: indeed you may and
must joy in the real sweetness of it, and this will increase, and not diminish
your love.

Quest. What is the real sweetness of the Creature?

Answ. Christ's love: Oh see this, if Christ should not love thee, would not thy
life be death, thy Salvation from many dangers be Damnation, thy Friends
miserable comforters, thy joys sorrows? what good would any thing do thee if
thou had these thoughts, all these I have, but wrath with them? What comfort
can a man take in his Feast, if news were then brought that after it is done,
you must go to the stake to be burnt? You that joy in your pastimes, one frown
of Christ would blast all. Oh see this, Psalm 63. Thy loving-kindnesse is
better than life, in thy favor is life. Now joy for this, and this will knit
your heart nearer to him. For Jesus sake ponder this Point.

Now 2. Taste the bitterness of the sweetness remaining now it is distilled;
and Satan shows a Threefold sweetness, before, in, and after the enjoying of
it.

Now 1. Before, remember how they have drawn away and held thy heart from God,
done thee more hurt than all afflictions, many a sweet smile had thou had
from God, but for them.

2. In the enjoying of it it is sweet, but when it is sweet to thee, it is then
most bitter to the heart of God; when thy joy is kindled, the Lords sorrow is
stirred up and provoked.

3. After. 1. It will draw thy heart from God: and 2. It will be bitter in thy
belly at last. Whatever sweetness draws thee from the love of Christ, Oh it
will be bitter. Romans 6. 21. Chew upon this, and see if any thing here be worthy
of your joy, and if not, then return to your first Husband.

II. Taste the allsufficiency of the love of Christ: a Woman that is not
content with her Husbands love, she will not love him as it is fit. So when
other things make love to us, and the Lords love is not enough, Cant. 1. 4.
More than wine: hence the upright love thee. Do but sit down and think what
this is: If once he loves thee, whatever he can he will do for thee, he will
order all thy life, not one thing shall hurt thee, every thing in providence
shall work for thy glory, sins, sorrows, etc. so as thou shall say his denyals
are better than his gifts, his blows better than smiles, his withdrawings
better than his presence, these evils better than joys, and when once he loves
me, he will never leave me, that come life; come death, I am safe. Oh taste
this!

III. See the Lord Jesus now as he is, and ^n truth this were enough to make
any profane heart love him, much more a Saint espoused to him, but the Lord
has hid himself from their eyes, shall he be so, is he so from yours? 1 Pet.
1. 8. When seeing not with bodily eyes, but with Faith, ye love him, 1 John 3.
1, 2, 3. We shall see him as he is. Why suppose the day of doom was come,
Christ in the clouds, and all creatures before him, all Angels ministering to
him, in all the Glory of his Father; Oh then the love of Christ, Oh one smile,
one word of Christ would be precious. Lord that men should be in a Dream! See
Christ a little higher set in his Throne, a place more glorious, though less
seen, in all the Glory of his Father, all mighty Angels ministering to him, all
the world put into his hand, doing what he will, and all he will; why will you
not love him now? Is the Gospel a Fable? say so if it be, then love him not if
you can. When Simeon and the Wise men saw him, though but in his abasement,
they honored him, much more now if see him in glory. It Is a question whether
the beams of the Sun are fire: Some demonstrate it thus, Take a Glass and
gather together the beams, it burns. Therefore so if you would see so as to be
affected, gather together the beams of his glory and love; Thus you see the
means to get fit love, and if it be lost, Oh now get it again, lest the Lord
strain for it, else you are not fit, and if it be not any love that suffices,
much less no love, as in many of you: but consider 1 Cor. 16. 22. He that
loves not Christ, let him be accursed: Oh that this might be won from you, O
little love goes out to Christ, who sees it not? Ordinances of Christ, men are
weary of them, the truths of Christ, despise them, the Servants of Christ, they
quarrel with them. Now recover your Love, the Lord help you so to do.

SECT. III.
TO do the work of Christ, Exhort. 3.
to be daily at it, and finishing of it; for look as it was with the Head, it is
so with all the Members that are to remain a while in this life, they have some
work to do for the Lord; some common, some special work, and when that is done,
now they are ready to return home again. Hence John 17. 4, 5. I have finished
the work, and now he stands at the door and knocks, and is ready for entrance,
Now glorify me with thy self, and you shall find a faithful heart will neither
be willing nor ready to go till this is done.

What is this work I am to do? Quest.


I have answered this elsewhere at large, Answ.
yet these two things I would say.

1. That a man's chief work lies not in facile duties, for though Grace and
Christ's spirit makes duties easy, his yoke easy; yet there is a contrary
Spirit that will make them hard and difficult at first.

2. Least I should leave you unsatisfied altogether, we shall find a christian
life is carried with a double motion: 1. In seeking of God in his Ordinances.
2. Or in walking with God out of his Ordinances, these are joined together,
Genesis 6. 8, 9. Noah found Grace, hence sought it, though not in the eyes of the
world: and hence Noah walked with God. Hence we see Christ was sometime in the
Mount alone, Sometime abroad going up and down doing good. Moses in the Mount
and in the Camp too. Now look as before a man is justified, his chief work then
is to seek God in his Ordinances for a principle: so a soul now espoused to
Christ is to walk with Christ: now walking implies constant following of
another, or a continual work; so Christ has work for you every moment. Hence
in every company, time, place, temptation, enquire thus, Am I not like to lose
my time, my heart, Christ's honor? What work has Christ for me to do? hold
here, for here lies your work. Look as an ambitious man asks, how serves this
for my honor, and Satan how he may dishonor Christ; so do you ask, how you
may honor him, Romans 6. 19. As you have given your selves instruments of
iniquity, etc. And now because we live in times and places wherein men have so
much work of their own to do, that Christ is neglected, wherein very few walk
with God. Hence men taking men's examples for patterns and copies of their
course, content themselves to do as others do: And this being a close act,
mainly consisting in what is unseen; and because men are apt to put off Christ
with desires, and serve Satan indeed, and because apt to resolve all Religion
into some two or three duties or Graces, and because men's hearts are catching
at comforts and promises, but commands tedious and burdensome; I shall press
this upon these Motives; only here let me premise when I press you to this,
it is not to a Covenant of Works, as though you could act your selves, but we
look to Christ's Blood and Spirit to set on things; I speak to them under Grace,
who have the Spirit without, and Faith within to act and carry them here. But

1. Whose work will you do? M^t. 1.
you cannot cease to do Christ's work, but you must do your own work, (I speak
not for idleness) i. e. you must serve your lust; now consider what good did
thy self ever do thee, nay Satan never such an enemy as thy own self: and will
you fall down to such an Image? Shall thy lusts have content more and rather
than Christ?

2. Consider the Lord will take care and charge of thee, to do thy work, to
bring about thy ends for thee, do but thou do his. Martha was cumbred about
many things, hence forsook the better part: so men neglect, forget Christ's
work, because of so many distractions of their own. What will become of my
hundred Talents? what will become of my Wife; Child? Now do you take care of
the Lords work, take that for your charge, and the Lord will take charge of
you. The best, readiest, and only way to have your own ends, is to seek the
Lords, and forget your own. As in Solomon, his great work and care was to rule
a State well, and the Lord gave all the rest. Set thy face to the Sun, and
these shadows will follow you. The Servant takes charge of his Masters work,
and he need not trouble himself for meat and drink, and e contra.

First, there shall not any evil hurt thee, whereas else thy good things
shall, Isai. 27. 3.

Secondly, All Creatures in Heaven and Earth shall serve that man that serves
his God, Hos. 2. 21, 23. whereas else they groan under thee.

Thirdly, Angels shall come out of Heaven to guard thee.

Fourthly, Nay the Lord Jesus himself shall stand at the top of the ladder,
that when every thing else shall leave thee, he shall then bring the best wine
at the last, he will be a portion to thee, Psalm 16. Phil. 3. 8.

3. Consider that the more difficult any duty is, the more sweetness shall you
receive if you break through it: Men plead difficulty, I plead gain. Hence he
that overcomes shall eat of the hidden Manna: Hence never any so comforted,
honored as Christ, because never any went through so hot a work for the Father
as Christ, Phil. 2. You plead the difficulty of a christian life, and taste not
the sweetness of that life: if you can do no more than what is easy, and
pleases self, the Lord will never let you taste the sweetness of pleasing
him. Have you not sometimes found your hearts dead to Prayer, yet you fell to
it, and then would not but have took the season for a world.

4. Consider, let the duty be to Nature impossible, yet the Lord is at hand to
help, even when no strength, Isai. 40. 29. Nay Heb. 11. 34. Out of weakness
were made strong. If you had no Christ, no Spirit, no Promises to assure you of
help, you might then cease acting, and say it is impossible I should ever
overcome such evils, attain to that measure: but when Promises to assure, and
Christ and Spirit at hand, now to plead impossibility, is to reproach the Lord;
to think he will set his people to make Brick, and give them no straw: nay to
war against God and to make the Lord war against you, Numb. 14. You know how
they cried out of impossibilities, and now the Lords anger rose when they were
ready to enter Canaan: So when men are ready to enter upon possession of
Christ, and Promises, then impossibilities appear. Consider therefore what the
Lord has done for David, Gideon, Samson, who went out in the name and Spirit
of the Lord, and were helped: If you were under the Law, you might plead this,
but under Grace it is horrible to make this excuse.

5. Consider if the Lord do not help (as he will be free) yet he will accept
thy will, I know he will not accept the wishes of servants, yet he will accept
the will of Sons; neither will he accept the will of Sons in a work they might
have strength from him to do, and go not to him for it; but in that case he
will; as 2 Cor. 12. 9. i. e. it is enough, I accept thee: and this is very
sweet, that for his own sake he should be pleased as well with the will as with
the work, for this is that which troubles, I would have help, the Lord gives
none; why the Lord accepts of it as if thou did it, as in David's building a
Temple: For a Christians work is done two ways.

First, Sometimes by feeling, when we feel help.

Secondly, Some times by Faith, by going to another for it: and this the Lord
accepts most mercifully, for this is his Victory over all sin, even his Faith.
When we see a duty hard, and do not go to the Lord for help, then we are
overcome properly: For out of the abundance of the heart the person acts for
Christ.

6. Consider the Lord will honor thee (though the work does not) John 12. 26.
Him will my Father honor, both in this life, Romans 2. 29. and in that to come.
Now as it is in acting parts, it is no matter what Fellow-acters think, God is
the great Spectator, God will esteem of thee, and Conscience shall witness as
much when no eye sees, or when men see and judge amiss, yet the Lord approves,
and at the great Day before Men and Angels, and all the world, 1 Cor. 4. 5.
Then shall every man have praise of God: and hence Mat. 25. Christ's judgment
is made according to the works of his people: because then they shall not be
compared with themselves and their sins, but with the wicked: and hence to set
out their glory, he reckons up all they have done. All men in all their acts
seek to avoid shame, and attain honor: now if you did know a way for all men
in the world to honor you, would you not attend it? what is their Dreams to
Gods honor? Hence not one act but is now chronicled, Mal. 3. 16. and afterward
rewarded, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Oh then give content to the Lord.

7. Consider the peace you shall have by this means, both while you live, and
when you dye: what is the cause of so many doleful clamours of Conscience, but a
loose careless heart, the Lord is neglected; that when one pleads Faith, it
will be replied, the true Faith is the Faith of the Son of God. Now is the
Faith of God a careless Faith, a secure, worldly, impenitent, dead Faith? you
may sit down, and rise again, and say true, yet I Will believe, so you may, but
it will be with such a trembling spirit as you will find no peace: Neither do I
know how any can keep his peace otherwise, for there are children but
Still-born; if born a living Son, thou will live to God, necessarily I must do
it: But by this means, Oh there is unspeakable peace, Mat. 11. 29, 30. Hence
Paul, I have finished my work, etc. John 14. 21. to 24. you live without God,
and walk without God, and Pray without God, but there is a day approaching that
you shall appear before the Lord Jesus, you shall wish then, Oh that I had
lived so and so: Oh do that now.

8. Consider the Lord will have it done, it must be done, hence Paul said,
Necessity lies upon me, and woe to me, etc. the Lord should be forsworn if he
should not bring you to it, Luke 1. 73, 74, 75. According to the Oath, etc.
Beloved you think lasie desires will serve: no, it must be done: you say I
cannot, it must be better with you. And hence look for a rod, and that the Lord
will bring you into great affliction till all is removed, and so purge you; and
if one affliction will not do it, then worse shall come, he loves you better
than so. And remember you have had warning this day: you came hither for the
Lords work, and now your own justles it out: look that God will take away the
Kingdom from you, or set oppressors over you, or send some stings among you:
and then say, Oh I may thank my walking unworthy of God and Gospel for this.

9. Consider else you shall make the Blood of Christ shed of no effect, 2 Cor.
5. 14, 15. Now wicked men need not fear this, no Blood shed for them. Will you
do so? God forbid: The Jews have killed him, will you drag him up and down the
streets, trample on his Blood, and put him to open shame.

10. Consider your time is but short, and you have done but little work, and
it is not long but that your Crown shall be put upon your head. It Is noted of
En^ch Genesis 5. that he walked with God three hundred years, (and that having
Sons and Daughters, h^ving Family-contentments, and encumbrances,) and he lived
the shortest time. I am sure Angels are content to come out of Heaven to do the
work of God: what not do it here? Paul thought himself born too soon because
for a time he lived without Christ. Oh but now make trial, and you will find it
the sweetest life, that you will say, why have I neglected this so long? and if
thou do not find seven times more peace therein than in all the world, never
set foot here.

How shall I thus do the work of Christ? Quest.


I. Without Christ you can do nothing, Answ.
John 15. 5. The Sun runs still because it is light of it self; so when the Lord
is in you, you will do so. Hence go not out to any duty in your own strength,
for then you will either not do it, or not hold out in it: No man can hold out
at his work that feeds not abundantly on his meat, so here; and here note but
these two things.

1. Do not only in Ordinances do thus, but out of Ordinances then, as in
particular times of trial (for the Lord will not give you in an Ordinance as
much Grace as shall serve you out of it) lift up your hearts to Christ, and say
as Christ, Father the hour is come, now glorify thy Name, John 12. 28. So
Lord, here is work to do, but a dead heart is upon me, Lord glorify thy Name.
I have seldom seen but the Lord either helped then, or at some other time when
thou did come, and then the Lord puts thee in remembrance that it is out of
respect to that.

2. Thus coming and feeding on the Lord Jesus, believe that he will help, and
that shall be so; some have never got strength against sin till then, but this
has conquered difficulties, Romans 8. 37, 38. In all these things we overcome,
for I am persuaded, etc. So you coming helpless to a Christ, all his strength
is yours by covenant. Be persuaded he cannot go from his word: but yet we must
use other means sanctified by Christ, for Christ works by means. And
therefore,

II. Find out where the cause of all your negligence and sloth lies in not
doing the Lords work, nay of your doing Satan's work. It may be you will say you
cannot, I know there is that in Saints in part, but this is not the main,
therefore I will tell you thus.

1. Before conversion the main wound of men is their Will, Video meliora
proboque dexteriora sequor: Hence John 8. 44. His lusts ye will do. Hence Mat.
23. 37. You would not: they say hence we have a Will, I say no. And hence we
answer that great Objection for Possibilities to keep all Laws by universal
Grace, which it is unjust to punish for not doing that a man cannot do. We
answer, There is a double impotency, Ex infirmitate, or Ex malignitate, when
men will not, Prove. 11, 12, 13.

2. Hence it follows after conversion, though the Will is changed, so that a
man would but cannot do many things, Ex infirmitate, yet the great cause why he
cannot do more is from the remnant of malignity not yet removed. A man will
sleep, he loves it, and secretly loathes the ways of the Lord: Hence the
Church, Isai. 63. 17. complains of this. A man shall find his heart wills the
end exceedingly, but when he comes to will the means, there his heart is weary
of them, and loath^ them; a man will be careless, and this being not seen, is
not fought against. Sin is vi^ified, and hence the enemy to all good remains
still. It Is an old Rule, Tantum possumus, quantum volumus. Get Christ to help
here.

3. Make this your last end, to live unto Christ, and to do his work: Hence
Paul did not account his life dear; this is your last end, for the end of being
born by Faith, nay of being redeemed by Blood, it is to live unto Christ, Tit.
2. 11. When you cry for Faith, and Peace, and Assurance, that is not your end,
for he that does so is a very Hypocrite, and has a false heart, but it is to
live to Christ: Hence Paul, Phil. 3. 9, 10, 12, 13. sought to be found in him,
but further to know him, etc. The Father is glorified in our bringing forth
much Fruit. Hence make it your ^ast end, and then your happiness will lie in
acting thus, and that that is a man's happiness he is carried to with most
infinite delight. For press people to do Christ's work, their hearts are dead,
tell them the Lord Jesus shall have a Name by what they do for him, yet dead,
because though they see it good, yet they place not their happiness there,
because that is not their last end. But come to this, now it will do; a man
cannot bear a cross, yet let him consider, the Lord shall gain though I do
not; so for Faith, so for any other duty. Men think it good, but not their
greatest good. Hence see Christ better than thy self, and his honor better
than thy glory for ever. Hence the Lord denies us help, because we ask it for
our Lusts, not for himself, James 4. 3.

4. Keep those glorious apprehensions of the Lord and his ways, which you have
sometimes in an Ordinance: You are sometimes near the Lord, and you then see a
beauty in Christ, in his ways, and then think shall I ever wrong him more?
then you come out and lose your light, and so you ever lose your strength and
life. Hence Ephesians. 5. 11. it is as with a man that eats, but he loses and spends
his spi^its, he can do no more work, but faints away: see 2 Pet. 2. 9. Steven
can be content to have stones about his ears, when he can say, I see Jesus. And
hence when those glorious apprehensions come into your minds, stamp them there,
for set up other Images of other things in your minds, and your hearts will bow
down every moment to them. Does not Christ's Spirit do all? yes, but by this
medium, 2 Cor. 3. 18. As by the Spirit of the Lord.

SECT. IV.
AFter you have done your work be ever humble, and be ready to give the Lord
the honor of his Grace, Use 4, Of Exhort.
that ever he gave any thing to you, that ever he did any thing by you; for the
last end of all the Elect, it is to admire and honor the riches of Gods Grace,
Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. Hence the Fall was permitted, never should Grace have been seen,
if sin and misery had not come in. Now if this be our last end in Glory, then
the heart is ready to have immediate fellowship with Christ there, when it is
ready to act for its last end. Hence it is frequent in the Psalms, when David
was in any strait, wanted any mercy, nay the presence of the Lord here, this is
the last end he pursues, the last word he speaks before the Lord, My soul shall
bless thee, as Psalm 63. 3, 4. and hence when all his enemies were subdued,
and he ready to lay all in the dust, he gives the Lord all, 2 Samuel 22. per
totum. and 23. 5. Beloved, this is Heavens work, Oh learn this Song before you
go there, which none can learn but the Redeemed and Sealed of the Lord, Rev.
14. 3. John 1. 14. It Is writ of Christ, he was full of Grace and Truth; Do you
ever think to meet with him, that get not your hearts full of the sense of it?

Before I come therefore to press this, I shall premise these two things.

First; That the Lord in all his dealings with his people, seeks lastly to
bring about the glory of his Grace: he regards nothing men do, if at last they
deny him this; He respects not what sins and evils men have, if at last he gets
this, for this is his last end: hence all he does to his people, for his
people, by his people, it is for this. And hence

1. He leaves them a long time in their Graves and Sins, that they live like
other men, which is strange that he that has loved them so long, should leave
them so long to be as bad as any, yet this he does, because it makes for the
praise of his Grace, Ephesians. 2. 4, 7, 8. Dead in sin, that in ages to come, etc.
And this does so confound Gods people, that they wish not only Heaven, but
Earth, and Ages to come may record this love.

2. Hence out of men fallen, he picks out usually the poorest and vilest, the
younger Brother less loved out of a Family, leaves elder, Romans 9. 11. and the
foolish, and weak things, and things that are not, that no flesh might glory,
but in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 31. and this is strange that the Lord should
choose thus, but this he does to blur the glory of all the world.

3. Hence the Lord saves by Faith, and justifies by Faith, and seals by Faith,
Ephesians. 1. 13. and sanctifies by Faith, and glorifies by Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 3. So
that all a Christians life is a Beggars life, and it is strange the Lord should
choose the basest, poorest Grace to save by; and the end is the glory of his
Grace, Romans 4. 16. It Is of Faith that it might be of Grace.

4. The Lord leaves many wants in his people, under which they sit sighing, and
that sometime very long, refuses to hear their Prayers, that they may repair
to the Throne of Grace, and so in conclusion bless Grace, Heb. 4. 16.

5. Hence the Lord takes away sometimes those feelings, those enlargements they
had, and baits them with most vexing sins, and pricking distempers, 2 Cor. 12.
7, 9. and it is to advance Grace.

6. Hence the Lord is sometimes angry with his people, and hides his face from
them, that if ever he returns in love, his Grace may be the sweeter, and last
the longer, Isai. 54. 7. Nay hence sometimes strips them so of all that they
have had, or can do, that if you ask what have you now to say for your selves?
nothing but Grace, their mouths are stopped. Hence Psalm 6. Lord save me for thy
mercies sake, Psalm 51. 11. According to the multitude of thy mercies, etc.

7. Hence the Lord speaks peace to his people, that they may say, I was so
vile, and yet loved; Oh Grace! Oh love! Ezekiel. 16. 63. When they see nothing but
shame, and shame covers them, and afraid to appear before God, it is for this
end. I Will name no more. Do you not observe it? Sometime you shall find the Lord
so strangely carrying matters, as if he did not love nor care for his people,
against the hair and grain of their desires, and when all comes to winding up,
it is to advance Grace. All a man's good days, and bad days, all Gods frowns
and smiles, all the Lords Food and Physic, all God cares for, works, plots
for, it is to do his people no more hurt than this, to advance his Grace in
them, and by them. All his hewings and hammerings of you, nay his knocking you
a pieces, and new melting, and new casting of you, it is that you may be Vessels
of his glorious Grace, that you may be able to live in the air of Gods Grace,
to suck in, and breath out Grace, and let all the power of Hell seek to blur
it, yet Grace shall conquer. Who would not be under Grace? Oh poor creature,
Satan is tempting, sin vexing, yet Grace must reign.

Secondly, This I say, that Gods own people do by strange ways and courses
deny the Lord, and deprive the Lord of the Glory of his rich Grace, for that
being the Diamond in Gods Crown, and the beloved Attribute which God intends to
advance; all the policy of Hell is against this; this is the reason why Satan's
enmity is so bitter against Faith, as in Peter; and observe, however there be
many Temptations, his end is to crush Faith: the reason is, as it is with an
enemy, if the Besieged has water brought to the City by Pipes, he cuts off
them and stops them, so Faith fetching all from Grace, and returning all to
Grace, hence Faith is opposed most; and hence the unregenerate part will take
Satan's part, and does strangely rob the Lord of the glory of this, though I
confess the Lord will have it for all that they seek to scatter it, Isai. 43.
21, 22. It Is strange to see how few plot for the praise of Grace; hence how
many are straightened, nay do cross Christ in this. As

1. If the Lord give them not what Grace they would, then they slight what
little he bestows; and if he gives them much, then they solace themselves in
it, and grow puffed up and proud. It Is the temper of Gods own people to set up
such a measure of Gods Grace and Spirit which they would have, and therein they
do well: Paul, Phil. 3. 11. looked to the Resurrection of the dead; but if the
Lord denies them that, (as he will make his people live from hand to mouth)
they slight what they have, either as if all were but hypocrisy, or because
it is but little, not so much as they would have, and herein they do ill, for
here the Lord loses the glory of some Grace, for it is Grace that you have the
least desires after it; nay that you do but know what it is, and see the want
of it, and yet ever complaining, and never rejoicing, for every degree of Grace
in Saints, is vertually saving, though formally common. But suppose the Lord
fills the bottle full, and gives as much peace, affections, enlargements of
heart, as it has almost required, (for there are Spring-tides, and
overflowing times of Gods Spirit, now they are ready to swell, and be puffed up
above measure, as Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Lest I should be exalted above measure,
for there is self-love in Saints. Hence they desire an excellency in
themselves: hence when they find none of their own, they are apt to deck and
set out themselves with what the Lord has done, and so to joy in this, and now
to think themselves better than others of Gods Saints, whereas they should be
more vile, and advance Grace the more, Ephesians. 3. 8. To me the least of Saints.
And hence the Lord after greatest deliverances and mercies sends great sorrows,
as to them in the Wilderness. Hence the Lord takes away affections, and they
dye, that Grace might be the more advanced.

2. If the sins of their hearts are common, and cannot be removed, and so seem
little, then they pass them by, and never take notice of them, God will pardon
them, and hence the Lord has sad times of reckoning (with a rod in his hand)
with his own people, Ezekiel. 6. 9. That those loose times are heavy times, this
is for my neglect, etc. but hereby Grace loses Glory; for how can they see how
deeply they are indebted to the Lord, if they see not their Debt? on the other
side, if their sins be very violent, and their distempers so strong, that they
think none like me, now their hearts sink, and dye away, and grow discouraged,
and all the use they make is this, I think it will never be better with me, and
can there be life for me so dead, deliverance, redemption for me in such
bondage, love for one that cannot but loath my self, and if others did know me,
they would do so too. Can the Lord love me now? Yes Beloved, that he can and
will, Isai. 63. 16. Though Abraham know us not, yet, etc. But here is your sin,
when you should make this use of all, to feel the more need of Grace to pity,
and say, the more precious shall Grace be to me for ever: your hearts now sink.
The Lord brings his people into very low condition to humble them, and to show
them more of his Grace, Psalm 78. 19. Can God prepare a Table? they spoke
therein against God: so it is here; for herein the Lords Grace is seen, to love
them when Lepers.

3. Grace that has been shown, for times past they forget it, 2 Pet. 1. 9.
And what is this but destroying Gods Grace? for why is Grace so precious at
first conversion, that Heaven and Earth are too little to hold praises enough
for it? And afterward, the Lord has little love; Oh you forget what once you
were, and what the Lord has done, hence 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14. I was so and so,
etc. but now have received abundant Grace. You have had many meetings with God,
many answers from God, many consolations and times of refreshing and reviving,
and these forgotten and buried, the life of them after a year or two expired.
And what is this but eclipsing Gods Grace? On the other side, as for Grace for
time to come, they fear it, especially when worms and no men in their own eyes.
Hence says God, Fear not worm Jacob, Isai. 41. 14. There is a certain Divining
Spirit (as one once told me) that until that was pulled out, no honor can the
Lord get. Before you come to Word or Prayer, thou will fear thou shall never
get any good; and when the Lord gives any, thou will fear thou shall never hold
out; and what Promise soever is made, thou will fear thou shall never find it.
And what does this but eclipse Grace? we should go with boldness to the Throne
of Grace; nay hence let the Lord send never so much Mercy for the Present, a
Fear will cut off all, that all this will rise up in Judgment against me.

4. When they are most fit to honor Gods Grace by Faith, now they will not
believe, not then above any other time: for then a man is most fit to honor
Grace, when he feels most need of it: and when has he most need, but when he
feels most emptiness? why now above any other time a man will not come in, but
will have somewhat in himself first, and then he will, when his heart is so and
so sweetly settled, etc. Hence Luke 14. Poor, and blind, and lame, and halt
compelled to come in: one would think there needed not that; but now when
fittest, now they will not: for let any man observe what would endear his heart
so much to Grace as this: to think if it be the Lords mind to save a poor dead
damned creature, then happy I? This is wonderful, this has quickened dead
love, and dead Faith, and a dead heart. And on the other side, if the Lord
delay, if it comes not at their own time, then they distrust it; Grace! alas I
feel my self never a whit better: For there be two things in Faith,

First, A coming to Christ, which is our work, i. e. Gods work in us.

Secondly, Receiving what I come for from Christ, which is the Lords work; Now
the first gives evidence he shall have it, John 6. 35, 37. Hence the Lord will
have them rejoice in what Christ has, as my Grace is sufficient; but if it
comes not presently, then they cast off Faith, and so cast away Grace, I feel
no good: hence John 4. 48. etc. I know there is a seeming coming to Christ, to
have the Grace of Christ and sin too, and this you may well cast off: and a
coming for his Grace and Spirit only, and you despise Grace, and distrust the
Lord if you cast off this, or you seek to put the Lord out of his working by a
covenant of Grace, (where he takes his times as he pleases) and give a flat lie
to all promises of Grace, and refuse to be contented with Christ's Grace, that
thou might have the more attributed to thy self, and the Lord the less.

5. Either they think not of the exceeding greatness of the Lords love and
free Grace to them, and hence Paul bows to Heaven for this, Ephesians. 3. 16, 17.
And hence it comes to pass, that look as it is with sweet things, swallow them
down in the lump, you never taste the sweetness to purpose, nor never commend
them; so it is when men swallow down Gods love, and chew not upon it, whereas if
they did but think of it, Oh how sweet would it be! Psalm 63. 5, 6. Lord, how
many days and weeks are spent thus? It Is apparent you have the profession of a
Christian life; but do you taste the sweetness of a Christian course? No: why
if you did think, you would; But you are weary at Night, sleepy in the morning,
busy in the day, dead on the Sabbath: hence think not, hence give not God the
glory of Grace: or if they do think of it, and the greatness of it, then they
cannot think so great things should be given unto them, or done for them: that
God should love me as his Son, make me an Heir of all he has with him, redeem
me that have despised his Blood: it is too good News to be true. Hence the
Disciples believed not for joy, Luke 24. 41. Hence when delivered out of Babel,
we were in a Dream; this robs the Lord of Grace, for the greater the love is,
and the more you take, the more love shall the Lord have, it cannot be
otherwise, if you come to say this is mine.

6. Either they will pore only on their sins, and distempers, and miseries, and
never look unto Christ the brazen Serpent, and search for a righteousness of
their own, and cannot find it, and hence pore still. As when men have wounds,
they only think on them, that when awakened out of sleep, they complain in
their beds like the Israelites, Exodus 6. 9. that would not hear Moses because
of anguish. As the impotent man answered Christ, John 5. 5, 6, 7. Wilt' be made
whole? he turns his eyes upon his misery, I have none else to help me at the
time; here is but this means, and when I come my self, others step in before
me, etc. Now so do men, and never look beyond means, the Lord can, the Lord
will, and so eye not him: or on the other side, if they get healing of their
wounds, then they eye Christ only, Ephesians. 2. 6. They were exalted in Heavenly
places, yet remember, as verse. 11, 12. For let any Christian see that he is
poor and miserable, but he is not much affected with it, nor afflicted with it,
and so eye Christ, and trust to Christ, and ease himself here, and say we must
look only to Christ, either you will hear of his fall (yea and himself shall
find a decay) or he will grow very proud, unfit to give all to Christ. Is there
Grace here?

7. Either if the Lord gives him any thing, himself and mercy, he will now add
something of his own to Christ, and pull the vail of the Law over the face of
the glory of Christ, Gal. 1. 6. or else do nothing at all for him, unless it be
when the good fit takes him, under a pretense Christ must do all; as here the
five wise Virgins that fell asleep: and thus you see how Grace is opposed by
the children of Grace. Now therefore my Exhortation is, to take heed of this,
and be ever ready to attribute all to the Lord, as they cried when the Second
Temple was building from beginning to the end, Zec. 4. 6, 7. so that thou wast
spared so long, that called by means that the Lord should by Faith accept, that
he should speak peace, this is Grace, that though vile, yet he will save me:
it is Grace, that though I can do nothing, yet he will help me, and afterward
Crown me: Oh this is wonderful Grace! And

First, Do not only give the Lord the glory of Grace to redeem you from misery,
for this you may do, and be full ready to give it, yet perish at last, as the
Israelites that sang Gods praises did, but that he will save thee from greater,
i. e. from sin. And

Secondly, Not only when you feel nothing, but when you feel most, Oh to honor
Grace! And

Thirdly, Not to do it coldly, but with a heart enflamed with sense of it, that
I live, I have, I do, I am what I am: Oh it is Grace. So that now if the Lord
shall come and ask you, what will you say if I Will deliver you from all misery,
subdue all sins, pass by all wrong, hear all Prayers, do all good to thee, do
much good by thee, love thee every moment, give a Kingdom when thy work is done
to thee, and my self better than all? say, Lord I can never recompense this, I
shall be I hope the more vile in my own eyes for ever, and give all to Grace.
Oh sing that Song, or get that Song by heart now, for Rev. 7. 10. there is a
Song, Salvation to the Lamb, which none else could sing. This is our work, and
a great work indeed.

How shall I do this? Quest.


1. Get a new light from the Lord to show you clearly the infinite, endless,
Answ.
unknown evil of the least sin; Paul was a proud Pharisee until he saw sin, and
Ier. 3. 24, 25. for if sin be seen, one smile, one day, nay a moments
breathing-time in this world will be matter of amazement to thee after all thou
have, and have done: much more when thou see so many sins, and that in every
thing: Entreat the Lord to do this. We walk up and down the world, and say we
sin and grieve the Lord; but Oh it is not known, happy art thou if the Lord has
discovered it; then thou will say, why does the Lord do any thing for me? could
not he pick out stones, nay Toads that never sinned against him, rather than me
to enjoy him, especially is sin vile in thee, so near God, and so near Heaven
too. Angels were hurled down for one sin.

2. Set a high price upon a little Grace; a man will be exceeding humbly
thankful for the giving a little of that which he highly esteems, much more for
giving much of what we value. The poor Woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. was glad of
crumbs. How thankful do you think she was for loaves? that made her ready to
receive all; Be it as thou will; so it shall be with you, for if you prize a
little, Oh when all shall be given, this will swallow you up into Grace. And
it is certain, there is never a mercy but it is great, if you consider him that
gives it, who receives it, him that bought it. But the most of Gods Grace in us
appears to be but small; hence we prize it not, and hence never ready to give
all to the Lord again.

3. Learn to put a difference between your double being: for every Christian
has a double being: 1. In himself. 2. He has a subsistence in Christ. Now
look upon your selves as in your selves, you will ever complain there, ever
dead, and never have your hearts ready to bless the Lord. If you only look on
your selves in Christ, you will be proud, and never give the Lord honor. I say
therefore, put a difference between these two, for men appropriating to
themselves what is Christ's, they rob Christ of his glory. Hence Paul so humble,
1 Cor. 15. 10, 11. For if you look upon your self, I am dead, guilty, damned,
weak, here will be shame: if any life, or Grace, this is Christ's. As a man on a
Mount is the same man, no taller, only the Mountain makes him so: so think of
thy self. Or as a mud wall, the sun shines on it, but in it self it is a
mud-wall still; all the warmth and luster is from the Sun.

4. Learn to love Grace; what we love we will seek the good of more than our
own, and commend it.

First, It Is the only first mover of all our good: thou should never have had
a dram of peace or mercy. Why have it? the Lord will have it so, Grace pleads
it may be so; this is the only Petitioner at Court against the cry of sin,
against the cry of Justice.

Secondly, It Is the only support under the heaviest evils; sometime God
frowns, and Hell smokes, and Satan tempts, and sin rages, and it may be no
feeling of Grace, no reason to show there shall ever be any; now what have you
done, what will you do? Fly for refuge to the Promise of Grace, Heb. 6. 18. It
is such a Friend as holds up the head when sinking, when dying holds that, when
all fails, and against which the gates of Hell cannot prevail. To him that
lays hold on Grace, this is wonderful; Paul was a man taken with Grace: hence
he every where commends it, I was received to mercy, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14.

5. See how the Lord loves that thou should honor it, for the greatest
honor Grace has is by Faith; hence they are put for one, Romans 4. 16. and the
great cause why Faith stirs not, is because he sees not how the Lord shall have
by it the praise of his rich Grace, nor how the Lord loves it should do so. For
if a man did see how by Faith he shall honor Grace, and how the Lord is
pleased with it, it would draw the heart to be assured, and to bless Grace; for
when the Soul feels it self at worst, why does it not believe? I shall presume:
True, if you have this only in your eye to save your self; but if the Spirit
presents the glory of Grace, and this draws your will that you will glorify
Grace, then you will say it is no presumption so to do, and so to believe, for
the Lord loves his Grace, and all means for the glory of Grace. Hence he will
use Faith for that end, to honor Grace. Oh therefore see how the Lord loves to
have thee honor it. This gives Gods heart full rest; this is that which he
desires most, because it is his end: This is that which all the business of the
world is for: Oh see how he loves it! and then you will love to act thus. Now
set upon this last work: look over all your life, and like Bees gather honey
from every flower, and then come laden home; so do you, and look over all the
Lords love, turn over all the leaves of it: The Lord has now called me; why?
it is because Christ has redeemed; and why that? because the Father has
chosen; and why me? to glorify his Grace: And why me rather than another? No
reason, but he would. This I doubt not will be the work of Heaven, I am
glorified because called, because redeemed, because elected, for none other
reason why, and here astonished. You have not christian hearts in you, that
will now have no care to do this work there before you are turned off the
stage: you poor doubting Spirits, that see so much vileness, and cannot be
persuaded; be not discouraged. Wait for the Lord, and say, if he shall save, I
shall for ever love him the more. Now hold here, an^ be ready to do so, and
it is certain thou art a vessel of Glory, ready to sing the Song of the Lamb,
and shall follow him wherever he goes.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning the Souls immediate closing with the Person of Christ, as the
proper Object of Saving-Faith.
3. Went forth to meet the Bridegroom.


SECT. I.
Here needs the Explication of Three Things.

1. Who is the Bridegroom?

Answ. The conclusion of this Parable is the Explication of this, viz. the Son
of Man, the Lord Jesus Christ, who according to the several conditions, or
dispositions the Church is in, appears to his Church under several relations
and titles. The Church is oppressed by her enemies, he appears now to her as
her Prince and King: the Church wants wisdom, light, and life, he appears now
unto her as an head. The Church has been seeking of his love, and yielding her
self to the obedience of him as her Lord: at last he appears more fully to her
as an Husband, or as a Bridegroom with whom she is to have her nearest and
everlasting fellowship and communion, and so here. And when Christ comes to
show most special love, and to have most special fellowship with his people, he
thus styles himself, Isal. 54. 5, 6. So John 3. 29. And when the Church has
tasted that love, she calls him so.

II. What it is to meet the Bridegroom?

Answ. To enjoy fellowship and familiarity with him.

III. What is it [to go forth to meet] the Bridegroom?

Answ. There are but three ways of going forth to meet with Christ in
Scripture.

1. When Soul and Body at the last Day meet the Lord in the clouds of the air,
1 These. 4. 17. Thus the whole Church, the Bride shall appear in glory to meet
the Bridegroom.

2. When the Soul only goes out of the Body by the ministry of Angels to meet
the Lord in Heaven, as Paul that knew not whether in or out of the body, 2 Cor.
12. 3. We know it here shall go out of the body: as Christ is said when he went
to Heaven, I go to my Father, and your Father; so it goes forth then to Christ,
Eccles. 12. 7. and neither of these can be meant here, for

First, ^his shows the (...) of the Jewish Church long before Christ's coming,
at least among many of them.

Secondly, Because the shutting out, verse. 10. is by and at Death: hence
letting in is so too. Now this was before.

3. When the Soul goes out or it self by Faith: hence John 6. 35. it is called
coming to Christ; and this not any Physical natural departing of the Soul out
of the body, but Ethical, supernatural, by the operations of the Soul out of
(...) self. And look as the whole Soul by unbelief departs from God in Christ,
so the whole Soul by Faith comes again unto God by Christ. The mind sees,
affections make after him, will fastens on him, and there depends. This is the
first work of Faith, or the first Faith, the coming (as in all motions there
are two extremes) of the Soul from a nothingness, emptiness in it self, to an
allness and fullness in Christ: And as it is in other motions, if there was a
vacuum, there would be motus in instanti; so if there was an emptiness seen in
the world, and all the works of it, and in all fears that all mountains were
cast down, Faith then would suddenly come by the Spirit to the Lord Jesus, and
this coming to Christ is not meant here: For

First, These Virgins were espoused to Christ by Faith already.

Secondly, At the first coming to Christ it goes to the Lord for life in him,
and from him; but here having life already, they go forth to live with him:
there the Soul goes out to meet him in the Gospel, in the Promise; here the
Virgins go forth to meet him in Glory. There the Soul goes to be justified by
him, here the Virgins go to be glorified with him: and therefore it is meant of
a second going out of the Soul by some special acts of Faith, after that it
does believe, and after it is ready for him. And for Explication.

From whence does the Soul go? Quest. 1.


It Is chiefly going out of this world by trampling this Moon under her feet,
Answ.
by forgetting this her Fathers house, by a holy contempt of it, and a holy
dying to it, and all the glory of it. For it is a thousand to one if Satan does
not entangle here, if Lot be not taken with Sodom though burnt out there; and
if this going out is to enjoy the Lord in another world chiefly, then going out
is from the opposite term, from this world. Hence Paul singles out this mercy,
Gal. 1. 4. Christ gave himself to deliver us from this present evil world. Oh
say men, it is a good world, and good being here. It Is an evil world: it is so
when Death comes, but for present it is best. No, it is a present evil world.

By what acts of Faith does it go forth? Quest. 2.


There be two affections of the Soul that chiefly look to a good absent, Answ.
yet loving that good, go forth to meet it, and those are Hope and Desire; like
the blind man and the lame, both together can make a shift to go. Hope like the
eye goes out and looks, Desire like the feet runs out and longs. The going
forth therefore to meet Christ, is: 1. By a real expectation of him. 2. By a
longing desire to be with him. Hope gets on the top of the world, and cries, Oh
I see him, Desire stands by and longs for him, Oh come Lord. A careless blind
world look not for him, nor after him, the Saints do. Heb. 9. 28. An
earthly-minded world longs not for him, the Bride does, Rev. 22. 17, 20. Oh
come Lord Jesus, come quickly; by love and joy we embrace and entertain the
Bridegroom, by hope and desire we go forth to meet the Bridegroom. Hence many
things are to be observed, and yet not all I might.

SECT. II.
THat the object to which Faith chiefly looks, Doct. 1.
and closes with, is the Person of the Lord Jesus.
It Is the Bridegroom himself that the Virgins chiefly have to do withal; they
are espoused to him, as in Marriage; there is a giving of themselves one unto
another; they make themselves ready for him, they go out to meet him: It Is him
they love, it is him they want, it is him they look for, it is him they close
withal^. Whorish lovers look not after him, but his: his peace to comfort them
when in horror and fear, his mercy to save them from eternal flames; but
Virgins look to him, they look to [ His] indeed, but it is himself chiefly they
care for, John 1. 12. to so many as received him, he gave power to be Sons,
John 6. 27. when the people followed him, but it was for loaves: Labor not for
bread that perishes, bu^, etc. for him has the Father sealed, Mat. 13. 44.
The man did not buy the Treasure, but bought the field: it is him Faith seeks
for, Ier. 50. 4. They shall seek the Lord weeping; it is him Faith chooses, and
is contented with, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? Psalm. 73. 25. It Is him Faith
glories in, Isai. 45. 25. In him shall all the Seed of Israel glory.

SECT. III.
It Is chiefly and firstly the Person of Christ that the Father gives unto the
Soul, Isai. 9. 6. hence Faith lays hold on him: Reas. 1.
It Is not seemly to keep^ Portion from any, much less Orphans Portion. Faith
empties a man so as it makes him the poorest Or^han in the world; now the
Father cannot, will not keep back his Portion, but gives it him: Wicked men
have their Portion in this world, Psalm 17. 14. and they think the Lord loves
them because he blesses them: they have many moral excellencies given them,
which makes them honored and lovely in the eyes of men, and they have honor,
and that is their reward; they have bread, but not the staff of bread, they
have Ordinances, but not the Lord in them: the Lord gives them answer to many
Prayers, but never gives them himself, nor his Son; this is highest love. But
it is his Son himself he gives to Orphan, fatherless, helpless creatures, for
the Lord is their Portion, Lam. 3. 24. The portion of Jacob, Ier. 10. 16. hence
it is him that Faith receives, and pitcheth upon; so that the Lord may deny them
many outward, many inward Blessings, yet they have himself that is better than
all, better as he said than Ten Sons. Children may be Prodigals for a time, but
when in want, they will then sue for their Portion. Saints for a time may
mispend all Times, Talents, Ordinances the Lord gives, but the Lord will bring
them to want, and then they will sue for their Portion, and the Lord will give,
and they will receive that.

Because there is no satisfying of the Father without him; Reas. 2.
bring Benjamin with you, or never look to see my face. The conscience of a man
can never be pacified until God is satisfied for all wrongs. Now the Lord Jesus
has satisfied, nay perfected for ever them that are sanctified, by once
offering up of himself to God, Heb. 10. 14. Now the soul never comes to have
settled peace in his own conscience (though peace was purchased before) but by
offering up of the Lord Jesus by Faith, even Christ himself: the Soul wants
him, the Father shows a Ram in the bush, gives Christ; and that the Soul gives
him for satisfaction, and offers him to God again. As the Priests in the Old
law, when the Sacrifice was slain, then it was offered. God offers the Soul a
crucified Son, Faith takes him and offers him, Lord behold thy Son, Romans 3. 25.
And hence comes Propitiation and peace, peace to see that God is satisfied. Now
if by Faith we come to have the peace of the Fathers satisfaction with us, then
it must needs pitch upon the person of the Son first. Hence many never have
peace, because it is not a Son himself they look for, but somewhat from him:
they are blind, and dead, and hard, and these things they would have helped,
but close not with Christ himself.

Because the Soul can neither actually receive, Reason 3.
nor expect to receive any thing from Christ, unless it has first pitched upon
the person of Christ. A man may hope he shall, and presume and think he shall,
and it may be receive somewhat out of the common courtesy Christ shows to them
that look toward him, but never shall receive any saving-good thing till now,
John 6. 53. Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of God, and drink his Blood, ye
have no life. Look as it is in our eating, as if a man should seek to get
nourishment out of meat or drink, not by feeding on it it self; so it is here:
Some said this was a hard saying, and so it is to a carnal heart, Romans 8. 32.
And hence observe when the Lord promises any great thing to his people, Isai.
7. 14. he ever brings in the Lord Jesus, that if he shall be given, then all
things also.

Because true Faith ever closes with Christ by love to Christ, Reason 4.
as false Faith closes with him out of self-love, Cant. 1. 2, 3. The Virgins
love thee: that is love indeed which is set upon the person. The Lord never puts
his Pearl, nor sets it in a swinish faith that contemns the Son: no, it is a
precious Faith that loves the Lord. Hence it carries the soul to the Beloved.

SECT. IV.
HEnce see the reason why the Lord keeps his people hungry, Use 1.
and empty, and cuts them short of many spiritual Blessings: it is that they
might ^lose with, and be contented with the Person of the Son. There are three
things some of Gods people seek for, and find not, if the Lord intends good to
them.

1. They desire the comforts, and conveniences, and peace of this World, Oh
rest is sweet! and the Lord will give them none of these, or keep them at short
commons with these: and why? that they might lay up their peace, and find all
in himself, Genesis 15. 1, 2. Abraham after the slaughter of the Kings was in fear
that he might make the Lord his shield, Hos. 2. 6, 7. She shall seek her
Lovers, but shall not overtake them.

2. They seek for some good to themselves, in themselves, from themselves; I
would fain believe and cannot; I would fain do (says a man) but alas he grows
worse and worse; the commandment comes, you will do, there is your task, do it,
yet they languish and dye, and why so? Ier. 3. 23. that they might look for
help and righteousness in another, In the Lord our God is the salvation of
Israel; not from the Mountains the strongest helps and means; in the Lord it is
alone.

3. They seek for Grace, and strength, and peace from the Lord Jesus very
importunately, and many times very impatiently, and so sinfully too, and the
Lord denies them; it has been better with them than now, therefore they wonder
the Lord should be so full, and they so empty, and think sometimes to seek no
more, and the Lord denies a dole at this door to, that they might content
themselves, and lay up their joys in the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 9. My
Grace is sufficient; It Is strange that Christ so able, so ready to help, yet
denies: I confess it is sometimes some lust and stumbling block the Lord Jesus
sees, Oh but against that they seek, and truly here is the cause, that having
no good from him, they might place all their happiness and felicity in him.
Look as it was with Jacob, a great Famine co^es, and all the sacks are s^ent,
and they are used roughly, though not hardly nor wrongfully, and all was to
bring them to the sight and embraceings of Joseph: all the time of Famine was
for this. So the famine of Spirit is to last long, and the Lord denies supply,
to bring the Soul to see, embrace, and rejoice in the Lord Jesus: the most
flourishing Trees in Gods House shall have their winter season, and cast their
coat, that they might preserve themselves in their root. This is the great
wound of many a believing soul for a time, to rest more contented with what he
receives from the Lord, than to quiet himse^f and his heart with what is in the
Lord: Man would have his lost happiness in his own hand, and this the Lord will
not suffer his people to lie in long, Genesis 26. 4. and the best and surest
course that can be taken, is to cut them short of all; for Faith is an
unconquerable Grace, that whatever it loses out of its own hand, it will find
it and enjoy it in another. And therefore see Gods end, and meet the Lord in
this end of his. See all in the Lord, and seeing your blessedness there in all
your wants, lay it up there, that if you will boast, here you may do it all the
day long: for this is Gods greatest plot to pull all men down that his Son may
be set up, to wither all the grass and be^uty of all the flowers of the field,
that the glory of the Lord might be revealed. I must here give you a taste, for
it does me good to think, and it will do you more good to enjoy the sweetness
of this Truth. There are four Things you desire all, which are chiefly laid up
in Christ, to that end that you might in all wants quiet your hearts with
unspeakable peace there.

1. The free Grace and love of the Father, this is that I hope which you prize
most, pray for most, fear the loss of most, would rejoice in the having of
most, without which thy life is death, and blessings curses, and death the
beginning of Hell. Would you see this love better than life to thee? Oh I
cannot see it, or but very little of it. It Is true, look upon your selves you
can see but little, many fears, many tears, many heart-sorrows, many
temptations, many desertions, many vexing sins, many denyals to your Prayers;
but Oh look up to that Ointment which is poured upon this blessed head, that
love that is shed abundantly upon the Son from before all worlds, and look what
love, what Grace the Father shows to him, that love is thine; that love in him
is shown to thee, 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. Here stand amazed all ye people of the Lord,
you have heard the Lord loves you, and sometime believe it, but being under
water, cannot conceive of it, nor see how he loves you, how dearly, how
abundantly; Oh look now upon the love of God the Father in the Son, as he loves
him, so he loves thee a worm, a Devil, notwithstanding all thy want, all thy
sins, all thy miseries, John 17. 23, 26.

2. Life: Oh Death is terrible, and a dead heart is woeful, it is the great
plague that lies upon men without Christ, that are strangers to the life of
God, Ephesians. 4. 18. Is thy heart ever so joyed as when it is most enlarged for God,
and has most delight and liberty in the ways of God: alas thy life is but a
lingering sickness, a poor life to that which thou have in Christ. Oh look up
there, Col. 3. 3. You think when your hearts are affected, and warmed, and
quickened in Prayer by word, or by Divine thoughts, etc. Oh if it might be ever
so, how happy! Oh but it dies presently, and thou kowest not how. Look up to
the Lord Jesus, he is alive when thou art dead, and his life is thine, and it is
ever thine in him, even e^ernal life, 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12. This is the record,
that he has given us eternal life; alas I find none: Oh it is in his Son, in
whom thou live a better life than Men, than Kings, than Angels. And I doubt
not but the Lord suffers Temptations to rob you of your life, that you might
find it when it is lost here, and rejoice that when you have none, yet here it
is: blessed be God, he will keep our lives as the life of Jacob was knit up,
and bound up in the life of the child; nay that life is ours.

3. Conquest and Victory over all Enemies; it may be you say often, the Lord
has commanded me to seek for help, and he will help, he has promised so to
do, but I find my Distempers still raging, Satan still buffeting, and
winnowing, and vexing, and fo^ling: and as I feel many, so I fear more sorrows
before I dye, and then Death and delusion, that at last I may be deceived: Nay
the agonies of Hell many times assault me, and then I am put to a loss, that is
it possible I should escape? why Beloved, the Lord Jesus conquered Death, and
Sin, and Hell, and the Grave, and Satan, with all the strength of darkness and
delusion, and has spoiled them, Col. 2. 14, 15. And now he is in Heaven in his
Kingdom triumphing over them, that they cannot hurt him. I but what is that to
me? Why this very Victory is thine: hence we are said to be dead with him,
Rom.6. 8. and risen with him, Col. 3. 1. Nay to sit in Heavenly places as it
were triumphing in him, in glory with him, Ephesians. 2. 6. Nay Heb. 10. 14. He has
by one offering perfected his people for ever that are sanctified: It Is true,
you may rejoice in that you shall conquer, but Oh remember this, it is done
already in thy Head, and in thy Husband.

4. Immutability and certainty of standing in a happy estate, for this is that
which sads the heart, I shall fall at last. How is it possible but I should be
so? no Beloved, look upon the Lord Jesus, in him thou art, if he can fall, if
he can dye, if he can be cast from the Fathers face, then thou may; believe
that I live, you shall live also, John 14. 19. Adam indeed was chosen to be
head of Mankind, and as when he stood perfect we stood, so (though mutably) he
falling we fall: so we are chosen in Christ, and as he stands unchangeably, so
we stand, and as he was tempted every way, yet did not, could not fall, no more
can thou: so that Oh that the Lord would give you hearts to learn this
lesson, when there is noth^ng but want in thee; Do not shift so much for a
little from the Lord, but see Gods end and rach it. Oh rejoice, glory in, and
bless the Lord. This was Paul's life, and the life of the Churches first
planted. Oh bless the Lord for all spiritual blessings in Christ; this will be
joy in sorrow, life in death, this is golden Faith, this will answer all fears;
when Satan says thou have not this or that, nor can not do this nor that,
and to Hell therefore thou must go: Reply again, it is true, I have little, I am
dead, but Christ lives for ever; I am under miseries, Christ is triumphing in
Heaven for ever: I may fall in my self, I never can fall in him; that which he
has is mine.

It Is true they may do this that know the Lord Jesus is theirs, but alas I
know not that. Object.


If you do not you must wait then until the Lord make himself known unto you:
but tell me, Answ.
will you do this, if you did thus know it? It may be some of you have not done
so, unless by force sometimes, and you will find it one of the toughest works
of Faith that is: What is a poor man better for another wealth? and a sick man
for another health, and a naked man when others are clothed? Yet Beloved, by
virtue of the power of Faith, and our union to the Lord Jesus, a man is the
better. A Woman that is matched to a Prince may have never a penny in her purse,
and yet she rejoices in that her Husband has it. It Is the secret nature of
Faith to make a man all one with Christ, in Christ, in that manner that I
cannot find such an union in the world; and hence his health, his clothes, his
Grace, his life may be matter of as much joy as if a man had all this in
himself. And because many a soul has Christ, but feeling such emptiness in
himself, as that he cannot think so, and it may be would do so if he saw
whether he might do so or no: I shall therefore express my thoughts to them
thus in these particulars.

1. That all that fullness that is in the Lord Jesus, it is not for himself, but
for them that want it, John 17. 19. he might have been blessed in his Fathers
bosom without thee; why should he therefore live, and do, and suffer, and rise,
and glorify his blessed Nature, but for them that wanted this. He is filled
with wisdom, life, strength, because men are blind, dead, weak.

2. But you will say, all the world want it, and yet few in the world shall
ever have any share there, therefore all them in the world that hunger after
all that good that is in him, they may now in the absence of it content
themselves with it, that there it is in him for them, for the Lord fills the
hungry, and so hungry as it is not something or other that they pick out, but
all Christ, and all of that is in Christ: now is the season to eat, if bread
and hunger meet, now satisfy your self. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Paul prayed, and the
Lord denied, yet now the Lord bid him feed on his Grace: so that when thy heart
asks what have thou to do with him when so vile? answer, Yet the Lord has all,
and I want him, and hunger after him. Take heed of despising his Grace; if thou
have no hunger, the Lord be merciful to thee!

3. If you have so contented your selves with him, as now you place all your
felicity in him, to this end, to receive life from him, as a man satisfies
himself with bread that he may have life: for as I would not damp the Faith of
the Elect, no more would I patronize the sloth of the wicked. Many a man it may
be may say, I have nothing in my self, and all is in Christ, and comfort
himself there, and so fall asleep; hands off and touch not this Ark, lest the
Lord slay thee: a christ of clouts would serve your turn as well. Run not to
this Temple to make it a Denn of your thievish heart; no, do you so content, or
will you so content your selves with him, as to account your selves happy here,
that all the world is Dung in respect of this; and this you do to suck and
receive more from Christ, and so to be like him: now hold here, and live here,
and rejoice here for ever, Phil. 3. 9, 10, 11. Isai. 12. 2, 3. First, The Lord
is my Song and Salvation; therefore we, will draw hence: if the Lord gives
nothing, yet I have it in him; if he gives any thing, the honor shall be given
to him. Oh take this course: 1. Lest you lose Christ and all too. 2. Lest the
Lord ever keep you short in a complaining condition. 3. That you may be every
day and moment in Heaven, and win the Crown from every Hypocrite who knows not
what this life in Christ means.

4. That the Lord may be your glory, for he is not only the glory of God, but
of his people Israel too. 5. That you may love your selves the less, and the
Lord the more.

SECT. V.
HEnce see a necessity of seeing and knowing Christ, Use 2.
before a man can believe, or if ever the soul believe; for if Faith closes
with the person of the Lord Jesus, the same Faith must first see that person:
If it takes the Bridegroom himself, it must see and know him first. Did you
ever see any espoused together that did not first see and know each other? the
eye must first see, my meaning is, there must precede this act of the
understanding to see Christ, before a man can close with Christ by his will:
for I aim not at this, whether it goes before in time, but in order of nature
it does precede, and absolutely necessary it is: hence John 6. 40. He that
sees and believes in the Son has eternal life: this is so necessary to
Faith, that Faith it self puts on this name, Isai. 53. 11. By his knowledge,
Luke 19. 41. Oh that thou had known. Isai. 46. 22. Look unto me and be saved.
And hence unbelief in Scripture is expressed by being blinded, Romans 11. 7, 8. for
though Christ be absent from us on earth, yet that is the excellency of faith,
it makes things absent present, and sees unseen things, Heb. 11. 1. John 8. 56.
Abraham saw my day; and that is the wonderment of Saints; there is light in
Gosben when all Egypt is dark, when others are blind they see, Isai. 60. 1, 2.

What is this knowledge or seeing of the Lord? Quest.


I make this question, Ans^.
partly because this is the first chief Evangelical work, as it appears to us,
nay indeed it is in a manner all; hence Mat. 11. 27. I thank thee thou have hid
these things, etc. If this be right, Faith is right, etc. And if this be not, a
man's Faith is but a Fancy; and a man's Sanctification and Reformation, hopes,
desires, are but the works of death and darkness, if this Sun be not risen.
And partly also because all the policy and power of Satan is to blind the eye
here, for then he knows men will stumble at every step, 2 Cor. 4. 4. He will
help to believe, and joy in believing, and reformation after tha^ joy, that a
man might content himself with this joy and Faith, and look not after the sight
of Christ. And if I was to leave the world, I should leave this to be thought
of, as Christ told the woman of Samaria, Ye worship whom ye know not, so men
believe in whom they know not, and pray to one whom they know not, and depend
on whom they see not, and hence do not wonder at an adulterous generation
rising up that deny all evidencing of a man's justification from his
sanctification, and that it is but a f^ding thing, because they never felt what
it meant, because they never knew what the Lord Jesus meant, and therefore
listen to it. I say therefore first what this knowledge is not, for every man
has some knowledge.

1. There is a knowledge of the Lord Jesus by report, the fame of a man may
come where himself is not seen, so of Christ, there may be a fame spread of him
and of some excellencies in him, where he is not savingly known, and this is
not seeing of Christ, for a man may live and die a damned creature with this
knowledge. The Samaritans had some knowledge by report of the Messiah, John 4.
25. When he is come he will tell us all things; so many among us hear that
Christ is come and risen, and glorisied, and the Savior of the world and of
sinners, etc. But how come they to know this? By way of tradition and report
only. I confess this knowledge may be a means in the Elect to bring them to
saving knowledge, as in the Queen of Sheba that heard Solomon's fame, and the
Disciples John 1. Come and see. But Reprobates are not drawn by it, as Herod,
Luke 23. 8. heard many things of Christ, but never saw him till he came to
judge him. So here, because they can live well without Christ, hence rest
content with the bare report. Whereas they that had diseases, heard of his
fame, and came to see Jesus.

2. There is a knowledge of Christ from his works, as we know what Trade and
what Artificers many men be because these are external things, yet know not the
man: so there is a knowledge of Christ by his works, that by him the worlds were
made, Heb. 1. and all creatures governed, and a man may see him in his trading
with others, and himself, all comes from him, that a man may say, the Lord has
done all this and that for me, and yet strangers to Christ. And if men be
ignorant of him here, he may do such wonderful things before their eyes, that
they cannot but wonder and say, this is the Lords work, and yet know him not,
Met. 11. 20. He upbraided the Cities where most of his mighty works were done,
but they saw him not, John 15. 24. If I had not done, etc. the Lord may work
strange temporal deliverances, that you may know all power is in Christ's hand
to save and pardon, Mat. 8. 27. so as to marvail and not envy; What manner of
man is this that winds and seas obey him? It Is true the Saints do know the Lord
here, but they are not idle spectators and receivers of them, but Oh that I
might see and have that Christ himself, they do him no good, give him no
content without him; as he said, What give thou me if I go childlesse? John
9. Christ had opened the blind man's eyes, and yet he cries, Lord, who is he?
verse. 36, 37, 38. whereas others see the works of Christ, and vanish, or if
affected, an evil spirit comes on them, as on S^^l when he saw David's love.

3. There is a litteral knowledge of the Lord Jesus by the bare letter only of
the Word, and it is wrought in this manner. A man does not only take up the
knowledge of Christ by report, nor from his works, but he hears, reads, is well
Catechized concerning Christ, and all his Offices, and Benefits, that there is
much light let in; hence his mind having those litteral relations, guesseth at
them, and conceives of them, and because the mind is carnal, it apprehends them
in a carnal manner (though in thinks it sees Christ truly.) Hence a man having
a form of this knowledge in his head, he may be able to express much, and make a
large confession of his Faith, disco^rse of points of controversy, in matters
that concern Christ, and justification by Christ, etc. and instruct others, and
yet having no more, know not all thi^ while what the Lord Jesus is.

First, Because as he was a carnal Jew that had but the form of Knowledge in the
Law, Romans 2. 20. so he is but a carnal Christian that has but a form of
Knowledge in the Gos^el. The Jews were exceedingly versed in Scripture, and
boasted they heard God, and saw God, Christ tells them, they never heard his
voice, nor saw his face, John 5. 37. i. e. they only saw it literally, not
savingly.

Secondly, This is but a carnal knowledge which letter and fancy beget, 1 Cor.
2. 14. He cannot know them because they are spiritually discerned.

Thirdly, It Is a dead Knowledge, or will be dead and unsavory; and hence many
that know much of Christ, feed on their lusts and Dunghill delights, because
their Knowledge feeds them not, fills them not, as fancies do not feed.

Fourthly, It Is a f^lse Knowledge, for give a blind man a description of the
Sun, or a ta^^eless man of honey, he may set up a false Image and deceive
himself, and so does this. Many set up a false Image of Christ, and trust to
that. Or as in the description of another Country, when he sees it, then he
sees he was deceived: so Saints see they were deceived, and saw not Christ, nor
Sin, nor God; and so shall men in He^^ see; hence Isai. 6. 9. In seeing they
see not: how came that to ass? they did see, but saw not really.

Fif^hly, It Is such a Know^edg as hinders from saving-knowledg of Christ, John
9. 39. I came that they that see might be made blind. The wise learned
Corinthians must become foolishness, and the light that is in thee is darkness.
This light stands in your light: and yet this is the Knowledge that thousand
thousands content themselves withal, and hence catch hold on Christ, and think
they have him, when in truth it is but the Image and fancy of him.

What then is this knowledge or seeing of Christ? Quest.


There is a seeing of Christ after a man believes, Answ.
which is Christ in his love, etc. but I speak of that first sight of him that
precedes the second act of Faith, and it is an intuitive or real sight of him as
he is in his Glory. Christ reveals his wonderful glory to the soul really, as
ex gr. A man hears sin to be the greatest evil, and sometime conceives by
argument how, but sees not the thing sin, though he sees the word sin: so a man
that never travailed into foreign parts, may hear, and read, and speak of
Countries: or as Herbalists read of the nature of Plants and Tree^, yet never
saw the things, nay trample upon them when they see them: so it is one thing to
read of the Sun in a Book, or to know it by relation, another thing to know it
by sight. This is therefore the saving-knowledg of Christ, to see the Lord in
his Glory as he is: not perfectly, for that is in Heaven; hence we shall there
see him, and be like unto him, but imperfectly, and in part, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
Changed here into the same Image. And this appears from these four Grounds.

1. That Knowledge the Saints have of Christ, it is not by bare word only, but
also b^ the Spirit. The word relates Christ, but the Spirit is the interpreter
of the Word: the Interpreter of Heaven must interpret the language of Heaven.
Now the Spirit ever shows us things as they are, even though they be deep
things, and mysteries, it makes them plain, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. As the Sun when it
arises it scatters all darkness, so when this day^ster arises: Not that
these things are revealed without the Word: for 2 Cor. 2. 14. and 2 Cor. 4. 4.
lest the light of the Gospel should shine: it is by the Word that the Spirit
does enlighten.

2. Because the sight of the Knowledge of Christ, it is as the knowledge of a
thing in a glass, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Now though you see not the man face to face,
yet if you see him in a glass, there you see him as he is: Quod videtur in
speculo, non est imago, as some think. A man may know another by relation, or
by some picture, but in a glass that is more full. The Jews they saw Christ,
but it was under Vails and Types, and Pictures of him, this was obscure: under
the Gospel the v^il is pulled off, and with open face we see as in a glass the
glory of the Lord. In Heaven the glass is taken away, and then we see as we
are seen.

3. Because that estate the Saints are translated into is a state of Glory.
Hence when justified, then glorified. Hence as that sanctification that is in
the will is the beginning of the life of Glory, so that light God puts into
their mind, is the beginning of the light of Glory. Hence as in Heaven the soul
sees Christ by the full light of Glory perfectly, face to face, so in this life
the soul sees Christ really as he is, yet as in a glass imperfectly. Hence we
are said to see in part.

4. In regard of that abundant goodness and love of Christ to his people. Love
cannot lock up secrets, Joseph hid himself from his Brethren for a time, but
his bowels melt, he must tell them that he is Joseph. Christ may do so, but his
love even constrains him afterward, to let them see whom he is, John 14. 21. I
confess its admirable love to reveal Christ in the Word and letter of the
Gospel, to hear of him is happiness, and if the Lord saves you, you will think
so too: But this is common to wicked men; there is a manifestation of himself
as he is unto his people. And now he is in Glory, hence reveals himself in his
inconceiveable, Glory, that now a man's eye sees the Lord, and such things he
never thought of before, which eye never saw, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

How does the soul see him as he is?

I in this case, Quest.
rather desire to learn than teach, even from the meanest; Answ.
yet what is obvious I shall suggest, in this weighty business.

This seeing of him appears in three particulars.

1. True saving knowledge and sight of Christ consists in the sight of the
glory of his person, especially now caught up to Heaven, and sitting at the
right hand of God, in all the Glory of the Father. Look as at the Judgment-day
the Lord shall break out of Heaven in such Glory as shall amaze all the world,
and all eyes shall see him, that he shall not only be admired in himself, but
in all his Saints, by all that are round about him: just so does the soul see
him now (though nor by the eye of sense, yet by the eye of Faith) though not
come to judge the world, yet now ruling of the world; though not in the clouds,
yet in Heaven; though his Humanity only in Heaven, yet his God-heads beams
filling Heaven and Earth; though not yet coming in the Fathers Glory, yet
sitting clothed with the Fathers Glory: for if a man looks on Creatures, he
sees Gods footsteps of power; if on Angels and Saints, Gods Image of
Holiness; if in Christ, there God himself, 2 Cor. 4. 4, 5, 6, 7. It Is true
then Christ's Glory shall be seen by the Wicked, but that is by sense, not by
Faith, that is only in their minds, but there is no shining into the heart, to
the kindling of an infinite esteem of him: and this the god of this World hides
from people; Christ the Lord of another world in spite of Satan reveals to his
people. Before a man sees Christ, there is nothing more base than Christ, even
to the Elect, and then the ways and work of Christ, I^r. 2. 11. Have any
Heathen changed their gods? these change their glory for that which does not
profit: now the Lord will be, must be esteemed of his people; hence will and
does reveal this Glory of his to his Saints, whereas here others are blind.

2. In the beholding of the Lord as he come^ and appears in the Glory of his
Covenant, for when the Lord reveals himself so as to cause the soul to believe,
and thereby to make it one of his people, he never makes any a people, but by
entering into Covenant with them. Hence he ever appears in his Covenant first,
Isai. 49. nlt. Look as when the Lord made him a people at Mount Sinai, Moses
came down from (...) with Tables in his hands, etc. So when Christ comes to
make any his people, he comes as Mediator of a be^ter Te^^ament, Heb. 7. 22. On
Mount Sion, Heb. 12. 22, 24. No^ look as it was with the Israelites, 2 Cor. 3.
they had the Covenant of Christ, and Christ revealed; but as Moses face was
covered, ^o theirs was, and Christ the^e was veiled over with the Law, even the
Moral Law written in stone. Hence there was a vail on their hearts too, they
could not see Christ, the end of the L^w, but only the Vail, viz. the Law, and
hence looked for life by that, and hence we^e hadened against Christ, Romans 9.
31, 32. So it is the misery and blindness of many people at this day, they see
the Lord Jesus, but with his vail on: for people being not able to see and
pri^e the glory of Christ immediately, the Lord appears with the law first,
requiring this and that, and they endeavor to do it; and hence if they cannot,
they comfort themselves with this, the Lord accepts my endeavors, not seeing
the hypocrisy of them, or else they are never at ^eace, or very seldom; and
why? because they see not to the end of that which is abolished, never saw the
end, the Lord Jesus Christ. Now therefore when the Lord reveals himself, the
Lord makes himself known without the vail, so that when conscience cries you
must do what ever is commanded, or dye, the Lord Jesus now comes and appears,
and says, therefore see what need thou have of me, who have fulfilled all
Righteousness, and done all. Receive m^ that have done it, and thou shall live.
Oh but may I now live as I ^ist? Am I now free from the Law? No, it is to be thy
Rule and life in Heaven, but I will write my Laws in thy heart, and cause thee
to walk in my ways. Hence the soul sees all done for him; 1. In Christ. 2. All
that he is to do for Christ; he sees it not in me^ns, nor in himself, but in
the Lords promise, and here Faith hangs, and has peace. For two things trouble,

First, I have broke the first Covenant of the Law, Christ appears not as one
that exacts the Debt, but as one that comes to enrich him when poor.

Secondly, I cannot walk after it as a Rule, Christ appears in this Covenant,
and promises to cause him to do it; and hence after all departings from the
Lord, he will not depart further by unbel^ef, but sees the end of the Law,
which is Christ, that in him he may perform the Covenant, and by him be
strengthened to walk with him as after a Rule: For the Covenant of Grace is not,
Christ will be rigthteousnesse to thee if thou will walk after the Law as a
Rule, but Christ will do both: and this the soul sees in it is Glory, else it is
no sight. Hence 2 Cor. 3. Gospel is called The ministration of Glory, which no
carnal heart can see, for the vail is taken away when it turns to the Lord, and
sees him. The Saints only with open face behold this: It Is true for a ti^e they
may make of Christ a Moses, as Peter, Luke 5. 8. Lord depart from me, I am a
sinful man. And the Lord may deal roughly with them to hu^b^e them, as Joseph
did to his Breth^en, but it will not ever hold; and the Lord ^ppearing thus to
them that have been stung by the Law, and that killing letter, now ^he Lord
appears in ineff^ble Beauty and Glory; To others there is nothing in it, they
may see this, yet not believe.

3. In seeing the Lord in the Glory of his Grace, or fitness for him, and this
is the main: for look as it is in Marriage, there is a respect to Beauty and
feature, and that draws. Now a Woman sometimes appears to one so, that though
Portion be great, etc. yet he cannot like, another can because God has a hand
in it, and what fits the fancy, that is beauty: there is a sutablenesse every
way. So Christ is presented with a rich portion to many, and yet they cannot
like, cannot see a Beauty, because they cannot see a fitness and sutablenesse
to them, and for them: another man can, because he sees a fitness and
sutablenesse in the Lord Jesus for him, in res^ect of his misery and sin, and
his gracious disposi^ion, John 1. 14. But we saw his glory full of Grace and
truth. Psalm 45. 2. Thou art fairer than the children of men, full of Grace are
thy lips: which is so beautiful in the Lords eyes, that the Father hence exalts
the Son, for all the Grace he shows to his Elect. Now what makes Christ appear
fit? Answ. The knowledge of a man's self, and sense of vileness; hence Luke 7.
29, 30. The Pharisees despised the counsel of God against themselves, when
Publicans justified God, etc. And it is a Rule, that the saving-knowledg of
Christ is dependant upon the sensible knowledge of a man's self. Let a Christian
in Christ lie in his sins, and comfort himself in Remission of them without
repentance, he may talk of Christ, but no beauty will appear in Christ: So it is
at first, first the Soul feels sin, and that God is holy, and will hate him:
then the Lord shows Christ; come to call such. Yea but I have no good, and
cannot help my self; Christ appears fit to seek out such. Oh but I cannot see,
nor believe, nor be affected; Christ appears one fit to do all, full of wisdom
to perform the Second Covenant. Oh but I want all things; Christ appears
all-sufficient. Oh but I shall fall; Christ appears constant in his love. Oh
but he is far to seek; Christ appears present. Oh but I shall sin; Christ
appears merciful to bear with, and heal infirmities. Oh but I shall believe too
soon; he is fit to prepare and dispose. Oh but all the world will be against
me; Christ therefore appears fit to rule all for me. Oh but Death and Grave may
hurt me; Christ appears fit who has conquered all: and this is ever in the
Saints. Now least you should think you have this when you have not; and know it
not, see the evidences hereof.

1. If ever the Lord has thus revealed himself to thee, he has brought this
light out of darkness, and made thee sensible of it, 2 Cor. 4. 5, 6. Oh you
that have been a little troubled, and then hear of Christ, and then depend on
him, and wait for comfort from him, and now you are well: you never yet saw
him. Nay if truly enlightened, you will go mourning to your Graves for your
ignorance of him, Prove. 30. 2. and seldom is your darkness seen and felt, but
there is some beam let in.

2. It damps the glory of all the world, that a man lays down all at Christ
feet, as the Wisemen Mat. 2. As glow-worm-stars go out when the light of the
Sun arises, so all the comforts, and all the miseries of the world are nothing
now, Acts 7. I see Jesus.

3. It makes a man very vile in his own eyes, Isai. 6. 5. Nay his excellency
vile as Isaiah his tongue, and wonders that the Lord should look upon him a
Worm who is so glorious. What am I that the Mother of my Lord should come to
me, etc. He see; Christ fit, and then sees his Glory, and then says, What me
Lord? me to stand before thee? Lord depart, I am a sinful man!

4. It necessitates the heart to believe, not with assurance, but with a
clinging to him: Hypocrites have knowledge of Christ, but it never heats the
heart; this as fire necessarily heats, and that which is put to it is heated;
so here, for the sight of the last end does necessitate when it is seen, Isai.
55. 4, 5. They shall run to thee, because God has glorified thee, Romans 1. 16,
17. it is the power of God, for there is righteousness revealed: that though the
Lord bids depart, yet he cannot be gone, nay when he concludes, yet as Jonah 2.
4. so he can see to a Temple through the belly of a Whale. Many say, may I
believe? or I cannot prize him! I tell you when the Lord appears as he is, you
cannot resist that light, but you must cling to him.

5. Where this is, a man rests not here, but sees more and more of him, John 1.
49, 50. A man sees now his Glory, but after he shall see his love, and after
that he shall know his mind, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Ephesians. 1. 9. The mystery of his will.
And then his constant presence, and all his walkings with him and toward him,
so as to be familiar with him, that in time of old Age he shall be an
Acquaintance of Christ's, 2 Cor. 3. 18. From glory to glory; whereas an
hypocrites light goes out or grows not. Hence many ancient standers take all
their comfort from the first work, and droop when in old age. I know the Saints
light is obscured, and the Lord ^ides his face, but then they are troubled, and
it shall break out with healing in his wings. Nay all their life time they may
think they know him not, because they have not those measures. Oh therefore see
a necessity of it.

1. You that are vile, and ignorant of Christ, no Faith yet, no Christ yet: And
what then? Thy sins are upon thee now, and woe to thee, for the wrath to come.
Oh poor creature! thou do not see, nor can not see, if thou did, thou
would not crucify the Lord of Glory.

2. You that be Professouts of the Church. Oh deceive not your selves, if the
Lord has enlightened you, Oh bless him. If Christ were here, he would bless
you, Mat. 13. 16. Nay when he was here, he did it, he does it in Heaven. I
thank thee Father, etc. Mat. 11. 25. Luke 10. 21. But if not, all is unsound,
that ever you had. Oh therefore look you be not deceived here, and therefore
wait upon the Lord to manifest himself, Who knows but the Lord may help? Nay
when you are feeling of the infinite need of it, and of your own woeful
blindness, it is begun.

SECT. VI.
SEE the happiness of Saints (all you standers by) and of all Believers. Use 3.
You think what are they? What have they, that I have not? What get they by
seeking, by mourning? They have the Lord himself, not Kingdoms, nor Heaven, not
guard of Angels, no^ pardon, nor comfort or Grace only, but which is greater,
and than which there can be no greater, the Lord of Glory himself. Is there any
thing that is good there? it is theirs. I doubt not but Angels stand amazed at
this. What have thou? Thou have peace, and ease, and duties, and friends, but
no Christ, then poor and cursed thou art.

SECT. VII.
HEnce le^rn to judge of your Faith, Use 4.
whether it be of the right make or no? whether it be such a Faith as will
never fail you, but shall in deepest miseries, in sore^t agonies, and most
furious temptations; nay in greatest sins and desertions, be indeed a friend
unto you? Is it such a Faith as pitcheth on, and closes with the person of
Christ himself, and him alone? So that all the delights in creatures quiet thee
not, unless thou can find him through them; Nay no Ordinances cheer thee,
unless thou can see him in them: Nay, Heaven it self will not content thee,
but him in Heaven, Psalm. 73. 25. And hence it is him thou seek, it is him thou
feet, it is him thou approvest thy self unto, and servest: So that it is this
Rock of ages thou trustest to, Isa. 26. 3, 4. It Is his strength thou art strong
by, it is his life thou live by, it is the Lord himself that thy Faith fadoms.
This is right, 1 Pet. 2. 7. For now what good can the Father deny thee, when he
has given a Son to thee? What hurt can Satan do thee by all his shakings, when
thou have the Son himself, this cornerstone, this horn of salvation to support
thee? What hurt can the Law do thee, when thou have righteousness in a Son?
What hurt can delusion do thee, when thou have wisdom ever plotting for thy
good, in such a glorious Head as the Son? What hurt can death do thee, or sin
do thee, when thy life is in the Son? Oh lead me to the Rock, says David, that
is higher than I. Oh here is a rock higher than death, than grave, than sin,
than Satan, Who can hurt thee now? But oh Beloved, how many fall short of
entering into this rest? and closing with this person? And there are four sorts
of them, that spin the finest thread of deceit to themselves* that think they
believe when yet they have not the Son.

1. Those that do not close with himself, but only come to him for some
righteousness out of himself (for I shall not speak of them that forsake all,
and follow Christ for the bagg and for the loaves) for it is with all men living
naturally, as it is with men that have been rich shopkeepers, but now they are
broke, and cast into great want; steal they will not, digg they cannot, beg
they know not how; turn Prentice to another they must not, they have not been
used to that life; hence they resolve to set up their Trade again, though they
sell but Pins, and Points, and small Wares; and because they cannot set up for
themselves, they go unto Merchants to help them, and run into their Books on
trust, and desire day and patience, and they will pay them all again: now it is
not the man that they respect, but to make up their markets out of him; but
alas they cannot pay their Debts, and hence to Prison they go: so it is here,
God set up Adam with a stock in his own hand, now he is broken and cast into
great want, and fears the arrest of Gods displeasure, now sin men dare not,
digg and help themselves they cannot, and to beg and live upon the Lord and
his Alms they know not how, indeed they will not, they are not used to this
life; hence seek to set up their Trade again, though in never so small duties;
and because they cannot help themselves, hence they go to Christ, not as to an
Husband for himself, but as to a Merchant to set them up again: and truly
Christ for many ends, and to show his freeness to his own, gives many Talents
to such, which they receiving hope to please the Lord by; when I can get the
Lord to give me some more knowledge, brokennesse, affections, enlargements,
abilities to do, then I hope I shall please him: but either they spend all and
fall away to nothing before they dye, or else Death come; and carries them
captive to the judgment seat of God, and there they see they are run but the
deeper in Debt, and not able to pay. Thus it is with Papists who profess that
none of their own Works save, but his works in us, and his Blood meriting, that
these shall save. Hence they trust not to what they do, but to what the Lord
does, against which very Faith the Apostle disputes, Romans 4. 5. Thus it was
with the Jews, diverse despised Christ, and sought a righteousness of their own;
others cried Lord, Lord: Lord there be these sins that wring my Conscience,
ease me of them, here be these duties I must do, else never saved, and my heart
is dead, Oh affect me, and help me to do them: there be such works I am to
perform, and have no strength to Pray, to Prophecy, Lord assist me, Mat. 7.
21, 22. Depart, I know you not, never accepted of you, you thought these things
would please me, you closed not with me, Oh now depart from me, from my
fellowship, my bosom, my presence: for this is ever their frame, they think to
pacify God by what they do, and though they think his justice cannot, yet they
hope there is such indulgence in his mercy that he will accept. Thus it was,
Isai. 58. 2. for this is their temper, they are not wounded with the want of
Christ himself, but with some jarrings against the Law, for which they fear
they must dye. Hence not seeing into the spiritual nature of the Law, they are
wounded, not slain by the Law: they hope they shall live if they can leave such
sins, perform such duties, feel such abilities. Now having made trial at home,
they go to Christ, and seek him with delight for to work this or that, and then
they are well: now if they do not receive at present, then they hope by seeking
to find in time, if he does not help them, then they shall be well. Hence they
ever live in some sin, and know it not, as these did, and as the young man,
Mat. 19. And thus it is, as it is with two Princes, one is in trouble by
inroders, he sends for aid to another, but does not cast down his Crown, and
put himself in subjection to the other. So men will be Kings, and hence send
for aid against the inrodes of some sin that stings Conscience, but put not
themselves under the Lord Jesus. Bring those mine enemies hither, Luke 19. 27.
In one word; as the Wound is, so is my closing with Christ, if one be in
outward trouble, now to Christ he goes to deliver; if pressed with inward
trouble for some sins, now to Christ to remove them, and so to pacify
conscience; if with want of Christ himself, now he goes for himself.

2. Those that close with Promises without Christ himself, and divide between
them two, that strip Christ of these his Swadling-clouts, make their gain of
these, and let himself go. I confess all a Christians wealth is laid up in
Promises, not in words and syllables, for they are dead things, but Christ in
them, and Gods faithfulness in them, 2 Samuel 23. 4, 5. This is all my
salvation, for all fullness is in Christ, he is rich, but what am I the better?
nay the more miserable, for all emptiness is in me; therefore in the promise
lies my peace. And this is a Christians support in all troubles, and hence he
casts anchor here; but here is his frame, he lays not hold on them without
Christ, but by them goes to Christ, and there rests, John 6. 45. He that has
heard of the Father comes unto me. Give children milk in the dish, they cry
still, they must have it from the Mother, and there suck: so 2 Pet. 1. 2, 3.
Now there are others that finding some work in themselves without Christ, and
thinking that it is saving, and so a good sign; hence are mistaken, and close
with it without Christ, and now they think it is well. I doubt not but the Jews
that be devout comforted themselves with that promise, He that confesses, etc.
Prove. 28. 13. not understanding of it, Mat. 3. Say not within your selves we
have Abraham to our Father, that promise kept them off from Christ, Mat. 22.
Some came not to the Feast, some came but without a Wedding Garment. It Is with
these men as it is with men that come to buy Wines, they taste them, and content
themselves with a taste, another buys the thing: a Saint does so; another
tastes the sweet, and after falls to the impardonable sin, Heb. 6. Or as it is
with a man that sees corn on the ground, he buye^ the field, another he gleans
somewhat, and contents himself with that. There is in one word a double error,

First, When a man shall close with Christ without Promises; and hence seek to
be se^ted without a Promise. Hence say some, you must not gather any evidence
from any qualification you feel in your self.

Secondly, When men shall snatch and nibble at Promises, and misapply them, not
closing with Christ in them and by them; I have confessed my sin, and repented,
and run away with this without Christ. Oh time will come the Lord will say, how
came^t thou in hither? what have thou to do to take my Promises into thy mouth?
to arm thy self against Christ by Promises to make a spoil of Christ's grants,
and let him be crucified. When Saul rent off Samuels garment, he said, The Lord
shall rend, etc. 1 Samuel 15. 27, 28. The letter kills, all Promises without
Christ slay, because they keep the famishing Soul from Bread it self.

3. Those that close not with Promises only, but with Christ himself, but it is
only with the Image and fancy of him, which they think is himself. In true
Faith the Father reveals the Son as he is, or the Son reveals himself as he is,
and Faith hence closes with him as he is, John 6. 40. But some there be that
hear of him, hence think what he is. Hence a carnal mind imagines of him as it
imagines of a King in a far Country, and falls down to his Image, and trusts to
it, and depends on it, and joys in it, until a man comes to be converted, or
to dye: and then he sees the deceit. Or if he did see him, yet he can see no
beauty in him to desire him. There is many a man in this case that trusts to,
and joys in Christ, whom if he did know he would loath. John came preaching
the Gospel to show them Christ, they all came to him, and rejoiced in his
light, but it was but for a season: for when he came to show them there he is,
John 1. 29. not one man stirs when he shows them Christ, and verse. 35. only
two: and chap. 3. 32. No man received his testimony. This is (Beloved) the
great sin and cause of all the rest, if they had known they would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory. Christ is not seen, hence not thought of, hence
not esteemed; hence men boast not in him: Nay it is the great plague under
means, that in seeing they see no^. Lord how long: You say Christ never so
clearly seen, true, but thou in seeing may not see; and if it be thus, then
look for ruin, Isai. 6. 9, 10, 11, 12. We say Christians want not light, but
life and affections. Oh beg for light that will bring affections, else all
affections will dry up if not fed with this Spring, John 5. 37. What people had
such means as they, yet they not eyes to see?

4. Those that do not close with the bare fancy of Christ, but with himself;
but it is not for himself, and for his holiness, but only for his peace, and
consolations, and joys. Like a sick woman that comes to the Physician, not to
marry her, but to heal her, cure her, and so comfort her. Or if she does come
to marry him, it is only to satisfy her lust, or to save her from trouble, etc.
In a word, they receive Christ, that he may give contentment to them, and not
that hereby they may also give contentment unto him. They close with Christ to
make them happy, not to make them holy; But they thus closing with him, think
they have him, and hence rejoice exceedingly, and hence have a love to him, and
hence some kind of communion with him, and hence think they are espoused to
him, and more familiar with him than others, and hence veri^y look with these
five foolish Virgins to embrace the Bridegroom: That look as a Saint from a
false apprehension of Christ, to be none of his, may be very ^ad, lose his joy,
nay his very love, in the act of it, nay his communion and boldness to go to
him, nay his expectation of him; so from a false conceit that Christ is mine, e
contra. Thus a man is grievously troubled with the sight of Gods anger, and
with horror, and uses all means, at last he sees only Christ can do it, and
hence seeks for and prizeth his love (for his one ease) for as horror may be
his greatest evil, so love to ease him, may be his greatest good: At last he is
fully persuaded. How? By any work or word? No, but God has persuaded, and its
now sealed, hence joy. But now there is matter of more trouble, holiness, and
close walking with Christ, this is troublesome, he cares not for Christ, to
help him here; but devises how to keep Christ and joy without holiness. Hence
let a world of sin lie upon them, they be not troubled with that, they look up
to Christ; or if they see and be troubled at it, they take it as a burden, not
as the greatest burden. Hence (say men) you must not judge of your estate by
any thing or qualification you feel in your self, for these may fail your
eyesight in misty times (But we must follow it then, and not rest till we see
and find it, for without holiness no man shall see God) Hence also let there
be never so many falls, yet say they, never call your state into question,
hence they profess, we cannot move till we be moved, and if I do not, it is
not my fault. Hence if Ministers do preach any things which are not about the
person of Christ, or the excellency of a Christian in Christ, or the emptiness
of the creature to prepare for Christ, (which are indeed of great use) and
press to any work or service of Christ, they are Legal Preachers, and bring
people under a Covenant of works. Whereas if we preach duties, and leave them
as signs, before being in Christ, they are so, but ^ere to preach any duty of
the Law, is part of the sweet will of Christ. Tell us (say they) what we should
do. What can a man do? He can do all things through Christ: True, but Christ
must come to act it. Ye^, But he has a Faith to fetch it, 1 John 1. 6. many
said they had communion with him, 1 John 2. 3, 4. It seems, they said they had
no sin, as now some say, God sees no sin in justified people, God looks to the
new creature only, it is not I but sin: if the Spirit help not, it is not my
fault. Not many days since it did lie upon the spirit of one, who seeing
Christ has undertaken all, closed with him, rejoiced in him, not for this end,
not from the beauty they saw in holiness, nor bitterness of ^infulness, but
because they should be eased of the work. I have known them that have lived in
some sin, and promised the Lord shall be blessed if he save them in their sin,
and conceiting he would, have loved him; thus these. In a word, the soul of man
desires rest and peace, seeks for it in Creatures, seeks to satisfy it self
there, there it cannot; hence seeks for it (as many dying men do) in Christ,
not in the Grace, but in the joy of Christ; not in Christ's holy presence, but
in his comforting presence; seeking the utmost perfection of a Christian in the
seal of the Spirit, not in the mighty actings of the Spirit for God. Hence he
is delude^, and fancies he has Christ, and hence joy. Sin is the great evil,
hence the end of Christ's coming is to take it away. Hence if a man close with
Christ, to remove horror, not sin, and so has not closed with him for his
holiness, you never closed with Christ for the end of his coming, nor for his,
but only for your own ends, and so it is not him, but his, 2 Cor. 2. 15. The
Gospel is a savor to them that perish, if of Death to death. Oh consider of
these things if it be not thus. 1 John 5. 11, 12. Have the Son for thy portion?
Do see his Glory full of Grace to accept and sanctify thee, thou have life:
if not the Son, but only so^ething from him, Oh death and not life! the bonds
of Death (not life) are upon thee, which no creature can unloose unless the
Lord come to they Grave-side and unloose thee.

SECT. VIII.
TO close with the Person of the Lord Jesus: Use 5. Of Exhort.
you will think this is not a right course thus to do. We cannot do it. Answ.
Yet the Gospel has commands and entreaties wherewith Christ's Spirit goes to
the Elect; and if you could see Christ in the mini^^ry of man, you should feel
it; And hence we look it should be so: and besides, Saints that have Faith and
power, are quickened by the voice of the Son of God. Consider therefore,

1. All men are fallen into a bottomless gulf of misery and sin, though once
righteous. Hence Gods truth having said, he that sins shall dye: hence justice
comes out to do execution, and when the neck of all men thus lies on the block,
yet mercy pities, and says, Oh spare, save! Satisfy me says justice, then I
will: hence mercy sends forth a Son, when no men nor Angels could help, and he
takes flesh, takes all their sin, fulfills all righteousness, bears their
sorrows, and by one offering perfects for ever them that are sanctified; and
having done this, is now at the right hand of God in the Glory of his Father,
all creatures subject to him, all excellencies being met together in him: so
that now he is the delight of ^od, the joy of Heaven; so that whatsoever thou
can want, or losest, if thou had him, thou shall find it in him: and also
whatever he can do for thee, in his time thou shall receive it from him, Deuteronomy.
33. 26, 29. Who is like the God of Iesurun.

2. Now there is a universal offer to all people where the Gospel comes;
enemies are entreated to be reconciled; for though he has not dyed for all,
yet now being King, such is his excellency, that he is worthy of all: Hence
commands all to receive him: and if this be a condemning sin to reject him,
it is then a command lies upon you to receive him, and the foundation of this
offer is your wants and miseries. You are dead, Oh come to him therefore for
life; weak, guilty, blind, Oh therefore come to him for pardon, peace, and
life. Not fullness, nothing but emptiness is the ground of this offer, Ier. 3.
22.

3. Hence there is nothing on Gods part, nor yet on your part that can keep you
from him. No sins, no wants, unless it be your will, Mat. 23. 37. Therefore now
who-ever will shall have him, let him take him, Rev. 22. 17. There be two acts
of the Will, Election and Resolution, I must have him, which if you will,
nothing that ever thou did or can do can please the Father so much: so that
he will 1. Adopt thee to be his Son, John 1. 12. As e contra. 2. Thou shall
enrich thy self with a greater blessing than if Heaven, and Earth, and all
glory was put into thy hand, as the Lord himself is better than all; and hence
once thine, ever thine, none shall pull thee out of his hand, 2 Pet. 1. 5. And
it shall rejoice the heart of Christ himself in Heaven, when as his Bride thou
give to him thy good will, Isai. 62. 5. And if you do not kiss the Son he
will be angry, Psalm 2. And God knows whether now the last word, the last offer
is to be made to thee.

But I find such sins in me, Object. 1.
that till they are gone I dare not.

Then you will first remove sin, Answ.
and after receive Christ: first be your own saviors, and then make him
another: you shall never do it. Oh close with him to take sin away, because
sick, therefore receive him.

But I have no will, my heart is endeared to my sin.

Therefore resign up thy self to him to give thee a will, Object. 2.
(put it into his hand as bad as it is, Answ.
this is Spouse-like) and to take away that will to sin, so thou shall have
him, I am my Beloveds, he is mine: For the Father looks to the Law, and says,
Sinner if thou believe thou shall be saved; now lie under the Spirit, and you
are where you should be; resist here, you resist the Holy Ghost. Oh but sin is
dear. Consider, 1. What good did it ever do thee. 2. Has Christ shed his Blood
or no, if not, Oh the wrath of God is to come; if he has, Oh will thou offer
this wrong to his Blood, that a Lust shall be dearer than it, thy bloody Knives
dearer than the life, and death, and mercy of a Son: Oh therefore if any Soul
has any lust dear, I beseech you by all the bitter sorrows of Christ, not to
reject so great salvation.

But must I receiv^ Christ with my own strength?

No, Object. 3.
you cannot, nor ought not, but if the Lord puts strength in thee, put it^
forth. Answ.
Many followed Christ for loaves, but none that ever came to him for himself
that ever he put away, Psalm 81. 11, 12, 13. I showed much love, but they would
none of me; Oh that they had hearkened. At this instant God may give thee a
heart.

But I fear I shall never get my sins removed that I feel, Object. 4.
which I think cannot stand with Grace.

Gods Promise and Reason is cross to thy fears; if a Son, Answ.
all things also though many years hence, Romans 8. 32. If not by receiving, is
i^ by rejecting that thou shall attain thy end? It Is true, thou have fallen off
by thy sin from Christ, because thy falls have made thee fall off by unbelief
from him, and made thee say, either I do not believe, or the Lord intends no
good to me: you have had no strength, because not satisfied with meat.

But I may presume. Object. 5.


Is it presumption to honor Christ, Answ.
and to have him honored in thee? No, Do think if the Lord shall after all
thy sins, and in the midst of all thy miseries give thee Christ, shall he not
be honored by this? yes, who can ever have such cause to love him as I? Shall
not thy receiving of him by Faith honor him? yes, Romans 4. 20. Can dishonor
him so much as by rejecting him? when he has laid down his life, showed his
love, offers himself; now to reject him, it is to offer greatest contempt to him
and his love that can be: hence can you honor him so much as by this? Do never
so much without him, he is unsatisfied: do this, he is well-pleased. Nay after
all thy sins, yet he says, Return to me: Nay, nothing else is such a means to
honor him, by doing for him. If so, grant thou art vile, unworthy, poor, yet
for the honor of the Lord Jesus do it, who is but little honored in the
world, and stand out no longer: thus receive him, and then know it you are
Sons, and rejoice in it, and do it now while the Spirit is upon thee, and
remember now not to change, Ier. 2. 11. As Women, Oh I would not change; see
how happy is thy choice: But Lord who has believed our Report!

How may the Soul come to close with the person of the Lord Jesus? Quest.


1. Before any man can close, Answ.
i. e. see and say he does close with the Lord as his own, he must feel a want
of the Lord and his presence, not only of his comforting, but of his holy
presence, for some people there be that never felt a want of Christ at all,
they are great and grievous sinners, but they trust to Christ, and though he
kill them, yet they will trust to him: others are in misery, and they feel a
want of redemption, and hence close with Christ for that, Psalm 78. 35. Others
are in horror, and know not what to do, and they feel a want of the comforts of
Christ, and hence close with Christ for that, and if they find it they depart
from Christ by looseness of life, if not by despair of heart, as Saul, 1 Samuel
28. God answers me not by Urim, etc. Others feel a want of some righteousness
from Christ, the having of which supports and sustains them without Christ,
till with the Prodigal, when all is spent, then they think of Bread at home,
and the want of which makes them to have less esteem of, and desire after
Christ, but they are full of Objections against the thoughts of closing with
him, but hence they close with Christ for that. Others there are that feel a
want of the Lord himself, and hence close with him for himself; so that let a
man have all blessings in the world, the purity of Ordinances, never so many
illapses, and droppings of divine light, and life, and comfort in these
Ordinances, that he wonders the Lord should be so good to him, yet he shall
find (if right) his soul secretly unquiet and unsatisfied till he has the Lord
himself. As the savor of meat makes a man that wants it, cry the more after
it, long the more for it; so the savor and sweet of all creatures, all
Ordinances, all Duties, do not stay, but stir up the soul to seek Christ, when
he is himself, Ier. 50. 4. They shall seek the Lord weeping. Hence first they
felt a want of him. The full soul loathes the honeycomb. Let the Lord be never
so sweet, let him do them never so much good, the more good he does them, the
less they regard him, Ier. 2. 6. They said not where is the Lord? Therefore
that soul that truly closes with the Lord, must first feel a want of the Lord,
and say these Ordinances are not bread, these creatures are not bread, all
these parts, gifts, duties are not bread, bran, not bread. All this savor,
this sweetness it is not bread. Hence I perish for want of bread, I have
creatures, Ordinances, Affections, comforts, Duties, but Oh no Christ. Like the
Prodigal, Luke 15. 17. Oh therefore do not only see, but feel the want of the
Lord Jesus, you that never had him yet; nay you that have him, you cannot have
more of him, but by feeling more the want of him. Oh it was a mavelous
expression of Moses, when the Lord began to grow weary of their company, Exodus
33. 15. If thou go not with us, carry us not up hence, i. e. Let us rather
die than live without thee. Mary when Christ was crucified, the carcass of the
Lord was gone, she sat there weeping: Oh much more for the Lord himself. Its
observed by some for the saddest spectacle, to see a desert Town: Oh what is it
to see a desert heart, where no Christ inhabits? Or a city, and no Inhabitants.
And hence its Romes curse, to be made an habitation of devils; so here. What is
Hell, but this, to see not Abraham, but to see Christ afar off? and thy self
shut out. It may be it is no sorrow now, but it will be. Its a sad thing to see
a man rise up early, go to bed late, eat the bread of carfulness, and yet
gain nothing, Phil. 1. 21. This is very sad. Christ is our gain, all the
creatures you have, means you use, duties you do, comforts you receive, they
are not gain, nay, the more God does for thee, the more thou losest, if no
Christ, because now thou art full by this means. Oh therefore get a heart
sensible of the want of the Lord. Think there is a Christ, whose Glory is the
amazement of Heaven, but Oh I see him not. Happy for ever are they that have
him, but Oh I have him not. Your hungry bellies cannot want bread, if they do,
they are never quiet till they have it. Is the Lord no better? Lord grant this
contempt be not revenged with spiritual plagues! Some of you know not your
want, others feel it not, you can live without him; worse than Saul, he went to
Urim, and lamented in great distress, He answers me not! Oh you feel no
distress, because of this, I have him not! Nay worse than Dives, that begged,
Oh a drop of water to cool my tongue! Why cry not you, Oh the Lord Christ to
comfort my heart! Why is not all this fullness longed for? Oh therefore let
nothing else comfort, and let nothing discourage, but make this use of all, Oh
I want him!

2. To the right closing with his person, this is also required, to taste the
bitterness of sin, as the greatest evil: Else a man will never close with
Christ, for his holiness in him, and from him as the greatest good. For we
told you that that is the right closing with Christ for himself, when it is for
his holiness. For ask a whorish heart what beauty he sees in the person of
Christ, he will after he has looked over his Kingdom, his Righteousness, all
his works, see a be^uty in them, because they do serve his turn to comfort him
only. Ask a Virgin, he will see his happiness in all; but that which makes the
Lord ami^ble, is his Holiness, which is in him, to make him holy too; as in
marriage, it is personal beauty draws the heart. And hence I have thought it
reason that he that love; Brethren for a little Grace, will love Christ much
more. Hence if a man feels not the want of Christ, the bitterness of sin, as
his greatest evil, he will never see nor admire Christ's beauty, much less
close with it. Hence John 16. 9. Convinces the world of sin, because they
believe not in me, i. e. of that chiefly. Oh these wrongs done against the
Lord! Why not of wrath and Hell? Oh sin is the evil, and then it appears
exceeding evil, when not against God simply, but against a Son. Paul why
persecutest thou me? Acts 9. Why? Did he not live in lusts and self-confidence?
Yes, but in all these he saw he persecuted Christ. And after saddest search, I
have feared the want of this, is the great cause of all a man's closing amiss
with Christ. I would but ask where was Judas wound? Was it resting in a
Pharisaical righteousness without Christ? Without Christ, no, for he forsook
all and followed Christ. Was it want of profession of him, preaching for him?
No. Was it for want of communion with him? No: one sin he lived in, he had his
bagg. And hence when many went from him, he stuck to him, John 6. Judas still
cleaves to him: yet even then Christ calls him a Devil, which if ever he had
tasted the bitterness of, he would not have lived in, not dyed desparately,
some think impardonably without Christ, and so sin more against him. Let any
man living show me how he can close with Christ, and yet love one sin: I Will be
his bondman, that can say, I close with Christ as my Husband, and yet I love
my Whore too. Let any man living close with Christ, and keep his sin, or hide
his sin, or let it be hid, his closing with Christ shall harden him in his sin,
and so he shall dye without Christ in his sins, as it is writ, Exodus 21. 14. As
it was with Ioab, who fled to the Horns of the Altar, so it is with many men,
they sin, and confess and sin under all Laws: why? they fly to Christ, and this
imboldens them, hardens them, why? because they never tasted the bitterness of
sin. I know a man's sin may be crucified before it is mortified, as it may be
buried after it is dead. Oh therefore I beseech you look to this, you fail not
here. Many of you are troubled, Oh take heed of being comforted until you get
the Lord to do this for you, or unless you depend upon the Lord for this in
his time. Some apply comfort when they see no good: I dare not to my self or
others: Oh therefore imagine thou did hear the Lord speaking, Why do thou
persecute me? why is a man so grieved at any thing that crosses himself?
because a man loves himself, because he thinks his good lies there most: Oh see
thy good more in Christ than in thy self, Acts 9. 4. Oh me, me in whom all good
is, oh to persecute him! Two men hear, and one is in horror, and the other not;
oh it is because God sets it on: so here.

3. Make the Lord Jesus present with you, and set him really before you, and
see him willing to give himself unto you, even to thee in particular. Those
that give themselves in Marriage, separate themselves from all company, and get
alone together, and give themselves one unto another: so sever thy self from
all the world, and (...) the Lord really before thee, as David, Psalm 16. 8.
and so close one with another. For two things keep from Christ. Either

First, they care not for him, and the cause is, they make him no^ present,
only have a notion and report of him.

Secondly, They dare not close with him, because they fear he is not willing to
close with them, with others, not with me; so that all the Scriptures they
read, all the Promises they hear are very sweet, but they look on them as
spoken to others. Hence Acts 2. 39. For the Promise is made to you, and to them
afar off; be thou never so far off, if thou receivest him, he will receive
thee, Luke 2. 14. Good will to men: Oh see this good will in the Lord to have
thee receive him, though thou have no money, nay because dead and vile, nay
because not sensible, Rev. 3. 17, 18. Oh wonderful because senseless of misery,
therefore close with him. 1. Is it not his command it should be so? 2. Is it
not a sin to reject him? will he not be angry with thee to reject him? 3. Are
not his conditions easy, so as he has undertaken to do all that which thou
say thou can not? Why wilt not? 1. Oh if I were a child, a son in Covenant
I would, but because otherwise, hence I dare not. Ans. Ioh. 1. 12. Receive him,
he will make thee a Son. 2. Oh but my wants are many. Ans. Receive him he will
make thee rich, Isai. 55. 1, 2. 3. Oh but I find my hearten deared to
creatures. Ans. 1 John 5. 4. This is the Victory that overcomes the world,
even your Faith. 4. Oh but I shall fall back. No, Ier. 3. 22. Return, and he
will heal thy backsliding. 5. Oh but I shall never be able to do any thing.
Ans. Yes, close with hi^ and thou shall. 6. Oh but I am very vile before the
Lord after all I do. Ans. Yet Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. He shall make thee amiable,
only receive him, set thy heart on him alone. Now do you think he bears a good
will toward you? can you deny it? Shall not this overcome thee, that the Lord
of Glory should fall in love with thee, and bear good will to thee a Leper, and
that can do nothing for him, and yet for all this, Oh this will draw thee,
Psalm. 36. 6, 7. Oh how great is thy loving kindness; this makes a heart of
steel to yield, Ier. 31. 1, 2, 3. Oh this will cut you in Hell, Oh hard hearts
that despised such Grace!

4. If the serious thoughts of this do not draw thee, at least not so fully;
look up to the Lord to reveal himself unto thee to be thine. For as no man can
take Christ until God gives him, so no man can say he is his, until the Lord
shows him that he is his. And as the creature cannot re^^st, but take when the
Lord gives: so it cannot but see the Lord when he reveals himself as indeed he
is. And look to see him to be yours by some Promise; for there is a seeing
Christ mine in great fulgor without the light of a Promise, and Spirit in it.
Is Christ yours? Yes, I see it. How? by any word or promise? No, this is a
d^lusion. The other is by promise, and that opened in the Gospel, Ephesians. 1. 13.
14. He says not in whom after ye were sealed you believed, but e contra. And
how believed? by hearing the Gospel. Hence Saints return to this, Psalm 51. 8.
Let me hear the voice, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. And this is that which has knit the
hearts of Saints to Christ for ever* Oh thou have the words of life: For there
is a voice of love to the Saints engraven in all mercies, in all afflictions,
in all Gods leadings of them, though it be in a Wilderness; but Beloved, only
the Word can tell me the meaning of these words of love. So there is love of
Christ revealed according to a Promise, not by it, and love spoken in mercies,
but the Word interprets them and clears them to be no delusions; I mean the
Spirit there: This is judged to be a good answer to Papists, who shall be judge
of controversies? We answer that which shall be judge at the last Day, must be
judge now: but so, Romans 2. 16. John 12. 48. So whether does Gods Spirit seal,
or the Devil delude? It Is a great controversy if you have no^ a word to see
Gods love by, but think you have a way to see it without, this Word shall judge
you. Oh look therefore for the Lord by a word to do it, and say Speak Lord; and
if by word, look not for it without a work on your own heart. Some Christians
have rested with a work without Christ, which is abominable; but after a man is
in Christ not to judge by the work, is first not to judge from a word. For
though there is a word which may give a man de^endance on Christ, without
feeling any work, nay when he feels none, as absolute promises, yet no word
giving assurance, but that which is made to some work, He that believes, or is
poor in spirit, etc. till that work is seen, has no assurance from that
Promise. Tell him God has promised to pour clean water, Ezekiel. 36. Yes for
some, not for me. Secondly, it is not to judge by the Spirit, for the Apostle
makes the earnest of the Spirit to be the Seal; now earnest is part of the
money bargained for, the beginning of Heaven, of the light and life of it: He
that sees not the Lord is his by that, see; no God his at all: Oh therefore do
not look for a Spirit without a word to reveal, nor a word to reveal without
seeing and feeling of some work first, I thank the Lord I do but pity those
that think otherwise: if a sheep of Christ, Oh wander not. Ob. But I have
waited long for this. Ans. True, therefore more need to wait still, it may be
now it is not far off. Ob. Oh but it may be he will not, if I knew that I could
be quiet. Answ. Down proud heart, Oh take heed of that pride: art' no^ worthy
never to hear a voice from God? Be silent then, and humble, and now hear what
the Lord will say, he speaks in a still voice, Psalm 85. 8. do as they in that
Psalm did; Thou have done thus and thus, Oh hear us, turn us, and then ^ie
still and listen: Oh do thus, else you make God a liar if the word comes, 1
John 5. 10, 11. and now when thou have him, Oh change him not.

First, What do want, and where wilt go to find it but there? any creature^,
and all the excellencies of them are there, and in time of trouble he will be
instead of all, and also bless all.

Secondly, Do want Grace to honor a God? it is in him the fullness of it.
Do want God and his love? thou have him, and now all his love, his care, his
wisdom is thine. Oh wonder at thy lot and portion, and say, Lord I have enough.
Thus much of the first Doctrine.

CHAP. X.
Showing that True Believers do with hope expect the Second Coming of Christ.
SECT. I.
Now they go forth by Hope Of Him and his Coming. Desire Of Him and his Coming.

THat the Church and People of God after they are truly Espoused to Christ,
Observe. 2.
and made in any measure ready for Christ, they now are no more of this world,
but look out of it, and verily expect the Second Coming, and Glorious Appearing
of Christ.

It Is true, they look for his coming and company at the last period of their
life, but this they look upon but as their welcome in the way, until the last
Trump shall blow, and that they shall meet the Lord in the clouds of the Air,
1 These. 4. 18. which is the last and chief time of his Coming they look out
for. The Five Wise Virgins did here verily look for him; the Five Foolish
seemingly did so too: That look as it was before the first Coming of Christ,
all their thoughts and searchings of heart were after the day, and time, and
glory of it, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. And the nearer His Coming was, the more ardently
was he expected: Hence such flocking to John's Ministry. Hence Simeon waited
long for the consolation of Israel. So the Espoused and Beloved of the Lord
looks out for his coming now. He has left them as Orphans in this world, he
has diverse of his Elect yet to bring home, and enemies to put under his feet,
and then they know he will come, and this day they look for. As Christ expects
it, Heb. 10. 13. By the same Spirit they look for it.

This is that which Christ so often presses on his Disciples, foreseeing the
slumbers of the world, to be ever watching for his second coming; and hence
these alone are accounted blessed, Luke 12. 37, 38. That let Christ come at any
watch, Oh blessed. The duration of the world from the first to the second
coming, is but as it were a night divided into several watches; the Saints are
the watchmen of the world, who you know look for daylight, though it be long,
it is but a night; it will be morning: All the rest are like birds at their
chafe. And hence he tells them the reason of the uncertainty of his coming,
makes this the end of it. They are Evangelical commands with which there goes a
power. Look through all the Primitive Church in the Golden Age, they had all
this stamp, 1 Cor. 1. 7. Waiting. 1 These. 1. 10. To wait for Christ from
Heaven. Nay, Heb. 9. 28. He professes those only may know the fruit of his
first coming, that now look for him.

SECT. II.
1 BEcause they really foresee, and see such a day, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. Reas. 1.
In the last days shall come Scoffers, saying, where is the promise of his
coming? all things are as they were, and hence live in their lusts, die in
their own dung, and never look for it. But these foresee it really, and hence
look for it. Men that live on land, and love the smoke of their own chimneys,
never look out to other coasts and countries, or to a strange Land, but Seamen
that are bound for a Voyage, and have a Pilot with them that has seen the
coast, that is it they look for; so men that live in this world, and are well
here, look not after Christ not his coming, but they that have a Pilot, a
Spirit to show them, this day, this coast, and are bound for another world,
they look out for this; they see it two ways

1. By the eye of Faith in the promise, 2 Pet. 3. 13. And this makes the soul
see it, when all things seem to be against it, and hence expects it; for that
is the difference between Faith and hope: Faith closes with Christ, and all
the Glory of Christ, in the promises as present, hope hence steps forth and
lays hold upon the performance it self as absent. Faith entertains the promise
as a faithful messenger, and sees that his message is true. Hope runs out of
doors and leaves it with Faith, and looks for the Lord himself, Heb. 11. 1.

2. By the Light of Glory in the thing it self; for Saints do not only see
things in Letters and Syllables, and words, but see things as they are in
themselves. The wicked see the word, sin, and Christ, and Heaven (and in seeing
see not) but not the things themselves. Now the Glorious coming of Christ being
a thing to come, yet to be done, how do they see it but by report? Yes, they
have the Spirit of Glory, which Spirit shows them things to come, John 16. 13.
Which eye has not seen. That look as their Head Christ sees this day as it
shall be, and his apprehensions are not false, but as he conceives of this day,
so shall it be: so the Saints by the same Spirit see it before it comes, and
are not mistaken about it, though it be very darkly, yet sometimes when the
Spirit of God is not overclouded, they see it more evidently. For this is the
great plague of the wicked, they see nothing as it is, and in Hell they see how
they have been deceived. So this is the happiness of Saints, that though they
see things darkly, yet they see things truly, the Spirit creating glorious
impressions on the ^ind of things as they are. They know things that the eye
sees not, as they are. That look as Abraham John 8. 56. saw Christ's day, and
was glad, though afar off; so the Saints by the same Spirit. Now why did Noah
make his Ark, and look for a Flood? Because he saw it really. Did not others?
No, it is said, They knew not, Mat. 24. 38, 39. Never knew till the Flood came:
The Lord made it not known. Noah did, the other did not. Hence the Saints
cannot but look for it.

2. Because they see nothing else in this world worth looking after, Reas. 2.
no, not for the present. For if a man sees the day of the Lord, yet has some
prey in his eye, in this world, and his game before him, he will follow his
hunting to catch his venison, though he comes too late for the blessing. But
the Lord makes his people to see nothing in the world worth the hawking or
catching.

1. They see the Glory of another day, another world, and this puts out the
Glory of this, and hence makes them look for that; and hence when Christ would
comfort his Disciples, he promises nothing here, but tells them, In my Fathers
House are many Mansions. I go to prepare a place, and Il^ come to you again,
John 14. 1, 2, 3. And hence they seeing this to be enough, look for this.

2. They see an end of all these things, of all the Glory of them, and that
these summer swallows will take their wings, and fly away in greatest
extremities. Hence they look to eternal things, the Lord, and his coming, 2
Cor. 4. 18. We look not at temporal things.

3. They find the Lord crossing them of what they look for in this world,
sometimes of outward comforts, sometimes of the performance of spiritual
promises, And when God thus hedgeth their way with thorns, then they think of
their first Husband. Look as it was with Abraham, Heb. 11. 13. You know
strangers when their way is uncomfortable, ever and anon look for their home.
Abraham was heir of the world, yet he sojourns as a stranger in it, in Tents,
because he looks for a City, v. 10. So here, Saints the heirs of all creatures,
yet the Lord makes them strangers here, and hence they look for something else.
The things God has promised to his people are very great, but not
accomplished. Why? Because full accomplishment is left till the last day, that
hope may wait, and that we may live by Faith. God has promised to take away
all tears, Oh welcome that day! This world cannot do it, and the Lord here will
not, 1 Cor. 15. 19. If our hope were only here, we were (...) mis^r^ble.

3. Because they see and are sensible of their deliverance from wrath to come:
Reas. 3.
There has been much wrath in the world seen, but yet the great wrath is to
come, what that is they see. What their escape from it is they see. Hence they
look for Christ, when he shall appear like the rising Sun, and like a
Bridegroom from his chamber to comfort them, 1 These. 1. 10. For the Devils
look for this day, and natural men, but seeing wrath, wish themselves under
rocks and mountains, and seek to smother it: But Saints seeing themselves
delivered, hence calmly look for it. The sense of this love makes them say, Oh
when will he come, that I may see him with these eyes! They fear not (for why
should they) the terror of this day.

4. Because the Lord has given unto them the first fruits of Glory, Reas. 4.
and of that day of Glory, hence they look and wait for it. You know the first
fruits were part of the whole vintage, hence they gave thanks for all, because
they then looked for all, Exodus 23. Romans 8. 23. We having the first fruits of
the Spirit, wait for the (...). That look as it is with the wicked, that have
rejected Christ, and counted his Blood ^ common thing, and done despite to Gods
Spirit, there remains nothing (...) for of vengeance, so here e contra. Romans 5.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Being (...) by Faith, now 1. Peace with God. 2. Access by
Christ to God. 3. Standing in that Grace. 4. Shedding of love, hence not only
hope, but Glory in hope of the Glory of God. There is none espoused to Christ,
but taste this love, feel the warmth of his fellowship, feel the abundance of
his love, but it is but in a little measure, in the first fruits, hence they
look for and expect the rest at his coming. They are sometime full of fears,
what if shut out at last? But when they feel the first fruits of Glory at that
day, now they verily look for his coming. Christ dies we know, but it was not
possible for him to be held long, and hence rose again, and then looked for
Glory, and then was taken up to Glory: So here, the Saints lie dead in the
grave of sins and fears, but its not possible for them ever to be held here;
hence when risen with Christ, they look upon things above, and are waiting for
Glory, and at last are taken to Glory with himself. That look as Jacob, Genesis
49. 18. said, My soul waits for thy salvation, when the stakes and pins of
this fleshly Tabernacle are loosing, and so the Lord is loosing him from the
excellency of this world; though he minds other things, yet he recalls himself,
My soul waits for thy salvation Oh Lord.

SECT. III.
HEnce let all flesh take notice that there is such a time, Use. 1.
and day, and coming of the Lord Jesus. This was the Apostles Argument to prove
a resurrection, Christ is risen, and to prove this, and so the resurrection
from the dead at Christ's coming, else is your Faith vain, i. e. Expectation of
him vain, 1 Cor. 15. 14, and 17. Men think it easy to believe a resurrection,
and a second coming of Christ for that end; but an hoverly slight work is
quickly done, and an hoverly Faith is quickly wrought. But when a man comes to
look considerately, Is there such a day indeed? Is there one now in the third
Heavens that will fire this whole world, and gather his Saints to his Glory?
Now its very hard. Its usual with Satan to pierce with extremities, that when
they do begin indeed to close with Christ, and receive comfort from him, to
smite them with thoughts: Is there a Christ, and is there such a time of
coming? Now of all the Arguments to convince and persuade, methinks none like
this, viz. That there be a Generation of men in the world, that verily look for
this day and see it, and have the first fruits and beginnings of it already in
their souls. A number of people that once never minded it, heard of it, but
looked not for it, now to see it; flesh and blood could not, Satan would not
reveal it, hence God that cannot lie, has shown it unto them, so as they are
in a manner eyewitnesses of it. Men will believe eyewitnesses of any thing,
especially if many. Such are the espoused of the Lord in all ages. The things
which we have heard and seen we speak. Object.


But may they not be deceived, Answ.
and conceit that which is not?

True, but Divine revelation of any Truth that cannot deceive, for that is no
fancy of the head, nor delusion of Satan. Now this is a secret the Spirit makes
known.

1. In that it fills the mind and feeds the heart with it, that it carries unto
God with wonderment of blessing him that ever he saw this. Fancies cannot feed,
especially in greatest agonies: Now they choose misery on this ground, rather
than present peace here, Heb. 11. 35. Not accepting deliverance.

2. In that it works effects cross to Nature, nay to all a man's lusts in them.
Noah foresaw a Flood nigh, but he might be deceived. No, it is said he feared,
kept close to God and it came, so here.

3. This Light whereby they see, it is not only sweet and Glorious, and cross
to heart and lusts, but its sudden, that as with Paul, when going to persecute,
suddenly there fell a great Light, and so he saw Christ. So when a man goes on
in his sin, and suddenly the Lord reveals this and that by a word (else it is a
deceit) which all Angels could not do before, so as to see it, and that none
can reveal it as he sees it, especially to bring this light out of darkness,
this must be miraculous power, and no dream. But what do I speak of seeing?
they feel the beginnings of it in the first fruits of it.

For two great things shall be at that day.

First, Then all the Elect shall have their fill of love.

Secondly, Triumph in Christ when in the clouds with him. Have they not the
first here? Romans 5. 5. The feeling of which love cannot be a Fancy, for it
cannot conceive of it nor hold it. This is an infinite love, and that in the
midst of the sense of sin and death. That many times they are even fain to say,
Lord hold. 2. Triumph, Romans 5. 3. and that in afflictions, which make them by
experience so to feel God in part, that they triumph for time to come. It Is
^rue at times they look down the Tower, and so tremble, but while they look up
here, then they triumph, having access to the Grace wherein they stand, So
then look for it, there shall be such a day, and such a coming of Christ, Rev.
1. 7. The Father has exal^ed the Son to inesfable Glory. But Lord! Who sees
him as these, in his Glory, or to come forth out of his Glory? It Is but
Table-talk. But behold he comes, and every eye shall see him. The Lord pities
you, and holds out bowels of love, and Faith; Oh receive me, Oh cast away those
bloody knive^ that have pierced me; and sends his good Spirit like his hand to
draw you. But Oh do you not kick his bowels, do you not pierce his hands and
feet daily? And when you have done no tears! But he comes, and you that pierce
him shall see him, etc. Consider of it therefore you that doubt of this, you
that think not of this, and hence live and lie in your lusts, and despise him.
Behold he comes!

SECT. IV.
HEnce behold the happiness of all them that be espoused to the Lord Jesus,
Use 2.
in that their hopes are laid up in another world, at the day of the coming of
the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 15. 19. If we had hope only in this life, we were of all
men most miserable. Because none so foolish, or so sensible of misery as they,
but our hopes stretch to another life, to the second coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Suppose a man had all the Crowns of the world cast at his feet, but at
last to be dragged before the judgment seat of Christ, and there to stand
quaking, What should he be the better? What though Saints have all the miseries
in this world, but at last with these eyes they shall see the Lord, and stand
triumphing before him, and have a real sight and certain expectation of this.
What people in the world so great as these?

What do they wait and expect for? Quest.


Great things which may astonish the whole Creation. Answ.


1. They look for him to change their vile bodies, that this their Husband at
the marriage day should take away these rags, and make them like unto his
Glorious body, brighter than the Sun; This was preached about the time o^ the
Pequot wars.
so that burn them, cut them to pieces, (as some by the Indians have been, Lord
help!) they see Christ loves both, and hence holds sword and soul in one hand,
and scabberd in another, etc.

2. They expect he should take away all their sins, and make them like unto
himself, engrave on their souls perfectly his own Image, that their enemies
they feel now, they look they shall never see them more. 1 John 3. 2. And as no
evil like it, no mercy like this; and no evil to Saints like this, that yet
they should grieve the heart of such a Husband.

3. They look he should take away all sorrows and tears from them, for this the
Lord promises, and begins to execute now, but it shall be perfected then, Isa.
25. 8, 9. And hence called the times of refreshing, Acts 3. 19, 20. It Is true
the Spouse and Church is now sorrowful to the very heart many times, but there
is a time coming that they shall never sorrow more.

4. They look he should take away all shame from them. For no people in the
world laden with more calumnies and reproaches by the wicked and by
hypocrites, and hard speeches from the Godly, and they doubt whether they be
Sons or no. Now then the whole world shall see they are Sons, and shall stand
amazed at them, and shall not doubt of it, nor themselves, for the Lord shall
proclaim it, and they shall hear, these are my Jewels. And this they look for,
1 John 3. 1, 2.

5. They then look for recompense to all their labor of love to him and his.
Hence 1 Cor. 15. 58. Knowing your labor is not in vain in the Lord. Hence the
Apostle often defers men for that recompense till now. The Lord show mercy to the
House of Onesephorus in that day, 2 Timothy 1. 18. So that some Heretics have
thought souls sleep till then. They may pray and no answer, seek to do good,
and do none. Oh but the Lord will recompense then abundantly.

6. They look then to be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. Never to be parted
from him, never to live without him, nay never to go away from under his wing,
out of his bleeding bosom of love and endless and unspeakable compassions any
more: And being with him to see his Glory, and never see the depth of it, and
to have the Lord to serve them, Luke 12. 37, 38. and giving whatever they call
for, and all this when thousand thousands shall at this time be crying for a
drop of water, and cannot get it. Now all this they look for, and more too:
Which is, 1. Certain. For hope makes not ashamed. 2. Which fills their hearts
with Glory, and unspeakable Glory too: for it makes it so clear and certain,
that they have it all already, for though absent, hope makes it as present,
Romans 8. 24. He does not say we shall be, but we are saved by hope. Faith takes
hold on the beginning, hope on the end. Oh the heavy wrath of God upon a world
of poor, blind, ignorant men that have no hope, no hope of Christ, no hope of
Glory, unless a flattering, dead hope. What a sad thing is it to think of a
number of men that are buried in the world, and never to awaken until they see
Christ in the clouds of Heaven, coming to be revenged on them. Oh methinks I
see them falling down before the Judgment-fea^, and crying out, Oh that we had
known of this day! Oh alas that I had hope, but not such an hope, but am now
deceived. Oh it is otherwise with Saints, they shall find what they hoped for,
and infinitely more. What hurt can any do them? Let all the world come against
them, their husband will come, and will kick them under his feet. Let them load
them with reproaches, fill their hearts with sorrows, and their eyes with
tears, their Lords coming will comfort them. Let Satan tempt, and a Father hide
his face, behold the Lord comes, that shall deliver and redeem them! Oh see
their blessedness, and let it draw you to make up the match with Christ, that
never did it yet! He has bin wooing of you, longing for you, and you wooing of
him again, Lord take me! What hinders you then from striking the match, and
concluding it? To give thy self this day to him, and take him only, rejoice in
him only, when nothing thou do can be so pleasing to him. And now you may
look and believe what one day you shall to your comfort feel. And account your
selves most wretched creatures until the Lord be pleased to espouse you to
himself.

SECT. V.
OR hence learn what to judge of those that never look for the coming and
company of the Lord Jesus, Use 3. Of Exam.
but it is with them, as it was with the Israelites, when Moses was gone into
the Mount, and stayed there long, the people made their Calf, and went to their
feasting and rejoicing: So the Lord Jesus being gone for the Spirit of life,
and to prepare a place of Glory, it being now long since, they make Idols of
their Jewels, and of their own excellencies, and of whatsoever is glorious in
their eyes in this world. Or as Christ compares the secure world, as it was in
the days of Noah, so shall it be, or as in the days of Lot, when they never
knew nor looked for it, though told of it; so it is with them. Do you think
these are espoused to Christ? or made ready for Christ? whose glorious
appearing is never, or seldom, or the least thing in their thoughts, and are
far from seeing and setting it before their eyes.

Now because if you ask most men, Do you look for such a time to see the world
consumed, and the Lord revealed, and your Glory with him? Every one will say,
yes, because indeed they have a dead hope. I shall therefore give discoveries
of it.

1. Those whose hearts prize (though their heads do not) Sign 1.
and whose eyes are dazeled with the withering Glory of this world. When men
lie under (not for a fit, for Christ's Disciples wondered at the Beauty of the
Temple) a great mistake of all things here, and put that good in them which is
not, and that worth upon them which they ought not. For he on whose eyes the
Sun of Glory has risen, and looks for the Glory which shall be revealed; looks
upon a Dunghill world as strangers upon their Inn, and as Travelers do on
their Tents, make a shift to rub it out there for a time, but Oh home. Oh that
Glory that shall be revealed, Heb. 11. 13. They were strangers, because they
looked for a City: Nay they look upon these things, as God and Christ judge of
them (for they have Christ's mind) 1 Cor. 2. 15. Which stand for Ciphers in the
Lords Book: Nay they look upon the very miseries of this world for Christ,
greater treasures than the happiness of it, and hence choose it and account
their scars their Crown, their shame their Glory, their losses their gain,
their sorrows their joys, as Heb. 11. 25, 26. Moses chose to suffer, and
esteemed Christ's reproach his Glory. And why? He had an eye to the recompense
of reward, and saw the God invisible. And 2 Cor. 4. 17. It works an exceeding
weight of Glory. That look as it is with a man that is born to great hopes of a
Crown and Kingdom, and therefore brought up not in the Country, but in the
Court; let a poor man offer him his thatcht house, and promise him if he will
come and live with him, and serve him in his patcht clothes, What will he say?
No, be gone to your friends, I am a greater man than you can make me, so here;
A man that is born and begotten to a lively hope of a Crown now by the
resurrection of Christ, and brought up under the wings and care of Christ, to
the hopes of a better world, offer never so much, promise never so fair, I am
greater than all the world can make me, I must not have, if I love Christ, and
I cannot have, if he loves me, both; and hence looks to honor then, and peace
and glory then, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. Its clear then thou look upon the things of
the world as great things; Oh to have such honor, such an estate, so many
Cowes and Goats, so much ground paled in, so many ploughs, lands and oxen fit
to labor, so much gain to come in every year, and such parts, and gifts and
duties to get me a name, to live before the best men, and to be good signs (to
comfort me) of the favor of God: This is a goodly thing, the very hopes heat
and warm the heart.

1. If you do not find pangs in parting with a friend, a bosom-blessing so
dear, you are not dead yet to it, nor risen to a lively hope of better things.

2. He that does not prize the evils of the world, more than the good in it,
his eyes are dazeled with it: If the life of the world be not death to thee,
the comfort of the world sorrow to thee, Oh they draw thy heart from God: Hence
called lying vanities. Look as it is with a King or Master that gives Talents to
use, they cast them by, and fish for themselves, they look not for the coming
of their Masters: So the Lord gives you his Ordinances, and Word to use for
him, and you scramble for your selves, to enrich, and honor, and comfort your
selves, you look not for the Lord. Factors that go far for wealth, they will
not bring home stones and rubbish, which they know will not go in their own
Country, hence other things that are of more price he spends his time for: So
here. What do you do? You that eat the bread of carfulness, sell your
commodities dear, and set your buyers on Tainter-hooks? I look to be rich. You
that can speak well, and have parts, and profess fairly; but go into your
Closets, God is neglected in your hearts, your constant union to Christ,
dependence on Christ, approving your selves to Christ, is not maintained. I
would fain be honored. You are come far from your own Country: Why did you
depart thence? To be free from trouble. And now here, what stay you for? Oh for
ease. Will these Coins go, and be taken at the last day? No, you look not for
that.

II. They that say they look for Christ, Sign 2.
but do not rejoice abundantly in hope of this time. Sometimes the hopes of
Gods people begin to die, and then comfortless, but when their hopes are up,
and stirring, and not wounded by some sin or sleeping, there is a double joy
that now they have.

1. This alone comforts them and fills them, John 14. 1, 2, 3. So that they
wonder at God, though they have never so little here, to have these blessings
now, and everlasting Glory, endless compassions and mercy at that day, John
16. 22.

2. This joy is Glorious joy, highest comfort, Romans 5. 3. We Glory in hope of
the glory of God. Disgraced, but then honored; hated of men, but then loved of
Christ; poor, but then enriched; miserable, but then blessed; empty, but then
filled; fatherless, friendlesse, but then glorified. Oh I tell you miseries
thus considered, are sweet! Can it be otherwise? Now you say you hope and look
for this day. Where is your comfort of it? Where is your glory in it? Acts 1.
11, 12. Compared with Luke 24. 52. So thou will be in the Temple, nay in the
fields rejoicing and blessing the Lord, that ever he should intend to set thee
at his right hand, at that great day of his coming. No man but has something
to joy his heart. Is it Corn, and wine and Oil, and not the Light of Gods
countenance at this day? Its a sign they never look for it. Do the world
rejoice in their hopes, and not Saints?

III. They that content themselves with any measure of holiness and Grace;
they look not for Christ's coming and company. For Saints that do look for him,
Sign 3.
though they have not that Holiness and Grace they would have, yet they rest
not satisfied with any measure, 1 John 3. 3. He that has this hope purifieth
himself as he is pure. Christ finds us not lovely, but makes us lovely, by
putting on his own garments, imprinting his own Image. Hence Saints content not
themselves with any dressings, till made glorious, and so fit for fellowship
with that Spouse. And when the Soul sees this Love to be a Son, and then to be
proclaimed Heir, Oh this makes them set Christ himself as the pattern to walk
by. Now therefore,

1. When men shall think this way is bad, and another way of some Saints is
good, and so take a Copy of his course from them, and now is well, this only is
to be pure as man is pure.

2. When a man leaves not till he gets such a measure of Faith and Grace, and
now when he has got this, contents himself with this as a good sign he shall
be saved, he looks not for Christ. Or

3. When men are heavily laden with sin, then close with Christ, and then are
comforted, sealed, and have joy that fills them, and now the work is done, and
they are past Grace, and past Repentance, and daily cleansing, now they study
not what to do for Christ, that neither Family no^ Church where they live, are
the better for them.

4. When men shall not content themselves with any measure, but wish they had
more, if Grace would grow, while they tell Clocks, and sit idle, and so God
must do all, but do not purge themselves, and make work of it (Indeed Saints
purge not themselves of themselves, for dirty hands will never wash a foul
face) but by a daily dependence on, and importunity of Faith sigh after the
Lord to do it; verily if not thus, you look not for Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12,
14. For if you did, you would say and think, if to be like him be my Glory, Oh
then that I might then have it now. Sons that are born to their hopes in the
Court, will go in the Court-fashion: Beggars that are born and brought up under
hedges, content themselves with their rags, so here: Lord where is this Spirit?
especially even among us. There is scarce any but either would be honest, and
then hopes God accepts of his will, or will be so, and then it is only so much
as will credit or comfort him. Lord where is the man that mourns for this, how
far short he falls of Christ, of Christ's thoughts, Christ's prayers, Christ's
speeches, Christ's meekness, but only patches up his comforts with some ends of
Gold and Silver, and shreds of Honesty: He has heard others teach and preach,
and gets some shreds of knowledge, thence he sees what others are, and do, and
gets somewhat to be like them. Have we not cried out, men are too good to be
better in our own Land? And unless a few under Affliction or Temptation, who
is? I pray God such a race come not over hither, where God looks you should get
a higher pitch; put off your wildernesse-shoes, get those sins removed that
provoked God there; or else besides the misery of a heart-brand upon thee, thou
do not look for Christ, and therefore art either not espoused, or asleep; and
shall if not by the Word, by the terror of God be dreadfully awakened. Oh
New England, New England, that art now making a conquest of the world, and
seek for the spoil of it to enrich thy self, to recover thy losses, and
therefore make a truce with thy distempers for a time, and do not purge thy
self as Christ is pure, I dare not yet tell thee what Christ Jesus has to say
unto thee! Therefore think of this, if not thus, you have no hope, it is but
talk and notion in thy head. And you that do not, he shall come in a time when
thou look not for him: And have not so much Grace as the five foolish
Virgins had? This is the frame of men and Professors, what are they? They were
troubled, humiliation is past, they have looked for salvation by Christ, that
is past; they have been comforted, that is past; What Holiness? They will pray
in Families, keep company with Saints, get into Christ, receive Sacraments,
that is past. What lack they yet? Many wants, but God accepts their desires for
what they want, and that is their Circle of Honesty now, and there rest. Is it
not thus? Is this to purge like Christ? If any have more, Oh wonder at the Lord
for it. But if not, Oh thy doom!

SECT. VI.
OH you espoused and beloved of the Lord, Use 4.
look for his coming, look for his company; the world looks not for him,
because they care not for him. Will you also depart? Has he called thee as a
Virgin forsaken, and not comforted, as a wife of youth, and given himself to
thee, and given thee a heart to give content to him, and thy self to him in
lieu of his love, life and all, if it might do him any good? Oh are you born to
so great hopes, and are they not worth the looking af^ter? God forbid. Do this
therefore especially in these five Cases.

1. In case of strangeness felt between thy soul and Christ: It may be thou
think, Oh he that has saved, preserved me, called me, when I never looked
after him, redeemed me when a captive, every moment pardons me, a daily friend
unto me, that has given me Ordinances, given me the comfort of them: But Oh
yet to be a stranger to him, this cuts: Oh look now for this time, 1 Th. 4. 17,
18. When thou shall see that bleeding heart, that has loved thee above all
Princes and Angels; that body in the Glory of the Father, and be as familiar
with him as thou art with any friend, and see his Glory, and the Father in him,
and know as thou art known. Oh look for this, for it shall be so.

2. In case Gods promises are not made good to thee. For at that instant a man
believes he gives Christ and all things, all Grace, all consolation, all Glory,
but it is in the promise, because he would have them live by Faith a while here,
as by sense in Heaven; and being wrapped up in the promise, they feel it not,
only plead with God: Have not said Lord, thou will subdue iniquities, purge me
as Gold is tried? Why then do I go childlesse, graceless? No more Grace, no
more Spirit, no better heart for thee! Oh now the heart calls in question Gods
promise or sinks! Oh now remember this day, for the perfect restitution of all
things, perfect accomplishment of all promises is reserved for this time, Isa.
25. 9. Thou prayest for many things, but they come not; Christ reserves the
payment till this day. What a comfort is this? What a sweet speech was it of
Joshua, Josh. 23. 14. One thing has not failed, when he had conquered the
Land. So then when the conquest is made, to see all the promises made good to
thee.

3. In case of Gods absence or withdrawing, or when thou feel but little of
his presence here in his Providence or in his Ordinances, private, public,
and that in New England too. Thou have found one half hours time with the Lord,
alone, sweeter and better than a thousand worlds. Oh but this holds not! Thou
may it may be wait on the Lord in his Ordinances, and go away with a sad
heart, Oh I cannot see him, and can not find out the cause why so heavy, and
vile, and so loathest thy self, Oh now think of this day, 1 Cor. 15. 28. Then
God shall be all in all, then thou shall have thy fill of love, and fill of God.

4. In case of sorrow for the uproar of the world against God and Christ, and
the wrongs done to Christ and his people; to see Christ crucified, and crying
spare my life, and saying, If you seek me, let these little ones depart, yet
they are abused, and every one against Christ, as this day the world is coming
to the last fit of madness against the Lord of Glory. Oh now, remember and
look for this day, 1 Cor. 15. 25. He must reign. Lord what a comfort will it be
to see Christ King then? Men come to see him King here, but Oh what will it be
when he shall come himself? To see all secrets open, and the Lord glorified in
himself and people, of all creatures. Look for this, to see the great and last
plot of God brought to perfection. Oh think that is our day, that is our
victory!

5. When you come to die, and to think of leaving thy carcass to rot in the
dust a long time; Oh think and look upon this day! They that hear shall live.
Why do I die? John 5. 28, 29. They shall then come out of their graves, etc.
Thus look for this.

Motives.
1. All creatures look for this in a manner, Romans 8. 22, 23. Nay Christ and
Saints in Heaven look for this day, Heb. 10. 13. From thence expecting till his
enemies, etc. Nay Devils look for it, but tremble: Only a secure world rockt
asleep to their eternal woe, look not for it.

2. This will help you to ride all storms, bear all knocks cheerfully. Our Hope
is our Helmet. Our Hope is our Anchor, Heb. 6. 19. Ephesians. 6. 17. You will meet
with them here it may be before you die.

3. The Lord has called you out of this world, he might have left you in it,
and given you your hope, your portion here, and then woe to thee, but he has
called thee to this hope, that if Princes of the world knew, they would lay
down, nay cast away their Crowns at thy feet for it, and say, Oh that I were in
that man's case! Ephesians. 1. 18. Hope of his calling.

4. Hope and expectation of all other things shall fail, if God loves thee, he
will make you know what it is to forsake your portion. If not, they shall fail
you when you die, this shall not; it makes not ashamed.

5. Methinks this is the Glory of a Christian, that he turns his back upon the
world, and lives and waits for the coming of the Lord.

6. Oh this will give Christ's heart full content, when he shall come, Luke 12.
37. He will make thee sit down to eat, and serve thee. The Lord Jesus himself
shall only then pour out to thee and give thee whatever thou call for,
honor thee as it were above himself. When thou art at rest in Heaven, he will
be at work for thee.

7. If not, he may come in an hour thou look not for him. Christ may say to
thee, from henceforth sleep on.

What Means are there to make me look for him? Quest.


1. Get some promise that thou may believe the Lord is thine, Answ.
else thou will never look for him; or if you do, you will be deceived, for
hope is of things not seen. Nay, commonly when the Lord brings any man to his
hopes, having given him a promise, and Faith to believe it, the Lord in the
midway seems to cross his promise. When the Lord promises life, glory, peace,
honor, joy, fullness, Heaven, they shall then and never so much before feel
darkness, death, shame, trouble, sorrow, Hell. For the Lord tries them by this,
and tribulation breeds experience, and experience hope. Hence you must first
get a promise of Christ and Glory, before you can hope for it, or expect Glory,
and then you may, Heb. 6. 18. For the promise will support hope, when heart,
and strength and all shall fail: Nay it will expect contraries out of
contraries, Genesis 22. 5. I Will come again to you. Compared with Heb. 11. 18, 19.
So that soul that has a promise, may say when he considers Gods power, and
what Glory he gives to God by believing it, God has said he will comfort me,
he will cleanse me, he will give me Glory, I will have all these out of my
sorrow, my sin, my Hell.

Take heed therefore of two extremes.

First, Of hoping without a promise, for that is but Faith scared out of its
wits, when it comes to be examined; I hope so, and I have had joy and
persuasion of it.

Secondly, Of not expecting when God gives a promise. Can you live one day
without it? It may be you have no feeling yet! But Isa. 25. 8, 9, 10. Do wait
for the Lord? i. e. From a sense of emptiness, for all fullness thou shall
find it in part here, and fully then, and say, Lo, this is our God, we have
waited for him! When a man's anchor is strong, and in good ground, he will look
for safety, when at anchor in the Harbor. Oh thou afflicted, tossed with
tempests, the Lord has brought thee at last to Christ, after many drivings to
and fro, and it clasps about him according to a promise; if God changes then
thy comfort may not be. If revelations come, I know they may deceive, but a
promise cannot.

2. Fear the terror of the Lord at this day, fear parting from him: I speak
not of doubting, but the holy fear of Saints, for that is the nature of fear,
it makes a man eye the thing feared: As Jacob when Esau was meeting of him.
Noah he fears and looks to safety in and by an Arc, Heb. 11. 7. Lots children
took not his counsel, they feared not, but he seemed as one that mocked to
them. Paul 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. knew the terror of the Lord, hence looked for
him, sought to approve himself unto him. Men that fear not parting with Christ,
will never look nor care for him. And let it be a strong fear, else it will
never carry you above your cares and surfettings of the world.

How shall I fear thus? Quest.


1. Unless the Lord put it into your heart, Answ.
none can; for the security of the world is not sleepy, but deadly: Men are
bound up as strong as with chains of death; that till they feel the misery,
they cannot fear it strongly. Oh look up to the Lord to unchain those chains of
death.

2. Know the happiness of them that shall ever be with Christ, what is the
sweetness of Christ's love, and worth of it. Imagine the last day come, and all
the dead raised, Christ with flaming fire, all the wicked on the left hand, and
then sent away with depart ye cursed; all the Saints on the right hand, and
then Oh come! and when all is dispatched, then to go up to Heaven, and when
gone, there to be for ever rejoicing, triumphing in the presence of God
Almighty; and now what it will be to be far off from Christ, weeping, never to
be pitied more. Oh he that was so full of pity, no heart then to pity, no hand
to help! I can but only paint this fire. Oh that the Lord would help you here,
that so you might look out for him. Saylors sleep in calms, and so it may be
have many here in this place of rest. Others of you take heed, I Will tell you
your bar, It may be most estates are brought low and sunk; when you see that,
now you either look back, or look for Lots accomodations, and such an estate as
is lost, it may be you will spy some hope of it, and then follow the game, and
never look out till you die. The Lord keep you from it! You then will not look
up for Christ's coming at the last day, or in his Ordinances; here: If thou do
so, had it not been better thou had been buried in the Sea, or left in sorrow
on the Shore? Oh take heed therefore, look for the coming and company of
Christ, and let this be enough, and because you cannot look for him in the the
clouds now, Oh look and wait for him in his Ordinances; and consider if
espoused ones look for his coming then, and for perfect knowledge of him, and
communion with him, then think, Lord what a heart have I that look not for him
here! But Lord who will believe our report?

Thus they went out by hope and expectation of his coming* Now the Second thing
follows, they went forth with longing desires after his coming.

CHAP. XI.
That Believers do long and desire for the appearance and Second Coming of
Christ.
SECT. I.
THat all those that are espoused to Christ, Doct. 3.
and beloved of Christ, they ought not only to look, but to long for the coming
of, and their everlasting communion with the Lord Christ Jesus. For the
consummation of their marriage with him, that though he be gone, our hearts may
be with him, before our souls be, or before our souls and bodies be; that
though we may die, and lie down in the dust, our desires may live and lie in
Heaven, and cry come Lord. Now do not think this point true, and so far good if
we could reach it, but this is a high pitch, for you must long for it. God
forbid a Christian espoused to Christ, should plead that work too much, which
Hypocrites, the five foolish Virgins in their kind attained to. See Presidents
for this in all ages: Abraham, and those in his time, who was Father of the
Faithful, Heb. 11. 15, 16. A better Country, where they might have fellowship
with the Lord, and hence God is not ashamed, etc. As if the Lord were ashamed
of all them to be his people, that profess themselves so, but desire not this.
In Christ's time, Simeon, Luke 2. 29. with 25. Where he waited for the
consolation of Israel, etc. to enjoy more of him. In the Apostles time, it is
also that which they all felt, 2 Cor. 5. 2. In this we groan earnestly, etc.
But you will say, It may be this was because of miseries, and want of
Ordinances, etc. Therefore see in the last age of the Church, when the new
Jerusalem was built, and when peace, and when Christ's face was seen in his
House, yet then the Spirit and the Bride say come, Rev. 22. 17. They are the
last breathings of John and the Spirit in him. Lord Jesus come quickly. But
Cent. 8. 14. The Church there entreats her Beloved to fly away to the Mountains
of Spices, that she might enjoy him out of this world.

SECT. II.
1 BEcause they are bound to love Christ and his appearing: Reas. 1.
to love his looks when he shall appear to the world, 2 Timothy 4. 8. The Crown of
Glory comes as it were by succession, not only to me, but to all them that love
his appearing. Now can there be any love of him and his appearing; and not so
much as any desire after him and after it? Certainly there is no love, or if
there be any, it lies languishing: For answerable to our love to any thing, is
our desire, what we love only, we desire only; what we love not at all, or but
little, we desire not at all, or but little; so here. Now therefore to
question, May a Christian desire it? is to question whether a Christian ought
to love the Lord Jesus or no. We are bound not to love earth, hence bound to
love Christ and his fellowship in Heaven. Let him be Anathema that does not so.

2. Because the Lord Jesus longs for them, Reas. 2.
John 17. 24. Throughout which Chapter he prays as if in Heaven already. Hence
I am no more in this world, and where I am, let them be also. He was on earth,
but looks on himself as in Heaven. That as it was with the High Priest, he
carries the Names of the twelve Tribes on his heart, bese^ with precious
Stones; very dear to him, (...) the Holy of Holies, so Christ. Not that he sees
any beauty in them of their own, why he should desire them, but because he
freely loves them, and dearly loves them, as being given him of the Father, and
as having cost him dear; and hence if he loves them, he longs for them: Now if
he longs for them, ought not they much more to long for him? Psalm. 27. 8. Thou
said seek my face, thy face Lord will I seek.

1. He longs for thee now in Glory, when one would think his thoughts and heart
should be swallowed up with it, and shall not we long for him here in the
valley of Myrtle trees, in misery, on the dunghill?

2. He longs for thee when thou have nothing to make him desire thee, he has
all that thy heart can desire, being the very bosom-delight of God himself,
Rev. 22. penult. He did but say he would come, and John desires, Oh come. But
does he long for thee? Now not to long for him. If this love be not worth
longing for, truly it is worth nothing.

3. Because this is our last and ultimate end that we are made for, Reas. 3.
chosen for, bought for, called for, sealed for, that at last we might be with
the Lord, and be made perfect in one, 2 Cor. 5. 5. He that has made us for
this is God, etc. For the whole Trinity enjoying infinite sweet fellowship with
himself, hence desire it might be communicated, in Christ it is so, and now the
last end is attained. Now if this be our last end, ought we not to desire it?
Then we ought not to desire to be blessed, nor to desire the Lord may be
glorified. Nay you know that whatever we make our last end, it will swallow up
all our desires after any other thing. This is the Center and rest and journies
end of our tired weary spirits. And the truth is, when we make it our last end,
we cannot but desire it.

SECT. III.
BUT ought not a man to desire to live here in this world as David and Hezekiah
did. Object.
May not one sin in this desire?

1. It Is true, precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints,
Answ.
not only in regard that they are as precious to him when they come to die, as
while they live, as Gold when it is melting is as precious to the Goldsmith, as
when whole, and it may be more too, because it is then made better; but also
because he will not lightly cast away their lives. He that bottles their tears,
and will not let them be lost, will not easily let go their lives, and if God
will not, they ought not upon every slight occasion to desire their death, and
loss of their lives to be with the Lord.

Now there are two cases Gods own people may not desire to remove hence, where
though there be some fire I confess, yet there is more smoke than fire, more
sin than Grace.

1. In case they meet with much unkindnesse from, and many sorrows in the
world, and behold the sins of it. Thus it was with Elias, 1 Kings 19. 4. Who
when Iezabel threatened his life, fled, and would needs set sail presently and
be gone; so it is with Gods people, when they see enemies without, the universal
rot of Profession, that they think they are almost left alone; when God has
begun to do good by them, as by Elijah, but they think their best days are
past, there is all they shall do, and God himself it may be meeting them with
some crosses in this world; now presently they grow weary of their lives, and
desire to die, which is nothing else but a pang of discontent, truly God will
not suffer it, nor you ought not to desire it, to die away in such a snuff:
No, the Lord has work for them to do, and a journey to go. This desire is
naught, and it is but a weed, and to be pulled up, that grows out of such a
root as a discontented heart for crosses. I confess God uses sorrows as means
to smoke us out of our Hive, and we may use them for that end, but not only or
chiefly them, nor from a pang or moody fit of discontent.

2. In case they desire death, and not life, before they be ripe for death.
Husbandmen desire their Corn in, but it is folly to desire it before it be ripe,
and then they may. I confess it is the commendation of some trees, if not only
good, but if ripe betimes, and it is the honor of a Christian, to be ripe for
death betimes; yet still before he is ripe he is not to desire it.

Now when is this? Quest.


1. While the Lord hides his face and denies full assurance of his love, Answ.
in this case as a Christian cannot, so he ought not (if it were the Lords
will) desire to be gone as yet, and this is one reason why David and Hezekiah
desired life, not death as yet, God had broken their bones, and his arrows
were yet in their hearts; now a man is to desire he may stay a little while
longer, that he may sing the Song of the Lamb, and tell the world what the Lord
has done for him, and that he may not set in a cloud and die in horror.
Mariners long to be on shore, but before they come there, they would not
venture in a mist, but see Land first, so should we desire to see the Lord in
the Land of the living. Nay though the Lord gives his people a promise, which
stays their hearts and is a twig to keep them from sinking, nay when he gives
them some joy, yet still God has promised to reveal more of himself and his
Christ in the promise, seeing him but darkly now: Now they ought not to desire
but wait, as in Simeons case, now let thy Servant depart in peace, having long
waited for the consolation of Israel. Children that will be up before it is day
must be whipped, a rod is most fit for them, stay till it is day.

2. While their work remains unfinished, and the Lord has got little or no
Glory from them, though they may have clear evidence of the Lords love: Christ
himself desired it not till now, John 17. 5. If thou could scale Heaven
before thy work was done, the Lord would send thee down from thence again, as
he did the soul of L^zarus, and truly to do the work of Christ one moment here,
is better than to have a thousand years felicity in Heaven, nakedly considered
in it self, in as much as the Honor of Christ is a thousand times better than
our own good. It may be there is much work within doors, many odd distempers to
be cashierd, spiritual decaies, etc. It may be there is work without, Christ
has many enemies in the world, many prayers are yet to be spent against them,
much good to do for his Church, many tears to be shed for them, for praying
trade is past in Heaven. It may be some friends yet to be converted, thou have
been a scandal to them, it may be as yet few have been, or can say they be the
warmer or better for thee; that work is yet to be done: It may be God has some
secrets to reveal by thee before thou die, stay therefore a while, while your
work is done; It Is true, thou have but one Talent, but little thou have or
can do; yet God looks you should improve it whilst he is gone. A man that
will needs to bed at noonday, before night comes, what deserves he but a
cudgel? So he that will die before his night comes, and while it is light to see
and work by. When therefore you apprehend your work even done, then as not only
Christ, but Pa^l, not only Paul, but Gods watchful servants have secret
warnings of death. And as Mariners when they can see no Land, yet by their
soundings can tell they are near Land or Sands, then you may desire it, for
then you are ripe, but its sin to do it otherwise. And verily happy is that man
that accounts not his life dear, but only the finishing of his course with joy.
To conclude all, we are to desire our fellowship with Christ, as a man desires
his last end, which desire does not exclude but include desire after all the
means and the means first, before the end. Now many things are to be done by
God upon us, and by us for the Lord again, before we appear before Christ,
which we may desire firstly for this our last end.

SECT. IV.
HEnce we see the vileness of the great, Use. 1.
yet hidden secret sin of the whole world, which may be in part also in Gods
dearest Saints, viz. in their hungry lustings and dropsy desires after the
sweet of the things of this world. You shall have many a man that amends his
life, reformes his course, forsakes his own righteousness, no man's tongue can
tell him, his own Conscience cannot bear witness against him that he lives in
any unlawful course; and I believe it is so, and may be and will be so. Shall I
tell you therefore what hurts them? They are inordinate lustings after lawful
things in themselves, and these they serve, Tit. 3. 3. Partly they grieve them
if they do not satisfy and serve them, partly because they pay them with
pleasures and delights if they do. Hence serving lusts and pleasures too, these
like tops of mountains are seen, now when floods of wickedness begin to abate,
these will continue while the life lasts.

I intend not to show you at large, but according to my Text the vileness of
them.

1. They eat out all desire after the Lord Jesus and his fellowship, that he
cannot long for the Lord Jesus. For a man can ^ay out no more than he has, now
when his desires are lavisht and let out to other things, How can he lay out
any on Christ? And thus the Lord of Glory comes to bear most horrible contempt,
that he is not worth desiring in such a man's Books. Thus it was with them, Luke
14. 18. Every one refused. Why? Because of their Oxen, and Wives, and Farms,
Lawful things, but they lasted too much after these. When a Harlot seeks to
satisfy her lusts, she cares not how fat her Husband be off, never desires his
coming home; so here: Many a one complains he cannot desire the Lord Jesus,
which I confess is in mercy to some. But where is the cause of it? Oh they are
running in another channel, and spent on other things: What a heavy curse is
this? Some never think of death once in a Moon, much less long for Christ;
desire not his fellowship here, much less there. And why? Because of their
lusts that eat out all.

2. Suppose they do not thus, but your heart is divided, so that you long for
these things now, and preserve your longing for him against you come to die;
yet these will make you lose his sweet fellows^ip. For a man's affections are
precious things, and it is pity any else should have them, they are all little
enough for Christ, and Christ is worth desiring and longing for, and he stands
upon it, and will make them know that have him, that all is too little for him,
and they shall give him all before he give himself to their comfort. Hence deny
him these, and never think to have himself, and his fellowship, Psalm. 73. 25,
26. Its good for me to draw nigh, How? By desiring, not Earth nor Heaven, but
him. Hence he says, Thou destroyest all them that go a whoring from thee, v.
27.

3. Suppo^e thou should have hi^ at last, yet he will never desire thee,
never take any delight in thee, until that you come to get your affections
unloosed here, Psalm. 45. 10, 11. Do not find a strangeness between Christ
and thy soul? Does he not hide his face? Does he not soon depart from thee,
though he appears sometimes to thee? Does he not let thee lie like a Broom
behind the door? And does little by thee either within or without. And is not
this a sad and heavy thing? Why say thou, does the Lord deal thus with me? Oh
thy heart is yet after thy Fathers house, if thou did forget it, then he
would take pleasure in thy beauty. What pleasure can earth give thee, when the
Lord takes no pleasure in thee?

But may not a man desire these things? Object.
If we may, how far?

1. A man may lawfully desire them, Answ.
provided his desires are not ^w^llowed up in them, but run through them to
Christ himself. For it is not lu^t properly to desire a creature, or any
pleasure in it; but to desire it for it self, and forpleasures sake. For now a
man makes a god of it. Thus it was with the Israelites, Exodus 17. Give us water
that we may drink; so give me sleep that I may rest, give me clothes that I may
be warm, give me estate that I may be rich, etc. Now when a heart desires them,
but his desires end not there, but run through them to Christ, that he flings
down all comforts, and says what is this to fellowship with Christ: Thus far a
man may desire and rejoice in them, and it is a sin to do otherwise. Nehem. 9.
35. A man may be content to have a Spring run through his ground to the Sea, to
be swallowed up there, but to swell, and rise, and overslow his ground and
house, that is not safe, he may be drowned so: So men come to be drowned in
their lusts, that let them swell within doors.

II. A man may desire the^, if he does not spend more desire upon them than
they be worth. A man may desire them for a good end as he thinks, but then he
lays out too much upon them. A man may spend too much in his Inn, when he
takes it up only as a way to his home.

1. They are perishing things, therefore let them have perishing desires. The
world passes away. They are passengers by us, that stay to rest with us for a
time, let them have passengers welcome.

2. They are not necessary things, let them have therefore indifferent desires:
I must have Christ, and his Spirit, etc. not these things: They are to be
sought not in the first, but in the second place. Therefore say first Christ,
now let me have Christ: Men say now these things, then Christ. I say now the
Lord Jesus, whether ever you have them or no.

III. Now all superfluity of evil desires are to be crucified, Gal. 5. 24. They
that are in Christ, have crucified, etc. Christ was not a dead, but first a
crucified Christ before: So no Saint living, but he has some superfluous
desires, but though they live, they do crucify them, so ought you. There is
two things in crucifying.

1. There is extreme pain upon the Cross.

2. A looking for death: So then lusts are crucified,

1. When you taste the bitterness of your lusts, by putting them on Christ's
Cross. Oh the wrongs they have done the Son of God! And do this with violence,
say, you shall to the Cross, he that looks to Christ with a frolic heart to
kill his lusts, shall never find him.

2. Now looking and longing for their death, by holding them there. Unless the
Blood of Christ slay these, I will never have any death for them. For all the
reason in the world will never kill a lust, no more than all the reason will
persuade the Stomach not to hunger. The Belly has no ears.

Thus you are to moderate your desires after these things: Which I speak of,

First, Because it is a wilderness-sin, Psalm. 106. 14, 15. Which it may be you
feel brings leanness on your soul. And

Secondly, Because it is the sin of prosperity and peace which God has given
us, which will grow up and choke the Word, that all Ordinances and Truths will
in time be saplesse, savourlesse things unto us.

Thirdly, Because I have had strong fears lately of some unexpected trials
among us, and I should be glad if it might not be, if the freedom from them
might make us better, else I say let them come. But

Fourthly, Because it is a rare thing among us to see such burning Lamps as look
and long for Christ's coming, which when I consider, though there be other
causes, yet one great one is this, Oh the heart is gone away by violent lusts
after these things here! Oh therefore take heed of them! And therefore consider,

1. You shall have Christ and his fellowship, if indeed you long for him, John
4. 10. That Is his love, you are not so desirous, but he is a thousand times
more Thou may desire these things, and if God loves thee miss of them. God
will make thee poor when thou would be rich, base when thou will be honored,
and when you would have honey, he will give you stings; and cause you have to
thank the Lord too, that he will not give you your portion here.

2. If thou have them, and do desire them, and God gives them, and thou
let Christ go, thou had better a thousand times be without them, Psalm,
78. 30, 31. The meat was in their mouths, and the wrath of God came upon them.
If the Lord gives thee Christ, happy for ever; if these things when thou do
so desire them, oh woe for ever!

3. The Fellowship of the Lord Jesus thou shall never lose. Death shall not
part thee from that, nothing shall rob thee of that; but look after and long
for these things, they will perish and die away. All flesh is grass, the Word
of the Lord, and the Lord himself much more endures for ever.

4. Why do desire these things? For some sweet in them. Why is not all that
in the presence of the Lord Jesus, and enjoying him? It pleases the Father
that in him should all fullness dwell, so that thou shall drink as out of a
pure Fountain all that is there. If there be any sweetness here, he gave it,
it is much more eminently in himself, Exodus 24. 11. They saw the God of Israel,
and eat and drank. Had they meat up with them? Oh no. But the sight of him was
meat and drink and all unto them. As therefore you desire Christ's fellowship,
Oh long no more after these things here!

Hence see death is not to be feared, Use 2.
but desired of all Saints. It was an odd speech of a Heathen, It Is ill to
desire death, and worse to fear it; he meant not because of any good in it, but
because we must die: But death brings us into eternal Fellowship with the Lord
Jesus. It does Saints more good than all Ordinances, all afflictions, (wherein
we complain we can get no good) than all means. It brings us into his
Fellowship, 1. Quickly, as Christ was caught up, so the Soul by Christ to
himself. 2. Immediately, for the next thing we shall see is Christ himself, our
Husband himself, and then see the Kingdom, and then wonder at the Lord. 3.
Everlastingly, never to part more. Oh fear it not therefore, Christ has
sweetened it to you.

SECT. V.
HEnce see a clear foundation and groundwork of longing for fellowship with
the Lord Jesus in his Ordinances here. Use 3.
This is that I shall exhort to. For

1. You cannot, shall not, must not now go to him in Heaven, nor enjoy
fellowship with him, nor meet him in the clouds though you do long for that
day; but in his Ordinances you may meet with him now. And truly those whom we
love and long for, if we cannot go to their house, or find them at home, we are
glad to meet with them abroad. As with those who stand before Princes, if we
cannot be with them on the Throne, or at Court, we will desire to be with them
in the Country, Nay on the Dunghill. Oh the Spirit of David! Psalm. 27. 4. One
thing have I desired, and that I will seek for, though I never have it. What is
that David? Is it to wear the Crown in Jerusalem? Is it to have all thine
enemies lick the dust of thy feet? Is it to have thy Name spread, and thine
Honor great through all the Kingdoms of the world? No, but that I may dwell
in the Courts of the Lords House all the days of my life, and that seeing I
cannot, shall not die presently, and so go to see his Glory in Heaven,
therefore that I may see his Beauty here, enjoy him here, and that not for some
years, but all the days of my life.

2. Ought you not to long to taste and pass through the sorrows of death, that
you may be with him? And are Christ's Ordinances more bitter than death, that
you are loath to break through the difficulty of them, that in them you may
enjoy him? The truth is so it is with many a man, that such is the strength of
his hidden contempt of Christ, and his love to his sloth, that he had rather
die than pray, and be damned eternally than to follow the Lord in an Ordinance
till he has found him graciously. How come Gods own people to lament this, if
there were not this?

3. I remember a sweet speech of one with God, That a Christian ought to
prepare for a Sacrament as he would prepare to die, for, says he, there is but
this difference, when we die we then go to Christ, in a Sacrament Christ comes
to us. What he said of a Sacrament, I say of every Ordinance, in every
Ordinance Christ comes to us, when we die we go to him. Now ought you to long
when you are absent from him to be with him, and will you not care for him, nor
long to see him and enjoy him when he comes to you? And so be worse than poor
naked Indians, Christ comes not to them, no dews fall down on their Gilboahs,
no Manna at their Tent doors, and hence they live without him, and desire him
not; and when he comes to you, do you see no beauty in him now why you should
desire him? Will you thus requi^e him for his love, ah foolish children and
^^wise?

4. Truly Beloved, you can have but little evidence you do desire the Lord
Jesus company in Heaven at the last day, that long not vehemently after him in
his Ordinances now. You have followed me in the regeneration, says Christ,
Mat. 19. 28. therefore you shall sit with me upon Thrones. If Christ's presence
here, a little of himself be burdensome, What will it be in Heaven then? Depart
from me, says Christ, I was in prison and you visited me not. Shall you depart
for not visiting an imprisoned, persecuted, sick, sorrowful Christ in midst of
miseries, and shall not you depart for rot visiting a comforting Christ, a
teaching Christ, an entreating, embracing Christ in the midst of his
Ordinances. If the Lord tries you with water, with a little of himself here,
and you care not for him, long not after him, and hence let all leak out again,
How shall the Lord trust you with wine? with full fruition of himself in Heaven?

5. Oh Beloved have you ever found him in his Ordinances? If not, Oh the heavy
wrath of the Lord Jesus upon thee: If you have, if ever he has comforted thee
when sad and sorrowful, if ever quickened thee when death and darkness did lie
upon thee, if ever he did deliver thee when distressed, Oh then take heed of
despising him in his Ordinances now, but long for him again, That I may see
thee as I have seen thee, Psalm.63. 2. Let them that never found him, deal so
with him. Peter when he saw Christ's Glory on the Mount, Lord says he, ' it is
good for us to be here. Has the Lord ever transfigured himself before thee, so
as he has appeared in another manner to thee in his Ordinances than ever thou
saw before? Then say, seeing Lord I cannot come to Heaven to thee, it is good
being in the Mount, in thy Ordinances with thee, its good being here, 1 Pet. 2.
2, 3, 4. I know Brethren you have many employments in the world, and are called
away to them, and cannot ever be with the Lord, yet let your longings be there,
nay though cast out of Gods sight, yet look to the Temple; this will give you
peace.

6. This if I may have leave to speak plainly, is the great sin, one of them,
of New England. Men come over hither for Ordinances, and when they have them
neglect them; or if it be too horrible to live in a gross neglect of them, yet
who maintains his Fellowship with Christ? or longing after the Fellowship of
Christ in them? And therefore I shall stay a while on this point. Men that are
sick of consumptions have sometimes a mighty stomach after meat, and when it is
brought them, they are weary of the very smell of it, and then say, truly I had
thought I could have eaten so much; so men loath Ordinances, nay the Cooks that
dress, and the Dish that brings, and the Ministry of Christ Jesus that
provides the meat, because consuming and pining away in their iniquities. I
know many use Ordinances, but are they not indifferent whether they find him
therein or no? Now,

1. When men had enough by them to live comfortably upon, then God and his
Ordinances were desired by them, but here men's removing begetting want, want of
the creature joined with fear and distrust of Gods Providence to provide for
them and theirs, either sink their hearts, that Ordinances are not sweet, no
more than Moses message to a people in anguish, or meat to a wounded man; or
else makes them hungry after the creature, and hence lavishing out their
desires, that they have none after the Lord himself.

2. When men are persecuted by enemies, driven into corners, or to Towns six
miles off to find a Sacrament, or hear a Sermon, then the Gospel of peace, and
them that brought the glad tidings of peace, their feet were beautiful, and
then men thought if one Sabbath here so sweet where Ordinances are much
corrupted, if some of them be so comfortable in the midst of enemies, Oh how
sweet to enjoy them all among Saints, among Friends? And so I know they be to
some, and I hope to more than I know; but New-Englands peace and plenty of
means breeds strange security; and hence prayer is neglected here: There are no
enemies to hunt you to Heaven, nor no chains to make you cry; hence the Gospel
and Christ in it is slighted. Why? Here are no sour herbs to make the Lamb
sweet. And if I get no good this Sabbath, this Sermon, this Sacrament, this
Prayer, I hope I shall some other time, when my heart is better, and my
business is over: Not considering that the days of trouble may be near, or
Gods final farewell may be quickly taken.

3. It was a sad speech of a Brother lately, which has often affected me, that a
man may pray out, hear out all the Grace of his heart: Meaning this, when God
begins to work upon a man's heart at first, then prayer and Word is sweet, stay
a while they hear out their hearing, and pray out their praying, so as in
praying, they pray not; and in hearing, they hear not! Would to God there were
no^ a generation of those men among us, that having been so often Sermon-trod and
Prayer-beaten, that now their hearts are hardened, and being used to Ordinances,
and being so long ridden under them, I wish they were not tired, and jaded
under them before they come half way home, that they had rather lie and die in
the high way, than get up and with mighty groans and invincible wrastlings of
heart seek after, and so find the Lord in them.

4. There is no place in all the world, where there is such expectation to find
the Lord, as here, and hence men bless the Lord for our rising Sun, when it is
setting every where else: Here therefore they come and find it not, hence not
considering the great and last temptation of this place, whereby God tries his
friends before he will trust them with more of himself, viz. deep and frequent
desertions, they give in, and therefore care not for, nor desire after those
plasters which they feel heal them not, nor that food which they find
nouris^eth them not. It Is strange to see what a Faith some men have that can
close with Christ as their end, and comfort themselves there; it is not means
(say they) but Christ, not duties but Christ, and by this Faith can comfort and
quiet themselves in the neglect and contempt of Christ in means, as infallible
a brand of Gods eternal reprobation of such a soul as any I know. So that this
is New-Englands sin. Is not Prayer neglected, wanting place and heart? if not
in family, is it not in secret? so that you have none, nor poor servants have
none. If any Prayer in secret, yet does it not die? Did ever find thy Spirit
so straightened? Where are the mighty groans? What is become of meditation? Do
not let Sabbaths, Sermons pass over, which shall be preached over again at the
last day, and find no Christ, no Spirit in them; and thus lie famishing, and
^et not cry for bread? If it be not so, I am glad, God, Angels, Saints, and all the world shall call you blessed: If it be so, I dare be bold to prophecy
ruin to this place and people, and that you or your pos^erity shall either in
woods, or in the Land, or hands of your enemies in this place lament with tears
the contempt of means; and you even Disciple; of Christ shall desire to see one
of the days of the Son of man, and shall not see them. Jer. 8. 13, 14. Let us
go into strong holds, etc. I know there are many that do meet the Lord, but are
you not apt to fall asleep again? Oh therefore let me entreat you, if the Lord
has espoused you to himself, if you have any longings after him in Heaven,
seeing those desires cannot be fulfilled presently, Oh long to meet him here,
and so long to meet him, as that you may indeed meet with him and with more and
more of him.

SECT. VI.
What is it to meet Christ, and to have Fellowship with him in an Ordinance?
Quest.


I have been often asked this, Answ.
and for the sake of them that be weak, I shall give you a taste of it.

1. Therefore look as it is with a man that receives any common mercy from God,
from Christ, if he sees not the Lord Jesus really giving it, he enjoyes it, but
not Christ in it, though he get some good out of the thing: So let a man
receive more knowledge of Truths, and more Truth be discovered, more Promises
revealed, more affections and life dropped into the heart, which may do a man
some good, yet if he sees them as separated from Christ, if he sees not the
Truth as it is in Jesus, if he sees not Promises spoken from Heaven by Jesus,
if he l^oks not on all Commands as part of the secret of Jesus, if he receive
affections, and by them behold not the Lord Jesus, he does not at that time
enjoy the Lord Jesus. For he now indeed enjoyes his gifts, but by these he does
not enjoy him: And therefore then a man may be said to have fellowship with
Christ in an Ordinance, when by all the light and life and comfort there, he
comes to see him, and sees them all in him, and seeing a transcendent Glory in
him, sees and beholds a hidden Glory in them. This Command is a secret of
Jesus, this Promise the sweet voice of Jesus, these Consolations the comforts
of Jesus, these Messengers the Ministers of Jesus, these Ordinances the Kingdom
of Jesus. And therefore look throughout all the Scriptures, you shall see our
Fellowship with Christ both in Heaven and here, it is expressed by seeing of the
Lord, John 17. 24. Psalm. 63. 2. and 27. 4. I have often said to my friends, the
great sin of Christians is to see Scriptures, Ordinances, Truths, Commands,
Blows, Kindnesses, as not flowing from and abiding in the Lord Jesus, to see
them separate from Christ, and not Christ and them together. And hence Promises
comfort not, because you receive them not as spoken by Jesus: Commands awe not,
because not as the voice of Jesus: Every Truth is not dear, because you see it
not as the Bridegrooms voice. Parents that have had rude children, have turned
them out of doors, they themselves have sent them money and clothes in pity,
but themselves have not been seen, that they might seek for a Fathers face at
last: So when God is angry with some of his people, he does send to them in his
Providence and Ordinances, because he pities them, but himself is not seen.
Why? That at last they might come home, and seek to see his face again, and
say, What good does all this do me, if I see no God? I confess he that
receives gifts from another, ought to be thankful; but a heart that loves and
longs after the Lord, will say, here is Blessing, Means, Truth, Warmth, but
Lord when will thou come thy self? Oh labor for this!

2. When a man feels the power of the Lord Jesus in his Ordinances; this is the
second part of David's desire, Psalm. 63. 2, 3. That I may see not only thy
Glory, but thy power, for there is never a child of God but feels a strong
party within him against Christ, so that he cannot seek Christ, cleave to
Christ, live to Christ, now you will find in some Ordinances your hearts shaken
and troubled for sin, and some desires and consolations stirred up, and hopes
never to be as you have been: But Beloved all dies and falls down again: Now I
confess there is somewhat of Christ in all this; but yet content not your
selves with this, because you want a power, or until you find a might power of
Christ by little and little subduing sin, for when Christ comes into the heart
indeed, he comes with his power, Psalm. 24. 7, 8. The Lord of Hosts mighty in
Battle. His flesh is meat indeed, Col. 1. 29. Christ's power works in a man
mightily. If you enjoy never such comfort, but find not a power pulling down
thy lusts, there is no Christ. If a man be sick, and he eats his meat, and
great care be had to tend him, but the disease is stronger than the strength of
nature and food; ask him, Do you eat? Yes, but it does me no good; So here:
Such comfort, such a Christ does you no good, unless you feel a power. Oh long
to meet Christ, and enjoy Christ thus!

How shall I do this? Quest.


1. Mourn bitterly for the Lords absence as for one of the greatest evils that
can befall thee. Answ.
For Christ's presence will never be sweet to him that can live without him, and
can you look for him then? John 16. 22. You have now sorrow, which he said,
filled their hearts, but I will see you again, visit you, come down to you by
my Spirit again, and you shall rejoice, and none shall take it away: And
therefore its noted, the first that had comfort was Mary, when she sat at the
Sepulcher weeping, John 20. 11, etc. And therefore do but observe your own
hearts, when your hearts have been soaked in grief, for want of or for the
absence of Christ, Oh I have lived without him, and prayed without him, and
heard without him, and spoke without him, him that has pitied me, spared me,
overcome me, laid down his life, sent his Spirit to me! that then you shall
more or less see the Lord, and feel the power and presence of the Lord. Oh
Beloved, shall not Heaven be sweet to you without him, and shall earth be
sweeter than Heaven, that you can live here without him? Beloved, whatever you
account of it now, in Hell the sting of all sorrows shall be this, Oh Christ
hides his face? One frown shall be more bitter than death, than a thousand
deaths, and shall it be so in Hell, and shall not many frowns, many days be
more bitter than death? Shall it be so to Devils, and not to Saints? Shall the
hiding of Christ's face from enemies be heavy, and shall not his friends take it
to heart? If you do not, then think not to meet him, but that Word and Prayer
shall be dead drink to thee; but if you do, I tell thee if he manifests himself
to any, he will reveal himself to thee.

2. Prize and love his presence, his face, the lifting up of the light of his
countenance. Princes will not come, or if they do, not stay, if they perceive
their company is a burden, and is not esteemed; no more will the Lord Jesus.
They that are fallen in love together will find out each other though it be at
midnight; prize Christ's company, and you will not complain for want of time,
and say you cannot, but you will find him out in Word, in prayers, though
others be fast asleep, Mat. 13. 44. When the man sells all, now he buys the
field, has it, and enjoyes it. You would have the Lords company and
fellowship, I believe you; But what will you give for it? I will tell you. It
may be you will give him the hearing for it, and give him a few good wishes,
and a few good words, and a little leisure. But will you turn the whole world
behind your back, and whatever you have out of doors, that he may come in: That
now it is not honor, nor wealth, nor life, nor ease, nor Heaven, but him, and
that not only in Heaven, but in his Swadling-clouts, his Ordinances here,
believe it salvation is at your doors. Zacheus being a low man of stature, gets
out of the crowd, stan^s in the way, and the Lord bids him come down. Do thus
when you come to any Ordinance, I tell you it is better than an host of Angels
compassing thee about with praises. Oh that you had the life of experience!
Have not found him better than friends, than means, than thy self? Oh that you
would believe expetience!

3. Make it not your task but your trade to seek for him, that you may enjoy
him he^e. Make this your business. Men make it not their main business to
seek our Christ, but only some work they must dispatch by the by. They make it
not their Trade but their Task which must be done. Esan would have the
blessing, but it is his hunting that he delights in. You shall have a man that
is a close worldling, come and hear, and joy therein, but his trade his heart
is after that, Ezekiel. 33. 31. Look but on a Christian at his first conversion,
what great gains gets he then? Oh it is his trade to follow the Lord, afterward
he is idle, and then feels little, Mat. 13. 46. Li^e a merchant, he ventures
all, and then finds. Now you shall find him, Heb. 11. 6. He is the rewarder,
not of them that seek him sluggishly, but diligently. What do you else seek
for? Why spend you your money for that which is not bread? Or if there be ought
else that is necessary, let thy care be for him, and his care shall be for thee.

4. Look before thou come to an Ordinance, if there be no lust, no stumbling
block of iniquity that thou harbourest in thy heart, or suffer to remain in
the sight of God, Isa. 59. 1, 2. I have know in experience, and seen it in
Scripture, many of Gods people and others have taken on that God hides his
face, etc. And this has been found to be the cause, either some sin not yet
subdued or mortified, or some sin that they have not gone for pardon of to the
Blood of Christ, and so unpardoned. When both these have been removed, the Lord
has appeared, Exodus 24. 10. After the Covenant made by Blood, they saw the God
of Israel. Ezekiel. 14. 3. Should I be enquired of by them that set the stumbling
block of their iniquities? etc. Come therefore to an Ordinance that the Lord
would take away thy (...), do not come to it that you may be comforted in your
sin, so that though there be sin in your heart, yet the Lord will not cast that
in thy dish, when thou come to him to take it away. It may be you know none.
You know not what Spirit you are of. Get the Lord to discover it to thee.

5. Oh be thankful, and cleave the closer to Christ for a little: For that is
the infinite mercy and love of Christ to his people, he lets them see their
end, the height of Grace and Glory the Lord will bring them to, but makes them
feel the want of it, and taste but a little, but the first fruits. Now there is
Satan's policy to make them slight what they have, because they have not what
they would have. Hence Christ estrangeth himself greatly; Do you thus despise
my love; Oh therefore cleave close to him for that little, and then see, John
1. 50. Thou shall see greater things than these, the Son of God, and Angels
ascending and descending on him. Think that I feel or have the sense of any
want of Grace, and peace, and mercy, and Christ, Oh it is mercy! That I have the
Star, oh this is mercy, this brought them to Christ himself afterward. Oh
unthankfulness stops Cods heart! God will never cease pouring out on thee,
that art pouring out praises on him; for else man's kindness should exceed the
Lords.

Thus you see the Means, now use them, and long for the Lord Jesus in them, and
so long as that you may meet him; and do it presently, else you may seek and
not find him, and die in your sins, John 8. 21. A sad and heavy speech. Has
God singled you out of all people in the world to enjoy him, and will you now
forsake him, and be eaten up with your Lots, and buried in the bellies of your
Beasts, or sit grieving that your estates are sunk? It may be Hypocrites will
forsake the Lord Jesus, but will you also depart? Others care not for him,
others long not after him, others give him no meeting, will you depart? Lord to
whom shall we go? Oh and long for more of him, forget what is behind, and hear,
and pray as if thou never did so before, as if but new to begin. There is a
plot afoot to make you loath Ordinances, that so God may loath you: Men that
are sick and like to die, can eat no common wholesome meat, but are now nourished
by conserves, and Alchermies, and Spirits of Gold: So when wholesome Truths of
God are despised, men are deadly sick, when any newfangled device shall feed
their fancy. The Lord keep you from it. Oh do you love and long for the Lord in
them the more, for his Spirit, his love, his Truth, his Christ, his company,
his Grace, his consolations, and then when death comes, you shall not need to
fear it, but make it welcome, and when Conscience shall ask, Do you think to be
with the Lord? Oh it shall be peace in thy bosom! Lord thee have I longed for,
thee have I sought for, wept for here, because I could not come to thee
presently in Heaven. Now Lord let me come to thee, and so go triumphing to
Glory.

SECT. VII.
HEnce we see no Christian ought to content himself with any measure of
knowledge or fellowship with the Lord Jesus here. Use 7.
For if full, perfect and immediate fellowship with him in Heaven and at last
day ought to be the mark he aims at, and journies end of all his desires, then
he is not to sit down in the midway, but to breath, and aspire after still
more and more of him. Thus Paul, though fully sealed with the Spirit, yet he
makes this his mark, Phil. 3. 14, 15, 16. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13. The Apostle
tells them the Prophe^s looked after the Grace given in their times, therefore
gird up your loins, and hope perfectly for Grace to be given you at the
revelation of Christ Jesus. Men that have preferment in their eye, and are to
come on by degrees to it, never content themselves with any (though they will
not slight what they have) until they come to their highest: You are born to
great hopes, slight not what you have, but look after more, 2 Pet. 3. 18.

Hence three sorts are to be greatly blamed. For as it is with sinful lusts, so
it is with spiritual, they are endless, infinite, and unsatiable, if they want,
they are not satisfied; if they have, they are when on in their appetites after
more. Oh let it be so here!

1. Some there be that are so far from thirsting after more of him, that they
have forsaken his fellowship, and lie still content it should be so. Time was
while horror was upon their Consciences, trouble in their minds, and heat of
affection lasted, that their prayers were many, their tears abundant, they
could not take their rest in the night, but pray they must, they could not hear
of a Sermon, but through wet and dry to it; and it may be the Lord drew them
with the cords of a man, and laid meat before them, and sweetened their labors
with great hopes to them; but the Father not having drawn them with an
invincible power, and knit them by an indissolluble union to Christ, they are
now fallen off from Christ, John 6. 66. And if you observe it, he looks not
after them, speaks not one word to them, because content to be without him.
Would to God this were not the temper of Saints that know it was better with
you once than now, and God hedgeth your way with thorns, and gives you no rest.
But Oh the grievous wracks of Professors! One can see some Boards and Planks
at low water, but that is all, Ier.2. 13, 14. The Lord will fetch you home if he
loves you, by weeping Cross.

2. Some there are that fall not to forsake the Lord, but like the door on the
hinge, and wheel on the pin, hang and turn about where they did. This Gods own
people are very apt to do, and hence the Apostle wishes them to take heed of
it, from a dreadful Argument, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6, 7.

First, Because the Lord at first conversion draws his people swee^ly, drives
them gently; being weak and young Infants, as yet keeps them in his arms, that
they may find a greater good in him than in the world: But afterward he suffers
Satan to tempt, himself deserts them, leads through a wilderness of sins and
miseries, that they may know what is in their own hearts. Hence now if they
will have mercy, they must fetch it, fight for it, and overcome, now hence
sloth is apt to prevail for a time, as with the Disciples.

Secondly, Because before they have Christ, they feel a total want, afterward
but a partial, and hence apt to be full and self-confident in what they have,
their stomachs are staid by some bits, and hence the Lord is fain to withdraw
the feeling of all that which they had before, that they feeling how soon that
vanishes, might hunger after more; as the Disciples could have been content
with Christ's being upon earth with them, then says he, the Spirit will not
come, hence away he goes, that they might have more of him in the Spirit. But
this is too common with many Hypocrites.

1. When men serve their turn of Christ. There is never a Hypocrite living but
closes with Christ for his own ends, for he cannot work beyond his Principle.
Now when men have served their own turns out of another man, away they go, and
keep that which they have. An Hypocrite closes with Christ as a man with a
rich shop; he will not be at cost to buy all the shop, but so much as serves
his turn. Commonly men in horror seek for so much of Christ as will ease them,
and hence profess and hence seek for so much of Christ as will credit them,
and hence their desires after Christ are soon satisfied. Appetitus finis est
infinitus.

2. No Hypocrite though he closes with Christ, and for a time grow up in
knowledge of, and communion with Christ, but he has at that time hidden lusts,
and thorns that overgrow his growings, and choakall at last; and in conclusion
mediates a League between Christ and his lusts, and seeks to reconcile them
together: Christ says out with every Lust, and let more of my self come in; no
says sin, let me stay here, remember what ease, what honor I bring you, I
cannot leave you: Now a man moderates, I Will keep my Lust because I love it, but
I Will ^eep it as my burden, that I may have Christ with it. Christ calls to seek
for more of him, Lust says no, the work is hard, and duties are difficult. And
it is it may be to no purpose to seek, you have other irons in the fire, many
worldly businesses: Now here men moderate; Do not say thou will seek no more
after him, nor indeed use means diligently for more of him; be sure only you
give him some desires to be better, and this will serve the turn. The Lord
Jesus wooes many a soul whom he never matcheth himself; one comes and wins the
heart afterward, and makes the match: so here, The l^sts of a man's heart grow
sweeter than Christ and his Ordinances, and hence there is no heart to seek
after more of Christ, when the Match is once made with the world, and
affections won, 2 Timothy 4. 10.

3. Some seek for more of Christ, but it is of an idol christ, not as
manifesting himself in and by a Word: for look as any act of obedience is an
act of willworship and imagery, that we have not a particular command for, or
is not directly deducted from some rule in the Word; so that act of Faith is an
act of willworship, which sees and chooses Christ as his own, when he has not
a particular promise for it, It Is an imagination of Christ, not Christ; and you
have more of your own imagination, not more of the Lord Jesus, 1 Pet. 1. 25.
Monks had sublime^ contemplations of God, Luther calls them such as looked upon
a Deus and Christus absolutus, -- not beholding the beams of his love, and
glory in the word. Oh therefore labor for more of such a Christ, as the word
holds forth. And look as in Heaven,

First, They are all one with him in fellowship, the Father in him, and he in
them, and they in him, and so made perfect in one.

Secondly, They have his fellowship only: so do you long for more of his
fellowship, so as to be made more one with him, and him with you, so as he may
be your strength, and life, and peace, and for his fellowship only, otherwise
you may go without him at last, Luke 13. 26, 27. Have we not eat and drank in
thy presence, etc. The Jews before Christ's coming had Christ's presence then,
but a greater measure of it is given to the Church since his Resurrection and
Glorification, for it was reserved to honor Christ in his first coming. But
how many be there that see not the Lord Jesus so as they did under vails?
either get more, or say Christ is not risen, John 14. 16. Christ promises to
send his Disciples another comforter: who was that? the spirit of truth whom
the world could not receive, because it knew him not: Why had the Disciples no
spirit now? yes, he was in them, but not that full measure, with which though
they were not as yet sealed, yet they knew they had him, and that Christ was
theirs too. So, have thou the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, Oh beg for more of it,
not miraculous gifts, for that is in vain, but more of the special powerful
presence and fullness of it, for it is this that the world cannot receive. I
have often feared it is the great sin of this last age to comfort and settle
christians in their weak beginnings, as though there was no more of Gods Spirit
to be poured down in times of the Gospel. But consider,

First, What came you into this wilderness to see, Reeds shaken with the wind?
No, for more of the Lord Jesus, and will you now forget the end for which you
come? it may be you never found less, no but God is emptying of you that you
might seek for more. Herod a long time desired to see Jesus, and then despised
him.

Secondly, You have here more means to have fellowship with the Lord, and will
you content your self with what you have had. If you do what can you look for,
but that the Lord should take away Ordinances, if they do you no more good, and
ease you of the burden of the Lord of Hosts; or send sad and he^vy trials: It Is
that I have often thought of, why are the wicked (...), and Saints deb^sed? the
worst are not bad enough to receive their plagues, nor the best good enough to
partake of blessings. You have had so^e me^n* do you so^e good, here you have
more, that you may receive more good, more li^e, more of Christ Jesus; if not,
then look for fire to purge you if you be Gold, o^ flames to devour you if you
be but rottenness and stubble. But is this thus? the Jews did long ^o Christ,
and when he ca^e they cruci^ied him, they loved the Prophets, they (...) have
Prophets and their b^ood too, to shy the^^; you love the Messenger^ of Christ,
and you would have more of Christ, etc. they have them Lord, but despise them,
they have them, but condemn them, they have them, and though they will not cast
them out of their place, yet they will so weary the^r spirits, and grieve thy
Spirit in them, that they will make the^ glad to bury themselves, and leave
their places. You shall have Prophe^s, and their Blood too, and their tears and
sorrows too. But why do I co^pl^in? Let me persuade: oh labor for more of
Christ in his Servants, in his Ordinances, in his Providence, in his Saints,
until at last thy desires break thy vessel, and carry thee up to behold the
Lord in Heaven. If there were never saving work of Grace wrought, but thou have
only rested in Duties without Christ, now sell thy self out of all for him. If
there be any that the Lord has settled there on his pro^i^e which never can be
shaken, hold your stedfa^tness, but yet still grow in Grace, and in the
knowledge of the Lord Jesus.

SECT. VIII.
OH long to be with the Lord Jesus. Before a man h^th Christ, Use 5. Of Exhort.
now his desires should be to have him; when he has Christ, now his longings
should be to be with him. Do thus in this place, especially in this Age. I have
often thought one great end of Gods bringing his own people into this place is to
(...) them to die, and be with Christ. Men have heard of Christ, and passed
th^ugh the waves of death, and stood many a week within six inches of Death to
see Christ here; well, when you come here, God visits you with troubles,
temptat^ons, losses, desertions, fears for future times; here it may be you see
(as some see) an end of all perfection, Church-builders, Church-ordinances,
Church-professors, etc. or if they find the Lord, it is soon gone; why all is
that you might long to be at home.

The Lord when he called Abraham out of his own Country to his Friends, M^tive
1.
he followed the Lord he knew not whither. You live now out of your Fathers
house, and from all your Friends that long to see you, nay are left among
enemies, and you know whither you are to go, to God the Judge of all, and to an
(...) able compa^y of Angels, and to the Spirits of just men made perfect.

Look but upon the men of this world, they long for things here, Motive 2.
though but temporal, though they have no Christ. Oh long for this though thou
(...) no world.

When Christ would needs go to Jerusalem, John 11. 16. says Thomas, Motive 3.
Let us go and die with him, and shall not we go to live with him?

Did Moses forsake Egypts honors, treasures, and embraced the reproach of
Christ as far better. Oh if God should se^ thee up in a Throne, Motive 4.
Oh depart from it to enjoy the glory of Christ himself in Glory!

G^ant Death he dreadful, Motive 5.
yet when Soldiers see their Captain upon the walls among the enemies, they
will press hard after to follow, though they die in the brea^h. To part with
sin is bitter, or to part with Christ, but to part with the body for a ^ime,
and cast off the clothes, this will be ^ound to be exceeding sweet.

Friends that send to us, and provide for us in a desert place, we (...) to see
them. Now who bath clothed thee, comforted, Motive 6.
pardoned, revived, found thee, kep^ thee that nothing has hurt thee? nay that
thy sins have humbled thee, and done thee good: Oh '^s Christ! Wilt not say,
who and where is he (...) does all this?

Oh consider how glad the Lord Jesus will be of thoe, though the world and th^^
art weary of thy self, Motive 7.
Zeph. 3. 17. Luke 10. 21. I thank thee O (...): so will the Lord say then.

Labor for assurance that Christ is thine, Means 1.
else you will fear Death and (...) follows it, and such an assurance as does
not only chase away (...), but fears, at least in the power of them; for there
is many a (...) find the Proposition true in the word, He that c^mes to (...)
the Spirit clears Gods work, and his own experience, and says, (...) Christ
now when he comes to make the conclusion, though ^e (...) not sin against clear
light and evidence of the Spirit, and conclude, yet I (...) yet he dares not,
nor cannot for a time conclude fully: why? because of some fears, what if I
should be mistaken, and when I die all prove naugh^ and while this fe^^ lasts
you will not long (till needs must) to be with (...) you fear or suspect Christ
as an enemy, you will not hear^^ly love (...) long to be with him: therefore
get these fears removed.

How may this be? Quest.


^om. 8. 15, 16. By the Spirit of Adoption only; Answ.
for though I do not exclude the work of sanctified reason from the witness of
the Spirit, yet this I say, that all the men in the world, nor all the wisdom
and reason of man can never chase away all fears, scatter all mists till the
Spirit it self says peace and be still, and puts its hand and seal to the
Evidence: till the Spirit not by an audible, but power^^ voice shows and
^erswades, Acts 12. 13, 14, 15, 16. They had been praying for P^ter, Peter
knocks, the Damsel says, Peter is there; now see their unbelief after such a
mighty Spirit of Prayer, It Is his Angel, say they, and could not be persuaded
till he came in and showed himself. So the soul is praying a man's own Spirit
goes out and sees there is more unbelief and fear, say no '^is a delusion: well
the Spirit still knocks, and the soul opens, and then he comes in, and the soul
is astonished. And that you may have it,

1. See there he no guilt upon thy conscience, no reservation, love, liking to
some lost, Heb. 10. 22. For these fears are commonly the fruit of guilt which
is not washed away, but by the blood of sprinkling.

2. Pray for the S^irit, Psalm 8 5. from 4. to 9. say they, 1. T^^n us from
si^, 2. Turn from thy ^rath, when the Father is angry, then no good word. 3.
The end, That our hearts may rejoice ^^ thee. 4. S^ew us mercy. 5. Then they
come to listen after it, for many times a Friend speaks not because he has us
not alone.

3. Mo^^n heavily for want of it, Means 2.
Psalm. 51. 8 and so look for it in a word. Labor to partake of the fellowship
of Christ's Resurrection, else no desires can be raised up, Col. 3, 1. 2.

Quest. What is that?

Ans. Look as we then have fellowship with Christ, and with the Church in
miseries, when we from the serious apprehension of their sorrows, condole and
(...) with them, so with Christ in Glory, when from serious deep apprehensions
of his Glory, we reign with him, we are risen with him: for let a man be
assured Christ is not his if he knows not what the worth and glory of his
fellowship is a man will then never long to be with him: Oh therefore labor to
comp^ehend this glory of the Lord Jesus, and that by the spirit of Revelation,
Ephesians. 1. 17. 18. The word reveals the Glory of Saints, that there is a
kingdom, that they shall be Perfect in one, that they shall have that Glory the
Father has given to Christ, John 17. 22. Oh get the Spirit to show thee the
thing what this means, what this is; else something in the world will make you
look back. There are false Spies that vilify Gods Kingdom to his Saints, Oh
say it is a good God, and country, and Christ, and Mercy, and love; let me go
up and possess it. O^ get the Lord to give thee but one glimpse of this!

Thus much of the first verse.

CHAP. XII.
Showing that there are Hypocrites in the best and purest Churches.
V. 2. And five of them were wise, and five were foolish. SECT. I.
FRom this Second verse to the Fifth there is set down the difference appearing
between the Virgins, wherein the Lord the searcher of hearts, makes an open
discovery of the particular estates of these Virgins, for all the best Churches
especially to take notice of, to the second coming of the Lord Jesus. This
difference is set down,

1. Generally, in this second verse.

2. Particularly, in the 3d and 4th verses.

I. Generally in this verse.

1. That some of them were sincere and wise-hearted to the number of five.

2. Others of them were foolish and false-hearted to the number of five more.
So that the sum is this, one half of them were indeed Virgins, another half
were in appearance Virgins; the one part were Virgins in the sight of God, who
says they are wise; the other were so in the judgment of man, and hence called
foolish ones. In this general description therefore of them, we may note,

First, Their description from the number of each sort, viz. five.

Secondly, From their different qualities or qualifications, holy wisdom or
prudence in the one, sinful folly in the other. He does not say five were holy
and five profane; five were friends to the Bridegroom, five were ^ersecutors
of him, but five were wise and five were foolish: Why the Virgins are described
by the number of ten, Ispake before, either because it was a perfect number,
and so signifies the estate of all Virgin-Churches; or because it was the
custom not to exceed the number of Ten, to honor them at their Marriage. Now
why five of them were wise, and five foolish, as though the one half of them
only were sincere, the other false, this seems to carry the face of Truth; but
I am fearful to rack and torment Parables, wherein I chiefly look unto the
scope, and that is this, that not one or two but a great part of them were
sincere, and a great part of them false. And hence the Observations out of
these words are these, omitting all the rest.

1. That when the Churches of Christ Jesus prove Virgin-Churches, Observe. 1.
and are most pure, yet even then there will be some secret Hypocrites that
shall mingle themselves with them. Or, There will be a number of Hypocrites,
mingling themselves with the purest Churches.

2. That when the Churches are Virgin-Churches, Observe. 2.
the Hypocrites in those times will be Evangelical. Or, The secret Hypocrites
of pure Churches are Evangelical.

3. That there are certain special, Observe. 3.
saving qualifications of heart, whereby arises a great internal difference
between sincere-hearted Virgins and the closest Hypocrites.

4. That the Spring or one main principle of Evangelical sincerity or
hypocrisy it lies in the understanding or mind of man. Observe. 4.


SECT. II.
THat there is and will be a mixture of close Hypocrites with the wise-hearted
Virgins Observe. 1.
in the purest Churches.

This I might manifest out of several Scriptures, from several times. Look but
upon Josias time, where there was as great a reformation as under any King
before him, 2 King. 23. 25. Yet Ier. 3. 10. and 4. 3, 4. Look on the Apostles
time, and what apostasy afterward. The Apostle complained of it, Every one
seeks their own, Phil. 2. 21. Many walk, etc. Phil. 3. 18, 19. Whom he could
not think on without tears. The mystery of iniquity began to work even then.
Christ manifests this by diverse Parables, Mat. 22. 14. Many are called, and so
called as to come in, and so sit and not to be known, till the Lord looks on
them. And here the wise-hearted could not discern and keep out, but opened the
door for the five foolish. Look as it is said, Job 1. 6. There was a day the
Sons of God presented themselves before the Lord, and Satan came in also, so
here. I shall not, do not speak of every particular Church, but of the state of
the Churches in general. For its possible there may be a Philadelphia, a new
Jerusalem which comes down from Heaven, a Golden Foundation, and for a time no
hay nor stubble built upon it: But this is rare, and not usual nor general.

SECT. III.
FRom Satan, Reas. 1.
the ancient enemy of the purity of the Church; he being an unclean creature
himself, if he could he would make Heaven it self unclean; but that is beyond
his reach; hence he seeks to make Heaven on earth unclean; hence he will get
into Paradise, and if he cannot come in the shape of a man, yet in that of a
Serpent to beguile and pollute innocence there: He will follow Christ into the
wilderness, and tempt him there, and hence will seek to get into Churches, to
pollute them. And if he cannot pollute the Church by unclean Ordinances, he
will then seek to defile it by unclean persons, Mat. 13. 25. The Tares be in
Judea like the Wheat, yet indeed annoy the Wheat: And how come they there? They
are sown there, i. e. hid for a time, and mingled, and die there too, Who does
this? Why the enemy did it, so that Satan will do it. If there be a Devil in
the Church, he will sow his ta^es.

Obj. But we see him not.

Ans. No, it is therefore said he went away, his care is over now they are sown.
Look as it is Jesuits policy at this day, the end of their Order is to raise up
the collapsed ruins of Rome, and to bring all Christendom (and if it be
possible all the world) to the Hellish bondage and blind obedience of the Sea
of Rome. Hence some Kingdoms, because they cannot conquer them by power, they
seek to do it by craft; hence they seek to lay their Leaven and make their
party within, from whom they may have intelligence, and hence they shall do
well enough with them: So Satan seeking the ruin of the Church, seeks to make
his party within the Church, for one of these three ends chiefly.

1. Either that he may divide the Church, that when any Error shall be
hatched, he may have his party to maintain it, and his faction to plead for it.
Or

2. That he may corrupt it, if he cannot divide it, that the Tares may suck out
the heart and life and power of Godliness in the hearts of the Elect; for you
know it is not the Briar but the Iv^ that sucks out the life and sap of the
tree, and it is not profane pricking persecutors, but seeming friends to the
Church, that suck out the heart and life of it. It was not Ieroboams
greatness, but the old Prophets gravity and seeming Piety that sucked out the
Spirit and Sap of the young Prophet, 1 Kings 13. That so by this little Leaven
he may defile the whole lump, and so provoke wrath against them all.

3. If he cannot do either, yet that he may blur and stain the Glory of the
Church: For the greatest Glory in the world is to see a Temple built, not of
sto^^^ of Gold or Pearl, but of living precious Saints, holy to the Lord only
and his Son, and the sight of which in Heaven shall be one part of the Glory in
Heaven. Hence Satan will do what he can to blur it; that though the greatest
Glory God has, shines in his Church, yet that he may blur it: And hence Jude
says, Some that crept in unawares, were Spots in their Feasts. And 2 Pet. 2.
2. By reason of whom the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of.

2. From the Officers chiefly of a Church, Reas. 2.
who when they should be full of eyes, as they are described, Rev. 4. And these
eyes should be ever watching, they are then sleeping, Mat. 13. 25. For it is not
the having, so much as the acti^g of Grace that helps men to read and
understand the Book of the Scriptures, and the Book of men's hearts and lives, 2
Pet. 1. 9. Hence in affliction and temptation we know the Lord, and his mind,
and our own hearts, and the world best: When Jonathan eats the honey, his eyes
are open: Now sometime the watchmen are not acting or watching, but sleeping,
and hence those are taken for wheat, that indeed are but Tares. The Book has a
fair Superscription or Frontispiece, and they so sleepy they do not read it
through, and so either see no fault at all, or if any, they be but Errata in
the Printing, and weaknesses to be (...) with; or if they do, yet the man is
commended, and has a Name to live when indeed he is dead, and so this serves
the turn, and though he comes in, yet they shall do well enough with him,
though indeed they herein have but a wolf by the ears.

3. In regard of Hypocrites themselves, who must be like themselves, Reas. 3.
ever to act for their own ends, for they ever have an evil eye; now it makes
for their ends, to join themselves to the purest Churches of the Lord Jesus.

1. Sometimes it makes for their honor: Hence you know the Church of Sardis
lost her power of life, for that is a burden, yet kept their name to live, for
that is an honor. For if men live out of Church-Fellow^hip, that is a great
shame, and now they have little love from Saints; Indeed the wicked may honor
them, but what is that to the honor of the whole Church? Who would think Saul
should have cared for Samuel, that dealt so plainly and sharply with him? Yet
Oh honor me before this people; that is the business. There are many excellent
gifts Christ poures down upon his Church: Simon believes also, Acts 8. and
would give any money for those gifts, that he might be wondered at, as he was
before. A man seeing others gifts, and the love they have thereby, even a Simon
may desire such gifts, and a mighty power of Grace to animate those gifts, and
would give any money for this, that be may be wondered at. Some refined,
polished Spi^its scorn honor of base men; and hence fish for it elsewhere.

2. Their gain, it is strange that Judas follows Christ for the bagg, that was
so poor, ye^ he did, until he saw after three years and a half waiting, so
little came in. So it is ^^ange men should seek to join to poor Churches for
that, yet they do and will so long as they have any lots to give, or purses to
lend, or hearts to take care and provide for those that are joined to them. You
shall have many poor Christian men, that be but kind and boun^iful to them, you
may lead them into any errors, catch them at your ^leasure with a silver hook,
until they see their g^in grows little and respect less, and then they fall
off.

3. Their comfort for union to the Church of God, 1. Covers their sin, and
hides it from the eyes of the world. Thieves walk without suspicion in true
men's companies, and thus they make the House of Prayer a Den of Thieves, and
this is some comfort. For Hypocrites if they can carry it cleverly that none
see, though God see it is no matter. It will not be thought that a Member of a
Church dares do such a wickedness, yet so it is sometime^. 2. Comforts their
conscience in their sin; men love their lusts, but what, no respect to
Ordinances of Christ? yes, and so conscience is quiet, and sin lives too, Ier.
7. 3. Because there is much comfo^t in Gods Ordinances, and in attending on God
there, not only verbal, but the visible Gospel is sweet, the Sacraments: hence
they join themselves as in John's Ministry, You rejoiced for a season, not only
in Christ, but in communion of Saints, especially in dangerous times, that a
man fears the judgments of God will come in those places where ever they live
without them. And now they are quiet when got into the Cities of the Levites,
from the pursuer of blood.

4. In regard of the Saints themselves. Reas. 4.


First, There is seen many times a Divine Majesty and excellency in them, which
has a drawing virtue with it, that many out of respect to that, close with
them, as Genesis 26. 27, 28. God makes Balaam to see Isreal's glory in his Tents,
and he cannot curse (if he might have all the world) but must bless them.

Secondly, There is much charity which thinks no evil, that where they see
evils, they cover them; where there is but little good appearing, they hope
there is more than they see, the Kings Daughter being all glorious within.

Thirdly, There is a spirit of humility in them, to think others that appear
fair better than themselves, until God discovers them, especially if they are
yet unsettled.

Fourthly, A spirit of desire to have all as near the Lord as they can, and
though there be evils in them, yet they hope that will make them better.

5. From the Lord himself: who has, Reas. 5.


First, Reserved this exact separation as one part of his own glory at his
Second coming: Then he shall separate sheep and Goats.

Secondly, Because some are very serviceable to his Church, and so to Christ,
as Caput politicum, both in regard of outward means of subsistence, and also
with edifying gifts: hence into his Family he will let them come, being
servants, and like Carriers that carry another money and wealth to him, and
then turns them out of doors.

Thirdly, Because of a certain real, yet not through work of the Lord, whereby
he draws them to some fellowship with the Church, the Members, and some kind of
fellowship with his Son; yet it not being a through effectual Almighty drawing,
they prove unsound, John 6. 65.

Fourthly, That the Lord might manifest the exceeding greatness of his wrath in
some, for Gods last end in all the wicked is to show the greatness of it, Romans
9. 21, 22. yet in some more than others: and hence raises them up in the
Church to great eminency of profession, and parts, and honor, that all the
Saints also may admire Gods Grace to themselves the more, that when Two in the
field, one should be taken, another left, that they should sit in the same
seats, and yet some called, others left, and of them that are called to leave
many, and love me, and that men of great parts, and I a poor simple one to
choose such a base thing, to confound the wise, the mighty. But as it is said of
Pharaoh, what meant all the miracles? all the humblings of heart? and yet he
would not let them go: For this cause have I raised thee up, Exodus 9. 16. Of
all that thou have given me (says Christ) not one is lost, but the Son of
Perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. So here.

SECT. IV.
THis serve^ to cle^r us in this Country from a soul aspersion that is cast out
of the mouths of Pulpits upon us, Use 1.
that we hold the Churches of Christ to have no Hypocrite in the^. We answe^,
that though if Hypocrite could be openly and Ecclesiass^ally disce^ned, they
should not be received in, no^ kept in, because (...) Church are not fit to
make a Church: yet we say there will be Tares and Whe^t, there will be chaste
and corn, there will be wise and foolish Virgins, there will be good and bad
mingled together in the Church; until the worlds end.

To the Watch ^en of the Churches* nay to all that profess themselve to be
their Brethrens keepers; Use 2.
to (...) Virgins, Of Advice.
not to lavi^h your cha^^ty too far, it is a precious Grace, and you have little
enough for (...), but to bear a jealous heart, and to labou^ for a quick
discerning eye to find out them that will (...) themselves among you. This was
the commendation and honor of the Ephesians, Rev. 2. 2. I confess it ^s a
sinful extreme to cry do^n all the virgins as foolish, when there be Five wise.
Satan will seek to ^reak he ^ond of Brotherly-love by so^ing false reports, and
horrible suspicions: and it is a hard thing for a Pa^^ after the Lord has wrapped
him up to the Third Heaven in Revelations, not to be pu^tup, and in seeing
himself at a distance from other men, not to despise and conde^n them that have
not risen so high as he, especially in a discontented spirit nothing will
please them. A false heart when, he sees more than others as he thinks, now
thinks highly of himself, as so he great reformer of Churches and world,
especially if men of shallow heads; and ^ence such do censure and conde^n all
that do not magnify them, and reverence their Judgments, and the dust of
their feet. And yet it is another sinful extreme to swallow down all flies that
be in the cup, and to think too charitably of every one that does pro^esse.
Children that have no children themselves, will make children of clouts, and
then love the^; and hence many a soul lies blee^^ng to ^eath because they have
such tender Friends as will not search them. An I doubt not but many in Hell
^ay say, Oh that I should live among such and such, and they never de^^
faithfully with me.

If a man walk ^airly, Object.
should I censure him?

No, Answ.
but yet maintain a holy jealousy over them, as Paul did over the Gal^^hiansa
(...) stands with love, as it was with Job chapter 1. 5. As it is with Chirurgions,
'^is love to cut to the quick. Love the^ because they appear to be Christ's, and
are so to thee, and this shall have a reward; but yet be jealous in love,
because there may be that hid which was never yet seen.

1. It may be thou may save a soul, and they will love thee; or else thou
shall clear justice by being a witness against them.

2. It Is the chief work for Christ here, there being no profane ones among us,
to overthrow the kingdom of hypocrisy, as well as of civility and
profaneness.

3. You will save the Lord a purging and cleansing time, for when Christ
purges not with the Holy Ghost in his Saints and Ordinances, he will with
fire. Here I might give rules for discerning men's spirits, as

(...), Mark their speech, for by thy words thou shall be justified, and many
times one word will give a light to see all, as in Simon Magus: as with men in
a labyrinth found out by one thread.

Secondly, Mark them that you see not grapling with Sin and Temptation, for if
we see them without that, they are not yet tried, therefore observe them here,
here is their trial, when time of Temptation comes.

Thirdly, Get thy self to stand at a distance from sinful men, from all the
world; We know we are of God, 1 John 5. 19. As men that are in the water look
only to themselves, but standing safe on shore; they see others drowning: I
speak this because I fear the Churches are so busy about their own things,
that their (...) not kept: if they see no gross sin then all is well.

Hence be not offended, Use 3.
if you see great Cedars fall, stars fall from Heaven, great Professors die and
decay: 1. Do not think they be all such. 2. Do not think the Elect shall fall.
Truly some are such, that when they fall, one would think a man ^ruly
sanctified might fall away, as the Arminians think, 1 John ^. 19. They were not
of us; I speak this because the Lord is shaking and I look for great Apostacies
toward, for God is trying all his Friends through all the chris^ian world: in
Germany what profession was there? who would have t^ought it? The Lord who
delights to manifest that o^enly which was hid secretly, sends a sword, and
they fall; others in other places receive the Word with joy, the Lord sends
Persecution, and fearing men more than the filth of sin, and anger of Christ,
they fall: others stand i^ ou^ there, and suffer and venture hither, and
Isac^ar-like see rest is good, and crouch under their burdens, and so they
fall. Others have had sweetness in Ordinances, the Lord departs, and so they
fall. Others have corrupt hearts, and received the truth in the form, not in
love, and stood in deferce of the truth, not love of the truth, the Lord lets
^rrour loose, and they fall. Well, never be offended at this, I am not, because
I never knew man fall but he loved some lust, and was never broken from sin,
and although this is not seen when they do fall, it offends not me.

Oh therefore search your own hearts: when Christ said to the Disciples one
shall betray me: Use 4.
Lord is it ^? say they: so when not one, but many, Lord is it I? Oh many a
christian lies fast asleep, never comes to a through search, a strict wa^ch. Do
but consider this: 1. That in Churches, nay purest Churches many may lie hid
nor discerned. 2. Thou may be one. 3. If thou be, that of all men living
none shall so deeply sink in Hell. 4. That all Ordinances shall tend to this
end, and all thy joys, all thy afflictions: and therefore Oh search before the
Lord search, and say, Lord, as no man's punishments and plagues can be like
(...) nor sins, if I ^erish, so if pardoned, loved, never any shall have such
cause to bless thee^ and therefore take not up with weak and groundless
hopes, but love that hand that smites and wounds thee, for this discovery is to
awaken thee: but you have so much business you will not, cannot, etc. Consider
what a fearful thing it is to be (...) up as for a gazing-stock to Saints, so an
everlasting terror to the damned themselves.

CHAP. XIII.
Containing a Discovery of Gospel-Hypocrites.
SECT. I.
THat the most hidden hypocrites of the purest Churches under the Gospel are
Evangelical, Observe. 2.
or Gospel Hypocrites.

For these that were foolish were not such as in appearance rested in the Law,
or in a Covenant of Works, but they had escaped those intanglements, and now
were Virgins that plead their interest in, and their communion and fellowship,
and love-knot with Christ, they had now their Lamps ready, and made much
preparation for him, and they did wait for him, and verily looked to have
eternal fellowship with him their Beloved, infomuch that they took their flight
so high toward Heaven and Christ, that they passed for a time the discerning
of the wise: for you must know that where the Gospel comes, there are two sorts
of enemies against it.

1. Open, and those are your Justiciaties, that seeking to establish their own
righteousness, and being pu^^ed up with it, can with pretended good
consciences in doing God service, oppose the righteousness of God.

2. Secret and subtle enemies, yet seeming Friends, and these are your carnal
Gospellers that cry down all their own righteousness, and cry up Christ, and
see nothing in themselves, as there is good cause so to think, and look for all
from Christ, and yet these when the Lord comes to search are found false; and
these are the worms that grow in this wood, in this building, in these
Churches. Thus it was in Christ's time, the Church of the Jews had left their
gross idolatries, yet this was their stumbling-stone, they sought to establish
their own righteousness, and hence he came to his own, and his own received
him not, and hence were cut off for this their unbelief, but others (diverse
sorts of them) did receive him, believed in him, John 2. 23. Many took hold on
Christ, and he took no hold on them, wondered at him, and entertained him when
others did reject him, as Capernaum did, yet under his woe. And these are the
spots of Evangelical purity, wenns in the best bodies of the best constituted
Churches. Look but upon Christ's own Family: John 6. 69, 70. The Disciples
professed when others departed, Lord, to whom should we go? thou have words of
life; yet says he, I have chosen you indeed to be for me, but one is a devil,
viz. Judas the Deacon stood not on his own righteousness, but was for Christ,
and followed him, and yet in this Evangelical Angel without, is a Devil within,
because he still harbored his lusts within. This the Apostle Paul foresaw,
Acts 20. 29, 30. Some Wolves without should come, and also some cankers within
should fret, that should draw many Disciples after them (in a Church bought by
Christ's own blood) speaking perverse things, pretending to draw Disciples after
Christ, but it is indeed after themselves; and Paul laments this, Many walk, i.
e. profess Christ and his Cross, yet enemies to it, Phil. 3. 19. This Christ
foretells, Luke 13. 25, 26. Many seek, many knock, and at last cry Lord, Lord
open, and in their lifetime they pleaded communion with Christ, yet Depart ye
workers of iniquity. Jude 4. Certain ^en are crept in turning Grace into
Lasciviousness; for that is the very form of an Evangelical hypocrite, in
denying his own righteousness, to establish his sin, it is advancing Christ to
advance his Lust. The Epistles of James and John are antidotes against this
kind of poison, and I look on them as lamps hung up to discover these men, not
but that these men are indeed under a covenant of Works, for there be but two
sorts of men, and two ends of all men, hence but Two Covenants; hence those
that are not indeed under Grace, are under the Law, and under the Curse; but
because the most subtle hypocrites ap^ear or seem to be under Grace, and their
external operations are chiefly Evangelical, hence I call them Evangelical
Hypocrites.

SECT. II.
IN regard of the power of the Word and Gospel of life and spirit in such
Churches: Reas. 1.
For the Gospel where it comes, as it advances the glorious and everlasting
righteousness of Christ, so it knocks under-foot all man's, as a means
subserv^ent to that end, and it coming with power and light, it would be too
gross for Hypocrites to maintain life by Works: hence Christ's is that which
they look unto; for Christ when he preached, not only many believed because of
his Miracles, but when they heard his Word, John 8. 30. Mat. 13. In the Parable
of the Sower, the Word came with much power, that they received it with joy,
and did believe, but fell by their Lusts. And look as it is with the Sun, there
comes light and heat with it, so there comes

1. Truth to the mind, and conquers the judgments of Hypocrites, that there is
no life, good, righteousness, but in Christ, nor salvation but by Christ.

2. There comes some goo^nesse of the Gospel to the heart, that men hearing and
seeing Salvation wrapped up there, Oh that is sweet and good! and hence their
affections and hearts are in some measure conquered by the power of the
overdazeling truth, and hence Hypocrites being thus conquered, partly being of
this opinion, partly tasting some good of it, desire it out of self-love,
expect it out of self-delusion, and profess themselves Virgins out of these
Principles.

In regard of power of Evangelical examples in the five wise Virgins: Reas. 2.
for look as it is with living men when the Sun shines upon their heads, they
cast their shadows that follow them; so when the Lord Jesus shines upon the
souls of his own people, almost every honest sincere-hearted man will cast his
shadow that will be like him; hence Hypocrites in those Churches which are
commonly rather led by example than by rule, will be very like them, and
imitate them: if they should not, what communion could they have with them, or
what love could they receive from them? for there is a mighty power in eminent
examples to overbear Hypocrites, that if they will turn themselves into any
form, they must into theirs, as in Ioash: for there are two things in the
carriage of the Saints.

1. There is a condemning power in it; hence men fear to live unlike them.

2. There is a winning virtue in it, an attractive virtue; hence men endeavor
to be and live like them, to be of the same mind, the same heart with them: and
hence others take them, and they take themselves to be sincere, and hence they
are Evangelical Gospel Hypocrites that lie hid in these Churches: Hence Zach.
8. 23. Many shall take hold of a Jews skirt (I doubt not but some false ones,)
we have heard God is with you. And as Christ when lifted up and risen, so
Saints draw Hypocrites to them.

Because the Gospel brings the greatest and sweetest consolations with it.
Reas. 3.
Hence a man under the terror of the Law, and sense of curse for his sin, will
make his last refuge hither, and hide himself under the wing of the Gospel, not
so much out of love to Christ, or Gospel, but because they serve his turn, and
give him ease. Like men scorched with hea^, and almost ready to die, the shadow
of a Tree is now very comfortable, and therefore there they sit; so these: Or
as men with scalded arms, they put them into wate^, which gives them ease, no
cure; but because it gives them ease, there they keep them, so here: Men have
been scalded with wrath, Oh now Gospel is very sweet, and so are e^sed (...)
it, never cured by it. Therefore here you shall find them disclaim all Works,
and cry up Grace only; where the purest Churches are, there are usually great
awakenings, there God is very near men, and made most manifest to men's
consciences, and there are most soul-plagues, contempt of the Spirit of Grace,
and hence most dreadful torments of conscience, and fearful lookings for of
Judgment. Now hence it comes to pass when Christ is offered, and general
notice given to men's minds, that yet there is hope and mercy for great sinners,
this fills them with joy and peace, as John's hearers, John 5. 35. and hence
they believe as the stony ground that had some plowing, and hence received the
Word with joy and believed, Psalm 66. 3. It Is a Prophecy of the Kingdom of
Christ, Antichrist he tormented the consciences of men, Rev. 9. Men have no
peace within or without. Luther is raised up, and preache^h the Doctrine of
Free Grace, which a world of men looking to their ease, others in truth receive
it; for some time before his death he cries to God that he may not live to see
the ruins that were coming on Germany for their contempt. The Law is the
Ministry of Death, the Gospel propounds great privileges, with much more
sweetness to sinners, and hence hither men fly.

4. Because the Gospel yields the fairest Colors for a man's sloth, Reas. 4.
and strongest props for that. Hence you shall see them w^lking in this garden.
For the last sin God conquers in a man is his sloth. When the swine have no
s^ill to eat, yet you shall find them in the mire of sloth; this slaies the
foolish. Hence the best Hypocrite will plead the Gospel, its troublesome to the
flesh, to bear a daily sense of the sins and wants of the soul. Hence you shall
have Capernaum receive Christ, and wonder at his Doctrine; and yet Christ
upbraids them, they repented not, Mat. 11. 20. Its troublesome, nay impossible
for a man to break his chains and get his soul loosed from his lusts, and free
for the Lord. The Gospel shows all fullness in Christ, and that he must do all,
a sloathful false heart there^^^e closes with Christ as the end, but neglects
him in the means. Why? Christ must do all, say they, and hence if Christ do
drop upon their hearts, well and good, if not, it is Christ's fault, he is a hard
Master that gathers where he did not sow, and hence wrap it up. A man's false
heart is weary of the yoke of Christ, and hence would fain be eased of it. Now
the Gospel promises libe^ty from the bondage and curse of the Law, and a
sloathful heart can find out reasons to free himself from the Rule of it, as
part of Christian liberty, this is our Liberty in Christ Jesus, 2 Pet. 2. 19.
And they rejoice exceedingly that the Law is dead, as they did, Rev. 11. 10.
for the death of the witnesses, because they tormented them: I say again, they
rejoice not because the Lord makes them like himself, and because of his Image
restored by the Gospel, and because they feel the power of it, but because they
are free from the power of it. Its an old deceit, yet subtle, to rejoice, and
love, and bless Christ, because he will pardon sin, though I lie and live in
them. Or if they do not free themselves from it, the Gospel shows the Law
within closing with the Law without, to be an evidence the Lord will not impute
it, and that it is not therefore they, but sin in them. Hence a sloathful heart
will continue in his sloth, and to ease himself of trouble for sin and
obedience too, say it is not he, but sin. And hence Arminius makes a strange
interpretation of Romans 7. Because he saw German Professors plead that for
themselves. The Israelites entered not into Canaan, unbelief caused it: And why
did that shut them out? Oh there were walled Towns and difficulties, and this
was the last shock, and hence they fell off; so it is in Hypocrites now. The
safest place to lie asleep is in Christ Lap.

5. From the mighty cunning of Satan, Reas. 5.
the strength of whose Kingdom is made and continued by peace, Luke 11. 41.
Hence he will turn himself into an Angel of light, and suffer men to go to
Christ and Gospel, to avoid the search, that they may be Christ's in appearance,
and his indeed, 2 Cor. 4. 4. He has a mighty power over men to blind them: For
there be three things which trouble men usually, and make them question their
estates, and the Gospel quiets and absolves them from all.

1. Conscience, that cries dolefully sometimes, these sins shall have these
woes. Yes, unless I believe; but I believe, and trust to Christ, and flee to
Gods Mercy.

2. Ministry, that cries and searche^h into the deepest windings of men's
hearts, that men cannot but see that Christ has eyes of flaming fire to see
through the^. Now hence men avoid the stroke and power of all Ministry, thus it
is with me, thus it is will be with me, but I believe and trust to Christ. And
hence men bea^ back like Brazen Walls all Blows.

3. Gods judgment seat. What though men see you not, yet God sees. Why, they
have sinned they confess, but Christ has suffered, they have sinned, but they
trust, etc. Micah 3. 11. Is not the Lord among us? Look as it was with Ioab, he
runs to the Horns of the Altar, yet there he perishes, there he would die,
there was the last refuge from search and death, so here.

SECT. III.
HEnce do not think your estates good, Use 1.
because you look only for justification by Christ, and look only to Gods free
Grace, and count of Grace in Christ. Its a common error for men to think,
being they be of this opinion, only to look for Grace in Christ, to think that
therefore their estates are safe, and they are justified by Christ. Why there
may be such a power of Word and Spirit to conquer their judgments as those
Papists that have been pleading against it, have been overcome by it. Thou
may receive the Notions of it thy Head, but the power of it never into thy
Heart.

Obj. 1. But my heart has been affected with this, to see when my sins deserve
death; yet there is mercy for the vilest in Christ.

Answ. Thou may taste and joy, and yet fall off at last.

Obj. 2. But I have Fellowship with the Lord Jesus.

Answ. Thou may eat and drink in his presence, and yet be bid Depart, I know
you not, a worker of iniquity.

Obj. 3. But I have escaped the pollution of the world, 2 Pet. 2. 20. And that
through this knowledge of Christ, his love has much moved me to part with my
sins.

Answ. It may be so, and it may wash thee from all external pollutions, and yet
thy swinish nature remain still hidden from thee, but seen of an all-seeing God.

Obj. 4. But I look for Christ, and wait for him and desire him, and all that
are wise think well of me.

Answ. You may do all this, and yet you may be found foolish for all this.
Evangelical work which is accompanied with Salvation in some, it may be
Hypocritical in thee: And therefore take heed you do not take shows for
substance. For look as in the Gospel Gods utmost perfection of wisdom and love
appears, so the most hidden and admirable delusions of Satan are Evangelical.
There his power is employed to undermine, and so to keep his head. Oh that we
could but imagine and set before our eyes the amazing condition of such a man!
whose plagues shall be made wonderful, that has been troubled with sin a long
time, at last looks to Christ, and there rests, and so hears all Sermons, and
there still sleeps, and considers often that his ways are evil, but never
suspects his Faith to be evil, then he comes to die, and then looks for Christ;
at last the week or snuff dies, and Sun sets, and darkness approaches, and
then suddenly slips into Hell, where he sees Christ and Saints afar off: And
what has deceived them? Oh their Faith has deceived them, to see Christ
shaking them off as dust: Oh they wish, Oh that I had known or feared this
before! and will you not fear now? as for you profane ones that can scoff, and
drink, and break Sabbaths, and live idly, your judgment is writ upon your
foreheads: but Oh take heed you that have escaped these pollutions, lest you
deceive your selves here. To show you that deceit particularly, it is not my
time yet, but go alone and think sadly of it, I may look for justification by
Christ, and wait for Christ, and yet perish. Oh let me be sure I get such a
Faith as will not deceive me here: Should not a man you will say trust to
Christ? yes when you can in truth; but thy Trust may be but Presumption.

II. Take not up therefore every Opinion and Doctrine from men, Use 2.
or Angel that bears a fair show of advancing Christ, for they may be but the
fruits of Evangelical Hypocrisy and deceit, that being deceived themselves,
may deceive others too, Mat. 7. 15. Beware of them that come in Sheeps
clothing, in the innocence, purity, and meekness of Christ and his people, but
inwardly are Wolves, proud, cruel, sensorious, speaking evil of what they know
not; by their fruits you shall know them. Do not think Beloved that Satan will
not seek to send delusions among us, and do you think these delusions will come
out of the Popish pack, whose inventions s^el above ground here? No, he must
come, and will come with more Evangelical fine-spun devices. It Is a rule
observed among Jesuits at this day, If they would conquer Religion by
subtilty, never oppose Religion with a cross Religion, but set it against it
self; so oppose the Gospel by the Gospel: and look as Churches ple^ding for
Works had new invented devised Works; so when Faith is preached, men will have
their n^w inventions of Faith; I speak not this against the Doctrine of Faith
where it is preached, but am glad of it, nor that I would have men content
themselves with every form of Faith; for I believe that most men's Faith needs
confirming or trying, but I speak to prevent danger on that hand. For it was
that which Christ did foretell, Mat. 24. 24. Many false christ's should arise,
i. e. such as should misapply Christ, that had a spirit for Christ, which was a
spirit against Christ, and would deceive if it were possible the very Elect;
for coming with Christ's Spirit, they dare not oppose them, lest they oppose the
Spirit of Christ; the only remedy is to hold to Christ's Word, and not to depart
one hairs breadth from it, Rev. 3. 10. and to a Word well understood, and then
dispute no more. Satan comes to Eve, and bids her eat, no, God forbid, yet eat
to be like gods; He dazeled her eyes with that which was not: now she fell.
Take the truth from what the Word says, and depart not from it.

III. Here see the dreadful estate of all them that be found false-hearted in
the purest Churches, Use 3.
and that in these three respects.

First, That they should so horribly forsake and blaspheme the Name of God, to
make the glorious Gospel of God, and all the sweet Doctrines of Grace a cover
for their hypocri^^e and sin, as indeed it is, for were it not for this, they
might be found out in their sins, but now they are beyond the discovery of all
men, or means.

Secondly, That they should be so lamentably forsaken of God, as to be left,

1. To the most subtle and spiritual Hypocrisy in the world, which being most
cross to God, shall receive most fierce and searching wrath. For as Divines
say of Christ, he was forsaken in Soul, because man had sinned with his Soul:
so Gods wrath will ^earch deep in their hearts, whose hearts have guilefully
departed from the Lord.

2. That he should lead them so far, and yet in the main forsake them; Oh this
is heavy wrath, for a man to be lead in the daylight of the Gospel, almost to
the end of his journey, and at last the Sun sets, and he left to wilder.

Thirdly, In regard of the cries of the very Gospel it self against them. Oh
that the precious Gospel of God coming with so much Peace, Love, Grace, mercy,
should win them to be Hypocrites, but never to be Friends. Beloved as there is
vengeance of the Law, and of the Temple, so there is vengeance of the Gospel
when the soul shall be drawn before the Tribunal of Christ, and shall stand
there quaking, all sins set in order before you, and your mouth shall be stopped.
What say you then for your life? Oh Grace and mercy Lord, Oh now shall the
Gospel come forth and say, all this I did, I spoke, I strove, I comforted, I
terrified, and yet he has opposed the Lord, and me, he has made a cover for
all these evils, and therefore Lord let him never be comforted more, John 3.
19. Oh Christ has heavy things against these Times, that take light of the
Gospel to see to commit their sin by! And therefore lament your present estates
you that know your selves naught, never yet drawn to Christ, never yet humbled
at the feet of Christ, and look up to the Lord whatever misery he inflicts,
not to suffer thee to be deceived here; not only to have such a Faith as may
catch hold on Christ, but he on thee, and come unto the light to manifest the
hidden enmity there. Never was yet man deceived, but he that was willing to be
deceived, that would not use the means, and search.

SECT. IV.
ALL you therefore that live under the light of the Gospel, Use 4.
consider if it does not nearly concern you to search and try your selves
whether you, or some of you may not be Evangelical Hypocrites; the time is
coming that you shall stand before the Tribunal of God, wherein the hidden
things of darkness shall be brought forth to light, and it will be too late to
know your selves then: Oh therefore search now. No man's misery will be so great
as this, if your heart be found false. I shall speak in a manner but generally
now.

1. Those that do believe, Sign 1.
and yet fail in respect of the efficient cause of Faith, it never had the
right maker, never came out of the right shop, nor mint, it was never a Faith
of Gods making, but a faith of your own making, so that it is a base bastard
Faith, that though it be born in the House, it shall never possess the
inheritance, because it was never begotten of the right Father, the Lord never
wrought it, but themselves, for many a man is convinced by the Law, and spirit
of bondage that he must die, and that he is a most grievous sinner, and that
when he has done all he is unprofitable, but yet he trusts to Christ, and Gods
mercy, and so believes, he finds no great difficulty in this, nor no great need
of the Almighty power of the Lord to work this, and all men living shall never
make him think but that he does heartily and truly believe: but ask him, have
you no doubt of your estate? and of Christ's not taking hold of you when you
take hold of him? Yes, but seeing he has been troubled about his estate, and
repented of his sin (in his fashion) and reformed himself and Family, and loves
the best things, he believes without question, and so misapplies promises to
himself, never feeling a need of the revelation and donation of Jesus to him by
the Father; and thus the Lord finds this man a Christ, and this man finds the
Lord a Faith, and the Lord Jesus redeems this man by price, and this man
redeems himself by power, and so the Father shall have some Glory for providing
a Savior, Christ shall have some Glory for paying a price, and the Spirit of
Christ which only can draw to Christ, shall lose his Glory, and so this man may
take it to himself. And is this good think you? Col. 2. 12. Risen with Christ
through Faith of the operation of God, 1 Pet. 1. 3. The same power that raised
Christ from the dead, must raise you to a lively hope. Mat. 22. 1, 2, 3. One
man came from his hedges and Highways to the Feast of the Promise, and
Ordinances of the Gospel, till the Lord saw him without Christ; but John 6. 64,
65. Unless the Father reveals Christ's face, the Father persuades thee of
Christ's love, you can never come to Christ, men know not thy Hypocrisy, thou
do not, but Jesus does, and what good will thy Faith do thee then? It was a
sweet speech of Christ, Thy Faith has saved thee. Oh heavy when it shall be
said, thy Faith has damned thee, that which I thought to be the way of life,
is the way of death; truly so it will if you do not fetch it out of Heaven.

II. Those that do believe, Sign 2.
but they fail in the object, i. e. they close with Christ, but they know not
who he is: that as the Woman of Samaria that had some lookings to the Messiah,
she did worship whom she knew not: so men believe in one whom they know not,
only have heard the fame of. For there are two things in the Gospel. 1. The
outward words and letters. 2. The things contained in those words: Hence there
is a double knowledge of Christ.

1. A fantacy knowledge, as a man that hears of any thing absent, presently
fancies the thing in his head.

2. There is an intuitive know(...) hereby the soul does not only see words and
fancies, but beholds the things themselves: Hence it comes to pass that many a
man hearing the Fame, and receiving the fancy of Christ, believes in him, but
not seeing him indeed as he is, therein he believes in one whom he knows not:
and hence the Lord Jesus may be a hid thing to many a man, and the Gospel a
sealed Book, though he lives and remains in the very light of the Sun, and that
all his days: Hence Christ laments Jerusalem, Oh that thou had known, but
now hid, hid; and yet Christ Preached. Yes, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. You have heard and
seen, and yet the Lord has not given a heart to see to this day; So it is with
many a soul, you have heard with your ears the great things of the Kingdom of
God, yet the Lord has not given you eyes to see: you have seen deliverances on
Sea, yet the Lord has not given you hearts to understand: and if so, all your
Faith is naught, and profession and affection vile, and estates miserable, 2
Cor. 3. 18. All we with open face, etc.

But many see it not so.

I confess some may see more darkly, Object. Answ.
and be mourning under it, ye^ he that does not in part, he to whom it is hid,
2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. is one of them that be lost, whose eyes Satan has blinded,
John 6. 45. He that has heard and learned of the Father: Many hear, but never
learn of the Father; hence never come truly unto Christ; it is in this case as
it is with a Traitor, he comes to the King for his life, and prays for his Sons
sake; the King sends for him, and says, here is one that beggs for your sake,
do you know him? For my sake! I wonder on what acquaintance, he is a stranger
to me, and therefore I regard him not. So here.

III. Those that have some kind of sight of the Object, Sign 3.
and see Christ, but there is a wound in the subject, because their Faith
arises and springs out of an ill soil, it is in such a party that never was yet
thoroughly rent from his sin, and here is the great wound of the most cunning
Hypocrites living: for there are two things in him,

1. A carnal heart, which cannot be satisfied with a spiritual good with
Christ; hence he must have his Lust.

2. A convinced conscience, which cannot be quieted without Christ and mercy;
hence men close with Christ, and their Lusts too. Look as it was with the stony
ground, and thorny soil, they believed, but had a stone at bottom, but (...) of
bitterness, etc. These men can sometime plead acquaintance with Christ, Luke
13. 26, 27. yet workers of iniquity, 2 Pet. 2. 19, 20. Some had escaped the
pollution of the world, that you may do, but a swinish nature lasts, that they
never selt, or grew not in the feeling of it, and loosening from it: as with
Apricocktrees rooted in the earth, but leaning on the wal^; so they on Christ.
Oh consider of this, let a man be cast down as low as Hell by sorrow, and lie
under your chains, quaking in apprehension of terror to come, let a man then
be raised up to Heaven in joy, not able to live; let a man reform and shine
like an earthly Angel, yet if not rent from Lust, that either you did never see
it, or if so, you have not followed the Lord to remove it, but proud, dogged,
wordly, sluggish still, false in your dealings, cunning in your tradings,
Devils in your Families, Images in your Churches: you are objects of pity now,
and shall be of terror at the great day, for where sin remains in power, it
will bring Faith, and Christ, and joy into bondage and service of it self.

IV. Those that believe, Sign 4.
yet fail of saving Faith in regard of the very act of believing and closing
with Christ, viz. they close with Christ, but it is without a high esteem of
him, or love to him, they have some, but right Grace consists in a kind of
summity, or excellency, else it is not right, 1 Pet. 2. 5. To you that believe
he is precious, and hence it comes to pass,

1. That some never come to find or enj^^ christ, because they will not come
off to the price of him, to sell themselves (...) for him.

2. Some sell him away again in time of Temptation, like Esau that sold his
Birthright, and never make any thing of it; because the Bond is not strong
enough down, they fall from him.

3. Hence comes all a man's uneven carriage.

4. Hence comes sometimes the unpardonable sin, Heb. 10. 29. Many a man lays
claim to Christ and his Blood, and righteousness, that never knew the worth of
it; and this is Christ's complaint me thinks in Heaven, (and of Saints on earth)
He comes unto his own, and his own esteem him not, his own love him not, his
own receive him not: him that is the glory of Heaven, the beauty of the Father,
the delight of Saints, the wonderment of Angels, he I say is not esteemed by
many a man, that in his judgment esteems him, and in his heart does despise
him. There are two parts of this esteem. 1. To esteem him only, John 5. 44. 2.
Him ever and always, Psalm 73. 26. Thou art my portion for ever, Many say they
esteem Christ, but to be ever loving him, ever looking on him, this is not
their frame. Oh think of this, fail here of your valuing of him, and you fail
every where.

V. Those that believe, Sign 5.
but they fail in their end; and these may for a while in a ho^ fit prize
Water, prize Christ and mercy above all things in the world, but their end is
naught; so that men here may ask and never have, because of their Lusts: As a
man that lies on his deathbed, or in a Sea-storm in fear of Hell, he may now
prize and take hold on Christ to save him. A man lies upon the Bed of horror of
heart, he may prize Christ to comfort him, and getting a conceit of it, be
wrapped up almost in an extacy of joy, that a man would think he was sealed with
the Spirit of Christ, and yet his end being naught, Christ only to comfort him,
misseth of Christ in conclusion; for when a man believes indeed, he receives
Christ for the end the Father sent him, viz. to be King and Sovereign of the
whole man as well as Savior. Psalm 24. 7. Open your gates that the King of
Glory, etc. Romans 8. 38. I am persuaded nothing shall separate us from the love
of Christ Jesus our Lord; our Lord as well as Jesus. Indeed John 6. 15. some
did receive Christ to be King, but it was that he might be their cook, he
provided loaves for them; so here. Psalm 66. 2, 3. Because of thy power thine
enemies shall flatteringly submit: ^tis but flattery, not Faith; look to it
therefore.

VI. Those that believe, but fail in regard of the use of the Gospel, Sign 6.
and of the Lord Jesus, and these we read of, Jude 3. viz. of some men that did
turn Grace into ^^nt^nnesse, for therein appears the exceeding evil of a man's
heart, that not only the Law, but also the glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus
works in him all manner of unrighteousness; and it is too common for men at the
first work of conversion, oh then to cry for Grace, and Christ, and afterward
grow licentious, live and lie in the breach of the Law, and take their warrant
for their course from the Gospel; I shall not name all the ways that men do
so, but I will only speak that which conscience and compassion moves me to; not
to begin, but if possible to still division, and what I shall speak shall be by
way of prevention.

1. Take heed of making Graces in a christian the weaknesses of a christian,
for this is to make darkness light, and Grace wantonness indeed: Is it not?
Take heed then of thinking or saying counterfeit or false Sanctification
consists in feeling something in a man's self, as love to, delight in the Lord
and his ways: True Sanctification, in seeing nothing, no love, no delight: why
the Apostle Paul ^new that in him, i. e. in his flesh dwelt no good thing, but
he calls it flesh there, and groans under it, yet he felt a Law within closing
with the Law without, and blessed the Lord for it, and that was himself. Do you
think the Holy Ghost co^es on a man as on Balaam, by immediate acting, and then
leaves him, and then he has nothing: Yes Beloved, know you not Christ is in
you (2 Cor. 13. 5.) as well as out of you; in you, comforting, dwelling,
sanctifying, preparing the heart for himself. Indeed to be puffed ^p with Grace,
or rest in it is a sin, yet that Grace is not that sin.

2. Take he^d of making weaknesses Graces or Duties: as

First, To make poverty of spirit, the sight of nothing in a man's self; why, he
that is poor has Heaven for his, and so Christ and Promises his, and has
Faith his, at least some seeds. Now to see nothing now, is to see an untruth,
and to tell a flat lie to God, and Men, and Scripture too. Indeed a man that is
poor does usually see nothing, but that is his weakness, not any Grace.

Secondly, To say there is no difference between Graces of Hypocrites and
Saints. Why so? Because I cannot see any. Is this your weakness or your
wisdom? you can see no^e, and will you make your weakness your Religion?

Thirdly, That a man must not evidence his Justification by his Sanctification,
I speak of that which accompanies Salvation. Why so? Because then there will be
comfort to day, and sorrow to morrow, grant it, but then consider, 1. That is
either a man's weakness and ignorance that he does not see it, or 2. his
wickedness and carelessness that has stained that work: And will you make
this a D^ty, a Grace? Oh but many have been deceived here; grant it, and will
you (...) your wret^hed baseness of heart the foundation of this conceit?

Fourthly, That a man must see no saving work, nor take comfort from any
promise until he is sealed: No, why so? Because many tall christians have
deceived themselves so, and deluded themselves there, and been kept off from
Christ, and truly I believe it in part. But what of that? Shall men's weakness
be my Religion or work? No Beloved, for a man believes before he is sealed,
Ephesians. 1. 15. And hence Christ is his, and now for him to deny Christ to be his
own, it is to make Christ a liar, 1 John 5. 10, 12, 13. not that I would have
christians content themselves here (it is a sign you never knew what Christ
meant if so you do) till he shall send a more full gale of his Spirit.

3. If you do account them weaknesses, yet take heed your closing with Christ
do not cause you to make a light matter of sin, either not to take notice of
sins at all, only look to Christ, ('it is not I but sin, as being the act of the
outward man: one calls this to unknow a man's self) or not to be deeply sensible
of them, and so use Christ as your shoe-clout to wipe them off, Oh this is
dangerous; the Spirit of joy never quenches the Spirit of Sorrow. Capernaum
entertained Christ, and yet perished, Oh she repented not! What must we repent
after we be in Christ? Yes, Ier. 30. 19. After I was turned I repented: It
argues a bold conscience, when men as they look to no good in themselves, so to
no sin in themselves, but wholly to Christ.

4. Take heed of those Doctrines which in show lift up Grace, but indeed pull
(...) any part of it, as

First, to think that the letter of the whole Scripture holds out no more than
a Covenant of Works, a most prodigious Speech, though colored with advancing a
Spiritual Covenant of Grace, and no Word but Christ.

Secondly, Under a show of advancing Gods Grace in doing all, to say the
Ordinances are not means, but only occasions of conversion.

Thirdly, under a show of giving all to Grace, to abolish that plain truth, as
to say we are not justified by Faith, which though it be true, not really, i.
e. not simply, by Faith in it self considered as a work, yet to say [not
relatively, as the Lord is apprehended by it] it is false. If we cast off the
power of the truth, yet let us not cast off the form of it: keep the form of
wholesome words as well as truths.

Fourthly, Take heed of maintaining that a man until sealed is not to be
persuaded to believe, under a show of letting the Spirit of Grace do all. And
Brethren, does not the Spirit of Grace accompany the word of Grace; are not
Evangelical commands part of that Word? is there not a power going along with
them? what is this but to take from Gods Book, and he that so does, God will
blot him out of the Book of Life, Rev. 22. 19.

Fifthly, That a Christian is to gather no assurance from particular
conditional Promises under color of receiving all from Christ and Grace. True,
them that have nothing to do with them, ought not; but for those that have to
do with them as their Inheritance, not to apply and make use of them for their
comfort, it is to trample under-foot Christ's blood that purchased them for that
end, and it is to raze out in our practice the greatest part almost of the
Covenant of Grace.

Sixthly, That the Law ought not to be our rule of life under a show of being
freed from it by Christ, as though Christ came to set Hell-gates open for men
to do what they please. Shall I say any more? I am weary with speaking, I
desire rather to go aside and mourn, and to think there is somewhat amiss why
the Lord lets these out. You that are sincere, search and keep close with
Christ, and fetch more life from him, and though accounted under a covenant of
Works with men, yet rejoice, you know it is better with you in his sight. And
you that are weak, beware and take heed, and do not consider what I, but the
Holy Ghost has cleared this day: and as for all them that do turn Grace into
Lasciviousness, not intentionally, but practically, not in all things, but
some things: consider this Scripture, Iud^ 4. Men ordained to this
condemnation; they thrive and have no hurt, and they joy, Oh but they have
condemnation enough upon them. Do but consider ver. 12, 13. Twice dead, dead in
Adam, then quickened by Christ with common Gifts and Graces, then dye and turn
Grace into wantonness, for whom is reserved the very blackness of darkness
for ever. They bring in painted profaneness.

Oh take heed then, Use 5.
lest you fall short of Christ by unbelief, Heb. 4. 1. Christ must do all; Oh
but take heed, use means, and then put the work into his hands to make Faith
right, Heb. 12. 1, 2. Looking to Jesus the Author and finisher. Suppose Christ
was here on earth, and thou should beg it, would he deny thee? Oh no, beg hard
therefore now.

CHAP. XIV.
Showing that there is a vast difference betwixt a sincere Christian, and the
closest Hypocrite.
SECT. I.
THat there is a vast and great internal difference between those that are
sincere indeed, Doct. 3.
and the closest Hypocrites. Or, There are certain qualifications within, and
operations of God upon the Souls of the faithful, which make a very great
difference between them, and the closest Hypocrites.

For the Lord Jesus here sees the difference, and shows the difference, though
but generally I confess in this Verse; some were wise, others were foolish;
wisdom and folly are different qualities, and though these keep their residence
chiefly in the mind, yet the Lord never did infuse any true wisdom into the
mind, but there was a great change of the heart, nor never was any man left
unto his own folly, but it did not only argue an evil heart, but did ever arise
from thence, Ephesians. 4. 18. so that Christ nor only sees, but discovers to the
Churches a vast difference for them to take notice of: I confess the
difference was only in regard of open profaneness, or common conversation in
living like men of the world, yet a difference here there is. For the opening
of this Point, I shall open these Particulars.

1. That the Lord does make this inward difference.

2. That it is so great that the faithful do see it.

3. That it is so great that others cannot receive it when it is offered.

4. That it is so great that they cannot understand it.

5. The reasons why the Lord makes this internal difference.

1. That the Lord does make it: only some Scriptures now, Ephesians. 5. 8. You were
darkness, now are light. Ephesians. 2. 1. You were dead, now are alive. It Is true
there is a life Hypocrites have, which puts much difference between them and
others, but if that does, what does the life of Christ in a man, arising from
the death of every sin? Acts 26. 18. The Lord turns not only from darkness to
light, but from the power of Satan to God, together with which arises
remission of sins. What is this then but a greater change than from Hell to
Heaven? Is it not worse than Hell to be under his, not only Temptations, but
power? and is it not better to be with God, than be in Heaven?

II. It Is so great that the faithful do see it. I confess at first work it is
like a confused Chaos, they know not what to make of it, but afterward they
can and do, 1 John 5. 18, 19. We know we are born of God, free from the
dominion of sin, of which he speaks, and that the whole world lies in
wickedness. Before a man is born again, he sees no difference between him and
other men, but now he does; and hence it is frequent in Scripture for Saints to
express their experience of their double estate, Tit. 3. 2, 3. and they are
commanded to try themselves, and may not only see Christ out of them, but
Christ in them, except they be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. and hence commanded to
give thanks for this, Col. 1. 12, 13. which commands being Evangelical, have a
power to all the Elect.

III. It Is so great that others cannot receive it when it is offered, they are
so far from having it in them, or counterfeiting, or making this inward work,
that they cannot receive it, no not when the Spirit it self comes to work it,
John 14. 17. The Spirit of truth which the world cannot receive, it does
receive Propherical Gifts, and common Graces; but there is a higher and more
Divine work which they cannot receive, Romans 8. 7. It Is not subject, nor can be
subject to the Law of God, where the holiness of God appears.

IV. It Is so great that they cannot understand it what it is spiritually, only
in fancy, 1 Cor. 2. 14. neither can he know them, and hence men lie groping all
their life for Grace, and ask and have not, because they know not the thing
they would have, John 4. 10. If thou knew thou would ask, and he would
give. A Beast cannot conceive what a life a man leads.

V. Now follow the Reasons why the Lord does make this internal difference, or
showing that there is this difference.

SECT. II.
IN regard of the infinite love of the Father which he bears to the meanest
Believer Reas. 1.
above the most glorious Hypocrite that ever lived. It Is an everlasting love,
and it is like that love he bears toward his own Son, John 17. 26. Now if the
Lords love be not common to both, neither is the work, or fruits of his love
common in both, but a great difference there must be; for as it is with men, so
it is with the Lord. There are three expressions of love. 1. Their looks. 2.
Their Promises of Love. 3. Their works of love: so the Lord does,

1. Create in his people glorious apprehensions of his blessed face appearing
in the glass of the Gospel, Rev. 22. 4.

2. The Lord makes many Promises of love unto his people, which go to the very
heart to cheer them, Hos. 2. 14.

3. The Lord con^ines not his love to looks and words, though it is wonderful to
have the least of them, but you may read his love in his works of love. Now
those works peculiar to them, are first and chiefly the donation of Christ, for
a man in redemption, to a man in vocation: and then the peculiar fruits of this
love expressed in peculiar operations upon the Soul, and in the Soul, which Gods
truth in the New Covenant promises, and Gods faithfulness executes, Ier. 31.
33. and 32. 40. to take away the stony heart, to write Laws in the heart, to
put fear into the heart; these are the peculiar effects of this New Covenant,
and they are operations in a man, which only the Elect feel and wonder at Grace
for, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. According to his great love has he quickened us together
with him: there is a kind of Resurrection of a man's soul when it is brought home
to Christ. And look as the bodies of the Saints shall be different at last day,
so when God raises their souls from the Dead here, there is a difference now.

2. In regard of the Death and Blood of the Lord Jesus, Reas. 2.
which was shed not only that he might be a God unto them, but that they might
be a peculiar people unto him, Tit. 2. 14. He gave himself for his people, not
only to justify his people, but also to cleanse his Church, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27.
for this has been Gods great plot: first to perfect his people in their Head;
and then lest there should be a golden head, and feet and hands of iron and
clay, and because the Church is not found lovely, therefore the Lord makes it
lovely by little and little here, until it appear without spot or wrinkle at
the last day. Do you think Brethren that Christ's Blood was shed to work no more
in his people than in Hypocrites? was it only shed to take away guilt of sin
from Gods sight, and then to let a man wallow in the sins of his own heart?
It Is true there is a work of Sanctification which Hypocrites have, which
Christ's Blood purchases, for I believe all common mercy and patience comes by
Christ's Blood, and so all common Gifts and Graces; but yet Beloved there is a
vast difference, their wills were never changed though their minds were much
enlightened; hence they sinned wilfully. The Lord never was dear to them, hence
secret despite grew up, that at last they committed the impardonable sin, Hos.
10. 26, 29.

3. Because those Graces or Qualifications, Reas. 3.
together with the Operations of them which are in the faithful, are the same
with Christ's, the same in kind and nature, Ioh. 1. 16. From his fullness we
have received Grace for Grace; hence we are said to bear his Image, and because
it is but little at first, hence from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Now the Lord
Jesus had not only the Spirit which he had without measure, but also he had
many Divine qualities, habits, or Graces, which it is blasphemy to think that
they were hypocritical or common, which the faithful receive from his fullness,
and wherein they are made in their measure like unto him: so the Saints have
not only the Spirit, but also those peculiar operations of it wrought in them
by the Spirit, whereby they come to be made like unto the Lord Jesus: Hence as
there was an infinite distance between the Lord Jesus, and the best Hypocrite,
so the likeness that they have of the Lord Jesus, makes a difference now. And
look as there is a difference between a Plant and a Beast, a Beast and a Man,
so there is a glorious life which Saints have begun here in this life, which
none have but themselves, 1 Pet. 5. 10. They have the First Fruits, etc. the
which is meat and drink which no man knows of that lies in his hypocrisy and
sins.

4. If there should be no difference, Reas. 4.
then these evils would follow: 1. This lays a foundation of contempt of
Grace, and of the Beauty of Holiness in the hearts and lives of Gods people:
for look as it is in the work of the Son in Redemption, if Christ should have
dyed as much for Judas as for Peter, and suspended the act of Faith to apply
this on the Free will of either, then Judas had as much cause to thank Christ
for his kindness as Peter: and Peter had no more cause of blessing Christ for
his love in redeeming him, than Judas, and what cold praises will he then give
him: So if the Spirit of Christ should sanctify or call a Saint no more than
an Hypocrite, then the one has no more cause to be thankful for the work of
the Spirit than the other: and when a man comes to look upon the work of the
Spirit, and the Graces of it, there is cold water cast upon those; this is no
more than what a Hypocrite has. Christ has not only redeemed by price, but
also by power, from the power of Satan, Sin, Darkness, Delusion, and not to be
thankful for this, is not to be thankful for the Redemption of Christ: Thou
shall never have it then that do despise the Spirit of Grace, whereby thou
art but commonly sanctified.

2. Because this abolisheth the use of all conditional Promises made in the
word: for you know they are made to some qualification or work of the Spirit in
a man, some to Mourning, Poverty, Faith, Hunger, Lostnesse, etc. now if there
should be no difference between seeming works in Hypocrites and these, then 1.
the truth of the Promises is destroyed, for the Lord says, They that hunger
shall be satisfied. I Will answer, Hypocrites may hunger, and yet not be
satisfied. 2. The use of these Promises should be lost, for why should a man
then cast his Soul upon Gods faithfulness in the Promise, when it is but common
love to him and Hypocrites: If it be replied the one has Christ, the other
nor. I answer, it is very true, but then I ask, Who is he a Christ to? it must
needs be to a particular People described in the Word by their peculiar
qualities, flowing from their forms and subjects by which they are known; and
now consider Rev. 22. 19. Is God a God of the dead? and not of the living only?

3. Because this makes the most holy men that ever lived deceivers of
themselves and others; only look upon John Christ's beloved Disciple, and
bosomecompanion, he had received the anointing to know him that is true, and he
knew he knew him, 1 John 2. 3. But how did he know that? he might be deceived
(as it is strange to see what a melancholy fancy will do, and the effects of
it; as honest men are reputed to have weak brains, and never saw the depths of
the secrets of God.) What Is his last proof? because we keep his Commandments,
i. e. we have them writ in our hearts, and keep them, though we cannot fulfill
them, it makes us every way more holy: Christ does not keep them only, but we
through his Grace keep them; thus he proves it by a work in him. Now thus I
reply, if all works in the souls of Saints be common to Hypocrites, then John
went upon false grounds, deceived himself, and all that heard him, and all the
Churches that ever were to this day.

SECT. III.
TO the Papists, Use 1.
who in their writings seek to shame the Churches of Christ, saying that they
deny all Inherent Righteousness or Graces, Of Confut.
making a man just by the righteousness of Christ, and in the mean while to
remain like a Carkase or Ghost, or a painted Sepulcher full of rottenness
within. Three or four of these Archers that have shot these arrows I have met
with, whereby they wound the heart of Profession, and keep the people in
professed enmity and opposition against the ways of Gods Grace: Now we do not
only deny this, but we profess that the Lord does not only out of the riches
of his Grace accept us in Christ, but out of the same love sends down the
Spirit of Grace, not only to make us civil and moral, or hypocritical, but that
the Lord works thereby such a change as is not to be found in the most refined
Hypocrites breathing. And we profess though our Justification does not consist
in this, yet who-ever has not this is not justified (whatever he may imagine)
in the sight of God. And the Lord grant the Churches of the Lord Jesus may
never open the mouths of those Blasphemers of his Name, in denying all
righteousness in our selves at all; Deny it to justify, deny it not
altogether.

Of an old Ar^inian error; Use 2.
for they hold and maintain an Inherent Righteousness, but that there is no
difference between the Graces of Believers and Hypocrites, Of Confut.
only in their continuance, and that is by chance too, and doubtful, viz. if
they hold on, and for this purpose cite many Scriptures, three especially, that
of Ezekiel. 18. 24. If the righteous man forsake, etc. which is spoken of rotten
Pharisaical Hypocrites falling far short of what the Saints have. And the
Parable of the Seed, Mat. 13. They all sprang up: where it is manifest the soil
was naught out of which they that fell away did grow. And Heb. 10. 29. Blood
wherewith they were sanctified, which is meant of such as had some inward
enlightening, and lasting, and external profession really, not in appearance
only in them, yet not any saving and effectual work, but thus by making Grace
common they make it vile, and under a color of making all men watchful, they
destroy all Faith in Gods faithfulness and Promise, especially until a man
come to die. Divines have many strong arguments against them, and show however
there may be decaies, and relapses, and winter-seasons of the Saints, yet ever
there remains in them the Seed of God, 1 John 3. 9. John 4. 14.

The main ground of this their conceit has been double.

1. False observation, in beholding many fall off that were not Stars, but
Snuffs, glorious Professors for a time; and lest they should be mad without
reason herein, they search the Scriptures, and in four thousand years find but
four or five that fell away, David, Solomon, Hymeneus, Alexander, and D^mas,
none of which if examined will serve their turn.

2. A great mistake of the work of Grace, together with their own experience,
for they conceiving Grace to be but a mean thing, and not understanding it,
because they never felt it in themselves; hence make no difference between one
man and another, and hence maintain apostasy from Grace. I hope I need not stir
you up to abhor this conceit, considering what has been said. I grant indeed a
man may fall away from Grace, considering Grace without Christ to keep it. But
yet it is in it self such a living Fountain, as in it self does not perish,
though it may; and in respect of Christ, it cannot.

Obj. Did not Adam fall from all his Grace?

Answ. Yes, because he had neither the Covenant of Grace, nor the Spirit of
Grace, nor power of Grace to support and keep him; but its Gods covenant now to
write his Law, to ut his fear in the heart, never to depart, and to give the
Spirit of Christ, who is now risen from the dead. Because I live, you shall
live also, John 14. 19. And power to keep us, 1 Pet. 1. 5. So that though it is
Christ that keeps a man from falling, yet the truth is, he that does fall from
Grace, as though it was a common fading thing, or does fall from Christ, he
never had Christ at all, John 4. 14. The water that I shall give, shall be a
Spring of living water, not of dead Graces, yet quickened by the Spirit, and
helped continually. And its kept till life of Glory comes, where it is swallowed
up in the Ocean of persection.

Hence we see the difference between the Graces of Hypocrites and Saints Use 3.
does not only lie in the efficient cause, viz. the Spirit of Christ barely
considered in it self, for then there should be no difference at all, for there
are not two Spirits, and the same Spirit that works in the Faithful, the same
Spirit is in the unfaithful, to work many strange works in them, 1 Cor. 12. 3,
4. Neither does supernatural power of the Spirit distinguish (I mean that which
is above the strength of nature, not that which is above the use of nature, for
nature crooks all Gods works to it self) for the gifts of Prophecy and common
joy are above the strength of mere nature, but the difference lies in the work
it self. As it is in creation, the least speer of grass has the same power to
make it, that made Heaven and Angels, Is there no difference then? Yes, it lies
in the very work or effect of that power. And as it is in a Cedar and a Fly,
there ^^ more excellency in the former in some respects, but the latter has
another life, which the other has not: So the meanest Believer is better than
the most glorious Hypocrite. And look as it was with Saul, when he was anointed
King, there was a new Spirit came upon him, the Spirit of a King, which common
Subjects had not; so when God makes us Kings and Priests unto Christ, there
comes another Spirit upon us, which common men have not. I know there is the
Spirit it self in the Saints, as it is not in other men; But how is it there? I
know it is there by Faith, but not only by this, but by certain peculiar effects
which are not in other men. As it is with the soul, it is in the body, hence
works a life which is not in any bruit creature, so it is here. And hence it is
said, The world cannot receive it, John 14. 17. Mal. 3. 2, 3. Who is able to
bear his coming, because he comes to purify, etc. Yet still the Spirit barely
considered in ^^ self, puts no difference, unless it be in respect of the work
it self. Oh therefore look to it, do not say, I have now the Spirit and Christ.
But what does Christ work there? John 15. 1, 2. There are but two sorts of
Branches there, fruitless, and fruitful; the difference is in the very fruits
of them, etc.

Oh then terror to them that content themselves with common works, Use 4.
and so think their estates good. You have been terrified, confessed, and
repented, Judas did so. You have reformed many things, and take delight to draw
^igh to God in Ordinances, those Hypocrites did so, in Isa. 58. You have seen
nothing in your selves, the Devils do so. You have had great ravishments, and
seen the Glory of Heaven, of Saints, Bal^^^ did so. You have beheld and seen
the Lord Jesus, as if present on earth; Many saw him, heard him, and were
lifted up to Heaven by him, and shall see him at last in Glory indeed. Oh but
my desires are good ^ Many shall seek, and not enter. Oh therefore consider of
your estate, and tremble, and set before thee all the mercy the Lord embraces
his people with! and say, Oh that mercy for me! and follow him till he has
done it.

SECT. IV.
HEnce it may appear that the tr^e Believer may know the blessedness of his
estate, Use 5.
by the ^eculiarnesse of a work within him. For if indeed there should be no
difference between those Graces that be in Hypocrites and in Saints, if no
difference between Love, and Faith, and desire in one, and that which is in
another, then none could know the blessedness of their estates by any work;
but seeing that the Lord has made a vast and a known difference, so that God
knows it, and themselves know it, as has been proved, and all the world might
know it, but that they want eyes to see men's hearts, and they shall know it at
the last day to their eternal anguish, when the hidden things of darkness, and
the secrets of all hearts shall be opened, then it must needs follow from the
knowledge of such a work, a man may conclude his blessed and safe estate. By
work, I mean, no Popish good work, nor consider a work without a peculiar word
of promise made the eunto. If we should ask a woman married to another Husband,
how she knows such a one is her husband, she would manifest it by those
peculiar acts or works or manifestations of a husband to her. She has known he
has forsaken great offers, and come to her: Her heart that was most opposite,
was at last overcome to forsake all, then they entered into a peculiar bond of
covenant, so that they cannot part, and though they do depart, yet they stay
not long. So here: If you should have asked the Israelites, how they did know
they should be saved from the destroying Angel? Why the Lord has promised to
save us. You that do what? That sprinkle the door-posts with the Blood. So the
destroying Angel of Gods presence shall destroy millions of people, and that in
the nightime, when they least suspect it. Notwithstanding all deliverances;
miracles, plagues and repentances, Shall you be preserved? Yes, the Lord has
promised it, and revealed it. To whom? To them that have their door-posts
sprinkled with Christ's Blood, apprehended by the work of Faith, Rom 3. 24, 25.
Heb. 10. 22. If one should have asked the Lord Jesus himself, whom he loves?
he would John to answer, his sheep, for for them he lays down his life; be
they feeble or strong. If one should ask further, who are his sheep? he would
describe them by several properties, as he has done, John 10. Such as know me,
as hear me only, as follow me. So if you ask a believer that question, How do
you know you are loved? Is it good to answer with Christ, I am his sleep, for
whom he has laid down his life, when I was lost an went astray. But how do you
know that? Is he now to answ^^ like Christ, by these properties wrought in me,
or no? If you say, No, because all these an hypocrite may have, then the Lord
Jesus has done very weakly in describing his own sheep, by such properties to
be his, which discover them no more than so: Its true an hypocrite has
something like all these, but not these indeed. If you say, yes, then a man may
know his blessed estate by these. The promise is, Prove. 8. 17. I love them that
love me. But how do you know you love the Lord? There is the question, If Satan
and blind carnal reason ask this question, you will be filled with accusations,
and never satisfy them; for he that accused Job to Gods face, will much more
to their own faces, accuse Saints of hypocrisy. If uncharitable men that never
had the love of Christ abiding in their hearts, you will never satisfy them;
but if the Lord ask the question in his Word, hold there, and the work is so
clear, that though there has been much decay, yet after recovery, the soul
dares eye the Sun, and say, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I
love thee, John 21. 17. Hence by this work you may come to know your safe
estate.

1. A man may know his blessed estate in respect of time past, by a work, i. e.
with a word or promise made to it, and the Spirit revealing of it, viz. the
everlasting thoughts and election of God toward him, Romans 8. 28. Them that love
God, who are called according to his purpose, notwithstanding all their
miseries and sins; yet love him, and so called according to his purpose, for so
the Apostle raises up his thoughts. I know the world is full of want of love,
and think it easy so to do, and like the Devil, are very kind to the Lord, as
they think, while the Lord ple^seth them; who yet when the time of patience is
out, shall be eternal blasphemers of him. But there is such love whereby Saints
may raise up their hearts thus to see Gods love, 1 These. 1. 4, 5. Knowing your
Election of God. How so? Immediately? Some Divines think Angels see it not so,
and that its peculiar to God so to do: But mediatly, for our word came in power
and in much assurance to make you enlarged for God, to turn you from Idols unto
God, and to wait for Christ in Heaven, seeing him here, but as in a Glass. And
by the same Spirit Paul saw it, by the same Spirit they might much more see it,
and so the Elect may see it. And ^f experience may be added to the Truth; How
many of Gods people daily, knowing their work of vocation and glory, ascend
from these lower stairs of the Lords Ladder, to the highest of Election, and
there are swallowed up with eternal wonderment, filling their hearts with that
joy and peace, that the weak. Tabernacle of flesh and blood cannot be at the
weight of that Glory long; That by works see the promise, and by the promise of
love behold e^ernal thoughts of love: And hence promises are said to be given
to Saint^, before the world began: Because promises to them that thirst, mourn,
believe, etc. are not bare words, but eternal counsels, in which you see Gods
purpose.

2. In respect of time present, by it we know our present union to the Lord
Jesus, 1 John 2. 4. He that says I know him, and keeps not his Commandments,
is a Liar. Yes, that is true negatively, but may a man, ought a man to see or
know his union positively by this? Ans v. 5. Many said, they did know and love
the Lord, but he that keeps his words, Oh they are sweet! Its Heaven to cleave
to him in every command, its death to depart from any command. Hereby know we
that we are in him. If it were possible to ask of Angels how they know they are
not devils? they would answer, the Lords will is ours: So here. How do you know
you have not the nature of Devils, and so in state of Devils bound there till
the judgment of the great day? Because God has ch^nged our vile natures, and
made our wills like unto his glorious will, etc. So for forgiveness, Luke 7.
47. Much is forgiven her, etc.

3. In respect of the state of Glory for time to come. We may know our blessed
est^te by a work, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen what the Lord has prepared
for them that love him, Psalm. 31. 19. Oh how great is thy goodness laid up for
them that fear thee! 3 Cor. 5. 3. If clothed with Christ, whole Christ, v. 5,
6. He has fitted us for this, and given the earnest of the Spirit, which, Romans
8. 23. are first fruits of Glory, therefore we are confident.

Obj. But if you look to your selves, you will have peace to day and sorrow to
morrow.

Nay, we are always consident, and yet Paul did not now go on in a Covenant of
works. Now whether a man first comes to know his estate by a work, word, and
spirit, so that there are three things to evidence our happy estate, or whether
by two things only, viz. a ge^eral word and spirit, I intend not to dispute,
because it makes nothing against the truth in hand: Only this I say, its very
dangerous to limit the Holy One of Israel, especially in his freedom of
working, to breath light, and life, and divine consolation, when and by what
means and promise, and in what measure he will. Christ when he was here on
earth, would say sometimes, thy sins are forgiven, Mat. 9. 2. Sometimes be it
unto as thou believe, Mat. 9. 28, 29. Nay, be it unto thee as thou will, Mat.
15. 28. If in these inferior things, much more in greater. Christ is now gone,
and we have no immediate speech with him, but in his Word, and he is free to
speak to his people according as he pleases, and when they need. And therefore
let me entreat Brethren to be wary in their speeches in dashing all promises in
pieces. What Christian heart can see Gods Truth mangled, without being angry
and mourning for the hardness of men's hearts? The Lord has spoken peace to
some men's hearts thus, he that is lost shall be found, He that believes in me
shall never hunger, and he that comes to me shall never thirst; and seeing
this, they conclude, the Lords Spirit helping them (for sometime they cannot do
it) peace. For the Major is the Word, the Minor Experience, and the Conclusion
the Lords Spirits work quickening your spirits to it. Now say some, how do you
know this? Thus you may be mistaken, for many have been deceived thus. Grant
that, And shall a child not take bread when it is given him though dogs snatch
at it? What should one do then? Bring their work to the light, to the trial of
the Word, which you know does but two things.

Shows that God is. And

2. What man is, and so discovers and describes all hypocrise of men, and all
grace of men, now if it will not bear the trial of the Word, convince them they
have gone on in a covenant of works indeed: But if it will, hold there, take
heed then of false witness against the Truth of God; so that do not condemn
the work of Christ in any man, where it is of the right stamp, and has Christ's
Image upon it, and so pluck men from their claim to Christ's love revealed in
his promise. But learn to difference it once, and then I am persuaded the sad
differences that begin to appear, would soon be ended among all them that love
the Truth in Christ Jesus, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given to us that have
precious Faith, exceeding great and precious promises, The Lord gives little to
his people, Oh but he gives them rich promises! Bonds, and Bills, and writings
to show for rich Grace, and riches of Glory, and riches of peace. Oh but these
promises Hypocrites may have! they may be lost, and hunger and thirst, and
believe. What as those do that have their interest in these promises? Why are
they called precious Promises? Precious promises are not common things.
Precious promises are not the portion of a base world. Precious things God
never gives to dogs, and believe me, you may come to know the price of them in
the times of your horror on deathbed, that account them common now. Oh but
many rest on promises without Christ! That Is all one, the faithful by them come
to partake of the Divine Nature, of Christ, of his Spirit, of Divine
Consolations, Peace, Grace, and this is not building on a work, or resting on a
bare promise, when it carries you to Christ and the everlasting embracings of
him. Its no matter what promise gives peace, so long as it lands us in Christ.
And therefore a man may know his blessed estate by a work, only let me put in
three Cautions.

1. Take heed you do not in your judgment or in your practice go about to move
the Lord to love you by your work, though it be of his making. For all works
are fruits, no causes of the Lords love, for this is Popery indeed, and it is
Hypocrise, Isa. 58. 3, 4. Why have we fasted, and prayed, and delighted to draw
near unto God? etc. but look upon the work and promise, and be the more vile in
thine own eyes, that the Lord should promise, or do any thing for thee. So that
when you feel any saving work, go not to God with expectation of any good in
the name of that work, but in the name of that free Grace and Faithfulness of
God, which has moved him to make such precious promises to such as those are
that have it. Have not said Solomon shall reign? 1 Kings 1. 13. So here.

2. Take heed you do not sit down contented with the work, and quiet your
selves with that, never looking to behold his face that gave it, that wrought
it. The poor blind man, John 9. had a mighty cure upon him, and some seed of
Faith; the Lord wrought the work, but hid himself: He wondered at the great
change, was affected with his love, at last the Lord Jesus comes himself, Do
thou believe? says he, Lord who is he? I am he; then he worshipped him, v. 36,
37, 38. So it is with the Lord in his way of working Grace: Oh therefore long to
see him here in his glass, and in Glory, in his face fully! Truly there is no
work of Christ that is right, but it carries the soul to long for more of it,
and to be with him that has done it. Many Christians when they have the work,
run away with it as a good sign, and look to the promise, Oh but long not, look
not to behold the Lord! Do ye thus requite the Lord, Oh ye foolish people and
unwise? Were it not enough that your sins make? but will you make works and
promises also a partition wall between the Lord and your souls. I profess the
Lord will fire such work about your ears, and dry up all your pits, that you
may long for to drink out of the Well of life it self. And it is a black mark of
Unbelief that shall keep thee from rest, Heb. 4. 3, 10, 11. Oh but when you
long to see him, Oh when shall I appear before God! Psalm. 63. 2, 3, 4. Then the
Lord will fill thee. As Leaden Rings with a Pearl, so Promises and Christ put
together (not divided) are exceeding precious.

3. Do not look to see the work or promise yours, nor receive any consolation
from either, unless the Lord appear in both, John 10. 16. They shall hear my
voice; for so most men bring home Humane, not Divine consolation from a work.
But Oh fetch it you from Heaven! as in Peter's redemption, Acts 12. You reason,
and others tell you, and yet you are full of fears and doubts; and thou criest,
Lord persuade me, Lord persuade me, yea, hold you here, now you are where you
ought for to be. Do you think Christ is filled with Grace and Life for you, and
not with Consolation for you too? Only use means, and so look up to him.

SECT. V.
OH therefore content not your selves with any hopes your estate is right,
until you find this difference, for the Lord speaks peace only to his people,
Use 6
and his people are differenced from all others. Hence how can you say peace is
yours, till this be cleared up unto you?

I shall speak to two sorts of people.

1. Those that content themselves with any thing that may stop and quiet
Conscience, any slight work, any poor desires, any hedge-Faith, any moral
performances, any groundless conjectures will serve their turn. And being
full, they can hear all Sermons, no wind will shake them, no searching,
threatening Truths concern them; they are so good, that they think the Lord
means not them. Well, I say no more to you but this, know it that the time is
coming that the Lord Jesus will try you, and examine you to the very Bran; and
will descry all thy paint, and open all thy lusts and thoughts, and thy
nakedness, and shame, and confusion shall be seen of all the world.

II. Those that content themselves with the revelation of the Lords love,
without the sight of any work, or not looking to it. I desire the Lord to
reveal himself abundantly more and more, to all that have the Lord savingly
revealed unto them. For this is the misery, Christ is a hidden thing, and so is
his love: Yet consider,

1. God reveals not his love to any Hypocrite, but to his people, that have a
work far beyond them.

2. That the testimony of the Spirit does not make a man a Christian, but only
evidenceth it. As it is the nature of a witness, not to make a thing to be
true, but to clear and evidence it. And therefore whether the Spirit in the
first or second place clears Gods love, I dispute no^, because it is doubtful;
ye be sure you find out the difference, viz. some work in you, that no
Hypocrite under Heaven has: Else what peace can you have?

1. Hereby you come to prevent the strongest delusion that Satan has to keep
men in bondage to himself, viz. to give men great peace, and sometimes great
ravishment, while they are in their sins, that so he may harden them there
still, Luke 11. 21. Now by taking this course, and going to Christ to untie the
knots of Satan, you do now undermine the main plot of Satan, you break his
head, having recourse to Christ to do this. His policy is, Let you heart alone,
let Christ alone with that. But now you may be sure all your consolation is of
the right make.

2. Otherwise you quench the Spirit, and resist the testimony of the Spirit, at
least one great part of it. For the Spirit when it does come to witness Gods
love, i^ answers all the doubts and objections of the soul that it had before.
Now the great doubt of Gods people is not only, Am I elected, am I justified
and accepted? But am I called, am I sanctified, are not my desires, my Faith,
my love counterfeit? which I may have, and yet go to Hell? Now the Spirit when
it comes, clears up all doubts, not fully, but gradually, for it is the most
clearing witness, and therefore, John 14. 18, 19, 20. At that day you shall
know that I am in you, and you in me, and I in the Father. The Spirit does not
only say Christ is out of you, in Heaven, preparing and interceding, but in
you, sanctifying, preparing thee for Glory, that art a vessel of Glory; and you
in me by Faith, by Love, desire, etc. Now when a man shall say, I look to no
work, but only for the Spirit to reveal the Lords Love; in seeming to desire
the Spirit, he does resist the Spirit of God.

3. Otherwise you shall be deprived of all that abundant consolation which the
Word holds out before you. For suppose you say, I look not to the work of God
in me, to receive any consolation from that, or any promise made to that. I
look only to the revelation of the Spirit.

Ans. 1. There is never a promise but the Comforter is in it, and they are
given for that end, to give strong consolation, now if you look to no work, nor
no conditional promise, nor to find the condition in you (which yet Christ must
and does work) Lord! what abundance of sweet peace do you lose? Rev. 7. 17. The
Lamb leads them to the living Fountain of waters, and God wipes away all tears:
And for ought I know you shall die for thirst that refuse to do it. Oh slow of
heart to believe all that the Scriptures have writ! all that God has spoken!
Ought you not thus to be comforted?

But 2. If you look to a Spirit without a work, whilst you do seek consolation
from the Spirit, you cannot avoid the condemnation of the Word. You say the
Spirit has spoken peace to you. But do you love Christ? I look not to that,
but to the Spirit. Why the Word says, He that loves not him, let him be
Anathema. So, Is the League between your sins and your souls broken? Ans. I
look not to that. Why John says, He that commits sin is of the Devil, 1
John 3. 8, 9. Are you new creatures? I look not to that. Why the Word faith,
Unless you be born again, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And the
Lord knows, but on your deathbeds, thus Satan may assault you, and then will
the Lord say, nay, look to your self. The Word shall be B^lshazzars terror.
Consider, Psalm. 32. 1, 2.

4. Look to it, else you shall be deprived of further manifestation and
communion with the Lord Jesus. The Lord reveals not all of himself at once, the
day dawns before the Sun rises, and there is a further manifestation of the
Lord in this life to his people, not for, but when they indeed maintain such
works before him. John 14. 21. I will manifest myself unto him. How? Oh says
Christ, I Will come and sup with him. Never think the Lord will dishonor himself
so far as to come into a filthy heart. Sin does and will grieve Gods Spirit,
that he will only accuse, not speak peace to you, till all is mended.

5. Else you may fall everlastingly away, as those, Heb. 10. 29. They had
received the knowledge of the Truth, and were sanctified, but their wills and
hearts never changed. Oh take heed there be not left only a fearful looking for
of vengeance! You stand on the brim of destruction every moment, that do it
not. For it is plain hypocrisy, not to bring works to the light; it is not
ceasing to go on in a covenant of works, John 3. 20. And if the Lord does love
you, and you will not take the counsel of the Word, the fire of the Lord shall
try you. And when that comes, and Conscience shall ask, wherefore comes all
this great evil upon me? when your miseries shall be great, Oh it shall be
said, this was because I loved not the Lord, I forsook the Lord, etc. Oh
therefore look to the Lord now to cleanse you! Zac. 13. 9.

'T^s true, there is a difference, Object.
but is it possible to know it, seeing that a false heart may go so far?
especially to know it in it self?

It Is true, it is difficult for men, Answ.
Ministers, or Angels to reveal it, yet it is easy for the Lord Jesus to reveal
it, and this he does do. This light discovers hidden things as they are, his
Spirit leads into all Truth. And this is a peculiar privilege and honor, as
for God to know, so they partaking of the Divine Nature, for them to know their
own hearts, Ier. 17. 9, 10. And although it be an easy thing for hypocrites,
that never knew what Grace meant, to be mistaken, yet after the Lord has made
it known to the elect, it is no easy matter to deceive them. As it is with
Apothecaries, that know when they meet with counterfeit drugs; or Jewellers,
that know the difference between Bristow-Stones and Pearls. As the blind man
says, whereas I was blind, now I see, so I was dead, now behold I live. Old
things are passed away, all things are become new. 1 Pet. 2. 9. They are called
out of darkness into mavelous light. If they could not know a difference,
why would the Lord command them to add one Grace to another, and grow in Grace?
May they not well reply? Alas Lord I know not Trash from Treasure! I know
nothing thou have commanded me to do, but hypocrites may have and do. I say
therefore the work may be seen in it self, and that by a three fold light.

I. The light of the Word, which is a Divine Revelation of or concerning God
and man, and of man, not only as fallen in Adam (which discovers all his sins,
their nature, their end, etc.) but as risen again and recovered in Christ, the
birth, being, breeding of the new creature. It discovers all hypocrisy of the
heart, so that they shall be forced to say the Lord has found me out, and
Saints shall say the Lord has done me good. As if the question be, Whom does
the Lord Jesus love? You need not go to Heaven for it, the Word is nigh thee.
Those that love Christ: Who are those? Those that keep his Commandments, etc.
So that the Word is a light to discover Truth from falsehood, the work of Grace
from the work of hypocrisy; and by this light Saints may and do know what the
work is. And it argues dreadful unbelief and Hypocrisy not to do thus, John 3.
19, 20, 21. And this all the Saints are commanded to do, 2 Pet. 1. 19. We
(sealed with the Spirit) have a sure word of prophecy, etc. Which is a light
in a dark place; both to reveal Gods heart and our hearts unto us; hence it
makes us wise to salvation.

II. The Light of the Spirit going with the Word, reveals the work; without
which the work cannot be seen, no more than a Book written in the fairest hand
or print, can be seen without light to see it by: And hence Gods people cannot
presently read what the Lord has written, etc. 1 John 3. 24. That look as it is
with Scriptures, Papists say they are obscure, and how do we know them? We
answer, there are Divine Characters of Majesty and Glory stamped upon them,
whereby we by the same Spirit that writ them, see them, and are persuaded of
them; so here. Or as it is in the work of Creation: How can any see God in it? We
say, in the very workmanship appears his Power and Eternity, Wisdom, Goodness,
etc. Now although Atheists cannot see these, yet others do and can, So in the
workmanship of the Elect, it is so. Its the Glass of Gods peculiar mercy and
love; now they that never had it, know it no^, but the Saints do, by the Spirit
especially. Thus far we grant the Spirits Testimony, that it must reveal it.

III. The Light of experience and sense: For Saints have an experimental
knowledge of the work of Grace, by virtue of which they come to know it as
certainly (as we dispute against the Papists) as by feeling heat, we know fire
is hot, by tasting honey, we know it is sweet. Now this is diversely apparent to
experience.

1. By meditation of the work, in comparing it with the Rule, for no dead
creature can perform one spiritual living act of life, no not a good thought,
though they may think of good things. Now the Lord has given to his people a
most exact Rule of life, hence by meditation they may see how far it agrees or
disagrees with the Rule, and judge of a living act by it; and so of the God and
Lord of life to be there. Hence try your selves, know you not Christ is in you,
etc. And hence I never knew yet a thinking Christian deceived, and hence I fear
all that make not this their trade, will be to seek, and so to begin again: Oh
the Lord teaches his people hidden mysteries by this.

2. By the operation and working of it, for Grace may be in the heart, and yet
lying asleep, and raked up under the ashes, not seen, not felt, but in the
operation of it, it may, which is peculiar as the form is. For how do we know
we love or delight in any creature? By the operation of love and delight. How
did Christ manifest to the Pharisees that they were of their Father the Devil?
Why his lusts they would do. So how can any tell he knows the Lord, or loves
the Lord, or believes in the Lord! The operation discovers it, James 2. 22. And
hence, Gal. 5. 6. Faith which works by Love. And though hypocrites act like
them, yet there is a peculiar virtue in the one that is not in the other.

3. By their temptations and trials, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. The Lord has led thee forty
years to prove thee and show thee what was in thy heart. Romans 5. 4, 5.
Tribulation breeds experience, and that hope or expectation of that which shall
never make us ashamed. I Will name no more. But look as we said to them that cried
out against Prayer without a Book, we answer, Has a man dwelt in his own heart
so many years, and not known his wants, to make him pray? nor the Lords work of
mercy, to make him bless, so here.

2. But if a man looks to his work, Object. 2.
this will interrupt and break his peace.

1. It may and does break and interrupt a false peace; Answ.
as many say, yet they trust in the Lords mercy, Oh it is a presumptuous peace.

2. Neglect of this yields most unpeaceablenesse, even in them that are
sincere. You have peace, and then break out into pride and passion again; then
question all. The Spirit will sigh, not sing in that bosom, Psalm. 32. 1, 2, 3.
Judge. 16. 20. Neither can you avoid the condemnation of the Word, though you
maintain consolation from the Spirit, nor suspicion of hypocrisy.

3. This is the way to peace, 2 Pet. 1, 7, 8, 9. Mat. 11. 29, 30. Christ's yoke
is easy and yields peace, in life and after life too, Rev. 14. 13. Their works
follow them. So that hereby comes double peace and rest.

1. From horror.

2. From sin, which is wonderful great.

3. But I look to Christ, Object. 3.
I look to no work. If I have him, I have all.

True, First look to have him, Answ.
to be comprehended by him, that so you may comprehend him. But because you
look for all in him, will you look for nothing from him? Will you have Christ
fit in Heaven, and not look that he subdue your lusts by the work of his Grace,
and so sway in your hearts? You despise his Kingdom then. Do you seek for
pardon in the Blood of Christ, and never look for the virtue and end of that
Blood to wash you, and make you without spot, etc.? You despise his Priesthood
and Blood then. Do you look for Christ to do work for you, and you not to do
Christ's work, and bring forth fruit to him? You despise his Honor then, John
15. 8. If I were to discover a Hypocrite, or a false heart, this I would say,
It is the that shall set up Christ, but loath his work. To have Christ, is
sweet, as Capernaum, to follow Christ, is heavy, John 14. 21, 23.

4. But if I have the witness of the Spirit, Object. 4.
what need I have any other difference.

1. The witness of the Spirit makes not the first difference. Answ.
For first a man is a Believer and in Christ, and justified, called,
sanctified, before the Spirit does witness it; else the Spirit should witness
to an untruth and a lie. For unbelievers are under wrath.

2. If the Spirit does not witness this peculiar work to be in you, and clear
it to you, tell me how you can escape the anguish of Conscience and the
terrors of Hell in your hearts, unless Conscience be seared and blinded? When
the Lord shall set Conscience to ask and say, I choose none but whom I call, I
call none but whom I justify, I justify none but whom I sanctify, and that
not with a common, but a peculiar work; Is it so with you? If it be dark or
doubtful, can you but think all your joys have been dreams, and your witness
delusions? Therefore look unto this.

5. But if I should do this, Object. 5.
I should look to find some cleanness in my self, whereas I am to see nothing
but ungodliness: Goats are clean creatures.

1. When you stand before Christ's judgment seat to receive pardon, Answ.
you are here to look upon all as unclean, and your selves ungodly.

2. When you come to look upon your Sanctification, you are to see it as it is,
mixed with sin and corruption, and so cause of being abased as low as Hell for
what is done; yet that cleanness and truth there is, you must see too, Romans 7.
He felt a Law warring against the Law of his mind, yet he felt another Law too
which he made an evidence of his being in Christ, Romans 8. 1. Giving all the
Glory of it to Christ. Not I but Christ. And yet Paul was no Goat, Its one
thing to see Grace in my self, another thing to look upon it as mine, to clear
me withal. You are to see the Lords work and not appropriate it to your self.
And this let me say, if there be no more than ungodliness in thee, and thou
see no more, thou shall never see God in Heaven, Heb. 12. 14. Nor did never
see him yet, 1 John 3. 6, 8. Oh therefore look to a work!

1. If you do not, you have no peace. For the Lords sake do it before fire try
you, or you stand scorching before the Tribunal of God.

2. The sweet of it will be great, as there is nothing more bitter than Christ
departing with his holy presence; so nothing so sweet as Christ's cleaving to
thee in his holy presence. And truly sin was never bitter to that soul to which
the work of the Lord Jesus was not sweet, though its accounted by some almost
Popery to speak so. To this all promises are made, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness has
them. It Is true, they are made to Christ, i. e. to Christ mystical, 1 Cor. 12.
12. Yet to the head as the foundation and conveyer of all to the elect, Ephesians. 1.
23. 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. If you despise work, you despise Promises, and so despise
Christ, and the Lord knows what use you may have of them before you die.

SECT. VI.
TO the people of God, Use 7.
in whom the Lord has made this great change, and made a difference between
you and all the world. Of Exhort.
Take heed of denying your work, and this real apparent expression of the Lords
love. How many doubting drooping Spirits are there, that though others may see,
and though themselves have felt the sensible expression of the Lords love, yet
often come to this conclusion, or fear that the Lord did never yet good unto me?
And dispute against it, and think that this an hypocrite may have, Isa. 49. 14.
There are two ways whereby Grace is despised.

1. By making common Grace special.

2. By making special Grace common. The Elect are apt to do so before they are
called, as Paul thought his innocent Godliness gain; they are apt to do the
latter when once in Christ. All this we may have, and yet to Hell. Oh take heed
of despising this kindness which the Lord Jesus has not shown to the greatest
Potentates of the world.

Yea, Object.
if I did but know it; but I am put to such fears and doubts about it, that I
know not what to make on it.

1. Do not think that thou art under the power of thy sin, Answ.
when thou art at war with thy sin and it with thee. For the Lord many times
clears up his love to the soul, and it is better than life to him, but then
winds arise, and storms come, and sin and Satan assaults, and now he cries out,
he perishes, and that he was never redeemed by Christ, nor never saw Christ's
love. Should his soul be thus ensnared, thus assaulted, and no strength against
it, and therefore being under the power of it, hence he never had pardon; they
cannot overcome their corruptions, though they strive against them, hence think
they are under the power of them, and then say, where is Christ's Spirit? etc.
Answ. When Rebekah had Twins, so that she was troubled, she went to the Lord,
who told her, the elder shall serve the younger: So there is Flesh and Spirit
in Saints, and these two are contrary, so that you cannot do the things you
would; and sometimes cannot will, yet something opposes this. Well, know it,
that the elder and stronger shall serve the younger, it shall be Lord. A man
that is at war with another, has received power against him, but victory is
not gotten presently, so it is here: Judgment shall come to victory. Though thou
art bruised and can not raise up thy self; now there is no fear of breaking,
if God will not do that, none shall do it, and therefore thou shall get
victory. Only know for the present thou have power. Thou go to all
Ordinances, and when no help there, raisest the power of Heaven. Oh Lord awake!
Awake Oh Arm of the Lord! Isa. 51. 9.

2. Do not think that the being of Grace is lost, when it is hid, by the
cessation of it for a time from act. For it is hard to know whether Grace be
there, when acts are not seen or felt; now sometimes it is so. The heart grows
careless and negligent, cease from acting, quenches the flame of the
Spirit. Hence come fears, was there ever Grace here? The Sluggards Garden grows
full of Nettles, and he says, was the ever good seed sown here? Answ. Consider
it is in this case, as it is in sin. Though the act of sin cease, yet there is
a bent of heart still toward it; and a carnal heart will return to his old Byas
and bent again: So though the act of Grace cease, yet there is an inner man,
a gracious bent and frame put upon the will, that though for a time it cease
acting, yet it will return to its old bent again, to its own nature, which is
called the seed of God, 1 John 3. 9. From which a man can never fall. For in
sleep there is cessation from acts, yet the frame remains still. In the old
Law, if any unclean thing fell on a Pitcher, it was accounted unclean, but if
in a Spring, not, because it would work it out again; so here: There is a
Spring of Grace, which may be muddied and stopped up, yet it will work it le^^
clear again. And this Gods people shall find, there is something in them that
springs up to everlasting life all their days.

3. Do not judge only of the truth and measure of Grace by what thou have in
thy hand of feeling; but by what thou have in thy hand of Faith in the promise.
God has ever delighted to keep his people short of what they would have, and
to give them but little, insomuch that they often question the truth of Grace,
feeling so little measure of it. Yet they look to the riches of Gods Grace, to
the freeness and riches of the Lords promise, and hang there, and plea^ that,
and suck that breast. Answ. Oh now consider thou art empty, but remember the
Lord Jesus is full, and the promise is free and full. Oh the riches of it, to
give abundantly, and to work Truth in thee* Hence it is there in the promise,
and thy Faith h^ngs on the promise for it: Why, it is thine by Faith then. The
nature of Faith is to carry the soul empty to a promise and the Lords Grace,
and Christ there, so that it knows not whither else to go but for bread here.
Now Faith doing thus, it makes the promise and all of it thine, 2 Pet. 1. 1, 4.
Abraham had his child first in the promise, when he felt a dry body, and saw a
barren womb. And know it, its insinite mercy to be kept up in the promise, and
thou give the Lord infinite Glory by embracing of it now, and thou may
triumph here. Have not said, Lord, that Solomon shall reign, and sin shall not?
It shall not. Oh rejoice oh Heavens and Earth at this, for the Lord has
visited me! God took from Paul his revelations, and sent distempers, that Grace
might be manifested in the promise.

4. Do not think that the Lords heart is not toward thee, while he hides his
face from thee. For there may be frowns in a Fathers face, and yet love in his
heart: The Lord purposely hides himself from his people sometimes, especially
when they begin to grow weary of him, or proud, but yet his heart is toward
them still. Now they think not so, when in utter darkness, then they think
there is no love. the woman of Canaan besought Christ often, yet he heard not,
yet his heart was toward her. How did that appear? Her heart and Faith was
still toward him, she would not leave him though she should have but crumbs.
Isa. 45. 15. and 8. 17. And the Lord does purposely hide his face in love, that
his peoples hearts may be toward him, Hos. 5. 15. and 6. 1.

5. Do not judge of the Lords love and heart toward you in these sad times by
present feelings, but by the issue of them. For such is the Lords carriage
toward his people sometimes, that God seems wholly to cross them, and appears
in all their ways with a drawn sword against them. He does not only leave them
to their enemies, as he did Samson, but to their sins, and to Satan to buffet
them, that there is nothing but clouds of wrath and no Star appearing. Now look
to the issue, and mark the upright man, his end is peace; and consider this,
Christ's Kingdom is hid, and he brings contraries out of contraries, he makes
darkness light, Hell Heaven, guilt pardon, weakness strength, and calls
things that are not, as though they were. Then think within thy self, I Will
conclude nothing against my self, but stay and wait what the issue will be,
which is ever glorious, James 1. 2, 3, 4. 1 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. Consider has not
the Lord done thee much good already? Oh consider what is then behind!

6. Never enter into dispute with Satan, or thine own self, about thy estate,
but by taking and making Scripture and Word tobe the Judge of the controversy.
Fears come in, you shall never have mercy, never have power; Who told you so?
Does the Word say that? The Lord never gave himself to me, I fear it! Does the
Word say so? Never was any as I; Does the Word say so? Or does not the Word
say, God delights to pick out the vilest, to send the Physician to them that be
sick. I cannot see nor conceive any mercy; Does the Word say so? Are not the
Lords thoughts above thine? I have not that peace that others have, therefore
the Lord intends none toward me; Does the Word say so? Oh but others if they
knew me, would loath me! Does the Word say so? When as it says, Doublesse then
thou art our Father, Isa. 63. 16. And bring before this Judge both sides, not
only what sin can say, or may do against thee, but what the Word of the Lord
Jesus can say for thee, Jer. 31. 18, 20. Ephraim cries out of stubb^^nesse: Oh
but is not Ephraim my only Son? Hear Ephraim lamenting too. And hear^ nothing
against a Word. Look on Paul warring against Christ, and yet the Law of Christ
in him also, Luke 24. 25.

7. In times of greatest and smallest fears, remember to be humble and vile in
thine own eyes, worthy never to be beloved. And let the Lord have his Will of
thee, and this will give you peace. God denies mercy to that man that will be
Lord of it: To be sure, evidence mercy then he will not; and when he does
manifest it, it is then when poorest and vilest, and the heart is meek and
humble, Isa. 57. 15, 16. Mat. 11. 29. Oh the Lord opens his heart and love,
when once his Will is dear. The Lord casts by his rod and frowns now, and
creates peace. Thus you may come to see the work, or the Lords Grace in you.

To Ministers, Use 8.
to take heed of making precious things common, by giving in false Signs and
Evidences of love, but look up to the Lord for a special Spirit here.

To Gods poor people, Use 9.
and thankfulness. Oh that he has called thee from darkness into mavelous
light, Of Consolat.
into the Kingdom of his dear Son! Oh that when so many come near to mercy, and
fall short of it; yet me to be let in! Caleb and Joshua to be let into Canaan,
when the rest so near, and all perished! Bless the Lord for all Afflictions,
Fears, Temptations, Enemies, Evils, Hidings of his Face, hereby he has but
tried thee and purged away thy dross; and be comforted against all reproaches
of Hypocrisy and Apostasy, and a proud world that casts filth in the face of
Holiness. Now we are Sons of God, it appears not what we shall be, but we
shall be like him in Glory, in Grace, in Honor, in his Kingdom, for we shall
see him as he is. And as for you that live, and lie, and bed it with your ease,
lusts, sloth, and God sends you means, but the Bellows are burnt, the Lead is
melted, and your Dross not consumed, Reprobate Silver shall men call you, and
God shall destroy all your confidence. But you that are the Lords, Oh that you
could see what the Lord has done! he has put Heaven into thy soul, and his
work which is more Glorious than the Creation of Heaven and Earth.

CHAP. XV.
Showing that the Hypocrisy of the Heart proceeds from a want of a Saving
Illumination in the Understanding.
SECT. I.
THE Spring or one great cause and original of Evangelical Truth and Hypocrisy
is the mind of man.

For here there was an apparent difference between the Virgins in their
practice and in their wills, as has been shown; yet the Lord expresses it in
general thus, that some of them were wise (which is one part of the perfection
of the understanding) and some of them were foolish (which is the great defect
of light in the mind or understanding) because the truth of the one and the
falsehood of the other, manifested what their hearts were, in their heads and
minds; and the Truth in the one, and Hypocrisy in the other did arise and was
maintained by wisdom in some of their minds, and by folly in the mind of some
others. Folly or want of Divine Light made the one unready for Christ, wisdom
or having of Divine Light, made the other prepared for him: Not that it does
exclude the evil or change of the will and affections, but because they
manifest themselves, and are maintained in the mind. Hence I say, one great
reason or Original of both lies in the mind, Mat. 6. 22, 23. If thy eye be
single, thy whole body is light, etc. The eye or mind of a man sits like the
Coachman, and guides the headstrong Affections; if now this be blind, there
will be falls and deviations into crooked ways, John 3. 19, 20. Light is come.
Now what is the condemnation? Men love darkness, i. e. will be blind, and
having sore minds and hearts, will not look up to the Sun. They see not, nor
receive not the Truth in love, and hence condemned, and e contra. Hence Deuteronomy.
29. 1, 2, 3, 4. Moses sets down the causes of all their evils: The Lord has
not given you eyes to see to this day. They did see and hear by natural and
acquired knowledge, but not by a Divine, created, infused knowledge, all that
God had wrought and done for them. Hence when the Lord intends to seal down the
Jews under unbelief, Isa. 6. 10. The Lord then said, shut their eyes lest they
see and so be converted. The heart makes the eyes blind, and the mind makes the
heart fat. A man that is at enmity with God, the Lord sets him against himself.
Hence men are left of God to their own lusts, Luke 19. 42, 44. Oh that thou
had known! and they knew not the day of visitation. Hence Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Oh
that this people had been wise to consider their latter end! You know it is in
the Proverbs of Solomon the frequent title of those that are sincere and
falshearted, the one is called wise, and the other foolish: Insomuch that some
Divines have made a necessity of a change and turning about of the will, when
there is fullness and clearness of light in the mind. Else they say a man
might be sapiens and yet impius too, which cannot be. But I dispute not a bout
that; there be many bruit creatures that imitate the knowledge of man, yet
there is no mind of man or reasonable soul in them; so hypocrites may have
excellent abilities of reason, and yet fall short of that new mind, the eye and
director of the whole man, that Saints have. Its ever dark night with them the
Sun of Glory never did yet rise upon them.

SECT. II.
1. BEcause all Divine Light of Glory is ever powerful through Christ to change
the heart. Reas. 1.
Hence if hypocrites had it, their hearts would be sincere, which is not so,
and hence they ever want it, whatever light else they have* and hence those
that have it must be sincere, John 8. 32. You shall know the truth and it shall
make you free, i. e. from your bondage of fears and sins, hence David prays
for light, Psalm. 119. 33, 34. And then he shall be set at liberty. As Iron is
drawn to the Loadstone by a secret hidden virtue, so there is a secret virtue
of Divine Light that draws the most Iron heart, nay changes it, John 17. 17.
Sanctify them through thy Truth, etc. For this is the difference between man's
and Gods teaching: And hence when the Gospel comes in power, it comes in
demonstration; whereby the heart is mightily overpowred, that it cannot but
fall down before God, whose voice and truth it hearts. And hence the young man
saw some worth in Christ, but not enough, and hence he forsook Christ. Truth is
not stones, but bread to them that see it indeed.

2. Because the mind is the first inlet of all sin and all Grace, and hence all
hypocrisy springs from thence. Reas. 2.
Hence when Satan laid his Train to blow up all the world by sin, he first
enters into dispute and parley with Eve, and as the Apostle speaks, deceived
her, 1 Timothy 2. 14. The woman was first deceived. And hence when Satan came with
his last and strongest temptation, to draw away the heart of Christ to him, he
attempted it by a sudden presenting to his mind the Glory of all the world,
hoping hereby to get in. Nay in the unpardonable sin there is summa caecitas,
to call evil good, and good evil. And hence the Pharisees that did commit it,
were called blind; and when sin is entered, it strengthens it self by the mind,
Heb. 3. 13. Least (...) of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. As
it is with Cities, they might be easily taken, but for the Forts that are built
about them, and the Soldiers that are in them: So men set up their hearts and
minds above, and against the Lord Jesus. The power of sin lies in the power of
darkness, as the power of a weak State in the wisdom of its Council. And hence
when the Spirit comes, all the work of it is expressed by conviction of sin,
righteousness and judgment, because convince one effectually, and you convert
him. And hence when the Lord comes with life, he comes in by light, Ephesians. 5. 14.
Christ shall give thee light. And hence when the Gospel comes to take away all
darkness and sin, it is said Satan's chief policy lies in this, to blind men's
eyes, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Either by obscuring the Light, or by kindling a false Light
in their minds, that they shall think they see, when their darkness remains;
not but that there is filth enough in the will, but Satan knows that Christ
shines into the heart by the mind; and hence he blinds men, and then he knows
he shall damn men. Beloved, if men had the Spirit, it would lead them into all
Truth, now this the world cannot receive, because John 14. 17. It knows him
not. This is that which opens and shuts to all life and sin; not that bare
light can change the will, but the Lord does it by the power of his Truth and
Light: And as it is with water coming through some Mines, there is a healing
virtue in it, so Light coming from everlasting love, it heals men of their
evils.

SECT. III.
HEnce see the danger of two sorts of men especially. Use 1.


1. Of those that fly from the Light, which is done sundry ways. I Will mention
only one, that is used by a false heart. A man is troubled in mind concerning
his estate, fears death and Hell, and so few shall be saved, how can I be one,
etc. How comes he to fear? The Lord has by his Spirit in the Word discovered
and found out his sin, the thief is taken and apprehended, and condemned, he
hears still, but yet can find no peace, Why? Because he lives in those sins
that he is convinced of. Hence the Word raises damps and heart-qualms, that he
has no peace, but is ever pulled from his own bottom and hypocrisy, and the
Word discovers more sins, and hence has no peace: The Word will not give nor
offer Christ and a base lust together, nor will not suffer any to have them
both in peace. Hereupon the soul finding no rest nor peace (which the false
heart seeks for chiefly) flies from the Light, especially if it has found out
a shorter cut to its peace, by any device or golden delusions of men. And now
they will hear there no more, and now the Publishers of Gods Truth are
tyrannical tormenters of the Consciences of them that be weak, false Prophets,
that lead them out of the way of peace. And because of this, they think they
were led out of the way of truth, because out of the way of peace. Or if they
do come, they can sit with disdain and contempt of men (alas they speak
according to their light) and of all the truths of God, which shall one day be
preached over again in flames of fire to their eternal horror, Rev. 6. 2. Its
said, Christ rides on a white Horse, conquering and to conquer. Men have unruly
hearts and strong hearts, and they will not die, nor yield presently. And hence
when one sin is cast away, another steps into the room of it; and when that is
gone, another supplies the place of it, and commonly the strongest sin and
temptation is the last. Now hence Christ goes on, rides on in the Chariot of
the Word, conquering and to conquer still. Those that do yield, he saves, those
that will not, he slaies. Now (...) poor Creatures have had Christ's arrows in
them, and are wounded for some sin, but the Lord discovers more still; hence at
last they fly away with the arrows in their hearts for ease. Oh poor
creatures know it, the Lord Jesus will find you out! You will not be conquered
by him, you shall never be saved by him. You have light, you shall have
delusions, endless unknown hypocrisy and darkness to be your portion. There
is never a plain heart but he accounts that wound and trouble greatest mercy,
and blesses the Lord, that he will not give him his sins and peace with them
too.

2. Those that f^ie not from the light of the Truth, but give it the hearing,
but yet let it slip; either not minding it then, or not pondering it afterward;
that before they come, thirst not for more light, look not up for it, nor are
mourning when the Lord hides it from their eyes. Some there be that be such
all-sufficient men, so good they need be no better, so wise that they need know
no more; some insufficient indeed to know, and hence ever learning, hearing,
but never coming to the knowledge of the Truth. If Light breaks not in, they
can lie in darkness still, and not mourn; and think no more of it than a tale
that is told, or ne^^ that is brought. Oh look to your standing, for you are in
the high rode to hypocrisy, and its impossible you should be kept from it that
lie so, John 12. 35. (...) while you have the light, lest darkness come upon
you. Satan knew if light came in, Christ would come in: And therefore know it,
all that time thou have heard and heard, but not with Divine Light, have got
only somewhat to prate on now, to be of another opinion now from what thou wast:
Oh now Satan has been ^et loose, by the dreadful vengeance of Almighty God, to
blind thee, that so thou might die in thy hypocrisy and sin. Oh poor
Captives, mourn under this, and behold your danger for time to come.

Hence see the reason why many that have had mighty strong Affections at first
conversion, Use 2.
afterward become dry, and wither, and consume, and pine, and die away, and
now their hypocrisy is manifest, if not to all the world by open
profaneness, yet to the discerning eye of living Christians, by a formal,
barren, unsavory, unfruitful heart and course, because they never had light
nor conviction enough as yet. You shall have some ignorant creatures awakened
by some thundering Ministry, weep and mourn for sin, and after vanish into
s^^cak, being never convinced of sin. Land-floods of sorrow without a Spring of
light, are dried up, and make the heart more fruitful in sin afterward. Many go
under fear^ of wrath, and never get peace, because never convinced of wrath.
Many are affected with Christ, and with joy of the Gospel, as the stony ground,
but they wanting depth of earth, of conviction, die away again; and hence all
the world can never stop a Christian in his shining Profession, no more than
they can the Sun in his course, as Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 11. We knowing the terror
of the Lord persuade men. And hence Moses, Heb. 11. 27. feared nofrowns of
Pharaoh, cared for no honors from Pharaoh, he saw the God that was invisible,
and hence Christ prays for his Disciples, to be kept from evil. The world has
not known me, but these have known me, John 17. When men are condemned to die,
they take on because now they see death; but here in time of health they see it
not. If men wrong a child, their heart smites them and grieves, but the Lord is
abased dishonored, and men are not affected, because they want light, and see
it not: If men be to match with a Prince, or stand before him, it is counted
blessedness; but before Christ, it is a burden, because men know it not. It Is
strange to see some people carried with mighty affection against sin and Hell,
and after Christ. And what is Hell you fear? A dreadful place. What is Christ?
They searce know so much as Devils do, but that is all: Oh trust them not! Many
have, and these will fall away, to some Lust, or Opinion, or Pride, or World;
and the reason is, they never had light enough, John 5. 35. John was a burning
and shining light, and they did joy in him for a season, yet as glorious as it
was, they saw not Christ by it, especially not with Divine Light. Its rare to
see Christians full both of light and affection. And therefore consider of
this, many a man has been well brought up, and is of a sweet, loving Nature,
mild, and gentle, and harmless, likes and loves the best things, and his
meaning, and mind and heart is good, and has more in heart than in show, and
so hopes all shall go well with him. I say, there may lie greatest hypocrisy
under greatest affections; especially if they want light. You shall be hardened
in your hypocrisy by them. I never liked violent affections and pangs, but
only such as were dropped in by light; because those come from an external
Principle, and last not, but these do. Men are not affrighted by the light of
the Sun, though clearer than the Lightning.

Hence take heed of contenting your selves with every kind of knowledge: Use 3.
Do not worship every Image in your own Heads; especially you that fall short
of Truth or the knowledge of it; for when you have some, there may be yet that
wanting which may make you sincere. There are many men of great knowledge, able
to reach themselves and others too, and yet their hearts are unsound. How comes
this to pass? Is it because they have so much light? No, but because they want
much; and therefore content not your selves with every knowledge. There is some
knowledge which men have by the light of nature (which leaves them without
excuse) from the Book of Creation, some by power of education, some by the
light of the Law, whereby men may know their sin and evils, some by the Letter
of the Gospel, and so men may know much, and speak well, and so in seeing see
not; some by the Spirit, and may see much, so as to prophecy in Christ's Name,
and yet be bid depart, Mat. 7. Now there is a Light of Glory, whereby the Elect
see things in another manner; to tell you how, they cannot, its the beginning
of light in Heaven, and the same Spirit that fills Christ, filling their minds,
that they know by this anointing all things; which if ever you have, you must
become Babes and Fools in your own eyes. God will never write his Law in your
minds, till all the Scriblings of it are blotted our. Account all your
knowledge loss for the gaining of this. It Is sad to see many a man pleasing
himself in his own dreaming delusions, yet the poor creature in seeing sees
not, which is Gods heavy curse upon men under greatest means, and which lays
all wast and desolate, Isa. 6. How long? Until all be wast, V. II.

Hence see the right way of living a life of Truth, Use 4.
of being an Israelite in whom is no guile. Keep light in your minds, and you
will keep Truth alive in your hearts and lives. Many a sincere heart may have
Hypocrisy and much unsoundnesse in him, though he be no Hypocrite. But how
comes it so to be? and whence so little Truth? and hence so many fears and
doubts about their estates continually? Oh! men lose that Glorious Light that
sometime they have. For when you have it in an Ordinance, Oh how sweet is the
Lord and all his ways to you! Afterward you have lost your hearts, truly it is
because you have lost your light.

Two ways Hypocrisy vents it self, which Gods people oppose.

1. In secret withdrawing of the heart to sin. Oh now get light! for sin never
draws away, but by appearance of some good at least, pro hic and nunc. Iam. 1.
14. Now put off the covering, keep the mind from being deceived, you will keep
the heart from being hardened, deaded and withdrawn from God.

2. In performing duties, but not for Christ as their utmost end; now the heart
is bent this way, yet it fails, because light is gone, to see and behold the
Glory and blessedness of this. Men that have honor or gain in their eye, are
carried violently after it. Men that are bound for a voyage will go through,
their eye leads them. Stephen speaks till the stones were about his ears, I see
Jesus says he, at the right hand of God. 2 Cor. 15. 58. Be abundant in the
Lords work, knowing that your labor is not in vain. Hence David Psalm. 119.
begs for knowledge of this and that, and then he will do it. Oh therefore keep
it in your minds as precious, Prove. 2. 10. If knowledge be pleasant, etc. And
pray to God to keep it for you. Light is in the Sun, and not ceased to this
day: so if the Lord would put in this Light, and be the perpetual Fountain
thereof to you, it would abide, etc. Thy Word I have hid in my heart, etc.
Psalm. 119.

SECT. IV.
HEnce learn the cure of hypocrisy, viz. Remove the cause, Use 5.
which is folly; and if you would be sincere, Oh prize, and beg for more light,
and love it, and you shall then after you have dug for it, find it. Would it
not be sad to be led blindfold like them till they were in the midst of
Samaria, so till in the midst of Hell? Would it not be sad to be like
Sodomites, groping for the door? Especially you that are come over to this
Country for more of the Knowledge o^ Christ. Oh then Beloved, take heed you
bury not your minds in the earth, lose^ not your thoughts in the dung. And you
must stand one day before God, when the Book of the secrets of your hearts
shall be opened, when if found too light, then would it not be a doleful
parting to lose the Lord Jesus after such light and affections, for want of a
little more Light? Oh look to your selves now!

1. Stick close to the guidance of the Scriptures, and love them. Moses says,
Means 1.
Then other Nations shall say, what people so wise? Deuteronomy. 4. 6. And these make
the men of God (2 Timothy 3. 15.) full of Gods Spirit, wise unto salvation, and
for neglect of this, the Lord gave, and does give men up to strong delusions,
that they believe lies, viz. because they loved not the Truth. Never a Truth
but is unsealed by Blood, and revealed to be the infinite wisdom of the Father,
and love to poor lost men, where God opens all his heart; if men will despise
these, it is pity but they should be blinded. Do not scoff at those that know
the Lord here, they are Scripture-learned men, if not, never Spirit-learned.
Take this for your Counselor, in all your doubts and fears it will teach you.
A man gets an opinion, or falls in love with a sinful corruption, both deceive
him. Why so? Is there no word against it? Oh yes, but they will not hear it,
but make God and Scripture bow down to them, they will not be led by it. Oh
entreat the Lord to keep thee from that.

2. Be abundant in meditation daily, Psalm. 119. 99. Means 2.
It Is an hundred to one else if not miserably deluded. And as the Spirit
convinces first of sin, righteousness and judgment, so let your thoughts be.
This makes a man see far, and see much.

3. Practice what you know, and taste the sweetness of it there, Means 3.
Psalm. 119. 100. And then the heart will grow savingly full of Divine Light.
Nothing makes men foolish but this. Oh taste and see! Oh if men knew the sweet
of this way of Truth, they would ever walk in it, and bring others to submit to
it! Shall I hide from Abram, that will teach his Family? Genesis 18. 17, 19.

4. Cast up your eyes to Christ glorified, being full of the Spirit for thee,
Means 4.
and beg of him, as if he were with thee to send it down. As Solomon asked
this. See, John 7. 39.

Oh learn to be exceeding thankful for any saving light the Lord has kindled
in you, Use 6.
if ever it has been powerful to discover and remove the hidden hypocrisy of
thy heart, that now the Lord has made thee plain and serious for him, that its
death not to live, Heaven for to live unto him. Oh then bless the Lord for
that means that did it for thee, that might have perished in thy own
delusions and dreams. Time was when thou wast deceived, now the Lord has made
thy eyes brighter than the Sun, to see such things as are hid from great ones
in the world. Oh though it be but a little, yet if real and saving light,
bless him. A man that has been in midst of Sands, and without a Pilot,
afterward looks back, and says, there I might have split. Oh this is
wonderful to him! Oh Christ did thus! 1I thank thee thou have hid, etc. Mat.
11. 25. The Lord has hid them from heads and hearts of many wise and prudent,
and ever they shall be hid, and e contra, revealed them to thee, a babe, a weak
one, a poor ignorant one, Mat. 16. 17. Flesh and blood has not revealed it, so
as to build here on this righteousness, to fetch all light and life from
Christ, and cleave alone to him. Oh remember you are called out of darkness
into mavelous light to show forth his virtues? What can desire more than
eternal life? And this is it, 1 John 5. 20. John 17. 30.

CHAP. XVI.
That Hypocrites discover themselves in an uneffectual use of the Means of
Grace. Secondly, The difference between the wise and foolish Virgins is set
down more particularly, v. 3, 4.
SECT. I.
THIS particular difference is declared by the different practice of the
foolish and wise Virgins each from other.

1. That the Foolish though they had so much wisdom (like the wise) as to take
Lamps, yet so much folly was bound up in their hearts, as that they took no Oil
in their Vessels for their Lamps.

2. That the wise did not only light their Lamps, but they did also fill their
Vessels with Oil, that either their Lamp might never go out, or if it did, it
might be soon kindled again. More plainly, The Foolish contented themselves
with the name and blaze of outward Profession, kindled from some inward, yet
lighter and more superficial strokes of Gods Spirit, neglecting the great work
within: But the wise did not only carry their Lamps of outward Profession, but
they filled their Vessels, and got an inward Principle of the Spirit of the
Lord Jesus to maintain their profession before man, and their uprightness
before the Lord. So that methinks here is a double difference, the first is
implied, the second plainly expressed.

1. That which is implied is this, that the Foolish made choice of a good end,
viz. to meet Christ, but it was with an ineffectual use of means to that end;
their Lamps were to light and lead them to Christ. These Lights might blaze for
a time, but they would consume without Oil. They neglect that, the wise were
better instructed than so.

2. The Foolish glory in an outward Profession, as also in some superficial
affection, without an inward Principle of the gracious presence of the eternal
anointing and Spirit in them; but the wise have it, and are carried to Glory by
it. And more at this time of the Lamps and Vessels I shall not speak.

1. Doct. 1.
That the closest Hypocrites of Virgin-Churches discover themselves (at least
before the Lord) in an ineffectual use of those means that do conduce toward
their desired and expected end.

The Bridegroom is here looked for, the presence of Christ Jesus is longed for,
he comes in the night, they must meet him in the night. Now means they use,
Lamps they take, and so much Oil as kindles their Lamps; but Oil they take not
in their Vessels, the only means to preserve their Lamps from going out, that
so they may meet the Lord and not be shut out from the Lord, as at last these
careless Virgins were. Search the Churches for the present, search the Records
of Ages past, many have desired the Lord and looked for the Lord, and yet have
lost the Lord their end: Why so? They never had hearts effectually to use and
improve the means to that end, either outward or inward. Look upon men out of
the Church, they perish because they have no remedy, they have no Lamps to
light, they have no Bread to eat, no Means to help. But why do those within the
Church perish? Is it because there is no remedy? No, but because they do not
use the remedy. Is it because they want Means? No, but because they do not
effectually improve means. Here they fall short, herein they discover
themselves. Look but upon this next Parable of the Talents, v.25. One of them
was cast off, and cast out. Why? Because he had no Talents? No, But because he
had no mind nor list to use his Talent, he did not make his gain out of it to
attain his end. All Ordinances of God, and all that time we have under them are
Talents. Now wherein do Hypocrites fail? There is a secret gain of Ordinances
which Hypocrites regard not, and hence the best hypocrite lives in debt, and
die^ a Beggar. For Prove. 16. 17. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a
fool, but no heart to use it? Precious Liberties, Ordinances, that many have
desired to see, and have not seen them. Why does the Lord betrust him with such
that uses them not? Oh he has them, but here is his wound, he has no heart
to use them! Look throughout all the Word, Why have many set a great price on
Christ, and yet have lost him? Because like higling Chapmen, they have had a
desire to the Commodity, but they have been loath to be at the cost to use the
means for it. The Gospel brings Christ and Immortality to light, and this
Serpent is lifted up, this Lamb slain before men's eyes, and this Bread put to
men's lips and mouths. Why are not all possessed of him, blessed in him? The
Lord says, come, and the Spirit says, come, and the Bride says, come; Why
the reason is, men will not use the means for him, Isa.55. 2, 3, 4. Men will
lay out their money, though it be for that which is not Bread. Jer. 2, 5, 6, 7,
8. I brought them through Pits into a pleasant Land, to eat the goodness
thereof. And doubtless he brought not a herd of swine into Canaan, only to
enjoy the outward blessings and swill of Canaan, but to enjoy the good of his
Temple, Ordinances, etc. But where was their wound? Neither Priests nor People
said, where is the Lord? i. e. Where is the Lord in these ways, that we may
come at last to the full enjoyment of him by these? This they neglected.
Methinks it is with the best hypocrites as it is with diverse old Merchants, they
prize and desire the gain of Merchandise, but to be at the trouble to prepare
the Ship, to put themselves upon the hazards and dangers of the Ship, to go and
fetch the Treasure that they prize, this they will never do. So many prize and
desire earnestly the Treasures of Heaven, here is their end, but to be at the
trouble of a Heaven-Voyage to fetch this Treasure, to pass through the Valley
of Baca, Tears, Temptations, the Powers of Darkness, the Breaches,
Oppositions, and Contradictions of a sinful, unbelieving heart, good and evil
report, to pass from one depth and wave to another, this the best hypocrite
fails in, and hence loses all at last. And this I conceive to be one of the
great differences between the strong desires and esteems of Hypocrites and
Saints.

SECT. II.
I. IN regard of God, Reas. 1.
because this neglect is one of the great means by which he does execute his
eternal rejection of men, and hence here they ever do fail.

For 1. The Lord has chosen some to life, the end.

2. He chooses certain means to lead to this end.

3. He purposes to carry all his Elect by these means to that end; themselves
cannot, hence the Lord does. And hence arises the great peace and support of
the Saints, when they look upon the everlasting mountains of hindrances and
impossibilities in their way, the Lord has undertaken to carry them through
them, John 17. 15. That when heart and strength fails, he will be heart and
strength, and guide by his counsel, and bring to his Glory. And hence as all
the Elect are to be certainly carried through all means to their end, and this
is proper to them, so hence the best Hypocrite being never appointed certainly
to come to this end, ever fails in the use of means; there he is and shall be
forsaken of God, and forsake God. Hence John 6. When many used the means, and
followed Christ for a time, that they might have life, at last they forsook
Christ and means to have him. Why? v. 65. Because none can come to me, except
it were given him of the Father. Hence, look as certainly as the Decree of
Reprobation shall stand, he having not appointed them to the end; so he never
carries them through all means to that end, and therefore here they do ever
fail. As it is in a Family, those that the Lord of the Family intends to give
his estate unto, he keeps a strict eye upon them, keeps them under the
Government of the Family; as for others, let them go where they will, and do
what they will; so here, all that shall enjoy God, are put under the Kingdom of
the Son. Hence he is said to give it up: To others he will say, you love
Liberty, take it then.

II. Reas. 2.
Because the Lord and Fellowship with him, is never indeed their last and
utmost end, or their only end, but they have some o^ her end of their own; and
hence they are never carried strongly through all means to that end. For this
is the nature of a man's last and utmost end, it carries a man without any stop
toward it, and that with delight. As a man that has ho^our and preferment, and
great hopes in his eye, that is reaching to the top of his aspiring thoughts,
he will ride, and run, and flatter, and sin, etc. A man that has riches in his
eye, he will rise early, and go to bed late, eat the bread of carfulness, and
he never has enough. A man that is sick, and has health in his eye, takes his
Physic, observes his seasons, wastes his estate, for this is his end. Hence a
Hypocrite never making Christ his last end, but being ever a double-minded man,
James 1. And having his own ends, and lusts, and self to attend upon, hence the
Byas draws him from following Christ effectually, but he must follow his own
ends, and hence ever neglects the means that lead him thereunto, Mat.6. 24.
Look as it is with men that have two Trdes, or two Shops, one is as much as ever
they can follow or tend, they are forced at last to put off one, and they must
neglect the one: So here.

III. Reas. 3.
In regard of that Spirit of sloth and slumber, which the Lord ever leaves the
best Hypocrite unto; which is the dearest lust and last enemy that the Lord
destroys in all his, but never destroies in these. Which so might^ly
oppresses all their senses, that they cannot use effectually all means to
accomplish their ends. And hence a man desires the end, but has it not,
Prove.13. 4. The Lord proposes the most Glorious end to his people, but its
through many difficulties that we must come to it. Now there being the Spirit
of sloth within, and these difficulties without, a Hypocrite sits down and
rests under the shadow of this growing, spreading sin; and says it is hard, and
because he cannot do so, he hopes it is but an infirmity, and God will accept of
his desires, and here perishes, Mat. 7. 14. For straight is the gate that
leads unto life, hence few there be that find it. Look as it was with the
Israelites, Canaan they were bound for, they came at last to it, but when their
Spies had told them of the difficulties, they sank, only Caleb and Joshua of
that mighty Host that had upright hearts here. Heavy things must descend,
though cast up; for their place is downward. Light things, cast them downward,
yet they must up again, for their place is upward; So it is here: A sluggish
heart may be lift up by means, but they cannot hold it, their place is
downward, here is their rest; so Saints, e contra, like fire will consume all
difficulties, their rest is upward.

SECT. III.
HEnce we see one ground of many complaints that are in the mouths of many
Professors of the ways of God, Use 1.
that never find the sweet which is the end of their Christian course, that are
ever complaining of wants, but never feels supplies, ever learning, never
knowing, ever hoping, never having, ever confessing of their sins, never
triumphing over their sin, ever wishing that they had the Lord, but never
possessing the Lord. And hence have minds full of fears, and mouths full of
complaints, and hence finding no sweet in their course, could be content but
for shame, to throw by their Profession. Why? Where is the cause of this? Is
Heaven so barren and beggarly, that there are no Jewels to be had there? Are
the fields of Gods Ordinances so empty, that there is no Treasure to be found
there? Oh yes! there it is, but Christians are idle, there is the Treasure, but
they cannot beg, much less dig for it, Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6. If there be a
treasure in the ground, and a man can find nothing, and so is ever complaining,
the fault is in the man, he does not dig long enough, nor deep enough; so it is
here: There is never an Ordinance, but the Lord is in it; he never said to the
Horse of Jacob seek his face in vain. Men pray, and if a few sighs will fe^ch
in relief, well and good, if not, they cast that Shovel by, dig I cannot; they
spend some time in laying sin to heart, but if I cannot presently feel the
bitterness of it, I cannot help it, dig I cannot. A man can be content to hear
the Word, and to listen after it, but to stir up the soul to lay hold on the
Lord, that their sleep forbids, Prove. 13. 4. The soul of the diligent shall be
made fat. Why do you famish under means? Is it because the Lords is unwilling
or unable to relieve? No, John 6. 27. You labor for that bread that perishes.
Labor not for it, but for the other, and the Son of man will give it you, for
he is sealed for that very end. You complain your hearts are always out of
frame. Tell me, do you keep then with all diligence? Prove.4. 23. With all your
Guard about it? You complain you never get assurance. Do you use all diligence
to make it sure? You complain you seek and find not. Do you seek him
diligently? Heb.11. 6. Oh this is the cause! The Lord has given you the Spirit
of slumber. Oh lay not the fault on the Lord, but on thine own careless heart,
and lament over it, and say, this has been the cause of all my complaints and
woe. Oh I remember what the Lord by Jeremy speaks! Go into the strong Holds,
for the Lord has poured upon us the Spirit of deep sleep, and given us the
waters of Gall to drink. I confess the Lords choicest servants have their
complaints, their sighs and groans unutterable, they have their fears,
temptations and tears; Who more abundantly? Yet Beloved, methinks it is with
them as it is with Passengers and Travelers toward their home, that they see
it Twenty Miles off sometime, when they be on the Top of an Hill, after they
have gone a little farther, they come into a Valley, and then they complain
they have lost the sight of it, and cannot see it again scarce till they be
upon i^; yet they sit not down in their Valley, but are going toward it. They
go from strength to strength, though they come tired thither; as Psalm. 84. 7,
8. They pass from strength to strength till they come to see God in Sion. They
rest not in their complaints, but get on; and the star before them, the Means
that lead them to that end, make them (as Mat. 2. 10.) rejoice with exceeding
great joy. I confess they may for a time give way to their sloth, and sit in
their valleys, and turn day into night, and sleep out almost the season of
means; yet you shall ever find this, if ordinary means awaken them not,
terrible Flashings and Lightnings of wrath do; and in their afflictions and
terrors and wounds of Conscience, Hos. 5. 15. they shall seek the Lord early.
Ponder therefore of this cause, and in a time of sorrow they shall complain for
something, viz. for their sloth. This may be the greatest sin of some, they
live in no sin, but complaint, thy complaints may be fruits of sloth in not
using means, and this may be thy great sin.

Hence learn it is not having of Means in this place, Use 2.
nor coming hither for Means, that will do you any good or evidence your safe
and good estate, but an effectual use and improvement of them; not only the use
of outward, but inward means too. Men that have never so great a stock may die
Beggars, by not improving it, Deuteronomy.29. 3, 4.

1. Many seeing and beholding that Sun which is set with them, to be risen here
in these Western Parts, partly out of fear of persecution, partly by Friends
persuasion and company, partly to enjoy Gods Ordinances, have taken their
flight hither.

But 2. Being come, wish Oh that our eyes had never seen it! partly through
plenty of means, despise and loath them, partly through multitude of covering
or vexing cares have no hearts to, or time to use them.

And yet 3. Are comforted in this, that they have them, though they see no God
in them, taste little sweetness, receive little power from them, and hope to go
to Heaven at next remove, that have come so far for these, etc. I would to God
it were so. But oh consider,

1. If you improve them not, thy coming hither is but the discovery of thy
hypocrisy to men and Angels, for this is the stage wherein the most fine-spun
hypocrisy and real sincerity shall act its part.

2. Nay thou art so far from being blessed in having them thus, that Gods
fiercest plagues shall here approach thy dwelling. The Arc among the
Philistims, made the Lord plague the Philistims.

3. Nay this shall lay all desolate one day. They cried the Temple of the Lord,
Jer. 7. Go to Shiloh. So I say, Go to the Palatinate, Go to Germany, France, go
to the places whence you came, and see what the Lord has done.

4. This shall be as to Saints greatest joy, when they shall look back, and see
all the difficulties they have passed over, that here and there hearts and help
failed, and there I lingered, but the Lord was merciful, and pulled me out, and
they shall wonder at that Faithfulness and Grace; so here: This will be
terror and anguish; that I came so far, and had means, and took some pains,
and was almost persuaded one time, almost confuted another, almost conquered
and had yielded up all at another, but oh my Lump fell down to the dust again,
and my soul forsook the pursuing of the Lord again? and this shall be the
portion of Hypocrites. You may neglect and wrap up your Talents, but the Lord
has a time to call you to an account what gain you make. Look therefore to it,
it may be some of you have need to improve means, you despise them in one
place, and hither you come for them, and poor hearts, eyes dim, hearts hard,
Consciences asleep, ears deaf, breath gone, life lost, God departed, and
nothing left but a dead Carcass. It may be some are sincere, and the work of
Gods Spirit is set back, your Lamps are out, your watchful minds and tender
hearts and earnest pursuit after the Lord is gone. Oh then consider what little
cause you have to boast in means! Men that have no part in ships, look for no
gain; but if you have any part in the Blessi^^ o^ Ordinances, rest not without
it.

Hence see what need you have of a mighty and unresistable power of the Lords
Grace and Spirit, to carry you an end in your Christian course, Use 3.
if ever you come to life. For if Hypocrisy discovers it self in an ineffectual
use of means, then you will find all the powers of darkness resisting and
seeking to surprise you here. That as it is with Thieves, you shall not see not
find them lying in the City, it is in vain there to offer any violence, but in
the way; So Satan cannot step unto the Gates of Heaven to keep you from thence,
and hence all his power and policy lies in the way of means, to keep you from
thence. And hence look upon the best man, how many hindrances to Prayer
sometime, though he has tasted the sweet of it, he had rather die than pray.
How soon are the thoughts turned from God, when we come to draw nigh to God,
how unable to wake one hour? That if it were not the inyincible strength of a
God that did support them, 1 Pet.1. 5. they could never go on. Tell me you poor
Creatures that never were effectually carried to your end by means, Do you not
often find checks for sin, desires against it, Christ and mercy weeping at your
knees, melting over you, and your hearts almost persuaded? Do you not find a
want of Christ, and Grace, and Spirit, and Promises, and you hope it will be
better? Do you not find some movings toward the Lord, but yet withal do you
not find a dead, sloathful heart slayes you again? The veriest reprobate in the
world may have as good an assurance of heaven as thou, there may be better in
Hell than thee. And who can mend this? long, long it has been thus. Oh then
feel a need of the Lords irresistible power! Thou indeed have an end, but say,
Lord thou must carry me like a lost sheep on thy shoulders to that end! Seek
the Lord and his strength, seek his face evermore, in all means, at all times,
but seek his strength then, Col. 1. 29. I labor thus, striving according to
his working, which works in me mightily: and so I strive. Oh see need of this!
Many of you make work with your own hearts, and strive, and endeavor, and yet
cannot stir. Oh look then for this mighty working, and feel a need of it!

SECT. IV.
HEnce judge what your estates are this day before the Lord. I know and believe
that you prize, pray for, long for the end, and if ever the Lord saves and
pardons you, Use 4. Of Trial.
you shall have cause to bless him. You may do as has been said, but never
find a heart given you by the invincible wrestlings of a God to use and improve
all means to that end; and thus your practice in the habitual neglect of means
is a clear and manifest witness, like the day against you, that you do not
desire sincerely the end (as you think) in having so little respect to the
means that conduce thereunto. Did you ever see that man that did indeed desire
life, but he would use all means, wits, and friends, nay cut off his Limbs to
preserve it? But however, put that name upon it, say you do desire and prize
the end, yet if the Lord leaves you, or you forsake the Lord in a neglect of
means, that lead thereto, and that effectually; what you may be, and what the
Lord may do, I know not, but to this day your estate is no better than a
painted salvation and pictured hypocrisy before the Lord. That stone at which
the closest hypocrites have stumbled, that rock on which the best hypocrite
has been broken, thou art fallen upon, that enemy of sloth, which has
carried Kings (men that have worn the Crown of Profession in the world)
miserable Captives, (notwithstanding their lamentable cries, Lord save us!) to
hell, the same enemy has already bound thee up in Chains, and what will
become of thee, it is only known in his Breast, that by the voice of his Trump
can awaken the dead, and break the bonds of sloth and death it self. But you
will say, there are no Virgins among us that neglect to take their oil, that
so far forget themselves as to neglect the means, that are come so many
thousand miles for means; there is not a day but some line is drawn, not a
Sermon, Sabbath but some good got, or else they think themselves half undone,
not a prayer but one step nearer to glory: The day is not long enough, and
therefore the nights are spent in wrastlings with the Angel; nay, in prevailing
with God for themselves and Churches, and blessing on both; Sabbaths are the
day breaks of heaven, the fellowship of Saints be^ter then to stand before
Kings, the fellowship of Christ in heaven so sweet, that in seeking of him men
forget themselves, nay to eat their bread; that if the Lord should have let out
the vineyard of Ordinances to any Husbandmen in the world, who could or would
have taken more pains to dig it, to dress it, then we do. Beloved, those
enlargements that are in any after the Lord, the Lord cherish and increase
them, but I fear we may go five times about the tree before we see such laden
boughs. I am much mistaken if the best may not be discovered here, the fairest
flowers in the field must wither, they cannot last, and the best affections
that are but temporary, that have acted men mightily for a time in the use of
means, must perish in the neglect of means at last. I shall not therefore
meddle with profane or carnal Gospellers, so much as with close deceivers of
their own souls; and look as it is in all sores, you may know where the sore is
by the lappings, so you may know a sluggard that neglects means by his shifts:
For if you observe, no sin has so many shifts and colors for it as this; Saul
when he had not gone through stich with the Lords work in slaying the
Amalekites, what ado had Samuel to convince him? He tells a lie, lays the
blame on the people, propounds the good end and affection he had; So here: Thus
it is with many, as Viz.

1. Those that live in a secret neglect of means, and yet hope to come to their
end, because of their desires; we shall find the S^^ipture gives us two sorts
of desires. 1. Of the righteous. 2. Of the sluggard, 1. The desires of the
righteous, Prove. 10. 24. shall be granted, being breathings of Gods eternal
Spirit, not a sigh or groan unanswered. 2. Of the sluggard, Prove. 21. 15. The
desire of the slothful kills him, for his hands refuse to labor; the desires
of the righteous are ever spurs to quicken them up in the use of means
mightily, the desires of the sluggard bridle him up, they bind his hands, and
fetter his feet that he cannot but neglect means: Some desires there be that
arise from the need of a good, and here will not only be desires, but all means
used, as in point of famine; some only from want of a good, and here a man
usually contents himself with bare desires, never has a heart to use the means
mightily for that end. Many a one is convinced his state is miserable, and
fears it, and Balaam-like, sees the blessedness of the people of God, and knows
he wants pardon, and life, and peace, and promises, and Christ, and desires it;
oh that I might die their death, oh that I might live and drink that water,
that I might thirst no more, oh that my sins were pardoned, oh that my heart
was humbled. But what if the Lord grant them no peace nor pardon? Do they make
earnest enquiry after the Lord Christ* with restless pursuits and groans
because they need it, is it worth that? Oh no, but yet they hope God will be so
merciful as to accept their desires, and so they rest, and live and die in that
rest, oh poor creatures your desires kill you; as a man is undone with slothful
servants that cannot earn their own, much less get their masters bread. And
many in Hell, say I had thought my desires would have carried me to glory, but
now I see they have been slothful, and here I must perish and famish for ever;
had I known of this, I would rather have wept out my eyes, and filled the world
with my sorrowful complaints, my meditations of the Lord should have been at
midnight; I would have deceived my eyes of sleep at night, and deprived my self
of bread at day, and lost my limbs, had I but known that by contenting my self
with these desires, I should have lost my life. Here many Christians are falsely
bottomed, they are troubled about their estate, come to some or other and
profess their desires are after Christ and grace, etc. And then comforted (as
in sinking fits a man snatcheth at any Flag or Twig) with them desires, before
they have followed the Lord in the use of all means to get the thing they
desire. And here is the first beginning of the Lords forsaking of them, and
theirs of the Lord, and he is left alone only with his desires, that if any
duty be neglected, desires comfo^t him; if grace resisted, desire; quiet him;
if sin keeping him captive, desires fill him; Luke 13. 24. And so like a Bird
that lies in the nest, but its wings never grow, there it perishes. I know
Saints may comfort themselves with desires before the things be given, because
promised, but you shall see an endless reach in them in the use of all means,
Phil. 3. 13. Others think their neglect of means to be but an infirmity, and
that their desires will serve, and hence abuse that Scripture, Romans 7.

2. They that neglect the means and yet hope to come to their end, because of
worldly clogs and encumbrances here; for this is the very spirit of many a man.
If God keeps the house from being burn^, and family from being sick, it may be
family prayer is neglected, if not that, yet secret is omitted; if not that,
yet meditation; a man can get no head nor heart, nor time for it, if any good
is got, its lost again; Sabbaths spent, and no good gained; a man knows his
soul lies waste and common without any fence or watch, and that he would not
let his fields lie as he does his heart, overgrown with cares and lusts and
vain thoughts. Now many a man though he does dislike this, yet lives in this.
Why? Is this your home, are these things your portion? No, but yet thinks he
may with a safe Conscience continue thus, and God forgive him too; why the
family is great, children increase upon me, (and they are so busy and long a
dressing on the Lords day, that Sermon is out before they come) and we are not
called to book it all day as Ministers can, and worldly employments are so
many, and the best are entangled here; and they think this is an excuse, Luke
14. 18, 19. Nay many a one convinced of this, yet lives in this against the
light of conviction, hoping that one day the stream of worldly occasions will
be run by. I confess, as the Lord has given us his Ordinances to seek him in,
so he has appointed our callings to walk with him in: Adam in Paradise must
not be idle, but look to the garden; and in this land those that will be good
husbands for God (least they discredit their profession by bringing themselves
to a piece of bread) must be good husbands for themselves: But here is that
which stings, when to worldly emploiments, men are servants, not Lords of them,
when men do not make their occasions ^ow down to them, and serve them, that
they may serve and seek a God, but they bow down their knees, nay, basely their
backs, under the feet of any mean employment, and that must be followed with
neglect of God. Do not say who is not entangled here? I tell you if Christ^
prayer can prevail some are not, John 17. 15. I pray not that thou would
take them out of the world, but keep them from the evil: If blood can prevail
it does, Gal. 1. 4. Oh look to this! it may be some of you do not only neglect
the Lord in means, but when the Lord comes to you in means and quic^ens your
hearts and kindles many resolutions in you; you neglect the Lord, all dies
again, oh it is the world! know your estates by this.

3. Those that depart from God in the neglect of means, because they find no
good, and do not feel themselves a whit the better for them; they neglect this
trade, because they find it a gainless trade: For thus God executes his
eternal rejection upon many a soul: As it was with Saul, it was one of the
last Vials God powered out upon him, 1 Samuel 28. 5, 6, 15. says he, I am sore
distressed, and the Lord answers me not by ^rim nor by Thummin, and therefore
am I come to thee; let a Devil comfort me if God will not: So many a soul
having committed some sin that lies glowing on the Conscience, is sore
troubled, and first it goes to the Lord, and the Lord answers not, there is
silence in heaven, and in all means, but the noise of fears within; now at last
the soul does not forsake the Lord for Satan plainly, but what means can
comfort them that they seek for, and in time a man is weary of waiting at Gods
gate^, and hence a form of duties, and prayers, and custom of devotion is kept
to quiet the conscience; but they are not restless for the gain of them, for
the Lord in them: they think it is in vain, to no profit, as those in Mal. 3.
14. to walk mournfully. Jonah was cast out of Gods sight, yet through the belly
of a W^ale he would look toward the Temple. So it is with the people of God,
though they sometimes conclude thus, and think not to seek any more, yet their
hearts have tasted the good, and their faith believes there is that hid in the
Lord in his Temple* that it never saw yet, hence they look still. What made the
man Mat. 25. hide his talent in the earth? I thought thou wast an hard Master,
and lookedst for so much gain, and I could not get it, and hence he hid his
Talent. Hence men keep the means, without use of the means, and some that have
for a time been used to do so, keep it as their custom without making any such
work of it, as to gain the end of the means.

4. Those that do neglect the Lord in means by an effectual pursuit of them,
because of some sips and taste of some good in them; and so me thinks it is in
this case as it is in some Countries where if a man comes to their house in the
afternoon, and both have a mind to part, yet loath to part without showing some
kindness, and the other without tasting of it, they lay their voiding napkin,
and finding that refreshing there, they are content to lose their, supper. So
it is here, a man comes weary to the Lords House, to his Ordinances, the Lord
will not let him go without some expression of kindness, nor they depart
willingly from the Lord without it, and hence the Lord gives them light out of
darkness, joy out of sorrow, peace out of trouble, a taste of his sweetness,
after tastes of sins bitterness, and then they take their leave; as they Hebr.
6. 2, 3, 4, 5. And here the Lord leaves many a poor creature, Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3,
4. they did see something, and taste something, and there they rested; Oh but
the Lord gave them not eyes to see, etc. For no Hypocrite living is fully
emptied of his lusts, but has somewhat to fill him; but some emptiness he may
have, hence may have some desires after the Lord, and hence it is not the
fullness of God only that satisfie^ him, but some tastes of Gods kindness, and
small things do and must fill him; his lusts fill him in part, and something of
God is wanting, and that some little matter does make up. Hence when this is
done, means is neglected fearfully, a man's heart is hardened and ignorant, a
little light and sorrow stays him, as the stony ground though there be a stone
at bottom; a man is full of doubts, and a little hope which frees him from
fears quiets him, hence he never conquers unbelief: A man has lived a loose
course, a little resolution of heart stays him, though the heart will depart
again, as those Deuteronomy.5. 27, 29. the Lord has but little of their hearts, and
the Lord shows them but little of his: And hence this is usual to see a false
heart most diligent in seeking the Lord when he has been worst, and most
careless when it is best. Hence many at first conversion sought the Lord
earnestly, afterward affections and ende^vours die, that now they are as good
as the Word can make the^: Hence the Lord when in mercy he deals with men,
keeps them long fasting till the time of extremity comes, and then he pours
waters on the thirsty. Hence better for those never to have known, 2 Pet.2. 21.
and an hypocrites last end is to satisfy himself, hence he has enough; a
Saints is to satisfy Christ, hence he never has enough.

5. Those that do neglect the Lord under this color of receiving Christ, they
can do nothing themselves, and Christ must do all; and hence neglect the Lord
secretly, and sometimes quarrel with the Ministry privately, when pressed to a
duty or to believe. Alas what can a man do, when all the Ministers in the world
have preached their hearts out, at last they must bring us to Christ; what else
should the Apostle mean, Rom.4. 5. Not to him that works, but believes is
faith accounted for righteousness. I must not live, I must let Christ live,
etc. And hence say they the cause of perishing is not men's wills, but Gods, he
elects not, he gives no heart; such hypocrites the Lord prophesies of, Mat. 7.
21. Many that say to me Lord, Lord, i. that advance the Lord Jesus, and live in
neglect of all duties, and bring the Lord of glory not from his Throne in
Heaven to Hell, but which is worse, debase him from his glory to sin; to be the
cover of sin, and protector of it. Beloved, I know no surer sign of a vessel
that God intends to break in pieces then this, to live in this neglect, 2 Timothy.2. 20. Nay it is an evidence there is no hope, no living hope, 1 John 3. 3.
He that has this hope, purges himself as Christ is pure. Many it seems
boasted of hope in Christ, so do Saints, but he gives this Note, He purges
himself, he will not sluggishly put all on Christ. It Is true, it is the mighty
working of Christ that must conquer thy lusts, but must this put you to neglect
striving, Col. 1. 29. I strive according to the working. And for mine own part,
though I Will not dispute the point at large, I believe, there is a constant
assistance of the mighty power of the Lord Jesus in the souls of all the
Saints, 1 Pet. 1. 5. And hence 1 John 4. Greater is he that is in you, then in
the world. The Saints as they receive the Lord Jesus to rule them, that he
alone may be Lord and King not only in heaven, but in their he^rts: So a false
hear^ receives Christ lastly for to ease him: Sometime for to ease him of the
burden of Conscience; sometime to ease him of the Lords work, the burden of
his will; and hence some at last have complained, though hardly convinced of
it, that they could be contented the Lord should act them; but their end was,
that hereby they might be rid of their burden, and so eased by him. I have
heard a Question should be asked, What is the difference between the workings of
Gods Spirit and the Saints? And that the Answer was, 1. The one is by graces,
the other immediately. 2. The Spirits is, when a man labors least: quite cross
to the stream of truth: Take heed how you understand these points aright, the
depth of the most hellish villainy in the world lies un^er them. Woe to thee that
can paint such a Christ in thy head, and receive such a Christ into thy heart
as must be a pander to your sloth; the Lord will revenge this wrong done to his
glory with greater sorrows then ever any felt: To make Christ not only meat and
drink to feed, but clothes to cover your sloth. Why what can we do? what can
we do? Why as the first Adam conveies not only guilt but power: So the second
conveys both righteousness and strength; as Christ is now triumphing by his
eternal Spirit, and his life is heavenly; so if you be in Christ, there is a
Spirit of Christ, whereby a never dying life is begot, that can and does
conquer; though it be but a spark, Christ maintaining it, it shall come to
victory. You are forsaken of Christ if you want this, or else take heed this
color make you not forsake him.

6. Those that neglect the means, and yet look for the end in hope of future
time, and so neglect the present season. Thus it is with many a one; the day of
life and health, and day of Ordinances continues; and hence the sluggard cries,
Prove. 24. 33. Yet a little more slumber, i. I Will have but a little while longer,
etc. Hence when Conscience checks, Ministers warn, the Lord wooes, the Spirit
cries; a man puts off all with this, I hope it will be better: And hence it
falls out with them as with those Matthew.24. The Lord comes in a time they look
not for him; and of this many on their deathbeds have cried out. Think of this
you convicted persons that know its miserable with you, before God stop your
breath; you have nothing to plead for your neglect, but hope of time. Know it,
Gods present seasons are golden, one moment worth eternity; and now is the
time, if you neglect his season, he will not regard yours. God is never found
in your time, but in his time. Oh lay these things to heart! especially you
that are grown weary of means, that faint in your way; God is not yet weary of
continuing means, art thou weary of gaining by means? Oh consider this you that
have had many hopes, desires purposes, but all blasted, your time and means
neglected: Think on this you that have had mavelous affections, but your
spirits are gone; Nothing can make you mend your pace, not all Ministry and
Word, but you are clogged with means. Remember that Isai. 65. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14. For my people that have sought me, etc.

SECT. V.
TO all those that do effectually seek the Lord in the use of means. And for
discovery thereof, Use 5.
Consider:

1. If ever the Lord gave you a hear^ effectually to seek him in means, you
will find mighty opposition, temptations springing up one after another, etc.
from within, from without, and the oppositions will make you seek him the more.
Hence Romans 13. 11, 12. he bids us put off the works of darkness, and put on the
armor of light. When man desires and lies in his sloth, he meets with little
opposition or trouble of his own heart; but here it is otherwise, therefore put
on armor. And I say the soul is made hereby to seek the Lord the more, as the
blind man, Mark 10. 48. Redeem the time, because the days are evil. As it is
with Mariners, they will not only use fair, but side, and almost contrary winds
to come near the shore they are bound for; let the Lord give any grace, oh more
of that mercy, as Moses, Deuteronomy. 3. 24. Let the Lord deny, yet the soul cries the
more; let agonies come, Christ prays the more; let the will oppose, he will
yield himself to the Lord to cross his own will, and deny himself; pe^ce makes
him love, and affliction makes him seek the Lord early. Hence because thou art
troubled at the feeling of a slothful heart, that will make you seek for more
help.

2. You will seek him with your whole heart, so that it is the Lord only that
the heart is bound for, Psalm. 119. 2. Phil. 3. 12. The feeling of the Lords
power and eternal life, and that not only while means last, but when in want
of, and banished from means: As David forgets his Crown and Kingdom, and says,
Psalm. 27. 4. One thing I have desired. Hence Hezekiah had a promise of life,
and going to Gods House when recovered, It was not life he minded so much as
this, What is the sign that I shall go to the House of the Lord? Hence Saints
though they neglect sometimes, yet as a Ship driven back by neglecting winds,
or as a Tradesman he is altogether for his gain, yet proves an ill husband
sometimes, but when he has felt his losses he falls to his losses he falls to
his trade again: So here, like Merchants seeking pearls, etc. Matthew. 13. 45.
Let this comfort you, though you find nothing, yet Saints are a generation of
Seekers, finding time is not come, yet certainly you shall come to your end at
last. You have no lappings for the sores of your sloth, but opening them before
the Lord, the Lord will heal and help in time.

But I feel no good, Object.
hence I am afraid I seek not aright.

Gal. 6. 9. You shall reap in due time, Answ.
and Hebr. 11. 13. All things were cross to the promise yet Abraham holds on
still.

But I find my spirit faint, Object.
and grow listless and weary.

When heart and strength fail, Answ.
yet God does not. God will desert that you may know where your strength, and
heart, and help lies.

But it is so great, Object.
I know no difference between mine and others neglect.

That is sad, Answ.
yet as it is in all sins, falls into them do but undermine them the more. Peter
denies Christ, as well as sleeps, yet he is the first that preache^h him. When
a man's meat is so far from doing good, as that it does him hurt, he is dying;
so that sin is dying, that slo^h is dying, when food given to it does kill it.
David is ready to give up all, yet says, Its good for me to draw near to God,
and there the heart will repose it self again.

SECT. VI.
OH be not sloth^ul then, Use 6. Of Exhort.
neglect no means, but use all means, get oil in your vessels that you may get
your desired end. Mariners that are bound for a voyage, when set out, will not
be at rest till they are landed where they would be. It was one of the Churches
sorrowful complaints, Isai. 64. 7. None that stirs up himself, etc.

But I find many hindrances without me, Object.
many sins within me, I have sometime neither strength (nay which is worse) nor
yet heart to seek the Lord, though my wants are many, though my days decline;
how shall I do?

1. Find out that which clogs thy heart from seeking effectually, Answ.
and causes that neglect, and that makes the Lord neglect thee in thy
ineffectual seeking; else thou may seek and never find, and that is some
lust, something that eases the heart which is not God. When the soul has not
bread, it will with the Prodigal then resolve for home; men could not live as
they do, so many days without God, unless they did feed on somewhat else beside
the Lord. Hence its usual for men in means, to use means for a good, and out of
means to resist that good, Isa. 58. 1, 2. Zac. 7. 6. Men that would have their
load drawn, must first take their wild Horses out of it: So do with these
lusts. If therefore not for your own, yet for the Lords sake, who else will not
be accounted worth the seeking, find out whatever contents you; necessity has
no Holidays, oh you must have him!

2. Use means, but trust not to them, nor to any strength received to carry you
along in this work: you will else neglect and fall from the Lord, and the Lord
from you. Its said of Asa, 2 Chro. 16. 12, 13. Asa was diseased in his feet in
his old age, yet he sought not to the Lord, but Physicians: So it is with many a
diseased Christian, they seek not to the Lord, to cure their feet, but means,
or themselves, hence he decays and dies. You have the stream of all temptations
against you, it is not your own Oars, but the Lords wind that must carry you
against it; look therefore to an almighty power in means to help you, plead
Gods Covenant to put his fear into your hearts, that you may not depart from
him, as he will not forsake you, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Paul received not grace in
vain, but lebours abundantly; yet not I, but grace. There is little fear of
drowning so long as we keep head above water, ^o long as we cleave to the Lord
Jesus.

3. Love the presence of the Lord and his company. If there be any love between
you, you will then find time, and nothing shall keep you from him, Ier. 2. 1,
2, 3. I remember the love of thine espousals, when thou followedst me in a
wilderness through pits and deserts. Remember he has been in heaven praying for
thee, when thou have been provoking of him, he has been blessing thee, when
thou have been abusing him, it may be he has let out his heart blood to make
room for thee in his heart, it may be he intends through all eternity to
express his dearest love to thee, and is he not worth your love? Love him, and
you will be with him, love will be stronger then death, it will break all these
bonds.

4. Set before you the greatness of the good you are to use all me^ns to gain;
why do men hunt after fleshpots? The world is esteemed great, it is near us,
and so for honor: Now Christ and eternity are afar off, and hence they seem
little, and hence to seek them is not made a business of greatest weight and
importance, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 18. We faint not while we look to things that are
eternal, Acts 24. 15, 16. There is not the vilest Rep^obate, but when he shall
see the glory that shall be revealed, shall stamp and rear his hair and say;
Oh, if I had known this! I hope I should never have dreamed out my time so as I
have done! We look on the Picture of Goodness in the volume of the Creatures,
which satisfy not; Oh never cease looking upward, till you see what you seek
for in the greatness of it. Suppose a man should sleep all his lifetime, and
be in a dream, and in it have all the delights and glory of the world presented
before him, at last the ground opens its mouth and swallows him up, and then he
is awakened, Lord how will he cry? Truly Christ and grace and fellowship with
God are not thought of, sought for, are small things with men, but the World is
great, and this is your delight; truly it is but your dream: What will your
souls be when death opens its mouth? what a sad thing is it to see men spin
Copwebs that must be swept down.

I. To those that never sought the Lord effectually to this day, Motiv^s.
not to neglect him now; those that are like children born before their time,
that have had some sorrow after the Lord, but comforted before it was deep
enough; have some desires, but eased with other things before they were
satisfied with Christ himself; that have run for a spurt, but are grown weary
before they come half way home, and so sit down in the way; like Clocks set
slow in the first hour of the day, run slow all the day after: So these set
back and think they are set right too, run slow all their life after. That as
he said of a covetous man, he had a strong desire for heaven if any would bear
his charges thither: So these. And to you I speak, not that never sought, but
that have been seeking; yet effectually to use all means, this you never did.

1. Consider how far men have gone? What means they have used? yet have never
found to this day, Luke 13. 24. Strive, says Christ. This I speak because men
think they may neglect their seasons of earnest pursuit after grace, men may
sit still, and put all care from themselves to God, and live in their sloth. Oh
no, Consider so many snares, so many by paths, so many deceits within, so many
sins and lusts to subdue, all time and means is little enough: Take heed of
spending prodigally, and think Christ's grace will bear you out. Oh! look upon
the cries at deathbed, to see some men that have been like famishing men that
have wanted bread, and then have cried bread, bread, but could not eat it. Oh
says Paul, I beat down my body, lest in preaching to others my self become a
cast away.

2. Consider how others have broken down the greatest difficulties, and are now
in glory, as Rev. 12. 11. They loved not their lives to the death. They have
not only spent their time, lost their name, their comforts, but their blood,
that have passed through waters, fires, bonds, imprisonments, and with Paul
have not accounted their lives dear, that they might finish their work. David
was full of God one would think sometimes he had enough, yet when he awakes, he
is with God at midnight, his thoughts and reins instruct him; the Law was his
meditation day and night. You shall see him in the Temple blessing God, on the
Throne advancing the Lord, on the dunghill, in banishment longing after him,
when he sat among Princes meditating; and was there here too much cost, might
any of this ointment have been spared? Consider Christ himself, Heb. 12. 1, 2,
3. cast off sloth, Looking to Jesus, who for the joy, despised the shame,
endured the Cross, and that not for himself, it may be for thee, that thou
might not, now he is at the right hand of God: So are the Saints in Heaven,
and now rejoicing that ever they sought him, that they spent so much time on
him.

3. Consider, There is a time of neglect of Christ, which when past, you shall
never finc'e him again, John 7. 3, 4. Ye shall seek me, but never find me. You
have had many Diamond-days and seasons, and God gives you a space to repent,
and says, My Spirit shall not always strive, it may be some are but within that
space, that the Lord is at the last cast with you.

4. Consider whatever your condition be, shake off your sloth, and set upon the
means, the Lord will be found; do it in good earnest: This will be good news to
you that think he will never, but be thy heart like steel, and hard, the Lord
will break it, Hebr. 11. 6. he will be found of them that seek him diligently:
And the greater things thou seek for, the more like to get them; as one of
the Fathers thinks that to pray with repetitions, is to pray for small things.
Open thy mouth wide I Will fill it, and it may be presently in a moment, when thou
think least of it, it may be at that time when thou find most
unwillingness and difficulty to seek, seek then and the Lord will be found. Oh
this damps many a man in the use of means, he thinks the Lord will never help,
and hence is tormented with this thought, and sits down and rests: If you would
keep a Labourer from work, or a Traveller from walking, put thorns in their
feet; now the work is neglected, there is pricking s^uffe, he cannot follow on
his business now: So it is here, Prove. 15. 19. Take heed therefore of sitting
down with such thoughts as these; its strange thou should be killed for every
cut, and because wounded for sin, to fall off from the Lord by unbelief too.

II. Motives to you that have followed the Lord, but now have begun to neglect
him: For what cause I know not, but I am sure the Lord has given you none: Yet
a spirit of slumber and sloth is upon you, that you are not the men you were.
It may be some for want of place, want of time, many occasions, many sorrows
and temptations in this wilderness; and hence no means sweet, no bed easy,
your bones are broken. It may be a little time of neglect has emboldned you to
a custom: It may be loose examples, the spirits of others flat, and thine is
so too, whom God sent into Church Fellowship to quicken them: It may be an ill
Husband is an hindrance, a bad wife, as Jobs wife, or whatever it is, Oh that
God would speak this day to you!

1. Consider thou art nearer to thy salvation than when thou did first
believe; and then you thought no time, no pains too much, but all too little,
Romans 13. 11, 12. Mariners near the Shore, look out for Rocks, Lord that I may
not split now. Truly as it was with Christ, the longer he did live, the more
sorrows, so with you. God has carried you near salvation, Oh now being nearer,
there are worse rocks, look about you now. Satan's last temptations are
strongest. Oh give not in now! It may be not many days nor weeks hence thou
shall come to thy journeys end: Awaken then out of sleep.

2. Consider how glad the Lord is of thy company, he has been so, and will be
so again; thou can not come in too late, 1 Samuel 12. 21. as poor and vile as
thou art, Prove. 8. His delight is with the Sons of men. Witness mercies,
witness afflictions. Oh then seek him! Witness desertions, then seek him;
witness his sweet entertainment of thee, many a time when he has given thee
meat that the world knows not of; witness so many hindrances which Satan lays
in, who knows how cross it is to Christ, Jer. 2. 1, 2, 3. I remember the love
of thine espousals, when thou did follow me; especially when with most
difficulty, when little strength within, when little hope without, yet I Will not
give over. He never forgets this. The Lord has never such sad days as when
thou turnest thy back on him, and thou never so good, as when thou seek him.

3. Consider thy gains, there shall not be the least endeavor, desire,
pursuit after the Lord, not the least Word, Prayer, Thought, time spent, but an
abundant recompense is in Christ's hands, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Ever abounding, knowing
that it shall not be in vain. A man that rows against the stream, a little
neglect of rowing carries him down again. But oh be ever abounding in the Lords
works, for your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

4. Consider if after admonition again and again, yet you nourish sloth, there
is some heavy stroke near thee. Believe it, he will not always bear with thy
neglect. As nothing joys him more than your company, so nothing cuts him more
than your neglect: But though he save you from eternal misery, yet sometimes
your greatest comfort is lost by this means, Mat. 26. 38, 40, 44, 45. First he
stirs them up once and again, then leaves them, and comes again, and says
nothing, but the third time, sleep on, the Son of man is betrayed. So your
comfort, and Christ and his presence are betrayed. Some have had their
husbands, wives, children estates gone, but which is worst of all, the Lord
betrayed, the comfort of their hearts gone, and hence horrors and fears
surprise them.

III. Motives to us especially in this Country.

1. God has put the price and wealth of the world, better than all Gold and
Silver into our hands, who are most unthankful, most unworthy; and will you
come so far for means, and here neglect them? Will you thus neglect the Lord?
Like men in Consumptions, they long for any thing, and when it comes, they
cannot touch it. If it were night, you might fall to sleep, but the day
approaches. Shall God plant his Vineyard, but you never come to eat the fruit
of it?

2. Your Temptations are greater here to neglect the Lord. Others are tried
with the scorching Sun, there is no sleeping there. God tries us with the
shadow, sets us under the Vines of Ordinances; others are in storms, we in
calms. When thou eatest and art full, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 8. 10, 11. Oh forget
not the Lord! You lose in your estates, and now you are hungry after the same
again. Satan when Christ was hungry, assaults him. It Is a thousand to one if he
makes you not fair offers, and overcomes. Things that cost us much, we prize,
and keep, and improve, if of any use. When we go Twenty mile to a Sacrament, Oh
then its precious! While under the bondage of oppressors, oh liberty of
Conscience, and Ordinances are precious? But when at liberty, we have liberty
to have them, hence take liberty to neglect them.

3. Our enemies will be upon us. Who sees not (that observes the Lords dealing)
that some sorrows are toward, unless the Lord awaken; some sudden blasting
blow. If any wind be stirring, men on the tops of the mountains will feel it.
The Lord has set his mountain above all others, and its f^lly to think to flee
from the Cross, unless we flee from Christ. It Is part of the portion he does
owe us here, if he loves us. Yet seek the Lord, neglect no seasons to gain him,
and you shall he hid, Zeph. 2. 2. Nay when worst times come, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3, 4,
5. when there is no peace, they that seek him shall find him.

I do fear there is at this day as deep mischief plotting against New England
as ever the Sun saw. Enemies will first deal subtly before cruelly, but
subtly that they may deal cruelly. When Pharaoh deals wisely, he means to
kill. Yet the Lord shall be with us, as of late has he not been seen in the
midst of us for a refuge? Whatever any think, I believe never did the Lord stir
up such prayers, Faith, etc. amongst us.

1. Oh therefore seek the Lord still in private. If you find no good, find out
the sin. Is not meditation neglected? Communion of Saints not improved? Do not
say, we can do nothing, and why are we pressed to it? If you cannot, yet it is
your duty, and you must be pressed; and perish you shall if you seek not; or if
you be called, there is some spirit of the Lord in you that is mighty.

2. Being come hither for public helps, and means, and all Ordinances; Oh do
not betray your Liberties! but lose your Blood before you lose them, and the
Lord in them. Bear the Arc still on your shoulders, that the Lord may dwell
with you. Hence,

1. If you would have the Walls of Magistracy be broken down (the means to
preserve the Church and means among you) If they make Laws, deride them; if
they execute Laws, appeal from them.

2. Would you have confusion the mother of discord among the people? let every
man then once one day in the year turn Magistrate, and outface Authority, and
profess it is his liberty. Would you have rapines, thefts, injustice abound? let
no man know his own, by removing the Landmark, and destroying Proprieties.

3. Would you have Gods Ordinances in the purity of them removed? keep out the
load of Superstition, but yet for peace sake, suffer a few seeds to be sown
amongst you.

4. Would you have all the Messengers of the Gospel at first revised, at last
massacred? Profess they are no better than Scribes and Pharisees, persecuting
Egyptians, enemies to the Lord Jesus, and the more devout the worse; as those
that stirred up storms in Germany said, Christ had four great enemies: The
Pope, Anabaptists, Martin Luther, but especially John Calvin.

5. Would you ruin the Gospel? set not Popery against it, but Gospel against
Gospel, Promises against Promises, Christ against Christ, Spirit against
Spirit, grace against grace, and then he is twice beaten, that falls by his own
weapons.

6. Would you have oppressors set over you, to remove ordinances, to increase
your burdens? Maintain this Principle then that they will not assault us first
by craft and subtilty, but openly and violently.

7. Would you have this State in time to degenerate into Tyranny? Take no care
then for making Laws. When they are made, would you have all Authority turned
to a mere vanity? Be gentle and open the door to all comers that may cut our
throats in time; and if being come they do offend, threaten them and fine them,
but use no Sword against them. You Fathers of the Country be not offended, this
I speak not to disparage any, the practice speaks otherwise; I only forewarn:
I hope the Lord has prepared better days and mercies for us, I am sure he
will, if what means we have we preserve, and what we preserve, we through grace
shall improve.

CHAP. XVII.
That the hearts and souls of Believers are made as Vessels, only for the
reception of Christ his Spirit, and the graces thereof
SECT. I.
2. THe Inward Principle, wherein lies the second Difference which is plainly
expressed.

We are now to inquire further concerning these Vessels and the Oil in them.
Vessels were the place only of receiving and preserving the oil for the
continual burning and shining of the Lamps: So that though in some Scriptures,
by Lamp is understood both the Vessel and the Lamp by a Figure, yet in distinct
Phrase of Speech, that is properly the Lamp which burns and gives light, and
that which contains the oil to nourish this is the Vessel: So that the Vessels
were not separate things from the Lamp, as though the Lamp was in one hand, and
a Vessel in the other; this was neither the custom, nor comeliness of that age
to cumber themselves thus; but the Lamp (as it is in ours) was that part which
was kindled and lighted, the Vessel that which kept the oil to serve this end:
And hence the folly of five of them appeared, that they would carry burning
Lamps with empty Vessels; just as if a man should draw the wiek through the oil
that it may burn for a time, and provide no oil in the Vessel to maintain the
Lamp; however all comes to one (if they be separate) in respect of that that I
aim at.

Thus Literally we see what the Lamp, Vessel, and Oil is: Now what is
Spiritually meant thereby.

1. For the Oil: What is that? I intend not here to show the fond and various
apprehensions of Popish Writers, who understand by oil, alms, good works, a
good intention, etc. But by Oil is meant the Spirit of Christ, and the graces
of it, peculiar to all the Elect; and thus in Scripture phrase, 1 John 2. 27.
the Spirit is called the anointing; and the graces of the Spirit, Cant. 1. 3.
The smell of Christ's ointments: Harlots love him for the gifts he sends, but
Virgins for the grace he has. That oil which ran first on our Aarons head,
and runs down to his skirts is here meant. Now as Christ himself had not the
Spirit without graces, nor these without the Spirit, but both: So both these
being in him as in the Fountain, they are in us as in the Vessel.

2. Christ being the Fountain of all grace, and having the Spirit without
measure, and therefore has enough to spare; he cannot be meant by these
Vessels which had but their measure, and such a measure as that they had none
to spare for the other. Therefore by Vessels are meant principally the precious
souls of the faithful, into which this golden Oil was put, and therefore, 2
Cor. 4. 7. We have this treasure in earthen vessels. And Romans 9. 23. They are
vessels of glory, prepared unto glory, and so frequently; so that herein the
foolish fall short, for the foolish boasted of Christ out of them, but where
was the Spirit and virtue of Christ in them? And this is conceived to be the
reason why the main difference is not made, by the want of the external
principle, Viz. Christ, but by want of the internal principle and work; this
they had not. 1. They had so much oil, i. e. lighter strokes of the Spirit, as
kindled a profession but they had not enough. 2. They had so much oil and
light as continued their profession for a while, but it continued not long:

Here therefore observe these four things:

That the precious souls of the faithful are Vessels made only or chiefly to
receive and preserve the presence of the Spirit and grace of Christ. Obs. 1.


That within these Vessels there is an inward principle of Grace and Life. Obs.
2.


That there is a certain measure, Obs. 3.
degree, plenitude or fullness of the Spirit of Grace in the hearts of the
Faithful, which the unsound, though most glorious Professors of the Gospel fall
short of.

That the graces of the Saints wherewith their hearts by the Spirit are filled,
Obs. 4.
are constant, and of an everlasting, and eternal nature.

These three last answer three Questions, If any ask the difference between the
Virgins; the foolish want, and the wise have an inward principle of the Spirit
of life. If it be said, Hypocrites have an inward work, yet this inward
Principle is such a fullness of Spirit which they ever fall short of, and this
will make them known for the present. If again it be said, That many flourish
gloriously for a time; yet its of an everlasting nature: And this will manifest
them one from another in time to come.

The First Point therefore I Will only touch on now.

SECT. II.
THat the precious souls and hearts of all the faithful are vessels made
chiefly and only to receive and preserve the Spirit and Grace of Christ, Doct.
1.
Or the gracious presence of the Spirit of Christ: That as it is with the souls
of the wicked, they are made only to hold Satan, sin and wrath, and so fitted
for destruction; so the souls of the Saints are made and fitted only to
receive and nourish the Spirit, grace, and love of Christ. That as it is with
Princes, the best rooms are reserved only for them; their Attendants may come
in and out to serve them, but its their room, their lodging: So here, the
hearts of the faithful, and the best rooms, best affections of it, are only to
entertain the Lord, and his grace and Spirit; yet other things may come in and
out as Attendants to him, to serve him, but the rooms themselves are only for
his proper use, 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21. The Church is Gods House; now there are many
Vessels (many souls) some baser of wood, and earth, some of honor; what are
these? Answ. If a man purge himself from these; for no man is born with a next
disposition to receive grace, as a Vessel full of puddle water that must first
be cast out: Now when this is done, he is a Vessel meet for his Masters use,
prepared, etc. The best Vessels abide in the house, not for their own or
servants use, but for the Masters use only. And though the Spirit may withdraw
for some time, and they be unable to do any good work, yet they are prepared
for the Spirit, and so for every good work, and here is all the use of the
vessel of honor. Hypocrites are vessels of Pomp, and State, and Ornament: Oh
the brave Church of Sardis! the profound judgments, deep heads, eminent
Christians, but not Vessels of honor, because not Vessels of use only for
their Master, only to receive the eternal anointing of the Spirit of the Lord
Jesus. If you would know the certainty of this more fully, 1. Go and ask
themselves; Is it so or no? If they be of age, and know themselves they will
say, I am the Lords only, Isa.44. 4, 5. When they spring up as willows by the
watercourse: One shall say, I am the Lords. As that eminent Light said, when
dying, Oh Lord, I will be thine: Ask the world whose they are? and to what use
and purpose they serve? they will answer, they are none of ours; and therefore
John 15. 19. The World hates them. Ask the Lord himself, he will profess though
many wants and weaknesses in them, nay, though sometimes they are weary and
neglect him, fall and soil themselves, yet Isai. 43. 21. This people have I
formed for my self: Vessels formed and fitted of God only for his glory.

1. Because all the creatures in the world are theirs, and servants to them,
Reas. 1
and therefore they are for the Lord only, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. If the more
we took care for, and set our hearts upon the creature, if the more we were
conversant with it, the more we should have, and the better we should live; Or
if they should not serve us, unless we did first bow down our knees to worship
them, and our backs to bear them; Then seeing the world lives by catching, we
might then dis-robe and dis-throne our souls, and care more for these things,
and less for the Lord; love these things more, and the Lord less; but the Lord
Jesus having taken all care for his people, and bearing more love to them, and
having more care of them than themselves, and therefore having given all
creatures in the heavens, sea and dry land to serve them, they ought to be, and
are only for him, Hos. 2. 21, 23. When a man is the seed of God, and born for
him, Now all creatures serve him; hence 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18. It Is a prevailing
Motive with all the Saints, we have a living God that gives us all things; all
creatures being dead, and not able of themselves to help us, therefore trust
not on these things, but him only, be not high minded in these things; but
magnify him only. We know how angry God was with Belshazzar for profaning the
Vessels of the Lords House in making them quaffing bowls, and turning them to
common use. When a man is brought to that misery that he has none, nor knows
of none to be a friend to take care or thought for him, none that loves him,
then he shifts for himself and becomes a servant. But those that know, as women
that they have rich husbands to live on, they take care 1 Cor. 7. 34. how to
please them: So here. What Is the reason that men are mad for this world? Because
they poor creatures have no friend, know no friend; but Saints have him, and
know him, John 17. 2. The Saints are given to Christ, Christ to them, and all
the world put into Christ's hands for us, (for the creatures are not given to us
immediately to our own dispose, and hence we have not much of this world) to
what end? That so he might give eternal life begun here. This is the only gift,
and last, and best, and worthy of himself, and this only we receive.

2. In regard of that blessed Liberty all the faithful are brought into, Reas.
2.
for what is a Christians Liberty? Is it to serve men? No, 1 Cor. 7. 23.
Therefore serve not your selves: Is it then to serve your own lusts? No, Romans
6. 22. You are made free from sin, and servants unto God. Is it then to serve
any Creature out of your selves? No, Gal. 1. 4. The world is yours already, 1
Cor. 3. 21, 22. given to you, bought for you, spend not therefore one groat
more to purchase it, but keep those affections and hearts for the Lord; much
less imprison not, and imbondage not your selves for it. A Christians liberty
which God crowns him with above all the Princes of the world, is to be only
for the Lord, which liberty all creatures groan to be in, Romans 8. 21, 22. To be
for God and a lust, for Christ and this world, its a shameful bondage, and most
lamentable, and you are not at liberty yet, if not only for the Lord. When the
children of Kings and Peers, of Princes shall be made to come at the call of
their Grooms and Kitchin-boys, if ever they stood before the face of Princes,
they will count this a heavy thraldom and bondage: So if ever you stood before
the God of the whole earth, you will account it an heavy bondage, to have an
heart sometime for, and sometime not for the Lord. Is not this liberty? No, but
to have a heart only determined to the Lord; as it is in Angels, and in the man
Christ Jesus. Verily look as the Lord leaves his people for a time to their
liberty in sin, so that their hearts are determined only to sin, that they are
fit only to receive the suggestions and pleasures of it, but fit to quench the
Lords Spirit: So the Lord Jesus making himself and grace more sweet than their
lusts, their hearts are determined only for him, their Vessels are only for
his Oil, Romans 6. 19. The liberty of will that Arminians plead for is nothing
but the hypocrisy of a false heart, whose heart being touched partly with God,
and partly with the creature; hence is always falling from one to the other,
Iam. 1. Double minded men; but the Saints are determined unto one, and hence
made perfect in one.

3. In regard of the fullness and all sufficiency of the Spirit of Grace which
their hearts are made fit vessels to receive, Reas. 3.
and do receive; they finding enough there, God reserves them, and they reserve
themselves only for the receiving of this, Ioh. 6. 68. Will you depart? Lord,
to whom should we go? Thou have the words of life; and so the Spirit of life,
that have quickened our hearts when dead, that do put fresh life to us when
dying, that comfort our hearts when sorrowing. Here is the life glory, the life
of Christ, the life of God; other things do but dead our hearts, thou have
words of life, John 4. 14. The Water that I give shall, 1. Be that which shall
quench all his thirst to other things; so that though a man wants them, yet his
stomach is gone, which the damned shall find otherwise. 2. A Well of Water in
him, ever near him; men have their accomodations far off, but this is i^ him.
Your hearts within are troubled, perplexed, and behold this is in you. 3.
Springing up, continually increasing, for to have a good thing, and not to be
satisfied in our desires with it, what is it but a misery? Hence it springs up
unto everlasting life, which is the Fourth, Viz. The Continuance of (...), this
will be here till my mortality is swallowed up of life. Like a leaking ship
that takes in water by little and little, till at last it is swallowed up in
the se^.

SECT. III.
HEnce we may see the reason why the Lord does not abundantly reveal and
communicate himself to the souls of many men. Use 1.
What is the matter? Is it because they find no want of his spirit, and life,
and grace, and peace, and glory? Yes they do, and hence express their wants
to men, and complain of their wants to God. Is it for this, that Christ has
not wherewithal? Yes, he has received the Spirit without measure, John 3. 34.
and fountains always run, though men seldom drink. What then? Is it because
they bring not their hearts, hold not their vessels under the Lords horn of
oil? Yes that they do, but their vessels are naught, they are not only for him;
they feel their want of grace and Christ, but not only or chiefly of this.
Special Grace shall never be poured into a common vessel, a common heart, that
lies in common for God, and lust, and world too. The honor, peace, life, gain,
of a God, are sweet and precious. Lord ever give me that water to drink. But
you have five husbands, and seek not this only: Hence, if the Lord de^ies you,
you can be content, because you have something else to fill your vessels; if
the Lord gives, you undervalue it and grow worse: and the very rising of that
common grace you have, is the beginning of your apostasy, and setting off from
God. And hence, no wonder why you pray but never have, Iam. 1. 6, 7. you want,
and crave, but never find; your vessel is naught, though the Lord is good. It Is
a black mark that thou art in bondage to the creature, and did never know
what the liberty, even the glorious liberty of a son means. And it is a most
grievous bondage to be half unloosed and yet to be in bonds. And I assure you,
if you knew the gift of God, if ever you tasted how sweet the Lord is; this is
the only thing your souls will cry for: That when you come to ask, and the Lord
says, what would you have? Oh the spirit of life! Oh the anointing of my
blessed head! And what else? It only; this is it only my vessel is made to
hold, I am not made for my lust, nor sins, nor world: I would I had a bigger
vessel, a larger heart to receive thy Grace only. I confess, a gracious he^rt
may for a time be carried too violently after other things; and yet seek the
Lord too, as Solomon, Eccl. 2. But after it knows Christ better, it is more
reserved now for him, as Genesis 39. 3, 4, 5, 6. Joseph's master for a time kept
things in his own hand; but when he saw the Lord was with Joseph, and that he
was prosperous, and blessed, then he made him overseer, and he knew not it is
said, what he had, save only the bread that he did eat: So it is in our Joseph.
As the poor woman that knew the Messiah, she leaves her vessel, her water-pot
with him, and now would have all the City to come and see and believe in him,
and depend on him only, trust to him only. etc. Do therefore seek, and find
not? Have bin long waiting, and feel not? And thou wondrest at it! Others
comforted, and I not! Search if this be not the cause; it may be thy heart is
not set only for this, but on thy back, belly, lots, ease, what shall I eat,
drink? etc. As some women, because God does not feed so liberally their sweet
tooth, their licorish longings; build them seiled houses, measure their present
condition according to their sinful humor; nothing can please them: neither
husband, servants, Ministers, nor Gods Ordinances. Is this a vessel for the
Lord and his Grace only? You must, you will have a longer coat than you can
well wear; Hold here. Never think to have one prayer answered: If this night
thy day of misery should come, cry thou may, but no God to hear thee or help
thee. Oh a little oil, now a little grace, now a little mercy, Lord now. Oh no,
you have no vessel to hold it. But oh bless the Lord you know it. Others it may
be are no^ so full of these sores of impatiency: but you pray for God, and
Grace, and have it not. Why so? These are not the things that you are only set
for. Why? Because you are content without them. I am not, you will say; But you
are; for you do not lament daily after the Lord for these things only: that
which only satisfies, that thy heart is not at rest till it find: I hope I may
have help for all this: No says James, think not so. Oh therefore bless the
Lord. You know what hurts you; Saints have hurts thus: but they purge
themselves, and hence are blessed vessels still. When Moses was begging for
Israel, mine Angel, says God, shall go with you, I will not. No, thou only,
else let us die here, Exodus 33. This prayer wins the field and wears the
garland. The evils of the Churches are many, an hour of temptation is coming
on; scandals are like to be great; the subtilties of enemies many. Now we pray,
and yet these have come, and we fear they will come. Oh beloved, go to the
Lord, and plead with him only for this; and when thou can procure nothing for
thy self, yet let it fare well with Sion: and this only I must have. Psalm. 27.
4. One thing have I desired. You shall have it then, else not.

See the great sin of those that lose their life, Use 2.
preserve not the Spirit when he comes to them in Ordinances; you are vessels
only made for the Lord, and will you lose that which He drops in? There is no
others can receive him, John 14. 17. and when He comes to you, do you thus
requite Him? etc.

CHAP. XVIII.
That the Holy Spirit is in beleivers as the Principle of their Spiritual Life
and Holiness.
SECT. I.
THat within these Vessels, is an inward Principle of Life and Grace. Doct. 2.
Or, The burning shining profession of all the faithful, it proceeds from an
inward Principle of the Spirit of Grace, by the means of which, their Lamp
burns, and their Profession shines.

For this I understand by oil in the vessel, the Spirit of Jesus, not out of
us, but received in us; not coming only upon us, for so he may on foolish
virgins, by Balaamitish ravishments, and hypocritical pangs, and land-flood
affections; but abiding in us, and that not as it does in hypocrites, but as it
is in Christ Jesus, without measure, both Spirit and Graces, so it abides in us
in measure: in Him as the fountain, in us as the vessels, from whose fullness,
we receive the same. So that by oil is not meant the external Principle of all
Life, the Lord Jesus having Spirit and Grace enough, but keeping our hearts
empty of it: but the Lord Jesus in us, who is not in us, but by his Spirit,
even the Spirit of Life, from whence all our actions spring, and from which oil
our lamp burns. This therefore I say, the Profession of the faithful, springs
not from outward motives, or principles of motion, as the actions of
hypocrites; sometimes sudden praise, sometimes gain, sometimes fe^rs, sometimes
fleshly hopes, sometimes sudden conceit and fancy, some times irruption and
rushings of the Spirit upon them; but there is a spring within, there is a life
within; there is oil in the Vessel to fill the lamp, and so hence it burns.
Ephesians. 2. 1. You has he quickened, who were dead in sins, i. e. you were held as
fast under the power of your sins, as a dead man is under the bonds of death:
but now in the room of that death, there is the Spirit of life, and the life of
the Spirit. Now life is an inward principle of motion, of any thing in its own
place; as the sun, and trees, and grass, and cattle. You may take a stone, or
millstone, or wheel, and move it, yet they have no life, because this is not
from an inward Principle so: hypocrites may be acted, and moved by the great
power of the Spirit in an Ordinance, yet not living but dead still. John 4. 14.
the water (which is the Spirit) is a spring of living water in him. Cisterns
may have water in them, but no spring that is running winter and summer. 1 John
3. 9. This is called the seed remaining in him: which is that new creation, new
birth, which the verse it self expounds, so that he cannot sin; it is against
his nature, now he cannot be a sinmaker. Balaam could not curse the people of
God; and many cannot do as others do. Why, is it, because they are born of God?
No, but from some other respects: and hence, Mat. 13. 21. the stony ground fell
away, because they had not the root within. This is called the inner man; the
good treasure of the heart, opposite to the evil treasure of the heart of a
wicked man. Now, as an evil man acts not only from Satan, the evil spirit; but
the inward power of lust; so the Saints, Mat. 12. 35. And here I intend not to
show what this inward Principle is particularly, for that I reserve to the two
last points. Yet, least any should stumble, let me speak to two sorts.

1. Know some of you, that there is not only external actings of the Spirit
from whence we act, but a new nature in the Saints.

2. Let others know, 1. That as before the Lord calls we are dead, so after we
are alive this inward principle is not perfect here: Hence actions sometimes
cease, and when they do not, yet are corrupted, as laesa principia act, but
ever err in their act, hence have need of pardon from and acceptance in the
Lord Jesus. 2. That this is not in us as in Adam, who did not need to borrow
life of another, but it stands in daily need of the Lord Jesus, and hence this
inward principle acts, but it is by faith, the operations of which are the
wagons to victual the camp continually, especially in time of need, and which
is part of this inward principle; and hence 1 Pet. 1. 5. You are kept by power
and faith, i. your souls, graces, lives are kept by the Spirit, but through
faith in us to salvation.

Let me therefore prove these three things to you for opening of this point.

1. That the Spirit of the Lord Jesus is in the souls of the faithful.

2. That there is a principle of created graces, or the life of the Spirit in
them.

3. That from this principle of the Spirit dispensing himself by his graces,
our lamp burns, our acts of profession spring and shine forth.

First, That the Spirit of Jesus is in the souls of the faithful, 1 John 2.
27. The anointing teaches you all things. Romans 8. 11. The Spirit that raised
up Jesus from the dead dwells in us. The manner of his being in us I intend not
to meddle with, unless I saw more cause: I do believe the manner of his
abiding in us, and his nearness to all the Saints, when seen of us, may
astonish our own spirits, and shall one day confound all the world; Only know,
as the Martyr said, He is come, he is come. The spirit of the world and Satan
is cast out, 1 Cor. 2. 12. and in room of them enters the Spirit of God.

Secondly, That the Spirit so is in the faithful, as that there is a principle
of created graces in them, or an inward principle of life and grace. Not that
these alone make this inward principle, but the Spirit in us working of them,
working by them. And truly it is a sad thing if the proving of such a principle
shall be an attributing too much to grace in us.

1. Therefore to deny this is to deny Christ to be our sanctification: For
beside the passive obedience of Christ, we are justified by his active
obedience also, i. e. his inward conformity to the Law, and his external
obedience to the Law. So that graces as they are in Christ become our
justification; and hence he is said to be our righteousness. No man can stand
before God but by perfect holiness, but by doing whatever the Law requires,
and continuing so to do; this is not in us, this is in Christ: This as it is in
Christ is properly our righteousness or justification. Now what is our
sanctification? if not graces in Christ, then graces received from Christ
Jesus, which is this inward principle now I speak of; and therefore to deny
this is no less than to say Christ is not our sanctification: But says Paul,
The Lord sanctify you in soul and body and spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. And if it
were so, a man may have a heart unsanctified and Christ too.

2. If there should not be those graces, then a Christian was not bound to add
one grace to another, but then the Apostles precept should be broken, 2 Pet. 1.
7, 8. and so a Christian could not grow in grace, for graces are perfect in
Christ; and the Spirit does not grow in grace, and the immediate operations of
the Spirit increasing in us, are not properly graces, no more than the act of
seeing is the eye, no more then giving goods to be burned is love.

3. Then we are not to pray for graces, if there be no such things to be found
in the hearts of Saints, but Psalm. 51. 10. David prays, Create in me a clean
heart; now if it be a thing created in me, it is not the Spirit only in me, for
that cannot be created. I doubt not but David had a clean heart, but he fell in
part; and therefore look as there needs a creating power to make, so there is a
creating power to restore us again to what is lost.

4. Then the Saints have none of their sins mort^fied; for it is as with the
eye, being made to see; if sight goes out, darkness comes in, and if that be
subdued, sight is renewed: So the Soul being made only for God, and to bear his
image; blot out that darkness and sin comes in: cast out sin, the Lord and his
Image and Graces come in. If therefore there be no Graces in the Saints, then
no sin mortified: truly if so, then the end of Christ's coming, and dying is
quite abolished, 1 John 3. 8. and Romans 6. 2, 3.

5. Then the Lord should be false in his Covenant, and break Oath, and be
forsworn: for, Ier. 31. 32. I Will write my Law in their hearts. Luke 1. 73, 74.
So that if you will not believe man, yet believe God: and if you will not
believe his Word, yet his Oath. Oh, but many good Christians find no such
thing. But is it so, as they find it indeed? Either then they are no
Christians, or else the Lord is forsworn.

Thirdly, That by the inward principle of Spirit, and Graces, our lamp burns,
and shines, our actions issue. The Spirit enables a man to know, and hence the
act flows, he does know the Lord. The Spirit enables inwardly for to love the
Lord, and hence it does love him. That as Christ says, a good tree brings
forth good fruit, from an inward sap received from the root, and by abiding on
the root; So here.

1. Those that are renewed to Adams image in their measure, have according to
that measure, power to act; or in those Graces there is power to act, for he
had power so to do. Every creature in the world had a Law of Nature to carry
them to their end; and so were carried to it. But Adam had a Law of Divinity,
whereby he being a cause by Counsel, was enabled by God to carry himself toward
his end. Now we are renewed to that image in part, Ephesians. 4. 24. I know there is
difference between Adams power to act, which had no Faith, ours that has. And
do not think that this does advance nature, and the power of man, no more than
the execution of the Promise of the Covenant of Grace, does destroy Grace and
advance nature. For the writing again the Law in our hearts, is that which this
Covenant promises; nay, this does honor the riches of Grace: that a man being
under the power of sin, and cannot get deliverance, the Lord should now give an
humble conquering Spirit: never a precious heart but will be thankful for it.

2. Because the Graces in us, are received from the Lord Jesus his fullness,
John 1. 16. Now the Graces in Christ are not dead, but living, are not weak,
but powerful; the Spirit of Grace it is now triumphing in him, it is so in us
only: it is in him in the highest degree, in us in a lower. And therein consists
our likeness to Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 18. And to deny this, is to deface the Image
of the Lord Jesus; and this is part of the Beauty and Glory of Christ: hence to
deny this, is to obscure the glory of the Lord Jesus. Without Christ a
Christian can do nothing: but how does Christ do all, by the Spirit without
Graces? (I speak not of Conversion where it is without Graces as causes) No
truly, as he acts, so we act in part. Unless any will say, we have not received
grace for grace; or are in no measure like the image of Christ.

3. If the first Adam has conveyed to all his members a power of corruption,
then the second Adam also a power of Godliness, contrary to that, 2. Tim. 3. 5.
yet in measure still, so as the Apostle says, we can do nothing against the
Truth, but for the Truth. 2 Cor. 13. 8.

But what measure of power is it? Quest.


I know no man that can from any ground limit the measure of it. Answ.
For it may be in some men in greater power, in some men in less, in the same
man at one time in a greater measure, at another time less. If one ask of
trees, what measure of fruit they can bring forth; we cannot tell, because
sometime more, sometime less: and the same tree more one year than another, and
more at one time of the year then another; for they have their winter season.
Only this, whereas before conversion he is stark dead to act, now he is alive
and is not dead. And if a man should after conversion be but in the next
disposition to receive Grace, then how could one Christian be more grown and
stronger in Grace in his inner man than another? I know not any to question
this, only I speak it to cut off their carnal hopes, that think Christ is
theirs, when they have nothing, can do nothing, and slightly say he must do
all; I cannot, I tell you the Saints can, they cannot but love the Lord, and
choose the Lord. etc.

But must not a Christian deny himself, and always go to Christ for power to do,
Object. 1.
and so be humble, and empty?

1. You must, because this is the means to live to Christ's; Answ.
but this does not argue you have no power at all. A man must pray for his
daily bread, much more for daily grace; but does this argue a man has no bread
in his house? No, this is the means to have it continued and blessed. Easily can
the Lord take away bread, or the staff of bread. Graces extinguish not Faith,
but help it.

2. A Christian can do no duty perfectly, hence must repair to Christ to help
him to do every duty better; hence though he must use that power he has, and
do what he can, yet he must not content himself with what he has, but seek for
more, and what a sweet life is this? What honor would here come in? God lets
in a new light into my mind, now I may and must see his truth, I saw it
yesterday, but I may and must go to Christ to do it better; I must not quench
the Spirit of prayer, but carry the key with me, and next day pray better. And
thus the soul is thankful for what it has, and emptying it self
notwithstanding that, and daily then receiving from Christ. And I believe many
Christians fail here: As in the body, meat feeds and strengthens life, so I
cannot live without Christ.

But does not this make a man trust to graces? Object. 2.


To act from them is not to trust to them, Answ.
no more then for a diligent hand to trust to his diligence, when he acts
diligently that so he may be rich.

But does not this dishonor grace to do all by the power of it? Object. 3.


Then the Saints in heaven that are made perfectly like Christ, Answ.
and that love the Lord perfectly, should not honor grace by this means, when
as this is it that makes them honor it most of all. As David, Lord what am I,
and my people, that we should offer willingly: So here.

SECT. II.
SEE hence what cause of thankfulness to all the people of God, Use 1.
that the Lord should make their souls the Vessels (which he might easily and
justly have dashed in pieces) to receive and preserve this eternal anointing; I
do believe there is no man that knows the bitterness of sin, the plague of his
own heart, but when he sees Christ is his, yet it makes him mourn that there
should be so little suitableness between the Lord and him, so little likeness
between his life and Christ; what though the Lord love me, and yet my heart
weary of him? what though the Lord bless me, and my heart abuse him? and hence
this makes it thankful, Romans 7. 24, 25. This is so far from dishonouring grace,
as that the Apostle makes this the matter of admiration of Gods grace, Ephesians. 2.
3, 4. God who is rich in mercy, when dead in sins has quickened us: Not only
quickened our head, for hence is cause of eternal praise, but us; and hence he
has set us up in heavenly places in him: This is the state of all men, they
cannot do one spiritual act; now that the Lord should help when all creatures
left us, is wonderful, but that it should be with such a life, even the life of
Christ Jesus himself, for the same Spirit that raised him from the dead dwells
in us, and the same Spirit that is now in glory with him, is in us, 1 Pet. 5.
1. This is mercy indeed; that he should not only die for us, and live in heaven
for us, but that he should love so dearly as to come and live in us, that when
our sins had slain him, he should not only come and dwell in our houses, nor
only lay his head in our bosom, but live in our hearts, where he finds such
poor welcome, and ill entertainment at our hands, I tell you this is wonderful,
to make his habitation in us, that before we go to live with him, he should
live in us: Let them that never knew what this meant refuse to be thankful, but
if you find it so, forget not this love, John 14. 17. I Will send the Spirit whom
the World cannot receive, because it knows him not. The Lord sends the Spirit
in common graces, and the World does receive that also in prophetical and
miraculous gifts, and it does receive that; but this Spirit which God pours on
the thirsty, this Spirit with which God fills the empty, they cannot receive
this. Oh that you should have it, when as they know it not.

1. Hence therefore take heed of not owning the Spirit in this his presence. Do
you thus requite the Lord, oh unthankful world! not so much as to own the
presence of such a friend, neither in your selves, nor yet in others. How like
the world is it to think that there is no such thing?

2. Take heed therefore of not esteeming highly of it. If ever God broke thy
heart, thou will esteem this life, this principle as the greatest piece of
love; and say, Lord I shall account this as the greatest part of love in the
world, Psalm. 119. 68. Thou art good, oh teach me thy Statutes: Now to
undervalue this, and to account it common, and hence as no sign of love, it is a
part of unthankfulness.

3. Take heed of imprisoning the Spirit of grace, common truth, Romans 1. 18. It
was fearful to imprison and silence that, much more this. It was the complaint
of the Church in those days, None stirs up himself, Isai. 64. 7. What strength
the Lord gives, let me use; what I want, the Lord has enough to help me
withal; put it to exercise, or else affliction will.

4. Take heed of enfeebling this Principle, weakening of it: The Church of
Sardis things were ready to die in it, you should strengthen this inner man,
not weaken it, either by not feeding it with Christ, or wounding it with known
sins against Christ. Therefore let all the Churches know this, and take heed
that you do not refuse to own this: where else will you make the difference
between men, that either Churches may discern them, or you may discern, and so
have peace your selves.

Hence see the reason of that inward hypocrisy that is in many men's hearts,
Use 2.
so that the best profession of many a man is but a Scheme; an Image, a very
craft* a very artificial form; all the duties are fair without, but sapless,
liveless, within: Here is the reason they have no inward principle of life, or
if they do go to Christ, they have no such principle within them, to carry them
to him, so as to receive life from him; and hence confess sin without sorrow or
shame, petition without thirsting, live without love, do without life, because
there is no spring, but a dry heart within; and hence they must do duty, but
they must make dead work of it, and hence all is but an appearance, and at best
but a would be: This is in a great measure in Saints when the Spirit within is
quenched, but it is in full age and strength in hypocritical hearts, Ier. 4.
14. when the profession of Judah was great, and the Prophets had scarce any
thing to say against them for outside, Oh Jerusalem, wash thy heart from
wickedness, there thy woe lies, it enters to the very heart; so Christ, How can
he that is evil, bring forth good fruit. And this is that which may make men
mourn, if I forsake all profession, I shame my self before men, if not, I must
blaspheme the Lords Name, and play the Hypocrite before the Lord, Matthew. 12.
33, 34, 35.

SECT. III.
TO take heed of denying the grace of God, or this inward principle, Use 3.
in whole, or in part, for this inward principle, being the life of Christ in
us, Of Caution; and sad Advice.
to deny this is to deny Christ, and to take away his life; and such the Lord
will deny before his Angels another day: When they shall say, Have we not eat
and drank in thy presence, he shall answer, I never knew you: I shall therefore
here direct my speech to four sorts.

First, To those that deny created graces in the Saints peculiar unto them
only, its said there are none such in the Country, if there are not, it may be
there have been, and it may be will be, and therefore i will speak: For I believe
it is a delusion dug and hatched out of the steam of the lowest sink in Hell:
And therefore that all may take heed of the evil of it, I will first show the
evil of it, then the causes that do beget it.

I. The evils of this delusion are these.

1. It settles and fastens a man under the power of all his sin, and yet with a
quiet Conscience, and yet to keep his Christ too. It transcends my capacity
from whatever I have read, or have heard, or have felt, or can imagine how the
power of sin can be taken away, but where the Spirit infuseth the contrary
grace; an empty house swept and garnished with common gifts, is but a fitting
house for Satan to return into: Say therefore a man may have no such graces,
and yet have Christ, and them in Christ, you stake this man down under his sin,
and make this member of Satan, a member of Christ Jesus. And upon this ground
all Churches in the Land may be forced in Conscience to take in all profane
members, if they plead Christ, and their allness in him.

2. This blurs all the glory of a Christian, or at least the greatest part of
it: For what is the glory of a Saint? It Is to be like Jesus Christ the Lord of
glory, to bear his Image before God and men: As to see a man with a Swines face
would be the shame of a man; to see a Christian with Satan's Image, is the shame
of a Christian; but to be like our Head, this is our glory, though it be in
sufferings, 2 Cor. 3. 18. heavenly, humble, compassionate, holy, as he was; and
hence when God has a mind to make Churches or Christians base in the eyes of
the world, he will withdraw here, and when he intends to draw the world after
him, he will glorify it with his glory, Isai. 60. 6, 7.

3. It cuts off a Christian from all hope of glory, how many be there that
scramble and catch at Christ, and every one says he is mine, The proud man
says, he is mine, and hopes now verily to be saved, but that hope is vain;
they have Christ out of them, but where is Christ in them? The life of Christ,
and the Spirit of Christ? Col. 1. 27. Christ in you, the hope of glory.

4. Give me but one place in all the Book of God, where blessedness is bestowed
upon, or conveyed unto any, or promised but to such as have these grace^.
Blessed is he that fears the Lord, and greatly delights, etc. Psalm. 112. 1,
2. If there be no such thing, let any man expect it if he can.

II. The Causes.

1. A magnifying Christ, and making him our Sanctification, when as you heard
the last day, this is to deny him to be our Sanctification: He becomes our
righteousness by imputation of his holiness, and our Sanctification by infusing
of it. Nay, hence a man deprive^ himself, of all good in the Lord Jesus, when a
man denies all grace in himself, and then flies for Sanctuary unto Jesus
Christ, ^ John 1. 6, 7. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness, we lie, etc. And hence it seems they denied men to have sin, verse. 8.
boasting of fellowship with Christ, verse. 6.

2. Because there are (say men) only immediate actings of the Spirit. If this
be so, then there is seeing in a Christian without an eye, and hearing without
an ear, and knowing Christ without an understanding, and loving without love,
and living without life, and feeding and eating without a mouth; and then when
these actings are over, a Christian is like another man, there is no Law
remains written on his heart, and so Christ should enter into his Saints, like
Satan into the Serpent, who only acts the Serpent, and when that is done, he
remains a Serpent again. Know it, the Lord Jesus his greatest work is not only
to change the acts, but to change the frame of the heart, not only to put new
actions, but a new nature into men.

3. Because men know not the Spirit, never felt the presence, not power, nor
comfort of it themselves; and hence men do as some Countries, because
themselves are black, they paint the Devil while. John 14. 17. The World cannot
re^eive, because it knows him not. Give me any Christian living that ever found
the sweetness of it, but his longings were to have more of that grace, to
forget things behind, and reach to things before, even to the resurrection of
the dead, whom I believe none will say want all habits of grace: I look upon
the Opinion as coming with a curse from God: A man has been a dry Professor
long, Conscience says, There is no grace in the heart, and hence is troubled;
True, says he, there is none in Saints, it is in Christ, and there he catches
and deceives himself.

Secondly, Those that do acknowledge them, but any power or activity in them
they deny; they say there is oil indeed in the Vessel, but it helps not, it is
no means to make the Lamp to burn or shine; there is the life of Christ, but it
is a dead life, they call them the graces of Christ, but they are but fruitless
graces. I confess it, if you consider them without the Spirit of Christ, they
are no true graces, much less active or living ones; but consider them thus,
they have a power, as take the least grain of corn, there is a growing power in
it, and fructifying too in it by dying first, though it actually does not
fructify presently, and though there must be rain, and Sun must shine also,
and a providence accompanying of it, so it is in the graces of Saints: And
hence its called a Law of the mind, there is a power of a Law, as of sing and
hence as Christ grew in wisdom and stature, so all the members of Christ are
like unto him.

I. The evil of this.

1. This abates of the excellency of grace, as from a Jewel to take away the
oper^tive virtue of it. For it is not like Christ's now, which is strong through
God, not weak; which is living, no^ dead. This is not like the glorious Graces
of Saints triumphing. This makes the Graces of Saints of less excellency then
common Graces: common Grace will make a man ^ide over many a sin, and run
exceeding fast, though he fall at last. A man that has bin angry, it will make
him very quiet and still, and is there no more power in this?

2. This will make a man content himself with a bare form, with a false
confidence if this be true. For take a man that has bin long seeking to get
strength against a vile heart, and ^e finds none; there is no power of
heavenliness, he is earthy; no meekness, he is proud; I would say to him, do
you ever think to get any power of meekness, love, faith, etc. You shall never
do it, never have it here; all your strength is immediately from Christ, look
for it there; in conscience a man must cease there. And it is certain all our
strength is in, and from the Lord; but it is dispensed mediatly, Ephesians. 3. 16.
Paul prays he may be strengthened with might in the inner man. Or thus, a man
may not pray for strength of Grace, which Paul refused not.

3. Then the Saints if they be asked whether they believe, or can love the Lord
Jesus; their answer must be, no I have no power to love, nor believe, and then
Peter did ill to answer so, Lord thou know that I love thee. Then Paul to
say, We can do nothing but for the Truth. Then that Martyr that to then that
said, the Lord strengthen you: yes says he, the Lord does. I know if the Lord
withdraw his Spirit, we are gone, as Adam; but is there not the immutable
assistance of it? Is there not the Promise, I will never leave thee, though
sometimes weaker, sometimes stronger?

4. This will make a Christian hide and not improve his Talents; he has Grace,
but no power to put it forth. Then suppose God gives power to see Truth one
day, I must not see it with this eye the next; but look up to Christ, and say,
I cannot see at all.

II. Causes of this.

1. In opposing the outward principle of life, or first principle, and this
second, I must live on Christ; hence I must no^, I have no power to act my self
in any measure, because all my strength is in him. When if this were true, a
man might argue, because all Grace is originally in Christ, hence no Grace in
me, because all Glory is in Christ originally; hence no Glory shall be conveyed
to me. No, this Scripture reconciles these: Because I live, therefore you shall
live also, John 14. 19. Because Christ is strong, hence he will make us strong
in the inner man, and not in the Spirit only: because Christ is glorious, hence
we are predestined to be made like unto him. Because all sap lies in the
root, to say therefore there is no sap or power in the branch to fructify;
this is false.

2. The hypocritical activity of false Professors, who having no spring to feed
their wells, no Christ, nor bucket to draw from him; hence are their own men,
and set up for themselves, till the^ turn bankrupts. And now because a Pharisee
is so active as to go through se^ and land to make a Proselyte; therefore Paul
has no activity of Grace of Christ in him to go from land to sea to make
Christians.

3. Sloth, A man sets upon a duty, and now because he cannot do it easily, nor
quickly, he cannot do it at all. A man would have Grace active without means;
and God will not help in that way: and hence many Christians cannot cleave to
Christ by love, or desire; no, so long as they pore upon their wants, no
encouragement, but turn the mind, and consider well of the love and glory of
Christ, then with P^^l, 2 Cor. 5. 14. Christ's love constrains.

4. Judging that to be the power of Grace at all times, which is at sometimes;
A man has given special occasion for the Lord to leave him, as the Camp in
Iosh^^hs time, Josh. 7. and he thinks there is no more power at any time in any
man. For then a man sees all the world cannot help, when if Acha^ were removed,
the Spirit of the Lord would return again.

5. That hereby a man may have his sins without trouble, for a man has bin
troubled, and cannot get power, now he heats there is no such power to be
expected, he looks to Christ, and if power come, well, if not, says he, it is
not my fault.

Thirdly, Those that deny the evidence of it, the evil of which apprehension, I
conceive to be no less then taking away that which is the chief, if not only
difference between hypocrites and Sa^nts in virgin Churches, for so it is made
here. A man says I have Christ, and so have not they: I ask, where is the
Spirit? You have the Deed, where is the Seal? You have the Testator, where is
the Executor, the Spirit in you? Yes, I have it, it has witnessed Christ is
mine. Answ. It has witnessed, but what has it wro^ght? Where is the power of
his death, killing thy lusts; Where is the life of the Spirit of Jesus in you?
Where is the Oil in your vessel? Truly I look for the Bridegroom, but I regard
not that, neither are others to regard it in way of evidence. Then I say the
chief evidence is destroyed in the Churches. I have known many that have had
assurances, yet never saw them prove right, till it witnessed this was here.
What should be the causes of this, and that men should make blusters in the
Churches, because of this, as though it was building on works? In several men
they are several.

1. An ap^ness in men's hearts to ^ou^run^ the Truth, and to fall from one
extreme to another. Many men there be that fall short of Christ, and the Grace
of God in and from him: and from their loose profane life, fall to duties, and
imitate Gods people, and then when they have got credit with good people, they
judge well of them: and having made their peace hereby, with conscience, and
not with God the Judge; never look after the saying knowledge of, and
fellowship with, and life from the Lord Jesus. Now, because men rest on this*
these duties (...) no evidence; hence none are at all. The Corinthians first
mourned not for the incestuous person; and when cast out, wanted pity toward
him. Calvin preached against Holidaies, hence entrenched upon the Lords day.
Some of the separation see many Churches where they have come corrupt, hence
make them all no Churches. A man is apt to think, because I have rested on my
self, and found those signs which now are not sound, hence all others do so
too. And I believe ivers Books have occasioned it, which give signs that will
not hold without a (...) explication of them.

2. The apostasy of eminent Professors, who have bin deceived in their
evidencing thus: And truly it would ma^e one think the honesty of the World is
but a fashion, and no evidence of any good estate; hence men say you have joy,
so had the ^^ony g^ound; you are blameless and strict, so was Paul a Pharisee;
and Satan hereby shakes many a foul: hence the Apostle comes in, Heb. 6. 9. and
speaks of better things, and things that accompany Salvation, and these should
you follow. Hymeneur and Philaus fell both, 2 Timothy 2. 18, 19, 20, 21. Yet purge
your selves and you shall be vessels of honor for the Masters use.

3. Corrunt experience, it may be a man walks so loosly without fear, or life,
or love, that the Lord leaves him, and he can see no clear through-wo^^,
sometimes has pangs, and then hopes, sometime dead, then doubts; hence being
vexed here, and finding, no peace; if he find it any other way than this,
therehe rests. As it is observed with man (...) hide their shame: but when dead,
their face is also covered, all their glory being then gone: so some glory of
God ap pears here, but when Christians are dead, they cover this, He look no
more to it, all the glory of it is now gone, and here lies a deceit to
loveChrist for freeing me from this way of evidencing.

4. A heart that never felt the bitterness and bondage of (...) as the greatest
evil. Take a man full of fears of wrath; on now assurance is his chiefest good,
and he will account it so; but if ever God did load the Soul with (...)
econtra, you will account of deliverance from this highly, nay a promise he
will do it is sweet but to be feeling those sinews of sin crack; oh its the joy
of Heaven that now sils that heart! The greatest evil in Gods eyes is sin; the
g^eatest good we have is redemption from it by a mighty hand: now not so much
as to account of this highly, this is hard. Thus I have left these things to be
thought of, I cannot avoid it, it lies in my text; and the rather, because of
that Scripture abused, If any say, l^e here is Christ, or there, believe it
not. i. e. by signs: or in a wilderness, i. e. in a sorrowful estate, of in
the privy chambers in frames of heart, believe it not neither. Take heed you do
not wrest Scripture^ thus; I'ts said, Esau hated Jacob for the blessing, Genesis
27. 41. This Spirit of Grace is the blessing which Saints account as the
evidence of the ^^^rest love; to separate from Churches, from Messengers of
God, for this will yield you sorrow enough one day. I tell you, you shall not
be found fighters against men, but against God, and the Spirit of his Grace,
and the Life of him who live^ in Heaven for us. Take heed you forget not oil in
your Vessels.

(...) Those that acknowledge in their judgemen^s all these things, but deny it
in their lives, regard not the having this principle of Life, and have peace in
this, from a double ground.

1. By a fruitless Faith which hang^ on Christ; but never receives nor brings
in this principle, as those, John 2. 24, 25. and hence though they receive
none, yet they hang on him. And so their Faith like a bucket without a bottom,
draws up nothing.

2. A form of godliness before men. If a man should neither speak well, nor
pray, etc. He would have no love, no respect, no receiving into Church; but he
cannot do it with life, and hence a form contents him, and there rests. So that
now if Conscience troubles, and says, those duties are done with no life of
Christ, and Spirit; he answers, yet I go to Christ: If this be all, why do you
not cast off your form? Oh then I should have no love from men: oh this life of
Christ is not prized, till with these Virgins they feel the want of it, and
it is too late, know this will be your woe at last. Look upon thy dead Soul, all
thy glory is gone, and wait upon the Word that the Lord may make thee live.
Could you know this Well of water and ask he would give it you. Oh beg for it
then as for your life. Only first (...) it in Christ, and so from Christ.

SECT. IIII.
WE live in a Country which has goodly trappings, Use 4. Of Trial.
rich hangings, glorious Profession, burning Lamps: and hence many think
themselves ^ich, when indeed poor; many look to mee^ the Bridegroom, when
indeed they shall he shut out-from the fellowship of the Bridegroom. How shall
I know that? That all my sorrows, prayers, reformation, profession, is but a
paint, an appearance, a fashion, a Church-craft, which will stand me in no
stead when the Lord shall appear, who shall judge the secrets of all hearts, by
the Word you hear^ this day. Try it therefore by this Rule, does it come from a
principle of life or no? Your Lamp burns, but look what is in your vessel that
feeds this flame. That as our Divines speak, how the Disciples could do greater
works than Christ, and others wrought Miracles besides Christ: how then do they
prove that he is Christ? It Is answered, in all his miraculous works we are to
consider not only quid fecit, i. e. what he did, but qua virtue fecit, from
what power he did it. The Apostles and others wrought Miracles, but it was
aliena virtue: Christ did them, but it was prop^^ virtue. So many an unfound
heart he may do greater works them Saints, and his lamp burn brighter.
Therefore in this case we are not to look so much to what is done, as from what
power and principle it is done: for therein the best hypocrite ever falls. We
shall ever observe in some beasts there are ambraerationis (...), yet there is
no ra^ional soul, nor any wise man will believe that their acts proceed from
such a Principle: So there are shadows of the power of grace in a carnal heart,
and yet no Judicious Christian will say they come from an inward soul; or
principle of life. Consider therefore whether there is this principle or no;
you see there is profession, you have a name to live in the judgment of all
the Church, but search your hearts, and see from what principle it proceeds,
for if this be wanting, all is naught: As he that had Beer given him, when Milk
and Wine, and Sugar was put into it to mend it, said, The Wine is good, and the
Milk is good, but the Beer is naught: So Profession, affection is good, but the
heart, the man is naught, Ier. 2. 22. Though thou wash thee with Nitre, thy sin
is marked before the Lord. And that the Trial may be full and fair, I shall
show Negatively, the several sorts of men that act not from an inward
Principle, yet carry it out as though the bitterness of death was past, and the
Bridegroom theirs.

1. When a man's Principle is nothing but the power of created nature expressing
it self, and setting the best face forward, in the gilded rottenness of some
moral performances, wherein a man says, he does what he can; for there is this
principle in most men, a desire to be saved, nature says so, and according to
the inten^ion of this desire, so accordingly will men do more or less; and
hereupon sooth up themselves, when they see they cannot do as others do, or as
the Lord commands; I do as well as I can. Nay, when condemned by the Word which
meets them, I do as well as I can, I believe, I repent, I pray, I remember the
Word, I do as well as I can, and so they hope God accepts of that; and though I
believe no man but may be hired to do more than he does, yet nature may do
much; hence I heard an Arminian once say, If faith will not will not work it,
then set reason a work, and we know how men have been Kings and Lords over
their own passions by improving reason, and from some experience of the power
of nature, men have come to write large Volumes in defense of it; and its known
the Arminians though they ascribe somewhat to grace, and in words all to grace,
yet indeed they lay the main stress of the work upon a man's own will, and the
royalty and sovereignty of the liberty of that: But to leave them and come to
our selves, Is it not a common thing for men to ^ake lies their refuge, and to
say, I was in a woeful condition once, and never looked after God, but now I
bless the Lord it is otherwise with me. How? Now I believe, repent, etc. And so
I confess all I do is full of weaknesses, yet I do what I can; and thus they
are like to men that have old garments new dressed, they have made them as good
as they can; and like the young man, Luke 18. 21. All these things have I d^ne
from my youth, yet one thing was wanting, which was to forsake all, and so
himself, that the Disciples said, Who then can be saved: With man it is
impossible, but with God all things are possible.

You say you do as much as you can; I say do so, but it is impossible with man,
from any strength of man, and you have no more yet, John 1. 13. Born again, not
of the will of man, but of God. There is in some men a birth, like to the new
birth, which is of the will and power of man, but oh this is not this inward
principle which the Almighty power of God creates; and therefore know it, if
you get no other oil in your Lamps, you shall never meet the Bridegroom.

2. When a man's principle is the power of holy example, whereby many a one is
drawn to do more than otherwise he would. Many men think for a while as that
man spoke; Men talk of being worth thousands, I would fain see the men.
Ministers preach and others speak well, we must do this and that, but I would
fain see the men that do it. Now it sometime falls out that the Lord sets
before men's eyes some pattern-Christians, hereupon they think thus; here are
two contrary ways, they cannot both lead to heaven, their way is better than
mine, and doubtless leads to life, mine does not, and therefore let me live
like the^. And hence there shall not be any Fast, but they will be at it; not a
Sermon near, but they will go wet and dry to hear it; nor any duty in Family,
but they will imitate it, and hence read and learn, that they may be like them.
No Christians in the Country hated, but they will love them, nor Ceremonies
cast off, but they will abhor them; and hence they reflect upon their patterns,
and think their estate safe, because they are as good as a Christians outside:
And hence like some dead C^ttel, there is nothing good but their skin; so there
is nothing good in these, but their imitating outside. Thus it was with Ioash
while Iehoiada lived, 2 Chronicles. 24. Hence he fell like Ivy with the Oak, when
God cut him down: Thus it was with these five foollish Virgins, a man may
follow good examples, but not rest in bare imitation of them: And hence a
blessed man is described, Psalm. 1. Negatively, from no^ imitating the wicked,
not from imitating the good; because good men may be in many things ill
examples, and it ever proves so in these men that have no more then this
Principle; hence if they be loose in their tongues, or on the Sabbath, their
plea is, they are like unto them. And hence come all your acquired
excellencie^; a man is an imitating creature, led by example, and a carnal man
out of the heart of hypocrise in himself, will imitate the divine nature which
is in another; and hence men not only take up such practices, but such opinious
only, because such and such are of that mind: And hence men change practices
and opinions as Examples do change; in Joshua's time great Reformation, he no
sooner dead, but all fell off again: then they were for purity of Ordinances
and Gods Worship, now they serve Baalim: Oh consider, here is an outward, but
no inward principle!

3. Those whose principle is nothing but external applause and praise of men,
and this will carry a man beyond all the best Examples: Nay, sometime to be
singular, and a man alone; a Pharisees Trumpet shall be heard to the Townesend,
while simplicity walks through the Town unseen: Hence a man will sometimes
covertly commend himself, and my self ever comes in, and tells you a long
Story of Conversion, and an hundred to one, if some lie or other flip not out
with it. Why, the secret meaning is, I pray admire me, hence complain of wants
and weaknesses; pray think what a brokenhearted Christian I am; and hence if
comforted they complain, if not, they will comfort themselves; hence many lift
up eyes and hands, and fetch deep sighs in prayer, remember and note Sermons,
look now what a gift I have: Hence if you come to their company, they will
have so many good words as may make you think well of them, and then the Market
is almost done with them: Hence men forsake their friends, and trample
underfoot the scorns of the world, they have credit elsewhere: To maintain
their interest in the love of godly men they will suffer much: Hence men in the
Ministry pray for grace to beautify and perfect their parts, that so they may
preach and convert and have credit: Hence men meditate new Light, and profess
deep things that few know, that men may worship the rising Sun: Hence the Lord
is neglected secretly, yet honored openly, because there is no wind in their
chambers to blow their Sails, and therefore there they stand still: Hence many
men keep their profession, when they lose their affection, they have by the one
a n^me to live, and that is enough, though their hearts be dead: And hence so
long as you love or commend them, so long they love you, but if not, they will
forsake you; they were warm only by another fire; and hence having no
principle of life within, soon grow dead: This is the water that turns a
Pharisees Mill, and the Lord passes a heavy doom, You have your reward. I have
wondered that the opinion of men, nay, dream of men's thoughts should act men;
only it is a curse of God, that when men despise his honor the greatest good,
they shall be fed with the basest good.

4. Those whose Principle is nothing else but their own gain of outward
blessings. Many there be that make not their honor, so much as their bellies
their gods, and thy rule them, Phil. 3. 19. hence the Shopkeeper will give
good words when he sells his commodity, he should lose much of his custom
else; and hence the Minister preaches contionably that his gain may come in,
1. These. 2. 4,^. Hence people would be as good as the best, they cannot get a
lot in all the Country else. Hence a man is sometime content to forsake all for
Christ, that he may make a booty of Christ, as Judas did. Hence when Christ
feeds them with Loaves, then the people will make him a King, John 6. though
afterward they cry Crucify him. So men deal with Christ as the Soldiers did,
that caught him, that they might strip him of his garments. And hence many men
if they see sorrows and wants attending them, if they attend on Christ, forsake
him. Look upon our own Land, many so long as they could enjoy Christ with fair
weather, cry out of Ceremonies, and profaning of Sabbath: yet this not being
to be had, creep to them, and read the Book for profaning thereof. Many
shadows have been seen since our Sun has risen here, and this way they looked:
but viewing other men's wants, and fearing their own losses, and conceiving they
may meet with Massah in this Wilderness, refuse to follow. And least this
should seem to be the cause, cry out we are Separatists, or strongly possess
themselves against all relations, there is no living at all here.

Look but at home, how many Dove; (that prove but Ravens, and live on the prey)
come hither to our windows, and have followed Christ to this Worlds end; when
he fed them with loaves, they made him their King: but now he has taken away
what once they desired; because there is better Bread to be labored for; now
they forsake him, and live on the spoil. This is no inward Principle. And hence
when men's Expenses for Christ, exceed their Receipts from Christ, they cease
spending, and fall in the high way to begging at the door of the World.

5. Those whose Principle is nothing else but the strength of natural
Conscience, which will set men a doing, when they have neither praise from men,
nor gain from Christ for their labor. For the Lord deals with some men, ^as
the Romans did with some of their Prisoners; they would chain a Prisoner and
his keeper together, and let them go up and down: so God chains many a poor
Prisoner of hell and his conscience together, and lets them go together. And
hence many a man keeps pace with his conscience, and cannot give it the slip
for all the world heaped up with gold, as Balaam said.

Now there are two things in a natural conscience, Romans 2. 15.

1. To accuse, Hence a man dares not omit prayer, dares not commit a sin he
has a mind to; conscience would then roar. Hence many keep constantly set
duties in private, and tremble at small sins: not because they take any delight
in the one, or are weary of the other; but because they are ever under the eye
of this Judge.

2. To Excuse, and to give much sweetness when a man follows the dictates
thereof; hence a man though carnal, will die for his Religion, and that with
some cheerfulness, because conscience chears within, and sings him asleep in
trouble. And hence a man will cry out of all the glorious hypocri^ies of men,
because to walk according to Conscience is sweeter to him. And hence a man
comforts himself, it is my Conscience, Mark 12. 33. To love God is better than
burnt Offerings. Hence a man will profit exceedingly in what he holds, Gal. 1.
14. because zealous for it for Conscience: and yet this is but a Principle of
Nature, not an inward Principle of life, whose property is to seek the
subversion of corrupt Nature, as natural Conscience seeks the garnishings of it
and the actions thereof.

6. Those whose Principle is the fear of death, and hell; raised not so much by
the power of Conscience, as by the power of the Word. And hence come complaints
about a man's Estate; that a man can have no rest by all duties that he has
done, or does. Hence following of the means, running to the best Ministry,
mourning, and lamenting, and confessing sin, Mat. 3. 7. Oh generation of vipers
etc. And hence prizing of favor and Comfort, Psalm. 78. 34, 35. Hence many do
take this for their Conversion, and say, I heard such a Minister at such a
time, and then I cried out I was damned, and thought I saw the Devil, yea, and
to Hell you may for all this, if no other Principle. Indeed, there is this fear
in the elect, but drives them to the Ark, as Noah: But those, when their fear
is over, they fall to fight against the Lord.

7. Those whose Principle is nothing else but the immediate actings of the
Spirit of God upon them. For sometime the Spirit of God comes upon men, as
Light shines on the mud wall, yet dwells not there as in the Sun. And hence many
speak, pray, prophecy admirably, as Balaam, Numb. 24. 3, 4. Many men like
Carriers bring others goods, that are not possessors of them. Now these are 1.
External enlargements, and hence a man does many things which he has no inward
power to perform, the Spirit is there assisting; hence he cannot do so at
another time, but it is the Spirit only assisting. And hence a man may have
abundance of knowledge, and he not affected with it; he may live, and pray with
applause of men; others wish they were like him, yet live without love, and
speak without feeling, and do without life, hence men leave themselves here. 2.
Internal pangs, the Spirit of God begets some inward grief, especially when
outward evils press, then inward flashes and desires, but they are soon done.
There is no Spring, no Principle within. What the difference is between Saints
uneveness, and this unconstancy, you shall hear hereafter: yet these are
wrestlings of Spirit not yet conquering, and hence it possesses not the Soul.

8. When men; Principle is nothing else but common gifts, which are inward, and
abiding long in the Soul. That a man now thinks he has Grace, and sure signs
of the Lords love, and here is fastened: when there be two things wherein it
appears here is no inward Principle. 1. These gifts ever puff up, and make a
man something in his own eyes, as the Corinthian knowledge did. And many a
private man thinks himself fit to be a Minister, many a Minister better than
all the Parish besides; when Paul was the least of all the Saints. And hence
commonly they degenerate to pride and form. 2. These keep men strangers to
Christ, and the life of Faith; they have these affections, yet ignorant of
Christ, take these as signs of his love, and live without him. And this is
indeed the inner Principle which all the wicked in the world want; there is in
true Grace an infinite circle: a man by thirsting receives, and receiving
thirsts for more. But hence the Spirit is not poured out abundantly on
Churches, because men shut it out by shutting in, and contenting themselves
with their common graces and gifts, Mat. 7. 29. Examine if it be thus. If so,

1. You cannot come to the Lord, John, 5. 44. how can ye believe?

2. Nor to receive any thing from the Lord if you do, Jam. 4. 3. When you ask
to spend it on your lusts, when that carries you.

3. This pulls down the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, when other things rule us,
and not himself alone.

4. Satan will have this against you, as against Job, You serve not the Lord
for naught. To what purpose are your new Moons, Church-reformations, if it be
thus? Now, because it has been replied to what was formerly said, that Christ
was the vessel, not our Souls. I shall therefore confirm the latter to be the
truth, by these reasons.

1. Mystical places of Scripture are to be interpreted by plain. Now though
Christ may be the Antitype of these Vessels of the Temple, yet he is not
plainly said to be a Vessel; but Souls are called so, Romans 9. 23. 2 Cor. 4. 7.
Acts 9. 15. Paul is a chosen Vessel. 1 These. 4. 4. we are to possess our
Vessels in holiness. 2 Timothy 2. 20. Vessels of honor.

2. The Spirit is not in Christ as in a Vessel, but as in a fountain; hence
Ioh. 3. 34. Christ's has received the Spirit without measure.

3. The foolish Virgins had Vessels; because its said, they took their Lamps,
but no Oil with them. Their folly was not in not providing Vessels. Hence the
foolish Virgins did not afterward beg their Vessels, but their Oil.

4. The wisdom of the Wise did appear, in that they did provide Oil for their
Vessels. If therefore the Vessel be Christ, therein lies the wisdom of the
Wise, that they got the Spirit for to put into Christ, and the folly of the
foolish, they got not the Spirit to put into him. Or the one go^ Christ Jesus
full of the Spirit; the other, Christ Jesus void of it. When whoever has
Christ, must have in him the fullness of the Spirit also.

5. The other interpretation crosses the main scope of this part of the
parable, which is to show the difference between the Virgins; all professed
Christ, went to meet the Bridegroom; but here was the difference, they never
looked for to get the Spirit in them: and this is most suitable to men raised
out of the dregs of Popery, where Works being abolished, Christ is owned, and
therein do well, but he^ein f^il.

Thus you have heard the use of Trial negatively. What this inward Principle
is affirmatively, you have generally heard; and shall more particularly in the
other two Doctrines. Only this I will add; it consists of two parts.

1. Our life in Christ by Faith.

2. Christ life in us by his Spirit. Faith empties the Soul, and looks upon it
as dead, and see; its life laid up in Christ; and hence forsakes it self, and
embraces the Lord of Glory. Secondly, the Spirit comes and posses^eth a
forsaken empty House, and there lives and dwells. Both these the Apos^le
mentions, Gal. 2. 20. Ephesians. 3. 17. Ioh. 15. 4. As two married together, their
Souls live not where they are, but in each other: The one cares not how to
please her self, but her husband; and e contra. So that le^st any weak Soul
should be discouraged, that thinks there is no Principle of Life, because such
a blind, empty dead heart, wandering from God, etc. Nay, when the Lord quickens
it, Oh its lost again! Nay, when quickened, oh then when it comes to, it is
feeb^e! I tell you it must be so. This makes you lay up your life in him: this
death is your life. And least any false heart should be here deceive^, that
says he has Christ; If you have not the Spirit of Christ, you are none of
his. The Saints have this sometime, their Temple is filled with Glory; and for
their general course, they are Admirers of the Lord Jesus; and account his
Life, to be Life, and all their life beside to be a continual death. There is
not any Grace but they say, oh that I h^d it!

SECT. V.
TO every man, as ever you look to be with Christ Jesus another day, Use 5. Of
Exhort.
get this oil in your Vessels. The Lord does in this Parable set before your
eyes the estate of the pu^est Virgi-Churches and Professors in the world, and
it is his in^nite love to tell us beforehand, before the time be past; to tell
us, that many of these shall be shut out from the presence of the Lord Jesus,
whom themselves and others think shall not, and yet this love would be but
little, unless the Lord had made known the cause or defect in not getting oil
to their Vessels. Oh consider therefore, here you are like to fail; you that
have Lamps before the cry and Bridegroom comes, acknowledge Christ's love, and
be overcome by it to get oil into your Vessels; when Rahab knew that the Lord
would destroy all Jericho, now she ^ays about her to preserve her life. What Is
the means? To tie the Scarlet thread at the window: Oh she would be sure to get
and keep that there. You know the Lord Jesus will come and discover the unsound
profession, and destroy the glory of the World, and Churches too: It may be you
have had some fears, what if he should cut me off, and cast me out as possibly
he may? and I may as well as eminent Professors. I tell you, none ever perished
but because of this. How just had Rahabs judgment been, if she had refused to
get her scarlet thread there, and yours if now you get not your Oil in your
Vessel? How many are there that have lived fairly and died quietly, and when
they are dead and knock, the door is shut: That then wring their hands, Oh had
I but known of this! I would have spent my care and strength, and tears, and
thoughts how to have filled my Vessel, but I knew it not. This time will
shortly came, and if you know it now, and do not set upon it, what a cut will
this be? As therefore the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 4. 1. Having a promise of
entering into rest, fear lest you fall short of it. I say so much more here,
knowing how only you shall enter into Christ's rest, fear least you fall short
of this; I hope I shall not, I thank God my course is blameless, spotless, I
have forsaken the sins of places, and pollutions of Ordinances; so these were
Virgins also. Oh but my Lamp burns as bright as any man's I know: So did the
foolish Virgins, oh but they all think well of me, so were these thought of,
till the Lord said, I know you not. Oh but I look to Christ, to meet with him,
and salvation from him; So did these, and yet were shut out from Christ. If the
Lord should have said it was because they had not wealth enough, nor world
enough, every man would not have been wanting here, but would have striven to
have got enough of that, though it were not to be had; but there is enough in
Christ to enrich you, who has the Spirit without measure to do it: The Spirit
may breath now.

Labor to feel and mourn under thy whole corrupt principles, Means 1.
that have acted thee hitherto: For many men are sensible sometimes of some
particular acts, and jarrings of their hearts and life with the rule; and then
they seek forgiveness of, and grace against them, and then they hope all is
well, then they do many things, and hear John gladly, and in plainness and
integrity of their hearts think that all is well. But still they fall short of
a Principle of life, because they never felt a whole corrupt Principle, and how
in every thing it crosses God, not only in the corrupt, but most glorious
actions. For all men living naturally turn from being open, to secret enemies;
and from being secret, to be subtle enemies, and to undermine the Lord in all
they do. Now many see it but not the evil of it, nor mourn under it. Hence the
Lord never sends another Spirit, because they have not the Spirit of heaviness
for want of it. But when a man sees that in every thing he is carried and acted
by a principle of bitterness against the Lord, and lives without the Spirit of
the Lord to act him; the Lord is not far from that soul when he feels this, and
mourns before the Lord, because of this, and the want of that, 1 Kings 8. 38.
So Christ said, Because I said I go away, sorrow has filled your hearts, John
16. 6, 7. This is the very reason why Saints have the Comforter, his absence
fills their hearts with sorrow; because when he is gone, oh the straitness,
vileness of a corrupt heart! you say it may be. If this be not a right
Principle, what is? Answ. To undermine all false works; oh therefore, feel this
plague! If ever God works this grace, feel you must the want of it, and if you
do mourn then you are under it: And oh mourn, 1. By considering the evil of it,
you can mourn after a dead father, and shall you not over a dead heart. 2. To
think there should be so much Spirit in Christ, and not a drop for me. Is he so
angry with me? See therefore I pray you that you are led by ill principles, or
false principles. I pray, but self-love sets me a work; I profess, but praise
of men acts me; I observe duties in secret, but natural Conscience only carries
me. No surer sign of ruin then for the Lord to hide these things from you; nor
of love then when he shows this, and gives you not only sense of some one act,
but a spirit of heaviness under this. This empties the Vessel, and so makes us
Vessels of honor; do not therefore set thy self so much to do, as to see where
thy evil principle is, in all thou do.

Repair now to the fountain of life, for a principle of life from him, Means 2.
and fetch it from him.

What is th^^? and how shall I fetch it from him? Quest.


1. It Is not a man's own striving, Answ.
a man may imitate nature, but cannot make nature: All the world cannot make
one poor fly. And as it is artis celare artem, so when he has done he may
deceive himself and others, but nothing else. Born not of the will of m^n: A
man is in great distress of Conscience for sin past, ^ear of death for time to
come, and now he comes just as far as a Devil; then prays Lord save me, and now
comes as far as nature can carry him, and therefore is ea^ed, and now he has
Satan's black seal upon him, and self-flattery has carried him on. The fountain
of life is not here.

2. It Is not the Law, it convinces one, and he complains, it condemns another,
and he cries out, it irritates another, and he falls to do what he can; but the
Law cannot give life, Gal. 3. 21.

3. It Is not bare Ordinances, which are of themselves but husks and shells, and
empty pipes; witness the cries of many a man Sabbath after Sabbath, no life,
and that for a long time: Nay, he grows worse.

4. It Is not God simply considered, He is indeed the fountain of life, but sin
has sealed that fountain; hence many a one goes to him, and departs from him
with frowns.

5. Where is life then? In Christ: I know he is Lord and Prince of Life. Yet
consider, as God-man no life is in him for you, as to be communicated to you.
Where then? It Is in the blood and death of the Lord of life: You are ready to
undervalue this life. Oh consider, what it mus^ cost the Son of God? and where
it must lie, Hebr. 9. 14. If Bulls and Goats blood washed the flesh, much more
this blood, etc. Many a man feels a blind dead heart, and all duties dead: And
hence uses many periwasions to himself, yet they continue so still, because he
never looks to this blood. There is this excellency in Christ's blood, not only
to cleanse from guilt, and power of sin, but from dead works, and none else
can. Now therefore repair hither for it; know what your lives will and must
cost. Now how shall this be done?

Answ. 1. Prize this blood, and satisfy thy Soul with it, choose it, and rest
in it, in the Lord himself as sufficient, Ioh. 6. 53. Except you eat and drink,
etc. many account it a common thing; you receive it not then, but trample it
under their feet, many esteem of it, but they feed not themselves with it, nor
quiet their hearts with life there first: and hence it falls out thus.

2. Keep this Rule, content not thy self with that measure which thou have from
Christ, but be thankful for it, and falling short, call ever for more; but
satiate thy self with that which is in Christ.

If thou can not do this, and it is beyond thy strength, then consider Christ
has words of life, John 6. Oh beg for that, and for those words! Hear what the
Lord will say, Psalm. 51. 8. You cannot see nor come to Christ: Then hear, and
your souls shall live. Who knows what the Lord may do. It Is not possible for
man to do it, but the Lord Jesus may and can.

Oh then you that have this Principle, Use 6.
Let all your actions issue and spring from hence! As Paul exhorted Timothy,
Stir up that gift that is in thee. Up Deborah, up. Awake Harp and Lute, says
David. Do not say, I can do nothing, and so the Lord must do all. Do not say, I
have a dead heart, and can do nothing, but stir it up. It was the Lords
complaint, Isa. 64. 7. None took hold of the Lord nor stirred up himself to
that end. It may be some of you have some strength. Oh put it forth? I know all
strength is from Christ, but there is a pe^manent strength in you. You are not
dead to act, you wrong the Lord and his Grace if you think so. As it is a heavy
sin to shut up and imprison natural truth, Romans 1. 18. So much more the power
of Grace. Others have lost it, oh recover it! And hence Paul prays for this
earnestly, Ephesians. 3. 15. The Lord strengthen you with might in the inner man. And
therefore put this forth to act, and be sure you act only from this Spirit of
Grace.

How shall I do this? Quest.


1. Set the Lord Jesus in all his Glory before you. Answ.
There is that excellency of the knowledge of Christ's Person, that it makes us
be and live like him, and according to the propinquity of our souls and eyes to
Christ, so we are like him, As ^tis with the Sun, when it is gone from the
earth, there are not so much as leaves on the Trees, yet when it returns, the
Trees bring forth fruit. Or as it is in Heaven, 1 John 3. 2. so in this life,
when we see him in a Glass, 1 Cor. 3. 18. That look as it is with an ambitious
man, when he is in the presence of men he will manifest all his excellency,
nothing shall be done to gain discredit. So if the Lord and his life be your
excellency, when you see Christ, you will approve your selves to him. See him
therefore beholding and accepting; and that Grace you would put forth, see it
in him: it is strange to see what a stream of spirit comes sometimes this way.

2. Keep the remembrance of the exceeding greatness of his love fresh in your
minds, in that he has quickened you, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. and that this life was by
his death. All the Flowers of the field cast their savor but for a time, and
then away with them; but Christ's love and Christ's death do usually always
breath a savor of life to a sincere heart that ever knew what the sting of
death meant, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Christ's love constrains, because he dies that we
should live. But how? Because we thus judged. God has made man an Agent by
counsel. Now some Christians go to the Lord to help them, but set not prayer of
Faith awork, and hence have no water of life: Some do, but use not other means
to set the understanding (the mind of Faith) on work, to quicken it up to act,
and so would have life brought in, but not by the right door: An empty Vessel
will not be full of this water till now, that the mouth of the understanding is
open. Now many things are to be considered to act every Grace, as Gods Command
and Promise, etc. But this is that which in the general quickens, oh Christ's
love which constrains the Soul to live to him! According as a man thus receives
from Christ, so he re^urns to him. As it is observed, one sign that when a
people visit not their Minister, they receive no good; so here: That is sign of
a decaying Christian, for usually they that get good by Christ, cannot by their
good will stay away from Christ. So then the soul will return in all fruitful
obedience to the Lord, when he receives the sweet of the Love of the Lord. The
Lord does me good methinks, and hence he follows the Lord. Satan hence prevails
with the heart, because of his external objects, and a party within; so here
Christ prevails, because there is a party within, when external Objects are
propounded. Let a man have life, if he have no food he will never live. If
bread be before him, and he feed not on it, and that abundantly, he will never
have strength, so this love of Christ in us, is life in us, and food for us.

3. Famish the contrary principle, the strength whereof is by sucking in the
sweet, and receiving in carnal content from the creature, Romans 13. 14. Put on
the Lord Jesus, his Spirit, his Righteousness, his Life, his Graces, Make no
provision for the Flesh. Many Christians look up to Christ in all means, but
can do nothing, because they have some delight either in lawful or unlawful
things, that lies between him and Christ. Hence that grows strong, the other
feeble.

4. Die to all self-confidence in Grace received, or self-contentment with any
measure of it; for thereby you stop the Spirit: For we of our selves cannot
think a good thought. Therefore be strong in Christ, and hence Ephesians. 6. 10, 11,
12. A man is apt to fall to a double extreme, to be strong in the Lord without
putting on Graces; and to trust to them without being strong in him. Corn must
die before it lives, so must you: and rest not content with the measure
received, but look for more, and hence be thankful, and say, it is not I but
Christ; yet look for more.

5. If no means come to give strength, consider sadly if you have not broken
covenant with God, as in Samsons case, God was in covenant with him, but he had
broken it on his part, hence his strength was gone. I know no place that breeds
men of larger Covenants than this place, by Sea and Land, personal, and
especially Church-Covenants. Now thy strength is gone. Do not live in breach
of Covenant? Not only it is broken, but you live in it. You covenant to cleave
to the Lord, or if you depart, to return soon again, but you lie in your falls.
Nay your Covenant and returning heals your horror only, not your sin. You
covenant to love Brethren dearly, but a little offense one gives; or hopes of a
bigger Lot, will tempt thy heart to leave them to their own shifts. You
covenant to submit to Officers in the Lord, but some take liberty to speak what
they will, and others do what they list. To watch over your brethren to put
life in them, but you grow a stranger, and it may be see them not once in a
quarter, unless at Church: But can it be said they are any better for thee? Oh
your sins are double, and hence your plagues of heart are worse now, more hard
to be wrought upon, and hence sin and Satan lead you, Psalm. 78. 57, 60, 61. Oh
consider this sin, the strength of God is taken as Captain of the Camp, that
when you cry, Lord help, there it is. But alas it is gone from you, and it is in
Satan's hand, not only your strength, but Gods strength, and the soul is taken
captive. Oh therefore mourn for this, lest you mourn at last.

CHAP. XIX.
Shows that there is such a fullness or measure of Grace in the hearts of
Believers, which the most Refined Hypocrites never arise unto
SECT. I.
THat there is a certain plenitude, Doct. 3.
fullness, or full measure of the Spirit of Grace in the hearts of the
Faithful, which the most Glorious, yet unsound Professors of Virgin-Churches
want, and have not in their Vessels, but fall short of.

Just as these Foolish Virgins, they had their Lamps, a burning and shining
Profession. And had they no more? Yes surely, for their Lamp how could it burn,
but by means of some Oil? They had their wiek touched and dipped in Oil, some
lighter strokes and superficial impressions of the Spirit. They had not their
Vessels filled with Oil, they had not this degree and full measure of the
Spirit. This they fell short of, and herein appeared the difference. There are
certain inward touches, an inward lighter Dye of Gods Spirit, which serves to
beget a most eminent Profession before men, but never to make the Soul sincere
indeed before the eyes of God. That look as some Naturalists make three or four
kinds of life, differing only as higher or lower degrees of life, though not of
the same life; as Plants have a Vegetative life only to grow, but no sensitive
to see; because their forms are more drowned in their matter; sensitive in
beasts, yet not rational; rational in men, but not Angelical, etc. So here; a
greater degree of the Spirits working, makes a difference in kind between
Christian and Christian. It Is the Spirit that makes a man live a civil moral
life, it is the same Spirit by a greater stroke, makes a man live the life of
God, Ephesians. 4. 18. Yet here are two kinds of lives as far different as sensitive
and vegetative; and though the rational has both, yet it is neither of both. So
though a Saint lives the life of reason and morality, yet there is another life
he has, which does differ from these of a higher degree, and of another kind.
I do not say therefore that a sincere soul only has a greater degree of the
same Grace, but that he is distinguished by a greater degree of Grace and
working of the Spirit of Grace from an unsound heart. As a man may love
another, but not with a conjugal love, here is now a degree of love, but not of
the same love, for it is not a whit conjugal; it might then be sinful in some
men, so it is here. A man that has filled his stom^ck with meat may have some
desire after it, but not an hungry de^^re, not in that degree; hence not hungry
at all. So the sluggard desires and has not, a carnal heart desire* and
another desires the Lord Jesus; a carnal sluggish heart desires and has not,
but another hungers and is filled; he has not any degree of the same hunger.
It Is therefore granted there are desires, and joys, and light, and growth in
false hearts, but there is not that fullness of joy, that fullness of light,
that fullness of the Spirit which is in the Faithful, and here they ever fall
short. Yet note,

1. There is not a perfect measure; no^ the fullness that shall be when our
souls shall be gathered to them that are made perfect.

2. Nor yet that there is that fullness the Saints aim at; for it is the
resurrection they aim at, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14.

3. Nor yet a glutting fullness, that men have Manna enough, and say, the main
work is wrought, and that is enough: Not such a fullness as satisfies their
appetite from longing for more. But which satisfies and quiets their Conscience
in regard of the uprightness of their souls before the Lord.

SECT. II.
BUT for the more full and clear explication of this point, I shall show you
these three things.

1. That Hypocrites may have some inward touches of Gods Spirit.

2. That the very reason of their falsenesse is because they have no more than
such touches or strokes.

3. That there is a fullness the Saints come to, which others want. To be
showed 1. Positively. 2. Negatively.


I. That Hypocrites may have not only outward shows, but some inward lighter
strokes of Gods Spirit. As

1. Of the Spirit restraining and confining, nay benumming of corruption, as
Paul was blameless, nay he had no mind nor will to many sins, nay did not think
he had any living contempt and enmity of God in his heart. Hence Romans 7. 9.
it is said, When the Command came sin revived. Was it not living before? Yes,
but it was asleep, it was benumbed, like cold Snakes, but not killed.

2. Of the Spirit preventing and exciting unto many, nay, to any duty of the
Law in general, and that sometime by fears of misery and terrors of the Law,
Deuteronomy. 5. 23. And sometime by love and mercy, morally affecting the heart, Exodus
19. 4, 5, 6. You have heard what the Lord has do^e, Will you now enter into
Covenant? Yes, yet what is said of them? Psalm. 78. 37. They were false in Gods
Covenant.

3. There may be some operative and quickening Grace of the Gospel, Heb. 6. 4.
They were enlightened, etc.

4. There may besome edifying and cooperating gifts of Law and Gospel, whereby
a man may not only be useful and helpful to some, but to the Church of God, as
those that did prophecy in Christ's Name. And these may be so inward, that they
think themselves clean and sincere; as Abimelech.

II. That the reason of their unsoundness is because they have no more than
lighter strokes of Gods Spirit.

As I might show in all these, Paul is blameless, yet far enough from having
sin mortified by Christ, and hence professes, We did serve diverse Lusts, Tit.
3. 3. The Israelites cry out, they will do what God will have them: Yet Oh that
there were such an heart! Deuteronomy. 5. 29. They in Heb. 6. were enlightened and
tasted, yet fell. He therefore adds, We are persuaded (v. 9.) better things of
you. They did prophecy in Christ's Name, Mat. 7. Yet depart from me you workers
of iniquity. But see it more particularly, Mark 12. 33. Says the Scribe to
him, To love the Lord, oh ' it is better than all burnt Offerings. Some Jews did
rest there, but neglected the inward work; but this man, the inward work was
prized in his judgment, he had both profession and some affection: And was he
now entered into the Kingdom of God? No. Here was his wound, he fell short of
it some degrees. Hence its said, thou art not far from the Kingdom of God. So
the Israelites, Why did not they enter? Was not the Land good? Oh yes! That
report the worst of the Spies brought: But their hearts were not taken with the
goodness of it, as Calebs and Ioshuahs were. And hence they were shut out,
Numb. 13. 27. and 14. 7, 8, 24. So it is here. So an unsound heart may be
enlightened, as it is there, Heb. 6. 4, 5. But there is a mavelous light which
they never have, they have not such a degree, 1 Pet. 2. 9. And hence, Deuteronomy. 29.
2, 3, 4. The Lord has not given you eyes to see to this day. Did the Lord give
them no eyes to see, no hearts to be affected with what they did see? Why came
they then out of Egypt? Why did they sing when they saw Pharaoh drowned? Why
they had not such eyes and such hearts as Moses had, not unto that day.

So for turning to the Lord. Do not many unsound hearts turn over a new leaf?
Do they not, not only outwardly, but inwardly too? Where is the flaw then? In
the degree, Jer. 3. 10. Judah has not turned with her whole heart, but
treacherously. So there may be some growth and life in false unsound hearts,
that may after fall away: But where is the wound? Look in the Parable of the
Seed; Some grew not at all; some did grow, but not having depth of earth, fell
again: Others fell not in persecution, but there were the roots of Thorns that
choakt the Seed; the good grounds seed came to ripeness and fullness of fruit,
though some in a greater degree than others; yet none at all (no ripe fruit) in
the rest. Hence the Lord is said to weigh the heart, Prove. 16. 2. Men think
they are humbled, and do believe, but God finds them too light, as Belshazzar
was weighed and found too light. And thus it will be seen at the last day, when
Christ Jesus shall appear, that all the most glorious Profession of many a man
is therefore rejected, because found too light.

III. That there is a fullness which the Saints have, and which others fall
short of. Which I shall show,

I. Positively and affirmatively from what has been said, Prove. 12. 26. The
righteous is more excellent. John 14. 17. Whom the world cannot receive,
because it knows him not. There is that Spirit in Saints which no unregenerate
man knows, hence desires not. Because he dwells in you, he does not only send
some gifts, or work somewhat there, but he dwells there, he fills the heart.
Hence the end of Christ's death is, to purchase to himself a peculiar people,
Tit. 2. 14. Of such a spirit, such holiness that only themselves know. So it is
that which all the Prophets press to, to a higher pitch; and hence that charge
of Josh. 22. 5. And it is a peculiar fruit of Election, Ephesians. 1. 4. 1. To be
holy. 2. Before him. 3. In love.

II. Negatively. If there should not be such a distinguishing fullness,

1. Then the whole Ministry of Christ is in vain; and so destroyed, for what is
the end of that, that God raises up any Ministers in the Church, but this,
Acts 26. 18. To turn men from darkness to light. If this light was only that
in Heb. 6. 4* then the end of the Ministry was to work hypocrisy. And from the
power of Satan to God, there the Lord leaves them not, but that they may
receive remission of sins,etc.

2. If there should not be this fullness, most of the Promises should be
destroyed, and Gods Faithfulness fail, and the Saints be deceived. For Promises
are made to them that mourn, to them that hunger, to them that believe, etc.
Now many Hypocrites mourn, and desire, and the stony ground believed. Then it
seems the promise is not true. Yes, and therefore there must be another kind of
mourning, another and higher degree of the Spirit of Faith, etc. i. e. not of
the same Faith, but of another kind of Faith.

3. If not, then all Christian endeavor after a higher measure of Grace should
be destroyed. For if any man only has Christ in his eye, that he may have him,
I say that is sweet; but I say you shall never have him, unless you receive
him. Oh but many receive him! as John 2. 23. yet Christ committed not himself to
them, for he saw what they were. Now therefore if you regard not the measure,
i. e. such a kind of receiving of him, you will never seek for it, pray for it,
nor learn to know it. And hence it is said, Prove. 15. 24. The way of life is
above to the righteous, If it were not above, of that height, he would never
come over difficulties to it.

4. If not, there is no true hope that any man can have: But it is utterly
destroyed, 1 John 3. 3. He that has this hope purges himself. I am as good as
such a one: But, as Christ is pure. That is his Copy and his Pattern.

5. The very people of God are destroyed from having a being in the world, if
this measure makes not the difference. If it be replied, the Lord Jesus makes
the difference. It Is very true, those that are in Covenant, they have God to be
their God, that makes one difference; but if there be not some peculiar
workmanship of the Spirit in them, then though they have God their God, yet the
second part of the Covenant is destroyed, i. e. They are not the Lords peculiar
people that have more than common wash-work. For we are not only the Lords
people by choice and purchase, but by new Creation also, Isa. 64. 7, 8, 9.

SECT. III.
HEnce we see the sight of no Grace is no part of a Christians Grace and
Holiness. Use 1.
The five Foolish Virgins were not shut out because they did not see they had
no Oil, but because when they did see it, (as the Lord will make you see it
first or last) they did not get such a measure and quantity of it as might fill
their Vessel. You may go down to Hell with complaints I have nothing, unless
the eternal Spirit work something at last in you.

Hence take heed of quenching and limiting the Spirit of God, Use 2.
when it is working upon and breathing in your hearts at any time, in any means.
Because you may then fall short of this measure of it, and so be shut out at
last. Look as it was with the Israelites, it is said of them, that they could
not drive out the Canaanites, i. e. they would not by reason of their sloth;
and ^^nce they were pricks, nay snares to them. So the Lord begins to work
strangely upon some men, but they are presently humble enough, and have comfort
enough; and Grace enough, and cannot be better, and hence God makes their sins
snares and thorns to their sorrow and ruin afterward. Nay Beloved, many a one
will quench the Spirit. Oh take heed of it! Thus,

1. The Spirit not only convinces, but humbles his heart, and shake; his
spirit with fears of sin. Now what should he do? He should welcome it, and say,
oh blessed Spirit, do begin to cast me down to the dust for my sin, before I
am cast to Hell for my sin! What wilt have me to do? Oh humble me more. Give me
not only an act of heaviness, but a spirit of heaviness! As she said of
affliction, I pray God this Plaster may never cease cleaving, till healed. Now
what do many men? Why either game it, or work it, or sleep it away. The young
man will not so soon lose all his mirth: The man that has thought his estate
good so long, will not believe it is so with him now. Or as Solomon speaks of
Gods hand, he gro^s weary of his chas^isement, and so casts it off, and
catches hold on Christ and comfort, and there stays, before the Spirit has
done it.

2. If they dare not shake it off thus till the Spirit eases, then they
satisfy themselves with some hopes the Lord gives, and some taste of his
sweetness, before they are satisfied with it, as those did, Heb. 6. 4, 5. And
hence Psalm. 90. 14. Oh satisfy us with thy mercy, so shall we be glad all the
days of our lives! So satisfied, as to live upon it alone. As many say, they
could be contented it should be so, but they do not live upon it. As if you
should ask a man, could you be content to be made King, and come from Beggary?
Yes; but he is left there, it is not so; and hence lives a Beggar still. Men
cannot live without their lusts. Yet says Christ, My flesh is meat indeed, and
drink indeed, i. e. This gives real consolation, satisfaction indeed. And here
many a Christian sinks, and goes up and down short of saving good.

3. Hence many walk in some desires which the Spirit has wrought, but to break
through all difficulties, and follow the Lord indeed, and come to that they
know they must indeed, this they will not do, but depart from Christ sorrowful,
and hope the Lord will accept of them; and hence the Lord complains, Mal. 1. 8.
of this generation that had desires in their flocks, but lame ones. Will thy
King accept this? And so all their work is overly and superficial by stinting
the Spirit. Thus far you shall go but no farther. Oh Beloved, this is the frame
of a sincere heart, the Lord empties him, but he is never content till the Lord
fills; and when he finds it, he sits not down content that the work is done,
but as his want made him beg before, so his taste makes him long more now, as
Moses, to see more of the Lords Glory: As Paul, Phil. 3. 12, 13. Oh therefore
when the Spirit comes, entreat it to go on and finish. And hence David begs,
Psalm. 119. 132. Oh the mercy that thou usest to show to them that love thy
Name! Why so? Oh David saw mercy to others, that sets God awork to do somewhat
for them, work somewhat in them, but it is not such mercy. Oh beg for that mercy
that humbled others, quickened others, that are now in Glory; that, or no mercy
Lord!

How shall I know whether the work is overly? Quest.


1. If sudden and violent, Answ.
it is usually overly. A Picture long a drawing is exact, another soon done is
lightly done. A man has Leopard-spots, which in our garments cannot be washed
out easily. Gods through-work is soaking and searching. Hence violent sudden
sorrows and joys and reformation which all were in the stony ground, proved
unsound, Mat. 13. 5.

2. God has thy time of trying thee, Mat. 13. The seed was sown. Which now is
good ground? Where is there fruit to be seen and ripeness of Grace? Look upon
persecution, if that does not drive thee from Christ. If that does not, see if
the world does not, which by a certain deceit and cozenage will befool you. I
am pe^swaded, as (...) is, that all the several trials of men are to show them
to themselves and the world, that they be but counterfeits, and to make Saints
known to themselves the better. As Saul, he has a temptation only of a
command, when he had nothing to cause him to stoop but it, yet he fell there.
So it is with many others that God does much for, he tries them, Romans 5. 5.
Trib^la^ion works trial, and that hope. Prove. 17. 3. If you would know whether
it will hold weight, the trial will tell you. Look you there, and in special,
if it drives to Prayer, fear not.

CHAP. XX.
Wherein is given a more Large and Full account of that Fullness of Grace that
is in Believers, as to the Several Parts thereof, and how the most Glorious
Hypocrites come short in all.
SECT. I.
MAke therefore a narrow search whether you have this Fullness of the Spirit Use
3.
or no.

What is this Fulness^?

When the Spirit comes in the room of those things which a man is full Quest.
of now. For fullness or filling implies emptiness, and the removal of that.
Answ.


Now there are six things every man is full of. 1. Sin 2. Darkness. 3.
Unbelief. 4. Satan. 5. Self. 6. World.


So there is answerably in every Saint, 1. A Fullness of humiliation for sin. 2.
A Fullness of illumina^^on and revelation, in the room of darkness. 3. A Fullness
of Faith, in the room of unbelief. 4. A Fullness of the Spirit it self, in the
room of Satan. 5. A Fullness of Sanctification in acting for God as their last
end, in the room of self-seeking. 6. A Fullness of Glory and Consolation, in
stead of the world.


I. Fullness of humiliation under sin, opposite to fullness of sin.

For every hypocritical heart has commonly some humiliation and casting down,
which is the first Principle of all his Profession, and hence can tell you of
his miserable estate that once he lived in, and for which he was troubled, but
it was never deep enough. For as there was before his terrifying, a full power,
a fullness of the dominion of sin, his humiliation for sin, never reached, never
came to that fullness or measure, so as to deliver the soul from that. For I do
not account that true humiliation whereby a man's heart is rent, troubled and
tormented with sin, but whereby it is rent from sin; not from the being, but
from the power, not from the bondage of some, but yet from the power of all.
For if rending with sin should be humiliation, then the Devils should be more
humbled then any. Then also a man may have too much of humiliation, and of Gods
Spirit. If rending from the being of all sin should be humiliation, then no man
living should be sincerely humbled; unless we dream of an est^te of perfection
before it comes, and of the day of triumph in the time of warfare. If rending
from the bondage of some sins should be humiliation, then a man might be truly
humbled for sin, and yet under the power of it. And therefore look as in every
one the Lord humbles, there was once a fullness of the reign and power of sin in
the full strength of it; so that full measure of Humiliation which the Lord
works in his, it ever comes to that height, as to break that power down, Ehud
-like, it not only wounds the flesh, but leaves the dagger in the heart of this
Tyrant; 2 Cor. 10. 5. The weapons of our warfare are mighty to cast down every
thing that exalts it self.

If I should leave this Point thus, I should but leave you as doubtful as you
came, and so in the dark; therefore for the better clearing of this Point, let
me explain five things to you: The Scope of which is to show you, what I mean
by sin, and the power of it, and that Humiliation that removes it.

I. That besides the outward acts of sin, and inward lusts and breathings of
sin, and the spiritual plagues with which God strikes men for sin, as
blindness, hardness of heart, there is in every man living another sin,
commonly called the sin of nature: (as in the Serpents, besides the spitting of
poison, their nature is poisonous) which sin is generally believed and
confessed, but felt by few. This is called in Scripture by the name of Flesh,
Joh. 3. 3. The Law of the members, The old man. For as in men, there are
actions, breathings, and the man himself; So here: Which sin of nature is the
deordination of the whole man, or a corrupt bent and set of the whole man
against God: And it expresses it self in two particulars; 1. In a constant
departing from God in every action, Civil and Moral: Like a man set out of his
way, every step he goes is ou^; or like a Clock out of frame, every stroke is
false, Psalm. 58. 3. The wicked go astray from the very womb. 2. In a fierce,
invincible, resisting and contradicting of God, when he has overtaken the soul
to draw it home, and turn it back, Romans 8. 7. We account it a doleful thing for
Christ to bid the soul depart at the last day, that woe is past upon all the
sons of men by this sin now; only with this difference, 1. They are forced to
depart then, men willingly depart now, and hasten away in every thing from God
as fast as they can. 2. They depart into fire, these to broken Cisterns of
creatures. I do 3. Believe they would not resist the Lord, if he should come to
save them from their separation then from him, this makes nature resist him now.

II. That this sin of nature is most properly only the reigning sin. The text
is evident for it, Romans 6. 12. Let not sin reign, to obey it in the lusts
thereof. There is 1. Obedience, i. e. the outward acts. 2. Lusts, the inward
breathings. 3. Sin it self where those lusts are seated. It has been a
Question, What a man's reigning master sin is, and many discoveries have been
made of particular sins, as that which rises and awakeneth first in the
morning with us, that which rides and labors a man upon the Sabbath day, when
the Lord or sin must ride in triumph: yet that is the misery of a carnal heart,
that when he gives his beasts rest, yet such is sins tyranny, he being sins
beast, that he shall then have no rest. Now if their meaning be, that some
particular sin may be a reigning sin, or a man's personal reigning sin; then
it is true, Judas loves his bag best, and Achitophel and H^m^n his honor most,
and (...) his whore most. But if they mean a man's natural reigning (...); the
reigning sin then, it is not any particular sin so much as this: For no sin is
able to reign over any man but by commission and power from this. As the Weeds
can never grow ^all, but by virtue of their soil where they grow, Mat. 15. 19.
All the boughs flourish by virtue of the root whence they grow. And hence we
shall see, let Satan sow his seeds of pride or lust or passion in a man whose
nature is changed, its impossible they should come to any perfection there, b^^
^^ey will die away within a time, because the heart of the soil is gone, and
power of sin removed; and hence also it comes to pass, that a man's master sin
may be changed: Those sins that are his master-sins in his youth, are not in
his old age, those that are at one time, in one place, are not in another. Now
there could never be such change of Governors and Viceroys, unless there were
some great King, that sets up one, and pulls down another, satis pro imperio;
This is therefore the reigning sin, which has taken possession of every part,
which has its hand in every act, which pulls down one sin and sets up another
under it, which gives strength to every sin that has any, which fights it out
till the last: This is I say the reigning sin; hence think not that then the
reigning sin is down, when your personal sins are destroyed, though it be with
a most sudden and fearful destruction.

III. That when the Spirit of God humbles the soul indeed, he strikes the head,
and wounds the ^eart of this sin; he does not only cut off some limbs of it,
not only bind it, but slay it of its life and power. That as it is with some
men, they may have many pains, gripes, diseases, yet live and recover again,
but the pangs are not so strong as to separate soul and body, for then the man
is gone: So a carnal heart he may be troubled, and have many gripes of
Conscience, and apply the promise, Come to me you that be weary, and so he may
find rest, and as he recovers his peace, his sin recovers its strength; but
when the pangs are so strong as to separate body and soul, sin of nature which
has lived there; now the man dies, now the soul falls down indeed. Now this
effectual humiliation carries the soul unto Christ, and hence Acts 26. 18.
turned from the power of Satan to God, Col. 1. 13. He has delivered us from
the power of darkness. And hence Gal. 5. 24. They that be in Christ have
cr^eified the flesh, as well as the affections and l^sts: For if the Lord
should only humble a man for the sins of a wicked life, and some wants in the
heart, the Lord should only bruise Satan's heel, but never strike his head; the
Lord should slay the A^al^kites, but spare the Agag; it is true, the Lord
usually at first conversion sets one sin upon the soul that brings to mind
many other, and the Lord humbles for them, and here the soul is apt to rest as
many do, but when the Lord comes indeed to work, he cuts thus deep as now I
speak. 1 Cor. ^5. It Is said, The Lord must reign till all his ^nemies are put
under his (...). Look therefore as this sin is the greatest enemy Christ has,
so if he reigns in heaven, he will be sure above all other sins, to strike the
head of this, and disthrone this; and w^ shall find that there may be deep
terrors upon the false hearted Virgins, but they only assault the soul; So on
Saints, but Christ then strikes at the sin and saves the soul, Isai. 57. 16,
17. And this I add, there may be a great power of Christ put forth to humble
the soul, but men's hearts resist this; and even Pharaoh was humbled, but its
never saving, unless it strike the very power and throne of sin, and so this
sin; and now the soul is humbled indeed.

IV. That no unregenerate man ever had such a measure of humiliation, as
ascended to, and ended in this, though he may have all that Humiliation which
is precedent unto this. As,

1. The Lord may arm first some few, and then many of the sins of their lives
upon them, so as they may feel the most intolerable burden of them; not only
to stand convinced they are most grievous sinners, but to shed many tears; nay,
to be sore troubled and distressed, oh the heavy wrath that lies upon my soul!
Thus Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 15. And hence many make heavy complaints, oh the Lord
hears me not! Send for Moses, says Pharaoh. My sin is gr^^^er than I can ^ear,
says Cain. Nay, not only so, but they may feel more terrors ^han many of the
Saints, as the damned now; for the Lord lays this burden upon his peoples
backs in measure, but the Lord empties out the whole sack upon them, and the
ground of this is but the sting of sin, or the gnawings of particular sins in
the Conscience, not the burden of the sin of nature as yet.

2. You will say, these fell from God, never looked to Christ, not left their
sin; but I have done so. I have seen the mercy of God in the Gospel, the Lord
Jesus has been revealed there, and I have seen sin, I must part with my sin,
if ever I have him, and so I have. And this you may have, you may see an
excellency in Christ, and be so affected with hope of his mercy, and melt at
the thoughts of his Love, as to cast off all outward evils that thou have, or
the world lives in, 2 Pe^. 2. 20. So that thou may escape these, by coming to
him to remove them, and by seeing that else thou shall have none of him; and
hence hated thou may be of the world. The reason is, Christ has only washed
thy skin, but never changed thy nature as yet, so that you may thank God my
Conscience is clear.

3. You may have not only outward acts, but for a time inward lusts quenched,
that a man has no mind nor heart to any sinful way, nor to the dearest sins he
has lived in, whilst horror lies upon him. As in Judas, when God did hea^ his
Conscience, his lust, after his Bag was gone, he had more mind to an halter;
And hence f^ings away his pieces of silver, and innocent blood lies heavy. Oh
^he mercy of a Christ that I have slighted! He thought he might have had his
money and Christ escaped with his life, and his sin pardoned afterward. And
hence its said, Mat. 27. 3. When he saw he was condemned, he repented, and as a
man not worthy to live in his own thoughts, he goes and hangs himself. It Is
with the soul as with water, all the cold may be gone, but the native Principle
of cold remains still. You may remove the burning of lusts, not the blackness
of nature, from a carnal heart, and the ground holds, nature is not changed.
This I say an unregenerate man may have, but yet never find this change of
nature, where the power of sin lies: change of Conscience from security to
terror, change of life from profaneness, and civility, and fashions of the
world, to escape pollutions thereof; change of lusts, nay quenching them for a
time; but the nature is never changed in the best Hypocrite that ever was. As 2
Pet. 2. 19, 20. Th^^ were washed, but never from their (...) nature; And here
they ever fail, Prove. 30. 12. There is a gen^ration clean in their own eyes,
yet not washed from their filthiness. 2 Timothy 2. 18, 19, 21. Alexander fell,
and Hymeneus; they talked of the glorious estate of Saints, and that here was
all the resurrection that is to be expected; and i^ seems it was such a fall of
such persons that many stumbled, and said, How shall we know who are the Lords?
Doubtless we may fall. No, the foundation remains sure, and the Lord knows who
are his. They were none of his all that time, and let all that profess Christ
depart from iniquity, for he that purges himself shall be a Vessel of honor.
And therefore read through all the Scripture, constantly never any Hypocri^es
but they had this brand, Mat. 7. 23. You workers of iniqui^y. Herod and Judas
had their haunts, etc. And Romans 1, and 2. The Apostle shows that all were under
sin. He may in every thing else be humbled, for all the humiliation besides
this strengthens sin in its Kingdom, and binds a man faste^ under the dominion
of it. And hence such men are more hard to he convinced th^n men that were
never cast down at all.

But this he never finds, for if he should, then,

1. A graceless heart might partake of the greatest Benefit of the Covenant of
(...) and love of God. For Romans 11. 26. This is my Covenant, to take away their
s^n* For to subdue s^n is greater love than to conquer Devils, death, and Hell,
Isa. ^1. 6. It Is turning Lions into Lambs.

2. T^en an unregenerate man may partake of the last end of all the sufferings
and sorrows of Christ, which is to save his people from their sin. And hence,
John 1. 29 B^hold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. 1
John 3. 5, 8. Christ came to destroy the works of the Devil. This therefore he
ever falls short of. He ^ha^ has found this easy, and accounts this work
common, never had it yet.

Quest. How may a Christian know when the Lord has changed his nature, and
taken do^^ ^he power of his Sin?

Answ. It might suffice to evidence this against all gainsayers, that thus
it is, and so to know it by the Spirits witness, which shows us the things
freely given of God, who to save the Lord a trying another day, tries us now,
and makes known these hidden works. Especially seeing some Divines think, that
as the first Adam conveyed this sin of Nature, I not knowing; so the second
Adam does also remove this by an immediate stro^k, I conceive it is so also, but
not only by it. And therefore take two Evidences now.

1. Wherever this is done, that soul does not only see this sin, for so an
unregenerate Paul did, Romans 7. 9. Where sin revived, etc. And the Word is a
divider of joints and Marrow. Nor do they only feel this as an evil, and so be
much troubled with it, but when the Lord makes the dejected soul feel it as its
greatest evil, so long as it remains in its being; (as it will) worse than
death, than hell, than all afflictions, and miseries. It Is not a particular
sin, but this that he feels thus. You will say, this is a high pitch. I say,
consider if any man was ever humbled under sin, but he that felt sin as it is.
For if I feel it not as it is, I am deceived. Now it is the greatest evil; To
depart from a living God is worse than for soul and body and all creatures to
depart from me. To make God miserable is worse than for all creatures ever to
be made so, and sin in its tendencie does so, being a cross to his Will, Isa.
1. 24. Hence he that feels it indeed, feels it so; the beginning of which is a
sorrow and mourning after God, that it might be so, Isa. 63. 17. Why have
hardened our hearts from thy fear? But thus it is indeed, Romans 7. 24. And when
it is thus, it will hold thus till death, while the cause remains; nay the more
life and love, the more tender it grows; setting aside some careless fits. And
hence its greatest joy is to think of the time it shall be for ever holy. And
hence accounts no such mercy as to be set at liberty to live to God indeed. A
graceless heart sees and fears it, and cries out of himself for it; but stay a
while, and he loses his tenderness, either because he cannot part with it, or
because of Christ, he looks now to him, or because he has now some sprinkling
of the Spirit, nature is eased thereby, and he is quieted; and hence never any
carnal heart, but some root of bitterness did grow up at last in this Soil.
Hence Ordinances profit not, because feeling is lost. But the soul thus feeling
it, beholding the Holiness of God and Love of Christ, and its constant
withdrawings, resistings, oh it cuts deep!

2. Then the nature is changed, when the Conscience being still and quiet, and
the soul assured of the Lords love, yet nothing gives the heart quiet till it is
contiguous to God in Christ to enjoy him, in his Holiness, and in the love and
delight of his whole will. For this is a certain Rule, If the nature be not
changed, if Conscience be but once quie^ed with the sense of Gods love, and
affected with it, and has not God indeed, nor his work to quiet it, it will
fall to lusting after Creatures and live upon them, and feed the heart there.
For as it is impossible for a man to live, or to be without provision, so the
world being provision for the flesh, meat, drink, sleep, and these lawful
things, there i^ does and will lie quiet without God. But now where the nature
is changed, and there is another nature, there is something else provided for it
to live on, and that is the Lord and his Will. As Christ said, it is my meat and
drink to do his Will. And Romans 7. 22. I d^light in the Law of God in the inner
man. There was somewhat that loathed it, but ^here was somewhat else delighted in
it, and there lies its life, and though the heart would rest and give over
sometimes, yet it is a Law of the mind that the soul has, he can have no rest,
Romans 8. 5. And therefore take a child of God, let him have meat, drink, sleep,
blessing in his Calling, preach, pray, and have honor, yet ^e will constantly
come home to the Lord mourning. What does all this do me good? When I rise up,
lie down, eat, drink and pray, and do all without him? An untuned heart all
this while. The world stands between him and the Lord all this while, but this
does not. Many a sincere heart has heavy complaints, and many doubts, because
it is not thus; this rather is an evidence of peace, than Gods war against it.
Its an old Rule, he that can live in Heaven, shall; and there is nothing but a
God to suck in, and breath out, and live unto. Is this thy Element now?

Oh consider and examine your selves here you poor Saints, that you may be
comforted. Others of you, if now you do not, the Lord Jesus will another day,
and bring these secret things of darkness to light. If thou find this was
never yet done, know it, all thy tears, and fears, and prayers have been in
vain; and under the power of sin and Satan thou still art, through the fierce
wrath of God against thee: And there I leave thee till the Lord find thee out.

SECT. II.
II. A Fullness of Illumination in the room of darkness.
BUT let it be first noted that I speak not here of Revelations of future
Events. When Virgin-Churches shall fall a dreaming, it is a sign they fall a
sleeping. Nor of revelation of new Doctrines, nor yet of the Love of Christ and
assurance thereof; but of the Person of Christ, a work common to all the Elect,
and not peculiar to some, for Christ may not appear in his promise of love for
a time to a sincere heart, yet this is then wrought. I shall therefore express
my thoughts herein in four Conclusions.

1. That all unregenerate men are under the power of darkness, Conclu. 1.
of ignorance, Ephesians. 5. 8. You were darkness in the abstract, Ephesians. 4. 18. So
that they cannot understand the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
Especially the Lord Jesus, for the knowledge of him is above nature, not only
corrupted but pure nature. Nay though the Lord gives the best and clearest
means of revealing himself, yet they cannot see, John 1. 5. Light shined in
darkness, and it comprehended him not, no more than he whose visive faculty is
lost, when the Sun shines round about him. Nay, that light which is in them is
darkness, Mat. 6. 23. And then how great is that darkness? For many men might
have known Christ, but that they thought they did know him before, and so are
delivered up in these chains of darkness to the Prince of darkness, but are
like wilderness-shrubs, shall never see when good comes. Ministers (as Christ
did) may mourn over them, but can never help them until the Lord pull off their
scales. For they please themselves in darkness, and love it more than light,
and are not as Paul, praying and mourning under the Scales that are upon their
eyes.

2. That there is a state of light to which God calls his people only; Conclu.
2.
or rather, that there is a spirit of Light, Illumination or Revelation let
into the mind, which is Peculiar to the Beloved of Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 9. As of
other things, so especially of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. 4, 5, 6. And it is so
Glorious a work that Christ himself admires the Father, and stands in a
ravishment at it, Mat. 11. 25. To Babes, incapable of all others of knowledge;
yet to them does the Lord reveal some things that the wisest in the world never
knew. I do believe that the greatest Scholar that ever lived, never had one
such thought or apprehension of the Lord and the things of the Lord, as the
Saints have. And hence Christ professes, oh blessed are your eyes that they
see; and themselves bless him, and fall a wondering many times, Lord why do
manifest thy self to us, and not to the world? And therefore it is an injury to
the Grace of God, to make precious things common, and all the work of the
Spirit on the understanding to be common to Reprobates, and to say, the
difference lies only in the work of the Spirit upon the will, John 6. 45. He
that has heard and learned of the Father, comes to me. If the Learning of the
Father be common to a Reprobate, then either they may come to Christ, which is
there denied, or Christ's promise is false, for then a carnal heart may hear and
learn of the Father, and never come to Christ.

That notwithstanding it is thus with them, yet foolish Virgins may have some
light in their Lamp; some sight and knowledge of Jesus Christ. Conclus. 3.
It is said we live in days of light, and so indeed we do, but as the Lord
said to them that had seen his Miracles, yet the Lord had not given them eyes
to see to this day; they were enlightened yet fell, Hebr. 6. 4. I shall
therefore speak not of the revelation of all the Word, but of Christ the end of
it, and the knowledge of whom comprehends all the rest.

1. There is a knowledge of Christ in many a man which is begot by common fame,
and humane private instruction, which men hearing from credible men, conceive
of and believe; As that Christ is the Savior of the World, is come, is dead,
is risen, is at Gods right hand, that in him Gods justice and mercy is
reconciled, that there is mercy with him for the greatest of all sinners, etc.
And according as men are more or less instructed; so do men conceive and
believe. But now this knowledge is but traditional, and begot by common fame
and humane report, like Herod's, that heard many things of Christ, and yet
indeed despised him. The Lord I know does make use of this to cause the soul to
come to further sight of him, as in the Queen of Sheba, but its far enough off
from giving any saving knowledge of the Lord Jesus; and hence John 1. 46. when
they had been with Christ, they do not wish them to rest in the report, but
Come and see; so you hear of these things, but come and see these things. You
have learned them from man come unto the Lord that he may teach them; and hence
we shall see many of the people of God that have been put to a Question of all
things that ever they learned, and learnt them over again; as, Whether there be
a Christ or no, etc. And they never saw these things indeed, until the Lord
taught them a second time; hence therefore those that have been thus trained
up, and have been troubled and comforted by some conceived promises of Christ,
but never saw any more of his person, then what you have learned before; Your
eyes are closed up to this day.

2. If any man should see and behold Christ really, immediately, this is not the
saving knowledge of him. I know the Saints do know Christ as if immediately
present, they are not strangers by their distance, if others have seen him more
immediately I will not dispute it, but if they have seen the Lord Jesus as
immediately as if here on earth, yet Capernaum saw him so; nay, some of them
were Disciples for a time, and followed him, John 6. and yet the Lord was hid
from their eyes; nay all the world shall see him in his glory which shall amaze
them, and yet this is far short of the saving knowledge of him, which the Lord
does communicate to the Elect. So that though you see the Lord so really as
that you become familiar with him, yet Luke 13. 26. Lord have we not eat and
drunk, etc. And so perish.

3. A man may see the Lord in his wonderful works, and glorious kingdom and
government, and yet not know him savingly, wondrous deliverances, preservations
of himself, and of Gods people, dreadful destruction of enemies, such as they
cannot but say, This is the finger of the Lord, and yet know not, Deuteronomy. 29. 1,
2, 3, 4. And hence John 15. 24. and hence men think such things are done, and
shall I ever be vile again, yet they become as bad as ever.

4. He may see the Lord Jesus yet more clearly by the letter of the Scripture,
which though it brings to the saving knowledge of Christ, yet to see the Lord
Jesus no otherwise then by the strength of fancy and understanding, from thence
is no saving knowledge of Jesus Christ; and hence Romans 16. 26. the Mystery of
the Gospel was hid from the Jews, but now it is revealed to all Nations;
literally, to all where it comes, savingly to some few. For between the saving
knowledge of Christ in the Gospel, and palpable ignorance of him in the Gospel,
there is this middle knowledge which is literal, whereby a man does see, yet in
seeing, sees ^^t, Isai. 6. 9. which is the St^^e of a Church which has been
long trained up under good means; And hence we shall see many men of great
learning have been able to wr^^e Volumes of the Mystery of Christ, and yet in
seeing ^^ver (...).

5. There may be in a false heart a strange knowledge of Christ without
Script^res, which may ravish a man's (...) heart strangely, which is usually the
first Temptation of the Virgin-Churches, that are of much knowledge, and little
love, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3, 4. Wherein Satan does no^ seek to pull away men to
forsake the Gospel, but from the simplicity of the Gospel, Repent, and believe,
and ^e (...), For says he, (...) is transfor^ed ^^to an Ang^l of light: And
hence we have heard that some have heard voices, some have seen the very blood
of Christ dropping on them, and his wounds in his side, some have seen a great
light shining in the Chamber, some wonderfully affected with their dreams, some
in great distress have had inward witness, Thy sins ar^ forgi^en; and hence
such liberty and joy that they are ready to leap up and down the Chamber: O
adulterous genera^ion^ This is natural and usual with men, they would ^ain see
Jesus, and have him present to give them peace; and hence Papists have his
Image; and hence Christ gives the S^crament to show himself as familiarly as
can be. Hence Th^m^^ would not believe, (...) be might put his finger in his
side, and the Lord tendered him, yet pronounced them ^lessed, th^^ h^ve not
seen, and yet believed, Joh. 20. 29. So I say (...), Woe to them that have no
other manifested Christ, but such a one. Little do you think what wrong you do
to Christ, for you do as much as in you lies Eclipse all his glory at the last
day, as the wicked by their sins Eclipse his glory at this day. 2 The^.1. 10.
He shall be admired in all that believe. Why? Because our Testimony was
^^leeved* That Faith which closes with, and sees Christ in a Testimony, is
tha^ whereby Jesus shall be admired at the worlds end.

That the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ is this, Concl. 4.
Whereby the soul being sensible of his Ignorance of Jesus, beholds such a
glory in Christ's person, as that he esteems him in all his glory, as his
present, greatest, and only good. I will take this in pieces.

1. I say that soul which has truly and savingly seen the Lord Jesus, has
been made sensible of his ignorance of him; I see him not, I have heard of him,
and ^ead of him, and taken his Name into my mouth, and professed him; and I
believe others see him, and blessed are their eyes, but I see him not, John 9.
26, ^7, 39. For (...) I come into this world, and look as all the increase of
the knowledge of Christ comes in by this door, so the beginning of it, and
therefore those that have been cast down and he^rd of Christ a Savior, but
never felt their ign^^ance of him before they have apprehended him, their light
is darkness, and their knowledge full of delusion and idolatrous.

2. It beholds a glory in Christ's person, for before the Lord reveals his Son
to any, look what he was to the Jews he is to every man, Isai. 53. 2, 3. He is
rejected and despised of (...), nothing so mean as Christ, every vanity
preferred above him, and men can do no other, because they see not his glory
and beauty, 1 Cor. 2. 8. If they had (...), etc. Therefore the Lord reveals his
hidden glory to them, such as never entered into their hearts before, or into
the minds of other men, which though others may talk of, yet they cannot see it
in that manner as they do; it is c^^^ed therefore (...) light which he does
reveal, when the soul has been viewing its own shame and filth, when all the
grass and glory is withered, Is^^. 40. 6. then the glory of Christ is revealed;
One every way so fit and suitable to them, according to all their wants and
woes, by some Sermon or other, which when the soul does see, it usually fills
the head, and heart, and eyes with (...). Oh that I have despised him so
glorious! Acts 2. 36, 37. 2 Cor. 4. 5, 6. If the soul should not feel its
ign^^ance of him, it would never esteem the fight of him, but now it does thus,
and now that Glory is revealed, John 1. 14. We beheld his Glory as the Glory of
the only begotten S^n. In every Truth there is a Glory which men see not, and
this is called in Scripture, the finding of the Pearl, Man. 13. 45.

III. He so beholds him in his Glory, as that he now esteems of him in all his
Glory. For a Bala^^^ may see the Glory of the Tents of Israel; and the Star of
Jacob, but they esteem not of him in all his Glory. The damned in Hell see a
Glory in Christ, else they would never grieve for the loss of him, but it is
only in regard of something in Christ, delivering Saints from sorrows they feel.
Nay many Reprobates under a lively Ministry, shall see some Glory in Christ and
in Saints, to think them the happy men, yet not esteem of him in all his Glory;
but it is otherwise here. The Lord arises as the Sun upon the earth, which
makes all things that have any Glory to appear therein, and it puts a Glory on
every thing, that was hid before. So Christ puts a Glory on every thing of
himself: So that,

1. The soul sees a Glory in the Grace of Christ, John 1. 14. For the Glory of
Christ's Person is not seen without these excellencies, Luke 1. 46. My soul
(...) the Lord.

2. A Glory in the Holiness of Christ, Isa. 6. 3. Especially to consider, it is
in him to make me holy, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

3. A Glory in his Covenant and Promises, Psalm. 45. 1, 2. Oh that all those
Promises might be made good to me! This is all my desire, 2 Samuel 23. 5.

4. A Glory in the Government and Commands and Will of Christ. Oh if once I
could in every thing give content to his heart^ Psalm. 19. 10. That the soul had
rather lose all than cross his will in a small thing, seeing a Glory in the
least Truth, in casting off a Ceremony, etc. Zach. 6. 13.

5. A Glory in all the Ordinances of Christ. Oh how amiable are thy Ta^ernacles
oh God! Oh the Fellowship of Saints! Oh the peace on Sabbath^!

6. A ^lory in all his carriage. Let him bless me with outward estate, though
but a little. This is the allowance that Christ in Glory provides for (...).
Let him threaten me, good is the Word of the Lord. Let him desert me, his anger
is love: Oh that is Glorious! Let him take all from me, reproach me, Moses
esteems Christ's reproach greater riches than Egypt, which is our estate here.
It sees a Glory in all Christ's ways, and quiets it self here, it is the Lord,
as Eli said. Thus Saints see and esteem of Christ in all his Glory, and we
shall find a false heart ever falls short here, a sincere heart never, but
commonly is so taken up with it, that if you ask, suppose you should have all
Grace, Holiness, Promises of Christ, etc. Would not this be mercy? Yes, enough:
I should then boast in him, and bless him for ever. And hence Christ is called,
L^ke 2. 33. the Glory of Israel, because they so esteem him. And Isa. 28. 5. In
that day the Lord shall be a Diadem of Glory. Others may in horror pri^e
Christ above the world, but it is only to ease them.

IV. I add, he esteems him thus,

1. As his present good; so that if the Lord does withdraw or deny himself, now
unto him nothing in this world can for the present quiet him, Ier. 50. 4, 5.
Hence those in their judgments acknowledge Christ the greatest good, and when
they are dying, and see he will be so at last day, yet now for the present a
little more liberty in sin, sloth, lust, honor, gain, Lots, large
accomodations are (...). You never saw him. Oh vile world! the Lord will one
day condemn (...) out of thine own mouth; thy own will was more dear to thee
than his; this worlds ease better than his peace, etc. When you (...) on your
Deathbeds, you esteem him then. Why? Because serves your turn then: Hence
before you did not.

2. As the greatest good, Deuteronomy. 33. 26. Ier. 10. 7. Hence those that see some
good in Christ and desire him, and offer fair for him, but prize him not as the
greatest good: And hence with the young man, though content to part with
somwha^, not with all* they will cast their rags down at Christ's feet, and
entreat him to take away their sins; but will not cast their Crowns down, the
dea^est things they have: And hence the thorny-ground-Profes^ors ever fall
away. The good things of this world which they forsook in time of persecution,
were dearer than Christ, and hence they fall away. It Is a dishonor to a King
to be valued as other men are, Zach. 11. 12, 13.

3. As the only good, Isa. 24. 23. The Sun shall be confounded, etc. And though
other things may steal into their hearts for a time, yet they recover
themselves; this is the one thing, Psalm. 27. 4. that they beg in this life. And
hence do fall short,

1. Those that esteem Christ as men do Merchandise; they would fain have it,
but are loath to fetch it. Men may esteem Christ, as they think, the only good;
but herein their falseness appears, that they neglect means to it, because they
have some good else to quiet them. And here is condemned all lazy Profession.

2. Those that would have Christ, and esteem him highly, and use means for him
diligently, but they must have Christ, and world, and lust, and ease too:
Christ to quiet their Consciences, and the world their hearts; Christ to rest
on, when their duties fail them, and world to rest in, when the Consolations of
Christ are denied unto them. The L^^d is good, go up and possess it.

1. But do the Saints come to this pitch? Object.


2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, Answ.
it is hid to them that be lost. Who are those from whom Christ is hid? When is
he hid? When his Glory is hid. I know Saints may feel a want of, and mou^r for
it, but it will appear if they are the Lords, at some time. Nay this they will
find, some and much contempt remaining which they oppose, yet this is here, and
at parting times it is seen.

^. But Saints cannot know this. Object.


Yes (as well as they can know their contempt) by means of Gods Spirit, Answ.
he (...) carried from one contrary to another shall know it.

^. But Hypocrit^^ may attain to this. Object.


^. Then the ^ospel may be revealed to an hypocrite and to them that are ^ost.
Answ.


2. Then they may believe; for to them only the Lord is precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7.
Then a (...) is pre^^ous, when we value it according to the worth of it. Now
the Lord is the greatest and only good^ and then when we esteem him so; this is
the (...) of Believe^^ only.

3. Then Christ may be a (...) Treasure. For that is our treasure which we
esteem most.

4. Then a carnal heart may honor Christ with one of the highest degrees of
honor, which consists in this high esteem, Luke 1. 46. My soul magnifies the
L^^d.

5. Observe we, tha^ never any lost Christ but because they undervalued him.
(...), and take the (...). That it shall lie upon you one day, oh if Christ had
had that (...) which lust and world has had, I had had him now^ Examine, if it
be thus, if you thus see and prize the Lord Jesus. Oh be thankful that ever the
Lo^^ sent (...) Messenger to (...) Christ! If not, oh go and mourn! Paul did s^
three (...), (...) 9. when ^e saw nothing. Oh Christ has been long ^id from
thee. Oh (...) this; but (...) about for it, for else that in Mat. 23. 39.
shall be (...) portion.

SECT. III.
III. Fullness of Faith, in the room of Unbellef.
FOR it is not unknown how strongly this sin keeps every man's Palace, and that
not Moses, but the Lord Jesus is the stumbling stone even of the Jews, the
peculiar people of God. When men are at their last cast, that the Lord intends
to wait to pity no more, at last the Son comes, and an unbelieving heart casts
the Balance and refuses him. After that the Lord has tried men by miraculous
preservations, deliverances from Pharaohs, provision at Massah, then Canaan
comes to be entered, and men cannot enter because of unbelief. This (...) stands
in open view, and keeps the breach, when all other sins in appearance are
beaten out of the field. Now there is a Spirit of Faith, which comes in the
room of this unbelief, dispossesseth (...) soul of the power of it; for there
may be some lighter strokes of the Spirit, (...) are lighter Skirmishes with
it, but yet it wins the field again; as in the stony ground, that believed, but
unbelief got head again in time of persecution and temptation, and then they
fell away.

What is this Faith, Quest. 1.
or that fullness or full measure of it?

I shall not speak here of Historical or Miraculous Faith: Answ.
The first of which is in the Devils, the second in some men only, that may
perish afterward. Nor yet of that Faith which we call, of Assurance, we shall
not come yet to that. But of that which we call justifying Faith, and that
which does first un^te to Christ, and justify. Now this Faith is the coming of
the soul to Christ. This is the general. For Adam had his life in himself, but
now it is lo^t in us, but laid up in Christ, Col. 3. 3. Now hence they that
would have this life, must go out of themselves to the Lord for it. Now the
motion of the soul between these two extremes of emp^iness and death here, to
life and fullness there, what is it but Faith? Which Adam had not, nor could
have in that estate; and therefore none of the Sons of Adam naturally can share
in it.

And that this is Faith it appears,

1. From Io^^ 6. 35. Lam the Bread of life, he that comes to me shall never
hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst.

2. Because unbelief is the departing of the soul from the God of life, Heb. 3.
1^. Not from a holy L^w, but from a living God.

3. Faith is the proper effect of Vocationi or rather the chief part thereof.
Now look as ineffe^^ual vocation is when the Lord calls, but the soul never
comes; so effectual vocation is whereby the Lord calls, and the soul answers,
and so comes. So that to ^it still and see nothing, and do nothing, is not
Faith, but sloth. No, Christ cannot be in that soul that is yet in himself.
Therefore Faith is not a passive possi^ility of the soul to receive Christ,
though that may prepare for him, but the going out of a man's self unto Christ.

But may not a man come to Christ, Quest. 2.
that never shall have mercy from Christ?

Yes, Answ.
there m^^ be many lighter strokes, as in temporary Believers. The world is at
this day full of Faith* Every man thinks and says he believes, though his
Faith be weak. It Is men's Buckler against all means, they know these ^ins, but
as long as they believe all is well. And it is their comfort in all their
troubles, though the Lord kills, yet they will believe. And I say, some men
have departed indeed from the Lord* The Gospel has been preached, and they
have made out of themselves to Christ, but missed of him. There is a
Bramble-Faith that catches and (...) Christ, kisseth and betraies him. That
coming to Christ therefore which none else have the full measure of, it appears
in these particulars.

It Is that work of the Spirit whereby a sinner, sensible of his extreme
nakedness, emptiness and wants, being called of God, his whole soul comes out
of himself to Christ, for himself. I speak not of assurance, for if that were
Faith, all ^^probates then we^e bound to believe an un^ruth, Viz. That God the
Father (...), and Christ has died for them.

1. It Is a work of Gods Spirit, and hence it is called the Spirit of Faith, no^
only because wrought by it; but because the Spirit is in an admirable manner
fastened to it, and clasped to the soul, and the soul to Christ by it.

2. The Subject in which it is wrought: A s^nner sensible of his extreme wants;
for Faith springs out of the destruction of our own excellency, and ruins of
it; like Christ, that did arise a root out of a dry ground; for the Lords great
plot, is to advance Christ and his rich grace. Now look as it is obscured by
bringing any thing of our own to it, so it is advanced by fe^ching all from it;
this can never be till the soul is sensible of his nakedness, emptiness and
wants; let Christ be never so sweet, a full soul will lo^th him; and I (...)
extreme want. The Prodigal never comes home, till he dies for hunger: (...) is
the fencelessness of men, and dislike of Christ, tha^ extremities only drive
them hither, as Judges 5. 6. When the Midiani^^s came, ^hey ran ^ike beasts to
their den, and until bread was taken from them, they cry not unto the Lord,
but then they do: So men have neither hearts, or if so, no heads to come to
Christ till now; and usually the Lord makes this the ground of the souls first
motion toward Christ. I die here, and because of my wants I therefore come.
Pardon ^in, because great, Psalm. 25. 11. Be marciful, bec^^se it is a (...)
^^ople, Exodus 34. 9. That so when the Lord pardons, the soul may have nothing
to boast off but misery, and now it is hard to believe. But this is not all.

3. It must be called of God, for else the soul though never so sensible of
misery, could not, would not, du^st not come; but it would either sink under
its burden, or plead against all means: It shall presume, as Judas that had no
look of Christ (as Peter had) h^ngs himself: And hence I^r. 3. 23. Come unto
me, Their heart answered, We come. For this is usually the Objection of the
soul when it sees the riches of mercy, What have I to do with it, that am so
vile, and have fallen so often, and rejected the Lord, and am like to do so; I
shall sin the more by this means. No, the command of the Gospel comes, oh come,
notwithstanding all this, nay because of this, for I will heal you of them. Now
this call has two things in it. 1. It Is particular, for general invitations to
believe and come in, are made particular to the Elect, who else would not come
in; And hence I^ai. 43. 1. I have (...) thee by nam^. For we shall find that
the hearts of men when they see a promise, cannot think it concerns them; all
that hunger shall be satisfied, but shall I? And hence show them it is as
particular as the Law, they cannot think it is to them; and hence they say
sometime the word All, is not put in. Now that is the mighty power of unbelief,
a word spoken to all is regarded by none, till the Lord make it particular; and
hence Isai. 2. Christ is said to judge the Nations, now when Judges ride their
Circuits, they do not make Laws, but only apply Laws. One man is brought before
them to be condemned, he hopes (...), but he is so; now he trembles: Another to
be acquitted, ^e (...), being (...) accused, he is freed; and now he rejoices.
2. It Is a living call, or powerful call, John 5. 25. And hence a man may live
under the calls of the Minister long, and never come, because it is not made
living from the Lord of life; and ^ence no^ irresist^ble.

4. Upon this call the whole soul comes out of it self to Christ; for if a man
could climb the clouds, and unlock the doors of heaven, and come Elias like in
his body to Christ, he might miss of Christ, as well as those that came and
followed Christ for a time with their bodies while he lived on the earth; a man
may come to Christ with half his soul or heart, there may be some hope, and
some d^^^res, some love, and some cleaving to him, and choice of him really,
inwardly, and yet not savingly, because the whole soul is no^ here come, but
half of it, James 1. 7, 8. Now the whole soul then comes, when all the
affections and will take their flight to the Lord, and fasten there. When all
the affections are gathered from all other things and changed, and so they come
to, and embr^ce the Lord; so that hope wait^ only here, when will the Lord
pity me? Desires that were set on a thousand things before, all long after
him, love only taste^h him; the Lord letting in some sight of the freeness of
mercy, hope looks out hither; the Lord showing the want, but the way to it,
desire breaks down stone-walls, and all means, and the difficulty of them, to
have him: The Lord letting the soul taste the sweetness of Jesus and his grace,
the soul joys, and love imbraceth, and the will fosters; a carnal heart
desires, loves, joys in other things, and the Lord also, and so has a false
heart. But the whole heart comes hither* and when it is here, thinks one heart
too little, nay one life, one soul, and when any part of the affections are
le^t any where else, then the soul mourns, hates that bondage, is ashamed of
it, etc. So that the stream of the whole soul runs now hither, Psalm. 119. 2.
Ier. 3. 10. Psalm. 45. 10. So it is with the soul, as with them when they were to
come out of Egyp^, they would not leave child, nor hoof behind, lest there
should be any occasion of return; it is with the soul departed from the body,
it only minds the Lord, it has taken leave of all; so by Faith the whole soul
leaves all, and comes to the Lord; otherwise the soul is not come to Christ,
but reaches after Christ; like men that waded after the Ark, but perished in
the waters: Their arms are not long enough, their desires and love are not long
enough to reach Christ, the (...) and stream of the soul is set and runs here.
It Is with the soul, as it is with two Rivers, both run with all their strength to
the Sea, but the great River is bigger, and runs faster, yet the others stream
is wholly carried thither. So some men may be more full of Faith then others,
yet both run to the Sea, and as Rivers, they run in their Circles, this way and
that way, and are sometimes dammed up, ye^ end there: So the souls of all
Saints run to this and the other creature, yet they end in the Lord at last. As
Peter and John that ran to the S^pulchre, though one out-ran the other, yet
they came both to the Lord at last; when both of them had for a time forsook
him, though all the world draw the soul back, it cannot live without the Lord;
nay, though the Lord beat away the soul from him, yet it follows after him.

5. It Is to the Lord for himself, for John 6. some came to Christ for loaves,
and could have been glad if Christ had been King for it, but did not care for
himself: And hence verse. 27. he points and turns them to himself; some came to
him for higher ends, therefore were his Disciples, that is, for life from him.
But when he told them, There is no life, unless you have the Son, And eat and
drink his flesh and blood, or else you die, it was a hard saying, they could
not understand nor see what that meant, and hence forsook him, but when they
come and receive him himself; now life is indeed theirs.

So that its Christ's person that this Faith first pitcheth on, as it is in
Marriage, and those that come for this, were never sent away. Now the soul is
truly come to him for himself: 1. When himself gives rest to the soul in the
want of all things, (...). 4. 3. If friends, protection, strength, life, glory
be wanting, yet having him, in him I have all these; when all is sold away, not
the treasure only, but the Field contents him: For it looks on this, as better
then heaven, then glory, it comforts the soul that the Lord himself should be
mine. 2. The soul that takes him, it is not only to make boast of him, as (...)
had him, nor to cover sloth, and sin, and delusion by him: I have Christ, and I
have no more to care for, etc. but to live on him, John 6. 57. He that ea^eth
me, shall live by me. Phil. 3. 9, 10. A man takes not Christ as Medicine to
ease him; nor as stately hanging^ to adom him, but as bread to receive life
from him. For many receive Christ, (...) they do upon him, and rest they say in
him, but they do not suck any good from him, nay before they had any Christ or
assurance of him they were better than now. You have nothing to do with the
Lord Jesus, you are our of your place. As in I^^hams par^ble, the Olive and
Vine would not be pulled out of their places, to be set on the top^ of other
trees, as Kings; lest they lose their farness and sweetness: So since you have
closed with Christ, you have lost your fa^ness and sweetness that once you had,
you are now out of your place, go to your horrors and sorrows again, till the
Lord so give himself to you as that you may receive life from him.

But must all come thus to Christ with their whole soul, Quest. 3.
will not part of the price serve?

No, Answ.
the whole soul must come, and cannot but come.

1. In regard of the Jealousy of God; who is like a jealous Husband, can bear
with many weaknesses, but will have the whole heart; and they that do not,
shall be destroyed for spiritual Whoredom, Psalm. 73. 27. He should dishonor
Christ else, to sell him so cheap.

2. In regard of the excellency of Christ: The Lord draws the soul by the
revelation of him, Romans 1. 16, 17. Isa. 55. 3, 4. Now look as men in this
world, when they see a seeming good, their whole soul is overpowered to be
drawn after it. So here, when such an Object is seen, especially the Soul
having been at his Sepulcher weeping, as Iron never stirs till the Loadstone
comes, and then it makes to that only, not to things touched with it: For as we
love him because he loved us first, so Christ loving the soul with all his
heart, and his whole heart set upon him, the whole soul is ^ contra set on
Christ.

3. In regard else a man can receive nothing from the Lord, Ier. 29. 12, 13. As
it is with Conduit-Pipes, let them be laid, but not reach the Conduit head, no
water can come to that Family; so here: And this is the reason why men live,
and pray, and receive nothing, their hearts reach not hither: Men's hearts reach
but half way to Christ: Tell me else, did you ever not receive?

4. Because else it is indeed no coming to him, but a leaning on him or toward
him. So as it is with trees, if not cut off quite, or not pulled up quite by the
roots, they cannot be set in another Orchard, if the tree be left with never so
little twigs in the ground, so here: Nay the Lord accounts this worse than if a
man had not come at all, Ier. 3. 10. The Lord abhors a double heart, that Judas
-like forsakes all for the Lord, but then loves the Lord and the Bag too. You
are not the Lords. As it was with that man that quarrelled about the tree, it
leaned over the Pales, but the root being found to be there, his it was: So
though he lean on Christ, he is none of his.

But do all Saints come to this measure? Quest. 4.


Ponder these grounds else. Answ.


Object. But are not our hearts partly carnal, and so close with the Creature?

Answ. True, but yet,

1. So far as it is carnal it is lamented heavily; so that they grow not there,
but are dying, withering daily, Ier. 31. 18, 19. When a man's affections grow
out of the world, and there is no fear nor sorrow, in this respect now, no
Christ is there.

2. The Bent and Byas of the Soul carries the whole Soul hither. For I would
not judge of this so much by sudden pa^gs, as by an inward bent; for the whole
Soul in affectionate expressions and actions may be carried unto Christ, but
being without this bent and change of affections, it is unsound. As in Gideon,
they would on a hurry make him King: He would not: He knew it was a sudden pang
which would die. And the reason is, the true turn of the whole Soul is not by
turning old affections upon another Object, but changing them first by this
bent, and so turning them. For a carnal heart may have the first, as the same
eye may see the Sun and a Dunghill, and the eye not changed; So here. Now when
the whole Soul is set here, it is never at rest till here.

But may not Hypocrites come to this? Quest. 5.


1. Then they may be blessed, Answ.
Psalm. 119. 2.

2. Then they shall never be cast off from Christ, John 6. 37.

3. Then they may partake of that which the Lord only looks for. For why is the
Lord angry? The heart is gone from him. Why is the Ministry ordained, but to
win the whole heart to him? John 3. 19, 20, 21. Oh therefore consider whether
it has been thus with you or no! If not, woe to you! Oh be very careful here!
It Is a thousand to one if some part of your heart be not fixed elsewhere. If
Christ were at Judgment, and should say, Come ye Blessed: How glad would ye be?
Oh he says now, Come and take my self*

SECT. IV.
IV. Fullness of the Spirit it self, in the room of Satan.
I Shall not speak here either concerning that fullness of the Spirit in
extraordinary gifts, spoken of frequently in the Acts; nor yet of that Fullness
of the Spirit which some Christians that the Lord sets apart to do and suffer
more for him, shall receive more than others. For John 14. 17. the Disciples
had the Spirit, and yet Christ promises to send them the Spirit. And Stephen
was a man full of Faith and the Holy Ghost, Acts 6. 8. And Barnabas Acts 11.
14. was a good man full of Faith and the Holy Ghost. But I shall speak of that
Spirit which is in every Believer, without which we are not Christ's; Romans 8. 9.
And this is that Spirit which is opposite to the evil Spirit, the Prince of
darkness, which possesses with craft and power all the souls of the sons of
men, who does not only encamp about men, 1 Pet. 5. 7, 8. Nor only work within
them, Ephesians. 1. 2, 3. but he inhabiteth and dwells in men. He does not only
take men captive, 2 Timothy 2. 26. but he dwells in and possesses the souls of
his Captives, Luke 11. 21. And though he does depart for a time, yet, v. 26.
They return and dwell there. Now in the room of this, come^ Gods Spirit, who v.
22. is said to be stronger than Satan, which cannot be meant but of Christ's
Spirit: That as it is with a man whose heart is turned from the Lord, he is not
left only to be carried by the power of his sin, but by the power of Satan
also. So when the whole soul is turned unto him, the Lord leaves not the soul
to be carried along by the power of his own Grace or Faith, but the Spirit it
self fills and acts that soul. And as the soul was carried by the mighty power
of Satan before, it is now carried by the Almighty power of the Spirit it self,
Hence 1 Pet. 1. 5. Kept by the mighty power of God through Faith. And hence
Acts 26. 18. Turned from the power of Satan, not to duties, but to God himself,
i. e. the Spirit of God, and so to close with him.

What is this Spirit which the Saints have? Quest.


I shall express my self in these three Conclusions. Answ.


1. That if Adam had stood, Conclu. 1.
he and all his posterity should have had that power and presence, and constant
assi^tance of the Spirit of God, as that they should never have fallen, nor
have been able to fall in respect of the assistance of the Spirit: He should
have been green all the year long, his Blossom should not have been blasted,
his fruit should never have withered. And the ground is the Rule of Justice;
for if he falling, all his posterity are forsaken of God, and under the reign
of sin, and death and Satan, Romans 5. 18, 21. Then he standing, all his
posterity should have had the everlasting presence of God, and should have bin
under the reign of the Spirit of Grace and life. Thus also the Covenant ran, do
and live.

2. That the Lord Jesus the second Adam standing and rising in the room of
Conclu. 2.
all his people, hence he does convey and prop^gate to all his posterity the
immutable and constant assistance and presence of his Spirit, whereby being
once begotten of him, and called to him, they never afterward depart from him.
And though weak in themselves, yet assisted by this Spirit, do not, cannot
depart wickedly again. The Lord Jesus having stood, they cannot fall, because
by virtue of his standing they have this presence of the Holy Ghost, John 14.
19. Because I live; you shall live also. John 6. 57. As the living Father sent
me, and I live by him, etc. Christ standing next to the Father, lives by him;
we standing next to Christ, live as infallibly by him. And I say the ground is
Christ's standing. For though there be many reasons why the Saints can never
fall from Christ, as the Spirit of Grace, Covenant of Grace, Intercession of
Christ, yet the main ground is Christ's standing without the least fall from the
fulfilling of the first Covenant, which we having the first moment of believing
kept in Christ, hence the Spirit is given, and the Covenant of Grace, of
strength. And hence Romans 5. 21. and v. 17, 18. And hence the Spirit is said to
dwell in Believers, Romans 8. 11. And we are the Temples of the Spirit, whether
he dwell in them in his person personally, the well is here deep, but he dwells
in the^ so as he never cease assisting of them, so that they cannot depart
from the Lord again; hence Isa. 59. 21. My Spirit shall not depart from thy
Seed. John 14. It Is called the Spirit that abides for ever. It knits the soul
to the Lord, and keeps it so for ever: Never suffers that love-knot to be
untied again. When the soul is weak, the Spirit helps him, when careless of it
self, the Spirit keeps him, though the soul offers to run from the Lord, yet
this Spirit follows him; though he grieves the Spirit, yet this Spirit still
keeps his own house, will not depart from him; and so not suffer the soul to
depart from the Lord. And this is the reason why the Saints never fall from the
Lord, though they have weak Grace, poor beginnings, many sins, and Adam stood
no^, though with the perfect Image of God upon him, because he had not this
Spirit yet given; though he had the Spirit of God, yet not this Spirit, which
some call the Spirit of Adoption given to him, because he had not fulfilled the
first Covenant, which we in Christ have, which is not only the ground of our
never falling, but of assurance we shall never fall. For what breaks a man's
peace after Faith? Apparition of sin in the Conscience: What makes that
terrible? The Law. Now when I see in Christ, I have kept all things in the Law,
not only the cry and accusations of the Law and ^in are stilled, but also there
arises a holy boldness and confidence and joy, even before the face of an
angry God, Ephesians. 3. 12. And as soul and body are ever knit, so here, etc.

3. This Spirit thus assisting, Concl. 3.
no unregenerate man ever has. I speak not now of keeping the soul from
falling from Grace, but from Christ.

1. Because the Spirit of Satan fills them, he is the strong man that keeps the
Palace, under whose Kingdom and power they are; and therefore this Spirit which
destroys the Kingdom of Satan is not in them.

2. Because this was a Pre^ogative that Adam had not, though he had great Gifts
and Glory otherwise: So this is not the Gift which is given unto them.

3. Because this arises, and therefore is given because Christ stood, and
therefore those he never stood for, rose for, suffered for, never have it.

4. Therefore we shall see in experience, take the best Professors living,
though they may come, as they and others judged, to the Lord, and follow the
Lord, yet they will in time depart, sometime outwardly, John 6. 64. There be
some of you that believe not. See them, v. 66. And why did they depart? It was
not given them of the Father. The Spirit never was given effectually to draw
them, nor yet to keep them.

I^ not outwardly, at le^^t inwardly; and hence Hypocrites though they have
mavelous affections unto Christ, and so have spoke of him and commended him,
and seemed to be carried above all creatures and duties toward him, yet himself
and his mercy, and his blood, becomes a common thing to them, and his knowledge
and promise; common: and hence they slight and loath him, and mourn not for it,
and so are so far from being kept close unto Christ, as that they are nearer
the unpardonable (...) then him. But all they have is like Io^ahs gourd, which
suddenly rises, but there is a Worm at the root, that pulls it down again: And
so their love dies to Ministers that Christ sent; and to his Truth and
Ordinances.

But if the Spirit does thus, Quest.
Who then shall be saved? for who is there that departs not?

When I say the Spirit does so assist the faithful, Answ.
as that they never depart: The meaning is not, as though the soul should now
never fall into any more sin or unbelief, for what do the Saints more complain
of then their backslidings, Isa. 63. 17. Heb. 12. 1. Saints hearts are no
sooner raised up, but their weights grow heavy and press them down; no sooner
do they walk in the way, but they begin to fall off: But when I say so, I say
three things. 1. Their whole heart never departs. 2. They do not depart for
ever. 3. Though they do depart from the Lord, yet the Spirit does not depart
from them; as it is in common reason, the same thing may go either in a
straight or crooked line to the same point. As a River may run in a straight or
crooked line to the Sea. So the Saints, their springs (their hearts) being set
a running after the Lord, though they do not follow him in a straight line, so
as never to depart to the right hand or left; yet they are so kept by the
Spirit that they are continually making after him, cleaving to him; though with
many crooked windings of their hearts, this way and that way from the Lord. And
therefore as it is in a wheel, it stands bent for such an end, yet ^uns at one
side, but is turned by the skill of him that guides it into the way again, and
so let it run the m^n is with it: So it is here. And because something is like
this in Hypoc^ites, I shall endeavor to cut the thread.

I. Their whole hearts never do nor can depart from the Lord, all their sins
and departings are against their new nature, which the Lord has given them.
Its against the grain, which as it agravates their sin* so it shows the
difference between their sins and the sins of other men; they may be drawn
aside, but its against their wills, or if so, yet against the bent of their
hearts, which is set toward the Lord, and Sion-ward* they may be carried
captive against their wills, as Paul complained he was, and made his moan to
heaven of it; or if with their wills, yet it is against the active bent of
their wills, which inclines them another way, 1 John 3. 9. They cannot sin,
because the seed remains in them; so that they cannot sin with their whole
hearts, nor depart from Christ with their whole hearts: As it is with a Woman,
though her Husband has her whole heart, yet there is much we^kness and sin
mixed with this love; So that whatever unkindness she shew^, it is not with her
whole heart, but against it, and hence she is no^ cast off: So much more here.
Or as it is with the unregenerate man possessed by Satan, though he may forsake
many sinful courses, take up many duties, despise the World, yet it is not with
his whole heart: And hence he is pulled back like a Bird by the leg, Satan
having an end of his heart, and he that is unholy and un^le^ will be so still.
So ^ contra: As it is with a stone, cast it up its against the (...) of it,
because the nature of it is to rest in the Center, and hence it comes down
again. It is not by internal bent, but by external vis or force: So sin and
Sa^^n being cast out, though they work in the soul, yet they are external
Agents, (it is not I, but sin) and hence it is against the bent. The whole soul
therefore never departs from the Lord Jesus, but the Spirit keeps it there. As
it is in the body of a (...), he grows sick and inclines toward a dissolution or
consumption, and operations are hindered, and little delight in any thing, yet
the soul and body are not yet parted wholly hereupon, for even then they are
kept close* So though the heart may depart and incline toward consumption and
death, and little can the soul do but lie still and grieve, yet the union
between the Spirit and the ^oul once made, is never broken. For as the whole
soul departed and made disunion, so the whole soul returning makes the union.
And hence if ever after the whole soul should depart, the union should be
broken; and hence look on a Christian when he is himself, he cannot stir, nor
depart; partly by a spirit of fear, Ier. 32. 40. Like a man in a Ship, he
cannot cast himself into Sea, it makes him tremble to think, what if I should
fall in, and hence keeps close in the Ship, whatever ^^orms come, whatever
calms come, for he sees death before him. Oh the loss of Christ and his
fellowship hereafter, nay here, is dreadful to him: Partly by a Spirit of love,
it constrains us, that when the heart sometime ca^es not for Christ, yet the
Spirit of love springs up: Shall I now leave him that pitied me, That brought
me a Pardon, when my neck was on the block, etc.

II. When he does depart by reason of some evil in his heart, yet it is not
ever, but he must return ^ooner or later to him again, it was best with him
then. For look as it is with Satan, How does he carry the heart from God? You
shall see it in Judas, John 13. He stands at the door and knocks by a sinful
thought liked of, verse. 2. Then he enters the house by causing the will to
resolve of it. He does not carry men like those Herds of ^wine against their
wills, but prevails with the Will to resolve thus, verse. 27. Hereupon Satan
having a Commission carries him out, and he must needs go whom the Devil
drives; so it is here, the Spirit in recalling the soul will have him come back.
1. P^^s in secret sweet living thoughts again, and makes the soul consider and
remember from whom it is fallen, or who the Lord is. 2. Then causes the will to
resolve of a return, and then he must go whom the Spirit draws, Psalm. 63. 6.
David remembers the Lord on his bed, though now driven from all Ordinances*
Hence verse. 7. Under thy shadow I will rejoice* Hence verse. 8. My soul
follows hard after thee, or, cleaves to thee. But David was weak and feeble,
how came he to do this? Thy hand verse. 8. upholdeth me. Look as it was with
Sampson, when his locks were cut, he was like other men, and was made to
grind, but they grew again, and then he was like himself again: So when the
affections and hearts to Christ are cut, they are like other men for a time;
but they are continually coming and growing again, and then they are like
themselves again. And I say they must return, for when the Spirit carries a man
indeed, there is a necessity put upon him, Acts 4. 20. We cannot but spe^k the
things we have heard; and 2 Cor. 13. 8. We can do nothing against, but for the
truth. For here we shall see the broad difference between a convicted Hypocrite
that knows all is amiss with him and the Saints: He ^ees his falls from the
Lord, and is afraid in his Conscience of Misery if he does not return, and
desires and endeavors for to do it; but what if it be hard? and it seem
impossible to be better? Now he falls down and thinks this is an infirmity
which God will pardon, and so Satan conquers him; I say again, not temptation,
but Satan conquers him: For then a man is conquered, when faith is conquered, 1
John 5. 4. then Faith is conquered, when returning to Christ with the whole
heart is conquered; the whole heart returns not until a man's will resolves by
being (...) with a necessity of a return and staying there. Now therefore the
Spirit of God puts the soul upon a necessity of returning to the Lord, that
when the heart ^aith, It cannot be that ever your heart should be better, or
the Lord help; it must be says the soul again, and it is so, I am not able to
bear this evil, for mercy must help, and Spirit must draw, and hence the soul
must come, Psalm. 42. 7, 8. The soul thinks mercy can and is willing, but will
it? Why the Lord commands it, when one way calls in for another, mercy must
step in, and hence my prayer is to thee. Now this necessity of return to the
Lord appears chiefly in breaking down all oppo^^tions against its return; which
are four.

1. Sometime snares of the world and other things beside. The Lord eases them,
the Lord sends no crosses, gives them their hearts desire, under which Vines
they rest, yet if the Lord takes not all from them, he puts such a cloyedness
in them, that the soul cannot but return to the Lord again, it cannot live on
such course bread, things that satisfy not, it had better once, Eccles. 2. 3,
4, 11.

2. Fears and discouragements of spirit, for when deli^vered from snares, then
fears come, and discouragements, either by reason of outward losses or the
Lords anger: So that the soul fears it never had, never shall have any mercy,
that has thus abused it; and it has thought God himself to say so, and his
behavior in not hearing and helping in so long a time, to witness so: Yet it
will return, though the Lord never save it; it will not sin: Jonah yet looks
again to the Temple, when he could not come to it, yet he would look to it. The
soul will turn up its eyes and mourn; Oh that I have so abused the Lord and
mercy! that Love it self should be angry and frown! Psalm. 77. The Psalmist
refused to be comforted, v. 2. Nay, v. 3. Though he remembered God, and all his
love past, yet troubled, this brought greater trouble, yet v. 10. I Will remember
the years of the right hand of the most High. Saul did not thus.

3. Thoughts of impossibility and unlikelihood to get peace or pardon, or
victory over sin now. For sometime the Saints think, the Lord loves me, and yet
lets these evils lie here, but I can get no help now, especially if after many
prayers. I know help against all sins they cannot get, and hence are humbled,
but against them sins that help can be got, wherein the Lord has done it for
others, and which make the Lord estrange himself it must be had (for this
temptation to a Saint is an Hypocrites overthrow) Psalm. 18. 21, 22, 23. If
earth cannot help, cannot Heaven? What, not the Spirit, Word, Blood, Mercy, of
a render-hearted Redeemer? What though not now? yet I will not give him over.

4. When Gods Providence seems to ^ross his Promise, yet they will cleave to
him or return to him. For many times Saints have their estates in the Bonds of
Gods Promises, and hence they wait for accomplishment of them; but the Lord
carries it quite cross to his promise to their seeming. He promises to make
alive, to comfort, to sanctify, to be with me; and he kills, sads, lets out
sin, never such a heart, and forsakes me. Oh now Faith shakes! yet they will
not away, Heb. 11. 15, 16. The Lord calls them to forsake their Country;
Abraham is a stranger there, and that among Cutthroat (...), and dwells in
Tabernacles, and four hundred years after, his posterity being afflicted should
(...) in; yet he would not return, though they might, God had said here, I Will
bless thee, so here. The murmuring Israelites fell short of this.

III. Whenever the soul does depart, yet the Spirit of God is ever in it and
with it, Psalm. 73. 2. The Psalmist almost fell. Why did he not? Thou art ever
with me, thy hand v. 23. has upheld me. So that as the Spirit keeps the soul
to Christ, so it keeps Christ in the soul at all times. And hence Saints in the
closure of all their dealings with God, and he with them, they have seen his
love, working good in all; that now the Soul can say, lo the Lord was here, and
I kn^w it not, Isa. 25. 9, 10. That the soul admires sometimes, and hence after
all sees the Lord more clearly and fully and sweetly, till at last it sees him
in Glory. (...) you see the Spirit that follows Saints is with them, which the
world wants. Oh admire at the Lord, if this Spirit be given, that Heaven is
come down into (...) That no (...), no sins can part, but its ever putting thee
in thy way again. Hence when

^. They are ready to quite fall off, and give themselves for gone, ready to be
made away by temptation, or to make away themselves, the Lord is with them
then, Psalm. 94. 18. At the time of parting, love appears.

2. Hence when they are sometime so far gone, as that they mind not their
return, or believe not, as in the wilde^^ess, but are well enough without the
Lord, the Lord before they think or desire, prevents them, Psalm. 23. 6. Mercy
and Truth follows me.

3. Hence when they think the Lord is provoked that he cannot save, then he is
in the midst of his people, Ier. 14. 11. Why art thou as a man astonished that
cannot save?

4. Hence at the end of life, all the ways of God have been peace, and all ou^
ways, though sorrowful, though evil, turned for good; as in Jonas his
depar^ing; and by miseries we are yet humbled; something the Lord is doing now
for Eternity, Micah 7. 8. Though I sit in darkness, the Lord will be a light
unto me.

5. Hence when the heart and strength fail, and Faith is failing, and the heart
feels nothing but pain, yet the Lord then keeps, and this is comfort, Psalm. 63.
26.

Consider therefore your estare, that

1. Do depart with your whole heart from the Lord. Has not the Lord bowed thy
heart toward himself, by mercies, by blows? But when sorrows have been past,
and mercies grown common, and truth common, thou have started back like a
broken bow which was bent backward, when stretched forward. And now when God
calls to any duty, especially when thy will and ends are crossed, that is a
burden, and thou art drawn to that as a Fish to the dry land. It is like a
Feaver-fit to thee, and never mournest for this. But when any matter of gain
and world is presented, all thoughts, time, strength is too little there, that
you smell of the field; or if there be any life or joy, yet the lean kine eat
up the fat kine. Nay, mournest not under that cursed bent which carries thee
from the Lord. Know it, thou art forsaken of the Lord.

2. That in times past had many affections, but now sorrow is gone, and seeking
of the Lord gone; and being f^llen, see it not, but think it is with thee
as with other Christians, have only the old work past, and some new pangs now
and then Why is it thus? Ier. 8. 4, 5. Will you fall and not arise? Wilt let
the Lord turn from you, and not return? Does the Stork know when winter is
near, and not you your season? Oh look to it! What are you fallen with a
perpetual backsliding? Why will you not return, but go away with a perpetual
backsliding? Know Satan has hold of this soul.

3. You people of God, wonder you at this Grace: Let your experience prove it.
Is it not so, that a Habitation of Devils should be a House of the Spirit of
God, not to sojourn, but dwell there, and though abused, vexed, yet it will not
depart.

SECT. V.
V. Sanctification, in the room of self-seeking.
THis work of the Spirit has had many scratches, and passed under diverse
censures; that if that question should be asked of it, which once Christ made
concerning himself, Whom say men that I am? We shall five several apprehensions
of it.

1. Some have made it common, and that this treasure may be dug out of
dung-hils, that the Lord casts these Pearls to Swine, that a carnal heart may
have all these gifts and graces which the righteous have, and Adam had, and
perish at last. And hence no evidence from it at all.

2. Some have not made it thus common, but proper to the Elect, and that none
are justified but they are sanctified, and e contra. But it has been, and they
think it is so disguised with the mixture of sin and temptation, and cannot be
known, or very hardly. If so, that though the Lord Jesus come unto his own, and
dwell not only in their Houses, but in their hearts, yet they know him not.

3. Some say it may be known, but not as dwelling in our hearts, but as
inherent in Christ, making the inherent Grace of Christ in Christ himself to be
our Sanctification, which the Apostle makes to be our righteousness. And so as
the Papists abolish Christ's righteousness for justification, by making it to
consist only in infusion of Grace in us; these abolish Christ to be our
Sanctification, by making all our sanctification to consist in inhaesion in
Christ out of us.

4. Some say there is a sanctification in us, But wherein does it consist? Not
in any habitual Holiness, or Graces in us, but in the immediate actings of
Christ in us, and so the Lord makes his Music without any strings, and reveals
things to us without eyes, and makes us live without any power of life: And so
after justification they put a Christian in such an estate of Sanctification as
that he is a mee^ Patient, in next disposition to move if he be moved: Like a
Weathercock, which has no power at all to move, but as the wind blows it,
good or bad.

5. Some grant that there is a sanctification proper to the Faithful, and in
the Faithful an habitual Holiness, and consisting in a most blessed, inward,
total change. But when they come to the application of this to themselves, they
think that if they have some reformation with some inward affection, they think
every overly change is presently sanctification, and this must be a good
evidence to them. And so like some Herbalists that treat of the Sovereign
excellencies of several herbs, but when they come to gather them in the garden,
they take their counterfeits in the room of them. The causes of which variety
of apprehensions is the rareness of it (and therefore it is unknown) and the
corrupt experience of men.

I shall therefore lay level these things, by showing you what that measure of
sanctification is which is in us, and which is peculiar to the Elect, and which
also may be known by them which have it: And therefore shall not speak of
sanctification at large, which is the change of the whole man by the death of
Christ, whereby he is separated from sin, and sin mortified in him; and by the
life of Christ, whereby he is dedicated unto Christ, and lives his life. But I
shall treat of it now so far forth especially as this change may be known by
it; and therefore I oppose it to self-seeking.

But why do you oppose Sanctification to Self-seeking? Quest.


1. Because this Sanctification, Answ.
I now speak of it so far forth as it may be seen; now it is seen here chiefly,
because it may be said here it is: But Hypocrites have a change, Wherein may it
be known to be different from theirs? Why, the change of the heart chiefly
appears in the change of the utmost end.

2. Because as the pollution of the whole man, and all his actions civil,
moral, and religious, consists chiefly, and appears in this self-seeking, or
making our selves our utmost end. This makes the most glotious actions vile,
and stains them all. So the sanctification of a man consists chiefly and
appears in making the Lord our utmost end of all we do: So that though the
actions be never so mean and poor, yet this puts a Glory and luster on them,
and is the Crown of them, even of the giving of a cup of cold water, Mat. 6.
22. If thy eye be single. Look therefore, as before the Lord justifies the
soul, every man living seeks himself as his last end and good; and out of this
captivity no power can redeem them. Dan. 4. 30. Genesis 11. 4. So after it, the
Lord sanctifies the soul with such a measure of his Grace as makes the Lord his
utmost end: And this no other have.

Let me therefore show you what this Sanctification is more fully, and with all
the chief ingredients in it, that so it may be the better known.

It Is the renovation of the whole man, appearing in the change of a man's utmost
end. But more particularly,

It Is that work of the Spirit in the soul, whereby the soul beholding the Glory
of Christ, and feeling his love, hereupon closes with the whole will of
Christ, and seeks to please him, as his happiness and utmost end.

For look as in self-seeking there are four things.

1. A man beholds himself and some good in himself.

2. Loves himself abundantly.

3. Pleases his own will.

4. Does this as his utmost and last end. So here in this description of
Sanctification which I oppose chiefly to self-corruption, are four things.

1. The soul beholds the Lord in all his Glory, seeing of him present with him
in all his Glory, and set before him, Psalm. 16. 8. For this is one necessary
ingredient to his sanctification and seeking the Lord as his utmost end. For
why does a man seek himself? He sees some glory and good in himself, none in
the Lord. And hence we say of some men, whose pride spoils their parts, they
know themselves too well, and hence Saints when they see their own vileness,
and see the Lord, they are so far from seeking, as that they loath themselves.
Therefore when the Lord reveals himself to the soul in his Glory, this makes
them seek him and not themselves, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ is made wisdom,
righteousness, etc. that all might glory in him. For this is the Glory of
Christ, and the first Principle of seeking the Lord, the soul sees his good
laid up in the Lord more than in himself; nay wholly in the Lord, not at all in
himself. His wisdom is in him, he cannot but wilder till utterly lost without
him. His righteousness is in him, he could never have one sin pardoned by
Angels holiness without him. His sanctification is in him, he could not have
the least thought nor desire, but the Lord must work it in him. His redemption
is in him, there could not be freedom one hour from unknown evils but by him.
Hence seeing him such an one, he seeks him. As why do men seek men, especially
if great? Why do men desire to stand before Princes, and please them, so that
they will not gladly offer them the least distaste? Because they see them
before them, beholding of them, apt to be angry, if displeased; and their
greatness awes them: So here. Why is not the Lord Jesus pleased? He is not seen
in his Glory, nor made really present; and hence Rev. 5. 12, 13. When they saw
him on his Throne, they cast down their Crowns and gave him Glory.

2. The soul also feels his love, and so abundantly loves him again. For how
come men to seek themselves in every thing, and they cannot but do it? It Is
because they love themselves, and that abundantly, necessarily, as fire burns;
though they burn so hot in this love that at last they consume themselves. So
how do any, can any seek the Lord? We know the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13. 5.
Love seeks not her own. When the Sun has put out this fire of our self-love,
when the sense of the Lords love has kindled that love to the Lord again, as
that it abundantly loves Christ, now it will seek the things of Christ, and not
its own things. And as there is abundance of self love, that men are eaten up
with it; so there must be much love, which must be abundantly shed in the
heart, so as to eat up that; arising from the sense of the Lords love, and that
abundantly. For many a man comes to have some good will, and affection, and
love to the Lord, but yet never comes to seek the Lord as his last end, and
live to him. Why? Because he has not tasted abundantly of the Lords Mercy,
Grace and Love, Psalm. 86. 12, 13. And hence the incomparable Spirit of Paul, I
seek not yours, but you; Wherein? In being willing to spend. But save your self
Paul: nay, and to be spent: With much ado; Nay, most gladly. Though you love me
not, because I love you: So here, though Christ should not love it, yet he is
worthy, he has done enough, and now the soul will not only do, but rejoice,
nay, in sufferings; because his love is not dropped, but shed in our hearts. And
hence it is a never-failing rule, little love or assurance of it, little seeking
the Lord; much assurance, much seeking of him.

3. Hereupon the soul closes with the whole will of Christ, and pleases it,
because it pleases him. Its with every man, as it was with Samson, he would
needs have a wife or the Philistims, Why so? Judge. 14. 3. Because she pleases
me. So, why will men seek themselves, save themselves, love themselves, and
please their own wills? Because it pleases them. Look therefore as the soul
when he loved himself, did seek to please only his own will in every thing, and
it is good because it pleases me; so the soul, whose heart is now indeared to
Christ, though he cannot perfectly do it (that is in Heaven) yet he seeks to
give the whole will of Christ content, because it pleases Christ. And this is
that that God has sworn his people shall have, Luke 1. 74, 75. And that Christ
has delivered us from all our enemies, (For the great reason why men cleave
not to the Lord, and please his whole Will is, because they have many things to
care for, and ^eep, and please, which we account friends, which are the Lords
enemies, Satan and world) to serve him without fear, i. e. in love, and in
holiness and righteousness, i. e. his whole Will all ^ur days. And hence
Ephesians. 5. 8, 9. They were darkness, but now are light, by Faith, now there is
sanctity, Walk as children of the light. Wherein consists that? Proving what is
acceptable to God. Hence Ephesians. 6. 6. They should please Christ, doing the Will
of God from the heart. And this is so necessary, that Gal. 1. 10^ The Apostle
says, If I please men, i. e. their wills, I am not Christ's. And this is
walking worthy of the Lord, pleasing him in all things, and this is fruit, the
end of the tree and leaves also, and differencing a tree from all other, that
be beautiful, but barren, Col. 1. 10.

But why do you make this to consist in pleasing the whole will of Christ, and
not of God the Creator? Quest.


1. Because our sanctification now cannot please God as a Creator, Answ.
though it may ple^se him that is the Creator in Christ, because only perfect
Hol^ness can please him.

2. Because Christ has pleased the Father by the Holiness of himself, now this
being done, and therefore God having put all things into his hands, having done
that for us, we are to give content to him. And herein our sanctification is
differing from the Image Adam had, who in closing with the will of God, looked
upon him as a Creator; ours respects a Redeemer, who has bough^ us to himself,
and hence we are to respect him in our acts now.

But why does the soul close with the whole will of Christ, i. e. so far as
it is made known? Quest.


First, Answ.
Because the holiness of Christ h^re chiefly discovers it self, and against
this a carnal heart will discover it self. For Copern^ites may boast in, and
give entertainment to the person of Christ, but when they come to repent (which
was one part of his will) that they did not, that they would not* Woe therefore
to thee Ca^ern^^m: as many will close with Christ for pardon of sin, and lay
their sacks on him, but you must burden your self with them, or the Lord will
never ease you of them. Oh no, and hence they have light sorrow for sin; many
will embrace the comforts of Christ and love of Christ, and this joys them, yet
the will of Christ that is wearisome to them, Romans 8. 8. They will pick and
choose.

Secondly, Because this discovers a deep ditch of deceit in the heart, many
take up some duties* and why do they do them? Because they please the Lord, and
the Lord commands, and for his sake, when indeed it is to please themselves: for
in other things they care not whether they please the Lord or no.

Thirdly, Because this closing with his whole will only gives the Lord content:
As it is not the strings, or striking upon one string that makes the Music, but
striking on them all according to rule. So here: And hence when they sacri^^eed
and observed new Moons, Isai. 1. 14. Who has required these things at your
hands? Hence when the people began to put the Lord off with mean per^ormances,
any common stuff, the Lord takes state upon him, and says he is a King, Mal.
1. 14. and 9, 10. I have no pleasure in you.

Fourthly, Because this only will give peace; and therefore let any man begin
to pick and choose, and his heart die to the Lords will, if Jonah like he will
fly from any way of the Lords and continue there, he shall have storms; and
hence 1 John 2. 3, 4, 5. Hereby we know him, etc.

4. He closes with the whole will of the Lord as his happiness and utmost end;
as a man made himself his last end before, and desired God and Christ only to
keep his sores from aching, for so I look upon all men made up of wants; if the
body ache with cold, stomach with hunger, head for want of sleep, Conscience for
sin, all happiness lies in the easing hereof, and here lies their bliss. So now
the soul make; the life of the Lord its happiness to live unto him, Gal. 2. 20.
He makes it his meat and drink to do the Lords will; for Iehu sought the Lord,
but his last end was himself, as John 16. 2. A man may kill, and think he does
God good service, but that is not his last end; a carnal heart may cross his
own wi^^, but not his own utmost end, as Judas: A man may seek the Lord with
delight, and follow the Ordinances, and fast, and pray, but himself is his end
still, Zac. 7. 5, 6. Isai. 58. 4, 5. As a man that goes to a City, he will do
your business, but he would not go unless he had his own ends to bring about
there. But those that are truly sanctified, make the Lord their last end and
happiness. It Is not only good to do the Lords will (for thus men may seek the
Lord) as thinking it good so to do, but as their blessedness, else it is not
their last end, and so not sought as their last end; and so it is with the soul?
As a River running to the Sea, many Springs run into it, but it carries them
down all with it; so there are many occasions, hindrances, businesse^, yet it
carries them all down with it, even the more violently, the more it is hindered,
Psalm. 119. 126, 127. Therefore love I them above gold. And this expresses it
self in three things:

1. In admiring at the glory of the Lord, and his will and ways, and accounting
them happy men, and blessed, that thus can do and live. For sometime the soul
is decayed and ^allen from this, or sick and weak; now it accounts them happy,
that have health and strength to walk abroad, Psalm. 1. 1, 2.

2. In being never at rest in his mind until now that he comes to this; for
therein a man's ^^king any thing his last end appears; as he made his goods his
last end, Luke 12. 19. Now therefore my soul be at rest, for there is no
seeking the Lord but self-seeking hinders; Now though it be thus yet, Do I make
my self my last end? then my mind would be at rest; but if sanctified, its not
at rest till now: And hence Paul when he had run this race, now you see him
leaning upon his pillow, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7. And hence Saints are loath to die and
be blessed in heaven, because they (...) done so little work as yet; little do
the Saints for the Lord many times, yet their hearts are upright, for what
mourn they for so much as this, when they have looked upon it; oh that the Lord
has been a looser by them*

3. It carries the soul through all difficulties with power and delight, Prove.
10. 29. The way of the Lord is strength to the righteous, and joy. ^^om. 7. 22.
I do delight in the law of God in the (...) man. Other Nations walk in the Name
of their Gods, we in ours, Micah 4. 5. As when wealth or honor is a man's
utmost end, with what violence are men carried to it; and hence a man thinks he
has never such good days as then when he can do much for the Lord; and hence
when any duty is to be done, when fearful to do it, or loath to perform it, when
the heart is dead, yet beholding it with a spiritual eye, that this gives
Ie^^vah honor, oh this carries the soul headlong even into miseries, Not my
will, (...) be done. This eases the heart, even in the belly of Hell, and in
times of the deepest desertion.

To this Sanctification all the Saints do come, every one in their measure; and
if ever the soul tasted the Lords love, or ever was humbled with the bitterness
of sin, the first voice and main care is; Lord, What (...) thou have me to do?
Nay, though no assurance, and it cannot joy in the Lords love, yet it will in
the Lords will; and hence when it has fall assurance, yet finding such a vile
heart, if God should give it heaven with such a heart it would be death* And
hence when he thinks of going to Hell, yet there (says he) let me^blesse thee*

This Sanctification all unsound hearts do want; much Reformation, much
affection, many duties, but their end is not changed, though their lives be,
and hearts seem to be.

1. Because they cannot love the Lord, because the Lord does never shed his
love into their hearts.

2. This was the life of Christ, John 8. 29. of which life they that are dead
in sin never have one act, though they may think they have.

3. This is the end of our Election, which therefore an unsound heart may as
soon attain to, as to elect, or to be elected of God, Ephesians. 1. 4. holy in love.

This may be easily known, 1. Cannot a man know when he is happy? 2. Cannot
Peter tell Christ that he loves him? 3. Cannot a man tell whether he be an
Hypocrite or no? For he that cannot prove his utmost end is changed, must
confess himself an Hypocrite yet, his heart was never changed, what ever
assurance or peace he has had; a thing is never good till it serves its end it
was made for.

Oh therefore look that you content not your selves with Reformation, but come
to this; else 1. You lose all your obedience, the Lord regards it not, the Lord
will take all from you, as Vessels that are made to hold Wine, and they cannot,
lay them by, the Lord has no pleasure in you, Mal. 1. 8, 9, 10. 2. If you do,
the Lord will accept your meanest and poorest services: Consider,

1. Christ cast by his Robes being privy to his own worth, to become obedient,
Phil. 2. 6, 8.

2. His infinite Wisdom is in every command, though thy carnal reason like it
not.

3. His infinite love for thy good, though thou think it is for thy hurt.

4. His glory, though thou gettest no good at all by it.

SECT. VI.
VI. Fullness of the Spirit of Glory, in the room of the world.
WHom the Lord does justifi^, those he does glorify, Romans 8. 30. i. e. with
the Glory of another world, which though it be hid for a time from others, and
sometimes from themselves, yet they do partake of it now, and it shall be
revealed upon them another day, 1 Pet. 5. 1. Now though Hypocrites may taste of
the Word, nay, of the powers of the world to (...), yet they f^ll short of this
measure of Glory. And I say, this fills them in the room of this world.

How ar^ men full of the world? And what is the Spirit of Glory? Quest.


I shall (...) three Conclusions. Answ.


That the (...) rest and peace of the soul it is to be found only in the
presence of God Almigh^y, Conclu. 1.
in this Being of Beings. Hi^ Perfections are in ^^^self, and hence (...)

^. A (...) to the Church to be (...) God as ^e can.

^. The son of (...), to whom the Promises (...) made.

And then, 3. King of Jerusalem, the last and least, He is that house and home
of his people, whether in fleeting or settled condition, from one generation to
another, Psel. ^^. 1. So that the Prophet finding this to be most true, I say,
stands astonished at men; and because men had deaf ears here, and their bellies
could not hear, he cries to the Heavens to be astonished at this, Ier. 2. 12,
13. This wine the Lord puts under his Lock and Key; It Is not to be found in
earth, in Church-Liberties, you may soon see this Temple not one stone left
upon another, nor in Heaven simply, nor in Fellowship of Angels; only it is in
the Lord, drawing nigh to the soul in these, and drawing the soul at last near
to himself by these.

That all Reprobates being estranged from God, and God from them, are also
strangers to this resty this life of God, Conclu. 2.
this life of Glory, Ephesians. 4. 18. and therefore seek for it and seek it out of
the Paps of the ^reature, and that which is not God. And thus their hearts are
full of the world, Psalm. 17. 14. Dust they eat, and upon their bell^es they go,
shift for it where they will, they shall never find it in him: And if they do
find it any where else in this world, let them fill themselves to the full, for
they have their portion, they have their reward. And hence they do (^^
unregenera^e men living) find their rest in something out of God* rest to their
Consciences in duties, and something of God, rest of their hearts in some
Creatures, either ^^lawful or ^^^ful, Mat. 24. 38. And there is never a carnal
bea^^, but give him his imaginary content here, and he would desire to live
here as a^ ^xile from God, and to be without him, if there were no Hell, no
plagues, etc. For here is their treasure, not above; here are thy good things:
and this is the very reason why a man lives without God, nay when he stands
convinced (...), nay when troubled with thoughts of this, and no duties can
ease him, because something out of God is his bottom to stand upon, and his rest
and peace; It may be meat, drink, health, sleep, occasional delights and a
quiet life. That as it is with Seamen, they can endure winds and weather, and
rent Sayls, and torn Masts, because they live upon that Trade; another will
not: So it is here. Though many troubles of mind, yet they ply that Oa^, it is
their living.

That all those whom the Lord intends good unto, Concl. 3.
those he calls in time out of this world into his eternal Glory of rest and
peace, out of this world into another. And as their hearts were filled with
another world before, so their hearts are filled with the Glory of this other
world now, John 17. 14, 16. 1 Pe^. 5. 1^. And this rest and peace in God is the
Glory of the Saints. That look as it is with Reprobates, What is their last and
great woe? 2 These. 1. 9. It Is separation from the Lord; So this is the great
Glory of the Saints, to enter in to him, as M^s^^ did into the Cloud, and so to
rest in him. I go to my God and your God. Hence the Saints are said to sell
away all for this Treasure, for this Pearl, for the Lord: And so the Lord is
in stead of all, and better to them than all they had before. They can live
royally upon him, having but one thing to look to, and having all things (...)
this one thing; and more royally than the Prin^^^ of the world can upon their
Lusts and earthly Treasures. This is the rest and (...) the Saints have, (...).
4. 3. They that beli^^^ do enter into rest. God (...) them out of the world by
some bitterness of it, or by some cloying and (...) and making their hearts
weary of the sweetness thereof, and then they enter into Glory. The Lord sees
nothing can fill their hearts no^ stop their cries, (...) him, and now this Sea
of Glory breaks in upon them, and fills their hearts: And this the Lord does
two ways, according as there are two things in that good that fills the heart:

1. Proportion. 2. Propriety.
So there are two Rays of eternal Glory chiefly, whereby the Lord give full
rest and peace, and so Glory to his people.

1. He reveals the good they are to enjoy in another world, in its full
proportion, viz. what is the riches of the inheritance of the Saints, Ephesians. 1.
17, 18. For no good satisfies till it is known in its greatness, though yet
there be degrees of this. For we shall see many Christians have assurance,
where is the joy of it? No^ affected with it, because he knows not what it is
at that time. At another time his heart is above all the world, because he sees
what is that Glory the Saints (...), and that he has it, it swallows him up
and confounds him. Why me Lo^d! And this is the reason why the Saints doubt,
whom the Lord has loosned from their lusts and all things here. What so vile,
and all that (...)* And this the reason why when doubting, so that there is
nothing in this (...) that does quiet them, nothing from God that does ease
them, yet their hearts are sweetly eased: Their desires are after him, and
their delights in his company, better go to Hell thus than in my sins; and the
thoughts of the Lord are sweet, because he has and does secretly fill their
hearts. Something they have or do see in him, Isa. 26. 8. And hence is the
reason of the sorrows of them, when their hearts are worst, now though they
have the world, yet are not at rest, because they have and do see something of
this.

2. He reveals by the Spirit and Light of Glory that this good is theirs, their
propriety. The first gives rest to the soul, viz, the Spirit of vision
incompleatly. This Spirit of Faith whereby the soul knows all this good is
mine, this gives it completely. Now the New Jerusalem is come dow^ from Heaven,
and God is among men, 1 Pet. 1. 8. For if a Christian sees the greatness of
this glory, but not as his, the soul will never cleave to the Lord indeed, nor
find full rest; and hence when the riches of Gods grace is revealed, and the
Feast set before them, they do not eat, because they fear they were not bidden.
Now both these give full peace and rest to the soul, when the soul has the
Lord Ieh^vah in his arms, and hence he cares not now when death comes: Oh it
shall be a welcome day to them! And hence they wish they might sin no more, or
cease to be. And hence they wish they could set even the whole world a
wondering. Was it ever heard since the world began of such a pattern of mercy?
Its true, the Lord indeed keeps his Servants for a time under much darkness and
doubts, but it is certain even in the meanest Saint this light is sown for them,
and joy for the upright in heart, and some work there is for the Lord to do for
them, and then he kee^s a Sabbath of rest in them.

But have not many Hypocrites their joys, Quest.
their peace, their Glory?

Yes, Answ.
they have some tastes and likeness to this, but want this indeed; and the
difference appears in three Particulars.

1. The peace and joy and assurance of that Glory which eye never saw in the
Saints, it is from the witness of the Spirit of Glory; not only because that God
is their God, but because they are his people. It Is I say from the witness of
God in his Word, not from themselves, nor from man only that they approve me,
(...) from dreams and Diabolical breathings, but from the Spirit of God, (...)
of it, and from such a Spirit (that yo^ may know it) that not only shows you
God is your God, and so you rejoice because of this, for thus it is with many a
carnal heart, and he has peace, being i^ horro^, from this, the Lord loves me;
but he makes you to rejoice because you are the Lords people, because he has
changed your heart, now the peace is sound, and joy is right; and here I would
try the peace of any man, God has witnessed pardon to thee, but (...) he shown
thee thou art his? If so, be thankful. But here is the doubt, for it may be the
change is not right. And hence those two are ever joined together, Zach. 13. 9.
John 14. 20, 21, 22. Horror lies heavy, hence love is sweet; sin lies heavy,
hence this witness, they are changed, they are subd^ed and shall be so, this is
sweet also.

2. The rest and peace the Saints have, it is not only from God, but in him.
It Is with the soul as with a Malefactor imprisoned and condemned, the Jailer
comes and tells him that he has his pardon here brought him from the King; How
shall it be proved whether it be a device of his own Brain or no? Why if it be
of the Jaylors own devising, he will never lead him before the face of the
King, but from him he shall be carried: But if the Messenger carry him before
the King, and sets him down before him, and as it was with Joseph, his
Prisongarments are put off, and he stands before the King, and glories in his
presence, now it is (...). So many have peace, and Satan sets them at liberty,
but carries them from God. But when there is a witness of peace from him, and
then you stand before him, now it is from Heaven, Psalm. 36. 7, 8. There is peace
from him and (...) in him, Psalm. 37. 4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he
shall give thee the desires of thy heart. When it is thus, all you desire is
granted.

3. The peace the Saints have both from God and in God, fills them with
everlasting content and peace, Romans 15. 13. Isa. 11. 9. Filled with the
Knowledge of the Lord at the waters cover the Sea. The earth is the rest of the
waters, and the waters fill all its empty place: So it is here, the soul is the
rest of the Lord, Isa. 11. 10. and he fills their empty hearts. A Malefactor
may dream ^e is before the King, when he has his Fetters on his legs; but his
dream feeds him not, but when he awakes, he is hungry: And so it is with many a
carnal heart that is in a dream for a time, but he meets not with eternal
satisfaction, Psalm. 65. 4. and Psalm. 90. 14. And hence men after they have had
their peace, grow more bold to sin, and more impenitent in sin, and more
worldly than ever before, because they have not everlasting joy; as those, Isa.
35. 10. Everlasting joys shall be upon their head (whereas a carnal heart has
soon enough of God) not everlasting, without intermission of joy, for they must
have their rights and tears, as well as their days and joys; but everlasting,
without decay of joy; that though they have their tears, yet God wipes them
away; there is nothing else, their joy, their peace, and so their hearts are
for ever satisfied here. As Christ, when he knew it was finished, now he gave
up the Ghost, so when the oul ^inds he is come, now it dies to the world, and
makes its perpetual abode in him. Others will have their Carrion, and their
stolen waters, how clean soever they (...) their mouths.

But have not the Saints many sorrows, Object. 1.
reproaches, persecutions?

Romans 8. 18. Answ.
They are not worthy the Glory to be revealed. 2 Cor. 4. 17. They work a weight
of Glory, and in these they glory. Oh the Lords Love is shed in their hearts*
Romans 5. 3, 5.

But have they not many losses, Object. 2.
and wants, and straights? and then where is their joy?

A camal heart he murmures indeed, Answ.
and sinks, and dies away, but it is not so he^e, Ha^. 3. 17, 18. A Saint taken
it out in him, in the Lord, it makes all the world too narrow for him. Others
are burnt and consumed in the fire, but so is not he that has the Son of God
with him.

But he has many sins and Temptations. Object. 3.


1 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. You greatly rejoice in the Salvation reserved for you,
though now your Faith have a precious trial by manifold temptations.

But are not the hearts of the Saints taken off from the Lord, Object. 4.
and taken up with other things?

No, Answ.
never as carnal men's are, Tit. 2. 12. For Gods Grace that has appeared to
them, teaches them to deny worldly lusts, as we deny children their asking.
They may greedily carry the soul by fits from the Lord, but he denies them
their fill in any Creature, and calls them all to come up hither. He denies
them as we do Beggars entrance, and if they do enter, he denies them lodging,
they shall not have good looks from them. Every vile heart has either a proud,
or worldly, or covetous heart, and these lusts being urgent and entreiting
long, he cannot deny them the best room he has. Oh it is the woe of men they
cannot but do thus.

But thus you see this world is cast out, and Glory comes in to all Saints: Oh
this world is the cause of all sin!

1. W^y do men neglect duties in secret?

2. Sleep at Meetings?

3. Though so fair abroad, yet passionate at home, and storms there?

4. Whence are wars and wranglings about rates and lots? Oh this world!

5. Whence Apostasy? It Is not with you as in former times, worse now th^n in
persecution; and Sermon-proof now? Oh this world! Whence is hardness of heart?
Oh something of the world eases you! And whence is it that men with rich stocks
are goodly things, and wondered at; and Holiness and walking with God, and
things of Heaven are nothing? Oh this evil world! Oh Adulterers and
Adulteresses, know you not that you hate the Lord, and the Lord you? It Is the
cause of all thy sin, but see withal it is the cause of all thy sorrow, Heaven
and the Glory of that would enter, but for it, but that it cannot, because thou
art full of it. Oh poor Creatures, take your Farewell quickly of it, or the Lord
will meet with you for it! Cry to the Lord, oh call me to come up unto thy self!

Thus you see the Fullness of the Spirit which the Saints have; and therefore
that conceit, that Saints have nothing whereby to discern them, let it for ever
perish and rot.

SECT. VII.
TAke heed you fall not short of the Grace of God, Use 4.
of the promise and Spirit of Grace, Of Exhort.
Heb. 12. 15. Oh get Oil in your Vessels! When there is much counterfeit Gold
abroad, every man will have his Scales, and not only look and rub, but he will
weigh every piece he takes: Was there ever more Counterfeits abro^d, or such
similitudes of the Truth? Insomuch as some in their Opinions, think it
impossible, others in their practices find it hard and very difficult to
distinguish the one from the other. Oh but there is a vast distance and
difference! As ever you look for Mercy, get this Oil in your Vessel. As ever
you look for peace, know that you have it in your Vessel. I am persuaded that
there is never a soul that follows the Lord tremblingly and tenderly, but when
he hears of this, sends up his sighs, good Lord let me not fail here; better
never have had thy Name in my Forehead, nor affection in my heart, than to want
Oil in my Vessel: And I am persuaded he trembles to think, what if I should
perish at the last? And yet how many never have strong fears of failing here,
that have most cause so to do. This Parable is directed to Virgin-Churches at
the last period of the decrepit world; wherein methinks the Lord Jesus speaks
unto his people, There is much profession, affection, but o^ take heed you
perish not for want of oil in your Vessel. Le^ all your care be to get that,
and fear to want that, wherein the Lord does answer that fear, and question,
and thought of his people: Oh what if I should perish at last? (...) in your
Vessel then, and if the Lord Jesus had been of that mind that there are no
inherent graces in the Saints, or so dim they cannot be known, or if known you
are not to respect them as any signs, but to look for a witness of grace upon
you, or out of you, without respecting or looking upon grace in you, he would
never have reco^ded this Parable, which to wise Virgins is to prevent those
conceits: Oh therefore how many fall short here, and regard not this!

1. Some fall short here by trusting to, and omnifying of Christ and grace,
regarding not any grace within; they separate those things from one another
which God has joined, and which a gracious heart joins one to another: They
respect not sanctification, faith or vocation, they look to Christ, and can
they honor Christ enough? Hence profess they that regard those things have
trus^ed to their frames of heart, and they scoff at them that look to be
justified by Faith: It Is such a delusion as is likely to deceive (if possible)
the very Elect. Look as it was with the Israelites, 1 Samuel 4. They were
overthrown in the battle of the Philistines; but what is the cause, Oh send for
the Ark where the strength and presence of God wa^, but what good did the Ark
do them with unhumbled hearts, that looked to that, and trusted to that, but
mind not themselves; and hence when Samuel bids the^ tur^ from their Idols,
and serve the Lord only; now they do it; so here.

2. Some only look to the outside, like those that built the tombe^ and
painted the Sepulchers of the Prophets: And hence if they be inwardly zealous
for external Order, Ceremony, Ordinances, carriage in garments, speeches, etc.
they think the bitterness of death is past, when Agag-like they are clad with
such soft raiment, and hence if there be transgression here it is sad: But what
if they walk wi^h unbroken hearts? oh they respect not this! And so their care
being taken up in trimming and making the Vessel bright, they neglect to get
oil within.

3. Some fall short here by thinking this thought, that that grace which is
inward is also sincere and unfeigned: And hence do not judge themselves profane
nor civil, because of their profession, nor yet Hypocrites because they do not
make only an outward show, when as the dee^est hypocrisy lies under much
inward affection many times: And hence they take every such work upon trust
without weighing it, if double guilt, and there is no show of Coppe^, put it
up, never enquiring where the bounds of truth and hypocrisy part; And hence if
they have inward comfort though by a dream, they take it; If upon their sick
beds after trouble they have had peace, they take it on trust; if they have any
promise of rest and peace, or feel some desires, love to Ordinances, and Gods
people; they take hold on promises, and trust themselves without trying,
without weighing: Sudden work is superficial.

4. Some feel a want of these things, and content themselves with desires, and
so never come to be indeed (...) they desire to be; Its true, Saints feel wants
and desire supply: But 1. They are never satisfied till it is so indeed: My
flesh is meat indeed. 2. They are humble and vile in their own eyes till the
Lord help; but these like Solomon's sluggard, desire and have not; whereas in
things of lesser worth they will not do so, They will not only desire, but
indeed till the ground; If one neglects to till, though they answer, I desire,
and God accepts that, every one will say he is deceived; their hunger is their
food; they build the sluggards nest of desire, and there sit: Oh therefore take
heed you fall not short here! Take heed your prayers and desires prove not
lazy and unfaithful Messengers which you send to your Friends to come and help
you, and they go half way and no further, and never fetch them to you indeed.
Oh therefore get oil in your Vessels, do not only fear the Lord, but fear him
greatly, 1 Samuel 12. 18. Do not only cleave to the Lord, but with the whole
heart, and cle^ve to him only; Beg this of the Lord. Look as poor people when
they come to rich men that have full heaps, do say, let me have full measure,
my family is poor, and charge great: So here.

Consider if once you get this it will never die, Motive 1.
it shall increase exceedingly: Its a treasure you cannot part withal, that you
shall never grow poor with; but Luke 8. 18. From him that has not, shall be
taken away that which he seemed to have. Oh many a one says, I fear I shall
fall at last, and I find my heart so soon cooled; Oh get this, nothing shall
quench it again! If you say I cannot keep it, I say it shall keep you, Prove. 2.
10, 11. Not when you have Christ and Spirit, and grace in your head, nor in
your Conscience to give you peace, but in your heart; and when nothing is sweet
but that, nothing lies between your heart and that; it shall now preserve and
keep thee, it shall follow thee, fill thee, seal thee, live with thee, go to
heaven with thee, etc. Mark this you feeble ones.

Oh consider what a ^ad thing it will be to thy heart to miss of, Motive 2.
and lose the Lord at last; The servants in Isaac's Family did not mourn so
much as Esan when the blessing was gone. Why? They never had hope of it, never
were nee^ it. He was so long in the field that the blessing was gone before he
came, and he sold it away for a trifle: So them that never came so near the
Lord and his blessing, never will have such sorrow, especially to think I sold
it away for a trifle: O thought Esa^ that I had come a little sooner, etc. When
Saul went to Gilgal to sacrifice, 1 Samuel 13. 10. He staid seven days, and then
sacrificed before the Lord, but then his doom was passed by God: And its said
presently Samvel came, Oh if he had staid a little longer! So you will one day
think, I sought and waited but forsook the Lord. Oh had I waited one day more I
had been well. This is the reason why the Hypocrites portion is heaviest in
Hell.

You will say, It will be heavy hereafter, Motive 3.
but not now? Yes, now to if you do consider the Lord Jesus is so full, and
thou not to have one drop of that which is saving, even when you come for it.
It was a heavy token of the Lords anger, 1 Samuel 14. 17. when the Lord answered
not all that day (when yet he did not speak bitter things against them) because
he did use to do it: It notes the anger of the Lord Jesus; as a man that has
abundance of bread, and yet gives not any, this argues he is very angry if he
continue so; and if so, how can thou sleep under it?

Consider, Motive 4.
else the Lord will try you; God has his trying times, and they were never
sent but to discover who were dross, who were gold, and the main end of all
Gods Trials is to discover this Truth that I now am pressing upon you. Some
have a through work, and now the Trial discovers the Truth, as in Abraham, Hebr.
11. 17. Some have superficial work, and they fall in Trial, as Saul, and it
does discover it was but an overly work; For this is the Question God makes: Is
it through or no? I, says a carnal heart, Yes, says a gracious heart. Hence
its strange to see what men will do when a trial comes. A man maintains a lust,
he will not show it, nor defend it, he shall turn to be of some opinion or
other, and the corruption of his mind shall show the corruption of his heart:
A man loathes the people of God, but he says he loves them; now this shall be a
sign: Time shall come that some of them shall be matter of offense to him, and
shall not honor him, it shall try him. A man loathes Ordinances, he says he
does not, but comes to the worlds end to enjoy them. He shall have plenty of
them, and some sad losses with them, and then you shall see he surfets of them,
never quickened by them, to show the work was but overly. A man's heart is above
God, he says he is content to be at the Lords dispose, let him do any thing
with him, this comforts him. He shall have a cross wi^e, or something that does
not please him, and now hi^ heart quarrels, and thus he shall be tried, to show
it was but overly work. Men despise the liberties the Lord gives them; they say
they pri^e them. A general Governor shall come with pretenses of Religion and
Protection, and you shall see this chafe will take old Birds now. Oh therefore
try your selves here, and be sure you fall not short here.

Wh^^ M^ans are there to be used? Quest.


1. Look that you make your Vessels clear. Answ.
It has been said of old, and I believe it is a truth still, ^that the Lord will
never send his Spirit to dwell in an unclean heart. Doves build not their
habitations on dunghils. Gods Spirit must come as an efficient to take it away,
but not as an Inhabitant to dwell in an unclean heart, 2 Timothy 2. 19, 20, 21. He
that pargeth himself, he does not say, God must do all, but he under God
searches and purges, he shall be a vessel of honor, if from these things,
especially from those sins which Apostates are conquered with, of which he
there speaks: For there be many sins a man may be purged from, and not be a
Vessel of honor. But what are the sins the Apostates perish by, mark them,
find them out, one by pride, another by sloth, another by world, etc. He shall
be a Vessel of honor. Men see and confess, but make not work of it indeed, the
old heart is not better, you consume and languish still, 1 Cor. 9. 26, 27. I
beat not the air, i. e. I lay deadly blows on my enemy, and I bea^ down my
body, least, etc. Overly search of sin, has made overly decay of sin, and
hence overly grace and affection. As a man has not light, nor love, nor esteem
enough, because he never felt his wound to the bottom. Oh account it an
inestimable mercy when it is thus; oh therefore remember the rule of the
Prophet, Ier. 4. 3, 4. Sow not among thorns, etc. Many men's profession springs
up, but withers, never comes to perfection; this ground is not plowed, or if
so, not thoroughly plowed, but thorns left to choke it. Well says the Lord, look
to your selves lest my wrath break out like fire; why is the Lord so dreadful
here? Oh because men are careless here, I look to Christ, and my desires are
good, and I pray in secret, and I am much changed, etc.

2. Look that your Vessel be ever kept empty; when a man has no grace, and
sees how others can pray and mourn, and how far short he falls of them, its
easy now to be empty, as Saul when he was no King; but when the Lord has
given some light and affection, and some comfort, and some Reformation; now a
man grows full here: Saints do for God, and ca^^al hearts do something too; but
a little fills them, and quiets them, and so damns them. And hence men at the
first work upon them are very diligent in the use of means, but after that they
be brought to neglect prayer, sleep out Sermons, and to be careless, sapless,
liveless, who is the better for them? Because I say that now they have got
something, the main work is wrought, they call not that into Question, and so
when God comes to reckon, they are found too light. Oh therefore keep the
Vessel empty, never content thy self with any measure. Has the Lord called
thee? Yes I think so, and believe sometimes so, but I am afraid I may at last
be found without oil in my Vessel; be then every day, as if thou were but now
to begin. And this I say, true grace as it comforts, so it never fills, but
puts an edge on the appeti^e; more of that grace Lord! Thus Paul, Phil. 3. 13,
14. Thus David, Out of my poverty I have given, etc. 1 Chronicles. 29. 3, 17, 18.

Its a sure way never to be deceived in lighter strokes of the Spirit to be
thankful for any, but to be content with no measure of it, and this cuts the
thread of difference between a superficial lighter stroke of the Spirit, and
that which is sound.

3. Look that your vessel be not broken, nor cracked, that when the Lord pours
in, it runs not out again, Heb. 2. 1, 2. Prove. 4. 12, 13. Oh here is the wound
of many a man, he has many affections in Word, in Ordinances, and they take
hold on him to convince; to affect him, but he takes not fast hold on them, he
keeps them not as his life, with thankfulness for any little, and with
watchfulness. And hence a man is where he was, dry and barren. It Is true the
Lord will not give that out of an Ordinance which he does in an Ordinance. But
it is one thing to have it lost out of thy hands and the Lords hands too,
another thing only to lose it out of thy hand. It Is one thing for the Lord to
withdraw it, another thing for thee to spend it away by the prevailing power of
a lust, viz. either the world without, or contempt of Grace within; you esteem
it not as your life, and hence seek not to keep it, you will lose the Oil in
your Vessels. And I am confident this is one reason why a man lives long under
means, and never profits, the Lord sees if he should pour any thing into the
heart, it would be lost. He takes fast hold of world or self, and keeps that,
and hence all runs out again.

4. Look that you be at the cost to get this Oil in your Vessel. These ^irgins
when the door was shut and too late would, but the time was past. For we shall
find the reason why men's works are slight, their buildings, their garments,
why, they will not be at the cost; so men's work of Grace is slight, because
they will not be at the cost. They find a want of Grace, and prize it, and
would fain have it, but it shall cost them little: they will not be at the cost
of their time. Sometime they can seek the Lord in an Ordinance, but what if he
comes not? They depart from him. Sometimes in pangs, and fits when the Spirit
comes, they seek, but to be ever seeking, ever carrying sense of sin, it is too
much time and trouble, they will not be at the cost. Some affections and hearts
they spend, but not their whole hearts: Hence Christ exhorts, oh strive,
because many seek and are never able. Look therefore as it was with Jonathan,
Saul, 1 Samuel 14. 45. said he should die: No, the people said, not so, for he
has wrought with God this day. Not that a man can get Grace by his own
strength, but Col. 1. 29. I strive according to his mighty working. Only let me
add this, be at cost first to get the Lord Jesus himself; As Mat. 13. 33. He
sold all and bought the Field; and when he had the Field, now he had the
Treasure. Oh think no time too much, no lusts too dear, no affections too much
for him (and then you have all things with him, and shall receive life from
him) and not for a dead, but for a living, risen Christ. Christ bestowed Gifts
on Judas, on Saul, but whom he bestowed himself upon, those never wanted any
thing, Psalm. 23. 1. But here I might take up a doleful complaint; Oh that men
content themselves with colors and tinctures of Truth and Spirit, etc. Some
Naturalists observe, that Brass would be Gold, it tends to it, had it but more
heat of the Sun to concoct it and to bring it to perfection; so it is with the
lighter Strokes of common Grace.

CHAP. XXI.
That true saving Grace in the Hearts of Believers can never fail.
SECT. I.
THat those Graces of the Spirit wherewith those Heavenly Vessels, Obs. 4.
or Souls of the Faithful are filled, are constant and of an eternal Nature.

For thus the wi^e Virgins, their Vessels were not only filled, but the Oil was
constantly preserved in them, and continued in their Vessels, until they met
the Bridegroom. It Is true, their Lamp went out, outward acts of the Spirit of
Grace, expressed in the Profession of the Saints may be extinct for a time, yet
the Oil did remain in the Vessel still, which was not so with those which were
Foolish, not only their Lamps were out, but their Oil was spent; so that here
is a third Difference between the Foolish and the Wife Virgins: That the Spirit
of Grace in the one is of a dying, withering nature; in the other, of an
eternal and everlasting nature. There is an eternal excellency stamped upon
them, John 4. 14. The water that I shall give him, shall be in him, no Pools,
but a perpetual living Spring. Heb. 6. 9. Some that were enlightened and tasted,
fell away, but we are persuaded better things of you. The Saints have better
things, which do not cause, but accompany Salvation. The Lord is so far from
suffering it to die, as that he will add to it, Luke 8. 18. To him that has
shall be given. Though it be like Mustard Seed, yet it shall grow; there is a
growing virtue in it. But as the Lord speaks of his people, Isa. 65. 8. As new
wine is in the Cluster, and one says, destroy it not, for a blessing is in it,
so it shall be here. Nay, though it be not so much as seen, yet the Lord then
can see it, and does then keep it, and will preserve it, Isa. 40. 29, 30, 31.
Nay, though opposed and resisted by temptation, yet, 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. It Is not
consumed, but tried, that it may be to Glory another day, notwithstanding
manifold temptations. It Is one of the greatest Miracles in the world to
preserve it, as a Spark of fire in a Sea of water: Nay, though it seems to a
man's feeling to be quite quenched and put out, that a man finds no more than a
Reprobate, yet the Seed of God then remains, and it will break out again. There
is life at the heart and sap at the root, yet the Lord will fetch them again.
When the Lord of Glory was crucified, and all the Disciples fled, not one spoke
for him, none durst confess him, yet the Lord returns to them, and they again
to him.

SECT. II.
HOW comes it to be thus immortal and of an eternal nature? Quest.


1. It Is not only in regard of the power of Grace received, Answ.
though it were perfect, for then Adam had not fell from it.

2: Nor in the freedom of a man from temptations, for then the Angels had not
fallen.

3. Nor yet in the power of a man's own watchfulness and care to keep it. For if
the Lord keep not the City, the watchmen wake but in vain.

4. Nor yet in the power of any means; as many think, if under a powerful
Ministry, then they are out of danger. It Is not in Paul, nor Apollos, but in
the Lord. Men may rejoice in John's Ministry, and be affected with it, but it is
only for a season. But,

I. In regard of the eternal Election and Purpose of God. Their constancy in
the State of Grace depends upon that immutability of his counsel, Matthew. 24.
24. They shall deceive if possible the Elect; but its not possible, they being
Elect. Wise men may have their Brains crazed, and Nebuchadnezzar like, the use
of reason gone, but the Principle of reason continues, and the use of it in
time returns again; and so it is in regard of damning delusions, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Hymeneus and Philetus fell; Hence do not the Elect f^ll? No, for that
Foundation remains sure. 1. The certainty of their continuance in Grace is
built upon a Foundation. 2. Not every weak one, but a firm Foundation. 3. Not a
Foundation of man's laying, but Gods. 4. Not a wavering and tot^ering, but
standing Foundation, and that sealed with the Knowledge of God, the Lord knows
who are his, i. e. though some men fall, that one cannot tell by outward
expressions and profession who are the Lords, yet The Lord knows who are his,
and they are sealed by his love and knowledge. And it seems this is the prime
cause of the continuance of Angels, 1 Timothy 5. 21. And Election being free, for
his own sake, not for their sakes, the Lord foresaw all their good and evil;
hence they are not cut off.

II. In regard of the Faithfulness and Promise and Covenant of Gods Grace. Adam
had that Covenant: If he did do, he should live: But he had no absolute Promise
he should do, or continue to do; but the Faithful have; and hence they stand,
not by the strength of Grace, but by the strength of the Covenant of Grace. And
hence that which to reason is incredible, to nature impossible, is brought
about by Faith; not by virtue of any power of Faith, but by virtue of the power
of a promise. God has said it, and Faith believes it; and hence Abraham's dead
body begets, and Sarahs barren womb brings forth Isaac. Hence through all the
Word, when the Apostle perswade^ himself of their continuance, he ever puts in
Gods Faithfulness, 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9. 1 These. 5. 24. 2 These. 3. 3. Hence Ier. 32.
40. I will not turn away from them. Answ. True, if they do not from the Lord.
No, but they shall not turn away from me. Object. But we see many do fall.
Answ. But if he does, he shall not be broken, but taken up again, Psalm. 37. 24.
Yea for a time the Lord may do thus. But will this continue, having sinned
against such mercy, and my sin being now greater? Now the Lord will depart.
Answ. 1 Cor. 1. 8. Yea, he will confirm you to the end. Yes, it may be he will,
as he has done, while I am out of temptation: But I may meet with it before I
die. Answ. 1 Cor. 10. 13. He will not suffer you to be tempted above measure,
etc. Yea, if I was such a one as Abraham or David, that had such hearts, and
did the Lord so much honor. Nay, but Isai. 55. 3. Even the sure mercies of
David. This is the Faithfulness of God.

III. In regard of the constant abode of the Spirit of the Lord in the hearts
of the Saints, whereby they are kept, John 10. 28. None can pull his Sheep out
of the Fathers hand. Look as the first Adam sinning, conveys the power of sin
and Satan and death, which reigns with unconquerable power over all the Sons of
men; so Christ rising, conveys that Grace and constant presence of the Spirit
which reigns to eternal life, and carries the soul through all difficulties,
Deuteronomy. 33. 27. The eternal God is thy refuge. Let what evils can come, there is
a refuge. Yea so long as I can stand. But what if I fall? Underneath are the
everlusting arms. Let a Saint fall never so low, yet Gods everlasting arms are
still lower; where ever he falls, he falls at last into the Lords arms; For
else it was impossible for any soul to continue, Isa. 46. 3, 4. From the womb
to the hoar hairs I will carry you. Saints when they are little, think they
shall fall at last, and when strengthened, fear if they live till old age,
their hearts and spirits will die; yet they do not. But how comes this about? I
will carry you. And hence it is impossible they should ever die or perish, no
more than the Lord Jesus, John 14. 19. So that if Gods purpose is firm, his
promise sure, his Spirit able, the Spirit of life and grace in the hearts of
the Faithful, shall be kept even to eternity.

SECT. III.
LET that Opinion that the Graces of Saints are fading and mortal, Use.
rot and die, and be had in everlasting derestation of them that know the Lord.

But we see how many fall off and fall back, Object.
and I have found it by experience so.

The seed that is cast into the earth, Answ.
first dies, and then lives and grows; so no sooner does the Lord fill his
Saints, but there is much self-confidence on it, and resting in it, hence it
dies, yet it lives and grows again. And hence the Lord keeps his people poor
and sensible of their own weakness as long as they live; but if it quite dies
and withers, they were never the Lords, nor never had ^ne Dram of Grace, 1 John
2. 19. If it be taken away, he did but seem to have it. All fleshly
excellencies in men, as common gifts be, do wither, Isa. 40. 6, 7. All Flesh is
grass: But Plants in Gods Orchard never lose their greenness, though Plants and
Flowe^s in the field may, Psalm. 1. 3. Whose leaf shall not wither.

But this may make men secure, say the Arminians. Object.


1. Nothing puts more life in the Saints. It would sink them else, Answ.
if it were not thus, as when the Lord told Joshua, where ever th^^ set thy
foot, thou shall prosper, not a man able to stand against thee, this puts life
into him.

2. Though they cannot fall quite away, yet they may fall so as to lose the
sweetness of Grace, and presence of God. If a man should eat too much, and ever
be sick, though not die after it; or if one should fall and break his bones,
though he does not lose his life: Is this any gap for any to rejoice?

3. Though they cannot wholly drive away nor beat out the breath of the Spirit,
yet they may grieve the Spirit by which they are sealed, Ephesians. 4. 30. Which is
more sad to a holy heart than all evils in the world beside. But therefore let
this Conceit die and perish, which is raised up by Satan to disgrace the Image
of God and Spirit of Grace in the hearts of the Faithful; for who will make men
seek after perishing things, under a color of making men seek for the Spirit,
it is to resist and quench the Spirit of God in them.

SECT. IV.
IT may comfort the hearts of the Faithful exceedingly against fears of
Apostasy, Use 2.
when they see great Cedars fall, How shall I stand? And when they hear of some
temptation that may be hereafter, then they fear. And when they feel the evil
of their own hearts (which the Lord lets them feel to humble them that they may
grow lower, and so stand the faster) they say, I shall fall, and when they have
found the Lords presence, oh if now I should relapse after this health!

How shall I know whether I shall stand or no? Quest.


It Is not only discernable by perseverance, Answ.
but by somewhat begun, though very difficult to be seen. As,

1. Observe Gods several and various dispensations of himself and his Grace
toward thee, whether they issue from his everlasting love or no; for if so,
then he will everlastingly keep that which he has given thee. Quest. How shall
I know that? Answ. Look as that issues from eternal wrath, that separates the
soul from God, or therein it is expressed; so that is the expression of eternal
love which draws thee to God in Jesus Christ. Observe therefore the Lords
carriage, Does it draw thee at last to him, nearer to him; and so the more he
dispenses of himself, the nearer thou art brought to him; here is the
expression of eternal love, and the Lord will keep thee, John 6. 37. All that
(...) given me shall come to me. Let the Lord give his Spirit, though but
little, they grow thankful. Oh he is come, whom I thought would never have
returned again! Let him deny it, this keeps them humble. Let the Lord dispense
himself in an Ordinance, they love him; and (...) day (...), better than a
thousand elsewhere. Let him not do so, they feel the more need of him. Let the
Lord free them from temptations, and give them conquest, Faith now rejoices.
Let them fall into many temptations, their Faith grows the more purified than
ever. Let the (...) give them outward blessings, they grow more vile in their
own eyes, less th^^ the least, with Jacob. Let the Lord deny them, Hab. 3. 18.
they rejoice in the Lord. They get good and are more endeared to the Lord by
every carriage of the Lords, at least in the issue it is so. As it is with
wicked men, they may for a fit be affected and return to the Lord, but in the
issue they forget the Lord, so it is here contrariwise. There is not any
unregenerate man, but something or other (...) him. The wicked ever are like
Chafe driven from God. Gold that is of an everlasting nature, keep it, beat
it, burn it, you cannot consume, but only purify it, it is not so with Chafe.
Let the Lord give him tastes of Grace and joy, it estrangeth his soul from
Christ, it does not bring him nea^ to Christ.

2. Observe whether thou do grow out of, and live upon an everlasting
Covenant or no, Romans 11. 1. God has not cast off his people, whom he (...).
Who are those? Children of the promise, Romans 9. 7, 8. That are born and bred of
the promise or whole Covenant of Grace; God has treasured up all Grace in
Christ, laid it up in that storehouse, Christ has dropped it in his promises.
Now when the soul is rooted in the Covenant, now it shall never die nor perish.
As it is with some trees, set them in the ground, they will grow, if they have
Sun and rain, but die at last: Take another, and set it in a Stock, so that it
abides there, and fetches all its life from thence by cleaving to it; now it
will grow and become a flourishing Branch. Now then the soul grows out of the
Covenant, when the whole soul cleaves to the whole Covenant, for the whole
benefit of it, and is fully satisfied with it, 2 Samuel 23. 4, 5. As take a soul
that feels a want of all the benefits of the Covenant, pardon, peace, life,
that the Spirit is ready often to fail, and has no assurance it shall have any
part of that which is the Childrens portion; and looks upon his own
unworthiness, never to have any from the Lord, yet it looks up to the free
mercy and Grace that made it to some, to make it good to me, and so pleads the
promise, and so lays it self there, and there rests, and there looks, and here
sucks, and takes root, and the roo^ spreads to every part of the Covenant. The
Lord has now rooted the soul in this Covenant, and it has received life from
hence, this is everlasting, you shall continue. And when the soul especially is
like a bough blown by the wind, yet it stands fast still. If men have been in
horrors and then fell to reformation, and there rested, it will not last. If
men have had some workings and actings of the Spirit upon them, and then say,
God must do all, but they grow not into the Covenant, they will die; But here
though God keeps thee short and naked, and thou only pleadest the Covenant,
thou shall stand. If you plead for pardon, and some good, not the whole good of
the Covenant, you shall die also. If you grow upon some distemper, and the
whole heart grow not upon this, you will die also. Look as it is with a man that
builds, he will make an end if the foundation be laid, but if not pull it down,
so here.

3. If the power of Grace received and acted by the Spirit, has risen to the
nature of fruits, and not leaves only, John 15. 2. And that is, when the soul
receives that Grace, as that in every thing its scope is to live to God, to
give his heart content. For fruit is the end of the trees growth, and leaves
and fruit is not for the tree, b^^ for the content of the owner of it. If so
the Lord has undertaken to purge thee, though there be much Self-seeking in
thee, and he hath^undertaken though little at present, to make thee bear more
fruit. ^ Many a man has much affection and grace, but when he has it, what is
it but leave; to adorn and beautify himself? But he lives not to the Lord;
another man will live to the Lord in what he does, the Lord is so dear, and
himself so vile; as that he does thus.

4. If you pray for it in Christ's Name. Object^ Many pray. Answ. But when
Christ and you pray together, you will speed; and then Christ prays, when his
Spirit cries at the Throne of Mercy, then himself is at the Throne of Justice.
And his Spirit cries, 1. Not for an unfit person, that has some slight change,
but (...) his Saints, whose hearts are endeared to him and his whole will. 2.
No^ for ^^ evil or private end, but the Lords. 3. Not coldly, but with gro^^s
unutterable. Is it thus with th^e? Oh then how can thou fall I Do fear
(...), Mat. 16. 18. he shall not prevail against thee, but thou shall give the
last blow and wou^d* Do fear the world, the deceits of it? Mat.24. 24. ( if
possible the elect) Do fear the evil or good things of it, John 17. 13 though
in the world, yet Christ prays you may be delivered from the evil of it. Do
fear thy sin, that will separate? Answ. Romans 6. 2. How can we that are dead
live any longe^ therein? It Is a strong, but a wounded, but a dying enemy. Do
fear the Lord, thou have walked so unworthy of him? He will not break the
bruised reed till judgment come to victory, though little, though weak. Oh
therefore be comforted against this in these times, which are aposta^ical,
declining, evil days, and bless the Lord!

SECT. V.
HEnce we learn what verdict to pass and give in concerning those men that Use
3.
decay and fall off from the Lord. They never had Oil in their Vessel, never
had dram of Grace in their heart, Thus, 1 John2. 19. If* they had been ^f us,
they would doubtless have continued with us. It seems they were such men which
were so eminent and excellent, as that there were no brands nor marks upon them
to give notice to the Churches that they were marked out for apostasy, but were
only discovered to be unsound by their apostasy; and this was argument good
enough. Hence Christ, when some of the Jews began to believe in him with a
temporary Faith, John 8. 31. If my Word continue in you, ye are my Disciples;
as if he should say, your Faith is a Fancy, if it continue not. Look therefore
as the Prophet said, Zach. 1. 5. Your Prophets, where are they? Your Fathers,
where are they? So say I to you; Your Tears, your Tenderness, your Groanings,
your Heartbreaking, Prayers, etc. Where are they? Is it with them as with
ships that are sunk and wrackt, some of the ribs remain, which gives you to see
and say, there was a fair ship, but it^s sunk, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Make shipwreck of
Conscience, and so lose their Faith also. Some men for a time seem to keep a
whole Conscience, wind and water-tite, they can pass through many storms, yet
at last it breaks, and when that is lost, their Faith is lost also. Their Faith
before God* and Conscience before men, both of them break.

Now there are two sorts of Apostates: 1. Open in men's life, whose falls are
like the falls of a mighty tree, it falls with noise, and breaks down all the
under-wood: So their falls make a noise in all the Country where they lived,
and by their falls some are sadded, others offended and damned. 2. Secret, when
men are Apostates in heart, Prove. 14. 14. which have chosen some sinful ways,
Ier. 3. When it is with men as it was with Saul, there is no commendation of him
but this, that he was higher by the head and shoulders then any of Israel: So
it is with these, in outward profession higher than others, but their oil is
spent.

But do not many of the Saints fall openly and secretly? Object.


True, they may and do fall exceeding greatly. But as Moses prophesying of the
Answ.
apostasy of Israel after his death, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. yet it is said, it is not the
corruption, nor spot of his children, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. There is a great difference
between an Hypocrites Apostacy from his grace, and Saints from theirs. Its one
thing to fall from branch and root too, another thing only for the branches to
be broken off and the root not pulled up, Jude 12. There are some apostacies
that argue there was never a dram of grace in that soul. Saints fall down, but
do not fall away: And of such Apostacies as argue want of grace, take the
following Discoveries.

1. When a man's rising is the cause of his fall (or seals a man up in his fall)
or at least the cause, through his corruption, Ex. gr. Time was a man lived a
loose, careless, carnal life; by the Minstry of some Word, or reading of some
Book, or speaking with some Friend, he comes to be convinced of his misery and
woeful condition, and sees no good, nor grace in himself, he has been even
hitherto deceived; at last he comes to get some light, some taste, some
sorrows, some heart to use the means, some comfort, and mercy, and hope of
life: And when it is thus with him now he falls, he grows full and falls, and
this rising is the cause of his fall, his light is darkness, and death to him,
and grows to a form of knowledge: His rising makes him fall to formality, and
then to profaneness, and so his tasting satisfies him, his sorrows empty his
heart of sorrow for sin, and his sorrows for his falls harden his heart in his
falls, and all the means of recovering him harden him; that now if men never
had had means, even Sodom, they would have relented before now. This is a sad
token of falling away, and having had only lighter work, it being a plain
evidence that at their best they were filled with their lusts, because a little
light and affection satisfied them, which is now turned by the power of their
lust to harden them, Isai. 6. 9. This is given as one sure sign of a people
forsaken of God, when in seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not. Look
as it is in diseases, if the Physic and me^t turns to be Poison, then there is
no hope of recovery, a man is sick to death now. The Saints little measure
makes them forget what is behind, Prove. 4. 18. He shines brighter and brighter
till the perfect day. So that let him fall he cannot be quiet there, but when
he remembers from whom he is fallen, if once he tasted the Lord, this will
fetch him again, and make him restless till he return. But if it be so as now
it is with these, then the case is woeful, when there is such a plague on men
and they know it not.

When a man says to himself, as the Glutton said to his soul, Take thy rest,
for thou have goods laid up for many years; so thou have repentance, and grace,
and peace enough for many years; and hence the soul takes its rest, grows
sluggish and negligent. Oh if you die in this case, this night thy soul shall
be taken away to Hell.

2. If when men fall from the Lord, and they rise up only in Ordinances, but
fall down constantly out of Ordinances without feeling. A carnal heart falls,
but he thinks himself is not therefore without all grace, because in an
Ordinance his heart sometimes is affected, so they were Ezekiel. 33. 31. The
Prophets Ministry was sweet to them, but their hearts went after their
covetousness, their Hogs, their houses, their lusts, their lots; and they joy
in the Prophet, but never mourn for that. A precious heart also falls out of
Ordinances, but he feels his falls* Though he falls from the Benefit of his
rising, yet not from the feeling of his fall, But to another man the sweet he
finds in Ordinances, is but Music to his meat, or as a man falls from Music
to his meat, Mat. 7. 26, 27. He that hears my words and does them not, that
man's house is built upon a Sand, which falls, and the cause of great falls is
this: Look as it is with corn-ground, if rain falls upon that, though it be long
before any ripe fruit comes; yet it makes it at last come to some ripeness: But
if it falls on other ground, seed is sown there, but it brings forth Briars,
though it drinks in rain, it is nigh to cursing, Heb. 6. 7, 8. Look as it was
with Saul, God had forsaken him, 1 Samuel 16. 14, 23. and a Spirit of Satan came
upon him, yet when David played with his Harp, it stilled the spirit in him,
and affected him much; it did not cast out the spirit, for when he had done
playing, the evil spirit came again upon him. So it is at this day, a man is
forsaken of the Spirit of God, and haunted with an evil spirit of pride, world,
passion, lust, Libertinism; a man prays, hears, and is made much better; it is
stilled, not cast out; for after this a man returns to his old spirit again,
and in time he cannot be quieted with preaching, nor praying, no more then he
could with his harping.

3. When a man is so fallen, as that he returns not in the season of rising:
Look as it is with Trees in Wintertime, their leaves, their blowths, their
fruit, their beauty is gone: Is it then dry and barren, and quite withered, and
cursed? One would think so for the present, but it is not so, because the season
of fruit and leaves is not now; if in Spring and Summer it should be so, then
you might well suspect it. Thus Ier. 8. 5, 7, 8. yet they said they were wise,
and they had Law and Ordinances among them: True, yet they did not know their
season, hence fell with an everlasting backsliding. Hence Psalm. 1. 3, 4, 5.
They are like the tree planted by the rivers side which bears in season.

What, and when is this season? Quest.


I cannot tell you the season of every man, Answ.
but I will show you the usual seasons of many men.

1. When Jesus Christ the Sun of righteousness draws exceeding near unto the
soul, and that to the reviving of others, Isai. 55. 6. but thy heart never a
whit the better, not yet much troubled it is so bad. When Peter falls, a look
recovers him; when Ephesus falls from her first love, to remember from whence
she is fallen, is enough to restore her to her love again. When the Disciples
fell after Christ's death, yet when he arose and opened the Scripture, their
hearts burned within them. But thou have had Jesus Christ opening the riches of
his grace from heaven, and thou have heard a voice, but not seen the sight, the
glory of the Lord in this thy day; and this thou have done though the Sun has
come to his full height sometime: This is thy season; Gospel, and Christ, and
promises, are grown common to you, etc. As it was with the possessed man, Mat.
17. 15. The Devil takes him often, and casts him into the water and fire, but if
when he come to Christ he have no help, the Lord be merciful to him then: So
you have been possessed and fallen, but when the Lord Jesus comes he casts them
out; but if the Lord speaks, enlightens, and comes saying, Remember me whom
thou have abused, my wet locks, my watery eyes, and my sorrowful heart which
thou have broken, here is all my love, and this prevails not, but thou neither
risest nor desire the Lord to raise thee: This is sad. In the day of Jubilee,
be a servant then for ever, if your old master still pleases you; especially
when all means are used; when the last of a course of Physic is taken, and is
ineffectual.

2. When the Lord is ready to depart from the soul. Sometime Saints do not melt
at love, but the Lord departs, now this recovers them. As a man that has a
friend, though they grow weary of their company, and they begin to carry away
diverse things, yet when they come to take their leave indeed, now they recover,
and they cannot part now. Like Joseph and his Brethren, they can neither of
them part. Nicode^^us and Joseph cannot contain, but cleave to Christ, when
most forsaken. David, when God hides his face, is troubled, Psalm. 30. 7. It Is
with (...) as with sick folks, when their sickness and sores come to their
height, now they break and recover, Hos. 5. 15. But if Gods departing from thee
makes thee more vile, it makes thee apostatize from him. It Is certain thou
had never life then. This is a Saul's brand, 1 Samuel 28. He forsakes the Lord,
and goes to ^ Witch. Never saw you yet a Gracious heart, but the Lord made
extremity fetch him in. And no surer sign of an ungracious heart, than to have
this blast him and drive him from the Lord, Mal. 3. 14. A man has Gods
Ordinances, he finds no profit, no God, no Christ, his affection is lost, and
now he forsakes the Lord. Oh when Christ is a rock of offense, woe, woe, woe to
that soul! Now thou have neither Summer nor Winter-fruit. Oh look to thy fall
here!

4. When men so fall from the Lord, as that their whole hearts make choice of,
and are espoused to some lust, wedded to some distemper. For though the Saints
may fall, yet never to another Lover; for they cannot fall into any sin that
breaks Covenant between them and the Lord, Hos. 2. 19. When men make choice of
any thing in the world to take content in more than in the Lord, or together
with the Lord, and hence defend it as lawful, and are fully free in it. There
was never Grace there. For if any thing does give the Saints content, it is not
their choice, but refusing: But you are wedded to your lust. David could say, I
have chosen thy Testimonies, oh forsake me not utterly! Others choose somewhat
else, not thee, Psalm. 125. 5. Those that walk in crooked ways, the Lord shall
lead them forth. This is given as a black mark of men that are broken off from
the Lord, Romans 11. 9. Let their Table become a snare. When it may be no
unlawful thing, but lawful is that which banes them, 2 Pet. 2. 22. Sheep may
fall into the mire, but if they lie and wallow in it, it is a Swine; and all
their excellencies are but Pearls in a Swines snout.

But when does a man make choice of it? Quest.


1. Answ.
When a man's heart is set upon a lust, and God blesses and prospers him in it.
When God fills the back-slider in heart full of his own ways. His heart is
wordly, and he thrives in it; his heart is ambitious, and he has his Honor.
This the Lord gives not to his people, but some rod or other upon their backs,
Hos. 4. 17. Let him alone.

2. When a man lies long in his Fall. Saints lie not long: I limit no time, but
when day after day, a man lives in it, Romans 11. 10. Let their Backs be bowed
down always. Oh when a man's heart and back is bowed down always! Saints are under
Christ's care.

5. When the Cause of a man's withering is a withering root. Trees in winter
cast their leaves, as withered trees, but others root is hurt. If the branches
do wither, yet if the root remain, it will recover again. So the Saints cast
their leaf, and their branches wither in desertions and temptations, but they
preserve themselves at the root. But why do others wither? It Is because their
Faith withers, Heb. 10. 39. and 3. 12, 14. Many a man withers because of his
Faith: He feels many wants. Why lives he so? Why dies he in beggary? Why see,
Micah 3. 11. When a man is twice dead and pulled up by the roots, so that the
root perishes; for him is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. That
the means and way of enriching Saints is a way of beggary, to these it is very
fatal. There is some false Faith in Saints, but it is not wholly such.

Oh consider these things! No Grace, What no Grace? I say then no life, no God,
no Spirit, no Christ, no Glory. Oh mourn here! See it now, that you may be
humbled, and so saved. Else you will fall worse and worse still, Ier. 3. 5, 6.

SECT. VI.
HEnce see how far they fall short of saving Grace, that serve the Lord by fits
and starts, Use 4.
and whose hearts follow after the Lord, and make much of the Lord only in good
moods. Dying pangs are not eternal graces; Withering Grace is flourishing and
prosperous wickedness. If the Spirit of Grace in the Saints be of an eternal,
constant nature; that is not the Spirit of Grace which accompanies salvation,
which is alive to day, but dead to morrow, which a man is full of to day, but
quite empty of to morrow. Hence the Prophet cries out, Hos. 6. 4, 5. Oh Ephraim
what shall I do? What more means can I use for thy good? Why, do we not get
good by means? Yes, but thy goodness is like the morning dew, soon lickt up by
the Sun, and like a cloud which passes away, which promises much, but is
scattered again. The Lord knows not what to do with such men; yet how many be
there of such, that like Jonas Gourd, spring up for a time, and then die the
next day, and they comfort themselves under the shadow thereof. That take them
in their Moon, they are as good as you can wish, more than men, but out of it,
they are bruit beasts, not men. Whatever is in a godly man, the likeness and
similitude of it is for a time in an Hypocrite. Would you have earnest prayer
for a blessing? look upon Esau, he seeks for it with tears, and mourns for it
for a time. Would you have following the means, and that the most powerful and
searching* and joy in it also? See John 5. 35. What went they out into the
wilderness to see? a Prophet, a burning and shining light, and rejoiced
therein for a season. Would you have hazarding life for Paul and Ministry of
the Gospel? Alexander did thus for a time. Would you have people enter into
Covenant with God? Look upon the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 29. with 31. 16. I know that
after they death this people will go a whoring. Would you have thankfulness?
Psalm. 106. 13. They sang his praise, they soon forgot the Lord. And these
Affections are for a time stronger than the Saints, like land-floods; and
because they be violent and strong, they last not long. But however, it argues
a wretched false heart, Psalm. 78. 37. Their hearts were not right, because not
steadfast in his Covenant.

But what man is there but changes? What body so healthful, Object.
that is found always in the same temper? Do not the Saints find their hearts
soon cold, their joy soon quenched, their affections soon spent? This therefore
will discourage them.

I answer to it two ways, Answ.


First, They sometimes deny the constancy of Grace, where constantly it is,
(for the Spirit of Grace in us is like life, for it is eternal life. It Is ever
acting or remaining in the soul) and this they do by reason of many mistakes. As

1. They think the Grace of God in them perishes, when the act cease.
Whereas a man may be weary of actions of life, where life remains, as in sick
men. A man may have a rich treasure always with him, yet not always spend it.
There is a gracious frame of heart which the Lord regards chiesly, which is
before the act, and hence may be without it. The wheel does not run that it may
be round, but it is made round that it may run. Hence when the act of running
cease, the frame whereby its fit to run again, remains; And this is the
Seed of God, 1 John ^. 9.

2. Many think the act of grace cease, when it does not act always upon the
same object; as some think, because they have not the sense of Gods love always,
all grace is lost, when it may be there is sense of corruption at that time;
sometime God gives victory over temptation, it rises again: Now the soul
thinks the very act of grace cease, when yet its now warring against the
temptation; sometime the Spirit of grace may lead a man to prayer and sadness,
sometime to a man's calling and cheerfulness. The act of grace is small, its
dominion large.

3. They think they are not constant, when they are not so at all times, as
they are at some times: As a man thinks he is unconstant at prayer, because he
is not all day upon his knees; not heavenly minded, because he is not all day
long minding heavenly things: Whereas the Spirit should be ready so to do and
be at all times, and in every worldly occasion to be sowing or reaping some
spiritual good; yet it is not a season always to be upon the Mount. Sometime Moses
must come down to the camp. God requires every ^it season for his special
Worship, not every Particle of time.

4. Many think the power of Grace is ceased and taken away, when some special
enlargements are: As a Christian shall find at some times, having special work
to do, special miseries to go through, he has special enlargements of the
Spirit, of joy, courage, boldness with God, love and zeal. These lasting not,
he thinks all is gone now. But look as it was with Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14. 8. Then
he alone and his Armor-bearer went against an Host, yet 1 Samuel 17. 11. Against
Goliath not a word. Paul to his death was a faithful and able Minister of the
Gospel, though sometime his mouth stopped, and his heart straightened: The Ship
may be going to the Harbor, though sometime greater, sometime lesser winds.

Secondly, But yet I confess there is much changeableness in the Saints, and
unevenness in their course, and their Spirits are apt to grow weary and faint,
otherwise they had not need to be exhorted not to be weary, and when they are
lifted up, they soon sink down, Heb. 12. 1. And hence question, Was there ever
grace in this heart? But yet there is much difference between the unconstancy
of the one and of the other, in three things:

1. An Hypocri^es affections when they cease, they are raised in him again by
some external Principles and Motives; but the Faithful when they have lost what
they had, they recover it again by a new nature, an inward principle; which is
an evidence there was the being of Grace all this while. Empty a Pond, it will
never fill again till the Clouds above it pour down rain. Empty a Spring,
though it sees no Clouds in the Heavens, yet it runs of it self, and will fill
it self again. So when an Hypocri^e is left dry and empty, if some clouds of
displeasure, fears of death and hell come, he is filled; but a child of God
when no fear of death or hell, yet many times something within begins to work,
as in David Psalm. 39. 3. While musing, the fire kindled, the sense of sin, to
lie out from God, to quench his Spirit, the Beauty of Grace, the Command of
God, the honor of the Lord Jesus recovers him, Heb. 8. 10. Deuteronomy. 5. 29. They
spoke as largely as any could desire, ye^ their hearts were naught, because
this came from no inward principle, but only from external fear. When the
Priests feet touch Jordan, the waters stand on heaps; but when they are passed
through, they overflow all the Banks again, according to their nature. So when
the Word is preached powerfully, and the Gospel with authority, and the Priests
feet touch men's Consciences, and they come to make way for the Arc, for the
Lord, men in fits fall down before the Lord against their natures; and for a
Sabbath day men are as full of good purposes and hearts as may be, yet pe^ish
at last, John 8. 30, 31. Many believed when they heard his Word; but then are
you my Disciples, if you continue. All Hypocrites pangs come from external
principles; and hence take them away, their affections die. Sometime the novelty
of a thing affects a man; the sight of shore is beautiful; at last when Manna
proves daily bread, it is loathed. At first Ministers feet are beautiful, they
would pull out their right eyes for Paul, yet afterward cast him off. A Pharaoh
in Thunder and fear of death, cries, take away the Plague. A man in affliction
promises much; when it is past, his care to find out his sin, his seeking to be
purged from his sin cease. Ioash is good while Ieh^jada lives. A man is good
in quickening company, but when iniquity abounds, his love waxes cold; whereas
when these fail, a holy heart grows better. That which make^ the one to fall,
makes the other to fear, and so to stand. A Conceit carries a man on, but when
his Conceit is gone, he falls. Look as it is with dead men, they may have heat
and color, but it is from the fire; a living man may be cold, and his beauty
gone, yet he comes to be hot again, not from external heat, but internal life
within: He can get himself heat, as we say, so it is here. Or as it is with the
Clock and the Sun, the one moves by Art, the other by nature.

2. Suppose there be some inward Spirit to raise their Affections, yet these
graces arise in them without the destruction of the contrary Corruption. And so
are like to Moses burning Bush, the Bush burning, but yet not burnt. And thus
it was with Balaam, suddenly the Spirit of God came upon him, and he saw the
beauty of Jacobs Tents and blessed them above all people in the world, yet his
covetous, malicious heart against them was not consumed: We never read of
Balaams mourning for want of the sight of their glory, and of love to their
persons and posterity; but the graces of the Saints do arise from the dying of
the contrary lust or corruption which they see and are sensible of; and hence
the act of grace cease some^imes, because it is opposed by corruption, yet the
being of it remains in full power, though not in the exercise thereof, because
it is in such a Subject where corruption is dying, not living; falling, not
reigning. Christ, dies, and so lives in his people; where Christ is indeed,
there we are first buried with Christ before we are raised by him. Paul could
do great things for Christ, yet sometime is weak, because his streng^h arose
from the sense of his own insufficiency to think ^ good thought. The Saints see
great things but it is in such a way, as that they that see not, might see, Joh.
9. 39. Paul is sometime set at liberty from pricking temptations, yet he has
them sometimes that he may feel them, and so be raised again. Hence many people
suddenly find they love the people of God, and love the Lord, but never felt
the contrary sin; suspect it is but a pang, as Capernaum was much affected, yet
repented not.

3. The continuance of the risings of a Saint are life to him, they are his
life; his coolings, and declinings, and decayings, death: But e contra to an
Hypocrite, the continuance of his affections in Ordinances are deaths and
burdens to him; the loss of them his liberty and life, wherein he allows
himself.

As for example, Take an Hypocrite to prayer, he is affected for a time, but
let him ^e long at it, he is like a Fish in a Fever fit out of the water, Mal.
1. 13. So for sanctifying the Sabbath, and being very strict, but stay long
here it is death, it is burdensome to him; and hence we shall see his decays are
his life, and that which makes him walk loosely is, sometime he repents and
believes, and has his Canonical set hours of prayer, and he thinks this is
enough, and pleases himself with this, (who is constant?) But now take a
child of God when his heart is ^nlarged for the Lord, that is heaven; it is
his food, and now he is in health, as Paul said, 1. These. 3. 7, 8. Now we live,
if you continue steadfast: So for others, so also with himself, Prove. 4. 22. and
if it might be ever thus, then happy; and the thoughts of this sweetens heaven;
but take away these, it is his death; and hence he groans to God for the removal
of it, Psalm. 119. 4, 5. What good does Christ, mercies, Ordinances, heaven do
me with such a heart? Be not discouraged you people of the Lord, nor encouraged
you that are good only in your Moods, as the wind turns you; whatever love you
have it is whorish, and whorish tears, if you follow the Lord and yet have your
haunts, whatever service you do it is odious to God, to work all day for
another Master, and twice a day come to the Lord for bre^d. Do you think the
Lord likes this, to taste of his grace, and make a meal of your lusts?

SECT. VII.
FIrst, Use 5.
To them that are fallen to begin again, if God would but give you ears to
hear, Of Exhort.
who like strange Eggs being put into the same nest where honest men have
lived, there you have been hatched up, and when you were young, there you kept
your nest, and lived by crying and opening your mouth wide after the Lord, and
the food of his Word. But now your wings are grown you have got some
affections, some knowledge, some hope of mercy, and are hardened thereby to fly
from God. Can that man be good whom Gods grace makes worse? And that flies from
Gods Ordinances, and people, and private prayer? Consider what thou have done.

1. You bring an ill report and name upon God, Ier. 2. 5. What iniquity have
you found in me. If a Country be well reported of, its no matter if some others
bring an ill name on it, Wise men will not believe them: But for the searchers
of Canaan to bring an ill report of Canaan, this is sad.

2. Thou have lost all thy prayers, all thy profession, nay better never to
have known these ways, 2 Pet. 2. 21. then to forsake the Lord.

3. No men's misery is so great, Jude 13, 14. the blackness of darkness is for
such. Search your selves, you may secretly depart, when you are turning to the
Lord; as a Snail round about the wheel, the wheel moves it, but it moves a
contrary motion of its own from the wheel: Therefore begin again. Oh but will
the Lord receive me? Who knows but he may? And heal your back slidings, Hos.
14. Because fallen, return: I know not how. Answ. Take words; But the Lord may
not regard us, You shall grow like the Lilly, and be as firm as Lebanon.

Let them that stand, take heed lest they fall, and you discover your
hypocrisy to Exhort. 2.
all the world, or be like the Hypocrites whose beauty soon fades. And here let
me commend three things to you.

1. Take heed that there be not found in your hearts a root of bitterness to
grow up and choke you, Hebr.12. 15. If your house be left empty, and yet one
living lust left in it, seven Devils will enter again, and your latter end will
be worse then your beginning. You do not know what hearts you have. Am I a dog,
says Hazael, ever to fall so? Let there be a lust after any creature, you will
find the spirit of prayer die; then to think them too long in the Word, then
to forsake the assemblies of Saints, then when your lust is met with, to oppose
men, Ministers, etc. One reigning lust will bring all into captivity to it
self, it will slay some, and make others serviceable to defend it self, Psalm.
106. 14, 15.

2. Take heed of taking on you the profession of a Christian course without
finding the rest, peace, joy, sweetness of such a course, Prove. 2. 10, 11.
There is a satisfying pleasantness in promises, commands, Ordinances, you will
never hold out else; for wherever the heart finds rest, there it will abide,
and for want of that it dies. As in Creatures, if it had rest there, the soul
would not be unquiet, if in God, it would never go to the creature. Some
sweetness you may find, but look to find full rest; as men do find some
sweetness in creatures, and so in Ordinances; yet being used to them, they grow
weary of them, because they find no God there, no fullness of rest, Hebr. 4.
11, 12. and go through all the world you shall never have it: Get all the
terrors of Devils upon you, you will never stand by that; consider therefore as
it is in sin, there is the act, and there is the pleasure; so in every Ordinance
and Duty there is both. All Apostasy is from this, Ordinances are too
burdensome unto men to be held unto.

3. Take heed you neglect not private prayer, build your houses fit for that
purpose, though you sell some of your clothes; you will for your Swine to lie
in, and will you not to meet God in? one hours meeting the Lord in private will
quit your cost: And pray for this, do it least you do it in the woods, and
deserts, and dens of the earth: So much strangeness from God, so much
Apostacy; Pray that you may hold out in this hour of Temptation; that you may
with David, not be forsaken, when gray headed.

Thus you see now the particular Difference between Wise and Foolish Virgins,
and what is the ground of the acceptance of the one, and not of the other? What
then will be said? Can it be, That there are no Grates in Saints: Or, That
there is no Difference between the one, and the other?

THE Second Part OF THE PARABLE.
CHAP. I.
Of Carnal Security in Virgin Churches.
SECT. I.
Matthew. 25. 5. Whilst the Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.
IN this Parable were noted two things; First, The Churches preparation to meet
Christ from verse. 1. to 5.

Secondly, The Bridegrooms coming out to meet them, from verse. 5. to 12.

In this second part, which now we are to open, three things are to be attended
unto;

1. The delay of Christ's coming, or the long-suffering of Christ before he
come, verse. 5.

2. The preparation he makes for his coming, a little before it, from verse 6.
to verse. 10. by an awakening cry, which makes all the Virgins look about them.

3. The coming it self; where those that were ready, were with joy let in; and
those that were unready were with shame shut out.

1. The delay of Christ's coming.
Whence note First, What happened in the interim of his delay, and that is
Carnal Security, expressed and set out from the lowest and highest degree of
it. 1. They Slumbered; i. e. fell a nodding or winking, as the word most
properly signifies. 2. They Slept; i. e. now they were buried in their sleep,
overcome by it.

Secondly, Upon whom these sleeps and slumbers fell; and that is, They All
slumbered and slept; i. e. though for a time they were both awake, yet good and
bad, wise and foolish fell into this senceless and stupid, dull and dead,
sluggish and sleepy condition.

Observe. I. That in the last days Carnal Security either is or will be the
univers^l sin of Virgin Churches.

Observe. II. That Carnal Security falls by degrees upon the hearts of men.

Observe. III. That the spirit of sloth and security is the last sin that
befalls the people of God.

Observe. IV. That Christ's tarrying from the Churches, is the general occasion
of all security in the Churches; or the not coming of the Bridegroom when the
Saints expect him, is the general cause of that security which does befall them.

SECT. II.
Observe. I. THat in the last days Carnal Secutrity either is or will be the
universal ^in of Virgin Churches: When the Churches are purged from the gross
pollutions of the world, and Antichristian fornications and bondage, then
either there is or will be general Security: For these Virgins, when they first
made profession of their Virginity by their burning lamps, were for a time all
awakened, but at last they all slumbered and slept: This is the temper of the
body of the Churches.

Matthew. 24. 38. As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of
the coming of the Son of man.

Luke 18. 8. When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith in the earth? i.
e. an awakening faith.

Hence the Lord forewarns his people of this, Deuteronomy. 6. 12. When thou come to
such a land, beware lest thou forget the Lord thy God.

Quest. But what is this their general Security?

Answ. Look as it is in our ordinary sleep, so it is in this general Security:
There are these six things in it.

1. A man forgets his business, his work he was about, or is to be exercised
about; so in a carnal security, men forget the Lord, his works, and his will;
that which we most think of while we be awake, we least think of indeed when we
be asleep: Take a man awakened indeed, O then the worst remember the Lord and
his Covenant, Psalm. 78. 47. But when asleep, the Lord and his errand is least
thought of; and hence security is expressed by forgetting God, Psalm. 50. 21. And
hence Ierusalems security was in this, they remembered not their latter end.

2. A man in sleep fears no evil until it be upon him, awakening of him; so
this is another ingredient into carnal security, though sin lies upon them,
they fea^ not till evil comes; as Joseph ^brethren, though warning is given
them, they fear not: Like them in the days of Noah and Lot. And hence Job 21.
9. their houses are free from fear; the misery for the same sin is lighted upon
another; yet the secure soul fears not, as in Belshazar, Dan. 5. 22.

3. In sleep all the senses are bound up, the outward senses especially, the
eye watches not, the ear hears not, the tongue tastes not, the body feels not;
to this is an ingredient of carnal security, it binds up all the senses, as it
did the Prophet Jonah his in the storm; when misery was upon him, he heard not,
he saw not, he felt not; so when misery, outward or spiritual, is upon a man,
he that had quick senses before, his eye sees not, watches not; Christians
neglect their watchfulness for their friends, the Lord, and his Spirit, and
coming; no^ watch against their enemies that daily besiege them; the ear hears
not the voice of the Ministry, the voice of Providence, the voice of the
spirit within; the soul smells not, tastes not the sweet of any promise, any
Ordinance, no nor of the grace of the Lord himself; hence it commends them nor;
nay the soul feels nothing, no evil, no good the Lord does him; that look as
the Lord there said, Isa. 29. 9, 10. The Lord has poured upon you a spirit of
sleep, and has closed your eyes; so the Lord closes up all the senses, that a
man is now stupid, when he is fallen asleep in security.

4. In sleep there is a cessation from speaking and motion: there a man keeps
silence and lies still; so in carnal security, the spirit of prayer is silent,
Isa. 64. 7. Psalm. 32. 1, 2, 3. David calls it a keeping of silence; up, why
sleep thou? seek to thy God, say the Mariners; indeed men may talk in their
sleep, so men may pray in their deep security, yet not thoroughly awakened: And
there is a lying still, no progress; so in carnal security the soul stands at a
stay, goes not backward, grows not worse, but goes not forward; such a one is
compared to the door on the hinge.

5. In sleep the senses being stupefied, and motion ceased, a man falls a
dreaming; some dreams he forgets, some he remembers, and in his sleep fully and
firmly believes them; so in carnal security, now a mans^ mind dreams of that
which is not, and of that which never shall be; a man's mind is grown vain, and
full of fancies and dreams; those things which never entered into Gods
thoughts, something a man dreams of the Lord that this is his will and mind,
which is not; of the world, that it is a goodly thing; of things to come which
shall never be.

6. In deep sleep, though a man be awakened, yet he presently is overcome by
his sleep again; so that is another ingredient into spiritual slumber;
sleepiness is predominant over his watchfulness; and thus it was with the
Disciples in the garden, they slept; the Lord came once and twice, and awakens
them, yet they slept till temptation surprised them; scarce any Christian so
secure in the chambers of Christ, but he has some knocks of conscience, some
cries of the Ministry, some woundings from the Lord, and they do awake him, but
yet he falls to sleep again.

SECT. III.
WE shall now show the Reasons why Virgin Churches in the last days are or will
be overcome by security.

First, Because that in Virgin Churches there are the strongest provocations to
this sin: Reason. 1.
Which are chiefly three.

1. Rest and places of peace, and freedom from hard bondage; Jacob may sleep
with his stone under his head, but much more easily under his own Vine and
Figtrees. A man may be secure in the times of trouble, but much more in times
of peace, when we have our beds made soft for us, and easy pillows. Friends
can boldly desire us to rest, where there is lodgings for us: The world thrusts
us out of lodging: While the prick is at the breast the Nightingale awakes and
sings, but when that is taken away it sleeps in the day. In times of
persecution Paul is preaching till midnight, and the Lord is remembered in the
songs, and sighs, and prayers of the night-season; but in times of peace, peace
like Iaels milk and butter stupifies all the senses, though destruction be
near; Hence Deuteronomy. 6. 12. Then forget not the Lord. Do you think that Noah in
the Ark, when the waters swelled above the mountains, was secure? no, but when
the waters ceased, and he had his Vineyard planted, now he sleeps in his
drunkenness, because he knew not the strength of wine. In the Virgin-Church,
where this sleep is, we suppose this freedom from evil.

2. Because there men are most free from inward pain; for where there is much
grief and pain, there is no rest, though all the house about be still; but when
the house is still, and the body well, now it is hard but there may be rest;
Whiles the Christian does live under Antichristian pollution, his Conscience
has no rest, and hence it is awake there; here (says the soul) I want the
Ordinances of God, Oh that I had them! Here I see sin and wickedness abounding,
that my child is like to be poisoned therewith; here are such and such
superstitions that my Conscience cannot bear: Hence Conscience is kept waking.
But in Virgin-Churches, where the house is swept of these, now Conscience is
quiet and at rest; now I have got a Levite into my house, God is now blessing
me, etc. Now Conscience has laid down its burden, it falls down to sleep; now
they cry, The Temple of the Lord,

3. Because in such Churches there is most aptitude in men to spiritual
fullness, viz. plenty of the means; there is all the Ordinances; in this
mountain, Isa. 25. 1. Gods feast is made, and fullness of spiritual gifts and
graces, because they have now escaped the pollutions of the world, conquered
the enmity of the world; now have come to a good measure of grace, and
conquered the way of their enemies, got the better of them; hence, as the
Israelites made peace with the Canaanites, not when they were too strong but
too weak for them: So now the Soul comes to be at rest, to lay down its
Warfare, and to yield to a truce, to a league to his lusts and distempers for a
time. When men are kept short of food, now they awake; so when the Word of the
Lord and his Ordinances be rare and precious, and hard to find, now a
Christian can trudge after them; but when men are full, now they desire rest;
so it is here.

4. Because in Virgin-Churches, there men are most apt to be overtaken with
weariness; A man that never walked on in a holy way, may at first setting out
delight in Christ; but after he has done walking in it, now he is apt to
faint; especially, if he sows much, and reaps for the present but little. And
hence Gal. 6. 9. You shall reap in due season, if you faint not: Now in
Virgin-Churches, these Virgins are such persons as have begun to make a
profession, and have made a fair progress; O how difficult now is it not to be
weary! it is strange to see what short spirits after the Lord, what large after
the Creatures we have.

II. Because they are the more easily overcome by this sin, Reason. 2.
than by any other.

1. Because it is a sin which a man least foresees or fears: The Apostle says,
They that are drunk, and that sleep, sleep in the nigh; and yet here men sleep
in the open light; Why so? Men see it not, men know it not; sleep steals upon a
man: It Is lawful to sleep; carnal security arises chiefly from the use of
lawful things, on which a man's heart and thoughts are spent; they eat, drank,
gave in marriage, they could see no hurt therein. When a man is had before
Councels, now a man fears to sin, he knows he shall be tempted unto sin; but
when the Lord brings the shoulder from under such burdens, now to fear out
Tables, our Beds, our Wives, our Children, our Callings, our Professions and
the snares of these, Oh it is exceeding hard!

2. Because Security is so sweet a sin; O sleep is sweet; meat is sweet, but
men may be soon full of that; but when sleep comes, many hours are little
enough to entertain that: Some ^ins are sweet for a time, as a short meal and
away; but sloth is a sweeter sin than any else besides. Let a Christian ask his
heart, when he can take no content in Pots, or loose company, or Queans, and
can find none in the Lord, yet this will give him ease, viz. his sloth: When he
is weary of the Would, and of vvalking with God also, yet sloth is his delight;
and hence he cries, A little more slumb^r and sleep, until destruction c^mes as
an armed man: Prove. 6. 9, 10.
When a man delights not in his Wife, Children, Riches, Honors, yet is he
sometimes contentedly svvallovved up with his sleep and rest.

3. Because Sa^an does make his strongest forces ready alvvay to bring a man
first into this in; because this makes way for the entrance of all sin and
misery; no people so happy as the Israelit^s, while they were awakened and up
with God; no misery could hurt them, Ier. 2. 1, ^, 3. but when they forgot him,
all misery came in; While the strong man keeps the Palace, his goods be at
peace; it is his care to keep men secure and still.

SECT. IV.
LEt us therefore now examine whether this sin be not out sin in this Country,
Use. 1.
if it be not begun among us; if we be not sleeping, yet are we not slumbering?
if we are not Virgin-Churches, why have we the name of it? if we be
Virgin-Churches, then make search if this be not our sin; we have all our beds
and lodgings provided, the Lord has made them easy to us; We never looked for
such d^ys in New England, the Lord has freed us from the pain and anguish of
our Consciences; we have Ordinances to the full, Sermons too long, and Lectures
too many, and private meetings too frequent, a large profession many have made,
but are you not yet weary? if weary, not sleepy, not slumbering? it may be on
you before you are aware, and you not know it; and when so it is, it may be so
sweet that you may be loath to see it, that so you may forsake it. Let me knock
again, is it not so? Let me come to every man's bed side, and ask your
consciences.

3. Have you not forgot your God, and forgot your work also? the business for
which you made this great undertaking? Psalm. 106. 12. When they were saved from
the Sea they soon forgot the Lord: Has not the Lord by a stretchedout arm
brought thee and thine through seas and dangers, and delivered you wonderfully?
are not all his kindnesses forgotten? all your promises forgotten? When the
Lord had brought the Isra^lites out of their captivity, and some hopeful
beginnings were, they came for the Temple; the dust was precious, but Gods
hosue did lie waste, Hag. 1. 5, 6. Consider your ways; no man prospered scarce
in his estate; God did blow upon their corn because they forgot their end. What
was your end of coming hither? the Ordinances of God, the presence of God; and
oh one day there better than a thousand elsewhere; has it been so? No, but as
it is verse. 9. Every man turns to his own house: Every man for himself, to
their own house, lot, accommodation, provision for children; and in the mean
while the Lords house lies waste, you build not up that; the Souls of thy
Brethren in Church Fellowship, yea, of thy family are not built up; the Lords
house is despised now; and it is like the Schools of the Prophets, and much
more. Oh thought we, if we had such privileges, how would we improve them! but
when we have them, have we the same thoughts? do we not forget them, like men
that come to a place for gold, and find it not without digging, they fall to
l^^de their ship with wood or coal, that which it will bear.

2. Have we not shaken off all fear almost of sin and misery? Go to the Ant
thou sluggard, she fears and provides against a winter: Do not men think that
we have fled too far for the cro^s to find us, or as if the Temple of the Lord
was such a Den as no Foxes or Wolves could follow us into? especially when
there are causes of fear, when War is proclaimed, and the causes known, and yet
they are never feared: How many men have the handwriting of death in their
Consciences against them! this they confess is naught, they have lived
careless, sluggish, and have had some sense of it, yet no awakening fear of the
terror of the Lord; when a Prince is nigh us, now to commit a little lewdness
is great wickedness: where is the man that trembles at the nearness of God to
us? when a breach is made, then fear enemies. Divisions and breaches go before
falls of Churches; where is that spirit of Iehosaphat, that feared and
proclaimed a fast? When God has begun to smite, what cause is there to fear!
We have been hurt, and yet not laid it to heart; the Lion roars, shall not the
people fear? I believe we should not have had those Pequot furies upon us, but
God saw we began to sleep: Where is the man that, with Paul, knows the terror
of the Lord, and hence persuades men? when the enemy is ever about us, there is
always cause of fear, and yet we fear but now and then.

3. Are not our senses bound up? look upon men in their fields and conversings,
buyings and sellings; where is a daily, weekly watchfulness over our thoughts
and tongues? Look to men's closets, do men there call themselves to account? can
they find leisure or need of it? are not men's eyes closed up, that the glory
of God in the Scripture is a sealed thing? Men have eyes but see not; are not
men's ears sealed up? Some Sermons men can sleep them out; man's voice is heard,
but not the voice of the Son of God: Oh how many men are there that become
quite Sermon-proof now adays! Are not men blockish, dull, senceless, heavy
under all means! they taste not, smell not, whereas elsewhere, O how lively and
spiritual are they!

4. Is not the spirit of Prayer, that lamp going out in the Church of God? the
blessedness of all flourishing Plantations in the world began by means of that,
and shall not continue but as it continues; and if ever cause to seek for
prosperity of Plantations, these have need. If God should take away this
generation of Magistracy and Ministry, what would this despised Country do?
and what would become of your children? then no Schools for them, when no
Gospel left among them; then every man's sword shall be against his brother, and
God spreading the place with darkness, which through his presence is made
light; what little hope of a happy generation after us, when many among us
scarce know how to reach their children manners? How apt are we, like to those
Asian Churches, to fall into those very sins which overwhelmed them, and ruined
them? how many fall off, and in time break forth, that it would make men sick
to hear of their pranks? what place more open to temptations of persecution and
worldly delusion? go up and down the Plantations, where is the man that lays
things to heart? who has the condition of the Country written upon his heart,
and presenting it before the Lord, rather than his own good? Oh men are silent
because asleep! How do sins run thorough men as water thorough a mill, and men
regard it not? what means, what deliverances have we had! but oh what little
thankfulness? 2. Do we make progress; nay, is not out shadow gone back? I
sleep, but my heart waketh; it should be so, but it is not so indeed.

5. Have we not fallen a dreaming here? what means else the delusions of men's
brains? what a swarm of strange opinions, which (like flies) have gone to the
sores of men's heads and hearts, and these are believed also? and more dreams
men have that are never spoken; every man has some drunken conceit that rocks
him asleep; dreams are quite contrary to the truths. What means these, if men
are not sleeping? First, Drunken dreams of the world. Secondly, golden dreams
of grace; that these things advance grace which indeed destroy grace; that
there is no grace in the Saints, no grace in Christ, no humane Nature, no
promise to evidence grace; no Law to be a Rule to them that have received
grace: Who would think that ever any should so fall by a simple woman? But if
this be not general; yet look how do men begin to dream concerning the world?
scarce a man but finds want, or is well; if he wants, Oh then, if I had such a
lot about me, such an estate, how well then were I? and e contra, They that
have it, and now they take their rest: Take heed, says the Lord, your hearts
be not overcome with cares; So say I to you.

6. Does not the Lord often awaken us, yet we fall to sleep again? the Lord
awakened us by the Pequot Hornet, yet what use is there made of that? does not
the Lord often meet us in an Ordinance, but he is soon lost and gone again? Is
there a man that has not had his cross since he came hither, as loss in cattle
and estate, a dear Husband, Child, Wife dead? a sore and sharp sickness, etc.
he has been exercised with, etc. but do we not sleep still? if it be not thus,
it will come; fear it for time to come; but if it be thus, then I say no more,
but know it, you are in your enemies hand; and in such an enemies hand, that if
you mourn not under it, will open the door either to the entrance of some gross
sin and temptation, or for some heavy and sudden wrath. It Is sufficient for me
this day to show you where your hurt lies.

SECT. V.
HEnce see the reason why men are worse in Virgin-Churches, than in Use 2.
polluted places, and why it is so generally; Because here are more temptations
to make them all slumber and sleep; here their beds are made soft, here the
storms are past, here they are under the shadow, and out of the sun, and
security opens the door for an enemy: No wonder if the City be taken though
never so strong, if it grow once secure: no wonder if the world be entered, and
men are grown more worldly; and if Satan be entered, and men grow more
passionate than ever before; no wonder a man's work be neglected, if he be
asleep, Ordinances more slighted than ever before: Never shall you see Security
fall upon a man alone, but it brings its train with it; when the Husbandmen
sleep, tares will be sown, and when the Disciples sleep, temptations will
enter; This is that which the Lord testifies of his people, Ier. 2. 2, 3, 4. I
remember what thou did in times of streights, in a land not sown; every one
that touched you did offend; but in the seventh and eighth verses, when brought
to a plentiful Country, they did not so much as say, Where is the Lord that
has done this for us! But yet the Lord questions his people for this, What
iniquity have you found in me? which question you cannot answer without grief
here, or confusion another, day. You that are the Lords, often have heard this
complaint (for this may be your condition as well as Noah's and Lot's) but now
see the cause of it, how hard to awake on hour? how hard to walk with God one
day? short awakenings you have, but long sleeps (this may be your condition for
a time) but you cannot continue so for ever if you are the Lords. But if you do
continue so, especially without bemoaning this unto the Lord, it is a question
whether ever there was that oil in your vessel, which others have, when not
only a man's acts grow worse, but the very spirit of a man degenerates; when not
only the leaves of the Vine fall, but the Vine it self grows degenerate, and
hence continues so; this is a sore evidence of a woeful state, Ier. 2. 20, 21.
When the yoke was upon thy nick, thou said, Thou wo^l^st not transgress; but
the Lord has broken thy ^ands; and now thou art become a strange Vine:
Remember, it will be an heavy indictment against thee, to be good in Mesheck,
but base in Sion; to be then worst when the Lord is best.

Use 3. Hence see one reason why the Lord pursues many a Soul with inward
terrors and outward sorrows. Those that are fast asleep, because soft speechs
cannot awaken them, hence we lay our hands upon them, and sometimes knock them,
because this is the way to awaken them, and then they hear; so the Word and
Spirit speak to a man, but such soft still winds rock them asleep rather than
awaken them; hence the Lord lays his iron hands upon a man, and knocks by
blows, and now when affliction is upon you, now you can hear; When as the winds
and water were ready to tear the ship in pieces, now they enquire, Why were
they sent? And the lot fell upon Jonah, who was then sleeping; it is easy to
awaken out of natural sleep, but very hard out of spiritual security: All the
terrors of God on Jonah within and without are little enough; but at last he
could hear, and run on his errand. Psalm. 30. 6, 7. Why did God hide his face
from David? he said in prosperity he should not be moved; this was the reason
of it; the Lord sees you have need of it; seldom shall one see an awakening
Christian without inward temptations and terrors, or outward sorrows: Oh
consider then if the Lord do meet with thee! consider thy own security thou
have been in, or art apt to fall into! This is the sin you must enquire after
and find out; and do not account it hard, though long, though bitter; for
never greater misery than for the Lord to say Sleep on; it is one of the
heaviest Judgments, for the Lord to let a man go on in a secure condition
without blows; mark therefore unto the end of those blows, to be thoroughly
awakend by them: For sometimes when the Lord sends them, a man (if they be not
very bitter, if he has any rest) lays them not to heart, Isa. 42. 25. Fire
burnt about him; and in this Country I know not what curse befalls men; peace
makes men secure, and sorrow makes men discontented, and sunk, and discouraged,
which may be for a fit in a Saint; but to continue so, this is that Ahab: Oh
when as thou feel the blow, look now that thou do awaken, and be thankful
for it, that you met with that you did never reckon upon, viz. to be frighted
out of security thereby.

SECT. VI.
Of Exhortation, Use 4.
TO watch over one another, by exhorting one another while it is called to day,
Heb. 3. 13. Let both the Watchmen and Members of Churches do this; for this is
one means appointed by the Lord to preserve the soul from sleeping, 1 These. 5.
1, 5, 6. Exhorting one another; as it is in Cities, when the Watch is apt to
sleep, they have their companies that are passing up and down the walls the
greatest part of the night, and so they are kept waking; and we shall find,
that as it is in a Town where men are all asleep, one Bell-man, one waking
Christian will keep life, and spirit, and the power of godliness in many; and
when he sleeps, all are fast. Nothing in the world brings security sooner upon
men than sleepy company: Officers of Churches watch not over members, nor they
one over another, exhorting and crying one unto another to their work, while it
is called to day: Oh then let every man get up, and fall to this work of mutual
exhorting! go and visit one another, go and speak often to one another; and if
thou be a child of the light, see that thou endure not thy fellow servants to
sleep in the open day in one duty or another. Know, if God stirs thee, thou will awaken others, 2 Cor. 5. 10. We knowing the terrors of the Lord persuade
men.

2. Consider thy labor cannot be in vain here; the best mettalled horse needs
spurs; others are asleep.

You will say if I knew such a sin I would speak, but I dare not.

Answ. It is the case of all the Virgins, they have need of it, Jude 23. Some
save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, Matthew. 3.

3. Consider this is one part of your Warfare, to keep your watch whereby you
may be made conquerors; You complain you have many sins and temptations arising
and prevailing; never do they usually prevail, but when you are secure; first
the Watch is taken, and then the City is suddenly taken; now look as Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7. he has finished his course, and fought his fight, and now
expects the crown; how can you end your days in peace, that cannot in some
measure find and feel this? The Church is the City of the living God, this is
taken, and every man in it, unless you be watchful, and exhort one another
daily, while it is called to day: And that I may not speak in the clouds,

4. Their sin will be yours.

First, Labor to know the state of thy Brethren whom thou art to exhort; what
their sleepy neglects be, and sins are; it may be thou have known one has been
very humble, tender, affected under Ordinances, made many fair shows and
promises of growing, and thriving, and sensibly complaining of his own
vileness, and now he is in a silent sleep; Do thou know this, and wilt not
speak a word to awaken him, for whom Christ shed his blood, who it may be will
do thee as good a ^urn, and make many a prayer for thee? ^arnabas when he saw
the grace of God, Acts 11. 23.
exhorted them with full purpose of heart to cleave unto him; much more should
you when you see grace dying, 2 These. 3. 11. Paul heard that some were idle,
them he exhorts to work; what good might one word do?

Secondly, if you do not know, enquire with a spirit of much love, how it is
with them; 1 Samuel 17. 16.
as David of his Brethren when they were gone into the fields; do you not
decline, do you not stand still? how have you found your heart since last
Sermon, Christians are to give up accounts one to another of their gains and
losses.
Sabbath, Fast, Affliction? have you got any ground against that sin you
complained of last year? etc. Suppose you cannot do this to all, yet why not to
some? Suppose you have no other place than when you meet them in the fields, do
it there, Jude 20. Build up your selves, etc. Now here a man must know the
height, how high they are built already, how can they lay their stones else? It
is one of the heavey curses of God upon the Idol. Shepherd, He shall not visit
the hidden, nor seek the young, Zach. 11. 16.

Thirdly, If thou know nothing from them, then relate thy own condition,
this is a most lovely provocation, and exhortation unto another frame, for one
great cause that hardens men in their security, is because they see no such
living Christianity in the world: But when they do, now (Zach. 8^) many shall
take hold of the skirt of a Jew, for they shall say God is with you; Agrippa
was almost persuaded and awakened when he heard Paul relate his conversion;
although there be many impostors in the world that do so, Tell me, are all
things in peace with you? the Devil is in you then: What? have no temptations?
yet many; Do not observe how they prevail? yes; do never get strength
against them? yes; have no good days after them? yes, much peace and life, and
presence of God! Has the Lord given these talents to thee to be hid in a
Napkin, this treasure to keep and not to spend? who knows but that the speaking
of these may awaken others? these temptations, and this condition is mine,
these sins I find he makes a great matter of them; Lord what will become of me
that am hardened under them? this peace they find, my Soul is a stranger to it;
Conscience will work thus: Women should speak thus to women, and men to men;
others were provoked by the example of the Corinthians, to help others; so
there is a provoking power here.

Fourthly, If this prevail not, speak often to them, of the sins of others; in
condemning others you condemn them; and this will make them look about them;
view the fields, and show them the tares that are grown up by security; and
laying down these sins you strike at the root of theirs; It may be, you cannot
tell certainly, Acts 2. 40. The Lord made this one means to awaken a
Belshazzer, Dan. 5. 22. God turned thy Father into a beast, etc. to live in the
woods, yet thou humbledst not thy self, etc. How many Professors does God deal
so withal?

Fifthly, Enter into Covenant and brotherly promise to exhort one another, as
David and Jonathan; If any hurt be toward David, Jonathan will speak of it, 1 Samuel 20. Some may in Church Fellowship be more nearly knit than others, to call
one another to account, to tell one another their fears, to know of one another
their progress. Can not give an account to man? how will thou give an account
to God of it? I am persuaded many a man lies smoothered to death by means of
this. Can not come to the light of a candle? Oh how then can thou appear
before the light of the Sun.

Sixthly, Provoke one another to frequency in Ordinances, Heb. 10. 23, 24. and
therein consider one another; do see thy Brother in doubts or complaints call
him to pray with thee; do see things go ill in Churches, and men bite the
bit? call to fasting and prayer, three or four together, as Paul, when he saw
the ship sinking, then he exhorted them, Act. 27. 22. Especially when you see
danger near men's hearts, ready to be lost in the World: In these times suppose
only two, or three, or four should go and pray one half hour together, and tell
one another their wants, now help here; in our times it has been so, one
living Christian helps others dying.

But yet how is this neglected, as if men were resolved not only to dye
sleeping themselves but to let others sleep also? No, you will say, not my
self; yet it may be in your family it is so, and before the Lord.

What art alive to God and family, where thou can do but little common good,
and art dead to thy Brother? it is made a sad sign of a man forsaken of God, if
when he thinks he shall sleep his last, and be damned himself, yet he would
have others damned also. Tell me, would you have all New England lie in
security as well as your selves? No! do you not desire it when you use not the
means that prevent it; and that is mutual exhortation; Oh therefore do it;
Ministers may preach, and every man sleep still, unless some awake and rouse up
the rest (as some, when others are abed and fast asleep) that lie a dreaming:
Some there be, that though Doomsday were to morrow, they would sleep; Oh
therefore let me persuade some one or two to fall to his work, lest their
security prove your undoing; therefore speak often one to another, forsake not
your assembling, visit one another, pray one for another, warning one another,
that you may awake with the Lord one hour.

SECT. VII.
LEt every man not only exhort his brother, Use 5.
but fear this himself; You have a race to run, many enemies to conquer, sleep
not lest you fall short, sleep not lest you be taken captive: lest in exhorting
others, your selves proves Reptobates: I will not tell you what I fear, but
Luke 21. take heed lest your hearts be overcome; be not drunk with some
delight, be not filled with vain cares; Hence, prevent it, as Noah moved with
fear made an Ark.

First, Set a high price upon those awakenings and revivings of heart that God
sometimes gives you; I am sure you find these sometimes. A man that has
nothing to lose, will sleep with his doors open in the night; when a man has a
treasure he will be watchful to keep it; all security comes from an
undervaluing of the Spirit of grace, and its presence among us, Prove. 4. 13.
keep her, for it is thy life; and when it is lost, what are you but dead?

Secondly, Consider thy continual danger; if enemies be at the gates, all the
Town is watching; one would not think the depth of security that is in a
careless heart, Psalm. 30. 6. I said I should never be moved; he had good days
and a thankful heart; then God did hide his face: A man would think Sampson
should awake when the Philistines are upon him; but here Devils be upon thee, 1
Pet. 5. 10. If all be well now, yet remember evil days; would you know when?
even then when men say peace.

Thirdly, Know the work you have to do, and make it your main business; when
men have weighty business of the world in hand, they cannot sleep in their
beds; and as the wicked, Prove. 4. 16. They sleep not without doing mischief;
and so it is their main work.

Fourthly, Call thy self to account daily, let not thy Soul long go on without
reflecting, What do I do? Hearts and Hawks kept from sleep lose their wildeness,
but they must be constantly tended and kept watching: So consider the account
you must give to God, 2 Cor. 5. 9. with 11. Hence Hag. 1. 5. Sins were upon
them, and they repented not; miseries, and those were not removed; because they
considered not their ways, especially before the great Tribunal of God. I am
persuaded the reason why men walk in their sleep, and go dreaming up and down
the world, is this, they consider not, nor reflect upon themselves to any
purpose; what do I? whether go I? no Sermons awaken, you consider not of them.

CHAP. II.
Carnal Security comes by Degrees.
SECT. I.
THat Carnal Security falls upon the hearts of all men by degrees; Observation
2.
for all the Virgins here first slumbered before they slept; they first fall a
winking and nodding (as the word signifies) short sleeps, and then startle, and
awake again, before they fall asleep for a longer time: a Christian is a
slumbering Christian before he is a sleeping Christian.

The truth of this may be seen not only in these Virgins, but also in other
Examples of security in the Scripture: As the old World, Genesis 6. 2. They saw
the Daughters of men, they let their eyes wander, and their hearts lust.

2. Then they took them Wives for to solace their hearts in, to please
themselves only, and not the Lord; they ate, drank, gave in marriage; they came
not to that height of wickedness, to commit Adultery, or to live in Whoredom.

3. Then they became fleshly and sensual; spiritual things are out of taste and
relish with them.

4. Noah Preaches, and they slight him; he condemns them, and they regard not
him.

5. Then God sets a time; no stronger means to awaken than this; and yet they
go on; and now they were come to their height.

Secondly, The Israelites. Deuteronomy. 8. 12. 1. They ate and grew full; here is
first spiritual fullness. 2. Blessing themselves, in their estates, herds,
flocks. 3. Then proud in heart, verse. 14. 4. Then they forget the Lord, and all
that ever he did for them, verse. 14. 5. Then men ascribe all which they have to
themselves and creatures, verse. 17. though only in their heart. 6. Then cleave
to other gods, verse. 19. and here lie so fast asleep, till plagues came down
upon them.

Solomon saw the sluggards Garden overgrown; now as it is in fields, the weeds
do not over-grow all the ground in one day, but they are a long time a growing,
but by degrees they overgrow all, that when he awakes (all is so overgrown) he
knows not where to begin: So it is here.

Be sober, be vigilant; security is a kind of spiritual drunkenness; a man is
not for that time his own man, not a sober man; now this is by frequent and
often sipping; a man he is half gone first, and then he is wholly gone; he has
not presently drunk out all his senses, not dead drunk; So it is here.

SECT. II.
IN regard of the quickness and power of the life of Conscience; whether it be
a natural Conscience awakened, or a spiritual Conscience awakened; Reason 1.
it is with Conscience as it is with a prisoner in a house; though all in the
house sleep, yet he is bound, he cannot, and hence he is speaking, and will
awaken the house; so Conscience has know, These sins I have watched against,
and been humbled for, these duties I have done; but now, Now says Conscience,
you neglect them, now you are worse, now fallen; now a man startles, espcially
when one stands at the door, and calls to Conscience it will awaken; so when
there is a word to call, Conscience will be crying ever and anon within,
especially when any hope or leisure to speak with any as they pass by; so it
will take men sometimes in their fields, and talk with them, and chide them:
Security grows up easily, but the awakening light of conscience cannot be soon
done out in any man; hence sometimes a man sleeps, and then awakens again;
Hence Romans 2. 15. Though they had many sins, yet it would accuse and excuse; as
those that are come out of their own Country to dwell in another, or from a
great estate, in a mean condition, they cannot easily forget their friends and
relations, but in time it wears away, Prove. 20. 27. Conscience is Gods candle,
it will shine, and is not easily put out.

2. Because the Lord does never depart from men but by degrees, Reason 2.
and hence security falls upon men by degrees; when God is near unto men, then
usually they be awakened, as the Israelites before the Mount. Now the Lord to
show the riches of his patience and long suffering, he will not depart
suddenly, and leave the Soul in a dead and sluggish estate. And hence the
Cherubims glory Ezekiel. 9. 10, 11. departed by degrees. Isa. 29. 10. with 13. God
does not so deal, as presently to close their eyes quite up, but they are
awakened to draw nigh to God with their lips, which is of God, and then the
Lord closes up their eyes; never can a man be cast into a deep sleep, till the
Lord says Sleep on, or till God close his eyes; and that he does not
presently; as to the Disciples he comes a second and third time.

3. Because this is the most ready way and method for sin and Satan to bring
the Soul into a deep sleep, Reason 3.
nay, to make themselves to sleep, which is that he aims at; look as it is with
those that sell things, their scope is not to put off their commodities, but to
put them off so as they may have money or moneys worth for them; so it is here,
the scope of Satan is not only to bring men into security, to give them ease
and peace, Luke 11. 21. but to have his money, that the Soul may give it self
to it: Now as it is in buying of Fruits, Sugars, Wines or Strong Water, they
will not buy all presently, nor buy before they see and taste, they know not
whether it is good or no, or whether they shall need it all or no: So here, to
lie in such a secure condition, as to neglect all means, to be hardened after
all sins, this Satan will not offer, not will men buy, or give themselves to
this, they know not whether this be good or no, less will serve them; and hence
taste first a little slumber and sleep, and so call for a little and a little
more until a man is a beggar, Prove. 6. 10. as at first in Paradise; first look,
then taste, then eat; so here.

SECT. III.
DO not think you are out of a state of carnal security, because you have many
times some quickenings and revivings of heart, because they may be only
awakenings between thy slumbers, which like slashes suddenly come and suddenly
go again, which make thee startle, and rub thy eyes, and stir up they self, but
down you fall again; wherever life is in a Christian, it is ever acting for
spiritual ends; a man will awaken first with God in the morning, and go first
to him in prayer (extraordinary occasions not preventing) and he will go from
his prayer to his work, not as doing his own work, but as doing the Lords work,
howing, plowing, sowing for him, etc. Now when the life of Christ does not act
in men, and act men, it is either because there is no life at all, but only
the awakening of Conscience which soon dies, or else that living Christian
slumbereth at least then; slumber is upon thee though sleep is not; make it out
else any other way.

Object. If so (you will say) who is not then sleeping?

Answ. Take Lot whilst vexed with the Sodomites, he awakens; take Paul while
tossed up and down in disgraces and reproaches, his inward man is renewed day
by day, though the outward man die. The Saints have some kind of sleeps when
they are at their best; but these are sick sleeps; but thine are sweet sleeps
to thee. I know Christ may say to his Disciples, Watch and pray, temptations
may be near, but their eyes may be heavy; the Spirit may be willing, the flesh
weak; and that it is infinite mercy the Lord will awaken them, a first and a
second time it may be by Sabbath awakenings, etc. Many cannot tell what to make
of themselves, because of their drowsiness and Gospel-slumber: Methinks this
may break thy heart, Cannot you awaken one hour? know therefore your sin; It is
a hard thing to be fully awakened, to have all heaviness to sleep taken away;
the Lord has taken you here alone to himself, you do by fits watch and pray,
but it is only as men asleep, not awake: The Son of man is betrayed, Christ,
and Gospel, and Ordinances; and can you find in your heart now to sleep?

Oh therefore shake off your slumbers and short sleeps, Use 2.
lest you fall to sleep; and for sleeping, be awakened by some direful blow;
Look upon those men Isa. 29. 10. God has closed their eyes, that is a fearful
thing; look upon many professors, all their savor, and heart, and life is gone
almost, and they know not that they be asleep, not all means cannot awaken
them, or unseal their minds again; God knows how far you may fall, if you give
way to a little; especially if God takes away Ministers from you, and that the
Elders that have known the works of God be gathered to their Fathers;
especially if you know it, and yet go on in your slumbers; if you will not
awaken when God cries and calls, you shall slumber and sleep; like the Smiths
dog, the harder the Master strikes, the faster the dog sleeps, being used to
it. I knew a man of great estate, often quickened by the Word; but he lost all
life and heat again, and he prayed, and desired the Lord to keep him, and yet
decayed, but he could not tell the reason thereof; at last the Word began to
grow common, and he slept there also; Conscience told him there was some evil
toward him which he feared, yet still slept, and continued so; notwithstanding
his fears would thus awaken him often; at last an affliction came, he regarded
not that, but was impatient and froward under it, till at last all he had was
gone, and then he looked about him; when his house was burnt, he was asleep; he
prayed, but lost all by sleeping when he should watch; so security grew upon
him; and hence, no wonder misery met him: Oh! take heed therefore of giving
way, liberty, or toleration to a sleeping profession, and your slumbering
Religion: as men will not tolerate Ceremonies, because they are the fruitful
seed of the body of Popery; so here, etc.

SECT. IV.
Quest. WHat are the first degrees of this spiritual slumber?

Answ. 1. When men have lost the satisfying sense of the blessed face and love
of God; when hypocrites have lost the imaginary sight of it, and Saints the
real enjoyment of it, Psalm. 17. ul^. I shall be satisfied when I awake with
thine image; sleep first shows it self in closing up of a man's eyes that he
sees not any thing about him; hence, something else contents, and must do it
when you feed not daily on the Lords love; and when that, then vain cares and
thoughts ( Luke 21. 34.) overcome a man, and then he grows a very worldling,
as if he had hope of no other portion; hence no mind after spiritual good
things; hence he sleeps at Sermons, hence he falls out into passion, and
discontent with his present condition, nay, with every other thing when any
cross comes: Because these things are sweet to you, and God is not, when
discontented; the Lord keep my soul from entering into thy secrets; Oh consider
it if you have had sense of the Lords love in Sacraments! and some new doubts
arise, and you are not satisfied with it; now look to your selves; it is
impossible a Christian should do any work without rest. Now as bodily feeding
causes rest, so does spiritual feeding, spiritual rest; feed and rest here,
and it will make you fall to your work; feed not here, rest not here, and you
will in something else; and carnal rest will bring carnal neglect.

2. When men have lost all fear of the wrath to come, and the terror of God
another day; not always a fear that I shall bear, but a dreadful apprehension
what it is. Many Christians lose the sense of Gods love, yet the Lord keeps
them in the sense of his anger, and so they are awake; but when both are gone,
or this is gone, then there is and cannot but be the first security. For as it
is with children, when their eyes are open to see and consider the things of
the world, now they are begun to be awakned; I never look upon a Christian
fully awakened till now, that the Lord lets him see the things of another
world; and when this is lost he begins to sleep, 2 Cor. 5. 9. with 11. 2 Pet.
3. 11. 12. Some securelings thought all things were past; No (says he) there
is a time a coming when all things shall be dissolved; what manner of persons
then should we be! Hence this being lost, men fear not sin, men prize not
mercy, men wonder not if ever they escape; hence men live and hang between
doubt and fear, never make sure, because they know not what Gods wrath is: Nay,
lastly, hence nothing awakens them, that though they know their misery, yet
they will go on (the highest degree of spiritual security) Oh then keep these
thoughts awake! what it is to be forsaken of God! what it is to grapple with
him!

3. When men have lost their foresight, and hence provide not against an evil
day; when Christians keep their profession, and go on sweetly in their course,
but to lay up for after-claps, that they do not, when Christians like
Grasshoppers sing all the summer, but what have they to live upon in the winter
time? the Ant can learn them that, Prove. 6. 6. Go to the Ant thou sluggard,
that provideth her meat in the summer; the Ant by a secret instinct (though
simple and little) considers there will be a winter, and that summer is her
gathering time; so a Christian, if awakened (though simple) will be taught to
do something which may serve him, not only now, but hereafter also; when men in
times of peace and enjoyment of Ordinances never fear, muchless provide for
that time, that all these treasures shall be taken away and carried to the King
of Babel, Isa. 39. when men in their life time think not of setting the house
and heart in order before the evil day, when men are not that now which they
would wish themselves to be another day, when men lay not up treasures of tears
and prayers in heaven, nor are provident for eternity, no^ think this will be
my peace, nay my glory another day, though I lose now; men will lay up
treasures on earth, and provide for themselves and theirs; hence their hearts
are lost here, and lay in nothing spiritual for the future, Prove. 10. 5. he
that gathers in harvest does right (but a sluggard will not) his heart and
mind is taken up to provide this and that for future; and hence it is that the
Christian is full of sorrow and tears in times of peace; but when the day of
trouble comes, he can lift up his head (now redemption draws nigh) when another
in times of trouble has most terrors, because the one was not laying up
against another day, as the other did.

4. When men go to prayer without receiving any answer, now a man begins to
slumber, Prove.13. 4. men that are fast asleep speak not all, but when awake a
little they speak a little, and then sleep, and then awake, and sleep again; so
men pray and sleep again; it is a deep slumber also when men shall beg for
bread and money, and then fall a sleep constantly, and so lie down satisfied:
Oh take heed of this! Hence comes First, Snarling at God. Secondly,
Heartlesness to the duty. Thirdly, Formality in it. Fourthly, Profaneness of
course at last.


5. When men do gain something from the Lord in the use of means, but now stand
still they go no further; they lose not what they had, but they gain no more;
they grow not, Matthew. 25. 26. Thou evil and slothful servant; that hid his
talent, and did not employ it; and here is usually the beginning of a man's
fall, when (like one in a journey) he goes not forward or backward, but stands
still, and so falls, Prove. 18. 9.

6. When men do duties that are easy, but when any difficulty is in them, now
they fall down asleep, Prove. 20. 4. and 12. 27. and hence beg the sweet and
gain of Christianity: it is sown in difficult duties; when the Soul denies it
self most: But when men not breaking through the difficulty find not the sweet
of it, Lord! what a tattered profession is there, that men come to be the shame
of Christ, not his glory! It Is easy to pray, and outwardly to fast, but yet to
have a whole heart in the work is hard: it is easy to cleave to the Lord when
quickened; but when God forsakes you, now more than ever to cleave to him, is
difficult.

7. When men fear not the danger of little sins; they are not asleep, yet so as
not to fear great sins; but in a slumber; and hence however they fear not
lesser sins, hence come to commit them, hence also to be hardened under them:
Many complain of hard hearts, but consider, is not this the reason of it? you
fear not sinful thoughts, nor carelessness in your Christian course; your
slumber is now upon you; thy Conscience startles at Whoredom, but not at a
wanton word; or playing upon the Sabbath, but unprepatedness for it that is
nothing; sin in a manner with thee; the reason is, because spiritual slumber is
upon thee.

8. When men are deceived and deluded by appearances, or colors, as the
Israelites when the Gibeonites came to them; confident of themselves, but
deceived as the men of Ai by stratagems; if ever your Souls be hurt, it will be
by appearances; if ever this Country receive a blow, it will be by appearances;
error will creep in by appearances; the most vile wickedness has been found to
be hatched under fairest colors: If ever any shall come under an appearance of
piety, and promise of protection, safety, liberty, only your Government must
be a little altered; slumber here, and you shall sleep in your enemies arms;
Grace, and the love of Christ and the Spirit (the fairest colors under the
sun) may be pretended; but if you shall receive under this appearance, that God
witnesses his love, first, by an absolute promise, where neither grace nor
life is seen; take heed there; for under this appearance you may as well bring
in immediate Revelations, and from thence come to forsake the Scriptures: and
then no wonder if men fall to deny all foundations in Christianity, and
Scripture also; take heed of mere appearances of repentance in evil members, be
not deceived there: Never was the world more full of craft; be not laid asleep
with appearances of truth: Thus you see the point opened. Stop security when it
is risen to your anckles, lest you be drowned in it, and perish in it afterward.

CHAP. III.
Security the last Sin of good and bad.
SECT. I.
THat carnal security is sometimes the last sin which does surprise Observation
3.
and overcome the hearts of good and bad, wise and foolish in Virgin-Churches.

That as it is said, That the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death; so
this death, like sleeping, is one of the last enemies that surpriseth the souls
of the wise, but Christ does destroy it; and of the foolish, but it destroys
them: Thus it was here with the Virgins; what was their sin that were ready
with their Lamps burning, waiting for the Bridegroom? you see the wise polluted
with no sin, till they fell down by Security (the foolish were wanting to get
oil in their vessels before) but this they fell last into: What into open
profaneness, or oath foul corruptions? No, but they all slumbered and slept, and
we read of no sin after till the Bridegroom came; many sins indeed there be,
which like branches bud from the root, but this is the main: And therefore look
upon the next Parable, you shall see this again confirmed, to show the
certainty of this point; the servant that hid his talent, verse. 26. is called
an evil servant; why, what evil did he? he did not lavish it (as the Prodigal)
upon others, not lose it; but he did not use it, sluggishness was his sin;
hence (says Christ) thou evil and slothful servant. And hence the thorny
ground flourished and grew, and suffered; all persecutions could not consume
them; what was their sin? Mark 4. 12. compared with Luke 21. 34. it was the
cares of the world; they began to dream (strange fancies came before sleeping)
and the pillow of their security was some worldly content: And this is the
reason why Christ and the Apostles are also exceeding pressing to watchfulness;
because this is the sin that Saints are ready to fall into after they have seen
Christ's love and care; and because this is the sin the wicked will fall into,
and their last sin; it will be just preceding their last plague; and hence the
Apostle exhorts, Oh sleep not you, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1, 2, 5, 6.

Let me open this thus:

SECT. II.
WE must know that the Lord in subduing a sinner to the obedience of himself,
it is with him as with an enemy in a City, there are many strong holds of sin,
to which he retires and resists, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. and when one is down he
flies for shelter into another, and maintains that as long as he can; so it is
with men: Or as it is with diverse fruits, they have their several seasons of
growing, and then of withering; so it is here; according to the several seasons
of a man's life, so are his lusts growing and decaying; there are the first and
the last ripe fruits.

First, Take a man that is born and bred up to some years, man is a sociable
creature, and it is a misery to live and be alone; hence the first evil he
usually chooses is evil and loose company; his lusts are grown up to some
years, and now he desires a match for them, and first he chooses a companion;
and Satan has a mighty hand in this; because as the Lord when he first sends
to do his work, he sends two by two to animate and strengthen one another in
the work; so Satan does first join hand in hand together that men might corrupt
one another, and harden one another in wickedness; this (I say) is the first
usually; hence Ephesians. 2. 2. and Prove. 2. 12. Wisdom first keeps from the evil
man; and this sin is for a time the dearest sin; for here he meets with some
pastimes, mirth, and so much love from them, that he loves this last more than
all the friends he has (though they dissuade him;) more than all the Sabbaths
of God, and hence he prophanes them; more than Christ himself, and hence when
he has many times purposes of turning to God, his company withholds him.

Secondly, Continuing long in this sin, at last he comes to fall into the sin
of lust, and from men he looks to women, and this is as deat to him as his
right eye; it may be God keeps him from the act of Whoredom, but wanton looks,
lascivious thoughts, speculative uncleanness, self-pollution (which he commits
when the candles are out, and none but God sees) and yet God spares him; and
this follows him to the Church, to the streets, whiles he is awake, nay, when
asleep, and thinks it is no sin for a time, or if he does, Oh the horror that
he has sometimes for it! Scholars of Westminster have been derected from
twelve or fourteen years of age to live in this sin. This is the second: Hence
Prove. 2. 16. first wisdom keeps from the evil man, next from evil women.

Thirdly, It may be a man marries, and then this sin is out of season; now
therefore another comes in its place, and that is, immoderate love of, and
dropsy desires after the world, and the wealth of it, for now charge is like
to increase, and it is a shame to walk in rags; and hence now a man begins to
look upon the estates of others, and to admire at them, and then he looks upon
what he has, and what labor, care, and providence in a saving way may bring
him unto; and hence burieth himself alive in the earth, and feeds upon clods of
earth, and uncertain hopes. And this is the next sin which grows up (though I
know some men will not come to this) but I speak of them that go on in the
fairest way; hence Heb. 13. 4, 5. Whoremongers God will judge; then let your
conversation be without covetousness, that follows.

Fourthly, It may be at last God terrifies this man's Conscience, and he begins
to see What profits it me to win the whole world and to lose my own soul?
hence falls now to take up another profession, to hang out another flag, and to
lead a new life; and now pride in spiritual excellencies is his sin; when glory
in worldly wealth dies, pride in spiritual glory lives: There were diverse of
the Heathen contemned the world, yet pust up with pride in their morality;
hence Choose no novice Bishop, lest he be puffed up, and fall into the
condemnation of the Devil. Now Lets of mind come in when he performs duties
publicly, openly; and now he hungers after the honor of men, and sets himself
to sale for it: Oh, says Saul, honor me! When he had confessed his coveting of
the cattle; but pride stuck in him still: And when he does duties privately, he
rests in them, and accounts highly of himself for them, though they neither
bring him to Christ, but estrange him from Christ. Hence Christ charge, when
you do alms, do not only do it not to be seen of men, but let not thy left
hand know what thy right hand does; take no delight in this: This was Simons
sin, Act. 8. he seeing the gifts of the Apostles, would give any money for
them; these gifts are sweeter now than money; hence such fall to some soul
opinions and crotchets; they can interpret Revelations, and ascend to the
Ministry, and be the forwardest in a Town, but when to do public service,
respect is gone, their love is gone.

Fifthly, When this is dying in the Saints, and fallen down in Hypocrites, now
sloth is the last thing that takes hold upon them, and this is sweet; What is
the honor of men? what is this base world? now sloth and sleep is sweet. Now a
man first cease acting, and this gives rest; and now being here, Secondly,
it is death to come out of this sluggish estate; when the hand of God is upon
men, and the spurs be at their side and in their heart, it may be it will be
otherwise; but else not; they will not awaken, sloth is so sweet to them,
though sins yet be to be subdued; time is short, Gods wrath is great; yet that,
as it is said, He that escapes the sword of Iehu shall Elisha stay: so it is
here, he that escapes one sin, another shall slay him; but at last sloth shall
slay: Hence let a man look, what joyeth my heart? God does not, wealth does
not; sloth does.

SECT. III.
BEcause it is the best and most fit season for this sin to arise, Reason 1.
when all the rest are fallen indeed in Saints, and seem to be fallen in
Hypocrites; as the temptation is, so men's sin is; when there is the fittest
temptation without, it broaches corruption within, and it runs not out before;
for it is here as in War; when the enemy (never seen before) is seen in the
field (very dangerous and very strong) is it now a season to sleep? no, Arm,
arm now; but when he has driven and routed an enemy, and is enriched with
spoils, and laden with prey, now it is a season to rest. Hence the Poet notes,
When all the World could not conquer them, their peace after conquest has; now
they have themselves (an enemy within) to conquer; So here. Hence if they
should have desired the Israelites to be at peace with the Canaanites, when
they first came in and had the land; No, they will cut out throats in time; but
when they had conquered them, now Josh. 15. 63. it is said, they could not do
it; had they not had Gods promise for it? yes, and he could make it good, but
they could not, because now they had no list to do it, they were slothful,
Exodus 23. 29.

Secondly, Because it is the strongest sin; Reason 2.
No bonds so strong as the bonds of death; it is a kind of spiritual death,
Ephesians. 5. 14. though in the Saints it is not death eternal. Now as it is with
the Lord, he reserves the best mercy till the last, so Satan reserves the
strongest temptation till the last; and in many men it is sloth: Now it
receives a double strength:

1. From the strength of natural corruption which will remain when other sins
dye, and in a great measure in the Saints, when the power of sin is taken from
the Saints; for take the best man and this remains; it is the sickness of the
Soul which will cleave to it: Hence as it is with sick men, when no mind to
meat, yet oh a little rest! it is greatest pain to walk, and hence the greatest
pleasure to lie still: sickness binds a man to rest, makes him love his rest;
so carnal corruption, to carnal rest.

2. The strength of pleasure in some lawful thing; for sloth and sleep's best
pillow is ever some delight in lawful things, that is the shadow: hence, when a
man delights not in gross evils, yet in health, and peace, and freedom from
dangers; and here he wallows, as Issachar.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
Because (not only so, but) it is the least suspected sin. I have known them
that have been gracious, and long it has been before the Lord has made them
know that they have had this (much less loved this) sin.

For 1. It is but a neglect or cessation from act; it is no sin that does
openly war against the soul, but lives within like a friend.

2. It Is a neglect which the best have; an infirmity; All slumbered and slept.

Thirdly, The main work is wrought; it is not therefore any dangerous
infirmity, men think; and hence the Apostle, Romans 13. 11. would have them
awake; why? we shall be saved, might they say, and had peace long ago; but
(says he) because your salvation is nearer.

4. Because he sees many difficulties before him to break through, which unless
God gave him more strength, he does not see that God calls him unto; and hence
says, that there are Lions in the way; after a long time of profession, then
God presents greatest difficulties; and hence now sloth reigns in a special
manner.

SECT. IV.
HEnce see the reason why many Christians at their first beginnings grow, Use 1.
and thrive, and abound in the fruits of Righteousness; but afterward so poor
and ragged; Oh the two or three first years, how frequently in prayer,
meditation! Oh what sorrow and peace! but after this, now they can find little
good they can get; little growth they make, unless it be downward; little life
they have, and what ado to keep it, or to get a good spiritual meals meat! this
is the reason of it; when they first began, then the enemy was out, and they
were up, and now they conquered and had the spoils; but since, they have grown
secure, and loved to sleep, I say love to sleep; and hence, little to be seen
about them but rags; hence ( Prove. 6. 11.) lest thy poverty come as an armed
man, Prove. 20. 13. 11. truly this is it, and hence no wonder you are ever so
full of complaints in midst of means; where God gives you matter of fullness,
joy, peace, everlasting glory, yet you find nothing; so that sometimes you
think there is no grace, or are almost of the mind that there is no grace to be
looked for in us; if not, yet finding so little, there is no evidence for it: Oh
your sloth it is the cause; hence it is you marvel at the Lord he helps not; Oh
you do not awake, to awaken the arm of the Lord; you shall know, if you follow
on to know the Lord, but that you do not; and hence the pricks and (...) you
made your peace with, and ate again vexed by them, this is the reason of it: Oh
therefore go in secret and say, I complain of my sins; the Ordinances and God
that I seek, and have not, when my heart should be otherwise; but oh it is not
because I cannot, but because I care not; it is not because of the strength of
my enemy without, but because of my neglect of watch and diligence within. I
know it was a sin for Pharaoh to charge Israel with idleness, because he
commanded work without means; But is the Lords work so? look up to him for
strength, he gives it them that have none; put forth that strength thou have,
he will accept thy will, but will never allow thee in thy sloth, but you shall
to beggary at the last. Hence men roast not what they take in hunting, (Prove.
12. 27.) after Ordinances; Oh there is world there; never shall you see a Soul
careful, but he finds every Sabbath something.

Hence we may learn the reason why many Christians, Use 2.
when the Lord begins to work upon them, have many combats and sore conflicts
with various temptations, and one corruption after another, and searce any
breathing time wherein they are freed from such; and then many strong cries,
etc. but afterward they are freed from all, and even these also; and they find
nothing either within or without that greatly troubles them; but they go on
smoothly in a course of profession also, without very much ado with their own
hearts; their Consciences are at peace, their distempers are at peace, and lie
not heavy upon them; and they think God is at peace with them, and hence they
are quiet; the reason is because they are quiet, and fall asleep, and let their
sin and Satan alone, and hence they let them alone: A sluggard says, there is
a Lion in the way, and it is hedge of thorns; many difficulties God sets before
him; now if a man meets with no Lions, no thorns, pressed with no great
difficulties in his course, it is certain sloth has seized upon that Soul, and
he is carried away captive by it, Prove. 22. 13. For

Look upon men, why should they be quiet? is it because sin and Satan are quite
vanquished, that they have no agonies and wrestlings with them? the Apostle
denies that, Ephesians. 6. 12. Indeed while he keeps the Palace then he is all^
peace, and it is a sign he is entered again if you have this peace: But else
Paul himself, and all that are in the field, are opposed, and will have fiery
darts; and hence the Apostles exhorts to put off the works of darkness, and put
on the whole armor of light; why not works of light? because then a Christian
will find many assaults, Romans 13. 12. Or it is because they are men of such a
refined faith, and such pure metal that there needs no knocking, nor melting,
nor temptations? I confess the Lord does nor see at all times the like need,
but gives his servants many sweet seasons; but yet 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7, 8. they were
begotten to a a lively hope, and they did rejoice greatly in that hope; yet
they had their seasons of trials, manifold temptations, etc. It may be they
thought, did the Lord ever love us, when such desertions, such fierce
oppositions? etc. I know the Lord may leave David thus, Psalm. 30. 6. but then
God was angry, and he saw it before many days: No, no, there is both reason for
it, and need of it; and why are you at peace now? it is because of your sloth,
Ier, 48. 11. Moab is at rest; and hence settled on her Lees, that they neither
feel not know their sin, and their scent is in them, though none is smelt or
runs out; hence never stirred by any word they hear, nor by any blow unless it
be very heavy; they are now at peace with Sin, Death and Hell, and are at
league with them, Isa. 28. 15. And hence as it is, where there be two Kingdoms
met, what is the reason that there is no hurt that the one do to the other? the
reason is, because there is a peace; why so? because War was so troublesome, and
rest was good: So it is here; Why are men never troubled? but only because they
are at peace with their sin; and why so? because rest is good: Oh they love to
sleep; I shall never overcome it, or I have other work to follow, say men, and
hence they spiritually war no more; and hence Satan and Sin are at peace: this
is the guise of men, they think the man is sure: they maintain a name to live
before men, keep duties upon the wheels before God, and have comfort often; and
though a world of vanity is in their hearts, yet it never oppresses them,
because they oppose not it, and so are quiet.

SECT. V.
Object. But is not Christ's yoke easy and his burden light, full of
sweetness, etc?

Answ. There is a life of faith, and a life of sloth; a rest which Faith gives,
and Christ gives; and a rest which man's own sloth and security gives: but there
is a wide difference between them.

First, a believing heart cleaves to the Lord, and so finds rest in the Lord,
and that with purpose and decree of heart, to cleave to him in one thing as
well as in another; the heart is not at peace with Satan, and at war with God,
but joyneth to the Lord, and stands armed with a strong resolution against
every temptation; and hence peace with Christ is maintained, not with sloth: as
Barnabas, Acts 11. 23 exhorted with full purpose of heart to cleave unto the
Lord, when he saw the grace of God; seeing you find such mercy from him, oh
cleave unto him: But now a secure heart cleaves to the Lord in some desires;
and if he be resolved of any thing, it is only of that which he can do with
ease, and will not be what he would be; he would be better, and know the Lord
more, and this quiets him; but he will not be what he would be, because his
compact and covenant of peace is made with another; he will be sluggish and
secure, and not use the means; oh sleep is sweet, Prove. 12. 27. The sluggard
roasts not what he took in h^nting; he will not roast it, there is trouble
there.

Secondly, A believing heart, or Faith, finds and feels its rest by trouble.
Unto the righteous there arises light out of darkness, Psalm. 37. After you
have suffered, God settle you, 1 Pet. 5. 10. Not as the world gives peace, give
I it unto you, Joh. 14. 27. For the life of a Christian is a life of faith,
which is a life contrary to sense and reason: When the Lord kills, what does he
intend then to save me? and when he blinds me, does he intend to teach me? yes
that he does, and by their warfare they find peace. Hence Paul at the end of
his life makes his trumph, I have finished my course, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8. this
makes promises precious; when, though a man feels the strength of sin, yet sees
the Lord will subdue it; when a man finds guilt of sin, yet sees the Lord will
pardon it for his own names sake: It Is a strange place 2 Cor. 1. 8, 9. We were
oppressed without reason, Why? that we might not trust in our selves, ( why,
was there no way but this?) why, this is the life of faith, to find life in
death, peace in sorrow: But a slothful heart finds not rest by denying it self,
and walking through trouble; but by pleasing it self, and easing it self of
trouble, because it is at league with it: One that has broken league, finds
peace by war, and then takes spoils; but another e contra, etc.

1. A man denies the power of godliness, that is a burden; his slothful heart
will not bear that, that is too hot; for the world carries a condemned carriage
of them; and hence he keeps a name to live, and thereby has peace with the
world.

2. He wrestles not against Satan, and his lusts, pursuing them daily, carries
not the sense and feeling of them; and hence being lukewarm, he thinks he is
rich, and wants nothing, when poor, and blind, and naked.

3. Hence, not wrestling against sin, he feels not sin, and so conscience is at
peace with him; sin is alive without the Law.

4. Keeping a constant course of private duties, he thinks God is at peace
also, and so his peace gives him rest, and sloth makes him make a league,
because he loves rest: and hence we find, a Christian most oppressed in times
of trouble, many times has most peace; and e contra: Because as it was with
Gideon, he had his peace by trouble, they had their peace by rest whose flesh
he tore with thorns, Judge. 8. 7. oh therefore fear and tremble at their
condition.

SECT. VI.
HEnce see the reason why many a Christian, after he has seen and felt the
work of Gods grace in his heart and soul, Use 3.
and hence has been filled with peace and joy unspeakable, that yet after long
profession loses the sight of it, and knows not whether there be any dram of
grace in his heart or no; and consequently has no assurance: but ask him, have
you not known it? yes; but it is a question whether ever it was immortal seed or
no, for then it would not dye, as I see it has; the reason of this is, a man
falls to a secure condition, fast asleep, forgets God and himself; and hence
though there be grace, yet it is not exercised, Matthew. 25. 26. and hence not
seen at all, 2 Pet. 1. 8, 9. and one grace to another, and then an open
entrance is made; this makes calling sure; if this they do not, they will not
see a fat off; why? because they forget the Lord, which is one part of
security: Hence we shall find in times of persecution, never such assurance as
then, Zach. 13. vlt. because grace is never so exercised as then; and hence men
much in prayer abound with much assurance (when Christ was in his agony he
prays more fervently) because then a man is watchful, and grace most exercised;
when a man dies in prayer, and grows secure, and has little exercise of grace,
now it is a question whether there is grace at all or no; and hence when men
come to Sacraments, how often are they put to it whether the Lord be theirs or
no! and hence when men come to the Word, they lose all comfort, because they
know now whether these promises are theirs or no, because they are asleep, and
not waking with the Lord. Oh therefore lay no blame upon the Lord, but thy
self; I have had grace, but I have not exercised it; I have lived a life of
sloth and security, had I lived a life of thankfulness, prayer, watchfulness,
and been ever awake, I should have seen my own heart, and what the Lord has
done for my soul: Here, here lies the security of a Christian, not in losing
all grace he had, but in losing the exercise of it.

SECT. VII.
Quest. HOw shall I do this?

Answ. 1. Look that your eye be single, that the Lord be your last end, and
that with an infinite love you cleave to that, and then the whole body will be
full of light; but if your eye be double, etc. Matthew. 6. 24. A ship that has
but one place to go to, will get thitherward in open sea with every wind. Who
is so great as the Lord? who minds thee but the Lord? does he provide, protect
and pity thee, when thou seek thy self? will he not do it much more when
thou art set for him?

2. Consider the sweetness of this life. 1. In this life, 1 Cor. 15. ult. be
ever abounding; why? oh you know your labor shall not be in vain. And what will
it be when you come to dye? Isa. 38. 1, 2, 3. Remember I have walked with thee:
And 2. After death, Rev. 14. 13. it may be you account them nothing, but they
shall follow thee; do you not find bitterness in the end of another life? you
will find your pillow hard enough before you dye; oh therefore get something to
make it easy.

3. Take heed of forgetfulness of the Lord, for this is the reason why many a
man is not ever up in walking with the Lord, because he forgets the Lord; It is
not because he will not, or because he cannot, but he remembers not the Lords
love, the glory of his ways, what an evil thing and bitter it is to depart from
the Lord, Psalm. 22. 11. They shall remember and turn, Jer. 2. 1, 6. The Lord
complains of Apostasy, they said where is the Lord? I remember thee, etc. So I
say to you, the Lord of glory remembers you, thou art written on the palms of
his hand, and like shewbread before the Ark, so thou do ever stand before
the Lord; hence every moment he is pardoning, purging, preserving and devising
how to do thee good; nay he remembers thy love, prayers, seekings after him,
nay, thy house and walls of it where thou dwell: Oh therefore forget not the
Lord, that so you may be ever seeking after, and cleaving to the Lord.

SECT. VIII.
HEnce see the reason why men after long profession fall into many slothful
opinions, Use 4.
because their hearts are surprised with this enemy of sloth first; and it is
Gods just judgment upon men, that seeing they love their sleep and laziness,
they shall be lazy by rule, and so be for ever hardened in it.

Quest. What are those slothful opinions?

Answ. First, What is this but one, to make the Law no rule to a Christians
life? as though a Christian should be like a man at Sea, and carried by the
wind, but he must have no Compass to sail by also: In these last times Christ's
Kingly Office is chiefly opposed; men are glad of Christ's righteousness and
death to save them, but when he comes to plant his Laws (as all Conquerors do
amongst men) they do then shake them off, and under a color of love to their
Prince, make his Laws no bonds to bind them; so these think this is the
liberty of a Christian, the liberty of a Prince to be lawless, 2 Pet. 2. 19.

Secondly, That there is no activity of Grace received, no power to stir till
stirred; and therefore leave all upon Christ, they can do nothing; if he gives
nothing, they cannot help it; if he does, then all is well, etc. It is true,
till the Lord does help what can we do? But there is an immutable assistance of
Spirit, whereby the Lord does enable his to act more or less like himself, when
stirred up: And if you find none, because you fall short of Christ, do not
think that the Lord will be a cover to such a cap; nor a pillow for a slothful
heart; there is a sickness in the best, and must be followed, else we dye.

Thirdly, That Ministers must not exhort: Why? what can men do? If servants
cannot abide to be spoken unto when there is need, from what can it come but
idleness? What can words make better? yes, the Lords words have a power to help
or ruin, when you shall say, oh the exhortations, oh the inretaties I have
had, etc. one main means of reconciliation is now abolished, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

Fourthly, That Christians must gather no evidence from Sanctification; we
shall find the root of it to be difficulty, which is never sloths bedfellow.

1. It is difficult to be holy always, but there will be many weaknesses and
sins, etc.

2. When we do so, it will be hard to discern what holiness it is, whether
counterfeit or not.

3. When we do so, it is hard to keep it, but you will lose it again, and be put
to farther search, and so off and on: I believe Christians make them more
difficult than indeed they are; but yet it is the Lords way; Scripture is plain
for it; and if avoided because difficult (which to many is sweet) what is this
but an invention of sloth?

Fifthly, That what a man cannot do, is always a weakness which the Lord will
pardon: Sometimes it is; but not here: for a man's chief sin may be kept
unsubdued from this ground, which sloth makes warrantable.

Sixthly, That if once the main be wrought, though he never grow better, yet he
is to keep his peace and confidence; Oh entreat the Lord to keep your heads
sound (though hearts be sluggish) so as you may not love, and defend your
security, and then go and leave Christ.

SECT. IX.
LEt this be a warning to all, Use 5.
that there is such an enemy to be slain; truly I had thought if I could have
got my heart broken, if I could seek the Lord till I had gotten a promise, then
I should be well enough; Oh no, there is a slothful heart yet continues; and
let it be encouragement to war against it; oh it is the last enemy, and then
comes your crown, and then your warfare is ended; and therefore do as Sampson;
Lord, help this one time, that I may be avenged for my two eyes; Judge. 16. 28.
so, thou have been made a slave to it in private duties, and God has
neglected thee; In public, at meetings you have been forced to sleep, that an
Indian it may be, if he had stood by would have jogged thee; therefore pray, Oh
help Lord this one time (though I dye) against this one enemy; Thus Paul 1
Cor.9. ult. Is an immortal crown nothing? will it be no sorrow to you when you
awake, to lose eternal rest in God, for a little rest in thy sloth? Oh
therefore beat down thy body; it is the last, hence the worst enemy; say as
Judge.9. 54. What shall I fall by a woman? shall I fall by the worst? why did I
oppose lust and pride? oh, because vile; why, this is worse; it is the last,
and hence Christ hates it most; and has he given strength against any sin, and
will he not against this? Oh therefore pray God that you fall not here.

CHAP. VI.
Christ's absence the cause of security in his Churches.
SECT. I.
THat Christ's absence, or tarrying long from the Churches, is an occasion
(though man's corruption) of all security in the Churches. Observation 4.


While Chirst delays the Bride sleeps; look as it was with the Israelites,
when Moses went first from them up to the mount, they had no speech of making a
Calf; but when he stayed long from them, now they make it, and make merry with
it; so it is here, Exodus 32. 1. The holy Apostle notes this to be in the last
days, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. Men shall say Where is the promise of his coming? all
things remain as they were; and hence scoffers (it may be with the tongue) at
least in the heart, and so walking after their own lusts; hence Matthew. 24. 49.
you see an evil servant smite his fellow servants (what is the reasons of
divisions between men?) one smites with the tongue, the other with the hand,
and the other suffers; ( and to eat and drink with the drunken) it is a sign of
a secure man when (though he falls not into a profane course, but) he can bear
with it in others, to sit by and see others sin without check; what is the
cause of this? he says (not with his tongue, but in his heart, My Lord delays
his coming: The very scope of the parable i^ to show the sin of men herein, and
to prevent it by watchfulness.

SECT. II.
Quest. HOw and why does this occasion and breed security?

Answ. 1. In that Christ's absence from the world makes him to be much forgotten
in the world (out of sight out of mind) especially at those times when men are
ready to be overcome by sloth; now forgetfulness of God is the beginning of all
the deepest security that can fall upon men, Deuteronomy. 32. 18, 19, 20. whence the
Lord says, I will hide my face from them, so as they shall not see me, but I
will see them and what their end shall be, and hence this is made the beginning
of returning to the Lord, Psa. 22. 27, 28. All Nations shall remember and turn,
for the Kingdom is the Lords.

Secondly, Because the absence of Christ keeps those things from being seen
which should awaken, and which sensibly do awaken; that as it is within the
night, when there is little noise, and darkness over-spreads all things, it is
hard now to be kept from sleep, when the curtains are drawn; so while Christ's
is absent, it is a kind of night (his coming called the day, and the day of the
Lord) because the things of the Lord are hid from men: And those are these two
chiefly.

1. The error of the Lord and the wrath to come; why did men sleep all the
Sermon long (which lasted one hundred and twenty years) when Noah preached?
because they knew not of the flood; so shall it be in the days of Christ's
coming, men know not what wrath is; the thoughts of this kept Paul's eye waking,
2 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12.

2. The exceeding riches and weight of glory that shall crown all the Saints;
hence all the faithful have been abundant both in doing and suffering for the
Lord; (2 Cor. 4.) It is not worthy the glory which shall be revealed: Hence,
Heb. 10. 34. They took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, because they had
in heaven a more abiding sustance; they overlooked all things here when they
saw that. When these two things are seen (which are the last things that shall
continue) it would awaken; but painted fire, and a painted Kingdom never draws
a man's heart much; so neither do these work upon securelings; or if they do see
them, they soon are hid from them again, their light decaying, being not like
the morning but declining Sun; and though the Saints do see them, yet they are
very apt to lose (for a time) the sight of them, especially if the Lord
tarrieth; and hence Heb. 10. they had need of patience; but when the day comes
who can sleep?

Thirdly, In regard of his absence, do things of the world present and keep
their glory before the eyes of men; for what is the reason that worldly things
(which men in their judgments say are vain) yet they are of such price with
men! It is with them as it is with Glowworms and Stars that keep their
shining, and are very glorious because the Sun is set; so Christ is hid in his
glory, and whilst men are led more by sense than by faith, men dote upon these
things; they know nothing more vain, yet nothing more glorious: When Christ
comes a man shall see all the world, the honor, comforts, wealth, crowns,
greatness of it buried before his eyes; and when an end of these things shall
be seen, now the Lord will be precious; as doubtless when they saw the Ark
floating upon the water, happy are they that are there might they say; and
hence Mal. 3. ult. those that said the proud were happy, what was the reason of
it? but because of this, The day of the Lord was not yet come to make up his
Jewels? Now when once the eye is bewitched with the glory of the world, nothing
causes security sooner; as strange fancies in the head work a man first
asleep: Psalm. 73. When David beheld the prosperity of the wicked, he began to
dislike all Religion, and to account it simplicity to be holy, until at last he
saw the end of these things.

Fourthly, Because in Christ's absence men feel not the evil of sin which does
befall them in their security, nor yet the evil of their own hearts; for if men
should be presently punished, and smitten by some revenging invisible hand of
God upon them after every sin, and as soon as first they begin to sleep, you
should never see the heart secure; and hence the Devils live in horrors daily,
in apprehension of the judgment of the great day; thus it will be at Christ's
coming, then the secret things of darkness shall be brought to light; but now
is a time of forbearance, hence a carnal heart is set to do wickedly, and to go
on securely, Eccles. 8. 11.

Fifthly, Because while Christ is absent, conscience lies still most commonly,
and seldom is thoroughly awake, and hence a man sleeps; for conscience is the
Lords witness, accuser, and notary; now the witness then speaks most fully and
clearly when the Judge is come: Now however God does awaken some men's
consciences thoroughly in this life, yet it is not universal, but in few, to be
thoroughly awakened, and hence men are very secure, Isa. 33. 14. Who shall dwell
with everlasting burning, etc?

SECT. III.
HEnce we see the vileness of the hearts of men, Use 1.
that Christ his absence (which time is given to us to make us watch) should
make us secure; that men should turn day into night, a day of forbearance, into
a night of forgetfulness; for if the Lord should not delay his coming, how many
thousands would be swept away before any peace made with God, or before any
work finished for God! now he in pity gives such days, delays his coming for
this end, and do we thus requite the Lord? 2 Pet. 3. 9. Christ himself does his
work while it is light; the night comes wherein no man can work, Ioh. 12. 35,
36. Now what a crossing of the Lord is this? If he should come, thou should
be consumed by him; and if he does not come, you will grow secure before him.

Hence see the reason why the hearts of men are so secure in times of health
and peace, Use 2.
but they cry out and look about them in times of sickness, and when the
approach of death is near, because Christ now begins to come, and Christ's
presence is near in great terror, and severity, and glory; but be these are
afar off; now the soul begins to see Christ, and how he must shortly stand
naked alone (stripped of all comforts and friends) before an all-seeing God; and
now they look about for evidence; but before, the Lord would not come as yet,
he delays his coming, I may live many years and provide thus and thus for my
children, etc. Oh men complain of secute careless hearts, and the cause is
this, they see not this day a coming.

Hence see one special way to prevent and remove security when it is fallen
upon the hearts of any, Use 3.
and that is by daily setting before you the coming of the Lord; the Apostles
penned this, and Saints believe this, 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult. I am persuaded some men
have had in their dreams the visions of the Almighty, of which Job speaks, and
have been awakened in terror and fear, even with the dream of it; but how would
this awaken if seen and beheld whilst indeed you are awake! Many Monkish
spirits have been much awakened in their superstitious way by this; but the
spirit of a Paul will be much more; for by this means he awakened all the world
to look about them, 2 Cor. 5. 11. And for himself, this did make him exercise
himself, Acts 24. 15, 16. so it will be with you; you will not only be awake
your selves, but keep all awake about you; and this is not legal neither thus
to do. It is certain if you complain of security, I dare complain against you,
that this is the cause; you look upon the coming of the Lord as a long time
off, and see it not daily; it converted some in scoffing Athens to the Fith;
much more (if converted) does it awaken. Let us therefore commend Three things
to you.

SECT. IV.
First, MAke the coming of the Lord real, see it real, and set it really (as it
shall be) before your eyes: Heb. 9. ult. to them that look for him, etc. Why do
not men look for him? truly, very few do look for him really; it is only a
report, a noise with many men; where there is the power of grace, it presents
things as they are, which shall be so; Faith is the substance of things not
seen, it puts them in their being; it is the evidence of things not seen, for
otherwise it will never work upon you. Especially think on these Four things at
that day.

1. The consuming of all things here in the world, which your hearts are so
ready to dote upon, and of all carnal and fleshly excellencies which you trust
unto, 2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing these things shall be consumed, what manner of
persons ought we to be! If a man that is to make a sea voyage, did know that
whatever he brought to shore beside Gold and Pearls, should be consumed as soon
as he comes to shore, he would not fraught his ship with those things: if men
were assured here is a house where you and yours shall be burnt, they would set
it elsewhere; men come from one Country to another, because sin will consume.

2. The amazing glory of Christ Jesus (when Christ shall come as a deliverer to
refresh they sad heart) and all his Saints at that day; look upon Christ as
sitting on the clouds of fire, raising the dead, then them that are alive
changed in the twinkling of an eye, coming with all his Angels, Heaven left
empty of them, and Saints sitting at his right hand shining like the Sun, so
that all the word shall stand amazed at them, and then, when Judgment is done,
up they go to Heaven (the third Heaven) with a shout, and so be ever with the
Lord. And then

3. Consider the fierce wrath upon Reprobates, who shall rise like Toads coming
out of their holes in winter time, standing before Christ's Tribunal, crying
out of the day that ever they were born, and receiving their final doom;
imagine the silence while the Lord is pronouncing the sentence; and when past,
a cry; and then Christ to depart, and shut up himself in Heaven with his
Saints, the Reprobate never to see him nor his face any more; are these things
tales, fables, notions? if they be, blot out the Scripture; but if real, oh
then who can but awake! If God intends mercy to you, the thoughts of these
things will awaken you, you shall see them really; if not, they shall awaken
you by feeling of them.

4. Consider how many will be found too light at that day.

Secondly, Make this day present: Optic glasses will take within them the
present image of things afar off; a Mud-wall cannot give the form of them; so
by Faith look at these things that be to come as near for if we see really the
Lords coming, but we look upon it as a thing that is afar off, it will not
affect: Now a thing may be present to Faith which is not to sense; It may be
the last and great coming of the Lord is not very nigh (although we are
doubtless in the last times) but the beginning of this, thy Petty-Sessions
before that general Assize, may be nigh. Oh therefore make it present.

Quest. How shall we make it present?

Answ. 1. By pondering that speech of Christ, spoken to that end, Matthew. 24.
44. In an hour you think not of he comes; so that either thy time is, when thou
think it is nigh, and then you attain the thing; or when far off, why then
is the time, and that he will not come presently is more then you can say; you
see with wrong eyes, and wrong the Lords patience.

2. By comparing the present time with eternity to come; for look as it is with
base and little things, look upon them in themselves, they are not base, but
compared with things excellent, as the Prophet shows, Isa. 40. 17. so the
time of this life, grant it be never so long, look upon it in self, it is long;
but compared with eternity, it is exceeding short: Set a prick alone and you
may perceive it, but when made at the beginning of a line it is scarce
perceptible; this time of life upon which we sit is but a point of eternity: Oh
eternity will amaze you, and make this time short, yea, nothing; Moses hence
forsook Pharoahs honor, because of the pleasures of sin for a season; and Paul
calls afflictions short, when he saw the eternal glory which should be
revealed: Oh that you could think this time to be as the delivery of a child
by many pangs into the world, so you by many sorrows are passing a short
passage to eternity.

3. By making earthly things nothing, or not as great things: A man's friend is
night to him, but there be trees and hills between them, and if these were
down, or he could get above them, he would easily see and say, Oh I see him
coming, he is even at the door, James 5. 8. So Christ is nigh unto us, and we
to him; but the things of the world, mountains, and hills, and cattle, and
ground, this and that stands between us and our sight, that we cannot see the
Lord; these things are so great, that the Lord is little, that though near, we
cannot see him; now when God cuts down these things at sickness, or when we can
get above the world, now we can see them whiles we look at them as they are, 2
Cor. 4. Prove. 18. 11. The rich man's wealth is a tower in his conceit (all
things are swayed by conceit) pull down that, now you make all naked before you
to see the Lord nigh.

Thirdly, Do this daily; else you will grow secure by little and little: Oh
that I could prevail with you to set before you once a day this time! how would
it keep your hearts from dreaming and doting upon these things: When any
sorrow, that day will refresh; 2. When any duty done, that day will recompense*
3. When in want, yet full at that day; 4. When in misery now, blessed then.
When a man is ready with light and lamp at all watches of the night, oh blessed
then! you can hardly keep from security and carelessness by this, how will you
then do without it? you will die in security.

SECT. V.
LEt this be a warning to all those who have passed the first age of their
Christian life, after you have waited long and tarried for the Bridegroom, take
heed of security, and think this may occasion it, viz. The Bridegrooms delay:
In the first heat of your youthful affections, there is not that danger then as
now, lest you grow decrepit, passive and dull; and therefore think, Whatever
else I do, I will be sure to keep this door, it shall not come in here, and yet
do we not see men fall here! one would think it should not be so in these
times, when God calls so many of his servants to Heaven to him, and is hacking
at so many posts and pillars of this Tabernacle; especially considering withal
that it is no time to seek great things to your selves: Thou shall have thy
life for a prey (as he said to Baruch) Who is it that thinks it long to death,
that is within a days walk of his grave! Oh if you have your life, you are
well; you may be glad of a place to die in.

CHAP. V.
Of Christ's awakning cry before his coming.
VERSE 6, 7, 8, 9.
And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye
forth to meet him.

Then all those Virgins arose and trimmed their lamps.

And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil, for our lamps are
gone out.

But the wise answered saying, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you,
but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.

SECT. I.
IN these words is set down the preparation made sometime before the
Bridegrooms coming, and that is by a Cry that the Bridegroom comes; and
therefore the Churches should meet him: This is amplified from two things
chiefly;

First, The time when this Cry was made, and that was at Midnight.

Secondly, the effect that this Cry took upon the Virgins, from verse. 8. to 10.

What should be meant by this Cry is disputed of by some: Some think by it is
meant the descending of Christ from Heaven with a shout, the voice of the
Archangel and Trump of God: 1 Thessalonians. 4. ult. which (as I do not wholly
exclude) because there shall be such a clamor before the Lord comes, as at the
giving of the Law; so at the time when the World shall be judged by the Law: so
this circumstance is added (as Par^us and other interpret) in regard of the
Parable, which speaks of Christ's coming under the similitude of a Wedding
solemnized in the night time, according to the custom of those times, who when
they came forth out of their several houses to meet one another, a cry and
noise is made, the Bridegroom comes. Now,

Quest. What is meant by the coming of the Lord, the Bridegroom?

Answ. The coming of Christ principally here me^nt, is that coming of Christ
either to general or particular Judgment in the latter ages of the world.
Then, for when, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2. they thought the coming of Christ was near;
no says he, not till Antichrist is revealed and destroyed; therefore when
Antichrist is discovered and destroyed, and Churches upon this refined, now
there remaining no more to be done in this world but Christ's coming, all
promises being fulfilled except that, so that they live in expectation of that;
Christ slaying and not coming so soon, Churches grow secure; yet before the
Lord comes to either judgment he has his cry: yet here is to be meant the
coming of Christ at other times of the Church when they shall be Virgins; and
hence a command to watch that concerns and binds all to be ready against the
coming of Christ, whether to general or particular Judgment at death, or any
other coming of the Lord in this life, either in special mercy to his people,
or in terror to Hypocrites, Luke 18. Christ's coming to hear prayers, and to
avenge himself of his Churches enemies, is a coming. When the Jews shall be
called, and Antichrist destroyed, 2 Thessalonians. 2. it is called Christ's coming: So
the sum is this, look as before the Bridegroom meets the Bride, and cry is made
to awaken them to come to meet him; so before Christ comes to his secure
Churches to take his people to nearer fellowship with himself in this life, or
at death, or at judgment, Christ has his cry to awaken them.

SECT. II.
THat before Christ's coming to his secure Churches, Observation 1.
the Lord will send forth his cry to awaken these Churches, to give warning of,
and to make them ready for his coming; his coming either at last day, or at
death, or in this life, to take them into nearer fellowship with himself.

It is true, Christ's coming is at midnight, at a time when one would think he
would not come; but yet at midnight there is this cry, which prepares and goes
before his coming.

Quest. What is this cry?

Answ. It is not a still voice, but a loud cry, which has its effect for which
God sends it. Now we shall find in Scripture there are two ways by which God
does usually awaken a secure sinner.

First, The cry of the Word.

Secondly, The voice or cry of the Rod* So this Cry of Christ is.

First, Sometimes the cry of the Word; for thus John (Isa. 40. 3.) is called a
Crier, and Prove. 1. 24. Zach. 7. 7, 13. And this is the first course, God takes
to awaken, by giving the first honor to the Word; this is his mercy to see if
that will do it. Now it is not every word that will or can awaken; for many
times it makes men more secure (as some can sleep best by the noise of many
waters) Isa. 6. 9. When the Lord sent to fat them, he sent Isaiah to preach to
them; however in it self it is a cry of Christ; and seldom does he come but he
gives warning by his Servants the Prophets: But when it does awaken, there are
these particulars in it that it may awaken.

1. It is a word of Majesty and glory in respect of those that bring it, Judge.
2. 1. one that preached to them (he was no Angel from Heaven, for it is not
said he came from Heaven, but from Gilgal to B^chim) why is he called an Angel?
because of that Majesty wherewith God clothed him, when he came to awaken them;
for they had made a league with the Canaanites, and they began to vex them it
seems, and he comes to tell them they should do so still, and God set on this
with majesty upon their hearts, and hence they fell to weeping: And this is
usual with the Lord, wherein he has a time when he will awaken men to purpose,
he puts a spirit of glory and majesty upon his servants more than usually, that
the most secure shall see more than a man, they shall see the spirit of glory
sparkling, and shining through such Lanthorns; as when God intends to harden a
man in security, or leave him for a time, then he shall despise the Messengers
of God, and see no more but man, and shall have strange opinions of them; and
hence Rev. 11. when witnesses are raised up again to confound Antichristian
Doctrines, the Spirit of life from God entered into them, that great fear and aw
fell upon all that saw them; such light shall shine through these curtains,
that men shall not sleep.

Secondly, It is a word of discovery, and that of some secret hidden vein of
sin, which men never knew before; for when a man is once grown secure, it is
wonderful to see that torpour that lies upon a man's spirit, a most palpable and
plain sin which may be smelt and felt, yet it is not felt by himself, like him
that sleeps when the ship is sinking, he knows it not; now when the Lord does
awaken, he does it by such a discovery, and this makes them look about them,
Hag. 1. 67, 8, 9, 12. because of my house which is waste.

Thirdly, It is a word of terror, that burns as well as shines, that so they
may indeed be awakened; for though Stephens face shines like an Angel, and he
singles them out, Oh ye stiff-necked; yet the terror of God not falling upon
them, they are secure still: But now when the Lord makes his Word full of
terror, it awakens them. 1 Samuel 12. They would have a King; they were told of
their sorrows; and hence they feared the Lord and Samuel; and now were awakened
to see that which they never saw; God helped forward the terror of expecting of
some outward misery.

Fourthly, A word of power to awaken some or other among the Churches, and this
makes all the rest to look about them, as usually when the Word comes with
never such terror and majesty, we shall see men fall asleep again, without they
see the effect of it in some, and one or two will awaken all the rest; like
some that are asleep, when they see others up, What do I here? Isa. 40. The
Lord shows how he comforts his people; First it is by the crier; and then Verse
9. 10. it is by Jerusalem: When Samaria generally received the Word, then Simon
also believed; when the Jew begins to look toward the Lord, ten men shall take
hold of their skirts* and say, The Lord is with you, Zach. 8. 23. Sometimes
this is the cry before Christ's coming, and yet men may shake off their fears,
despise the light: Hence the Lord has a second Cry, and that is

SECT. III.
Secondly, THE Cry of the Rod; for there is a loud voice in every Rod, which
many times those that are most secure, must and shall hear, Psalm 2. 5. He
shall speak to them in his wrath, Micah 6. 9. Now what are these? (I speak not
to secure persons alone, we know how the Lord does exercise them, but how he
speaks to secure Churches) sometimes he has lesser blows; but he that is not
awakened by the Word and the cry of that, is seldom awakened by the cry of
smaller evils; he may be startled, but seeing his pillow is still soft, he must
bear it, and cannot amend it, he sleeps again. Now the things whereby the Lord
does and will awaken are Two.

First, By bringing Churches into great extremities and distress, that they
know not what to do, scattering them one from another in woods where they know
not what to do for bread. Judges 6. the Midianites prevailed against them seven
years, until they fled to Dens like beasts hunted up and down, and at last
they have no bread, but begged, and their cattle destroyed; Verse 6. Now they
cry unto the Lord because of the Midianites, and he sent a Prophet to make them
cry for their sin; for this is the nature of a secure heart, while it has any
thing to ease it, it will not be awakened thoroughly, if it be in a sleeping
vain; and hence the Lord distresseth them; hence Mat. 24. 29, 30. after
Antichristian tribulation shall there be worse? yes, after that Sun and Moon
shall be darkened, i. e. there shall be a confusion of all things (for it is the
language of the Eastern Countries so to express it,) Dan. 12. 1, 2.

Secondly, By ruin^ting of Churches, breaking the Candlesticks, quenching the
lights, delivering them to spoylers, until the Land be almost left without
inhabitant, some slain, some carried into captivity; and now conscience cries,
Word cries, and Rod cries aloud to awaken them, Isa. 6. 9. Go and make this
peoples heart fat; Lord how long? until their house be desolate; and then you
hear of the sparing of a little remnant whom the Lord awakens, Amos 6. you see
them secure, Verse 7, 8, 9. there is captivity and plagues to destroy families;
will the Lord deal so with Jacob, the most excellent people under Heaven? yea,
says the Lord, I abhor them, and when you see them on the banks of Babylon,
then they remember Sion, Levit. 26. 39, 40.

SECT. IV.
BEcause it is so difficult to awaken one thoroughly; Reason 1.
no bonds (next to death) so strong to keep men under as security; and hence
Ephesians. 5. 14. sleeping and being among the dead are joined together; and hence
the Lord will cry, and if the Word cannot, the cry of the Rod must and shall.

In regard of the people of God, who are secure with them that are vile in
secure Churches; Reason 2.
if the Lord had none among them, he would come without crying; but because
they are there among them, the Lord will awaken; but if any do, it is chiefly
for their sakes; for though the Lord do pardon and wash away his peoples sins,
yet they come not to the f^^ition of pardon without faith, and this faith is
never severed from repentance; and hence the Lord will not come upon them
unawares before he has broken their hearts (not from infirmities, for they
will last till death, but) broken their hearts for and with their iniquity,
their chief sin.

In regard of Christ himself, Reason 3.
that so he may be received with esteem, and attended upon with all respect;
for let the Lord show never so much kindness to a ^ecure ^inner, he is not
esteemed, he is forgotten, buried like a dead carcass (a dead Christ) out of
doors; as it is with men that ^^eep, let the King stand by them, provide never
so much for them they regard it not; so Deuteronomy, 32. 15. Therefore we shall find
the Lord never comes to his people, but he comes then when he is esteemed;
first the Lord works the esteem, and then comes, Matthew. 23. ult. Christ departs
till men say, Blessed be he that (...) in the name of the Lord.

SECT. V.
HEnce we may see the dangerous condition of all those that fall into a secure
condition, Use 1.
and so dye.

1. That have been once very forward, affectionate, strict, tender, etc. but
now their lamp is out.

2. That have kept themselves and their hearts from soil, their lamps bright,
but now though their hearts contract soil every day, they are settled upon the
Lees, and their scent is in them, and their lamp never dressed.

3. That did once delight in approaching nigh to Christ in his Ordinances, in
going forth in them to meet the Bridegroom; but now they not only neglect
this, but take delight therein, and rest upon their neglect; as a sleepy man
takes his delight, not in his work, but in the neglect of it; and though their
hearts tell them of this, yet they go on their way, and dye so; what shall we
think of them? I will not absolutely determine, but they give shrewd signs,
that they are fallen into a dead sleep: For the Lord will awaken his Virgins
before his coming; nay, he will awaken very many others for their sakes, rather
than they shall be secure; Look as it was with Christ, the nearer he came to
his end, the more enlarged, and heavenly, and spiritual; so it is with them
that have the Spirit of Christ: Who are the Servants whom Christ shall bless at
his coming? Luke 12. 37. Blessed are those that shall be found watching; That
look as there is no smaller evil, but usually before it, comes the Lord and
gives warning; so the greatest and last evil Death, that so they may prepare
for that; as Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 5, 6, 7. The time of my departing is at hand (how
could Paul tell that?) the Lord gave him secret hints of it, he could smell
that state before he saw it or touched it; he could observe by the course and
c^ncurrence of providence; now my course is finished, the corn is gathered,
all in Asia forsake me; so the Lord does many times unto his people; however he
does keep them watchful: Oh consider it therefore, you that are secure, if the
Word now does not awaken, yet when thy sick bed comes, and death appears,
remember this truth; But remember it now, I carry the brand of a Reprobate upon
me.

Hence see what little cause any man has to take pleasure in his security; Use
2.
no pleasure in any sin (especially to a holy heart) as of the sin of security;
for if a man takes pleasure in his cups, or in his course company, or in
dancing, as Herod, or in gaming, etc. conscience will give him knocks, to every
bit he snatcheth here; there is honey, but then a sting in them also; But now
when a man's carriage is fair, outward duties performed, conscience is quiet;
when a man has been at work, he thinks in conscience he may sleep; for
deepest, sweetest security comes after most work we have done; it is but a
neglect, a slip, which I hope to recover out of one day; it is not an unlawful
thing, but a lawful that I quiet my heart upon: Now I have good company,
freedom from dangers, Ordinances, curtains drawn about me, the best sleep with
me; and what hurt is here? but see the little cause you have to sleep,
especially in this Country.

First, It will not be your rest always, for there must and will come a cry;
Moses took but little delight in Pharaoh's pleasures, they were but for a
season; and therefore as the Lord there said, Micah 2. 10. Depart, this is not
your rest.

Secondly, If the Word does not awaken you out of it, your cold prayers, your
heartless hearing, your careless walking with God, that your lamps be not
burning (burning love to the Lord and his people, shining holiness, so as
others may walk after your light, and be glad to follow you) that present
pleasure you take is the rotten wood that breeds the worm of a gnawing
conscience, when in the time of your trouble, it shall say, What has your
idleness gained to you? and it is the forerunner of misery; that if lighter
miseries will not do, the Lord will bring seven plagues more, and drive you
into a wilderness, and there shall you be famished for want of bread; and if
this will not do, God will send spoilers that shall sell you for slaves, and
that shall carry you away captive, and then you shall remember Sion, and the
days you slept over your time: Find any sin, but security in it will make a
desolate Country and familes; if you sin and rest in it, (though not gross) nay
do but decay in what once you had; many say it is more here then ever; I deny
it utterly, unless it be to them that are secure; and if it be so, the loss of
your first love (a small thing, etc.) will hasten breaking. Let this truth
therefore be a burning Beacon to awaken you; for God will make this word good,
and not let one tittle of it fall to the ground. Ezra 10. 3. them that trembled
put away their strange wives, and wept sore for it; so do you; you think you
may have this and the Lord too; true, but the Lord will not long abide with you
if secure.

Hence see the reason why the Word strikes deep, Use 3.
and is very smart sometimes upon the consciences of men, that a man speaks as
if he were in their very bosom, that a man says, God is here, that the Lord
leaves thee with sad qualms upon thy conscience, and no peace from all (it is
often sanctified unless no grace) nay, after all this affliction comes; if thou
were not secure, why would the Lord cry, make his Word cry, and his Rod cry?
etc. and therefore be not weary of either, but bless the Lord for, and quietly
bear both; unless I had those terrors within, and afflictions without, I had
gone astray, Psalm. 32. 4, 5. David was secure and kept silence, he confessed,
and the Lord pardoned; for this shall every one that is godly seek; Oh so do
you! think then, am not I in the number? oh let me seek then and confess my sin!

CHAP. VI.
Of the certainty of Christ's coming.
SECT. I.
THat though the coming of Jesus Christ to his Churches be late, Observation 2.
yet it is certain.

For though it be midnight, yet he comes we see: For this coming at midnight is
not to be understood of the last day of Judgment which shall be at midnight (as
the Rabbis and Monks in their devotions conceive) for Christ speaks here of
his coming to particular judgment also, which is not always at midnight: The
scope of the Parable is to provoke to continual watchfulness; because though
the Lord does not come in the beginning of the night (as was the custom of the
Jewish marriages) yet he will come late, even when you look not for him; even
at midnight there is a cry. I confess the Lord speaks principally of his coming
to Judgment; yet it is true of any other coming of Christ to his people in this
life; and because particular examples and instances are the roots of general
truths (as Circumcision a seal, so all Sacraments are so; Christ is a Savior
of his people; it is meant of great salvation at last, yet is true of all
salvation beside) therefore I shall speak of the coming of Jesus Christ to his
Churches and Servants in the general; and so involve the whole coming of
Christ, for the more use and comfort to us.

Now we shall find that the Scripture speaks of a sixfold coming of Christ,
that as all our deliverances are but shadows of our great and last deliverance;
so Christ's coming now is but a shadow of his great and last coming.

First, Christ is said to come to his people, when he comes to hear their
prayers, Luke 18. 8. And the Lord argues strongly, Will an unjust Judge arise
at night, to help a widow a stranger, when she is importunate? and will not the
Lord hear his elect and chosen? yet when he comes, shall he find faith? i. e.
such prayers of faith as shall continue; oh no! but soon apt to be weary before
the time comes.

SECT. II.
Object. BUt if they cease, how do they pray night and day?

Answ. 1. Because they do so for a time.

2. When they cease, then they are ringing in Gods ears; so that let the
prayers of the elect for any mercy be once offered and presented as incense
before the Lord, the Lord will not be worse than an unjust Judge, never to come
to his people.

Secondly, Christ is said to come to fulfill his promises; for sometimes the
Lord keeps his people exceeding short, and gives his people answers to their
Prayer in particular promises (you find it so) Psalm. 85. 8, 9. I will hear what
the Lord will say, for he will speak peace to his people, that so they may live
by faith, and glory more in the Lord then in themselves; yet he will come,
though it be very long, Heb. 10, 36, 36. Ye have need of patience, that ye may
receive the promise; for yet a little while, etc. We think it long, yet it will
be so.

Thirdly, Christ is said to come to his people when he speaks peace, and breaks
the clouds of fears and troubles, and shines upon his people; for while the
Lord is angry, and hides his face, that a man is beyond sight of the face and
love of God, now God and Christ is said to be gone; so then, when he returns to
speak peace, now he is said to come, as that Martyr said, He is come, Zach. 1.
16, 17. I am r^turned to Jerusalem, with my mercies, and the Lord will yet
comfort Zion; for when the Lord forsakes his people for seventy years, and
takes away all his Ordinances, the external visible signs of his presence, one
would think he would never come, yet the Lord will come and comfort his people,
Isa. 61. 2. God has sent and anointed him, and the Spirit has filled him, and
he is as willing himself to comfort them that mourn, nay when they have the
spirit of heaviness; and when it is done, Christ is come; then that is a coming
of Christ.

Fourthly, There is a coming of Christ when he comes in more full measure of
his Spirit to his people, and that in his Ordinances; for there is a state and
time of Christianity, wherein a man is carnal and blind, and the Image of
Christ darkly stamped upon the soul, and is exceeding weak; now the Lord is said
to come when he does this, Ioh. 14. 18. I will see you again, and I will not
leave you comfortless, Orphans alone without any one to take care for you; now
though it be long before the Lord do come here; yet come he will, when the soul
thinks it impossible, and the thing incredible; Behold thy God, thy King
comes, Isa. 40. 9. with 23. He shall come like the rain upon the fleece of
wool.

Fifthly, Christ is said to come when he comes to destroy and root out the
enemies of his Church, whether outward enemies or inward enemies, Isa. 26. 21.
Now grant it be long, the Lord does suffer them to prevail, and to be pricking
briars to the hearts of Gods people, and to the heart of Gods Spirit in his
people, yet he will come; and hence the Church pleads this with God as an usual
thing with him, Isa. 64. 1, 2, 3. He comes when men look not for him, yea he
came so here; and the name of God lies upon it to make known his name to his
adversaries, Isa. 66. 5. Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his
word; your brethren that hated you and cast you out said, Let the Lord be
glorified, He shall appear to your joy, but they shall be ashamed.

Sixthly, Christ is said to come to the soul, when he comes to it at death, to
abolish all sin and sorrow, and to possess the soul of immediate fellowship
with himself, and at Judgment when the great marriage day shall be, and the
Bride made ready, and the Bridegroom in their perfect glory to the view of all
the world, Ioh. 14. 3. Oh many a one is troubled now the Lord is gone from it
mediately to comfort it; Let not your hearts be troubled, you have a God in his
Word to believe in, cleave to that, and me in it; but when death comes against
me, and enemies come against me, and heart fails, and eyes fails, will the Lord
come? Yes, I will come again, for I go but only to prepare a place for you, and
make Heaven sweet and ready for you; some would have all Christ's coming here,
but there is some hereafter.

SECT. III.
BEcause the love of Jesus Christ never fails his Churches and People; Reason 1.
love will keep men from being ever absent from the thing they love: Now look
as it was with Lazarus whom Christ loved, John. 11. 3. he heard that he was
sick, he could have come then, but he lingers and stays until he be dead, (
behold Lazarus is dead) yea, till he had been four days dead, and then awakens
him again, and Lazarus must come forth of his grave, to show forth the
everlasting love of the Son of God, verse. 4. For there are two things in
Christ's love; first, it is pure independent, and dear, Prove. 8. penult. hence
he will not ever be absent; for 1. If it be dependant, then we might say (as we
change he changes) he was good, but we have provoked him since, etc. 2. If
independent, yet it is apt to forget, he minds me not, nor my prayers, nor
sorrows: Yes, it is exceeding dear, and assures us of all; if he in love came
to suffer, what will he not come to do, and that when the Church is most
withered, Zach. 3. 1, 2, 3. and hence says the Lord, why say^st thou, the Lord
has forsaken me and forgotten me, when written upon the palms of my hand? Isa.
48. 14.

Lest their spirit fail; Reason 2.
Oh the Lord is very tender of that; he that bids parents not to be bitter to
their children, lest their spirits fail and be provoked, will not do it
himself, Isa. 57. 17. he will not always contend, lest the spirit fail within
him, and the souls that he has made; Oh remember this! now how apt is the
spirit of a child of God to fail upon this! what more bitter than Gods absence!

Because to come late, Reason 3.
is many times the best time, for he comes ever in the fullness of time; if he
should come sooner or latter, he should not come in season to his people.

Of unspeakable consolation to the people of God that lie under sad and Use 1.
heavy perplexities in respect of the Lords absence from them (as for you that
can bear this, that say to God depart if he will, this concerns not you at all)
and the Lord being gone, you lie under sad thoughts that he will never return
again; yes, you have now heard, he will come and return again, Say unto Sion,
behold your God comes.

Object. But what? when I have been secure and careless withal?

Answ. Yes, though the Virgins sleep, yet the Lord will come to them; for if
his love did depend upon your watchfulness, he might never return; only it may
be longer as to these, and he will awaken you some time before he does come;
and truly to mourn for his absence, is to awaken with him.

Object. But it has been thus long before the Lord come, and therefore he will
never come.

Answ. Though long, yet you see he comes at last to them; first, the cry says
so, and then he comes; Ministers tell you so, and it is not long after; nay,
then is the very time, when so long as you look not for him, as here to these.

SECT. IV.
Object. BUt I know it not.

Answ. God keeps his best blessings (and persumes them long in his own hand)
from his own children; as Isaac, David, Abraham, Heman, Christ; but it is best
you know it not.

Have thou been seeking the Lord for his presence (that the Lord would but see
and consider thee a little) until thine eyes fail thee? and do you think the
Lord will ever forget? I tell thee if Peter were in Prison, prayers would
deliver him, and fetch Angels from Heaven to him; though the Church of God lay
desolate, sins great, yet the prayer of Daniel shall bring down words of
command to make all up again; If thou be in any want, be careful in nothing,
etc. He asked thee life, thou gave him long life for ever and ever; nay, when
thou ^easest, thy prayers have their cry, when thy mouth, when thy heart speaks
not; for prayers are not dead things but living, begotten out of a living
Spirit, from a living God, presented by a living Mediator, who takes them and
presents them, Heb. 7. and though unclean, yet being laid on that Altar they
become holy.

Object. Oh, but I am fed with nothing but promises; I cannot deny them, but I
feel them not; I think I shall never meet the Lord, Isa. 55. 10. Look as the
rain on the dry yields fruit, so my word shall give you joy and peace, and the
desire of your heart, etc. Can a man live by promises?

Answ. Hezekiah says, by these things ( i. e. afflictions) do men live; why
not by promises? the words Christ speaks they are Spirit and life; David did,
2 Samuel 23. 5. Heb. 10. The just shall live by his faith; and if my man draw
back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, i. e. wholly. It is admirable how
the Israelites had a promise of the land, and many wars must they have, and yet
Josh. 23. 14, 15. Not one thing has failed of all that the Lord has promised.
So say I to you.

Obj. Oh but I have been long in trouble, and have bad no p^ace?

Ans. Have thou been longer than David, whose moisture was dried up, who has
nothing to present before the Lord, Psalm. 6. but weakness, and bones vexed,
verse 2. a soul vexed, verse 3. and that long weary with gro^ning, verse. 6.
tears in the night when others are at rest, his eyes consumed with grief, and
yet verse 8, 9. The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, and prayer too;
sorrows cry, and sins cry also; and hence he says, Depart from me all ye
workers of iniquity, etc.

Object. But I am so weak, my heart so streitned, so little light and life, and
seeking I have been for more, and find it not.

Answ. If Christ's presence be sweet, and his absence bitter, that you seek not
more for your lusts sake than the Lords sake, then know that the Lord will
return again, as verily as he is gone; he will not leave thee comfortless; you
shall have that is fit for you to keep you humble and faithful; it may be one
Sermon may do more good than twenty. Ioh. 1. 50. D^st believe because I saw
thee under the figtree? thou shall see greater things than these; God has
greater things to show thee, if the Lord has translated thee into the Kingdom
of his dear son; hence it is said of the increase of his government and peace
there shall be no end, Isa. 9. 7.

Object. But enemies may opposeus?

Answ. Let it be so; but what if the Lord be with you?

Object. But he is gone.

Answ. No, the Lord will either come before trouble to deliver you from it, as
Asa when a troop came against him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 11. let not man prevail against
thee; Asa had wrapped God about him, clothed himself with the majesty of God by
faith, Isa. 54. penult. They shall together, and shall come against thee, but
they shall not prosper, because the Lord is come; or if he does stay, yet he
will give them some blood, and come upon them for your blood; he that sheds
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; but such as shed Churches blood, by
God shall their blood be shed; The souls under the Altar shall cry, and then
comes woe; he will do so in Germany if there have been Churches blood shed; he
is making way for glorious deliverance when God shall come, and the wicked
shall melt away as wax: Lucifer must fall though lifted up with pride. David
was troubled with a Saul and a Doeg. Psalm. 54. but God shall pull them up by
the roots, etc. many of Gods Servants lie under reproaches and revilings (and
the wicked boast of their sin) God shall pluck them up by the roots never to
grow again: Hypocrites lie hid for a time, but all the Churches shall know that
the Lord is a God that searches the hearts, Luke 12, 1. Psalm. 12. 5, 3. No
good man left, but some men of deceit and flattery, some Apostares, etc. We are
in fear (in this Country) of enemies; we came hither to shelter our selves
under the wings of God; left our comforts for it; here we are at his posts, it
is not honors we seek; and now it may be enemies are plotting, or will be
coming to take us unawares, when weak, and so run away with the spoil, unless
we will be bondmen to our former yoke; it may be the Lord will help then,
Ezekiel. 38. 10, 20. to the end. If not, it may be the Lord will refine us more,
and purge away our dross, and discover men that came hither for Ordinances and
for peace sake, and betray the Ordinances; yet the Lord will come, and his blow
shall ruin them, especially if his awake not at his cry, Isa. 25. 9, 10. it
shall be said when the terrible ones are blasts, Lo! this is our God, and in
this mount shall the hand of the Lord come.

Object. But still my sin con^^nues.

Answ. The Church in the Revelations, when they have all things, yet are absent
from the Lord, and sin before the Lord makes them say, Oh come Lord Jesus!
says Christ, Behold I come quickly! Christ will come at last and for ever
comfort you, and be with you, and you ever with the Lord; this coming to be
sure shall be, and what then though you walk through the vail of the shadow of
death! the Lord is with you, and him that is the glory of Saints, the joy of
Angels, the rest and delight of God, whom all ends of the earth have looked
unto, shall thou see with those eyes, and be with him for ever, and then shall
he give thee double for all thy sorrows, sins, temptations, when every one else
shall leave thee, and shall rejoice and glory in thee, that ever he has got
thee, and (as he said) he will then serve thee, Luke 12. Oh his coming would
swallow up all our sorrows; Christ tells them of nothing but this, Ioh. 14. I
wonder at Christians that are sadded at losses and evils here; Why the Lord
will come!

SECT. V.
Quest. HOw shall I know whether the Lord will come or no?

Answ. 1. If the Lord ever has or does make this the rest and stay of thy
heart, not only for righteousness, but for all fullness of comfort, and that not
only to thy conscience, but to thy heart and will: for many rest on Christ for
righteousness; but what comforts their hearts? they joy in other things, and
are greedy after things in the world, etc. Now as a man that rests on Christ
for righteousness, he abhors all other righteousness; so if a Christian rest on
Christ for consolation, you will deny all other things to comfort you also,
Ier. 17. 5, 6. Cursed is the man that trusts in man, he shall not see when
good comes. Psalm. 22. 1. Oh Lord, why have thou forsaken me? I ^ust in thee;
our fathers trusted in thee and were delivered: Yes, but not you that are so
poor and vile: True, I am so in the eyes of the world; but on God have I been
cast; To trust to Christ for righteousness, but not for consolation, is to
marry a man to pay debts, but not to live upon his house; try if it be so or
no; thou feel the Lord gone, yet thy faith is not gone from him.

2. If the Lord has given thee a heart, whether the Lord comes or no, not to
trouble thy self about success, and time of coming, as to mind the doing of
his work against his coming, that thy heart is resolved and will live to him
though he never comes to thee. Ioh. 2. 5. When Mary said that wine was wanting;
says Christ, it is not my hour; then, what ever he bids you do, do it; Heb.
10. 36. you have need of patience; for all impatience arises from minding
inordinately the success, what the event will be, and distracting the mind
there; but (as a poor servant) when a man thinks whether Christ come or not,
these sins shall down; this argues love never to be forgotten; Judges 10. 16.
nothing grieves the Lord and makes the Lord absent, but because grieved with
sin, misery comes; now sin is removed; it may be no assurance while thou die
or live; yet if resolved my soul shall follow the Lord, now it is right, etc.
But if while the Lord is now gone, your hearts are jolly, and loose every way,
way desire you the day of the Lord? it is darkness to you.

CHAP. VII.
Of Gods compassion toward wise and foolish Virgins.
SECT. 1.
SUch is the compassion of Christ to his people, Observation 3.
that deep security cannot always make the Lord to reject them; and therefore
we shall find three expressions of the love and kindness of the Lord to the
wise and foolish Virgins also.

First, When they not only slumber but sleep, and that long, even to the coming
of the Bridegroom almost, yet Christ spares them, and does not all this while
cut them off, and bury them out of his sight, as men that do forget him.

Secondly, He prevents them with awakening grace, and the Lord is up when his
servants be abed, and is awakened for their good when they are asleep and
regard not him; and first by his cry he awakens them before they shake up
themselves; when once the Churches fall asleep, they would sleep their long
sleep, and never awaken, if the Lord should not by some cry or other prevent
them.

Thirdly, He longs for their fellowship and company though secure; and
therefore it is not a cry of terror and wrath, the Bridegroom has forsaken
you, for your secure careless course; but it is a cry of grace, go forth to
meet him; yet he is willing to have communion with you, yet he desires that you
would have communion with him; oh come out to meet him; I shall wrap up all
these together, because I shall be brief. Wonderful was the grace of Christ
toward the old world, when for the space of one hundred and twenty years he
waited for them, who after they had been an hundred and nineteen secure, yet
then the same spirit that waits for us in these days of the Gospel, preached
the Lord unto them.

Jeremiah was very long speaking to Israel (as the other Prophers) in so much
that the Lord professes to send the King of Babylon against them, yet the
Lords heart melts, cha. 26. 1, 2, 3. Speak unto them; it may be they will
hearken, and turn that I may repent; So Ier. 3. they had polluted the Law, ver.
2. showers are withheld (which is no great matter) small evils are arguments of
hearts revolted from God; they did the Lord as much mischief as they could, and
were secure, verse 3. Yet mark, will thou not from this time cry My Father?
meet the Lord as thy Husband? will he keep his anger for ever? Nay, the Lord
cast off Adulterous Israel, and they knew the cause, yet went on securely in
the same sins; yet see, verse 14. Turn oh backsliding children, Prove. 6. 5, 6.
How long, etc.

SECT. II.
IN regard of the foolish, Reason 1.
there is no reason, but the Lords pity and compassion to a sinful people; he
has compassion on them because he will; for he does not pity people only in
respect of their miseries, but in respect of their sins, 2 Chronicles. ult. 16. he
sent his Prophets among them (and they despised them) because he had compassion
on his people; the cords of grace are let down to all sinners, Blasphemers,
Opposers of God, etc.

In regard of the wise Virgins, because his Mariage-covenant with them is not
suspended on any thing on his peoples part; Reason 2.
for though there is a condition which the Lord does require of his people in
Mariage-covenant, yet the Lord so requires it, as that he intends to work it,
and undertakes to maintain it; and there is no evil in them, but he promises
in this Covenant to remove; he will heal them of it, but he will not cast them
off for it; hence Ephesians. 5. 25. Christ loves his Church; what, because it had
loveliness? no, but that he might wash it; and if he loves it to this end, that
he might wash it, then no pollution can make the Lord utterly to cast it off;
if he loves because of deformities, that he might wash them away, then none can
quench his love; hence no security, no carelessness, though deep, though long,
so long as the Mariage-bond between man and wife conti^^s, so long as no sin is
committed that can break this Mariagebond, so long infirmities or other
distempers never separate. Now, no sin in them that are given to Christ can
break the Mariage-bond, because it is wholly undertaken on the Lords part;
women may commit Adultery, and break their Mariage-bond, because they are not
kept by their Husband from that; but the Lord undertakes this for his people,
to put his fear in their heart, that they shall never depart from God. Hos. 2.
19, 20. I will b^troth thee unto me for ever, and you shall know the Lord;
hence the Lord may humble, but never utterly reject his, for security in a lust.

SECT. III.
OF Direction and thankfulness to the people of God; Use 1.
Oh! do not always fall to fits of doubts after security, though deep and long
(as many Christians do) and so are ever laying and pulling up foundations;
after most peace of conscience, most security, and then the Sea rages again,
and it is hard for any man to keep his peace; have you had such mercy, and
love, and will you thus be careless and loose again? believe it, the Lord will
break your bones if you love your beds, and not give you rest till you find it
on another pillow; but yet do not deny his love, though you have forgot it; do
not say you are not Virgins, because fallen asleep; and that the Bridegroom
will never come to meet you, because you have lingered in meeting him; for
behold he comes: I know there is a difference between the security of the wise
and foolish; of which hereafter: The Disciples fall asleep in the garden after
a trebble warning, yet it was against much relucta^cy; hence Christ pitied
them; the Spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak; and when they were
awakened, their vessels were not found empty; Peter's vessel was full of love to
Christ before, and when the Lord awakens him, he tells the Lord he loved him;
and his fall and security in it for a time made him more humble, and love the
Lord with less self-confidence, and more purity: But oh, wonder at it, rejoice
in it, and be thankful for it! especially you that have fallen into any secure
frame since ye came into these Virgin-Churches; which you cannot but do, if you
consider the greatness of this sin; to sin and be long secure, and fast asleep,
is strange.

1. This is the great provoking sin; look throughout all the Book of God, let
the sin be grear, and immediately after conscience smitten, bones broken, and
heart awakened, we shall never see the Lord but he is pacified, the Lord hears
their groanings, and remembers his Covenant; but little sins fallen into, and
by security continued in, the Lord visits for this, Psalm. 50. When a man shall
not only sin, but take delight in it, as a man does in his sleep.

2. This is a sin in places of liberty and Ordinances, whereas the Lord was
never so good to thee, and thy heart never worse to him, never so secure, you
thought and purposed never to be so watchful and tender as now; to be secure
here, greatly aggravates such security.

3. This sin is a common sin; now this adds to a sin, when a man has a hand in
a national sin, that runs in the blood of all the Churches; for so you see it
is, all the Virgins secure: when all forget the Lord, as though there were not
enough to lay more loab upon the Lord; what does this but harden others in
security; thy wives heart, thy brethrens heart, such a one is secure; as though
it were not enough to fight against the Lord, but Ciant-like to fall among the
troops of them that securely dishonor the Lord: When the old world was secure
we heard nothing of that; but when the Sons of God came to be secure, and all
flesh corrupted their ways, the Lord falls a mourning, and repents that he had
made man: When any sin grows general in Churches, that sin is most grievous
to God; Princes children when they sin alone it is grievous, but when they take
part with all the mutinous crew against their Father, this strikes deep; Oh
that ever mine eyes should see this evil.

4. It is a sin which is the last, and is the ruin of all the foolish Virgins,
and perfects their perdition, as here it did; they slept till it was too late;
oh that the Lord should not cast you off for this! admire at this; and let thy
heart, and house, and work be filled with praise for this: You have complained
long of a secure heart; see it humble thee that it continues, but make thee
wonder that the Lord will not cast thee off.

SECT. IV.
TO all those that have been long secure; Use 2.
let this compassion of the Lord awaken you, and draw you to him, and make you
come out and meet him; and give entertainment to the Lord, who has not yet
cast you off from him, but yet cries, oh come and meet me: Methinks this should
awaken you; what, has not the Lord cast me off yet? no! but his cry this day
is, Oh come out and meet me! The Lord might have cut thee off in thy security;
this is his season to others, when men cry peace, peace; and he might have let
thee slept and never awake more till past hope; yet here is his grace, oh come
and meet him! and will you despise it and refuse the Lord?

Object. 1. I have no oil in my vessel, no grace in my heart; what should I
meet him for, or look for him! I am s^ vile and so secure, he cannot look upon
me.

Answ. 1. You have the more need of receiving him as your Bridegroom, that so
you may receive the eternal anointing of his Spirit of Grace and Life in your
hearts.

2. Now you have time to get both.

Object. 2. But it is long before the Bridegroom comes; there is time enough for
this hereafter.

Answ. 1. Would you never look after the Lord, and being betrothed to him till
the very time of his coming? will you despise Grace to the utmost, and weary
out Grace to the last gasp? behold the Lord shall come, and thy eye shall see
him, and wail because of him; and the Lord will make thee cry out on thy
deathbed, and warn others to take heed of trifling with the Lord long, who
did never take warning thy self.

2. You see when the Cry is made, the Bridegroom is not far behind; now is his
cry, and you see some that did awaken, and after the cry, had time too little
to trim their lamps. It may be many cries have been sounding in thy secure
ears; and yet there is time, he is not come; grant it, and will you therefore
despise this rich grace the more because of his goodness.

Obj. 3. But I am well as I am without the Bridegroom.

Ans. It may be sleep is sweet for the present; but if thou were awakened, thou
would be of another mind; there are many here present that can say, they
thought themselves well, etc. but now I see my error, etc. Oh Lord, what if I
had been left to these thoughts; yet this is ever the frame of a secure heart
(like swine) well when it is in the mire, basking in the Sun.

1. It is pleasure; but consider, it is but short; long security will end in
hideous affrights, and doleful awakenings, for one days short sleep: I remember
Nineveh's are set out by this, Zeph. 2. 15. This is the rejoicing City, that
dwelt carelessly; painting out their misery for this sin above all the rest; so
when plagues be upon you, God and Angels shall point at you, This is the secure
sinner that lived loosly.

2. It deprives you of more rest and ease; carnal security keeps a man from
knowing spiritual security; while your sin and sleep is sweet, the grace of
Christ and the sense of his love shall be strangers to you, and to your hearts;
Christ is anointed to preach to a weary, not to a sleepy sinner: Isa. 50. 4.
There are seasons of refreshings and coolings, which such shall never know.

3. This which is thy pleasure, is the Lords sorrow and grief; look as when the
sinner mourns under his sin, the Lords heart is quieted, Zeph. 3. 17, 18. I
said I would confess, and thou forgavest: So when a man delights in his sin,
the Lords soul is then grieved; and the more delight, the more grief; Christ
mourned for the (...) of their hearts, Mark 5. 3. Now grant that you (...) what
joy is it to think, that while I have my ease and peace, (...) Lord has his
burden; my rest and peace is the Lords sorrow in Heaven; when the sons of God
grow fleshly, the Lord repented that he had made man; Oh let the groanings of a
compassionate God awaken you out of this security!

SECT. V.
Object. BUt there is none s^cur here.

Answ. It Is hard for wise not to fall here; but for foolish not to fall to this
sin, at least to be long preserved from it, will be miraculous; but for the
most part of men not to be drowned in it.

1. Have not diverse lived and never been awakened at all, not so much as to cry
out, I am a damned man, what shall I do? thou never had a spark of eternal
flames of wrath to kindle thy conscience, and that after an ignorant and
profane life.

2. If you have been troubled, have you not fallen asleep before ever you have
gotten any settled peace and comfort in the blood of Christ, only have got so
much oil as makes thy lamp burn, and gives thee a name to live, when thy vessel
is empty, and heart is dead.

3. Have not many, nay most of thy days been spent without any sorrow for, or
reckoning concerning thy sin? it may be you have a Lent and a cleansing week
sometimes; but most commonly it is otherwise, that you never see sin, but sleep
in it, and set your selves to go on, having found no hurt in such a course as
yet.

4. How many use the Ordinances of God, come to them, but never gain good by
them? What is there no gold in these mines? Yes, but a slothful, secure heart
will not dig for them.

5. Nay do not Gods cries make the sleep thee faster? he takes away a great
part of thy estate from thee; and thou look upon the misery and shame of
rags and poverty; and thy heart dies away with discontent, and grows more
worldly. If light be darkness, if means of wakening be a means of sleeping, how
great is that security? Oh therefore go out and meet the Bridegroom!

SECT. VI.
Quest. BUt how shall I receive the Lord as my Bridgroom and Husband?

Answ. 1. See what thy widowhood is, and forsaken condition, Isa. 54. 5, 6.
When thou wast refused, the Lord loved thee; what creature can help thee, when
the Lord forsakes thee? what a misery is it to live out of a fathers house!

2. See his love that he makes to you, otherwise you will never conclude it,
but sink, saying, The Lord forgets me: Oh see his love he makes to thee to
receive him; and that thou would give thy consent to have him, that thou
may love him, Isa. 56. 6. A carnal heart, a whorish lover desires to close
with Christ, that Christ may give gifts to it and love it; but a Virgin that
she may love the Lord, and be wholly his; and this will answer all doubts; what
have you to do with Christ, and all that mercy, grace and glory? Oh it is that I
may love the Lord more.

Object. It Is presumption.

Answ. No, it is that I may love the Lord indeed; and now when the heart is
drawn here, Psalm. 45. 10. Then shall the King have pleasure in thy beauty;
pleasure in thee, and all that thou do: What, in me, that am weary of my
self? Yes in thee. 1. When he forsakes others, he will meet thee. 2. Though he
departs, and sorrows attend thee, yet thy sorrows shall be turned into joy, and
he will see thee again, and never cease delighting in thee, but wrap thee up in
everlasting embracings.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Christ's coming, and his awakening sleepy Christians.
VERSE 7. Then all the Virgins arose and trimmed, etc.
SECT. 1.
IN these words to verse. 10. is set down the effect which the cry had upon the
Virgins.

First, Upon all of them in general, in this seventh verse.

Secondly, Upon the foolish in particular, in the next verses.

First the effect it wrought upon all of them in general, both good and bad, is
set down in two things. 1. They did all arise, i. e. they were thoroughly
awakened out of their secure condition. 2. Being awakened they fell to their
work, which was to trim their lamps, as to beautify and adorn their lamps,
which had now lost their ^light and bea^ty by soiling themselves, and all
through neglect; now they trimmed them, when first, they wiped off the soil;
secondly, made search for that which was necessary for the shining glory of
them; Thus far the foolish trimmed their lamps, who yet did not find that oil
in their vessels, which was the main thing to beautify them indeed, which the
wise had; so that they all trimmed their lamps; the wise trimmed theirs indeed;
the foolish theirs, so well as they could.

That the serious real apprehension of the nearness of Christ's coming, is
enough to awaken thoroughly the most secure Virgens: Observation 1.
I say, if Virgins (especially that have been awakened to know any thing of the
Lords coming) this will awaken them; for when the cry was made He comes, now
they all arose; whilst he did tarry as they thought, then they sleep; but when
the cry comes, that he is near and coming, oh now they awake.

This coming is meant either of his coming to the last Judgment, or of his
coming to particular Judgment immediately at and after death: I shall apply my
self chie^ly to the coming of Christ at death to his people, because this does
chiefly concern us; the near approach of this will awaken, when apprehended
near.

Romans 13. 11. When the Apostle would awaken them out of security, Your
salvation now is nearer than when you first believed, i. e. that perfect
salvation which is at that time; now if the apprehension that it is nearer than
at first awakens, much more when it is apprehended so indeed. Iam. 5. 8, 9.
There was it seems diverse that were oppressed, and they ready to faint, and
forsake the Lord, and wait no more; what therefore does he do? the coming
(says he) of the Lord draws nigh.

1 Samuel 12. 19. When Samuel told them before that misery should come if they
would have a King, they cared not; now when thunder came, that they saw death
and the Lord near them, now they feared, and cried, and repented; Oh we dye,
say they, pray for us: It is with the Soul as it is with Seamen, when they
first set out in the Main, if the wind be good, and all things well, they take
their rest and sleep, though going nearer every day than other; but when they
apprehend they are near the shore, now they look out, though in the night; so
here.

SECT. II.
BEcause here a man sees an end of his sinful way, Reason 1.
and of all his delights which have bound him up in the bonds of security; a
soft bed, and an easy pillow, and much feeding in a place of rest, will
procure much sleeping; the heart of a man would never be secure, if it had not
some delight or other to quiet it self withal; now at Christ's coming there is
an end of it, then a man is stripped naked of all his greatness and honor,
friends, blessings; and when a man sees an end, and is come to an end of a
sinful way, now all a man's delights and hopes perish; the beginning of a sinful
course is sweet and beautiful (like pictures seen afar off beautiful) but the
end is gal and woormwood; for every sinful secure course is sweet in
appearance, or indeed; if only in hope, and conception (as in a dream) when the
end comes, all a man's hopes perish. If indeed it has been sweet, now there is
the more grief; now my heart, my life, my blood must be taken from me, and what
profit is there now in this my stubborn way! when a man is sinking, and the
boat is breaking, what a miserable wretch now, Lord help! hence Ezekiel. 7. 3, 6.
when an end is come, now they fling their silver in the streets; Oh the
stumbling block of mine iniquity, verse 18, 19. now they shall seek peace and
shall not find it, verse 25. now they shall seek a vision of the Prophet, verse
26. Like a man that is drawn into a fair way, and is out of that his way, when
he comes to an end, and is forsaken of all and left in a wood, now what is the
profit?

Because at his coming there is the entrance and passage into eternity, Reason
2.
and into an eternal state of weal or woe; now though the apprehension of the
end of a secure sinful way, may and will awaken, yet when eternity is
apprehended it will amaze; for this time is but a little spring or river which
runs into eternity, and carries all men living down with it to eternity: Now
when men see an end of time, and the beginning of eternity, and themselves
posting thereto, it is as when a man sees himself floating upon the waters,
where there is no bottom, and all stay gone, though he has been long secure,
now he will cry out if he sees it. It is with men now, as it is with those that
are ready to be cast down from some Towr, it makes the heart tremble, oh! where
shall I alight! oh it is impossible but if men do apprehend eternity, and that
also near unto them, but it will awaken them; it will make a stout,
stony-hearted Saul to run to Urim; it will make Kings and Princes run to
Monasteries, and men to Cells and Deserts; It will make the proudest Felix
tremble when Paul reasons of Judgment to come. It Is usually the first thing
that does awaken the people of God; eternity does amaze them, and them that
have fallen to all ^asciviousness. Oh eternity!

Because of the terror at the coming of the Lord; Reason 3.
Revel. 6. ult. to them that be unprovided and unprepared; hence it is, and
will be, when an evil is near, fear will fly out: Men as men will do it,
unless they be walking blocks and bruits. For,

1. Then they are to stand naked before the Lord so great and holy.

2. Then they shall have all their sins set in order, Psalm. 50. 21. and
especially those secret sins which they never saw, and whereby they did perfect
their own perdition.

3. Then the final sentence past, never to be recalled again, and they shall
know it; for if there might be a day to repent, then some hope; but if not, o^
this awakens.

4. Then to be surrendered up into the hands of Devils, to be kept by that
Jailer in Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19. until the coming of the great day; and so to be
kept in their custody, and to be in their fellowship, looking back, and
mourning for time misspent, looking to time to come, shortly to meet my body,
and then to be parted for ever from the Lord! oh when this evil is apprehended,
it will awaken a man to search and look about him.

SECT. III.
HEnce see a great cause of the deep and long security of many a man, Use 1.
and that in Virgin-Churches under all awakening means, Ordinances and
Providence of God; men put far from them this day of death, and time of
Christ's coming, they think seldom of it, come not near to it, nor make it near
to them; sometime they complain of a dead sluggish spirit, secure heart, and
yet remain so, and wonder sometime at the reason of it why it should be so;
why? this is one reason of it, either you think not of this coming of the Lord,
or see it not near, even at the door, but number many days to your selves, and
this is the cause of it, you do not lodge in, nay look to your Coffins, and
walk to your graves side often, and so stand there and hear the cry, and see
the Lord a coming; there will be more in what I say than what you see at first
blush of this truth; but this I know, and the Word proves it, universal
security arises from hence. As for instance.

1. Why do men mind the things of the world so much? that there is such care
for them, such eager desire after them, that many times prayer is neglected,
Sabbaths neglected, when will they be at an end? God neglected, Souls of wife,
children servants, a man's own soul neglected and overgrown with nettles; that
there is such an high opinion, dreams of worldly goods, and when a man has
them, then at rest; because, with the glutton, they think they have goods for
many a year; and hence we shall see when a man waketh, death is near to him;
and when it is near to a man, now he thinks he has been deceived in all the
things of the world, that they are not good for him, 1 Cor. 7. 29. The time is
short, and the fashion of the world passes away: Nothing makes these things so
sought after and good but only esteem; now this is because men look only to
things present.

2. Why do men's hearts sink with the meanness of their outward condition, and
the troubles of it? (for this is security) it is because of this, they do not
remember the nearness of the coming of the Lord; it is but a little while
longer, and then the God I have chosen will alone be sweet, and he will make me
amends for all my troubles, and therefore let me bear up my head a little
while. Psalm. 39. when David's heart began to be troubled by seeing others
prosperity, his own misery, Lord (says he) make me to know my end and the
measure of my days, mine age is as an hand breadth; hence ver. 7. Lord what
hope I for? truly my hope is in thee.

3. Why are men pu^t up with their own excellencies, and filled with such pride
and high conce^^s of themselves, sometimes of their beauty, sometimes of their
apparel, sometime their friends, sometime their esteem, and they value
themselves much by this? men consider not the coming of the Lord, which shall
stain the pride of all glory, Isa. 23. 8. and that this time is near.

4. Why do people complain they cannot prize the Lord or his Ordinances as they
could? why do men on their deathbeds then prize it, then pray, then hear? then
oh a little mercy, then send for Moses, then the Lord is righteous; and if he
show mercy, never such a pattern as I, because now death and Christ's coming is
near: you do therefore undervalue the gain of Ordinances, because of this; Jer.
9. 20, 23.
if you did, you would glory in nothing but the Lord, Ier. 9. 21, 23.

5. Why do men go up and down without any assurance of the Lords love, or the
truth of any grace, and that after conviction? why do men upon their deathbeds
seek for it, and then fall a searching, and then open their estates, and then
desire peace? because the coming of the Lord is near; you put the day of the
Lord far from you; if you saw it near, you would get on your armor in readiness
against the day of battle; if your Husband be at door, you would get on your
apparel, Psalm. 89. 46, 47, 49.

6. Why is so much time spent unfruitfully, that a Christan is not abundant in
doing and receiving good? who is the better for thy speeches, for thy prayers,
for thy example? when Moses Psalm. 90. had numbered men's days, then v. 17.
stablish thou the work of our hands upon us; Look upon a Christian at first
conversion, he thinks he shall not live long; it is strange to see what prayers,
what tears; how fruitful, how diligent he is; Oh therefore see your sore this
day! it is nigh almost, O therefore up and be doing.

SECT. IV.
OH therefore, Use 2.
if ever you would be freed from this infectious, this damning sin and plague
of security, make the coming of the Lord near unto you, and come you near unto
it, be ever near it; number your days, they are soon told over, and often think
of your latter end when the Bridegroom comes; for this will awaken you out of
your secure fits, and make you fall hard to your work.

First, This will make you do much work for the Lord in a little time; when
Moses was to be gathered to his Fathers, now he provides for the Church, now he
instructs the people more than ever concerning their e^^ates, etc.

Secondly, It will be very sweet; it is but a very little while though it be
bitter, and it will put strength to do it; work is wearisom for want of
strength; so Christ's work is wearisom, because we want strength; now this does
put strength into the soul, Iam. 5. 8, 9.

Thirdly, It will be very glorious; works even of dying men are very glorious
and successful: Speeches of living (yet dying Christians) sink deep; for then
God is near unto us when we are near unto him, and see things as they are; and
hence such speeches are commonly blessed to men; the speeches and works and
carriages of Christ were never so glorious, as when most near his end.

SECT. V.
Object. BUt should ^ Christian in Christ use this as a motive to stir up his
heart, or no? this is mockery, this Philosophy sends men to; does Divinity do
so? a Christian must be acted by love, not fear.

Answ. 1. That which God has sanctified for this end we may make use of for
the attainment of it; now God has sanctified afflictions, death, and the fear
of them for this end, to awaken the secure sinner; Iehosaphat fears and
proclaims a fast; Noah feared and built an Ark; Christ himself to the Church
of S^rdis (to awaken her) professes he will come as a thief in the night
suddenly, 2 Pet. 3. If the heavens shall be dissolved, what manntr of persons
should we be: It is true, it is hypocrisy for a man to be led only by fear;
but it is profaneness (the original of the Sadduces) not to be terrified at all;
it is not hypocrisy to be awakened partly by fear to the apprehension of these
things; for God has sanctified them for this end, and though these do not work
grace (where there was none before) barely, yet the awakening of conscience, is
that whereby the Lord prepares for grace; and this is good in its kind; and it
stirs up grace where it was before, as here this cry makes the Virgins to
kindle their oil, and set that a burning.

Objection 2. But the time is not near; Should I apprehend an untruth?

Answ. It may be it is near; the apprehension of this is not false, and this the
Lord gives verse 13. as the ground of constant watch, for you know not when he
comes; now if men love their goods, they will watch.

2. It is near; if you had but wisdom to see into eternity, and the nature of
time, you would say so also, Psalm. 90. 4. A thousand years are but as
yesterday, and as a watch in the night. Verse. 5. our time is as a sleep, short
and vain. Ver. 6. it is but as a flower of one days glory; nay, it is but as a
thought, verse. 9. It is so when you see things as they are, and you will
account it so. Oh therefore let me beg this of you, make Christ's coming, and
death near to you, tha^ you may be delivered from your dead palsies, deep
slumbers, and dying sick sleeps; especially seeing the signs of the Lords
coming to reckon with you, do you think to escape? Masters that betrust
Servants with most, will they call others to account, to whom they have
betrusted less, and not you? what people under heaven be trusted with more
mercies and liberties than we! and do you think he is gone to a far Country,
and will never return? He let Palatine and other Churches enjoy the means long,
he summons them to an account by famine, sword, and pestilence, wild beasts,
and cruel Soldiers; and shall he never ride in his circuit this way? yes
verily: Do you boast in the goodly stones of this Temple? If the Lord by your
security be despised, and his Messengers, and Ordinances, and Kingdom, he will
not leave one stone upon another: When will this be? not yet: that is true; yet
awake at the signs of it, Mat. 24. Wars, rumors of wars, famine, aerthquakes,
deceivers that come in the name of Christ, Apostasy of Professors, whence many
com^ to be offended, Divisions and scatterings of one Brother against another,
Iniquity abounding in the World, and Love growing cold in Churches; If these be
not amongst us now, we have the less cause to fear; if so, have we not cause to
awake one hour considering our time is nigh! if not, yet Christ's time is nigh
of coming to particular persons.

SECT. VI.
Quest. HOw shall I make it near?

Answ. Truly till the Lord teach us the number of our days, we can never do it:
yet three things do;

First, Convince thy soul of the sin and evil of looking after to morrow, and
reaching after that time which is to come, Prove. 27. 1. 1. It is none of thine.
^. Nothing draws the heart so much from God. 3. You will never find what you
expect hence; these are lying vanities, therefore come not to these wells.

Secondly, Either thou want assurance, then fear his coming, for fear will
make misery present, and so awaken; and hope ( e contra) good present: Or thou
have assurance; then love his coming, see all thy good wrapped up there; and love
will make things absent beloved, and present comfort in the thoughts of them;
as wicked men that love the things of this life, and are in certain hopes to
have them, they often rejoice in the hopes; because the good is present, they
reckon upon it as theirs already.

Thirdly, See how near you are unto the Lord Jesus: 1. That you are made for
the Lord, not to enjoy these things; they are made for you, and not you to
serve them; because God has called you out of this world, from the grave,
hell, sin, to life; now the next is glory, 2 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5.

2. That now there is nothing but thy breath, thy body between thee and Jesus
Christ; when this shell is broken, thou art with the Lord, and shall see him
with open face; this will make you look for the day of delivery.

CHAP. IX.
Of Christians, trimming their Lamps; and how holiness is the Christians glory.
SECT. 1.
And trimmed their Lamps.
THE word ((...)) signifies adorned, beautified their lamps, made clean or
cleansed; It is the same word which is used 1 Timothy 2. 9. Women's adorning let it
not be with pearls, but good works.

Quest. What is the glory of the Lamp?

Answ. First, When the filth is wiped away, which did defile it.

Secondly, When oil is gotten, and the lamp is lighted; now its in its full
trim as it was at first when they went out; whilst they were sleeping, their
lamps not being looked into, began to lose their shining glory; now they
recover them.

Object. But how came the foolish to trim their Lamps?

Answ. They did endeavor it, and did something that way, as is apparent from
the context, and so they trimmed them so far as they could reach; but the
complete and full adorning of them was this of the wise. And therefore look as
by oil in the vessel is meant the eternal anointing of the Spirit of grace
within, so by shining is meant the glorious profession arising from it, as the
adorning of women, 1 Timothy 2. 9. is their holy conversation.

That the Spirit of holiness abiding in the hearts, and shining in the lives of
Observation 2.
Saints, it is their excellency, ornament and glory: This adorns the Virgins
lamps; through security they began to lose their glory; Now when they prepare
their lamps, they adorn their lamps; and this is their glory. --

2 Cor. 3. ult. We are changed into the same image from glory to glory; grace
and holiness is glory. Ephesians. 5. 27. Christ presents a glorious Church;
wherein? without spot or wrinckle, and holy before the Lord. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4.
Sanctification and honor are joined together.

SECT. II.
Quest. WHat Spirit of holiness is it which is a Christians glory?

Answ. It is not every patcht profession of holiness which is a Christians true
glory; for by what means is the name of God more blasphemed by the wicked of
the world, than by those that profess holiness, yet break out into scandalous
sins! Romans 2. 14. it is a wonder if a profane man be good a little; but it is
a greater wonder and scandal if a professor be bad a little. Neither is it a
most glorious appearance of holiness; this is deceit, craft, and hypocrisy,
not a glory: A Stage Player that acts the part of a King, wants the glory of a
King; and hence Paul opposes himself to these, 2 Cor. 5. 12. But when there is
first an exemplary holiness, arising secondly, from the fullness of the Spirit
of grace within, as here in the Virgins, a shi^ing profession from an inward
Spirit, when Christ has attained the end of offering up himself, that men are
a peculiar people, zealous of good works: Suppose the lamp does burn, yet if
not for the end it was made, so that a man can scarcely see his way, nor others
by it, its glory is much lost: Now the end of the Spirit of holiness is this,
the end of Christ's death and ministry is this; Phil. 2. 13, 14. and though
they may speak evil, yet 1 Pet. 2. 12. they may glorify God in that day; when
it is with men as it is with those, Z^ch. 8. ^lt. We have seen God is in you;
when a man maintains a sleepy careless profession and name, the lamp now wants
its trim; when lamps are put under bushels, they lose their glory.

Quest. 2. Before whom is this their glory?

Answ. 1. Before the eyes of God the Father, Ioh. 12. 26. He that shall serve
me, him shall my Father honor; and though the world honor them not, yet they
shall be spectators of it.

2. Before Jesus Christ his eyes, Psalm. 45. 11. Forget thy country, and thy
fa^hers house, so the King shall take pleasure in thy beauty.

3. Before all the people of God themselves, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 4, 5. So that we glory
of you among all the Churches; every one will be speaking of such; oh there is
one of a thousand; hardly shall you go into his company but you shall get some
good, and life, and heat from him.

4. Before Hypocrites many times, who of all others are the greatest haters of
the ways of holiness and the power of godliness* hence Herod, Mar. 6. 20. loved
John, because a holy man, not because a deep Scholar, or a great man; hence,
while Joshua and the Elders live, the people serve the Lord; and while Iehoiada
lives, Ioash is forward; the greatest Monarchs fall down here.

5. In the eyes of bad men, and hence Deuteronomy. 4. 6, 7. when they kept the
Statutes of the Lord, what nation so great, as has such Laws, and so wise
also! Jer. 33. 9.
this is their glory before all the world, at least in the consciences of all
men, which is their better part, 2 Cor. 5. 11. we are manifest in their
consciences; and hence the worst say often, if all were such as they are, etc.

Quest. 3. When is it their glory?

Answ. 1. In this life (as has been already showed) in midst of reproaches,
the Spirit of glory, 1 Pet. 4. 14. in midst of weaknesses, David's heart was
perfect.

2. At the great and last day; let a man by his wisdom, conquests, excellencies
get himself a name, yet when death comes, his glory perishes; if it does last,
yet not long; the greatest Monarchs have been like a mighty wind, filled the
world with a noise for a time, and then down; but at the last day, then Oh
their shame, what everlasting contempt shall they arise unto! But this shall be
our glory at the last day, 1 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. which shall be to glory and
praise at the coming of our Lord; and it is said, then shall the righteous
shine as the Sun; and then all the world shall stand and admire, and wonder at
them. And

3. Throughout all eternity this shall be their glory, even an everlasting name
unto them, better than the name of Sons and Daughters; Isa. 56. 5.
when the wicked shall see them all at the right hand of God, and gnash their
teeth, that themselves are shut out, when the Lord and his Saints shall take
infinite delight one in another, Luke 12. 37.

SECT. III.
Quest. 4. WHy is this a Christians glory, excellency, and honor?

Answ. 1. In regard of the baseness of other things wherein men do use to
glory; the wise man in his wisdom, the strong man in his strength, the rich man
in his wealth: There are Three things which make these base.

First, These things make a man not the more to be accepted of God; the Lord
respects not, values not the worth of any man by these things; and to make all
the world know this, he staineth the pride of all glory, and chooses the poor
and foolish things of the world to confound the wise; a wise man will never
respect the horse the more because it carries store of rich treasures, he will
not fall down and reverence it for this; hang Swine about with pearls, who
honors them the more? and will a wise God respect a man the more for these
things? 1 Pet. 3. 5. What is that that is of great price with God? Holiness is
of great price with God: And what though all the world honor a man, and a man
honoreth himself, while this is wanting?

Secondly, All these things leave a man dead under the reign of Satan, power of
his sin and dominion of death; and hence Ier. 9. 24. Let no man glory in his
wisdom, etc. Death is entered into your windows; take any bondsman bound with
fetters (though golden) does any man account him the more glorious? a Prince
that is made a vassal and slave to every base fellow, is he the more glorious?
no: So whiles men lie under the reign of death; stick a man that is dead with
flowers, what is he the more glorious? alas no! his life is gone; now the
Spirit of holiness is called the Spirit of life, even of the life that never
shall dye, Romans 8. And therefore as it is said of a Fly, there is more
excellency in a Gnat than in a Cedar, than in the glorious heaven, because it
has life, which the other has not; so though men wonder at the goodly
trappings of wicked men, yet the poorest and most despised Christian, that has
the Spirit of life, is more glorious.

Thirdly, Because these things only purchase the more credit and honor in the
eyes of men, and that of wicked men; for 1 Cor. 5. 10. We know no man after the
flesh; if they do, it is that which they account themselves beasts and fools
for, as David did, Psalm. 73. And what is the honor of man? it is the b^sest
thing that is; for it is that which is without a man, it is no excellency
within the man; it is but the thoughts of a man's head and heart, than which,
what more vain, what more mutable? nay, it is but the dreams of a man's head, for
they are mistakes: If all the town should dream another was a King, who yet
were indeed a Beggar (which when they awake they see) what were he the better
for this? Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 23. how he does glory in privileges, which were
better and more goodly hangings than these^ this (says he) I speak as a fool;
and what be these a Christians glory? no surely.

Answ. 2. Because that is a Christians glory which is Christ's glory.

First, It is that glory wherein the glory of Christ consists, Psalm. 45. 2.
Thou art fairer than the children of me^, full of grace is thy lips; and 2 Cor.
3. ult. into the same image from glory to glory: Indeed Christ's greatness in
governing the world is his glory, but it is because it is mixed with such
holiness, Isa. 6. 1, 2, 3. Phil. 2. 8, 9. he humbled himself, and this has
given him a name, and shall be his name for ever; this is that which makes the
Lord Jesus lovely and amiable in the eyes of all his people, Rev^ 15. 4. Who
would not fear thee, or thou only art holy! and so he is, for all the stars
receive their light and shine with it, by this Sun only; and so the more a
Christian excels in this, the more like he is to Jesus Christ, and so more
glorious and lovely.

Secondly, This is that which gives him glory, ^. e. so far as creatures can,
which is to manifest it, and hence 2 Cor. 8. 23. which is the glory of Christ;
and hence Isa. 46, 13. Israel is called the glory of the Lord; Isa. 62. 2, 3.
the righteous is called the glory, and crown, and diad^m in the hand of the
Lord; and as God is better than the Soul, so this, viz. to glorify the Lord,
is better than to be glorified by the Lord.

SECT. IV.
HEnce see one reason why men lose their honor, their love and respect in the
Use 1.
eyes of God and men; their judgments are not revere^^ed, their persons not
accepted, their names and practices despised; this is one reason among the
rest, a decay in holiness; the lamp is defiled, the light and luster of it
going out, and who will reverence it then? it is admirable to see the complaints
abroad.

First, Look but into Families, what is the reason there is so much discontent
there, that Servants are weary of their Masters, Masters of their Servants; and
there is such complaints one of another, little respect one of another? it is
for want of holiness, power, and life of godliness; the Master says, the
Servant is unruly, froward, surly, flothful, unfaithful, untrusty, and must not
be spoken to; the Servant says, his Master is passionate, unkind, wants pity
to his body, and sometimes strikes him without cause, and much more careless of
his soul, never instructs him, but is eaten up with the world, etc. truly this
is the cause. It seems the Lord wrought upon diverse in Primitive times, and the
Apostle gives Servants an item, that they may glorify God, and adorn the
Gospel of the Lord Jesus; Tit. 2. 10.
how came Joseph into ^o^iphar's books? oh, he was very holy, and very prudent;
and I Will warrant did his Masters work better when his Master was absent than
before, and prayed for success in his business, as Abraham's Servant. Look but
upon Husband and Wife, it is strange to see what divisions and jars there; and
what is the cause of it, Wife does not honor Husband, nor Husband honor Wife?
how comes this? oh, there is little holiness seen in their private walking one
with another; the woman thought the man godly; had I known this, I would have
seen you a hundred miles off, etc. the man also he complains of his wife, I see
now I am like to be troubled with a continual dropping, a very fury of hell, so
impatient, (and the next neighbor hears of it) nothing can please her; what is
the reason of this? your sin makes your shame, and there is the want of
holiness, 1 Pet. 3. 3. man might be conve^ted by the Wife, and the Wife by the
Husband; not that it is always so, but usually so.

Secondly, Look into Churches, what is the reason people lose their honor much
in the hearts of Ministers? he respects others, but not me; and sometimes they
think, now he strikes at me, and means me, and then the heart swells, etc.
what is the reason that Paul professes he will come with a rod among the
Corinthians? they were babes, and carnal, and contentious, and pu^t up, little
love and life; and what is the reason he sets out the Thessalonians so? 1 Thessalonians.
1. 5. because of this they did abound, and hence commended of all Saints; hence
want of growth and holiness; they travel in birth till Christ be formed, and
when they cannot see that, hence they are in throws for you; what is the reason
Ministers lose their glory among people? I confess it is not always for decay
here; for John in prison did not lose his holiness; and hence, when they
despised him, Christ commended him, and his reward was with the Lord; it was
not a testimony of his unholiness, but a fore-r^nner of the end of his days, as
well as of the end of his work; and hence when all Asia forsook Paul, 2 Timothy 4.
16. it was the time of his departing now at hand. But that which is the cause
of it many times, is want of holiness within; and hence though men fee not, yet
the Lord will not give a false testimony, nor let men do so; hence neither
judgments nor their speeches reverenced; or because men see not the ancient
Spirit of holiness, hence no mourning for them in secret, no holiness in
speeches, they smell of the field, not walking as patterns before them, Mal. 2.
8, 9. not caring for the f^ock which Christ has purchased with his own blood.
What Is the reason there is that complaint of want of love one man to another,
one member to another, who are bound by covenant to it, such jars, divisions?
etc. Truly nothing makes so firm an union between man and man as holiness and
grace, this tieth the knot; and it is not holiness hid, but now seen; it not
being seen, hence comes all your breaches, its impossible else such small
things should make it: Oh a tender heart and the life of Christ is not indeed
seen; a holy man exact shall never want love, that in every company scatters
something, that like Christ, goes up and down doing good, healing the diseases
of men's hearts; there is a man I could dye with him in my very bosom: I am
persuaded the decay of holiness in the lives of men, is the cause why
Sanctification is questioned as an evidence of Justification; and hence
division.

Thirdly, Look abroad into the world, what is the reason the Churches lie among
the pots, and are soiled with so many disgraces, that though we be the people
of the Lord, yet we are not called so? why, ja^s, divisions, earthliness, want
of love and mercy, murmurings, loss of former life. When Jews are shining with
the glory of God, Kings and all Nations shall bring in their glory to them: Oh
consider this! sin does make you vile in Gods eyes and man's eyes: Many complain
they cannot be respected, nor received; this is the cause of it, you excel not
here; others take notice of your unrighteousness, unholiness of life; there is
some evil in their bargaining and buying, and ill language from the people of
God. Oh therefore go home and lament this, as she, The glory of God is departed
from Israel; so do you here.

SECT. V.
HEnce see when the Lord does honor us to do his work, what little cause Use 2.
there is to seek honor of men (nay though all the worlds glory be taken from
you) because it is honor enough to do the Lords work; would you have more honor
than Christ? this was his beauty, glory, and honor; God has an everlasting
name for you, though you have disgrace by it, nay though no success, yet Isa.
49. 5. glorious in the Lords eye: Oh it was a sweet course of Barak, Judge. 4.
9. thou shall lose honor; that is all one, said she, Let me do the Lords work,
though it be in a difficult work of pursuing the Lords enemies; what profit
have you on the other side, when you seek it in your pitchers? what company?
etc. this was Saul's sin, 1 Samuel 15. 30. Oh worship and honor me nevertheless
this time before the people; it is his reward, and it is the Devils sin to be
puffed up; this pulled down Nebuchadnezar; Herod was smote with worms, because he
gave not glory to God, but took it to himself; it was a heavy speech to Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 29. Because thou honor thy sons above me, this and that I will do
unto thee. Nay though men are so holy as to honor God with their lips, yet God
will blast the wisdom of the wise for it: Oh therefore let this be enough, and
then you will not hunger after other honor; for this is glory and honor enough,
and you have thought so, when your selves, Oh if I may but honor the Lord, it
is enough.

Hence see what little cause any wicked man has to lift up his head with any
glory he has, because the spirit of holiness, beauty and glory is departed
from Use 3.
them; as when the Soul is departed from the body its glory and beauty is
departed from them, it is withered; and therefore we shall read in Scripture
what names the Lord gives them, as Dogs, Swine, Serpents, a generation of
vipers, painted Sepulchers, Devils in the time of the greatest profession, as
Judas, Ioh. 6. Wild beasts, and that in the greatest outward glory; and hence
the four Monarchies of the world are resembled to such beasts, Bears, Leopards,
etc. Dan. 7.
Thus for their persons: And as for their actions, all they do is unclean, and
ignoble and hence compared to Thistles, that cannot bring forth Figs or Grapes;
and hence Solomon compares them, As jewels in a Swines snout, so is a parable
in the mouth of a fool, it becomes them not, it is abomination in the sight of
God all that which they do, though glorious before men; and at last day they
shall rise up to everlasting contempt; and it is said Isa. 66. ult. their worm
shall never dye, and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh, though they Dan.
12. 2.
may carry it out fair for a time; the fairest professors that by their
Sorceries and enchantments deceive the people shall be filled with shame, and
as the Magicians were smitten with sores they could not stand before Moses
(being smitten with sores) so you shall not be able to stand before the Lord at
the last day; and Exodus 9. 71.
look as it is with Christ and his people, their cross and shame here, it is
but their preparation to their crown; and hence, when Christ was put to the
most open shame, then was the daybreak of his glory; so all that you glory in,
which God gives, it is but a solemn preparation for your shame: And hence, when
Nebuchadnezar is at his highest pitch and thoughts of glory, then is his
downfall; if a man should have a crown upon his head, all honor given him, and
it should be whispered to him, This is but a preparation to your execution,
what little glory could he take in that? but rather fall a weeping as Paul,
Phil. 3. 18, 19. when he saw some that made their belly their God, and boasted
of the things of the earth, whose glory is their shame; and he speaks of them
weeping: And therefore you that can sit in a chimney-corner, when you meet with
your companions, hang, draw, and quarter within your selves, and censute all
Churches, Ministers and Christians of a Town and Country, and if you see any
sores, like flies, go and suck them and make them worse; or if not, you can
make them and imagine them, and scoff at holiness secretly; and though your
consciences condemn you of wickedness, yet lift up your selves with something
that you have; Oh know it, your beauty is gone; never a man but glories in
something; so much estate, so much esteem, so much wisdom, and gifts, birth,
and beauty; and now as proud as Satan, but yet a stranger to the life of God,
your conversation is not above: Oh poor creature! happy were it for thee if
thou were no man, (dying so) but the most despised of all Gods creatures, who
art now abhorred of God, and shall be the shame of all creatures another day.

SECT. VI.
HEnce if any man has lost his glory and esteem in the consciences of the Use
4.
people of God, see how to recover it; the Country is full of complaints and
murmurings; among the rest this is one of the sorest that many complain of'
They are not respected, they are no body; they had this and that esteem in
their own Country of such Ministers, Christians, and were of this esteem; now
the market is fallen here, and hence offended at every one, and cannot pass for
members in many Churches; and hereupon bear a private grudge against the
Church, and all Ordinances in it, and fly Towns, or sit still, and comfort
themselves their conscience is clear, etc. It is with many as it is with
Bristo^-stones, they are like pearls, and so they go till they come to the
Jewellers; and then when tried not worth two pence; so many men never came to
the trial, as here Gods providence try some men more than ever losses,
sorrows; Gods Ordinances try men, and thus they are found too light; would you
now recover it? Oh get a Spirit of holiness! and think, Oh I have had a high
esteem of my self; but I fall short of that brokenness for my vileness, and
want that esteem of, and acquaintance with the Lord Jesus, that the glory of
the Lord is not to this day risen upon me; Oh then make after, and merchandise
for this, Prove. 3. 14, 15, 16. Sometimes a godly man loses this; is there not
inwardly a decay of holiness^ and hence God has forsaken, and suffered to fall
into some sin, so as man has seen it; do you think the Lord will honor you in
the hearts of his people, while you dishonor him? when you live in a vain
dead-hearted condition, and disguise your selves, or in impen^tency for open
offenses either of opinion or practice; Be it far from me, says the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 20. them that dishonor me shall be lightly esteemed; and hence God will
cut off Eli's children; you know what a sad letter Paul wrote to the
C^rinthians; but when they saw the spiritual meaning, 2 Cor. 7. 14, 15. Paul
boasts of them; Titus his affection was abundant toward them; if not abund^nt
confession and giving glory to God, how should you look that God should else
give glory to you? it is wonderful to see, how men that have been convinced of
sin, and yet would hide it, how the Lord in his jealousy has discovered them
in his time; the sin has been committed by them, and enqu^ry has been made,
and some conviction, and yet they have wound off, and cried out of wrong; the
Lord has left them to worse evils; And so the Lord will deal with men; and so
I say, hide your sin, it shall be your shame at last, and the Lord will never
honor you in the consciences of his people till you out with it, and confess
it; Iannes and Iambres, their madness shall be made known at last; I speak not
this that men should make holiness a bridge to their own honor, and so to stand
upon Christ's shoulders; but that this is the way to regain such a blessing,
which an humble heart knows how to want, as well as to have.

Oh then place your glory in this; of all things in the world, a man des^res
nothing more than honor; it is dearer than life, and it is that which every one
Use 5.
does desire; Oh beloved, hunt not after shadows, feed not your (...) with
dreams; make not your Garl^nds of withered flowers, but in this which is your
glory before God and men. Ier. 9. 24. Let not rich men glory in riches, but in
this, that ^e knows me; It was the heavy complaint the Lord took up against
his people, Ier. 2. 11. That they did change their glory; the Lord himself is
the glory of his people, as shining in them by his Spirit; it was the great sin
of the Gentiles, Romans 1. 23. that they changed the glory of the (...) God, into
an image of corruptible men and beasts; so you know this is your glory; and oh
now to change this glory for an image of glory! and hence given up to vile
affections, to a corruptible mind; and therefore Prove. 8* 4, 8. Exalt her, she
shall promote thee; admire at this! a man excels in nothing but what he admires
at, or seeks not to excel in any thing but what he wonders at; you will never
place your glory in holiness, nor excel in it, unless you admire at it, and it
will then exalt you, and bring you to honor, because indeed it is your honor:
Oh that God would work this, men would not be so greedy after the world, nor
praise of men.

SECT. VII.
Quest. BUt how shall we come to this?

Answ. 1. Consider the example of Christ, and all the people of Christ at all
times, who did not place their glory in these things, but in things above: If a
man is to lay much out upon something in the market, if he be wise he will
enquire of prudent men that know things, the worth of them, and then it falls
out sometimes those things he esteems highly are of no value; so here, look
upon Paul, Gal. 6. 14. God forbid I should glory in any thing but the cross of
Christ; 1 Cor. 4. 13. When the Corinthians were puffed up with greatness, to
pull them down from this, he professes he and others were the offscouring of
the world; and this was their glory, v^rse 16. Look upon Christ himself, he had
as much excellency as could be, yet he cast it off, despised all the glory of
the world, was a worm and no man; he professes he sought no ^onor of men, ^ut
the will of him that sent him; this was his glory.

2. Look upon the excellency of your estate in Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 21. Glory not
in men, for all things are yours; take any Prince that has a Kingdom, will he
house in a cottage or spend his time and care to thatch and repair that? no,
all the Kingdom is mine; and hence he will have Kingly thoughts and Kingly
aims, and ends, and acts that ennoble him indeed: So here, 2 Cor. 5. 9. Knowing
we have a house above, that there is but a breath between us and glory* we
labor (are ambitious) that whether absent or present to be present to be
accepted of him. The very reason why the hearts, minds, lives of men are so
debased, as to seek their glory in that which is their shame, is this, they
know no better estate, no greater glory; the God of glory, and Kingdom of
glory, and promise of glory, and Ark, and Cherubims, and Oracles of glory in
Christ have been to this day hid from their eyes; hence Heb. 12. 2. Christ for
the joy set before him desp^sed the shame.

3. Make the Lord present with you, and see him shine about you in his glory;
when poor men come to the Court and see no King there, they bow down to his
Chair; whereas if he was seen he should have all the honor then; so when men
see creatures, but see them like empty chairs, the God of glory not filling of
them, we bow down to creatures, but when God is seen, now the soul gives all
glory to him; a man that lives without any in his house as chief, all servants
attend on him; but when the Prince comes with his train, now all his Servants
with himself are too little to attend on the Prince; so here, when men come to
pray, or preach, or speak, Oh how does a wicked heart seek it self? but when
the Lord is seen, now all attend on him; hence when God sends his people to
honor him, he first appears to them in his glory, and it never is long out of
their minds; hence Abraham forsook his own Country, Acts 7. Moses forsook
Egypt, he saw God invisible, Heb. 11. 26, 27. Psalm. 22. ult. All nations shall
remember and turn to the Lord; when the Lord is seen, all our glory is shame,
Isa. 6. and now glory in that, and make him as present as at the last day, then
all shall fall down before him.

4. See how every service you perform unto him, every act of holiness, quickened
by the Spirit of life is pleasing to him; if a Prince be with a man, and cannot
be pleased, nothing can content him, or we hear not one word from him whether
we please him or not, we shall grow weary of him at last; but to consider this,
he that serves me, him will my father honor, that every cup of cold water,
shall have a Disciples reward, that every groan shall be heard, that what you
do to one of these little ones, you do it to Christ, and Christ takes it as
kindly as done to himself, that the Lord remembers the love of your e^pousals,
Ier. 2. when you follow him in a land not sown, that the comfort of all your
labors, tears, sufferings, shall follow you to heaven, and for ever lodge in
that blessed breast of thine; Oh Brethren, says Paul, always abound, and spend
your time here, knowing your labor is not in vain in the Lord; why do men seek
to please men, and place their glory there? because men see and approve them;
Oh what is this to the approbation of a God?

SECT. VIII.
OH then preserve this your glory; when men have any thing in the world Use 6.
that is their glory, their Crown their Treasure, Oh they will keep that
especially; rather lose life than lose their names, and glory in the world; Oh
preserve the spirit of holiness, especially in these places; this has been
this only shall be our glory; and that not in name, and yet dead, but in deed
and in power we have had our Christian conversation, and that not by contenting
our selves with a little, but to be exactly holy; a little spot is soon seen in
your coat; you shall observe it.

1. When the Jews shall be made the glory of all the earth, their glory shall
not consist then in immediate Revelations, but in Sanctification; there shall
be holiness and sanctification; there shall be holiness on pots and horse
bridles.

2. When the Lord will be a defense to his people, and a shadow from heat, and
from the Sun! it shall be when the Lord has purged away the filth of men by a
spirit of burning; not which burns up all holiness, but filthiness and
selfconfidence in any holiness, and hypocrisy, and so they shall be holy, Isa.
4. 3, 4.

3. How many men stumble by opinions, divisions, etc. (the fruits of a corrupt
head, and streams of a dunghill heart) that had rather live in sorrows among
enemies, than divisions among friends! Oh the spirit of people, as soon as any
new Calf is made, fall down and worship it, and break the ancient Landmarks
which the Word has set, and then make prognostications of all ill weather, to
arise from opposing their opinion; never shall our glory be recovered till
these evils are confessed and lamented, and the sin of the heart, which begat
them.

4. I have wondered why so few be converted (though blessed be God, some the
Lord does pick out, a few Servants, Children and Natives) is it not because
either this exemplary holiness, which is our glory, is not, or not so shini^g,
but our lamps are dim? Ministers preach, and hearers are ^troubled, but they
then look upon scandals and offenses from others, and so are beaten off again,
Zach. 8. 20, 21, 22, 23. Oh therefore preserve it.

5. HOw will all the world ahhor the ways we walk in, if we miscarry?

6. God will have holy Churches, he is refining the whole world now for that
end, and will do so more and more, and go on.

SECT. IX.
Quest. How shall we preserve it?

Answ. 1. Take heed of harboring an ill opinion of holiness, for then if your
judgments dislike it, your tongues and your lives shall disgrace it: Take heed
of imagining that First, there is no grace in Saints, only immediate actings of
the Spirit; this is no spirit of holiness, no more than in Baalams Ass, through
which God spoke to him.

Secondly, That these graces are only common; who will seek much after that, or
esteem that which is but common? this is to despise the Spirit, to contemn the
blood of the Covenant, whereby the Church is sanctified.

Thirdly, That grace is so dark and obs^ure a thing always as no evidence can
be had by it, though it be peculiar grace: this is a high degree of disgrace to
the Spirit of Grace; if one should say here is a man, but believes not his
testimony, it is doubtful and very questionable what ever he says, it is a
dishonor to him, take heed of this: When the Spirit of Holiness comes to us in
form, it comes thus, with little peace; but when in power, with much assurance,
1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. It is a sad thing, if that which was the complaint of the
Prophet, shall be the complaint of the Spirit, Who has believed our report,
and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed!

2. Take heed of decaying in a spirit of bounty and love, and in largeness of
heart to all the people of God, nay, to all men, so far as you have time and
strength; let a man be never so great a Prince, if he once lose his bounty, he
loses his glory; so here Isa. 58. 8. Give bread to the hungry, then shall thy
light break out of obscurity: Many complain that New England has so little
love, Non-members not visited, not regarded (though many times unjustly) Oh
they thought to see so much love, and care, and pity; but here they may live
and never be spoken to, never visited; Oh take heed of this; Nothing beautifies
a Christian in the eyes of others more than much love, (hypocrisy is naught)
Oh excel here; visit poor families, sit one half hour and speak to discouraged
hearts, show kindness to strangers; such you were; I Will warrant God will bless
you, this was the glory of Christ, full of grace and truth.

3. Be very careful in receiving in of Members into Churches, one ill man will
be a spot and pollution to all the rest, Jude 12. spots in your feasts; you
know how many come over, how it begins to be pleaded for, What, not baptized,
and Professors? and yet how many are disfigured? therefore try them well; take
heed of thinking Elders or Churches are too strict.

Fourthly be much in prayer for the Churches, Isa. 62. 7. Give the Lord no rest
till he make Jerusalem the praise of the whole earth, that is the way; do you
see any sins in the Country, go and stand in the gap with Moses, and though the
Lord offer to do good to you, yet turn him not off so, till he promise to
relieve his poor Churches also; beg and this will do it; be much in fasting; it
is a shame for us (who are laying the foundations of many generations) not to
be much with God in prayer and fasting; and that when in other places there is
so much sowing of this seed.

CHAP. X.
Showing that counterfeit Grace is not lasting.
VERSE 8, 9. And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil, for our
lamps are going out. But the wise answered saying, Not so, lest there be not
enough for us and you; but go you rather to them that sell, and but for your
selves.
SECT. I.
IN these words is set down the effect which this awakening cry took in the
foolish Virgins only:

First, They come to feel, and so to complain of the want of oil.

Secondly, They petition the wise, that they would give them of their oil;
which latter is amplified in verse. 9. from the answer the wise made unto them.

We shall open the words as we come to observe any thing from them; and begin
now with the complaint [ Our lamps are gone out] or going out, it is all one;
The wise Virgins lamps did grow dim, but yet their oil was not spent; but here
their oil was spent, and hence their Lamps were going out.

That counterfeit and c^mmon grace of foolish Virgins, after some time of
glorious Observation 1.
profession, will certainly go out, and be quite spent: It consumes in the
using, and shining and burning. Luke 8. 18. To him that has shall be given,
but he that has not, shall be taken from him that which he has. Joh. 15. 2,
6. Every branch in me that bears no^ fruit it withers, then it is taken away,
and so it is consumed, and in time burned; and hence, many that are first, are
^n time last, Matthew. 9. 20. and many that are last first: Men that have been
most forward, decay; their gifts decay, life decays, and these are last: and
last are first; many newly brought home to Christ, excel them, and live so, and
die so, that one would think should never hold out. I need not speak more,
Scripture is so abundant: I say it is after some time of profession; for at
first it rather grows than decays and withers; but afterward they have enough
of it, it withers and dies: And look as it is with some bodies when they are
healthful, they grow by all means; but when once Nature is spent, and now
declining, nothing recovers them, though they may be kept at a stay for a time,
but dye they will with their best cordials in their mouths; so it is here.

For Explication of this Point, we are to attend how and why this is thus; and
that not in the worst, but in the best of the foolish Virgins.

First, The Spirit of God comes upon many hypocrites in abundant and plentiful
measure of awakening grace; I say it comes upon them as it did upon Balaam,
Numb. 24. 2. And as it is in overflowing waters, which spread far, and grow
very deep, and fill many empty places, they fall upon the ground, they come not
from any spring within the ground; and hence though they last not always, yet
they last some good time; so it is here, the Grace and Spirit of God come
suddenly and plentifully upon many a man, which gives them a time of
flourishing, it comes not from imitation, or education, or moral persuasion
only, but physically from the Spirit of God, 1 Samuel 10. 12. when they wondered
that Saul was among the Prophets, one answered, who is their father? who gave
them this gift of prophecy? is it not the Lord? so the fame Lord is rich to
Saul also: And I say it is only awakening grace; for renewing grace, savingly
to change their nature, is not given, but awakening grace, which works upon
conscience, and conscience upon the whole man; and thus it was here with these
Virgins, they had wonderful light, and a spirit of illumination to see the Lord
Jesus, and hence to look for him with much affection and forwardness, as well
as the wise, and to keep them company in Church Fellowship, and though they
were secure, to complain of their decays, and desire the spirit of grace which
they saw in the wise.

Secondly, Though it does come upon them thus, yet it does never rest within,
so as to dwell there, to take up an eternal mansion for himself, Isa. 11. 10.
his rest shall be glorio^s, Isa. 57. 15. This is a favor the Lord shows only to
the (...) above all people in the world besides. Romans 8. 11. If the Spirit
which raised up Jesus Christ from the dead dwell in you, it shall q^icken you,
and seal ^ou up to be Sons, as it is there expressed.

Thirdly, Hence it does decay by little and little; as a man that dwells not,
but so journeth for a little time in a house, he removes by little and little,
till at last he is quite gone; as ponds filled with rain water, which comes
upon them; not spring water that rises up within them, it dries up by little
and little until quite dry; as it is with light, after the Sun is declining and
setting, it decreaseth by little and little, until it be turned into darkness;
so it is here; and as it was in the Cherubims, where the glory of God was, and
the Lord departed by little and little; as in Saul, first he neglects the
command of the Lord in one thing, then in another, then the Spirit of God
departed, and (...) vil spirit of sadness came upon him; and then he threa^ens
David, then kills the Priests of the Lord, then goes to a Witch, and at last
kills himself; and I say this is because the Lord dwells not there; and hence
Ioh. 15. because the branch is not engraffed into the stock; and this is
usually at the very heigh^ of affection on and profession; as the stony ground
sprang up; when did it wither? when it came to its height; as flowers that come
to wither when they are come to their height of growth; and hence also men when
they have most, and best means, and affect, and love them, yet then they dye
and wither. And it decays by Four means.

SECT. II.
First THrough want of daily nourishment and supply from the Lord Jesus; for
look as it is with many bodies, suppose they have life, yet if there be not
daily nourishment for it, and wholesome also, it will dye ere long, and consume;
so it is here, there is a kind of life which hypocrites have from Christ, and
it may be fed, and so they live for a time; but this the Lord ever does for
them, they are not always fed, and hence die, as it is John 6. some were
quickened to follow after Christ in the wilderness for loaves, some for better
ends (as his Disciples) but the Lord knew their want, labor not for them at
that perishes, but for that which gives everlasting life, which Christ will
give you; and hence the whole Chapter is spent upon this, to feed upon himself,
whence the best were offended: Let a man partake of all Ordinances, Privileges
he shall find nothing else but decay unless the Lord be in them all to give
daily nourishment, Ephesians. 4. 16. daily, I mean, as there is decrease of that
taste they have had of the Lord.

Secondly, Through the emptiness of a form; for when the Spirit of God dwells
not, but only comes upon a man, it is not long but it corrupts into a form ever
after; a man at first knows many truths, and at first is affected with them, he
does not presently forget them, or shut his eyes against them, but after he
has known them a little while, at last the sweetness of that knowledge is
lost; and so he has a form of knowledge, like lessons which a man has been
much affected with, but having played or heard them often, he hears and knows
them, but is not affected with them, Ezekiel. 33. ult. So at first a man does many
duties with delight; stay a while, and he keeps the duty, but the delight is
gone in it, and so has an empty form; now where the power of godliness and the
eternal life of Christ is not, it degenerates firstly usually into this form,
and this is all that is left; and the form being empty, hence first, A man
comes to loath the truth, and profession of the ways of God which once he
loved, and so in time to fall and decay without as well as within; as drink or
milk at first are sweet, but stay a while and (the spirits not preserving
themselves) then it grows dead, and sour, and sapless, and so it is here.
Capernaumites at first be affected, then they fall to a form, then hard to be
wrought upon, their hearts fat under all means; if thy light be darkness, how
great is that darkness!

Thirdly, Through the power of lust; for where the Lord dwells not, there sin
reigns, and it will get head where it has had any affront, and so choke the
power of all means, and hence a man withers, as in the thorny ground, it grew
up and choked the word.

Fourthly, Through the fitness of external temptation, which must and will
prevail, when the Lord is not within to keep the Palace; it is stronger than
all common graces in the world, and will draw away the heart and life, Rev. 3.
10. there is an hour of temptation which tries men, which will discover men
indeed; now those temptations are ever suitable to places and persons.

SECT. III.
First, SOmetime the temptation is extreme want, as it was with the Israel^^es,
when they were under the oppressions of Pharaoh; Oh to sacrifice to the Lord in
a wilderness, and to enjoy the land of Canaan, where they should have
Ordinances, Oh they are much taken with this! and many prayers and groans to be
delivered out of their oppressions; but when they came to the wilderness, and
there did want bread, and then water, now they murmur; which murmuring God
remembers, and casts them off for: Had they not Moses, and the cloud, and God's
promise, and experience, why did they complain? Oh to bear want, they could
not! extreme want is like extreme sickness, it makes all sweet things bitter;
some wants men can bear, but not extremity; this saddle does pinch so hard; so
the young man, forsake all for me, says Christ, but he could not; God and
Creatures are enough, but not God alone; so it is with many a man, he can be
content to lose something, but when brought very low, cares and fears grow up
and choke all.

Secondly, Sometimes the want of spiritual supply; a man looked for much from
the Ordinances, and finds it not; not because the Lords heart is streitned, but
because theirs are not enlarged; and hence they have enough of God, and all his
Ordinances; they have had the heart of them, and now let them lie fallow, Zach.
11. my soul loathed them, and theirs me.

Thirdly, sometimes abundance of outward blessings, peace, liberty, plenty
here; now these things, like ground in Summer, it is strange to see what lusty
weeds now there be, that did appear dead in time of winter, D^ut. 8. 11. Oh
then take heed thou forget not the Lord thy God; now proud and secure, and
forsake all.

Fourthly, Sometimes persecutions from men: if hot and total ruin be
threatened, this scares from God.

Fifthly, Sometimes corrupt Teachers and delusions among them.

Sixthly, Increase of iniquity in good and bad, in the place where men live;
hence love waxes cold: All which are Matthew. 24.

I will name no more, but thus men's common grace comes to wither, and dye in
them; and the Reasons are these.

SECT. IV.
HEnce do not trust men too far, nor boast of any man too much, especially Use
1.
in regard of his glorious profession and affections at the first; God sends
diverse of his faithful servants to a place, and many at first hearing are
wrought upon, battered down, convinced, mourning after peace, going to
Ministers, delight in Ordinances; now many Ministers bless God for their
conversion, and many a Christian is put out of doubt of it, parents of their
children, and children of their parents, one brother of another, and one
Christian neighbor of another; whom he got out once to hear, and once hearing
overcame; and for a time there is no other: Oh take heed of boasting too much,
it may be they may and will fall (before they have lived many years) down, when
at their height: what man was ever sought unto more than John? all Judea came
unto him, yet at last they forsake him, rejoiced but a season in that light;
they went also from him to Christ, Ioh. 7. 26, 32. yet John complains, none
received his testimony; Christ himself preached in Capernaum, and (...)
exalting a man, they boasted in him; yet only a few Babes which the Lord
wrought upon; the Galathians would lose their eyes for Paul, yet a^terward they
flight him, and join with false teachers against him: Oh therefore pray for
them, and weep for them, but do not trust them too far; neither trust your
selves too much; Ioh. 8. 31. Then are ye my disciples if you continue; Demas
forsakes Paul, all in Asia forsake me.

SECT. V.
HEnce be not offended if we see many apostatize, and fall from their most Use
3.
eminent profession; the Lord has here foretold that after some profession
their lamps will go out; we do not wonder if ponds full in winter are dry in
summer, because it is the time and season of it, and they want springs to feed
them; and never was there any time since the world began that there were such
Apostacies as now.

First, One man after much profession intends to follow the Lord, conscience is
troubled at humane inventions; Oh, says he, if delivered, well enough, though
I lose never so much! well, he lays out all, and is delivered; but that which
quiets conscience, does not quiet his heart and affections; but his very loss
for conscience makes his lusts and desires after other things break out more
eagerly, and men cannot now live upon Gospel only, with bread and water; no,
no, you are deceived; as it is with sick men, they let go all their estate for
recovery; but when recovered, they must get up their estate again, this will
not satisfy: And thus some fall spiritually.

Secondly, Others they sought for much in Ordinances, but finding not what they
looked for, Ordinances are but as pictures fair a far off; but when men come
near them, Word, and Fellowship, and people of God, then they despise them,
because they find not a living God there.

Thirdly, While God keeps men under sad temptations, wants and afflictions; Oh
then they are humble, and pray; but when blessed with ease, and peace, and
plenty, and honor, then how lofty and secure? this is better than the Lord:
Never such a decay of the spirit of prayer; never was there such a conconfusion
in the world, such burning of Cities, slaying of men, rents of Churches, God
minding to stain the pride of all glory; and yet never such hearts.

Object. But to stand so long, and yet to fall, seems strange?

Answ. If soon it is a wonder, but if long it is no wonder; if once past
growing, you do not wonder if an oak be now decaying.

Obj. But they keep their profession still, only in one thing vile, the error
is only in their minds; a spirit of discention from the people of God.

Ans. Scarce shall you see one man in a hundred that is vile in every thing,
that falls totally; the foolish Virgins did not so, yet their oil was spent,
and their lamps going out; there was a man that was slain suddenly, and his
blood in his face was fresh, his beauty glorious, and many weeks continued
without putrefaction, yet life within was gone; so it is the condition of many a
man by one wound or sin: And hence a Physician at Wittenb^rg writes of the
cause of it; be not therefore offended at them, but wonder at the Lord that he
keeps thee; I know there are decaying Saints, but they recover again here.

SECT. VI.
OH therefore labor for the grace that may last, Use 3.
the bread that may last to everlasting life; in all bargains and buildings men
will have a special eye to that which will last; if it be rotten, let whosoever
will take it; and be sure it is so; for when God does fully awaken you, you
will see it is not right; the foolish Virgins they though they were we^l
before; but now after some time, and awakened, they see it will not hold nor
continue. For the Lords sake be suspicious here; fear lest a promise being
left, any fall short of it; other things will not last, neither Creatures, nor
the Lord to do you good, unless you have everlasting grace. It is a time the
Lord is stripping the world of all ornaments, your Wives, Children, Churches;
God will take your Husbands, Parents, Members, Ministers from you; yet if a
heart to close with the Lord, Oh this is right.

Quest. How?

Answ. 1. Take heed of any affection, without first subduing the contrary lust;
for if you mingle them, the one will choke the other; this is sowing among
thorns, Ier. 4. 3, 4.

2. Maintain it upon an everlasting root; if the Lord gives you grace, and you
set it in your own garden, it will dye; no, let it receive life from the
promise, that unchangeable love, and grace, and faithfulness; say, if that
supports not I fall, 1 Samuel 23. 5. Isa. 46. from gray hairs, I will carry thee;
Psa. 23. 2, 3. the Lord leads to waters, he feeds: But I decay? yet he restores
my soul: Oh but he afflicts much? yet his rod and staff comfort me; I shall
dwell in the house of God for ever. Be more empty as the Lord fills you. But oh
the sin of this world; all the creatures in the world cannot content, but grace
does, and hence men regard not the Lord; and hence you perish, and your grace
shall perish also.

CHAP. XI.
Unregenerate persons may have a sense of their want of Grace.
SECT. I.
Our Lamps are out.
THat foolish Virgins, or unregenerate persons may see and so complain
Observation 2.
of an utter want of all saving grace.

Look but upon this pattern, they thought they were rich; and had something,
but now they see they have nothing; and hence when they search their lives, our
lamps are o^t; when they search their hearts, is there any Grace, or Spirit of
Christ, or Christ by his Spirit there? no, our oil is spent, and hence give us
of your oil; they saw nothing now. The same persons that are sometimes so puffed
up, that they think they are rich and stand in need of nothing, may be basely
dejected, and so feel a want of all things.

Quest. How may this appear?

Answ. First, Because this is no more than what the Devils have; if this be
Sanctification, to see, I have no Sanctification; if this be Humility, to see,
I have no humility; if this be cleanness, to see, I have nothing but
uncleanness; the Devils then are sanctified and cleansed; who as they are
unclean spirts, and accursed of God, and set apart to all evil and sin, and
bound up in the chains of darkness, so they know it; they believe the Word, and
they know they have no Christ, no Grace, no love of God, never shall see mercy,
comfort, etc. and tremble at this, with whom there is nothing but a fearful
looking for of Judgment.

Secondly, Because this is no more than what the Law may bring a man unto; For
by the Law Romans 3. 20. is the knowledge of sin; i. e. not only of gross sins
but also of secret sins; for Conscience which is in every man's heart will
discover the first, men that live under the Law see more; and hence Paul speaks
of himself, so far forth as under the Law, Romans 7. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Now that
which may be wrought in a man merely by the Law, may be wrought in a man under
the Law; a man under the Law, is under the reign of the Law, which is to
convince of pollution universal, and so to curse; The Law is not the
ministration of life to any man, 2 Cor. 3. 7. Gal. 3. 24. and if the Law may
convince of sin thus, this sight of sin and vileness is no part of eternal
life; and therefore foolish Virgins may well come thus far; and this will
especially be found among them where there is a searching Ministry, that there
is scarce any close conveyance but the Word discovers them: Gehazi cannot carry
it so closely, not Ananias so cunningly, but Elisha and Peter will find it out;
Heb. 4. 12. The Word is quick and powerful, and searchetls, which is but a
common work; and hence when Peter had told Simon Magus, Thou art in the gall of
bitterness, he denies it not, but says, Oh pray for me; indeed if the Word
discovers the strongholds, and high forts, and secret lusts and imaginations,
and beats them down, and so brings the Soul in subjection to Christ, and into
captivity, that is it which is the power of the Gospel, and love of Christ
peculiar to his peoples works; but to let a man see he has nothing but filth,
and to be a little affected with it, this is no more than what is wrought in a
deceitful hearer. Iam. 1. 23, 24. The Law or Word lets a graceless heart (a
forgetful hearer) see himself; and what can it truly discover to him but his
vileness? this glass will discover their smallest spots; this Sun will let you
see ^otes; you know and see, and that is all.

Thirdly, Because this is no more than the awakening of sleepy Conscience,
which the worst man, and closest hypocrite may in time have; Cain's conscience
while it is secure, thinks his offering as good as his Brothers; but when
awakened, now my sin is greater than I can bear; Saul goes on in persecuting
David, and thinks God will help; and hence 2 Samuel 28. 5. goes to Urim, etc. but
God answers him not; now he sees his condition, and makes a doleful complaint
of it, That God was departed, and no answer: This is usual; Psalm. 9. 20. Put
them in fear, O God, that they may know themselves to be but men, weak, sinful,
vile men: When the Lord sets up his Judgment Seat in a man's conscience, not
only gross evils, but the secrets of all hearts, all men's hypocrisies are then
opened to themselves, as at last day to all the world; and hence as hypocrites
consciences shall be broken open at the last day, so now also in this life,
they may see their profession to be but paint; hence Isa. 33. 14. Hypocrites
are afraid when God appears in anger; Oh who shall dwell with God? they are
sometimes so confounded with the holiness of God, and the terror of God from
thence against sin, that who shall dwell with God? are there any in the world
that can stand before him? now all is paint, and vile before him.

Fourthly, Because Hypocrites may have experience of a great change wrought in
them, which decaying and corrupting, they may sensibly find a want of what
once they had; which though they thought it had been saving grace, or that
which would commend them to God; now they see they have no grace at all, hence
are lest as these Virgins; if a man never was rich, he cannot be sensible of
being a Bankrupt, a Beggar; Look as it was with Adam, he was in a happy estate,
in the image of God; now when lost, he saw himself naked, and was ashamed, and
was this saving grace? no: So though Hypocrites attain not to that
righteousness, yet they may attain to many spirit^al excellencles, which they
may prize exceedingly, as those that commend them before God and men; but these
corrupting, they may now easily see their nakedness, and vileness, and want of
all: Saul had the Spirit of God we know, but 1 Samuel 16. 14. an evil spirit
came, and Gods Spirit departed; did not Saul know this? the having of Gods
Spirit made him more sensible of the evil spirit; so it is with many a man; the
Spirit of God does depart, and he cannot pray nor prophecy, nor speak, nor
think, nor do, as he did; nay he may find an evil spirit upon him; and is this
unknown? may not foolish Virgins know this? as Sampson when shaved.

Fifthly, Because that which is sometimes a just judgment of God upon a carnal
heart, that they may see and feel; but many times (I say not always, because
the Lord does use this to prepare for mercy) it is so that men that have
despised grace, and Christ, men that have colored it over with God, and
thought highly of themselves for what they had; they shall see all their
profession is but paint, and all their Gold, Tin and Copper: Io^. 8. 21. You
shall seek me, and shall not find me, but shall dye in your sins; seeking ever
presupposes a want; so that you shall find a want of me; and if of me, of all
life, of all grace, of all comfort and good; and this loss the Lord makes a
punishment which they shall bring upon themselves by contempt of him.

SECT. II.
HEnce we may see the woeful condition of those. viz. First, Consider how far
from eternal life those are that never knew their fall; Use 1.
the foolish Virgins knew their want of oil and shining, and yet were foolish,
and yet were shut out; how great is their fall then, and how great their
misery, that have had burning lamps, but now know it not? this is the state of
many a professor, many a man who is fallen from the Lord, and the affections
once he had, but he knows it not; God did enlighten him, but now he is blinding
of him; he did affect him, but he is now benumming of him; he did make him
tender, but not he is making his heart fat; he did make him low in his own eyes
(as Saul, but when a King then pu^t up) so God is swelling of him; but this is
most grievous, he knows it not, Isa. 6. If a man did know his lamp were going
out, he might seek, as these, for it, and possibly find it; but now no hope
unless the Lord help; as we see men wounded and falling, they are astonished at
the blow, that they know it not, and may die, unless those about them dress
them, and send to and fro for help for them; so it is with many; men are so
stupifled with some blows of their lusts, that unless Christian friends exhort,
admonish and send their prayers and tears to heaven to the Lord, no hope of
recovery again; and whether the Lord will be entreated is hard to say; surely
it is rare, and yet thus it is 1 Ioh. 5. sometimes, if it be not a sin unto
death; but in a Brother, grace will fetch help; but if the man never had grace,
and now fell without feeling, there is little hope; if a man can feel no sun
rising upon him, nor yet how the day goes away, whether the Sun be setting or
no, it argues miserable carelessness, or miserable blindness, and that the man
is in darkness; so here.

Secondly, What will become of them that were never cast down so low as these,
that never came to be so good as Hypocrites,

For 1. You were born and have lived not only in a sinful estate, but in a
Christless estate; dead without all life, every part of thee polluted.

2. If the Lord does draw any out of this estate, he will make you know what
poor creatures you be, that you shall say, I thought I had been thus and thus,
but I see I am wretched; I thought I should be saved, but now I am condemned,
so that your mouth shall be stopped, Romans 3. 21. else you would never come to
the Lord, to your Fathers house, and prize the grace of God, if any husks to
live upon now.

3. You never knew this; never came to complain to any Christian, Oh my oil is
spent, my lamp is out; Christ and Spirit, and all good is gone; no, you think
your selves rich and want nothing; you have some knowledge, restraint of good
affections, and full of these, The Lord will spue you out his mouth, if it is
thus with you: Nay, although you have means and hear of it, yet all the world
cannot make you know your nakedness, misery, sin and emptiness; Well, if the
Lord does not set up a Judgment Seat now, you shall be called before it one
day, and then your secrets shall be made manifest before all the world; and
because you say you see, therefore your sin remains; Jer. 9. 41.
so say I to you: You never did contemn God, nor hate God, etc. therefore your
contempt remains; if it be, there Christ will discover it, and so remove it;
but is it not so ^ therefore you sin remains.

SECT. III.
HEnce see the deceit of that sinful opinion, Use 2.
That true Sanctification is to see I have no Sanctification; and cleaness of
heart to see nothing but uncleanness; and that this is poverty of Spirit, to
see no grace in a man's self, nor no Christ there; and this not only hath^been,
but it seems is scattered still; which as it is pleasing to many a graceless
heart, and suitable to his lust, so it carries a fair cloak of Humility and
Self-denial in it, and makes way for such an Evidence which the Scripture did
never yet declare.

Poverty of Spirit is a Grace peculiar to them that shall have the Kingdom of
Heaven; But to see no Grace is common to those that shall be shut out of the
Kingdom of heaven; none but those that are justified can be savingly
sanctified; many that shall be condemned, may see, do see that they have no
Sanctification: And therefore this is no Sanctification.

1. If this be Poverty of Spirit to see no Grace, then Common-grace is
Special-grace, peculiar to the Elect, as true Poverty is.

2. Then it is a grace of the Spirit of God to maintain an untruth, and to give
the holy Ghost the lie; for where there is Poverty, there is Grace and Christ.

3. Then the Grace of Poverty of Spirit, should be quite contrary to the Spirit
of Grace, which makes us know the things given us of God; but this poverty of
Spirit makes us not to know them at all.

Yet many will profess this true Poverty of spirit, and this is true
Sanctification indeed.

First, It is true, where there was never any of the Grace of Christ, but men
have run upon Reformation without Christ, and affection, etc. there men are
bound to see their black feet, and happy is the heart that can pull off every
feather from such crests; but where it is, and the Lord has given evidence
thereby according to his Word; now to deny it is devilish, for it was he that
said Job did not serve God for naught, and is a lie, of which he was the
Father; and is great unthankfulness to the Spirit for what he has done.

Secondly, If there be no Grace in a Christian nor Spirit, but all in Christ,
then say it upon the house tops, and be not ashamed of it; men must see
nothing, because they have nothing; otherwise let this delusion rot, and never
find acceptance in holy hearts; and yet how many still describe an Hypocrite by
all the Graces of the Spirit, Faith, receiving Christ as King, Priest, and
Prophet, etc. and so are clean creatures and upright men, by seeing nothing in
themselves, contrary to Christ, Io^. 13. You are clean, but not all.

Thirdly, It is true, a gracious heart is apt to deny all the Lord has done
for him; yet the Lord likes not this; as Calvin thinks Peter did, Lord, hands,
and feet, and all; no, says the Lord, thou art clean in head, and all but thy
feet; and hence needs no washing but in that: And what more frequent than this
sin? but to make what is sinful a duty, this is to turn day into night, and
night into day, to call evil good, and bitter sweet.

SECT. IV.
Quest. 1. BV^ does not the Lord bring every man to see nothing in himself?

Answ. Yes, that the Lord does in preparing him for Christ, or in drawing him
toward Christ, but it is where there is nothing, neither poverty or any other
grace.

Quest. 2. But is not this poverty of spirit, or do not those that are poor in
spirit see nothing?

Answ. 1. In regard of their unregenerate part, which the longer they live, the
more they feel of the evil of it, and so the more poor they grow; they see no
good there, and so account themselves the most miserable men, mourning more
under it than ever; yet to see no good at all in themselves, this, if their
eyes be open, they are not to say, I delight in the Law in the inner man; and
hence a regenerate Christian is vile in his own eyes after all duties and
enlargements, he sees how all is defiled with a filthy heart, and hence Prove.
30. 4. I am brutish; and he speaks of his natural estate, and in that part, for
else it is cross to 1 Cor. 2. 10.

2. They see nothing in themselves to commend them to God in point of
Justification; here all Paul's past and present righteousness is accounted dung.

Quest. 3. If an Hypocrite sees and feels nothing, and those that are poor in
spirit do so? what is the difference?

Ans. The differences are many. 1. He that is truly poor, sees so much
vileness, as that he loathes himself, Ezekiel. 6. But the Hypocrite if he has any
excellency, remains full of it, proud with it; if it be gone, he seeks himself
again, and loathes not himself.

2. True poverty of spirit drives a man out of himself, and all carnal
contents, tents, as well as graces, to mercy, to live there, and cleave there,
as in the Prodigal, he did not only see a want, but feel a need of bread; I die
without it, Psa. 40. 9, 10. But another that sees no good, either is not driven
out of his contents, but when he sees nothing, as C^in, builds Cities, or if he
see's some good in himself, then he is not driven out of himself.

SECT. V.
HEnce see which is the surest and safest way of evidencing our good estate,
Use 3.
for here men now are perplexed, either it is by seeing no grace, and so
expecting the witness of the Spirit, or by seeing some saving work of grace,
and so looking to the witness of the Word, and waiting for the confirmation of
the Spirit; for seals do but confirm the Promise and Covenant; if it be by
seeing no grace, then either by seeing no grace, without having the being of
it, and now wait for a revelation, and then it is a delusion, for he is under
the condemnation of the Word, and therefore far from consolation of the Spirit;
or by seeing no grace without seeing the being of it: If so, then a man must
seek for a witness of the Spirit, without understanding the meaning of the
Spirit, or of the witness of it; and so a man must shut his eyes against part
of the truth, that he may see another part; a man must see that he is beloved,
but not thou believer, or thou called, art loved or justified. Oh then take
heed of this way of evidence; or else by now seeing grace, and waiting for a
witness; now this is safest; for when ever the witness comes it is certainly
right now, not a delusion: Hereby we shall see the full meaning of the witness
and compass of the Lords love. And therefore take heed of denying all grace,
and seeing nothing, and then wait for a Revelation, and if it comes now it is
right; no such matter; you may see nothing, and to hell, and no consolation to
them that see nothing; think not that this is poverty; it may be a seal to a
blank, to such a one as the Lord never intended mercy unto; that which God
promises pray for, Zach. 13. ult. first, to say It is my people, and then the
Lord is my God; find that the Lord makes you his people, and then say so. Let
all know this is never questioned, whether the Spirit be the cause of witness,
and clearing our estate; but whether by seeing nothing, or showing something;
here is the mystery of it: Oh that God would make you hear, that are called away
from the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ: These foolish Virgins were wiser
than many now a days in this particular, they cried for oil in their lamps, or
they knew they could not be accepted of the Bridegroom.

Oh search and try your selves thoroughly, Use 4.
for you may come in time to see all your paint fall off, all your guilt
discovered, etc.

CHAP. XII.
Of the desire of Grace that may be in Hypocrites.
SECT. I.
Give us of your Oil, etc.
THat foolish Virgins may, and seriously do desire, Observation 3.
not only Salvation, but Grace it self. For these Virgins did not only desire
the Lord to open to them, but give us of your oil; and this they do not desire
in show, but seriously, for they felt a want of it; our lamps are out, out oil
is spent, our misery is great; Oh now help us with your grace: This may appear
in these particulars.

First, They may feel a loss and a want of it, and having some hope in this
life to gain it, hence may seek it; thus not only the Virgins, but Simon Magus
Acts 8. 24. when he was convinced he was in the gall of bitterness; he does not
only content himself with his own, but does commend himself to the desires of
the Church, and Apostles, Oh pray for me, that none of these things may come
upon me, but that I may be brought into another estate, whereby I may escape
all this, Amos 8. 11, 12. I will bring a famine, not of bread, but of hearing
the Word, i. e. you shall feel a woeful want of that, and of the consolation,
life, and spirit of that, and you shall go from sea to sea to find it, and
shall not: Oh that I had taken my time, will the careless ones say!

Secondly, They may have a high opinion of it, and see a mavelous excellency
in it, and hence may be drawn to desire it, Ioh. 6. 33, 34. My father gives you
bread from heaven, which Moses gave not, and such bread as gives life unto the
world; then said they, Lord, ever give us of this bread; and yet they were
carnal, and desires carnal, arising from the sight of the excellency of it;
that Scribe Matthew. 12. 33, 34. To love the Lord thy God with all thy heart is
better than all burnt offerings and sacrifices; Oh that is admi^able, the
Ordinances are good, and Creatures are good, but this is better: As a man when
he admires the world, he ever desires the world, though he never has it; so
here, as in Balaam: Not only Word and Spirit may commend it, and so they may
desire it, but the excellency of it in the lives of the Saints will commend it,
so as carnal hearts may desire the company and love of such men above all in
the world, Rev. 3. 8. Genesis 26. 28. We saw God was with th^e, and that thou w^rt
blessed of the Lord; and hence there are some desires after it, 2 Pet. 2. 19.
Men escape pollutions by Christ.

Thirdly, They have a taste of the sweetness of it, and hence may desire it,
Heb 6. John was a burning light, and they rejoiced in him, and all Judea and
Jerusalem flocked to h^s Ministry, and came into the wilderness after him; the
savor of the grace of Christ may wonderfully draw desires after it, they may
find such a sweetness in it, L^k. 13. 26. Many shall say, Lord, have not we can
and drank in thy presence? that is, they find much sweetness there; the Lord
taught among them; they desired him, and thought he was their own, yet shut
out; and hence verse 24. Many shall se^k to enter in, and shall not be able.

Fourthly, They may and do grow up in a glorious profession in the ways of
grace, and such a profession as to stand it out against persecution, as the
thorny ground did, and may have some growth toward it, which cannot be without
some desires and springings of heart after it.

SECT. II.
HEnce let this be an item to all the people of God, to preserve with all care,
and not to lose, Use 1.
but to make much of the Spirit of Grace inherent in them; for look as the Lord
Jesus, when he would make his Disciples wonder at their blessedness, and make
much of him, and his love, says he, Many Kings and Prophets have desired to
see these days, and have not seen them; so many professors of great parts and
gifts shall desire to have that Spirit of Grace and Peace which you have, and
shall never see it, never shall have it: when David's heart began to be drawn
away by the evils of the world, and then beheld the vanity of that, his desires
are now turned another way, Oh it is good for me to draw nigh to God, that is
good: As if he had said, though it be good to have the things themselves; yet
it is not good for me to draw too nigh in my desires and esteem of them, but
good for me to draw nigh to him. It may be sometimes your hearts are taken off
from esteeming your condition, and what the Lord has done for you; and hence
no desire after the Lord or his Grace, but the lawful comforts of the world,
not inordinately, but if I had so much, or as good as others, then well. Psalm.
141. 4. David entreats the Lord not to incline his heart after any evil thing,
no not after the wickeds good things, Let me not eat of their dainties; for
grant that thou losest all these things, which others have; the time will come
when the greatest Prince, and those that have their desires filled here, shall
say, Oh that I was in that man's estate! Let the Lord therefore exercise you
with many wants and sorrows; remember this, your end will be peace, which the
worst would give a world for another day.

What then will become of them that never desired grace at all, because they
are well enough without it! Use 2.
a man cannot live (say they) by praying, and hearing of Sermons; such duties
are troublesome; hindrances, not desirable helps; and when any Ordinance comes,
when will Sabbaths be ended? and as for the people of God themselves they can
see no difference between them and other men, nay, they think them worse; if
this be your Religion, God keep me from your Religion. Nay; they can see no
beauty in Christ to desire him; they can desire that they were not kept inso
much on the Sabbaths, not so much pains taken with them to instruct them; it
may be these may desire that their hands be kept from stealing, their tongues
from cursing, and their feet from running to shed blood; but the life of Grace,
and power of it, they desire not that, nor never did: I remember when David was
in extremity, Lord, says he, my groanings are not hid from thee; this was his
comfort when he could not pray, Psalm. 38. 9. But here it is otherwise: Can
thou if extremity should come upon thee, say, Now I am not able to speak, Oh
remember my closet tears, my midnight groans, and daylight complaints, and
those daily sighings after thee which have arisen from this sorrowful heart?
did the Lord never work this in thee? if extremity comes, and thou have no such
thing to witness for thee, do you think that you shall meet the Bridegroom in
peace? Oh no! go home, and make thy mo^n over thy own Soul; the Lord is far
from me; if many seek to enter and shall never be able, what will become of me?

Hence see how many people deceive themselves in their evidencing of a good
estate, Use 3.
who because they see no oil in their vessel, nor see no shining in their
lives, yet because they desire it, they think hereupon the Lord accepts them
and their desires, and therefore the Lord will fulfill them; this very conceit
keeps thousands in their sins and miseries, and that under conviction of them;
yet I desire it were better with me; and they think Hypocrites make shows of
this and that, yet they have not unfeigned desires; and here thousands rest,
and this slays them, as Prove. 27. 5. The desires of the sluggard kills him.

SECT. III.
Quest. BUt does not the Lord respect the groanings of his people? does not
Christ say, Joh. 4. 10. if thou had asked, etc. does not the Lord look upon
the inner man, the very frame, nay, desires that have been past?

Answ. Yes, there be some desires which are evidences; some which are not; I
shall discover them that be unsound in the particular example of these foolish
Virgins, etc.

First, Those are unsound desires, which arise in the soul easily, without
feeling a need of the Lords almighty power and Spirit of life to work them at
first; we shall find that the desires of regenerate Christians do not come
easily, but they find a need of the Lord to draw them. Ier. 31. 10. Lam. 5.
21. but the desires of others spring up easily and quickly; as these foolish
Virgins, they wanted oil, they could quickly desire it; and they go to their
fellow-breth^en for help, Oh give us of your oil. Look as it is with wild Rye
and Pease, they will come up at the season of the year in abundance, without
sowing or plowing, the ground bears them naturally; but other corn and grain
will not come so easily; your ground will not bear it till plowed and dug,
and then the hand of man must set it, and dye it must, before it can live
again; so here, if desires come and spring up easily, it is a sign they are
wild; the Lord must break the heart, and then sow these, and plant these from
heaven, and you must fetch it out of heaven, else it is naught; for when the
Lord works saving desires indeed, he ever sows them in a broken heart, which is
thoroughly broken indeed; when God sets the smoking flax on fire (which are
desires) he first bruiseth the reed it self.

Secondly, The subject in which these desires are; a man has a Son and a
Servant; the Son has all his desires granted him, because he has a sonly
spirit; all the Father has is for him, that may be good for him; a Servant
desires importunately, but he prays from the spirit of a Servant, and all that
his Master has is not for him; and therefore if he pray for the inheritance or
a part of it, of the portion of the Son, shall he have it? no, he shall have
what is fit for a Servant; so it is here, the Lord has some Sons in his
Churches; these praying and desiring from a son-like spirit, all that God has
being theirs, they shall have it; and hence Psalm. 145. 18, 19, 20. He will
fulfill the desires of them that fear him, and love him, and delight themselves
in him; for that is the son-like disposition; when he is cut short of all
comfort in the world, nay, when he may have his fill of them, yet he delights
in his Fathers face, love, and grace, and fellowship, and house, Psalm. 27. 4.
For they are heirs and coheirs with Christ, being Sons; but now there are
Servants in the house of God; shall they have their wills and lusts? no; thus
it was with these foolish Virgins; they were only Servants in the house, no
true Spouse or Sons, and were foolish at best, and had not the spirits of Sons,
but had their lusts; never were espoused savingly to the Lord Jesus himself,
nor laid up all their hope in him, but were foolish and that is the ground why
others desires are heard, not theirs.

Thirdly, Unsound desires make after a certain measure only, whereas the
desires of Saints seek after this Grace without measure; and thus the foolish
Virgins fell short of the wise; all that they could get was little enough for
themselves; but the foolish look after some of their oil, as many a man looks
upon the gifts and parts of another; Oh, says he, if I was as honest, as
humble a man as such a one! and many a man sets up such a measure, and if he
has that, is well, while he wants that miserably: Look wistly upon the foolish
Virgins, they did content themselves with a measure, and now they are in want
of it, seek for it; at first a little did content them, and now when it is
spent, a little will serve them again: And what is their measure?

1. So much as will beautify and adorn them before men, our Lamp is out.

2. So much as will comfort them against the coming of Christ; for now they
were troubled that their oil was spent, whereby they might meet the Bridegroom:
he that desires it for a little measure of it, his desires are certainly
unsound; so much as will serve his turn (he cuts his coat according to his
cloth) but he that desires it without measure, e contra, as Paul, Phil. 3. 12.
That I may apprehend by any means, that for which I am apprehended: As
Chrysostom calls Paul that insatiabilis Dei cultor; for he makes it his last
end; as he that desires wealth without measure, though he gets not all the
wealth of the world, yet the more he has, the more he craves; this his fleshly
lust is his last end.

Obj. But he may desire it without measure for his own ends.

Ans. I confess it is true; for men may desire honor and no honor but by gifts,
and no gifts but by grace; and hence may desire infinitely, but yet it is but a
measure, viz. to serve his own ends, but not the Lords ends; to set up himself;
true desire of grace, is for that which may pull down self, and make God all,
Psalm. 119. 4, 5.

Fourthly, It is not their only desire, or the only thing they desire, viz. the
good Spirit of the Lord, and that they might not live or any thing else in
them, but that the Lord may live, and his Grace and Kingdom may prevail in
their hearts; the desires of Saints are only after this; or if their desires
are after other things, the Spirit lusts against them, 2 Samuel 23. 5. As carnal
desires are after life, and the comforts of it, so spiritual desires are after
the life of Christ in them, and the comforts of the Lord thereby, Psalm. 27. 3,
4. One thing I have desired, and that I will seek for; what was it? a Crown, a
Kingdom? no, but that I may dwell in the Lords house for ever, and visit his
Temple: Notable is that example of Abraham, Heb. 11. Two things he met with
that might draw down his desires.

1. He came to a land which God promised to give him, where he lives among
enemies and in fears.

2. He might have returned to another Country, and now have been better.

3. God blessed him, etc. but it was nothing he desired, only another above;
hence God is not ashamed to be called his God; but the foolish Virgins fell
short of this, and hence they now seek only in times of extremity: And this is
the frame of many graceless hearts in time of extremity. 1. When all grace is
gone. 2. When death is come, then they seek earnestly after the Lord, and
Grace; Oh their sin lies heavy! Oh then an humble heart is sweet! but before
their hearts were overcome with lusts after other things; and this double heart
every carnal heart has, Ephesians. 2. 3, fulfilling the lusts of the mind, i. e.
Diabolical lusts, and lusts of the flesh, i. e. sensual and beastly lusts, it is
the state of all men; and hence promises are not made simply to men's seeking
the Lord, for they may miss, but to them that do it with their whole heart
Psalm. 119. ^2. Ier. 29. 13. this they never do; and hence men pray daily, and
live in their lusting all the day after; men long in misery, but are cool in
peace.

SECT. IV.
Quest. BUt seeing there is in Saints two Natures, flesh lusting against the
spirit, and spirit against flesh; and a double heart in a Reprobate, whereby he
desires grace and other things, how shall we distinguish them?

Answ. 1. The lusts after grace and worldly things in an Hypocrite agree
together in the same heart; but those lusts which are after the flesh and
spirit in a regenerate heart are contrary one to another, and like fire and
water one seeking to destroy the whole being of the other. Exem. gr. A man
wants the things of this world, he seeks and desires after them, riches, honor,
rest, and peace; but thinks he, if I have no more but this, I may to hell; if
no Grace; hence he desires that, and so doing now he has peace, and all is
quiet with him, and goes on sweetly in a way of profession and prayer; and a
gracious heart is ready thus to do, and to make his head lie soft with two
pillows, but yet the Spirit rises up against this, that the soul thinks, I
shall fall by this heart; Lord, how apt to rest in these lees! Gal. 5. 1.
lusts in Hypocrites are like brethren, that help one another, to this end to
get peace; but here as enemies, to destroy such a cursed peace as that is in
the Godly.

2. In a false heart, lusts and desires after these things are dear to them,
like their limbs and best members, they cannot be nor cannot do without them;
but in Saints they are sores and blains, and so hated of them; ex. gr. Let a
man have a full table, and fair estate, and outward blessings, promising much,
and the Ordinances of God, and a heart to follow God there; now see him lively
in the service of God; but let him be brought to extremities, and want of all
this, and fears of poverty, estate wastes, poverty appears, many rates come
in, and the wife cries out; now he falls down to the earth in discontent or
worldliness, and his life and affection to Ordinances, or the fervants of God,
is now gone; as it is with a bird, when she has two wings she can fly, but
when she has only one, then she falls, and the fowler takes her, because it
was a limb precious to her; so here: Thus it was with David's servants at
Ziglag, 1 Samuel 30. 4. all wept till they could weep no more; but here it was
otherwise with David, he could fly to God without those wings; so when God
gives a man a condition not so great as he would, and the heart lusts after so
much, and God crosses; he cannot be content with a little, or with a mean
estate, because his lust is his limb, he cannot suffer it to be cut off, or be
pa^^d; if a man has a wooden leg, he can cut it answerable to his shoo, but if
but a limb, he must have his shoe cut answerable to his leg; because it is his
limb, no cutting of that le^s; oh it is dear: So it is with a man that has a
lust after any thing, it is dear, and hence he is said to live in them, and to
be in the flesh; but the desires after these things in a gracious heart, they
are blains, they can be without them; Oh never such a happiness if the Lord
would dead them to me, Gal. 5. 24. they that are in Christ have crucified the
flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof.

3. The lusts and desires in a false heart are reigning lusts, and make the
lusts after grace and holiness serve them; but e contra in a holy heart. Ex.
gr. A man prays for the love of God, and the Spirit of grace, and it is
affectionate, but yet it is ever for some lust: Iam. 4. 3. a man desires grace
to perfect his gifts, and gifts to deck him, and purchase him honor before men;
a man desires grace to quiet his conscience in assurance of Gods love, and
pardon of sin, that he may live the more peaceably with his sin, Isa. 58. 3, 4.
Now in a gracious heart, the desires of these things serve the desires after
grace; for he desires the things of this world to be the more holy, Prove. 30.
7, 8. Feed me with food convenient, that I may not tempt thee; he desires, and
has them for Isreal's sake, 2 Samuel 5. 12. Like a Tradesman, he buys and sells,
but it is for gain, Phil. 1. 20. Oh consider of these things, and if your
hearts have had only such false desires as these, know it, that as verily as
these Virgins were shut out, so shall you another day.

CHAP. XIII.
The desires and endeavors of Hypocrites after Grace are not lasting.
SECT. I.
THat foolish Virgins in their first endeavors after the Spirit of Grace,
Observation 4.
usually cease from seeking farther, before they have got that measure and
fullness of it which will continue to the last. Or,

That there is ever a cessation in the first endeavors of carnal professors
from seeking after that measure of grace which will indeed last and continue
until their meeting with, and appearing before the Lord Jesus Christ.

For these Virgins here did seek after the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Spirit of
Christ, and hence did get that measure which lighted their lamps for a good
season; and they contented themselves with this, and gave over seeking until
it is too late; and therefore now they say, Give us of your oil, our Lamps are
o^t: These foolish Virgins when they had got somewhat, they are carried with
abundance of affection and profession, they think themselves as good as the
best, and what need they seek for more! and then grow secure and fall asleep
until all is spent. The Scripture is pregnant every where for this. But let us
look and see the causes of this.

First, Sometime it is because they know not what that measure is which does
accompany salvation; but they set up an imagination of their own heads, which
is a false image of Saving-grace, and when they have that, now they think all
is well, and they go no further. Judge. 2. 11, 12. People that know not the
Lord, nor the po^er of his grace, will set up other gods, and serve them, and
there rest; until it is with them, as it was with those, when the anger of the
Lord wax^th hot, and spoilers come, now they cry unto the Lord; What is the
reason why many a man falls short of the righteousness which is of God, viz. of
Faith? Because he sets up in his head a righteousness of his own; and if I get
that, then I hope the Lord will accept me, and forgive me; and hence Romans 9.
31, 32. why did they miss of it? Because they sought it by a righteousness
which is of their own; so why do many miss of Faith? because they think it is
an assurance; or when a man rests upon Christ, not considering the need of an
Almighty power; and hence the Apostle prays for this, Ephesians. 1. 19. So for
Repentance, why do men fall short of it? they think it is when Gods anger is
expressed, the soul then comes to seek the Lord, and finds some comfort Psalm.
78. Matthew. 3. and so runs away with it: So for Holiness, they think it is to be
like others; and then well, they think these are the men that shall live, and
are happy; and look as it is like it was at Babel, when head and tongues were
confounded, one calls for a Brick, the other brings him a Trowel, Hammer or
Tile, because he did but imagine what he spoke, and so understood not his
language; So it is here; men read and hear God speak, and Ministers call for
Faith, and knowledge of God; but earthly minds cannot understand heavenly
language; and hence they imagine that is Faith and Repentance which indeed is
not, and so miss of that which indeed else would continue; and this is the
misery of many thousands that in seeing see not. The experience of the work of
grace, makes men savingly to know what Grace is, John 5. 37, 38. Now men
graceless never felt it in the life and power of it, and therefore cannot tell
it.

Secondly, From the nature of Common-grace; the nature of which is as the
Apostle speaks of lifeless knowledge, 1 Cor. 8. 1 to puff up; it never leaves
the soul more sensible of his vileness, as Saving-grace does, Ezekiel 16 ult. and
so makes a man never rest in seeking after the Lord; but makes the soul feel
himself full, and hence the stomach is gone from seeking after more, as Rev. 3.
17. She thought she was rich, etc. The Spirit of Grace which is but common,
that heals a vile, proud heart, it eases him, it quiets him, in healing some
sin, which lies sore on the conscience; it heals and quiets the man, so he is
well, needs no repentance; but the Spirit of life indeed destroys the man,
and ^^ays corruption, and hence he resists; and now says the soul, I never
felt my heart so vile as now; and hence, says Paul, Sin revived, and led me
captive, Oh wr^tched man! as it is with a Prince, if any great ones come and
serve him, he likes them, this gives him rest, settles him in his Throne; but
if any one come to reign over him, now he gathers all his strength to oppose:
So Common grace it ever comes as a servant to corrupt; and hence take a man of
best wit and parts, he turns them against the Lord, and makes them serve
himself.

Thirdly, From an apprehension of this difficulty, and an unwillingness in the
heart to break through the difficulty of seeking after the Lord; many a man sees
(as Dives in hell, Abraham afar off) Grace, and God, and Christ afar off; but
there is a great gulf between them and Grace; now to be watching, fasting,
seeking the Lord diligently, to follow the Lord hard, Psalm. 63. to keep the
heart lamenting till the Lord comes, this is hard, as Heb. ^. it is said, They
could not enter in because of unbellef. 1. They thought they could never
overcome. 2. They thought the Lord did therefore hate them, Deuteronomy. 1. 27. They
did not regard the strength of God; they shall be but bread for us says Caleb;
Numb. 14. 9.
they could not believe that to be bread that is so hazzardful. So it is with
many a man; and hence he sits down with desires and hopes, and so perishes;
the sluggards desires slay him; hence many complain of difficulty, but never
break difficulties, and so perish; and so not like to the Merchant that goes
far for pearl. It is his business, and no storms no^ ill weather drive him to
desire the smoke of his chimney, till he has got them, he has now resolved to
venture all for, Prove. 2. 5. if thou dig for silver, etc. many prize Christ and
Grace, Oh that I had it, but are ^oth to dig for it, they love their ease so
well, and hence rest in their desire after it; but indeed miss it; and hence
many can come to, and follow God in outward Ordinances, but never find fruit
and comfort in any of them, because of difficulty, yet sit down content because
they seek for Ordinances, as Prove. 12. 27. The sluggard roasts not what he had
^ook in hunting; there is a very great delight in coming to Ordinances, as
travelers under the shadow, but then to climb the tree that is hard, and hence
lose the fruit; and hence God seeing a man love his sloth, and has that base
esteem of his Grace, as that he will not follow so hard after it as he has
done after his lusts, let us loose Satan, and he comes and stakes down a sinner
in this, God must do all, and there he rests, and so he falls short; like one
that comes to Husbandmen, and tells them they have taken much pains and care to
get their ground good to bring forth much, but for time to come their ground
shall bring forth fruit without planting or sowing, only reap you the fruit, it
would be good news to them, and they believe it, and then when the year comes
about, they are to seek for corn; so this affects, and here they rest, and by
this means want.

Fourthly, From feeling the unprofitableness of seeking the Lord through
difficulties, and hence they give over but a little before they find that that
will continue.

1. Some follow the Lord for carnal ends, as Judas did, but he finding the
purse grow lank, and the bag empty, he forsakes the Lord.

2. Some for comfort, and hence pray and mourn; and hence Mal. 3. 14. what
profit is there that we have walked so? as it was with Naomi, when she returned
home, both her daughters accompany her some part of her way, Return again,
says she, to your friends, here is no Husband for you where I go; the one
would not be beaten off, it is not a Husband I came for, but a God; thy God
shallbe my God; the other hearing her speeches, and loving her Fathers house,
and Country, goes back, not without some affection; so it is here; whereas
Faith will cry the more.

Fifthly, From the offenses which usually Satan casts in when they are in the
heat of their first endeavors; as the stony ground being offended fell away.
As,

1. Persecution, and hence they fall; a child begins to look toward God; the
Father, Mother, Friends scoff and reproach.

2. Corrupt Teachers, Matthew. 24. that like false Christ's deceive, and put a
world of scruples into men's heads, and then lead them away; as the Galatia^s
that would pull out their eyes for Paul, yet by love and smooth carriage of
false Teachers so plausible, they fell off strangely.

3. Corrupt company, women or men; many strong men have fallen by the one, and
men also who having a form of godliness, yet denying the power of it, their
hearts be taken in these snares.

4. Some hard point of doctrine, Ioh. 6. 60, 66. something is preached that is
cross to our apprehensions; I Will never believe it, say they; and away they fall.

Sixthly, Because of false comforts which usually men meet with before they get
that which will abide in them, in their worst hours; and this quiets all.

1. From themselves; A man sees Christ only can redeem him by price, but he
feels no need of Christ to redeem him by power; and now seeing what a miserable
creature he is, stays himself upon the Lord, and that it may be by some word
which he hears. John 8. 30, 31. when they heard that, they believed; yet the
Lord tells them, they are not free, but were yet captive to their sin, which
they need the Son himself to dye to save them from; and so many^a one comforts
himself, and stays here, though he have no other assurance.

2. The approbation and comfort of others, Ezekiel 13. 3, 4.

^ Strange ecstasies of joy which many a man meets with suddenly; they have
(...) and drunk in Christ's presence, and have been comforted at such and such a
time in such a manner; this, we shall find it, persuades men that God is
theirs, without revealing the subject, viz. we be his people, and that change
which God has made.

SECT. II.
Quest. What is that measure which will last, and throughout continue?

Answ. I have spoken of this at large; but he that loves the truth as his daily
bread, will feed upon it, when ever it is set before him: Now there is one
thing (this is different) and I shall express my self in one thing only, viz.
They give over before they have tasted and drunk the satisfing sweetness of the
grace of Christ, and the presence of his grace in their souls: That look as it
was with Israel, they came out of Egypt, and saw the wonders of God in the
wilderness, and had his fiery Law, and glorious Tabernacle among them, yet they
never came to the la^d of rest; so it is at this day with many, they have some
glimpses of the excellency of Christ, and his grace, and some desires after it,
and some tastes of it; they are pulled out of their woeful bondage, and seeing
words of God, are often affected, yet their carcasses must fall in the wilness,
because they never come to rest; they fall off from God because they never knew
what this rest means, Heb. 4. 11.

Hypocrites have awakening grace, and are much troubled; they have enlightening
grace, and know more than many Christians; they have affecting grace, and are
wonderfully taken with the glad tidings of the Gospel; but satisfying grace, or
that grace which brings them to full rest, and satisfying sweetness in God, not
only to their consciences but to their hearts; not carnal, but spiritual, this
they never came to, Ioh. 4. 14. he that drinks the wat^r I give, shall never
thirst again; Joh. 6. 54. If ye eat my flesh and drink my blood, there is life,
if not, no life; eating and drinking, is not sipping and tasting; many may eat
and drink in his presence, as those Exodus 24. 11. but yet not feed at all on
his person; this makes the soul hold out, Prove. 2. 10, 11. Psalm. 90. 14. this
makes the soul glad in God, and in all the days of his life; where any creature
is at rest, there it is in the proper place; it is a token the Lord is the
proper place of the soul, (not sin, nor hell, which was Judas proper place)
when it is at rest there; and this is the last end, and fruit of the redemption
of Christ, Ier. 31. 11, 14. i. e. not having so much of God as to be a
God-glutted Christian (as he said) but so satiate as not to desire other
things, but there to stay, though the heart does often feel not the same
sweetness.

SECT. III.
NOw there be four things which do concur to this fullness of satisfying
sweetness.

First, Manifestation of the Lord Jesus in his full proportion, and in all the
dimensions of his goodness to the soul; the soul of man is made for, and so
desires an infinite eternal good; whiles this good is not known to be such a
one, it never satisfies; and hence let a man look upon any one creature, there
is much sweetness in it, but not all; hence it satisfies not; there is sweetness
in honor and wealth, but if sick, a miserable man; there is sweetness in
health, but if poor and naked, a desolate man; and if one creature had all in
it, yet when one thinks this must be taken from me, it is like Ionah's gourd,
it never satisfies:

Now the Grace which satisfies must first, Manifest the fullness of infinite
goodness suitable to me in the Lord; if that now do I want any outward blessing
it is in Christ, for he is Heir not only of heaven, but of all the world.

2. Do I want spiritual blessings? Ephesians. 3. there is all in him; life, and
peace and glory.

3. Have I nothing to move the Lord to do any of these to me? yet there is
fullness of tender mercy, and pity in him, Eph^s. 1. 17. and 3. 18.

Secondly, Possession of this good as mine; let a poor man see heaps of gold
before him, it satisfies not him, because it is none of his; let a Christian
hear of Kingdoms, peace, glory, in and with Christ, yet it satisfies not him;
it troubles him the more, if Christ forsake him, and grow strange to him; but
to be sure that Christ is mine, this makes the soul do, nay suffer the utmost
for Christ, and to know that nothing can separate, etc. as a man that knows he
shall kill, and not lose his life, will venture like Sampson upon an host of
men; they may wound me, they cannot bind nor slay me, Romans 8. ult. there is joy
and some satisfaction in finding the pearl of great price, what joy when it is
possessed!

Thirdly, Communication of this good to the soul; let a man have meat and
drink, but he cannot come at it when he has need of it, will this satisfy if
it be locked up? let a man have real possession of never so many lands, yet if
he has not the benefit sure to him, as well as the thing, he will never hold
out; what am I the better? so that grace satisfies that brings the sold to
fruition of the good, that it is now in respect of the benefit of it conveyed
to the soul, Psalm, 16. 4, 5, the Lord is the portion of my lot and cup, and he
maintains both; and hence Ier. 14. 9. Why art thou like a man astonish^d, yet
in the midst of us! if a man have meat and clothes, and the one never feeds,
the other never warms, would this satisfy? no, unless that he may feel them,
nay he would think this a curse; so let Saints have God in his Ordinances, the
best in the world there is, if not fed thereby, Lord! what a misery is this?
especially if the Lord helps not in time of need.

Fourthly, Reflection of good again to the good which does refresh us, else it
never satisfies; if a man have meat dealt out, and it is very sweet, yet if it
gives him no strength to perform acts of life; if a man have a friend, and he
cannot love again, nor show testimony of love, it will not satisfy him; so
that grace satisfies which makes the soul reflect the love of God to God again;
shall I serve the Lord, said David, of that which cost me nothing? you know the
Vine and Olive, Judge. 9. were quietted by this, that they did rejoice the heart
of God and man; what do you tell me of bonds? I acco^^t not my life dear to
(...) my course, says Paul.

Now a carnal heart gives over before he sees or possesses or enjoys the
Lord, or found the sweetness of a holy life in walking with God. Hence,

1. He loathes and is weary of all his profession and truth he knows, and the
God he talks of.

2. Hence they break out to some lusts or others; which because if not
satisfied here, they must satisfy themselves some other way, either in vain
conceits or opinions, or lusts of the world.

3. Hence, desperate doubts, Is the Lord mine? whereas if it were otherwise,
then as it is with a man, ask him, how do you know you eat and drink? it
satisfies me, says he, it puts strength, I should die daily else.

SECT. IV.
OF Examination, Use 1.
Instruction, and Exhortation to all those who have rest content with that
measure of the Spirit which will never last, to begin again, and lay a better
foundation, lest it befall you as it did these Virgins, or as the sinner in
Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13. you mourn when you, not your flesh, but soul is consumed;
Oh how have I despised instruction! lest wrath break out which cannot be
quenched, for dealing slightly with God and your own souls; how many Christians
take that for grace, which when it comes to trial will be found too light, and
know it not, and regard it not, till the hand-witing of God is upon their
consciences!

If therefore you have not found the satisfying sweetness of the Spirit of Gods
grace, that water which quenches all your inordinate thirst, that bread which
feeds you to life, be sure your oil will be spent, and your light will go out
before you dye.

SECT. V.
Quest. HOw should I know that satisfying sweetness?

Answ. Ah methinks you should say, Oh that I did know it! yet wary I would be
of giving any just occasion to break off what the Lord in his grace has
wrought; yet you may know something of it by this.

1. When the Spirit of Gods grace dispensed in his Ordinances does glut you and
slay you, and make you worse; here is not the grace of Christ which does
satisfy you; if the more knowledge you have of the truth, the less glory you
see in the truth, and the less you love the truth; if the more comfort you have
sound by it, the less you now desire after it; if the more abilities you have
received by it, the more proud you grow, and high-minded; if having come for to
seek the Ordinances of God, the less good you find by them, the more weary you
grow of them, and the more you despise them; it is certain, the satisfying
grace of Christ is not here, when the bread to feed, is poison to slay; is not
this the condition of many? what is the cause they are growing worse, that they
are worse in their latter end and middle of their Christian profession, than
the beginning, because they are grown full by Gods Ordinances, and so worse;
what is the cause in places of persecution the Lords Ordinances were precious,
not when they come to them? Gods Ordinances plenty makes them to undervalue
them through their sin; that look as it is with men in consumptions, whose life
is going out, they think they can eat, yet when it is before them, loath the
smell of it, or a little serves them, whereas another finds it otherwise; not
but that Saints may think thus, but they with Hezekiah mourn under it, 2 Chronicles.
32. Hos. 6. 5. I have hewn and slain, what is the cause? because your goodness
is like a morning dew, which soon vanishes, therefore have I slain them. Oh
God loves us, and we are the best people in the world, because we have
Ordinances; no, but because you be shallow, hence you shall have Prophets to
slay you.

Secondly, If any man maintains any living lust in himself in the midst of his
profession, and hungers after it, and the life of it; for when a man has
better food to feed upon, he will neglect his own at home, as Christ said to
them when they asked him, why he did not eat; how many be there which have
strange gifts, and have had mavelous ebbings and flowings of the Spirit of
Life and Peace, and yet one sin have they lived in, and would not, could not
live without it. Look as it was in the wilderness, they were for a time pretty
well content with their allowance and wilderness^walks and provisions, but they
could not stay long, They asked meat for their lusts, but he sent leanness into
their souls, Psalm. 106. 14, 15. So that there it is, if lust be stirring, the
Lord either denies it his own people, because he will starve the lust, that the
soul may grow, or if he gives it, slays the lust by it, gluts it, makes the
soul grow weary of it, and prize his first Husband more; as Solomon by his
experimental discovery of the creature: Many men confess and pray aginst their
sins, but by their sorrows and desires, they do maintain the life of their sin,
fall to it as the dog to the vomit; you will be cast away at last, 1 Cor. 9.
ult. I beat not the air, lest I become a castaway; whereas a gracious heart
does not maintain, but waste and consume his lust. His life is to live to God.

Thirdly, If a man's heart and affections reach not the people of God with the
dearest embracings, no^ yet mourn for the want of such a heart; for sometimes
there are some drops of the Lords goodness falling into the heart, whereby the
soul cleaves unto the Lord, and is moved and ravished, and bears much (...), as
it thinks, toward him; but look to their love to the people of God, t^^re they
fall short; because the love of Christ is not shed abroad abundantly into their
hearts, filling and satisfying of them; and hence have none to pour out upon
the souls of their neighbors, 1 John 4. 20, 21. In our own Country, what was
the accusation of Saints? viz. They are Hypocrites before God; What did you
think of those men that said so? Answ. Surely they were enemies to the Lord,
and that never loved him; for then they would love his people. But what is the
occasion here? Now they say they come far for Ordinances; but they are unjust
oppressors, cruel; poor men may starve before regarded by them; and so they
cast reproach not only upon some few, but all the people of God, and Church of
God; If that it be so, their accusation is Gods accusation; if not (as
generally it is) for many, though unable to do much, yet if called to it, would
lay down their estates and lives for others; then know thou never had
Christ's love shed in thy heart (which will continue) but drops of it only;
because thy love cannot reach to these. Beloved, what is the end of your coming
over hither? is it not to enjoy first Christ, and nextly his People, so his
Ordinances? because next to fellowship of Christ, the Saints company is most
precious; and do you here bite, and censure, and devou^e, and neglect, and
reproach one another, and upon any conceived injury stumble? are poor men
neglected? It is a sad sign the love of Christ in not in power, Heb. 6. 9, 10.

Fourthly, If there have been abundance of sweet affections and sweet
refreshings, thereby rising up within the soul, without the death, and killing,
and removal of the contrary lusts and sins; it is certain this soul was never
truly filled nor satisfied with the Spirit of Gods grace; for as it is with
vessels, while they be filled with lime or chaff, they cannot be filled with
wheat or with water; so while the heart is filled with some noisome distempers,
it cannot be filled or satisfied with the Lord; look but abroad in the
Churches; how many be there that say and think they ^ate their sin as the only
evil, they close with the Lord Jesus, they love the people of God all of them,
they seek the glory of God, and yet they do but think so! for though they hate
sin, yet it is unsoundly, because they see not how closely their hands are knit
to their sin; they never did believe, because they never felt their unwilling
heart to close with Christ; they never loved the Saints, because they never
felt their contempt of Saints; never sought Gods glory, because they never
mourned under that which did stain it; they never make work with their own
hearts; the stony and thorny ground withered because their soil was naught; a
heart filled with sweet affections, which never felt the strength of contrary
corruptions lying underneath, it is an ill soil, and where those affections
will never prosper, nor prove right; and hence, 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21. he that
purges himself from these things shall be a vessel of honor, ever preserved,
never broken. Do not put it to a venture, it may be I may have grace, and so
put your salvation on the hazard of such hopes; but the Lord that has come to
thee knocking, open the door that he may come in and feast; cry for infinite
creating power and mercy to make haste and come and help thee; what have you to
do else but to get your old lusts purged away? what do you labor for else? if
you have children to bring up, if you have any love to them, nay if swine or
cattle, meat you will have to feed them, and satisfy them if possible; and yet
behold thy soul perishing for want of true spiritual refreshings!

SECT. VI.
OF Exhortat on to all young beginners, Use 2.
and so to all others; Take heed you chop not at your comfort too soon; take
heed you do not perish in the way, that whiles seeking after the Lord and rest,
you fall from the Lord by security and scandal, and so you perish; but labor
for that which will continue and last.

1. Mariners when they go a voyage, they will trim their vessel, and search if
there be not something amiss which may sink the ship at last; if once out at
sea, they may dye before they come home; and hence at first setting out are
careful; so do you.

2. You will meet with trials enough to exercise all your grace, that you will
find all little enough in the issue.

3. This will be your comfort at death, that though it be difficult, yet if you
have fought a good fight, and run a good race, there is now a crown, this will
make you to go out of the world wondering, and go up to eternity in your
triumphant Chariot of glory, when you shall see on the one side, here a Demas
forsaking, there a Judas betraying; here one Chri^^ian withered, there another
scandalized and offended, and yet the Lord has upheld thee (in thy integrity)
a poor creature, that thoughst thou shou^dst never have held out at all.

That you may do thus, two things are to be done.

First, Be sure your wound at first for sin be deep enough; for all the error
in a man's Faith and Sanctification it springs from that first error of his
Humiliation; if a man's Humiliation be false, and weak, and little, his Faith is
light, and his Sanctification counterfeit, as may be seen in the stony and
thorny soil; if a man's wound be right, and Humi^^ation deep enough, that man's
Faith is right, and his Sanctification is glorious; for Christ cannot be
exceeding sweet and satisfactory to the soul, unless sin be first exceeding
bitter; and this is the reason why Christ is not sweet nor precious at first
nor afterward, because sin is not so better to them, especially heart sins;
Christians shall find it, the esteem and price of Christ falls, whiles sin lies
light and is not bitter.

SECT. VII.
Quest. HOw bitter must it be?

Answ. So bitter as that nothing contents your heart, Joh. 16. 22.
whiles sin is with you, and the Lord is gone from you, Lam. 3. 49. Mine eye
cease not mourning, till the Lord look down from heaven; as a man that looks
for a Prince to come and live with him, he prepares rooms for all his
attendants, but he reserves the best lodgings for the Prince himself, and they
are kept empty whiles he comes: So the soul entertains Creatures, and
Ordinances, and Saints of God, but yet the heart is not content, but sits
empty, desolate whiles the Lord is gone; for whiles the heart is delighted with
somewhat else beside the Lord (that if the Lord comes, it is well, if not, it
is merry and jolly) see what the Lord there speaks, Iam. 4. 8, 9, 10. Cleanse
your hearts and he will draw nigh unto you; turn laughter to mourning, else you
are not humbled. Let Gods own people do so, it stops up the fountain of Gods
love, and sweetness of mercy, Psalm. 30. 7. When carnally confident, I was
troubled; as it is in marriage, if a man knows there is familiarity between the
woman and another Lover he will have none of her; but when sin is thus bitter,
the Lord has the garments of joy to give for the spirit of heaviness, Isa. 61.
1, 2. Oh therefore, though it be cross to have limbs cut off, and breasts
feared, bones broken, etc. yet part with all for life, even this life of Christ
in you, which will give you full content.

SECT. VIII.
Quest. HOw shall I do thus, my heart will be wanton and carnal?

Answ. 1. Set this down for a conclusion, I shall never be comforted by the
Lord, whiles any thing else comforts my heart, i. e. for it self, as has been
proved; and if this was well thought of, this would make a man above all other
things detest his carnal content, because this indeed keeps the Lord from him.

2. Keep the remembrance of the bitterness of your sin and evil in it; thus
David, Plal. 51. 3. set it ever before him; for all the sweet of sin comes into
the heart by a delusion first begot in the mind, of some present good in it,
which the soul not attending to is drawn away by it, ^^am. 1. 14. drawn away
and enticed; hence fortify here. Three things in sin, which if remembered,
would make it bitter.

1. Sentence of condemnation past upon thee by the Law of God for it, which may
make a soul to mourn: Little (...) do men take in their Prison-bolts.

2. The death, and agonies, and sorrows of the Lord Jesus, to acquit the soul
from this condemnation; this is that which may work bitterness as for a first
born, Zach. 12. 10, 11.

3. Crossing the will, and so grieving the heart of Christ now in glory; as
when the old world grew sensual it grieved God to the heart; keep these in
remembrance; what pleasure can thou take in that which makes the Lord sigh?

4. The end w^ll be bitterness, Psalm. 73. 17.

Secondly, Take heed you miss not of that Faith which will bring in supply,
He^. 4. 1, 2. Take heed lest a promise being le^t, any fall short of that rest
which comes by the promise, by an unbelieving heart; for many desire the Lord,
and rest upon the Lord, and they are satisfied with their hunger, and with
their rest on him, without receiving life from him; truly you will fall from
the Lord then; for if the Lord does not daily drop life into your hearts, you
will grow weary of him; and Ordinances they are empty wells, and Promises they
are dry (...): if you have bread, but it feed you not, you will not care for it.

SECT. IX.
Quest. HOw shall I get this Faith?

Answ. 1. Honor and advance the Lord's rich grace in thy heart, before thou
go to him for the Spirit of life; thus that poor woman, If I can but touch
his skirt, I shall be whole; if I can come to him, I shall have help; many can
think before they go to Christ, I shall never speed, I shall never over come
these evils; and hence the Israeli^es are excluded Canaan: though I know the
Lord does pity his poor people when they believe, though not thus far; as it is
with men, if you would get their hearts from them; commend them; so here; and
though this does not move the Lord, yet it is an Ordinance; it is a way of God,
Micah 7. 17, 18.

2. Take up a firm resolution never to let thy heart go from seeking the Lord
till this is wrought, Psalm. 27. 4. this I will seek after; see that thou must
needs have this; and hence do not say, I have desired and gone to the Lord, and
no help comes, and now sit down; no, but take advantage hereupon to desire the
more, and to make the Lord's denials or delays the ground of the (...)
Canaanitish woman, crumbs; as Jacob by wrestling against the Ang^^ (...)
blessing at last; Say, as it has been long, so therefore Lord help (...) But
sins are many, and the heart is worse: Oh the more need of (...) Exodus 33. 18.
If thou will not go with us, carry us not up (...).

3. Wait for the Lord quietly, and lock out when will it be better. Isa. 64. 4.
eye has not seen; and wait for him first; and so for other things, Isa. 30.
18. Blessed are they that wait for him.

4. If the Lord gives not; yet seek to give him content, though he does not
content thee; as Mary, Ioh. 2. when they wanted wine, 1 Ioh. 3. 22. we do what
pleases him; and hence have our answer; this will fetch it.

CHAP. XIV.
Shows that the Grace of one person will not advantage another that wants Grace
himself; and that the best Christians cannot dispense Grace to those that want
it.
VERSE 9. But the wise answered, saying, Not so, lest there be not enough for
us and you; but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.
SECT. I.
HErein is set down the Answer of the wise to the Request of the foolish
Virgins.

This Answer of the wise Virgins contains two things.

First, A denial, together with the reason of it, which is a check to their
folly.

Secondly Their counsel and advice directing them to the remedy, if there be
any which might supply them with oil; Go to them that sell and buy for your
selves. The Spirit of Grace comes not so lightly by: You would have it given;
no, you must buy it; you would have us help you; no, there are others appointed
for to self it you; away to them before the Bridegroom comes.

1. Not so] They are words inserted in the English Text, not so in the
original; but yet they are safely put in, partly because they are intended
directly in the strength of their reason, and involved therein, implied
thereby; partly because they do more clearly express the meaning of the words,
and give their sense more distinctly.

2. Lest there be not enough for us and for you] What did the foolish now look
to works of supererogation and prayers of Saints, and the treasury of the
Churches holiness and Indulgencies? surely no, for these were Virgins, had
escaped the pollution of Antichrist, and they go for this not to Popish
Treasurers, but unto them that are wise; neither is it likely that Christ's
coming could awaken them out of their security to fall to gross Popery so
suddenly, whiles they were the Companions and Imitators of the wise, and
therefore this is not the meaning, as some have wrested the words, and so make
the Answer of the wise to be a Protestant Answer to a Popish Petition, and
therefore bid them go to Shavelings that will for money sell Pardons, and
Indulgencies, and Prayers, and Merits.

SECT. II.
Quest. WHat then are the wise unwilling to communicate of the Graces they
have? what Christian but is willing?

Answ. First, We are not to adhere to words in opening Parables, but the scope;
now their scope was hereby, First to sink and humble the hearts of the foolish,
and to let them know that all that which they had in time of extremity, was
little enough for themselves at this season.

Secondly, This answer is made answerable to the ground of their request; you
know how Hypocrites in Churches rest in outward privileges, and how they are
carried unto Ordinances, but not above Ordinances indeed to Christ; and though
they have some knowledge of, and lookings above them unto Christ, yet missing
him, like men sinking catch hold upon that which is next, and so look for help
thence; so these being in the fellowship of the wise, and admirers of them, and
having got good by them, and imitated them, hence they rely too much upon them
for it; and hence they answer, We have but our measure, and therefore it is not
in our hands to dispense grace in times of extremity; that must come from him
that has received the Spirit without measure; so that this answer does not
imply unwillingness to communicate, but to let the others see that they were
not the first that could communitate.

Thirdly, You are to consider that God had now broken open the consciences of
the foolish, that they professed they had no oil; hereupon the wise Virgins are
not unwilling to communicate altogether; but considering other means are
sanctified to beger Grace where it never was, or rather of greater efficacy and
power; hence they send them to other means, to them that sell, professing this
for their ground, that they had little enough for themselves; and it was not in
their power now to convey any: This I conceive is the direct scope of the
Parable in this Verse: Hence three Notes.

SECT. III.
THat the Grace of Gods Spirit in other wise-hearted Christians, will do no
good to foolish Virgins, Observation 1.
and slothful Christians in the days of their extremity. Ezekiel. 14. 20. Though
Job and Daniel stood before me, they shall but deliver their own souls;
gracious holy men, if not only in misery but sin 1 Ioh. 5. 16. they shall
recover; not others, I^r. 4. 4. lest my wrath break out like fire. Oh therefore
dally not under Ordinances; to have them, but no gain of them; to have Vines
planted, but not to eat fruit of them, and all by reason of a slothful heart,
is a dangerous thing; as many a man has a rich stock, and a good trade, and
yet thrives not; Oh he is not careful to keep, nor diligent to improve, but is
idle; so here

Oh consider the wrath of God! In extremity usually the Lord hears and helps
his poor people; but it shall be far from the Lord, when others shall say Lord
help; no, let others tears and prayers be regarded; no, what Lord, not in
extremity? no, not in extremity.

SECT. IV.
THat it is not in the hand of the most eminent Christians to dispense the
Grace of Christ to whom, Observation 2.
and when, and where they will: Not in all separably, nor in all jointly; it is
not in all the wise Virgins hands together: It is not in the hands of a whole
Church, or all Churches to do this. These poor foolish Virgins it may be they
did not in their judgments think thus; however in their practice they now trust
to this. But these answer, It is not in us.

It is not in Moses to give his spirit to whom he would, but the Lord, Numb.
11. 17.

It is not in Paul nor Apollos, the one deep in wisdom, the other admirable in
expression, but in God, who gives the commission to fetch the whole world in, 1
Cor. 3. 5, 6.

It is not in Christ as Man, to give to one to sit at his right hand or left.

It is not in the hands of the best Parents; It is not in the wills of all men
living, Ioh. 1. 13.

SECT. V.
BEcause they have but their measure received wholly, Reason 1.
and dependent wholly from another, answerable to their own necessities;
therefore it is not in their freedom, but in the hands of him who has received
it without measure, John 3. 34, 35. but the Father has put all things into his
hands; as it is in stars, one star does not give light to another, but the Sun
to all, having received it without measure comparatively; so one Spring does
not beget another, but it is in the Sea, which has water without measure, from
whence they come and return again.

Because all the Saints, Reason 2.
and all the fellowship of God's people, it is but a means, or they are but
instruments in the hands of Christ to convey Grace; now you know all
instruments act and work according to the will of the principal agent; as it is
not in the axes hand to cut down one tree for fuel, another for building; but
in the agents hand, especially if the instrument be weak and powerless, and
such are the people of God; 1 Cor. 1. 29. they are poor things, and weak
things, and nothings, things that are not; 2 Cor. 3. 5. not so much as to think
any thing of themselves* It is not in the people of God as it is in salves,
that there is an inherent virtue abiding always to heal, and that in any man
which is cureable; but there is only an adherent virtue which does not always
abide; and when it is there, works not upon all, but only at the pleasure of
the principal Agent the Lord Jesus; those means which providence has put an
inherent virtue into, cannot bless, but as the Lord will; meat cannot nourish
sometimes, muchless can these without the will of another; hence Ephesians. 4. 16.
the Saints are edified by this, but from Christ still.

In regard of the greatness of the power and honor that is required to dispense
the Grace of God, Reason 3.
and the Spirit of Grace, which the Church is not capable of.

First, Knowledge of the Elect; the Spirt of Grace which accompanies Salvation,
shall never be given to any but to them, Romans 11. 7. the election have obtained
it; hence they must be known first to them that have power to dispense it; now
that they cannot tell; indeed Paul by seeing the (...) forth, knew the election
of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4. but not (...); he could not say This man I
will give grace unto, and not to that; a Minister, as Paul, Acts 18. 10. may in
general know that there is some people in such a place, at least probably, but
who they be he knows not, no more than Samuel, who knew one of Iesses Sons was
to be King, but not one whom he liked, but whom the Lord did choose; and hence a
Minister calls all, because he knows not who they be: only some are called,
because Christ knew, and therefore in his hand it is.

Secondly, The power must be omnipotent, both to lay the foundation, and to go
on with the building; now that cannot be put forth by a poor finite creature,
when it will, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
but when the Lord will; a Minister may preach and quicken, a Christian may
exhort and comfort, and yet they may hear and meet again twenty times and never
find the like day, because their weapons are only mighty through God, 2 Cor.
10. 4, 5.

Thirdly, Shedding of blood, dying and bearing wrath, to purchase and so to
have the Spirit to send; for the Spirit of Grace could never be given, nor
increased, nor continued in any, had not blood first purchased this; our sins
are said to be healed by blood, and we cleansed from them by it, i. e. by the
Spirit purchased by it, Heb. 9. 14. Blood sprinkled purifies your consciences
with blood, i. e. the virtue of blood applied by the Spirit: If any of the
Saints shed blood for the Church to redeem it, then they have power to convey
the Spirit of Grace to the Church; and it is as hard to convey one dram of
Grace as to dye.

SECT. VII.
HEnce we may see the glory and excellency of the Lord Jesus above all men; Use
1.
nay, above all the best men and best Chruches living; ask David whom he loves
and honors most, he will tell you, Psalm. 15. 4. He despises a vile person, and
honors them that fear the Lord; and that Christian that is most excellent had
all his heart; ask any Christian, to what men his heart is most knit, and whom
he does most of all honor, if he sees one man in forty most holy most humble,
most like to God, most acquainted with God, and the mind of God; a Paul for
wisdom, a David for brokenness of spirit, an Abr^ham for Faith, a Steven for
courage and zeal, etc. their very feet are beautiful, their very names are an
alablaster-box broken up. And why does he thus? Because he sees they are holy,
and like to God; Oh but consider they cannot make thee holy, it is not in their
liberty; though they should like thee, they cannot teach thee one truth
savingly; thou have a rugged heart, they cannot polish thee; and wild, they
cannot tame it; they cannot convey one dram, or taste, or savor of the life of
Grace to thee: Oh if these be lovely who only have oil in their vessels, though
they can give none for thee: What is the Lord Jesus then? who is not only holy,
fairer than the children of men, having all without measure; but can also make
thee holy, which none of the Saints can; who not only* is good and holy, but
does good, and makes holy. Thou look sometimes upon Saints, and see their
grace and life, and mournest for want of it, keep company with them, and
wishest thou had their oil, but they cannot help thee to it: Oh look up to
the Lord: If thou love and prizest them, oh prize and love the Lord much more
who has it in his hands to give it unto thee: who like a Spring sends not
forth its streams to refresh it self, but the weary, but the faint, Isa. 50. 4.
who like (...) sends not his beams out to enlighten it self, but (...) which
sit in d^^^ness might see, and blind might know, Io^. 9. 49. Ioh. 17. for their
sakes I sanctify my self, he has an humble, meek spirit to give to th^e that
art proud and sturdy; he can make a Lion a Lamb, who has a wise and heavenly
Spirit to teach thee that art simple, and thee that art earthly, if his good
pleasure will.

SECT. VII.
DO not say I have found good from them, as well as seen Grace in them (...) I
blessed God that ever I saw or spoke with them, or ever saw (...) etc. I
answer, Know it that they were but powerless instruments (...) of a merciful,
yet powerful Christ, otherwise thou had never (...) from any Christian, any
Minister, any Sermon; the Lord Jesus (...) have used them as means to have
condemned thee, as he did (...) and Noah's example, by which he condemned the
world, as well as to have called thee, or done the least good to thee;
therefore this still (...) upon Christ above all others in the world; all the
Saints and Ministers in the world could not have changed one hair from being
black to white, no^^^ all their cares for thee added one cubit to thy stature;
Oh it was the Lord, (...) if they have any pity, the Lord put in them; if they
ever spoke one word, or made one prayer, the Lord put it in them; if blessed,
it is by him.

Now do thou honor and love them, because they have done thy soul good, else
thou had been in hell? Oh admire the Lord much more, for they were but set on
work by him; and now they have done thee good, there is a stop, they can go no
further you think; I did receive good by a little, while being with such
Christians, but now when thou come hither again, thou think (it may be)
thou shall receive much more; no, their hands and feet may be bound, those
Conduit-cocks cannot turn themselves. O^ but Jesus Christ he can go on, nay, he
will go until he has made thee like unto his own self; and hence 1 Ioh. 3. 2.
then we shall be like him, now we be sons; children though born of poor men,
yet love their poor father that begat them: Who gave you your being? who begat
you to God, and so made you sons of God? Oh methinks the Lord that did this
should be precious and lovely! that you should call the world to wonder at it,
that the Lord has made an incarnate Devil a blessed Angel: But thou have a
vile heart still; Oh but you shall be like him; he will make you like himself
at the last day, who is brighter than Angels, and whose face is fairer than the
children of men; only he will do it by little and little here, rather by
causing thee to feel thy vileness, than removing it wholly.

Therefore, as the Apostle Gal. 4, 9. when they were turned from the Gospel to
Mosaical observances, he calls them weak and beggarly rudiments, which had no
power of themselves to convey Grace, not at best in that abundance which the
Gospel did; so say I, do you now know the Lord, who did not once know him; and
do you now admire and love Chirstians and others, if they do good especially to
you; and do you refuse to honor the Lord, but look only upon beggarly, weak
means and Christians? God forbid; it is the Lord only that can enrich you, etc.

2 Cor. 3. If the ministration of condemnation was glorious, oh what is the
ministration of the Spirit; if those which have the Spirit be glorious, what is
the Lord that not only has it, but can also give it, and make you like unto
him in glory, and that by the very beholding of him! verse. ult. If a man had
such a glass which not only gave him the sight of some dear friend always, but
as often as he looked in it, makes him like unto him, how would he prize this
glass, but especially the image of his friend in it! so Christ is not only
glorious, but he thereby makes himself glorious.

SECT. VIII.
Object. DO not say the Lord can do this, but he will not; Saints would if they
could.

Answ. 1. You do not know but that he will do it; when Christ was here on
earth, and men were sick, though their friends willed their good; yet I doubt
not but Christ was most glorious, because though they knew not that he would,
yet they knew that he might heal and pity, and if it were for his honor he
would.

2. Pray to him for it, and do it; he will pour water on the thirsty, and give
the Spirit and water of life to them that ask; Do not think you seek in vain,
especially if your cries arise from a sick heart, that sin is thy disease not
torment only; it is not thy delight, you need a Physician, he will not heal
you, if it is not your temper, your food, etc. If a man has a mind to a thing,
and another denies him, he will not see less beauty then, than he did before;
if you have a mind, Christ has a mind also.

Obj. But I do not feel the Lord giving me the Spirit.

Answ. Yet if you prize it, and reach after it, the Lord has done this for you.

SECT. IX.
TO all the Servants of the Lord, Use 2.
if ever you did any good to any, Oh boast not of your selves, but carry the
glory of it to the Lord Jesus, as he said the Lord does good by me, but I know
no reason why: So add also, but I wonder at the manner how a poor, weak, dead
nothing, whose unclean heart and lips might have made others worse, not better,
as infection sticking to the best garments, Act. 3. 12, 13. Why stand ye
looking on us? be it known to you, by the name of Jesus it is that which is
done; when Christ was known to heal all diseases, all the Country round about
by this fame of him came to him, and so he healed them; this will bring in
customers to Christ: Some Christians are very forward to speak to others, to
let in some new notion, or to convert, that they may make an Absoloms pillar
afterward, and that they might report I did this; some take content in speaking
of conversion of others, that I did this. Let your works praise you, but let
your tongue praise Christ; it was the Lord that did this. If bread could speak
it would say, it is not I that feed; and fire, not I that warm: You can speak,
tell others so; you would fain be accounted some body, and therefore will
devise new Gospels, and mint new notions; that not only Christ may be pleased,
but men may say, this I received of such a one, that their names might be
spoken of. The Theif takes the sheep for himself, a good Shepherd carries it
home to his owner.

SECT. X.
OH then do not rest in this, Use 3.
that you have now got to partake of the fellowship of Gods people; I confess
next to fellowship with God, their fellowship is best and most sweet, 1 Ioh. 1.
3, 4. and nothing more powerful to preserve and keep Gods people from Apostasy
than this, Col. 2. 5. order and stedfastness in faith are coupled; they that be
planted in the Courts of the Lord shall flourish here, nothing increasing Grace
more, Col. 2. 19. when many eyes to see by, many hands to help work by: When a
man sinned, if one or two men only took up stones to stone the sinner, it may
be they might miss, or the man live; but when there be many it is strange if it
does not kill; so out of fellowship of the people of God, one may admonish then
another, and it may be he can shift, but here there be many, etc. 2 Cor. 2. 7.
When a man's life is going away in a swoon, if one or two be there present only,
he may never recover; but when one rubs, another chafes, another holds him,
another runs and fetches hot water for him, it is a hundred to one but he
escapes. But yet as the best means, if neglected or trusted to, will make men
worse, as Caperna^m was worse for Christ's preaching, which they boasted of; so
the best means if not trusted to, will make men better; as it is with some
Extracts, and Spirits, they will make quick work one way or other.

1. If ever you see or receive any good, look to the Lord in them, 1 Samuel 10.
11, 12. who is their father.

2. If ever you look to receive any, look to the Lord that by them he may
convey help and succor in his time.

SECT. XI.
Quest. HOw shall I get that good?

Ans. 1. Feel your need of their fellowship, and their help, you will then be
getting good by every example, every prayer, 1 Cor. 12. the eye cannot say to
the hand I have no need of thee: Oh be not full; for God has not made you so
full, but if you be an eye, you need the foot, etc. David knew more than the
Levites did, yet how did he long to see God, and the goings of God in the
Sanctury!

Paul did need the mutual comfort of Christians; it was a strange thing in Paul
when he was to carry money to others, yet he beseeches them, Oh pray for me,
Romans 15. 30, 31. Do not say only, I feel a need of Sacraments or Ministry, but
I need the prayers, the counsel, the examples, the exhortation of the meanest
Christian.

Secondly, Be sure you join your selves to living Christians, that is, not only
such as have Grace, but such as are lively in the use and exercise of it; for
those God sanctifies especially to communicate Grace to you; if a living hand
be knit to a dead arm, 1 John 1. 3.
sure little good will it receive from it, Romans 1. 12. a lively believing
Christian will comfort Paul, and an humble Christian will humble.

This is the very reason why Christians do not get good, because their hearts
are dead, and their fellowship with God little; and hence others despise them,
and withdraw from them.

Thirdly, Love them dearly* a man will never get good from any Christian that
he despises, or slighteth; as it is with a man, if his hand would have life
from the head, set it in his place, and let not it be tied outwardly, but
united as a member, and then it receives it; and hence it edifies it self in
love; so by love are men edified.

CHAP. XV.
Of the plentiful dispensing of Grace in the Gospel Ministry.
SECT. I.
Now follows secondly, their Counsel and Advice, [Go to them that sell and buy,
etc.
THem that sell] Some there be that make this an Irony, or a plain mock of the
foolish Virgins for their folly; as if they should say, You have lived like
Hypocrites hitherto before the Lord among us, and deceived us and your own
souls; now you would have out Grace to help you; no, get you gone to
Mass-Priests, and Pardon-sellers, and Merit-mongers, and buy for your selves,
they have merit enough, etc. But this meaning as it cannot be evinced
necessarily from the words* so such an answer cannot stand with that sad and
gracious compassionate spirit which is in every holy Virgin; for suppose God
should break open the conscience of any in these days, and they opening their
hearts to others, they should receive this answer [ Nay seeing you have
neglected your season so long, get you gone to Mass-Priests, let them help
you;] would any of common honesty in like manner mock? much less a gracious
heart; no, but if any have a true sense of their misery for sleeping out their
season of Grace, their bowels will melt over them.

Those that sell] These are the Ministers of the Lord Jesus.

For 1. It Is manifest it is not a mock.

And 2. Those that sell are not ordinary Christians; though they may and do
convey the Spirit, yet not in this case so powerfully; and hence they do send
them from themselves.

3. They do send them to those means which do most abundantly convey the
Spirit; now the Word and the Spirit are united, as shall be proved; the chief
dispensers of which word, are the Ministers of the Gospel.

4. Because Ministers are called such as sell, Prove. 23. 23. Buy the truth and
sell it not; now where is the truth chiefly sold, but by the prime publishers
of it? Mal. 2. 6, 7. Not that the Holy Ghost is to be sold for money; but to
buy it there, as it is to be sold without money, Is. 55. 1, 2, 3. Come and buy
wine and milk, that is in the ministry of the Gospel, which calls all that
thirst to come, Rev. 3. 18. not that they should fix their eyes upon them, as
upon the chief means to convey it, for the Lord Jesus fells, and we are to buy
of him; only these are servants under him, and appointed as an Ordinance of his
for this end; the Apostle conveys his ministry, 2 Cor. 2. ult. sincerely and
gloriously.

Buy for your selves] that is, seek for it there, though you lay out never so
much of your money, your time, and thoughts, and affections for it, and receive
it there when it is offered upon any terms, though you part with all you have,
that so you may make it your own, and so have of your own, and so may with
comfort meet the Lord; and this suits with the custom of the Saints, to send
them there where they got theirs.

SECT. II.
THat the Spirit of Grace is principally and most abundantly dispensed in the
ministry of the Gospel by the Ministers thereof; Observation 3.
That is, they are those that sell; this is their business, and trade, and
work, like the Olive Tree to the Candlestick, Zach. 4. 5, 6. which take rooting
in the Courts of God to this end, to drop in their golden oil; but still
observe it is as servants under the Lord Jesus, who gives what and when he will
by them.

You know the famous expressions of the Apostle, How can they hear unless they
have a preacher? Romans 10. 14.

2 Cor. 3. 7. The Gospel is called The ministration of the Spirit in the
mouths of the Apostles and their Successors; by which it is made more glorious
than the Law delivered in tables of stone, though less outwrd glory, for we
have it but in earthen vessels.

Gal. 3. 2. By whom received you the Spirit? by hearing of the Law? no, but by
the hearing of Faith; thereby is the Spirit revealed and dispensed.

SECT. III.
BEcause they are set apart principally by the Lord for this end; Reason 1.
for Gods separation of any thing for an end, though the thing be unlike to
bring that end about, yet by this it has a strange power accompanying it; as
the Brazen serpent, how comes it to heal? It was set a part for that end, and
sanctified of God; and hence God setting apart an Ordinance, is present with
his Ordinance; as Aaron and his Sons were sanctified for the service of the
Tabernacle: and this is done two ways.

First, By the Church, according to the will of God, they are set apart from
all other employments, unless those which other relations bind them too, that
so they may dedicate their time, their strength, their private studies, their
selves, their prayers, and tears, and all for them; and this ought so to be
unless necessity compels, Act. 6. 4. The Disciples would give themselves to the
word and prayer, and would not be cumbred about the Deacons office; and so
their studies; Paul exhorts Timothy to give himself to reading, to think on
these things, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 15.

Secondly, By the Lord himself, Gal. 2. 15, 16. What is true of Gods separating
Paul to an extraordinary, is true in a measure of all his servants set apart
for ordinary work, Mal. 2. 7. For the Church sometimes may not set a man apart,
yet the Lord may and does; and hence (by these sometimes he sends to call a
Church before there is a Church to call) and how is such a one set apart? not
as an ordinary Christian, but as an extraordinary Ambassador, as it were in the
room of the Lord Jesus himself; For Christ being Mediator of his Church, two
things are required to make peace. 1. To speak to God for us. 2. To speak from
God to us; The first he does by his intercession. But we hear not from him?
Yes, for he sets these in his room, and by them he speaks as Mediator to our
ears and hearts, 2 Cor. 5. 20. so that if Christ was here present to speak, we
would look for the Spirit by him and his Ministry; Now all Messengers of the
Lord Jesus are in the room of the Lord Jesus, etc. Nay, if Christ was here, the
Spirit would not come but by this means; and hence Christ converts not so many
as the Apostles by their Ministry within Judea.

Because the Lord has furnished them with special abilities to dispense the
Grace of Christ for the Churches sake; Reason 2.
2 Cor. 3. 6. Christ ascended on high to give gifts for edifying the body; if a
man should have an Apprentice set apart to sell, but his shop is not furnished,
how could he then sell, and how should men in wisdom expect to buy? I will not
speak of what is required to make men able; Christ not only as a free agent
sets them apart, but as a wise agent furnishes them with abilities for that
end. There must be that knowledge which may make the man of God wise to
salvation from the Scriptures, which cannot be without knowledge of Tongues and
Arts in some competency and study about both.

1. They cannot think a thought; Christ furnishes them with thoughts; the
Minister knows not what to say, yet his thoughts are from him.

2. They cannot speak; hence Ephesians. 6. 19. the Lord opens their mouth; Ezekiel
must be dumb for a time.

3. Have they therefore any knowledge of the mysteries of Christ? it is to
teach the Church, 2 Cor. 4. 5, 6. all their gifts and spiritual abilities,
though never so great, and peculiarly sanctified, but it is for them, 2 Cor. 2.
ult. have they any temptations, tribulations, and gain by them, viz. spiritual
consolations? it is for them that are sad, that want it, 2 Cor. 1. 4, 5. (and
though it is true, there is in other Christians Christian abilities to help and
comfort others, yet not ministerial in every Christian (the whole body is not
an eye) nor which has a special presence of the Spirit of God in it and with
it) which they should never have received but for the necessities of some in
the Church; there is good to be had by watering-pots, when grass and herbs are
dying; but yet sometimes the rain falls, and that has a peculiar virtue in it,
as being fitted for that end; and hence Ministers are compared to clouds; and
hence men will pray especially when many clouds are, the Lord grant these
bottles may drop; so hither you are to look; dish-milk and flit-milk may convey
some nourishment, but brest-milk has spirit going with it; good books may be
blessed, but there is not that spirit in them as in lively dispensations of the
Gospel by Ministers themselves.

Because the Lord has given them hearts enlarged to dispense the Gospel, that
so the Spirit may be conveyed; Reason 3.
we preach not our selves, but the Lord Jesus, and our selves your servants,
etc. 2 Cor. 4. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8. If one be appointed and furnished but has no
mind to sell, they have other trades to follow, little help is to be expected
there; take a Minister of large abilities, if once he comes to have some other
penny in his eye, besides the souls of people, seldom shall it be seen that the
Lord is present there; Satan does not cast out Satan, neither is his Kingdom
divided; when Peter fisheth for himself, all night he catches nothing, but
when the Lord comes, and for his sake he casts out the net, then the net is
full; and for to be a means to convey the spirit to any, it is their life; as
in others, when gain comes in, they could not live without it; Now we live,
says Paul, if you stand, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 8. This is their glory, You are our joy
and glory, 1 Thessalonians. ^. 20. this is their gain though it be by loss of all; life
is not dear to finish their Ministry, I suffer all things for the elects sake,
they are willing to spend and to be spent, 2 Cor. 1^. 15. Paul wishes himself
anath^^^, amor divin^s est exst^^cus, ^ carries; out of self, Romans ^. 1, 2, 3.
though it is true the Ministry was not blessed to all, yet the election obtained
it, Romans 11. 7. hence the ministry is from men not Angels, that there might be
the more pity, and so the more help, Heb. 4. 2.

SECT. IV.
2. BUt why by the Ministry of the Gospel? Reason 1.


Because the Law cannot give life, Gal. 3. 21. Now the Lord cannot make him
that has sinned not to have sinned, that would be a contradiction; and he that
has sinned must dye; and hence there is no possibility for the Spirit to give
life here; hence the Spirit takes another instrument, the Gospel can persuade
to believe, and bring to Christ, where life is feared.

Because there is more of Christ's blood here, Reason 2.
and hence more Spirit; for they are all one to be cleansed with Blood and
Spirit; for the Lord Jesus did not by his blood purchase the unsealing of the
Law; but the Gospel is a secret, and not known but by this means; it is the New
Testament which arises from the death of the Testator; to have the ne^^ of the
Gospel printed, it is by means of Christ blood; but to have men sent to open
it, there is more of his blood therein; and hence more Spirit.

Because there is more of Christ's love in the Gospel; Reason 3.
and where most of his love goes, there his Spirit goes most; it is love to
make us know the Law, though it be a hand-wr^ing against us; but now (when we
see death) to bring the Gospel and therein to entreat and wait, there is great
love; and hence it is called the Ministry of R^conciliation. Oh it is infinite
pity to offer to take a dead ^artion up under his wings; here he lo^gs for the
salvation of a si^ner most: if we were fallen Angels, he would never send the
Ministry of the Gospel to us; but so it is now, that he has taken the seed of
Abraham.

SECT. V.
OF Instruction. Use.
1. Hence we may see the glory of the Gospel, in that it is the Ministry of the
Spirit of God; this the Apostle professes it exceeds in glory; glorious light
it scatters, that which has been hid from the wise, nay, from Prophets, and
Abraham who desired to see this day, and saw it but ^^ far off; hence it is
called mavelous light, which brings the foul to the light of that blessed
face of Jesus, and his glorious love, which never shall be sounded to the bottom
of it, which damps the glory of all other things; and although many great and
wise despise it, yet if they did know they would not despise the Lord of glory,
nor crucify him; but their eyes shall never see those glorious consolations
and comforts promised to the people of God; I will send the (...), says
Christ, which (...) can be taken (...) from Beleivers, which in midst of all
misery comforts; it is a great mercy when a man sees his sin, else he would
never seek for remedy; but the Law cannot do any thing but arrest, and imprison;
it cannot get sin removed; yet the Gospel can set at liberty, which (...)
prisoners; Ioh 8. 32. You shall know the truth, and that shall make you free. I
can through Christ, etc. Phil. 4. 13. It is a mavelous mercy to tremble
before God, and see, and know, and be affected with Gods wrath; but yet if this
be all, the heart will sink and fly from God; now the Gospel reveals Christ,
and so Ioh. 10. 16. his sheep he ar and follow him; and the Gospel comes to
hell with the Spirit, to a poor sinner when he is blind, captive, broken,
mourning, never so miserable; now the Gospel penetrates thus low, and brings
the Spirit with it; it makes the soul not only to see Christ, but gives it him,
and now it is safe. Oh (beloved!) if the Spirit be glorious, then is the Gospel
glorious; if the Ministry of men could bring in, and draw with them the Princes
of this world, and all their wealth to serve you, Angels and their Ministry,
nay, bring Christ himself bodily to you, how glorious were this? but what is
this to bring the Spirit into a Sty, into thy Soul! Oh therefore take heed of a
light esteem of the Gospel, as those Matthew. 22. 3. which were shut out: Men
must speak something; take heed you that have once esteemed it, of accounting
it a common thing (it is next to the unpardonable sin) of accounting the
Gospel, Ministers, Truths, Justification by Faith, etc. common things; but see
them glorious; the greatest glory that ever was in the world, did once lie hid
under the meanest outside, viz. Jesus Christ, and yet the Apostles beheld his
glory; so the Gospel is most glorious now, as being his glass, and this
notwithstanding is most mean in the account of many; Paul is in the eyes of the
Corinthian Doctors a mean man, his presence was contemptible, his words mean
also; men despised them.

Secondly, hence see what cause they have to sit, and go home to their houses
lamenting, that never found the Spirit conveyed by the ministry of the Gospel
in life and power. Lam. 1. 16. Oh the comforter that should refresh my soul is
far from me; if there be any hope of help, it is by the Spirit; and if the
Spirit, it is by the Ministry where the Gospel is published and the Spirit
conveyed: Oh thinks many a one in himself, I find no such good! thus long have
I heard, and thus often do I hear, but I come, and go away as I came, my heart
never shaken, my soul never broken, my spirit never humbled, nor comforted,
etc. and therefore what care I for Ministers or Gospel? it is true, it is hid,
2 Cor. 4. 3. but then it is from them that be lost only, whom Satan has
blinded; it may be the last medicine is now using; as it is with many that have
the last remedy applied when they be sick to death; truly so it is here.

Heb. 6. 8. The tree or ground that brings forth briars, is nigh to cursing;
the condition is sad, as it is there expressed, it shall never see good when good
comes, Ier. 17. 6. Oh it was a sad complaint of Saul, Oh the Lord answers me
not! and of the people of God, We see no vision; but you have none, and lament
it not; if men in the old Law did not meet with the Lord in their Tent doors,
it was no wonder, it was not usual so to do; but when at the Tabernacle, if
they met not there with him, it was sad then; so here; if you meet not the Lord
there where he dwells, it is strange; not but that Saints may find the Lord
absent; but I speak to them that find it not, and mourn not for it; others
shall rejoice when they mourn for the absence of the Lord.

SECT. VI.
OF Confutation of those that think there is not that necessity of the Ministry
Use 2.
to convey the Spirit;

But First, think good Books may do the deed, and hence can profit as much at
home as thereby; but these Virgins are not directed to books, but persons,
(though there is a good use of Books also) Books are but a carcass of the
living Word.

Secondly, They that would have it by immediate revelation, by elevations of
the Soul to God, a Familistical principle collected from the Apocrypha
speculations of devout Monks, received in G^^many when the Gospel was preached
to overthrow it, and entertained by the deceitful experiences of some (as in
London, etc.) she that was con^erted by dreams, etc. indeed we are to look for
the Spirit; but to look for it without the Word is vile; if the Apostles were
living, these would overthrow their doctrine.

Object. What can man do? ( say many) you must look for the living voice of
Christ; the Word is but a dead letter, and will only make you a Jew in letter.

Answ. If indeed we had only souls, and no bodies, then we might lay aside our
Bibles; but seeing it is not so, look to the Word thus dispensed; hence the
Lord says, Hear and your souls shall live; these say, Hear not, etc.

SECT. VII.
OF Terror to all them that oppose the Ministry of the Lord Jesus, Use 3.
and resist it; the Holy Ghost being in it, you resist the Holy Ghost himself,
and that not only where he is dropped, but most abundantly poured out, Acts 7 51,
52. How did they resist the Holy Ghost? they did but resist men; No, it was the
Holy Ghost there, for so he spoke those words, and the Spirit had some
operation upon their hearts by those words, Zach. 7. 12. Neh. 9. 30.

Sometimes the Spirit puts forth its prerogative power; then it is not
overcome; sometimes words without power, and then men resist and overcome it,
(for that is the meaning, because all men resist, more on less) and this is
enmity against the Spirit, Act. 5. 39. Fighters against God, which is a most
sad and heavy evil, for to be left to that evil to overcome the Comforter
himself; as he said, Is it not enough to grieve man, but you must grieve my God
also? Isa. 7. 13.

SECT. VIII.
Quest. But who does resist thus?

Answ. 1. Some do it by filencing and persecuting of the Ministry of the
Spirit, which is most grievous: When Amos preached against Bethel, up steps
Amaziah the Priest of Bethel, Amos 7. 10. and first makes complaint of him to
the King; First, that he was factious, and conspired against the King: And
secondly, That the Land was not able to bea^ his words; that he troubled the
Country and Kingdom with his Doctrine, viz. That we shall all dye if we receive
not his Doctrine; and hence he commands him to depart and flee from thence, and
prophecy no more there; but you see what he answers, I was a Herdsma^, and the
Lord called me; think not that you oppose a private spirit, but the Lord's that
called me: And hence see because he did but say so, what his sentence is, upon
his Wife, Children, himself and upon all Israel: Are there not many Amaziah's
in these days? do they not take the same course? is not the same spirit working
against the Spirit of God now? what will their end be? Let a man be never so
peaceable in his place, blessed in his work, if he does but reach Bethel, nay,
if only the judgments of them, the Altars there, and Idols there; Amos may
prophecy in another Land, but no more there; but what will be the end of this?
see verse. 17. it is a sad speech 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16. Forbiding ^s to preach to the
Gentiles that they may be saved; for the wrath of God is come upon them to the
utmost: You know the Jews raised up persecution against them where ever they
came, but wrath is upon them for it ev^n to the utmost; why, look as it is in
hell, to resist the Gospel ones self is heavy; but when in hell there they wish
that no others might receive it, or that it might not be preached to any other,
that none might ever know the Lord: So it is here, it is greater wrath to
oppose God in hell, than to be opposed of God; and the first they are come to:
Oh but they garnish the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and beautify their
Temples, and if they had lived in the days of the Prophets, they would never
oppose them.

Object. But these are other kind of Hot-^purs, and Novices.

Answ. Matthew. 23. 30, 35. You shall have Scribes and Wise men, and you shall
kill them, that upon you may come all the blood that ever was spilt; and blood
they must have who are the open persecutors of the Prophets and Saints of God
first or last; certainly God is remembering the tears and troubles of his
banished distressed Seers.

2. Some others by reviling and reproaching of the Ministry; for Satan in the
hearts of the wicked, if he cannot hurt it with his teeth, he will seek to
destroy it by his tongue; how was Paul censured by a company of proud
Corinthians, that when they had nothing against him almost, yet they censure
him for his manner of speaking and carriage! 2 Cor. 10. 10. His l^tters are
mighty, but his presence base; how was John, though for a time, flocked after!
and Christ Jesus himself was thus evilly reputed; this was that which brought
the total ruin of the Jews, viz. mocking at the messengers of God, 2 Chronicles.
ult. 16. When Paul had persuaded Sergius Paulus, and Elymas gainsaid, says
Paul Acts 13. 10. Oh full of sub^ilty, and child of the devil, enemy to all
righteousness (why to all? because all Grace comes to be wrought here by the
Word) thou shall be blind.

How have the Messengers and Ministers in this Country been trampled upon by
some, who though they have not yet been able to reach them by their power, yet
by vile reproaches so pursuing most of them, that one would stand and wonder at
the blindness and boldness, not of moral men, but Church Members and
Professors, and at the wrath of God upon them, that ever they should be left to
be scorners of them, of whom the consciences of the vilest cannot but sometime
say, verily God is with you! Yea, Grace it self has been pretended to be the
weapon, by which the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ have been fought
against; and indeed the vilest opinions usually have been sheltered under
Grace; that has been the Kings colors, which the enemies of the Kingdom of
Christ have lifted up to deceive* for in places of profession, not merit and
works, old shoes, etc. but Grace and Christ, Matthew. 24. 24. are most fit to
deceive.

And hence if Ministers have persuaded men to believe, and receive the Gospel,
what can we do (say many?) God must do all; if evidences and signs of a good
estate be called for out of the Word; it is a way of works, almost flat Popery
in their books: If Ministers have had the Spirit burning within them, seeing
people led from the truth, and so speak against them that deceive them, it is
passion and bitterness; if they have sought to keep the hearts of Gods people
close one to another, the strong man then keeps the palace: What should I name
all?

Quest. But for what is it that they are thus s^andalized?

Ans. 1. For preaching that we are justified by Faith, and that Faith is
required to the entertainment of Christ as a condition of the Gospel; here is
not bread (say men.)

2. For preaching that Sanctification is an evidence of Justification; and
though it be granted the Lord never justified any without a work of vocation at
least, and this is not against Gods Grace to justify by Faith; yet it is
against Grace, and it is a way of works, say some, to see my self justified by
Faith. If the Word did reveal a second Justification by Faith, and a first
Justification without Faith, then our first evidence might be without sight of
Faith, because there is some word which reveals our being Justified without it;
But the Word reveals all our Justification to be by Faith; and thus for
preaching the Gospel of Christ have the Servants of the Lord been reproached.
And though they keep it in, yet how many are there whose hearts go after these
detestable things!

3. Some resist the Spirit by despising inwardly, and so casting off the Word
of the Lord, Heb. 2. 2, 3. if we neglect or slight so great salvation; and when
was the Gospel more slighted by many? every thing we say is dear but Gospel,
which should make us mourn that ever it should be said so in this Country; you
despise the Spirit of God; a man of greatness suffers by nothing so much as by
contempt; so it is with the Spirit of Grace: And it is a thousand to one but
that there will be something to make them despise at last the Lord himself: But
the Word comes thus to be despised and cast off

SECT. IX.
First, PArtly by the false reports of others, as if they were factious
disturbers of peace, men under a Covenant of Works, etc. It is the Jesuits
policy to raise up lies; and though all will not believe them, yet some will
stick.

Secondly, Partly by covetousness; the glory of the things of this world is
greater than the glory of the Gospel; tell them of living by Faith and
Promises, they deride you in their hearts; tell them of a Kingdom, and the
excellency of holiness, they slight them; to be so rich and honored, it is
glorious indeed, Luke 16. 14. The Pharisees scorned him because they were
covetous.

Thirdly, Sometime because Ministers and Ministry are Bills of charges to a
congregation, and are too costly inhabitants among them.

Fourthly, Partly because of ignorance of the truth; why was Paul's Ministry
foolishness? it was a mystery; so many come and understand not the truths
preached; they be too high points for them to conceive of; let truth be never
so precious, they esteem it not, because they know it not.

Fifthly, Partly because they have known all that our Ministers do preach
before, which is now like flowers and roses withering, which were flourishing
heretofore; Capernaum despises that which Sodom would not, and Tyre^ and Sidon
would have repented at; and say, They can do as well themselves as this, and
better.

Sixthly, Partly because Ministers are so long at it; and that may be delivered
in one hour which is stood upon an hour and half; and they wonder men preach so
little, and yet so long; which argues contempt, and that every truth is not
precious. Men cry not out of men when they are telling money to them many
hours; and yet this is more precious; Eutychus grows sleepy; thank Paul for
preaching so long; and falls down; thank long Sermons for that: This is the
sinful language of some.

Seventhly, Because they cannot profit by them; hence when they should mourn
for themselves they despise the truth of the Lord, Mic. 2. 7. are not my words
good to him that walks uprightly.

Eighthly, Because some have weaker gifts than others: And thus I say, the
Ministry of the Lord and his Spirit is despised, Mat. 18. 8. Take heed you
despise not little ones, for Angels behold them: Oh what is it then to despise
the Spirit himself? And thus I say the Spirit of God is res^sted; go home
therefore and mourn, and consider, 1. The time is already set; the Spirit will
not always strive; and time may come that it will go from you and never return
to you more. 2. Fire will come out of their mouths, Rev. 11. 5. 3. The
Ministry shall be taken from you and your children, Act. 13. 46. 4. The Spirit
it self shall torment you, Isa. 63. 10.

SECT. X.
OF Exhortation; Oh therefore if ever you would have the Spirit dispensed to
you, Use 4.
wait here upon the Ministry of the Gospel for it; neglect not private helps,
books and meditations, etc. but know if ever you have it dispensed, here it is
chiefly to be had; buy at this shop.

Do you not find parched, dried up hearts? the Spirit of God is gone from men;
and this verily is the cause of it; what consolations, what peace, what glory
from the Spirit of all comfort, of peace and glory might men have, but for this?

Obj. But I may never get this Spirit!

Ans. Yes, Hea^ and your souls shall live, Isa. 55. 3. (for to reprobates the
Lord never gives an ear) what a comfort is this? you cannot help your selves to
look to Christ, to come to Christ; hear him then when he is come to thee, Romans
11. 7, 8. he has given them ears not to hear; and usually the first work of
the Spirit in the soul is to give an ear; the Lord awakens that to (...), that
never regarded any thing before; and then something enters first or ^ast.

SECT. XI.
Quest. HOw shall I so hear as to receive the Spirit?

Answ. 1. Get a deep sense of your wants particularly and distinctly before you
come; if a man comes to the Market, and (...) his Family wants, he will never
come and buy of them that sell; a poor man if he comes into a rich shop, has a
mind to buy all the commodities he sees if he had money; but if it may be had
without money he will take them gladly, Matthew. 11. The poor receive the Gospel;
I am persuaded that this is the great cause why scarce any buy here; they know
not their need of every truth; hence Isa. 50. 4. He has given me the tongue of
the learned to preach a Word in season to the weary; the Lord will do it in
season; when the heart is weary of its own deceit and ignorance, and all carnal
contents, and blessings, and sins, now the Lord Jesus must speak at last; let a
people be more weary of outward miseries than of inward, they will not regard
Moses by reason of anguish of spirit; this keeps off many a man; either he
feels only outward miseries; his mind is broken with cares, how shall I live?
with losses and crosses, Family is sick, Cattle die, Servants are untoward and
unfaithful; his drink is turned to water, and the English flower is gone; his
Friends respect him not, his acquaintance grow strange; these things lie more
heavy than sin.

2. Pray before you come; for as it is in men that trade, their Servants are
ready to let out their commodities, but ask the Master first whether he will
sell them or no to you; so ask the Lord first. Ministers are but Servants under
the Lord, it is not as they will, but as the Lord will dispense, Matthew. 11. 25.
I thank thee that thou ^ast hid these things from the wise and prudent, though
Christ himself preached: Oh therefore loo^ up to the Lord; Oh Lord let not thy
Gospel be a hidden thing from mine eyes. I am persuaded you should see strange
things, and grow up more and more if thus you did: When Christ told them that
the Spirit should come, he bids them wait for it, and they continued instant in
(...), Act. 1. 4. and then the Spirit of God came upon them, though
ex^raordinarily, yet here ordinarily; Psalm. 51. Lord cause me to hear the voice
of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice; and
hence the Lord complains, Isa. 50. 3. Why, when I came was their no
intercessor? as if he should say, he would have given them help else; Oh
therefore before you come, and when you come, pray, Lord speak; pray all the
week long that there may be some Sabbath mercies for you.

3. Give the Lord the price of his Gospel; men that come to buy must give the
price Zach. 11. 12. And God will not let you have any thing without price; give
away all thou have (when thou come to hear) to the Lord, let him pluck or
take any thing from thee, only let him not take away himself, and his Spirit;
prize the least truth above all the world, as indeed it is better, the Lord may
else deny these pearls to you, Heb. 4. 2. The word did not profit because not
mixed with faith; and that is the property of that? vide 1 Per. 2. 5, 6. To him
that believes the Lord is precious; it makes Christ precious, and every truth
precious; and when the Lord himself is precious, the Spirit is sent, Joh. 14.
17. whom the world cannot receive, because they know him not. Oh he is not
sweet not precious to them.

Three things are here to be laid out and given to God at the hearing of the
Word:

1. Thy Thoughts; let a man have never so much meat, if he feed not upon it,
never will he have spirits thereby; therefore while hearing time lasts, be
taken up with those things you hear; be in them, that your profiting may appear
to all; you know not so much, but that there is more yet to be known.

2. Thy Heart; Love it; Christ's love was so great as to shed his blood, that he
might purchase this Word of his Gospel for thee; and wilt not thou let thy love
out of thy heart to it, when it is for thee?

3. Labor; labor for the Spirit here, as for the meat that endures for ever,
Ioh. 6. ^7. Christ will give it you, spare no pains and labor upon it, to
enjoy, and be eternally advantaged by it.

Thus much of the Second thing, in this Second Part of the Parable; Now the
Third follows, viz. The Coming of Christ himself.
CHAP. XVI.
Concerning Christ's Coming.
SECT. I.
NOw this coming of Christ is set forth and amplified from two things.

1. From the time of his coming; While the foolish went to buy, he came.

2. From his different entertainment of the Virgins, and carriage toward them
being come.

First, The wise they went in with him to the Marriage.

Secondly, The foolish were shut out, etc.

By this coming of the Lord is (as has been often said) meant the coming of
Christ to Death or Judgment; but especially and principally his coming to
Judgment, as may appear by the whole series of this Chapter and the next,
wherein the Lord answers to the second question of the Disciples, viz. the
signs and ^^me of his coming; i. e. his second coming, which is called his
coming to judge the the world, etc.

That there is and shall certainly be a Second coming of Christ to Judgment.
Observation 2.


This truth the Prophets have foretold; Enoch, Jude 14. Solom^n, Eccles. 12.
ult. Romans 14. 11. with Isa. 45. 23. The Apostles have preached thus, as 2. Cor.
5. 10, and it was ever in their eye, and the main part of their Ministry when
they pressed people to believe in Christ as a King; where is he? He shall come,
they tell the unbelieving world; Angels also have published this, Act. 1. 11.
and Devils believe this, who are in their chains bound over to that day; and
all the Saints have looked for this, 1 Thessalonians 1. (...) and hence promises of
mercy at that time are made to such, Heb. 9. ult. And lastly, the consciences
of many wicked people have confessed this; Paul preaches of Judgment to come,
and Felix trembles, and Heb. 6. 5. diverse felt the powers of the world to come,
and by judgments on them have been made to know that he is the Lord.

SECT. II.
Quest. 1. BUt when shall the Lord Jesus come?

Ans. In general, when all the E^^ct are gathered under the wings of Christ;
hence Matthew. 24. 22. For the elects fake those days shall be shortened, i. e. an
utter ruin of all had then come but for them; and therefore when they are once
collected, the Lord will come; and hence in particular Judgments the Lord does
thus; only a few Elect keep a whole land from being utterly wasted, Isa. 65. 8.
Isa. 6. ul^. 1 Cor. 15. 23, 24. first Christ is quickened, i. e. in soul and
body raised, then those that are Christ's at his coming, and then comes the end;
and hence the tares are spared, lest in pulling up them, the wheat also be
plucked up.

Now as for setting down the particular time, the Lord Jesus does it not in
this Chapter; only gives some signs of it, by which we may give certain credit
that it is not far off (as of the death of a crazy man) and there are two that
are not yet accomplished.

1. The destroying of Antichrist, at least in the principal power of it, and
throne of it.

2. The calling of the Jews, Romans 11. who must have a great day of it again;
which dry bones shall live; and their restoring a kind of resurrection and
life from the dead: Some have thought two thousand years before the Law, and
under the Law, and under Christ; and then when these six days of a thousand
years a piece are ended, comes the great Sabbath; this is already proved to be
false in the second two thousand years. In the Primitive times and Churches the
Apostles, especially ^ames and Peter, spoke of the end of all things to be at
hand, who writing to the scattered Jews had good reason to tell them of it,
viz. the end of the Temple. Though Bar^^^s to weaken the Authority of
Scripture, thinks they spoke only their own apprehensions; diverse Christians
thought then it was nigh; and hence Paul (...) them to beware of those
thoughts, seeing much danger in them, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2. And in succeeding ages,
Tertullian expresses the affection of the Christians to the Roman State, that
they sought not the ruin of it, but prayed pro mor a finis, as fearing it was
then coming upon the world for sin; and so many Saints seeing wicked^ess
abound, have thought that time is not far off; but yet the times and seasons
are not in our hands to know, Act. 1. 7. and that must quiet us, that come he
will.

SECT. III.
Quest. 2. WHere will he come to judge?

Answ. Into this visible world again; for if it should be in heaven, as no
unclean thing shall come there, so we should then rather come to Christ to be
judged, than for him to come to Judgment* No, there is a second coming; that
as his first was into this visible world, so shall his second, Act. 3. ^1. Wh^^
the heavens must contain until the time of the restitution of all things; and
then shall he break out of heaven again for this work; Now to what particular
place in the world he shall come to judge is disputed on by many, especially
some of the Schoolmen: Some think that it shall be in Mount Calvary, where he
was crucified; some in Mount Olivet, where he ascended; others in the Valley of
Iehosaphat, Joel 3. 2. which as it cannot contain all people that ever were, so
the place only speaks of the terror of God against the enemies of his scattered
Jews at their conversion; I would not be wise above what is written, all that I
read most plainly of, is, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17, 18. That then we shall meet the Lord
in the air; now how high, or where the Lords Throne shall be set, those things
are not for us to enquire after, but so the Lord will order it, as that all
Nations, all the dead, small and great shall stand before him and see him in
one place; which shall not be very low; where men have sinned, there they shall
be judged; and hence as Judges have their Circuits; so men having sinned in
this world, shall be judged here.

SECT. IV.
Quest. 4. HOw will he come to judge?

Answ. He shall come in power and great glory, Matthew. 24. 30. As first, The
glory of the Father, Matthew. 16. 27. the brightness of his Diety, his infinite
wisdom was hid in the dark lanthorn of his humanity, but then he shall appear,
as it is said, Romans 1. 4. manifested to be the Son of God by his Resurrection,
so then much more when he comes to raise the world, all the world shall see his
power, wisdom, greatness then.

Secondly, All his mighty Angels with him, Matthew. 16. 27. all shall be there,
so that heaven shall be left empty; a thousand times ten thousand* shall then
minister unto him; and you know how gloriously the Lord made the Angels shine
at Christ's Resurrection.

Thirdly, With the voice of the Archangel and the trump of God, and with a
shout, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. He shall descend with a shout, i. e. of joy to the
Saints, as in the day of victory and triumph of God; as at giving the Law the
Trumpet did blow to work dread and terror then, so now.

Fourthly, With burning and consuming of the world, 2 Pet. 3. 7. 2 Thessalonians. 1.

Fifthly, Raising and call^ng all the dead before him, small and great, good
and bad, in earth and sea, and that in a moment it shall not be a long work, 1
Cor. 15. 52. and thus the Lord shall appear at this day, that as he came before
with baseness, so he shall now come in glory, and nothing then shall have any
glory but himself, and those that are his, because he will damp all the glory
of the world; and thus sitting in the clouds in a Throne of glory, he shall
judge, i. e. examine, convince, and condemn; examine all secrets, and convict
men of their evils, and then condemn them and pass sentence upon the wicked,
and grace to his Saints; the Saints examinations, and all their duties and
actings for God opened, and that all the world that censured them may see then
the infinite wisdom and love of God in his people, in making and keeping them
sincere.

SECT. V.
Quest. 4. Why will he come?

Answ. 1. If it was only for his peoples sake, for their perfect redemption,
and refreshing, there were reason enough for it; hence it is called a day of
redemption, and a time of refreshing; here they are captived under miseries,
and sadded by them under sin, Satan, world, but then they shall be redeemed:
Now that it shall be so;

First, He has come already to redeem his people from sin, which is the
greatest evil, and which redemption was performed by his blood; now if he has
redeemed from the greatest evil, viz. Sin; then from Corruption, then from
Death, and Satan, etc. If he once came by blood and baseness, then he will come
in glory and greatness; if he came through fire to them, then he will come
through fair ways to them; if by death to them, then by life to them; and hence
Ioh. 5. 24. all judgment is committed to him, because he is the Son of Man.
And though it be long, yet surely he will, he must come, especially seeing
himself has perfectly redeemed his people, and is now himself exalted above
all: A man that has been in prison himself, with his poor brethren that are
left there still, the price of their redemption being paid, and there being
nothing for their delivera^ce wanting, but one to fetch them, if none help, he
will do it alone: So here.

Secondly, in regard of the Justice of God, that that may be cleared before the
eyes of all the world; men sin now, and are not punished; but flourish, and the
Saints are grieved; every man sees patience, bounty, long^sufferance exercised;
but the wrath of God against the least sins is not yet made known; there must
therefore be a day to declare it, and the equity of it.

Thirdly, In regard of the Wisdom of God: Look in all Commonwealths well
governed in the world, and we shall not find any but they have Court days, and
their Petty Sessions, and great Assizes, as in Israel; for to what extremity of
wickness would places come to else? so here; Shall the wise Governor of the
world never have a day of hearing and trying causes? has he no care? others
are but in his room under him till that time: neither is it enough to say that
there is Judgment of death* Answ. That is only Christ's judging the soul in
private either to his shame or glory before Christ; but the body is to be
judged as well as the soul, to shame before men, or glory before all the world.

Fourthly, In regard of Christ's sovereignty and excellency; the coming of
Christ is called his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1. Why, does not Christ rule now in the
world? Yes, but it is in the midst of his enemies; his enemies rule and he
rules also; but there must a time come that no enemies must rule, but Christ
alone* and this is his kingdom in a most illustrious manner; for the things of
Christ are said to be with us, when they do in a special manner appear; as the
coming of his Spirit, and his love, so his Kingdom; now Christ must reign till
all his enemies are put under foot; for it is not fit he should lose his
Kingdom; has the Lord suffered others to reign and rule, and himself to be
hid, and his glory lost, and that so long? and will he never return to his
Kingdom to be glorious, there to reap all his glory that he has lost by all
his enemies in the world? Was there ever King that would ever endure one
generation of Rebels after another, and never make himself sole Sovereign?
however Man may suffer it, yet the Lord will not, he must reign. And wherefore
does Christ reign? It is to trample (...) under foot, his and his peoples
enemies; Christ sets death his enemy, to destroy his enemies, and keep them as
in a Goal; but afterward Christ will call them forth, and pass an irreversible
doom upon them.

SECT. VI.
SEE therefore and believe the truth of this Point as well as hear it: Use 1.
At the first coming of Christ, Heb. 11. 13. they did thus, saw the Promises
afar off, and embraced them; so see it afar off: There be diverse people that
profess this truth that do not fully believe it; for if they did, they would
never live as they do: That look as men that know the Judge rides Circuit
within half a year, dare not commit any open sins; so if you believed this, you
would make conscience of secret sins which this Judge shall judge.

Others there be that do believe it as they do reports that every man says,
but they do not see that really to be true indeed, which their hearts literally
believe; and hence men's hearts are not a whit moved with grief, or sorrow, or
joy, or fear at the remembrance of this day. For as it is with us in reports of
news out of Germany, many hear things, but are not affected with their misery,
because they do not see it acted before their eyes; God presents not their
sorrows; and hence they are not moved; but when they do see them acted, then
they are moved much; so here. Look as it is with a man awake and in sleep; a
man awake believes the day of Judgment, and never stirs; but when asleep he
dreams of it, and is much affected with that because he sees it acted before
his eyes; much more when men have not dreams but real visions or sight of it,
it will affect: And hence set, painted fire before a Malefactor, it affects
not, but show him really it wherein he must be burnt, now it amazeth him; and
hence 2 Pet. 2. 11, 12, 14. looking for; and hence Peter says what manner of
persons ought we to be! and wherever there is Faith, thus it will be, Heb. 11.
1. it makes things absent present, and things unseen evident.

Oh that God would show you this truth, you young men, Eccles. 11. 9. you would
not spend time vainly, but know God: You aged men whose hearts are rooted in
this world, Oh know that God will come and burn up your delights; will you
never see this day and fear it before you see it, and mourn because of it!

Oh take heed of rash judging and condemning, Use. 2.
and suspecting, and censuring other men: In Paul's time Romans 14. 10. one
Brother in a Church there judged another about indifferent things in a
Christ-like manner, as if he had no Grace, etc. You shall stand before Christ's
Judgment Seat, says Paul* and hence Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4, 5. accounts little
of man's Judgment, and bids them judge nothing, etc. What if Christ find that
to be a lie which thou judge to be true.

Many of Gods Servants lie under hard thoughts and speeches in private, not
only from Enemies abroad, but from inhabitants at home; men out of the Church
censuring and judging of Members; men in the Church, one of another, especially
if they take to a side; The Lord will discover hard speeches, and an edition of
all your hard thoughts put out in print at the last day: This breaks love, this
breaks Church Fellowship, and is the cause of breache^ in this Country.

Oh take heed of an hypocritical heart; Use 3.
if the Lord should come to judge according to the seeing of the eyes of the
outward man, then well were it with many; but when the secrets of the hearts
shall be judged it will be terrible; if there should never be a calling over of
things again, happy were it for many, but it is otherwise, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Paul
sought only to please the Lord, for we must all appear, etc. Civil men if they
can carry it so as men may not say hurt of them, they think it is well;
Hypocrites if they can maintain a name of Religion, so as they may maintain
their interest in good men's hearts, it is well; if they get some enlargement in
duties, that they are commen^^^ of them, well; if they can get so much mercy as
to get the Lord to accept of Christ's righteousness for them, it is well; but
says Paul, We laborto be accepted of him. I am persuaded godly men do not
think of this; we think the wicked shall have all their secrets laid open, but
the Saints come not into condemnation; it is true not of wrath, but of trial, so
as that their righteousness shall be laid open to all, to their glory at the
great day, 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. And therefore get that life which Christ himself may
commend; that as Christ said, I have not found such faith in Isr^el: So here,
when thou have spoken a good word, repeated a Sermon, spent a Sabbath, ask thy
heart, is this worth showing to all the world? that though at be vile, yet
Christ himself will commend this? Oh you will find only acting for him will
commend the act, Mat. 25. 40. there is that needlework, and golden Arras of
Holiness which is lapt up in the Saints, that Christ will open before all the
world another day.

Oh therefore repent, Use 4.
Act. 17. 31. Paul tells them times past were spent in ignorance without God,
time to come was a time of Judgment and wrath of God against all sin; Oh then
repent: Mourn for all wrongs done against Christ: You will ^^il then, if you
take not your season now; mourn therefore for time past, and for time to come
agree with him; now he sits on a throne of Mercy in Heaven if thou would not
be put to shame; then, Oh be ashamed for all sins now; if not judged then, then
condemn and judge thy self now; the Lord looks for no more; Oh welcome him as
King into thy heart as his Kingdom.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Christ's coming as a Bridegroom to his own.
SECT. I.
THat the Lord Jesus Christ shall come as a Bridegroom to his (...) people,
Observation* 2.
at his Second coming; that as it is said of the Sun, ^^ arises as a
Bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices etc. so will the Lord arise upon
the world at this day, Psalm. 19. 5.

This Point will be cleared and proved by opening the several degrees wherein
he will manifest himself to be a Bridegroom then to his people; not but that
Christ is a Bridegroom to his people now, but then he shall be so also in a
more eminent manner, and then the perfect accomplishment of all.

First then, the^re shall be a personal meeting between his Spouse and himself,
as it is in marriage; before the marriage i^ consummated, there are the friends
of the Bridegroom and Spokesmen, and he sends letters and tokens, but then he
comes himself; so here Christ sends his Spokesmen, 2 Cor. 11. 2. and his word
and spiritual refreshings; but when this time comes, he appears himself in
person, and both meet in person; 1 Th^ss. 4. 16, 17. here we meet the Lord
spiritually in his Ordinances, but then visibly in the clouds; while we live in
this world, it is a time of parting, 2 Cor. 5. 8. and when we come to dye, in
respect of the whole man, it is so also; but then the whole man shall meet him;
these eyes shall see him, and those arms shall embrace him; you are left as
Orphans here in this world alone; it will not always be thus, for there is a
time of meeting.

Secondly, Then all deformities shall be taken away from his people, and he
shall adorn his Bride in perfect beauty; for this is one part of Christ's
con^ugal love to his Spouse and People, Ephesians. 5. 25. different from other
Husbands, who find but do not make them beautiful; for if the Lord should meet
his people, and they him with their deformities, they would do it unwillingly
and with shame: as in this life why are Saints unwilling yet to be with the
Lord? viz. because there be so many deformities and spots abiding on the
Spouse; sometimes the soul would not have Christ, and such a heart too, though
he offers himself to it; Lord depart, I am a sin^ul man, Luke 5. 8. Oh but then
all deformities shall be removed; Phil. 3. ult. Who shall change our vile
bodies, not destroy them; and make them like his glorious body, which shines
brighter than the Sun: Matthew. 13. 43. Then shall the righteous shine like the
Sun; is there any beauty like that of Christ's? then shall they be like unto
him; 1 Ioh. 3. 2. it is a dishonor for a mighty Prince on the day of marriage to
let his Queen go in rags; they shall be Christ's then; And look as it was with
Joseph, all his shame, baseness, imprisome^ts, did but ^ake way for his glory;
and hence he was delivered out of prison by the Kings command; now his apparel,
and countenance, and name, and estate, and all is changed; so here, all your
sheme, imprisonment in the grave-chains of sins, that enter into your soul,
does but make way for this certain glory; As it was with Iehosuah, Satan stood
at his right hand to accuse him, he only stands before the Lord, at last the
Lord says, Take off these filthy garments; is not this a brand? So Satan and
Conscience accuse often here, but then it shall be so that all thy filthy
garments shall be taken away.

Thirdly, Then there shall be an open manifestation, and glorious declaration
of the dearest love of the Lord toward them; before the great day of marriage
comes, there is love expressed, concluded between the parties, and it may be
some few know of it, as Friends, and some of the Family; but the open
declaration is at the day of marriage; so Christ loves his people now, etc. and
will not only love them then, but openly declare his love before all the world;
Come ye blessed; he shall declare then his own love, Matthew. 10. 32. Luke 12, 8.
He that has made it his glory to confess Christ in a holy life, Christ will
confess him before God and before Angels; and so before all the world: Men in
great place will not know their poor friends, especially in open places; but
the Lord Jesus will, and he will divulge the Fathers love to them also, Act, 3.
19. You blessed of the Father, Ioh. 17. 22, 23, 24. I have given them that
glory, united them and made them flesh of my flesh, that the world may know
thou have loved them as thou have loved me. Here the Lord does love his people
dearly, but it is not so known; the Sun shines on good and bad; the world hates
and persecutes them as Hypocrites; civil men think them like themselves;
worldlings think them as little loved as any, their estates thrive not;
Hypocrites bear a base esteem of them; and if they love them, it is because they
love them; Saints themselves many times suspect them; or if not, yet they judge
as well of others as them; nay it may be they are so disfigured sometimes by
those sores that break out of them; that they know not themselves; but now the
Lord will openly declare his love to them, and to all the world besides; These
are the men which I have born on my breast, and carried on my shoulders; for whom
I have built and planted Churches, and destroyed enemies, and trod the
wine press alone, and prefered above mine own life, and blood and glory; whose
hairs have been numbered by me, whose walls have been continually before me. No
greater misery to a holy heart than this: Psalm. 42. 10. Where is now thy God?
So when conscience says, and men say it here: Oh what a mercy is it that then
it shall be heard, I am now come to comfort thee!

Fourthly, Then they shall be brought into actual possession and fruition of
all the glory promised unto them, of all their inheritance and portion: Before
marriage there be promises made of such an estate; but when the day is come,
then they come to actual and full possession of it, and become equal possessors
of the estate; so much in this life the Lord does promise to possess his people
of; there be promises of peace, redemption, victory, and triumph over all
enemies, fellowship with God, and all the Saints and Angels together, an
incorruptible inheritance, and now they shall enter into possession of all
these; nay, all that Christ has, signified by that word Kingdom, Matthew. 25.
Come and take the kingdom prepared for you; 1 Cor. 15. 54. Then shall be
brough^ to pass the saying written, O death where is thy sting, etc. Isa. 25.
7, 8. So that reckon what Christ has, you shall have it then. Much mercy the
Lord shows to his people now, but Psalm. 31. 19. how great is that which is laid
up! then it shall be brought forth; now you shall have an end of all your
desires, prayers, faith to feel that which you have believed, etc. as it was
with Joshua 23. ult. Not one thing whereof God has failed. Here the poor
hardly get bread; here many prayers get nothing, etc. but there, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9,
10. God does then what he can for them and gives what he can give to them, then
all treasures are broken open.

Fifthly, Then there shall ever be cohabitation and living with him, never to
be any more parted from him, or he from them; for while any is a Suitor to one
in a far Country, he comes and goes away again; but when marriage comes, then he
carries her to his own house, and now live they must together; so the Lord in
this life is sometime with his people, sometime absent from his people, but then
they must cohabite together, and shall; 1 Thessalonians. 4. ult. And then we shall ever
be with the Lord. If the Lord should do all the former, and not this, it would
be a bitter cut: When the Disciples had Christ's presence for a time, it was
sweet; but when parting came, that was bitter; but here is no more parting with
the Lord; to be in a Kings dominon where peace rules, when other places are
slaughter-houses, and Golgotha's, it is good; but to be with the King, and ever
with him, and to follow him where ever he goes, and to be familiar with him,
this is wonderful; Husbands depart either because not pleased at home, or
because of business abroad; all such motion arguing imperfection; but now there
shall be nothing in the Saints to displease; and Christ's business shall then
be done, he shall have no more to do but only to give up the Kingdom to God the
Father; that is the last work of Christ in this world: To see the Lord in his
beauty of grace and love, will be wonderful; but for dust and worms to be with
him for ever; the poor things of the world to be with him, when thousands are
cast by! we say that is the beauty of a thing which no picture can express; now
to see that beauty in Christ is mavelous; but to be in the bosom of one so
amiable, how great is this?

Sixthly, Then shall the Lord rejoice over his people, and they in him; Marriage
day is the great day of joy, they long for it before; and when it comes, the
longer it has been deferred, the more feats of parting, the more are they
affected with joy then; so here, the soul has desired the Lord in grace first,
and then in glory, Rev. 22. Christ has been desiring after them in glory, John
17. 24. now their desires being fulfilled, all his scattered lost Elect
gathered, now he rejoices with exceeding joy; and the longer lost, and meeting
deferred, the greater joy now; hence Zeph. 3. 11. he shall rejoice over thee
with joy, etc. Look as the Lord when they were but converted to him, poor, and
miserable, and sinful, and some of them but very babes, Luke 10. 21. yet he
rejoiced in Spirit, and falls admi^ing of the Father; so here much more when
they shall become glorious and perfect, and altogether at this day. If the
Lord, Isa. 40. 1, 2. would have his Prophets speak to the heart of Jerusalem,
when it had but Seventy years captivity, much more will the Lord himself then
do it at that day; and look as it was with them, Rev. 19. 1. to 6. Alle^uja^
for the destruction of Antichrist, and that Christ reigns, Oh let us rejoice;
so shall all Saints meet him with joy, being delivered out of the hands of all
their enemies; they shall cry Allelujah with joy to see them destroyed, and the
Lord reigning; and then shall they up to heaven in a shout of joy with
Allelujah, etc.

SECT. II.
HEnce see how ill the sin of worldliness or any sinful l^st suits with a
gracious godly man: Use 1.
Shall the Lord come as a Bridegroom to you, and will you run a whoring from
him in this day? A man can bear it when others that he never set his heart
upon, depart from him; but these to do it, it is a sin against his kindness,
against his person most immediately, and against his name and honor. As a
virtuous woman is a crown to her husband; so here. Covetousness is a vile sin
in any, but especially in these; and hence Ier. 3. 4, 5. Will thou not from
this time cry my Father. When Baruch sought great things, Will thou seek great
things when God came to destroy all? so will you keep great things here when
the Lord is destroying al^, Jer. 45. 5.
when your Husband will be all in all? when a woman knows that a great Prince
loves her, she scorns all other Suitors, etc. So should you be content, though
poor, though sinful, etc. Col. 3. 4. 5. as long as Christ loves thee.

Hence see what a great sin it is not to receive evidence of mercy and comfort
from any promise of Christ wherein he reveals his love to his Spouse; Use 2.
if Christ shall come as a Bridegroom to you, by what promise soever
(therefore) he shall manifest his love to you, receive it; some would not have
Christians to receive evidence of Christ's love by any conditional promise; but
remember this, that if Christ does not speak them, if they be not the
Bridegrooms voice, or if not true, then do not receive them, or any evidence
from them; nay if he does not by his own Spirit clear them, and apply them; but
if they be the voice of the Bridegroom, if you be friends, or show your selves
friends, rejoice at it, Ioh. 3. 29. As for that immediate revelation of his
love, expect it at his meeting when you shall see him face to face; in the mean
while if he by his letter reveals his love, Oh make much of it because it is
your Bridegrooms; if the day of Judgment be come, and Resurrection past, and
Christ seen immediately, then look not for your evidence from such Scriptures;
but if otherwise, then own his love here if he speaks. It is true, it would be
a sweet thing if that day would come; yet as Christ said to Tho^ as so say I to
you, Blessed are they which have not seen and yet believed; and therefore when
ever the Lord does this, first or last; hear his voice, and believe his word.
Do not say you see nothing in your selves; suppose a woman should make a match
by love and consent, though hardly; she did ^ath him, but he was so mighty as
to prevail for her goodwill, and now she is comforted; and another should come
and say to her, How do you know this? Why thus he sought me, thus I concluded
with him, and so fixed: It Is no match; Why? You must see no consent, no love no
imbracings, etc. would not such a one be counted a deceiver? 2 Timothy 4. 8.

Of Terror; Use 3.
What will become of you that refuse the Lords kindness now, that regard not
the Bridegrooms voice, that refuse to bestow your hearts upon the Lord! he
shall never be a Bridegroom to you at this day, when others meet him in the
clouds, etc, Now you see Saints absent from the Lord, ^oor and mean, and
question the Lords love to them; but then all shall be seen, and all this you
shall lose, Ioh. 3. 32. No man receives his testimony, etc. you that never
mourned as widows without him, never felt need of his love, what will become of
you at this day!

Of Consolation to all those that be espoused, Use 4.
and contracted to the Lord, who have chose him, who have given themselves to
him, who look now no further but content themselves in him, or have a frame of
heart so to do, though fears keep them from possession of him; Oh Christ shall
come as thy Husband at that day. Many Christians fear this day, and hence do
not sensibly love, nor long for this day, being under the whip continually of
fears, and questioning their estate; but why do you fear, when the Lord shall
come as a Brid^groom! Isa. 54. 4, 5. why do fear, himself the Judge so holy,
when he is thy Husband! thy chains and debts, and sins, when the Judge is thy
Husband! thy accusers or enemies, when the Lord is thy Husband! You should
rather long for this day, and rejoice in it, because now comes your full
Redemption from all sins, all sorrows; the coming of a Husband is sweet.

First, Though the people of God have weaknesses and wants, the Lord has none.

Secondly, Though they must part for a little while, the Lord is ever with thee.

Thirdly, Though they car not help out of all evil, yet the Lord Jesus will. Oh
they should rejoice, that when he comes like a Judge, and all the wicked shall
melt like wax before his presence, and burn up before him, Oh yet a Husband to
thee!

SECT. III.
Object. IF I knew this!

Answ. Yes, you know it; but there be some things that are false Objections
against it: as,

Object. 1. Because the Lord is such a stranger, and the Lord absents himself
so much.

Answ. Is that a good Argument for a Woman? Isa. 54. 6, 7, 8. It is not the
time of being ever with the Lord in his time of wooing; John 16. 20. I will
depart, and you shall mourn, the world will not, and your heart shall rejoice.

Object. 2. Because my heart goes so soon, so often a whoring from him.

Answ. It may be that you are sorely tempted, and thy heart may begin to be
taken, etc. but yet if you cannot yield to lie in your falls, this is not an
evidence of a breach of the match. Psalm. 73. he was almost gone, yet the Lord
recovers him, and says he, the Lord is with me; therefore as it was with
Christ, it was not possible that the bonds of death should hold him; so here
shall it be with the poor doubting believer.

Object. 3. Because my heart cannot love him.

Answ. Why do you then sigh under captivity and bondage of your love? you
cannot love him, other things do keep you under; oh but can she say she loves
not her husband, that does sigh in bondage to be with him^ Consider how it is
at Christ's absenting himself from thee (as thou think) at any time; for then
love is seen, especially at the time of parting.

Object. 4. Because he is so unkind to me, he hears not all my prayers.

Answ. This is a great Objection; if Christ would give them all their portion
together which he promises them freely in his time, then they think he is
kind, not else.

First, Though he does not hear all prayers at once, yet he has given thee
that which is better than all prayers; ( viz.) himself, 1 Samuel 1. 8.
and a pledge of all the rest, and this is better than ten sons.

Secondly, It would do you hurt; oh therefore rejoice in this day, whatever thy
condition be now: Give some women their will, and you give them your lives, and
loss of all; so here, and therefore says Christ, I will be Lord in my house.

SECT. IV.
OF Exhortation: To those that are out of Christ, or do not know that they be
in Christ, to labor to get your souls espoused, Use 5.
and matched to the Lord Jesus; it is a laudable custom grounded on Scripture,
that before marriage there is the time of espousals or contract; and such may
know though there be absence for a time, yet that when he says he will return
to marriage, he will come as a husband, though others in the family cannot look
for any such thing; so here the great work of the Ministry is to espouse
people to Christ; now that they may be presented chaste Virgins unto the Lord
Jesus, 2 Cor. 11. 2. you may look then that he shall come as a Bridegroom to
comfort you; others cannot look for any such presence of Christ, to them that
are not espoused to him now; -- Now Christ is gone up to his Kingdom, but let
base dust, and vile man hearken, the time is coming, that he shall come in
glory to the amazement of the World; before whom all the wicked shall melt, but
the Saints shall live in glory, caught up in the clouds of heaven; Christ
infinitely rejoicing in them, and they in Christ. Would you have him come thus
to you, or as a revenging Judge, and consuming fire for your contempt? ^if so,
then get your souls espoused to him now.

SECT. V.
Object. A las! What can I do? the Lord must do it.

Answ. True, but he does it by means; the Ministry of the Gospel; else what
need there be any Scripture writ, or Gospel preached? use you the means, and
wait on the Lord thereby, for the effecting of this:

Quest. What should I do?

Answ. Look as it is in marriage here, or espousals here; there be but two
things that make up the match.

1. Earnest suit on the one side.

And 2. Consent on the other; and therefore if any thing hinder, it ever lies
either on the one side, the man is unwilling, he desires it not; or on the
other side, if he be desirous, she is unwilling; but both these finish the
business; if therefore you would be ever espoused to the Lord Jesus, look to
these two things.

First, See evidently that earnest suit the Lord makes unto thee for thy
consent, for thy good will; and this will appear by his own speeches, and this
is a sufficient testimony; by what speeches? by his voice in these Scriptures;
for is this the Bridegrooms voice or no? if not, away with it; if it be, and
that they do breath the Holy Ghost, then know it, it is as if he spoke from
heaven to thee now.

Object. But he does not speak to me there by name particularly; he speaks to
others, not to me.

Answ. 1. The Lord when he calls any to himself, he does not in his ordinary
Call speak to them by name, and yet they have so received the Lord in the Word,
as if he had called them by name; for look, as when the Law says All that sin
shall dye, the Lord speaks to all by name; and if conscience be awake, it will
apply it, This sentence is against me; so when the Lord says, All that will
receive the Lord, shall live before the Lord; and therefore receive him; if
conscience be awake, it will apply: As in the three thousand that were
converted, What shall we do? they were not called by name; but when they heard
that they that repented should live, because the promise was to all, they
gladly received the Word; so here it should be so; and therefore we see when
the Spirit makes particular application to a man, he so sets on a truth, as if
the Lord spoke to the soul particularly; and therefore if you do not, it is
because you are left of the Spirit of God, and the power of the Word; for it is
your duty so to do.

2. Though your names are not set down in the words of the promise, yet your
names are wrapped up in the meaning and sense of the promise; and this is as good
as that; for though the Lord does not desire every man to keep the Sabbath by
name, yet he means every man, and there your names are; so when the Lord Jesus
makes suit to a wretched heart to receive him, he means every man, as if he
had named them; that which is set down in Scripture, and written to others, God
means not them alone, but all others in like case; -- as I^r. 3. 12. What the
Lord spoke to Israel to return, he meant especially Judah; so Esaias 2. ver. 1.
to 5. There is a Prophecy of the Gentiles to flow to the Mount of the Lord;
what means the Lord by that? the Lord meant hereby to stir up the Jews, and
therefore he says, Oh come house of Israe^, etc. And hence Romans 15. 4. What is
written, it is for our learning, that we might have hope; i. e. God means us
therein also, so that when you see the Lord calling the wretched Jews in his
Word, the Lord calls thee; and when the Lord in his Ministry comes to them, he
comes to you; and to have thy name in the sense of the Scripture, is most for
the glory of the Spirit, and s^iting best with the work of faith, and most
sure, and most sweet to you; but especially I say, when the Messengers of God
come to you, they make things particularly clear, which were but generally set
down: O consider therefore the Lord is earnest in his suit to have thee receive
him.

SECT. VI.
1. IT breaks the heart of the Lord Jesus to see thee depart away, and go a
whoring from him; when a man is so set in his desires that when he is crossed
of his hopes in marriage, it makes him sick and pine away with grief, because
he is very earnest for the match; so it is here, Ezekiel. 6. 9. And therefore we
shall see Mark 8, 12. the Pharisees who had seen all his works, yet an
adulterous generation sought after a sign, it is said Christ sighed deeply in
spirit for this; nothing grieves the Lord so much as this; to despise any part
of his will, or poorest member of his, grieves him; but to despise himself,
this much more; as we shall not find any joy in Scripture ^ike this, when the
Lord has overcome the unkind heart of a rebellious sinner; Isa. 35. 1.
and hence heaven and earth and deserts are commanded to rejoice at this:
devise to grieve him, and you cannot do it so much as by refusing him.

2. The Lord is so desirous of it, that he will pass by all thy former
lewdness, if now thou will receive him, Ier. 3. 1. with 4. men will not do so,
yet the Lord will; what, when so many vanities are loved more than the Lord,
can the jealous^e of Christ receive me? Yes that he can.

3. When the Lord has cast off a poor creature for refusing him, yet then his
heart yearns and his soul longs for it (many times) again, I a. 54. 5, 6. the
Lord has called thee as a wife of youth when refused; i.^. when God did appear
to them, to refuse them; Oh wonderful! that when the soul has refused the
Lord, and the Lord it, and all creatures refuse to love it, yet these the Lord
calls agan; and hence the Lord comes upon his people Isa. 50. that complained,
God had utterly re ected them, and all the fault is ^n him: no their sins had
done it; but then he blames them that when he came, no man answered, etc.

4. All the anger of Christ, especially his greatest anger is expressed against
a soul for want of this being willing to receive him; when you say How does the
Lord regard or desire me, when he fights against me?

First, Is there an evil not inflicted, but devised against thee? (as many a
one fears what is not yet made known) this is to make you r^turne, Jer. 18. 11.

Secondly, Are there any sorrows upon thy conscience, upon thy outward man,
that God takes all comfort from thee? Hos. 2. 9. 14. 16.

Thirdly, Are there any evils inflicted upon others in this life, especially
whole Churches, their Ordinances broken, Temples consumed, and laid into
dung-heaps? it is to get thy good will, Jer. 3. 8.

Fourthly, Are there any gone down to Hell, who did once flourish here, that
you have even seen the flames and tears before you of crying Ghosts; if so,
then know it, it is that thou might draw near the Lord, Psalm 73. 26, 27.

5. The Lord professes that he will give the choicest of all blessings to them
that receive him; and this argues strong desire, Psalm. ^1. 11, 12, 13. Honey
out of the rock.

1. Thou shall have himself taking infinite delight in thee, because he will
make thee beautiful with his own beauty, and cloth thee with it, Psa. 45. 12.

2. All creatures shall be servants to thee throughout the world, Hos. ^^lt. As
when one is married, all the servants in the Family are to serve her or him, so
here it is in regard of the faithful: Oh that you could hear the voice of the
Lord Jesus, and his earnest suir to you herein. This you see is clear.

There now wants nothing but for you to give your consent unto him, and
therefore this is that which the Lord lays to the charge of men, viz. their
breaking off the match; and so Rev. 2^. 17. Whoever will, let him come and
take; Prove. 1. 29, 30. they did not choose the Lord, nor would none of the Lords
counsel; and this made the Lord cast them off; so that now there is nothing but
thy wll: Shall the Lord desire it, and wilt not ^^ou be glad of it? there is no
beauty in thee, why he should do this to thee: there is in him beauty and
excellency; Oh shall not this love win thee? Shall it be said another day,
Wherefore is all this evil come upon such a one? had he not means? had he not
offers? But this shall come against thee, You would not, Oh you would not.

SECT. IV.
ONly take these four Cautions concerning your consent.

Take heed that your consent arise not only from fear of misery, for this is a
forced consent, and is ever naught, and it appears so when the misery is past;
many do thus in fears of death, or times of calamity; Oh then the Lord, Hos. 8.
1, 2, 3. Psalm. 78. 34, 35.

Secondly, Take heed it be not a conceit of your own making in days of peace;
for that which you make from your selves, you will break also; but that it
arise from the sense of thine own insufficiency to give consent, and the Lords
Almighty power and infinite grace to work it, and then no powers of any
creature can untie that knot.

Many hearing of this, Will you have Christ? Oh yes, withal my heart, and force
a consent by their own labor; this is naught; and hence Ezekiel. 16. 60, 61. The
Lord will receive that harlot but not by he^ covenant, i. e. which she
undertook in her own name; no, the Lord must work it, Ier. 3. 19. How shall I
do this for thee, etc. Hos. 2. 19. I will ^etroth her: For no creature can
incline the heart to another but the Lord; there is a natural antipathy between
Christ and the Soul; and hence we see it in many a Christian, ask him, Why
cannot you love the Lord, nor cleave to him? Oh because I know not why; I
cannot, I have no heart; the truth is, you have hearts that do loath him;
unless the Lord overcome you, you can never submit indeed unto the Lord.

Thirdly, Look that your consent be not made according to your own terms and
conditions; for look as it is with a woman, if she shall say she is content to
love such a man; but if she keeps an open Inn to entertain all strangers, and
love all comers, or if there is one she is in league with; there can be no
marriage; so therefore the conditions are so, Receive the Lord, and give your
consent to love him only, Prove. 8. 17. I love them that love me, otherwise the
match will never be made, Isa. 50. 1. if you keep your wretched, unruly,
stu^bo^ w^lls st^ll, never had thou, or shall thou have the Lord; Let thy sin
be never so little, so close, as (it may be) sloth, it is death to pray; it may
be it is pride; or whatever else it be, you must have your hearts first divorced
from them, or thou can not have Christ.

Fourthly, Take heed then that sense of want of dowry, beauty, portion in or
from your selves, does not hinder you from consent; for the Lord requires no
such thing of you; hence M^tth. 22. 4. All things are ready in Christ to
receive from him, Ephesians. 5. 25. It Is not for you to make ready to bring to him;
only come; and the Lord does bring his people to sense of vileness, that they
may do thus, know that it is his Grace that makes the Lord close there.

SECT. VIII.
NOW will you refuse, and not let the Lord have your hearts this day?

First, is there any thing in the Lord that should keep thee from consenting?
what good is there else but in him? what want of perfection there? his love is
better than life; if there be any thing in the world that can be better to
thee, or do greater things for thee, make thy match; but who can pay thy debts?
who can fetch thee out of prison? who can put beauty on thee? who ever did thee
good but the Lord? therefore there is none like him; he will cloth thee,
possess thee, etc.

Secondly, is there any thing in thy self that keeps thee from consenting; have
thou no need of him, or consenting to him? you may, it is true, have other
creatures to adorn you; as they Ezekiel. 16. 37, 38. But the Lord will gather your
lovers together, and give you blood and fury in his jealousy: I mean, when the
Lord shall come at this day, to embrace, comfort, glorify others; thou shall
not have a smile from him; Oh men now despise the Lord, and his Grace and
Patience; tell them of a match with the Son of God, they regard it not, no more
than a tale that is told; well, the Lord will bring you into horrors, wherein
you shall prize and be glad of this, before you die, even one glimpse of his
love.

Post tenebras lucem spero. After my sickness December 12. 1639.
CHAP. XVIII.
Shows that Christ will not tarry when once his time is come; and the folly of
such whose work is then to do; and that the blessedness of Saints consists in
immediate communion with Christ.
SECT. I.
THe coming of Christ, we have heard is set forth first from the time of it,
viz. just then when the foolish went to buy: Could not the Lord so patient and
long suffering, tarry a little while longer for them? especially seeing they
went not about any sinful work, but were using the means to get that grace now
which their vessels were empty of before? No, but the Lord deals with all men,
especially that live under the means; as he did with these foolish Virgins.

That as God is long-suffering toward men, Observation.
whiles through ignorance of their spiritual wants and security of heart they
have no hearts to use the means for supply. So if once his time of forbearance
be slept out, he will not tarry one moment longer; even when men are most
diligent in the use of means for spiritual supplies; when Christ has a heart
to help, many people have none either to see their wants, or seek for help;
when men have hearts thus to do, then Christ has none, because his time of
tarrying is out; when men are worst and most secure, Christ's door is open to
them many times; when men are best and indeed awakened, Christ's heart and door
is shut against them, as it was here; for what are the best endeavors of
foolish Virgins? what excellency is there in them, that the Lord of glory
should stay their leisure, after long neglect of himself, and loss of precious
time?

SECT. II.
BE sure you sleep not out the day time of Grace; Use
especially you.

1. That know you want oil in your vessels, and Grace in your hearts, and mercy
to your souls, and think I would not die yet for a world.

2. You that being asleep with these foolish Virgins, dream you are rich, and
want nothing, and would be half offended with them that should tell you to your
face, or bat think in their hearts that you have no grace, when indeed you are
poor and empty, and naked; -- Take heed you give not that answer to time that
tarries for you, and unto Christ that waits upon you, as Felix to Paul, when
his heart trembled to hear of judgment to come; I will speak with you at a
more conv^^^ent season; The Lord has not left Churches without examples of the
terror of Christ's patience in this kind, who upon their beds of distress have
lamented before men; Oh my time is out, Call time again, call tim^again; and
who have besought it of God with tears, as he did the blessing, and cried out,
What Lord, wilt not give me one hour, one day more! and so like men sinking
have ca^ch'd hold on any thing to save them, whiles others have stood upon the
shore lamenting of them, the Lord be merciful to them; this may be your case,
that neither your tears nor blood can purchase a moments time.

Look to it that your vessel be not found empty at the coming of the Lord; it
is a dying time in this Country, and the Lord has taken away some, and those
that were ready are gone into the Marriage. Consider of it that faith, that
grace which you think you have now, may prove but chafe and stubble when it
comes to be tried in the fire of the Lords coming; the best man will fi^de all
l^ttle enough; then be sure you miss not of it now: Do not think I will pray,
and seek then, and I hope to find, though thou art secure now; think of this
point, When did Christ come and shut the door, but when the Virgins went out to
buy? but woe, woe to thy dead heart; some here present shall seek Christ, and
not find him, but shall dye in their sins; till arrows are in your hearts, you
will not cry.

SECT. III.
THat after long profession of godliness, Observe. 2.
it is a piece of foolishness to have any thing then to do but to dye, and so
to give welcome to the Lord Jesus: These Virgins when they were to dye, were
then to buy; when they were to receive Christ, were then to seek for oil in
their Vessels, that so they might be ready to receive Christ; but of this
hereafter.

Oh their sad condition that have all to seek yet! Use 1.


Be not ever seeking, Use 2.
never find^ng; but so seeking, as that when you dye, you may say, Com^ Lord, I
am ready!

SECT. IV.
ly. THis Coming of Christ is set fo^th from the different entertainment of the
Virgins, and Christ's different carriage toward them.

1. For his entertainment to the wise Virgins; that is set down to be an
entering or admittance into marriage, fellowship, communion and joy with the
Lord Jesus; which ^s amplified

First, From the Antecedent (not cause) of it, and that is their readiness.

Secondly, The Consequent of this their Communion, the Doo^ was shut.

That the last end, and full blessedness of all the Elect espoused here to
Christ, it consists in immediate communion with Jesus Christ alone.

What becomes of these Wise Virgins? they enter into near comm^^^ion and
fellowship with the Bridegroom Jesus Christ. What becomes of the souls of all
the Elect when they are separated from the body, and from this World? the
spirit returns to God that gave it; so the soul returns to Christ that bought
it. When this World shall be burnt up, what will become of the souls and bodies
of the Elect, when there shall be no more Sun to shine, nor Kingdom to rule,
nor Creatures to comfort? they shall ascend from the clouds up into the
marriage-chamber of the Son of God, and be for ever with the Lord, and the Lord
alone; and this is their blessedness, etc. Blessedness, yea, the last and
only blessedness, even of heaven it self.

John 17. 23. There are variety of creatures here, and in every one there is
dropped some sweet; but the Lords end is to make his people perfect in one; how
is that? God in Christ communicating all his goodness to his Son, and so
living in him, then Christ communicates all his own and Fathers love and
goodness unto them, and so lives in them, and now they are in him, and so made
perfect in one; as those that are thirsty for a time, are refreshed with some
drops, or waters running in their Channels, at last they come to the wellhead,
where they partake of all together.

1 These. 5. 10. This is the end of Christ's death, that we might live together
with him; not live only from him, but live with him, and together with him; in
beginnings here, hereafter fully.

SECT. V.
BEcause God the Father has laid up all his glory most abundantly in Christ.
Reas. 1.
Col. 2. 3. Treasures of wisdom; it shines in the face of Christ. 2 Cor. 4. 5,
6. and all our glory also. Luke 2. 32. Glory of his people Israel. Psalm. 29.
19. In his Temple he utters all his glory; in the world, there it sparkles in
every creature, and the heavens declare it; but there is but some, and that
common to all tongues and languages; but in this Temple, the Lord Jesus
especially, there all the Fathers glory is uttered, and himself does utter it.
Treasures are such things where there are

1. Precious things.

2. Abundance of them.

3. Hidden, not open to all.

4. They are sure and safe there, for their owners to take and enrich
themselves withal; so it is in Christ, there is first, precious things; all
Gods preciousnesse, and all our precious things; our life, our peace, our joy,
our strength, etc. and secondly, abundance of them; thirdly, hid from the
world, and unknown in part to the Saints; fourthly, but sure there for their
owners, and Christ is the treasure of all these treasures, which are infinite
as God himself is; now if all our glory, and the glory of God be in Christ;
then as privation of, and separation from this glory is the last and only
misery; so conjunction to, and communion with, and fruition of this glory, must
be the last and great happiness of the Elect. I would convince any carnal
heart by this Argument; Did ever find any comfort from any creature? that
comfort is not from it, but from the Lord by it; for creatures are but as cold
water, all their warmth is from the fire; now there is but a little of the
sweetness of God, because creatures can hold but little, it is so narrow a
vessel; but in the Lord Jesus all the goodness of God is gathered together
there, which is scattered in several creatures here; nay, not fin^te, but
infinite goodness and glory; therefore this is our blessedness.

In regard of God the Fathers exce^ding great love, Reas. 2.
and the purpose of God to manifest it to the sons of men; this is the nature
of love, when one is in a blessed condition himself, he will labor to bring
those it loves to that condition; now the blessedness of God lies in
fellowship with his son, Prove. 8. 30. Now God the Father loves them dearly, and
would have all the world to know that he does so, and hence brings them at last
into the same fellowship with himself in his son; John 17. 23. That the world
may know thou have loved me; the Father out of his infinite love commu^icates
himself to Christ, and his fellowship is with the Father; all know this is a
dear love; in mean while love to his Saints is unknown; they and the wicked
share all alike; and the Saints have the least portion and worst part many
times; so that men cannot see by any outward thing any more love to them, than
unto others; the time will come that they shall be made perfect in one, as near
the Lord as can be, that the world may know this love, etc.

When Abso^om had slain his brother, and fled from his father, it is said, 2 Samuel 13. 39. that the s^ul of David longed, or was consumed to go forth to him;
David might have said, I will never look after him more; so might the Lord have
said to us; or if he l^ved, he might never have manifested it (as David) but
the Lord must show his love, etc.

Because this is the end of all the prayers and endeavors, Reas. 3.
and all the workings of the Saints in this World: Suppose all glory be in
Christ; let a thing be never so good, but if a man has no desires after it,
has no mind to it, it would not be blessedness to him; but this is the end of
all the prayers, duties of the Saints, if at last they may be with the Lord,
Phil. 3. 8, 9. Joh. 4. 14. He shall never thirst, their desires are taken off
from other things, ^ut only their hearts are to this. If there be any pillow
the Lord lets them sleep upon in this world, they shall find it hard at last,
and arise with a Kings head and heart, and say, Oh here is not my rest; the
best entertainment this world can give, has ever somewhat mixed with it, that
makes the people of God say, Oh that I might be with the Lord!

SECT. VI.
Quest. Shall not the happiness of the Saints partly lie in fellowship with
^he Sai^s?

Answ. 1. True, but this is but a consequent to the former; as separ^tion from
God is ^he substance of misery in hell, but other things follow upon it; viz.
communion with Reprobates and Devils; so here we have first communion with
Christ, here is the substance of our blessedness; then this is acciden^al^ and
follows upon that; viz. the communion with the Saints, which is exceeding sweet.

2. That good we shall have in communion with Saints, is not from themselves,
but Christ in them; as 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. Christ shalls be admired in all his
Saints; so Christ shall ^hen in his Saints and Angels; it is the light of the
Sun that shines in the Stars, and they shall do nothing but set out the praises
of Christ.

Quest. But what blessedness is there in this, seeing it is in one thing only?
when a man is s^^k or poor, can grace refresh him, can he live by that? (thus
many carnal hearts think.)

Answ. 1. The Lord shall then take away all fleshly appetites or desires; for
then our bodies shall be spiritual bodies; in this life sometimes God takes
away the stomach, when he takes away food. Christ forgot his weariness,
because he had other bread to eat.

2. It is therefore blessedness, because it is in one; there is

First, Trouble in seeking and fetching our comfort out of many things.

2. Unsatisfiednesse, because one thing can give no more than it has; now all
things in this one thing are there together; the sweet of all creatures, all
Ordinances, nay, variety of unknown mercies, (Prove. 8. 21.) shall center here
in Christ Jesus.

SECT. VII.
OF mavelous Consolation to the Saints of God: Now you have many wants, Use 1.
many sorrows, many temptations, many sins, many cares and fears of livelihood;
but the time will shortly come when you shall be with the Lord alone in
communion with him, and so out of the crowd and press of troubles, and
temptations, and sins, and evils in this world; that as he himself is above all
these, so shall you. John 14. 1, 2, 3. Their hearts were grieved for the loss
of Christ; I will come to you, and take you to my self, that where I am, there
you may be also; sometimes outward losses and fears trouble thee; sometimes
absence of Christ from thee troubles thee; hear what the Lord says, Let not
your hearts be troubled; for the Lord will take you to himself again, John 16.
22. Christ tells them, I will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice;
what if he had said, I will come down from heaven to you again? I tell you the
Lord will do so to you, but that he is in a better place preparing i^ for you,
and doing better things for you; but he sees you for the present, and you shall
be with him at last.

The Apostle prays that they might know what is the inheritance of the Saints;
so I desire of the Lord for you, that you may know what it is to have communion
with Christ alone; oh see your blessedness, etc.

SECT. VIII.
1. This Communion it shall be by sight, not chiefly by faith, as it is in this
world: Many go many Miles to the supposed Sepulcher of Christ, and account
their time, though superstitiously, yet happily spent; oh but what will it be
to see the Lord himself, not as he was here in his abasement, but in all his
glory, brighter than ten thousand Suns! now we see, 1 Cor. 13. as in a glass
where we see the glory of God in the face of Christ; but then we shall know as
we are known; as a child knows not the father, but at ripe years it does; but
as Philip said to Nathanael, who said, Can any good come out of Nazareth? so
can any such mercy come from heaven? come and see him of whom all the Prophets
have spoken of; so then the Father and Spirit, and Saints and Angels will say,
oh come in and see him of whom all the Prophets have written; come and behold
him that has shed his dearest blood for thee, that has taken thought and care
for thee night and day; that has been all thy life in^erceding for thee;
Revel. 22. 4. There you shall see his face.

2. This com^union it shall be spiritual and inward wi^h the soul and
conscience; suppose the soul should be with Christ, and not have spiritual
communion with him, what were it the better! as many ^ad when Christ was here
in this world, that eat and drank in his presence, and yet are now shut out: Oh
no! the glory, beauty, goodness of Christ is not to be seen with bodily eyes,
nor tasted, nor handled with ou^ carcasses; and hence Angels though in heaven
with Christ's person, yet look to the Gospel, to hear, see, and enjoy the
spiritual excellencies of the Lord; hence Simeon when he had Christ in his
arms, yet now desires to depart, because he should then come near him into his
spiritual commun^on; Oh this the soul shall have, inward light, love, peace,
etc. it is Christ's great love to live with the soul; but so to live with them
that are his own, as to live in them; Oh this is exceeding love, for Christ to
live in one that was a dunghill: It comforted the Disciples when he went away, I
will end you the comforter; Oh but what a blessedness wi^^ this be, to be with
him, and the comforter in us also?

3. It shall be a f^ll and perfect communion, communicating himself out to the
utmost ext^nt of the capacities of his people; for here we have spiritual
communion, but we see but little and know little, and receive but little, the
first fruits and tastes of what we shall drink; but there fully. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
They shall be separa^e from the Lord and glory of his p^we^, i. e. as much as
ever the Lord is able to fill or load the soul withal, a crown of glory as
weighty as ever it can bear, it wraps up the heart sometimes; the soul lies
down confounded before the Lord; Oh that ever the Lord should here look upon
such a one so vile! much more then shall there be wonderment; he will set open
all his treasury; Oh come take thy fill of love! there he shall pour out all
his heart, etc.

4. It shall be an exceeding familiar communion: When Christ was here on the
earth, we know how familiar he was with his poor Disciples; how one leaned on
his bre^^, could come to him, speak to him, etc. (Oh brethren) much more shall
it be then, Ioh. 21. 17. ^ouch me not, I am not asc^nded ^ as if he should say,
Oh then there shall be sweet embracing, as Joseph that (...) ^ver the neck of
Benjamin; Oh the spiritual embracings there! the Lord and Christ will say, I
love thee dearly.

5. It shall be an everlasting uninterrupted communion; We have here communion
with other creatures, but they as passengers will leave us; we have also
communion with Christ, but it is interrupted; many clouds come between us and
him; but then it shall be everlasting without any interruption. ^ ^hess. 4.
ul^. We shall ever be wi^h the Lord; hence comes comfort; infinite is the glory
of the Lord, we cannot see it nor enjoy it in a short time, we have no leisure
here, no^ time enough to see it; hence we shall be to ^^^eternity behold^^g and
enjoying of it.

6. A (...) most sweet (...), Psa. 16. ult. filling the heart with (...) of
glory* much more than feeling. And Three things make it so.

SECT. IX.
First, IT will be after many troubles, labors, and conflicts here in this
world; there is not a godly he^rt but has his burden, if not of misery, yet of
sin; if not from flesh and blood, yet from ^ell; and he fears also (it may be)
that he shall never come to heaven; now hence this communion must be the more
joyful, as Jacob that thought he should never see Joseph; and as Isa. 9. 2, 3.
those that divide the spoils, and reap the harvest; then there shall be an
answer to all thy^ doubts, etc.

Secondly, It will be thus because this communion shall be chiefly in sucking
ou^ the sweet of all Gods love, past, present, and to come, Ephesians. 4. 9. Psalm.
24. 6. Love from a friend is sweet, but from a God sweeter; it does us good to
think of their love, their honor and respect to us, much more the Lords; Oh
this will like wine, cheer the heart, that as the damned shall suck the fierce
wrath of God, Oh it shall sting them; so this e contra, we shall see all his
bowels open.

Thirdly, The Lord Christ himself shall rejoice over the soul, and so all
Saints with him, Luke 10. 21. And the soul shall see this, and all Saints
rejoice in its communion. Oh consider this and comfort your hearts with this
all ye people of the Lord! I only say as Joseph dying, God will surely visit
you when I am dead, Genesis ult. 24. So when thou art dying the Lord will surely
visit thee with his presence, and you shall surely be with him. You have been
praying for this, and hearing, and now and then you taste a little, but think
it is too good to be true; yet if Christ be blessed, thou shall at last, thou
shall not miss (though thou find but little of him here, and walk in the dark)
of being with him for ever; God hides his face from some of you, and you mourn,
though the world rejoices; but happy art thou, for thy mourning shall be
turned into joy.

SECT. X.
TO mourn for our strangeness now to Jesus Christ, Use 2.
and our distances from the Lord Jesus, may not the Lord take up that speech as
to Philip, Have I been so long with thee, and have thou not known me? So has
Christ been so long with thee, and shall thou be for ever with him, and yet
do not know him?

There are five things that are ever conjoined with a near communion with
Christ.

First, Knowledge of him; Alas, how little do we conceive of the Lord?

Secondly, Persuasion of his love and faithfulness; Alas, we have little
assurance of him, Psalm. 9.

Thirdly, Love to his fellowship; and the more in it the soul is, the more
desirous it is of it: Oh but the weariness of being with him that we have! no
o^^ner are we with him now than needs must; but hereafter it shall be otherwise.

Fourthly, Likeness to him in his virtues, as Moses comes shining down; a man
imitates them whose fellowship he loves in all their imitable excellencies.
Alas, how unlike to him now are we, to what shall be?

Fifthly, A daily opening of, and bemoaning daily evils to him; Oh it eases
the heart; if a man is gone from his friend, yet troubles will fetch him in
again; but we pour not out our souls thus to him; hence he poures not out his
blood into our souls to heal us; Oh may not we take up that complaint of Agur,
Prove. 30. that we are more foolish than any man! speaking of Christ; Oh
therefore mourn for it; David, when God hid his face for a little time, was
troubled.

It was the complaint of the Prophet of evil men, That in their eyes, he was
rej^cted and despised, and we hid our faces from him. Let the world do so, will
you do so also? it should not trouble so much that he hides his face from you,
as that you have from him.

When David turned aside to Bathsh^ba, the Prophet comes and tells him, I
ano^nted thee King, and d^l^vered thee out of the hands of Saul, and gave the^
thy Masters Wives, and more also; now wherefore have thou despised the Lord?
the sword shall not depart; Oh (says he) I have sinned against the Lord; so
say I to you: if the Lord had never made known himself to thee, it had been
another matter; but the Lord has delivered thy soul from hell, thy eyes from
tears; the Lord has anointed thee to partake of the glory of Christ, the Lord
has given himself to thee, and says Suck my blood, take my life, and more I
would have given; and have thou looked after Baths^eba, other l^vers, and
despise the Lord? Oh say I have sinn^d, and mourn for it, 2 Samuel 12. 9.

There are two evils in this. 1. Forsaking thy own good, nay blessedn^ss, Jonah
2. 8. own mercies.

2. It is despising the Lord and his f^llowsh^p for other things, base things;
that whereas you shall be for ever beholding of him hereafter, yet you should
proclaim him not to be worth looking on now.

Object. But I would have fellowship with the Lord, and he will not.

Answ. First, Never did any desire thy fellowship so much as the Lord when he
wants it.

Secondly, Nor love it, and glad of it when he had it.

Thirdly, Nor mourn and lament more when he wants it, as Ier. 2. 2, 5. God
pleads for it.

Fourthly, he calls to the heavens, 2 Ier. 10, 11. Did ever nation deal thus
with Idols! If this will not break thine heart for strangeness, I know not what
will do it: It is your sin that breaks off communion, not the Lords
unwillingness.

SECT. XI.
HEnce see the exceeding great worth and excellency of Jesus Christ; and learn
hence to esteem a right of him; Use 3.
there is no blessedness in the fruition of all the creatures together; good
there is, but no^ blessedness; or if there were, yet it lies in many things; no
one^hing, no^ twenty blessings can make blessed; and it is but a broken
blessedness in diverse pieces; or if there were a kind of blessedness to be
found in one, yet it is not a lasting blessedness, it is so but for a time, and
so the loss of it at last will trouble us more than the having of it for a time.

But as he says, I^ him is light and no darkness; blessedness, and no misery;
peace, and no trouble; fullness and no want; beauty, glory, and no blemish;
life, and no death; pure, dear, infinite love, and no anger; and it is in him
alone, Psalm. 148. 13. His name alone is excellent; all our glory and the glory
of God also is met together in him, all things i^ one thing; whatever good
there is in other things, it is borrowed from him; base, begga^ly things; but
the fullness and plenty of all is in the Lord, so that we shall not need to
cumber our selves about unnecessary things; we need not a candle when the sun
shines: and our last blessedness is here; when every thing else will make them
wings to hasten from us, this will continue and last; when all our vessels we
are tossed in here are sunk, and where our entertainment has been very good,
yet the shore sinks not, it is above over-whelmings; here alone we are fast.

However the world sees not this, because their blessedness lies in preserving
themselves by creatures, from feeling that misery which lies upon them now, as
also because they shall never share in it; yet the Saints have been exceedingly
taken with this that David accounted them blessed that might dwell in his
Courts in this world; Solomon was blessed that might but wait at wisdoms gates,
and so be ready to be received when they be opened; Abraham rejoiced to see
Christ's day afar off; Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ great riches; what
did he then esteem of the presence of Christ here! but what i^ glory ^^

Think of this, you that say you cannot find in your hearts to esteem of the
Lord Jesus; especially let him be precious to you, you espoused of the Lord;
for others may say he is precious, but I shall never enter into this
fellowship: No, no, but you shall, but he will take you to fellowship with
himself: It was a great favor to Moses, Exodus 24. 1, 2. when others might come
toward the Lord, yet Moses alone might only come near; and he was in the Mount
alone with God; so that the Lord should let others come toward him; but that
you alone above many thousands in the world may be suffered to draw near to
him, this should make the Lord precious to you at least. Lev. 13. 46. The Leper
was to dwell alone without; the Lord might have dealt so with thee; but when
thou were vile indeed, and most vile, nay when thou did separate thy self
from thy self, then for the Lord to come near thee, and (as if thou could
never be near enough) to manifest himself to thee forever in glory! When David
found out Me^hibosheth (says he) What am I ^ dead dog that I should sit at the
Kings table! 2 Samuel 9. 7, 8. It was a great favor to Christ himself, that when
rejected of men, yet that he was chosen of God and precious, and taken up to
him; it may be thou think thy self unworthy of fellowship of any man, and
men do, or men man reject thee; yet for the Lord now to receive thee, it is
much; but whereas thou were not only rejected of men, but of God also, Isa. 54.
6. now for Christ to take thee to him; that as he lies in the Fathers bosom,
because thou could not for sin immediately lie there, he should lay thee in
his bosom, and say, Father love this soul as thou have loved me: Besides, the
Father took Christ because he had worth; but for Christ to take thee when thou
had no worthiness! for one to take dross and prize it when others cast it
away, it is much; it is no wonder if pearls be so esteemed of, but for dirt to
be prized! Oh therefore let the Lord be precious, and his fellowship precious
to thee, seeing thou and thy fellowship is so to him.

Object. But I cannot believe it, why should the Lord do so?

Answ. It is hard to believe it when we look upon our own vileness; but
consider the reason why the Lord does this; it is not because he loves any for
fleshly respects as we do; but

First, Because of his own grace and glory; the Believer is infinitely beloved
of him, without moving him thereunto; and hence if his grace be exceeding dear,
and his glory dear to him, thou art so to him.

Secondly, Christ loves not first because men are holy, but that he may make
them so.

Thirdly, He loves because the father loves them.

SECT. XII.
HEnce learn to be content with the Lord alone, Heb. 4. 9. there is a rest;
hence labor to enter into it; so if he will have rest and blessedness
hereafter, that you shall be content and for ever glad in him and with him
alone; Oh labor to possess this blessedness now: You are in your worst
condition now, your best is behind; shall the blessedness of thy best
condition, not be blessedness in thy worst cond^tion unto thee? shall that
which satisfies thy soul in heaven, not satisfy thy soul here. Mos^s, Deuteronomy.
32. 10. reckons this as the happiness of Israel, (viz.) That God alone did lead
them when they were in a wilderness, a land of drought, and pits, and wants,
and the shadow of death; so Christ now.

Solomon reckons it as one part of his folly, madness and vanity, when he
forsook the Lord in his degenerate condition, Ec^les. 2. 3. that he gave up his
heart to vanit^y, and to wisdom also; as if that was not sufficient alone.

Men are not contented with the Lord alone; Solomon as you heard, was gone,
whom God appeared twice unto; David's heart was sorely assaulted, P^al. 73.
until he wen^ into the sanctuary of God, and then, says he, whom have I in
earth but thee? but as for others they are far from this; and hence come the
many murmurings and sinkings of heart; why do not men sink and drown? because
they are not in the ark or ship, and stay there alone; so it is here, Psalm. 16.
4. their sorrows (...) multiplied, etc.

SECT. XIII.
LAbor for this contentedness in spirit, in four cases especially, wherein the
heart is apt to withdraw from the Lord;

First, In case the Lord takes away the dearest, nay, all outward blessings
from us; men can ^ub it out with quietness of spirit, when some of their money
loose in their pockets is lost; but when their jewels are lost, their dearest
blessings singled out, Wife, Husband, Children, then as Jonah, the soul is
almost angry with God, when his gourd is smitten: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. without
hopes; again some can rub this out till they come to part with all; when some
of our boughs are cut and branches lopt, we can be content; but to have ou^ top
boughs cut off, and to strike at the root too, that we should remain as
w^thered ^ry trees, this can hardly be born: Men can be content to follow
Christ, if they may carry something on their backs beside the cross; some can
endure any thing but poverty, because covetous; others any thing but disgrace,
beca^^e proud; if some thing or many things be cast overboard in a storm, men
can be sometimes contented therewith, if something escapes; but when there is a
w^a^k of all, now to be content is as hard as to walk upon the waters; Israel
when they be fed and led by God, all was still; but when they want bread and
water, then they murmr, and also ques^ion, Exodus 17. 7. Is God among us now?
And truly it would break ones heart to see what sinkings of heart there be
among us (the fruits of ex^ream pride and Christlesness) and what vexations men
are to themselves, that men are become devils to themselves, their own
torme^tors; what cares, fears, griefs, losses, decays, that their heads are
dawled, and their memories lost, and their hearts sunk, and their count^na^ces
al^ered, and the Ordinances comfortless, and themselves heartless, and pining
away in their iniqui^^es, because of outward sorrows: Oh consider, either thou
shall shortly be with the Lord, or not; if not, there is cause of ^ourning: Oh
to go home and see Abraham, Isaac, and Iac^b in Gods Kingdom, and thy self shot
out, it were a lamentable thing indeed; but if it be otherwise with thee, Oh
consider thou shall be happy enough without these things in heaven; and
therefore though these things be lost, thou shall not lose one jot of thy
happiness: A man that is blessed with ^lessedness it self, and yet sunk, either
should say Christ is not blessedness, or else recover.

Object. Oh but though I have lost my estate, yet that does not so much trouble
me, as to have lost friends and their love!

An^w. And what if thou had lost thy life, and thy body were rent from thy
soul, if that goes to the Lord! Heb. 11. They were ^awn asunder. It may be thy
heart has gone from Christ; Oh therefore re^^^^! for it may be this is Gods
end; and methinks this should make you content with any cross, thou art not
near enough to the Lord; Oh therefore you poor Saints, be not in heaviness by
many temptations; the Lord does it to try your faith; can you be content with
him alone? It was Justin Martyrs speech, Nothing else to care for.

Secondly, In case the Lord makes outward peace and blessings to abound upon
you, set not now your hearts upon these things; sometimes when miseries abound,
and there is wracks of all, now the soul is glad to stand upon the rock to save
its life, Psalm. 78. 35. When he smote them, they then remembre^ God was their
rock; but when the Lord begins to fill the soul with outward blessings, it is
then exceeding hard not to lodge them in the Lords own room and habitation for
himself, and the Lord is forgotten and fo^saken also, Jet. 2. 1, 2, 4, 5.

But when these things are removed, or with you continued, yet let your hearts
still be kept for the Lord; for if these things were necessary, you should have
them in heaven; but there is no need of them there, but only of the Lord. Psalm.
17. ult. It was David's prayer that he might be delivered from the men who had
their portion in this world; but I shall behold thy face, and therewith be
satisfied when I awake; i. e. Some outward troubles now made him heavy, that he
slept the sleep of death, says Calvin, but then he should be satisfied; it was
David's argument to prove his faith, Psalm. 16. The Lord is the portion of my lot
and cup; not his crown nor kingdom; 1 Cor. 7. 30. Paul mixes this with his
counsels, use the world as if you used it not, possess as if you possessed not,
for the fashion of it passes away. The love of Christ sweetens these things;
nay, the sweet of them is Christ's; he lets into them his love and his
sweetness, etc. Oh the peace that comes by this means, when a no outward evil
detracts, and no outward good thing adds to your blessedness! It is so in it
self; Oh that it were so indeed unto you, Psalm. 23.

Thirdly, In case the soul comforts it self in hopes and desires after good
things to come in this world; for sometimes that which fills the heart, is not
things present; a man finds a bottom here, but he looks for things to come,
and so lancheth out his heart in the deep, lets the rains of his heart go
strongly after things to come, and so the Lord alone does not quiet him; many
men's blessedness here is imaginary, and chiefly because of that which is to
come.

Oh consider when it will be found to be blessedness to enjoy the Lord alone,
without hope or desire of any good else to come; thy soul shall say, Let me
ever see and love this God, and none else. It was the sweet affection of Paul,
I desire much to be with Christ; he did not desire these things, no not body
nor life; nothing else but to be with him; and that not faintly but earnestly,
2 Cor. 5. 1. because he was now absent from the Lord; Oh the sinful lusts of
men^ men think themselves miserable if they be not satisfied; and they are not
satisfied because Christ is not enough alone. Oh but know it, he will be so
shortly, soul-satisfying blessedness to his people: And this I add, the way to
have all desires satisfied, is, to joy in Christ alone, Psalm. 37. 5.

Fourthly, In case of all spiritual wants; for this troubles the heart above
any other thing; thou say thou have such wants and such sins; Oh but remember
this, thou shall have thy fill of him hereafter; he is absent now, but thou
shall be with him; he hides his face now, but he will arise upon thee and never
set more, and will supply all thy wants. Thus the Apostle persuades to love the
Scriptures, though they gave but a little light, and they were in darkness,
until this day star arose; so then all darkness shall be abolished; so the
Saints complain, If a Son, why so unlike Christ? yet remember When he appears
we shall be like him, 1 John 3. 2. Col. 1. 3.

Object. But these things are to come, how can I be content now?

Answ. 1. Carnal hearts feed themselves chiefly with hopes, and false hopes of
base things to come; why will not you now with this? Romans 5. 2, 3. we rejoice
in hope, and live by hope.

2. Faith makes things absent present, Heb. 11. 13. They saw the promises afar
off, and were persuaded and embraced them; so do you, and the Lord in them
here, but the fruition and possession of those things promised is more.

3. Though there is not perfect and full fruition of the Lord here, yet it is
in part here, which gives unknown sweetness, Revel. 21. 23. They need not the
Sun, but the Lamb is the light of that Temple, P^al. 23. ult.

4. What though the Lord keeps thee short, yet for his sake be content whiles
he keeps thee in want; there is not a cross but the Lord says, ^or my sake
bear it; nor a denial of any mercy, nor a putting by any prayer, but Christ
says, For my sake be content with it, as they Psalm. 44. 22. and be content a
little while; glory is not yet ready for thee, nor thou for it; now let this
prevail with you; be content to be afflicted, buffetted, forsaken; q^iering the
heart with this, I shall one day be with the Lord; Christ was thus for thee.

And as for you that never had heart to receive Christ yet; oh that this thing
might make your hearts come off from all creatures to him; Isa. 55. 3. Why
spend you your money for no bread, and for that which satisfies not, and for
that which continues not; what though thou lose by parting with thy lusts, al^
comforts, friends, favor of men, gain? thou shall find all these in him; lose
him, and thou can not find these in them: Oh but this you will not come to;
but yet remember, Psalm. 81. 11. Heb. 5. 9. and therefore is there any soul here
that as Hannah was praying for a Child, so you for Christ alone? I offer thee
Christ; in the name of the Lord take him; thou can not exalt Christ more by
any act than by taking him; and therefore, as hers, so let thy heart go home
quietted, mourn no more, and let it ever bear up thy heart, as the ark above
all waters, that thou art shipped safe in him.

SECT. XIV.
OH therefore be as near the Lord Jesus now a^ you can be in this world; Use 5.
be as much alone with him as you can; there will be a very near conjuction and
communion between you and Christ another day; and herein alone lies your
blessedness; you are yet in your race, and absent from home; yet be as near
home, and reaching after the price of your high calling; when David could not
come to the Temple, yet his heart was as near it as it could; he would be
coming after it, and accounting them happy that might be near, even the very
Swallows. That is the nature of love, Where it cannot go, it will creep; it
will be as near the thing beloved as it can: So here.

The Saints when they were cast from the Temple, when they could not go to it,
yet they would look toward, and pray toward it; Daniel did it though he died
for it; Jonah, though discouraged, and thought he should never come there, but
be cast out of Gods ^ight.

Jacob and Joseph, though they might have had honorable burial elsewhere, yet
such was not only their faith in the promise, but their love to the Land of
promise, where they knew God intended his presence, that their very bones must
lie there, Heb. 11. 22. when they could not live there, their very carcasses
shall lie there.

'This was the power of the timo^ous faith of Joseph and Nicodemus (when they
had lost the life of Christ, and Christ was departed) yet they loved and begged
the dead body of Jesus; so though you have neglected the Lord, yet now be as
near the Lord as you can; Christ himself when he was to depart from his people,
yet he would be as near to his as he could; hence he sends the Comforter; Oh so
be you toward him! I know his love to us exceeds ours to him; but there is no
reason why it should, for we are vile; there is reason ours should exceed, for
he is worthy; this is the honor of the Saints, To be a people near to him; as
it is the curse, and shame, and misery of all the world to be far from him.

Men's hearts lie further out from Christ than we are aware of; some stars seem
to be within a hands breadth of the moon, when they are indeed far off, because
of our weakness not able to judge of things at that distance; so it is with
many; nay many of Gods own people are far off, or not near enough to the Lord:
And hence come

First, All afflictions for the most part; why are they sent but to fetch you
in from your strayings? hence Psalm. 23. 4. the rod of God comforted David.

Secondly, Hence comes your sleeping in your strayings from God; as Jonah that
went away from the presence of the Lord, and the Lord let him alone for a time;
I know there are daily strayings; but to lie and live in them not lamented,
this argues your hearts are gone, and lie out from the Lord, at least, for a
time.

SECT. XV.
Quest. HOw should we be near unto the Lord?

Answ. In Four particulars.

First, Be near to him in his Providence; the Lord is exceeding near to all
men thus, Act. 17. 27, 28. in him we live and move, as the beam is in the Sun,
so as he may be felt; it is wonderful to think how near the Lord is to men, not
only by the immediateness of his virtue, but of his person; yet they are far
from the Lord, and men are to seek for him; hence verse. 30, 31. he persuades
unto that, especially to be near God, not only as a Creator, but as a Mediator,
by whom the affairs of all the family in heaven and earth are ordered.

Oh therefore seek him till you come so near as to see him and find him hete;
David saw this really, and that in times of peace, when he had far pastures and
full cups, Psalm. 23. he saw the Lord as his Shepherd; Ioh. 10. 1. who is known
of his, feeding, leading, restoring, comforting by rods, adhering to him in the
valley of the shadow of death; and then for outward things, furnishing his
table, anointing his head, giving necessities and superfluities; he looked not
only on second causes, but saw God as really doing all these, as carnal men see
second causes doing these: Nay, he so sees the Lord, as that he falls a
wondering; and indeed the Lord is never seen in his Providence till then; as
Manoah saw the Angel do wondrously, Judge. 13. 19. Psalm. 139. 14. Mavelous are
thy works, verse. 17, 18. How precious are thy thoughts ^ he saw from the Lords
works, and gathered an idea of the thoughts of God; so should we; and hence
when he did awake he was still with the Lord; the first thing that appeared was
the Lord, Psalm. 73. 23, 24, 25.

To the beasts the Lord is near, but they cannot reflect upon their own
actions, much less upon the Lord; The Heathens may see we are Gods offspring,
and see God as a Creator at some times; but let them that profess Christ, see
and find out Christ as Media^or; as Moses that desired to see the Lord passing
by him, whom he had seen a little before; truly the Lord not only passes by
you, but is with you proclaiming his name by the voice of his Providence toward
you, patience, pity, love, truth, wisdom; and yet truly this is very difficult
and hard to see.

SECT. XVI.
MEn see not Jesus Christ, First, Because second causes seem to work all; this
estate my friends gave me, or my labor got me; this house the Carpenter built
for me, these provisions my money bought for me; and so the creatureslike broad
leaves hide the boughs of the glory of God in Christ on which they grow, and
are opake and dense, and not transparent, through which the soul may see the
glory of God abroad.

Secondly, Because men have so many businesses and cares that they cannot have
leisure really to see the Lord.

Thirdly, Because there is a malice in all men's hearts naturally which
suffocates all that which may be known of him, Romans 1. 28. They delighted not,
to retain God in their knowledge; the works of God grow vile and sordid through
their commonness to them.

Fourthly, Because men can live well enough without him; hence like a child at
nurse, that forgets friends and home, because it is well enough without them;
thus men's minds are not fed with the thoughts of him, Ier. 2. 6.

Fifthly, Because Nature never heard of a Mediator governing; all their lives,
and comforts, and all; they see not all given them by the Almighty hand of
Christ, who has all power given hi^^ in heaven and earth, and who must reign
not only friends till they are gathered, but over his enemies also till they
are subdued, and to question this is to question Christ's sitting at Gods right
hand. He is owner of all, and dispose^ of all to the least growth of thy
stature, and the most careless fall of the least hair; to do not only the
greatest, but the meanest offices of love for thee.

You say indeed you believe all is from Christ; oh but you see it not; come
near therefore and see the Lord, Deuteronomy. 8. 9. they were forty years a learning
that Man lives not by bread, nor is warmed by clothes, etc. and though they had
mar^ellous wondrous works, yet Deuteronomy. 29. To this day the Lord has not given
you eyes to see.

Oh therefore labor to see who it is that nurses you, gu^des you, tends you,
leads you, teaches you, lays you down, and takes you up, and let the works of
Christ raise up your minds, to the thoughts of Christ in heaven, remembering
thee in his Kingdom of glory, who might forget thee; and the poorer and smaller
the mercy is, the more do thou wonder that he should therein be a servant unto
thee; see all blessings growing upon this tree, seated in the midst of Gods
Paradise, Rev. 22. 3, 4. though thou layest thy head with Jacob upon stones,
and sorrows, yet see this ladder of the Lords providence toward thee; common
blessings sometimes descending, sometimes taken ou^ of thy hand and ascending,
and the Angels of God with thee, ministering to thee; but the Lord at the top of
them; the Lord his care, his love, in all; and let not this be a dream, but a
reality to you. It is a wonderful sin to be thus unmindful of Christ.

1. Because hence all whor^^g from Christ arises, Hos. 2. 8. Judge. 2. 12.
especially in times of peace.

2. Hence the Lord is forced to hedge your w^y with thorns, and to bring you to
extremily of troubles that you may see the Lord, Isa. 41. 17, 18. nay sometime
to bring ruin, Isa. 5. 12, 13.

And tru^y as it is a great sin, so it is a very great shame, Isa. 1. 2. The ox
knows his owner^ is the Lord the owner of you, and do you not know him? when he
comes by you, and to you, provides for you? It is a worse thing, says
Chyso^^om, to b^ compar^d ^o a beast than to be so. To let many days and
streams of goodness pass by you, and yet not to take any not^ce, and still to
be so far from the Lord: I know in heaven this is perfected, and then comes
acknowledgement of the Son of God; but here you may be near him; I think unless
the Lord did descend in cloudy pillars, and of fire, some men would never see
him.

SECT. XVII.
Secondly, BE near him in his promises; for Christ is near to us here also,
Romans 10. 8. the word of faith is nigh thee; so that you need not ascend to
bring Christ down from heaven, etc. When Parents are dead and gone, children
w^ll then search out their last Will and Testament, and preserve that, and keep
that near them.

Christ draws near to his people, 1. In his Promises, according to his thoughts
of them.

2. In his performances, joining the soul immediately to himself, and filling
it with himself; this we cannot enjoy yet, the Lord lays it up in his promise,
which they have in liew of the performance: Oh draw near not to words and
syllables, but to the Lord there, apprehend him there; as it is with the
Attributes of God, his Glory cannot be comprehended by us; hence he manifests
himself there according to our capacity, God manifesting himself severally; so
in promises we cannot comprehend Christ as yet; hence Christ manifests himself
in his glory, in several promises; Oh embrace him there; Heb. 11. 9, It Is not
said that Abraham and Jacob were heirs of Canaan, but heirs of the promise, and
Sarah first received her son in the promise; so do you em^ra^e Christ in the
womb and bowels of the promises; we live by faith in this life; and hence all
our enjoyment of Christ is first in the promise.

First, Labor to draw near unto, and enjoy the Lord Jesus by the Promise.

Secondly, Labor to enjoy him in the Promise.

First, By the promise or by means of it; all that which the Lord conveys to
his, is not by mee^ providence but by promise, Psalm. 25. 10. He was free before
their calling, but now he has bound himself by an eternal covenant, to be all,
and do all for them, Genesis 17. 1. So that the Saints may and should bring all
their empty pitchers to the wells of the promise, Isa. 12. 3. and draw out of
those breasts, ^, and get Christ Jesus Spirit in your hearts by them; now some
think the Promise is not theirs, hence they go not thither for spiritual
refreshments, or at least, they let other things come by providence, especially
common blessings, without going to the promise for their daily bread, or
looking to the promise out of whose bowels they are begot, Heb. 13. 5, 6. the
Apostle there sends them to the promise. Or else they use not the means, or
faint in the use of it; whereby they come to enjoy the Lord by his promise, and
that is restless wrestling with Christ by prayer for it, Genesis 32. 12. Thou
said I will surely do thee good; He might have said, I have a promise, what
need I pray? or he might have said, I had a promise of safe convoy, but now I
see the Lord is coming out to br^ak it; and so he might have perished; yet he
prays, and wrestles, acknowledging himself unworthy of all the truth, etc. So
N^h. 1. 8. Men have so little of Christ because so little of the Spirit of
Prayer, pressing Gods promise; thou have a barren, empty, weak heart, because
the promise is not improved as it should be.

Secondly, Labor to enjoy him in the Promise; sometimes the soul has a
Promise fair, and seeks and finds not; now the heart goes on to seek, but is
exceeding unbelieving, or sad and troubled whiles it does not feel; and
unthankful also, and accounts it self miserable whiles it wants, and so does
not glory in the Lord, and his fullness, which is his in the Promise, unless he
feels the good come from the promise, like a man that does not account himself
rich while he has it in his treasure, a most safe and sure place where it is
kept for him, unless he gets a little out of it into his pockets; and fears he
shall be slain with thirst, though he stands by the Spring and that be full, if
his dish be empty; oh this is vile, Heb. 11. 13. These received not the
promise, i. e. things promised, yet saw them, believed, and embraced them i. e.
in the promise. You say you are sinful and born down by your distempers, and
base, and poor; I say you have power, victory over all sin and misery, and have
eternal glory already in the promise; only here is thy wound, you think you
want it because you have it not out of the promise, though you have it in the
swaddling clouts of the promise lapt up there; and by means of this sinful
distemper of heart you partake not of Christ, because you apprehend not your
exceeding great riches in the promise, 2 Pet. 1. 2. 2 Samuel 23. 4. God made an
everlasting Covenant, this is all his desire; sweet was David's spirit. 2 Samuel
7. 22. Who is like to thee, when he had no accomplishment of the promise; Oh so
do you say. Heb. 6. 17. The Lord has appointed we should have strong
consolation by promise and oath, not by dreams; it was the complaint of Christ,
unless you see signs and wonders you will not believe; so you call in question,
like Thomas, unless you feel; Oh close with the Promise, keep it as most
precious; and then Psalm. 25. 10. He says not to them that keep their covenants
or their feelings, but his covenant as their portion, and get the Lord to
undertake to keep it for them, and so make sure.

SECT. XVIII.
3. LAbor to be near the Lord in all his Ordinances also, both privately and
publicly, for there is his presence, Ezekiel. ult. ult. Psalm. 26. 8. he not only
loved Christ's presence, but the place where it was; it was an argument of his
integrity. Psalm. 102. 13. They did love the dust of Sion; never think there is
a time of mercy till then.

First, Be with him in secret as often as you can, prayer, meditation, daily
calling your hearts to an account; time has been that you have been so when in
affliction, or at first conversion; but now twenty hindrances; and now you
cannot only neglect, but think you have reason so to do; there have been tears,
and prayers, and thoughts, and pressings hard after the Lord, but now no words,
nor groans; you women have children to suck, and families to tend; you servants
love your sleep rather than the bosom of Christ; and though Conscience cry out
against you for it, yet you hope to be better one day, and so you grow
strangers to Christ, and no public Ordinances profit, because private duties
are neglected, and thy heart like the sluggards garden is andressed; is this to
be as near the Lord as you can? no, if the Lord oves you, look for the death of
thy Husband, Wife or Child shortly; look for terrors, and then you shall
account it an honor, if you may but once more speak to the Lord.

Secondly, Be with him, and as near him as you can in all public Ordinances,
and not only to have them (which some care not greatly for, because they see no
glory in them, unless glorified souls should come out of heaven to be members,
and Moses and Elias to build tabernacles here, and ^o be Elders) but come
through them, look beyond them to the Lord; look at them as empty and weak,
unless the Lord fill, and be powerful in them; David did enjoy God secretly,
yet there was more in public; hence Psalm. 63. 2. The Saints are a generation
of Seekers, Psalm. 63. My soul follows hard afteh thee; mercy and truth
follows you many times when you forsake it, Psalm. 23. ult. much more when you
cleave to it: Hezekiah's frame of heart, Isa. 38. ult. is imitable; Act. 1.
Christ promised to send the Comforter; wait at Jerusalem, as there they did in
prayer, and at last the Lord came.

You have forsaken all for Ordinances; and now you have them, you despise them;
I con^ess they are mere outsides, yet the Lord is there; there is a glory which
wi^e men can see in Christ in the mange^.

SECT. XIX.
Fourthly, LAbor by thy desires to be (...) him, Rev. 22. 20. So desire as to
wait for thy change all thy life, look for it, 1 The^. 1. ult.

1. Christ's desire is that thou were with him, when thou art ready, and when
thy work is done; Oh let this make thee to desire it also.

2. If you cannot keep your hearts from vain hopes, and foolish and noyso^
lusts, without desiring him, do not then desire to be with him; for you may
desire communion with lusts and Christ.

Object. But death is terrible, and separation from him bitter?

Answ. Long for him therefore to come and then take thee, and see thou desire
nothing but him^ rebuke thy (...) llingness of not being with him. If Christ
was on earth, you would hazard your lives to get unto him; much more herein.

Obj. But what will become of Gods name?

Answ. Let the Lord alone for that; w^^les thou live en^^avour to the utmost;
but its appointed for thee a little season only to be here, and be willing the
Lord should honor himself also by others as well as by thee.

Object. What will become of my wife and children?

Answ. Who regarded thee in thy blood? when thou live, they are thine; but
then the Lords.

Desire to be with him, this will support your hearts in all your changes of
this (...).

SECT. XX.
Use 6. YOu that never received Christ, now do it.

Object. Yes, I have.

Answ. No, you have not so received him, as to let all go for him. Why so?
because he alone will be blessedness, but he is not so to thee; Oh therefore
let all go now; you must part with Christ, or all these things. Which will you
do? If with Christ, you cannot find him in these things; but if you part with
these things, then you shall find them all in him.

Object. But he will have none of me?

Answ. 1. He cries down thy laying out money for what is not Bread.

2. He promises to give thee to drink, now, and hereafter.

CHAP. XIX.
Showing, that none shall enjoy Christ hereafter, but those that are prepared
here.
VERSE 10. They that were ready, (...) prepared.
SECT. I.
THose only who are ready and prepa^ed in this life for Christ, Observe. 2.
shall enjoy eternal and immediate communion with Christ; those only who are
now fitted for his fellowship, shall partake of his fellowship; for of all
these Virgins (though many of them were otherwise very well qualified) only
those which were ready, did enter in with the Bridegroom; which readiness in
these wise Virgins, was not, nor is not any Popish preparation, either
meritorious, or congruous, or wrought by the power of corrupted or adorned
nature; but Divine and glorious, wrought by the power of Christ, out of his
eternal love to the Vessels of glory, as an Antecedent, not moving cause of
this eternal fellowship; it is the first degree of our Resurrect^on with
Christ. Romans 9. 23. Vessels of glory prepared unto glory; the same word which
is used here, there are two ends God has appointed all men to; either to be
Vessels of wrath; who are those? Ve se 22. Those that are fitted for
des^ruction; others of glory; who are those? prep^red unto glory. 2 Cor. 5. 5.
with 8. How comes Paul, and all the Saints to know, and groan for to be out of
the body, and to break the Cage, and to be with the Lord? one reason is, they
are wrought, and molded, and fashioned for that condition by the hand of a
merciful God, even as one may know what Vessels are for special use, by their
met^al, and curious engravings upon them.

SECT. II.
Reas. 1. BEcause all men's souls are naturally unfit, and unprepared to enjoy
communion with Christ, it is said, Rev. 21. ult. Nothing enters into the new
Jerusalem on earth, which is unclean, and defiles; and Heb. 12* 14. Without
holiness no man shall see God. Now naturally all men are de^iled, and unclean
Vessels, and under the power of their sins, loathing Angels food, the grace of
Christ, and weary of the fellowship of Christ; and therefore they must be
prepared for the Lord first; this is one reason, why preparation to every holy
duty is needful, and so needful, that let men perform any holy duty, wherein
they draw near to Christ without a heart prepared, Psalm. 10. 17. their
performances a^e rejected, or not blessed; and hence Rehoboam, though he did
maintain the worship of God at Jerusalem, yet he prepared no^ his heart, 2
Ch^on. 12. 14. (...) and begs par^on for this, That he is not so purified
according to the purification of the Sanct^^ry. Now if to a holy duty, and
comm^nion with Christ here, this is needful; much more to eternal fellowship
with him; sore eyes cannot behold the Sun without grief; sick bodies loath the
best food; if the Lord should let a carnal heart into heaven with that heart he
has, and not change his nature, he would not stay there if he could escape;
but having his swinish nature, he would be in his mire again; and the
Government of Christ being a bondage to him, he would break bonds, and break
his Prison, if he knew where to fly from the presence of the Lord; And hence no
work so wearysome as Christ's now, no time so uncomfortable and tedious as
abiding under Christ's wings in his Ordinances now. 1 Cor. 15. 50. If flesh and
b^ood cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven, much less corruption.

Reas. 2. In regard of the rich grace and wisdom of his love toward his
people; for who sees not, but that it is a curse to be unready as these foolish
Virgins, who were therefore shut out! Oh therefore it is grace and mercy to
make ready, and indeed an answer to prayers, and a comfort against all fears
of the Saints, who are then desi^o^s to be with the Lord when they are indeed
ready; readiness for Christ does not destroy grace, but being a fruit of Gods
grace, advances it. Romans 9. 23. the Apostle makes it the first fruit of glory,
that the Saints are prepared unto glory; glory of mercy is the end,
preparedness thereto is the means, or way leading to that end; if God appoints
the end, his wisdom also leads first to the means which lead at last to that
end; if out of his rich grace he appoints the end, out of the same grace by
this other, he leads to this end; and though you think it not now grace, you
shall say it is so another day, when with these foolish Virgins, you shall say,
Oh that I were ready! I know not almost which is greatest love, to prepare for
glory, or to bring into the possession of i^* to make a Vessel of poisonous
dross a Vessel of gold, or when it is so, to fill it; for the Lord to look upon
a man when he is in his blood, and then to wash him; when a man is as water
spilt upon the ground, and a broken Vessel of no use, now for the Lord to pity,
and fit for use, it is exceeding rich grace.

Reas. 3. In regard of the honor of the Lord Jesus; it was one part of the
honor of Christ, to have John go before him; and Luke 1. 17. to prepare a
people ready for the Lord: As it is part of a Princes honor, to have his Bride
ready, and attired to welcome and entertain him, when he shall return to her,
she owes this honor to him, and he expects this honor from her; So the Lord
Jesus deserves this honor from all his people to be in a readiness for him.
Suppose these Virgins had turned Harlots, and gone a whoring from him till his
very coming, and then had been taken in, what might the world think? does he
love the fellowship of Harlots? for a man's heart to go a whoring from the Lord,
after the world, or lusts, to die so, is to disgrace the Lord Jesus; And hence,
Phil. 3. 17. to the end, there are two sorts of men professing godliness; some
mind earthly things, others look and mind a Savior from heaven; the one
disgrace Christ, and are enemies to him; and hence Paul weeps for them; the
other are his friends; And are Princes so far respected as all things are ready
for them? and is the Lord worthy of no such respect, so as that his People then
should be unready? No, know it, as he said, Mal. 1. He is a great King.

The particulars wherein this readiness consists, I have spoken of in the first
Part of the Parable, and shall now only speak of them in the subsequent Uses.

SECT. III.
Use 1. OF terror and astonishment of heart, to all those that are wholly
unready, that have no readiness at all to meet, or to have fellowship with the
Lord Jesus; if those that are ready be received^ in, then those that be
unready, shall be sh^t out.

There is a number among us, young and old, of all sorts almost among us, that
swarm up and down Towns, and Woods, and Fields, whose care and work hitherto
has been like bees, only to get honey to their own Hive, only to live here
comfortably with their houses, and lots, and Victuals, and fine clothes, etc.
but not to live hereafter eternally. Suppose the Lord should stop thy breath,
and cut thee off, what would become of thee? I trust to Gods mercy, I hope I
should go to Christ, though I am not assured; but are you ready for Christ?
yes, I hope I am; Oh poor wretch, why do hope so, if thou never had one
hours serious thoughts, What will become of me? or how shall I be ready?
feeling thy unreadiness and unfitness thereunto. Or if thou have had any
thoughts, never wast possessed with any strong fears of eternity, and
separation from the Lord Jesus, which has dampt thy mirth, and sunk thy heart,
and perplexed thy thoughts, and made thee think with terror upon thy
conscience, What will become of me? nor made thee desirous to ask others that
question, as it is commonly one of the first, though but a common work, to
think of dying presently, I have lived long without God and Christ in the
world, and dye I must shortly, and what will become of me then?

But you have ^^ept (...) enough in the night, and sung care away, and (...)
fear away in the day, and thy heart never had one hours fit of shaking and
trembling at eternity to come, when it is the nature of true fea^, ever to have
the eye upon what it fears, till it is taken away; and if difficulty attend
the same, to remove it; it cannot be quiet, but will cry for help, if possibly
help may be had; this you never did: No, thou never had so much as these
foolish Virgins, viz. to be awakened at all, but a spirit of slumber has been
upon thee; God ^ath given thee eyes, but thou can not see; ears, and thou
can not here; Thou say (it may be) that thou do hope thou art prepared;
alas, thou have not a Virgins name, much less nature, nor do not deserve it
neither; thou have not forsaken thy loose company, nor yet come to the company
of the wise, neither do thou desire it, or think ^^^ self unworthy of it; thy
Lamp is out; nay, thou never had any light at all, never made profession at
all, as of one ready for Christ; but O poor wretch, all is yet to do with
thee! if so, then remember that if thou die now, thou shall never have
communion with Jesus Christ in glory.

SECT. IV.
Object. WHat if I have not?

Answ. I know it is the misery of men, they can make nothing of this till they
feel it: But two things I will say.

1. Do but consider what if thou should be deprived of the light of the Sun;
nay, only of bread, only that one creature, and have clothes, Sun, Friends, all
other blessings but that; would it not be a woe with a witness, would it not cut
a man's heart to hear him cry, Bread, bread, a little bread for the Lords sake,
to save my life! there is but a drop of the sweetness of Christ in that. Oh
what a misery will it be to pine away, and famish under wrath in chains of
darkness, and to cry, Oh a little refreshing from the p^esence of Christ, and
can not get it, but to live ever tormented without that, when thy soul shall
cry, Lord, thus long have I been tormented without thee, till my spirits are
weary, and my heart faint; Now, O now a little mercy, -- Oh no.

2. That though thou see it no great matter to be separated from Christ now,
yet when the heavens shall be in a flaming fire, and the earth shall g^ve up
the dead that be in it, and Christ shall appear in infinite glory, admired of
Angels, blessed of Saints, Crowned of God, comforting his Elect, Come, oh come
ye blessed; then you shall think this separation something. Oh that you would
now go home and mourn, and look up to the Lord, that he would make thee ready a
Vessel of honor, and acknowledge it is righteous with him, if he should never
do it.

SECT. V.
Use 2. IT is of examination to all the Virgins; Would you know whether the
Lord will bring you to e^ernal fellowship with him? are you ready for him, made
sit to live with him or no? for ^e^e only those which are ready, are received
in; the foolish Virgins did (...) so long asleep, that little did they think
they were unready, until the Bridegroom^ came, and it was too late. It is the
condition of many at this day, that little dream of their separation from
Christ, and yet shall be when he comes; but they have some hopes and assurance;
they look to meet the Bridegroom when he shall come, and so fall into a sweet
sleep; a comfortable condition, until the Lords coming, puts them upon more
narrow searching than ever before; that which many think gold now, shall be
found hay, and stubble, and consumed to nothing at the coming of Christ;
therefore search now.

I know there is many a gracious soul that is ready, fears to slip in at the
passage over that narrow bridge, between life and death, this end of time, and
beginning of eternity, and loath I am to sad any; but, hear what I shall now
say in fear; when there are these three things in the soul, then it is ready;
whiles any are wanting, it is unready; And by these try your selves.

SECT. VI.
1. WHen the soul, the Spouse of Christ is made lovely by its Wedding Garment,
the Royal Robe of his own righteousness in the eyes of Christ; for this
Bridegroom, though he finds his Spouse (...), yet he being glorious and lovely
himself, makes it lovely and glorious, E^h. 5. 25, 26. A Queen fit for the
fellowship of this King of Kings, and through this righteousness (though
otherwise weak and vile, yet) the object of his, and the Fathers infinite and
endless delight in heavenly Glory; now it is fit, Zach. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 2
Cor. 5. 2, 3. Without this righteousness, there is nothing but shameful
nakedness in the best; so as the soul (...) Adam, will rather seek bottomes of
Mountains to hide it from Christ, (...) to appear before him. Now examine you
Saints; time was, that (...) was no shame to thee, though thou did wallow in
that Vomit, and livedst in it, and livedst by it as by thy Trade; or if the
Lord did keep and deanse you from foul sins, and that you could pray, and
sorrow, and k^ow and remember what you heard, and had some good affections, now
you were some body in your own eyes, and it may be you thought if you died
then, you should to heaven, and Christ must needs save you; who should he save
else? but now the Lord has made thee poor in spirit, and ashamed; nay, the
Lord has made thee lie down confounded, because of all thy shame before him;
and the Lord has made thee see a glory, a ri^ing Sun in Christ's righteousness
which the Gospel has brought to light; though thou were a poor, naked,
condemned, vile creature; yet the Lord has made thee seek for it, so as to
esteem all things loss to be found there, and now here is all thou have to
glory in, as that which may make thee lovely in the Fathers sight; and here the
Lord has quieted thy conscience, and heart also; be not discouraged, nor
afraid to stand before the Lord, if he should send for thee this night; for
though thou art vile in thine own eyes, yet the Lord looks upon thee as lovely.

The Apostle makes a question, why the Gentiles are justified, and not the
Jews, Romans 9. 30, 31. he answers it, verse 32. viz. they sought it by the
works of the Law; but if it be otherwise with thee, that in Christ thy
righteousness and strength is, then thou may glory; so that now thou shall
have peace again, against all the condemning of conscience, Satan, and God
himself.

But have you seen your nakedness, known, and stood convinced of your vi^eness,
and have heard the voice of God condemning thee for thy sinful, though civil
life, and been afraid, and hereupon you have reformed your life, lamented your
course, set upon some duties, gone to Christ for strength against some
corruptions, and you have had it, and you have looked about you, and have been
ready to say, If the Lord saves not me, who should he? and so have sown these
leaves and skins together to cover your shame; and now you are well, being
strangers to this true righteousness, you shall never see the Lord in peace, if
you die thus. Or if thus, you see not Christ to be all, sin is not your shame,
but you lie in it, and holiness is not your glory; and hence you esteem it not,
but it is a common thing to you, if that was, then it would be your glory to be
like Christ, and to live to him: Know it thou art not yet ready, for thou only
see the Garment, and you catch at it, but the Lord helps you not by faith to
put it on.

SECT. VII.
2. When the soul is filled with the Spirit of Christ, when there is not only
some of the workings of the Spirit in the soul, but the soul is filled with the
Spirit; for this was the wound of the foolish Virgins, they had Lamps, outward
Profession, and glorious, which was a work of the Spirit, and some dipping of
their week in the oil, some lighter superficial changes, and works of grace in
their hearts; but they had not oil in their Vessel, they had not plenty and
fullness of the Spirit; some unripe ears there were, but not full; and hence
they were to buy when the Lord Jesus came; but the wise had.

The blood and righteousness of Christ, ever brings the plenty of the Spirit of
Christ, hence 2 Cor. 5. 5. earnest of the Spirit.

I speak not now of extraordinary fullness, which Prophets and Apostles had, nor
of that fullness which is in glory, as if we must have that here, but of that
which the Saints attain to in this life, every one according to his need and
measure of capableness of the same; the Spirit of love is not dropped, but shed
into the heart; the Spirit of God in them, is not a Spirit of some light
affection, dying affection, but of eternal life, Romans 8. 2, 3. The spirit of
mourning does not only drip upon them, but it is poured down upon them, Zach.
12. 10. the spirit of wisdom does not only give them light and knowledge, but
Mavelous Light, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

I have opened this at large; only three signs now I shall give you to
discern this Spirit by.

SECT. VIII.
1. THis Spirit and fullness of it, the Saints not only pray for, but they
follow their ^ray^rs to Christ, until their sou^s are sweetly satisfied with
it, and so it abides daily satisfying their hearts. John 4. 14. The water I
shall give, shall be a spring, so as the soul shall not thirst after more
gra^e; i. e. with a tormenting thirst; nor after the world; the grace of God,
and the Spirit of God in the heart is so sweet, that the soul says, Oh it is
enough, oh if my soul might ever be thus near the Lord, indeared to him,
walking thus humbly, thankfully, cheerfully with him, this should be all my
desire; and hence, John 14. 16. it is called the Com orter, which dwells in
them, and is known by them, the world knows it not. Now here is the wound of
others, they have the Spirit convincing them of emptiness, misery, nakedness,
and they lie so, and they desire; but as Solomon says, Prove. 13. 4. They are
forsaken of the Spirit, before they find him to be a Comforter quenching their
thirsty desires, making them to feel the sweetness of his Presence, of his
Grace. Isa. 58. 11. There were diverse that did pray, fast, draw near to God,
and did delight in it, but they felt not what they desired at all; there were
some lusts, their souls were lean, and like parched deserts; but when the
heart is indeed humbled, the spirit comes in, and makes the bones fat, and like
a watered garden; Oh therefore take heed you give not over, till the Lord pour
out in thy empty heart, of the fullness of his grace.

2. This Spirit ever keeps a man poor and vile in his own eyes, and empty. Take
a man that has no knowledge, nor taste of Gods grace, whiles he finds
ignorance, he may pray, and be diligent in use of means, and full of life; but
when he has got some knowledge, and can discourse pretty well, and has some
tastes of the Heavenly Gift, some sweet elaps^es of grace, and so his
conscience is pretty well quieted, and if he has got some answer to his
prayers, and has sweet affections, he grows full, and having ease to his
conscience, casts off sense, and daily groaning under sin; And hence the Spirit
of Prayer dies, he loses his esteem of Gods Ordinances, feels not such need
of them, or gets no good, feels no life and power by them; and whereas before
he could catch at every word, and mourn when he found the Lord passed by him,
and speak never a good word to him: now no such trouble, because he is full.
This is the woeful condition of some, but yet they know it not; but now he that
is filled with the Spirit, the Lord empties him, and the longer he lives, so
that others think he needs not much grace, yet he accounts himself the poorest,
and feels a need of every truth of God, and Ordinance of God; his sin ('it is
true) continues, it is not quite abolished, and his sighing within himself
continues also to his grave. Isa. 57. 15. poor, and yet the Lord dwells there;
how can these stand together? very well in those who are the Lords.

3. This Spirit comes in that fusness, as that it so purifies the heart of sin
and self, as that it makes the soul set it seef for God, as his last end and
happiness, and so as that the work of Christ is his blessedness. 2. Tim. 2.
20, 21. He that purges himself from these things, is a Vessel of honor, and
fit for his Masters use. It is with some souls, as it is with some drosly
Vessels, they are put out of the fire, and they are taken out before their
dross is removed, or they melted, or if melted, yet not fashioned for use, even
to every good work; so some have great troubles without and within; now the
fire goes out, or they get out of the fire; viz. the trouble, before their
dross is removed, or their sinful natures be changed; or if they be melted, yet
they are not fashioned, and framed for their Masters use only; they are for
their own use, and their lusts use, and seek themselves in all they do, but not
for the Lords use; it is not their life to live to God. Promises are sweet, and
Christ is sweet, and Heaven is sweet; but the work of Christ to be of use for
Christ, this is not their bliss: I know Saints fall short here much, and seek
themselves; but yet their hearts are prepared, fashioned, set for this end, and
they through the help of the Spirit, refine themselves for the Lord; that when
sin desires them to serve it, No (their answer is) I am no debtor, nor servant
to you; I have lived too long to you already, I am now the Lords, and for the
Lord; Oh that I might have that honor as to be employed for him; I say unto
you, the Lord has here filled you, and fitted you for his use, and you may be
comforted.

SECT. IX.
3. WHen the soul is recovered out of that security, which usually befalls men
after some time of first affection and profession, in that measure, as that now
it lives unto the Lord in a daily waiting for him, and longing for him, when
the Lord sees it meet to come and take him to himself. For all these Virgins
fell asleep, after they came out to meet the Bridegroom with their burning
Lamps; and not only the foolish, but the wife also slept. Now I ask you, Do you
think they were ready then for the Lord? No, not until they were awakened
again, and the wise had got their Lamps burning again, and waiting for him;
but yet the foolish had got not only no light to their lamps, but Oil was
wanting also to their Vessels; So it is here.

Time h^th been, that the Lord has awakened you with fears and terrors about
your estate, and you have got into the assemblings of the Saints together, and
kept company with them, and you have escaped the outward pollutions of the
world, and defilements of Gods worship and services, and you have seen the
insufficiency of all duties and it is Christ you have looked after, and prayed
for, and got some peace and comfort that he is yours, and have looked to meet
him, hoped if you die, that you should be saved; but have you not fallen into a
secure frame again, both wise and foolish? have you not turned Prodigals, and
scent, and lost all, after you have had your portions? if not, thank God, be
not high-minded, but fear; for very few, but after fullness fall asleep; and
after they have had some peace of conscience, but they fall to enter into some
peace, if not with some foul open sins, yet some truce with some lesser secret
sins; and if their oil be not spent, their sorrows spent in sorrowing, their
trouble spent in trouble, their desires spent in desiring (as water spends away
it self in running out of a Cisterne, not out of a Spring) yet their light has
gone out; the beauty of thy profession is (it may be) lost, that heat and life
is gone which others saw, and you saw much more: are you ready now? and though
you may have some awakenings, yet are they so far as to cause you to get up,
and kindle your Lamps, and wait for the Bridegroom? If it be so that still
you keep sleeping, and have not your Lamps ready trimmed, then you are just as
all the foolish Virgins were, before the cry came.

SECT. X.
Quest. BUT may not a godly man die in a declining, decaying, secure frame?

Answ. 1. He may die in an uncomfortable frame, without great peace of
conscience; for sometimes a man's Lamp may shine brightest, when his peace is
least; but the more prayer, the more searchings and washing of heart is then to
be attended; a godly man may die mourning for ought I know, and the Lord give
him his garment of gladness in Heaven, for the spirit of heaviness here on
earth; because though he loses the comfort of his estate, yet not the safety
of it, because he dies under the wings of a Promise; So that though he dies
uncomfortably, yet not securely.

2. He may die to his feeling in such a frame, poor, and contrite; for growing
in the sense of emptiness, is not decaying in the being or power of holiness;
the Lord is now preparing of him to honor his grace, when he does not help him
to honor his Will in that inlargedness of heart to it as he would, so that
this soul is not decaying.

3. But yet I do not know that the Lord lets his people die ordinarily in a
withering condition; especially if it appear so to others of his discerning
servants; the Lord will send some cry to awaken his servants before he comes to
them, or they enter into the Marriage with him: I will allow some unusual
exceptions against general rules, and put in Asa for one, and leave secrets
with God; but ordinarily the Lord does not let his dear Servants dye in a
sottish secure estate: When Sampsons locks are cut, and his strength lost, he
shall lie in the Mill until they be grown again before he dies; and Solomon
may run riot, but he shall proclaim his folly to all ages in the world for it,
in Eccles. before he dies. Ep^es. 5. 26, 27. Christ presents his Church without
wrinckle; you are to be presented by Christ to the Father, and to be set before
Christ without wrinckle, without witherings, and decays, if he loves you, he
will wash you, that it may be so.

SECT. II.
Quest. BUT must they be so far awakened, as to wait for the Lord, and desire
to be with him, having got Vessels full, and Lamps burning?

Answ. Yes, in some measure at least; for there are awakenings to the life of
glory in another world, and awakenings to the life of duties in this world; by
the one the soul is raised out of this world to the Lord in Glory; by the other
the soul is raised up to duties in this world; if the Lord awakens not his
Saints to the first, either they are not awakened truly, or not thoroughly and
effectually; for till then the soul is not ready, Luk^ 12. 40. with 35. As it
is with a man who is sent for to enjoy favor and fellowship of the King, he is
not ready for it, until he stands waiting at the door, and that it is his
business; the patterns of mercy, and Vessels of glory, are ever set out in the
New Testament, by this, Heb. 9. ult. Tit. 2. 12, 13.

Look as it was with Simeon, Luke 2. 25. He had a promise he should see Christ
before he died; hence he waited for the consolation of Israel; so the soul
having a promise of seeing Christ when he is dead, it makes him wait for this
time; and when he wants a promise sealed, though he waits not nextly, yet he
waits remotely, that the Lord would cause him to believe it, that so he might
wait for it; that is his end, this is the mea^es; he knows it is best to be
with the Lord, where is no sin, but holiness; he has found him sweet in his
looks, in his words, in his works, in his hopes, his first fruits, but to be
with him is best.

This is not such an high pitch which Saints come not to, it is indeed such
which Hypocrites come not to; the Hypocrites end is to escape misery; hence
they desire comfort by duties, that they shall be freed from it, but not to
enjoy Christ; the Lord never tied in their souls such a knot of faith and love
which works this.

For 1. Security of Saints, it is not the privation of life (that is death) but
a suspension of the acts of a heavenly life; there is in them love to Christ,
delight in him, happiness in living to him, pleasing of him; but it is
suspended by cares or contents of the world, and love of ease; hence a
Christian is never thoroughly awakened, till he comes to that life again; his
heart is with Christ in heaven; and because he cannot be there, hence he stays
a while, and looks, and waits for it; another security is the privation of
life, of empty duties arising from some vanishing affections, as in the foolish
Virgins which were to quiet conscience only; Hence their awakening are only to
that life again^e at the best, if ever God do awaken them, unless the Lord
indeed convert them.

2. Every thing will mightily tend to that to which its nature bends and
inclines it; as a stone if thrown upward, will mightily tend downward. Some say
there is an Element of fire above, because this here endeavors to ascend, as
being out of its place; he that is of the earth, he will be tending to it,
though awakened, t^ough lifted up; Saints will be tending upward, because their
nature is heavenly, loving, looking, waiting, longing, 2 Cor. 5. 3, 4. with 1.
as Angels here be willing to stay to do the work, but yet they long to be
before the face of God again, because their natures are heavenly, and there
their proper place is.

Now for the Lord Jesus sake examine your selves here. I hope some are
awakened, the Word has done it; cry of afflictions, inward temptations have
made you look about you, and you are wearied out with your own ways; but are
you not since grown secure? time was the feet of the Messengers of peace were
glorious, but now their Message is mean; Sabbaths longed for, now you are
weary of them, heartless in them, sleep with the spoon in your mouths; private
duties were seasons of breaking the heart, refreshing and comforting from the
Lord, but now you neglect them, slight them, and the Lord in them, and are not
much troubled at it, because you have some excuse or other for it; thy mouth
was full of good questions, now thou think thy self more fit to teach than
learn; thy society was sweet as the Rose in Spring, now the sweet odor of it
is lost; time was thou were exceeding tender of the least sin, and not a day
past, but thy cheeks were wet in secret before the Lord; now thou art grown
blind and bold, and you can defile your self in all your ways, and your faith
in Christ keeps you from repentance for sin; time was, the truth was glorious,
and you could make use of your Notes many a day after, when you did not find
good in public; but now pen and Ink is left at home, you cast your bread into
corners, and feed not your hearts therewith: Time was, you could take a rebuke
kindly, when you were little in your own eyes; but now if you think a reproof
is meant of you, your hearts can swell, nay, now your judgment decays; What
warrant for private prayers twice a day? what warrant for weekly Sermons, when
we have six days to labor, and one to rest in? you were formerly more exact,
but now wiser, and thus you lie, and as if you were come to the end of your
race already, and reach not after things before you, you have enough grace,
hence you think you shall be saved, and so sit st^ll, and now play the good
Husband: Oh the Covenants you have had, if ever you came hither what you would
do! oh the esteem of the Lord afar off! but now you are broken by your Voyage,
and your Vessel is cracked, and oil is run out, and Lamp is out, will you dye
so? if you say yes, I profess you are not ready; it is a question if ever you
had grace, if it be so; and therefore bless God, the Lord gives you warning
this day; but I fear many will not stir till Christ comes; I say as she to
Sampson, Up, for the Philistines are upon thee; so I say, Security is upon thee,
and wrath is now gone out to awaken thee, if the word does not.

SECT. XII.
Use 3. OF Exhortation. Labor to be in a readiness, awaken out of sleep, and
get your Garments on, your loins girt, your Vessels full, your Lam^s burning,
tha^ you may be indeed ready, and he Lord may find you so, as well as men
think you so; It is Christ's Exhortation, Luke 12. 40. whereupon Peter asked, Did
he speak that Parable only to the Disciples, or of all? Verse 41. he answers
all, especially them that know the Lords mind herein, and do it not, Verse 47.
So you may ask me, Whom do I press to make ready? I answer all. Two sorts I
shall therefore name.

1. Those who are yet unready, either in whole or part.

2. Those who are ready, but not so ready as those should be who stand before
the Lord, and as themselves will wish another day they had been; the wise as
well as foolish, may be sleepy, and so unready for a time; but O awake.

First, Those who are unready and unprepared for the Lord and his coming; are
there any such? Yes, very many; some there be who know they are unready, and
will not yet buy, and yet prepare not for it, because they are young enough
yet, or have time enough to provide for that hereafter. Some others, because
they cry, Lord, Lord, and look to Christ, and are well thought of by the wise,
that think they are ready; but know it, all your thoughts, and cares, and
prayers, and endeavors, are little enough for it, even all your life; and yet
to prepare for this, has been the least part of many a man's life; and such is
the security of some, that till Christ come, they will not Gird up themselves
to this Work.

SECT. XIII.
COnsider the lamentable end of one who dies unready; Motive 1.
some (not all) the Lord leaves for terrors to the secure world, who are as
good as men risen from the dead, to tell men of the vanity of their sinful
courses, who looking upon time past, they see that it is irrecoverably lost,
and past away as a dream, and lost as a shadow; look upon time present, they
feel their souls left naked, their accounts not made, an end come to all their
hopes and comforts here, their body sick, their conscience trembling, if not
tearing, their hearts hard, God departed, the grave opened for their filthy
carcasses, and Devils waiting for their secure souls; And now say such, What
profit have I for all my vanity under the Sun? Look to time to come, there they
see the Throne set, the Lord Jesus on it, their souls standing naked before
him, whose grace was great toward them whiles they lived, but whose face now is
a consuming fire; and they behold eternity, even that eternal black Gulf
between them and the Lord; and here they lie wishing they had taken their time,
professing now their time is lost, beseeching others to take warning by them,
desiring the prayers of others; but yet thinking though Noah and Samuel should
stand before the Lord for them, there is no hope. Come and tell them, Do not
cast away mercy, cast not away that blood, which is worthy to be gathered up by
blessed Angels in Vessels of gold; lament, and return, and the Lord will to
you; what tell you me of repenting and believing? is a sick time, a fit time to
repent in? but the Lord has done great things for you, you have thought so,
but there were such sins, or such a sin, I knew, you knew not; I knew it, yet I
loved it, I had indeed some lazy purposes to forsake it, but the Lord has
taken me in my seemings; but mercy is infinite; oh it is my torment; I have seen
an end of my sins, and now I feel the beginning of my torment; happy are they
that die in the Lord, and thrice happy that make ready for the Lord.

Consider thou have but a short time to prepare in, Motive 2.
and the time will be then, when thou do least think of it, Luke 12. 46. The
Lords Arrows are now flying abroad; if you did think you should be next smitten
down dead, you would prepare; but you think the Lord delays his coming; Oh
Remember, that time thou do least think of, Christ will come.

If unready now, you will be much more unready next day; Motive 3.
grant thy time to be long; you will be the more unfit the longer you delay;
thou have hindrances now, the longer thou live, thou will have more and
more; ^y heart will be harder every day than other.

SECT. XIV.
PRay unto the Lord that he would prepare you, and fit you, give his Christ,
and fullness of his Spirit unto you, Means 1.
which you know the Lord will give to them that ask; for man like the Potters
clay, is no more able to prepare himself for glory, than to appoint and elect
himself thereunto. Hence Psalm. 10. 17. Romans 9. 23. prepared to glory; therefore
pray, not that prayer can move the Lord to it, but because it is a means
appointed of God to execute his eternal purposes of grace unto the Vessels of
grace, Acts 9. 9, 11. Paul was three days mourning, and he did not eat and
drink, and yet was not discouraged, but kept on praying, and cease not, till
the Lord sends Ananias that he might receive the Spirit, Verse 17. So say I to
you, Time has been thou have not prayed, mornings, evenings, your sleep would
not suffer you, or if so, yet it has been without mourning for living without
Christ, abusing of Christ, and the sin of your nature; or if so, it has been
on^y by fits, and you could hold up your head again, before God sends Anamias
with a Message of peace, or that Message without the Spirit of grace; Are you
now prepared? Oh no! oh therefore now begin this work; say, I am thy clay,
Lord, and have been a broken unclean Vessel, unfit for any use, to hold any
grace; if mercies come, I forget thee, and grow worse; if sickness, I am
blockish; if Ordinances, I despise them; if thou forsakest me, I forsake thee;
if thou drawest near to me, I resist thee; if Christ be offered, I reject him;
if not, I presume, and turn his grace to wantonness; now Lord gather a broken
Vessel; if I live, I shall still sin; if I die, I shall blaspheme; if I forsake
acts of sin, yet lusts of sin remain; if they be quenched, yet my polluted
nature remains not cleansed; and the guilt cries; Now Lord undertake for me,
begin thou the work, and take the glory; and here mourn till the Lord comes;
know the worth, and prize the presence of the Spirit, and then pray, John 14.
16. The world cannot receive it, because they know it not, with John 4. 10.
Sacrifice is unfit to be offered, till by shedding blood, life is taken away.

Be very watchful over your hearts, that they grow not too gentle, and handle
tenderly sins arising after faith, Means 2.
and profession of your interest in Jesus Christ, sins of the second growth;
some sins grow up before profession, as all manner of ignorance, and hardness,
and lasciviousness, and vanity; now many grow terrified for these, and
comforted by the Gospel against these, and now peace is made; Oh but there are
some men's natures like some fields, which when they are mowen and weeded, yet
they have a second growth; it may be as with other kind of Weeds, you may
never fall to those sins you lived in once; but other sins more close, more
spiritual; like the House Luke 11. 24. swept and emptied, but seven other
spirits worse than the former, may at last enter in; Oh take heed of these, for
they will make your latter end miserable; you know habitations of Satan, are
not fit mansions for the Spirit of Christ; you know Vessels not only of Wood,
but of Gold, if filthy and poisoned, are unfit for Princes use till cleansed;
and look through all the Scriptures on the faces of the best hypocrites, you
shall find some filth growing up after their Profession, or together with it,
like blood and sacrifice mixed together, Matthew. 7. 23. Luke 13. 27. Not those
that have iniquity, but those that work it; not those that work against it, and
are destroyers of it by little and little, but workers of it.

If you ask me, what these sins be? I answer, These tares, and choking
Thorns, as they are sown, and grown whiles you be asleep, so they may be seen
when they are grown up, if you walk in your fields, and meditate on your
hearts. I Will only name some.

1. Pride, affecting some excellency above others, and thinking your self some
body.

2. Spiritual fullness, and secret loathing of Ordinances, when men are clogged
with them.

3. Despising known truths (which like flowers, were notwithstanding sweet at
first gathering) either concerning your misery, or Christ: if the Gospel were
preached to the ignorant, they would take heaven with violence; but thy soul now
is not moved, and the messengers of God that bring them, despised, as Galatia
and Corinth did Paul.

4. A spirit of contention with good people. Now you cannot bear unkindnesses,
and they offend you, etc. Alexander at first stood for Paul, and he opposes
Paul to his face at last.

5. Boldness to (...) in small matters commonly without sorrow, begot by
counterfeit assurance of Gods love.

6. Seeking of God in Ordinances, and working of iniquity out of them; fits men
have of good affections, but healthful constitutions of bad ones.

7. Thinking you are indeed what you would be, and yet indeed would not be:
There be other sins, but these are some of the most special which I shall now
mention; take heed of letting these grow, or dealing gently with them; for
Saints may feel these, but they put their hook to the roots of these Weeds, and
would feign pull them quite up; but if you deal gently, (as David with the
young Absalom) and think God must do all, I cannot part with them; and hence
you give way to them; and though there be these sins, yet I have many good
signs and promises too I shall be saved; and so long as they cannot destroy my
soul, what though they grow in my soul? You perish (1 Cor. 9. 26, 27.) if thus
it be with you.

Take heed you do not run away with such comforts arising from your feeding
upon the promise and person of Christ, Means 3.
without refr^shing the soul also with the good Will and Commands of Christ;
do not think your selves ready to enjoy Christ, when his promise, person, and
love is sweet, (which is good) but his will is bitter, and a burden to thy
soul, even thy whole soul, (I know it is so to the ^nregenerate part of godly
men) for such men there be, 1 John 1. 6. To the Saints, Christ's love is sweet,
and promise sweet, and therefore his Will, his Work. John 4. 34. -- Bread you
know not of, to do the Will of him that sent me, and to finish it; so it is
their food to do the Will of him that loves them, and to finish it; If a man is
to remove from one Country to another, and he cannot live upon the Bread of
the Country, nor water where he goes, he is then unfit for such a Journey,
because he cannot live upon the bread of it. Now what is that which feeds the
life of Saints in glory? not only Christ, but living unto Christ, to be
perfected under the Government and Kingdom of Christ; can you live upon this
now in part, and the first fruits of it? if you can, know it is then prepared
for thee, and thou for it; if not, but you live (as you say*) upon the present
sweet of the promise; nay, it may be upon the thoughts of old comforts; but to
do the Will of Christ, is death, not life to you; and it is merely your task
for wages, to do his Will, not part of your Inheritance, you are unfit to be
with Christ; Acts 21. 13. Why break you my heart? (says Paul) I am ready to
die for the sake of Christ, and to do much more; So think thus, Was Paul ready
to die, and I not ready to do? my heart loathes thy Commands Lord; but what the
Law makes heavy, the Gospel makes sweet; for thy sake, Lord, I love thy will;
pray, Oh thy love is sweet, but let thy will be so also.

Labor to grow poor in spirit, that when you cannot honor the Lords Will,
Means 4.
yet you may be gathering som^thing out of all sins and weaknesses, to honor
Gods grace; the glory of grace is the last end; those that be prepared for it,
shall enjoy it; Who are those? The poor, who when they see they have lost
their lives, their souls, their comforts, in not doing his Will, which is
bitter to them, yet the Lord shall not lose the honor of his grace, Psalm 74.
21. The poor will be thankful; What does Paul, that Vessel of grace,
Persecutor, Blasphemer, but a Saint, now say? Oh but the least of them; but he
was an Apostle; but I deserve not that name, but yet he is received to mercy;
it is very true, yet never such an example, as he thinks; and therefore says he
To the King immutable, etc. when Jacob had seen the Lord, Genesis 26. ult. if he
shall give me food and raiment, he shall be my God ( i. e. I shall then
magnify him; he having said he would be so before, and he had it in plenty; So
say, If the Lord shall pity, pardon, I shall then give all to him, if I had a
thousand hearts, tongues; truly as Psalm 40. ult. The Lord now thinks on
you; When a Servant has spent and lost his Masters estate, and he is to give
up an Account, truly then he may give it with comfort, when as he gains one
way abundantly, though he loses another, and makes the best gains; so here.

SECT. XV.
2. TO those who are ready, but yet not so ready as is meet.

The Lord has given you warning to prepare, by some sharp afflictions on thy
self, or by the death of thy friends, Motive 1.
or by secret fears of thine own heart, thy time is not many hands breadth
longer; and it may be this shall be the Funeral Sermon of some of you; you have
been flying like Bees abroad in the world to gather your honey, and the Lord
ha^h been smoking of you, and that in your own Hive; you have thought to dwell
long in Tabernacles; the Lord has let it fall to decays, and repaires it not
again.

If you live unready, it may be the Lord will try you with some sore conflict,
Motive 2.
with fears of death, and terrors of darkness; and all your preparation is too
little for your combat then.

The place of glory is made ready for you; how shall I so unholy, see God?
Motive 3.
Christ is there John 14. 3. waiting for thee, longing after thee.

Thou art it may be yet in many respects unready. Motive 4.
As

1. Not yet planted in the House and Church of God, not yet gathered to
communion of Christ in his Saints on earth. I know men may have just reasons to
defer; but if they have none, I would be loath to die in their room; Hezekiah,
Isa. 38. ult. Psalm 26. 8. I have loved the habitation of thy House; Oh gather
not my soul with the wicked. I am persuaded, some dear to Christ linger here,
and you cannot find this not that saving good in your selves, you say; I had
rather hear one mourn for emptiness, than boast of his grace.

2. There are many sins not yet mourned sufficiently for, in day of youth,
and in a secure condition; in heaven is no mourning; oh therefore take time
now, for want of this grace is not so sweet.

3. It may be some main duty is neglected to the souls of them, whom thou have
a charge of, as not Ca^echising thy family, children not careful for their
souls.

4. It may be thou have been little in prayer for the Churches (though for thy
family and children) which is usually the last work of the Saints; there is no
praying for them in Heaven; as Christ at the end of his life like a Priest shed
blood, and prayed for them, so Saints are made Priests to God and Christ:

5. It may be thy house is not yet set in order, nor thy Will made, Reckonings
between men not yet set right and even, and then there is Quarrels when thou
art Dead, and trouble when you dye.

6. It may be thou art grown secure, and art lost, and driven away, and many
wrinckles be on thy face and heart, etc. you cannot say with Paul, 2 Timothy 4.
That you have fought, etc. but are rather at truce with sin; you run not, but
have slipped, and fallen down, and so lost all.

SECT. XVI.
THerefore to help here in this readiness, Means 1.
Get a heart more loosned and weaned from the world. Solomon he did launch out
his heart herein too far; not in Epicurisme, but Eccles. 2. 3. applying his
heart to wisdom all this time; so may you, and be unready; How? I cannot, but
God will teach it you by affliction. Psalm 39. 6, 7. You are Sojourners here
with God, as all your Fathers; there is nothing proper, nothing long to be
enjoyed.

Own the Lord Jesus; he is yours, Means 2.
but you own him not; as Simeon came to the Temple and there found him, and
there blessed God; and now (says he) let me depart in peace; has the Lord
stirred up unutterable sighings, and groanings, and mournings, (you think (it
may be) if Christ was present, you would not doubt of answer) and they continue
still, and do you think Christ is hard-hearted? has the Lord come to thee in
the Temple, and manifested his love by his own promise, sure, and faithful, and
will thou not yet own him? have had, and have now the first fruition of the
Spirit, and wilt not yet own him? and art afraid to go to him, when others are
in glory that trod in thy steps? Oh be humbled for it; I know there is nothing
which makes thee fear it, but a Rebellious vile heart, and nature; and can the
Lord love such a one? Yes, such a one, if he mournes under it, Romans 7. 24.
Isa^. 57. 18, 19. The Lord will create peace; he has seen thy ways, and
he^will heal them; And when you have him thus, own him daily, keep your peace,
do nothing which may make you lose boldness in prayer, and therefore reckon
daily with him; and Remember, the promise stands, when feelings are lost.

Object. But I can do but little for him.

Answ. True, Isa. 64. 6. Thou the Lords clay, his Vessel, though of little
public use, yet in thy place do what thou can for Christ Jesus. Servants,
Masters, Members, Rich, Poor, bestirre your selves For Christ, you shall lose
nothing by it, etc.

VERSE 10.
The Door was shut.
IN these words is set down the consequent of that which immediately followed
the Wise Virgins gracious entertainment with Christ; the door was shut, by
which is signified the exclusion of the foolish from the fellowship of Christ;
as also the greatness of Christ's love to the wise, opening the door of glory
unto them; and when they are gathered, shutting the door against every one else.

Hence Observe,

That the endeared love of Christ to his Elect, does much appear in this,
Observe. 1.
In opening the door of glory unto them, and shutting it against others of
great esteem and name in the Church of God; for this is one Scope of the words,
Genesis 7. 16.

To open the Kingdom of Heaven to all the world, and save all, would be great
love in the eyes of the Sai^ts; but to save them, and condemn others; to
receive them, and ex^lude others, and that of great name and esteem, Virgins,
this sets out the Lords love exceedingly; Christ's distinguishing, separating
love, is his great love, Mat. 11. 25.

If we consider the multitude of the one, Reason 1.
and fewness of the other; not only in regard of the world, but in regard of
others in Churches, Luke 13. 24. Many shall seek, and many that are first,
shall be last, Matthew 19. 30.

If we consider that there is as much reason appearing outwardly, Reason 2.
that the Lord should choose thee one as well as the other; what difference is
appearing outwardly between these Virgins? I Will warrant you the wise did think
the foolish as good, and it may be far better than themselves. Judges 6. 15.
Says Gideon, How will thou save Isra^l by me? I am the least in my Fathers
house; yet says the Lord, I will be with thee; so the Saints may say, and do
say, Why Lord, will thou save me, I am the least and poorest of all others.

If we consider the reason why the Lord does this, Reas. 3.
and that is because of nothing but the Will of God, his good pleasure; Matthew.
11. 25. For why should their Vessels be filled; they received, and not others
only the Will of God; I know not you, etc. Of which hereafter.

If we consider the intolerable torment of those who go far, Reas. 4.
and yet are excluded. Mat. 8. 11, 12. Children of the Kingdom cast out, there
shall be weeping; the higher a man is risen, the greater is his fall, and his
bruises at the bottom; so when one has been raised up to great hopes,
profession, affection, yet now to fall, to lose all, to see he has been
spinning Cobwebs all his life! when Israel were near to Canaan, now to be shut
out! Now they wept.

Use 1. Use 1.
We may see hence, what little cause any have to boast only in outward
privileges, or common gifts, graces, excellencies. I confess it is great mercy
for the Lord to call a man out of his profaneness, and separate him from the
world, bringing him to the fellowship of Saints, and give him that which makes
him reputed well of by others; but boast not only of this, as if the Lord did
therefore highly favor you; for the Lord Jesus may show (for all this) his
love to his own, and his terror to thee, and may shut the door of glory at
last upon thee. 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29. The Lord chooses things that are not, to
bring to naught and to stain other glory. Romans 11. 17. The Gentiles boasted
themselves, that they were graffed in; oh says the Apostle (seeing this spirit
apt to rise) boast not, be not high-minded, do not grow secure, but fear;
common graces ever make men proud, as others make men humble; they despise not
others, they magnify God, if the Lord has made a difference; see the goodness
of God, verse 22. but boast not therein; therefore do not content thy self with
a name to live, and having some cankered hopes, some shining excellencies; for
the Lord may do this to show others his love, and yet stain thy glory; as one
that has great hopes of preferment, many Friends to commend and speak for him,
if one tells him, You shall certainly lose all your labor, he will mourn more
than another that had no hopes, nor helps at all of rising; he will not glory
in any thing he has, but will take some sure and safer way; So I say to you,
If there be the least Grace and Favor, bless God for that, but do not boast
of any thing else.

Use 2. Use 2.
Hence the Saints may learn how to affect their hea^ts with the Lords love to
the^ (for there is such a poysonful disposition in them, that though they have
it, yet they cannot be affected sometimes with it; Up Deborah, Aw^ke L^te and
Harp) and it is this; Do not only Remember, and think on the Lords love saving
thee, calling, humbling, etc. but so as to call thee, and leave others; to
quicken thee, and leave others dead; to open the door of glory to thee, and
exclude others; to call thee out of the Kingdom of the world, to look upon
thee in a sinful Town, to awaken thee, and leave others (so many) secure, to
call thee out of thy sinful company, some of which like brands, are now
smoking in this world, others burning in another; to call thee out of a
sinful, ignorant family, thou the least, the worst of them, and to leave the
rest, this is much!

But when thou art brought into the Kingdom of Heaven, Fellowship of Saints,
for the Lord to love thee, set his heart upon thee, when he forsakes others of
thy own company, of great parts and abilities, whom thou think better of
than thy self, at least as well; to pull down these Princes to the dunghill,
and to exalt thy horn; to cut down these Cedars, and to preserve a Shrub; to
tread upon the greatest glory of man, and to pity a worm, for so thou art in
thine own eyes; Oh let this fire warm thy heart, though thou have been
affected with it before, especially considering no reason for it, but only the
good pleasure of God; this affected Christ himself, Mat. 11, 25. It Is true, you
do not see this done, but you shall one day behold it with your eyes; only let
this love kindle love, thankfulness, humility in thine heart again.

And hence, if the Lord has put a difference between thee and others, do not
deny, do not doubt of, do not despise his grace; that if thou have lost thy
first love, this may recover it; if all his love makes thee more humble, and
thankful, you stand, Romans 11. 20. Isa. 65. 16. Do not fear thy estate, because
the Lord cuts off the natural branches, that therefore thou may be one; but
be featful of the least sin, and wrong to Christ, that has loved thee,
especially of pride, and unthankfulness the root of that; and Remember, that
the poor things are chosen to confound the Mighty.

That the door of grace and glory shall be shut against all wicked men living,
Observe. 2.
at the coming of the Lord to death or judgment; there is a time that the door
is open unto men, in regard of Ministerial dispensations (for secrets of
election we are not to mind) Isa. 55. 6, 7. This time is in this life; but
when death comes, then it is shut; when Angels sinned, the Lord immediately
shut the door against them; but through Christ the door is open for term of
life to men.

Because after death there is no means of grace or glory left, which is the
Reason 1.
Ministry of the Word and Prayer; for that is the chief key of opening the
door, even when the doors of heart and heaven are shut, Mat. 16. 19. and
hence, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Now is the time of prayers and preaching, and so to be
helped; but after death there are no Ministers, they are at rest from their
labors; and the Ministry of men is for men, not for naked souls. Lazarus must
not give a drop of cold water then to cool the tongue, much less Ministers to
comfort or convert their hearts; it is true, the Lord can work extraordinarily;
but do you think he will do it for one that has despised grace all his life?

Because it is impossible they should repent after death, Reason 2.
by any other means (if means were afforded) as by seeing their sin, and
feeling their punishment. John 9. 4. The night comes wherein no man can work;
because after death, comes judgment of wrath to the wicked, Heb. 9. ult. all
patience, and pity have forsaken them, and so wrath lies upon them, that they
can do nothing but bear it; as one under a great load, or burning in the fire,
all his thoughts, and affections, and spirits, are taken up with that, and that
is all he can do, Heb. 10. 27. So here.

Use 1. Of Confutation of a viperous, satanical, Use 1.
secret opinion, which like a ghost (...) the minds of some people, (viz.)
that think and conclude even in time of health, in midst of saving healing
means, that their time of grace is past, and door is shut to them, before
Christ comes against them at death or judgment; which though God many times
turns for good, to humble a bold heart which will burn Gods daylight out,
and linger in its sins, yet it does sometimes dead the heart from all
effectual endeavors, and discourage the heart from all duties, makes all the
Gospel the Ministry of blood and death, and a handwriting against it; and when
it concludes God has shut the door against it, it shuts God, and Christ, and
all his Promises out of its heart.

1. Some think they having sinned against light, have had some blasphemous
thoughts, that they have committed the unpardonable sin, etc.

2. Some others think not so, but yet they hear that some men's time is out
before death; they think theirs is also, having sought so long, they are even
sealed up by God to hardness of heart; and thus some seemingly coming to
Christ, are indeed kept off from him.

3. Others of the Saints meeting with many sore troubles and trials, and that
for some sins; and one deep calling to another, they think with David, God has
forgot, has shut up his mercies, will remember no more to be gracious; and
though he has been so, yet because he has been so abused by them, that
therefore now he will not be merciful again; and thus their hearts sink.

Oh Remember, the Gate of Gods Grace is not shut up before death, then is the
time for it to be shut. I confess indeed there is a time in this life, the Lord
does cease to strive, and does forsake the soul; and we may say of them, as
Christ, Oh that thou had known! but now they are hid from thine eyes; -- But
yet this is a secret, which as a secure despiser of grace should tremble at; so
those that are awakened, and set in their way to Christ, should not trouble
themselves about it.

Object. But oh that I did know whether it be past or no!

Answ. I shall rather give to these people some good counsel, for it is not for
you to know these times and seasons; though this I would say, if the
impardonable sin be not committed.

1. This time of the doors being shut, is not in time of health and peace, but
in time of extreme trouble, wherein trouble does affect them more than the sin;
as Prove. 1. and as many when a sick bed is come, and in Noah's Flood, 1 Pet. 3,
20.

2. Or if it be in time of health, this is ever the companion of it, ( viz.)
hatred, and opposing Saints secretly or opening, because Christ having quite
forsaken him, his heart swells against the Saints; hence Saul envied David,
Esau hated Jacob Murmurers against God; were in the Wilderness, and against
Moses; But I come to counsel; for God lets loose Satan full of malice, upon a
poor creature, sometimes to vex and trouble.

First, Consider the root of this distemper, (viz.) either great pride, or
despising of the riches of Gods grace.

1. Pride, for (this we shall find) such spirits, because they have not peace
sealed, strength against sin granted unto them, and that which they would have,
(if discouraged, and not quickened by this) they regard not life, means,
offers of grace; What is all this, if God has forsaken me? What is it? Yes,
that it is; as might at large be showed.

2. Despising of grace; if I had not committed such sins, I could then think
for mercy; but such evils, such miseries, cannot be remedied. Truly, as it is a
despising of a Physician, to think, If I was not so sick, he would be tender,
and helpful; but not now, being so exceedingly diseased; So it is here, etc.

Secondly, Consider, Suppose the time be past, yet remember thou art worthy to
be forsaken of God even from thy birth, not worthy of thy daily bread, much
less to taste of Gods Supper; the Lord was loath to shut the door; Hence he went
on Jerusalem; and Psalm 81. 12. cried out, Oh that my people had walked in my
wayes^ thy sins provoked the Lord unto it, if he has in justice cast thee
off; therefore though it be past, be not discouraged, but lie down humbled, as
Judges 10. 14, 15. and as David, Psalm. 42. 3. My tears are my meat, whiles
they say so, Where is you^ God? So tell the Lord, Satan says, and feeling
says, and fears say, Where is my God? Lord pity! And if thy heart be sick,
tell the Lord of it, Verse 6. I am persuaded many should quickly feel an
Answer to this Question, by taking this course; but they miss at least of the
comfort of Grace and Mercy, because they will be Disposers of the Lords Grace
and Time.

Thirdly, Consider, it may be that time is not past, it is a secret only known
to God; the door of grace may only seem to be shut; why does Christ bid knock
else? When the Ninevites heard that they should dye within forty days, Jonah
3. 9. say they, Who can tell but the Lord may repent? you say the Decree is
past, and spoken; and as Spira said, I have that Witnessed. I say again, Who
can tell, but (if God had said so, but) that ^he may repent? therefore be not
discouraged, or faint because of this. Nay, it is most probable time is not past.

1. Because the things of thy peace, the discovery of the vileness of thine own
heart, the glory of Christ, is not hid from thine eyes.

2. God calls thee now to return; When Judah had banished David, and they might
think He will not receive us; yet when David sent by his Messengers, Why do you
not bring the King back! I am flesh of your flesh; then they all were
encouraged to hope for favor, 2 Samuel 19. 12, 14. So,

4. Consider, if thou do return, the time of love is so far from being
past, as that it is then come indeed unto thy soul.

Object. But my sin is great*

Answ. Suppose it be ^lasphemy of Christ, nay, murder of the Son of God; yet
Acts 2. 38. when Peter preached Repentance to life, they that gladly received
that word, who might be instrumental to crucify Christ, were received. Oh but
my heart is hard! Hosea 10. 12. break up your fallow ground, etc. It Is time,
says he, etc.

Object. But I have refused to return, and have not been ashamed!

Answ. Yet, Ier. 3. 3, 4, 5. Will thou not from this time cry to me? etc.

Object. But I may return to the Lord, and he refuse to return to me

Answ. No, Ier. 8. 7. Shall he fall, and not arise? shall the Lord turn away,
and not return? why then is he fallen perpetually; the reason is given, No man
said, What have I done, how have I despised Gods grace? the Stork knows her
season; but, etc. the Lord keep you from dashing your selves in pieces here,
and make this a Word of Christ's Encouragement to thee.

Use 2. Of Exhortation unto all men, Use 2.
not to delay your making peace with God; for when you are dead, the gate is
shut; and if Angels should cry to have it opened, they shall not be heard.

You that are young, take warning this day, do not think there is time enough
hereafter: You that are old, do not think it too late, or that it would be a
shame for you to begin now, who have propt up your hearts with base comforts;
you that have been stirred, but are now fallen asleep, beware of dying in your
ditches, and pits, wherein you are fallen; you must stand before God shortly.
Though you never repented yet, etc. never was in bitterness, never had any
great mourning, etc. never knew the life of Christ, peace of conscience, never
felt the Kingdom, and mighty power of Christ, yet despair not, for yet there
is hope; but if once death comes, then thou art gone; it is day yet, and Christ
holds open his wings yet; but if death comes, his time is out.

Object. But I have a fair time yet before me.

Answ. 1. It may be not, for thou art condemned already.

2. If you have, yet wilt abuse patience, and forbearance of God? wilt despise
what leads thee to repentance! as a man ^inking, spits in the face of him that
holds up his Head; will thou be worse than a devil?

Objection. But a little repentance will ^erve the turn, it is quickly lon^?

Answer. Oh no! as Paul said, I have fought a good fight; thou have ^ins as
dear as thy life to forsake; thou have Devils, World to wrestle with; n^y, God
himself to wrestle with; you cannot run your Race in a day.

Object. What if I be shut out?

Answ. I say no more but only what Solomon said, Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13. O how
have I hated reproof! that shall be thy woeful dirge another day, when shut out;
oh never to have one look, one word from Christ, but to see him afar off, this
shall be thy fearful portion hereafter. Truly we may take up that complaint of
Christ, You can discern the times of the Weather, not Christ's coming.

VERSE 11, 12.
Afterward came also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us. But
he answered, and said, V^rily I say unto you, I know you not.
IN these two Verses, is set down the entertainment Christ gives unto the
foolish Virgins, and his behavior toward them; and that is, he did not own
them as his, but says, I know you not. Their miserable rejection is aggravated
from these particulars, showing their misery.

1. The note of certainty of this, Verily, etc.

2. Though they came afterward to the Lord, (it is not said, with their Oil in
their Vessels, etc.)

3. Though they prayed to the Lord to open when they came.

4. Though they prayed earnestly, Lord, Lord,

5. Though they sought thus with Arguments, Lord, Lord, as if they should say,
Thou art our Lord and Savior, we look for life from none but thee.

That after the coming of Christ to death or judgment, then shall those Oserv.
1.
who are most secretly wicked, know certainly that the gate is shut, and their
exclus^on, and final separation from the face of Christ.

These foolish Virgins had some hopes and assurances of mercy, whiles the
Bridegroom was absent in their life; so men have in this world such hopes; but
when Christ came, and shut the door upon them, then they knew their miserable
condition.

This life is compared unto a sleep, and dream, Psalm 90. 5. wherein men
understand and conceive of things with false shapes; so here; but when they
awaken, then they appear otherwise; after death men are awakened, and then
they see things as they are; the Parable of the rich man, Luke 16. proves this.

Because then God lets in a new light, most full and clear, Reason 1.
to see and know things as they are, and so to know themselves and their
estates; it is an Atheists speech, Eccl^s. 9. 5, 7, 10. That the dead know not
any thing; and hence, be as merry as you can, eat thy bread with joy, etc. No,
now they do know, etc. as the Saints know their eternal acceptance, by a most
glorious light; God walks darkly here, but then this full light shall come in;
As it is with a man that is to be condemned, before he be cast, the Judge
brings in full evidence; so Heb. 9. ult. After death comes judgment; there is
full evidence; when A^am stood before God, the Lord fu^ly convinced him; when
death comes, then there is an end of men's Stewardships, Luke 16. 2. and when an
end comes to that, what comes then? Come give up thy account; now those whose
reckonings are naught, must either deceive and blind the all-searching eyes of
God, and so not be found out, or they shall see wherein they have been
faithless and false. What is spoken of the general Judgment, is true also of
this particular; it is the day of Revelation; God himself will now clear up
matters as Christ here does, Verily, I know you not.

Because then the soul will desire to know, Re^s. 2.
and have leisure to see and know it self; as these foolish Virgins, their
souls were looking (in a sort) in their lifetime for Christ, but now they look
and see indeed; some know not themselves, though having light; nor their
present misery, because they desire not to know; and hence reflect not upon
themselves according to light now; or if they desire so to-do, yet they have
not leisure; the noise and multitude of cares, keeps them from a clear knowing
of their estates: but now men shall be brought to the Land of solitariness, and
shall have leisure to see, having Gods light let in to see by; there shall then
be no business, but only to consider, Who am I? and what have I done? men shall
have no Cities to build, nor business to do, as Faelix then, and hence put out
the light.

Because then conscience is thoroughly awakened, Reas. 3.
because it is a time of judgment now; and if so, then the witnesses must
appear; though they have been silent long before, they shall be forced to
speak. Now it is wonderful to see what conscience will speak when God awakens
it; men many times will not see the evil which they have done; but conscience
will make them see it, nay, confess it, when it is awakened. Three things
conscience will do, when it is awakened.

1. It will show a man his chief sins, which he defended, which he extenuated,
which he never suspected; These things have thou done.

2. It can bring fresh to memory sins forgotten, slighted, dead and buried, a
great number, all of them as if new done. John 4. 29. all things that ever I
did.

3. It can, and will aggravate all these things and sins, and present them in
the greatness of them, that men's mouths shall pass their own Sentence upon
them, as Cain did; that let all the world persuade them their case is good,
they cannot believe it; now this we see in this life in some; but when life is
ended, then these things shall be acted much more lively, Psalm. 50. 21. I will
reprove thee; even of what they thought God did approve; and I will set them in
order, in their number and greatness before thy eyes; i. e. of conscience; all
falsehoods, deceits, loathsome tricks, etc. I did this and that, but I had these
ends in them, and I harbored these sins by them, will conscience make men say.

Because now Satan, to whose custody the soul is committed, Reas. 4.
appears to the soul, and it sees it self in his hands. The best Hypocrite is
never delivered out of the hands of Satan and his power; he will eithe^r keep
constant possession; or if not, yet he will return again; now he will not
appear in this time of peace to the soul, because there is yet hope; but after
death, then hope is past, and therefore then he appears; for as the souls of
the Elect are carried to Heaven by Angels, and blessed among them; so e ^ontra,
the souls of the wicked are in the hands of Devils; 1 Pet. 3. 19. He preached to
the spirits now in Prison; Thieves, so long as they are not known, or if known,
not apprehended, they fear not death; but when taken, and laid up in prison,
there they know their death, and there they see their Jaylour; so here; and as
Satan did condemn, and sad the heart of the humbled outcast, 2 Cor. 2. 11. so
much more these, when cast out from the presence of God. A Ca^tive when taken
by him that has overcome him, the Conqueror appears, and sets his foot upon
him, especially if one eminent whom Satan has conquered.

Because of the intolerable and heavy wrath of God, Reason 5.
which then does seize upon the soul. Luke 16. I am t^rment^d: In this life,
though God be lost, yet men's hearts are comforted with creatures, and patience,
and common bounty; as it is with skall'd legs, eased in the water; but now when
men are dead, then there is no creature to enjoy, to ease the heart; the body
is dead, and what are these things to the soul; now hence the soul feels God
is gone, and for ever gone; and now when he has most need, in great torment
gone, the soul feels this, I say; and feeling this woe, it knows it indeed; the
beasts know their misery, when they feel the Knife in their hearts. Let men
deceive themselves never so deeply with false imaginations, yet when they feel
it otherwise, it shall confute them, as the Generations of men in the days of
Noah; men will have some hope while patience lasts, but when that is gone, then
their hopes and hearts sink also; whiles men be in the Vessel, they hope to
live, but if that sink, and they can see no plank, nor shore, but see waves,
and men crying, etc. now their hearts must needs fail them.

Of terror to them who upon clear conviction from the Word, Use 1.
will not believe their doom, their misery now. Sometime the Word comes so near
men, and the very sin they live and lie in, is pointed at, found out, and
words, and thoughts opened, as if some body had told the Minister of the man;
and they think He speaks against me, but they will not believe that sin is so
black, or God so angry, but hope well; but if they do slight, and regard not
these convictions, yet oh remember the time is drawing on, and it is not far
of, but therein you shall know, the word of the Lord is more precious to him
than to you; you let it fall, but the Lord will not; 1 Samuel 3. 19. The Old
World would not believe Noah, the Lord therefore made their experience convince
them of it. I know men may be deceived; but as he said in another case, The
word is not bound; so the word which like God, searches the secrets of thy
heart, and thy Hypocrisy, that is not deceitful; thy Scepter, O Lord, is a
right Scepter, and it cannot be crook't and bent. And if man does condemn thee,
know it, God is greater then man, and it is his glory to confirm the words of
his Servants, that are not Diviners, South-sayers, and uncertain
Prognosticators of men's des^inies, Isa. 44. 26. but having their warrant from
the Word, it shall be confirmed by God himself; nay, that very Word shall
arise, though it sleeps now; the Word is only left as a Witness, Matthew. 24.
14. and do you think it shall not be so? if Christ lives, he will confirm it.
Is it not better to know your condition now, and be humbled for it, seeing else
you must know it, when it is too late to know it? If two have a Quarrel against
each other, and the one who has the better side entreats to agree with him, to
acknowledge his fault, be humbled, he will forgive him, before he comes to
higher Courts where it will be tried, and himself cast, and such a Fine, and
damages be set upon his head, as will utterly undo him; is it not a misery for
such an one so brought under, to feed himself with hopes, and not to listen,
till he has spent all, and is utterly undone, and beggared; truly thus it is
here; And so I end, with reminding you of the speech of God to Elies Sons, 1 Samuel 2. 25. They heard not their father, because God would slay them; so here
you will not hear Ministers condemn you, because God will do it.

See the great folly of those, who having got some false comforts, Use 2.
and are lo^h to know the worst of their ^states now; Isa. 30. 10. that say to
the Prophets, Prophecy deceits; or if not, they will not come to the light;
John 3. 20. or if light come to them, they hate it, and put it out, choke it,
if they do not also hate the man. Shall you know your estates hereafter, and
will you not see them now? what comfort will this be to you? There is a Beast,
when it is hunted, and weary, runs its head into the ground or bushes, and
thinks it self then safe, though its body be all seen; and that the Hunter does
not see it, nor the Hounds, because it sees not them; So it is here; What will
it profit you to hide your eyes from the Almighties search, who cannot hide
your selves? It Is true, if there was no hope n^w, then men might comfort
themselves, and not dye with thoughts and fears of it, till they come to dye;
but there is hope; -- Oh folly not to see it now! and truly this is men's frame.

1. Because some think it a shame to begin now, after they have been so well
thought of, now to strip themselves.

2. Because of trouble, men naturally will avoid it, and hence skin their ^ores
over superficially.

3. Because they think it impossible, or very difficult to be saved now, if all
should be naught that they have done already; and hence, rather hazard all, and
put it to the venture.

4. Because they must maintain their innocence and confidence. What? must I
not believe, no^ hope well?

5. Because when they have done their best, they can do no more than what they
do now, viz. trust to Gods mercy.

But more particularly this appears.

First, When men will not see, nor desire the Lord to reveal their sin and
deceits, Psalm 36. 3. That Is one part of ^eart-flattery, not to see to do
good; a gracious heart is broken off from flattery; he knows it, and hence will
to the Lord; when he know^ not himself, and his estate, Lord teach me; the
damning sin, is some dear sin; a sin which the soul allows habitation, and
house-roome, and heart-roome unto; and hence it will not see it, because it
would not part with it; and hence it faith, It cannot see it, because it will
not; it is in love with the flattery of it; and hence it is it, because it will
not, it is in love with the flattery of it; and hence it is strange to see some
that live in oppression by unlawful prizes, and exacting immoderate wages,
cannot see their sin, though privately, and publicly spoken of, because they
will not; cannot see it, because they will not; it is strange to see how
time-servers will defend their Fashions; and they cannot see it, because the
heart is secretly in love with such vanities; and it is just, seeing they love
not the truth, they should be deceived by errors; Two ways men have to hide
their sins from God himself.

1. By covering them with reason; A man that is ashamed of his nakedness or
sore, he will get a covering for it; hereby one may know what a man's chief sin
is; viz. by his reason^ngs for it; as one may know where the eggs be, by the
Hens sitting upon them; and truly, a little reason will blind the eyes many
times; nay, though God and Scripture be brought in; Balaam would ^ain find out
some light from God to curse, and from Altar to Altar he went, etc. but found
nothing; Thus here, etc.

2. By covering them with duties and sorrows, and yet keeping them; for when
men do see their sin, and it is great, what do they therefore? they wash it with
tears; they confess it as those, Isa. 58. 5, 6. they fast for strife or
debate; they would be vexed with enraged consciences but for these duties; and
this makes them hope well; and here come in those distinctions, I have sins as
others, but I mourn under them! oh but Remember, those sorrows destroy sin by
little and little, and do not feed sin; but these ease thee in thy sin; Hosea
10. 4. Hemlock grows up in the F^rrow^s; you speak words, says the Lord, etc.
So here, etc.

Secondly, When men are willing the Lord should let them see their sin, but
unwilling to attend him in the use of all means for that end; especially these
two.

1. Diligent watch over the heart daily, by frequent reflecting upon its own
acts; it is strange to see what discoveries might be made by observing ends,
aims, motives of workings; Hence Christ beats much upon this.

2. Daily Meditation in some solemn manner. 2 Timothy 2. 7. Consider what I say;
and ^he Lord shall give thee understanding; It Is a thousand to one if men do
not lose themselves, and souls in neglect of this. Hag. 1. 5, 7. David said, I
considered my ways, and turned. Now to say, Let the Lord search me, but not to
use means, is to shut your eyes against the book, and say, Now Lord teach me.

Of Exhortation; Vs^ 3.
Oh therefore know the worst of your own hearts n^w. Phil. 2. 12. Work out your
salvation with fear: Saints with a fear of careful search, but you much more.
Genesis 27. 11, 12. When Reb^ccah would have Jacob go to Isaac, says Jacob, What
if my Father f^el me! I may get a curse then. So the Lord Jesus (believe it)
will feel thee; he will see who thou art, before he let thee into Heaven; if
thou art a stranger to thy sin, and Christ, and his grace, thou shall see the
gate shut upon thee hereafter; therefore know it now how it is with thee;
nothing will be such a cut to thy heart as this, viz. when it is too late to see
the sin which ruined; oh this will torment! as it does Politicians, when they
see, There I forsook a Rule of Policy, there I was mistaken; if I had carried
the business otherwise there, then I had got this; oh it troubles them; so it
will do you, when you shall see your Projects and Hopes dashed.

Quest. How shall I know this?

Answ. 1. Mark what others, godly, and discerning, speak, or fear concerning
thee; for though God reveals not a Hypocrite to all, yet it is seldom but it is
to some or other. 1 Timothy 5. 25. not speak against, yet not give a full
Testimony.

2. Mark what conscience speaks, or fears thee with in cool blood, without
getting those fears quenched by fresh Application of Christ's blood; it is said,
The fears of the wicked shall come upon him; there are some hot pangs which
men have, and then think well of themselves, but gene^ally live out from God
and Christ. Mark which way the scale tur^es, when you are still; the worm that
is not killed, will gnaw for ever, if it bites now.

3. Mark what troubled thee when afflictions were upon thee; then God many
times convinces men of folly; when Benjamins sack had the Cup, The Lord has
found out our iniquity, said they, Genesis 44. 16. So some evils may be falsely
imputed, but then you shall see some other sin (it may be) for which the Lord
may have had long, a Controversy with you.

4. Mark what thou art when crossed; many a one is good, while men and God
please him; but when reproof comes, or he is crossed, then he is mad,
hair-brained, hateful, scorneful, wilful, Eccles. 10. 11. for men may be crossed
of their will, but their own ends they will not be crossed in; Mark how you deny
your own ends in what you do, then you may appeal to God indeed.

5. Mark your temptations, and corruptions, with opposition; if all be quiet,
either there is a truce for a time, or else there is peace between you and
sin, and Satan, and so War between God and you.

6. Mark thy Opinions; Sometimes, says Solomon, a fool is not known till then,
Prove. 17. 28. for they arise (unless some in simplicity) from some corruption.

Question 2. How may the Saints come to be settled, that they may know this?

Answer 1. Beware of contenting your self with any measure; but with Paul,
reach after things before, etc. for hence the foolish Virgins were deceived;
but after all fillings be ever empty, hungry, and feeling need, and praying for
more, setting thy self against all sin; say with David, Cleanse me from secret
sins.

2. Strike at the root of all sin, ( viz.) your evil natures, mourn daily under
it, and the activity of it; and though some sins be unknown, yet when the root
dies, they shall dye. Isa. 57. 18. When you mourn for this, God will speak
peace.

3. Be sure your end be right, that having received Christ, and doing duties,
you do them before him, and for his sake; for here Hypocrites (...); and this
makes Paul to appeal to Christ, 2 Cor. 5. Depart you ^^rkers of iniquity, will
Christ say hereafter; You have sought your selves in all this: Though the duty
is hard, and thy heart loath to come to it, yet say, For thy sake, Lord, I love
it.

The earnest cries and prayers of unregenerate men at death or judgment,
Observe. 2.
are then too late to pr^cure m^r^y from the hands of Christ. If there be any
means in time of distress ^o have help, it is by prayer; it^ helps the Saints
out of deep pits, dark dungeo^s, Lam. 3. and Iron Furnaces, bitter agonies,
intolerable pressures; but this means, though they shall use it then, because
their torment is great, and their self-love remains, as these Virgins did, yet
it comes too late then; I know their prayers differ; but of that I shall speak
hereafter.

If in this life sometimes they come too late, much more after this; Reason 1.
but so it is sometimes; Prove. 1. 28. Psalm. 18. 41. Prove. 15. 1. even unto the
Lord. The Lord sees it meet to give a taste of his severity after life, and in
this life, that men may fear, and the terror may fall upon many.

Because then Christ sits upon the Throne of judgment, Reason 2.
and so no Mediator to help them, as has been proved; and if it be so, how
shall they stand? Psalm 130. 3. In this life mercy waits, and patience bears,
till it can bear no longer, and then does ease it self, Ez^kiel 5. 13. and
cries to justice, etc. And therefore the prayers and howlings of the wicked are
to no more purpose than of a Malefactor before the Judge condemned for Treason.

Because their cries are but only Howlings, Reas. 1.
Hosea 7. 14. only rising from their own torment, because the Spirit of God is
quite gone; and if the Lord should hear, they would be as bad again as ever
before; if mercy should save these Thieves from this Gallows, they would cut
the Throat, and S^ab the heart of mercy afterward; as all such persons do, who
are carried from that principle in their prayers; and therefore let them never
look to be heard now.

Hence see the exceeding greatness of the wrath of Christ, Use 1.
to them that die without him, Psalm 18. 41. Many times the Lord hides his face
from his people for a time; but then they pray, and seek his face again, and
the Lord hears them, and shines upon them again; when his Spirit in them
speaks to him, his Son in his Covenant speaks unto them; and the Lord hears the
cry of their weeping, as well as their praying, Psalm 6. 8. But if when they
pray earnestly, and the Lord hears not then, but is angry with their prayers,
oh this is bitter to them, Psalm. 80. 4, 5. Lam. 3. 44. it is that which Christ
typically complains of, Psalm. 22. 1, 2, 4, 5. There is no wrath like this; for
a God so pitiful, as many times to help without cries, more than a Mother with
tender bowels, and not to regared cries, as if he had cast off his nature; this
makes wrath and sin bitter to the people of God; and indeed this is the reason
why the Lord gives his people mercy; but it is by means of prayer usually, that
they might see in what favor they are in his sight above others, that when he
seems to be averse from hearing, yet prayer will turn the wheel, and Jacob
prevails over God; and hence Psalm^ ^. Christ shall have all Nations for his
possessi^ns; but yet Ask of me; as Her^d said, when he said, Ask of me, to half
of the Kingdom, etc. And hence exceeding wrath is shown, in denying for a
time, to he^r prayer many times; Now look upon the condition of poor ^inners
dying without Christ; they shall then cry, and cry earnestly, and yet not
prevail, if the wrath of God did break out at this time, and lie he^vy, and the
Lord say. Now cry, and I Will deliver; it was no such sorrow, though b^^ter
enough to lie under wrath one moment; but to cry, and cry vehemently, Lord,
Lord, and never to be heard, oh who can bear this! their torments are
intolerable; has the Lord no pity? their cries are many, and heart^ are faint;
has Christ no bowels? has this Lamb no more meekness, gentleness? yes, that
there is; but such is his terror now, they are shut up from you; and so shall
ever be, though you shall cry, and weep as many tears, and more too than the
Sea has drops; and when you cannot come before his face, the Gate being shut,
you shall cry, That the Rocks and Mountains may fall upon you to h^de you from
this wrath of the Lamb; and you shall then cry, Behold, and see, if ever sorrow
were like mine^ but all shall be in vain.

Oh therefore see the greatness of this wrath, so as to see the bitterness of
any one sin, which stands yet between thee and Christ; which though it be sweet
under thy tongue now, yet when the day of thy anguish shall come, it shall shut
up Christ's heart from hearing all cries.

Of Exhortation, To persuade all men to take their season of praying now. Use 2.
Isa. ^ 55. 1. with 6. when the Lord cried, Come to the waters, etc. and
because they might plead, Hereafter; oh says he, Call upon him whiles he is
near^; there will be a great Gulf between you and Christ, when you are dead;
now therefore when the Lord comes in his Word especially, cry unto him for help
and pity.

You will say, There is no great need, thanks be to God, of pressing meant to
prayer here; Who is so profane but does? he is not worthy to live, or to enjoy
the benefit of the Sun, nor fit to live among the society of men, who dares not
do thus, but to live among Bears and Wolves, and Beasts in the Wilderness. I
would to God there was no need to press this point; but truly, the Country
being a place filled with discontents, which ever keeps from prayer, because
the Devil is in them; and also of great peace and rest; hence, here men are
more apt to sleep, and grow secure, than in any other place of the world; and
the Spirit of prayer is ready to dye, even in Gods own; and hard it is for this
Incense to be sweet, without some fire, some affliction thereunto.

1. Some there be, that do not so much as feel their misery at all, neither sin
nor wrath; and hence they cannot pray at all; they are not in so good a case to
pray, as the damned who feel their misery, and cry out under it; these cast out
of Gods sight, yet h^ving hope, and so should pray the more, and so cry out
under it, yet cannot; though the earth groans under their sins, yet their
hearts are hard, and they cannot feel them, and so cannot pray; and they quiet
themselves with some forms, and their Coleworts twice sodd, and some cold
prayers morning and evening, and hope that these will serve the turn, and here
is all the comfort they have; nay, not only so, but if others that know their
hearts better, and so pray longer, reprove them for it, they sinfully reply,
What? you are like the Pharisees, that think to be heard for their long
prayers. Oh the Lord gives many up to this spirit of slumber; their hearts are
heavy, and can no more lift them up than a stone.

2. Some there be who feel their misery, and go unto the Lord with many cries
and prayers, but yet herein behave themselves like Saul, when God answered him
not, then they forsake him; and like them, Mal. 3. 14. What profits us that we
have walked mournfully? and thinking they shall not find, they build their
Cities as Caine did, and ease themselves that way.

3. Some there be that do not give over, because they think they shall not
find, but ease themselves by their very prayers, pray out their prayers, and
confess out their confessions, and mourn out their sorrows; and are compared to
the Dog, who eases himself by his vomit; they are troubled, and then prayer
eases them; and when a little ease, then prayer is done, as Psalm. 78. 35, 38.

4. Some that have no ease, yet have no leisure, not time ^ as many servants,
and men greedy of the world rise betimes, and work hard, sleepy at night, that
they cannot have leisure; and when conscience asks, Why do you not take time?
this is their excuse. Oh but cannot you take it out of your sleep, and lose
your life, rather than lose your seasons of prayer? they hope hereafter so to
do.

5. Some that have leisure, yet their hearts are dead; they can pray, and stand
convinced of misery; but I say their hearts are dead. Isa. 64. 7. None stirs
up himself; nay, sometimes as a man asleep, when the fire burns round about
him, yet he feels it not. Isa. 42. ult. They can vex, and be discontent when
crosses and afflictions come, but no heart to pray, or lay their condition to
heart: Oh this is sad and fearful.

1. Beseech you therefore take your time now; you must and shall pray.

1. Do you think ever to have mercy without seeking it, and praying hard for
it? No, if ever God intend good to thee, if an Elect Vessel, thou must pray;
yea, and glad you may have such an unvaluable privilege* and that you are
alive to do it. I know the Lord is found of them that seek him not; but he will
make you seek, that so he may be found; seek therefore in time now, before it
is too late.

2. Do not say the Gate is shut; no, it is yet open, and that by the blood of a
Mediator, Heb. 10. 19, 20. So that when you object God hears not sinners, yet
Zach. 13. 1. there is yet a f^untain opened, for to wash in for sin and
uncleanness; all thy sins cannot shut it, because it is opened wash away sin.

3. Do not say, If I had a part in Christ, I could then be encouraged to ask. I
pray what think you of that Woman of Samaria, when Christ spoke, If thou did
know and ask, he would give thee living waters; What did the poor Woman of
Canaan do, when Christ himself told her, She was a Dog, and had nothing to do
with Childrens bread; when you have no Promise to assure you the Lord will
give; yet the glorious bounty, and riches of grace, may encourage you
sufficiently to seek.

4. Do not say, But it may be I shall be denied, let me pray never so long; I
know you are worthy to be de^ied, and as you have cried the Lord should not
hear, and as you have abused grace, it should cry against you, why should you
Quarrel? the Lord owes thee not strawes; but yet Remember the Parable of the
unjust Judge, who heard a woman, a stranger when importunate; and this is found
a sure truth; it is with all men praying, as it is with women in travailing,
either their pangs will deliver them of their burden, and so they live, or else
they will be their death; if they cease, and give over, then they die. Prayer
will deliver you of your sins, unbelief, or whatever stands between Christ
and you; or if not, they shall die, and perish. Sow your seed of Prayer, it
will multiply if it be the right seed, until your Harvest be great, and your
gain unknown; security will fall on a Hypocrite, before he gets the blessing,
and the cares of the world will choke his prayers.

5. O^ therefore follow the Lord; Hosea 6. 3, 4. You shall know him, if you
follow on ^o know him; especially if you be truly wounded, though he has been
as a Lion to you; Is Christ so glorious, his presence so sweet, his Kingdom so
great, his mercy so rich, his Inheritance so full, and wilt not thou pray,
awake one hour? has Christ bought mercy with his blood, and wilt not thou
spill thy blood? nay, not spare and spend thy poor prayers to beg it, (it may
be praying time is declining apace) and so get it; and by that means hear
Christ Jesus say, Come, oh come thou blessed, that have been praying, weeping,
following me, and take thy Crown, and sit down on my Throne; oh it will be a
cut to think, Had I sought it, I had had it! Psalm. 24.

Of Thankfulness to the Saints, Use 3.
that the Lord has given them hearts to seek the Lord in a finding time, Psalm.
32. 5, 6. Time was thou could not pray; but the Lord has found thee out, and
stirred up unutterable groans here, and all thy groanings have not been bid
from the Lord.

Object. But many pray and find not; how shall I know I have found?

Answ. When the spirit of prayer, not the gift of prayer has carried thee,
R^m. 8. 27.

Quest. How shall I know that?

Answer, 1. It is not fervency. 2. Nor looking to Christ and his Mercy. 3. Nor
Arguments that are evidences of this Spirit; for these the foolish Virgins had.
But I shall show it in three Degrees.

First, Observe what is the ut^ostend in prayer, and so has been in all thy
prayers; it is certain all the prayers of unregenerate men, though enlivened
with some common gift of the Spirit, are ever for themselves; if any outward
calamity befalls them, they then pray, Psalm. 78. But it is as Pharaoh, for
themselves, because the plague is upon them; if the Word meets with them, and
troubles them, their prayers (if fervent) are only for ease; when their bones
are broke, it is for peace and comfort; and if they desire grace, 't^s for
peace-sake; if they have peace for the present, and feel blindness, hardness of
heart, they think these will damn them; and hence salvation and deliverance
from misery, is the utmost end they aim at and so in all their prayers; let men
study their hearts, and they shall see themselves the mark they shoot at, and
the God they serve, and Idol they worship in all their prayers; and do you
think these shall be heard? No, no; but Saints they look not at these things
chiefly, but their utmost end is another thing; at first conversion it is much
self, but it turns in time to higher ends, etc. and that is, what though I
have peace, salvation, these loa^es, but yet miss of Christ himself, and the
life of Christ, to live by him, and live to him, which is our last end! 2 Cor.
5. 15. And here all his prayers end, though crooked many ways; else these are
the prayers of that Spirit of life, which is ever heard; and hence James 5. 3.
Ye ask and have not, because ye ask to spend it on your lusts. Isa. 58. 5.
though they fasted and prayed, yet it was for s^rife and debate; the Saints do
it to destroy their lusts; and hence, though all fervent prayers are not of the
Spirit, yet all prayers of the Spirit are ever fervent, though expressed with
chatterings, mournings as Doves, because the last end has a mighty force with
it; and hence waiting on God in all means for Answers, follows; and hence,
prayers of the Saints are endless, Appetitus finis est infinitus; hence Romans 8.
23. life in heaven is his Scope, and he is longing for it, glad of that time
(for all prayers of Hypocrites are but issues of self-Iove) (...) all occasions
do but quicken up that principle; so all the prayers of the Saints rise from
the spirit of love to God, and faith in him, Romans 8. 27* 28. The Sonlike
Spirit, or Spirit of Adoption, not servile, is in them.

Secondly, If the soul receive any thing from the Lord thus praying, it is
exceed^ng thankful; the Spirit of Christ, wherever it is, glorifies Christ,
John 16. and Psalm. 116. 1. and that in time of peace; hence Psalm 50. 14, 15.
Offer to God thanks giving, and par thy vows, and then call though in time of
trouble, and I will he^re. For the Lord to begin to do the soul any good, (...)
and show it its misery, the worth of the Lord Jesus, to give him any heart to
seek, to give him any hope, to give him the least hint by any word of mercy; oh
its heart melts (it should be thus) and wonders but to think, nay, to see the
Lord has answered him! oh this swallows him up, makes him give all to the
Lord, as Hannah did, when she had her Child, 1 Samuel 2. 1, 2. Esau lost the
blessing, though he begged it with tears; he had a profane heart that did not
esteem it indeed, (...)
and so would ^ever have been thankful for it; poor Jacob gets it, though he
had but a sta^f to hold him up.

Thirdly, If it receive not answer, it mournes, and loathes it self* justifies
God, gives all to him; prayers from self-loathing, are not prayers which come
from self-love, Psalm. 22. 2, 3, ^4. Zach. 12. 10 Psalm. 72. 12. There the Spirit
dwells in the poor and contrite, and their cries are heard; when men pray, and
want, and are quiet without wishing they could lament it is not from the Spirit;
oh therefore try here if it is thus; as he said to H^zekiah, The Lord has heard
thy cries, and seen thy tears; and oh wonder at the Lord, that he should give
thee a heart to cry now.

Reproof to Saints, Use 4.
Who though received and heard, yet think the Lord regards them not; and as
David, think his mercy is shut up.

1. Remember former times, Psalm. 77. 7. Your experiences of the Lords pitying
thee in thy blood, and he will not cast thee off now.

2. Consider the Riches of grace; when you cannot find any thing past, but what
might cause him to loath thee, yet the Lord may then love, when thou art
lamenting thy vileness, Isa. 63. 15, 16.

3. Consider the Lord does purposely seem to dis-regard thee sometimes; not to
shut out prayers, but to make you pray better; not that you should not pray at
all, Judge. 16. 10. but to make you seek, and follow him, though in the dark.
Lam. 3. 45. with 55. in a land of pits; eye has not seen what God has laid up
for you.

4. Consider there is as much in the Lord to move him in thy worst estate to
help thee, as in the best, ( viz.) his mercy, Psalm. 6. 4. You say, If my heart
was not so vile, if I had not committed such sins, the Lord might! this is as
if you said, The Lord shows not pity only for his mercy, etc.

VERSE 12.
I know you not.
WOrds of fence in Hebrew, bear and signify affection also; The principal
affections, are Love, and Hatred. 1. Love, Psalm. 1. ul^. John 10. 14. 2.
Hatred, Hosea 7. 2. Revel. 8. 12. In this place such knowledge is meant, which
has the affection of love joined with it; so that it is as if Christ should
say, I love you not, I delight not in you, my heart is not toward you, whatever
good words you give me, and how ever your heart is toward me, or you have
thoughts of me; And this is the great misery of foolish Virgins.

That it is a most heavy and dreadful misery not to be beloved, Observe. 3.
not to be known of Jesus Christ; for now when the Tables are turned, and the
Stage is pulled down, and the Foolish shut out, and when Christ himself would
give them a doleful Answer, express in words their woe, he coucheth it under
these, I know you not. I do not say that men do feel it so, but it is so, and
at last it will be found so.

This may appear, if we consider these particulars.

If you consider the exceeding greatness, and glory of his place, and person;
Considerat. 1.
He is exalted, and set at the right hand of God, upon the Throne of his
Father, and his Dominions reach from sea to sea; he is King of Kings, and Lord
of Hoasts of Angels, etc. Phil. 2. 9. A Name abo^e every Name he has, and God
has sworn, To him shall every one bow. Now being thus great, and not to be
beloved of such a one, is heavy; if we want the love of poor men, and base
ignoble spirits, it is no such matter; but to lose great ones favor,
especially if we depend upon them in life and goods, peace and honor, this is
bitter; hence 2 These. 1. 9. from the glory of his power.

If you consider the terror of the wrath of God for time to come. 2.
Considerat.
If a man be abroad in the Fields from home, and no storms, not colds, nor
heats arise to hurt him, a shelter would not be so much prized, nor the loss of
it great; but if there be such, and then to want it, and to lie open to the
injury of all Weathers; now it is a woe to want it: So I say to you, men that
are abroad in the wide Fields of this world, and gone from home, if there
should never be misery, but you might eat your bread, and drink your Wine with
a merry heart, and rejoice in your Wives, and there then should be no knowledge
of any thing after death, as those Epicutes spoke, Eccles. 9. the Love of
Christ would not be so sweet; but there will be storms, scorching heats that
shall burn, and never be quenched, there will be colds which shall blast all
your budds, and blossoms, and beauty, etc. Now to have no love of Christ to
take your self to, as to a shelter in these times, is very heavy; hence Isa.
32. 2. Christ typified by Hezekiah, shall be a shadow in a weary Land, which is
spoken to show the sweetness of his love, and their blessedness that have him
to fly to; and hence their woe who want him. It is said, Genesis 6. 8. Noah found
grace in Gods eyes; not in the eyes of men; for before the Flood came, they did
^not see it such a favor, for to have an Ark; but when that came, and they
fled from Houses to Trees, from Trees to Mountains, and waters beneath, and
above prevailed, now they saw it someth^ng to find favor in the eyes of God,
and their woe to want it. Moses dies, wondering at the happiness of the Saints,
in regard of this, Deuteronomy. 33. 26. and ult. The eternal God is thy refuge; he
fore-sees storms, he preserves from miseries above head, so as they cannot
touch the heads of the Saints; if so be they do fall, yet they cannot fall so
low, but underneath are his arms; As a Child which stands alone, if it be in
danger to fall, and others cry out, Pray take heed, I have my arms say they,
under it; hence Moses dies with this word, Oh Israel who is like unto thee?
happy art thou! then woe to those who want this; there is not one man living,
but he shall meet with extremities, which shall make heart and spirits to
fail, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken; every thing may forsake you,
but Christ's love; but if that also does, woe then to you.

If you consider the power which this privation of love has to damp all joy
and mirth in all things present; it 3. Considerat.
invenomes, and puts a sting and poison in all blessings, and makes comforts
torments; to have all blessings, and all privileges, and not to have Christ's
love with them, is to have a snare, a trap, a stumbling block, and a
Recompense, etc. Romans 11. 9. Men regard not wrath to come; but consider of
this, thy blessings are woes, curses; and you shall one day cry, Woe is me that
ever I was, or that ever I had any blessing! Suppose a man should be enriched
with bags of D^amonds, hung with chains of gold, fare deliciously, but
condemned to die, this would damp all. Pharaoh had a stout will, Moses tells
him, Exodus 9. 16. For this cause God had raised him up to show his power upon
him; one would have thought it should have pulled him from h^s Throne, and made
him lie in the dust; it did not, because God had hardened his heart; so would
this, if the Lord had not hardened yours.

Hence we shall see Saints, when they lie under false fears, only of loss of
love; those very things which are most sweet, are made most bitter. Psalm. 77.
3. I remembered God, and was troubled; but what think you of those that be not
indeed loved, it is enough to bring down the most merry heart, and highest
looks for the present; what are my friends, mine enemies? is there none to
comfort me of all my Lovers?

If you consider the sweetness of this Love of Christ. Considerat. 4.
I'^e instance only in one particular, Psalm. 63. 3. Cant. 1. 3. The Elect, when
they are glorified, and with Christ, what shall be most ravishing in their
eyes? what shall swallow up their thoughts most? oh the love of Christ, his
free love! why should I be accepted, beloved! oh that ever the Lord should cast
his eyes, and set his heart upon such an outcast! Hence, praise of the Riches
of Grace, Ephesians. 1. is the w^rk of Heaven. Now to be cast out of this love,
will, must be exceeding bitter to the soul; hence Mat. 7. 23. I never knew you,
will be daggers at the heart, or the stone upon the graves mouth, which shall
torment for ever.

If you consider the nature of this want, or negation of Christ's love, what it
is. Considerat. 5.


1. Degree, Is for Christ not to have so much as one purpose, or thought of
peace and good to them, not to put the least Character of their names in the
Book of life; that is the first degree and fountain of all other; Gods love,
Ier. 29. 9.

2. Degree, Is not to speak one word of peace and love to a man, no absolute
promise of life to them; Psalm 50. 16. They have nothing to do to take Gods
Covenant into their mouths; those promises which comfort and support the hearts
of the Saints against all sins, all miseries, belong not unto them.

3. Degree, Not to suffer for them, not to shed one drop of blood for their
lives, Ioh. 17. 9. so that all their sins must lie upon them, to bear and
answer for.

4. Degree, Not to do the least good for them; good things they have, but
through their sins, and Christ's ordering of it, are not good for them, but they
are thereby fitted by patience for destruction.

5. Degree, Not to accept any thing which they do to him; their sacr^fices and
prayers are sins, Mal. 1. I have no pleasure in you.

6. Degree, Not to pity them in time of their trouble, but to laugh at their
Calamity, and to rejoice in their Ruin, and eternal overthrow; Christ shall
get glory from them then, whom they despised so long before.

This may let us see, Use 1.
what cause all the people of God have to be abundantly satisfied with the love
of Christ; the heart of man is naturally like the raging sea, never quiet, if
the least winds do but arise; the Saints may have unmortified affections, and
are very apt upon troublesome temptations to be disquieted; the Saints are
compared to the Apple of Gods eye; and we know little things will trouble much
there; it is because in losses and sorrows which befall themselves, and in
beholding the madness and folly of others, they are very apt to look upon the
anger of the Lord in them for their sin, which others usually do not. Oh
consider, is it such a misery to lose Christ's love? and have you a share in it?
oh then be thankful for it, and contented with it. When Christ was to depart
from his Disciples, Ioh. 16. 22. you shall sorrow; but what does he leave with
them to quiet them? I will see you again, that mourn now for loss of my
presence; What else? does he promise them nothing else? truly that is enough.
When David looked upon the prosperity of the wicked, and that they should ^ever
see light, Psalm. 49. 15. with 19. But God will redeem my soul from the grave,
not from troubles, and he will receive me; Some read it, For he has received
me; both may stand together, and this was enough to him.

If a Traveller have lost his way, and not come home to his journeys end, he
may be very well unquie^; but when he is come to the end of his journey, and
can go no further, then he sits down, and lives there, and would not go back
again, especially if he considers how many are out of doors, and under
tempests, he may now bless God, they have a shelter; So if the Lord had never
revealed his grace to you in the Gospel, and you were not yet drawn by it, nor
drawn to it, but were lost in your sins, or selves, or world, and had miseries
upon you, then you might be unquiet; but now when laid ^n the bosom of Christ,
when suck^ng the breasts of the grace of Christ, when you can go no further
though thou were^in Heaven, for there is no other happiness there; Now sit ^till
c^ntented, and be glad of this, as under thy Vine and shadow; especially
considering the woes of them, that are yet far from this grace and mercy in
Jesus Christ, and under Clouds of blood. Men that fail upon the Sea, if they
see nothing but waves, and vast raging of waters about them, they keep
themselves close in their Ship, though their Cabbins be but little; tell me one
thing that is good, where Christ's love is not; show me any thing but misery,
death, and eternal sorrows out of it; oh therefore sit still, quietly, meekly,
contentedly, though you be tossed as high as Heaven, and go down as deep as
Hell again.

You are troubled sometimes with losses of outward things, Cattle dye, and
Rachels Children and Husband are not, increase little, decays many, and Jobs
wife bids him bless God (and give glory to him, by confessing he is an
Hypocrite, because so much afflicted) and dye; and David sees the ungodly
flourish, and he thinks he has washed his hands in vain, and it is good to fare
and live here as they live; Oh consider, suppose the Lord should give thee
these things as he does to others, to be snares, and at last say, I know you
not, when thy soul shall come trembling out of a sick and weary body, before
the Tribunal of God Almighty, as these, was that portion then so good? Oh
therefore take your portion, and be thankful for it! Oh therefore be glad in
this, and say, I have these miseries, but Christ's love to sweeten them! these
sorrows, but Christ's love to sanctify them! I see Floods of Fire arising, but
oh here is this shelter to be a Refuge to me!

You have heard what it is not to be beloved, what a misery it is; by that
contrary, see this, viz.

1. For the Lord to have thoughts of peace to thee, when thou were nothing but
death and misery before his eyes, to bear thee in his heart ever since he was
God.

2. For the Lord to speak to thee, and make an eternal Covenant, and every
promise thine. David's dying words are, This was enough, even all his desire;
and not one tittle but shall be accomplished one day.

3. For the Lord to ^hed his blood, bear thy sins, curse, and tread down death
and sin, and tear away the handwriting of the Law against thee, rather than
the least evil befall thee.

4. For the Lord to be working for thee by all good things, all evil things,
all providence, all Ordinances, night and day, and you may find it in part,
and shall find it hereafter.

5. For the Lord to accept all thy poor endeavors, desires, prayers, Isai^h 56.

6. For the Lord to pity thee in all thy misery, and worst times! then to show
his greatest love, when death, and powers of darkness put forth their greatest
malice! truly thus it is; Oh let this love be enough, considering especially
the woeful condition of them that want it, who shall cry for one smile, and
cannot get it! See this love, and doubt not of it; how could you love him, if
he did not love you first? especially if you have been satiated with it? tray
for it, Psalm 90. 14. I speak this the rather, because of the sad miseries
which make men lame in their Christian course, that they are ready to lie down
disconsolate, because they Remember not this; Do not always doubt, but once at
last get through the Crowde to this Love.

Let those who want this love, mourn for it, Use 2.
though the Lord gives you, and does for you never so much in regard of other
things. Suppose he does not smite thy body with sickness, thy name with
disgrace, thy estate with losses; yet if he does not love thee, this is woe
enough. It was the misery of Israel, Ier. 15. 1. with 5. My mind is not to
this people, cast them out; and as the Lord there said, so I say; If the Lord
deal thus, who shall pity thee, or bemoane thee, or ask how thou do? Joel. 1.
8, 9, 10. They lament when the Fig Tree was wasted; much more now the Lords
love is not toward thee. Lam. 1. 16. The Church there laments, that the
Comforter which should refresh was far off.

Quest. How shall I know that?

Answ. If he never did affect thy heart with loss, and want of his love, and
abusing of it, but has let you go on in peace all your life; you were borne
out of his love, cast out to the loathing of thy person, and have lived so,
though he has been pitiful to thee; now if you were never troubled with loss
of this, and wrongs done against this, you are as yet out of love. Look as it
is with a Father, if he has a Child froward, and cannot restrain him, he
lets him alone, he loves him not, else he would chasti^e and correct him, and
make him shake at his frowns; so here, as it is Heb. 12. 8. If no correction,
you are Bastards; So here you have gone on, and never have been yet troubled in
mind with the frowns of Christ, never lamented your wrongs done to Christ; are
you loved? I know the Lord may let you go Prodigals for a time, but he will
bring you back, if he loves you. I never knew any whom the Lord brought home,
but this broke their hearts. O that the Lord was so patient, and I all my life
abused him! nay, he would often have gathered me! he did often strive, and I was
lik^ a Ballock unaccustomed to the yoke, Jer. 31. 18. and he might have cut me
off, or given me up to my stubborn heart. Many are troubled for want of memory,
ignorance, and want of power to pray, or some sin, and then God is merciful to
them, and this eases them again; but this is nothing, till you come to this,
viz. fears of the eternal los of this love; and this lies heavy. If this be
thy condition, that for the present thou art not loved of the Lord, tell me but
one thing which thou have to comfort thee; thou have friends, peace, health,
but they are all without love; if without love, then thou have them with a
curse, and wrath of God. Suppose thou were dying, and the Lord should say to
thee, when thou cryest, I know thee not; would it not be sad! Lie upon thy
Pillow, and sleep quietly if thou can; for ought I know, there was never drop
of blood shed for thee, never thought of peace in Christ's Breasts to thee; a
vile wretch that never lamented the loss of his love, nor contempt of it to
this day!

Obj. But I care not so long as I have been well without it, so I hope I shall
do still, I will not believe I am out of his love.

Answ. Yea, this is the misery of men, as it was of these Virgins; but time
shall come, when you shall see him sit upon his Throne, brighter than a
Thousand Suns, in the glory of his Father, a fire burning round about him, and
the Kings of the earth trembling at his presence, and his Saints in his bosom
like unto him, then you shall wish you had his love, and lament, Rev. 1. and
wail, because of him. Oh secure world, will you sit still in your sins, and
lie in your unbelief, till the fire burns about you, and there be no escape!
Oh that the Lord would pity you, many of you that have yet lived with dry eyes,
and merry hearts, and yet have no love from Jesus Christ.

Learn hence not to despise or refuse the love of Christ when it is offered to
you, Use 3.
and propounded to you in the Gospel; we can be content to want the love of
some men, because we can live well enough without them, and their love; their
love lost hurts not us; but if the loss of their love may be the loss of our
goods and lives, then (if it may be had) men will seek for, and long for it,
thought it should not be offered; but if offered, it is gladly accepted: So if
you could live without the love of Christ, you might content your selves; but
the loss of it is more bitter than ten thousand deaths; and therefore refuse it
not when it is offered; but as they, Acts 2. 39, 41. when they saw how they had
imbrued their hands in the blood of Christ, and yet saw grace offered, it is
said, They gladly received the Word of the Lord.

The Law is a word of condemnation; but that is not the last word the Lord has
spoken, then I should spend time in vain now; the Gospel, even the whole
Gospel is a word of love and Reconciliation; 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. wherein the Lord
does beseech men to be reconciled; i. e. to accept of Gods love offered therein.

The Lord knows full well that men's hearts are so full of enmity, that they
will never seek for Reconciliation first, though they have good cause, because
they have offered the wrong; and therefore he stands not upon terms, but
offers love first, without which he knows they are for ever undone! Oh
therefore receive it, accept of it when it is offered to you; and lose thy
life, rather than lose his love.

For the further opening of this Point, I shall show three things. 1. That
Christ does offer his love in the Gospel; and how. 2. Upon what terms. 3.
Motives to accept it, and answer Objections against accepting of it.


First, That the Lord does offer, and how he does offer his love in the Gospel;
and this I shall clear, because nothing can draw the soul to accept of love
but this. For the better understanding of which, you must conceive that the
love of Christ in the Gospel, is diversely manifested unto men; either to men
after they be in Christ, and are brought home by it, and this is a love of
delight in them. Psalm: 45. 10, 11. Or it is a love of good will to men not
brought home; as it is in Husbands, before their affections be set upon any,
they make love, as it is 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. They received not the love of the
truth, because the truth made love to them. Luke 2. 14. Good will toward men;
and this love, I say is offered; this love the Lord makes unto you; stand
amazed at it, that after all your sins, wrongs done him, nothing but love is
offered, even his dearest love; for though there is patience, power to help,
wisdom to guide; though there is terror in him, yet, Take my love, says he,
John 3. 17. And hence, Heb. 2. 3. it is called Great salvation, or love; it is
offered; else how could men be said to reject it, or neglect it, which he
warnes them of? A man may as well question whether there be a Gospel, as
whether love be offered there; for as the Law is nothing but the manifestation
of sin, the handwriting of death and wrath against all men, writ with the
Finger of God; the Gospel is the manifestation of grace, the handwriting of
grace and peace to all men, written with the blood of God; and hence the Gospel
is that which brings life and immortality to light, 2 Timothy 1. 10. Not that
there is life absolutely for all, but there it is for all that shall by faith
accept of it. More particularly,

First, It is offered Universally to all wherever it comes, and therefore
personally to every man; the words are plain, Mark 16. 15. Preach the Gospel
to every creature; and not only to them that do belong to Christ, and shall
believe; for though it be offered with the power of it effectually to these,
yet offered it is also unto those that never shall have God, nor portion in the
Son of God; and hence, Luke 14. The Lord of the Feast invited those that never
came in; and Christ himself, 1 John 11. He came to his own, and they received
him not; he would have gathered them under his wings, and they would not; not
only to them that be humbled (though none will care for Gospel but such) but to
them that be unhumbled, Revel. 3. 18, 20. does this Gospel come. There be many
object, Yes, the Lord offers love to them that are his, but not to me? yes, to
thee; there is not a man here, that can exempt himself. And I would make no
doubt to go to every man particularly, and say, The Lord entreats thee to be
Reconciled; nay, if there be one man worse than another, though his hands have
been imbrued in the blood of the Prophets, and his soul stained with the crying
guilt of the most hydeous sins that ever the earth bore, or Sun saw, yet the
Lord makes love to him; the price is paid for him, if he will accept of it, and
that the Lord would have him so to do; neither does this Universal offer
infer an Universal Redemption; for the Gospel in the offer of it, does not
speak absolutely that Christ has dyed for all, and therefore for thee, as the
Arminians maintain; but it speaks conditionally, It Is for thee, if ever the
Lord gives thee a heart to receive that grace there; therefore consider of it,
there is not one here present, but the Lord would have you receive his love;
and consider this one reason, Thou shall be condemned for refusing it; Hence
it is Gods command, and Christ's desire you should receive it, Io^n 3. 19. If not
thy duty to receive it, it is not thy sin to refuse it; but it is such a sin,
that all men that perish under the sound of the Gospel, are principally
condemned for.

Secondly, It Is offered really; I put in this, because men cannot see the
reality of this; because not Christ, but Ministers (they think) only make it,
and so the offer is only external and Ministerial; the Lord himself they think
is not of that mind.

Answ. 1. What any Minister according to the Gospel does, that Christ would do
if he was here present; hence 2 Cor. 5. 20. We beseech you in his s^ead; as
Ambassadors speak what the King himself would do, and no more, and himself
would speak what they do if he was present; and hence Christ did not only
preach the Gospel to his Elect, that should receive him, but to them who did
reject him also, which made his blessed heart and eyes also break forth into
tears, Oh that thou had known, etc.

2. It Is Christ in them which does speak, Heb. 12. 25. Him that speaks from
heaven; and hence Ephesians. 2. 17. He came and preached peace, when he was gone up
to Heaven; and hence receiving of these Ministers and Ambassadors of Christ,
is receiving of Christ; despising of them, is despising of Christ; and look, as
the bowels of God the ^athers love are opened i^ Christ, so the bowels of
Christ's love are opened in those whom he sends. Never did thou see any
Minister pity thy condition, and offer peace to thee, but because Christ put it
in his heart; and as in rejecting the Gospel, you shall not sad their spirits
so much as Christ's Spirit in them; so in accepting, e contra.

3. Your life and salvation, and certainty of mercy from Christ, hangs upon
your receiving their Word; for men wi I say, If Christ were here, I durst
believe his Word; I tell you, the Lord hangs thy life upon believing their Word
spoken according to him, John 17. 20. I pray for them that shall believe in me
through their word; Why not through my word? Answ. These may stand well
together; my word as the foundation their word as building upon it; their word
in the external administration and view of man, but my word indeed; my word in
their mouths, and so their word as instruments under that principal agent; so
that if an Angel, or one should rise from the dead, I should not look for more
certainty of life by believing these, than them. Christ will speak no more,
till he shakes down heaven and earth with his voice; but their word he honors,
and says, Believe it; their word is not, Christ has loved thee; but Believe,
that thou may be beloved of Christ.

4. The Lord is so real here, that he punishes men more for this, than if he
was present. Christ lived among the Jewe^, and preached, they crucified him,
and rejected him in his person; yet this cast them not off, till Luke 13. 46.
they put away the offers of grace by the Servants of Christ from them, and now
the Apostles are to shake off the dust of their feet against such as those.

Thirdly, It is offered with vehement desires to accept of it, 2 Cor. 6. 1.
Psalm. 81. 11. We beseech you receive not Gods grace in vain; for you may say
There is some offer, but the Lord desires it not in good earnest; never did man
desire to get the affection of another most beautiful, as the Lord does thee
that have none; we use to judge of the affection of another to a thing, by what
he is willing to part with for it; As he that sold all for the pearl, and
bought it; So the Lord is content to part with all he has to thee; the dearest
thing he has, is his precious blood, and all fruits and benefits of it; his
Spirit to comfort, himself to dwell with thee, his Father to love thee, his
Kingdom to receive thee, his sweetest promises to assure and stablish thee;
all things, except his glory; it is ^ot fit that you should receive that, but
for him to receive it from thee; and giving it to him, is better than having of
it to thy self. To thee I say, that art like an incarnate Devil, Dead, and
Damned, and undone for ever, unless thou accept of this Grace, is all this
Mercy of the Gospel tendered.

Fourthly, It is offered freely, Isa. 55. 1, 2. For this makes many stand and
wonder, Why should the Lord make love to me so vile, so unworthy, good for
nothing but to sin! dry bones! or what need has the Lord of me? what can I do
for him? what can I add to him? why goes he not into the Palaces of Princes to
call in them! but that he should deal thus with me that have sinned worse than
Paul before conversion! not ignorantly; I have known the grace of Christ, yet
rejected it; and have gone on desperately, have been mad in following my
lovers, forsaking the Lord; True, I know no cause, but only his free love,
because he has compassion on thee, and because it is for his grace sake; hence
he desires it vehemently; for that is worthy to be honored, received, embraced
of thee. Methinks it is in this case, as it is with poor Marines, whose ship is
wrackt, many drowned, and they cast upon the shore, one comes to them, and
offers them house, and meat, and home, they tell him We are poor men,
havenothing to pay; true, I know that, but I have compassion upon you, because
I see you are distressed men; so it is here with the Lord Jesus, I know thou
have nothing to require me, but I have compassion upon thee, accept my grace,
take it, live upon it, because thou art a distressed soul; God has shown
wondrous mercy in giving life, now I offer more, one would th^nk; now surely
men should be glad to accept of this grace.

Quest. Upon what t^rmes is this offer of love made?

Answ. There is nothing required, but only and merely receiving of it; John 1.
12. Under the Law it was, Do all this; but the Gospel says not so, but Re^eive
me who have done all, and suffered also, with thy whole heart; as it was in the
Land of promise, nothing required, but going up, and possess it; here it is no
more. Prove. 4. 8. She shall bring thee to h^nour when thou do embrace her.
The offer of love, is like the offer of a rich portion, nothing required but
receiving it thankfully, and so living upon it; so Psalm. 16. 5, 6, 7. I thank
the Lord that gave me counsel, etc. Or as it is in the offer of a Prince to a
Traitor, he offers life to him; Upon what terms? I could crush thee as a fly
between my fingers, but I desire nothing, only accept my favor, come and
embrace me, and then live under my Government in my Kingdom, because that I
love thy company, and because here is my honor, and thy safety; so does the
Lord in the Gospel, the Lord professes he had rather a soul should return, and
live upon his love, and under the Government of his love, than dye; Come under
my wings, says Christ, Matthew 23. you may all. I would have you safe, and
near unto me, that you may feel the warmth and life of my love; this is all the
Lord looks for; and who would not accept of love upon these terms!

Thirdly, Motives to accept of it. Why should I name any more than what the
Text mentions? no woe like this to lose it! and though it may be now you may
esteem it nothing while it is fair weather, and whiles it is a day of patience,
yet when the depths of anger are broken up, then you shall see, and say, No
people like unto those that have it, when you shall see Christ on his Throne
with ravishing beauty, and see him tread the Wine Press of wrath alone, and his
garments dipped in the blood of his enemies; then you shall say, The want of this
love is bitter; and hence if it be offered, take it now gladly, thankfully,
joyfully.

Obj. But I am but one, will the Lord receive me?

Ans. I have been stirred up to preach the Gospel for the sake of that One; and
Ier. 3. 14. I will take one of a Tribe. Though all else be rejected, the Lord
minds thee.

2. Ob^ect. But Christ is in Heaven, how can I receive him, and his l^ve?

Answ. A mighty Prince is absent from a Traitor, he sends his Herald with a
Letter of love, he gives it him to read; how can he now receive the love of the
Prince when absent? Answ. He sees his love in his Letter, knows it came from
him, and so at a distance closes with him by this means; So here, he that was
dead, but now is alive, writes, sends to thee, Oh receive his love here in his
Word; this is receiving him by faith, Acts. 2. 37, 38.

3. Object. But I am not elected, nor redeemed; if I knew that, I durst receive
the Lord and his love.

Answ. What-have you to do with Gods secret Decree of Election? it is your duty
to look to the Gospel, which is the Will of Gods command; there is a Will of
Gods Decree, and a man may fulfill this Will and sin; as Ier^b^am in revolting
according to the Prophecy of the Prophet; and to submit to this, is not moral
obedience, though moved thereto by a Divine instinct, as in Cyrus; but there is
a Will of Gods Command, and this you are to look to; obedience to this, never
wants its recompense; You say you are not Redeemed. Answ. True; but it may be
thou art Redeemed; and therefore do not crucify Christ a second time; receive
this love, and it is certain it is for thee.

4. Obj. But I am not humbled sufficiently?

An^w. I know no man can receive Christ, till the Lord has humbled and broken
him down; but know, there is no more humiliation required, than that which
brings thee to receive the Lord Jesus Christ. Many have a spirit of cleaving
to, and receiving of Christ, as has been opened, but are kept off, because
they fear they are not humbled; but methinks the very offer of Christ to one
condemned and lost for ever, who must else lie to all eternity mourning
(methinks this) should break thy heart, if it be not a Stone, and a Rock, as it
did Paul's; indeed you must be more and more humbled all your life; but this is
a consequent required of those who are in Christ.

5. Object. But I cannot believe, why press you me to it?

A^sw. 1. The Lord does not press you to believe, because you should believe
from your selves; but that feeling your own inability, you might suffer him to
make you believe.

2. The Lord by words of Exhortation does work Faith; there goes a power with
it; as Acts 2. Repent; they gladly received the Word; and whose heart may it
not draw and compel, especially if there be any spark of God in any soul? and
therefore pray give the Lord leave to speak, whose Word can quicken the dead,
though the dead can neither stir nor hear.

3. There be many of you that say You cannot believe; but this Gospel draws
out a power; The way of the Lord, is strength to the upright, Prove. 10. 29.
Will you? can you despise or refuse his grace? No, it should constrain.

6. Object. But I have received him, and I feel no virtue from him.

Answ. 1. I know many do receive him, and feel not the virtue of Christ; but
because Saints may be kept poor in Spirit, possess all things in Christ, and
yet receive little from Christ, I shall only ask two Questions.

1. How do thou esteem of, and desire that blessing of Christ? Do esteem of
nothing so precious, desire nothing more, and followest the Lord on with prayer
for it? it is in Christ for thee; what thou want, thou shall have it, John
4. 10. Phil. 3. 9, 10. No false heart but undervalues these things; and the
Lord will fulfill all thy desires; in heaven thou shall have all thy sins
subdued and trodden to death.

2. How is thy heart for thy general frame, affected with the absence of the
good thou feel not from the Lord? do mourn bitterly for this? look as the
Disciples that mourned for Christ's bodily absence, the Lord tells them. They
should rejoice; ^o here; a carnal heart is indifferent, though he lose Christ's
virtue. And therefore accept the Lords love, you poor mourning souls; the most
stony heart I speak to; but much more unto the weary, and them that have been
seeking after the Lord, behold salvation is come to thy heart this day, only
^et it in; do not reject it, because thy sins are great, thy unworthiness
great; the Lord knows them, yet he offers; some of you have had some hopes or
assurance Christ is yours; yet he may be thine* Suppose he was never thine yet,
now stretch out thy shaking hand, receive him who is this day crucified before
thy eyes, his head hanging down, his blood gushing out, beseeching thee to
accept of this which is shed for thee. I remember a godly man receiving Apples
from a poor Woman, he took them thankfully, but said withal, This came from the
Spirit of God; so does this offer much more, and therefore take it: But I know
this love will be despised by some of you; some not knowing your woe, some not
feeling it, being without Christ; some under terrors, but shut up under
unbelief. If I did think the Lord had no purpose to do thee good, and I knew
thee, I would read thy doom; but the Lord may p^ty^ and therefore I Will go and
mourn, and pray that the Lord would not lay your sins to your charge; your base
lusts are better than Christ to you; O therefore mourn for this: you that know
him not, prize him not; but carry this Acts 13. 41. about with thee, viz. hear
yo^ despisers, and wonder, etc.

That many (...) may, and do apprehend Christ by a seeming Faith, Observe. 4.
whom yet Christ Jesus apprehends not by his dearest love.

For here were Virgins many of them, who cried, Lord, Lord, only looking for
salvation from him, hanging upon grace, clasping about his feet (as it were)
and who in their lifetime went out to meet the Bridegrom, expecting love from
him; and yet Christ here professes, I know not you, I love you not.

I say, this is by a seeming ^aith; for no man apprehends Christ by a lively
Faith, but i^ apprehended of Christ, John 1. 12. But if it be by a seeming
Faith* i. e* which seems to be Faith in the judgment and opinion of others,
and also which seems only to be so to their own apprehension, as it did unto
these Virgins, the Lord does not apprehend such by his (...) love; and that is
I say, with his dearest love; with common love he may, but with dear and
eternal love, never.

The Faith of some men, is like the casting of some Anchor at Sea; it sometimes
falls upon a Rock, or light sand, it touches the ground, but the Rock holds
not it; and hence the Ship is ever driven before the wind, or carried away
with the ebbings and flowings of the water; So it is here; and hence men are
tossed to and fro with lusts and temptations, and driven before strong winds.
Or as it was of Saul to Samuel, he apprehended Samuel, but Samuel departed from
him, saw him no more until the day of his death; So here, the Kingdom and
Love of Christ is rent from you. John 2. 24. ^lt. But he committed not himself
to them. Luke 13. 26, 27. H^ve ^ot we eat and drunk in thy presence? and yet
Christ will say, I kn^w you not; and this is the ^ase of many. Job 8. 13, 14.
When an H^pocrite dies, his hope peris^^^; if the Lord had apprehended him with
his dearest love, it could not be so.

For Explication of this Point, three things are to be opened. 1. How one may
be said to apprehend Christ Jesus by a seeming Faith. 2. How Christ is s^id not
to apprehend such. 3. Why he dot^ not.


Qu^st. First, How may one be said to apprehend Christ by a seeming faith?

Answ. Five ways usually.

1. When men are forced ^o fly to Christ merely out of extremity and pressures
of misery, the stro^ks, and dry ^lowes of Divine Vengeance light upon them, and
now they cry, Lord, pity us; It may be, in time of peace, while conscience and
Divine Vengeance were asleep, they regarded not Faith, nor Prayer, nor Christ,
nor any thing else, notwithstanding a^l the heartbreaking cries, and loud
calls of God, but were merry and light, and licentious, etc. but in extremity
then they will cry, and prize mercy above a thousand worlds, Prove. 1. 28. One
would think their mouths should be stopped then; some think those words are an
allusion to the A^k in No^hs time, Hosea 8. 1, 2, 3. When the Eagle shall come
against Gods p^op^e, Psalm. 78. 35. they shall cry, My God, we know th^e; No
says the Lord, The enemy shall apprehend them, I will not; this is not faith,
but only self-love; when as men are naught before, and their hearts sitting
loose from God continual^y, having no daily embracements of him* and would be
worse after Gods afflicting hand, if he should help them; but so it is, that
they cry out to God for help, merely because of torment, etc. This is like that
cry of our Indians to the Devil, who worship, and cleave to him, because he
p^agues them. True, in times of extremity, the faith of the Saints may be
awakened which was asleep before; and when God hedgeth their way with Thorns,
they may then return to their first Husband, because i^ was better; but when
ex^remity begets it, it begins and ends with it, lives and dies with it; here
such may fear that then Christ apprehends them not. Psalm 66. 3. Because of
thy power, thy enemies shall sta^er, and submit. A proud Rebel^ious Wretch in
times of peace, swells bigger than God, and is above God; the Lord Jesus has
his times wherein ^he grapples with them when no Ministers can, and flings them
down with his Sword at their heart, and his hand at their Throat, and terrors
in their consciences; and now they yield; Christ may hence take these as common
Subjects; but never as special favorites to stand before him; and this is the
case of thousands, who fly to Christ merely for extremities. Thus the case
stood with old Ioab; he should have dyed before; 1 Kings 2. 30. but at last he
neglects his harge, he run^es to the A^tar only out of self^ove and there he
will dye; one would think a man that had been so useful, flying to the Altar in
his old age, might be pitied; No, the Altar which secures others, secures not
him; justice may be shown to him that will abuse favor long; so it is here.

2. When men fly to Christ in times of peace, that so they may preserve their
sins with greater peace of conscience; so that sin makes them fly to Christ,
as well as misery; not that they may destroy and abolish sin, but that they may
be preserved in their sins with peace. For this is the frame of all men living;
sin before it is committed (not all sin, but what is (...) able ^o men's
constitutions, corruptions, place, temptations) is very sweet; and if
conscience be awake, it is after the commission bitter; sweet in the mouth,
bitter in the belly; or else they know it will be bitter another day; Prove. 23.
32, s^ings like a Cockatri^e, and what profit in inheriting lies? Now because
men have not other good to live upon, or delight in, for God they have not;
hence many an heart secretly says this, If I can have my sin, and peace, and
conscience quiet for the present, and God merciful to pardon it afterward, then
all is well; hereupon hearing those that put their trust in Christ shall be
pardoned for present, and saved afterward, hence he does re^ie (as he says)
only on the merry of God in Christ; and now this hardens and blindes him, and
makes him secure, and his Faith is Sermon-proof, nothing stirs him, etc. and
were it not for their faith, they should despair, but this keeps them up; and
now they think, if they have any tro^ble of mind, the Devil troubles them; and
so make Christ and Faith protectors of sin, not purifiers from sin (which is
most dreadful) turning grace to wantonness, as they ^id sacrifice; so these
would sin under the shadow of Christ, because the shadow is good and sweet,
Mi^ah 3. 11. they had subtle slye ends in good duties, for therein may lie a
man's sin; yet they lean upon the Lord, etc. Matthew 3. 7, 8. The Scribes came
in peace to Ioh^s Ministry, which was to awaken men to believe in the Messiah,
Oh generation of Vipers, who has for^warned you to flee from wrath to come!
hence says he, Bring forth fruits; as if he should say, You would have the
blessing of the warm Sun still, but you care not to have your viperous nature
changed, you will bring forth the old bitter fruits, etc. when Mony-changers
came into the Temple, you have made it a Den of Thieves; Thieves when hunted,
fly to their Den, or Cave, and there they are secure against all searchers, and
hue-and-cryes; so here, but Christ whipped them out; so when men are pursued
with cries and fears of conscience, away to Christ they go, as to their Den;
not as Saints, to pray and lament out the life of their sin there, but to
preserve their sin; this is vile; will the Lord receive such?

I am persuaded, many a man's heart is kept from breaking and mourning, because
of this; he says (it may be) that he is a vile sinner; but I trust in Christ,
etc. If they do go to Christ to destroy their sin, this makes them more secure
in their sin; for (say they) I cannot help it; and the thing I would not do,
that do I, and Christ must do all; whereas faith makes the soul mourn after the
Lord the more, as Paul did; yet do you think they that believed said, Let us
sixn^, that Grace may abound? No, No.

3. By seeing some glory, and tasting some sweet in the Gospel, and Christ
manifested and arising therein; hence some men may apprehend Christ neither out
of fear of misery, nor only to preserve some sin; but God lets in light and
heat of the blessed beams of the glorious Gospel of the Son of God, and
therefore there is mercy Rich, Free, Sweet, for damned, great vile sinners;
Good Lord (says the soul) what a sweet Ministry, Word, God, and Gospel is
this! and there rests; this was the frame of the stony ground, which heard the
Word, and received it with joy, and for a time believed, Luke 8. 13. And this
is the case of thousands that are much affected with the promise and mercy of
Christ, and hang upon free grace for a time; but as it is with sweet smells in a
Room, they continue not long; or as flowers, they grow old and withered, and
then fall; in time of temptation, lust, and world, and sloth is more sweet than
Christ and all his Gospel is; it is in this case with the soul, as it was with
Mary, who applied the Spikenard only to the feet of Christ, but all the Room
was filled with the sweetness of it; so in the Gospel, the sweet odor of it is
scattered to all; and the Apostle Paul says, We are a sweet savor of God to
them that perish; but Christ only applies it unto the heart of a wounded, poor,
humbled sinner; and though smells and odours refresh, yet men cannot live by
the smell; so it is here; such is the rich grace of Christ, that the worst shall
know and say, He is good; As the King passes by, many come to see him; but
does he take all up to the Chariot with him? No, but they go home to their
several houses again, and then they commune, and speak of what they saw; so
Christ accepts only of, and apprehends none but those that have forsaken all at
his call, and so live upon his favor; so here, as Psalm. 45. all his Garments
smell of mirth, yet only the Queen which hears, considers, and forgets her
Fathers house, stands at his right hand.

4. When the soul is persuaded to close with the Lord Jesus Christ by the power
of immediate Revelation, without the medium of the Word; the Word they grant
has its use, and it is good to attend to it, as to a light in a dark place, but
stay till the day star arise; the Word is obscure, and may deceive, but this
cannot; and they think Christ never apprehends them, till this does; and this
some feel, and rest upon, as upon a light and comfort in sickness, and leave
others to the Word; some feel and hold no other evidence but this; ^^me h^^d
it, but never felt it, but live in admiring of it, and it is a pretty new thing,
etc.

I confess the Spirit must reveal the meaning of the Word, before ever it can
draw any to believe, and it must mightily, immediately apply the Word; but for
Christ to reveal himse^f without a Word, and a Word of promise in the Gospel
truly understood, is a delusion, especially if the evidence of the Word be
herein despised. Romans 15. 4. Paul had Revelations; so may a godly man have more
than common manifestations of favor at some times; but Paul speaks not of
these, H^b. 6. 17. that we might have strong consolation, etc. All the Heirs
of the promises, as Heirs that have Legasies left them, they go to the Will of
the deceased Father, and that comforts that they hold to; that is sure, such a
one shall have it, if his name be there; but if one shall say, Such a one has
promised me such lands, is it in the Will? No; but since he dyed, as I was
taking a Pipe, he came to me; oh be not deceived! but say some, I hold to the
Will; let us see, where is it? I love such and such, says the Lord; true; but
whom? it is Children believing, broken, poor, humbled. Now if you say, No, I
regard no such Will; then you regard not the Lord; so it is here, Ephesians. 2. 20.
Built upon the foundation of the A^ostles; i. e. upon the Word, and Christ in
it, etc. Hence, if you build without the Word, you build without a Foundation,
and you will fall; and do you hold to that comfort that the Word never gave
you? Christ is not the ob^ect of Faith, but as revealed; John 6. 45. He that
has seen, etc. Christ is not revealed, but in his Word of the Gospel preached;
a I your conceptions without it, are idolatrous and monstrous; you neither see
nor apprehend Christ, nor Christ you.

5. By closing with Christ upon false signs of grace: there is a company of
people, if they have but some pangs, and some Reformations now and then, they
are presently Christ's, they hope; and if they be like unto all other good
people, and do as they do, now all is well, Thus these foolish Virgins did
deceive and delude themselves; they were Virgins, they were like others, and
they though^ well of them, and hence they fell to have hopes, out of some
sleighty work of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus; but they are in the interim,
strangers to the life of God, and Christ, and Grace; these should have looked
to have oil in their Vessels before now.

Secondly, What is it for Christ not to apprehend such, and to withdraw from
such?

Answ. You may know this by the Affirmative. What is it for Christ Jesus to
apprehend? Consider a soul drawn home to the Lord Christ to believe; there are
two things he does apprehend his people by. As,

First, By an eternal Covenant of grace which the Lord makes and enters into
with a poor sinner, whereby he binds himself for ever to be his, a God unto
him; we cannot make the Lord apprehend us. (as in 2 S^m. 5. 1, 2, 3.) But by
his Covenant, he binds himself unto the souls of h^s people, Isa. 55. 2, 3.
which is a mighty strong Covenant, as strong as Gods purpose is; for it is
nothing but Gods purpose revealed. Now this the Lord reveals usually two ways.

1. In the Word, without the conscience knowing it, so as that a man has not
assurance of Gods Good Will to him. And

2. To Conscience; and this two ways.

1. By prayer, the soul being instant with God to reveal his good will, the
Lord does it. Ez^kiel 36. ^7. I will yet be enquired of for this, etc. Zach.
13. 9. Hence the Lord asks the poor heart, Will nothing content thee but the
Lord? I will fulfill thy desires then, the Lord has heard thy cries; all thy
sins shall be pardoned, all those corruptions subdued, etc.

2. By the Ministry of the Word, when the soul has been froward in seeking the
Lord, but now mournes under it, that it cannot find the Lord; the Lord
professes, I Will create the fruit of the lips, peace. Psalm. 25. 14. He will
show them his Covenant, etc. So that the soul is for a time, stablished and
supported by these and the like blessed words of Grace from the Lord.

Secondly, By an eternal Spirit of life, which (as from Christ the Head) comes
into every member, and is in them, and shall be in them, never forsaking them,
though it be grieved a thousand times in a day by them; this Spirit sets on the
Covenant, and gives the first fruits of glory, etc. Isaiah 59. ult. This is my
Covenant, my Spirit shall never depart, etc.

Thus Christ apprehends his; herein differing from Adam, he was next to God,
and was apprehended by God. But 1. It was by a Covenant of works. 2. As a first
cause upholding, and preserving, and governing the second; but this Spirit
which should never forsake, this he had not; now when by Faith we are turned
unto Christ, Christ apprehends us with both these arms. Now e contra, you may
see what is it not to be apprehended by Christ.

Because they were never given unto Christ in Vocation by the Fathers dr^wing,
Reason 1.
John 6. 65. And Christ takes hold on none but them; they are apprehended for
the Givers sake, though they be worthless in themselves: All lawful Marriage,
is by the Parents consent; so here.

Because he knows the vileness of such men's hearts, lying in their sin, the
falseness, Reas. 2.
deceits of them, Ioh. 2. ult. As we use to say, Such a one! No, I know him
well enough.

Of sad Reproof to those who never trouble themselves with any thoughts whether
Christ has apprehended them; Use 1.
if they have once apprehended Jesus Christ, they never question whether their
Faith so apprehend Christ, as that Christ apprehends it. Oh consider! these
Virgins they did thus after a sort apprehend Christ all their li^e, but now
they know Christ never loved them, because they never savingly apprehended him.
I remember Isa. 4. 1. Seven women shall take hold of one man, and shall say, We
will be called by thy Name, to take away our reproach, but we will eat our own
bread; So^ many take hold upon Christ, Lord, let us be called by thy Name, to
take away our reproach; when as they care for no part, nor portion in Christ,
but they will eat their own bread, live upon their own lusts. It was Christ's
speech unto diverse that saw him, and followed him, John 6. as to h^s Disciples
also, Except you eat my flesh, you have no life in you. What does a man aim at
in eating? not only that he may have Bread in his hand, but he examines, What
virtue has it? His end is, that it may grow one with him, and be turned into
the ^ame flesh with him, and so, that there may be a most rear union that can
be; so should all Christians study that, and aim at that, that the Lord may be
nearly united to them, and grow one with them; a gracious heart prayers and
mournes for want of this.

Oh there be many that profess, What should I trouble my self with this and
that grace? when I have done all, I can but look up to Christ! True; but will
you not yet try whether you so look to Christ, as that he looks toward you?
John 10. 10. I k^^w mine, and am known of mine; there is a world of false faith
in the world. Ier. 7. 8. When they cried the Temple of the Lord, says he, Do
you swear, lie, etc? So I may say, Are you slothful in carriage, discontent in
families, live in secret adultery, and your eyes and thoughts are full of it?
do you break your promises, and Covenant with God and men, and forget the Lord
in a Land of Peace, care for little but that your Plough may speed, and your
names may rise? and do you cry, Christ, Christ? go to S^i^h, go to the
Palatinate, Bohemia, and see what God has done; Oh but I am better! oh but go
to these foolish Virgins, let their dead ghosts affright thee, if the Lords
Word cannot make thee search here.

A man drowning, all his care will be for a hand to take him, so would you if
all were right; but you will not so.

Of Examination, Whether ever the Lord Jesus has apprehended you with his
dearest love, Use 2.
as well as you have apprehended him? 2 Cor. 13. 5. In all Covenants among men,
whereby they are to bind themselves one to another, men will make it sure on
both sides; Christ will make you sure to him; do you see that he be also made
sure, and fast bound and united unto you.

Methinks the consideration of the example of the Virgins, might awaken every
one unto it; for if this was the frame only of some rude, profane Rout of
^arnal Protestants, professing Christ with their lips, but denying him in their
lives, it might be excusable for us; but when Virgins, and so many, and that in
these times of Christ's coming, to fail here, this may strike a holy ^awfulness
even in the best; and with much fear and trembling to search themselves, as it
did the Disciples of Christ, when they heard not many, but one only should
be^ray him; for there is this union on both parts, John 10. 14.

2. But though there is cause to search, I confess it is very hard to find out
this blessed Love-knot, the union between Christ and the soul being so
mystical, and secret, and spiritual a work, especially in this life; wherein
the Lord Jesus arises in the souls of his people, not in his perfect fullness,
but only as the day star, at which time there is much darkness before the
rising Sun; and hence the Apostle, Gal. 4. 9. You have known God, or rather are
known of him, etc.

3. But yet it may be known; the many examples I might allege, might prove it;
and the promise of Christ to his Disciples does evince it, John 14. 20. They
were weak for a time, and Christ forsook them, and left them very sorrowful for
a time, but says he, I will come to you again; yea, and they might be never
awhit the wiser for that; Nay, (says he) At that day you shall know I am in
you, and you in me; As a child cannot tell how his soul comes into it, no^ it
may be, when, but afterward it sees and feels that life: So that he were as
bad as a Beast, that should deny an immortal soul; and it is an Article of our
Faith; so here, etc.

4. And truly when it is known, it is exceeding useful, if a man was never
apprehended by Christ, that now before he be cast out of sight, and reach of
Christ, he may (if possible) get the Lord to apprehend him; and if he has been
apprehended, he may be supported in sad combats, and comforted against all
fears of Apostasy from the Lord, but may know he stands as fast as Mount Sion
that never can be removed; for times of spiritual assaults are to destroy
faith. Psalm. 22. 8. He trusted in God, let him deliver him; and therefore you
had need make sure of this; time may come, that to sense and feeling, hope and
heart may fail; What supports now? yet Christ does not, Christ will not,
Christ cannot.

Quest. How may this apprehending love on Christ's part be known? (...)

Answ. In these five Degrees of it, it manifests it self; for it is unknown in
it self; but in the manifestation of it, there 'is seen of us.

1. Degree, When the love of Christ apprehends the soul effectually, it
overcomes the soul by sense of love, and thereby draws the soul from the strong
holds and bondage of sin to Christ; wherever there is exceeding dear love of
the one unto the other, it is winning, it is of an overcoming nature; and though
Christ does threaten, or terrify his people sometimes, yet the end is love;
the love of Christ is of a winning, overcoming virtue; and he overcomes by
love; and where he sets his heart on any, he will sooner or later overcome by
love (if he can) the hearts of his, to forsake all other Lovers, and cleave
unto him. Ier. 31. 3. I have loved thee with an everlasting lov^; What follows?
hence, I have drawn thee; How? by loving kindness. Cant. 1. 4. Draw me, and I
will follow thee; this is the prayer of all those whom the Lord espouseth to
himself; and it is as if they should say, I have neither strength, nor heart, to
come nor follow; my iniquities clog me, and my fears discourage me, etc. but
yet Lord draw me.

Let a man believe in Christ, and accept the offer of Christ when he can; but
he can never do it, until his heart a verse to Christ, and unbelieving, be
drawn to the Lord Jesus; and that not violently only by terror, but by
stronger cords, even the cords of Love, which persuades mightily the soul of
unwilling to become willing; the Lord revealing the glorious grace and
righteousness of Jesus Christ, and all the benefits of him, and therefore he
offers this to it, and requires nothing but faith to receive it; this which
stirs not the heart of another, overcomes the hearts of the Lords own, even
with an holy admiration at this grace! What, Lord, am I! so vile I am, and
filthy, and hellish, after so long abusing God and Grace, now to reveal, offer
on such terms Christ and Grace to me! Oh Lord, I am swallowed up with this
kindness! how can thou think such thoughts of love! yet I see it. Romans 1. 17.
The Gospel is the power of God to salvation; for therein is righteousness
revealed from faith to faith. And mark, it is such a drawing of love, as pulls
the soul from all the strong holds of sin, to Christ; for that which the
Prophet complains of people in his time, is true of ours, Ier. 8. 5. They took
fast hold of deceit, and refused to return; they hold it as their life, and it
holds them as fast as spiritual bonds of death; either the pleasure of sin
holds them, or the power of unbelief in refusing grace, attended with sinkings,
and sadness of heart, or objecting against grace through pride of heart, when
the Lord comes to apprehend it; hereupon the Lord Jesus Christ, uno and eodem
actu and ictu, in drawing the soul to himself, draws it from the captivity of
sin; thus, Acts 26. 18. from darkness to light. 1 These. 1. 9. and the soul
says as they, Ier. 3. 23, 24, etc. The Lord Jesus does not so draw it to
himself, as that at the same time it abides in sin; no^ so from sin, as
that it abides without Christ; but uno, etc.

For I observe a double error in men's drawing to Christ.

First, Either they come only from misery (I say, Only) and so are rather
driven, than drawn to Christ; they rather come themselves on the legs of their
self-love, than on the feet of Faith. Now when Christ does effectually draw, he
does it by love; Oh this me^ts, this draws, this breaks, this overcomes; and
now as we say in War, It is better to Reconci^e an Enemy, than to Conquer him
by force; because the one overcomes his power only, but the other overcomes his
will; so Christ could crush (and he does bruise his peoples souls with
miseries, they would never else be suitably affected with the bruises of his
soul) but this makes way for love; he overcomes the will by love.

Secondly, Or else if love does meet, affect, and draw them, yet it does not
overcome them, o^ draw them from the hold of sin, but as Ivy clasps about the
Tree with a root of its own. I have known some that have been melted, affected
with the patience and goodness of God toward them; that have been almost
persuaded, and yet have turned almost Devils afterward; the Reason has been,
because they were never quite taken off their own botto^es. Now a soul whom
Christ draws, the Lord in drawing him to himself, pulls him from his sin, so
that he is weary of it; the sight of Christ's grace, oh this draws indeed! that
now not only it dare not, will not, but cannot live in sin. Romans 6. 2. Titus
2. 11, 12. Grace appears to all; but it teaches us (says the Apostle) to
deny ungodliness; ungodliness will be suing and seeking for love, but they
deny it; the soul thus comes not unto Christ, without feeling of s^nne in it,
but that the Lord would take away all iniquity from it. Ier. 3. 22. And because
it fears there may be some secret evil; its care therefore is, that the Lord
would strike the root of all, and make it more bitter than death, to its grave.
The greatest evil of all, is sin; it is greater than Death, Grave, Hell; hence
Christ's greatest love is in Redeeming first from sin; And as if there had
never been sin, grave, nor death should never hold; so when he breaks the
power of sin, no power of Satan, World, Death, shall hold thee from Christ;
and it is never overcome by love till now. Let a man be ^n never such fears and
troubles of mind, and sinkings of heart, and soon after he pretends to great
joys, and assurance, but sin is not overcome, though it be s^ibbed and hid,
yet it will overcome you at last, and would pull thee down from heaven, if ever
thou were there; As if one that makes suit to another, and she is forced to
give consent, but she has her heart still to another Lover, he will never have
her; Not that the Saints are really free from all sins, and weaknesses, but
they are free from peace with sin, though not free from War with sin till
death; as when two Lovers are fallen out, it is enough if the League be broken.

2. Degree. The apprehending love of Christ; it sa^iates, fills, and feeds the
soul with the sweetness of its self, now the soul being come to Christ, and
seeing the height and depth of the love and pity of Christ. Psalm. 65. 2, 3, 4.
Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, he shall be satisfied; the stony ground
received the Word with joy, was affected with the grace of Christ; as one that
stands by where smells are (but smells do not feed) (or they may taste, but
tastes do not feed nor satisfy) So it is here. You know we feed on our meat,
that we may be strengthened thereby, and it may be turned to nourishment, and
good blood, and flesh, and be made one with us; so Christ gives himself to be
spiritually eaten by Faith, out of an earnest desire, that he may have a near,
a very near union to him, and he to us* Now the maine end of eating, is
satisfying; and if a man be satiated with it, though ^e think it will never
prove nourishment, yet it does; So, where life is, etc. Ioh. 6. 56. He dwells
in me, and I in him.

If a man tastes not a greater good in Christ, than in his lusts, he will fall
to them again from Christ; but if he feeds on Christ, and is satiate with him,
never can he hunger again; otherwise the soul will say, It was better with me
once, than now it is; Solomon, though he tasted all good of the creatures after
he knew God, and God had appeared twice to him, yet he felt them fall short of
what he once found, and at last he remembered his rest. When Abram gave his
children gi^ts, he did not lay hold on them with special love, but to him to
whom he gave his Inheritance; So the Lord may take hold on a man, and give him
many abilities, but when he gives himself as an Inheritance and portion, this
is special love; and wh^^ is that known? ( viz.) when the soul is fully
satiated with it, Psalm 16. 2, 3, 4. And hence the Prodigal he did not know he
should be received; but when he came, Make me a servant, if not a Son (says
he) and his Father hung about his neck, etc. So here. Ex^dus 6. 3. God has two
ways to satisfy his people. (...).

1. By fulfilling his promises.

2. By manifesting himself, and that to their satisfying, as sufficient to do
all what he has promised.

Oh Consider of this, you that have seen mercy, but it has not satiated you,
nor does yet! but you have other bread to feed on; the Lord never took hold on
you.

3. Degree* This apprehending love of Christ, having thus satiated the soul,
it const^aines the soul to live and act for Christ. Now, what shall I do for
the Lord, and the poor soul begins to lament days past of folly; and secretly
desires of the Lord, it might rather not live, than not live to him; and though
happily it often serves sin and self, yet the soul accounts that life death,
and so laments ^t before the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 15, 16. That they that live, might
live to him. John 6. 57. He that believes in me, shall live by me; i. e. both
by me, and for me; and Christ apprehends the soul fast now; for Christ must
rather lose his life, than lose this soul. Look as it is with a Graft, put the
science close by the stock, tie it fast, if there it withers, and rather loses
life than gets it, we say, Surely it is not put in right; for if it were, the
living Stock would convey sap and nourishment to it. So it is here; some herbs
are very precious, but for ornament, rather tha^ use; so Christ is dear, but
what use do you make of Christ? what life do you fetch from Christ? the least
joint in a man's finger united to the soul, has life of it; but Signets though
near to the finger, yet they have no life, and hence no union, and hence no
members; so the Saints have life, though weak; but unregenerate men (as
Signets) may be near life, and near the true Members of Christ that be
quickened, but receive no Life.

Gluttons will feed, that they may go to sleeping; others, that they may fall a
working; So, many take Christ, and get some peace, and then turn Grace into
wantonness, and so sleep in their sloth; but a gracious heart, all his prayers
and feeding, is, that he might have strength, and heart, to live and work for
Christ; Has the Lord pitied, pardoned? how Lord shall I now live in my
Calling? now his friends are by him pityed; now he is fruitful, and mourns,
when others be not so.

4. Degree. This apprehending love of Christ having thus constrained the soul,
it ever follows it, and dwells in it, Ioh. 14. 17. For after Christ has
apprehended the soul, so as that the soul thinks it shall never be as it has
been before; yet oh the lamentable decays and losses that it feels! it loses
favor and life too afterward, and lives against Christ sometimes (a thing
never to be lamented enough) but mark, if Christ has apprehended, he will not
forsake the soul, though it has forsaken him; and hence the Lord by his
constant assistance of the Spirit, recovers it again, brings it back again, and
that after questionings sometimes, if ever there was grace indeed in it; yea,
^f not, yet oh that it should thus forsake the Lord! nay, the Lord sometime
preventing before it was seeking.

Judas fails, the Lord never looks after him; Peter falls, Christ looks after
him, and recovers him; all the Disciples denied Christ, and fled after promise
never to do so; yet, says he, Mark 14. 28, 16, 7. I Will go before you to
Galilee; my Spirit is in you, and shall be in you, though you gr^eve it, and
sad ^. Adam falls, and one sin cut him from Gods hold of him; hence he dashe^h
quite to pieces; but now Christ upholding on other terms, hence, though his
people forsake him, yet he holds them still fast and sure, and keeps them from
breaking utterly to pieces; nay, if they be as water spilt on the ground, he
will gather them up again; he deals not so wi^h others, John 6. 66. Many
forsake him, being never given indeed to him, he lets them go; but Christ
speaks to his Disciples, Will you go? So if a man h^th a stranger in his House,
he will let him go, and enquire not after him; he came to me for a time; but if
he has a Son, and he is gone, he will find him out; and there he wonders at a
Fathers love, to see his Spirit; So here; and hence come the Saints to wonder
at the Lord so much, What is not the Lord yet gone?

I speak this partly to terrify those that go, and never return again, and to
answer Objections of Saints; the Lord has hid himself from me, and I have
forsaken him; yet mark, he will bring thee back again to himself lamenting, etc.

5. Degree, This apprehending love of Christ, it now witnesses love to the
soul most clearly and fully; the Question is, Does Christ apprehend any but
those to whom he witnesses love? No, for he does witness to all in some
measure; but here comes the clear manifestation of it; When I was dead he
quickened me, and since that I have lost the Lord, and he me, yet he has found
me out; and hence now the soul concludes, the Lord loves it. Gal. 2. 20. Who
loved me, and gave himself for me. Psalm 23. Vlt. The Lord restores my Soul,
surely mercy shall follow me.

Now try if the Lord never dealt thus with thee.

As this may serve to discourage, or terrify those that never did, Use 3.
so it may encourage those to preserve their faith who so apprehend Christ, as
that they are apprehended of him; If a Woman was never Married to such a man,
for her to call him, or speak of him, or think of him to be her Husband, it is
presumption; but when he has given himself to her, then let her own her
privilege, and maintain her claim against all Law, and wranglers, and
preserve her interest; So those that never were given to Christ, let them know
their faith is but smoke and vanity; but let Job say, Though he kill me, yet
I Will trust him. David Psalm. 42. 3. had that temptation, Where is now thy God?
that his tears were his meat, and drink, and was much shaken, and cast down by
it; but what, Does he lie still? No, he stirs up himself, and chides himself,
Why art thou cast down? Ver. 5. 11. He is my God. 1 Timothy 6. 12. Fight a good
fight of faith, and lay hold of eternal life whereun^o thou art called.

It Is very unsafe for any Christian to lay by Faith, and cast off the exercise
of it, because it is Christ's apprehending of us which does preserve us; True,
but it is by faith, which may not be at all times seen, as neither the other
can; and therefore take heed you make not this use of Doctrine here, because
many may apprehend Christ, whom Christ never apprehended; therefore what have I
to do to close with Christ? To be kept from putting out faith either in your
judgment and practice, or practice only? I would but only ask of such these
Questions.

F^rst, If we were only to look to Christ's apprehending us without the other,
why does the Apostle put such a weight upon Faith, as that all the benefits of
Christ are communicated by it? Heb. 3. 14. We partake of Christ, if we hold the
beginning of our confidence steadfast; and Heb. 10. 38. The just lives by it,
not from it.

Secondly, If so, why does Satan so much strike at faith? when Peter fell, what
did he strike at? what did he winrow him for? To shake out his faith; and hence
Christ prays that it fail not; When Satan comes to Christ, the first thing
which made way for all his temptations, was, If thou be the Son, etc. Our
blessed fellowship with Christ, he sees consists of two things; Faith on our
part, and the Spirit on Christ's; and Satan strikes at the weakest first.

Thirdly, If so, Why does the Lord Jesus so carefully seek to preserve it? both
mediately by all means and Ministries, Word, Sacraments, which are to feed
Faith; and hence Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 2. To establish you in faith. And ver. 5. he
hence rejoiced; and ver. 10. We would be yours to perfect your Faith. And also
immediately; Peter falls, Christ prays his faith fail not, his grace should
not; And 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3. Preserved by faith to Salvation.

Object. But I cannot believe?

Answ. Before faith you cannot; and after you do believe, the Acts of faith,
and lively working of faith, may be many times in disertions of the soul from
God, or God from the soul, hindered; and when he has those lively workings of
it, it is from the power of Christ, that it is acted, as well as preserved; but
yet if Christ has once given power to believe, he maintains it constantly,
and increases it; and therefore you have no cause to plead, I cannot; so that
you cannot sin, and live in it, especially in unbelief, and lie there, you
cannot draw back to perdition, but believe to the salvation of your souls; the
just lives by faith; we say we must live; Faith will be stirring, when no other
grace can be so; it Victuals the whole Camp, Relieves the besieged; and it is
most strong, when man is most weak. It Is true indeed, there may be many acts of
presumption for one act of faith; take heed of that; That faith is not
presumption, which the more it works, the more humble it makes the soul to be,
and vile in his own eyes; because as Faith ever fetches of Christ's fullness to
the soul, so it ever is attended with sense of emptiness in the soul
naturally, and then it is right.

Oh resist not the Lord Jesus, when he comes to apprehend you by his Almighty
Arm! Use 4.
In a shipwreck, if a man sees many drowning, and perishing, never a hand to
take hold of them, when one is reached out to him, will he resist it? Oh no! I
know indeed when the time of love comes, there is no power of overcoming and
frustrating the grace of God, but yet there is a power of resisting, which the
Lord complains of in them, Acts 7. and which he makes his people to complain
with bitterness of in his bosom when his time comes. Isaiah 50. 2. The Lord
cries out of his people when they had sold themselves into the hand of their
enemies, and were apt to lay the fault on the Lord, as men do. Now the Lord
gives not me a heart to believe; Says he, Wherefore when I came, was there
none to answer? Object. You can never pardon such finners, help against such
sins, mercy cannot reach us? Is my hand shortened? No such matter. I do not
press you now to apprehend Christ, but resist not the Lord when he has his
hand upon thy heart or conscience to apprehend thee. Is the Lord at work with
none of you? art forsaken of Christ altogether? There are many ways of
Resisting Christ thus; I Will only name these two.

First, When the soul will not suffer the Lord Jesus to bruise, or cross its
will, that so he may prevail over the resistancy of it. A strong arm, a
strong man when his arm is bruised, or broken, or wounded, takes away the act
of resistance; as taking away the very life from it, takes away the very power
of resistance; so Christ would unite himself to the soul; there can be no
constant union, where there is constant resistance. Christ comes to take away
that; hence bruises and wounds the soul; outwardly sometime in name, estate;
inwardly in conscience, in heart. Now here is men's folly, That they will not be
humbled, when they hear of their estate in the Word; they will not believe
it is so, though they stand all the while convinced therein, as if they had been
named; nay, they will not think of it; if it begins to trouble them, or if they
do begin, they think it is the temptation of the Devil; and if their estates or
names begin to dye, they will not be poor nor despised; they had rather dye, or
live in vexing and fretting, rather than yield; they will have Gods Will bowed
to theirs, not theirs to the Lord, nor yield themselves Captives to his mercy,
let him do with them what he will, who owes them nothing. Thus it was with
Ephraim; Capernaum heard, admired, embraced Christ, but yet repented not; that
was to live in the smoke and fire; Woe to you, says he, for it. Ier. 6. 7, 8.
Be instructed; He says not, Instruct thy self, but be instructed, be
convinced, be humbled for thy sin, lest my soul depart; I am with thee yet to
pardon it, yet to take it away.

Secondly, When they will not be gathered to Christ, nor come to him, nor
receive his love when it comes to them, but put it far from them as much as
in them lies. The Disciples told Thomas Christ was risen, but he would not
believe unless he saw him; nay, unless he felt; nay, unless he felt his very
wounds; Christ pities, and bears with the weakness of Faith; But (says he) be
no more faithless, but faithful; and hence says he, Blessed are they which
have not seen, and yet believed; this, Christ complains of in the Jews, He
would have gathered them, and they would not!

Now here resistance is made two ways.

1. By the will; when the soul sees the offer of love fair and full, but will
not be drawn to close with it, because it knows whether to go, and live, and be
yet well enough without it. John 6. 68. Whether shall I go? It has some other
Lovers to give it content; but loss of Christ's love, is not for the present as
bitter as death to him; because having of it, is not life to him, because
something else is his life; this is enmity of heart; and indeed the root is
worse (if worse may be) you can find some pillow to ease you, when you refuse
Christ's love to help you.

2. By the mind; the soul knows not whether to go, and yet the mind does not,
not will meditate with fixed meditations on the grace of Christ, whereby it
might be drawn to Christ; but pores upon its sins, and unbelief, and fears,
and objects strongly, and continually against the Lord. Isaiah 40. 27, 28. Have
not seen, etc. (Beloved) It Is with the mind, as it is with burning glasses,
hold them to the Sun, and you gather and unite the beams, that they burn; So
the soul by musing on Christ's Love.

Object. Many say, I cannot believe though I see a command for it; and God will
not help me.

Answer. The fault is not here, but in this, You will not use this means in
musing on the gracious freeness, riches and need of his love, Psalm. 6^. 6, 7.
but on the earth.

1. Object. You will say, I cannot but resist.

Answer, Yet I pray give us leave to exhort you to believe; give Peter leave to
persuade; Acts 3. 19. Repent and be converted; the Lord requires that only; it
may be the Lord may go away from thy soul, and take his leave of thee for ever;
and if you did know, you would no^ crucify, nor resist the Lord of glory; if
you would consider, you would know.

2. Object. I find my heart much affected and drawn, but then I am afraid of
pr^suming; ^ow shall I know when I may close with the Lord?

Answ. 1. When the Merchant has sold all, let him take the Pearl, and enrich
himself with it; the Devil may grudge thee it, but the Lord does not, will not.

2. When the Lord comes to draw indeed, you cannot but accept; your need will
be so great, the offer so fair, love so abundant, and like the honey comb
dropping into thy heart before thou suckest it; and Christ so dear, that thou
can not tread upon him whom God has smitten for thee. Mary Job. 20. 15, 16,
17. stands weeping; at last Christ appears, Woman, why weepest thou? whom
seckest thou? she knew him not; hence her heart stirs not; but at last he
calls her by her name, and then she knew him, and saw him present; Rabboni,
says she; and now had she best apprehend? Yea, she cannot but embrace him; Oh
touch me not as yet says he, etc.

Of Exhortation, To labor that the Lord Jesus may apprehend you: I know it is
nothing but his mercy can move him to it, Use 5.
even to take away that resistance of your hearts; but yet hear his voice, as
well as know his power, and harden not your hearts whiles it is called to day,
in use of means for this end, Psalm. 61. 7.

1. Consider your need of this. Isa. 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold;
Did Christ need? Yes, Christ himself must be supported by the power of the
Lord; Psalm. 40. 11, 12. Let thy mercy and truth continually ^reserve me; and
this was not only when sins swallowed him up, but when he had been preserved,
Psalm 17. 5, 6. Hold up my goings; You are gone in a moment, if the Lord lets
his hold go; you are kept in strong holds, in Iron bolts, in invisible,
everlasting chains, in the Dungeon where no water is, unless the arm of
Christ help.

2. Consider the benefit of it. Acts 2. 24, 25. It was impossible Christ should
be held under pains of death, because of his Princely Spirit exalting him; so
here, Christ is and will be with you, and when once he has apprehended you,
none can pull you out of his hands, no not the Fathers hand that was angry; and
he will never cast away his ( Ioh. 10. 29.) when they come to him.

3. Consider how few find this. Isa. 53. 1. To whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed, and who has believed our report? both joined together, the arm is
Christ, and the power of Christ by his Spirit in the hearts of his Elect; but
for want of this, it is that one lives loosely, and another falls foulely, and
never rises; another falls secretly, and is never known, and dies in a dream,
etc. and that there is such miserable scrambling for promises; and that men are
so worshipping whom they know not.

4. Consider the misery of the want of this.

But further,

Be careful to get satisfaction by blood, Means 1.
before Application by the Spirit; if ever you look for the latter, be careful
to get the former; God is full of Spirit; why sends he it not? sin is not
satisfied for, first get that done therefore. John 6. ^3. Except ye eat my
flesh, and drink my blood, etc. God could not send the Spirit nor Word but for
this to thee; a man feels the strength of sin, and prays, Lord, subdue it;
oh but look to pay thy Ransom. If a man be in chains for debt, and gets out
without satisfaction for the debt or wrong, he will be taken again; but if it
be satisfied for, though he be taken by the Jaylour, and ill-intreated, yet he
shall be set free again; and therefore do as those, Levit. 3. 3, 4. You are
freely to go to Sacrifice; and it is said, it shall be accepted to make
Atonement.

If the Lord withold his Spirit, Means 2.
mourn for the want of it; as Psalm. 41. 3. My tears are my meat.

If the Lord gives any thing, be thankful for any little; Mean^s 3.
see it, and make much of it, for it is from Christ, the least thought or
knowledge of thy misery; John 14. 17. The world cannot receive it, because it
knows him not; i. e. so as to prize it, love it, bless, and wonder at the Lord
for it. Thy Spirit is go^d, Lord let it lead me, says David.

Quest. What if I find not these things in my soul?

Answ. Mourn then.

Object. What if I cannot?

Answ. Then muse on thy misery.

Object. But I cannot?

Answ. Then hear what the Lord will speak.

Quest. What if he helps not?

Answ. Thou art unworthy, thou art his clay, he may and will do what he will.

Of thankfulness to the Saints who are apprehended of the Lord Jesus; you know
him, Use 6.
and he knows you; you come to him, and he takes you; you give up your selves
to him, and he gives himself to you; you make him your God and Head, and he
makes you his people and Members, etc.

Oh be thankful for this; it is a choice and peculiar mercy, denied to many, and
given unto you. Psalm 73. 23, 24, 25, 26. Thou art continually with me when
falling from thee; What is the use that David makes? Thou will guide; and
hence, Whom have I in heaven but thee? I might be broken, and like water spilt
on the ground every moment, but thou keep me.

Object. But I find the Lord methinks sometime utterly gone from me; and I
fear he will fail.

Answ. True; and hence Jeremiah asks, Ier. 15. 18. Will thou be unto me as a
liar, and as waters that fail? shall thy truth and mercy be spent? No, once
apprehended, he will not lose thee.

Quest. How shall I know that?

Answer. Something I have spoken, and three things more I shall add now.

First. You may know it by time present; There are two things which seldom
fail in deepest disertxsions.

1. The soul forsakes not the Lord by unutterable groans, when the Lord seems
to forsake it, Psalm. 22. 2, 3. and it presses hard after the Lord, Psalm 63.
8. and does not as the Philistines, 2 Samuel 5. 21. forsake their gods, when they
forsake them.

2. If this fails, it grows poor in spirit, and vile, and loathes it self, as
worthy the Lord should never regard it, Isaiah 57. 15. and so (...) grace most,
when the Lord makes it least; and when the Lord makes it nothing, it makes God
all things to it.

Secondly, If neither of these will serve, yet you may remember days of old;
as David, Psalm. 77. 10. Psalm. 71. 6, 9, 11. Some said, God had forsaken him,
but yet now he remembers Ancient mercies.

Thirdly, Then stay awhile longer in waiting for the Lord; what the Lord does
now, you know not, but you shall know afterward; Isa. 64. 4. that which eye
ha^h not seen, has God prepared.

1. You that are young men, has the Lord plucked you out of your S^d^n^ sin,
when you lingered in it, when you resisted the Lord in the heat of your youth?
etc.

2. You old men; how many temptations, corruptions, backslidings, pollutions?
beating out (as it were) the breath of the Spirit? yet from the belly to gray
hairs the Lord has carried thee, kept thee; Oh thy foot had fallen, if the Lord
had not kept!

3. You that have been once sinful, vile creatures, yet has the Lord loved you
for all this! what if the Lord take away comforts from you, and afflict? yet
has he not taken living-kindness, not mercy from you, but done good to you by
your sorrows, when others go by Droves before his Door, and takes none, etc. O
what cause have you to magnify mercy!

That the Lord Jesus at his coming to death or judgment, Observe. 5.
will make a perfect separation between the wise and foolish Virgins.

For the Virgins were all one together till Christ comes; and now the one sort
is received to Christ, the other separated from Christ; nay, not so much as
known of Christ. There are not, have not been any Churches in this life, but
there will be wise and foolish, Tares and Wheat grow up together; not Virgins
and Harlots, not openly profane (it may be) or wicked and godly; No, but when
all are Virgins in outward Profession, and Conversation, yet then some will be
wise, and some foolish in the sight of Christ, (though not in the sight of man)
and between these the Lord Jesus will make a separation at his coming. Matthew.
25. 31. He shall set Sheep and Goats at his right and left hand. Mat. 3. 12. He
shall thoroughly purge his floor, and separate chafe and wheat. 2. These 1. 9.
punished with eternal destruction from the presence of the Lord. The Son of the
bondwoman, must not be Heir together with the Son of the freewoman, and
therefore cast him out; they must part companies.

Quest. 1. Whether shall they be separated?

Answ. 1. At particular judgment; what became of the soul of Lazarus? It was
carried by the Angels to Abraham's bosom; i. e. to the Third Heavens where
Abraham was, and to fellowship with him, dearly loved of him; What then becomes
of the souls of others? they being sentenced by God, are dragged down to hell
by evil Angels, and are reserved; Where? they are reserved in the Elements.

2. At general judgment; the Elect shall be called to come and inherit their
Kingdom; and hence others shall be cast with the Devil and his Angels, to
eternal fire, which is there where the Third Heaven is not; and here shall they
be parted, and never joined together more, which is fearful.

Quest. 2. Why will there be such a separation?

Answ. 1. Reason. Because at Christ's coming they shall be immediately judged,
and examined by Christ; he shall then make strict and immediate (...) of them;
Why do these foolish Virgins creep in now? is not Christ present with his
people, ruling and judging among his people? Yes, but* Christ ^udgeth now
mediately by means of his servants; and hence he not giving, and they not
having perfect knowledge of the secrets of men; hear^s, no^ having perf^ct
hatred of the evil and hypo^risie of men's hearts; hence they are no^ separated
now, not cannot be (though the ^ervants of God should be very watchful) so long
as they cannot see nor convince men of all their Hypocrisy; some ^ight and
life he gives them to see beyond the^ own natural abilities, but it is not
perfected; and hence his work is (as the instruments are) imperfect; but now
when Christ himself comes immediately to judge, and they fall into his hands,
he can perfectly see all their secret evils; he has his eyes like a flaming
(...), and themselves shall know, and all Churches shall know; nay, all the
world shall know that he is ^ Go^ searching the hear^s and reins, 1 Samuel 16.
7. and he perfectly hates Hypocrisy; he regards not any man's person, or parts;
or profession, or kindnesses, or relations, (which move us many times to accept
whom ^he refuses against some ^ight): but as ^tis, If. (...) 8* He ha^es
robbery in (...) offe^ings, and loves judgment; and hence, the more present
Christ is with his people, the more able are they to discern, as Pet^r, the
secrets of Ana^ias in the Primitive times, or the Lord discernes for them, and
by some inexpected way or other little thought of to themselves, discovers them
by their own mouths, or base actions; by their fruits you shall know them;
Matthew 22. 12. when the King came, he was speechless, whom the Guests could
not d^scerne; So here, men have many things to say^ for themselves, who when
they come before Christ, will be s^^uck dumb. A wise Prince when he judges by
inferior Officers, they may discern of some cases; but if a King (as Solomon)
was present, secrets which they see not, would be found out; so ^ere.

Reas. 2. Because this is part of the Curse upon Hypoc^^tes, To be ca^^ out of
the fellowship of the Elect; secret sins do not only separa^e ^^ from Christ,
but from all out fellowship with the Saints, which next to se paration from
Christ, is the greatest evil in the world; It comforts the hearts of
Hypocrites, they are loved of good people, and liked of good people; and though
pr^vy to a world of filth, which a gracious heart is ashamed of, and loathes
himself for, and thinks himself not worthy of a look of love from any of the
least; yet Hypocrites quiet themselves, if they can cover it from the eyes of
Gods people, Matthew. 24. 40. but now they shall no longer rejoice under the
shadow of these Vines; No, the Lord will separate them to evil, D^ut. 29. 21.
which is partly begun now, and perfected afterward; Mat. 8. 11, 12. they shall
see Abraham and Isaac in Gods Kingdom, and mourn when themselves are cast out.

Reas. 3. For the joy and comfort of the Saints; for it is a wonderful joy to
the heart to enjoy fellowship of Saints aloue; when in a Sacrament we see
profane people approach to it, it troubles us, grieves us; when we come to a
place where we may be persuaded of the uprightness of all, it is very sweet; but
now there is some fear, and hence less joy; but when we shall see the Saints
together, and say, These are they who are eternally beloved of Christ, dear to
him, and to be with them, and be asone, this is very sweet; those that love
together only, rejoice to be alone together; so Saints, so Christ himself, 1
These. 4. ult. Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that keep his commands, and may go
to the City; for without are dogs, and those who make lies, etc.

Reason 4. In regard of the Glory of Christ, and Honor of Christ.

First, Hereby Christ's infinite wisdom searching the secrets of all hearts,
shall be seen, and that before all the World. 1 Cor. 14. 25. it is said when the
secrets of men's hearts are discovered, they shall fall down and say, Verily God
is in you. Rev. 2. 23* All Churches shall know, etc. Why? are Churches so
ignorant of that? Yes, they believe it in the general; but they shall see it in
the example, as well as in the rule, more fully afterward. We think he
searches all hearts, but are there no hypocrites to be found in such and such
Churches? Yes, he shows some even in such; and the more secre^ and subtle any
thing has been; the more openly will the Lord Reveal it, because this makes
the more for Him.

2. Hereby Christ shows his exceeding great love to his people, in parting them
and others; John 17. 23. I in them, that the world may know, etc. Genesis 6. 8.
No^h found favou^; Wherein was that shown? Verse 7. I Will destroy man and ^east;
but Noab found favor; and ver. 13. Make a^ Ark, etc.

3. Hereby he shows his acceptance of the uprightness of the hearts and ways
of his servants, which it may be are poor and mean in their own eyes, but
precious in the sight of the Lord, above all the pompous furniture and pithless
profession of Hypocrites, Man. 3. 16, 18. hence Mat. 25. Come take the Kingdom
for you, etc. What is glorious in the worlds, is vile in the Lords eyes.

Let none be then offended at the Apostasy of men (eminent in profession) from
the ways of God, in the purest and most reformed Churches; Use 1.
What are these people (say some scorners) better than others? some of these
make a greater show than others, and yet they fall; What are these Churches
better than others, where there is no such examination, no^ trial? and these be
your Church Members, and your holy people, and your Coven^nt^r^, and thus men
stumble. Oh consider, in the purest Churches there be many foolish whom Christ
will separate one from another; and therefore if Christ d^^h give a (...) of
this before hand, and those that are vile before him, he makes them vile before
others, that all Israel may see and fear, do not wonder at it. Isa. 32. 5, 6.
The Churl shall be no more called lib^r^^, f^^ he will speak; and think, and
work so. Luke 12. 2. Nothing secre^, but it shall be ^^re^led (many secret
evils are hid) but it shall be but in part here. Christ saw his Disciples apt
to be offended at the fall of Judas. Did not he know him? then he was not the
Son of God; or if he did, why did he suffer him? Says he, John 13. 18. He that
eats bread, shall lif^ up his heel against me, that the Scripture may be
fulfilled; and it is the portion of the Churches and people of God, to be
troubled with such as these, that the Scriptures may be fulfilled; therefore be
not offended; it ever has been so in the Primitive times, as well as in
Christ's Family; Paul fore^ells of Wolves devouring the Flock, arising out of
themselves; and 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. as there were, so there shall be false
Prophers; and Paul (though discerning) reckons his danger in regard of false
Brethren; and it is a heavy judgment of God, that that which should make a man
adore the depth of Christ's Wisdom, Holiness, Presence in his Church, and fear
his own heart and Spirit, should offend men in the least measure; for surely
these are warnings to all the Churches, and all men, and examples before our
doors, as those are, 1 Cor. 10. A man that is prescribing Rules of Art, he
gives one or two examples, he could give twenty, but that is enough to make the
wise understand, Hos. 14. 9.

Hence see the fearful and sad condition of those who shall voluntarily
separate Use 2.
themselves (and are glad of it) from the fellowship of the faithful; nay, the
Churches of Christ, they do but execute the divine sentence of Christ upon
themselves in this life, which shall be past upon them at the great day; they
shall then be parred, and cast out of the family of God, the Church of the
firstborn, of which the Churches on earth in their purity are a resemblance.

Look as it is in sinning, a man departs from God, and executes upon himself
that which shall be (though now it is not felt) his greatest doo^; so it is in
parting from the Saints; they do but execute their sentence upon themselves;
and hence, 1 John 2. 19. They went out from us, that it might be made manifest
they were not all of us; if ever they had portion in the Saints, they would
never have parted; not but that one may separate from the incurable corruptions
of a true Church, and not but that one may remove from one Church to another,
provided it be with love, and utmost care for the good of that where he was;
and also, not but that one may be forced upon some special cause to dwell in
Mesheck, and be forced to forsake Sacrificing, to show mercy; but I speak of
such forsaking wherein men voluntarily separate themselves from all the
Churches of God at least, though not the people of God, out of a base esteem of
their fellowship, and a hi^h esteem of something else which they shall have
without it; they regard not Communion of Saints, no further than it may serve
their turn; and when it will not serve their turn, then they forsake it.

This separation it commonly arises from certain preparations to it, which are
the loosenings of a man's heart from Gods people; Like the Apple, before it
falls, it begins to grow loose from that which holds it. I shall briefly show
how this is, that you may be watchful; many not yet fallen, but their hearts
sit loose from Churches, and fellowship of Saints, and people of God, even when
they think their hearts sit close to Christ; and I will not name all; for
particular men have their particular temptations; but what is most common; and
this is one secret sin, and plague of men in these Churches, and there will be
rendings; Christ's work is to gather, and Satan's ever quite contrary, to
scatter; and it is a Rule, What is Christ's greatest work, the contrary is
Satan's chief^st; as when Christ is humbling, he is hardening; when drawing to
believe, he to unbelief; when Christ's work is to gather and unite, his^s to
scatter, loosen, and divide; with that foot Christ treads on Satan most, there
he bites most.

1. The Lord withdraws that honor and love from a man, which either he looks
for, or thinks he deserves from the hands and hearts of Gods people; either
they are not lovely, or not loving to others; when they have either no personal
worth to purchase love, or they have nothing to give of love in exchange for
love, or else (to try them) the Lord for a time leaves his people to a
blockishness of spirit; their love waxes cold, or they think they are not
honored, or have not enough; and so (if men do not make) Satan will make them
scandals to themselves through their pride of spirit. 1 Samuel 15. 35. Saul
desired, Honor me before the people, but Samuel came not to Saul; hence what
did Saul do? you never read that he came to, or made use of Samuel again. We
are united to Christ by faith, but to the Saints by love, and mutual love,
Ephesians. 4. 16. Take away this mutual love, that you love not others, or they
love not you, unless you have Christ's Spirit which was in Paul, and all the
faithful, 2 Cor. 11. 16. you will fall secretly; and hence Hebrews 10. 24, 25.
Provoke one another to love and good works; say to one another, Pray Brother
tell me of my faults, and your fears; I Will tell you my heart again, etc.
Truly h^re is the temptation of some, if not of most, to Apostasy from the Lord
and his Servants; and this is the guise of Hypocrites, let any godly not honor
them, they despise them; let any ungodly honor them, if they be not extremely
vile, they love them and their fellowship, and are ready to think them as
honest as the best, because they make themselves their own gods, those that
honor them, are their good Angels, and e contra.

2. They begin to feel by woeful experience, no spiritual good, or power of the
Spirit and Presence of the holy Ghost in their fellowship, or in these
Ordinances in it; they have them, but not the use not comfort of them, and this
sets them going, and ripens, and rots them for a fall; for as want of love made
them sit loose from the persons, so this makes them s^t loose from the
Ordinance; and a man thinks now, What am I the better for the purity of
Ordinances? and so hence, when he should loath his heart, he loathes the truth,
and ways he seems to approve, and hence falls. For this is a standing Rule,
Let a man have Ordinances, and not know how to use them, or not indeed make
spiritual use of them, if he knows it, but he will sit loose from them. Mal. 3.
14. Zach. 11. 8. My soul abhorred them, and they abhorred me; not their own
hearts, as it is with the soul and body, they are not knit one to the other
immediately, but by spirits, which if they be extinct, then they fall asunder.
Let a man have meat, and it not feed him, clothes that cannot warm him,
physic that cannot purge him, a Vineyard planted that never has fruit on it,
he will cast them off, and despise them; and this is the second step, the
heaviest judgment of God on men for not loving the truth, but taking pleasure
in unrighteousness; and this works thus especially, if they have had some trial
of the people of God sometime, and after great expectations of receiving good
from them, meet with but little; the Word, Sacraments, Fastings, hence come to
be stones, not bread; the heaven of promises is Iron, and there is no rain
falls on them; and hence they, 1. Carelessly refuse at sometimes to come to the
fellowship of the Saints. 2. Hence if they do come, they come late. 3. If
timely, yet without prayer, or prizing of them; they have felt no good, and now
they expect little. 4. If conscience force to duties, yet they think them too
tedious, or too frequent. Ezekiel 11. 21. they are losing, and dying, no man
will tell you so particularly, but the Lord tells thee so now.

3. The Lord visits them with many sad and outward evils, and strange
unexpected Trials, which they thought they could bear, but indeed cannot, puts
them upon great losses, and leaves them to sad wants, their estates decay, they
run into debt, and provisions are scarce, etc. and now they secretly repent
themselves of the fellowship of Gods people, but accout their course and
hazards they have run, either madness or rashness. Moses Heb. 11. 25. did
choose affliction and suffering, that he lotted upon, and upon nothing else;
hence forsook honor and preferments, and pleasures; men not doing thus, hence
choose the world, and forsake the ways of God; the Israelites brought to the
Wilderness, they would go back; why? they questioned whether God was with them;
why? because they wanted water, bread, and variety of blessings, N^^b. 16. 13,
14. And this sets them off; as a man that loves his friend very well, but when
he puts him to so much cost, and is so costly by his company, let him then even
go; so do many men, the Lord and his Ordinances.

4. Hereupon they come to call all into question again, which were without
(...) before, the ways and Ordinances of God; What warrant now say they, have
you for Covenant, such constitution on of Churches, of Saints, st^ict exami ing
of members? and why not a form of Prayer? and why not a Ceremo^y lawful? and
now they want but a temptation, and then they fall. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. They
receive not the truth in love; Why not? because they feel loss by the truth, or
feel not the spiritual good of the truth, and hence are given up to believe
lies; the first beginning of which is to question the Truth, not from
tenderness of conscience, though that be pretended, but from carnal lust; and
hence, Ezekiel 11. 24. whose heart goes after that derestable thing, and this
they are hardened in; if any good men by violence of temptation fall therein.
Thus men fall from fellowship, and sit l^ose; you will fall, if you look not to
it (which I say is fearful) And as Christ said, By this shall all know you are
my Disciples, if you love; so all men shall know you are none of Christ's, if
you fall here, if you sit loose, etc. I have been searching and discovering
that which is working in sundry, and lies as leaven, cast it out of your doors.

We may see hence one just ground of that diligent and narrow search and Use 3.
trial, Churches here do or should make of all those whom they receive to be
fellow members with them; the Lord Jesus will make a very strict search and
examination of wise and foolish, when he comes, and will put a difference
between them then; may not men, not Churches imitate the Lord Jesus according
to their light now? If indeed all the Congr^ation of the baptized were holy,
then as Korah said, They take too much upon them; if Christ at his coming,
would make neither examination, nor separation, not only of people baptized at
large, but of professors, and glorious professors of his Truth and Name; if
Churches were not set to disce^^e between Harlots and Virgins, foolish Virgins
and wise, as much as in them lies, that so some of the glory of Christ may be
seen in his Churches here, as well as at the last day; then the gate might be
opened wide, and flung ^^ the hinges too for all comers; and you might call the
Churches of Christ, the Inn and Tavern of Christ to receive all strangers, if
they will pay for what they call for, and bear scot and lot in the Town, and
not the house and Temple of Christ only to entertain his Friends. But
(Beloved) the Church has the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and what they
bind and loose, following the example and rule of Christ is bound and loosed
in Heaven, and they judge in the room of Christ. 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. 2. Cor. 2. 10.
Whom the Church casts out, and bids depa^ to Satan, Christ does; whom the
Church receives to it self, Christ does; we should receive in none but such as
have visible right to Christ, and Communion of Saints. None have right to
Christ in his Ordinances, but such as shall have Comm^nion with Christ at his
coming to judge the World; hence if we could be so Eagle-eyed, as to d^scern
them now that are Hypocrites, we should exclude them now, as Christ will,
because they have no right; but that we cannot do, the Lord will therefore do
it for his Churches; yet let the Churches learn from this, to do what they can
for the Lord now.

There is a fourfold Glory of Christ shining in his separating foolish and
wise at the last day; which when Churches imitate now, they hold out now.

First, Hereby he shows his wisdom, in discovering the secrets of darkness,
and all the wily knots men have tied, to hamper themselves in their own
miseries; so Churches show forth this wisdom, not only in discovering such
whom you may feel to be hairy, rough Esaus with M^^onson, but such as have
Jacobs voice, and are very wily; when the secrets of hi^ spirit are discovered,
they will say, if not proud and passionate, God is in you; hence the wisdom of
Christ, Rev. 2. 2.

Secondly, Hereby the Lord Jesus shows h^s holiness, who withdrawes himself
from those that are foolish, though outwardly most glorious; for he will be
sanctified; so the Churches shadow out the holiness of Christ ^erein, who are
bound to be holy as he is holy.

Thirdly, Hereby the Lord keeps the Communion of his Saints pure; this is a
wonderful glory in Heaven, that only the Elect and faithful of God shall lie
down together; and is the last and greatest glory that ever shall be seen in
this world, Revelations 21. 27. One man or woman secret'y vile, which the
Church has not used all means to discover, may defile a whole Church, and
bring it under wrath, as Achan, and make work and sorrow enough for many a day
and year after, and bring that blemish and scandal as will not ea^^ly be worn
off again, and then men will wish that they had kept their communion pure.

Fourthly, Hereby the Lord abundantly vouchsafes his presence to his people in
Heaven, when the Goats are separated; now come and take your fill of love, and
possess your Kingdom; so the Church hereby gains more of the presence of
Christ Jesus in public and private; when ^das is gone out, now Christ comforts
the hearts of his Disciples; when the Lord has his Spouse alone, then he
sports himself with her. Isaiah 4. ^^^. When all in Jerusalem are holy, there
shall be a Cloud and Pillar of smoke on all their Habitations. And therefore
not only the Churches should do thus, but a godly holy heart will desire it;
it is the end of his coming that he may be searched; better had men be tried and
examined now, than by Christ another day.

Objection 1. But we must look not to what may be d ne, b^t to what must be
done; Churches have power to cast out them that be bad; but what power to keep
out them that be Baptized, and have a name to be good?

Answer 1. Christ does not only shut out Harlots, but professing Virgins; which
example is to be imitated now so far as we can; for on the same ground Christ
excludes, we have the same if we know them.

2. The Apostle is punctual for it, 2 Timothy 3. 5. speaking of the last days,
Having a form of godliness, turn away from such; He says not, Let them in,
and turn to them; and if they prove evil members, cut them off, and turn them
from you; but turn away from them; He says not, If they be profane, or not
baptized, and cannot say, I was humbled, and now I believe; but which is more,
if they have a form, under whose garments of profession you will ever see some
of those sores, Psalm. 2. 3.

3. Rev. 2. 2. It was accounted part of the wisdom and power of grace of the
Ephesine Church which tried them which said They were Apostles, and had found
them liars; they could not creep in there, but they were found out.

4. In the Jerusalem come down from Heaven; it is part of the glory of it to
cast out the unclean; but Rev. 21. 27. nothing enters therein which is unclean;
and are not they to be imitated now in their glory, who are set out for that
end?

5. To omit all other proofs, see Ezekiel 44. 8, 9. The Apostle gives a sad
charge, Hebr. 12. 15. Look diligently, lest a root of bi^terness g^ow up; the
Apostle does not say, It Is no matter what roots you set in Christ's Garden; only
when they spring up, and begin to seed and infect others, then have a care of
them; but look there be not a root there; truly so we do; for they tell us they
believe and repent, and we believe them, other strict inquiry we make not; Oh
but says he, Look diligently to it; it is ill counsel to the Gardner to say,
have a care to weed your Garden; but it is no matter, God looks not that you
should be careful of your seed, so long as it be seed; nay, the Lord that
forbids me to suffer weeds to grow, forbids my carelesseness in sowing what
seeds I please.

It is the judgment of some Divines, That the first sin of Adam and his Wife,
was in suffering the Serpent to enter into the Garden (...) for* the ^uine of a
Church may be the let ting in of some one ^ll member.

Objection 2. But they that are innocent, and say th^^ believe, are in the
least degree of probability converted; and the best, we are but certain of
their conversion in the highest degree of probability; and therefore may both
orts be admitted?

Answer, No; Paul may fear with a godly jealousy some of the Cor^^hian
Church, 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21. and may know some to he childish, and carnal, and
weak, yet children; yet he calls them all Saints, and dates not mince his
speeches with such notions of probability; and Heb. 6. 9. We are persuaded
better things of you; A moral certainty a^ man may have, and should have of all
Church Members; a certainty of faith, conditional, though not absolute; as if
it be thus as they say, and I cannot, ought not to say otherwise of them, it is
well with them.

Objection 3. But the Primitive Church never received in any with such strict
confessions, and large examinations; three thousand in a day were admitted.

Answer, I remember a godly Divine in answering an Objection of late repentance
from the example of the Thief; having whipped it with many other Rods, at last
lasheth it with this, it is an extraordinary case; and hence not to be brought
in for an ordinary example; hence he speaks thus, When therefore the time comes
that Christ shall come and be crucif^ed again, and thou one of the Thieves to
be crucified with him, and it fall out that thou be the best of the two, then
shall thou be saved by Christ; that despi^^ng Christ now, puts off thy
repentance till then; So I say here, there is somewhat imitable and ordinary in
the Apostles example, in admi^ting three thousand in a day, but something
unusual, and far different from our condition now; and therefore this I would
say when the time comes, that the Spirit is poured out on all flesh; and that
time is known to be the Springtide, and large measure of the Spirit, when
Ministers are so honored as to convert many thousands at a Sermon; and so God
and reason call for quickness; when Elders of Churches are as sharp-sigted as
the Apostles; when the conversion of men also shall be most eminent, and that
in such places where it is death, or half hanging, to profess the Lord Jesus, as
that they shall be pricked at their hearts, gladly receive the Word, lay down
their necks on the block, cast down all their estates at the Churches feet, out
of love to Gods Ordinances; when men shall not have Christian education, the
example and crowd of Christians from the teeth outwardly to press them to the
door of the Church, as those times had not; then for my part, if three hundred
thousand were converted, I should receive them as gladly and as manifestly as
they receive Christ; but truly, there is such little takings now, that we have
(...) enough to look upon our money, and the Hypocrisy of the world gives us
good reason to stay and see; yet we grant Simon believes also; and if he does
deceive the Apostles eyes for a time, let him come in, and tell him of his gall
of bitterness afterward; and if he be not o^stinate, but entreats Prayers,
Charity hopes the best, and lets him stay in, Matthew 3. 7.

Obj. 4. But you may in weeding out the Tares, pull up the Wheat, and keep out
the godly in such strict searchings.

Answ. 1. It Is true; and the want of tenderness and love to them that be
Christ's Lambs and Babes, having much ignorance, and carnalness, out of zeal in
some, not guided aright; and pride in others, despising those that are of
meaher gifts than themselves; or because of some weakness; which if they were
convinced of, would soon lament and amend; and to be so rigorous toward them,
will not be suffered by Jesus Christ, if continued in by Churches; Hence
Churches must be Watchful against this: And then.

2. If they follow the light, are weak with them that are weak, and strong with
them that be strong, and are all things to all men, and gain all to Christ;
look as the receiving of ^ll members shall not be laid to their charge to h^rt
them, so nor the excluding of some that are good. And this I Will add, The Lord
may see in some good people that are about to join themselves to the Church,
that which makes them fit to destroy a Church; not to build up a Church, as in
case of some secret sin not sufficiently repented of, and some decay of the
first love, Rev.2. 5. and the Lord by this means may recover them by Word or
Rod under witness of the Church against them; and hence many say, If I had then
come in, I should have been proud and vile.

Obj. 5. But there are many odd confessions by those that are recived, and
extravagant enlarged discourses of the jet time of their (...), and their
Revelations, and ill Application of Scripture which makes such long doings, end
are wearisome and uncomely.

Answ. So I would say, There may be many weaknesses in an Ordinance, shall. I
therefore despise or cast off an Ordinance? I could then cast away a^s; and my
own life, and soul too, when I had done; No, lament them, and heal them. I
confess it is not fit that so holy and solemn an Assembly as a Church is,
should be held long with Relations of this odd thing and the other, nor hear of
Revelations and groundless joys, nor gather together the heap, and heap up all
the particular passages of their lives, wherein they have got any good; nor
Scriptures and Sermons, but such as may be of special use unto the people of
God, such things as tend to show, Thus I was humbled, then thus I was called,
then thus I have walked, though with many weaknesses since, and such special
providence of God ^ have seen, temptations gone through, and thus the Lord has
delivered me, blessed be his Name, etc.

I have done; let all Gods people, Watchmen on Gods walls, still be watchful
and careful; there be temptations enough to make men fill and pester Gods House
with Swine; one has his friend, and his affection leads him; another he is a
man of estate, and his money is in the mouth of his Sack; another thinks there
is one bad enough, but we shall do well enough with them; Oh take heed of these
things! methinks a godly man should abhor the opinion, at least, if it was but
for this reason; viz. it is so suitable First, To a proud man; shall I stoop to
Churches, and give an account of my heart and course to them? I am as good as
they. Secondly, To Apostates from Churches; who when they are gone, then they
give way to these conceits, You are too strict, and are loath to confess their
falls afterward. Thirdly, And Libertines, who cry out, Why shut you your Gates
so close, that Swine and Sheep, Sheep and Goats, and all their Herds and
Herdsmen come not in? No, the Lord will separate one day; do what you can
therefore, you that are in Christ's stead now.

Boast not of Church Priviledges only, I am a Churchmember, Use 4.
and now all is well; say not, We have Abram to our Father; cry not the Temple
of the Lord, and all the Christians in the Church think well of me; for Christ
Jesus will make a separation one day (all is not Fish that comes to the Net)
and then better never have known what Church fellowship means, and yet be all
the wh^le a stranger to Christ; thou think all have g^ven their approbation
of thee; so in charity they may; but yet it may be some have had secret fears,
and doleful thoughts of thy estate; and what have they done? Even as we do with
those we cannot cast by any inferior Courts, we put them over to be tried by
the Highest Court of the Kingdom; and that is very dreadful, if their case be
bad; so here, one thinks it a shame to live out, and hence for to serve his
honor, sets himself up there; another wants Marriage, and that is the way to
it; another thinks of his gain in a Town, in Fields, or in shop, hence desires
it; another conscience is only troubled for want of a Sacrament, hence would
come in, and there they sit still; oh takeheed of this.

Hence see there is need of conversion in some Church Members; Use 5.
Did you ever see a Churchmember converted? said one, as if then the
bitterness of death was past, when once in the Church; some should look about
them herein; I Will only give this Rule, Be always converting, and be always
converted; turn us again O Lord; When a man thinks, I was humbled and
comforted, I Will not lay all by, and so live on old Scraps; Oh beware of that
frame! not that a Christian should be always pulling up foundations, and ever
doubting; but to make sure, be always converting, more humble, more sensible of
sin, more near to Christ Jesus; and then you that are sure, may be more sure;
and you that are not, may be sure indeed.

Of thankfulness to all Gods people called to Christ, Use 6.
that he should make a separation between you and others; this is the wonder
and Diamond of Gods Ring of love compassing all the Saints, in separating them
from others. Mal. 1. 1, 2, 3. Was not Esau Jacobs brother? yet I loved one, and
hated the other. Psalm. 78. 67, 68. He c^ose not the Tribe of Ephraim, but
Judah; and there was Sion, and there David; so for the Lord to choose thee, and
leave so many thousands in the World, is mercy; but to choose thee, and leave
many of the Town where thou live, that is more; that had some means, and were
better in birth, place, and parts, than thee; but to choose thee from thy
friends, two grinding in a Mill, and lying in a bed, one taken, the other left, is
more; but of professors, and glorious ones too, whom thou do highly esteem,
to choose thee, and leave them; to open to thee, and shut the door against
them, this is indeed wonderful! if thou art one of these, he has made thee
thankful for it; Oh this the mark and Crown of glory, and fruit of the Lords
old love, for his opening of thy eyes, and changing thy heart, and giving thee
rest and peace on his Son.

VERSE 13. Watch.
THat all the Churches of God are bound to be very watchful, Observation.
by considering the Parable of these foolish Virgins.

Quest. 1. Against what shall they watch?

Answ. 1. Against security, and dead-heartedness.

2. Against sleightness and shallowness of the work of grace in them.

Quest. 2. For what should they watch?

Answ. For the blessed appearing, and glorious coming of Christ Jesus. at his
first coming, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. they searched after, and waited for his
coming, and rejoiced to see that day; so should we now for his second.

Of exhortation to these Churches in N. E. Oh be watchful, First, Use.
Against security. Motives.

1. Because it is the last sin as you have heard, which surprizeth Saints; a
Christian at first conversion, strives and gets mastery over many sins, but
some are very hard, that he cannot overcome them; and because he cannot, hence
like the Israelites, he is ready to think the worst is past, and I cannot be
better; and hence lies secure, and makes truce with sin.

2. It Is a very dangerous sin; What temptation may not a man fall into, and be
overcome with, when he is sleepy and secure? A strong man that is asleep, may
not a child, any weak enemy cut his Throat, or pick his Pockers? it may be
when awakened he may recover his losses, but it is sad for the present with
him; so here.

3. It is a most bewitching sin; because nothing is so sweet as sleep, and the
sweeter, the stronger, and the worse.

4. It Is the temptation of this place. 1. Because when Churches grow secure,
then all begin to slumber; else one might awaken all. 2. Because here is peace;
we have our ease, and our pillows, and feather-beds, and are out of the noise
of persecution; and hence sleep, and watch not; are secure and dead-hearted,
and pray not; our hearts dye, and prayers dye by this means.

3. Because of many sad wearisome Trials, and heavy loads; it is hard to live
for some, and their bodies are weak, and cates, and distractions many, and
griefs from servants rudeness, etc. exceeding; and debts come upon men; sorrow
made the Disciples eyes heavy, Luke 22. 45. The poor laden horse when
sp^r-gall'd, and the Load heavy, and Legs weary, he will lie down in the high
way, till rest and provender be given him.

5. Oh therefore blessed are ye if you endure temptation, and watch one hour in
this place and time. I tell you the Lord will fet thee down, and serve thee,
and give thee what thou call for.

Secondly, Against sleightness, and an hoverly work; Motives.

1. Many looking after Christ, deceive themselves here; here is their wound;
they have some taste of sins bitterness, and some taste of Christ, and some
affections; but the life of Christ they want; not that all must have the same
measure; but consider of what has been opened to you; Oh these colors,
forms, and figures, and images, and pageants, and pictures, and names, and
paints, and gildings, are the undoing of many.

2. Consider the example of David, who though a Prophet, yet desires, O that I
might see the Lord in his house! Paul reached after more and more; as for his
prize, he made work of it.

3. Christ is full, and has enough Spirit; oh therefore seek for more! if you
know this gift, and ask, he will give Rivers of waters; Young Christians, look
to your selves as you wax old; what is become of your gold? why does Copper
appear now, in comparison of what it has been (it may be) formerly?

Thirdly, For Christ's coming; Motives.

1. This is the beginning of glory; Adam looked only for his happiness in an
earthly Paradise, but you are heirs of an heavenly, Tit. 2. 13.

2. You have nothing else to look for; if only of the things of this world you
might look for your portion here, it were another matter; but now when called,
justified, sanctified, sin warring against thee, and nothing but thy body and
breath between thee and Christ; oh look after it.

3. Sorrows in the Country cry for it; we think within few years the Land will
be out of heart, and want of clothes, or not money to buy, or pay debts, and
this and the other evil will ensue; so for particular persons, What shall I do
hereafter? etc. True, but glory will pay for all at Christ's coming.

4. All Saints ever looked for this long ago; the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. 7. and
the Thessal^^ians, 1 These. 1. ult. and the Philippians, Phil. 3. 20, 21. grace
teaches men so to do, Tit. 2. 13. and promise of mercy is made to such only,
Heb. 9. ult. and hence Rev. 22. the Church cries o^t, Come Lord, come quickly;
Oh wait for this time when he shall Redeem, comfort, glorify, free from all
snares and sins; if no hope in this life, of all men most miserable; some young
ones think it is too soon; old men that are near do it; many have businesses,
and cannot; cannot you carry it to the fields, and rejoice in expectations of
this, but must be always cast down? etc. O teach it your Children; speak of it
one Brother to another; some of you are poor and morning, oh be comforted, it is
for your sake Christ will come, and refresh, and wipe away your tears.

Thus I have finished this Parable; there are diverse and many Interpretations
hereof given by some, but I speak what I believe; I differ in nothing but ever
gave reason.

And verily if you regard not, the Lord shall bring all these things as
Witnesses against you another day; I believe it shall not be without some
fruit; give him the glory that gives it.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE, Showing the chief Heads contained in this TREATISE.
A.
Absence of Christ causes security; how; and why* part 2. page 26, 27. Acts of
holiness must be from Christ alone; and how, part 1 p. 31, 32, 33. Actions of
holiness must spring from an inward principle. part 1. p. 188, 189. Appearance
of men or Angels no ground of credit. part 1. p. 125. Apprehension of the soul
by Christ examined. part 1. p. 188, 189. Apprehension of Christ his second
coming the Saints duty; and how gotten. part 2. p. 50, 51, 52. Apostasy of
Jeeming Saints is to be expected. part 2. p. 66. Arminians Doctrine of inherent
righteousness confuted. part 1. p. 134.
B.
Blessed estate how known. part 1. p. 137. Bridegroom of the Church who is.
part 1. p. 67. As such, Christ will come. part 2. p. 112. Bridegrooms coming,
its effects to the Church. part 2. p. 111, 112.
C.
Calling and election to be made sure; why. part 1. p. 45, 46. How done. p. 47,
48, 49, 50, 51. Carelessness of waiting for Christ incident to Converts. part
1. p. 44, 45. Church Relation an high honor. part 1. p. 5, 6. Church visible,
the place of preparing to meet Christ. part 1. p. 3. Charity of men's sincerity
to be maintained with jealousy. part 1. p. 119. Christ the only and excellent
donor of grace. part 2. p. 91, 92. Christ how to be apprehended. part 2. p.
171, 172, 173. Christ in reallity, and for himself must be closed with. part 1.
p. 81, 82. Christ his person is to be embraced; and how. part 1. p. 83, 84, 85,
86, 87. Christ may be apprehended by such as he loves not; and why so. part 1.
p. 174, 178. Change of nature how known. part 1. p. 198. Coming of Christ how
manifold. part 1. p. 9. part 2. p. 37. Coming of Christ to judgment what it
means. part 2. p. 31. it is most certain. part 2. p. 36, 37. at an appointed
time. p. 120. when, where, how, and why. p. 105, 106, 107, 108. Coming of
Christ is to be believed. part 2. p. 109. expected by the Saints; and why so.
part 1. p. 88, 89, 90. sense of it awakeneth security.part 2. p. 47, 50.
assordeth comfort. p. 39, 40. how it is reallized to the soul. par. 2. p. 28,
29. Coming of Christ, its concomitants. ib. effects. part 2. p. 48, 49. it is
terrible. ib. Comfort not to be too soon, or easily taken. part 2. p. 85. when,
and how to be taken. p. 86, 87. Comforts denied to Saints; what, and why so.
part 1. p. 70, 71, 72. Common grace no ground of comfort. part 1. p. 139.
Compassion of Christ to the wise and foolish Virgins. part 2. p. 42, 43. it
should awaken the secure. part 2. p. 44, 45. Communion with Christ the Saints
privilege. part 2. p. 123, 124. the properties of it. p. 125. Communication of
good, no ground of men's boasting. part 2. p. 93, 94. Confidence of Christ's
coming characterized. part 2. p. 41. Conflicts attend Saints, if not secure.
part 2. p. 21. Conversion of others not to be hastily concluded. part 2. p. 65.
Conscience quiet, no sign of true grace. part 1. p. 139. Content in the Lord
Jesus Christ the Saints duty; and when to be acted. part 2. p. 128, 129, 130,
131. Cry at Christ's coming what it is; and why. part 2. p. 32, 34. Comfort in
desertion. part 2. p. 191.
D.
Day of grace not to be slighted. part 1. p. 120, 121. Day of Christ's coming
to judgment certain. part 1. p. 91. seen by the believer how. p. 89. Death to
be desired by Saints. part. 1. p. 104. in what cases not to be desired. p. 101.
it may take the goaly in an uncomfortable frame, but not void of grace. part 2.
p. 145. Delay of grace dangerous. part 2. p. 157. Defilement of Virgins what.
part 1. p. 38. Desires of this world wherein lawful. part 1. p. 103, 104.
wherein sinful. p. 102. Desires of the godly and hypocrite differenced. part 2.
p. 77. Desires of grace consist with want of it, and destroy many. part 2. p.
75, 76. in hypocrites last not. p. 78, 79, 81. Dishonor attends the unholy.
part 2. p. 55, 56. Divorce from others; necessary to Virgins that will meet
Christ. part 1. p. 11. Divorce of Christians from
Lust. part 1. p. 6. Law. part 1. p. 7. Door of grace and glory shut on the
wicked. part 2. p. 155. why, and when. p. 156, 158, 159. Dreaming a note of
security. part 2. p. 6, 7.
E.
Enjoyment of the world and Christ inconsistent. part 1. p. 15. Entertainment
of the Virgins at the Bridegrooms coming different. part 2. p. 121, 122. of the
wise Virgins. ibid. of the foolish, what. p. 158. Espousal unto Christ how to
be effected. part 1. p. 14, 15, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119 Expectation of Christ's
coming, and its effects. part 1. p. 82, 83. Examination of Church Members, the
grounds of it, and Objections about it answered. part 2. p. 197.
F.
Faith to be judged. part 1. p. 79. false known by four notes. p. 80, 81, 82.
Faith its life of rest different from that of sloth. part 2. p. 22. Faith its
fullness not attainable by hypocrites. part 1. p. 205, 206, 207, 208. Fall of
professors not to be admired par. 1. p. 120. it is incident to the best. p.
233, 234. Fallen Saints must endeavor to recover. part 1. p. 239, 240. False-
hearted, their misery. part. 1. p. 125. False hopes fearful at Christ his
coming. part 2. p. 161. Fearlesseness a note of security. par. 2. p. 5.
Fellowship with Christ in Ordinances how had. part 1. p. 107, 108, 109.
Flagging in duty wherein it is. par. 2. p. 20 Folly and security found in
Virgin Churches. part 2. p. 10. Forgetfulness of God a note of security. part.
2. p. 5. Fullness of grace what it is. part 1. p. 195. it belongs to Saints.
part 1. p. 190, 191. is wanting to hypocrites. p. 192, 193. wherein satisfying.
part 2. p. 182.
G.
Glory of God the end of all his dealings. part 1. p. 62. sometimes denied by
Saints, and how. p. 63, 64, 65. Glory of grace how given to God. part 1. p. 66.
Going forth to meet the Bridegroom, what it means. part 1. p. 67, 68. Gospel
wherein glorious. part 1. p. 98, 99. Gospel-hypocrites are the worst. part 1.
p. 121, 122, 123. their Characters. p. 126, 127, 128, 129. Grace to be
carefully kept. part 2. p. 74. true and false differ more than in the efficient
cause. part 1. p. 135. true how to be judged. p. 144, 145. it is created in us
by the Spirit. p. 174. not communicated at men's pleasure. part 1. p. 90, 91.
that of the wise will not profit the foolish. part 1. p. 89. nor is it
communicated when desired from them. p. ib. Grace enjoyed, must not be denied.
part 1. p. 144. Grace common and co^nterfeit will fail; and how it does so.
par. 2. p. 62, 63, 64, 65 Grace true is constant and eternal. part 1. p. 228,
229. Graces created denied by some. part 1. p. 176, 177. their activity denied.
p. 178, 179. their evidence denied. p. 180, 181.
H.
Hearing the way to get the Spirit part 1. p. 103, 104. Holiness what it is.
part 2. p. 53. how, when, and before whom the Saints honor. p. 54, 55. it
looks not for honor from men. p. 57. Honor of holiness how gained. part 2.
p. 59, 60. how preserved. p. 61. Honor of the unholy vile. part 2. p. 57.
Humility fits for Christ his second coming. part 1. p. 61. Humiliatio^ its
fullness not attainable by hypocritespar. 1. p. 195, 196, 197, 198, 199
Hypocrites are in purest Churches. part 1. p. 115. how it comes to pass. p.
116, 117. they have some inward touches of the spirit; yet but touches. p. 191,
192. Hypocrisy its acts, and its cure. part 1. p. 150, 151.
I.
Illumination, its fullness not attainable by hypocrites. part 1. p. 200, 201,
202. Inward principle of grace, the want of it examined. part 1. p. 182, 183,
184. and aggravated. p. 185. Insensibility an hindrance of grace. part 1. p.
171. Insensibilitie of the want of grace, a sad estate. part 2. p. 69, 70.
K.
Kingdom of Heaven what it means. part 1. p. 3, 4. King the same to the
Church visible, and invisible. part and p. ib. Knowledge of Christ necessary.
part 1. p. 73. what it is. p. 74, 75. how gained. p. 76 77, 78. common what. p.
201. saving, what it is. p. 202, 203, 204.
L.
Lamps, the taking them, what it means. part. 1. p. 39. Lamps, their glory
what it is, and wherein. part 2. p. 52. Laws of heaven in the Church visible.
part 1. p. 4. League with lust what it is, and how known. part 1. p. 17. with
Law what. p. 19. Light, the danger of declining it. part. 1. p. 148, 149. it is
peculiar to Saints. p. 200. some in Lamps of foolish Virgins. p. 201. Looking
for Christ his coming, the Virgins duty. part 1. p. 96. encouraged. p. 97.
directed. p. 98. and characterized p. 94, 95 Longing for Christ his appearance,
Virgins property. part 1. p. 99. why so. p. 100. Longing for Christ in his
Ordinances, a duty; and why so. part 1. p. 105, 106. Longing for Christ's second
coming persuaded. part 1. p. 113. directed. p. 114. Love of Christ precious and
satisfying. part 2. p. 170, 171. offered how, and on what terms. p. 173, 174,
175. to be accepted. p. 176, 177. want of it is dreadful. p. 168, 169. it is
extended to such as love him. part 1. p. 23, 24. it is not vain. p. 25. how it
appears. p. 52, 53, 54, 55. Love of Christ how comprehended. part 1. p. 34,
35, 36. it makes his coming certain. part 2. p. 38. opens the door to the wise
Virgins. p. 157. Love to Christ persuaded. part 1. p. 21, 22 it must be fixed
in such as wait his coming. part 1. p. 51. how this is to be done. p. 56.
Christ's love to us how known. part 2. M. p. 184.
M.
Marriage to the Law, what it means, and how done. part 1. p. 18, 19. Means
ineffectual, a note of hypocrisy. part 1. p. 152, 153. and why so. p. 154,
155. Means enjoyed, no advantage unless improved. part 1. p. 156. the careless
use of means characterized. p. 158, 159, 160, 161 effectual use exhorted. p.
163, 164, 165 Measure of knowledge or fellowship with Christ must not satisfy.
part 1. p. 110. content in it characterized. p. 111, 112. Mind of man the cause
of truth or hypocrisy. part 1. p. 146. why so. p. 147, 148. Ministry the means
of grace. part 2. p. 96. must be of Gospel, not Law. p. 98. despisers of it
rebuked. p. 99, 100. described. p. 101. Ministers sent by the Church, but
furnished by Christ. part 2. p. 97. they are scandalized in the world, for
what. p. 102, 103.
N
Nearness to Christ the Saints duty and privilege. part 2. p. 132. how to be
gained, and managed. p. 133, 134, 135, 136. New Englands warning. par. 1. p.
166, 167
O
Opinion of justification by Christ alone, is not sufficient to salvation. part
1. p. 124, 125. Oil in Virgins Lamps, what it is. part 1. p. 168. it must be
prepared against the bridegroom come. p. 186. helps how. p. 187.
P.
Pain prevents security. part 2. p. 4. Papists confuted. part 1. p. 134. Peace
provokes security. part 2. p. 3. Peculiar work of God in the heart, the only
note of blessedness. part 1. p. 136. Perseverance in grace, is certain to the
Saints, and how known. pa. 1. p. 230, 231, 232 Person of Christ glorious. part
1. p. 22. closed with by faith. p. 69. Power of doing holily lost by man's fall,
restored by Christ. part 1. p. 28. Power of Christ in Ordinances how felt. part
1. p. 108, 109. Prayer neglected, a note of security. part 2. p. 6. it will be
too late when the door is shut. p. 163. Prepared for Christ must only possess
him. part 2. p. 137, 138. Principles of grace make shining professors. part 1.
p. 172, 173. Privileges outward, no cause of boasting. part. 2. p. ^54.
Pulling down Gods Kingdom is dangerous; and how it is done. part 1. p. 6, 7, 8.
R
Readiness to meet Christ, what it is. part 1. p. 40, 41, 42. necessary. p. 43,
44. its characters. part 2. p. 141, 142, 143, 144. motives and helps unto it.
p. 147, 148, 149, 150. Saints must be most ready. p. 151, 152 Rod cries to the
secure before Christ his second coming. part 2. p. 33. Resistance of Christ
twofold. part 2. p. 189
S
Sanctification, its fullness not attainable by hypocrites. part 1. p. 214. it
is opposed unto self-seeking. p. 215. its particular ingredients. p. 216, 217.
consists not in a sense of the want of it. part 2. p. 70, 71. Satisfying
sweetness of the spirit explained. part 2. p. 83, 84. Security the sin of last
times, and incident to Virgin Churches. part 2. p. 2. what it is, and wherein
it consists. p. 3. the easiness of its entrance. p. 4. a sweet sin. p. 5. marks
of it, p. 6, 7. the last that seizes on the Church p 17. a strong sin. p. 19,
20. a dangerous state. p. 34, 35. greatly sinful. ^44 Season of grace to be
taken. part 2. p. 164, 165, 166. Selling grace, what it means. part 1. p. 95.
Self-acting most pleasing to men but vile to God. part 1. p. 29, 30. Sense of
want, no true sign of grace. part 1. p. 193. Sin suits not Virgins who wait the
Bridegrooms coming. part 1. p. 13. Sincerity differs from the closest
hypocrisy. part 1. p. 131, 132, 133. it may be discerned, and how. p. 141,
142, 143. is to be sought after. p. 223, 224. motives to it. p. 225. means. p.
226, 227 Sleep its properties. part 2. p. 3. Slumber spiritual, its degrees.
pa. 2. p. 15, 16 Slothful opinions, what, and whence. part 2. p. 24, 25. Souls
are the vessels for oil of grace. part 1. p. 169, 170. Spirit of Christ, the
inward principle of grace in the believer. part 1. p. 173, 174. it fits the
soul to meet Christ; how part 2. p. 142, 143. must not be limited or quenched,
part 1. p. 193, 194. its fullness not attainable by hypocrites. p. 209, 210.
consists with the departure of Saints. p. 211, 212, 213. its glory, and the
fullness of it. p. 219, 220, 221, 222, 223. Strangeness to christ lamented. pa.
2. p. 126 Subjects of heaven converse in the church visible. part 1. p. 5.
Sweetness of the creature, what it is. part 1. p. 56. Separation one work at
the day of judgment and the reasons of it. part 2. p. 192, 193. Separation from
the Churches of Christ, sin. part 2. p. 195.
T
Temptations to Apostasy, three sorts. part 1. p. 37. Terrors occasioned by
security. part 2. p. 8.
U
Vessels for oil, are the Saints, not Jesus Christ. part 1. p. 167, 185, 186.
Vessels of honor, how they must act. part 1. p. 176. Virgins, who are meant by
them. part 1. p. 11. Foolish who are. p. 115. wherein they differ from the
wise. p. 152. they desire grace. part 2. p. 73. wise Virgins enter, but foolish
are shut out from the Bridegroom. p. 122, 123. Unbelief of the eternal doom,
denounced in the word, dangerous. part 2. p. 160. Unconstancy a note of
hypocrisy. part 1. p. 236, 237, 238. Unprofitableness in Ordinances, the
effect of neglect. part 1. p. 155. Unreadiness at Christ's coming, is woeful.
part 2. p. 139, 140. Unregenerate men are not sensible of the want of grace.
par. 2. p. 67, 68.
W
Waiting for Christ, fits for his coming, part 2. p. 145, 146. Want of love to
Christ is very dreadful in its effects and nature. part 2. p. 169, 170.
Watching over one another, the Saints duty; and how to be done. part 2. p. 8,
9, 10. Weaknesses are not graces. part 1. p. 129. Weariness provokes security.
part 2. p. 4. Will of Christ the object of sanctified obedience. part 1. p.
217, 218. Withdrawing of Christ, what it is, and how done. part 2. p. 173, 174.
Word cries before Christ his coming. part 2. p. 32, 33. Work of Christ to be
done, what it is. par. 1. p. 58, 59. must be done by such as wait his coming,
and how. p. 57, 60, 61. Worst of man's estate is to be studied. part 2. p. 162.
how known. p 163. Wrath of Christ at his second coming, great. part 2. p. 164.
Watchfulness the duty of Church Members. part 2. p. 202.
FINIS.

