POIKILOPHPONISIS* OR, THE Different Humors OF MEN: Represented in an
INTERLUDE At A Country-SCHOOL.

Dec. 15. 1691.

LONDON, Printed, for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel. 1692.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To the much HONORED Sir John Shaw Baronet. Sir John
More Knight. Christopher Pack Esquire.

Worthy Sirs,
WHen the Reflections of the Censorious bad Extorted from me, what the
Importunity of the Friendly and Candid could not Eli^i^^ (...) A Consent to
make this Scholostick Interlude public; I thought there was a great deal of
Justice, that it should be humbly presented to the Principal Erectors of those
Walls, wherein it was contrived; as a Monument. (...), and my Own Gratitude.
May the public Acknowledgment of the kind Assistance, that I received from
you, and your generous Parents in Reviving a Free School out of its Ruins,
(...) Encouragement to the Ingenious and Wealthy Gentlemen of the Age, to
favor Learning and the good Education of You^h, and it will Effectually serve
the Design of

Ashby De-la-zouch Leicestershire, Jun. penult. 1692. Your much Obliged and
most humble Servant Sam. Shaw.

The Names of the Speakers
Sir. Francis Freeman, a good Landlord Dr. Cas^e, a casuistical Divine Dr.
Helye, a Physician. Mr. Speed, Sir Francis his Clark. Simon Shorthose. a
scrupulous Man. Lawrence Large, a broad conscienc'd Man. Benjamin Brag, a
confident ^^uff. Harry Heart, a pusillanimous Man. Mr. Spruce, a finnical Gentle
man. Goodman Gray, ^^clownish Countryman. Anthony, Angier, a pettish testy Man.
Lawrence ^amb, a meek sheepish Man. Will, Wake, a hen-peckt Man. Charles
Catchit, a covetous Man. Peter Peace, a contented Man. Mr. Medler, a
News-monger. Mr. Slack, an Epicure. Mr. Grindon, a snarling Carpet. Frank
Fawns, a Flatterer. Stephen Sad, a Melancholist. Moses Merry, a castaway Care.
Kester Killagrew, a vapouring Soldier.
Prologo.
(...)

Prologus.
QUousque tandem, Auditores, Senescentis and caduci ora^^ris facetias audire
and videre flagitatis. Satis est, plus quam satis est, quod praeceptor noster
jam seniculus and repuerascens geniis vestris hactenus indulserit, ^uum ipsius
defraudaverit. Been vertat quod multis ab* hinc annis vobis donaveri^: vestrum
est consulere ne quid mali de futuro illi struatis, pudet equidem, pudet illum,
-- capiti non posse pericula cano pellere: multo magis pudeat vos exigere, quae
non est genii ejus vel aetatis praestare. Quod ad nos balbutientes (ne dicam
vagientes) histriones, non est quod veniam vestram oremus, quod ipsi promptius
impertiemini: Candidi enim hoc est ingenii, quod non potest laudare, saltem
tolerare. Sinite ergo, sinite, quaesumus, in haec aetate ludicra, quae in
aetate adolescentiori forsitan f^rent non tam ridenda quam corrigenda.
Queri^ur, and non injuria queritur Magister noster de quorundam (vel quarundam
dicam?) malevolentia victum, vitam and v^^ae viam sibi invidentium. Sed
incassum queritur; (...): sibi ipsi sapit, sibi ipsi placet; and rumpatur
quisquis rumpitur invidia. Male agitur cum m^seris paedagogis, si ad libitum
and nutum cujus cujus homunculi vani and sibi male temperantis, os eorum
obstruatur, and constringantur manus. Sed ^d vos redeo, benevoli auditores;
Convenistis huc ho^lie specta^um, and ut spectemini. Nihil nost^a interest, an
vigiletis, an dormia^is; an audiatis* an solum spectetis; an intelligatis quid
volumus, an approbetis quod intelligitis. Silete vel plaudite, laeti sitis, vel
sitis tetrici, candidi vel ^ynici, eodemres redit. Sciatis vero veli^^,
hodierni colloquii finem esse and propositum vos sapientiores magis quam
hilariores efficere: Cavete vobis de aegritudinibus animi, quas nos proponimus
solum ut sanemus. Boni consulite seniles lucubrationes and gesticulationes
pueriles. His legibus salvete omnes.

Prologue,
Welcome kind Auditors, and all ye who are either so curious as to come to
see, or so fine or so pretty, as to come to be seen. The truth is, it is not
worth your while to attend upon either what old age caninvent, or childhood
can represent. Nay, possibly you will say, -- Merito suspecta libido est, quae
venerem affectat sine viribus.

-- He Is a Fool that would make sport,
And has not Wit sufficient for it.
To which I might subjoin,

And he is a Clown that looks for Wit;
Nor Age nor Time affording it.
Gentlemen, If you find nothing to entertain your more exalted fancies, I will
administer this consolation to you, that if you be set on gigg, you may still
laugh at your own simplicity, when you find your selve^ disappointed. I know no
body that is endebted to you a treat, nor that has promised you any thing, but
your selves. Therefore if you cannot laugh that we have made our selves fools
for you, yet finding your selves disappointed, you cannot but laugh to see how
we have made fools of you. But indeed, good people, we are in good earnest, a
little to represent to you the extremes, that men commonly run into, that ye
may avoid 'em, and the enormity of other men's passions, that you may the better
suppress your own. We will not purposely reflect upon any person in the World:
And yet we would have every person that hears us, make application too. To
mingle good sense with well devised fables, facetious expressions or comical
actions, was of old esteemed a good way of recommending virtue and exposing
vice: And if we could possibly both delight you and edify you, we would dare
to call it an entertainment. But (alas) we cannot pretend to the one or the
other: The one we cannot do, the other perhaps you will not suffer. For I must
tell you, there are but few people in the world so ingenuous or good natured,
as to suffer themselves to be edified. Man is a male-pert creature, and will
much sooner fall out and swagger, than either fall down to stagger at any
reprehension. However Gentlemen, put on your holyday humor, and be as good
natured as you can: And if it be above us to receive your thanks, or below you
to give 'em, yet at least let us have your pardon: which if we cannot obtain,
we will take heed not to offend another year. But we are not sollicitous about
either the one or the other, knowing that when we have said all we can, --

Plays must run their different fates,
According to the hearers Pates.
Enter Sr. Francis Freeman, with Father Casye a Scholastical Divine, and Dr.
Hely a Physician accompanying him, and Mr. Speed his man waiting on him. They
Compliment each other, and take their places. Freem. MY worthy Friends, your
Visit is very seasonable, and I am right glad to see you. I know your
Accomplishments are very great in your respective Professions, so great, as
that nothing can match them, except it be that Singular Humanity, which
instructs you to communicate them for the Edifying and Healing of all
Neighboring Mankind. And I dare say, if your Sphere were as large as the
Sun's, your Influences would be as diffusive as his: You are rather straightened
for room to Act in, than for Benignity or Ingenuity to Act with. It is pity,
that such large Souls should be pen't up within such narrow Bounds of
Mortallity.


Cas. Good Sr. Francis, do not trouble your self (not to say us,) with such
high strains, which do more express your own Eloquence, than our
Accomplishments. They only show what you are able to speak, though it be such
things which we blush to hear.


Hell. I pray, Sr. Francis, rather make Trial, than Proclamation of our Skill
and Aptitude to serve you. Bestow upon us your Commands, rather than your
Encomiums, except you would have us to think, you have brought us h^ther,
rather to Shame us, than Entertain us. For my own part, I assure you (and I
think, I speak the Sense of this Reverend Father) I had rather do a thousand
good Acts, than hear of one. The greatest Ingenuity imaginable is imperfect,
however, it is not illustrious, without a proportionable Modesty. Tell us
therefore, I pray Sir, wherein we may possibly serve you, or any of your
Dependants, by our respective Faculties, and then, if we cannot approve our
selves able, yet you shall be obliged to confess us willing.


Free. Sir, I am well satis^i'd already, both of the one, and the other. In
short therefore, I will tell you, what I would consult you about. I am not only
a Landlord of Estates, but I take my self also to be a kind of a Landlord of
Tempers and Conversations, and that my Tenants do in a great measure, hold
their Minds and Manners of me, as well as their Lands. I have a plentiful
Estate, which I never labored for, never swate for, never fought for, never
studied for, never purchased. But it was devolve^ upon me from my Ancestors,
without any Care or Charge of mine; So that I take it with all its
Encumbrances, and whatever I find upon it, I take to be my own. All the
Inhabitants of it, are my Family: The poor that I found there, and their
Posterity, I reckon, have as much Right to live upon it, as I. The Land was
charged with them, as much as any Land is charged with an Annuity; which cannot
be discharged, till the Persons cease to be, or at least cease to be there is.


Cas. Really Sr. Francis, I do admire your curious Notion, I wish it were
imbibed by all the Landlords upon Earth.


Free. In the Application of this Notion (for that you know, Father, is the
life of all) I take my self to be concerned, to be almost paternally kind,
charitable, and hospitable to 'em; to make much of those that do pay their
Rents, to forbear those that do not, and to forgive those that cannot. And not
only so, but I take my self also concerned to look after the Health of their
Bodies, and the peaceful, agreeable Tempers of their Minds. I would not see
them injurious to one another, nor so much as uneasy to themselves. The
Principal of my Tenants, are now in my House, they are come together to pay
their Mich. Rent, and I have made them an Entertainment. But I know your good
Counsel, and grave Advice will much excel my Meat and Drink, if you will please
to vouchsafe it.


Cas. Sir, you express a Nature so good, and a Design so ge^erous, that you may
assure your self, of what I can contribute to the healing of their Tempers, and
the reconciling of their Differences: And that without respect to any Party or
Sect whatsoever. The very words, Sect, Fashion, Schis^, I verily believe, have
created more Divisions, and more Enmity amongst Men, than the things themselves
about they which differ. Every party, as they are more potent or more numerous
than other, take it to be their privilege, to call all the rest that are not
of their mind, Factious, or Schismatical. And why should one party be called a
Sect more than another, merely because it is less, or perhaps less favored in
the World? -- mutato nemine de te Fabula narretur. Do but turn the Tables,
alter the Scene, change the Scales, and then they that branded the other for
Sectaries, will themselves be ^ound to be but a Sect. A Sect is but a part in
proper speaking, and there is no Party in the world can pretend to be any more.
Let any party in the world swell it self by Numbers, by Power, by Preferments
and Privileges, or (which is more) in Pride and Self-conceitedness; yet it
will never be able to get to be the whole, no more than the Frog in the Fable,
could get to match the Ox. The Aristotelian Philosophers had once almost
engrost to themselves the name of Philosophers; and yet they were but a Sect of
Philosophers, for all that. For my part, Sr. Francis, I look upon every man to
be a Sect, or Particle of the Universe, and as such I love him, as such I would
serve him.


Free. Sir, I do admire the Amplitude and Benignity of your Mind; I wish all
the Fathers of the Church, would respect all men as their Children.


Hell. I can promise nothing for my self, Sr. Francis, but to be faithful and
friendly in my Advice. Faithful in giving the best, and friendly in giving it
for nothing; that so, if I cannot mend the man, yet I may not spend his money.
There are many Phrases, whereby our Employment is expressed amongst men; but I
like none of 'em so well as that of Givin Physic.


Free. I had thought Dr* all your Givings, had been Receivings; they go all by
the name of Recipe's.


Hell. Yes, Sr. Francis, to the Patient it is a receiving, but from us, i^ is a
giving. For my part, as Father Casye looks upon all men to be Sects of the
Universe, so I look upon them all to be Members of it, Fellow Members with my
self. And* shall one Member hire another to be helpful to it, or relieve it?
will any Member that has Life and Sense in it, suffer a Fellow-member to
languish merely for lack of a Fee?


Free. But if you should have this Sympathy, Dr. toward all, you your self
might in time languish for lack of food.


Hell. No danger of that, Sr. Francis, let this Sympathy be, as it ought to be,
reciprocal, and all men will be as forward to administer to my Necessities, as
I to their Infirmities; and so Kindness and Charity will circulate through the
Universe, as naturally as the Blood through the Veins


Free. Well, I thankfully accept your generous Offer, Dr. But I hope we shall
not have occasion to give you much trouble; my Neighbors being generally more
troubled with vicious Passions, than morbifick Humors, Aegrotani animo magis
quam corpore. -- Speed, Call in hither my Neighbor Simon Sho^those, and
Lawrence Large. Speed. I doubt Sr. they will not agree to come together, they
are of so different Humors.


Free. I warrant thee, they can agree to eat and drink together, sure they can
agree to appear together -- --

Exit Speed. This Shorthose, Gentlemen, is a wonderful scrupulous man, and
exceptious almost against every thing. But my Neighbor Large, is not troubled
with that fault, he is rather in a contrary Extreme, he swallows all that
comes, and sticks at nothing*

Enter Speed, with Shorthose and Large.

Come Mr. Shorthose, you're welcome into our Company.


Short. Nay, pray Landlord, do not master me, you know I am no Gentleman.


Hell* Why, you are a Man, and you are Gentle; ergo, you are a Gentleman.


Short. Sir, whosoever you are, your Ergo sounds like the Language of the
Beast; and your Logic runs Arseward; for if I be a man Gentle, it will not
follow, that I am a Gentleman.


Hell. I perceive you are very scrupulous or very captious.


Short. Whatever you call me Sr. my name is Shorthose.


Cas. But what, Friend, have you no Christian name?


Short. Sr. I do not like Christians in name; Those Christians in name, have
quite spoiled the name of Christian* Give me a Christian in Deed.


Free. Nay, pray goodman Shorthose, be not so very exceptious, these Gentlemen
are Friends of mine, and I am sure design you no hurt.


Short. Goodman? Sir, I do not pretend to be a good man; I am full bad enough:
If I be but a good Tenant, I hope it will serve your turn.


Free. Yes, yes Simon, I own you to be a good Tenant: you do not scruple to pay
your Rent, and that is enough to recommend you to me; but I could wish you were
more easy to your self, than your scrupulous Temper does suffer you to be.


Short. Why, you would no^ have me to digest Iron Sr. would you?


Cas. Iron? I perceive you cannot digest so much as a Feather.


Short. A Feather! Sr. Feathers, as light as they are, are as hard to be
digested as Iron, for ought I know. I Am sure I had a good Cow choked with one
of them the other day. I guess ^r. by the length of your Raiment, tha^ you are
of the breed of the Pharisees, and by the Complexion of it, that you are allied
to the Priesthood. Now I hear it is a great piece of Priestcraft at Rome, from
whence perhaps you are come, to prescribe things as hard to be digested as
Iron^ and yet at the same time* to call 'em light things, and make the World to
believe, they are but Feathers. A Rapier is but a smathing, but it will run a
man through; and even Feathers themselves will choke.


Hell. I perceive Sr. Francis, that this man will prove my Patient. I suppose he
is troubled with a narrow Throat, I have an Instrument that will bore it wider.


Cas. Nay Doctor, I rather think he is troubled with a short-hos'd Conscience,
I will endeavor to cut it longer.


Short. I thought what a Doctor you was Sir; rather than make the Blous less,
you will make the Throat wider. And this you say you would do by boring it; I
wish you do not mean cutting it, many men's Throats have been ^ut, for no other
fault that I know of, but because they could not swallow well. And as for your
cutting a Conscience longer, Sr. neither I, nor never a Tailor in the Town, I
think, can understand that Notion. Many one I believe you have set upon the
Tenters, and stretched 'em till they gasht again; But cutting of Consciences
longer, I never heard of before. Sure, you rather belong to the Company of
Clothworkers, than Tailors. Certainly most men act by a public Conscience: For
if they acted by a private Conscience, it would inform 'em, that they ought not
to impose upon other men's ^elief, any more than themselves would be content to
be imposed upon by others.


Large. A public Conscience, Neighbor Simon? why, what can be more safe or
easy, or indeed reasonable, than to act by a public Conscience? Safe I Am sure
it is; for then a man shall meet with no Disturbances, nor Persecutions in the
World. Let my Conscience be of the current national stamp, and a fig for all
Informers. Easy I Am sure it is, it prevents a great deal of thoughtfulness,
supersedes many Disputes and Controversies, saves a great Labor of running up
and down to consult Divines and Casuists, and frees a man's M^nd from the
perplexing Thoughts of another world, when he knows that the King and
Parliament must answer for him. And to me it seems very reasonable to.


Short. Reasonable? I believe nothing seems unreasonable to a man of your
Dimensions. If a man had a Mo^th wide enough, he might swallow Mil^-stones.


Large. Nay, Neighbor Simon he must have a Throat proportionable, or it will
not go down. But as to the Reasonableness of acting by a public Conscience, I
pray hear what I have to say. You know we Countrymen are Idiots, homespun, of
no ingenuous Education, in no public Employment, we are not our selves
learned, we know not what their Hebrew, and Greek and Latin means: Is it not
fit then, that we should be ruled by them that are Book-learn'd?


Short. Book-learn'd? Away with this Letter-learning. If we cannot read
English, we are Fools; and if the Learned Linguists have falsely translated the
Original, they are Knaves. If they have dealt faithfully, we are as wise as
they: if they have not, there is no reason to trust them any more.


Large. But I pray, Neighbor Simon, do we not trust Physicians with our
Bodies, and Parliaments with our Estates? And is it not as equal, that we
should trust the Church with our Consciences?


Short. For my part, Neighbor Laurence, I never trusted Physicians with my
Body, nor never will. If Temperance and Exercise will not keep me alive, I will
be content to die. As for Parliaments, they are not a thing distinct from us,
they are an Assembly of our selves, what they do, we do: I my self sit in
Parliament at this hour, though I stand here prating with you. But I pray, who
ever made such bargain with, or gave such Power to any number of Spiritual Men
(as they love to be called) as to tax their understandings, or excise their
Consciences?


Large. I do not know who did it; but your Conscience is basely exc^s'd or
precis'd or some cis'd or other to my thinking; for it is not of the same size
with other folks.


Short. That Is because yours and theirs is of too large a size.


Large. I know not what you call largeness of Conscience. For my part I reckon
it a piece of liberty and generosity not to stand in awe of any punctilio's;
and a piece of humility and self-denial to resign up my judgment to my betters,
and to believe as the Church believes.


Short. I thought it would come to that at last. But if it be so, how can one
choose but wonder for what Man was made with a Mind and Conscience? Can one
imagine that Man was made with a Conscience, that like a silly Animal he might
be pack-sadled by every Driver, and ridden by every Jocky. He needed not to
have a Conscience put into him to qualify him for such servitude, sure. In my
opinion Conscience is that to Men which chastity is to Women; lose that, and
lose all; Farewell all Virtue, and all respect to things Divine or Humane. And
who can deny but that it is prudent and safe to suspect? Trust not, and you
will not be betrayed.


Cas. I confess, friend Shorthose, you have spoke a great deal of good sense in
what you have said. It is a great virtue for a Man to be Prudent, Cautious and
Inquisitive: to believe by authority rather than by argument, is the Religion
of an Ox, or the Conscience of a Horse, that obey their Drivers and their
Riders. But yet sure there is a mean; extreme scrupulosity renders a Man
uneasy to himself, unconversable to his neighbor. Besides, it argues weakness
of apprehension, and an unmanly Cowardice.


Short. I pray Sir, do not judge me. If scrupulosity be a fault, I Am sure
censoriousness is a greater. It is more tolerable to judge our selves than
other men, though we should happen to be too severe. But I doubt I have spent
too many words and too much time to little purpose. I hope my Landlord will not
be offended; and as for you strangers, I do not scruple at your displeasure at
all.


-- Exit Shorthose. Large. Farewell Neighbor Shorthose.


Short. -- Turns again, I do not make so much of my self as you do.


Large. I Am glad he is gone. I abhor this Puritanical squeamishness. It is not
for us Country people to distinguish nicely, to know the causes and reasons of
things, to rack our Consciences about every thing, nor indeed about any thing.
I think it is enough for me to follow my guide, and to ride in company with my
Neighbors; and in such case, I wonder who ever troubled himself to enquire the
way.


Cas. It is very good indeed, friend, and an argument of an obedient, humble,
peaceable, and self-denying Mind, to have a great respect to our Superiors, and
to have a deference to authority: for want of which some self-conceited humors
and pragmatical Spirits have strangely enflamed the World, and unhinged the
Governments that they ought to have lived peaceably under. But yet I hope you
are not so profligate, nor your Conscience so prostituted, that you would pin
your Faith upon any Man's sleeve whatsoever.


Large. Really Sir if it were a Lawn Sleeve, I do not much care if I did.


Cas. You do well to have a veneration for that Consecrated kind of Linen; but
yet pray remember it is but Linen, it is tender, and possibly may not bear so
great a stress as you lay upon it. Obedience is good and laudable, but then it
must not be blind. An easy, ductile, and tractable temper is commendable; but
the tractableness of a Horse, or of a Spaniel, are not commendable in a Man.
Reason is our distinguishing character indeed, but then it must be our own and
not another.


Large. I do not well understand your Learned sayings, Sir, but yet I thank you
for them; for I believe you mean well to me. And as to the main point, I fancy
my Landlords Worship is much of my Mind, that a poor Tenant need not trouble
his head about any thing, but getting his Rent ready at Lady day and
Michaelmas. I beg your leave to go to my Neighbors. Your humble servant Sir.


-- Exit Large. Free. Make much of your self Laurence: but take heed my Ale do
not do that by you, which I perceive never any Case of Conscience could yet do*
I mean, trouble your head.


Large -- Returns. My Head, Sir? I doubt your Hogshead will suffer more than my
Head.


Free. They are resolved to be merry I perceive at the parting with their
Money. I hope, Gentlemen, you will not be offended with their rustical and
unpolisht behavior.


Hell. Oh no, Sir Francis. I pray let us see some more of them.


Free. Speed, Call in hither Benjamin Brag, and Harry Heart.


Speed. Your Worship knows that these two Men can never agree.


Free. I pray thee hold thy Tongue: they will not fall out with us.


Speed. I doubt they will fall out in your Worships presence, and I should be
loath to see that disturbance.


Free. Go thy way. I doubt not but that these worthy Gentlemen will either keep
'em from falling out, or soon make 'em fall in again. Nay I my se^f have so
much authority, that if they should happen to fall asunder, I can make them
fall together again presently.


Speed. Together Sir? Ay together by the Ears it may be*


Free. Thou know Heart is of those principles that he will not fight; and
Brag I am sure dare not. Take this for a Maxim, Vaporers are never good
fighters. Go fetch 'em hither.


-- Exit Speed. Free. Gentlemen, these two Neighbors are also of a very
different temper, but I think both in extremes. Ben. Brag is of a bold,
conceited, overweening temper, highly opinionated of his own abilities and
undertakings. ^arry Heart is mean Spirited, Cowardly, Pusillanimo^s, easily run
down by any confident Huff; he has scarce the courage of a Worm, to turn at him
that treads upon him. But they are both good sufficient Tenants. I would their
tempers could be rectified.


Hell. It seems to me, Sir Francis, as if these Men would be put into my hands.
For these different tempers of Mind do mainly spring from different and
diseased temperaments of body. An undue mixture and dyscracy of humour^ in the
organized Body do necessarily taint the disposition and operations of the Mind.


Free. But I fear for all tha^, Doctor, we shall have much ado to persuade 'em
to take Physic. -- Enter Speed with Brag and Heart. They bow.

Come Mr. Brag. I have desired your company a little out of pure kindness.


Brag. I thank your Worship, Sir Francis, though I assure you it is not the first
time that many worthy Knights and Gentlemen have taken it for a kindness to
have my company.


Free. Not unlike Mr. Brag. But indeed I meant kindness to you, not kindness
from you. If any thing ^il you in Mind or Body, here are worthy Gentlemen, that
I believe can relieve you.


Brag. Nay I thank my good Stars, Sir Francis, I am not brought to that pass as
to need to be relieved; though I my self relieve many at my Gates daily.


Heart. He means the Gates that lead into his fold-yard; for other Gates he has
none, to my knowledge. And the poor that he relieves there, are nothing but his
poor Pigs, and a few Crow* trodden Hens.


Brag. Harry, Thou art a Mouse of a Man. I tell thee, my Mind to me a Kingdom
is. If I please to cal^ my entry a Porch, my Porch a Court, my Court a Square*
my House a Hall, or my Door Gates, they are all this to me* and the
satisfaction I take in them will justify the appellation, and warrant the
highest phrase I can use. For the content of my Mind is such as admits of no
hyperbole.


Hell. You are the happiest Man that ever I met with, Sir, sure your name is
Nihil. For I never met with any thing that was ex omni part beatum, but one
Mr. Nihil.


Brag. I know not what you mean by Nichils; I am no Latin Scholar. And I think
it is well for all you Learned men that I am not: For if my Education had
equaled my ingenuity, --


Free. What then, Mr. Brag?


Brag. Why then Sir, perhaps I had been Sir Francis Freeman, and your worship
Benjamin Brag.


Free. Methinks you are as free, yea as prodigal in your own commendation, as
if you had had all the Education in the World.


Brag. And indeed Sr. Francis, bating the name, (which is but a poor thing) I
think I am as much a Freeman as your worship, and as happy as any Man that
dwells under the shadow of a Scepter, I have a Body of Brass, and a Mind of
Gold; my Constitution is healthful, my Disposition harmless, and my Reputation
spotless. I can work as industriously as an Ox; when that is over, I can play as
wantonly as a Calf. In the night I sleep like a Top, in the morning I fly
abroad like a Gigg I can eat like a Horse, and drink like an Ox, and yet not
make a Beast of my self by either eating or drinking. My Mind is virtuously
disposed: I hate no man, I despise no man, I envy no man, I admire no man. I
have no Enemies that I know of; If I have, I wish they were my friends. I have
a chaste and loyal wife, dutiful and obedient children, diligent and faithful
servants, peaceable and kind Neighbors. And now, Sir Francis, give me but
leave to add to all these such a Landlord as I desire, and what flesh upon
Earth happier than Ben.


Free. You mean a Landlord that would look for no Rent, I warrant.


Brag. Nay for looking, if that were the worst, let him look his Eyes out if he
will: but this straining; oh this straining puts the poor Tenant to the
greatest distress of any thing. I would the King would call a Parliament of
Tenants, we would soon redress this grievance.


Heart. Nay pray, Mr. Brag, let Tenants be content to be Tenants still. He that
is Mr. Brag whilst he is a Tenant what would he be if he were a Landlord?


Brag. Why what would he be, do thou think man?


Heart. I doubt he would add soraewhat, and lengthen himself out to Braggadochio.


Brag. I believe thou wast ha^cht under an Hen, Harry, and car'st not to be
trodden by every Crow.


Heart. Nay, But I think it is good to know my own breed, and herd with my own
kind* It is a dangerous thing for Asses to associate themselves with ^orses,
much more with Lions. It is not for every back to bear the great burdens of
Worship and Lordships. Me^n men would bow down, yea be quite broken under them.


Brag. Ay such mean-spirited fellows as thou art. But I would my Landlord would
try me with his Worship and his Lordships, he should soon see how I could cudge
away with them.


Cas. But what, Sir, is there ^o insirmity of Body or Mind, no inconvenience in
your life, that you would have remedied.


Brag. Sir, if any thing ailed me d I would not complain of it; especially ^
would not whine to strangers. I have if occasion be, counsel in my self, both
for Body and Mind, I need no Physician nor Divine. But if you will needs be
meddling, or that you are so charitably disposed, there is a poor Sheepish
Neighbor whom you will do well to relieve. I believe he will dye of the rot
shortly, if he be not relieved.


Heart. Yes indeed, Gentlemen: I am a poor Snake, a silly sheep, a vermin, as
much less than a Man, as a man is than a Mouse, my Body is diseased, my Mind
discomposed, strangers despise me, Neighbors oppress me,. Neighbors oppress
me, I cannot be at peace with my self, I dare not fall out with other folk. My
days are wearisome, my nights are wakeful, my Wife indeed smiles, but I think
it is at my folly, and when my Children laugh, I think they laugh me to scorn,
my Landlord, I thank his noble Worship, is very kind to me, but I am troubled
to think it will not last long.


Free. Why Harry, you are a good Tenant, you pay punctually, you keep good
repairs, you have a good stock, you are a good Husband with it, and it prospers
well under your hands. Why are you so discontent and timorous? you want nothing.


Heart. Ah Sir, but I shall want. The worst is to come yet. I shall want in my
old age, when I shall not be able to relieve my self, and I know of nobody that
will relieve me.


Cas. Let not that trouble you friend, perhaps you may never live to be old.


Heart. Ah Sir, that troubles me too. For if I should dye young, what would
become of my Wife and Children?


Hell. I never met with such a cowardly fellow in my life, that dare neither
live nor dye, that dare neither live long nor dye young. Here*s no room for
Physical Prescriptions. If he had a deire to live, I could help him; if he had
a mind to die, I could hasten him. But I know not what to say or to do to such
a Coward as this.


Free. But I pray Doctor, is there no help for the case of these Ne^ghbours.


Hell. Indeed, Sr. Francis, your Neighbor Brag's Humors are so stubborn, that I
doubt no Physic will work upon them: And your Neighbor Hart*s so thin, that I
doubt there is no filling 'em. or bringing them to a Consistency.


Free. That Is strange. Cannot one take the ones wild Oats, and the others
Vetches? and sow 'em together, and make good pullymugs of 'em.


Hell. I do not understand that rural kind of Physic, Sr. Francis. But I will
tell you what I can do, I can make a Transfusion of some of Mr. Brag's fiery
Blood, into Mr. Hart's Veins, and some of Mr. Hart's weak watery Blood, into
Mr. Brag's Veins, and so make a Temperament.


Brag Say you so, Sir? But I will have no such sheepish blood run in my Veins.


Har. I thank you Sir, but I desire no Man's Blood; neither can I endure to see
my own.


Cas. I pray Gentlemen, take some moral Advice then; and you Man, remember that
you are but a Worm; and you Worm, remember that you are a Man.


Brag. As if I should say, you Father, remember you are but a Child, and you
Child, remember that you are a Father of Children. Come, come Harry, let them
talk of Transfusion as long as they will, Go with me into my Landlord's Celler,
and I will infuse some better Blood into thee.


-- He takes him by the Hand -- Exeunt. Free. ^ doubt he will make a worse
Beast of him than a Worm; if the company do not overruled him, he will make him
that he cannot crawl, and then he will lose his worm-hood as well as his
manhood.


Speed. There*s no danger of that, if it please your Worship. The Butler has a
strict Charge to see that they drink no health but their own.


Free. That Is very well. I pray thee, Speed, then go and invite Mr. Spruce and
Goodman Gray hither.


Speed. Your Worship does match 'em so strangely, that I doubt you will make
them fall together by the ^ars. For those two men cannot set up their Horses
together.


Free. But I Will keep 'em from fighting, or I Will set 'em by the heels together.
Have not I taught thee this piece of Logic, Opposita juxta se posita magis
elacescunt?


Speed. Your Worship has many wise Sayings in the year, which I am little the
wiser for; but I will go fetch 'em before your Worship -- Exit.


Free. Gentlemen, you will find these men in Extremes too. The one of 'em is so
finnical and complimental, that a Hair must not grow upon his Head, nor a Word
come out of his Mouth awry. The other, so plain and home-span, that you will
not believe him ever to have been at the Barber's shop, nor at the School till
now. -- Enter Speed with Spruce and Gray. You*re welcome Mr. Spruce, and you
also goodman Gray, I do not wish any thing to ail you; But if any thing do, I
hope here are Gentlemen that will heal you.


Spr. Your humble Servant, Sr. Francis^ It is your more than Humanity, to
invite us to the Acquaintance of these worthy Persons. And if they will help us
in any thing, it is more their Goodness than our Desert.


Gr. I pray Mr. Spruce, speak for your self. I think I have deserved at the
hands of any man living, as much as he has deserv*d at mine, Bless the King and
my Landlord.


Spr. I think you will never cease to be a Clown, till you cease to be --


Gr. That was wittily spoken indeed; I shall never cease to be, till I cease to
be --


Free. He means, till you cease to have a Being.


Gr. He means? It is your Worships Wit to gather Means. For my part, I am a
poor man, and know no^ what folk meanen but by what they speaken. But I pray,
Landlord* what have these fine Gentlemen to say to us? They are none of those
folk they callen Parliament Men I hope: they say they are in Power now.


Cas. No, no, Friend, we are no Taxmakers, nor Tax gatherers. But if any thing
be amiss with you in Body or Mind, we are ready to serve you to the utmost of
our power, freely.


Spr. Oh blessed thing! That this last and degenerate Age of the World should
turn out any such generous Souls!


Gr. Turn out? I think Mr. Spruce, never any Age turned out more generous
Souls, than this has done. I Am sure those that were turned out, did a great
deal more good, than they that were put in.


Spr. I hope, noble Gentlemen, you will not be offended with the plain Talk and
course Wit of my Neighbor Gray. He does not pretend to fine-spinning.


Gr. I think Mr. Spruce, you was spun so fine, that you had like to have been
twitter'd.


Spr. Neighbor Gregory, I am fine and true spun. Every Thread of my Life,
every Line of my Language, is as even as any Hair of my Head.


Gr. As for your Language, Mr. Spruce, I think if you do but speak truly and
kindly, it is fine enough of all Conscience. As for the Threads of your Life, my
Neighbors, Isaac and Eph^aim the Weavers, can judge better than I; for they
know your Warp, as well as your Woof. But indeed, I think either of 'em may
soon be as even as the Hairs of your Head; for I do not know any you have.


Spr. Why, what are you Gray-Ey'd too? do not you see I have Hairs on my Head?


Gr. I see you have Hairs upon your Head, but I much question, whether you have
a Hair of your Head, I doubt they are all borrowed.


Spr. Borrowed! I scorn your words, I bought 'em all.


Gr. Yea, so I think. But for all that, I doubt they are all borrow^d. And if
every Where and Jade on which they once grew, could come and challenge their
own, I doubt you would be laughed at as bad as the Crow in the Story.


Spr. I doubt goodman Gray, you have read the English Esop's Fabies. But I
pray, what have you to say against Periwigs? for I know you reflect upon them.


Gr. Indeed Mr. Spruce, I do not use to trouble my Brains about other folks
Heads, nor my Head about other folks Hairs. But to tell you plainly, as the man
said of the Wooden Deity, I do not like 'em. I think they smellen of Popery:
for if it were not for ^haven Crowns, I think we should have no false Locks.


Spr. Popery, man? Bless me from Popery 4. And pray Gregory, what if the Popish
Priests be shavelings, will it thence follow, that either the English Priests
or People are Popish because they are shavelings?


Gr. No Sir, but I think they that throw away their own Hair, and then are
forced to buy other folks, to cover their Nakedness, are very prodigal. And if
they do it for no other cause, but Modishness, it is apish and odious Vanity.


Spr. Apish? Ha, Apish? why I pray Gregory, whom do they imitate?


Gr. I think Sir, they imitate the French Catamites, whom this present Age does
so foppishly dote upon in all things, that to me it bodes very ill. And what
can one expect better, than that all frenchify'd Heads, should be subject to
the French Crown? Besides, Sr. the Prodigality of this Trick is as odious as
the Vanity of it. I believe, for your part, your Hair costs more in the year,
than your Head's worth. A Barber that adorns the Head with Hair, is a better
Trade than a Schoolmaster, that furnishes it with Brains. I would I were Mr.
Parliament for one Session Instead of a Poll-Bill, I would make a Perwig-Bill:
And if I should lay it but low, I believe it would furnish the King with Money
enough for the next Campaign.


Spr. And do not you think, that my Curled-Locks, are more decent than your
unfashionable Bristles?


Gr. In such Bristles as these I have heard, that the great Julius Caesar
marched before his Army over the cold Mountains: And thus bristled, did all the
Roman Dictators and Generals perform all their Great and Hardy Exploits. Oh
rare Improvement! Grecian Helmets turned into French Periwigs. and do not they
agree bravely? til'd Houses and thatcht Heads.


Spr. I know Gregory, you are an old fashioned Fool, and it is to no purpose to
talk to you.


Gr. I know Mr. Spruce, you are a new fashioned Fop, and it is in vain to answer
you. You are so fi^nical forsooth, and so complimental, that one scarce knows
whether he is Inlander or Outlander, English or French; nay, scarce whether you
be Monsieur or Madam. This I am sure of, you have not so much as an Hair of any
honest Man, growing either upon your Head or Face.


Spr. This I am sure of, that you are a fordid Clown. I was born under the
auspicious Planet of Jupiter.


Gr. They say he was the greatest Whore-master in the World.


Spr. And under the auspicious Aspect of the ingenious Mercury.


Gr. The Errandest Knave and Thief in nature.


Spr. What will this blasphemous Fellow make of my Stars by and by? I was bred
up in the most Advantageous Circumstances of Education: that what by Nature,
and what by Art, I may be very well called double-refin'd.


Gr. I fancy Mr. Spruce, you were cut out for a Sugar Loaf.


Spr. And what I pray, what was you cut out for, Gregory?


Gr. A lump of brown Sugar Candy, if it please you Sr.


Spr. A lump of dirt rather. You are Gray by Name, Nature, Manners, Apparel,
all over Gray, Gray, Gray, Gray. Your Coat homespun, your Behavior course,
and Temper coursest of all.


Cas. Gentlemen, you talk of fine spinning, and course spinning, but me thinks
I have seen Linen and Woollen agree better in one piece of Cloth, than you two
agree in Conversation.


Gr. Ay Sir, Linsye-woolsy is a good sort of Cloth: my old Jone has Aprons of
it, that wear very well. But I doubt it would pass the skill of any Weaver or
Barber in Town, to make up a Periwig of Whores Hair and Swines Bristles; or to
make Velvet of a Sows Ear.


Cas. But yet friend, me thinks if Mr. Spruce were a little more Gray, and
Goodman Gray a little more Spruce, you might make up one good even Thread
between you.


Spr. Sir, I tell you, I would not be a Clown, for all my Landlords Estate.


Gr. Sir, I tell you, I would not be so Spruce as Monsieur, to be as great as
he, if I were sure to be made Universal Monarch.


Free I see Father Casye, that Spruce will be Spruce, and Gray will be Gray
still in spite of all the Tailors, Barbers and Manner-mongers in the World* If
you please, we will leave these men, the one to his old Mumpsimus, the other to
his new Sumpsimus, and I will send for some others in, of whose Cure there may
be more hopes. I pray Sirs, go in, and make much of your selves, drink together
and be friends.


Spr. I thank your Worship Sr. that uses to make men friends, but doubt it will
make us fall out the more; he drinks so old fashionedly and slovenly, that he
will slabber in the Glass.


Gr. You had more need to wipe your Mouth after your Slander, than I after my
Slabber. I will never be reconciled to Pride whilst I live. I Will see all their
Periwigs made into fishing Lines, and their Cravats into Halters before -- --
Exeunt.


Free. My worthy friends, I Am sorry that you have only Exercise for patience,
and none for skill. Speed, call in hither Anth. Angier and Lawrence Lamb.


Free. -- And Lawrence Lamb.


Speed. I doubt your Worship will not mend the matter, by that pair. I doubt
your Worships Ale, has had some influence upon Anthony already; for I heard him
quarrelling and snarling when I was last in the House.


Free. You cannot tell, but he may be a little mellow'd by this time: And then
if Lamb be but a little sharpened, as sometimes it comes to pass, they may meet
in a Temper. Go your way, we will try 'em.


-- Exit Speed. Hely. Sir Francis, you suggest a great Notion, and I think I
may say, a strange Phenomenon in Nature. For really, I think there is nothing
more unaccountable in the nature of man than that wonderful Metamorphosis,
which is made by intoxicating Liquors. One would verily think, it were an
Enchantment. It makes the Coward bold and quarrelsome without provocation; the
Modest, Obscene and Rampant, without any temptation; the Covetous, and
Penurious, Prodigal without reason; the faithful Counselor sliftery and
impertinent out of season, and many other such strange pieces of Witchraft it
does perform. Sometimes it shuts the Mouth, that men cannot speak at all;
sometimes it opens the Heart, that they speak all, and more than all. It makes
the merry Melancholic, the Melancholic mad: It makes the meanest Subject as
good as a King, and the greatest King, as mean as a Beast.


Cas. It is true, what you say Doctor; and I believe with you, as well as
amongst us, it is unaccountable. But it is a ruled case amongst us, that though
strong Drink does discover Tempers, it does not make 'em, and that men had in
'em before, what they then bring forth: according to the old Maxim, Nihil dat
quod non habet. -- Enter Speed, with Angier and Lamb.


Free. Come Anthony, you are apt to complain, when it may be nothing ails you;
or at least, when there is no body to relieve you. But now here are Gentlemen,
that if you have any fault to find, I believe will remedy it.


Ang. What a goodly Harangue have you made Landlord? If I should bring such a
parcel of words instead of my Mich. Rent, I doubt I should be reckoned to be in
Arrear still. I am apt to complain, you say, when nothing ails ^ce. Why this
ails me, ay, and vexes me too, that I am poor Anthony the Tenant, and you are
Sir Francis the Landlord; and I work hard, and you do nothing for it. When
there is no body to relieve me, you say. I hope I do not yet need to be
relieved by the Parish: there are enough that do; so many, that I fear shortly,
the Parish it self will fall to some other Parish to be relieved. But here are
Gentlemen, you say, that if I have any fault to find, you believe will remedy
it. Even let 'em be gone then: for this is the fault that I find, that there
are any more Gentlemen here, we have too much of you. These are pitiful Genmen
sure, that offer to remedy people that have no disease.


Lamb. Something ails you Anthony, I doubt; what makes you so angry at every
body else?


Ang. Every body? Ha! you three or four are every body, I warrant, nay, you
Neighbor Lamb pretend to be some body too, do you?


Lamb. Yes Anthony, I am some body sure, tho I am but a mean Person.


Ang. I know not what you call a Person: I take you to be a Sheep.


Lamb. I may be in time; for I am Lamb already.


Ang. Away with you; Lambs are out of season: They are Lamb-hegs now.


Lamb. It may be I partake of both, Anthony.


Ang. Not unlike Lawrence, i. e. the filliness of a Sheep, and the sordidness
of a Swine.


Lamb. My silliness any body may see: But as for sordidness, I do not
acknowledge it: me thinks I am pretty neat.


Ang. Ay, if thou were well tanned, I think thy skin would be Neats Leather.


Lamb. I doubt you call me Calf too by craft, but I pray good Neighbor, what
reason have you to be so angry?


Ang. Thou silly Sheep! Reason to be angry? Do folk use to be angry by Reason,
or Rules of Art? He is a silly Sheep, or a foolish Neat like thee, that cannot
be angry without Reason. I tell thee I am angry, and that is enough. But if thou will needs have a Reason, I tell thee, I am angry at thee, for not being angry.


Lamb. Angry? Alas! I see nothing to be angry at.


Aug. See nothing to be angry at? Why then thou can not see at all, put on my
Spectacles, and thou will see nothing, but what thou ought to be angry at.


Lamb. I pray, Neighbor Angier, consider, we have a Puissant King, a Prudent
Parliament, a Pious Clergy, both pro and con, a gentle Landlord, good
Penny-worths, Convenient Houses, Comfortable Relations, peaceable Neighbors,
and what should fret us?


Ang. -- Stamps. Oh! these peaceable Neighbors are enough to vex any body, who
can endure to live, and mould? To lie and rust, for want of a little whetting
and sharpning. And do but see how your silly sheepish Fancy can digest any
thing. If you had any Concern for the World, as we brisker men have, you would
say, we have a King (it is true) that is no Child; but he is childless. We have a
Parliament that are no fools; but they may make fools of us. We have a Pious
Clergy (especially about Christmas time) what you mean by your pro and con, I
cannot well tell; but according to my little Latin, it should be pro mundo, and
contra Christum. We have a gentle Landlord, but he calls for his Rent for all
that. We have good penny-worths, but we pay dear for 'em. We have convenient
Houses; but they cost a great deal to keep in repair. We have comfortable
relations too forsooth; but I Am sure they are very costly, if yours be like
mine.


Lamb. I see, Neighbor, you have a mind to pick a quarrel with every Man and
every thing. But I pray how can you say, we have good penny-worths, and yet pay
dear for 'em?


Ang. Dear? we pay the sweat of our brows, and I know not what our Landlord
would have of us more, except he would have the blood in our Veins.


Cas. I perceive Sir Francis you have called this man in at a wrong time of
day, or on a wrong day, the one. He has been newly paying his Rent and that
puts him out of humor: He does as good as tell you, he parts with his Money
like drops of his Blood.


Free. That need not trouble him: He Will get new blood by Lady d^y.


Ang. Ay, and then that Horse-leach of a Landlord will suck him again.


Free. I had hoped that a Glass of Ale would have digested the Payment of your
Rent, before now. They say Ale heats the Stomach and so helps digestion.


Hell, I doubt Sir Francis, yours had heated more than his Stomach.


Ang. You are some sorry kind of Doctor I warrant, that differs but little from
Dog-turd.


Free. Fie, Fie Anthony, if you must needs be angry, yet be not nasty.


Ang. Nasty? I doubt your Worship will not give the Countryman leave to call
his Spade a Spade? Nasty? Ha! I warrant to gratify your worships
squeamishness, I must call the Gentleman Album Graecum.


Cas. Friend, However Sir Francis is squeamish, I'msure you are sc^rilous.


Ang. How is that Sir Reverence? Currilous? I pray what is that Currilous? I
doubt you mean Curr^h. But if you do, I matter not. A snappish Cur is as good
as a Lazy one; a crusty Cur as good as a Cur that will be bribed with a craft.
But I believe you can Bark too, when you are minded. You are one of those that
can Bark at the Sheep, and be silent at the Wolves.


Hell. I doubt Sir Francis, you must be at some charges with this man in Bedlam.


Ang. I need not go far to seek that, if a Company of Madmen will make a Bedlam.


-- Exit Angier in a Passion. Free. Farewell Frenzy. As for your part Laurence,
I am glad to find that you are so easy and all nothing. Here is no practice
for either of these Gentlemen upon you.


Cas. Nay good Sir Francis, It is sometimes Virtuous to be angry, upon
occasion: And I doubt no man lives but sometimes finds occasion.


Hell. Yea and it is healthful too; so it be not raging. Winds, yea brisk Winds
are good for purging the Air; and so are passions for discussing ill humors in
the body, and patting it into a right ferment; so they do not amount to
tempests.


Lamb. I pray Gentleman, do not go about to disturb me with your Divinity or
Philosophy. I value an even and easy temper above all the vertuousness and
healthfulness that you spea^en of; or rather indeed, I esteem it to be the only
temper virtuous and healthful. If I could be angry at any man or thing, it
would be at that man that Counsels me to anger, and at his Counsel. Therefore I
humbly bid you all farewell.


-- Exit Lamb. Free. They are so cross-grained, that I see there is no calling
'em in by pairs. I beg your pardon Gentlemen, and I will endeavor to prevent
this disturbance for the future. Speed. Call in hither Wit Wake; It is very
likely something or other ails him.


Speed. I doubt so Sir, for I saw him yonder with his Head lapt.


-- Exit Speed. Free. This poor Man is in miserable subjection to a domineering
Wife, that Hectors him like a Male-pert baggage, or a Fury rather. And I know
not what to do to relieve him.

-- Enter Speed with Wake. Why how now Wit? Have thou drunk Ale (...) ^ead
aches?


Wake. Alas Sir, It is the Ladle, and not the Liquor that makes it ache. My
Tormenter has been with me when I thought no hurt, and because I did not come
away as soon as I had paid my Rent, has paid me with a sore rent in my Pate.


Free. Alas poor Wit! I promise thee, if I had been there, I would have clapped
her in the Cage, and cooled her Toes.


Wake. Ah Sir, She Is a Bird not worthy of a Cage. But if you had put her in the
Cage, she would have s^ng you a lesson there, that should have made all the
Town to ring of you. And as for cooling her Toes, her Toes are cold enough
already. But her hands, oh her hands! she is so hot-singer'd that I am not able
to live with her.


Free. It Is wonder thy Horns did not save thy Head.


Wake. I doubt not Sir, but she has made more Horns on my Head, than Knobs. For
when she beats me out of Bed, and out of Doors a Nights, I question not but it
is to make room for other company.


Cas. I have heard of a disease in Men, called Henpeckt; but I never thought
the Hens had peckt so deep, as to send their Husbands to the Chirurgions.


Wake. Ah Sir, peck deep? M^ne pecks so deep that I believe she will peck out
my Brains shortly.


Cas. But what, friend, cannot you pull up your Heart out of your ^ose, and put
on courage?


Wake. Indeed Sir, I cannot find in my Heart to hurt her, neither is it in the
power of my Hands to keep her from hurting me. She got the mastery at the
first, and she is resolved to keep it.


Cas. Nay friend, if it be so, and that you cannot put on the Buckler of
courage, you must resolve to put on the Helmet of Patience.


Wa. Ah Sir, any Helmet, to keep my Head from being broke.


Cas. I mean friend, if you have not the prowess of a Man, you must take unto
your self the Patience of an Ox.


Wa. If It please you Sir, I have the Patience of an Ox, and I fancy my Horns
are as large and wide as most Oxens are, but all this will not save my Head
from breaking.


Cas. You do not make use of 'em then, nor sense with 'em as you should do.


Wa. Alas Sir, they lie inwardly, and are no defense at all to me. She knows I
cannot push with *em. She has made me an Ox long ago, and now ^he makes an Ass
of me* a mere Ass ^he beats me black and blue, and all colors, but especially
as yellow as Saffron. If I can lie quietly under the Table, and but keep my
manly looks, I* think my self very happy. In short Sir, she is a Devil
Incarnate, and Apron'd fury, and the French King and all his Luxenburghs and
Catinats are tame Fools to her.


Hell. I have heard of many men that have been Hectored but I never heard of a
poor Man so Andromache'd before.


Wa. Hector Sir? I have heard of that Hector, and what a cruel fellow he was;
but I dare say, be he who he will, he was a mere Sheep to this tormentor of
mine.


Hell. What can be prescribed for the relief of this poor, cowardly, coxcombly
Cuckold?


Free. Nay Doctor do not call him Coxcombly: He has nothing of the Cock left in
him, not so much as the Comb or the Crow.


Cas. What a sad Family must he needs have then?

Ill fares that Family that shows.
A Cock that is silent, and a Hen that Crows*
But I pray Doctor, (since my advice avails nothing in this case) be pleased to
bethink your self to prescribe something proper for him.


Hell. Alas Father, It is not the man, but the Woman that should take Physic.
If you will fetch your Wise hither, I will give her something that shall do you
good.


Wa. Fetch her hither Sir? why it is as much as my life's worth, if she should
know I were here.


Hell. Why then I can only prescribe you something for your broken head, till it
be broken again. Clip off the Hair, wash the wound clean with warm Milk and
Water, put into it two or three drops of Lucatella's Balsam, and clap a
Plaster of Diapalma upon it, and it will be well presently.


Wa. I doubt Sir, I shall forget these hard words.


Hell. Stay in the House a little, and when I come in I will write it down


Wa. Your humble Servant, good Dr. And this I hope will keep my head from ever
being broke again.


Hell. Nay I dare not promise that Friend. But when I come in, I will prescribe
you also a co^^obora^ing Oil for your Nerves, and some unguentum bacill^num to
apply to your Wife.


Wa. Ah Sir, if you can but do any good of her, you will be the best man that
ever came to our town, and I shall be bound to pray for you all the days of my
Life. Your humble servant Sir.


-- Exit Wake. Free. Gentlemen, I am sorry the distempers of my Tenants are
such as do not fall under your cure. But I will recommend one to you, whom I
know if his distemper be not grown obstinate, you may cure.


Hell. I doubt Sir Francis* all your Neighbors are troubled with Chronical
distempers, for there is little hopes of any of 'em that I can yet see.


Free. Speed, Call in hither Charles Catohit, I Am sure he needs cure* but
whether his humor be obstinate or no I know not.


Speed. I doubt Sir, there is no more hopes of him, than of my Neighbor
Angier. However at your Worships command I will call him in.


-- Exit Speed. Free. This Catchit and I have the greatest antipathy of any of
my Neighbors. And therefore I think the controversy will mainly lie between
him and me; and that before you Father Casye.


Cas. I shall be glad to serve the rectifying of mistakes, and the
accommodating of tempers to the utmost of my power, Sr. Francis.


-- Enter Speed with Catchit. Speed. What Is the matter? Have you lost any thing
Charles?


Catchit. I know not, Mr. Speed; I thought I heard something gingle under my
Feet, as if some Money had dropped from me.


Speed. Come, come Charles, it is nothing but a covetous conceit.


Catch. It may be so indeed, Sir, for I am fuller of conceit than I am of Money.


Free. Why Charles, do you conceit you have more Money than you have?


Catch. Money Sir? Alas your Worship has got all the Money; and more than all.
I was fain to borrow some part of your Worships Rent.


Free. Come, come Charles, I know your tricks well enough, you have two Bags;
the one you call Catchit, the other you call Holdit; and no body but Catchit
can borrow of Holdit.


Catch. I have no bags, if it please your Worship, but a Batch Bag, and a Malt
Bag. As for Catchit and Holdit, I ken not what your Worship means, it is true,
my name is Catchit, but it might as well have been Catch-itch: for I Am sure
I Am* likelier to catch that, than any thing else. The times are too hard to
catch any thing, except one should chance to sue a Beggar; and then you know
one might chance to catch, (saving your Worships presence) a Louse.


Free. But what do you catch Charles, when you sue the richer sort of Men? Then
I hope the penalty of the Bond, besides the ordinary Usury, brings in
procuration, continuation, and dismission; Besides, it involves many a good
gratification.


Catch. Your Worship speaks many hard words, which I do not understand. I was
never snappish with any Man in my Life.


Free. Not snappish? Why they say you are a Curr of a Usurer.


Catch. I know not well, what your Worship means. But I confess if I have ten
Groats or five Shilling to le^d a sufficient Neighbor for a Week or a
Fortnight, I had rather have interest for it than not. And yet I think the
Attorney that has a Groat for the Bill, gets more by it than I do.


Free. Ay, but they say, Charles, you shave your Eggs, and sell the shavings to
the Apothecaries for twelve pence the Ounce, to make Medicines for the Stone.


Catch. That Is the better for them that buy 'em; for then they will ask the
less boiling.


Free. I pray Charles how many Acres of Land have you manured in your time,
with the clippings of your Hair, the shavings of your Beard and the pairing of
your Nails? for they say, you save them all. Besides, they say you abhor the
prodigality of an House of Office, and will never untruss twice in a place.


Catch. Your Worship has a mind to make your self merry. As for the clippings
of my Hair, they are but few; and they must fall into the floor, and go amongst
the dust, and be swept to the Muck-hill: though I confess I think it is no good
husbandry to sweep the House every Week that comes, for it wea^s up the Floor.
As for my Nails, I never pair 'em close, that would spoil my catching: But that
which is paired, the Barber has for his pains. As for a House of Office, I
confess I think it is an unnecessary building; and I do untruss where I think
there is most need; and so, by my good will, I would have my Cows do too.


Free. Well, well, Charles; But they will untruss where they please for ^ll you.
But now you talk of Cows, I know you keep a good Dairy, I pray how do you order
that?


Catch. If It like your Worship I am no Qua^: But I will tell your Worship what
my Maid says. She first washes her Hands and Milks the Cows: of the Cream she
makes Butter, of the old Milk she makes Cheese; of the Whey of that Cheese she
makes Curds; and the Whey of that Whey she se^ls to a Chemist in Town, and he
exalts it into Sack, or something like it; and this Sack we use instead of
Aqua-vita, when any qualm comes over our Stomachs.


Free. On my Word, Charles, you Spin it out to the utmost length. But you are a
Sheep-master too; I pray how do you order your Sheep?


Catch. Sheep Sir? Alas Sir, I have but an end of Sheep; and I think those are
almost at an end too; they are half of 'em rotten I fear. But when I had a
Flock and a Fold of Sheep, I used to order 'em thus. I make my Eldest Son my
Shepherd, till he be fit to go to service; and so the next, and ^he next. For
this I take to be the best way of Education: if you would have your Son to be a
Gentleman, make him a Shepherd first well, he has his Scrip containing a good
Cantil of Bread* and Cheese, for himself and his Dog Trusty. They abide in the
Field, the Boy Knit^ing, and the Dog sleeping and farting, Early and Late, Wet
and Dry. Now I instruct this Boy ingeniously, that if he sees an other Man's
Sheep to have a better walk than ours* if he can catch up a new fallen Lamb of
any bodies, and father it (if I may so say) upon a Dam of ours, or if he can
light of any Sheep that wants a Mark, not to lose the oppor^unity. I always
keep 'em clean ^elted, and tie a Bag under their Tails all da^, and so I have
all their Muck in the Fold at Night, your Worship little thinks what good Sauce
Sheep Muck is for Land; it is as good as Currants for roast Pig.


Cas. But I pray Friend, amongst all your Arts of good Husbandry, how do you
deal with the Parson and the Schoolmaster of the Town.


Catch. Truly Sir, as for the Schoolmaster, neither I nor any of ^ine ever
trouble him. I prefer Lowing of my Cows, and bleating of my Lambs, before any
Language he can speak or teach.


Cas. But I hope you make use of the Writing-master.


Catch. Oh no, Sir, They are ^he worst of Men. It was never good World, since
that trick of scratling came into it. Many a poor Man, ay and rich too, has
been undone by writing his name, or setting his mark, which is all long of
them. As for the Parson, he prates and keeps a puther, and pretends to have
much to say to me, but indeed I have little to say to him. I cheat him of all,
if I can; if I cannot, I pay him the Tithe, I mean the Tithe of what he
demands. And I pray Sir, what reason is there that a Man should pay good
substantial Lamb and Wool for Words, that are but Wind, Hay for Stubble, or
Corn for Chaff?


Cas. Fie, fie, you profane ^ellow, do you value your trash before their
t^easure, your Barley Corns before their J^wels? What a Dunghill Soul, what a
Muck-worm of a Man are you?


Catch. You may call me what you please Sir, but I think, and you shall never
make me think otherwise* that if I do not get more by keeping Sheep, than by
being a Sheep of theirs; if I do not profit more by my own good bargains, than
by their grave ba^lings, I shall dye poor Charles Catchit. And so Gentlemen
fare ye well, for I see there is nothing to be got amongst you. Your humble
Servant Landlord -- Exit*


Cas. What a wretched Mortal is this? Man was made of Earth at first, we
acknowledge; but this man continues mere Earth to this day; nay he is made mere
Muck. Are all your Tenants, Sir Francis, of this stubborn ill humor? I wonder
how a person of your sublimation does to converse with 'em.


Free. Truly Father Casye, I am sorry for their bad breeding, and gross humor:
But they have all of 'em one good humor; they pay their Rent punctually at
Lady Day and Michaelmas. And it is only when they are in that good humor, that
I converse with 'em. But go, Speed, find me out a better, if there be one in
the bunch.


Speed. Would your Worship have one that ails nothing?


Free. No, no, what should he do here then? But some one that is willing to be
cured of what he ails. Call in Peter Peace.

-- Exit Speed. This Neighbor is a quiet contented Soul as lives. I doubt you
will find he ails nothing; but I call him to let you know all my Neighbors are
not made up of ill and obstinate humors.


Hell. It Is well if* we find him such as you represent him, Sir Francis we will
try him.


-- Enter Speed with Peace. Peace. Your humble servant Landlord, I pray what is
your Worships pleasure with me?


Free. I have invited you in hi^her Peter before these Gentlemen, that can cure
all Diseases of Bodies and Minds, to show 'em at least in one example, that I
have Neighbors that stand in no need of their skill.


Peace. I know not whether you have Neighbors or no, Sir Francis; but you may
say, you have one poor Tenant, that never complained of any thing since you
knew him. I am always pleased with what I have, and I never covet what I have
not. If I want any thing, I am content to want it: though indeed, to speak
properly, I want nothing, however I am without many things. I look upon the
World as a Wilderness; wherein I expect no great entertainment, if I can escape
being worried of Wild Beasts, whilst I pass thorough it* I think it is very
well. I love my Neighbors and Relations very well; but if they dye, I bury
them out of my sight, and out of my memory too, as I hope they will do by me.
If I have a plentiful crop, I reap it, and am charitable; if I have a poor one,
still I reap it, and am sparing. If my Wife smile and be pleasant upon me, I do
not dote upon her, because I know that Sex is subtle and variable; If she scold
or cry, I do not divorce her; because I know all the Sex is frail and fre^ful.
If my Children be dutiful, I love 'em and bless 'em, if they be otherwise, I
think, why they are but Children, or at least they are my Children. If my
Landlord call for his Rent at the very day, I pay it cheerfully, because I know
it is due; if he never call for it, still I am content. In short, I live as I
list, because I list to live as I do.


Hell. This is a fine Temper Mr. Peace. But what, are you never sick?


Pea. Yes Sir, I am sometimes sick in Body; I am sometimes visited with the
Head-ake, but never with the Heartake: I was never so sick, as to send for a
Physician, whom I take to be the worst of Diseases. And I pray Sir, is Sickness
such a Business? I should ill be content to die, as I know I must, if I cannot
be content to be sick


Cas. But what, does nothing in Church or State trouble you?


Pea. No Sir, the State may command me to be what it will; and I can make the
Church to be what I will.


Cas. You make the Church to be what you will? How can that be?


Pea. How can it be otherwise Sir? For I choose my Church, the Church does not
choose me.


Cas Your Contentedness, I warrant, or rather Bruitishness is such, that you
would choose a Barn, as soon as a Church.


Pea. Sir, I am no Humorist nor Fanatic: Yet I am content you should call me a
Bruit; and I think it as good to be a Bruit in a Barn, as a Thief or a Murderer
in the Temple: Neither do I account it any more dishonorable, for any one to
be served in a Barn, than to be born in a Stable.


Cas. And as for the Government of the State; I suppose you are content that
men should seize upon it at a venture, by right or wrong.


Pea. I am not skilled in right and wrong, Sir, I am content the Government
should go as it will go. Let it go by house-row, as Constables do, it shall not
trouble me: It may come to my turn at length. However, since the taking of
Limbrick, I am well satisfied that King William has a Right to the Crown: at
least, till some body can take it from him.


Cas. Come to thy turn, thou silly Ass? Thou art not fit to make bum-fodder for
a Gentleman.


Pea. I am content to be an Ass too, so your Reverence will vouchsafe to carry
the Pack-saddle. Yea, I shall be content to be Bum-fodder to your Reverence, by
that time you have wiped your Breech with your Nose, till you have worn it to
the stumps, as some Gentlemen have done. But I perceive, Gentlemen, you are
offended with my peaceable Disposition, therefore how ambitious soever I am of
your worshipful Company, I will be content to leave you.


-- Exit Peace. Cas. Sir Francis, how do you do to live amongst such a parcel
of Fellows. I never met with a company of such cross-grained Tikes, in my life.


Free. Oh Father, I do not live amongst 'em, I live above 'em. I told you
before, they are good natured twice a year, and that is as often as I have
occasion to converse with 'em. But now I think on it, I have a Tenant, of a
genteelish kind of Humor* that possibly may prove pretty agreeable: but I dare
not promise that he ails nothing. You will soon find his Disease, and the one
or other of you easily prescribe to him. Wish Mr. Medler to come in hither,
Speed.


-- Exit Speed. Cas. I know not what the man may prove; but his Name imports as
bad a Humor, as any we have met with yet: I ever hated the pragmatical breed.
I had rather my fingers were cut off, than have'em in every man's Pie.


-- Enter Speed with Medler Med. Your humble Servant Landlord, and yours also
Gentlemen; you both seem to be Lords of Land. And that is the Character that the
great Men of the World do most thirst after, now adays. I hope these Strangers
have brought you some news from abroad, Sr. Francis, which you are minded to
communicate.


Cas. News Sir? why, I hope you do not take us us to be Mercuries or
Observators, or Penny-book-pedlers, that you thus speak.


Med. Oh no Sir; But I take you to be intelligent Persons.


Cas. And what, do you take all intelligent Persons to be Intelligencers?


Med. Truly Sir I think, he that knows no news, cannot well be called a knowing
Man, as the World goes.


Cas. Why, there is nothing new, Sr.


Med. Nothing new? you're an old fashioned Gentleman sure, that would have all
the World, and all the Affairs of it, always to remain in the same fashion. Is
it not news [here he repeats the Heads of the Thursaays and Saturdays and
Mondays news.]


Cas. But suppose all this to be news, and all this news to be true too, how
will this justify the Folly of Curiosity?


Med. I know not what you call Curiosity, Sr. I take it to be a sollicitous
prying into things either secret or impertinent, things that are either not to
be known, or that it does not concern me to know.


Cas. Why, I pray Sir, how it does concern you to know the things done in
Spain, Germany, Italy?


Med. Oh Sir, it is a generous humor to desire to be acquainted with all the
World. It is true, I live here, I rent my House and Land of Sr. Francis, but my
mind is a Member of the Universe, and in that, I am as good a Freeholder as he.


Free. Ay, ay, Mr. Medler, Be as good a Freeholder as you can, so you do but
pay me Rent.


Med. I do not envy you, S^. Francis, what is yours? But when I hear what
scrabling there is in the World, for Countries and Kingdoms, and how other men
at home, add Town to Town, and Lordship to Lordship, me thinks my Pittance is
very small.


Cas. This Sir, is the fruit of your unnecessary Knowledge; you would think
your Condition very good, if you knew no better. I warrant the news of the
French King's Conquests, puts you into a humor to be a K^ight Errand.


Med. No Sir but I take it to be ungenerous, and snailish, always to live at
home, and to carry ones House on ones back. What Sympathy can one have with the
Happiness or Misery of the rest of mankind, that knows it not? How can a
Stranger to the World, direct or order h^s Affairs rightly in it? How can I pay
my Tithes conscientiously, except I know how the Parson comes by his Sermons?
or my Taxes cheerfully, except I know what the King will do with the Money?


Cas. I doubt you want to know who is King too.


Med. No, Doctor; I am satisfied as well as any of you, since the taking of
Limbrick, that William is King. My Landlord knows what a noble Bonefire I made
for him the other night, and how prettily the Boys and Girls hopt and grinn'd
about it.


Hell. Father Casye, you mis^ake this man: he is my Patient. The man is troubled
with a Disease called Scotonia, or the Giddy. He thinks all the World turns
round, and he is resolved to turn with it. It proceeds from a certain Ventosity,
in the Ventricles of the Cerebell. But I can cut him, and cure him.


Med. Your Worship is some Cow-Doctor I warrant. And I think you are a couple
of dry hasty, narrow-spirited Gentlemen, and so fare you well -- Exit Medler in
a pe^t.


Free. Gentlemen, you complain of my Tenants, that they are cross grained; I
doubt it is long of the cross Questions you put to 'em. I pray thee Speed, call
in Mr. Slack; it may be he will fit Father Casy's humor better.

-- Exit Speed. This man rents a good Farm of me, but he has a good Yeomans
Estate of his own, and, I believe, lives as easily and unconcernedly, as any
Lord in the Land.


-- Enter Speed with Slack. Speed. I beg your Worships pardon, that I have been
so long. But Mr Slack was so deeply engaged in company that he knew, and Liquor
that he liked, that I could not easily persuade him to leave 'em.


Slack. I know your Worship has nothing to say to me: For I have but one
Concern in the whole World, that is, to pay my Rent; and that your Worship
knows I have. And as for these Gentlemen Strangers, I suppose they have no more
to say to me, than I have to them; and that is just nothing.


Hell. But what, Sir, does nothing ail you in any respect?


Slack. Not now I have paid my Rent Sir.


Hell. And have no Distemper upon you at no time?


Slack. None but what I cure my self. Sometimes I am hungry, sometimes thirsty,
sometimes sleepy; but I have a Remedy at hand for all these; and such a Remedy
too, as is pleasant to take.


Hell. But what, are you never weary?


Sl. Never, except it be with doing nothing, or with hearing impertinent Talk,
or long stories of news.


Free. Or a long Sermon


Sl. You are in the right, Landlord, I had forgot that. But yet I go to Church
too sometimes, to take a Nap. I love the Collects too, only there is so many of
them; and Sermon too, if it be not too loud to waken me, or too long, to keep
me from my Dinner.


Cas. I doubt you are Atheistically given, Mr. Slack.


S. I know not what you mean by Atheistically. I confess I am no great admirer
of Orators and Observators, nor do I love to have my head troubled with Sermons
or Gazets. I cannot endure to be concerned: Let things go which way they will;
for they will go which way they will. What if the Earth quake; must my Heart
needs ache? what if the Heaven^ crack, does it follow, that my Brains must crow?
What care I, whether the Pope be a Papish or a Protestant, whether he be a Man
or a Woman, whether he be a Woman or a Devil. What is it to me, whether the
King of Germany, and the King of Turkey fall out or fall in. It does not concern
me so much, whether the French King gets Flanders or loses it, as whether my
Flanders Mare in the stable be with Foal or no? They have made a great deal of
stir about reducing of Ireland, as they call it; they might even have let it
have gone for me: If it were all of a Bog, it would not trouble me; I have never
a foot of Land there.


Cas. But what, have you no mind to know how things go abroad?


Sl. To know Sir? Why I Will tell you, I think it is the wisest way to know
nothing: for the more one knows, the more he is vexed: It is an easier and
sweeter life to be ignorant, than to be a knowing Man.


Cas. But if he knows nothing, he is not a Man, he is a Beast.


Sl. Beast, Sir? The life of a Beast is not so contemptible as you make fair
of. I believe there is never a Beast I have, would change lives with you. The
life of a Beast? what life can be easier sweeter, freer? He leads the life of
knowing nothing, of caring for nothing: he eats, and drinks, and sleeps, and
desires nothing, wants nothing, fears nothing. Oh Sir, if men were but as free
from Passions, and Apprehensions as the Beasts are, how happily might they
live? We forsooth, fret at what we have, and vex for want of what we have not.
We cannot enjoy our selves, because any body else enjoys any thing as good, or
better. We cannot digest ^n Injury, till we have requited it; nor be reconciled
then neither. There is worse found in the Nature of Men, than in the nature of
Beasts; and all because men can think, and know, and argue, and have the ill
luck to be concerned; which these silly Beasts are free from. If you did but
know Sir, how sweet and pleasant it is to approach as near as may be to the
life of a Beast, and yet not to be one, you would almost be tempted to doff
your Periwig and Coloshes, and put on Horns and Hooves.


Cas. But what, would you die like a Beast too.


Sl. Their way of dying? ^s all one with yours; they leave breathing, and so do
you. And their way of burying, much nobler than yours: They are buried in you,
whereas you are buried in the Bowels of Fishes, of Crows, or at best of Worms.
My Ox, or my Hog, when he is dead and eaten, comes to be a part of my self; you
being dead, turn to Dust and Eilthiness. And if you enquire any further, for
the Credit of the Beast be it spoken, he has nothing to answer for; which you
Divines and Doctors have.


Cas. I think, Sr. Francis, you would do well, to make this man your chief
Herds-man.


Sl. Content Sir, if you will be Chaplain to the Herd.


Hell. Nay rather, Sir Francis, be at some Charges with him, to lengthen his
Ears, and so he will be one sort of Beast presently.


Sl. Gentlemen, I wish you no worse, than that you may always be kept in your
Senses; and then I Am sure you will never want something to vex you.


-- Exit Slack. Free. Gentlemen, you do so disturb my Neighbors, that they
know not what they say. They are a ^ittle shattered, and you make 'em s^ark
mad. It is to be hoped, if I call in a pair of men that are mad already, you
will make 'em sober. I pray thee, Speed, go and call in hither Mr. Grindon and
Frank Fawns. I believe we shall have no great trouble with them, except it be
to reconcile 'em: and that I hope Father you may do.


-- Exit Speed. Cas. Alas, Sir Francis, your people do not understand my
Divinity-trade; but I will do what I can for 'em. My work lies in Cases of
Conscience, and I perceive your people have no Conscience, that a man can come
at.


Hell. Oh, it lies deep, Father; but by the Lancet of Inquisition, or the
Horse-leech of thorough Examination, you may possibly come to it and let out
some bad Blood.


-- Enter Speed, with Grindon and Fawns. Free. You're welcome, Mr. Grindon, I
have invited you in, to know whether here be any thing, wherein these Learned
Gentlemen can pleasure you.


Grin. Sir, you think sure, I am a man much given to Pleasure. If you Knights
and Gentlemen loved your Pleasure no more than I do, there would not be so much
Hunting and Hawking, and breaking of men's Hedges, as there is.


Faw. I believe, Mr. Grindon, his Worship did not mean as you interpret him.


Grind. Interpret him? I wonder how I came to be an Interpreter, I think all
the World has a mind to abuse me. I can scarce read the Text, and yet I must be
an Interpreter forsooth.


Faw. I mean Sir, (I pray pardon me) as you understand him.


Grin. What, I am become an understanding Man; that to my own Knowledge, was
but a Fool when I came in. Ay, and the most understanding of men too, a^^ Pope
forsooth, that can pardon. I warrant I am infallible too, am I not?


Faw. Sir, if I be not deceived, you are infallible, you are a Pope.


Grin. I a Pope, you Dotterel? how can I be a Pope?


Faw. You carry a Pope in your Belly, and that is all one.


Grin. I pray thee Fawns, explain thy self.


Faw. I am plain enough Mr. Grindon, I need no great Explanation. But my
meaning is this: The conceit that you have of your own Understanding, is apt to
make you snarl at the different Sentiments of all other men. Now whoever,
(being himself satisfied in a thing) does thereupon declare, that he will never
alter his Opinion, or the Conduct of his Affairs, must needs be infallible; at
least, he does assume an Infallibility to himself, as well as the Pope. The
Pope says, I cannot err; you say you will never alter, and I pray then, which
is the more infallible?


Cas. I pray, Sir Francis, rebuke this man, he nibbles at the Church.


Grin. It Is well Sir, he does but nibble at you; he bites me. He says I am a
Pope, I would he could make his words good. He says I snarl, as if I were a
Dog: but if he could make me a Pope, I would make Bulls* that should push this
Dog out of the Church.


Faw. It Is well Sir, the cured Cow has short Horns.


Grin. Now I Am come, from a Bull to a Cow or a Cuckold. Thou will make an Ass
of me, I believe by and by.


Faw Oh no Sir, no man is an Ass, but of his own making. You may do that for
your self, that no body can do For you* Your Neighbors may help you to Horns
possibly, but they can never help you to Ears.


Grin. To Ears Sir? why, I never was upon the Pillory, I have ^^ars of a
natural length.


Faw. You mean I believe Sir, of the length of a natural.


Grin. A natural* have a natural? what do make a Bastard of me too?


Faw. Oh no Sir* for though many men have the ill luck to be Bastards, yet none
of them are naturals, but the Byblows of Princes. You are a^ honest Gentleman,
and so was your Mother before you.


Grin. Thou nonsensical Owl, my Mother before me a Gentleman?


Faw. And why not I pray Sir, as well as the Gray Mare be the better Horse,
Your Father was plain George Grindon, but your Mother was Mrs Betty Courtney.


Grin. Well, and what am I then?


Faw. Sir, you are Mr. Grindon at every word.


Grin. what, do I grin at every word? Just now he would make me to snarl at
every man; now I grin at every word. This pitiful fellow will make a Dog of me
by and by.


Faw. Oh no Sir, far be it from me; you are the meekest Spaniel upon Earth.


Grin. Upon Earth? It Is well I am not a Water-Spaniel too.


Faw. I Am sorry Sir, that you should so mis^apply all my words.


Grin Mis-apply? have mis-apply? He made me a Conju^er just now, in saying I
could interpret; and now he will make a Parson of me, which is next to it. For
none can mis-apply, out those that apply; and that you know is the Parson's
Trade.


Faw. You speak wi^tily Mr. Grindon; but under Correction, that is not the
Parson's Trade, but yours and mine.


Grin. I never heard a man speak sacrilege till now. A Parson, and yet not
apply to himself, the things that he teaches us?


Faw. Sir, he is left to his liberty, as Physicians are, who forbid their
Patients many things, that are found upon their own Trenchers.


Hell. What have you to do with Physicians, friend?


Faw. Not much Sir, I thank my good Stars. But this Gentleman, my good
Neighbor may possibly nee^ Relief from you.


Grin. Relief? He Will make a beggar of me too, I think.


Faw. I mean Sir, you may be beholden to him for his Directions.


Grin. Thou Idiot, I scorn to be beholden to any man: My Landlord here has good
Money of me for bad Land.


Free. No, no, Mr. Grindon, you are not beholden to me; I am rather beholden to
you.


Grin. Nay, if I thought so, ^ would throw up all my Land: For I will never
keep a Farm merely to gratify my Landlord.


Faw. Me thinks, though you be Mr. Grindon, and my very good Neighbor, you are
very humorous Sir.


Grin. Humorous? Now I warrant he will make me sick too, and put me into the
hands of this Doctor.


Hell. I doubt indeed Sir, you do abound with Humors. But I perceive they are
not very gross and feculent, but serous and fine Humors.


Grin. For all your fine words Mr. Doctor, I do not so abound with Humors, as
to humor you with a Fee to purge 'em.


Faw. I pray Sir, do not fall into a peevish Humor, of all others.


Grin. Peevish? Now he makes a Child of me. I pray good folk, keep the Child
from being peevish. Must I not have a Nurse, and a Pa^ too?


Faw. Oh Sir, we know you have a good Nurse at home, and it is a sign you are
not at home now, if you were, she would not suffer this Feather to stick upon
your Coat. -- He takes it off.


Grin. Thou envious Fellow, why would thou hinder the world from knowing that
I lie upon a feather-Bed?


Fawn. This is not not a Feather ^oo I hope -- he brushes off some dust from
his Shoulder with his hand. -- This is dust Sir.


Grin. Thou saucy Fellow: I carry it on purpose to be a Monitor of my
Mortality; and do thou brush it off? Give me my dust again.


Faw. -- Stoops, and takes up a handful, and lays it upon his shoulde^^


Grin. This is not dustying ^^e, Sirrah, this is daubing me. It were a good
deed to reduce thee to the dust and a shadow


Faw. Sir, I am meaner than a shadow; for I honor your shadow, yea, the shadow
of your ^hoe^ties.


Grin They are Buckles Sirrah.


Faw. Still Sir, will be meeker than they, and buckle to your very Buckle.


Grin. Thou art a dissembling Knave, Fawns.


Faw. Some men are so professedly, without dissembling, it is well your Worship
escaped.


Free. Nay, now he Worships you, Mr. Grindon, you must be reconciled: I pray
walk in and drink a Glass of the best, and be friends.


Grin. A Glass, ha a Glass? a poor modicum. But come Frank, if it must be but a
Glass, it shall be as big as a looking Glass.


-- Exeunt Grindon and Fawns. Free. Call in Stephen Sad.


Speed. He Will make you all Melancholic, I doubt Sir.


Free. Poor man, possibly we may make him merry, -- Exit Speed. A very honest
fellow: But he is always laying one thing or other to Heart, present or future.
If he feels nothing to trouble him, yet he fears something. -- Enter Speed with
Sad and Merry skipping after them.


Mer. Oh Derry, derry, my Rent is paid my Rent is paid,
Oh Derry, derry, my Rent is paid, is paid,
And fie upon all Fools
That are such very Tools,
That their Rent is unpaid, unpay'd.

Free. Why how now, Moses? who sent for you?


Mer. If It please your Worship, I Am like ill Weather, I come without sending
for.

And as the fair Fountain springs, and springs,
Which by no Mud is stayed
E'ne so poor Merry sings, and sings,
Because his Rent is paid.
-- He claps sad on the back. Come have a good Heart Stephen; thy Rent's paid
too, lad.


Sad. Ay Moses; but Lady Day will come after Michaelmas.


Mer. Ay and Michaelmas* after that again.

-- And so the year goes round.
But let us be merry whilst we may.
Till we be under ground.

Sad. Sure Moses you draw a light Harrow. You are always full of mirth I know;
but what makes you so full of Rhymes?


Mer. Why should not the Heart sympathize with the Purse, and be both light
together?

Who can sing so merry a Note,
As he that cannot change a Groat?
And as for rhyming, lad, thou know,
Alum stalum non est malum.
Poet and Pot differ but in a Letter.
The Pot, oh the Pot, does make me rhyme the better.

Sad. But how many poor People of the same make with our selves are now crying
for Bread, and lamen^ing in Prose?


Mer. And who can help it Lad? they must e'ne put their Tears into Tune, and
then they will be as merry as Moses.


Sad. Oh but can you think of this great Tax that is coming, and be so merry?


Mer. Tax, Stephen? I am thinking, further than so. I am thinking how merry we
shall be, when we have conquered France, and drink nothing but Cla^^^.


Sad. Ah Moses, I wish I may never want good small beer till then. In the mean
time, whilst the Grass grows, the Steed starves. I doubt we shall want Whey
before we get Clarett.


Mer. Why Lad; we'll make the Pigs drink Water, before we'll want Whey. Have a
good heart Stephen.

Come cast away Care,
For sure we are,
The Parish is bound to find us;
Thou must die,
And so must I,
And leave this World behind us.

Sad. Ah Moses, Moses, if we come to the Parishes finding, I doubt we shall go
with many a short Meal.


Mer. Nay Stephen, so they be but many, I care not how short they are: a
little, and often is the best feeding.


Sad. But what if the Turks or French come in upon us, and cut our Throats?


Mer. Why then our Breath will go out of the Gap: And is no^ that as good as if
it went out at our Nostrils?


Sad. What if the Sea should overflow this Island?


Mer. Then we should have plenty of Fish; and that is very good Victuals.


Sad. But what if the Sky should fall?


Mer. Then we should catch plenty of Larks, which are now worth six pence a
dozen.


Sad. I pray thee now, Moses, be not so mad-headed. Who can be merry, that
lives in an Age of Fools and Knaves and Beggars and Mad men* as we do?


Mer. And I pray thee Stephen, who can help it? There will be Fools and Knaves
as long as you and I ^ive; and Beggars too, as long as my Landlord lives.


Free. Why Merry, do I make any Beggars?


Mer. I beg your Worships pardon; I mean, whilst there are any rich, ^ere will
be some poor to bestow their Estutes upon: else what should they be rich for?


Cas. Gentlemen, I do advise you to beware of Extremes. Stephen, it is good to
be thoughtful, but not frightful; to be cautious, but not jealous; to be
^^using, but not misdeeming. Take heed your grave Seriousness do not ^urn into
Sadness; or however, be sure it be sober sadness. And you Moses* in all your
Merriment, remember to be merry and wise.


Mer. I thank your grave Advi^e, Reverend Father. I will be sure to remember
the first; and as for the latter, I leave it amongst you Book-learn'd Men, make
the best you can of it. But they say, one cannot be wise and merry too. If it
can be, then I cray you Wise Men, rest ye merry.


-- Exeunt Merry and Sad. -- Enter Kester Killag^ew. Kill. Your Worships most
humble servant, Sir Francis.


Free. What Kester? Art thou come again? I Am glad to see thee, thou art welcome
into England again. Thou have escaped many a scowring, I warrant thee amongst
the Teagues.


Kill. Escaped many a scowring? Ay Sir, and so must every body that comes there.
I believe they are the greatest fluts in Nature? They made no washing, till I
came to wash 'em in ^^eir own Blood.


Free. In their own Urine rather.


Kill. Why has any body told your Worship what havoc I have made there?
Besides the many hundreds tha^ I have killed, I have made thousands bepiss 'em.


Free. I warrant thou can show me many a fair wound, Kester.


Kill. Ay* Sir Francis, and these in fair places too. But it is no matter for
troubling your Worship with such a sad sight: Besides, it may be these
strangers are squeamish or cowardly, and cannot or dare not look upon Wounds.
But good Sir Francis, how do my Wife and Children amongst you. I have not been
at home yet. I made my first visit to your Worship.


Free. They are all well at home Kester, as you left 'em.


Kill. Blessed Heavens do favor Williams Friends,
And all that to their welfare tends.
Lilly bo^aro, etc.
I hope I am come in good time Landlord, to pay my Michaelmas Rent.


Free. In the very nick of time Kester; that is, if thou have brought any Money
with thee.


Kest. Money, Landlord? Hold your Hand, my half years Rent is ten pound; here is
nine Guinneys, and six and six pence in Silver. I pray enter it into your book.


Free. Oh brave Kester! I did not think the whole Teague-land could have turned
out so much Gold. Thou have stripped some Captain or Colonel, whom some body
else had killed.


Kill. Some body else Sir? with these Hands.


Free. What with these Hands I pray you?


Kill. I killed that Rogue St. Ruth.


Free. St. Ruth? why he was killed with a Cannon Bullet.


Kill. Ay, ay Sir Francis, he had a thump of the breast with a sixteen pounder,
and was mask'rd, but this Sword ended his wretched days. And Sarsfields too.


Free. Sarsfields? Why Sarsfield is gone into France.


Kill. Well, but I had certainly killed him, if he had not gone; so that indeed
the taking of Limbrick is owing to me.


Hell. Why, was you at the Siege of Limbrick?


Kill. Of Limbrick Sir? I was as at the Siege of Limbrick; and not only of
that, but of Carrick-fergus, Tredagh, Dublin, Wick-low, Water-ford, Kill-kenny,
Kingsail, Cork, Athlone, Galloway, and what not?


Hell. I perceive Sir, you speak comprehensively. For some of these places were
never besieged at all.


Kill. It is no matter for that Sir, for if they had been besieged, I Am sure I
should have been sent for one.


Hell. But I pray Sir, have you been all that Kingdom over?


Kill. Over Sir? Ay and over again; from St. Patricks Purgatory in the County
of Tyrone, to the Devils Hole in the County of Kerry.


Hell. I wonder how you ever got out of those dismal places.


Kill. Oh Sir, there is no way ^^passable to an English Heart, and a German
Blade. This Sword with this Hand will cut it is way thorough any Rock, better
than any aquafortis.


Hell. But I pray Mr. Killagrew.


Kill. Sir, my name is Kill-a-crew: and a Crew I have killed of the verye^^
Vermin that ever the Earth bore.


Hell. Well then Mr. Killacrew, how did your Sword make way for you thorough the
Bogs?


Kill. The Bogs Sir? I needed no Sword. I was grown so expert, that I made no
more of running over the Bogs, than one of you grave sirs would do of walking
along the streets. Did your Gazzette never tell you of my chasing a party of
Rapparees over the Bog of Allain, and killing nine of 'em?


Hell. Now you speak of it, I do remember something of a certain stout Soldier
that killed eight or nine Rapparees upon the bog of Allain, who afterward,
like Cowardly Rogues, ran away to their Garrison of Mullingar. But I little
thought you had been that Champion.


Kill. I am the Man Sir, I ^eft my* Horse and my Jack-boots at the side of a
Wood, and these Feet carried me to that exploit, and brought me off again.


Hell. I perceive Sir, you have been a zealous servant of the Kings: how chance
you forsake him now?


Kill. I forsake him Sir? No; his Enemies forsake him. His Enemies cease, not
his Friends.


Free. Come, come, Kester, tell truly. Are you not come away in some disgust?


Kill. Disgust, Sir? I tell you, if every Hair on my Head, were a Head, I would
adventure it for his sake, and if every Finger on my Hand were a Hand, I would
employ it in his Service. But having conquered, I am willing to sit down in
peace, which few Soldiers are. For they that draw the Sword, commonly love to
live by it.


Free. Well said, Kester: For it is no less a Virtue to leave off fighting,
than it is to fight. Fighting is an honest recreation, but a bad Trade: and so
is talking as we do. Wherefore if it please you Gentlemen to walk in, we will
entertain honest Kester with the best the House will afford, and drink a health
to his Master.


Kill. -- Flings up his Hat, Huzzah! Long live, King William and Queen Mary.


-- Exeunt Omnes. Epilogus.
Gentlemen,
MY Master Sir Francis, gives his service to you all, and commands me to tell
you, that if his House were as large as his Heart, you should all lodge all
night in the former, as we^l as you are sure to do in the latter. Though the
entertainment was intended for his two great friends the Doctors, and the
benefit to redound to his Tenants, yet he thanks you all for the honor you do
him in this visit, and wishes himself capable (can you blame him?) of
entertaining you all like Princes. He is a person of a Mind and Temper ample
and generous: He gives me leave, that am but his Butler, at any time to
entertain as many as the Buttery will hold, with as much Ale as their Bellies
will hold. But, alas, he wants room for so great a Company; as indeed you may
easily perceive: For if he had had other room convenient, he would not have
desecrated his Chapel, as you see he has done to cay, for your sakes. But his
Worship has commanded me to direct you to certain ^nns for accommodation and
lodging at his charges. As for present accommodation, there is scarce a public
House in Town, but can furnish you. If you intend to lodge, they can also
furnish you: only you are to be you lodge at any Man's House that has Horns,
you leave no more behind you than you found. As for particular choice. I need
give you no directions, they are all good; nay they are all best. The Bull has
the best Mouth, the Bell is the best Me^^le, the Stag and the Heart are the
best Venison, The Lamb is the best natured, the George is the best mounted, the
Dog has the best heels, the Lion has the best Heart, the Bear has the best
back, but the Keys if they be St. Peter's, have the best authority. The Peacock
has the best Feathers, the Swan has the best Neck, the Royal Pate has the best
Brains, but the Vine, (oh the Vine!) affords the best Liquor. But, if after
all, you would know my opinion, the Eagle that carries away the Child is our
best Emblem, she will mount all the pretty Lads into the Skies upon the Wings
of Fame, and so every Boy shall be a Ganymedes. And I assure you to be a Butler
to Jupiter is no small preferment.

And now Gentlemen, as we met lovers, I hope we shall part friends.

Fare ye well.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 9. r. swet, l. 24. r. there, P. 5. l. 9. r. nomine, p. 6. l. 15. r.
giving, P. 10. l. 1. r. small, p. 15. l. penult. r. humourous, P. 25. l. 10. r.
fixing, l. 12. for one r. we, p. 32. l. penult, for he is r. you be, p. 34. l.
3. after talk add much, p. 35. blot out line the 24. p. 39. l. 2. r. Hogs, p.
42. l. 6. after heated add his head, l. 16. r. Crust, p. 43. l. penult, r.
speak, p. 44. l. 12. and 23. p. 45. l. 12. r. Will, p. 47. l. 5. r. an, p. 61.
l. 7. after fodder add too, p. 65. l. 15. r. Scotomia, p. 68. l. 4. r. Papist,
p. 14. l. 3. r. cursed, p. 78. l. 17. dele the.


