IMPRIMATUR

Hic Liber cui Titulus, A Discourse of Superstition, etc.

May 11. 1678. Guill. Sill, R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a sacris Domesticis.

A DISCOURSE OF Superstition With respect to the PRESENT TIMES. WHEREIN The
Church of ENGLAND is Vindicated from the Imputation, and the Charge retorted
not only on the Papists, but also on men of other Persuasions.

By William Shelton, Rector of St James Colchester.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXVIII.

To the RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in GOD, AND RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY LORD BISHOP OF
LONDON, One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Lordship,
THere is none to whom I owe account of my self and Studies, more than to your
Lordship as my Diocesan. None to whom I more readily submit this Essay, which
endeavors to do Right to the Church of England, whose Honor and Security is
so great a part of your Lordships care, as to challenge the acknowledgment of
all Pens. The Moderation of our Church (which ought to be esteemed her Glory)
in receding no farther from the Church of Rome, than she has receded from
Primitive Christianity, is objected as a Crime, by the eager men of the
separation.

Our First Reformers were Wise men, and (Thanks be to God) so are their
Successors too. Their Wisdom in the first compiling, and late Review of our
Liturgy, has directed them to keep the mean between the Two Extremes, of too
much stiffness in refusing, and too much easiness in admitting variations. So
by the good Providence of God, have we been delivered from the superstitions of
the Romish Church; and so have we been preserved from a superstitious avoiding
superstition.

As the Kingdom of England is famous for being the Balance of Europe; so is the
Church of England, for being, by a regular Reformation, well fixed in a due
distance between the superstitious additions of the Church of Rome, where
Supremacy, Infallibility, and the Inquisition compel men to swallow Camels, and
the superstitious Abstinences of those who strain at Gnats, and either will not
Understand the notion of a thing Indifferent, or will not rightly infer from it.

To evince this, is the Design of the following Tract, which in all humility I
offer to your Lordships Patronage, being thereto emboldened, by the Experience
I have had of your Lordships Candor and Favor, which by how much the less I
have merited, I ought the more to acknowledge.

God Almighty preserve your Lordship to a long Presidency in this Church: and
bless the joint labors and cares of the Right Reverend my Lords the Bishops,
to such an happy Repair of our Breaches; that neither the Wild-Boar, nor the
Foxes, may spoil our Vineyard: to be such a defense upon the Glory of this
Church, that neither the Romanist nor Separatist, may stain or darken it. So
prays,

Your Lordships in all Humility and Obedience, W. SHELTON.

THE CONTENTS.
SECTION I. THE Occasion of this Discourse. The Church of England charged with
Superstition. In the times of Queen Elizabeth, King James. The reproach
restrained by a Canon, to no purpose. The Jealousy increased in the beginning
of Charles I. and in the time of the Covenant. The design of this Discourse.
Page 1 SECT. II. The use of the word first inquired into: Then the nature of
the thing. How Greek Authors use (...). Smith's select Discourse. Plutarch.
Max. Tyrius. Antoninus. Dr Hammond's Tract of Superstition considered. What
Latin Authors mean by Superstitio. Tully opposes it to Religion. Lactantius not
agreeing with him in the reason of the word. p. 11 SECT. III. Other
Etymologies. Superstitio quasi super statutum. Lucretius huffs at all Religion
as super stans. Nigidius Figulus account of the word. Seneca, Tacitus,
Suetonius, Pliny take it in a bad sense, so Festus and St. Paul. St Austin
differs not, who comprehends many particulars under this General, according to
whom many superstitious observations obtain still in the World. Three
Definitions of superstition out of Aquinas. Zanchy, Ames to the same purpose.
Religion, True Worship; Superstition false worship. p. 18 SECT. IV. The Nature
of the thing considered in several Propositions. First, Superstition is first
in the Opinion, then in the practice. To which agree Morton, Hooker, Falkener.
The same practice superstitious or not, as the Opinion is by which it is
guided. This the Foundation of what follows. p. 28 SECT. V. Second Propos. The
Doctrines upon which the Conformity of the Church of England is established,
are not superstitious Opinions. Those Doctrines are as follows. First, All
Circumstances relating to the worship of God, are not particularly determined
in H. Scripture. T. C. gainsays, but it is manifestly true. Our Adversaries
acknowledge and build upon it. p. 34 SECT. VI. Secondly, Some things
(notwithstanding Scripture determinations) do still remain Indifferent in their
nature. This denied by Bradshaw and Brook: Bradshaw changed his mind, but his
followers propagate his first Opinion. A gross mistake. A Thing Indifferent not
a mean between Good and evil, but between Commanded and forbidden. p. 40 SECT.
VII. Brooks notion, Optimum est eligendum, not always true. In diverse cases no
Best. Many dishes at a feast. Many Inns in a Town. Many Shops in a City. He
that stays till he know which is Best, will in many cases never determine,
because he has nothing to determine him but his own choice. The Ceremonies of
our Religion not altogether so Indifferent, but in specie neither Commanded nor
forbidden. p. 45 SECT. VIII. Thirdly, The Church may make Determinations in
things Indifferent. Scrupled by Brook, whose Discourse of Episcopacy is again
examined. The weakness and Unworthiness of it detected. Denied also by others,
Modest Discourse, etc. and Bagshaw, but upon insufficient grounds. p. 55 SECT.
IX. This acknowledged by the Presbyterians in their Directory, Confession of
Faith. Other Authors that have written since. Acknowledged also by the
Independents in their Confession of Faith, 1658. p. 66 SECT. X. Fourthly, Where
the Governors of the Church have power to determine, they ought to be obeyed.
Zanchy and Calvin on our side. When Zanchy would not have these things imposed,
yet he would have them yielded to (if imposed) rather than any man should quit
his Ministry. p. 71 SECT. XI. Calvin of the same mind. Much for a stated
Liturgy and Ceremonies, which though he would have few, yet those he finds
fault with, do not now obtain in our Church. What he did not like, he would
have born with. As the Surplice in Bishop Hoopers case, and Unleavened Bread at
Geneva. p. 80 SECT. XII. Besides these M. Durell cites about 40. Foreigners all
of the same Judgment. As were also our Countrymen, T. C. Humfrey Rainolds,
Knewstubs, others. And of late Mr Baxter. These Testimonies concluded with St.
Ambrose, and St. Austin's determination. p. 87 SECT. XIII. Fifthly, It is
lawful for the Church to appoint significant Ceremonies. This denied by N. Cts.
How they differ from Sacraments. The Presbyterians require sitting at the Lords
Supper because significant. Their pretense of the Example of Christ not
sufficient. Because, p. 93 SECT. XIV. First, That Example does no more oblige
in this, than in other Circumstances of Time and place, unless in the
significancy of it, which then is as much superstitious as our kneeling. For
secondly, They have not Example for the same manner of sitting. Thirdly, Not
certain whether they have Example for any manner of sitting at all. p. 100
SECT. XV. They use another significant Ceremony in the Covenant and consent
they require of people whereby they should own their Minister. Worcestershire
Agreement gives account of it. Distinction between Discipline and Worship will
not help them. p. 108 SECT. XVI. Upon these Grounds the Church of England not
superstitious, unless the number of Ceremonies be too great. Which has been
complained of without Cause, and some of them acknowledge in our favor. A
Digression about the number of Ceremonies. Or unless our Rites be required as
somewhat more than Indifferent. In which the Prefaces to our Liturgy vindicate
us. p. 112 SECT. XVII. Two Objections. 1. Ceremonies imposed as Indifferent are
not so. So they were once believed. But now some N. Cts. think not so of them.
Answer. Where no Law, no Transgression. Not forbid in the second Command, nor
elsewhere. The Surplice, and Kneeling, and the Cross particularly considered.
p. 123 SECT. XVIII. 2 Obj. Though in Nature Indifferent, yet some Accidents may
render it sinful to impose or practice them. They are thought by Bagshaw to be
laid as snares for tender Consciences. If so, it would be Tyranny rather than
superstition. But it blasphemes Dignities so to think. The Accidents
considered: Because they are offensive: because they come from Papists. The law
of not giving offense does not disoblige the subject from obedience in things
in themselves lawful. Nor does it disable the Magistrate from making laws in
things Indifferent. The abuse of Popery signified nothing to T. C. in his own
case. The second General Proposition concluded. p. 132 SECT. XIX. Third
Proposition. The Opinions that are superstitious are rejected by the Church of
England. Diverse Objections against Popery besides superstition, but that now to
be considered. They are superstitious. First, in making their Ceremonies
necessary parts of Gods worship. Pius IV. Creed imposed upon all Bishops, makes
all the Doctrines of Trent necessary to salvation. They equal Traditions to the
written word, and so introduce false Doctrines. They teach for Doctrines the
Commands of men, and so are superstitious. p. 144 SECT. XX. Secondly, They
ascribe an efficacious sanctity to their Ceremonies. They worship the Cross
with Latra, and affirm that it scares away the Devil, drives away diseases, and
sanctifies the things on which it is made. This is superstition to expect
effects as by divine Institution, which we have no warrant to expect. Estius
endeavors to salve the matter, but not to satisfaction. They teach that the
Sacraments confer Grace Ex opere Operato, and that is superstitious.
Bellarmines distinction between opus operatum, and operantis, to their
prejudice. p. 154 SECT. XXI. Thirdly, Their Doctrine of Merit is superstitious.
Bellarmine ascribes Merit and satisfaction to good Works. His famous
acknowledgment to the contrary. We own a necessity of good works, but exclude
Merit. Whatever else is any where done upon a Religious account, farther than
Religion ought to be concerned, is superstitious. The Church of England not
guilty in any of these Cases. p. 163 SECT. XXII. The Fourth Proposition. There
are superstitious Omissions of which men may be guilty, when they seem greatly
to abhor superstition. A Negative Superstition. A superstitious fearfulness of
which Lord Bacon and St. Austin complain. Such was that of the Jews who would
not defend themselves on the Sabbath day. Of the Soldiers in Sfetigrade. The
N. Cts. have reason to examine whether their Abstinence be not such. To abstain
from that which is lawful, as believing it Unlawful, this undue opinion of
Religious Matters is superstitious. The Conclusion. p. 171
ERRATA.
PAge 95. line 9. for where insignificant, read wherein significant, p. 149. l.
13. for rest r. rests; the lesser faults are left to the ingenuity of the
Reader to correct or pardon.

THere is lately published the seventh Edition of a Body of Divinity, etc. By
the most Reverend Father in God, James Usher, late Archbishop of Armagh, to
which is added his Life, containing many remarkable passages never before
Extant. Sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lyon in St. Paul's Churchyard.

A DISCOURSE OF Superstition With respect to the PRESENT TIMES, etc.
THE prejudices and disaffections Sect. 1.
which have alienated so many from the Communion of the Church of England, owe
themselves to no Original more; than to an Opinion taken up, that some Usages
in our Church are Superstitious; An Opinion strongly concluded, but upon weak
grounds, and by a Process very illogical. For when the Adversaries of our Order
and Peace, have amply represented, how jealous God is of his Honor, how
severely he has threatened the breaches of the second Commandment, and how
sorely he has punished the Idolatry of the Jews; in the application of these
things to our Times, Superstition and Idolatry are frequently joined, as
equally forbidden in that Commandment, and without more proof the Church of
England is supposed guilty of Superstition, and good people are exhorted to
come out of her, upon pain of partaking of those Plagues which Idolaters have
reason to fear.

From the times of Queen Elizabeth down to our days, Superstition has been
laid to our Charge. Mr Hooker acknowledges and resents it. Ecclesiastic. Pol.
Book 5.. 4.
So it is judged our Prayers, our Sacraments, our Fasts, our times and places
of public meeting together for the Worship and Service of God, our Marriages,
our Burials, our Functions, Elections, and Ordinations Ecclesiastical, almost
whatsoever we do in the exercise of our Religion, according to Laws for that
purpose established, all things are some way or other thought faulty, all
things stained with Superstition.

One of the Treatises that were sent abroad (as it were to give new light to a
new World) 1660. under the name of Mr William Bradshaw, is about things
Indifferent, where he thus speaks in the Marginal Notes. Notes on the fifth
Chapt. of things Indifferent.
The Doctors of Oxford ask, what hurt can a wise Man see in a square Cap and a
Surplice? Indeed there is no outward hurt or evil in it, but it must be
considered, whether there be not any inward hurt therein; for if it can be
proved, that by them the Souls of many are poisoned with superstitious
conceits, then it is apparent that they have inward hurt in them. This is but a
supposition, but it follows dogmatically, The Ceremonies Ibid. Notes on Chap. 8.
in Controversy have been and are, the special means and occasion of the Schism
of many Hundred Brownists, of much Superstition in many Thousand Ignorant
Protestants, and of Confirmation of many Infinites of wilful Papists in their
Idolatry. He concludes the Treatise thus: The Ceremonies in Controversy are
either excellent parts of our Religion (which he not yielding must believe the
other part of the Disjunction) or notorious parts of Superstition.

This is the dirt that was cast upon the Church of England, in the beginning of
King James his Reign, that he might be out of love with her. A reproach of
which the Convocation of 1603. was so sensible (for though that Treatise came
first out, a little after the Convocation, yet the suspicion was rife before)
that they pass this Canon among Canon 6.
others: Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England, by Law established, are wicked, Antichristian or
Superstitious, etc. Let him be Excommunicated, etc. This Canon did not restrain
the petulancy of Censorious men, for besides Mr. Bradshaws confidence; in the
defense that Dr Burges makes for Bishop Morton, it appears, Burges Answer
Rejoined Chap. 4.. 1.
that the N. Csts of those times did thus argue. The Ceremonies of the Church
of England have been and still are abused to Idolatry and Superstition by the
Papists. And that we Id. ib.. 4.
cannot be thought sincerely to have repented of that Idolatry and
Superstition, except we cast away with detestation all the Instruments of it.
Once more, they say, That a superstitious construction is Id. ib. ^ 79.
made of our Cross, not only by the Papists, but by our own Canons and
Canonical Imposers of it.

These Jealousies did but fly in the dark during King James his Reign, but soon
after Charles the First came to the Throne, he received diverse Complaints of
this nature: The Parliament, Anno 1628. Rushworth Historical Collections, p.
526.
complains of Idolatry and Superstition as some of those heinous and crying
sins, which were the undoubted Cause of those evils that were fallen upon them.
The Remonstrance which the Commons Id. ib. p. 621.
of the same Parliament made against the then Duke of Buckingham, expresses
their fears concerning Innovation of Religion. A while after Mr. Rouse makes a
Speech concerning Religion, wherein he desires it may be considered, what new
paintings are laid on the old face of the Whore of Babylon. How the Sea of Rome
does eat Ib. p. 645, 646.
into our Religion, and fret into the banks and walls of it: for a remedy of
which, he propounds the expedient of a Covenant, to hold fast God and Religion,
to which Covenant he would have every man say Amen. This man does not (it is
true) speak of Superstition, but he is understood to mean it, by another Orator
of the same House (Mr. Pym) who complains that the Law Ib. p. 647.
was violated in bringing in superstitious Ceremonies. After whom, another in
the same Session (Sir John Eliott) apprehends a fear of some Ib. p. 649.
Bishops then in place, that if they should be in their power, they might be in
danger of having Religion overthrown, because some of them were Masters of
Ceremonies, and labored to introduce new Ceremonies into the Church.

After those eager Debates, the motion for a Covenant slept for some years, but
was renewed again in the Unhappy Times of the Fatal Parliament. In the times
when it was a great part of the Impeachment against the Great Archbishop of
Canterbury, that he had traitorously Artic. of Impeach. 7. 10.
endeavored to alter and subvert Gods true Religion by law established in this
Realm, and instead thereof to set up Popish superstition and Idolatry, and that
he traitorously endeavored to reconcile the Church of England with the Church
of Rome. In these times it was that Mr. Rouse's motion ripened up to a Solemn
League and Covenant, wherein they obliged themselves to endeavor the
Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, and Superstition. By which words the
Covenanters (as some of them have since declared) believe themselves obliged
against Conformity; for, this reason they give in a Book they call a Sober and
Temperate Discourse concerning the Interest of words in Prayer, etc. in which
the Title of one of their Chapters is: The Ministers Third Reason, viz. Chap.
10.
why they do not meddle with the Common Prayer (as are the words of the
Chapter) is, because they have sworn to endeavor a reformation in worship, and
to endeavor to extirpate Superstition.

Nothing now can be more evident, than that both of old, and in our times
Superstition is objected to us. It does not come in my way to condemn, nor do I
take upon me to justify the practices of all particular persons; I concern my
self only in the legal Establishments of our Church, and they would little need
a vindication, if men would take the pains to enquire into the nature of
Superstition; for they would soon find the Innocence of our Rites would defend
themselves from this suspicion. But it is our Unhappiness that we have to deal
with men who take things upon trust, who are not easily undeceived, because
they will maintain a Conclusion, before they have examined the premises:
observing Superstition to be a word that signifies somewhat bad, they condemn
us without a Trial, and before they know what it means, conclude us guilty of
Superstition.

I have waited some while in expectation, that some abler Pen would engage in
this Argument, but not finding that of late days, the Nature of Superstition
has been particularly and fully discovered or described, I have now undertaken
the task, in which because I desire to be understood, I labor for no other
ornament of style than perspicuity: And without farther Preface I proceed to
enquire, what is this Superstition with which the Church of England is so much
upbraided.

There is no Precept in the Holy Scripture that forbids Superstition by that
name, nor does any sacred Author mention it, except St. Luke in two places to
be considered in due time, when I examine how the word is used in other
Authors; For by this Method, I conceive, I shall best accomplish my design, if

First, I enquire into the use of the Word. And secondly, into the nature of
the thing signified by such a Word.

1. (...) (by which the Greeks Sect. 2.
expressed that which we now commonly call Superstition) signifies most
literally a service performed to God or to a Demon, rather out of fear than
love; An over-timerous and dreadful apprehension of the Deity, as the learned
Smith, who also calls it Select Discourse of Superstit. p. 26. and 36.
a compound of Fear and Flattery; such an apprehension of God in the thoughts
of men, as renders him grievous and burdensome to them. But however this may be
the primary sense of the word, yet that it has been transferred to signify
more largely, is evident from Greek Authors. Plutarch in his Tract, (...),
constantly discourses of it, as of an extreme to Religion, to which he opposes
Atheism as the other extreme; Thus he begins, (...) Ignorance of God from the
beginning has run in Two Channels, one way to Atheism, and the other way to
Superstition. And after he had in many like expressions, opposed them to one
another he concludes, (...) Some have run so far from Superstition, till they
have overshot themselves into Atheism, having neglected Religion which is the
mean between both.

Maximus Tyrius as plainly opposes Dissertat. 4ta.
the Religious, and Superstitious man. (...), etc. A Religious man is the
Friend of God, A superstitious man is a Flatterer of God.

Antoninus gives this Character of Lib. 6.. 30.
himself, He was (...), Religious without Superstition.

The Incomparable Dr Hammond does (I know) pursue the Etymology and Original
Notion of (...), in the former part of his little Tract of Superstition; where
he gives several Interpretations of (...), and afterward gives these senses of
the Compound word.

1. It is taken in general for Religion or Worshipping God.

2. For the worship of deify'd dead men, and Angels which the Heathens took to
be True Gods.

3. For any part of Divine Worship which for fear of vengeance from God, any
Worshipper performed to him.

4. For a trembling fear of Gods punishment due for every sin.

5. For the use of Magical Spells. From whence he concludes the Modern use of
the word improper; but whether proper or improper, because it is use that gives
the rule for our manner of speaking, therefore that must be considered: And
that the word is used for somewhat undue in the worship of God, he himself
acknowledges in these words. That which men see those of another persuasion do;
which they like not, or think them not bound to, they call it straight their
Superstition.

And that thus Authors have made use of this word, will more appear by
considering the Latin word, Superstitio. Concerning whose Etymology all
Critics are not agreed. Tully discourses at large both of the name and thing,
and he is the first among the Latin Authors now extant, for so far as I can
find, that so translates the Greek Word: for if Nigidius Figulus (of whom by
and by out of A. Gellius) were before him, yet I suppose he has no entire
Volume now extant. I therefore take some particular notice of what Tully says
in this Matter. When he had given some natural Account of the Multitude of Gods
that were so much talked of in those Ages, and of the Superstitions that took
rise from the Fables of the Poets concerning them, he proceeds to distinguish
between Religion and Superstition, in memorable words. Cultus Deorum Cicero do
Natura Deorum lib. 2.
est Optimus idemque castissimus atque sanctissimus, plenissimusque pietatis,
ut eos semper pura integra incorrupta and mente and voce veneremur. Non enim
philosophi solum, verum etiam Majores nostri Superstitionem a Religione
separaverunt. Nam qui totos dies precabantur and immolabant, ut sui liberi sibi
superstites essent, Superstitiosi sunt appellati, quod nomen patuit
postealatius. Qui autem omnia quae ad Deorum cultum pertinerent, diligenter
pertractarent and tanquam relegerent, sunt dicti Religiosi, etc. It a factum
est in Superstitioso and Religioso, alterum vitii Nomen, alterum laudis. The
best, and purest, and most holy worship that we can give to God, is to serve
him with a pure and incorrupt heart and voice. For it was not only peculiar to
Philosophers, but our Forefathers also made a difference between Religion and
Superstition, for they who prayed all day long and offered Sacrifice that their
Children might survive them, were called Superstitious; A word which afterward
was extended to a larger signification: But Religious men had their name from
their diligence and care in reviewing what pertained to Divine Worship. And
hence it came to pass, that in the settled use of these words, Superstition was
counted a Crime, Religion a praiseworthy thing. According to which distinction
he had said before: Superstitione facile est liberare, Id. ibid. lib. 1.
cum sustuleris omnem vim Deorum: nisi forte Diagoram aut Theodorum qui omnino
Deos esse negabant, censes Superstitiosos esse potuisse. Horum enim sententiae
non modo Superstitionem tollunt in qua inest Timor inanis Deorum, sed etiam
Religionem quae Deorum cultu pio continetur. It is an easy matter to secure men
from Superstition, if you will make them Atheists; Unless you think such
Atheists as Diagoras and Theodorus could be tainted with it, whose Opinions did
not only root out Superstition, which contains in it a vain and needless fear
of God, but true Religion too, which consists in a right worship of the Deity.

The reasons which this learned Heathen assigns of the names and differences
between Superstition and Religion, Lactantius likes not, and Lactant. de vera
sapienti^ Cap. 28.
therefore when he had derived Religion a Religando; of Superstition he speaks
thus: Superstitiosi vocantur ii, qui super stitum memoriam defunctorum colunt,
aut qui parentibus suis superstitibus colebant Imagines eorum domi tanquam Deos
penates. Nam qui novos sibi ritus assumebant, ut in Deorum vicem mortuos
honorarent quos ex hominibus in coelum receptos putabant, hos Superstitiosos
vocabant; eos vero qui publicos and Antiquos deos colerent, Religiosos
nominabant, unde Virgilius,

Vana superstitio veterumque ignara Deorum. They were counted Superstitious who
did honor to the memory of the dead, or who while their Parents were alive,
worshipped their Images as if they were Household Gods: for they who took up any
new Rites, in giving honor to dead men, whom they thought to be taken up to
Heaven among the Gods, were so called; whereas they were esteemed Religious,
who confined themselves to the worship of those who were anciently reputed for
Deities. Hence Virgil introduces Evander, excusing himself to Aeneas, that the
Honor he did to Hercules did not deserve the name of Superstition.

There want not other Etymologies Sect. 3.
of this word. Isidore is quoted for this, Superstitio quasi superstatuta M.
Delrii Disqu is. Magic. lib. 1. Cap. 1.
observatio. An unstatutable, unwarrantable observation. Alii dicunt a senibus,
quia multis annis superstites per aetatem delirant: then is introduced
Lucretius, qui superstitionem dicit superstantium rerum, i. e. coelestium quae
super nos stant, for which these Verses are quoted where he huffs at all
Religion.

Humana ante Oculos foedi cum vita jaceret,
In terris oppressa gravi sub Relligione,
Quae caput e Coeli regionibus ostendebat,
Horribili super aspectu mortalibus instans.
(So not only Delrio, but Turnebus also Adversar. lib. 10. Cap. 26.
reads that Verse which others read thus,

Horribili aspectu semper mortalibus instans.) according to Lucretius, all
Religion, because it concerns it self in things above us, (with which that
Atheist thought we had nothing to do) deserves the name of Superstition.

Whatever the first Reason of this appellation might be, thus much is certain,
that in ordinary use, it signified somewhat undue in Divine Worship; and of
this Tully was aware, when he made the acknowledgment, of which Lactantius
forgot to take notice. Quod Nomen patuit postea latius. Also Nigidius Figulus
in his Comment upon the old Verse,

Religentem esse oportet, Religiosum nefas. takes Religiosus in an ill sense as
all A. Gellii Noct. Attic. lib 4. Cap. 9.
one with Superstition. Religiosus is appellabatur qui nimia and superstitiosa
Religione sese alligaverat, eaque res vitio assignabatur. He who was
superstitious in his Religion (which was counted a Crime) was called a
Religious man.

Seneca expresses the Import of this Senec. Epist. 123.
word well, according to the Greek: Superstitio error insanus est, amandos
timet, quos colit violat, quid enim interest utrum Deos neges an infames?
Superstition is a wild kind of error, it is afraid of him who ought to be
loved, and dishonours him whom it worships, for what difference is there
whether you deny God or blaspheme him? In a former Epistle he discourses thus.
Audiat quemadmodum Id. Epist. 95.
se gerere in sacrificiis debeat, quam procul resilire a molestis
superstitionibus. Nunquam satis profectum erit, nisi qualem debet Deum mente
conceperit. He who desires to understand himself and his Religion, let him
retire as far as he can from troublesome superstitions. No man will proceed
well in Religion, who has not right Conceptions of God.

In a like sense do other Latin Authors use the word, when they upbraid
Christian Religion under that name, as apprehending it a false Religion. So
Tacitus when he speaks of Nero's laying the blame of the burning of Rome upon
the Christians, calls Histor. August. lib. 15.
their way Exitiabilis Superstitio, A pestilent Superstition. Suetonius also in
the life of the same Nero, calls the Vit Neron. Cap. 16.
Christians, Genus hominum superstitionis novae and maleficae. A sort of men of
a new and mischievous Superstition. And Pliny to Trajan, gives Christian
Religion the same name though with somewhat a softer Epithet. Superstitio prava
and immodica, An Immoderate Superstition.

This is then the Account I gather out of Heathen Authors, mostly hitherto: the
sense they had of a Deity persuaded them not only that he ought to be
worshipped, but also that every kind of service would not be acceptable to him.
The right worship of God (that which they so apprehended) they called Religion,
that which was undue, and therefore unacceptable, passed under the name of
Superstition. Even as Festus did apply the name to the Religion of the Jews, as
esteeming Acts 25. Acts 17.
it not the best way of worship. And St. Paul more truly, did so reprove the
Idolatry of Athens.

When the World was better instructed in the Notion of a Deity, and in the
manner of worship that was due to him, we find the word still in use among
Christian Authors. Lactantius has been offered already. St. Austin comprehends
Idolatry and many other particular Customs under this Term. Superstitiosum est,
De Doctrina Christiana lib. 2. Cap. 20.
quicquid institutum est ab hominibus ad facienda and colenda Idola, pertinens
vel ad colendam, sicut Deum, creaturam partemve ullam Creaturae, vel ad
consultationes and pacta quaedam significationum cum Daemonibus placita atque
foederata, qualia sunt molimina Magicarum artium, etc. Ex quo genere sunt
Haruspicum and Augurum libri, etiam omnes ligaturae atque remedia quae
medicorum disciplina condemnat, sive in praecantationibus sive in quibusdam
notis quas characteres vocant. Idolatry and consulting with the Devil, or any
kind of Witchcraft: The practices of Soothsayers, that would pretend to foretell
future Events by the flying of Birds or Entrails of Beasts: Those Charms that
are designed for the Cure of Diseases, of which no natural or physical account
can be given: These and diverse like Observations he taxes with Superstition.

And some of those (or others like them) which St. Austin there mentions,
obtain still in the World: viz. If Rats do any mischief, to be afraid of that
as an ill Omen of some death or disaster in the Family: And many other as
unaccountable. If it rain or snow such a day, or be fair such a day (as
Candlemas, and Swithin, and others) then the future part of the year will be so
or so. These Observations have upon this account been esteemed Superstitious,
because they are taken to be an indication of the pleasure of God as to future
Events, whereas we have no assurance that they are a sufficient indication. And
it may deserve enquiry, whether the Custom of praying God to bless persons when
they sneeze, were not originally superstitious. I determine not in this case,
because sneezing has been sometimes reckoned a Disease, and then praying for
such an one, is of the same import, with praying for any one in danger: but I
make the doubt, because sneezing has been sometimes reckoned an Omen of good
or bad luck, and St. Austin mentions this in the same place where he speaks of
Millia inanissimarum Id. ibid.
observationum, when a man does redire ad lectum si dum se calceat
sternutaverit. If a man chance to sneeze while he is putting on his shoes he
must to bed again. These and a Thousand such observances as these, are deemed
to have a relation to God, when it cannot be proved, and are therefore judged
superstitious, so far as there is any Religion placed in them.

I proceed no further in examining the use of the word, than to give Three
Definitions of it, from Three men of several Ages, and several ways and
Opinions, but such as do all amount to one and the same purpose.

Aquinas gives it thus: Superstitio Secunda secundae qu. 92. Art. 1, and 2.
est vitium Religioni oppositum secundum excessum, quo quis divinum exhibet
cultum vel cui non debet, vel non eo modo quo debet. And in the next Article
concludes. Multae sunt superstitionis species, ut Indebitus very Dei cultus,
Idololatria, Divinationes and varia observationum genera.

Zanchy to the same purpose. Manifestum Tom. 4. lib. 1. Cap. 17.
est superstitionem esse Religioni oppositam and per excessum. He adds, Unde
etiam fit ut omnis falsus cultus superstitio appelletur.

Ames also says thus. Superstitio est Medul. Theolog. lib. 2. Cap. 13.
qua Deo cultus indebitus exhibetur, and again, Superstitio dicitur excessus
Religionis. The sum of all which is, as Atheism is a defect of Religion, so is
Superstition an extreme on the other hand, an Excessive Religiousness, when men
go beyond their bounds in Divine Worship; so that all false worship goes under
the name of Superstition. A man may be righteous overmuch, and overmuch wise,
so may he also be, not too holy or too good, yet too religious, when he
exceeds, and practices in matters of Religion upon Opinions false and unworthy
of God.

This has been the use of the word in approved Authors of diverse Ages. It has
sometimes been determined to particular practices, as Magic and Enchantments;
but upon a general reason, because these are undue mixtures in Religion, for so
both in Heathen and Christian Authors this difference is commonly assigned
between them. Religio est Ubi prius.
very Cultus, superstitio falsi, as Lactantius has it. When we worship God
aright that is Religion, when by any undue additions we corrupt Religion, in
all those things we are superstitious.

2. The Enquiry into the Nature Sect. 4.
of the thing still remains. Whereby does it appear, whether the worship we
here, or others elsewhere perform to God be regular and Religious, or excessive
and undue, and so superstitious? The Resolution I give to this question, I form
into these Propositions.

1. Superstition is first in the Opinion, and thence influences upon the
practice.

2. The Doctrines upon which the Conformity of the Church of England is
established, are not superstitious Opinions.

3. The Opinions that are indeed superstitious (such as are diverse that obtain
in the Papacy and elsewhere) are rejected by the Church of England.

4. There are superstitious Omissions, of which men may be guilty, and that
then, when they seem to have a great Zeal against Superstition.

1. Superstition is first in the Opinion before it can have any influence upon
the practice. Practices are unlawful, when they transgress the Commands by
which they are obliged, but superstitiously unlawful they cannot be, unless
they proceed from such Opinions: Hence it comes to pass, that the same
practices are sometimes superstitious and sometimes not, according as men's
Opinions are, by which they are persuaded to them. So is the difference between
the Chapter of England, and of Rome, in the use of the Cross, in kneeling in the
act of receiving, etc. as will afterward appear. I am not alone in thus
stating the Notion of Superstition. A superstitious act is that Bishop Durham
(Morton) Sermon on 1 Cor. 11. 16.
which is founded upon a superstitious Opinion. It was not merely the Pharisees
often washing, but their Opinion of some especial purgation thereby, which
Christ reprehended in them. Nor was it the having an Altar for which St. Paul
reproved the Athenians, when he called them superstitious, but the opinion of
honoring a God thereby they knew not whom.

To a like purpose, Mr Hooker, Superstition is when things are abhorred Eccles.
Polity. Book 5.. 3.
or observed, with a zealous or fearful, but erroneous relation to God. And in
words just before. Superstition is always joined with a wrong opinion touching
things divine.

Conformably to both these, says a late learned Author, All Superstitious,
Falkener Libert. Ecclesiast. B. 1. Chap. 5. Sect. 2.. 7.
or other sinful honor of the Elements, must be founded in embracing those
false apprehensions and corrupt Doctrines which our Church rejects.

(...) refers to the inward sense and apprehension of our minds: or if it must
be distinguished between the thoughts of the mind, and the passions of the
Soul; it is evident, that fear arises from such opinions and apprehensions as
administer to it. Yea though superstition be (as has been said) an excess of
Religion, and though this excess may discover it self in the practices of men,
yet the reason and that which occasions this excess, is in the Opinion.

False Notions and apprehensions of God, tempt men to try by undue ways to
please him. Men have a conceit, that such services are more grateful to him
than they are: Or, there is a superstitious observation of some Accidents, as
Prognostics of Events, because of an Opinion taken up, that God Almighty does
by such signs declare his pleasure or displeasure.

In all these Cases, the First Seat of Superstition is in the Opinion, and from
thence it is derived into practice; for did these false Opinions which thus
mislead men, cease by a better information of the understanding, the practices
and observances that depend on them would also cease; or if they were
continued, they would be hypocritical, or vain, or any thing rather than
superstitious. For Example: It is superstitious (say we) to worship an Image,
or to pray a Soul out of Purgatory, etc. because they are false and
superstitious Opinions that induce men so to do. If it may be supposed that men
who opine right, who do not in their judgment yield more to an Image than they
ought, and who do not in truth believe Purgatory; may yet perform the same
Ceremonies, and make the same prayers; I ask then, for what reason are these
things done? If not for this reason, because men are of opinion that the Image
deserves it, that the dead may be profited by their Devotions; then is it a
vain and ridiculous piece of Pageantry. Or if some politic reason, and secular
Interest tempt men these ways; what they do may be excused from Superstition,
because it is not intended for the honor of God, and so is not performed as a
part of his Worship, but it is otherwise faulty, because by pretenses of
Religion they advance their Interest, and gain becomes their Godliness. If in
truth there be any Religious intendments in these performances, then this is
that which plainly renders them superstitious, because they Originally proceed
from superstitious Opinions.

This I have first said, because upon this depends the Vindication I design of
the Usages of the Church of England. For, if what is done in Divine Worship, be
not otherwise superstitious, but as it proceeds from and is directed by
superstitious Opinions; then if it can be evinced, that we are not guided by
any such Opinions, it will follow that our Rites and Ceremonies are void of
superstition. And this I trust to make appear in what next follows.

2. The Doctrines upon which the Sect. 5.
Conformity of the Church of England is established, are not superstitious
Opinions. Of which matter I give this Account, which I shall take to be
sufficient, till by an Enumeration of some other particulars, of which I am not
aware, it be made appear, that there are some other Doctrines that may be
suspected of superstition, which the Church of England in justification of her
Conformity is obliged to maintain.

1. All Circumstances relating to the Worship and service of God, are not
particularly determined in the word of God.

2. Therefore, notwithstanding the Determinations of the Holy Scripture, some
things do remain Indifferent in their own Natures.

3. The Governors of the Church have power to make Determinations in things
Indifferent.

4. Therefore people are bound to obey their Governors in such their
Determinations.

5. It is not unlawful for Church Governors to appoint some significant
Ceremonies. These are the foundations upon which we stand; upon which our
Governors require, and upon which we practice Conformity, and none of these
are superstitious Opinions. Wherefore in the application of these Generals to
our Times and state of things, we conclude, the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England not being for their number burdensome (of which in due time)
are not in their nature and kind superstitious.

1. He who judges all Circumstances relating to the public worship of God not
particularly determined in the word of God, is not superstitious in that
Opinion. For this is so plainly and manifestly true, that it is a shame for any
man to deny it. There has been (I know) an Axiom among Cartwrights Disciples,
That nothing ought to be established in the Church, which is not commanded in
the word of God. This they thought plainly warranted by the manifest words of
the law, about adding to or diminishing from the word of God. Now (adds Mr
Hooker) these Eccles. (...) Book 3.. 5.
men having an eye to a number of Rites and Orders in the Church of England,
such as the Ring in Marriage, the Cross, etc. thought by the one only stroke of
that Axiom to have cut them off. And T. C. is quoted as arguing thus. You
which Ib.. 2.
distinguish and say, that Matters of Faith and necessary to salvation, may not
be tolerated in the Church, unless they be expressly contained in the word of
God, or manifestly gathered; But the Ceremonies, Order, Discipline, Government
in the Church, may not be received against the word of God, and consequently
may be received, if there be no word against them, although there be none for
them: You I say distinguishing in this sort prove an evil divider.

To all which there needs no other Answer than what Mr Hooker gives. Let that
which they do hereby intend, be granted them; let it once stand as consonant to
reason, that because we are forbid to add to the Law of God any thing, or to
take ought from it, therefore we may not for matters of the Church make any law
more than is already set down in Scripture; Ib.. 6.
who sees not what sentence it shall enforce us to give against all Churches in
the World, in as much as there is not one, but has had many things established
in it, which though the Scripture did never command, yet for us to condemn were
rashness. He goes on to give the Example of the Church of God in the time of
our Savior instead of all others.

If this ratiocination be weak, they who suspect it have great reason to show
us out of Scripture an exact form of Church Government; but instead of doing
so, they only argue that so it must be, without directing us to the place where
it is. To which I again oppose Mr Hookers words. As for those mavelous
discourses, Ibid. ad finem.
whereby they adventure to argue, that God must needs have done the things
which they imagine were to be done: I must confess I have often wondered at
their boldness herein. When the question is, whether God has delivered us in
Scripture (as they affirm he has) a complete, particular, immutable form of
Church-Polity, why take they that other both presumptuous and superfluous
labor, to prove he should have done it: There being no way in this case to
prove the deed of God, save only by producing that Evidence wherewith he has
done it? But if there be no such thing apparent upon record, they do as if one
should demand a Legacy by force of some written Testament, wherein there being
no such thing specified, he pleads that there it must be, and brings Arguments
from the love of the Testator, imagining that these proofs will convict a
Testament to have that in it, which other men can no where by reading find.

It will appear in the process of our arguing, that the very men who would
insinuate to the disparagement of our Rites, that Divine Worship must have a
Divine Warrant, for Circumstances as well as for substance, have not themselves
been guided by this Opinion, but have taken a liberty in their Directorian or
Dictatorian way, which they have denied to others: And because I shall by and
by bring them as witnesses for us and against themselves, I respit yet a little
their farther Conviction in this matter.

2. Notwithstanding the Determinations Sect. 6.
of the Holy Scripture, there do still remain some things in their own nature
Indifferent; and in this Opinion there is no Superstition. It might reasonably
be thought, that this Proposition is so evident, that no man who pretends to
learning will deny it. But so it is, that the power of Church Governors may be
reduced in a manner to nothing, some there have been, who will not own any
thing Indifferent in these matters. I meet with two who have maintained this
Assertion, and I presume they are the same whom Bishop Saunderson means, when
he speaks of some of Saunderson de Obliga. Conscient. praelec. 6.. 23.
this Opinion. Duo praesertim, alter alicujus nominis apud suarum partium
homines Theologus, alter e proceribus Regni laicus. Those Two, I conceive, must
be Mr Bradshaw and the Lord Brook.

I shall not do Mr Bradshaw right, if I do not acknowledge, that Dr Burges
Answer Rejoined. Chapter 2.. 9.
Burges tells us, he reversed his Opinion of things Indifferent. Surely he had
great reason to do it. That he was once of the Opinion which I fasten on him,
must not be denied. One of his Treatises Reprinted 1660. is Of the Nature and
use of things Indifferent. Where he states the Case thus: A Chap. 2.
thing Indifferent is a mean between good and evil, so that whatsoever is
Indifferent is neither good nor evil, whatsoever is either good or evil is not
indifferent. After this he avers, that no Action of Religion, Chap. 8.
whether it be Moral or Ceremonial, is Indifferent, but either good or evil;
and again, No Ceremony of Religion is Indifferent. Ibid.


A gross and palpable mistake and unworthy of a man so cried up for his
learning, the more pardonable indeed because he acknowledged his Error: but
because they who Reprinted him, were not so just to his Memory as to insert
that acknowledgment, and because they for whose sake he was reprinted, have
not, it may be, that respect for Dr Burges as to read him, I must animadvert on
it as I find it, and answer, That no considering man can think, that when we
use an Indifferent Rite, we mean that we do neither good nor evil. No sure,
that which is Indifferent in its Nature, may be in its use Necessary. We use it
as being by sufficient Authority commanded thereto, and therefore upon such
reasons as justify us that we do well; if we are mistaken in our Judgment, and
have no sufficient reason for what we do, it is ill done.

But this plainly we mean by a thing in its Nature Indifferent, somewhat which
is not in specie commanded of God, and so is not absolutely necessary, nor is
it so forbid, therefore not simply Unlawful. This Mr Bradshaw might have known
to have been our Notion of a thing Indifferent, for so Mr Hooker (at whom he
sometimes nibbles) had told him. The nature of things Indifferent is, neither
to be commanded nor forbidden, but left free and Arbitrary. He instances
quickly after. When many meats are set Eccles. Polity, Book 2.. 4.
before me, all are Indifferent, none Unlawful, I take one as most convenient.
If scripture require me so to do, then is not the thing Indifferent, because I
must do what scripture requires. They are all Indifferent, I might take any;
scripture does not require me to make any special choice of one, I do
notwithstanding make choice of one, my discretion teaching me so to do. Now
though eating of this dish rather than another, cannot be said, after my choice
is made, to be neither good nor evil, (for I choose discreetly or indiscreetly)
yet before my choice determined me to one, they were both Indifferent (so in
their nature they still remain) neither commanded, neither forbidden, neither
necessary, neither unlawful in its own Nature.

So in the Circumstances of Religion, after my choice is determined by the
Command of my Superiors, these things are not so Indifferent as that I do
neither well nor ill in my obedience. Before they had determined they found
these things Indifferent in their Nature, their discretion having guided them
to make choice of such a Vesture, etc. as they apprehended convenient, now that
becomes necessary as to use, which at the same time remains Indifferent in its
Nature.

The Lord Brook by a little Metaphysicalness Sect. 7. Disc. opening the Nature
of Episcop. Chapter 5.
goes farther, and from this principle, Optimum est semper eligendum,
endeavors to prove this Conclusion. That there is nothing Indifferent in Re
and in se, but to our Understandings some things seem so, for want of good
light, but in the things themselves every thing, pro hic and nunc, is either
Necessary or Unlawful. It may seem harsh to say that a man is not always
obliged to do that which is best. Where there is an apparent difference and
inequality in the matter of our actions, how far a man may satisfy himself to
do that which is good, though he do not always that which is best, I digress
not to examine. The Assertion may be founded upon another reason and state of
things, and upon that I build and say, There is a Truth in this Proposition, A
man is not always obliged to do that which is best; the reason is, because in
some Cases there is no Best, but the severals that fall under deliberation are
alike, no more Intrinsic Good or Evil in one than another, but any of them if
it were alone, were sufficiently eligible and satisfactory. Now if in every
action of a man's life he must not proceed, till he can find a difference where
none is to be found; If a man must no where act, till he see clearly what is
best to be done, this must needs fill the minds of men with Infinite scruples
and perpetual anxieties: And after a man is satisfied that this is good and
lawful and fit to be done, yet must he demur and take heed he do it not, lest
peradventure somewhat else were better to be done in the room of it. I give
Instances whereby it will appear we are not left to endless doubts in all Cases.

I am at Table and have many Dishes of meat before me which please me well, I
care not to eat of all, but make my choice as it may happen, I cannot say it is
Best to eat of this or that, either that which is commended to me, or that
which is next me, or some like accident determines my choice, and if I had
eaten somewhat else it would have been equally to my satisfaction. Otherwise,
should I sit still and dispute with my self thus? I must do that which is Best,
therefore I must consider of every Dish by it self, and diligently observe all
the differences between them, and if I cannot clearly discern which is best of
all, I must sit still till I can: so I might lose my Dinner, and when I rise,
should find my mind as unsatisfied as my belly. Or, I am traveling and take up
in a Town where I never was before; I see diverse fair Inns before me, know
none; nor have I any manner of reason to prefer one to another. I go to one as
it happens, not out of this principle that I must do that which is best, for
they are all alike, all Indifferent, and if I choose not till I certainly know
which is best for me, I may lie in the streets all Night. Once more, I go to
London to buy somewhat that I want, without any other Interest or Acquaintance
than my money. Many Shops sell the same Commodities, I can give no reason (but
this only, that I must buy somewhere) why I call at the sign of the Sun, or the
Moon, the Lion, or the Bear. They are all alike, only some accident (without
full persuasion that I do that which is best) determines me. And an Hundred
such like Cases happen in the Course of Affairs.

Now in all these, what shall we say to Bradshaw? Cannot these things be
Indifferent, unless what I do be neither good nor bad? No sure. Till I have
made my choice, it is Indifferent, because I am under no Command in these
Cases, but am left perfectly to the conduct of my own discretion. And what
shall we answer to Brook? Must I not stir till I know which is Best? There is
no Best nor Worst. If I discern any inconvenience on one side more than on the
other, then is there a difference, and I am unadvised if I do not consider it:
but where I discern no difference, and yet scruple till I be satisfied which is
Best, I shall scruple till Doomesday if I should live so long, because I have
nothing to determine me but my own choice. It remains then, that there are
things Indifferent in their own Nature. Where there is no Antecedent Command to
make such an Action necessary, nor Antecedent prohibition to make it unlawful,
it is Indifferent in it self, not between good and evil, but between commanded
and forbidden, between absolutely necessary and simply unlawful.

I have laid my Foundation thus low in a Consideration of the Nature of things,
because the Objectors I deal with go thus far. It is not necessary to our
Cause to affirm, that the Ceremonies of Religion in Controversy (the Surplice
and Cross, etc.) are altogether so Indifferent, as that there should be no more
reason to determine rather to one, than there is to take one Inn or Shop rather
than another. These Instances were produced to show where the Rule fails,
Optimum est semper faciendum, and to prove that there are things Indifferent in
their own nature. To which I add, that some Rites and Ceremonies of our
Religion are so too, as I prove by this Irrefragable Argument. Whatsoever is in
specie, neither commanded nor forbidden ( i. e. antecedently to humane laws) is
a thing Indifferent in its own nature. But the Surplice and the Cross, and
Kneeling, etc. are in specie neither Commanded nor forbidden. Ergo they are
Indifferent.

They who deny the Major fight with their own shadows, and gainsay out of a
spirit of opposition; for we persist in this (and they know it) that we mean
nothing else by a thing Indifferent in its own nature, but somewhat left
undetermined in the Holy Scripture. They who deny the Minor, must prove these
things in the use of them forbid in Scripture; which if they shall endeavor to
do, I doubt not but to pronounce them superstitious, and shall in the
Conclusion prove it. In the mean time, because Negatives are hard to be proved,
it concerns them to confute us by producing the Texts which forbid them: which
Texts if they be no other than the second Commandment, or that in Coloss. 2.
about will worship, or Matthew 15. Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of
men, or some such like these, then I demand farther, In as much as the
Surplice, etc. are not named in any of these places, by what good Consequence,
by what Demonstrative Syllogism shall it be proved from such a Text that it is
not lawful to wear a Surplice? Here now will be the failure, they quote Texts
from whence they declaim, but they do not argue closely and cogently. We know
we do not add to the word of God (whether they do not Ipsi viderint, and I
shall anon endeavor to open their Eyes) We do not teach for Doctrines the
Commands of men. We do not urge humane Impositions upon account of Divine
Institution (any otherwise than as it is the appointment of God to obey
Authority) Wherefore when such a Text is one of the premises, we fear not with
Confidence to aver, that this cannot be a good Conclusion. Ergo, to wear a
Surplice is not Indifferent in its Nature but a Sin. But of this a little more
hereafter.

Now I farther proceed and say, The Church of England does not reckon these
things so Indifferent as to partake nothing of the nature of good or evil
(which is Bradshaws false Notion) or so Indifferent that all other things that
may come in competition with them are as equal to them as one Shop or Inn may
be to another. For Example. Kneeling is not so Indifferent that there is no
more to be said for it, than for lying along. A White Garment not so
Indifferent as that any other color would be altogether as grave and decent:
but therefore Indifferent, because undetermined in Scripture. Nevertheless,
when the Governors of the Church have descended to consider, what is expedient
to be done in these matters, the determinations which they have made, have not
been by chance as a man goes to his Inn, but they have proceeded according to
the Rules of Christian Prudence (and it is to be hoped they may be allowed to
do so, as well as the Assembly who in their Directory so profess, as will
presently be said) The general Rules of Decency, Order, and Edification have
set them their bounds. According to the best of their Wisdom, they have judged
such and such Impositions expedient, and therefore have so determined
concerning them.

Which determinations when they are once made, so far as the Lord Brooks Notion
is true, it serves our turn very well, Optimum est faciendum. We have so much
Reverence for our Superiors, as to judge they have determined us to that,
which they thought most fit and expedient: then for our own practice, we still
esteem these things Indifferent in their nature, but necessary as to use. Being
satisfied that the Holy Scripture does not forbid such usages, we count them
lawful. Being also satisfied that our Governors command them, now by virtue of
a Law Intervening, they are necessary to us, because we are commanded to obey
our Governors in all lawful things.

These things pertaining to the Propositions that next follow, I go on.

3. It is no superstitious Opinion to believe, Sect. 8.
that the Church may make determinations in things Indifferent. Our
forementioned Lord Brook boggles here, I must therefore consider what he says.

First, He concludes thus. The Ib. Chap. 6.
Church has no power to make any one thing Indifferent in it self. (That, say
I, she need not do, for she finds them Indifferent.) Again (he says) we cannot
say the Church has power to determine what is Indifferent. In things that seem
Indifferent, where neither of the excreams is necessary, there (especially
where both are doubtful) [he conceives] the Church has not power to determine
to either extreme. As suppose Black and White Colors should be doubtful,
whether both or either, or neither were lawful; In this Case (says he) for
ought I yet see, the Church has no power to determine any one so doubting,
either to Black or White; the reason is, because neither is necessary, there
being so many Intermediate Colors between both. That is as much as to say (if
these things be applied) Ministers may be determined neither to a White
Surplice, nor to a Black Gown, because there are other Colors, and rather than
the Church shall determine to one, Ministers shall be left to their liberty, to
dress themselves in a Fools Coat. But he goes on to cut short the Churches
power. When one of the extremes, between which we waver as Indifferent, is
necessary to be embraced, as in most cases it is, here all the power lawful (as
he conceives again) can do no more but resolve which of the two extremes is
best.

And is not this hitherto pretty well? A surplice cannot be said to be
necessary, because a man may wear a Gown, or Cloak, or Coat, or Mantle, or if
he be disposed, may nakedly hold forth the Truth. Kneeling is not necessary
because a man may stand, or sit, or loll, or ly along. What then? Is it
therefore unlawful for the Church to determine to some one of these? No sure;
for according to the latter Conception, when one extreme is necessary to be
embraced, the Church may resolve which is best. And this is the Case here. For
though no one of the two be necessary, yet some one of them all must be
embraced. For the Sacrament cannot be received but in some posture or other,
etc. I conceive therefore his Lordships latter Conception, in the very birth of
it pulls the former by the heel and supplants it. For if the Church may resolve
which of the two extremes is best, where one is necessary; with as much reason
may she resolve which of four or five is best, because some one of them must be
embraced. Or else it will follow, because a Pulpit is not necessary, in as much
as a man may preach in a Tub (at least if it be set on a Tressle) because a
Folio Bible is not necessary in as much as a man may read in a lesser print;
because a Communion Cup of Silver is not necessary, there being other Metals;
therefore the Ecclesiastical Court may not compel a man to pay to the
Churchwardens rate, when he has provided these things. And what a blessed
Reformation will this be!

And yet it seems there is danger lest the powers already given should be too
large, wherefore he limits again. This power wherever it is must be very warily
exercised, since of all two extremes (and according to Idem ibid.
his Principles the Case will be the same, where four, or five, or twenty
things are opposed) only one can be lawful, so that one is wholesome and the
other poison. But where at last is this power? be it little or much, let us
know its bounds. The Church has a Judicative declarative power, like the
Judges in Westminster Hall, but not a legislative power, as the King and
Parliament. If a man may be bold to ask again; Who is this Church? You shall
find his Lordship give a noble answer. By the Church here I mean (says he) not
only one, or two, or a few of what rank soever, but all, even every true Member
of the whole Church; for I conceive every such member has de jure, a vote in
this Determination.

A right Ecumenical Council indeed, when every member of the body must be
convened to declare his opinion, about any Rite or Ceremony that shall happen
to be called into question. If I may add a Conception of my own, I should think
it worth enquiring, whether Women and Children be not true Members of the whole
Church, the liberty of whose Consciences may be as little imposed upon as that
of us men. Well, to gratify his Lordship we will suppose what is Impossible to
be put in practice: Every true Member of the whole Church, awakened and alarmed
with the scruples of John a Nokes, about the posture in which the Sacrament is
be received; is met together to declare and determine what is best to be done.
Now, it ever the Mountains brought forth a Mouse, you shall see how little this
Convention signifies; for when every Calves- Head has spoke an Oracle, every
one passed their Vote, let us Imagine that some one among them (and it is
hardly possible it should be otherwise) should be dissatisfied and dissent from
the Judgment of the greatest part of the Church, and after reading and praying
should continue to dissent, In this case (he conceives Ibid.
once more) no power on earth ought to force that man's practice more than his
Judgment.

Liberty! Oh sweet Liberty! What pity it is the Lord Brook has not another
life to lose in defense of this Gospel liberty. But seriously (so far as
amazement will admit) are not things now brought to a strange Conclusion? Will
it not be perfectly in vain, to determine any thing at all about
Church Matters? For, even in those things that seem Indifferent, one is Best,
the other Unlowful. When the Church has resolved which is best, yet every man
must be left to do what he thinks best. So is the State of the Church as
deplorable as ever was that of the Commonwealth Judges 21.
of Israel. In those days when there was no King in Israel, but every man did
that which was right in his own Eyes.

There are many other scurvy passages in that ill-natured Book, and many
Unworthy Reflections upon my Lords the Bishops that then were: but I must not
digress to take notice of them. This process of his is sufficiently exposed by
this account of it.

I confess I have met with two other Pamphlets that also demur in this thing. A
Modest Discourse concerning Ceremonies, believes that the Churches Authority in
commanding matters Page 1.
of Indifferency, wants ground from Scripture. And Mr Bagshaw in his Two great
questions concerning things Indifferent in Religious Worship, holds it utterly
unlawful for any Christian Magistrate Page 2.
to impose the use of them. But neither of them are so extravagant, as to deny
that there is any thing Indifferent, only they think what God has not
determined, men may not. Against whom I oppose to this purpose.

Either Church Governors have power in these Cases to determine, or all people
must be left to their liberty, to determine for themselves. But what
intolerable disorder and confusion would that bring into the Church? Then would
God be the Author of confusion and not of peace. There is then no power now
left in the Church, that may take care that things be done decently and in
order: but this is orderly and decent, that every man should have liberty to
break Order, and go his own way. And if in forms and modes of worship there
could be as many differences (as those that are, are not few) as men, it might
be lawful for every man to go by himself, and a single person should constitute
a Church. Men would never agree neither about time, nor place of public
Worship, nor about the person that should teach them and pray for them, nor
about the manner of public Prayers, or public Preaching, nor about the form
of administering the Sacraments, nor is it easy to name any one thing in the
public worship of God, wherein all men would be of one mind, but if all were
left to their liberty when Church Governors have determined as they think most
expedient; every private person shall have a Negative Vote, and if he like not
to worship God in the same way as others do, he must pass without control to
worship as he pleases, or if it so please him, not to worship at all.

But these are but the Capricio's of some few particular men, the vanity of
which I need not labor much to show, because however the Fox pronounces the
Grapes sour which he cannot reach; however some discontented men quarrel at the
power of the Keys, when they do not hang at their own Girdle, yet there never
was any body of men, that did at any time usurp a power to make Laws, and
determine in Church Affairs, but did proceed upon this Principle, that it is
lawful to make determinations in things Indifferent; and plain it is that the
Presbyterians and Independents both, allow what I now contend for.

The Presbyterians in the Preface Sect. 9.
to their Directory, distinguish some things to be of Divine Institution, and
others not, and of these they say: Other things we have endeavored to set
forth according to the Rules of Christian prudence, agreeable to the general
rules of the word of God. Also in their Confession of Faith set out with
Assemb. Conf. of Faith. Chapter 31.
their Catechisms they define: That it belongs to Synods and Councils to set
down rules and directions for better ordering the public worship of God and
Government of his Church, which Decrees and determinations if Consonant to the
word of God (where it is worthy observing, that when they are establishing
their own Authority and way, they expect not express Commands for every thing
they do, however they have been observed to huff at Episcopacy and to require
Commands for our establishments) are to be received with reverence and
submission, not only for their agreement with the word, but also for the power
whereby they are made, as being an Ordinance of God appointed thereto in his
word.

Since these first attempts of the Assembly, we find some writing conformably
to their dictates and professing thus. We freely grant that the Discourse
Liturg. etc. Chap. 16.
Civil power, or the Church (orderly assembled) may determine at what hours on
the Lord's Day the Congregation shall meet, as also it shall determine
particular times for Fasting or Thanksgiving, as Gods providence shall
administer Occasions, (and yet some of this way are against keeping Christmas,
etc.) that places of public worship shall be erected, frequented, kept decent,
and an Hundred things of that Nature, which even reason and nature it self
teaches all sober persons to be such, as that without some Order to be observed
in them, the worship of God either would not be performed, or would be
undecently performed.

True it is that the same men say in the same Chapter, The Assertion of the
Churches power in appointing Ceremonies and Circumstances of Divine Worship is
the very root of all, the Pandora' s Box, the very Fountain head of all those
Impositions, which have bred so much trouble, disturbance, and persecutions in
the Church of God. Which how to reconcile to what is just now quoted, I well
know not, nor to another passage in the same Chapter, where though they desire
to distinguish between Circumstances and Ceremonies of worship, yet they
acknowledge thus. That the word of God has left many things (not possible to
be determined by it) to the Authority of the Christian Magistrate cannot be
denied, whether any Ceremonies or no is a question, diverse Circumstances
relating to the worship of God, are undoubtedly so left.

When I compare these things, I know not how to understand the Coherence of
them, unless it be thus. When Church Governors are Episcopal, and shall assume
a power to appoint Ceremonies and Circumstances of divine worship, this is the
fountain head of Impositions that breed disturbance and persecutions: But if
they shall chance to be Presbyterian, then there are an Hundred things not
determined by the word of God, but left to their Christian Prudence. For
Example: A Convocation may not by a Canon or Rubric appoint, a font of stone
at the West end of the Church, nor kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, nor that the Bread and Wine be severally distributed to every
Communicant, but the Directory may make appointments contrary to all these and
an hundred things of the like nature. For the Ordinance of Parliament (all the
Authority it had) which established the Directory, says. The Directory for
public worship herein set forth, shall henceforth be used, pursued, and
observed, in all exercises of the public worship of God, in every
Congregation, Church, Chapel, and place of public Worship, within this
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.

The Independents in their Confession of Faith, set out from the Savoy, 1658.
speak to the same purpose. There Chap. 1. Sect. 6.
are some Circumstances concerning the worship of God and Government of the
Church, common to Humane Actions and Societies, which are to be Ordered by the
light of Nature, and Christian prudence, according to the General Rules of the
word, which are always to be observed.

Now I must crave leave that our Adversaries would judge whether they are not
unequal to us, in denying us a liberty which they grant to themselves. In this
general Consideration of things, it is not material to ask for what reason they
scruple our Ceremonies, whether as significant or popish, etc. which shall be
examined in due time. All that I now conclude, is no more than what they
themselves believe and practice, viz. It is no superstitious Opinion to believe
that the Church may make Determinations in things Indifferent.

4. Where the Governors of the Church Sect. 10.
have power to determine, it can be no superstitious opinion to believe, they
ought to be obeyed, in the exercise of this their lawful power. Yea, if it
should be granted (what I do not by any means grant, only to come as close as
may be to our Adversaries, I suppose the case) that it is not well done to
Impose such things Indifferent; yet if they be not in their own nature evil, it
is better to obey than to disturb the peace of the Church, and to separate from
established order. Zanchy and Calvin are professedly our Advocates in this
Matter, on whose Testimony I build the more, because they are of great
Authority with those who dissent from us.

Zanchy wrote a Letter to Queen Elizabeth, wherein he did earnestly persuade
her not to Impose the Surplice and such like things upon the Clergy of England.
This he did with Zanch Epistol. lib. 1. p. 111. Tom. ult.
great Zeal, and it may seem with some acrimony; as if he had been a great
Patron of Nonconformity, and I will not deny that it seems by that Letter he
did greatly dislike such Impositions; and but that he was commanded by his
Prince to write as he did (he did Coactus scribere as he professes) it is a
Letter that might argue him to meddle too much in the affairs of another
Church: but we take it as we find it, and notwithstanding all that is there
said, it is manifest that Zanchy was of our side.

That he was abused in the Information that was given him of our affairs,
appears by his Letter to the Queen, wherein he complains of her introducing and
establishing all the Massing attire of the Romish Priests, for so he calls
them. Vestes albas ac lineas, quibus in papatu utuntur sacrifici: Antichristi
supellectilem: Papistarum Impiam pompam: Idololarriae and superstitionis
Papisticae reliquias vel saltem symbola: that is in the English of some of our
Malcontents, All the rags of the whore of Babylon. Whereas the attire of their
Priests is made up of six Vestments (as a Learned man of our own has observed
out of their Ritualists) Amictus, Alba, Cingulum, Falkner Libert. Ecclesiast.
lib. 2. Cap. 4.. 9.
Stola, Manipulus, Capsula, all far different from the Surplice; and these six
Garments are accounted holy Garments used by their Priests, and all of them
have their particular Consecrations, as the Surplice in the Church of Rome has
not. Zanchy then thus mistaking the case was more eager than he needed to have
been, but he was under another and greater mistake.

It was reported to him that there was great danger, lest many pious men should
be turned out of their Livings upon this Occasion; yea, it was told him, that
there were plerique Episcopi (that must be some considerable number of the
Twenty six that are in England and Wales) Viri omni eruditione and pietate
insignes, qui malint Officio and loco cedere quam istiusmodi vestes admittere.
There were many Bishops that would not conform. Now who that knows any thing of
the State of the Church of England, Anno 1571. (when that Letter was written)
knows not that the Bishops of that time were sufficiently satisfied with the
Conformity that was then urged, nor was there one among them (for so far as I
can now find) that made so much noise about these things as Bishop Hooper of
Gloucester did under Edward the Sixth: If therefore Zanchy may be excused for
endeavoring what he could in favor of those good and Learned men whose
exauctoration he feared; yet that not being the case, the earnestness of his
Letter (if we should yield more to his judgment than of necessity we are
obliged to do) will not signify much to the reproach of our Conformity.

But we have greater assurance that Zanchy was our Friend: For when he had
dated his Letter to the Queen from Heidelberg, Sept. 10. 1571. he dates another
the very next day Zanch. Epist. lib. 2. p. 181. Tom. ult.
to Bishop Juell (though it be doubtful whether he lived to receive it, because
he died the 23d of the same Month) from the tenor of which I conclude, that in
his Letter to the Queen he says nothing to prove the usages of our Church
unlawful to be practiced, (whatever his opinion might be of the convenience of
Imposing them) or if he did, he unsays it again the very next day in his Letter
to the Bishop, which of so Learned and fixed a man, is not easily to be
believed. For the very occasion of that second Letter, was to desire Bishop
Juell and other Bishops, to use their Authority with the rest to persuade. Ne
si Regina amoveri nullo modo possit a sententia, ipsi propterea suas deserere
malint stationes, quam edicto Regio obtemperare. If the Queen were resolved and
would be obeyed, he would have all the Clergy rather obey than leave their
places and Employments. He goes on declare his Opinion, that for such things as
these, Ministers may not leave their Flocks: He acknowledges the Case, that
where things are in their own nature evil, we must with the Apostles obey God
rather than Man, and then adds, Si vero res sua natura adiaphorae, lege
mandatoque regio praecipiantur, quando alterutrum necesse sit, ut aut cedatur
loco, aut tali mandato obtemperetur, obtemperandum potius esse, etc. When the
Magistrates command Indifferent things upon this necessity, that men must obey
or forsake their Ministry, they must rather obey. Nay he reckons this Case so
clear, that he concludes: Esse vero hanc sententiam it a certam and perspicuam,
tum in sacris literis tum apud patres and in Historiis Ecclesiasticis, ut
supervacaneum omnino sit, ullam adferre probationem apud illos, qui vel
mediocriter in scripturis sunt exercitati. Nunquam enim propter res sua natura
adiaphoas, deserenda est vocatio legitima and necessaria. They who ever
consulted the Scriptures, or Fathers, or Ecclesiastical Historians, will need
no proof of this, That it can never be lawful for men to leave a necessary
Employment (such as that of the Ministry is) for the sake of Indifferent Rites.

If this will not convert a Nonconformist, yet I hope it will make them
ashamed to quote Zanchy's Letter to the Queen, as if it were much to our
disadvantage (as the Replyer Vid. Burges Answer Rejoined. Chap. 1. Sect. 19.
upon Bishop Mortons defense does) let both his Letters be compared, and much
good may they do them.

That this was Zanchy's settled Judgment, appears from what he elsewhere says,
in defense of Garments peculiar to Divine Service: Quod veteres Episcopi coenam
administraturi, Zanc. Tom. 4. de Cultu Dei externo lib. 1. Cap. 16.
aliam induerint vestem, ad mutationem coenae nihil pertinet. Non enim Christus
jussit, ut communibus vestibus induti coenam administraremus, sicut and ipse
indutus erat, sed tantum ut faceremus quod and ipse fecit. Idem de multis aliis
rebus dici potest, tam in Baptismo quam in coena Dominica. Whereas the Bishops
of old did celebrate the Eucharist in a peculiar Garment, this makes no change
in that service, for our Lord Christ did not command us to be clothed as he
was, but to do what he did. And the same may be said of many other things, both
in Baptism and the Lords Supper.

The sum of all he thus expresses, Quae addita sunt, sed tanquam adiaphora,
propter ordinem, propter decorum, and ad aedificationem, ea substantiam
Sacramentorum eoque cultum non mutarunt. Those things that are added for Order,
Decency, and Edification, make no alteration in the substance of the
Sacraments, or of Divine Worship.

I conclude then, though we yield Zanchy theirs, as to his Opinion, that it is
not well done to impose these Indifferent things, yet he is clearly ours as to
the Proposition I maintain. When Indifferent things are once determined
(whatever Governors may have to answer for such Impositions) because they are
not in their own nature evil, it is better to obey than to disturb the peace of
the Church.

But Mr Calvin is a greater man Sect. 11.
than Dr Zanchy, and the cause which he condemns shall ly under a great
prejudice: his opinion therefore M. Durell View of Government and public
worship in the Reform. Churches beyond the Seas, page: 161. etc.
must be considered. However he be generally esteemed no great friend to
Episcopacy, yet M. Durell has endeavored to vindicate him from being very
Antiepispocal* Be that as it will; if our N. Cts will stand or fall to Calvin's
Judgment, our advantage is as great as we need desire.

1. For first he does greatly admire set forms of Prayer. So he says in a
Letter to the Protector of Edward the Sixth. Quod ad formulam precum and Calv.
Epist. 87. Dat. 1548.
Rituum Ecclesiasticorum, valde probo, ut certa illa extet a qua Pastoribus
discedere in sua functione non liceat. I do greatly like that forms of Prayer,
and the Rites of the Church should be stated, so as Ministers in the exercise
of their function should not have leave to vary from them. His reasons are
Three, Ut consulatur quorundam simplicitati and Imperitiae: Ut certius constet
omnium Ecclesiarum inter se consensus. Postremo ut obviam eatur desultoriae
quorundam levitati qui novationes quasdam affectant. First, For the supply of
some men's inabilities (a reason that our modern N. Cts. in this time of Gospel
light, think an undervaluing of them) Secondly, That the several Churches (of
the same Dominion) may appear to consent together. Thirdly, For a security
against Innovators (and in that also I wish they were not concerned.) Upon this
last reason Calvin adds, that there should be summa quaedam doctrinae ab
omnibus recepta, quam inter praedicandum sequantur omnes, ad quam etiam
observandam omnes Episcopi and Parochi jurejurando adstringantur, ut nemo ad
munus Ecclesiasticum admittatur, nisi spondeat sibi illum sensum inviolatum
futurum. Extet praeterea communis Catechismi formula, etc. Which I thus
accommodate to our Usage, he could not think it unlawful to subscribe to the
thirty nine Articles.

2. Because some Ceremonies must accompany Divine Service, it appears by the
former words that he would have them stated too. I conceal not his Opinion,
that he would have but few Ceremonies for fear of Superstition. Nihil
consultius video Epist. 303. Dat. 1560.
quam parcissimis Ceremoniis uti in Ecclesia, satis enim Experientia constat,
quam proclivis sit lapsus in superstitionem.

Now if any shall hence infer, that Calvin, if he were alive, would judge us to
abound in superfluous Ceremonies, I oppose his former Letter to the Protector,
where he speaks, de abolendis and radicitus evellendis abusibus and
corruptelis, of rooting out abuses: but he instances but in three things,
Praying for the dead, Chrism and extreme Unction. All which having now no place
in our Church, and it being undeniable that we are reformed to some greater
degrees than in Edward the Sixths time, we have fair reason to say that the
present state of things is such as Calvin would not disallow; at most if he
would have advised to have omitted some of our Ceremonies, yet in the same
place where he desires Ceremonies should be few, he adds, Aliud vero est, cum
nobis jus non est admittendi aut repudiandi quod videbitur. Si non licet
obtinere quod cupimus, feramus istos defectus, non approbemus. Where we are to
obey and not to rule, let us bear with those defects which we need not approve.

3. But Calvin is the man, who called some of our Rites Fooleries. Because our
N. Cts. shall have liberty to make the most of that word, I so translate it,
though others think it may be rendered Unfitnesses. Let them take the advantage
of it, provided they will acknowledge that at the same time he calls them
tolerable. The words are in a Letter to some English Divines at Frankford, in
Queen Mary's time. In Anglicana Ep. 200. Dat. 1555.
Liturgia qualem describitis, multas video fuisse tolerabiles Ineptias. Calvin
being at a distance, takes things as they were represented to him, therefore he
speaks of the English Liturgy according to the description they gave of it, and
there is some reason to suspect, that they who gave him that account,
misrepresented the case. I am not alone in the Imagination. M. Durell is before
me who View of Government, etc. p. 117.
undertakes it at large. But Calvin says moreover video fuisse: so it had been
(he thought) in Edward the Sixths time, and who knows not what perfective
alterations have been since made? Suppose at most he did not like some things,
yet this is certain, that he did not think it worth while to contend about
them, for so he says in the same Letter. In Id. ibid.
rebus mediis ut sunt externi Ritus, facilem me and flexibilem praebeo. In such
Indifferent matters as outward Rites are, I am an easy man and ready to be
persuaded. And I give but Two Instances more that I may have done with him.

When he writes to Bullinger about Bishop Hooper's Scruples and troubles, he
says, De pileo and vest Ep. 120. Dat. 1551.
linea maluissem (ut illa etiam non probem) non usque adeo ipsum pugnare, idque
etiam nuper suadebam. Though I do not much like the Square-Cap, and Surplice,
yet I wish Hooper had not been so fierce against them, and so I lately
persuaded him. Yea, in an affair of their own, Beza reports him to have been of
the same temper. Some there were at Geneva who had upon some pretenses
introduced the use of Unleavened Bread (and of that only) at the Communion: At
this others were so offended, that they inclined, rather to stay away than
Communicate. Calvin who Bez. Vit. Calvini. An. 1538.
was then withdrawn from Geneva, hearing of it, advised them, ne ob istud (...)
litem moverent, sic obtinuit panis Azymi usus, de quo etiam postea restitutus
Calvinus nunquam contendendum putavit, minime tamen dissimulans quid alioqui
esset magis probaturus. He would not have them quarrel about such an
Indifferent matter. So the use of Unleavened Bread was established, which when
Calvin returned again, he did not think fit to make any disturbance about,
though he did not dissemble that he rather wished, it had been otherwise. It
appears then Calvin was not so inflexible in all matters of Conformity as many
of our Modern N. Cts. are.

To Calvin and Zanchy it is easy to Sect. 12. M. Durell View of Government,
etc. p. 119. and deinceps.
add like Testimonies out of other Authors magnified by the N. Cts. M. Durell
has brought about forty, mostly Divines, as it were into Council, delivering
their Opinions about Ceremonies and Circumstances of worship. All unanimously
agreeing against our present Dissenters, that these things, viz. the Surplice
and Cross, etc. are not such, for which a separation is to be made: and if all
do not speak to every particular matter in Controversy between us, yet all
speak to some, and some to all, by all which it appears, that the Church of
England is not condemned by the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, nay she is
justified, nay she is admired.

For the particular purpose of the Argument now in hand, I offer a few of our
own Countrymen, and I cannot begin better than with T. Cartwright, who is
quoted as professing Burges Preface to Answ. Rejoined, p. 3, 4.
to oppose our Ceremonies as inconvenient but not as unlawful, and therefore
persuaded Ministers, rather to wear the Garments than cease their Ministry, and
taught men to receive the Sacrament kneeling, if they could not have it
otherwise, because though the gesture be (as he takes it) incommodious, yet he
says it is not simply unlawful. Mr Sprint, also assures us, that Dr Humfrey, Dr
Rainolds, Cassand. Anglic. p. 163.
Dr Sparks, Dr Chaloner, Dr Ayray, Mr Chaderton, Mr Knewstubs, though they
stood out and testified their dislike against sundry of the Ceremonies
established, yet they did in case of deprivation yield to them, and studiously
persuaded others in this case to this practice.

Of latter days Mr Baxter has determined, that it may be very sinful to
command some Ceremonies, when yet it may be the subjects duty to use them when
they are commanded. Upon which Proposition he says farther: If a thing Baxt.
Disputat. of Church Government, p. 460.
be simply unlawful, as being forbid by God himself, there no command of man
can make it lawful: But if it be but inconvenient, or evil only by accident, or
circumstance, it is possible for the command of Governors to take off that
accidental evil, and make it become a duty.

I have dwelt at large upon these Testimonies, not because the Reason of the
thing is doubtful, so as to need such a Confirmation, nor because if it were,
other Testimonies as considerable could not be produced, but to comply with the
humor of the N. Cts. and to deal with them at their own Weapon. They have made
a great noise about the consent of the Reformed Churches, and did Covenant to
endeavor a Reformation according to the Example of the best Reformed Churches;
as if all that go under the name of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, did
as much believe us Superstitious as these men pretend to believe. Whereas
beside the Veneration which Spanhemius expresses to have for the Order Epist.
ad tertiam partem. Dub. Evangel. An. 1638.
of the Church of England, in a time when Conformity went higher than of late
days: besides Bogerman's acknowledgment at Dort to the Bishop of Landaffe that
then was, Domine, nos Bishop Hall Episcopacy by Divine Right, Sec. 4.
non sumus adeo foelices, It was their misfortune not to be under Episcopal
Government; we have many more clear evidences of the great respect which
Foreigners bear to the Church of England.

I conclude this Proposition with the grave and excellent determination of St.
Austin, in which he gives account of St. Ambrose too. Monica coming to Milan,
and observing the Order of the Church there, that they did not fast on Saturday
as was usual in other Churches, was troubled about it; for her satisfaction St.
Austin advises with St. Ambrose, who answers him, and resolves her, by his own
practice. Cum Romam Augustine. Januario.
venio, jejuno Sabbato, cum hic sum non jejuno; sic etiam tu ad quam forte
Ecclesiam veneris, ejus morem serva, si cuiquam non vis esse scandalo, nec
quenquam tibi. When I am at Rome, I fast on Saturday as they do there, here I
do not; so I would have you, wheresoever you come, observe the Order of the
place, if you would neither give nor take offense. An Answer which satisfied
Monica, and passed for an Oracle with St. Austin, who adds of his own in the
same Epistle: Some things Universal tradition had so confirmed, that he did not
think fit they should be altered, as the Observation of Easter and Whitsuntide,
etc. but then, Alia quae per loca terrarum Id. ibid.
variantur, sicut est quod alii jejunant Sabbato, alii non, alii quotidie
communicant, alii certis diebus, etc. and si quid aliud hujusmodi animadverti
potest, Totum hoc genus rerum liberas habet observationes, nec disciplina ulla
alia est in his melior, gravi prudentique Christiano, quam ut eo modo agat, quo
agere viderit Ecclesiam ad quamcunque forte devenerit; quod enimneque contra
fidemneque contra bonos mores injungitur, Indifferenter est habendum, and pro
eorum inter quos vivitur societate servandum est. As to those Observances which
are diverse in diverse Countries, that some fast on Saturday, others not; some
communicate every day, others at stated times: All such things as these are
free, and a grave and prudent Christian can follow no better rule, than to
behave himself according to the Order of the Church, to which he shall chance
to come: For whatsoever is enjoined that is not against Faith, nor good
manners, is to be esteemed Indifferent, and to be practiced according to the
Company with which we converse. St. Austin does rightly state the Notion of a
thing Indifferent (suppose the Surplice) somewhat in its own nature not
necessary, therefore in a Church that does not enjoin it, it may be omitted,
somewhat in its own nature not Unlawful, therefore in a Church that does enjoin
it, it ought to be used.

5. It is no Superstitious Opinion to believe Sect. 13. Discourse of Liturgies,
Chap. 16.. 9.
that the Church may appoint significant Ceremonies. This is another matter
wherein the N. Cts. speak big. It is not true that they have any Authority to
appoint significative Ceremonies, where are sensible signs to affect the
Understanding, this is to give them Authority to institute Sacraments. Another
formerly. All humane Ceremonies being appropriate Abridg. Lincoln. See Burges
Answer Rejoined. Chap. 3. Sect. 1.
to Gods service, if they be ordained to teach any spiritual duty by their
Mystical signification, are unlawful. But such are these Three, the Surplice,
the Cross in Baptism, and Kneeling in receiving the Communion. Ergo, they are
Unlawful. There is a clear difference between signs of Grace inwardly infused,
and signs of duty enjoined. It is the nature of a Sacrament to be an outward
sign of inward Grace. Wherefore because Christ is the Author of Grace, as it
belongs to him whose the deed of Gift is to set to his Seal, so is it the
Prerogative of our Lord Christ to institute Sacraments for his Church. But
signs of duty are other things, and this distinction is thus expressed by the
Learned Morton. There be two acceptions of the word Mystical, See Burges ut
supra. Chap. 3. Sec. 4.
one Sacramental by signification of Grace conferred by God, the other only
moral, signifying some duty of men to God. The Mystical Ceremonies condemned by
Learned Writers, are Sacramental; all the Ceremonies which we defend, are
Mystical, Moral, not Sacramental.

They who have written of these things, have given us diverse Instances, both
out of the Old Testament and New, where insignificant Ceremonies have been
allowably practiced, although they have not been strictly Sacramental, nor of
Divine Institution. That which I offer to consideration, is somewhat not fully
retorted upon our Adversaries, that I have any where observed, therefore I take
liberty to enlarge upon it, when I have first moved one question. Put the Case
a Canon or Constitution of our Church, should enjoin the Sexton to make his
Graves East and West, and to take care that they who are buried be laid with
their Feet to the East. I ask, would it be lawful, or unlawful, to obey this
Constitution? Unlawful? How can that be so, when it is commanded, which is now
generally practiced, and that without scruple? If lawful, then is a significant
Ceremony allowed lawful, for though all men may not think of it, or may not so
design, yet there can be no doubt but the Original of that Custom, had a
Respect to the Resurrection of the Body, and to an expectation of Christ's
coming to Judgment, the belief of which was declared by this significant
Ceremony.

But that which I urge is this. They against whom we argue, contend for sitting
at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and that for this reason, because it is a
significant posture. That it is any where in the New Testament commanded to
receive the Sacrament sitting, no man in his Wits will say: Yet the
Presbyterians have often argued for it, upon the account of its significancy.
So I have heard it out of the Pulpit. That gesture which ought to be kept above
all the rest, is Sitting, because though it be but a Circumstance, yet it has
some significancy in it, because it is a supper gesture. And secondly and
chiefly, because it signifies the familiarity that is between Christ and
Believers, Luke 22. 30. This Supper is a Type of the Everlasting Supper in
Heaven, where one shall not sit and another stand. I name not my Author because
he is long since dead, but I am certain I do him no wrong. And to make it
appear that this is their Doctrine, I add a Printed Testimony.

Among the Treatises that bear Mr Bradshaws name, one is a Proposition
concerning Kneeling at the Sacrament, wherein are these words. Whereas Bradsh.
several Treatises. p. 104.
the end of a Sacrament, is to inform the outward man, by sensible
demonstrations, it pleased our Master to use such a gesture, as agreeably with
Bread and Wine, sets out our Communion and spiritual familiarity with him,
and rejoicing in him, and therefore as he says, If any man hear my voice, etc.
I will come in to him and sup with him, and he with me: So he says, Many shall
come from the East and West, and shall sit with Abraham, etc. By which place it
appears, that as by Supper, so by sitting, familiar rejoiceing, or rejoicing
familiarity is expressed. Therefore not kneeling but sitting is for receiving.

It is plain then, that sitting is reckoned a significant posture. It is also
plain, that it is required in the Directory. Direc. Celebra. Commun.
The Table being decently covered, and so conveniently placed, that the
Communicants may orderly sit about it, or at it, etc.

I know the pretense is, that they do not Institute a significant Ceremony,
they only retain it, as having warrant from the Example of our Savior. So says
the forementioned Proposition. Kneeling is contrary to Ibid.
the Example of Christ and his Apostles, who ministered and received sitting, or
in such a gesture as in those Countries was most used at eating, from which
Example to differ without warrant from Gods word, cannot be without fault,
seeing the Examples of holy men, much more that of Christ, are to be followed
except there be some reasonable cause to the contrary.

In Answer to which I oppose three things.

First, If the Example of Christ were as they say, yet it does no more conclude
for our sitting, than for our receiving at Supper time, etc.

Secondly, They have not the Example of Christ, for that manner of sitting
which they now urge.

Thirdly, It is not absolutely certain, whether they have his Example for any
manner of sitting at all.

1. Suppose the most, that the Sect. 14.
Apostles at the first Institution of the Sacrament, did receive it sitting,
where is the Argument, because they did, therefore so must we? Let this be
proved. Where is the particular Command that makes it our duty to follow this
Example? Cedo locum and we yield. That must not be said. What then? Will they
argue from the Equity of the Example? Let us go on then and say, Because of the
same Example we must receive at night, in an upper room, and only Males: For
either the whole Example binds in all Circumstances, or in none; or some
difference must be assigned between this Circumstance and the other of Time and
place, etc. And what I pray shall that be? Is it because (which is a sufficient
reason) they were but Occasional? there was no design in Instituting and
administering the Sacrament in such a place, but because it was judged by our
Blessed Savior a convenient place; Or at night, but because the Passover was
first to be eaten, and that night our Blessed Savior was to be betrayed,
therefore that time of night was most proper, because it could not be sooner or
later. Now let it be considered, was it not also Occasional, that they received
it sitting? so as their Master found them at the Passover (as is now supposed)
so being in have, he administers this Sacrament. Why therefore should this come
into Example rather than the other Circumstances, unless (which can never be
proved) there be some indications in the Gospel, that it was the pleasure of
our Lord that this part of his Example should oblige and not the rest.

Oh! but this gesture signifies (as was before said) and does it so? Who can
tell that? Who may be bold to say, that the posture which was used upon
occasion, was intended for signification, when no such thing is said, only the
wits of men have devised this reason, and imagined a significancy in it? But be
it so. May not then also some signification be fastened upon the time and
place? It is best to receive in an upper room: this signifies the exalted state
to which Believers are received, and by which they are dignified, whereby also
they are raised up to a nearness to Heaven in that holy Ordinance. Again, it is
best to receive at night: this signifies, after a poor Sinner has been wearied
in his days of sin, as men at night turn to their rest after the labors of the
day; so now after the labors of sin, Return to thy rest, O my Soul, for the
Lord has dealt bountifully with thee, Psalm. 116. and Come unto me all ye that
labor, etc. and I will give you rest, Math. 11. I dare say as good Texts to
prove receiving at night, as sitting with Abraham in the Kingdom of God proves
the posture. Thus is it easy to devise and imagine; and if this shall be
thought a worshipping God after our own devices (as the men who seem so much to
abhor Superstition will be ready to say) I see not but they who contend so much
for sitting, will be guilty, unless they can make it appear that the Holy
Scripture has rather recommended one than another. Now if I should repeat
those Tragical Declamations against adding to the word of God, Willworship, and
men's devices in the worship of God, of which their writings are full; how would
they all fit here? For what is, if this be not worshipping God after men's
Imaginations, when they will make differences where our Blessed Savior has
made none? And yet this is the best that can be said of this Case: for this
supposes that Christ's Example recommends sitting.

2. Whereas this is farther to be said, They have not so much as Example for
that manner of sitting which they now urge: (...) and (...), Matthew. 26. Luke 22.
the two words used by the Evangelists upon this occasion, do not signify such
a sitting as is now in use: It is therefore generally agreed, that their
posture was more like to lying than sitting. So that the best of their Argument
can be but thus: Because our Blessed Savior gave the Sacrament to his
Disciples in that gesture which they used at Meals, which was a kind of lying,
therefore we ought to receive it in the gesture now used at Meals which is
sitting: where we must desire their Logic to tell us, what degree of necessity
is in this sequel, because they did one thing, we must do another. Yet neither
is this the worst of it, all this is but a supposition of that which they are
never able to prove. For

3. It is not absolutely certain, in what posture they did then receive the
Lords Supper. Probably they continued in the same posture, but who can
peremptorily conclude it? Who can demonstrate to the contrary, but that when
our Blessed Savior, while they were eating, solemnly betook himself to the
Institution of a new Sacrament, they to address themselves to a new service,
might betake themselves to a new gesture? I cannot prove they did, nor (for
ought I can find) can any body prove they did not. There is nothing conclusive
in any of the Evangelists, that they did certainly continue in the same
posture; Unless the Order of St. Luke be insisted on, who ( Chap. 22.) after
the Institution of the Sacrament has these words, But behold the hand of him
that betrays me is with me at the Table. Which Order signifies little to those
who will not yield Judas to have been at the Sacrament (as diverse of our
Adversaries will not) but admit he was there, as seems very probable, yet
though they were all at the same table as before (and who can demonstrate but
it might be another table) yet it does not appear certain, that they were in
the same posture as before. This doubt I move, not as a thing in it self
considerable, but to represent how strongly some men (and even the same who
call so much for Scripture grounds, and for a divine warrant for Circumstances
of worship as minute as this) will build upon probabilities, when it serves
their turn. Because it is not said they rose up, it is by consequence gathered
they sat still. If they did, it was not our manner of sitting, but another. If
they had sat as we, yet this Example is no more obligatory, than it is to
other Circumstances of the same Institution. Yet through all these If's, and
Consequences, and Suppositions, they conclude to the expedience, if not to the
necessity of a significant Ceremony, though in us they call it Superstition.

The lifting up the hand at the Covenant, the laying the hand upon the Book in
swearing and other like Ceremonies, have been objected to them by others, I
urge not that, but add another Instance whereby it will plainly appear, that
many of the N. Cts. though they suspect so much superstition in a significant
Ceremony, yet can themselves allow and urge the use of a Ceremony, and that in
a Religious matter, and because it is significant, although the particular
Ceremony be no where in Scripture commanded.

They who have endeavored to Sect. 15.
settle Presbyterated and Associated Churches, have determined to do it by way
of Covenant, so consenting to be a Member of such a Church. The Agreement of
the Associated Churches in Worcestershire, will give us light in this thing;
who thus express themselves. Because Ministers should Agreement of the
Associated Churches in Worcestersh.. 18.
have a particular knowledge of their Charge, which now is uncertain, and for
diverse other reasons propounded and debated among us; We judge it very fit, if
not of necessity, to desire a more express signification of our peoples
consent, to our Ministry and Ministerial actions, and in particular to submit
to this discipline, as the members of that particular Church. Afterward they
tell us in what form of words they require this consent to be given.

I do consent to be a Member of the particular Church of Christ at -- whereof
-- Teacher, etc. The reasons why this was required, Mr Baxter gives in his
Explication of that Agreement, not as his Ibid.
own, but as those that moved the Association to make that determination. The
reasons are Twelve. In all which there is not so much as a pretense of a divine
Institution, nay it is confessed in the Preface, that the sign it self of this
consent is not particularly determined; and Mr Baxter after the reasons adds
this Memorandum: Remember yet that I maintain, that God does in Scripture
require, only consent signified (a thing which I do not now debate) but has
not tied us to this or that particular sign, for signifying it, but having
given us general Rules, that all things be done to Edification, decently, etc.
he has left it to humane prudence to determine of the particular sign, whether
voice, subscription, etc. So then, such a form of words is owned to be a sign
signifying consent. It is also owned a sign required only upon General Rules of
Scripture. What unpardonable crime is it then, if the Church of England agree
upon some Ceremonies significant, by virtue of the same general Rules, of
Edification and Decency? In which Cases if private men will be so wise as to
abound in their own sense, whether or no such things be decent and edifying,
the same Mr Baxter has determined the Controversy in the same place: where
though he assert, that the Pastors are to consult with the people about the
convenience; yet he positively concludes: That people are to obey the
determination of their guides. And how now comes it to pass that the power
which they in their times assumed, should be denied the Church of England, viz.
Power and Authority to appoint significant Ceremonies?

If they will distinguish between Discipline and Worship, and allow a
significant Ceremony in that, but not in this, I reply, that in their
contentions for Discipline about Mr Hookers time, that Axiom of theirs [
Nothing ought to be established in the Church, which is not commanded by the
word of God] was applied to Discipline as well as worship, and therefore
Eccles. Pol. Lib. 3. Sect. 5.
Degrees in the Universities, sundry Church-Offices and Dignities were struck
at. Yea, they did affirm, that the Discipline was no small part of the Gospel,
Survey of the pretended Holy Discipline. p. 440.
that without this Discipline there can be no right Religion, that they who
reject the Discipline refuse to have Christ reign over them. However it is
clear, A significant Ceremony because allowed in Discipline, is not in the
Nature of the thing unlawful. Nor does it deserve the name of a Sacrament
properly so called. Nor does the Church of England deserve to be upbraided with
superstition because of such appointments.

If these grounds be firm and good, I conclude that the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church of England, unless they be either burdensome in their Number, or
required as somewhat in nature and kind, greater and more necessary than things
Indifferent, are not faulty or superstitious.

Both which Cases deserve Consideration.

1. If our Rites be in their nature Sect. 16.
Innocent, no man has reason to find fault with their Number. The Compilers of
our Liturgy have been aware, that an Objection might be here made, and have
taken care to prevent the scruple. Some Ceremonies are Preface to the Liturgy,
of Ceremonies.
put away, because the great excess and multitude of them has so increased in
these latter days, that the burden of them was intolerable, whereof St. Austin
in his time complained, etc. This our excessive multitude was so great, and
many of them so dark, that they did more confound and darken, than declare and
set forth Christ's benefits to us. That Complaint of St. Austin, is in his
Epistle to Januarius, where he acknowledges. Aug. Januario Ep. 119.
Quamvis enim neque hoc inveniri possit, quomodo contra fidem sint; ipsam tamen
Religionem, quam, paucissimis and manifestissimis celebrationum sacramentis,
misericordia Dei esse liberam voluit; servilibus oneribus premunt, ut
tolerabilior sit conditio Judaeorum. Admit that such observances be not against
the Gospel; yet in as much as the Merciful God would have Religion free from
the burden of many Ceremonies; they have so clogged it with burdensome services,
that the condition of the Jews was more tolerable than of Christians now adays.
That there may be no such Cause of Complaint among us, the Church of England
has been very moderate in this thing. Not so as to escape the ill will of her
Adversaries, when they were resolved to find fault; for the Preface to the
Directory complains of the many unprofitable and burdensome Ceremonies,
contained in the Liturgy, which occasioned much mischief: yet in cool blood
some of the party are constrained to acknowledge the Disc. of Liturgies, p. 91.
number of Ceremonies retained in our Church, pretending to any legal
Authority, but small. The Surplice, and Cross, and Kneeling at Sacrament are we
think all. And they do us much wrong if they refuse this acknowledgment. For a
great number of observations which obtain in the Church of Rome in the
Celebration of the Sacraments (which from their number of seven we have reduced
to Two) and in other parts of Divine Worship, have no place in the Church of
England, lest they should divert the minds of men from worshipping God in
spirit and truth. Ceremonies harmless in themselves may yet be hurtful in
respect of their number, therefore has our Church abrogated a great number of
Saintsdays and other like Customs, as Mr Eccles. Pol. lib. 4. Sec. 14.
Hooker has observed.

Wherefore such is the present state of our Church, that we may securely defy
our Adversaries in this matter, if it were as easy to cure their Jealousies of
what may be, as to answer their objections against what is established. But
here they make difficulty. Though our present Number of Ceremonies be but
small, yet they raise a doubt, how far a Church may go; how many Ceremonies may
be established, before the number be burdensome. Where is the Maximum quod non,
and the Minimum quod sic of superstition. This is thought a great Argument why
no Ceremonies, (beyond what are of direct necessity) should be imposed; because
of the Bagshaw's Two great Queries, p. 10.
Impossibility to fix a point, where the Imposer will stop. For do but once
grant that the Magistrate has power to impose, and then we ly at his mercy how
far he will go. And they who allow our present number to be but small, yet
think them too many, because, though there Discourse of Liturgies, p. 91.
be no more Ceremonies established by law as yet, there are many probationers,
and they can see no reason, but the Churches power if allowed to appoint any
(save only such, without which the service of God, would apparently to all
rational men, be performed indecently and disorderly) may appoint Hundreds. It
is also one of Mr Baxters reasons, against the Imposing Crossing, and the
Surplice, etc. When we once begin to let in Humane Baxter Disput. of Chapter
Government, p. 477.
Mystical Rites, we shall never know where to stop, or make an end. On the same
ground, that one age invents three or four, the next think they may add as
many: and so it will grow to be a point of devotion, to add a new Ceremony (as
at Rome it has done) till we have more than we well know what to do with.

I answer. The Writings of Moralists are not thought defective, though, when
they have given General Rules for Temperance, that men may not drink till they
disable their Reason, and impair their health, etc. they do not descend
particularly to determine how many Glasses a man may drink, and precisely to
say, such a draught makes him Intemperate. Nor did Mr Chillingworth think, he
was wanting to his Adversary, who counted it prodigiously strange, that
Protestants Chillingw. Religion of Protest. etc. p. 128, 129.
could not be induced to give in a particular Catalogue of points Fundamental,
when he calls it an Unreasonable demand, because variety of Circumstances makes
it impossible to set down an exact Catalogue of them.

I think I may have as much reason, to reckon it no Imperfection in this
discourse, if I do not venture punctually to determine, how great a number of
Ceremonies may be required, before we come at Superstition. When the number
becomes so great that the shadow darkens the substance: When the substantial
service of God, which should be performed in spirit and truth, is prejudiced by
the attendance that is given to the outward Ceremony: when the use of the means
renders us incapable to obtain the end; then does it rise to that excessive
multitude of which our Church speaks. But because the use of our liberty in
other lawful things, cannot be fixed in an Indivisible point, but alters
according to the various Circumstances of times, and persons, and conditions,
and relations of men; therefore no wise man will give one particular
determinate rule, which shall oblige equally in all Cases.

In like manner as our Church reckons Ceremonies Indifferent, so at the same
time are they concluded alterable, and it is acknowledged, that upon weighty
and important considerations, Preface to the Liturgy.
according to the various exigency of times and occasions, such changes and
alterations should be made therein, as to those in place of Authority should
from time to time seem either necessary or expedient. And here sure must the
thing rest. It must be left to the prudence of our Governors. If they shall
impose any thing in which the Consciences of people are not satisfied; If in
truth it shall be believed that the number of Ceremonies enjoined is so great,
that the means disserve the end; that what is ordained as an help to Piety and
Devotion, does rather hinder it: these persons so dissatisfied about the
number, are in the same case with those who are dissatisfied about the nature
of an Injunction. If they scruple without cause, and are not duly informed,
their scruples do not render the Injunction unlawful in it self. Nevertheless,
the Doctrine of our Church does not encourage them to act against their
Consciences, they must peaceably suffer where they cannot act. No doubt, but it
is possible Church Governors (who among us do not pretend to Infallibility)
may in some things be mistaken: Yet such things as these must be left to their
determination. For is it not so elsewhere? There may be too many Alehouses in
a Town, and it may be difficult to determine exactly how many are sufficient,
and where the number will exceed, but is it therefore unlawful for the Justices
to license any? There may be in a Country, or Town, Parishes too many for the
Maintenance, or too few for the people, and it may be difficult for Authority
to know exactly how many are needful and convenient; Shall there be therefore
no division made into several, for fear lest there should be too many or too
few? What if there be the same difficulty in adjusting the true number of
Ceremonies? yet in as much as it is necessary there should be some, because
else Religion in the substance would suffer and decay; therefore is it also
lawful for our Governors to make a determination in this matter.

The Determination of which number must proceed upon the same Rules of Decency,
Order, and Edification, which give a law to the kind and nature of Ceremonies.
And in this General may men rest satisfied till the number shall grow doubtful.
Then it will concern private persons to take heed as to their own practice,
that the Ceremony do not devour the substance. But because at present there is
no reasonable Cause to fear; because the Ceremonies that are now required are
so few, that no man may without peevishness quarrel at their number, if they be
Innocent in their nature and use, therefore I return from this digression to
consider that in the next place.

2. The Rites and Ceremonies of our Church are not required as things in their
nature necessary, but Indifferent.

The use of the Cross at Baptism is Canon 30.
thus accounted for, as being purged from all Popish superstition and error,
and reduced in the Church of England to the primary Institution of it, upon
those true Rules of Doctrine concerning things Indifferent, which are consonant
to the word of God and the Judgment of all Ancient Fathers, etc. And upon the
same Rules of Doctrine are our other Ceremonies established. For so the Preface
to the Liturgy expresses it. The Ceremonies that remain, are retained for a
Godly Discipline and Order, which (upon just causes) may be altered and
changed, and therefore are not to be esteemed equal with Gods Law. And the
Preface that was made upon the last establishment says. The particular forms of
Divine Worship, and the Rites and Ceremonies appointed to be used therein, are
things in their own Nature Indifferent and alterable, and so acknowledged.
Words too plain to need a Comment, and liable to no Objection that I can
foresee, unless one of these two things shall be replied both upon them, and
all that has hitherto been said in this matter.

First, That some things are required under the Notion of things Indifferent,
which are not so.

Secondly, Be it granted that some Indifferent things may be imposed, yet it
does not follow that all may, or that the things in controversy may.

We say, the things they scruple Sect. 17.
are required but as things Indifferent as indeed they are. They are not all
satisfied to think so of them. The time was, when T. C. did oppose our
Ceremonies, not as unlawful, but as inconvenient, as has been already said.
And Mr Ash in the Epistle to his Funeral Sermon on Mr Gataker, when he had
named Cartwright, and Hildersham, and Dod, etc. he says of them, though these
men disliked the use of superstitious Ceremonies, yet they opposed their
Tenants and practice, who separated from the Church of England, condemning it
and the Ministry of it as Antichristian. The separation is, it seems, now
advanced, for there are men that reckon there is more superstition among us,
than was believed formerly, and therefore separate farther from us. It is
denied Modest Disc. of Ceremon. p. 8.
now that these are things of Indifferency to be used (as is required) in the
service of God. And whereas it is supposed that we say that the Imposition of
Rulers makes Indifferent things cease to be Indifferent, they answer. They are
not Indifferent in the Judgment Petition for Peace, p. 12.
of Dissenters, though they be so in ours. Exercit. about an Opining Cansci. p.
80.
They think they have probable Arguments to judge it unlawful to Minister in a
Surplice, to sign with the sign of the Cross in Baptism, and to kneel in the
Act of receiving the Lords Supper. Yea these things are so far from being
Indifferent, that they are thought so Unlawful, as that because of them people
separate from our Churches. For whatever reasons may persuade their Guides not
to conform, yet the people separate from us, that they may not partake with our
Ceremonies, or for a worse reason.

I could not altogether omit so necessary a part of my Discourse, but because
it has been so often said, I pass it in fewer words. Where no Law Romans 4.
is there is no Transgression. That which is not forbid is not Unlawful. Are
these Rites and Ceremonies forbid in the word of God? By what Text? perhaps by
the second Commandment, or by those words of St. Matthew. Teaching for Doctrine
the Commandments of men: Chapter 15. or by the Text of Will Worship, 2 Colos. or
because we may not add to, nor diminish from the word of God, Deuteron. 4. Now
because the Surplice, and Cross, and Kneeling, are not named in these Texts (as
was upon occasion said before) therefore Consequences must be drawn from them,
and labored so long, till the Conclusion must hold as firm as confidence can
make it. Because the second Command forbids making and worshipping graven
Images, therefore all devices and Inventions of man's brain must have no place
in Divine Worship. Ergo, what? Ergo, rend the Surplice, etc. As if the Basin at
the Desk were not as much the device of man as the Font, and the Directory were
not as obnoxious as the Rubric.

If our Church did equal her commands to the word of God, then were she guilty
of adding to the word, and establishing the Commands of men in the room of the
Doctrines of God. If any accidents may bring our Rites within the compass of
some general prohibitions, the Unlawfulness of them upon that account, will be
to be considered in what next follows. If they shall be denied Indifferent in
their own Nature, and yet no one Text of Scripture can be produced that speaks
one word about them, they who shall so deny, do both bring an Unanswerable
prejudice against all the particular establishments, made by the General Rules
of prudence, whether by the Presbyterians or Independents, and do also quite
mistake the nature of a thing Indifferent.

If we descend to particular Instances, I desire to know, why the Surplice is
not as Indifferent as a Gown or Cloak. Not because it is a white Garment, for
then why are not Bands Unlawful? And where is the Text that forbids white more
than black? Nor because it is of such a fashion; for the Scripture gives no
more directions for the shaping of a Cloak than a Surplice. Why then? Surely
either because it is thought decent or significant, or because it is
appropriated to divine worship.

1. If it be decent, then is it no Error to think it so; then the Apostolical
Canon, let all things be done decently, justifies and maintains it. And is it
not decent? Does nature teach so, to whom St. Paul appeals? We do 1 Cor. 11.
not find any inbred shame, as if we did somewhat Unnatural in the use of it.
Does Scripture pronounce it uncomely? We cannot find it. There is no other Rule
for Decency, but either common estimation, or the pleasure of our Governors:
for the latter we are secure, and set peevishness aside, fear not being
condemned by the former.

2. Peradventure it is thought significant, therefore not Indifferent. I
answer: that a significant Ceremony (if this should be such) only as such, is
not superstitious. But who told our men of scruples, that it is urged as
significant of Candor and Purity? By what Canon or Rubric is any man obliged
to have such an Opinion of it? Whatever others, who may have a better Opinion
of significant Ceremonies, may think of it, he who is satisfied to wear it as a
decent Garment, transgresses no Law, if he think no more.

3. Is it unlawful and not Indifferent, because it is appropriated to Divine
Service? This it seems is Dr Collings Exercit. of Opin. Consc. p. 80.
scruple, who thinks it Unlawful to wear any habit peculiarly appropriated to
the worship of God. I wonder then how it can be lawful to lean on a Pulpit
Cushion, or to use a Communion Cup, if the Churchwardens should be so
superstitious as to lock them up and preserve them from all other uses. If
there be any thing in Scripture that forbids the use of a Garment upon any of
these accounts, somewhat will be offered worth considering, till then, we
continue to believe it Indifferent and free from superstition.

2. Why is not Kneeling, etc. Indifferent? not because it is a posture, for so
is sitting, but because it is such a posture. And what is it? A posture used
upon any superstitious Opinion? Let us know what that is. Is it suspected to
signify our Adoration of the Elements? The Declaration of our Liturgy delivers
us from that suspicion, and authorizes us to reckon them pitifully Ignorant, or
monstrously Uncharitable, who after so plain a Declaration will suspect it.
What it signifies we there read. This Order Order for Adminis H. commun.
is well meant for a signification of our humble and grateful acknowledgment of
the benefits of Christ, and for the avoiding of profanation and disorder. If
it be unlawful to signify humility and thankfulness, why do we at any time
kneel or lift up our hands and eyes to Heaven? Or if it be unlawful to avoid
profanation and disorder, then let St. Paul be reproved for setting 1 Cor. 11.
things in Order in the Church of Corinth. Till I can find some Text that
forbids Kneeling, or till I can be satisfied that some superstitious Opinion
gives occasion to it, I must continue to reckon this also Indifferent.

3. And to the same purpose I say of the Cross at Baptism. How superstitiously
the Papists use it, I shall have occasion to say, but our use of it being to
where in Scripture forbid, unless it can be proved, that our 30th Canon (of
which before) gives a false Account of it, unless there be some Popish (or
other) superstition or error from which it is not sufficiently purged, it
remains in its nature Indifferent. Our general Answer in all is, as before,
Where no Law is, there is no Transgression. What is not forbid, is allowed, is
not Unlawful.

2. There may be some who will Sect. 18.
grant that some Indifferent things may be Imposed, yet will not yield that our
Ceremonies therefore may, because of some objections against them, which have
not equal force against all matters Indifferent. Such are these two thought to
be.

1. The case of Scandal and giveing offense to weak Brethren.

2. Because they have been abused among the Papists.

I should be ashamed to mention these things where in the N. Cts. have been so
often answered, did I not consider, that till this be cleared, the prejudice
which I desire to remove will still remain; for if for these reasons Conformity
be Unlawful, then may it seem, that they who either impose or practice it, have
an undue opinion of that which is so unlawful, and that opinion shall be
suspected of superstition. I proceed therefore to say, If they who impose these
Rites, did not in truth judge them expedient and decent in the worship of God,
only because they think them barely lawful, they urge them as believing many
scrupulous minds will be offended at them, and therefore they lay them as
Snares, and take advantage to incommode and bring under a penalty, those who
scruple them; this might be called Tyranny, but not properly superstition, and
so would not rach our Case. I make not this supposition as if I would tempt any
dissatisfied man so to judge of them, for assuredly it is no less than a
blaspheming of Dignities, to think they enact Conformity for this reason. But I
find they who pretend to be dissatisfied will thus suspect. And Mr Bagshaw thus
expresses it, Whoever obtrudes his conceits Two great Queries concerning things
Indiff. p. II.
upon others, who perhaps are not so well satisfied as he is; becomes impious
to God, by invading his sovereignty, and lording it over another man's
Conscience; and likewise injurious to men, by pressing such things as are only
baits to the careless, and traps for the Conscientious. Unless there be more
hypocrisy than superstition in our Governors, this cannot be the case, for
they profess to have done that which to their best understandings Preface to
the Liturgy.
they conceived might most tend to the preservation of peace and unity in the
Church, the procuring of Reverence, and exciting of Devotion, in the public
worship of God, and the cutting off occasion from them that seek occasion of
cavil or quarrel against the Liturgy of the Church. They have then imposed
nothing, but what they judged not only lawful, but expedient; which Impositions
being already proved Indifferent, unless the Circumstances that attend them
render them such, may not be judged superstitious.

It is therefore to be considered, whether either of the two suspicions now
mentioned, be reason enough to charge our way of worship as superstitious.

1. Suppose the Governors of the Church do not err in esteeming these things
in their own nature Indifferent, yet say Dissenters, in as much as they are
offensive to many Godly and Conscientious men, they ought not to be imposed; or
if they be, it will be doubtful, whether the great opinion they have of such
matters, as to enjoin them notwithstanding their offensiveness, be not a
superstitious Opinion.

I answer. If the Act for Uniformity should contradict those Precepts of the
Gospel, that oblige us not to lay stumbling blocks, nor give offense to our
weak Brother; in as much as giving offense and not walking charitably are the
same thing, this procedure would be a trespass against the second Table, rather
than the First, would be uncharitableness rather than superstition. It will be
replied. Though directly it be an offense against our Neighbor, yet
reductively it is against the First Table, because such a practice is
declarative of some undue and superstitious Opinions of those things which are
so imposed. Let it be added therefore. So long as private persons are not
determined by the Laws of their Superiors, it concerns them warily to use their
liberty, to take heed that their doing that which is lawful, may not tempt
others to do the same thing, while they judge it unlawful, which is the
offending of our Brother, of which St. Paul speaks to the Romans and
Corinthians, who only discourses of what ought to be done in those Cases, where
no lawful power had interposed, to determine them one way or other. For eating
flesh and letting it alone were both lawful, and remained Indifferent in nature
and use too: Now so long as the case remains thus, the Law of not scandalizing
a weak Brother is a Moral Law, because it is an instance of the great Law of
loving our Neighbor as our selves, and doing to others as we would have them
do to us, wherefore so far as it is practicable it obliges. But this may not be
extended to disoblige the subject from obeying his superiors in lawful things,
nor to disable the Magistrate from making laws in things Indifferent.

First, it does not disoblige the subject, because the law of obedience to our
Superiors being also a Moral Law, either we are at the same time obliged by two
laws which contradict, or one must yield to the other. If wearing the Surplice
offend, I must either disobey the Magistrate, or offend my Brother. Which then
of these two must give place? According to the N. Cts. we must relinquish a
certain Rule for that which is uncertain. What the Magistrate commands is
certain, it is also certain, that I am in my Conscience resolved of the
lawfulness of that which is so Commanded (taking it abstractly from its
offensiveness) If I must now demur in my obedience lest I give offense, how
shall I certainly know whether I offend or no? how shall I know how many I may
offend? What assurance shall I have but my Nonconformity may offend as many on
the other side? I shall now proceed by an uncertain Rule, because I know not
whither it will carry me, and I am in a Case wherein one Moral Law must give
place to another. Whereas upon our Principles things are fairly reconcilable.
In matters undetermined by Law, where we are at our liberty, we must walk
charitably and take heed that we give no offense, that our liberty become not a
stumbling block, 1 Cor. 8. 9.
this is the Moral Law, and this is Gospel. But there is no Precept of the
Gospel that commands us to disobey our Superiors lawful commands for an
uncertain danger of giving offense. Wherefore when we practice Conformity in
obedience to established Laws, although peradventure we should offend our weak
Brother, yet do we not thereby declare a superstitious Opinion of the
Ceremonies we use. We may think our selves obliged to obey our Governors in
all lawful things, and yet not think of the Surplice or Cross, etc. more highly
than we ought to think.

2. And as it does not disoblige the subject from Obedience, so neither may it
be thought to disable the Magistrate from making laws about things Indifferent.
For if it did, it were not safe to make any laws about Decency and Order,
because the Magistrate can never be secure, but his Determinations may be so
cross to the opinions of some of his subjects, as to make them offend if they
obey. But it has been already evinced, that the N. Cts. yield the Magistrate a
power to proceed according to the Rules of Christian Prudence in governing the
Church: And the frame of the Directory, and the urging of the Covenant do
sufficiently assure us, that the hazard of scandalizing a weak Brother, was no
restraint to an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons. He who in his Conscience
thought there was no way of worship so Regular as that of the Church of
England: He who thought he should sin if he should conform to the Directory,
was not thereby excused from sequestration. Yet I dare say, they would take it
ill, if they should be suspected of superstition, of having an undue opinion of
their manner of Divine Service. And I cannot yet see why they, commanding men
to receive the Sacrament sitting, when probably that would tempt some men not
to receive it at all, did not as much offend their Brother, and did not as much
declare that they had a superstitious opinion of such sitting, as the commands
that now require Kneeling may be so interpreted.

2. Nor does the second scruple weigh much. Our Ceremonies are supposed to have
been abused among the Papists, and this is made a great Argument by the N. Cts.
why they should not be retained. To this the Answer has been so often given to
this purpose, that by the same reason our Churches may not be now used, nor our
Bells which have been Christened, nor any thing retained that relates to Divine
Worship, but what is of absolute necessity, and is particularly commanded; that
I dwell not here any farther than, according to my former Method, to give a
Testimony how little this objection signifies when it is made against them.

It had been laid to T. C' s. charge, that he should thus declaim against the
Church of England. The Communion Survey of the H. pretended Discipl. p. 315,
316.
Book was taken out of the Mass Book, that it were better to conform our selves
in outward things to the Turks than to the Papists. Whatsoever comes from the
Pope which is Antichrist, comes first from the Devil, etc. In the time of this
Raillery it did chance to be laid to his charge, that their Disciplinarian way
did smell of Donatism and Anabaptism, and was a kind of Papism. Now what
defense does he make? If amongst the filth of their Heresies (viz. the Papists,
Donatists, and Anabaptists) there may be found any good thing (as it were a
grain of good Corn in a great deal of Darnel) that we willingly receive, not as
theirs, but as the Jews did the Holy Ark from the Philistines, whereof they were
unjust Owners. Yea it may come to pass that the Synagogue of Satan may at some
time have some one thing with more convenience than the Catholic Church of
Christ.

Our Liturgy is indeed taken from them, but as gold is purged from dross. And
there are diverse things wherein we agree with them, because it is no crime to
agree with them there, where they do not disagree with the word of God: And
because it is not hard to believe that running into a contrary extreme, that an
Aversation from what is Innocent among them, does harden them in their Errors
as much, yea a great deal more, than a retaining some Customs which may
honestly be retained. If we do not symbolize with them in the superstition of
their Rites, there is no reason we should be charged with superstition; because
we do not run a madding from them as far as we are able into another extreme.

This is that I had to say to the second general Proposition (which has
exceeded the proportion of the other, because it was my chief design.) The
Doctrines upon which the Conformity of the Church of England is established,
are not superstitious Opinions.

3. The Opinions that are superstitious, Sect. 19.
such as are diverse which obtain in the Church of Rome and elsewhere, are
rejected by the Church of England. There are many differences between us and
the Church of Rome, and they are not all reducible to this Topic of
superstition. There are Doctrines among them of other denominations, because
they serve some secular Interest of profit, or pleasure, or honor; so is it
easy to evince, that the Doctrine of Purgatory, and Celibacy of Priests, and
others are Doctrines of men who reckon gain their Godliness. The Doctrine of
Indulgences and Dispensations, etc. does not only design profit, but together
with other loose Doctrines of Morality, makes a very easy way to Heaven, and
so is sensual and pleasurable. And the Supremacy of the Pope and exemption of
Ecclesiastics from secular Jurisdiction, is a Doctrine of Mundane greatness
and unsufferable Ambition. There may be a mixture of superstition in all or any
of these, according as men's apprehensions are concerning them. But there are
other matters, wherein I give account of their superstition. Bishop Morton has
comprehended this in three generals, wherein he does at the same time vindicate
the Church of England, and condemn that of Rome.

Our Church in her Service Book does Presentment of a Schismatic. p. 14.
make known to all the World, that she does detest the superstition of the
Romish Ceremonies, by condemning their superstitious Opinions. First, In making
them necessary parts of Gods Worship. Secondly, In ascribing an efficacious
sanctity to them. Thirdly, By arrogating a meritorious condignity from them to
themselves. I need not restrain my discourse to Ceremonies only, be it in
Ceremony or be it in substance; If I make it appear that they esteem that a
necessary part of Gods worship which ought not to be so esteemed, (and so for
the other two) I shall conclude right when I charge them with superstition.

An Enumeration of particulars will be the best evidence in this matter. I
therefore give Instances to show that for these several reasons the Church of
Rome is guided by superstitious Opinions to superstitious practices, by which
it will also appear that the Church of England does renounce those practices,
at least if for other reasons some of them be retained, yet the Opinion which
is the original of their practice is disowned by us.

1. That opinion is superstitious whereby men judge and esteem any usages in
Religion necessary when they are not so, or more necessary than indeed they
are. When men advance any thing in the worship of God beyond its nature,
judging that to be holy, and to have a relation to God which has none, or to
have a nearer relation than in truth it has. Pius IV. in a Creed which he
imposed, Oruphrius in Vit. Pii 4. p. (mihi) 384.
furnishes us with sufficient Instances.

When he had by his Diploma allowed and confirmed all that was done at the
Council of Trent, he proceeded to direct in what manner Bishops should be made.

Then it follows. Hanc Fidei formulam quam Episcopi designati profiterentur
instituit. He appointed a certain Creed which all that were to be made Bishops
should make profession of. In the Conclusion of which Creed are these words.
Hanc veram Catholicam fidem, extra quam nemo salvus esse potest sponte
profiteor, etc. This true Catholic Faith, out of which no man can be saved, I
willingly profess. Now among the Credenda, which he reckons, and obliges others
to reckon necessary to Salvation, are such as these. That there are seven
Sacraments of the New Testament properly so called, instituted by Jesus Christ.
The propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints, worshipping Relics and Images; and lest enough should
not be crowded into that Creed, it is added. Caetera item omnia a sacrosancta
Tridentina Synodo tradita, definita and declarata indubitanter recipio atque
profiteor. All that was determined at the Council of Trent is to be received
without scruple. This is the Faith without which (they say) no man can be saved.

How these Opinions are rejected by our Church is too plain to need proof. It
rest to say, however otherwise faulty and dangerous they are, this makes them
superstitious, that they are made necessary, whereas indeed they are false. I
mean not every thing established by that Council of Trent, but the Articles
before-named, and diverse other like things decreed in that Council.

If the Intendment of this Essay were principally against the Church of Rome,
it would the less be an excursion, if the things now mentioned were severally
considered, and their repugnancy to Scripture shown; but being designed rather
for the Vindication of the Church of England, and that for the sake of those
who agree with us in rejecting these Doctrines, I am not willing to engage in
all these Controversies. I think it sufficient to add another instance under
this Head, and so convict them together of superstition.

The Council of Trent does advance Histor. Council. Trident. Sess. 4.
Unwritten Traditions to an Authority equal with the word of God. When the
question is moved what are these Unwritten Traditions, their Authors
distinguish between such as are Divine, Apostolical, and Ecclesiastical. Those
which they call Divine are in the Account of Azorius, such as these. Purgatory,
Azor. Institut. Moral. Part. 1. lib. 8. Cap. 4.
Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, worshipping Images, Communion in one
kind enough for Laics, etc. Whereas the question may be again asked, how shall
we know that these are Divine Traditions after some other Rules, Bellarmine
wholly rests it upon the Bellarm. De Verbo Dei non scripto. Cap. 9.
Testimony of the Romish Church. Ex Testimonio hujus solius Ecclesiae sumi
potest Certum Argumentum ad probandum Apostolicas Traditiones. From the
Testimony of the alone Church of Rome may a man have a certain Argument to
prove Apostolical Traditions. Which rule I suppose he intends for the assuring
us of Divine Traditions too: for so he had before joined them. Asserimus in
scripturis Id. ibid. Cap. 3.
non contineri Totam Doctrinam necessariam, sive de fide sive de moribus, and
proinde praeter verbum Dei scriptum requiri etiam verbum Dei non scriptum, i.
e. Divinas and. Apostolicas Traditiones. We assert that the scripture does not
contain all necessary Doctrine, whether about Faith or manners, there is
therefore moreover required, Divine and Apostolical Tradition.

From these premises I argue to the superstition of the Church of Rome. Because
they practice in their Sacraments and elsewhere upon superstiti^us opinions.
The Devotion of the Jews Isai. 29.
is thus challenged, Their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men. The
Messages which God Almighty sent them by his Prophets, were not the Rule of
their worship, but the Traditions of men were instead of the word of God. And
this was their Indebitus cultus, their superstition: This Text the Septuagint
translate, (...). In vain do they worship me, Matthew. 15.
teaching the commands of men and Doctrins. St. Matthew has altered the site
of one word, and there we read in application to the Pharisees. In vain do they
worship me teaching for Doctrines the Commands of men. The case to which this
quotation is there applied, is their making the Fifth Commandment of none
effect by their Tradition. That which God had made necessary by his Command [
Honor thy Father and Mother] with that they dispensed. That which God had not
made necessary by any express Declaration of his pleasure, that was made
necessary by their Tradition. And this was their superstition.

To which the case of the Church of Rome is but too parallel. They make the
second Command of none effect by their Tradition of worshipping Images. In
other things they make that necessary which the written word of God has not
made so. Some of which Traditions if they be not directly contrary to the word
of God, yet because they are arrogantly equalled, and commanded to be received
Pari pietatis affectu and reverentia; the practices that flow from these
Doctrines cannot be excused from superstition, as we now use the word (and as
they, as well as we, define the thing) for an excess in Religion, whereby men
worship God, after such a manner as they ought not.

2. The second Account of their Sect. 20.
superstition is, that they ascribe an Efficacious sanctity to their
Ceremonies. Here also Instances will make it plain, both that they are thus
chargeable, and that the Church of England does reject these Opinions.

The Doctrine of Rome is, that the Cross is to be worshipped with the highest
kind of worship. Crux Christi in Aquin. tertia Pars qu. 25. Artic. 4.
qua Christus Crucifixus est, tum propter repraesentationem, tum propter
membrorum Christi contactum Latria adoranda est. Crucis vero Effigies in alia
qua^is materia priori tantum ratione Latria adoranda est. The Cross whereon
Christ was Crucified is to be worshipped with Latria, both because of its
representation, and because of its touching the Body of Christ. But the sign of
the Cross elsewhere, is to be worshipped only for the former reason, (which
last words were well put in, for it would be a wonder indeed, if the sign of
the Cross made at Rome, should deserve worship propter Contactum.) This we
contend is superstitious, because the Opinions they have of the Cross are such.
For they ascribe such Effects to the Cross, which neither the word of God
ascribes to it, nor any man's reason without the help of feigned Miracles, or
Traditions (before accounted for) would expect from it. Take it in Bellarmin's
words. 1o Tres sunt Effectus Crucis Bell. de Imagine. Sanctorum lib. 2. Cap. 30.
mirabiles. Terret and fugat Daemones: 2o pellit morbos and omnia mala: 3o
Sanctificat ea quibus imprimitur. There are Three wonderful effects of the
Cross. First, It frights and seares away the Devil. Secondly, It drives away
Diseases and all Evils. Thirdly, It sanctifies those things upon which it is
made. The first of these effects he ascribes to it for Three Causes. Ex
apprehensione Daemonis, Ib^^
ex Devotione hominis, ex Instituto Dei. From the apprehension of the Devil,
from the Devotion of man, from the Institution of God. So that they suppose the
appointment of God has empowr'd the Cross to scare the Devil. The power of
sanctifying that upon which the sign of the Cross is made, he makes parallel
with the power which he supposes in Relics. Sanctificantur Ibid.
aliquo modo ii qui tangunt Reliquias, which he has the confidence to assert
upon the Authority of the Fathers.

Our 30th Canon (as has been said) rejects these superstitions and errors.
Which superstition we therefore lay to their charge, because they ascribe an
effect to a certain Cause, without a sufficient warrant. That the sign of the
Cross has not naturally in it self any power of sanctifying or curing,
Bellarmine cannot but acknowledge. Signum Crucis operatur mirabilia non ex Id.
ibid.
virtute sua naturali quam habet ut figura quaedam, sed ut signum divinitus
Institutum. The sign of the Cross works wonders, not as a certain figure, by
any natural virtue, but as a sign appointed of God. Here is then superstition,
to esteem the sign of the Cross more holy than indeed it is, to believe it to
have such a relation to God, which it cannot be proved to have, to ascribe to it
a virtue which no syllable in the H. Scripture declares to us. And who has
known the mind of God any farther than he has been pleased to reveal it to us?

Estius makes a little attempt to deliver Estius in sentent. Tom. 3. Distinc.
37. Sec. 8.
such like Ceremonies as this is from superstition. Si debito decentique modo
exspectetur effectus aliquis a Deo, etiamsi naturali virtute haberi non potest,
nulla est superstitio. If the effect be expected in a due and decent manner,
though the cause cannot by any natural virtue produce it, it is no
superstition. So, he says, the Church does consecrate Salt and Holy Water, etc.
because Christ gave his Apostles power over unclean Matthew. 10. Luke 10.
Spirits, and power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, etc. which power he
supposes still to reside in the Church. As Elisha cured the waters with salt,
as Christ cured blind Eyes with clay and spittle, in like manner, potestas
exorcizandi Daemones a Christo Apostolis tradita usque in hodiernum diem in
Ecclesia permansit. The power of casting out Devils committed by Christ to his
Apostles remains in the Church to this day. If we will take Forgeries and
cheats for real miracles, the thing is proved. But if we should be a little
scrupulous, and require better proof of matter of fact, and till that be given,
should doubt whether the Apostles power of working Miracles be transmitted to
this age, we are then at a great loss to solve the Phenomenon, and to clear
the use of the Cross and holy water, etc. from superstition. Whereas it is
confessed, that the natural virtue of these Ceremonies cannot produce such
effects, it is also as plain, so far as the Word of God is our guide, that we
have no sufficient warrant to expect these preternatural and extraordinary
Events, because there is no divine promise annexed to the use of these things.

Of the same nature is that Doctrine that the Sacraments confer Grace, Ex opere
Operato. The Council of Trent Histor. Conc. Trid. Sess. 7.
anathematizes them who say, per Sacramenta non conferri gratiam virtute
ministrationis eorum, sive ex opere operato. That the Sacraments do not confer
grace by virtue of the very administration of them, or by the deed done. So
Bellarmine begins his second Book, De effectu Sacramentorum, with this enquiry.
An sacramenta novae legis sint verae Causae justificationis ex opere operato.
Whether the Sacraments of the Gospel be true causes of Justification by virtue
of the deed done. That they are so, and that they are thereby distinguished
from the Sacraments of the old Law, he offers to prove in the process of that
Book. In which though it be true, that he speaks of Faith and Repentance as
dispositions in the subject, to mollify the Opinion, yet there is no doubt but
their Opinion is, that the Sacraments confer grace, however indisposed the
subject be. Which appears by the absolutions that are given upon Confession,
even there, where no Contrition shows it self. According to the Jesuit's
Doctrine, Mist. Jesuitis. Letter 10. p. 145. 150. T. Bauny. Ibid.
they ought not to be denied or delayed absolution, who continue in habitual
sias, against the laws of God, and nature, and the Church, though they discover
not the least hope of amendment. And Valentia determins that Contrition is not
requisite at all in order to obtain the principal effect of the Sacrament, nay
on the contrary it is rather obstructive. Yea Bellarmine himself Bellarm. de
Imagine. Sanctorum lib. 2. Cap. 30.
elsewhere distinguishes between opus operatum, and opus operantis. When men
pray for help against Diseases, the effect does not infallibly follow, for this
reason, quia tunc effectus non producitur ex opere operato, more Sacramentorum,
sed ex opere operantis. Because it is not produced by the deed done, as in the
Sacraments, but supposes the disposition of the doer. What they thus attribute
to the Sacraments, Azorius extends to sacramentals (though he consesses
Institut. Moral. Part. 1. lib. 4. Cap. 11.
some Romanists are against him) he affirms that the very sprinkling with
Holy Water without consideration of the act of Repentance, does away venial
sins.

How much our Church ascribes to Sacraments, is plain. They are sure Artic. 25.
witnesses and effectual signs of Gods Grace and good will toward us, by which
he does work invisibly in us. But in the same Article it is declared against
the Opus Operatum, for in such only as worthily receive the same, they have a
wholesome effect or operation.

The dangerous Consequences of this their Doctrine, especially as their late
Casuists have improved it, I now exaggerate not. All that I would conclude
hence is, that their worship of God in the Sacraments, because it is built upon
this opinion, is superstitious. God alone is the fountain of Grace, he conveys
it into the hearts of men as he pleases: But no man has reason to expect it by
any other means than what God has promised to bless. The Sacraments are of
excellent use: But there is no promise extant that the bare receiveing the
Eucharist, whatever the disposition or indisposition of the Receiver be, shall
produce this effect (and it is conferring grace in Adultis, that is now to be
considered.) Nay, we are assured that he who eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks damnation to himself. Wherefore he who promises to himself, that
which God has not promised, he who expects grace upon these terms, who
receives the Sacrament upon an Opinion, that the deed done (however it be done)
will bring him into a state of grace, is superstitious in so thinking and so
doing.

The Doctrine of Merit is another Sect. 21. Bellarm. de Justificat. lib. 9.
Cap. 17.
superstitious Opinion. If Bellarmine understood it, this it is. Opera bona
Justorum meritoria sunt vitae aeternae ex condigno, non solum ratione pacti and
acceptationis, sed etiam ratione operis. The good works of just men do merit
life eternal of condignity, not only because of the Covenant of grace, but also
from the nature of the works themselves. Moreover beyond the bare merit of good
works, he affirms, that as a man may merit a reward to himself, so he may make
satisfaction for the release and discharge of another. And this is the
foundation of their doctrine of Indulgences. Extat Thesaurus aliquis in
Ecclesia qui sit Indulgentiarum Fundamentum. For the making good of which he
thus argues and proceeds.

Prima Propositio. In bonis actionibus Bellarm. de Indulgent. lib. 1. Cap. 2.
hominum Justorum duplex valor sive pretium assignari potest, meriti, viz. and
satisfactionis.

Secunda Propos. Opus bonum qua part meritorium est, non potest alii
applicari, potest tamen qua satisfactorium.

Tertia Propos. Extat in Ecclesia Thesaurus satisfactionum ex Christi
passionibus infinitus, qui nunquam exhauriri poterit.

Quarta Propos. Ad hunc Thesaurum superfluentium satisfactionum pertinent etiam
passiones B. Mariae Virginis, and omnium aliorum sanctorum qui plus passi sunt
quam eorum peccata requirerent.

That is in short. Together with the infinite value of the satisfactory
sufferings of our Savior, The sufferings of the B. Virgin Mary and all other
Saints, who have suffered more than their sins required, are to be joined, by
which as they have merited to themselves, so have they satisfied for others.

How much this dishonours the Undertakings of our B. Savior, and for what
other reasons we explode the Doctrine of Merit, and the appendage of
satisfaction, and Indulgences, I have not now to say. The superstition of these
Opinions is now to be considered.

Bellarmin's Controversies would not have deserved the Character given them by
Albertus Hungerus, in his approbation prefixed to the First Tome, viz.
Integerrimum, pulcherrimum absolutissimumque Controversiarum omnium corpus, A
most Entire and Complete body of Controversies; if he had balk't any of the
Doctrines current at Rome. So he must write when he pleads for a party; but I
think it no very difficult task, to find some acknowledgments, even in those
same Books of Controversies, which would greatly weaken most of the things in
difference between us, Bellarm. de Justificat. lib. 5. Cap. 7.
which he would establish. In this of Merit, who has not heard of that famous
resolution of his: Propter incertitudinem propriae Justitiae and periculum
inanis gloriae, Tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and
benignitate reponere. Because of the Uncertainty of our own righteousness, and
the danger of vain glory, It is most safe to put our whole confidence only in
the mercy and goodness of God.

-- Sisic Omnia dixisset -- How well does this agree with what we say in our
Office of the H. Communion! We do not presume to come to this thy Table, O
Merciful Lord, trusting in our own righteousness, but in thy manifold and great
Mercies, etc. And with our 12 Article. Good works which are the fruits of
Faith, and follow after Justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the
severity of Gods Judgment. We will join against the Antinomians, and with great
zeal assert the necessity of good works, if the merit of them may be excluded,
but that we cannot but charge with superstition.

He who gives Alms, etc. does a good work acceptable to God by Jesus Christ;
but he who opines, he thereby merits the favor of God (any otherwise than
because God has promised to accept such services) He who apprehends such a
worthiness in what he does, as that for its own sake he may expect to receive
some reward, because there is some proportion and equality in it, ad praemium
vitae aeternae, as Bellarmine speaks: He who designs to oblige Almighty God by
his good works; has a proud conceit of himself, who when he has done all he
can, is but an Unprofitable servant; and he has a false and undue Opinion of
God, to think a man may be profitable to God, as men may be one to another.
Therefore are these services superstitious, because they are performed upon
false and undue Opinions, and he who thus worships God, does that which is not
required at his hands.

If these things wanted evidence, I might add their works of supererogation,
their Austerities and penances, so far as they apprehend a Merit in Opere
Operato. Also other things might have a place in this Argument, and might range
by themselves, if they be not reducible to any of Bishop Mortons general heads.
Such as are, Their public Prayers in the Church, in a Tongue not understood of
the people. Their requiring and using such a vast number of Ceremonies, which
by their great excess and multitude become a burden intolerable (as the Preface
to our Liturgy acknowledges) These and such like things cannot be excused from
superstition.

Together with these I might add a number of observations which are neither
proper to Popery, nor indeed to the Christian Religion, but are scattered all
over the World. Such as St. Austin means when he complains of Millia
inanissimarum observationum, etc. and such as Aquinas comprehends, when he
makes diverse kinds of superstition, Divinationes and varia observationum
genera. Of which Customs Mahometanism and Gentilism are very full. But having
given account of these before, I pass them with this general acknowledgment.

Whatever we do upon a Religious account, where Religion, properly so called,
ought not to be concerned; When any undue Opinion of God excites us to any
action, when we exercise our selves in that, which may be deservedly called,
Indebitus Dei Cultus, when we think God is pleased with such a manner of
performance, which does not please him; as it does well agree with the Import
of (...) (an over-timorous and servile apprehension of the Deity) so may it
properly be called superstition.

But in as much as it is very evident, that the superstitious Opinions of the
Church of Rome are rejected by the Church of England, in as much as it cannot be
proved, that any of our service is enjoined upon any other Opinion equally
superstitious; we conclude, there is wrong done us, when superstition is laid
to our charge. Yea, if peradventure some of our Church should have private
Opinions of their own, that might render their particular practices
superstitious, yet this is enough to deliver our service from the Imputation,
and in this we persist as our just Vindication.

There is no Canon nor Rubric, no Article nor Injunction that obliges any
within our Communion to any superstitious Opinion.

4. Proposition. Sect. 22.


There are superstitious Omissions of which men may be guilty; and that then,
when they seem to have a great zeal against Burges Answer Rejoined Preface, p.
64.
superstition. It was laid to the N. Cts. charge in King James his time, that
they were guilty of negative superstition. A phrase cavil'd at by those who
reply upon Bishop Morton, but Dr Burges has sufficiently vindicated it, and
commends them to their friend Ames, who comprehends it in his definition of
superstition. For when he had defined it to be an excess of Religion; He adds,
cujusmodi Medul. Theolog. lib. 2. Cap. 13.
excessus non tantum est in exercitiis positivis, sed etiam in Abstinentia a
quarundam rerum usu, ut acibis. This excess of Religion is not only in what we
positively do, but may be also, in what we abstain from, as Meats.

True it is, that superstition is an excess, as it has been defined, yet the
defect in the practice may be superstitious, because it may proceed from excess
in the Opinion. For if a superstitious Opinion be the reason why men abstain
from the use of a Ceremony, that abstinence is as properly superstitious, as
the use of it upon a superstitious Opinion can be. My Lord Bacon says well and
wisely. There is Bacon Essay of Superstition.
a superstition in avoiding superstition, when men think to do best, if they go
farthest from the superstition formerly received. There is a superstitious
fearfulness in some men, of which St. Austin complains August. Januario. Ep.
118.
thus. Sensi saepe dolens and gemens, multas infirmorum perturbationes fieri,
per quorundam fratrum contentiosam obstinationem and superstitiosam
timiditatem, qui in rebus hujusmodi, quae neque sacrae scripturae Authoritate
neque Universalis Ecclesiae traditione neque vitae corrigendae utilitate ad
certum possunt terminum pervenire, tantum quia subest qualiscunque
ratiocinatio, cogitantis qut quia in vua patria sic ipse consuevit, aut quia
ibi vidit, ubi peregrinationem suam quo remotiorem a suis eo doctiorem factam
putant, tam litigiosas excitant quaestiones, ut nisi quod ipsi faciunt nihil
rectum existimant. Words which by a little alteration and paraphrase are but
too accommodate to the case of our present Dissenters.

To the grief of my Soul I have often observed, how weak and scrupulous minds
have been miserably perplexed in matters of Religion, by the contentious
obstinacy and superstitious fearfulness of some who seem to be very Godly men.
Differences arise in matters Indifferent and alterable in their own natures;
such as the H. Scripture has not any where particularly determined; nor has
any tradition of the Universal Church fixed them in one certain course; nor can
it be said, that for the bettering the lives of men, it must be thus, and may
not be so: yet there are Jealousies and scruples in their minds, it may be they
remember it otherwise in their times, and where they have lived. It may be they
have been as far as Scotland, Amsterdam, or Geneva, and have a greater opinion
of what is done abroad: For one reason or other they are litigious and
troublesome, and think nothing well done, but what they do themselves.

From this scrupulosity are men apt to call any thing into question, and for
fear lest they should err on one hand, and run into superstition and Popery;
they run as far on the other; and their Omissions are as superstitious, as they
feared their practice would have been.

Such was the case of the Jews, 1 Machab. 2.
when they were assaulted by their Enemies on the Sabbath day; rather than
violate the Sabbath by defending themselves, they tamely suffered themselves to
be destroyed. The law of self-preservation could not persuade them to any
resistance, and if Mattathias had not been wiser than the rest, they might all
have perished.

Such also was the superstition of the Knol. Turk. History.
Soldiers in Sfetigrade, when Amurath besieged it ( An. 1449.) A Traitor in
the City had cast a dead dog, into the only Well which supplied the City with
Water: which when it was espied in the Morning by the Soldiers, no Importunity
could persuade them to drink of that Water which they reputed Unclean by a dogs
Carcass; so was the Governor compelled to surrender the City.

And such surely was the conceit of that zealous man some while since among our
selves, who cut out of his Bible, the Contents of the Chapters, and so would
cut out the word of God it self, that was on the other side of the page, rather
than suffer any Humane mixture with the pure word of God.

Whether the case of our N. Cts. be not somewhat parallel, is now to be
considered. They suspect superstition in the use of the Surplice and Cross,
etc. and therefore Religiously abstain from them; but what if this Abstinence
also should be superstitious? If the Rites and Ceremonies of our Church be as
they imagine, it must be, either because we judge that lawful which is
Unlawful, or that necessary which is but Indifferent, or because these
Ceremonies though granted in their own nature Indifferent, yet by reason of
some Accident that attends them, may not be imposed, and may not be submitted
to if imposed. All which things have already had their Consideration, after all
which I have not doubted to conclude, that our Rites may be used without
superstition.

But now I move a doubt on the other side, to which if they cannot give a
better Answer than I am aware of, they cannot excuse themselves from
superstition. For what other reasons Conformity may be refused I now enquire
not. If any refuse it, because they cannot wear a Surplice, or use the Cross,
and if any private persons neglect the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, because
they cannot kneel as is commanded; I desire to know for what reasons they are
not free to join with us in these Usages. Either they think them lawful or
Unlawful: If lawful, such as may be submitted to, and yet for some politic
respects they will not submit; this Abstinence of theirs may be free from
superstition, but some other way it will be as Unaccountable: For he who
without violating his Conscience can conform but will not, let him (if he can)
excuse his disobedience to the Powers which God has set over him, let him (if
he can) deliver himself from the Character of a contentious man.

If without fraud or guile, there be a man who does not act because he dare
not, who is persuaded in his Conscience, he should sin against God, and do that
which is Unlawful, if he should wear a Surplice, etc. This is the man whom I
charge with superstition, because he judges that Unlawful, which is
Indifferent, because he proceeds upon a mistake of the nature of things,
because a false opinion betrays him to this abstinence. He declares hereby that
he has a wrong Notion and apprehension of God, when he thinks him displeased
by such an Action, against which the Scripture has not declared his
displeasure. As men may teach for Doctrines the positive Commands of men, so
may they also teach for Doctrines the prohibitions of men; and this is adding
to the word of God. And in this does Ames condition take place. In illa
Abstinentia Medul. Theol. prius.
Honor aliquis singularis Deo intenditur. They conceit they Honor God by
abstaining from that which is no where forbidden. It is no where said, neither
in express words, nor in any equivalent phrase, That it is the will of God, no
man should wear a white Garment when he Ministers in Divine Offices; that no
man should kneel when he receives the Sacrament, etc. Wherefore what God has
cleansed, why should we call Common? Where is the man that has Authority to
pronounce that Unclean, which God has not so pronounced? The necessary use of
these things when they are commanded, does not take away the Indifferency of
their nature, and this delivers us from superstition: But to abstain from them
as Unlawful in their nature, does directly contradict the opinion of their
Indifferency, and leaves the men who so abstain, under the guilt and bond of
superstition.

So may men find that at a Conventicle, which they are afraid to meet at
Church. Superstition lodges in the minds of men, and they who are inclined to
it, may discover it when they sit still, as well as when they move. Touch not,
taste not, handle not, are not greater Indications of a superstitious
abstinence, than are wear not, kneel not, Cross not; when the Doctrine of these
Ceremonies is known to be Innocent and allowable. Wherefore they who are indeed
afraid of superstition, who are afraid of mixing their own Inventions with the
worship of God, and doing that which is not required at their hands, are
concerned rightly to inform themselves, in what they are commanded to do: And
when they find that the H. Scripture has no where forbid the use of the
Surplice upon those Terms upon which it is enjoined, (only the liberty which
they themselves had power to determine, is by the Magistrate determined for
them, not lightly or wantonly, but for grave and weighty reasons) Let them not
fear they shall transgress where there is no law. Let them not fear
superstition in those practices to which they are induced by Opinions not
superstitious. But on the other side let the fear be, lest they make the way to
Heaven straiter than our Savior has made it. Lest they scruple and condemn
that which does not appear unlawful. Lest they split upon Scylla while they
shun Charybdis. Lest they run into superstition while they desired to avoid it,
and lest an Innocent Ceremony scare them to an Unjustifyable Separation.

FINIS.

