THE CASE OF Oliver St. John, Esquire. Concerning his Actions During the late
Troubles.

THE CASE OF Oliver St. John, Esquire.
Concerning the King's death.
1. IT is said, Cromwell at the time of the King's Trial, both before and
after His Death, often lay with me in the same Bed, or in my Lodgings.

This denied: For Cromwell having been all the Summer in the Wars in Wales,
and other where, came to London about the time that the King was brought from
the Isle of Wight, my Wise then was at Lincolns Inn, and so continued all the
time of the Trial, and after the King's Death, never lay out of my Chambers,
in which, there is but one Bed save for Servants; and that Cromwell never lay
with me, or in my Lodgings after his return to London.

2. That I had a hand in a Book, written by Mr. Sadler in Justification of the
King's Death.

This denied: I never saw more then one Book alleged to be Mr. Sadlers, and
remember not the Contents of it, but had no hand in it, nor ever knew thereof,
nor what was in it, until I found it Printed.

The truth hereof, I believe Mr. Sadler will affirm.

3. That Mr. Thurloe, late Secretary to Oliver, related to some of the Army
that my self and Cromwell advised the King's Death.

This denied; or that I ever advised it with Cromwell, or any other person
whatsoever. This was near twelve years ago, at which time, Thurloe as I
believe was not acquainted with the Army, he was then my private Servant, and
not Cromwell's until five years after, not being recommended by me to him; and
he had been out of my service near two years before he was in Cromwell's; And
Thurloe being charged with the relation, I refer my self to his Testimony; and
deny, that any person is able to charge me with it.

But in answer to these Rumors, and all others of this nature; 1. I clearly
and confidently affirm', that I never knew of any intention to try Him for his
life, or of any one thing that tended thereto, other ways then as Common news
when all others upon the notoriety of the action, knew the same; as of his
removal from Homby, or to any other place, the treaties between him and the
Army, His removal from the Isle of VVight; nor of any intent to try Him, nor
of the matter, or manner of his Trial, or Execution, or any thing conducing
thereunto. 2. That in these times, upon all occasions, I manifested my dislike,
and dis-satisfaction; and this, if the House think fit, will be made good by
many witnesses. 3. That I was not then of the House of Commons, for being made
a Judge in October 1648. I sat not again until June 1651. so that having
nothing to do in the House, where the Commission issued, and declaring my self
openly against it; It is hard, these times considered, when the danger was more
in showing dislike, than consent, That I should be thought to give private
advise, and the rather, because I was of no High Court of Justice, nor
Commissioner of Oyer and Terminer, nor in any Circuit executed any, upon the
late distractions.


2. As to the altering of the Government, to a Commonwealth.
This is denied: nor is any particular, as I hear, vouched to make so much as a
color for it; many can witness my declared Judgment, both before and after,
to be for King, Lords, and Commons: The then pretended House, commanded the
Judges assistance and opinions, for alteration of the Government, I refused to
give advise, always manifested my dislike of taking away the House of Peers,
and of secluding the Members in 1648. nor was then of the House of Commons.

3. That he was the dark Lanthorn, and privy Counselor, in setting up, and
managing affairs in the late Oliver Protector's time;
This wholly denied, and the contrary true, and many witnesses of my
manifesting my dislike. Besides that no color of proof is made, These
circumstances will further clear it.

1. In October I fell sick so dangerously, that, from that time until the end
of May, my friends expected death; I think in December, or January he was set
up, when I was at the worst. 2. He named me one of the Council, and summoned
me to sit in that which was called the Other House. I never would come to his
Council, or sit in the other House. He made me one of the Commissioners of the
Treasury: I never intermedled, or received Salary, either as a Councellor or
Commissioner; I, nor any of my Relations, ever had one penny advantage by him,
or by his means, directly or indirectly, save the continuance of my place as a
Judge. And in the pretended Parliament 1656. when the Petition and Advice was
made, my relations then, that the House forbore to sit all that Parliament, few
others absenting themselves. 3. As soon as the Term was ended, I ever went down
into the Country, and came not up until the beginning of the Term following;
seldom saw him, save before or after the Term to take leave; but followed my
Calling. 4. Contracted displeasure from the Army, as a party disaffected to his
Protectorship and way. And as for managing of private advice by Mr. Thurlow,
This wholly denied; having bred him from a youth in my service, he out of
respect once or twice in a quarter of a year visited me.
4. That I had a hand in the setting up Richard his son, that I endeavored to
the last to resettle him.
This untrue; I never knew of his father's intent to appoint him his Successor.
After the Summer Circuit, I went to my Country house, 60 miles from London:
Oliver died, as I remember, about the 3d. of September, Richard was proclaimed
and set up before my return to London: In the interim, I knew nothing of this
business, but what was known all England over; since his being out, I never
saw him, nor received any message from him, nor sent any to him; never had any
thought or treaty with any to restore him; and think it strange any should
think me guilty of so great a folly.

I do therefore with all humble boldness deny, that I had either in public or
private any hand in the King's death, or in the alteration of the ancient
Government of Kings, Lords, and Commons.

It is true, that when the other Governments were set up by others, that I did
act under them. And I humbly desire, that what I shall say for my self upon
this Subject, may not be taken as a Justification, but only as an Extenuation
of my offense, for to that end only I offer it. His Majesty in his Declaration
in April last, and by his late Proclamation, does graciously declare, That no
crimes formerly committed, should be brought in question against any, to the
least impeachment, either of Life, Liberty, or Estate, excepting only of
notorious Delinquents; and this Honorable House, in their own names, and in the
names of all the Commons of England, did lay hold upon his Majesty's grace,
which, as much as in me lay I had formerly done before the Honorable, the
Speaker of this House.

And in regard the House, since the laying hold of his Majesty's grace, by
their Vote of this instant June, have subjected me to such Pains and Penalties,
as by a future Act shall be Inacted, It is a great affliction to me, that I
should by them be thought unworthy of his Majesty's grace, which extends to
all that are not notorious Delinquents, when as so many thousands, who have
acted under these Governments, and some who have had a hand in the alteration,
do partake thereof. And upon these considerations, and that the pains and
penalties are not yet set, I hope it will not be offensive to any, that I set
down the grounds and motives of my actings; because before God and Man, all
actions are accounted more or less good or bad, from the Circumstances,
Manner, and Intention of doing them.

1. As to my Embassy into Holland with Mr. Strickland, I humbly offer: 1. That
it was above two years after that the Commonwealth's Government was set up; it
was set up in January 1648, and I was in Holland the latter end of March 1650,
and continued there until toward the end of May 1651. 2. I was sent against
my will; for both by Petition to the House, and otherwise, I used all means to
avoid it: No reason I should desire it, considering, that Dorislaus sent
thither before, was killed; and the loss of a good part of the profits of my
place, as Judge, in my absence. 3. Commanded by those who then, de facto,
though not de jure, exercised the Supreme Power of the Nation, from which, no
appeal for relief could be then made.


The Embassy was, to renew the ancient Amity and intercourse between the two
Nations: While we treated upon these, we were recalled, re infecta, and the
whole Embassy became fruitless. We did never treat concerning the exclusion
of his Majesty, or his Title. And to the Allegation, that the Ministers there
forbore praying for his Majesty, as an effect of this Embassy: As I never
heard it before, so I am confident that no occasion was given for it by me, or
that Embassy. And if it be further enquired into, I believe it will appear,
that it arose from some other occasion, and at some other time. The King was
all this time in his Kingdom of Scotland, and had been Crowned, and resident
there a year before. During the time of this alteration of Government, Treaties
and Alliances were made with the Princes and States formerly in amity with
England.

I had no advantage by this Embassy; the Plate, Furniture, Beds, and other
things, claimed formerly by Ambassadors, were by us returned to the Wardrobe.
The States at our Farewell, as a gratuity, promised to return to each of us
here in England a 1000 l. in Gold, which I refused; all the reward of that
Embassy was, that whereas the Minster of Peterborough, being an ancient and
goodly Fabric, was propounded to be sold and demolished, I begged it to be
granted to the Citizens of Peterborough, who at that present, and ever since,
have accordingly made use of it, Vid. Act. 19. Aug. 1651.

As to my acting as a Judge, I was in the place before the alteration of the
Government, and did no other than the rest of the Judges, Justices of Peace,
and other Ministers of Justice, for the administration of public Justice
between Party and Party, which, as the state of affairs then stood, could not
otherwise have been done.

The place when I came into it was vacant, by the death of the Lord Banks, and
none appointed by his Majesty to execute it.

As to any expressions I should use in Parliament, to set up a Government by
the Long Sword:

The time alleged was before the exclusion of the Members in 1648. and if I
had made any such expression, I should deservedly have been then called to
account by the House. About that time, one of the House having used that
expression, and the present debate being, Whether an Act of Parliament,
procured by actual force, were good, or not, I used this expression, That if
such Acts were good, it would justify the opinion of the Gentleman, That the
Long Sword must govern, which I spoke of as the worst of evils.

This I the better remember, because an old Knight mistaking me, I took
occasion to explain my self for his satisfaction, the House not requiring it. I
have in my capacity endeavored constantly to preserve the Civil Government,
in Parliament, and out of Parliament, from the Sword, and all Arbitrary Power,
and have suffered for it, both from the Army, and otherwise, and from the first
raising of forces in the Kingdom unto this day, I have never been privy, or
consented to any action of the Army, or any Members of it, in opposition of the
Parliament, or Civil Government. And as to the Acts or Ordinances made by the
Convention 1653. or by Cromwell and his Council, I have not only privately
showed my dislike, but some of them having come before me as a Judge, I have
not only not acted upon them, but declared my self against them; for which,
complaints have been made against me to him and his Council; and as it came in
my way as a Judge, I always discharged such as had been committed by the Major
Generals.

Concerning my sitting at all times after 1648, in that called the Parliament:
I never sat in the Convention called in 1653, nor any thing called a
Parliament, upon Summons from Oliver or Richard; though always summoned to sit
in that called the other House.

I never sat in any Parliament, but that which was summoned by the King's Writ
in 1640. I was not of the House in 1648. (being excluded from October, 1648.
until June 1651.) nor had any hand in exclusion of the Members, for not
declaring their dis-satisfaction to the Treaty in the Isle of VVight.

After my return from Holland, in June 1651, I was called to give an account of
the Embassy in my place in the House, and was commanded again to attend the
House, and so were all the other Judges, whose places were not filled up by new
Elections, who accordingly sat as well as I.

I endeavored not to have been called again into the House. I never made any
Declaration of my dis-satisfaction of the Treaty at the Isle of VVight; Upon
all occasions, I declared the exclusion of the Members in 1648. to be unjust,
and was isntrumental in restoring them to sit again.

I always opposed my self, to the taking away or altering of the Law, or of
the Ministry by taking away of Tithes, both which were strongly endeavored.
And not being satisfied concerning their sitting without the Lords and the
Members excluded; I endeavored the bringing in of a Free-Parliament, as a
thing due to the Nation, and, as the distractions then were, I thought it the
best, and justest way of healing them, and this was near effecting, when in
April, 1653. there sitting was hindered by Cromwell, and the Army.

After their sitting in May, 1659. I declared the same resolution, of
maintenance of the Law, and Ministry, and that their sitting in Justice to the
Nation, should be made use of only as a bridge, to let in a Free-Parliament:
That I fell into their great displeasure, and felt it, is well known. I know no
other Cause, but the public owning these Principles.

After the Army had again interrupted their sitting, and about January last
they were restored, and an Oath of Abjuration of his Majesty's Title was in
question, I came out of the Country on purpose to oppose that, or any other of
that nature, and did declare that to be the cause of my coming up, and did
publicly oppose the same; and the other Oath which the Council of State was
enjoined to take, and did for that cause forbear at all to sit in that
Council: It may be presumed, I apprehended as others did, that the issue of a
Free-Parliament, would be the happy restoring of his Majesty to His Subjects;
As always formerly, so I then used my utmost endeavors for the calling of
this therein, and had the happiness, when the force was taken from the
secluded Members, after their sitting, to make the motion, to put a period to
the Long Parliament, the 11th. day of March last, which upon debate was
accordingly resolved. What my carriage was in the House after their
restitution, and in the Council, both before and after the rising of the
House, I leave to their testimony that were present.

This Narrative, I humbly tender in answer to the Rumors spread up and down,
which if true would make me guilty of the King's Death, and of alteration of
the Government, from King, Lords, and Commons, all which with due humility I do
deny.

And if any of my former actions shall be thought well of, these are not
mentioned to Justify any that are bad, (for it was but my duty therein to have
done better) nor do I in any thing justify my own opinion; but humbly desire,
that (the Distractions, and the Conjuncture of affairs considered when they
were done) my actions may receive a favorable construction. His Majesty is
pleased to receive to his grace, all that have not been notorious Delinquents,
(though faulty) I have done nothing from a depraved or ill intention, and
therefore hope, and humbly beg, I may be likewise received into yours; which if
this Honorable House, the Sanctuary of the Commons of England, and where we
are all represented, should think me unworthy of, and should adjudge my crimes
unpardonable, (the hand considered) Affliction would be added to Affliction.

FINIS.

