AN ANSWER TO THE SCANDALOVS ASPERSIONS OF COMMITTEES, By Mr. Walter Powell, in
his Book, called, NEWS for NEWTERS, etc. and in his Epistles preceding his
Book.

By William Sheppard Esquire, one of the Members of the Committee for
Gloucester, Hereford, etc.

PSALM. 64. 2, 3, 7. Hide me from the secret council of the wicked: from the
insurrection of the workers of iniquity.

Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows, to shoot their
arrows, even bitter words.

But God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

The Epistle to the READER.
COurteous Reader, one Mr. Walter Powell, a Minister (who calls himself Vicar of
Standish) has of late Printed, and published a new Book, named News for
Newters, etc. and in his Dedicatory See his Epistles and the Book. fol. 28.
Epistle; first to Major General Massy, and next to the Honorable House of
Commons in Parliament, and in some passages of the Book he has taken upon him
the boldness freely to rail upon Country Committees, more freely upon the
Committee of Gloucester, etc. but most virulently against one Member thereof,
for the injustice and hard measure he has had by a sentence Si accusare
sufficiat, ecquis erit innocens?
given by the Committee of Gloucester against him, to out him of his Vicarage;
whereby he pretends he has suffered more injury (se ipso judice) then ever
the Martyrs did suffer by their persecutors. Wherefore to vindicate the
reputation of the Gentlemen of that Committee who joined in that act, (some
whereof are dead) to pull off the vizard from his impudent face, and to put a
stop to his deceits that he may no longer amuse and abuse other men there with;
I have been necessitated to take upon me this task, to Examine the proceeding
of the Committee against him, and his representation thereof, and charge
therein against the Committee.

In answer to, and for the clearing of both which, I shall do no more, but
present you with the naked truth of the proceedings, and give you the whole
case faithfully extracted and stated out of the Records of the Committee, with
some short additionals, and brief observations thereupon: entreating you that
have read the one, to read the other also, Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita
altera, etc.
that so by comparing the one with the other, you may be able to judge of both.

If you read his Epistles, you find him therein affirm these particulars See
the Epistles
against the Gentlemen of the Committee of Gloucester. 1. That their
proceedings against him in the matter before them was unjust, and in the
judgment of some Members of Parliament unparallel. 2. That they are ruining
unjust Judges. 3. That the sentence given by them against him was matchless,
malicious, and abominable, such as the stones cry for justice against them for
it.

For answer to these Charges, if you will be but pleased to read his Crimes for
which he was ejected, in the proofs of the witnesses against him, or (if that
be too long) See it, fol. 16.
in the sentence given against him, wherein they are abridged, and the manner
of the proceeding of the Committee in his ejectment, and take this withal,
that there was something more proved before the Committee, viva voce, at the
hearing of the cause then is Recorded; you will easily perceive that this
slander of Mr. Powell, of the living and dead (not the sentence and proceeding
of the Committee in his case) is matchless, malicious, abominable, and
unparallel. But he tells you of some particulars wherein this injustice was
showed. 1. That he was cast out of his Living See his Epistles.
being unheard, and that his censure was before any witness of his could be
heard, and that the Certificate of some of the Committee herein contains
manifest untruths, etc. For the clearing of this Slander (if his mouth or pen
be a slander) if you please to look into the Sea in the process of the cause,
f. 12, 8, 13, 14. Fatetur facinus qui fugit judicium.
proceedings, you shall find he did examine three witnesses, refused to answer
the Articles exhibited against him, appealed from the Committee, to the
Parliament, refused to be tried by the Committee, having as little mind to be
tried by them (many of whom were his neighbors, had lived more then twenty
years by him, and knew him very well) as he has to have his cause re-heard
according to the order of the Committee of Plundered Ministers made now more
then two years since. But the truth is he had, and might have had (as others
had in like case) leave to examine as many witnesses as he pleased. And you
shall find in the process of the cause, that the witnesses fol. 14.
on both sides were to be present at the hearing of the cause. And that
Warrants were to be sent forth to bring them in, which he might have had done
if he had had any mind to it. 2. He will tell you he waited long. I shall say
thus much to this, that had it been true, it had been no cause of complaint;
for all men that had to do with the Committee in that time did so, nor could
the Committee, having then so much to do, dispatch men sooner. But how long did
he wait? If you view the case, you shall see the 19 Articles against him were
exhibited against him December. 3. 1644. and it was heard the 25 of Febr.
following, which was no long time to examine above 40 witnesses, and if it were
long, it was made long by his delay. 3. He will tell you he had additionall
Articles put in against him, we do not find, remember nor believe this to be
so, but this may be true, his crimes deserving it, and (if so it be) is just
and no more but what was used before that Committee, and is used before other
Committees in like case. 4. He complains that he could not have Copies of the
depositions, and be present at the examination of witnesses; For the first of
these, I have examined the Clerk, who does affirm, that he had the offer of
the heads of the proofs against him, without the names of the witnesses, as
other men in like case: But nothing would satisfy him, but the depositions at
large with the names of the witnesses, a thing (in that time) not granted to
any man in like case. But (by his favor) I think he ought not to have had so
much granted to him till he had answered the Articles exhibited against him,
which he always refused to do. And that the party accused, should be present
at the private examination of witnesses against him, was a motion against all
reason, and that which the Committee did not think fit to grant to any one in
the like case, but he might have been present at the public examination. 5.
He complains yet further, and says: That all that was done by the whole
Committee (being eight of them) was done by the procurement of one
Committeeman; This is as true as the rest, and as sensles and ridiculous as
false. Nor can these seven Gentlemen take this well, that they should be deemed
so shallow and weak, to be all of them in so great a work led by one, and one
of the meanest of them. 6. But he finds fault further, and says: That he was
adjudged to be scandalous, to satisfy the greedy appetites of a new
Committee-man, an old hangman, a posted Malignant, and a professed Newter: I
must herein, as to the persons whose appetites he pretends were satisfied by
this unjust censure, profess my ignorance of his meaning, except by old
hangman he mean one Henry Gabb, who offered to give evidence against him, but
was refused, For the greatest part, if not all the witnesses, who did depose
against him were very substantial, many of them Religious persons. And I dare
say that as the Judges were discreet and just men, so was that judgment of
theirs incorrupt, and according to the merit of the cause, not to satisfy the
greedy appetite of any, but to satisfy their own Consciences in the discharge
of the trust put upon them. 7. But he tells you somewhere he sped the worse in
his cause for his Sermon. This is as true as all the rest: And observe how
probable it is when himself affirms, that the man that procured all this
in-justice to be done, did not hear the Sermon, and (if we mistake not the man)
he does assure you he never (to his remembrance) heard any thing of his Sermon,
till now that he had made it so common by his Printing and publishing thereof.

2. But in aggravation of all these wrongs, he boasts himself, for lack of
neighbors to do it for him: and cries up what love he has borne to, and how
much he has done, for the Parliament.

Tell me for this Mr. Powell, when you began first to show your self so
friendly to the Parliament: for I do not remember I have heard any thing of
your zeal for it, till first by their zeal against you, you were like by their
Commissioners to be justly punished for your wicked life: and then (as your
manner is) you begin to flatter with the Parliament: but what have you done for
the Parliament tell me if you can: if not, I will tell you what you have not
done for it. Did you out of your great estate lend the Parliament any money in
the time of its extremity? I will play the fool a little also, and tell
Amicus certus, etc.
you of a Committee-man, and (it may be) the man you are so much troubled
withal, who out of his penury lent the Parliament 40. l. in the time of its
extremity, did you out of your plenty lend it 40. s.? Nay are not you the man
that did and still do show your self most averse and unwilling to the payment
of all Parliament taxes, and See the case. fol. 11.
threaten and reproach the Parliament Collectors and Officers in the execution
of their office, yet more, I shall tell you what you have done against the
Parliament. 1. You have, yet more to heighten and provoke the rage and fury of
the people against the Parliament and their servants, charged all Country
Committees with injustice, oppression, and tyranny, as one of the great causes
of the staggering of the people, and in this do you not strike the Parliament
through their Fol. 29. of his Book, Injuria servo illata redundat in dominum.
servants sides? you are doubtless in the right where you say, This does
reflect upon the honor of the Parliament, as moisture in the feet strikes up
to the head. But can you make out this accusation well against all Committees
as you have done the accusations you have made against the Committee of
Gloucester? I dare say, if you were put to it you cannot prove two unjust acts
to be done by all the Committees of England, your Tongue is your own. 2. Are
not you See the case. fol. 9.
the man that placed and kept in Raudwick one of your Cures, one Mr. Smith, a
man notorious for his scandal and ill affection to the Parliament, till he was
for the same ejected by the Committee of Gloucester, and did not you then
endeavor to oppose their justice therein? and are not you the man that
notwithstanding you were present at the hearing of his cause, and the sentence
of his ejectment, who did cause the same Smith to Preach in your own Church at
Standish, your self being present, the next Fast day, after his ejectment? 3.
And (if I mistake not) you placed and kept in Hardwick, A good cause is much
wronged by a bad champion.
(another of your Churches) one Mr. Swan (as great a Cavaleere as any you cry
out so much against) till he was forced to fly from thence for fear of the
Parliament Army. I dare not affirm that you do not love the Parliament: But if
you do, I will tell you what is said of Ithasius hatred to the Priscillian
heresy, it was all the virtue he had.

3. After this he tells you of his sufferings for the Parliament in his name,
person and estate, which he tells you have been intolleraale, incredible, and to
the loss of his livelihood and danger of his life.

For this we have enquired of his sufferings by the Kings Party, and can hear
of nothing of value taken from him save what he had again, except two Oxen, a
Bullock and Bull taken by Sir Ralph Duttons means, for a debt of 8. l. Sir
Ralph challenged from him for Rent, the which he had again, and might have
kept if he would have paid him, and four Kine, and some small pieces of
housholdstuffe; this we have heard to be the truth of that case.

And as to his sufferings by this hideous sentence of the Committee, we cannot
imagine how he should be much hurt by this: for the truth is (as he himself in
one of his Epistles confesses) that not long after this sentence given for his
ejectment, he got an Order from the Committee of Plundered Ministers to restore
him to the Vicarage of Standish, and his arreares, and hereby he has ever
since enjoyed it against the Order of the Committee. And we are credibly
informed, that albeit Mr. Powell was absent from his charge at Standish almost
a whole year, and (for the most part) the same was served by other Ministers:
Yet there has not been above 30. l. of the profits of the Viecarage taken from
him by any other Minister. And that he either has, or might have received the
rest. Runwick and Saul being places inconsiderable, not able to discharge the
Curate: I do not find that the Committee have intermedled with them. And as for
Hardwick (now worth about 40. l. a year) it was at or near the time of the
Order of ejectment, in the hands of one Mr. Dowlman, who held the same by an
Order of Major General Massy then Governor of Gloucester, made by him before
any Committee there settled upon the Petition of the Parish: After that Mr.
Dowlman had left Major See the case. fol. 9.
General Massy and others (as Committee Men) placed Mr. Ven there, who after
he had been there about eight weeks, was frighted from it by Mr. Powell, and
had nothing at all (that we can hear of) for his pains, and after this time
the Committee did not at all inter-meddle with the disposal of this Church,
till they placed Mr. Walker in it, who was there about five Months only; so
that upon this account there could not be above 50. l. at the most of the
profits of all his Churches, disposed away from him in all that time by order
of the Committee, which is the thing he desires the Parliament to consider,
and to give him reparations for, as for intolerable sufferings.

4. But in this Mr. Powell finds great fault in the Committee, especially in
one Member thereof, to place (for his supplanting) in his Chapel (as he calls
it) a Minister that has been taken in Arms against the Parliament, ejected
out of his living in Monmouth shire, for being contentious against his
neighbors, a common drunkard, a rayler against the Parliament, and one who
said he was and would be a Cavaliere. And herein he supposes he has charged
the Committee home, and so he has, but it was without powder or bullets. To
all this I answer, that if this be true of this man (which Turpe est doctori,
etc. See the Orders in the case. f. 17
is more then the Committee know) he is too too like Mr. Powell. But all that
the Committee did herein was this. The place being void, upon a Petition under
the hand of most of the parishioners, to have this man settled amongst them. The
Committee knowing no more of the man but this only, that he was a man well
gifted, able to pray and Preach very well, they passed an Order that he should
be there upon trial until they might have better knowledge of him: and as
soon as they had information against him, that he was a man ill affected to
the Parliament, they made another Order to put him out. The Copies of both
which Orders you shall find at large in the process of his cause.

5. He seems to find fault that Committee men, who have no land, do act in the
Committees, and thereby implies, that he thinks those men who have no land,
unfit to be employed in that work.

Is not this your meaning Mr. Powell? if it be, it is strange Logic to me,
that because a man has no land, he should be unfit for public employment; if
your arguing in your book be no better, I marvel not, it has so little
esteem amongst the wisest men: may not a man have a good estate that has no
estate in Land? But why may not a man without land be as fit for a
Committee-man, as a Minister? I doubt not Mr. Powell was as honest a man, and
as fit for his office when he had no Land, and before he bought the Manor of
Sir Ralph Dutton, and was to give 3000. l. for it, when I presume he knew not
where to have 1000. l. to pay for it, and after when he had for want of money
reconveyed it to Sir Ralph Dutton for his security of his money, as while he
was by this purchase Lord of a Manor.

6. But in his Errata upon his Book (not having spit all his venom before) he
tells you of something he had forgotten: that some Committee Men had bought more
Lands since they were preferred to their Committeeships then they sold before.

I suppose be means by this that they sold their Land for need, and bought
again by their dishonest gain in their new office, otherwise he says nothing
to purpose, and who these men are, I, nay I dare say he cannot tell. But being
willing to tell you all I know, I shall tell you of one Committee-man, that
having a piece of Land of 80. l. per. an. who did (not for lack of money) but
for other weighty causes (as is well known to many Parliament Men) sell it for
2000. l. part of which he laid out before, and part since he was made a
Committeeman, upon Leases and Coppy-hold estates. And yet in all he has not
laid out by 100. l. so much as he made, it may be this is the man and matter
you intend.

Last of all, as to all that barking of his, in a rabble of groundless,
frivolous and senseless accusations against one Committee-man, he calls his
malevolent Committee adversary. That he procured all this injustice to be done,
turned his back to his Sermon, went out of Gloucester at the Siege, etc. albeit
the things are not worth answering, yet I shall give them this answer. There is
no truth in these assertions. Aeque laus, est ab improbis, improbari, ac a
bonis probari.
For first, men would have more easily believed, that one of the Members of the
Committee was his malevolent adversary, had the accuser showed any reason why
he should be his adversary, for the next thing (as I have said already) what
was done by the Committee against the complainer was unanimous by all the
Committee, without the consent of three, of whom no Committee act can be done;
for the third Mr. Powell makes a very good improvement, but a strange
construction of that act: It is much he could think of no other occasion which
the man might have to go out of the Church, but disrespect of his Sermon, and
fear of his presence, it is more like, Mr. Powell a guilty man as you were,
might fear the presence of the Committee-man appointed to be one of your
Judges, then that he should fear you. The going away of the Committee-man from
Mr. Powels Sermon, (if we mistake not the man) was not out of fear of his
person, or disrespect Parturiunt montes, etc.
of his Sermon, nor for any other reason, but because he was sent for out of
the Church about some special business. And for his going away at the Siege,
he went away about a fortnight before the Siege, and stayed out at the Siege:
And what of this? is it (in your judgment) a crime for a man that had nothing
to do in Gloucester to go out of it at the Siege? Thus have you the whole case:
And now let the world judge by the promises, what manner of man this is: and
whether he has not herein evidenced to all the world the truth of one of these
Articles exhibited against him (not so fully proved before) to wit, that he is
a common liar; for he that will in so few lines print so many lies, may be
presumed in his ordinary discourse to tell many lies. And whether the Committee
of Gloucester have not more reason to Petition the Parliament to have a
Commission, to such Commissioners as the Parliament shall be pleased to name,
to examine the falsehood of these accusations, then that Mr. Powell should
desire a Commission from the Parliament, to such Commissioners as he shall
name, to examine the Combination and unjust proceedings of his malevolent
Committee adversay, etc.

Your true friend W. S.

I Have left his Book to be scanned by those that have more leisure, and
ability then I have yet: I shall give you the sudden sense of a witty
Scholar upon it, in these Verses I lighted on by chance.

To the Reader on Mr. Powels Book.
Laugh and be fat: for thou did never taste
So many kickshawes at a public fast:
He the first service prefaced (as appears)
With Hedghogs, Eagles, Pussicats, and Bears.
Whether this Cook served it in Plate or Pewter,
Were wise, or witty? Ask not: He is Neuter.
Ask what he lent the State, himself can tell it,
Much in a mouthfull, or a paper pellet.
Ask what was offered on his Fasting day?
They offered more then one to go away.
Ask what he did? what grist he brought to the mill?
Then the man's groun'd, and neuter passive still.
Here follows a true Copy of all the proceedings of the Committee of
Gloucester, in Mr. Walter Powels case.

That Branch of the Ordinance, made the 10. of May, 1644. by which, the
Committee of Gloucester, etc. are authorized to put out Scandalous, and
il-affected Ministers.
ANd be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the said
Committees, or any three of them, shall have power to call before them, all
Ministers and Schoolmasters within the said Counties and City, that are
Scandalous in their lives, or il-affected to the Parliament; or fomenters of
this unnatural War, or shall wilfully refuse obedience to the Ordinances of
Parliament: or shall have deserted their ordinary place of residence, not being
employed in the service of the King and Parliament. And they shall have power
to send for any witnesses, and examine any complaint, or receive any restimony
against them, upon Oath of any person that shall be produced to give Evidence
against them, and upon such proofs of the aforesaid crimes, the said
Committees, or any three or more of them, have hereby power to remove, and
Eject, all such Scandalous Ministers, and Schoolmasters, and in their places
nominate and appoint, such learned, able, and Godly persons as they shall
think fit, and shall cause all such Ministers, and School masters, so
nominated and placed, to be put in possession of the said several Churches,
and Schools, who shall and may representatively, take, receive, and perceive
to their own use, the profits, and revenues, belonging to the said several
Churches and places.

Articles Exhibited to the Committee for the County of Gloucester, against
Walter Powell Clerk, Vicar of Standish, in the said County, 3. December. 1644.
1. IMprimis, That he keeps and holds four places, with cure of souls in
his hands, and endeavors to do so still, and takes little care for either
of them.

2. Item, That he is a common haunter of Alehouses, and has been drunk often.

3. Item, That he does so exceedingly busy himself in secular affairs, that
he is not fit to undertake the cure of souls.

4. Item, That he is a common liar, and very deceitful in word and deed.

5. Item, That he is a man very contentious, and given to Law suits.

6. Item, That he is a common Cheater, and does usually overreach his
neighbors in bargaining.

7. Item, That he having the Cure, and charge of Rendwick Church under him,
has for diverse years together, kept and continued Mr. John Smith, a Curate
under him, who is a man very scandalous, and ill affected to the Parliament,
and one who for the same is Ejected by the Committee, and yet a man much
favored, and countenanced by Mr. Powell.

8. Item, That the said Mr. Powell the last year, was absent from all his
Churches 12. weeks together, and made no provision for them all that time.

9. Item, That when the Committee (the presentation of the same Churches
belonging to the Bishop of Gloucester) had at the suite of the Parishoners of
Hardwick (they being then in distress for want of a Minister) put (in Mr.
Powels absence) one Mr Ven an honest Minister, who continued there diverse
weeks, and served the Cure, yet Mr. Powell when he came home, turned him out
contrary to the Order of the Committee, and refused to give him any
satisfaction for the time he had served the Cure.

10. Item, That Mr. Powell when he came from London, gave out speeches he had
an Order from the Parliament to put out Mr. Ven, when he had none.

11. Item, That Mr. Powell in contempt of the Committee after they had Ejected
Mr. John Smith his Curate at Rendwick, caused him the next Fast day after the
said Ejectment, to Preach in his own Parish Church at Standish, he being
present when the said Mr. Smith was Ejected.

12. Item, He has caused diverse persons of the Parish of Standish, to be
presented in the Consistory Court at Gloucester, for going to other Parishes to
hear Sermons, when as himself did neglect the said Cure once a day at least.

13. Item, That after there had been debate before the Committee, touching the
Rents in question, between Sir Ralph Dutton and Mr. Pawell, and the Committee
had told him that he should not receive the said Rents, he notwithstanding did
cunningly practice with Mr. Heart the Collector, persuading him to abuse the
power committed to him, to get the said Rents into his hands.

14. Item, That since he has been questioned before the Committee, he has
given out threatening speeches against the witnesses that have been summoned in
against him.

15. Item, That since he has been questioned before the Committee, he has
been seen drinking in an Ale house at Wethenhurst 24 hours together.

16. Item, That the said Mr. Powell did suffer his servants, with Waine and
Oxen, to carry Hay certain Sabbath days together.

17. Item, That after Mr. Powels Cattle had been distrained for Contribution
money, the said Powell gave out threatening speeches, that if ever the Kings
Army came into the County again, he would be revenged of those that had
distrained his Cattle.

18. Item, The said Mr. Powell is a man much given to fighting and quarrelling.

19. Item, That when the Overseers of the poor for the Parish of Hardwick
demanded of Mr. Powell his dues to the poor according to the Statute in that
case provided; The said Mr. Powell answered them, that if they would make him
pay to the poor. according to the Statute, then they should have Sermons
according to the Statute, that is, once a month, or when they could have them.

Depositions of witnesses to the Articles exhibited against Walter Powell Vicar
of Standish. December. 8. 1644.
1. TO the first Article, John Bainham of Hardwick being sworn, says, that
the said Walter Powell being now possessed of the Vicarage of Hardwick, is for
the most part a non-resident at Hardwick: And he says that the last year 1643.
there was but one Sermon in the Parish Church of Hardwick for 14 weeks
together.

Thomas Beard of Saul sworn to the first Article says, that Mr. Powell has
the charge of four several Churches and Cures, (viz.) Standish, Hardwick,
Rendwick and Saul. And says, that the Privy Tithes of Saul and the Gleab-land
there, is worth about 7. l. per an. And says that Mr. Powell since he had the
Cure of Saul he sold away the Gleab-land and the Churchyard belonging to Saul
for 60. years if he the said Powell so long live. And that Mr. Powell has for
the most part placed to serve the Cure of Saul Drunken Idle Ministers, such as
he could get best cheap; one whereof (whose name was Floyd) the said Powell
hired for about 40. s. per an. to serve the said Cure, and that the said Floyd
was enforced to sue the said Powell for the said 40. s. before he could have
it. And he says diverse of the Inhabitants of Saul, have formerly been
presented at the Consistory Court, some of them and their whole families by the
said Powels bad Curates for going to other Parishes to hear able Ministers
Preach.

John Beard and John Ellis of Saul aforesaid say upon Oath, that what Thomas
Beard has spoken is true in all points.

Robert Keylock of Hardwick sworn to the first Article says, that Mr. Powell
has the charge of four Churches and Cures, (viz.) Standish, Hardwick,
Rendwick and Saul. And says, that in the Parish Church of Hardwick they have
had no Minister the last Summer for diverse weeks together, but what the Parish
procured of themselves: and says he has heard and does believe that the
Vicaridg of Hardwick has been worth 50 l. per an. And says that Mr. Ham being
Curate of Hardwick about ten years since under Mr. Powell, was enforced to sue
the said Powell for his wages at the Council.

John Niblet of Standish sworn says, that Mr. Powell has the Cure and charge
of four Churches, (viz.) Standish, Hardwick, Rendwick and Saul, and says that
Mr. Ham, his Curate at Hardwick, told this deponent, that he was feign to sue
the said Powell for his wages, for serving the Cure of Hardwick.

Edward Mill of Standish being sworn says, that Mr. Powell has the charge of
four Churches, and that Standish being one of them, has been sometimes
neglected for a fortnight or three weeks together, without any Preaching or
Prayers.

John Pain of Hardwick being sworn, says, that Mr. Powell Vicar of Hardwick,
has been very negligent in serving the Cure of Hardwick, and for three months
last past, the said Parish of Hardwick has been neglected six several times.

Richard Yealf of Hardwick being sworn says, that Mr. Powell has and holds
four Churches with cure of souls (as this deponent has heard) and that
Hardwick being one of them, has been many days neglected once a Saboth.

Giles Wyman of Standish being sworn says, that Mr. Powell having the charge
of four several Churches, of which Standish is one: and he says, that in
Standish Church they have been many days neglected at least once a Sunday: And
he says, that when the well minded people of the Parish have (by reason of his
neglect) gone to other Parishes, he does usually rail at them, calling them
Neuters, lean Witches, Gallopers, and Amblers to other Churches; And that when
the Parliament does settle things, he will be the first that shall question
them for it, these have been his usual expressions in the Pulpit.

George Stratford of Standish being sworn says, that Mr. Powell has been
very negligent in serving the cure of Standish, and he says, that for two
Saboth days within two months last, the Bell having rung for a Sermon, when
the people came to Church, they had no Sermon at all.

Henry Pain being sworn says, that Mr. Powell is a man very negligent in
serving the Cure of Standish, for this deponent says that he has lived many
years in Standish parrish, and that the said parish has been many Saboth
days neglected by Mr. Powell (in his duty) in serving the said Cure, which
has occasioned diverse of his parishioners (as the deponent believes) to go to
other parishes to hear Sermons, whereupon the said Mr. Powell usually fais a
railing at them in the Pulpit for going to other parishes, calling them
Trotters and Amblers, and that if the Parliament do not take course with such,
they might pray that the Parliament would take course to pull down the
Churches.

Oliven Haltham being sworn says, that Mr. Powell Vicar of Hardwick was in
the year 1642. absent from his parish of Hardwick about 14 weeks together, and
that during all that time they had but on Sermon in Hardwick Church, and that
the Church doors were shut up most of that time.

Daniell Wats of Hardwick being sworn says, that Mr. Ham Curate of Hardwick,
was enforced to sue Mr. Powell often for his Wages: and he has heard Mr.
Powels Curates often complain for want of their pay from Mr. Powell.

John Rogers and Thomas Rols both of Hardwick, being sworn, say, that on
Sunday the 16 of February last, they had neither Preaching nor Prayer in the
parish Church of Hardwick; And they say, that on the said day the Bell did ring
in the morning, and almost the whole parish came to the Church, but had no
Minister there: And they say, that the Clerk of the said parish told them that
Mr. Powell did appoint him to ring the Bell every Sabbath day, except he did
hear from Mr. Powell to the contrary; and they say, that he rang the Bell twice
accordingly, but Mr. Powell came not nor any else for him.

Richard Watkins of Standish being sworn, says, that Mr. Powell has for many
years last past, been very negligent in serving the Cure of Standish; and he
says that about three years since he gave out threatening speeches against this
deponents son William Watkins, that if the said William would not keep his
own parish Church at Standish (he sometimes going to other parish Churches by
reason of Mr. Powels neglect) he would make him forsake the place of his abode:
whereupon this deponent wished him to question those that never come to any
Church, mentioning one Henry Hall, and one or two more who did seldom go to
any Church at all: To whom Mr. Powell answered, that if the said Hall and the
rest do not come to his Church, yet they go to no Church else, with which he
the said Powell seemed to be well pleased.

Thomas Fowler of Standish being sworn, says, that the last summer Mr. Powell
was absent from all his Churches for about ten weeks together, and sometimes
they had Preaching in their Church at Standish, and sometimes none.

2. To the second Article Thomas Beard of Saul being sworn, says, that he
has diverse times seen Mr. Powell sit drinking in an Alehouse at Fromyload
passage, and other places.

John Niblet being sworn, says, that about ten years since, the said Mr.
Powell drew this deponent into an Alehouse, and caused him to drink Beer and
Wine, more then did him good.

Nathaniel Knight of Arlingham being swore and examined, says, that about five
or six years since, he saw the said Mr. Powell so drunk upon his horse back,
that he could scarce sit upright upon his horse, and being Drunk he rod into
an Alehouse at Arlingham, and did drink more Ale or Beer.

Edward Norman of Haresfield being sworn, says, that he has often seen Mr.
Powell sit drinking in Alehouses.

Jane Mill of Standish, widow, being sworn, says, that she has diverse times
seen Mr. Powell sit drinking very freely and merrily at the Bull in Standish
parish: And she says, that about six years since she saw Mr. Powell at Sir
Ralph Duttons house in Standish, and that the said Mr. Powell (as this deponent
heard) had drank hard in Sir Ralphs Buttery: And she says, that as he sat in
the Buttery drinking with other company, he fell a vomiting; and within two
hours after, when he came to himself again, he went home to his house.

Thomas Park of Whetenhurst being sworn, says, that about three months
since, he saw Mr. Powell drinking at Whetenhurst, in Turberviles house, at the
Inn there, and that he was drinking above an hour in this deponents sight,
and that he left him there, and how long he stayed there afterward, he knows
not, and how long he was there before this examinant came he knows not.

Richard Pain of Hardwick being sworn, says, that about two years since he
saw Mr. Powell sit drinking in one Coopers house, an Alehouse in Haresfield;
and that Mr. Powell caused this examinant to drink with him; and this
examinant left him there drinking, and how long he stayed there he knows not.

Henry Wintle of Arlingham being sworn, says, that a little above four years
a go, Mr. Powell being a Commissioner at Arlingham upon a Law suite, was so
Drunk that he was not able to sit on his horse back; and being helped off his
horse by a man that stood by, he was not able (by reason he was Drunk) to get
up again: And he says that he saw the said Mr. Powell at the same time sit
drinking in two Alehouses in Arlingham six hours, and did drink abundantly
all that time till he was Drunk.

William Harris of Hempsteed being sworn, says, that about four years since,
he saw Mr. Powell sit reeling on his horse back, between Gloucester and
Hempsteed, and he says, that the said Powell was once almost ready to fall off
his horse back; And he believes the said Mr. Powell at the same time was either
Drunk, or Mad, but he rather believes he was Drunk.

3. 6. To the third and sixth Articles, Robert Keylock of Hardwick being
sworn, says, that the said Mr. Powell is much given to Buying and Selling;
and that he bought the Reversion of a Living in Hardwick over this deponents
head (this deponents life and his wifes widows estate being in the said
Living) as this deponent was told by Nathaniell Hawkins of Elmore, and believes
to be true. And he says, that about eight years since, the said Mr. Powell
bought a Bond or Specialty of the said Nathaniel Hawkins, in which Bond this
said deponent stood bound to the said Hawkins for 40. l. and was turned over to
pay it to the said Powell, to this deponents intolerable loss and damage. And
he says, that the said Powell is very contentious, and has been much given to
Law suits, and has sued this deponent for the money before mentioned, since he
bought the said debt or Specialty.

John Niblet of Standish being sworn, says, that Mr. Powell has, and does
spend most of his time in buying and selling, and meddling in worldly matters.

John Pain of Hardwick sworn, says, that Mr. Powell is much given to buying
and selling of Land, and to Law suits, and a common Commissioner, which renders
him unfit for the work of the Ministry.

Rirchard Yealfe of Hardwick being sworn, says, that about a month since,
Mr. Powell Preaching at Hardwick upon a Sabbath day in the afternoon, and
Sermon being ended, this deponent desired him to come to his house: and being
come, he saw there one widow Packer of Putley, and seeing her fell to
threatening her, because she was behind for chief Rents of her Living in
Putley, which Mr. Powell said was due to him, and in a threatening manner told
her, that half her Cattle would not (or but) make him satisfaction for her
neglect: The which widow Packers Living was part of the bargain that Mr.
Powell bought of Sir Ralph Dutton. And being admonished by this deponent for
his threatening speeches, it being the Sabbath day; he notwithstanding continued
threatening her till he went out of the house.

Mary Packer of Putley widow being sworn, says, that about the latter end of
April last, there came two Soldiers to this deponents house, and distrained
two of her Kine for Rent, which they said was due to Mr. Powell, and they said
that Mr. Powell sent them to do it: And this deponent says, that the said two
Soldiers drove her two Kine to Mr. Powels house, and kept them about two
days, and the deponents servants carried them Fodder to Mr. Powels house or
court: And this deponent says, that about a month since she being at Richard
Yealfs house at Hardwick upon a Sabbath day, Mr. Powell being there, and seeing
this deponent there, fell to threatening her for not paying her Rent to the said
Mr. Powell, and told her in a threatening manner, that half her Cattle would
not satisfy him for her said Rent; the Rent being the chief Rent of her
Living, being part of the Lordship which Mr. Powell bought of Sir Ralph Dutton.

Joyce Gabb widow, and John Gabb of Haresfield say, that about five years since
Mr. Powell caused Richard Gabb of Parkend in the County of Gloucester, late
husband to the said Joyce Gabb, and a poor blind man to be Arested upon a
Writ, and brought him to Quedgley, and afterward to Standish to an Alehouse
there, to bring him to a composition: And the reason why he did so, was,
because he the said Powell, would have cozened the said Gabb out of his Living,
for there were but two lives in the said Gabbs Living, and Mr. Powell had
bought one of the said lives before, and now in all likelihood thought by this
means to have had the other.

4. 6. To the fourth and sixth Articles, Thomas Beard of Saul being sworn,
says, that about 12 years since, the Ministers house of Saul being decayed,
the said Powell turned it off to the parish (whereas before he took rent for
it) whereupon the parishioners of Saul bestowed in repairing the said house
about 10. and within a short time after, the said Powell did sue Thomas
Greening (now deceased) being then a Churchwarden of Saul, for the said house,
and as the said Greening confessed, caused him to spend about 40. s. in the
said suite, for deteining the said house from him: and not long after the said
Powell had an order from Sir Nathaniel Brent, to take possession of the said
house, and so had it from the parish again.

John Beard and John Ellis of Saul affirm the same.

Anne Gabb of Standish widow being sworn, says, that Mr. Powell is a man very
contentious, and given to Law suites, and has sued this deponent, and caused
her to spend most of her estate in Law suits: And about four years since, Mr.
Powell sent one of his daughters to this deponents house to tell her, that Mr.
Powell her father had put Cattle in this deponents ground: whereupon this
deponent going to see whether it were so or no, and coming to the said ground,
the said Powell had there provided two Bailiffs to Arrest her: And says, that
Mr. Powell used this policy on purpose to Arrest her: And that when they had
Arrested her, Mr. Powell refused to let her go upon Bail, but ket her two
days and a night as a prisoner, and made her pay all the charges of the
Bailiffs before she could be let go, and afterward let her go upon her own
Bond: And she says that Mr. Powell through his violent prosecuting her by Law
suits, cozened her out of 10. l. per an. because she was not able to defend her
self in the said suits, she being a widow and not capable of Law suits. And
she says, that Mr. Powell keeps away from her six Acres of ground by violence.

Margery Knight, the wife of Nathaniel Knight of Arlingham being sworn, says,
that about four years since, she saw Mr. Powell as she believes, so drunk
that he could scarce sit upright on his horse back: And she says, that Mr.
Powell at the same time did lean over his horse as if he had vomited: And she
says, that as many as saw him at the same time, were sorry to see a man of his
coat so Drunk.

Robert Chamles of Saul being sworn, says, that about a year since, he was
sent by the parishioners of Saul to Mr. Powell, to desire his approbation for
one Mr. Summers an honest Minister to have the Cure of Saul: And the said Mr.
Powell in answer, desired this deponent to give the said Mr. Summers all the
encouragement that might be: and withal promised that the said Mr. Summers
should have the place if the parish of Saul would pay him their dues; And this
deponent says, that the next Sabbath day after, the said Mr. Powell (contrary
to his former promise) sent one Mr. Grime of Woodchester to serve the said
Cure: whereupon the parishioners of Saul, were enforced to Petition the
Governor to have the said Mr. Summers, to be their Minister, who granted it
unto them.

5. To the fifth Article, Thomas Beard of Saul being sworn, says, that Mr.
Powell is very contentious, and has been much given to Law suits, and has
sued this deponent and diverse others (as he has heard) and he says, that the
said Mr. Powell is very deceitful in his dealings, as appears in that after
this deponent had paid his money for Tithes, the said Mr. Powell denied the
receipt of the said money, and caused this deponent to prove the payment of it
by witnesses.

Edward Mill of Standish being sworn, says, that Mr. Powell is very
contentious and given to Law suites, and that he sued this deponents mother
when as she owed him nothing, and caused her to pawn her Coverlet from her bed
to pay Fees, and that she has not redeemed her said Coverlet to this day: And
he says, the said Mr. Powell has sued this deponents mother, because she
would not exchange four Acres and a half of Land for three Acres and a half
of Mr. Powels.

Richard Cowly of Standish being sworn, says, that Mr. Powell is a man very
contentious and given to Law suites, and says, that the said Powell sued this
deponent, and caused him to spend money upon an unjust suite.

Edward Norman of Haresfield being sworn, says, that Mr. Powell is a man very
contentious, and given to over reach his neighbors in bargaining: And he
says, that about 12 years since he took Land to halves of Mr. Powell, and
after he had bestowed a whole summers work in plowing and earing the said
Land, and making it ready to be sowed, he the said Mr. Powell enforced this
deponent to yield up his bargain, without giving him any satisfaction for all
his charge and pains.

6. To the sixth Article, Edward Mill of Standish being sworn, says, that Mr.
Powell is a man deceitful in his dealings, and given to overreach and deceive
in bargaining.

8. To the eighth Article, William Turner of Standish being sworn, says, that
the last summer Mr. Powell was absent from all his Churches or Cures for 10 or
12 weeks together, or there about; and that during that time they had neither
Preaching nor Prayers in Standish Church, for three Sabbath days and one Fast
day, and the last Sabbath day they had no Preaching nor Prayers in the
afternoon.

Michael Niblet of Standish being sworn, says, that Mr. Powell was absent
from his four Churches the last Summer, from the beginning of May, to the end
of July then next following, and he says, that he being Clerk to Mr. Powell
at Standish, knew not of any Minister that Mr. Powell provided to serve the
Cure at Standish in his absence: And he says, that during the time of Mr.
Powels absence, he did ring the Bell in Standish Church two Sabbath days,
expecting to have Preaching or Prayers, but had none at all.

9. To the ninth Article, Mr. George Ven now Minister at Whetenhurst being
sworn, says, that about Midsommer last, he was placed by the Committee to
serve the Cure of Hardwick in Mr. Powels absence (they being in distress for
want of a Minister) and that he served the said Cure seven or eight weeks: And
he says, that Mr. Powell when he came home, turned out this deponent, contrary
to the Committees order, and has not yet given him any satisfaction for
serving the said Cure.

10. To the tenth Article, Mr. Ven says (being sworn) that after he had
served the said Cure seven or eight weeks, Mr. Powell came from London, and
showed this deponent an Order or Letter under the hands of Nathaniel Stephens,
and Edward Stephens Esquires and one Parliament man more, but refused to let
this deponent read the said Letter or Order, but said the substance of it was,
that he should take the Cure of Hardwick into his own hands.

11. To the eleventh Article, Richard Cowly of Standish being sworn, says,
that upon the last Fast day being the 27 of November. This Smith was proved
before the Committee to be a common Swearer, a Drunkard, a Blasphemer, a common
Gamester, a whoremonger, and a man ill affected to the Parliament: for which
crimes he was Ejected by the Committee, Mr. Powell being present.
Mr. John Smith of Rendwick Preached in Mr. Powels Church at Standish, the said
Mr. Smith being Ejected by this Committee the day before, being the 26 day of
November. last.

Thomas Fowler of Standish being sworn, says, that Mr. John Smith of Rendwick
Preached in Mr. Powels parish Church at Standish upon the last Fast day being
the 27 of November, or upon the Sabbath day after, being the first of December
last as he remembers.

William Turner being sworn affirms the same.

Michaell Niblet being sworn, says, that Mr. Smith of Rendwick Preached in
Standish Church the last Fast day, being the 27 of November last.

12. To the twelfth Article, John Niblet of Standish being sworn, says, that
Mr. Powell has diverse times presented this deponent in the Consistory Court
for going to hear Mr. Capel; and has threatened to have him in the High
Commission Court for so doing: And that Mr. Powell presented this deponents
wife in the said Consistory for staying at home one Sabbath day after noone;
And Mr. Powels man said, his Master did it because he thought she had been gone
to Eastington to Church: And he says, that Mr. Powell has caused this
deponent and his wife to be Excommunicate: And says, that he is a man
notoriously known to be false in his dealings; and is usually more conversant
with Drunkards and Usurers, then with good Christians, and therefore an
unworthy man to be a Minister.

John Window of Standish being sworn, says, that about nine years since, Mr.
Powell caused this deponent and about 20 persons of Standish parish to be
presented in the Consistory for not coming to his Church, they going to
another parish to hear Sermons, when as in their own parish of Standish they
were sometimes neglected at least once a Sabbath. 18 December. 1644.


14. To the fourteenth Article, Thomas Vick of Hardwick being sworn, says,
that a little after Nathaniel Knight had been examined before the Committee
about Mr. Powell, the said Powell in the hearing of this deponent, gave out
threatening speeches against the said Nathaniel Knight, saying, he would have
his ears nailed to the Pillory.

Nathaniel Knight being sworn, says, that he having been formerly summoned by
warrant from this Committee, to testify the truth of his knowledge concerning
Mr. Powell, and having testified accordingly: About a week after Mr. Powell
meeting this deponent in Gloucester, told him he would make him repent his oath
taken against him.

15. To the fifteenth Article, Anne Parre of Whetenhurst aged 11 years, says,
that about three months since, Mr. Powell came to Whetenhurst Inn, and two
others with him, and stayed there almost two days and a whole night, and was
there drinking part of the time.

James Perry of Standish Morton being sworn, says, that since Michaelmas last
he coming to the Inn at Whetenhurst; the Inne-keepers wife told him that Mr.
Powell and an Inne-keeper of Barkley and others were there: And the next day
after, this deponent coming to the same Inn, the said Inne-keepers wife told
him, that Mr. Powell had continued in the said Inn from about 10 of the clock
the day before, till 2 of the clock that present day; and that the said Powell
and the rest, had been drinking in the said Inn.

Margery the wife of George Turbervile of Whetenhurst Innekeeper, being sworn,
says, that about Michaelmas last Mr. Powell came into the Inn at Whetenhurst,
and there sat drinking with other company (as this deponent believes;) And she
says that he continued there from about 10 or 11 of the Clock, till the next
day after about twelve of the clock.

16. To the sixteenth Article, William Mill of Haresfield being sworn, says,
that about a year and three quarters since, he being a fervant in Mr. Powels
house, did for three Sabbath days together with a Waine and a Yoke of Oxen,
carry certain Loades of Mr. Powels Hay to fodder his Cattle, in a ground of
the said Mr. Powels: And he says, that the first of the three Sabbaths Mr.
Powell knew not of it; but the other two (he believes) the said Mr. Powell did
know of it.

Edward Mill of Standish being sworn, says, that about two years since, he
saw Mr. Powels Teeme carry Hay upon a Sabbath day, about a quarter of a mile.

2. And he says, that he has seen Mr. Powell sit drinking in the Inn at
little Haresfield, above forty and twenty times.

Nathaniel Shatford of Standish being sworn, says, that about two years
since, he saw Hay carried upon a Sabbath day morning: And he says, he knows
not whether it were Mr. Powels Teeme that carried it: For he says, that
sometimes it was Mr. Powels Teeme, and sometimes Captain Bayleys his
son-in-law.

17. To the seventeenth Article, George Wild, William King, and Joseph Probert,
three of Captain Singletons Company, inform that about three weeks since,
they having distrained Mr. Powels Cattle for Contribution money: The said
Powell fell a railing at the Committee, and said, he would make them ashamed of
it when he came to London, and for keeping away his Rent, and that Mr. Sheppard
was his only enemy, and that the Committee kept away 16. l. of his money from
him.

Item, About 3 or 4 days after this, the said Mr. Powell being before the
Committee to have his Cattle again, which they refusing to grant, till he had
paid his Contribution money for which they were distrained: The said Mr. Powell
said, he never found such dealing from the Cavaliers. 10 Feb. 1644.

Also Mr. Powell said before the Committee, that Mr. Sheppard of the Committee
did always speak as an adversary in his business, and not as a Judge.

Also he said, that if there be five Articles exhibited against himself, he
the said Powell has ten Articles against Mr. Sheppard.

Daniel Guilliam of Rendwick being sworn, says, that about four months
since, Mr. Smith of Rendwick being questioned before the Committee for a
scandalous Minister; and this deponent having before been called before the
Committee as a witness against Mr. Smith: The said Mr. Powell came to this
deponent, and would have him and the rest of the parishioners of Rendwick to
Petition the Committee on the behalf of the said Smith, that he might stay at
Rendwick till S. Mary day, to take up a quarters pay, and his Easter book:
which this deponent refused to do: whereupon Mr. Powell spoke to this deponent
to this effect, viz. Suppose the Kings Army should come into this Country
again, as it is like enough it will be so; what will you do if Mr. Smith, or
some friend of his, should come on his behalf?

18. To the eighteenth Article, Edward Mill of Standish being sworn, says,
that on the 26 day of March last, as this deponent was diging in his own
ground; Mr. Powell and three men more came upon him in a violent manner, and
Mr. Powell with his own hands smote this deponent on the face with his fist,
and tare his doublet and hose; and told this deponent that he had not cared if
he had killed him.

19. To the ninteenth Article, John Rogers of Hardwick being sworn, says,
that about seven years since, he being Overseeer of the poor of the parish of
Hardwick, and coming to Mr. Powell to demand of him his dues to the poor of
the said parish: he the said Powell answered, he had no money: This deponent
replying, told him, he must pay according to the Statute, whereupon Mr. Powell
said, that if he would have money according to the Statute, then you must have
Sermons according to the Statute, that is, once a month, or words to the like
effect.

Mr. John Lygon of Painswick informs, and says upon oath, that about five
years since, there was a suit in the High Commission Court, depending between
Mr. Wild and Mr. Acson, sometimes Vicars of Painswick. And they had a
Commission to examine witnesses in the Country; Mr. Powell was Mr. Acsons
Commissioner, and Mr. Wild had diverse witnesses from Painswick; and when any
was examined who was a conscientious man, Mr. Powell with cross
interrogatories did endeavor to disparage his testimony; asking him whether
ever he were at any Conventicles? whether he did kneel at the Sacrament? with
diverse other like queries touching Bishops and the Ceremonies.

Testimonies of witnesses on the behalf of Walter Powell Clerk, 7 Jan. 1644.
Walter Powell the son of Walter Powell Clerk, says upon oath, that at the
time of the Siege against Gloucester, Mr. Powell his father had four Oxen
taken from him by the Kings Army, by warrant from the Lord Forth. And this
examinants mother speaking to one of her friends to speak to a Gentleman of
the Kings Army, that Mr. Powell may have the Oxen again: the said Gentleman
promised he would do his endeavor therein upon two conditions: First that Mr.
Powell should enter into Bond to bring his son-in-law Captain Baily (a
Captain of the Parliament Army) into the Kings Army. Secondly, that he should
take an Oath never to pray for the Parliament again. To which the said Mr.
Powell answered to the said friend: To the first (said he) how shall I enter
into Bond to perform impossibilities? To the second he answered: The Sun is
the Sun though it be sometimes Eclipsed: The Parliament is the Parliament what
ever the success be: Have I stood for the Parliament thus long, and shall I
now decline? shall I wrong my conscience or damn my soul to get four Oxen? I
will never do it while I live: And so he heard no more of his Oxen.

Francis Yeat of the parish of Haressield, says, that what Walter Powell has
deposed touching Mr. Powell his fathers answer to the two questions aforesaid,
is true in all points.

Robert Bright of Haresfield, Clerk, testifies, that at the time of the Siege
against Gloucester, the said deponent being at the house of Walter Powell Vicar
of Standish, there was one William Rogers Constable or Tythingman of the parish
of Standish, who by virtue of a Warrant had seized upon four Oxen and a Waine
of the said Walter Powels: the Warrant as far as this deponent remembers, came
from the Lord Forth, or Troth. And this deponent having some Corn ready to
carry, borrowed of the said Constable or Tythingman Rogers, the said Oxen and
Waine for that afternoon, conditionally that both Oxen and Waine should be
delivered safely that night at Standish Court, which the said deponent did
perform: And upon the entreaty of the said Walter Powels wife, the said
deponent did endeavor the regaining of his said Oxen, and preservation of
other Cattle, which he the said Walter afterward lost: But in regard he was
absent from his house, he was taxed for a Rebel; and one Captain Hanbury
which quartered at this deponents house, did say he did believe he would be
enjoined to bring his son-in-law Bailey, and not to pray for the Parliament, or
words to that effect: But this deponent never upon discourse betwixt them,
could ever find the said Powell halting from the Parliament, but always for it.

8 Februarii, 1644.
A Warrant was sent out to call in Mr. Powell to answer to the Articles, and
depositions exhibited against him, upon Monday next the 10 of February.

10 Februarii, 1644.
Upon which day Mr. Powell in person appearing before the Committee: And being
by them required to answer to the Articles exhibited against him; he refused so
to do, and said he had an Order from the Committee, that before he had put in
his answer to the said Articles, he should have a Copy of the depositions of
the witnesses that had sworn against him; and said, he would not otherwise
answer, till he had the Copy of the said depositions.

It was thereupon ordered by the Committee, that Mr. Powell shall appear at Mr.
Lanes house, near the Kings Board in Gloucester, to morrow in the afternoon by
two of the clock, to answer to the Articles exhibited against him, else the
Committee to proceed against him according to the proofs.

11 Februarii, 1644.
At which day and time Mr. Powell appeared not according to the former order,
but Mr. Dorney the Towne-clerke appearing for him, moved the Committee to grant
him a longer day to put in his answer, and to have a Copy of the depositions of
the witnesses.

It was thereupon ordered by the Committee that Mr. Powell shall have a Copy of
the Articles exhibited against him if he desire it, and that he have time till
Saturday night next to put his answer in writing to the said Articles; else the
Committee to proceed against him according to the proofs.

It was then also ordered that Wednesday the 19 of this instant Febr. be the
peremptory day for the hearing of Mr. Powels cause at Mr. Lanes house
aforesaid, by nine of the clock in the morning: And that the witnesses on both
sides do appear viva voce at the same time, and a Warrant to issue forth to
summon them to appear accordingly.

19 Februarii, 1644.
This day Mr. Powels cause being to be heard, Mr. Powell appeared not according
to the last Order of the Committee, whereupon the Committee proceeded to the
examination of the witnesses: and as the cause and witnesses were in
examination before them, William Powell the son of Mr. Walter Powell aforesaid
came in where the Committee sat, and told them his father was gone to London,
and had sent an Appeal by him to the Committee; And being asked when he saw
his father last, and when his father delivered him the said Appeal? he
answered, that he had not seen his father since that day seven night, and that
he saw him then at Leonard Stanley, where his said father delivered him the
said Appeal: A Copy whereof here follows.

Whereas there are Articles of Scandal preferred against me Walter Powell
Master of Arts, Vicar of Standish, with the Chapels thereunto belonging: And
the same Articles are prosecuted by the instigation of Malignants: and the
Committee of Gloucester, by Warrant under their hands, did promise and
conclude, that I should have the Copy of the depositions exhibited against me,
reserving the names of the deponents, and now have denied the same unto me: And
the High Court of Parliament having promised that such as have been eminent in
Action, and Suffering, and so continued constant, should not be slighted, but
honored and rewarded.

I therefore do Appeal from the censure of the Committee at Gloucester for
many good causes; and do demand, that the public Notary or Clerk of the said
Committee, do enter this my Appeal to the High Court of Parliament. In
witness whereof I have put to my hand, this 18 day of Febr, 1644.

Walter Powell.

Ordered the same day by the Committee, that the cause of Mr. Powell be put off
till Satturday the 22 of this instant Febr. at eight of the clock in the
morning, at Mr. Lanes house: And that notice be sent to Mr. Powell that he be
then there; and a Warrant to be sent out, requiring the most material
witnesses that have not appeared this day, to be then present in person to give
their evidence viva voce, to the end that a final sentence may be given in the
said cause.

22 Februarii, 1644.
William Watkins of Standish informs upon oath, that upon Thursday morning
last, he left at Mr. Powels house an order from the Committee, wherein the said
Powell was required to appear before the Committee this present day, to hear
the final determination of his cause.

At which day diverse witnesses being examined viva voce, by the Committee: It
was ordered that the censure in Mr. Powels cause be respited till Tuesday next,
eight of the clock in the morning; Then all the Members of the Committee who
have been at the hearing of the cause this day to meet, that so in the interim,
a more serious and deliberate consideration may be had thereof, the proofs
having been fully heard this day, and before, and Mr. Powell summoned to appear
before the Committee, to attend the said censure this day but came not.

Present
Mr. Mayor. Mr. Kyrle. Mr. Fettiplace. Mr. Wood. Mr. Clifford. Mr. Sheppard.
Mr. Jones. Mr. Fowler. Mr. Catchmay.
25 Febr. 1644. To the Honorable Committee by Ordinance of Parliament for
Gloucester, Heref. etc.
The Humble Petition of diverse of the Inhabitants of Standish, Hardwick,
Rendwick, and Saul.

Shows,

THat the said several Parishes, or places, do consist of many people; and
that M. Walter Powell has for above 20 years past, been Vicar of the said
Parishes, whereby the Cure of the Souls of all the said Parishoners have been
under his Charge: The profits whereof, (as is conceived) have been worth about
200l. per annum, for the recompense of serving the said Cures. Notwithstanding,
the said M. Powell has, for a great part of the said time exceedingly
neglected the Cure of the souls of the said people in the discharge of his
duty in the said places: And sometimes the said Churches have been void, and
had no Minister for many Sabbath days together, not so much as to read
Prayers. And when the Inhabitants of some of the said Parishes have procured an
able Minister among them; The said M. Powell has refused to allow them a
competent maintenance for their support, whereby they have been forced to leave
the said places: And to the knowledge of most of us, some of the said Parishes
have been neglected ten or twelve weeks together, And have sometimes been
served (to many of our knowledges) by ignorant, scandalous, and wandering
persons, such as the said M. Powell could gain best cheap; And scarce at any
time have the said Cures been long served in an orderly way, whereby many of
the said Parishoners have been forced to go to other Parishes for performance
of their services to the Lord: All which have been an exceeding burden and
grievance to the said Parishioners. For redress whereof, (to some of us known)
a petition has been exhibited unto the Honorable Parliament, and since to the
Honorable Governor of Gloucester, but by reason of the present distractions,
your Petitioners have not (as yet) obtained any relief in this Case.

The premises considered, your Petitioners humbly desire, that you will be
pleased to execute the power which the Honorable Parliament have entrusted you
withal in this Case, for the Souls comfort of your Petitioners,

And they shall ever pray.

Will: Andrews. Henry Robins. Richard Yealf. Joseph Ellis. John Bainham.
Richard Dowding. Thomas Brether. Jo: Merriman. James Haines. Thomas Pride. John
Beard. Alice Tovie. Elizabeth Jones. Anne Bohan. Thomas Beard. John Kylock.
John Niblet. George Stratford. William Chew. John Eliots. Daniel Gwilliam.
Edmund Alen. John Spencer. John Barnard. Henry Nicholson. William Balden.
Elizabeth Watkins. Elizabeth Balden. Daniel Wats. Thomas Rolls. Lewis Harris.
Rebcceab Keylock. John Window. John Barnard. Thomas Mills. Anne Packer Edith
Beard. Thomas Pride. Anne Haines. John Pain. Samuel Smith. William Pello.
John Merret. John Rogers. William Whichurch. Giles Wyman. Elizabeth Beard.
William Trevis. Richard Harris. Natha: Greneing. Richard Watkins. Joseph
Greening. Richard Pain. Robert Chamneys. John Croome. Dorothy Nichalson.
Thomas Beard. Thomas Dowding. John Ellis. Walter Friar, John Beard. William
Beard. Edmund Beard. Samuel Beard. Nich: Prosser. Alice Chew. Thomas Allen.
Thomas Wintle. Mary Beard. Thomas Robins. Anthony Russell. Edith Wirtle. Robert
Wait. Thomas Morweut.


Die Martis, 25. Feb. 1644.
FOrasmuch as upon Complaint made to this Committee against Walter Powel Clerk,
Vicar of the Parish Church of Standish, and the Chapels or Parish Churches of
Hardwick, Rendwick, and Saul; for matter of scandal in his life, it did appear
to them by the clear and pregnant testimony of many substantial witnesses,
beyond all exception, That the said Walter Powell having for diverse years
together now last past, had the Charge and Cure of the Souls of the people of
the said Parishes which have been many; and taken the Tithes, and other
profits, incident and belonging to the said Churches: yet has been notoriously
careless thereof, and negligent of his Charge therein, sometimes absenting
himself many months together, and not leaving any to Officiate for him; so
that for diverse Lords days the other, the people had neither preaching nor
prayers: And in one of his Churches they had not the Sacrament in a whole
year, causing the Bell to ring, and the Congregation to come together many
times when there was neither sermon nor prayers. And yet notwithstanding, would
not suffer his people that were well-affected, to go abroad to other Churches,
to hear godly and Orthodox Divines, but preached against them; presented and
vexed them for it in the Chancellours Court: And substituting, and keeping
under him, to officiate in his Cures, base and scandalous Ministers; which,
when the people desired to remove, and suppress, he did by all means labor
to keep in and bear up: And when the people had sonetimes, by their own care,
procured honest and able men to supply the Charge, he did either by not paying
off, or opposition against them, soon weary them, and make them desert the
place. And whereas it did also appear to the Committee, by a clear proof,
that the said Walter Powell has been drunk diverse times, and that he is a
great frequenter of Ale houses, and does spend much time therein, and that he
is very false, dishonest, and injurious in his dealings, contentious and
litigious amongst his neighbors, one that does exceedingly entangle himself in
secular affairs, and is guilty of many other Crimes, and the said Walter
Powell being required by the Committee, to answer those Crimes charged upon
him, he wilfully refused, and behaved himself so before the Committee, as
declared in him a manifest neglect and contempt of them. It is therefore this
day Ordered, that the said Walter Powell shall be, and hereby is ejected and
removed from the Vicaridge of Standish, and Chapels, or parish Churches of
Hardwick, Rendwick, and Saul: and of all the said Churches, and service of the
Cures thereof, and from the Tithes profits, and Revenues thereof: And that in
his place, some such godly, able, and learned person shall be placed, and put
in possession of the said Churches, and Cures severally, and respectively as
this Committee shall nominate and appoint, who shall receive, and have all the
profits and revenues thereof, according to the Ordinance of Parliament made in
that behalf.

Luke Nurse. Major. James Kirle. John Fettiplace. Sil: Wood. Will: Sheppard.
Henry Jones. Stephen Fowler. Christ: Catchmay.


4 Febr. 1647.
This day the Parishioners of Hardwick exhibited a Petition to the Committee,
desiring them to admit of Mr. Henry Walker (a stranger) to be their Minister.
Whereupon they made this ensuing Order.

WHereas the Parishioners and Inhabitants of Hardwick have petitioned this
Committee for the settling of Mr. Hen: Walker amongst them to be their present
Minister there: And the Committee have not as yet received satisfaction
concerning his godly life and conversation. It is therefore Ordered, That the
said Mr. Walker shall Officiate in the said Parish, and be Preacher to the same
Parish for his farther trial, until farther order be given by this Committee
to the contrary. And that so long as he shall continue to serve that Cure, he
shall receive all the profits incident thereunto.

John Madocke Mayor. Will. Sheppard. Jo: Dorney.


After Master Walker had been there about five months, Information came in to
the Committee against him upon Oath, That he had been in Arms against the
Parliament. Whereupon they (...) an Order to eject him. The Copy whereof
follows.

18 Julii, 1648.
WHereas several Depositions containing matter of Delinquencie and ill
affection to the Parliament are exhibited against Master Hen: Walker the
present Minister of Hardwick in the County of Glouc. whereby it appears by the
oaths of several witnesses that the said Hen: Walker has been in actual
Arms against the Parliament, and was taken Prisoner by the Parliament Forces
in the Kings Garrison at Hynam about five years since: And the Committee being
informed that the said Walker is Ejected by the Committee of Mormouthshire for
his Delinquencie, and other crimes proved against him: It is thereupon Ordered,
That the said Hen: Walker be and is hereby Ejected and removed out of and from
the Vicaridge of Hardwick, and from serving the Cure there: And that from
henceforth he shall no longer officiate in the Parish Church of Hardwick: And
that in his room, some godly, able Minister be placed, such as this Committee
shall nominate and appoint, according to the Ordinance of Parl. in that behalf.

John Madocke Mayor. Will: Sheppard. Jo: Dorney.


FINIS.

