THE LANGUAGE OF THE FRONTISPEICE.
AMid the thrice three sacred Quire,
Gold-haird HYPERION strikes his Lyre,
Whose music charms the power of FATE,
The AONIAN GYRLES reverberate,
His melody with voices sweet,
(The whole CONSORT in one tune do meet)
Showing when MARS is grown the proudest,
The MUSES ever chaunt the lowdest.
MARTIAL the life and soul of SENSE,
(That mighty Lord of ELOQUENCE)
AUSONIUS, in ARTS SCHOLE most great,
[Sublime, quick, fluent of conceit]
Before this Fabrics Portall stand,
And (in the Dialect of the hand)
Invite all to aproach; beneath
These, MERCURY presents a wreath
New plucked from DAPHNES brows to one,
Whose LANGUAGE and INVENTION
Whether Legitimate, or no,
He knows, but few will care to know.
EPIGRAMS

Also the Socratick Session. Or The Araignment of Julius Scaliger.

With Some Select Poems by S. Sheppard.

London Printed by G. D. and are to be sold by Tho: Bucknell at the Golden
Lion in Duck-Lane. 1651

engraved title page, incorporating: lyre and lute players; Mercury gesturing
with his caduceus to a drinking man; and portraits of Martial and Ausonius

EPIGRAMS THEOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, AND ROMANTIC.

SIX BOOKS, ALSO THE SOCRATICK SESSION, OR The Arraignment and Conviction, of
JULIUS SCALIGER, with other Select Poems.

By S. SHEPPARD.

LONDON Printed by G. D. for Thomas Bucknell, at the Sign of the Golden Lion
in Duck-Lane, 1651.

IF THESE EPIGRAMS SURVIVE (MAUGRE THE VORACITIE OF TIME) LET THE NAMES OF
CHRISTOPHER CLAPHAM, AND JAMES WINTER, (TO WHOM THE AUTHOR DEDICATETH THESE HIS
ENDEAVORS) LIVE WITH THEM.

TO THE READER.
Candid and Courteous,
I Here present to thy perusal, a Body of Epigrams, and (least thou should
mistak the worth of the gift, reflecting on the worthlessness of the giver) I
cannot but inform thee, that Epigrams in all ages have been oftener desired
then attained, either for the paucitie of Epigrammatists, or for the fluencie,
and delicacie, they have ever exhibited; never but two amongst the Latins,
viz. Martial, and Ausonius, famous for their performances in things of this
nature, and amongst us here in England, none in our native tongue, (some
pidlers excepted) save Bastard, and Harrington, that have divulged ought worthy
notice: The first of these deserved the Laurel, but the last, both Crowning
and Anointing. I confess my self guilty of no less then Treason against the
Sovereignty of Apollo, and the Dignity of the Nine, to put forth any thing to
public view in this Age of Ignorance, and Ostracism of Learning, when the
Thespian Fount is so pitifully puddled, the Sacred Mount so Sacreledgiously
Asassinated, and the Castalian Cave, become a covert for Chattering-Magpies,
the (nominall) Doctor, that can scarce render an account of his Faith, (if he
were Catechized) whether GALLEN dealt in Druggs, or PARACELSUS in Simples, yet
can make a shift to clime Parnassus, though (at his descent) his feet are so
lame, all may perceive he deserves rather Helebore, then Helicon: Oh POESY!
once so renowned, how have thou forfeited thy pristine Splendour? The Tailor
measures thee with his Yard, The Astronomer with his Jacobs Staff, The
Merchant exposes thee, as the wind of his moody (or muddy) Fancy hurries him,
and the Effeminate Gallant (who knows only how to powder his Hair, starch
his Beard, adorn his (frenchified) testicles with all the colors of Iris, lick
up his Mistress spittle, talk Mimmick blasphemy, and prate by the Academy)
boasts, that he has thee at his beck, and can quaffe up all Helicon at one
draught.

Oh what a shame it is (gentle Reader I address my self to thee as a
competent Judge) that Jupiters Daughters (who came from Heaven, and are
desirous to continue perpetual Virgins) should be thus rapaciously towfed by a
crew of croaking counterfeits, who can do nothing without a Helenae Crater, etc.

I know I shall incur as direful a curse from this fry of Fools, as ever
Oedipus bestowed upon his Sons, but I as much value the barking of these
Canicular Coxcombs, as I do the fawning of a Drunkard, or the Protestations of
a Prostitute: Neither shall I weigh the non-sensicall cavills of those
Lymphatick Sabinus says that these were a multitude of foolish people met
together in Crect. Regius reports that they were turned into toad-stooles. The
like Fate I wish may attend these.
Corybantes, those Semiviri Phryges, who make more noise with their tongues,
(in the defense of their darling IGNORANCE) then ever those Curetes with their
Brazen Instruments, for the preservation of Jupiter, these may fitly (with
Momus) be called the Sons of NIGHT, and SLEEP: Dull dry-witted fellows, who
take a pride to undervalue other men's labors, but do nothing themselves.
TERENCE made a fit discovery of one (of the better sort) of these MOMES, qui
nisi quod ipse facit, nil rectum putat, and I wonder, that any accomplished
Author should be the least troubled at this, since this God Momus (says
NAZIANZEN) does not touch the worst only, but the best of men, yes, and the
best of Gods too, (Optimus Maximus) as the be-nighted heathen styled their
(lecherous) God, Jupiter.

Will you please (a little) to here him exclaim, Thou O Jupiter art the
Original cause of our vices, and of the adulterating our Senate with such a
multitude of Bastards, whilst thou forsakest thy Heaven, and in a borrowed
shape committest lewdness with mortals, insomuch, that we not a little fear,
that when thou art a Bull, one or other will sacrifice thee; when a golden
Shower, that some Goldsmiths should melt thee, and for our Jupiter, return us
an Eare-Ring or Bracelet, etc.

And indeed Jupiters pranks and rapes, justifies Momus his Invectives, but
Jupiter (in Lucian) thinks him not worthy his Thunder, but rejects him as a mad
prating fellow, and so I leave him.

Now though nothing is more certain then this, that it is equally as facile to
cut and shape a garment for the Moon now cresent, and now in the wane, as to
please all persons, and content all constitutions, yet I have a hope (in some
measure) to satisfy all, having suited my self to all capacities; art thou
sportive? here thou art fitted with a Jocular vein; art thou Philosophical,
Amorous, Stoicall, a mere Moralist, or devout Theologist? here thou may
recreate thy self to thy own wish.

But now for those who truly merit the Laurel and Ivy Wreath, (fitly
mythologising the incessant verdure and beauty of their learning and
Ingenuitie) to them I bow the Knee.

Gentlemen,
It is very requisite that the GRACES should accompany the MUSES, Iunctae
Nymphis Gratiae decentes.
Hor. Nymphae noster amor Lybethrides.
Virg. therefore (with yours) I implore the smiles of those fair Nymphs, whose
Intellects are as excellently splendid, as their exteriors are splendidly
excellent: I confess Nature molded me a Cynick, yet shall those rare pieces
of perfection find here, APHRODITE, and ATALANTA, as well as your selves APOLLO,
and ADRASTUS, may I find a courteous reception at your hands, and a favorable
reflection from those Angellick Substances, and I shall esteem my self not
only immortalized, but shall ever be proud to record my self

Yours, (equally obliged) in all Service, S. SHEPPARD.

To Mr. Sheppard on His EPIGRAMS.
NO matter! let the dunghill-wits crow on,
And bathe their Beaks in putrefaction:
Joves harness-bearing-bird finds better prey,
Flying alone, the Magpy, and the Jay,
Not worth the meanest of his moeniall train:
Thou have discovered (friend) so rich a vein
Of wit, and learning, that the pit-pat fry,
Will (with Minervas bird (sure) fear to fly
By day, but linger till their wits are ripe,
Dreading the danger of thy powerful gripe.
Thou have redeemed the age, (leprous with Schism)
And taught the world to perfect Barbarism:
We are not yet reduced; but that we yet
Are Masters of Minervas Carkanet:
And our perdition may (perhaps) protract,
Maugre this most portentuous Cataract,
Which threatens Earth and Heaven; until now,
Daphne has dwelt upon quaint Martials brow.
No more the Nymph will with his dust remain,
But make her mansion in thy vigorous brain.
For what the son of THIA made such suit,
She (like a THAIS) loves to prostitute
To thee, (which if we truly scan, 'twill follow)
Thou art HYPERIONS Son, the true APOLLO.
ARTHUR ESTWICH.

To the Author on his exquisite EPIGRAMS and other POEMS.
THus Anacreon taught of yore,
Thus the quaint Venusian chanted,
Songs that made Scilla cease to rore,
And the rage of Tyrants daunted:
Thus Thracian Orpheus struck his strings,
Listened to by Founts, and springs.
Thus witty Martial did compile,
Ausonius thus quaff't Helicon,
And here in this our Borean Isle,
Thus once warbled Harrington:
Though thou exceed'st his strain as far,
As Cynthia does the stmallest Starr.
Thus learned Maro sang of old,
(Underneath the broad Beech-tree)
Songs fit for to be engraved in gold,
He was but a type of thee:
Thus Theocritus, and Brown,
Made the Dryades their own.
(Dear Sir) the very soul of wit
In this body of your book
Resides, (and takes delight in it)
May that man be thunder-strook,
That (by hellish Instigation)
Shall project a separation.
GEORGE ROSSE.

To the Author on his EPIGRAMS.
HAd these thy learned Epigrams been owned
By L. or B. or any wit renowned
For empty trifles, (oh the name! the name!)
Thy Statue had been fixed in the house of Fame,
And over thy head, in golden letters, writ,
'The Prince of Epigrammatists and Wit.
But we (alas) do take up Wit on trust,
If this man say it is his, of force it must
Be rare and excellent, although if scand
More dull then dross, heavier then lead, or sand.
Rare SHEPPARD, nere what Fount, upon what Hill,
May I sometimes but listen to thy Quill,
And see the horn-hooff'd Satyrs dance to please,
Those Sylvan beauties, the Oreades:
Sure not a Nymph, or Wood-God but does lie
Couchant, when thou do chant a Lullabie.
But when more strenuously thou list to advance
Thy tone, they cannot but Corantos dance:
For to thy Lyre the Thespian Ladies sing,
The thrice three Spheres, in consort answering,
Ecchoed by all those The Hyrarchy of Angels, Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, Powers, etc.
Orders, named Nine,
(Who still sing sacred Anthems to the Trine)
Both Heaven and Earth to share thy wit contend,
How blessed am I, then, to have such a Friend.
JOHN RIDLEY.

To my much honored Friend the Author, on his most Excellent EPIGRAMS.
TAke heed ye crabbed Critics, how
Ye censure; he that wears a brow
Curld up in furrow's, viewing these,
Is Traitor to the Aonides.
Friend, (though without thy Laurel on)
Fear not the conflagration
Of any (foolish) fiery Spirit,
Though he did Typhons ire inherit,
^hy Epigrams have strength and skill,
To sink him underneath a hill,
More ponderous then Aetnas load,
Chief Darling to the Delphian God.
The Mnemosinides do ate on thee,
(Those Ymps of Jove and Memory)
In this our British Horizon
On JVDGEMENT, and INVENTION,
(The two wings with which MARTIAL flew)
Thou soar'st a pitch he never knew,
Rich in all knowledge; thou do twist
^he Poet, and Mythologist,
and (with a FIAT more then man)
^^e Catholic and Affrican.
^e thinks I hear sweet Martial mourn,
See; he with tears bedews his Urne
Angry, thou art as great as he
In all (save the Art of Flattery)
He had a Caesar, who at least
Gave him a Graunge (though else a beast)
But thou (his Rival) can find none,
Worthy a Dedication;
For who would force his Muse to trudge
To him that knows not how to judge
Nay, (which to water thrills my blood)
Cares not to gratify a good.
But thus it hap't with him to fare,
In whom all Arts included are.
Homer, who does all Judgments fix,
More then the dark Apocalypse,
Yet though reward crawle backward; this
Make thy Asylum; thou wilt not miss
Eternal Fame, the after times,
As Diamonds will prize thy Rimes,
And though the Parcae gall thy thread,
Thou shall survive when thou art dead:
And while thou liv'st, the wiser few
Who know the worth of wit, what is due)
^o such a Genius as is thine,
So quaint so terse, and so Divine)
Will count it glory for to be
^artakers of thy Amity.
^his I pronounce (as backed by Fate)
^ll know I scorn to Adulate.
ANDREW DIXON.

A due Encomium on the Author and his Ingenious EPIGRAMS.
THe ancient Shephards of the Arcadian Plains
Elegant were in Verse and witty Strains,
And as their Rural title is thy Name,
So thou partak'st of their Eternal Fame:
In thy facetious Fancy Learning, Wit,
Which merit in Apollos Chair to fit,
And to correct the Sisters in their Lays,
Each of which offer thee a Crown of Bays,
Which like another Martial thou do merit,
And shall (in these thy Epigrams inherit)
Which elevate thine honor to the sky,
And tells the World the Ingenuity
Of these thy lines, are of such excellence
As may be termed, (Wits rare Quint-essence)
Even in this critical and carping Age,
When few in Epigrams durst vent their rage,
Yet thy Minerva (doubtless) will be free,
From Envy, as from Thunder, Daphne's Tree,
And SHEPPARD by his sharp ingenuos Quill,
Shall honor gain, and grace Parnassu^ Hill.
SAMUEL HOLLAND.

To the Author on his excellent EPIGRAMS.
SIr, I have read your Epigrams, and confess
To read them is a real happiness.
Martial, Ausonius, Harrington, and Moore,
All that have written in this kind before,
In you included are, the worth of all,
Their Wit is yours, which makes you Principal.
Vincent Howell.

EPIGRAMS
THE FIRST BOOK.
EPIG. 1.
I Write of Fear, of Love, of Harm, of Hate,
Of Honor, Magnanimity, of Fate,
Of Courtezans, of Chastity, of Charms,
Of Policy, of Perfection, and of Arms,
Of Heaven, Earth, and Hell, of Temperance,
Of Prodigallity, of Choice, of Chance,
Of Knaves, of Dolts, Cowards, and Valliant men,
Of Art, and Eloquence, and now and then
Of Kings, and Captains, Queens, and Queans, of Schism,
Of Thieves, and Panders, sometimes Aphorism,
Drops from my quill; thus Proteus-like Iv'e dealt,
To please thee (Reader) be thou what thou will.
EPIG. 2. To my beloved Friend Mr. James Naworth, the best way to better a bad
Wife.
FRiend, thou art yoakt, and can not help the thing,
(Thou see what power there is circled in a Ring)
Better or worse, it is in the power of Fate,
And not in man, to alter thy estate:
Therefore take counsel, "It is meritorious,
"In Husbands (sometimes) for to be Vxorious.
Thou sai'st she is clamorous, yea will disimbogue
Too often, and not stick to call thee ROGUE.
To strike is barbarous, a better way
Observe; laugh at her, on thy Viol play.
If she will needs in folly be prolix,
Sometimes inform her, that she shames her sex,
" No better way to calm a woman's Ire,
" Then to breath water, when she belcheth Fire.
But thou will say, can flesh and blood dispense
With such incorrigible impudence?
Know that you are incorporate; but one
Connext, by a Celestial union,
She Is but thy self, cast in another mold,
Thou art a Verbalist, if she is scold.
"Women like Tortoises, are ever won,
Throw her upon her back, and all is done.
EPIG. 3. To Sir I. C. Knight.
When the Law enjoined your feet
To tread the Labyrinth of the Fleet,
You were clogged with various sports;
"Bands are but Bracelets, Goales but Courts,
Sea-borne Sturgeon, broadside Breame,
The Trout that thrives against the stream,
The Carp full laden with her spawne,
The Scarlet Lobster, prick nosed Prawne,
Oyle-steept Anchovis (from his brine)
Came swimming in red Seas of wine;
The brawny Capon, full egged Hen,
The Swan, and Mallard of the Fen,
The costly Plover, mounting Lark,
Furnished your Table, (like the Arc
Preserved Ogiges) whiles I made moan
Over smoakie beef in Whittington.
Never was heard one note to sing,
But droopt, and hung my feeble wing:
But (Sir) your fare my soul abhors,
You fed upon your Creditors.
EPIG. 4. Of Proems.
PRoems, to Cypress Trees we may compare,
They Are long, but yet they very fruitless are.
EPIG. 5. The proof of Princes.
I Wonder Princes should be good,
(When I conceit them flesh and blood)
What change of Pleasure,
What ease, what Treasure,
Cannot he Command
And not obtain, that is Ruler over a Land?
Who dares enquire
Or thwart's desire,
Who dare begin
To tax his Vice, or call a Sin, a Sin?
Who will not be
(Nay what is he)
Will Not fan the fire,
To increase the flames, of his unblown desire?
What saucy eye
On him dares pry?
What season will
Not wait, his Royal lust for to fulfill?
Then (sure) that Prince,
Can curb his Sense,
Swaying his Passion,
Is more then Man, and fit to rule a Nation.
EPIG. 6. Loving Mirabell.
MIrabell does her Mate, so dearly love,
That if the least he from her sight do move,
She seems as one distract, the good man once
Went out, and staid to try her for the nonce,
But when again returned, his dearest Wife
(whom he thought loved him better then her life)
Was with his friend in bed, and seeing him
She cries, oh husband, you are welcome in,
My dear affection unto you was such,
I thought I could not love your friend too much.
EPIG. 7. Absolonisme.
AS Absolon, so do the Sectists now,
They mean a Ruin, but pretend a vow.
EPIG. 8. Homer.
HOmer though blind, yet saw with his Souls eye
The secrets hid, in deep'st Philosophy,
Who while he sang the Gods, deserved to be
Himself adored, as a Dietie.
EPIG. 9. To his unconstant Mistress.
SAtan, no woman, yet a wandering spirit,
Once did hell disinherit
O'th Sailors Trade,
(By strict inquiry made)
When he saw ships sail two ways with one wind,
The Devil himself, loves not a wavering mind.
EPIG 10. To Captain C. D. on his Periwig.
SIr, this exactly does with Justice suit,
Your Mistress quaintly knows to retribute,
She stole your hair (thanks to your lusts excess)
And gives you hers, though in another dress.
EPIG. 11. To Mistress E. L.
MY pretty Protea, thou, without a spell
Can transform Satan to a Michaell,
Like those Effigies (sometimes) Artists paint,
This side a loathsome Fiend, that side a Saint.
It Is not for love of thee, but least that shame,
Should swallow thy whole sex, I shroud thy name.
EPIG. 12. To James Nevill Esquire.
Believe me (Sir) this Town's all on a flame,
London we now, may well Lutetia name,
Perfumes without, but plasters are within,
(Take heed how with a City Dame you sin)
I Will sooner enter a Cole-mine, although
The reaking ventage were damd up, then go
To one of those, they Aetna always bear
Beneath the navell; tremble (Sir) and fear.
"O it is a fatal object, and a Dire,
"To see Saint Anthony triumph in fire.
You Will say, to whom then would you love profess,
TO a Country Damsel, in a City Dress.
EPIG. 13. The Letanie.
Hear me great Jove, from him professes Physic,
Yet has the Maunge, the Gout, the Cough, the Ptyssick.
Respond. Libera me, etc.

For how can he have skill for my disease.
That his own rebel Tumors cannot appease?
So from an Alchymist that is clothed in rags,
Yet of the wondrous working Stone makes braggs.
Respond. Libera me, and.

For he that cannot put fresh linen on,
Can hardly make Brass Gold, (as some have done.)
So from a Corpulent, or fat fed-Priest,
Who only minds to Sleep, to quaffe, and feast.
Respond Liberame, etc.

For he whose fulness, makes him foame and pant,
Lets his own soul and others starve for want.
EPIG. 14. On Saint Thomas.
THomas was diffident, the Scripture says.
Till at his fingers ends he had his Faith.
EPIG. 15. To my Friend Theodor Vaux.
IT is set down, by Heavens just Decree,
The Child of Riot, must be beggerie.
Take caution (Friend) for "that man spends with shame,
"That with his riches does consume his name.
EPIG. 16. Afflictions Beneficial.
IT is not for our good, in ease to rest,
"Man (like to Cassia) when bruiz'd is best.
EPIG. 17. The Incarnation of Jesus Christ our blessed Redeemer, narrated by a
Shepherd.
THis night
By Cynthias light
A Virgin has brought forth a son,
God, though clad in flesh and bone:
Prince of rest
For ever blessed,
A Virgin has brought forth a Child
Immaculate, and undefiled,
All the Troop
Of Prophets stoop,
All the harmonious Quire of Heaven,
Archangels, Angels, to other Seven;
Perfect man
His life a span
Like to us, is the Heir of Glory,
Whose Kingdom is untransitory.
EPIG. 18. An Acknowledgement.
THese Verses (Martial) I composed to be
Tapstry, for to be trodden on by thee;
Oh may thy Genius pardon my escapes,
Some are much famed, for being great men's Apes.
EPIG. 19. On my Self.
SOme look upon me, as one rude,
Quite erring in my Altitude,
For above Atlas Shoulders, I
Am placed, and all the world do eye,
When I took for me the earthly Sign
Of Scorpio, in's ascent did shine,
Just in the Planetary hour
Of Saturn, (who does ever lowre)
I viewd the light; it much does win me,
I have part of that Plannet in me.
No way facetious am I
To toyish mirth or Jollitie,
Yet in one dream I can compose
A Comedy, in Verse or Prose,
Behold the Action, apprehend
The Jest, and the quaint plot commend,
And so much of the sense partake,
As serv's to laugh my self awake.
EPIG. 20. Lydia Inviolabilis si nolit.
ERrat in Argutis puer irrequietus ocellis,
Blanditur Roseis Euphrosenia labris.
Candida lactentes colit usque Aglaia papillas,
Stat propter niveos pulchra Thalia pedes.
Invidiosa nimis servat sua regna Cythere,
Haec pateant nostris, haec precor una Jocis.
EPIG. 21. Ballad Poets.
THe Muses wear these patches on their Faces
To foil their Beauties, greater then the Graces.
EPIG. 22. Scylla and Charibdis.
SCylla's Dogs bark not more, nor yawn so wide
As Mortals against each other in their pride,
Rejoicing to augment each others woe,
Man is to Man Charybdis, his worst foe.
EPIG. 23. PEDRO, and RODERIGO, The one Franciscan, the other a Dominican Friar.
PEdro, and Roderigo traveling,
Came to the brink of a Religious spring,
But Pedro fearing for to wet his feet,
Prays Roderigo, if he think it meet,
Since he is barefoot, on his back to carry
Him over, and save charges of a Ferry,
Roderigo's willing, takes him on his back,
And being in the midst, him thus bespake,
Tell me good Brother, have you any Cash;
Poor Pedro fearing that he would him wash,
Replies I have, and mean to pay thee too,
(Not daring to return him answer, no;)
Which Roderigo hearing lets him fall
Ducking him over head, and ears, and all,
Saying, You know that by my order I,
Must bear no money, therefore, there e'ne lie.
EPIG. 24. Acrisius Enclosing his Daughter Danae.
Fool! do thou think thy Destiny to dare,
By hiding from thy Jealous eyes thy fear:
"Women are never wiser in their drifts,
"Then when by fortune forced unto their shifts.
'Had not Jove came to Danae in a shower,
'Her hot Lust had dissolved her brazen Tower.
EPIGRAMS.
THE SECOND BOOK.
EPIG. 1. Roberto Astonio, Equiti Poetae eximio.
TV Comes assiduus tristi mala cura dolori,
Et requie^, et somni munera grata negat.
Illa novos revocat, veteresque resuscitat ignes,
Illa omnem ex animo spem rapit una meo,
Illa facit tristem, desolatumque vag^^*
Luminaque in duram figere (...).
Quin etiam invit is lachrymas extorquet ocellis,
Pallorem in nitidas and jubet ire genas,
Et subita obducit macie miserabile corpus,
Sugit, et e venis sanguinis omne meis:
Haee est, haec memorem, quae me vetat ire, meoreum,
Haec est, haec memorem, quae vetat esse, mei.
EPIC. 2. Epitaph on I. P.
BUt are you sure he is dead, and did you hear
The Screitch-owls voice? else it is not true I fear,
Was the sky blasted and with thunder torn,
The Devil's seldom laid without a storm;
Yet like a fatal Comet though he is gone,
Has left behind a sad contagion.
EPIG. 3. Catalines conspiracy.
IT was thy praise, thou like a Chemist chose,
To work thy poisons in the smallest Dose,
Extract of Treason, Schisms Compendium,
Shorthand Sedition, and Rebellions Sum.
To thee the great Sejanus large soul fell,
As did great Pompey at Ericthos spell.
EPIG. 4. Confident Carrus.
THou say thy wife flies him as her last hour,
And he to win him to her has no power.
I like thou art so well conceited on her,
But know, her last hour still does come upon her.
EPIG. 5. Richard the Usurper.
THy active brains owed to Prometheus much,
Like Sulphur they caught flame at every touch.
Quick thy contrivance was, thy Lamprey eyes
Where there were none, could make discoueries,
Discord thy music was, and in thy Bed
Thou only slep'st, when Storms did rock thy Head.
EPIG. 6. To Mr. E. C. on his Spolario.
AS unsound men, who do with Fevers burn,
Do the best meats to their diseases turn:
So of all subjects, what was worst you chose,
Like a course searser, still the finest lose.
So the best viper wines, if you stir their lee,
And honey badly stilled will poison be.
EPIG. 7. The Spanish Armado.
NEptunes back cracked so great a weight to bear,
The Monsters of the Sea affrighted were,
Their overthrow does cause proud Spain to quake,
Crying Jove once a Swan, is now a Drake.
EPIG. 8. Borgias.
MOst excellent villain, thou that did do all,
And were more sin then we can think or call,
We now begin to love thee for thine ill,
As Drugsters Serpents which most venom spill.
And as from blackest clouds comes thunders light,
And the worst leprosy is always white:
So thy foul crimes are with this honor clad,
That to was thy glory to have been so bad.
EPIG. 9. De Amore.
SOlus Amor docuit contemnere dura pericla,
Cunctaque constanti pectore far mala;
Solus Amor, perque and tenebras jubet ire, viamque
Monstrat; et insidias non timuisse sinit.
EPIG. 10. These Times.
LEarning does live in penury, and bare,
While fools grow rich, and feed on daintiest fare.
EPIG. 11. To Claius.
CLaius, thou say, I write too mystical,
Had better write for to be read of all,
I know not, but if some not understand,
It Is sure cause Ignorance has most command;
But yet this is Aenigma unto me,
How thou should find out such a Mystery.
EPIG. 12. Ovid banished.
LOve break thy Bow, ye Muses sing no more,
For Ovids banished to the Pontick shore.
EPIG. 13. On the two admirable wits, Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher.
CEase Greece to boast of Aristophanes,
Or of Menander, or Euripides,
The Comic Sock, and Tragic Buskin we
Wear neatest here, in foreign Brittanie:
Or if you list to struggle for the Bays,
We Will fight with Beaumont's, and with Fletchers Plays.
EPIG. 14. Ovid, to Augustus Daughter in the Person of Corinna.
OVID.
SInce thou did deigne (Soul of my life)
Within these Walk's to dally,
Me thought I saw the Nine at strife,
All taxing Nasos folly.
CORINNA.
Tell them Augusta claims thy love,
Whose far superior looks,
Commands thy measures not to move,
And bids thee burn thy books.
OVID.
Should any to Augustus show
The triumph of my fate,
How should unhappy Ovid know
For to prevent his hate.
CORINNA.
Timorous fool dare thou adore
My shrine, yet fear to be
Marty'rd, as others heretofore
For Love, and Venerie.
EPIG. 15. To our British Bards.
TEll me Sons of Levi, who profess
More of the Gospel though you practice less;
How dare you Boanerges, Sons of Thunder,
Untwist Loves knot, and break that bond in sunder;
While in the Pulpit you revive old Jarrs,
And re-imbroyle the Kingdom in new wars;
Whiles you preach controverting points, and next
In parts divide the people with the text.
EPIG. 16. Palladium Homeri.
Virtue, was the Palladium Homer feigned
Kept Troy so long from sacking, and when gained
By the curled pated Greeks, then Illium fell,
(Juno conspiring with the powers of Hell)
Religion only brings peace and glory,
It is the surety of things transitory.
EPIG. 17. In Vini abusum.
NOn olim fatuo solers Pandora Epimetheo
Dira tot in clausa pixide damna tulit;
Quum fundo spes una imo subsidet, ut inde
Solamen miseris posset adesse males.
Quot vinum furias, quot tristia funera terris,
Morborum species quot tulit, atque neeis:
Quin o quin Divi perditis hoc vitium.
Quis tulit huc Satyros? vel quis madidos Silenos?
Quisve Corymbiferi Sistra. Scyphosque Dei?
EPIG. 18. To my Friend Mr. E. R.
FRiend, thou art far above me, and do slight
Poetic Lays, wherein fond I delight:
For thou, whilst I do Poems scrible, take
Thy seat in Bacchus Temple, where thou make
Lyaeus flow, and quaff'st a health to those,
Who love (like thee) to drink and pledge in prose:
Yet at thy call the Muses come, it is strange,
That when thou will, thou can thy liquor chang,
Aand tipple Aganippe, I must learn
Thy Art, but first would thy great gain discern
EPIG. 19. To Mr. Davenport on his Play called the Pirate.
MAke all the cloth you can, haste, haste away,
The Pirate will overtake you if you stay:
Nay, we will yield our selves, and this confess,
Thou Rival'st Shakespeare, though thy glory's less.
EPIG. 20. A Pacification.
BY Moses Law, he that desired to take
His Captive to his bed, meaning to make
His slave his Wife, must clean cut of her hair,
Give her new garments, and her nails must pare:
So let the Church of Rome repudiate
Her Superfluities; find her pristine State,
We two will be one flesh, hate banished quite,
She shall be unto us an Israelite.
EPIG. 21. Francis Spira.
DIvines, and dying men may talk of Hell,
But in my heart her several torments dwell
EPIG. 22. Of Fame.
Often have I wondered at it, yet it is so,
Fame, when she list her Trumpet loud will blow,
Renowning some with wealth and eminence,
Only for folly, and for Impudence;
And those, whose merits ought on earth ner'ed it
She buries with them in obscurity.
EPIG. 23. Palinodia.
AH me me! hoc igitur fuit,
Quod Lymphae latices olim Aganipidis
Propter, dulcisonae Chaelys
Pulsavi digitis fila trementibus,
Vt dulci Dominae meae
Tam gratus modo jam qui been vixeram,
Quo nullus potior dabat
Cervici tenerae brachiolum teres:
Nunc divisus ab arbitrae
Often vitae, at que necis, lumine Lydiae.
EPIG. 24. Of Honor.
A Time there was (but ah) that time is gone,
When precious Honor was bestowed on none
But such as for their valiant Acts did merit,
Or for their Learning Honor to inherit:
But Dastards now the Badge of Knighthood bear,
And Fools like to the wise respected are.
EPIG. 25.
On the wondrous accident happening in Delf, a Town in Holland (much
frequented by Storks) which Town being accidentally set on fire, the old
Storks perceiving the Flame to approach their Nests, attempted to carry their
Young ones away, but could not, they were so weighty, which perceiving, they
never ceased with their wimgs spread to cover them, till both the old ones and
young ones perished together.

THe white hu'd Stork, that never touches bough,
Whom once the foolish Frogs did King allow,
Seeing her young in flames, oh how it pains her,
Shall she for them adventure life to lose,
Pity bids her try, but fear restraines her,
Yet pity her fear so on overthrowes,
And so one tomb, with her poor young, contains her.
Give place Arabian Bird, thou seek'st new breath,
By being burnt, but she sought only death:
Learn hence Medea, from an Augurs tongue,
To cherrish, and not to destroy thy young.
EPIG. 26. An old Woman Letcherous.
GIve over Beldame now to sport,
The young men will not thank thee for it,
Pull'st thou thy garments never so hie,
They will not stoop for to descrie;
Prepare for to encounter Death,
And try to blast him with thy breath.
EPIG. 27. Ben. Johnsons Play, called the silent Woman.
THe reason why this play's not counted common
Is, 'cause it does present the silent woman.
EPIGRAMS
THE THIRD BOOK.
EPIG. 1. The Sectaries of these times.
LIke to Goliath they do make their brags,
Yet of the people are the taggs, and rags:
Men of small knowledge, though they love to bawll,
Less Honesty, Discretion none at all.
In their attempts Pragmaticall,
In their humors Fantastical,
In their profession Pharisaicall,
Their Books Hypocritical,
Their opinions Anabaptisticall,
Their Doctrine Schismatic,
Their words Angelical,
Their deeds Diabolical.
Yet these (oh England) are thy Gods, o Dire!
This Ignis lambens is thy holy Fire.
EPIG. 2. A Contented Citizen called Horn.
SUre thy Progenitors all Cuckolds were,
Why should thou ^grudge, like them the horn to bear?
Remove thy fear, thy wife's a comely Dame,
And does report thou art so cool and tame,
She in thy body has not least delight,
Thou not of strength to sat her appetite:
Why do thou let thy Rooms to Gallants brave
If thou intend'st thy Wife alone to have?
Thy name is ominous, and sure I think,
For money thou, at thy Wives faults do wink.
EPIG. 3. To Penelope.
Why should not thou as far renowned be,
As ever was the chaste Penelope
Wife to Vlissis? this I dare averr,
By contraries thou imitatest her.
EPIG. 4. Sua Flamma.
FLamma mihi dolor est, flamma est mihi summa voluptas,
Flamma mihi curae, spes mihi flamma meae:
Flamma mihi furor est, flamma est medicina furoris,
Delitiumque animi, delquiumque mei:
Flamma mihi calor, and simul est inamabile frigus,
Flamma mihi risus, flamma mihi Iachrymae:
Flamma mihi labor, et dulc is grata aura quietis,
Flamma est quod fugiam, flamma quod usque petam:
Flamma est quod nullo me vulnere sauciat ^grum,
Flamma est quod string it me sine compedious:
Flamma mihi sine luce dies, sine nocte tenebrae,
Flamma agit Ingenium, flamma premitque, meum:
Flamma est quod mihi me raptat, quod me mihi reddit.
EPIG. 5. To Clarissa
WHat though thy eyes
(Clarissa) do surprise
My yielding heart,
It Is in the power of Art,
Alcon concludes for me
To quit this Lunacie:
What words can cheer
The wounded Dear
The Herb being gone
He Would nibble on?
I burn, I burn,
I mourn, I mourn,
My self I tire
In ye and fire,
Though Juno gave
Her gesture brave,
Pallas her skill
Unto thy will,
Venus her Ceston,
Yet my blessed one,
Fair Hellens pride
But terrifide
Her self at last
Her splendor past.
And Anaxerete
Mourns Iphys bitterly,
And Lydia plains
In ruthful pains,
With much rebuke
The Frizland Duke;
Thy lovely face
Can find no grace
With Charon in his Boat;
Amongst others thou must floate:
To him all are
Alike, the foul as fair,
Prithee assent,
In Hell there is punishment
For these, who love to try
Their lovers till they die:
Else Danaes gyrls by turn,
Ere this had filled their Urn;
The Gorgons howling there
At first were Maidens fair,
From love they were estranged,
Therefore to Haggs were changed,
So bright their beauty shone
They turned all men to stone,
That is the power of Cupid
Made them dull and stupid,
But no relief would they
Afford for to allay
A Lovers passion,
Therefore in uncouth fashion
Their once fair tresses
A Snake-haird front expresses:
But the Babylonion THISBE.
Maid,
And Hero who obeyed
LEANDER.
Him of Abydos, Semele
Calistho, and fair Ariadne,
By power Divine
Bright Constellations shine.
Yield, and I Will out-play
HORACE.
Him of Venusia,
Striking mute
The Alcian Lute,
My music shall constrain
The sad HERACLITUS.
Ephesian
In mirth for to delight
Beyond the DEMOCRITUS.
Abderite:
It is in me
To give Eternity
Unto thy Name,
Or else to blast the same:
All that I crave
Is Love, for Love to have.
EPIG. 6. To the most excellent Poet, Sir William Davenant.
What though some shallow Sciolists dare prate,
And scoffing thee; Apollo nauseate:
What Venus has snatched from thee, cruelly,
Minerva, with advantage does supply:
Johnson is dead, let Sherly stoop to Fate,
And thou alone, art Poet Lawreate.
EPIG. 7. Sperandum esse.
QVid jam est, quod ante non se
Invenit esse; quid jam est
Quod non erit; futuri
Revolutione ab aevi:
Quod jam vides vbique
Subito recedet; and non
Existet idem, at illud
Quod non erat, subinde
Exurget, hinc peribit,
Ita nil vetus novumve est,
Speremus ergo; non si
Male nunc and olim erit sic.
EPIG. 8. Of Sillius.
SIllius, himself does to the Stars apply,
And says, they are the Book of Destiny,
List he to ride in's Coach but to Mile-End
By the Almanac he does the hour attend.
If his eye-corner itch, the remedy
From calculation of's Nativity
He fetches, but at this I wonder much,
How he should break his neck, whose skill was such.
EPIG. 9. The fall of the Druinian Oak.
THe clap of this dire thunder sounds
From Ganges, to Aleides bounds:
Earths Monarks stand amazed all,
To hear an Act so Tragical;
They Rest forsake, Repast forbear,
And do the self same fortune fear.
EPIG 10. To my Friend Lucius Varrus.
HOw can I choose, but like mount Aetna glow,
Though I Carussa made my drink each day,
Or fed on frigid lettice, and lay low
Upon the humble earth, Love to allay:
Her skin for whiteness passes Atlas snow,
Her cheeks the Roses that in Jury grow:
Her crisped locks do out shine Lybian Gold,
Her teeth the pearls, in stately Orm^^s sold:
Her lips as Cherries, breath as ince^se slow,
Her eyes as to pure Crystal Heavens show;
Her tongue, like Lydian Music, does delight,
Then how can I (Friend Varrus) want her sight;
Her presence can alone preserve my breath,
Her loss (to me) is Famine, War, and Death.
EPIG. 11. De Cupidine arante.
VAcum puer pharetram
Positoque liber arcu
Caepit repents curvi
Prensare dentem aratri
Verum movere terrae
Glebas Deo volenti,
Torvus per arva taurus
Quae situs, inque toto
Armenta nulla campo
Iratus ergo patris
Domum intu^tur igneam
Et opus quid, inquit, orac
Terrarum obire nobis,
Quum servet ipse Olympus
Taurum mihi to^ante.
EPIG. 12. Carbo the Courtier.
CArbo a great Astrologer is grown,
The Plannets motions unto him are known,
And all the Signs, he most judiciously
Observ's, black patches under either eye
He places, and so variable proves,
He them misplaces, as the Sign removes:
Nor Warlike Mars, nor potent Jupiter,
Were Rulers at his birth, but only her
Whom Paris.
Alexander gave the Apple to,
For which Saturniae wrought the Trojans woe:
That fatal Apple which fair Illion fired,
Is mightily by this Musk cat desired,
Variety of Females make his skin
Look parched, and all his marrow fry within.
EPIG. 13. On a Lady singing.
What Heavenly sounds inchant my ears,
Passing the Music of the Spheres?
Me thinks I hear a Mellodie
Better then Arions harmony,
The quavering of a well tuned voice
Making a most Celestial noise.
Angel-like Quires that sing in Heaven,
The Muses Nine, the Plannets Seven
Stand still, and listening do admire
These songs, equal to Apollos Lyre.
EPIG. 14. To my noble Friend Van Velsen, the merited praise of the famous
City of Amsterdam.
BElgias bright glory we may call
This Town, who from the Rivers fall
Called DAM, has name; the People never
For ought save clothes, and meat did care,
Hence Amsterdam, and with the name
Its Fortune has increased, and Fame:
Known to far Coasts, and Continents,
And may well, for the good it vents,
It Is Rich in corn, in Flesh, and Fish,
And all that Heart can think or wish,
And to speak truth it seems to hold
Tage, Hermus, and Pactolus gold.
EPIG. 15. Epitaph on Prince Henry.
HEre lies Prince Henry, I dare say no more,
Lest after times this Sepulcher Adore.
EPIG. 16. The Lady E. D. had her Picture drawn thus.
IN her fair hand just overthwart her womb
A green bay-branch, one sprig whereof did come
Up to her Heart, another downward ran,
Shading the place of procreation:
And cross the branch these words all might epsy,
"Fetched from the Fields, Here let me never die.
Upon the upper sprig was written, HITHER,
Upon the lower, (who would not come) THITHER.
EPIG. 17. Joves Cup Bearer.
SWeet Ganimed, snatched fvom the Idean Hill
By Joves appointment, Nectar for to fill
Unto him, and the rest of the Dieties,
The Allegory fitly this implies.
"Ganimed, or the understanding Soul,
"The beauteous mind not clogged with error foul,
"(So drawing near the nature of great Jove)
"Is raped to Heaven by his Eternal love.
EPIG. 18. Wicked Myrha.
What will none serve for to allay thy fire
Is there no young man abler then the Sy^
For to content thee? See, she has her will,
Her Father sports with her all night, until
Aurora blushes, thou had never more need
(Lady) to leave old Tythons bed with speed,
See the old man, when he beholds her face,
Knows it is his Daughter, and bewailes his case.
Her crime he would expiate with her hot blood,
Behold she flies into a neighboring wood,
Not worthy for to breath, the Gods Decree,
She is transformed to a weeping Tree.
EPIG. 19. To Cupid.
GOd of hearts Prithee be gone,
Forsake my homely Mansion,
Thy Diety is all to great
On Parsley for too make thy meat,
Such, as to my Lares I
Offer up nocturnally;
Lucullus does not harbor here,
But Cato with his beard austere.
EPIG. 20. Homers Prophecy of our Saviors Incarnation and Passion, etc.
Odiss. 12. THE FABLE.
THe Inferior Gods (says Homer) once did vie
With Saturns Son, for the Supremacy,
His Balls, and flashie fumes they overcome,
And doom him to the Mare Mortuum;
Ore which no bird what e're unstruck, with death
Can stretch her wings, so poisonous a breath
The Lake evaporates, it ever fries
Ejecting Bitumen unto the skies,
Therefore the Grecian Bards thought fit to name
This Pond Avernus, to express the same
In its true nature, here the once great Jove
Sit's a sad exile, no one dares to prove
A danger for his rescue, he must lie
Secluded here, until he starve and die.
But the Olympic Thunderer must not so
Perish in the dark, twelve Doves together go
Conglomerating in a winged dance
Over the lake of Sodom they advance,
To the distressed God they Nectar bring,
Which tasted, He again is Lord and King
Of Heaven and earth, his twelve deliverers, he
(One where of fell into the dreadful Sea)
Before him calls, their number he makes even,
And gives them residence, near him in Heaven.
THE ALLEGORY.
MIraculous Prediction, sugered song,
Wonderously warbled by an Heathens tongue,
Christ the true Jove, the Lord and King of Heaven,
By the Decree of Providence was driven
As't were in exile, doomed man's form to take,
Our Grandsyres Garden-Sin to expiate;
Twelve Dovelike men (regard their innocence)
(Not tutord in the Schole of eloquence)
When by stern Tyrants rage, Christ's sacred Truth
Lay gasping, Killed in'ts Nonage, ere grown youth,
From their mellifluous mouths such Nectar flows,
The infant Verity a strong man grows,
And Jesus is acknowledged the sole Lord
Of Heaven and Earth, Judas a deed abhorred
(Put on by unresisted power of Fate)
To his damnation, dares to perpetrate,
Into Avernus falls, (black Barathrum
The wickeds burning Mare Mortuum)
But the worlds Architector does supply
That loss, and makes up the Society;
When in the shape of fiery tongues his spirit
Finds a fit man, the office to inherit,
Who now in one mixed concord jointly sing,
Tryumphant Paeans to their Heavenly King.
EPIG. 21. To Mr. Glascow, a solution of his Question, what Wit is, and who
ought chiefly to drink Sherrie.
He Is witty, and he only, that can speak
Things little greatly, and things dull and weak
In their own entity, can so embelish
With flowery eloquence, that they shall relish
The nicest pallat, can make Barren things
And empty, honored as the Acts of Kings,
Rendering them fruitfully, and fully too,
The man (my Glascow) that these things can do
May be called witty, for his skill Divine,
And worth the favor of the God of Wine.
EPIG. 22. Joves Raping Europa.
IF we believe the witty Sul^ian, Jove,
Was pleased (in shape) a lustful ^ull to prove
In all proportion, (sure) as strong as he
Leap't the prodigious lustful Pasiphae)
For fair Europas sake; great Jove thy brow
Should have had horns, when Io was a Cow.
EPIG. 23. Lucians memorial.
COuld Charon choose but laugh alow'd,
To see thy Soul amongst others crowd,
(Who with such art did him deride)
To have passage to the other side,
Or were thou not so much abhord
By him, he threw thee over board,
Hating thy Trunk should lade his Wherrie,
Now in Cocytus fishes worrie
Thy Ravens Soul, (Fishes in Form)
As once thy carrion lump was torn
On earth, thou can not now aspire
To carp at the Meonian Lyre;
Excellent Rogue erect thy eyes,
See all the deathlesse Dieties
Laugh at thy dolor, and esteem
It just, because thou did blaspheme.
EPIG. 24. The transformation of Narcissus.
NArcissus, once a Cupid, add but wings,
Who too much trusted to deceitful springs,
A flower now to the flood enclines, and so
By that which was his ruin, he does grow:
While with Narcissus on our selves we doat,
We lose our selves, and act we know not what.
EPIG. 25. It Is money makes the man.
NOw only wealth prevails, let him be base
Descended, of a vile and vulgar race,
Be he a sot, a fool, yea a mere swine,
Yet if he have but money, and go fine,
He shall be honored by our sons of earth,
As the best he that comes of noble birth:
Be he debauched, yet he is a second Cato,
Money makes him divine, he equals Plato:
He Is Virtuous, Wise, well borne, and what you will,
That can with money, both his pockets fill.
EPIG. 26. To Mrs. Rhodes.
SItting, reading, ever spinning,
Knitting, kneading, never linning,
Painting, progging, ever doing,
Fainting, cogging, ever woing
For knacks, as Girdles, Ribbons, Lace,
Striving at Feasts for the best place,
Yet still at hatred, spited, loathed,
As unto Lust, and Hell betrothed;
Well may it be if truly Bernard swears,
That Devils sway thy eyes, and stop thy ears.
EPIG. 27. Epitaph on a young man that dyed on his Wedding Day.
HYmen has lost his honor, here does lie
A young man, who as soon as wed, did die.
EPIG. 28. On the death of Mary Queen of Scots.
THe doom of Judges fore appointed,
Racking the Law beyond all reason
To death condemned a Queen anointed,
Without allegiance finding Treason:
The Axe to do the execution
Shunned to cut of a head once crowned,
The Hangman lost his Resolution,
To kill a Queen so much renound:
Remorse in hangmen, and in steel,
Yet Judges no remorse to feel?
O henceforth may there never be seen
By English eyes, a headless Queen.
EPIG. 29. To my much honored uncle M. Paul Clapham.
Why bring'st thou not to light thy worthy lays?
That we may crown thee with a wreath of Bays
But thou art wiser far (alas) then I,
And scorn'st to have those judge thy poesy:
Whose sordid souls cannot afford them Art
Of Hopkins maimed Psalms to sing a part,
Who take the lines to pieces that they read,
Wound some, wire-drawing others, and do need
A Prompter, M. P's, Sonnets to con over,
But let not these, Dear Sir, I you implore
Hinder the wise from what they else might gain,
Who shall with shouts reward your learned pain:
" For though we cannot tie the tongues of Fools,
" 'Twere madness therefore to pull down the Schools.
EPIG. 30. On Sir Phillip Sydneys Decease.
When Venus.
Aericina saw brave Sydney die,
She threw her purple Ceston clean away:
(As when Adonis bathed in blood did lie
At her fair feet) weeping, she thus did say,
For Mars I plain, and not for him alone,
In Sydney, Mars, and A name of Apollo.
Sminthus both are gone.
EPIG. 31. Disorder the forerunner of Ruin.
BOth bodies Politic, and Natural,
By this ill-shaped enemy do fall:
The Ottoman Empire.
Christendomes whip, who now does so are so high,
By this in her own ruin low shall lie,
Factions those Comma's are, ordained by God,
When he will bring Kingdoms to their period.
EPIG. 32. A journey to Totnam Court.
IT was the time when Lady VER had dight
The earth with garments green, and pleasant flowers,
When Virgins for to walk the fields delight,
There for to sport them with their Paramours.
I (with a crew of those, whose youthful blood
Did swiftly glide within them) went to walk,
All of us being in a merry mood,
Joves thigh-borne son compelled our tongues to talk.
With us a train of Nymphs, in garments gay,
Whose beauties dimmed the Sun, did pass along,
And unto Totnam Court we took our way,
To hear sweet Philomell's delitious song.
But so it hap'd, the Heavens began to lowre,
While thunder rent the Air, the lightning flame
Shot from the Clouds, who 'gan amain to power:
Jove squeezed their spungie sides, and now we came
For shelter, to a pleasant seated Grove,
Whose branches met; there each man did embrace
A Beauty, and I think the Queen of Love,
Had taken up that for her residing place.
For er'e we parted thence the Lasses brave,
Had what Aeneas unto Dido gave.
EPIG. 33. Valor always accompanied with Love.
THey swell with LOVE, that are with VALOVR pressed,
VENUS DOVES, in a headpiece wish to rest
EPIG. 34. To Mr. K. R.
IF thou art injured, thank thy own deceit,
Serpents prove Dragons, when they Serpents eat,
EPIG. 35. Lodowick and Artesia.
LOrd Lodowick with Artesia walking was,
And happening through a Galery to pass
Where many Antic Statues they epsy,
Some on their feet, some on the ground to lie:
Artesia, whose bright eyes about did rove,
Espies Sylvanus naked, as in a Grove
With pendents hanging ore his privities,
(Which were carved out, of a most wondrous size)
Quoth then Artesia, (Lodowick) who is this,
That looks so gravely, and yet naked is?
He answers (Madam) verily to me
One of the six Clerks he does seem to be.
Why think you so said she? said he, look then,
And see his mighty Inkhorne, and his Pen.
EPIG. 36. The baseness of the present age.
1
O That (if Fate so pleased I now were one
The Palfray, that same chaste and wondrous wight
Bestrod, and cleft the Air, BELLEROPHON,
Or in Med^as Chariot took my flight
2
To some strange Country not inhabited
With humans, but a wild and barren waste,
Whereas the The fruit of this tree, according to Homer, whosoever tasted,
quite forgot his Country, and what ever before happened to him.
LOTOS Tree, his boughs does spread,
Whose fruit l'de prize 'bove all by men embraced.
3
For that rare fruit, my most ungrateful soil,
Would make me soon forget, and I never more
Should back return amongst Furies for to toil,
Who (with fond Mydas) wish for golden oar:
4
And nothing else esteem, for should they hear
Apollo strike his strings, (unto their sense)
Even Rustic Pan the Laurel wreath should wear,
And before Sol have the pre-eminence:
I grovell on the ground, and fools do stride
Over my bulk, and on my back do ride.
EPIG. 37. On the death of that Incomparable Hero, Sir Walter Rawleigh Knight.
LIke to the Athenians, when with furious ire,
Against learned Socrates they did conspire,
After his death themselv's were like to slay,
For sorrow they had made him so away:
And having carved his Statue out in brass,
Erected it within their Market place,
And to him offered Myrhe, and Spicerie,
Adoring him, as if some Dietie.
So we, while thou on earth with us did live,
Slighted thy worth, not having hearts to give
Thee thanks, and honor for that History of the World.
gift of thine,
The lovely Issue of thy brains divine:
But now thou art not with us, we look on
Thy book, and wonder at thee being gone.
Rest sacred spirit, while thy work shall be
Devoutly honored by Posterity.
EPIG. 38. On Mr. Sands inimitable translation of Ovids Metamorphosis.
TEll me did thou converse with Ovid's Spirit
Converse, said I, most sure thou did inherit
His Soul, I now will credit thy relation,
That souls transplanted are by transmigration:
For when I read thy work, and it compare
With Naso's own, to me it does appear
Thou have outdone him, and his Latin Verse,
(Pure and unspotted) while thou do rehearse
In our own tongu, is graced and made more high
Then when to was absent from each vulgar eye.
EPIG. 39. The power of money, to Sir Edward Buzbey Knight.
EVen the Gods with gold are fed,
Jove rests in a golden Bed:
Gold helps in peace, prevails in Wars,
Causes debate, compoundeth Jarres,
It bears with it such potent sway,
Earth, Air, and Sea, to it obey:
It breaks down Towers, (such power it claims)
And Cities wrapped in eager flames:
To give me gold, would any be
Inclined, he in my Poesy
(Which 'twixt my fingers -- thus -- I streine)
Should find a bright and golden vein.
EPIG. 40. A Simile.
THe Frogs will sing, though wanting wool or hair,
Therefore to them we Poets may compare.
EPIG. 41. An Apollogie to Sir Thomas Engham.
SIR,
BLame me not although I flag,
My wings are wet, I needs must lag,
I taste ('it is true) the holy spring,
But then am forced Swan-like to sing
My own sad Fate, Swans should have fair
Weather to sing in, clogged with care
Who Is he can clime Pernassus Hill?
I Am with my Fortune jarring still:
The reason why I am so hoarse,
Lost to my singing, and discourse.
EPIG. 42. To Sir Alexander Wroth, of the most noble Order of the Garter
Knight, a Resolution to his Demand, etc.
AS Sarums beauteous Countess in a Dance
Let fall her spangled Garter, that great Edward 3.
King,
Who laid such powerful claim to fertile France,
By accident himself took up the String;
The Origin from hence that order came,
O high Original -- oh monstrous shame --
That famed installment is eclipsed, and we
Give it to mean and vile a Pedigree:
Truth is victorious, The 1.
Richard (that brave King)
At Acon pleased to tie a leather string
About each Soldiers Leg, with his own hand,
Thence came this order (famous in our Land)
But (Sir) I leav't to you, pray choose you whether
You Will have the Countess Sylke, or Soldiers leather.
EPIG. 43. On the probable continuance of these Civil Wars, the Scot, and
Irish not reduced.
OH now after a little ease
We must again our weapons weild,
Be It so, since war must purchase Peace
Lets take the Field.
But see (oh wretched Land) how thin
And barren thou of Natives art,
Thy much presumption is thy sin,
Thou need's must smart.
Money the nerv's of War is wanting,
Yet thou another Shock must stand,
Thy wounded heart full sore lies panting,
Oh dying Land.
The fleering Hollander, and France,
Rejoice to see Aerynnis reign,
That thou must lead a second dance,
To thy own bane.
Ye Heavens, must Marius once more rise
From the Minturnian lake,
And Scilla horrid death devise
His ire to slake.
Naseby.
Pharsalias fields our eyes have seen,
And must Philippie's battle end
The Harvest, the corn yet but green,
Oh Heaven defend.
EPIG. 44. King Arthur.
GReat Arthur worthy Fame, but that
Thy Acts are told by those who chat
Of Hamptons cutthroat, and the Knight
Of the Red Rose, (that sanguine wight)
The errors of some Monkish pen
Does wound thy honor, far more then
The Saxons could thy body; he,
That killed such truths with Forgerie,
Deserv's to have his hand lop't off,
Thy legend is but wise men's scoff,
When truth and falsehood mingled lie,
All Is falsehood to Posterity;
Without Fabulous Legends.
There Is truth enough in thy fair story
For ever to enshrine thy Glory.
EPIG. 45. Lots Wife turned to a Pillar of Salt.
THis is a Sepulcher, a Body too,
A Sepulcher or Body choose you whether,
A Riddle strange, one, yet distinctly two,
A Sepulcher and Body both together:
This fatal fortune fell to Niobe,
Yet this the odds; this the more Savorie.
The end of the third Book.
EPIGRAMS.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
EPIG. 1. On the death of I. P.
NOne di'de more grieved, we all lament thy Fate,
So as we do our Sins, which we most hate.
EPIG. 2. Sir Philip Sydneys Arcadia.
SIr, you are at the Races end before us,
But must acknowledge thanks to HELIODORVS,
Your Romance is most rare, yet half it is fame
Had been eclipsed, had any other name
Troubled the Title Page, each Ladies Kidney
Twitter'd to hear but of the Name of Sydney.
EPIG. 3. To Doctor Bulwer, on his artificial CHANGELING.
Were Naso now alive, and should he see
Thy Book full fraught with Ingenuitie,
He would write over his changed shapes anew,
Or scorn to wear the Chaplet that is thy due:
Those that read thee, and find no change at all,
Are Changelings, not by Art, but Natural.
EPIG. 4. Ad Sodales.
STellas polus micantes,
Orbem orbis, ignis auras,
Auraeque aquas, aquaeque
Terrae Sinus capacis,
Homines ferasque terra
Complectitur, fovetque:
Quid ergo me decoram
Vetatis, o Sodales,
Complectier Puellam.
EPIG. 5. On Lucians true History.
THat there were Snake-foote Giants, that a Ring
Obscured the person of the Lydian King,
That Ixion got a race of half horsemen,
That Hercules drew Cacus from his Den,
That Vulcans shop's in the Island Lemnos, where
He forgeth fireballs for the Thunderer,
That the two Corgons could transform to stone
All those unhappy men they looked upon;
Are things so credible compared with those,
Weaved by thy wily hand in looser prose,
I will believe them all, and as I read
Register each' an Article of Creed:
Great Lord of Lying, I applaude thy wit,
But wish none, save thy self, may Father it.
EPIG. 6. AN HYMN TO BACCHUS. To Sir THOMAS ENGHAM.
YVie decked God, with dangling hair,
Unto thy Rites we make repair,
As is thy Right
This Gloomie Night.
Thou that have thy tresses bound
With Vernall flowers, and Miter crowned,
Now curiously
In knots thy tresses tie.
As when of thy step-dame affraide
Thou rarely counterfeit'st a maid,
Come hither dressed,
In The robes and naked breast.
Those Nations who do Ganges drink,
And slide in cold Araxis brink,
Could not thee behold
In thy Chariots rooff'd with gold.
Untamed Lions dragg thy Carre,
Then Hyrcian Tigers fiercer far,
Silenus on's lean Jade
With thee himself does shade.
Drunk Priests thy Orgies celebrate,
Basarian Froes upon thee wait
With INO, the Nereides,
And thy Aunt in sacred Seas.
The Stranger Boy there make's abode,
Thy Son PALEMON (held a God)
Pactolus thy burden tried,
(Whose waves bright gold do hide)
Thy power, Lycurgus Kingdom knows,
Zedacians too, where Boreas blows,
On hoarie trees that shake
Ysicles, in Moeotis lake.
Those under the Arcadian starr,
The Northern and slow Waggoner
Sound thy applause in the skies,
Lustiest of the Dieties.
Naxos, girt with Aegean wave,
A bed to Ariadne gave,
Her loss repaired by thee:
Oh let thy pleasures be
Sent hither by some frantic hand,
Let us drink deep at thy command,
Set open thy flowing Springs,
Create us potent Kings.
Thou art our LAETHE, we prefer
Thee too, for our REMEMBRANCER,
Come not armed Cap-a-pe
Lapethites we would not be.
O come not frowning we implore,
Let not thy surly Lions roar,
Messagians quaffe Beasts blood,
None but thine can do us good.
That so the watchman, and his bill
At Christs-Church corner may stand still:
Our Drawer fly his Fate,
Who fears a broken pate, etc.
Not finished.

EPIG. 7. To LILLY the Starre-Gazer.
What weather waits upon the Hyades,
Orions progress, and the Pleiades,
Arcturus and his Sons, with the two Bears,
Cynthias revolv's, the motions of the Spheres,
And what ACHILLES.
Pelides CHIRON.
Schoolmaster does do;
Whether the Sun (so bright to humane view)
Be not a sumpe of matter, made red hot
With fire, (at first by fervent heat begot?)
And whether pale-faced Cynthia so unstable,
Be not a Region, (though inhabitable?)
What Astrorum Cultor.
Zoroastes, and the Chaldes taught,
And what Egyptian Ptolomey has brought
To light, thou know (Oh Emperick Divine)
Predicting with the liver of a Swine.
EPIG. 8. Nihil omni part beatum.
DVlcius harmonia Coeli quid credimus esse,
Est tamen a resonis sors quoque dura polis.
Sole quid utilius? tamen idem corpora frangit,
Quid face lucidius noctis? at illa levis:
Munera cunctorum tulerat Pandora Deorum,
Quae pestes homini, quae mala sola dedit.
Deem tamen superis connexos orbibus orbs,
Non homo, non quadrupes, piscis and Ales erit:
Solemn aufer, nox una oculis erit obvia nostris,
Deem facem Phaebes, causaque noctis erit.
Non Pandoram homini est hominem nocuisse put andum,
Japetioniadae, cor sine mente fuit:
Cuncta nocent, prosunt re, nil sine labe bonoque,
Da mihi pro damnis basia, Nympha, tuis.
EPIG. 9. DEDALUS, and ICARUS, A DIALOGUE.
DEDALUS. Why striv'st thou to salute the Sun,
Soaring above thy Sire?
(Dear boy) Sols radient luster shun,
Thy wings cannot brook his fire.

ICARUS. To sport thus 'twixt the Air and Sea,
Oh how it glads my sense,
To doubt a danger, seems to me
But foolish diffidence.

DEDALUS. From cruel Minos, Cretan Tower,
Have I escaped by skill,
To see these Waves my Son devour,
(Rash youth) then use thy Will.

ICARUS. Now up unto Olympic Jove
I Will take my speedy f^ight,
These Pinnions were not made to move,
But in the Angels sight.

DEDALUS. Descend (fond youth) ere't be too late,
Thy waxen wings do fry,
Thy wretched Father wailes thy fate,
"Those must fall low, mount high.

ICARUS. Oh Father (see) I fall, I fall,
And plunge into the deep,
"This Destiny must wait on all
"That in no Medium keep.

DEDALUS. So drops some erring Star, farewell
Dear Icarus, thy Fame
Shall not with thee find parallel,
This Sea shall bear thy name.

EPIG. 10. To Clio, having but begun my Faerie King.
OMuse, what do thou whisper in my ear?
What thou suggests to me I dare not hear
Find thee an abler Agent, alas I
Am all unfit for Warlike Poesy,
To sing the Acts of Heroes, and compile
The Deeds of Kings, in a full heightened style,
Is such a task I dare not undergo,
How to begin, or end, I do not know:
And more, if Spencer could not escape the spite
Of tougues malevolent, whose gentle spright
Prompted him, so meek as never man
Before him could, nor (I think) ever can,
I then shall (sure) be bitt to death, but yet
If thou command that I forward set,
I will not be rebellious, but desire,
Thoult warm my bosom with thy hottest fire.
EPIG. 11. To Judge Jenkins.
SIr be content, it grieves not me at all,
The Gospel Cajold, that the Law should fall.
EPIG. 12. To the Illustrious Cardinal Mazerine, his Victory lately obtained
over the Spanish Army under the Archduke Leopold.
NOw have thou silenced Slander, pared the claws
O'th Blatant Beast, and given Gallia cause
To curse her fond misprission, and apply
Her self to thee, (great Lord of Loyalty)
Not long ago it was hoped a fine pretense
Should send thee to the Land of Diffidence,
-- But by thy skill
The Scene is changed, ascend (great Sir) until
Thy loyal head knock against the arched sky,
While the Spain, anciently called Iberia.
Iberians howl thy memory.
EPIG. 13. To Mr. E. C. the Lawyer.
THou have a voice so sharp, so shrill, and peircing,
When thou art Littleton, or Cook rehearsing,
That though thy beard bespeake thee man, thy tongue
Proclaims thee woman, or that thou had wrong
Beneath the navell, I conclude that Fate,
Shaped thee both to conceive, and generate.
EPIG. 14. All is not Gold that Glisters.
GLorie's like Glow-womres, afarre-off shine clear,
But have nor heat, nor light, if looked too near.
EPIG. 15. A Catholic Medicine to cure the Passion of Love.
HArd fare will famish Love, if that not do,
Time, and long absence will impair thy woe:
View others beauties, if that will not speed,
Then take a Halter, that will do the deed.
EPIG. 16. To Mr. E. G.
YOu gave me Gold, I did accept your gift,
But give me leave for to refuse your drift.
EPIG. 17. A Dialogue maintained by five, viz. the Poet, Clio, Poverty,
Ignorance, Mammon.
CLIO. HIther direct thy steps, descend this Cave,
Castalia called here, thou a place shall have
To hear our Harmony, here Homer sat,
When he his high immortal Illiads wrote,
Here Orpheus penned his Hymns, here Maro sung
Aeneas Travells with a golden tongue:
Here Pindar, and Anacreon did devise
Their Odes, which since none er'e could equalize:
Here Flaccus, Naso, Spencer, has been seen,
I helped the last to frame his Faerie Queen:
Here make thy self Immortal, taste this spring,
Which will inform thee like some God to sing,
And though (perhaps) thou taste of some affliction,
It shall be sweetened by our Benediction.

POVERTY. If to her charms thou listen, then with me
Thou must expect torn Rags, and Penury,
For to converse with want in some dark Den,
Shunning, and shunned of all other men,
Thy whole life one continued Scene of carke,
Leaving the world despised, and in the dark.

POET. Twixt Scilla and Charydis, thus I stand,
Not knowing which to take on either hand,
This way my Genius wills me for to go,
But wise foreseeing caution answers, no.

IGNORANCE. Look this way, erring mortal, learn to know
What gratitude to me the World does owe,
It Is I that graspe both Poles, and unto me,
Both Love and Honor Vassalized be,
He that has me to friend, can never want,
"He Is only happy that is ignorant:
Knowledge confounds knowledge, what got he,
So much renowned for his Poesy,
But blindness, nakedness, and hunger sharp,
Yea sometimes forced for to pawn his Harp:
And he that wrote The Art of Love, the Rapes
Of Jupiter, and of transformed shapes,
Found banishment the guerdion of his wit,
He cursed his Vein, and will thou Father it:
Combine with me, and my endowments try,
Thou liberally shall live, and wealthy die.

MAMMON. If credence to her words thou wilt not afford,
Unstable man, take thou God Mammons word,
Pluto has made me Master of his Treasure,
I have whole Hills of Ophyr, Gold at pleasure,
For to dispose to them, I list to advance,
Who bow the knee to God-like Ignorance;
He Is mad, that literature or Science chooses,
He Is trebly plagued, that is loved of the Muses:
Turn over blind Homers works, consume thy time,
Till thou grow'st hoarse in reading Maro's Rhyme,
Or take thou Platos Prose his Scholar too,
And con over him, who Natures secrets knew,
Yet with the First thou' it die a wretched man,
Or with the last, perish in the Ocean.

CLIO. Behold this wreath, plucked from that Damsel bright,
Tunr'd into Laurel by the God of Light.

MAMMON. View this refulgent O are, these heaps of Pearl.

IGNORANCE. Be Ignorant, and be a Lord or Earl


CLIO. Converse with us, and famous shall thou be,
Canonized unto all Posterity.

POET. Thrice sacred Virgin, unto thee I come,
Thou only lead'st unto Elysium.
Though Folly glorious seem, thou art more fair,

POVERTY. Here I adopt thee then, my lawful Heir.

POET. And welcome Poverty, thou art my choice,
Oh that I could but beg with Homers voice

EPIG. 18. A defiance to Fortune.
DO thy worst (whore) I will not Cry,
Although thou pinch me till I die,
Throw me down on the vilest earth,
Let one ill give another birth,
Cloth me in rags, yea let me be
Scornd by all Mortals, as by thee,
Yet like my self I needs must fall,
Though in a Ruin General.
EPIG. 19. The Poets invitation to Ben Johnsons Ghost to appear again.
REverend shade,
Since last I made
Survey of thee,
Me thinks I find
A fresher mind
To Poesy.
Most honored Ben
Appear again,
That so I may,
Embrace thy Ghost,
Although it cost
My life's decay.
Sacred Spirit
Whose boundless merit
I Adore,
Upon thy Hearse
I Will drop a Verse
And no more.
Thy Laurel wreath
Does lie beneath
Great Phoebus feet,
He asks of thee
Which way to be
A God more great.
Thou Ben shall be
A Saint to me
Each Verse I make,
I Will censure it
By thy great Wit,
If it partake
The least of thine,
I will Divine
It shall subsist,
Alas if not
The same I Will blot,
'Twil not be mist.
EPIG. 20. Women must not rule.
LEt him be made a slave, to all a scorn,
That will not be the same that he was born.
EPIG. 21. To my much honored, and incomparable Friend, Mr. Theodor Lo
Esquire, upon his request to me to pen a peculiar Poem of Obe-ron and his Queen.
NOble Sir, your Poet prays
You Would tear from's head his wreath of Bays,
And in its stead a Chaplet place
Of living flowers, to would better grace
His aspect, now you would have him sing,
Pucks treachery against his King.
Jelous Ob'ron when his Queen,
Dubbed him Cuckold on the green,
Conveigh me into yonder grove,
Where the broad faced Owl does rove
With waving wings from tree to tree,
And the sweet Turtle mournfully
Chants her own Dirge, beneath an Oak
Which Sylvanus never struck
In anger, nor the Dryad's cursed
Since the time it sprang up first,
Here seat me, and I Will sing to life,
Oberon's frenzy for his wife.
EPIG. 22. LUCAN to NERO. Dialogue.
LUCAN. BUt why Stern Tyrant must I bleeding die?

NERO. Wretch, thou were one in the Conspiracy
With Traiterous Piso. LVCAN, I confess my guilt;

NERO. and therefore shall thy tainted blood be spilt:
^now too (ambitious Mushrompe) not alone
^or that, I Will send thy Soul to Acheron,
^emember my disgrace upon the Stage,
^hen thou inspired with a Lymphatick rage
^ep'st forth to thwart, my Action. --

LUCAN. -- O Apollo!
Who Will dare (warned by my Fate) thy steps to follow?
Thus Orpheus, and Euripides went hence,
Forced by the hand of Rabbid violence;
But know (pernicious Monster) I shall live,
Pharsalias Field Eternity shall give
Unto my Name, when thou Ingloriously
(Blaspheming Jove) on thy own sword shall die

EPIG. 23. Fantastic Silius.
SIlius' an Arras maker sends for,
To whom he thus declares his pleasure; Sir,
I would desire you in a piece of Cloth
(Was never stained or eaten by the Moath)
To work me a strong Castle, and in it
A Dog that barks, yet on his tail does sit,
And at the Castle gate in Armor bright,
A big-bon'd man who dares with any fight;
The workman did so, and then brought it home,
Presenting it unto this gaudy Mome,
Who in a chafe does stamp, and swear, and cry
Where is the Dog should in the Castle lie?
The workman answers, pardon Sir a sinner,
Belike those in the Castle are at dinner,
And (perhaps) in some corner all alone,
The Curre you miss is gnawing of a bone.
EPIG. 24. In Imaginem Amoris, ad Poetas and Pictores.
ERgo fingere si lubet, Poetae,
Pictoresve animabitis tabellas,
Non talem mihi fingite hunc Amorem,
Non talem mihi pingite hunc Amorem,
Sed quum is omnia, quumque nil videtur,
Sed quum idem nihil, omnia and videtur,
Fingite omnia, nilque pingite unum,
Pingite omnia, nilque fingite unum,
Imo fingite cuncta, nilque prorsus,
Imo pingite nil, simulque cuncta.
EPIG. 25. Epitaph on the Lord Capell.
HEre Virtue, Valor, Charity, and all
Those rare endowments we Celestial call
Secluded are; nor wonder at the Story,
Capell lies here, Loyalties chiefest Glory.
EPIG. 26. Epitaph on Duke Hamilton.
A Politian, yet a Fool,
A Teacher, and yet went to School,
A Hempen cord of Silken twist,
A Papist, yet a Calvinist,
A mere OGYGES, Yet a Stranger
To Prudence, that foresees a danger;
Here lies (he is but to Scotland gone,
No worse a Hell) it is Hamilton.
EPIG. 27. On the Earl of Holland.
BY Venus self beneath this stone
Lies Holland that spruce Earl,
His Carcass here, his Head is gone
To Bridget his brave Girl,
Who makes it her Memento Mori,
While she lies close to Captain Pory.
EPIG. 28. On Mr. Spencers inimitable Poem, the Faerie Queen.
COllin my Master, O Muse sound his praise,
Extol his never to be equaled Lays,
Whom thou do Imitate with all thy might,
As he did once in Chawcers vein delight,
And thy new Faerie King, shall with Queen,
When thou art dead, still flourish ever green.
Cease wealthy Italy to brag and boast,
That thou for Poesy art famed most
Of any Nation, Ariostos vein,
Though rare, came short of our great Spencers streine:
His great Orlando has received great loss
By Spencers Faerie Knight of the Red Cross:
Warrelike Rogeros honor clouded is
By his Arthegall, and much fame does miss,
His sweet Angellica described with Art,
Is wan and withered, to his Brittomart,
His admirable Poem darkened quite,
As if he only had known how to write,
Nor may that wonder of your Nation claim
Supremacy, before our Spencers Fame:
Admired Tasso, (pardon) I must do
That right the Muses all persuade me to,
Although to Godfery by thy worthy Lays,
Thou do a Mausolean Trophey raise,
Yet Spencer to Eliza has done more,
And by his fulness lesseneth thy store:
He like the grand Meonian sits on high,
Making all Verse stoop to his Poesy;
Like to some mighty River Nile or Po,
All that obstruct him, he will soon overthrow:
And shallow Brooks, if any list to strive,
From forth his Ocean soon they may derive.
He next unto Apollo sits above
With Homer, and sweet Maro, who approve
Of his society, and joy to see
Him that did equal their famed Poesy.
Niggardly Nation be ashamed of this,
A Tomb for thy great Poet wanting is,
While fools, not worth the naming, seated high
On Sepulchers of Marble God-like lie:
The learned in obscurity are thrust,
But yet their Names shall long outlive their dust:
Although Great Spencer they did thee interre,
Not Rearing to thy name a Sepulcher,
Yet thou have one shall last to the last day,
Thy Faerie Queen, which never shall decay:
This is a Poets Privilege, although
His person among sordid dolts do go
Unto the Grave, his Name shall ever live,
And spite of Time, or Malice shall survive.
EPIG. 29. To the brave and nobe Lady, the Lady E. B.
OH may these Comic lays be blessed by thee
And from thy Lips, suck their Eternity.
EPIG. 30. On Mr. Davenants most excellent Tragedy of Albovinek of Lombards.
SHakespeares Othello, Johnsons Cataline,
Would lose the their luster, were thy Albovine
Placed betwixt them, and as when the Sun,
Does whirling in his fiery Chariot run,
All other lights burn dim, so this thy play,
Shall be accepted as the Sunshine day:
While other wits (like Tapers) only seems
Good in the want of thy Refulgent beams.
This Tragedy (let who list dare dissent)
Shall be thy everlasting Monument.
EPIG. 31. CUPIDS CREATION.
LUst favoring Vice, a Dietie
Ascribed to Love, and to be free
To that wild Fury adds
A forged power, that Cupid gladds,
By his Paphian Mother sent
All about Earths Continent;
Flies up to Heaven and there straies,
Shoots shafts, that every God obeyes:
Saturnus, MERCURY.
he with the awful Rod
Whose feet with winged shoes are shod,
All power to him is given,
On Earth, Seas, Hell and Heaven;
T'xcuse their guilt, Franticks bestow
Upon Dame Venus Son an awful Bow.
EPIG. 32. All Saints, and all Souls Day, 1. and 2. of November.
THou Sun, that shed'st the days, look down and see,
A month more shining by events then thee,
Departed Souls, and Saints signed it before,
But know the living now do sign it more,
Persons, and Actions meet, all meant for Joy,
But some are born to build, some to destroy;
Bate us that Ushering curse so dearly known,
Not these two days, but the whole month's our own.
EPIG. 33. The Egyptians first found out the Art of Navigation.
THese passed the dangerous Gulf, and durst
By new found ways adventure first,
These first fraught Ships, found Merchandise,
First observed Stars, and Checkered skies.
EPIG. 34. For the Statue of Queen Elizabeth.
BEhold the Effigy of a Virgin Queen,
Zealously courted wheresoever seen:
The Peoples Love first from her troubles grew,
And then her Reign did make that Love her Due:
That comely order, which did then adorn
Both Fabrics, now is by many Factions torn,
That form by her allowed of Common Prayer,
Our Sectaries call vain beating of the Air,
How do they honor, how forsake her Crown,
Her Times are still cried up, but practiced down.
EPIG. 35. Baptizing of Infants, the New Mode.
BRing here the Basin, is the Babe defiled,?
Good Parson play the Barber with the Child,
Place him in public view, in sight of all,
But spare your Crosses, and your Washing-ball;
And (that the Goldsmiths may be quite undone)
The Father and the Godfathers are one.
This Babe of Grace shall be of more account,
Then all the Antichristians of the Font.
EPIG. 36. The Powder Treason.
THis was a Treason of the worst intent,
Had not our own done more then strangers meant
EPIG. 37. To Mr. L. H.
TO eat so much, and yet to look so thinn,
Thus Lust puts out, what Luxury puts in.
EPIG. 38. On the birth of the Lady E. D.
AWay, and view the Graces, and the Hours
Hovering aloof, and dropping mingled flowers
Upon the Cradle where an Infant lies,
The greatest Grace, chiefest of Dieties.
EPIG. 39. On the Death of Strafford Deputy of Ireland.
THat thou were wise as Nestor, vallianter
Then great HECTOR.
Priamides, and stronger far
Then big-bon'd Ajax, that thy skill did shine
Suparlatively in Wars art, to thine;
That Caesar's vici was but slow, that all
Which makes an able Statesman, thou migh'st call
Thine, and thine only, that thy mighty Soul
Dispans'd, extended unto either Pole:
Truth must acknowledge, that thy Royal Lord,
Durst to have morgag'd unto thee his Sword,
So great his confidence, during whose Reign
Thou shon'st a Constellation, next his Waine,
And it is not yet decided, whether thou
Or he were more resplendent, on thy brow
Sat Terror mixed with Wisdom, and at once
Saturn, and Hermes in thy Countenance.
(Second Sejanus) in thy fall we see
Nosce teipsum, was not known to thee.
EPIG. 40. On the Death of the truly learned and exquisitely Virtuous I. D.
Esquire.
When Fates impartial hand shall summon me,
It will increase my Joy to visit thee,
Yet we must sympathize, and on thy Hearse
Power out a Sable tear to write a Verse:
With your swart weeds my Azure lines agree,
"Amourners beauty is deformity.
Blame not the The Parcae.
Three for this sad Fate, they do
Consume themselves in tears, as well as you,
'Twas not their will so fair a flower should stay
So short a time, and fade so soon away,
They had resolved upon this common State,
He should have acted out old Nestors Age,
While they their over-busied hands conjoyne
With curious Art, to draw the fatal twine
To a full length, they forced the same so small,
That (unawares) alack) it brake withal:
And all but right, should they do heaven wrong
To keep his precious Soul on Earth so long
That longed to part, should they his Joys repreive
And kill him thus, by keeping him alive;
Heaven then took pity, and could not dispense
With this their kindness, therefore Raped him hence.
EPIG. 41. A Cobbler to Plato, on his Commonwealth.
ARistos Son, behold we all agree
To have the Government prescribed by thee,
And sit enthroned even in our drudgerie.
EPIG. 42. To Mr. G. K.
SIr, I do run, but you attain the prize,
"'It Is better to be Fortunate then Wise:
Besides by Randalle's Exit, it appears,
"Witt's a Disease, that kills men in few years:
Which bids me this Prediction freely give,
Longer then Nestor you are like to live.
EPIG. 43. To Will. Lee, the Bookseller at Paul's Chain.
SYrrah; thou art so base a Fool that I,
Think thee not worth my Anger, else I Would try
In ARCHILOCHVS tone, so loud to sing,
(With a Quill borrowed from a Ravens wing,
Penning such fatal Scripture) thou (thou Elfe)
But hearing it, should streightway hang thy self,
But I am merciful, repent thy ill,
And know no sword, cutts deeper then my Quill.
EPIG. 44. To Lydia scorning him.
I Care not now, still harden, know that I
By viewing thee, begin to Petrefie,
Though thou art Rockie, yet the Gods assent
I am the stone must be thy Monument.
EPIG. 45. To I. Buzby.
THE art not in debt, (thou swear'st) and I dare say it,
For those alone do owe, that mean to pay it.
EPIG. 46. Epitaph, on Mr. Fountain and his young Son dying, and being buried
together in one Grave.
Fountain of tears shed here, here lies a man,
In whom a Fount of Learning gliding ran,
Yet cruel death this living Fountain stopped,
The pleasant Palm that grew beside it crop't:
You may search far, and yet not find a Well,
Fit with this matchless Fount to parallel.
EPIG. 47. The deliverance from a garrulous vainglorious Scholar in Sion
Coledge.
TO I. P's Chamber, I one day resorted,
Where the young man to me rare things imparted,
As first his Study full of Learned Books,
On which (I dare be sworn) he seldom looks.
Then next a Chamber, at the Eastern end
Thereof, a bed to entertain a Friend.
Then led he me toward a gloomie hole,
Quoth he, this is repleat with Wood and Coal,
Not so well stuffed was Epeus Brazen steed,
Then he discovered boxes full of seed
Which fed his Finches, and Canary-Birds,
And then he led me to his house of ( --)
Gravely Discoursing all the tedious way,
That Athanasius in a Cistern lay
Fearful of Arius, seven years and more
Not half so sweet: then next he opened a door,
Discovers a large Shelfe of Boots and Shoes,
Refulgent Sol (said I) that al things views,
Rescue, oh rescue me, (great Dietie)
This Fool will kill me with his discovery.
Apollo heard, one toward us did advance,
And so great Phoebus saved me by chance.
The end of the Fourth Book.
EPIGRAMS
THE FIFTH BOOK.
EPIG. 1. To Lydia.
TO thee fair Nymph my life, my love, my gaze,
Thought-chaste Dictinna, Natures only maze,
More Lovely then was bright Astioche,
Or Junos hand-mayd sacred Diope
I didicate these labors, Read I pray,
For thine eyes stellifie all they survey.
EPIG. 2. Unmanly Fear.
THunder affrighteth Infants in the Schools,
And Threatenings are the Conquerours of Fools.
EPIG. 3. To Cap. Purvey.
True Valor ever accompanied with deliberate Advice.

RAsh Isidas, the Lacedemon Lord,
That naked fought against the Theban power,
Although they crowned his Valor by accord,
Yet was he fined for rashness that same hour,
For in attempting, Prowess is not meant,
But wisely doing what we do attempt.
EPIG. 4. A Callidonians Character.
A Scotland anciently called Callidonia.
Callidonian, ever at his birth,
Does enter Hell, and when he goes from Earth,
He leaves tormenting Tophet, wondrous well
Assured there cannot be a worser Hell.
EPIG. 5. To Mr. E. H. Complaining of his Wife.
SIr, be content, let this your hopes uphold,
Venus was but a Queen, Juno a Scold.
EPIG. 6. Sir John Harringtons translation of Ariosto.
ARiost beyond Protagoras did lim'
Better then Zeuxes could, thou have rendered him.
EPIG. 7. Uni omnia sola.
Cur ego felici numeros ab Apolline poscam?
Cur Pindi aerij culmina nota velim?
Cur mea Daphneae cingant ut tempora laurus,
Ex Aganipaeo pocula font petam?
Cur ego lascivam Venerem, Venerisque puellum
Suppliciter multa solicitabo prece;
Telaque plus metuam pueri quam mill Phalanges,
Et plusquam Aegiochi fulmina rauca faces:
Quid pharetram ex humeris pueri sine fine sonantem,
Vdave ne lachrymis lumina sepe fluant?
Quid toties ducam suspiria pectore ab in^o?
Quid cadet aversos ante querela Deos?
Perdere si certo potis es me sola dolor,
Solaque me certa, Nympha, levare manu.
Adspice quam, o, variis distringar, Lydia, curis,
Adspice quam, o, nulla part quiescat Amor:
Tu mihi sola quies, quae fix'ti vulnera amoris,
Quaeque noces, medicam sola adhibebis opem;
Nam mihi tu Phoebus, to Pindus, Laurus and unda,
Tu mihi blanda Venus, tu mihi dulcis Amor:
Tela Faces, Pharetrae, Lachrymae Suspiria, Questus,
Omnia at (hei) quum sis cur ita nulla meaes.
EPIG. 8. To Mr. John Sands, on his excellent Water-Worke called the Chaos.
FRiend, thou the Chaos have in every part
So well expressed by the power of Art,
That when I saw't I wondered, and I find
In that rude mass, thy well digested mind:
Nor is that all, but when I do behold
Thy whirling Orbs, how they about are rol'd,
The Earth replenished, and the Heavens clear,
More quaintly then in Archimedes Sphere,
And then our Grandfyre Adam in his bliss,
(The same I think Arabia felix is)
His fearful fall in height of all his pride
[Tempted by her was taken from his side]
Then other Stories to thy matter fit,
Not feigned, but borrowed out of holy Writ,
Performed by Pigmeis of thy own Creation,
Who seem to walk, and talk in pretty fashion,
I then to learned Rhasis do adhere,
That great and wonderful Philosopher,
And do conceit, one may so play his part,
As to make little living men by Art:
But to conclude, for I abhor to be
Guilty of tedious Prolixitie:
Thy show shall more and more in Fame increase,
And ever shall be styled Arts Master-peice.
EPIG. 9. A Constellation betwixt bad and good Fortune, for Antiquity, and
Supremacy.
THe glorious Senate of the skies was set,
And all the Gods in State,
When Happy-Fortune, and Ill-Fortune met,
Striving for Heaven Gate,
Confusedly as Floods do pass
Their bounds, their entrance was.
The Gods disturbed admire their strange approach
Censuring their anger by their eyes,
Ill-Fortune was attended by reproach,
Good-Fortune Virtue stellifies:
The Gods divided yet agree,
The Fates should judge their Pedigree:
Good-Fortune draws from Heaven her high Descent,
Making Jove root of her large tree,
She shows from him how many Godheads went
Archangels, Heavens posterity,
Annexing to her line,
Honor, Virtue, Endless time.
Ill-Fortune yet would needs be elder-borne,
[As sprung from Saturn, Joves wronged Syre]
And Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, her Arms have worn,
(Bleeding Hearts in a Field of fire)
Just proof may her great praise commend,
All that Best-Chance begins, Ill-Chance does end.
EPIG 10. To H. P.
THou Grand Apostle of the Gadarens,
Thou, who have cured the Nodes, sliced off the Wens
O'th Body Politic, it troubles us,
That thou should have the Morbus Gallicus.
EPIG. 11. The Invention of Letters.
TRadition tells us that the Elephant,
(Made up of sense like man, who naught does want
Save speech) the Alphabet did first invent,
At this some laugh, and others to it assent,
Voting its verity, but some contest
That Cadmus first found Letters, and expre'st
His Art first in Campania, if the first
Found out that milk by which all arts are nur'st,
I dare Decree the Beasts expressions all,
Were figured forth in letters Capital.
EPIG. 12. On the death of the late Prince of Organge, by the Small Pox.
POx one thee (Fortune) had no other way,
To bring the Royal Cause unto decay,
But by that Scarre-Crow picks out Childrens eyes,
There were sure many noble Malladies
Far fitter Harpyes, to prey on a Prince,
But oh! the Fates by snatching Nassaw hence,
Do by a contradictive Riddle tell,
They Will bring their ends to pass by Miracle.
EPIG. 13. The Boy-preaching Furrier.
Do thou know what thou do, fond Child alas
Thy heart is furred, as is thy Face with Brass:
Do thou not fear the fervor of his Ire,
That slew two Brethren who produced strange fire
Upon his holy Altar? can thou show,
Us thy Commission, and who bad thee go?
If not, remember forty thousand di'd,
Because too nearely in the Arc they pri'd.
EPIG. 14. To Delia.
DElia, alas, and art thou now grown poor?
Walking like a dejected forlorn whore,
Have all thy Lovers cast thee off, what all,
And given thee unto the Hospital?
No presentations of Gloves, Tyres, or Pins,
Now naught is left unto thee save thy sins:
O heavy load, now (Delia) thou do find,
"They nothing have, who want a virtuous mind,
EPIG. 15. To Claudius.
ANd why (good Claudius) should I hide,
That wherein gods do take a pride,
She, who is of the Nymphs the Queen,
The loveliest that has yet been seen,
She, with her most enflaming eyes
Has fired my Heart, those curious ties
Of her entortell'd tresses bind,
With golden fetters my whole mind:
Her graceful smiles, her red and white,
Which Art can never pencill right,
That wisdom in her tender years,
Scarce to be found amongst gray hairs,
The constant tenor of her life
Which may beseem the gravest wife,
Her modest, and not gay, Attire,
Whereby she honor does acquire,
The pleasing Majesty of her face,
And her deportment with such grace,
These have Captive took my mind,
Oh! that my Martiallesse were kind,
I count me happy in my Gyves,
And would not change for thousand Lives.
EPIG. 16. The Prodigal.
SEe in a Tavern where Calianax sits,
Spending his coin, and dulling of his wits,
His painted Cockatrice does sit him nigh,
(Who has the marrow from his bones drawn dry)
His naked crown a Perriwig does cover,
See how he courts her like an amorous Lover,
Fool, she more deadly is, thou do embrace,
Then th'juice of Hemlock, or the loathed Race
Of Scorpions, her poisonous breath more hot
Then Aetna's fumes, by Earth and Air begot,
Who, when thou have thy Lands morgag'd away,
And beg'st for food, will smile at thy decay,
And having filled thy body full of sores,
Will laugh to see thee turned out of doors,
Despised by all men, when too late to will be
To wish for that, thou have spent Id'ly.
EPIG. 17. Lydia Inviolabilis si nolit.
LVmina servat Amor, Charitum sed prima labella,
Proxima dein mammas, tertia sola pedes.
Dulce sub obscuris gaudet Venus ima latebris,
Ridet and hinc timidos, insidiosa viros,
Si faves; oculos Deus, and labra prima papilla
Proxima, terna pedes, Diva dabit latebras.
EPIG. 18. An Alderman.
YOnder goes Carrus in his Velvet Gown,
And is reputed one of great Renown,
He strokes his Beard, and on the Bench does Cough
And seldom is beheld to smile or laugh,
Ascends his Coach with an austeere aspect,
And gravely all his Actions does direct,
He would be thought a very sollid man,
As equalizing the famed Ithacan,
Yet has not brains enough for to endite
A Letter, when occasion calls to write.
O Fortune, thou were cursed from thy birth,
And aye wilt be so: Fools have all on Earth.
EPIG. 19. Christmasse Day.
NO matter for Plomb-porridge, or Shrid-pies,
Or a whole Ox offered in Sacrifice
TO COMVS, not to CHRIST, this day I Will sing
Celestial songs to JESUS, who did bring
Unto depraved Adam's race Salvation,
By the Aenigma of his Incarnation:
I Will dance too, but as Jesses God-like Son
Before the Arc, a sacred Ephod on.
EPIG. 20. To Mr. L. H. Esquire.
YOu say, (Sir) that you wonder some times I
(Who am a rigid Stoic naturally)
When I do practice mirth, am so profuse,
My mirth is madness, and my sport abuse,
I will not (Jove forbid it) say you err,
But take this Story, The Philosopher
Rich, Learned Proclus, had a Son whose vein
Was to spend money, but get none again.
On Whores, on Hounds, on Hawks, his Fathers eyes
Were witness to his Prodigallities,
No Counsel he omitted, nor no way,
That might the young man's swerving passions sway;
Nothing proves prevalent, his grieved Sire
Finding he powered but oil into the fire,
Resolv's upon a way, as new as strange,
Not doubting speedily to cause a change:
A very youthful habit he puts on,
And needs will be Associate to his Son,
Who does his Fathers dotage deadly hate,
And now bethinks him of his own Estate,
Condem's himself to have been so much a fool,
Leaves Epicurus, sits in Plato's School.
So Sir, take notice when I sportive am,
I do it, such Fools as you for to reclaim.
EPIG. 21. To E. K.
I Just had made an end, for to rehearse
Some of my Papers blotted over with Verse,
Unto a learned Friend, when thou came in
And once again would have me to begin:
Untutored Groom, suppose that thou should come
Without a Supper in thy dirty womb,
I being newly sated, were it fit,
Or would it not proclaim preposterous wit,
For thee, for to desire me for to try
My teeth again, to bear thee Company.
EPIG. 22. A Dialogue 'twixt LYDIA, and the POET, for the renewing their Loves
after a long time of suspension.
POET. NOw she is numbered with the dead,
That won my heart from thee,
Why art thou like to Stone, or lead,
And make not haste to me.

LYDIA. Claudius, the Son of Aretine,
Possesses now my Love,
And shall I change for that of thine,
Who ever love to Rove.

POET. Forget what is past, my future Zeal
And my obsequious care
To thee, all former wounds shall heal,
Not leaving any scarre.

LYDIA. After thy stock of strength is spent,
And thou grown weak with doing,
Thou would our former breach Cement,
Away, I hate thy woing.

POET. The shag-hair'd Goat in's prime of heat,
Is not more apt then I,
For to perform the wished feate,
My Veins with blood swell high.

LYDIA. Though thou art harsh and Rude as fire,
More humerous then the winds,
So well thou satiat'st my desire,
To thee Loves cords me binds.

EPIG. 23. On excellent strong Beer.
PLumpe cheek'd Bromeus venge thy wrong,
Barley, as thy berry strong
Makes us talk, and sing, and laugh,
As if we did Nepenthe quaffe;
With Elder leaves our heads we twine,
Not with the Ivie-creeping Vine,
And Oake-leav'd Javelings we bear,
Which in our drunken rage we tear:
Thy Orgies must ever fail,
If this strong Liquors fame prevail,
All for to drink will agree:
Smooth chin'd Anacreon could not be
More heated with his Corsick vine,
Nor Flaccus with his Falern wine,
Then I with this most potent Beer,
Kept in a Marble Vault a year:
And now it sparkling freely drills,
Cur'st be he a drop that spills:
Fill the steep flaggons, and each pot,
Drink till all sorrow be forgot.
Had great Johnson had the hap
To taste of what flows from this tap,
Nine muses had no number been
To contend against such Hypocrene,
And he (no doubt) had finished well
His Mortimer, and Issabell:
Nymbly dance all in a Ring,
Paeans to god-BARLY sing,
Gallop round in Faerie measures,
Oh that in height of all these pleasures,
Charmed by the sleepy God,
Ere the Hymn is sung, I nod.
EPIG. 24. Leanders Ruin.
While bold Leander, swam as he was wont,
Brushing the billows of the Helespont,
Thetis her self envying fair Heroes bliss,
(His Love being sought by the Nereides,
Cymodoce, and sweet Pronea too)
But when she found it was but in vain to sue,
She beggs of Aeolus, and he complies,
To raise a storm, by which Leander dies.
EPIG. 25. A Frolic to Capt. Baines the Poet being Prisoner (for his Loyalty)
in Whittington Goal.
1
Polihymnia, lend me thy Lute,
And thou (my Bains) take the shrill Flute,
No rainie Hyades
Or the rude blasts at Seas
Can strike our Music mute.
2
Drink thou to Peleus stout Son,
Or the Grandchild of Laomedon,
With ardent zeal then I
Will flowing Cupps apply
To Pindar, Horace, and Anacreon.
3
It Is sin for us to know
What Fate Jove will bestow,
What need we try
Lillies Astrology,
The Gods, at Westminster can truest show.
4
With Ivy Chaplets lets empale
Our Fronts, and though lodged in a Goal
(My loved Baines)
Did we were chains
Their rattling should make Briscoes heart to fail.
5
Bring forth the Tun of sparkling Wine
Such as learned Flaccus termed Divine,
Pierce its rough rind,
Leave none behind,
(Dear Baines) 'twill make our Faces shine.
6
Minerva, (O my Patroness)
To thee I will my Faults confess,
I am too Stoicall,
But yet can smile withal,
And now and then slip into loose excess.
7
About with it, let us swill
Stand near (boy) nimbly fill,
Sing, Jo, triumph cry,
Young C. has Victory,
Thanks powerful Rector of Olympus Hill.
8
What though we do not wear
Laconick Purple, but are forced to bear
The frowns of slaves,
When in our graves,
Fame to our memories shall Pillars rear.
9
Foggie Cocytus we must view,
Nor can we the Eumenides eschew,
In Charons Wherrie
We both must Ferrie,
Then drink and Dance, Earths blisses are our due.
EPIG. 26. Martagon, and Ancilla in the person of the Poet, and Mistress E. R.
Mart. MUst thou be gone, my pretty one,


Ancil. Alas, I dare not tarry,


Mart. O what a spite is marriage-life,


Ancil. Then why (Sir) did you marry?


Mart. Although that Hymen hold full high,
His Torch above my tresses,
Yet thousands sweet as well as I
May purge their lights with Cresses:
Pox on his horns, and spotted hide,

Ancil. His Dowcets, and his Rutting,
But (Sir) he is like Argus ey'de,

Mart. And like a Ram still butting.
Away by Moone-shine we will wend
Unto my Country Villa,
And there securely we will spend
Our days, my dear Ancilla.

Ancil. Love give us wings unto our wish,
Be lustful Jove, Protector,

Mart. A Toade be still in the Husbands dish,


Ancil. And poison in his Nectar.


Mart. Actaeons Ghost still haunt him,


Ancil. The God of Cuckolds daunt him,


Mart. Let a dead man stroke him,


Ancil. And his spittle choke him,


Mart. And every Fiend invoke him,


Ancil. While we thus twine,
Like the Amorous Vine,

Mart. Away base Strumpet leave me,
If thou have Will
Thy Lord to kill,
Most sure thou will deceive me.

EPIG. 27. On Mr. Websters most excellent Tragedy, Called the White Devil.
We will no more admire Euripides,
Nor praise the Tragic streines of Sophocles,
For why? thou in this Tragedy have framed
All real worth, that can in them be named:
How lively are thy persons fitted, and
How pretty are thy lines, thy Verses stand
Like unto precious Jewels set in gold,
And grace thy fluent Prose; I once was told
By one well skilled in Arts, he thought thy Play
Was only worthy Fame to bear away
From all before it, Brachianos Ill,
Murdering his Duchess, has by thy rare skill
Made him renowned, Flamineo such another,
The Devils darling, Murderer of his brother:
His part most strange, (given him to Act by thee)
Does gain him Credit, and not Calumny:
Vittoria Corombona, that famed Whore,
Desperate Lodovico weltring in his gore,
Subtle Francisco, all of them shall be
Gazed at as Comets by Posterity:
And thou mean time with never withering Bays,
Shall Crowned be by all that read thy Lays.
EPIG. 28. Epitaph on that Excellently Learned young man Mr. Anthony Dyer.
A Morning fair as the first look of May,
With the glad promise of a Glorious Day.
The ^un was early up, and at first rise
With noone-tide Beams amazed our duller eyes,
Is crep'd behind a cloud, a blossom bright,
As those Sunbeams that kiss and paint the Light,
Which first of all salutes the budding year,
And smiles to see it is fellows not appear,
Dies by rude Frosts: so when beginnings raise
Too great an expectation, and amaze
Our Senses, Wisdom plucks it by the ear,
And bids us turn our hopes into a fear,
So if some one leap over sluggish time,
And wear his Ages Autumn in his Prime,
Nature her self her future Progress fears,
And dares not trust this Virtue with more years,
And therefore Dyer di'd, and here does lie,
To force a tear from every passer by.
EPIG. 29. To his Muse in (reference to his Faerie King.
BY thee fair Muse, when violent hands have made
England a Den of Dragons, a dark shade
Where shag-hayrd Satyrs Dance, when Kingdoms are
Quite overturned, and fry in flames of War,
I shall command the Farth, and to the sky,
Above the Earth, borne on Fames Wings shall f^ie.
EPIG. 30. Epitaph on my dearly loved Kinsman Thomas Clapham.
REader, here lies a youth, whose Fac^
Passed even Adonis for sweet grace,
And winning gesture without peer
For wit unequalled, closed here
Does lie, an heap of virtuous dust
Keep it safe (Marble) to thy trust,
We do commit it as a Gemme,
Hid in a Casket of esteem.
EPIG. 31. To his Book.
Go forth in thine own strength amid the Crowd,
Be not thou too submisse, nor yet too proud,
If any jostle, stand the sturdy shock,
Have I not fixed thee firmer then a Rock.
EPIG. 32. Fortius est qui se quam qui fortissima vincit.
It is the greatest Conquest for a Conqueror to Conquer himself, to conquer
his Irascible passions, which Alexander could not do, and his Concupiscible,
which Hercules could not do, so vassalized to his IOLE, to him, Dei ira
Hercules.

HE Cacus, Cerberus, Hydra overthrew,
Lions, not Lust and Whores could he subdue.
EPIG. 33. Ben Johnson 's due Encomium.
When he, with Verse to's pipe applied did, sing,
The Rude His excellent Under-woods.
Woods listened to his caroling,
Scillas Dogs barked not, the harmonious spheres
Took pains to plant their Souls into their cares,
More excellent then he, no age e're saw,
More sacred, wonderful, (by Phoebus Law)
His Verse Divinely framed, deserves alone,
The thrice three Sisters Benediction.
EPIG. 34. Epitaph on a Virgin dying for Love.
Ye virgins that this Tomb pass by,
Behold the same with weeping eye,
Accuse the blind god of stern wrath,
That he this Virgin here laid has,
For he was partial, nothing moved,
He wounded her, not him she loved.
EPIG. 35. The Paper Hero's.
THeir murmuring splendor is Nocturnall all,
They are but Torches to a Funeral,
That Is all, their glory for themselves must fall
In his great doom, quite waste and perish all
In Lighting him to's Vault, their Luster must
Shrink to a Snuff, their Honor to the dust.
The End of the Fifth Book.
EPIGRAMS.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
EPIG. 1. Virgula Divina.
SOme Sorcerers do boast they have a Rod,
Gathered with Vows, and Sacrifice,
And (borne about) will strangely nod
To hidden treasure, where it lies:
Mankind is (sure) that Rod Divine,
For to the wealthiest (ever) they incline.
EPIG. 2. To Will. Dross the upstart Gallant.
FRiend, those gay clothes, as well thy hyde befits,
As Purple does the untutord Marmuzets.
EPIG. 3. To Tatam.
TAtam makes Verses of all sorts, and sizes,
And Plays, and Songs, and Ballads he comprizes:
In keen Iambicks a Lymphatick Lyrick
He is, and plays, and sings, sweeter then Derick,
For which, amongst the Broakers and Broomcriers,
Amongst the Watermen, amongst Dolts, and Diers,
He Is cried up for a Bardus, Prince of Wales, an excellent Poet, of whom Poets
are called Bards.
Bards and he is one,
For he writes Welsh, or in some stranger tone.
EPIG. 4. To Mr. Giles Granvert.
NOw we
(Dear Sir) be
Our own Antipodes,
Our own Disease,
Seamen the Whip,
Plowmen the Ship
Usurp and guide,
Men walk, Mules ride,
Children begin
To teach to spin
Their Grandams old,
Sheep Shephards Fold,
Meteors exhaled
From mud are called
The highest Spheres,
Small hopes, great fears,
Wolves in Humane shapes
Men, Asses, Hoggs and Apes,
Hermaphrodites with Child,
Herod reconciled
To Pilate; Justice, Knowledge,
From Gotham College
Proceed, the blind perceive
What Seer's will not believe,
No way but Chemistry,
Salt, Sulphur, Mercury.
EPIG. 5. Aristotle.
NAtures great Midwife, thou that knew'st far more
Then all the Ethnic Sages, did before
It Is more then a Chimera unto me,
Thou that could weight the Earth, should by the Sea
Be swallowed, thy Wits Ocean knew no shore,
Fathoming Rheas wealth and Thetis store.
EPIG. 6. Epitaph on Mahomet the Second, Emperor of Turks, Anno Dom. 1450.
I That so many nations have
Tumbled together in one grave,
Am now by Death, which all devowers,
Laid here, where now are my powers?
Phillip's mad Sonne's most glorious Fame,
Compard with me shall want a Name,
And mighty Caesar.
Julius have small glory,
Parrallel'd with my Deathless story:
I the Greeks vanquished, all Epire,
I tamed, and with vindictive ire,
Made the squat bodied Tartars stoop,
The Assyrians under me did droope,
Likewise the Arabs, fierce and wild,
I Persia, and Hungaria spoild,
Rhodes I had taken by Martial strife,
Had the three Sisters spared my life:
Death in the twinkling of an eye
Forced me to a Satietie,
So perished the Pride of Glory,
Proving all things but Transitory.
EPIG. 7. To the brave and beauteous Lady, the Lady I. G.
Circe the Enchanteresse (who as Homer relates) transformed rational men into
the similitude of brute Beasts.

CIrce, not only was a Sorceresse,
But also Lais Function did profess,
By ^er loose postures many were enthralled,
Most aptly she is Daughter to the Sun.
Hyperions Daughter called,
Because her filthiness to every eye
Was obvious, by her Impudicitie,
Lascivious gestures, and her wanton tricks,
(More base then any London Meretrix)
She caused men, of honest Morallists
To become Brutish, and mere Sensualists:
"Man by the Gods was framed Just, and Free,
"But innate guile forfeits his purity.
Thus did she Metamorphose Men to Beasts,
So he (bright Lady) on your beauty feasts,
Sol's Daughters Soporiferous draught does drink,
Let me be Gryll, or what you please to think,
Not any sordid shape will I eschew,
Some Bristled Swine, so I may grunt near you.
EPIG. 8. Silvesters Translation of Du-Bartas, His Divine Weeks, and Works.
'T Were no absurdity to question it,
Whether the great Du-Bartas better writ,
Or Silvester translated, quaintly rare
Is his conversion, had he rested there
His Fame had been advanced to the skies,
Now grovelling, clogged with his own Tripperies.
EPIG. 9. On the pollution of a well known Temple.
NOw birds, and Four-foot-beasts inhabit where,
The Sacred Fathers er'st assembled were,
The Porches full of noble Imagerie,
Oppressed with their own weight, prostrate lie,
Fanes lie full low,
Grass on Tombs do grow,
So many adornments, rare works, Sepulchers
And sacred Urnes, one ruin now interr's.
EPIG 10. The celebration of a Health to my joviall Friend, James Gort Esquire.
SEe Sir, here flows a curious Cup
Of sparkling Nectar, full charged up
To' the brim, her sprightly dancing bubbles,
(Defying fears, and duller troubles
Of care-clog'd hearts) look how they swell
In proud disdain, as threatening Hell,
As if she meant to undertake
A Duel, with the Infernal Lake,
See how she mantles, with what grace
She sweetly smiles upon thy Face:
Drink Sir, (a fig for Fools, and Wealth)
This Sea to Claracillas health.
EPIG. 11. Defacing of Images
IF that all Images defaced should be,
(My Friends) IN me sure, you would not escape Scot-free.
EPIG. 12. To the Pamphleters of these times.
Forbear fond Pamphleters, forbear to vex,
The giddy world, as with an Apoplex,
Cease railing Rabsheka's cease to disclose,
And vent such poison in prophaner Prose,
Whose Basilisk-like Vapors seem to impair
The squeasie temper of the troubled Air.
EPIG. 13. To John Tailor (commonly called) the Water-Poet.
IF ever I did drink, or taste one drop
Of Hellicon, or coveted the top
Of craggy cliv'd Parnassus, if that I
Did ever pipe or sing ^ armoniously,
Then let my censure find a free access
To those that make thee more, making thee less:
I say thy Lines are fluent, and thy Lays
(I do avowch't, not partial in my praise)
[Some Cockle cast away] are such to me,
That when I read'em, IN me in Love with thee,
And sighing say, had this man Learning known,
(Who has so quaint a Genius of his own)
Great Ben had crept to's Urne without a Name,
And Tailor solely slept in the house of Fame.
EPIG. 14. Modest, Martha.
When to thy Husband I resort,
We sometimes jest, and talk in sport,
And if that any word obsceane,
Do pass, thou askt's us, what me mean,
With looks demure thou silently
Do sit, as one loved Piety,
Yet I one day unwares came in
Ere thou had time to shroud thy sin,
And found in those fair hands of thine
The filthy works of Aretine.
EPIG. 15. Lactantius, his strange opinion of that Text of Scripture, Genesis 6.
2. Then the Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men that they were fair, and
they took them Wives, etc.
To the Fair and Courteous Mistress, R. H.

THe Angles, whom their mighty Lord
Appointed mankind for to Guard,
With this Command, they should take heed
How they Commixt with humane seed,
And so polluted, did become
Unfit for blessed Elysium.
Yet could not escape the Paphian Gin,
Jehovah sees, and hates their Sin,
And now as useless properties,
Secludes them from celestial Bliss
Thrown down, never to return again
Fell Satan, does them entertain
His Agents, their prodigious brood,
(Not harmefull Fiends, nor Angels good)
Not mortal, nor aeriall Spirits,
Suffer not for their Fathers merits,
To Barathum they were not sent,
Nor yet up to Olympus went,
Two sorts of Devils there became,
The one we may Celestial name,
TO other Terrestiall, thus far he,
Whose profound Ingenuitie,
All men admire, but he forgot,
That Heavenly Spirits cannot blot,
Their purity by such a deed
Not capable of humane seed,
But this (bright Mistress) makes for me,
If to Lactantius you will agree:
For if the Angels could not tame,
The force of Aericinas flame,
No marvel I am scorcht to dust,
Served up an Oglio unto Lust.
EPIG. 16. My Imprisonment in Whittington for Writing Mercurius Elencticus.
MOst strange it seems unto the Vulgar rout,
That, that which thrust me in, should guard me out,
My Soul with no engagement's clogged, but thus
My gaining life, struck dead Elencticus.
EPIG. 17. In Memory of our Famous Shakespeare.
1
SAcred Spirit, whiles thy Lyre
Ecchoed over the Arcadian Plains,
Even Apollo did admire,
Orpheus wondered at thy Strains.
2
Plautus Sighed, Sophocles wept
Tears of anger, for to hear
After they so long had slept,
So bright a Genius should appear:
3
Who wrote his Lines with a Sunne-beame,
More durable then Time or Fate,
Others boldly do Blaspheme,
Like those that seem to Preach, but prate.
4
Thou were truly Priest Elect,
Chosen darling to the Nine,
Such a Trophey to erect
(By thy wit and skill Divine)
5
That were all their other Glories
(Thine excepted) torn away,
By thy admirable Stories,
Their garments ever shall be gay.
6
Where thy honored bones do lie
(As Statius once to Maro's Urne)
Thither every year will I
Slowly tread, and sadly mourn.
EPIG. 18. Pimponello, Flambello, A Dialogue.
FLambello. Happy Pimpinello, thou
^hriv'st, I prithee tell me how,
Pimpinello. Learn of me for to engage
If thou wilt thrive this Iron Age,
Pleasures at the highest pitch,
Pandora only can make rich,
No gold, nor meed is held too dear
To buy a Beauty for a year,
To sin securely, swim in pleasure,
Twice six Months: Flambello. If that Treasure
May so facily be won,
I have a Daughter, she shall shun
No wealthy Letcher. Pimpinello. A match, our Trade
Shall last till Sin, and Pleasure fade.
EPIG. 19. To Mr. James Ford, his Medalls being Miraculously preserved from
fire.
VVlcan to save these Monuments
Suffocates his own flaming Vents,
The Elements themselves had sense,
(By a coactive Providence)
Their Father Air, and Mother Earth,
Bridled their fury in its birth,
As when they choked Enceladus,
For Anapis, and Amphinomus,
For which (Sir) you ought every day
A Jocund Vulcanalia say.
EPIG. 20. Our Blessed Redeemer (in scorn) by the Cursed Jews, clothed in
White Raiment.
ALmighty and Omniscient, thus thy Power
Was visible, even in that very hour,
When Satan's ire, was most predominant,
(When the thing made did against its Maker vant:)
Wrapped in an Alball, (though on vile pretense
The perfect Emblem of thy Innocence).
Unwittingly they did Mithologize
Thou were to die a spotless Sacrifice,
Thus were thou Typified by Samuels deed
Then when he made a sucking Lamb to bleed,
And Israel, was Victorious ore his foe,
By thy dear blood, we quell Apollion So.
EPIG. 21. Mortimer, and Queen Isabel, A Dialogue.
MORTIMER. NOw, now, securely we may clip
Not fearing Edwards Ire,
Let me suck Nectar from thy lip,
And 'bove the gods aspire.

ISSABEL. Yet, our embraces are but stolen
No safety, can I see,
The Commons, are with anger swol'n,
And rage against thee and me.

MORTIMER. Let the Plebeians mutter all,
All is our own (my Dear)
Confirmed in Canarvans fall
Which I expect to hear.

ISSABEL. Is Gurney gone to do the deed,
Our Loves Foundation
Is laid in blood. Mortimer. Edward must bleed,
This night (my Love) to is done.

ISSABEL. I, that when Edward was a King
Enthroned, by all obeyed,
Durst love thee, now do fear the thing
I shake, -- We are betrayed.

MORTIMER. Betrayed, me thinks thy Noble Soul
Should not be timorous,
Who Is he dares Mortimer control?
Fate must not menace us.

ISSABEL. I could rejoice that he were dead,
But that I durst conspire
To macerate his vital thread
Is horrible and Dire.

MORTIMER. In that, in that alone (fair Queen)
Thy Love is manifest,
All had been naught, had this not been
In sanguine Lines expre'st.

ISSABEL. Then let our Loves obstructer die,
But I Prognosticate,
Many, that his Throne shall supply,
Shall taste the selfsame Fate.

MORTIMER. No matter, I am sure my brow
Shall never empaled be,
With Britains wreath, a Crown I know
Was not ordained for me.

ISSABEL. Oh, but unhappie Edwards Son,
See not how he does lower,
He knows, although a Child, what is done,
He must ere long have power.

MORTIMER. But I Will anticipate his time,
The Boy shall to his Sire,
That he is Edwards is his Crime,
Ere long he shall expire.

ISSABEL. But my distressed Soul does Divine
Thou by his rage shall Perish,
I justly in a Prison pine,
That durst such Treason cherish.

EPIG. 22. To the hopeful and excellently Ingenious, Mr. JOHN QUARLES.
IT were a Treason, against Apollo's Gam,
Should I not consecrate one Epigram
To thee (sweet Quarles) whose Person though I never
Did bless my eyes with, I affect most dear,
Heir to thy Fathers Genius, He whose Brain
Measured the Earth, and Fathomed the Maine,
Whose Theologick Lays I do admire,
Who drew the Starr's down with his Thespian Lyre.
How like thy Father do thou strike the Strings,
Soaring aloft, borne on those very wings
Raped him to the third Heaven, where he is now,
Wearing as fair an Anadem on's brow
As god-like Bartas claims, go thou but on,
And doubt not of a Chaplet, and a Throne.
EPIG. 23. On Mr. Chapmans Incomparable Translation of Homers Works.
What none before durst ever venture on,
Unto our wonder is by Chapman done,
Who by his skill has made great Homers Song
To veil it is Bonnet to our English tongue,
So that the Learned well may question it,
Whether in Greek, or English Homer writ?
O happy Homer, such an able Pen
To have for thy Translator, happier then
By Golding.
Ovid, or By Phaer.
Virgil, who beyond their strength
Are sttretcht, each Sentence near a Mile in length:
But our renoun'd Chapman worthy praise,
And meriting the never blasted Bays,
Had rendered Homer in a genuine sense,
Yea, and has added to his Eloquence:
And in his Comments, his true sense does show,
Telling Spondanus, what he ought to know;
Eusthatius, and all that on them take
Great Homers Mistick meaning plain to make,
Yield him more dark, with far fetched Allegories,
Sometimes mistaking, clean, his learned Stories:
As 'bout the fly Menalaus, Agamemnons Brother, a Soft pated Prince, as Homer
[covertly] renders him throughout his Illiads, and as Mr. Chapman has aptly
observed in Homer.
Menalaus did inspire,
Junos retreat, Achilles strange desire;
but he, to his own sense does him restore,
And Comments on him better then before
Any could do, for which (with Homer) we
Will yield all Honor to his Memory.
EPIG. 24. Epitaph on Mr. Flood.
REader, thou need'st no Inundation fear,
Yet be it known a Flood's Imprisoned here.
EPIG. 25. To Mr. E. G.
YOu say, (Sir) that I do obscurely live,
And my retyr'dnesse does suspicion give,
Fame (you say) on wings does fly,
" Whole aves himself, does living die,
It Is true, I do in darkness go,
That I am thought-bound well I know,
Honor I seek not, I flight Fame,
I feel within, what those do blame
That are without, I scorn, it is true
The World, it me, I honor you.
EPIG. 26. Epitaph on Mr. James Gourd a singingman.
HFre lies a Chorister, whose voice applied
Unto the Organ, often has dignified
His maker, who so likt his Carroling,
He took him into heaven there to sing.
EPIG. 27. To the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.
YOu are the Brain, the Liver and the Heart,
We are the Hands
Of this great Body, and the Vital part,
The Feet whereon it stands,
The Bones, and Bulk, which must the Burden bear,
Therefore without offense
With you we (sure) may claim an equal share,
'Specially in the Common sense.
EPIG. 28. To Mr. Edward Gosling pitying my want of Books.
THe rage of these rude times has snatched away
My Books, from Aesop to Mirandula,
I now for Books have 'bove my head the skies,
The Truth for Light, and Reason for my Eyes,
Under me Earth, about me Air, and Sea,
Virtue for Guide, and Nature for my Way,
And truth to say, in Books, as Clouds, men see
Of whose Embracements, Centaures gotten be.
EPIG. 29. A Parallel.
AS Humors drawn up from the Ground
Are unto many Functions bound,
'Cause of their native property,
And climes through which their journeys be,
Some Meteors, that amaze below,
Some Comets, that fore-threaten woe,
Some hailestones, that afflict the earth,
Some rain, which hastens every birth,
Lightning and Thunder made of those
Cold regions double heates enclose:
So is mankind in other fashion
Raised and let fall with his own passion,
Formed, Transformed, made instruments
In many shapes, and many vents,
Feeding great men, as Vapors do,
And vading Scourge their Parents too:
Some mishap'd Meteors terrifying
True Spirits, under Tyrants lying,
Others like Winds, and made to blow
To breath themselves, and overthrow
Others, some like Dewes where they touch,
Exhalation-like, some flame too much,
Hatching in heates of power and will,
Thunders, and Flames, to amaze and kill.
EPIG. 30. To Mr. John Sob, of these times.
FAme, and Religion but assure
Vain man, to give wounds, and endure,
Those Princes still most famous are,
Who stain most earth with blood in war,
As when winds amongst themselves do jarre,
So restless humors bring forth war,
Seas then are tossed, the waves do fight,
The people bear the wounds of might,
All the diseases of the head
Descending till the Limbs be dead.
EPIG. 31. The Character of an accomplished Man.
He that is molded of a noble mind,
Dares bear (with Atlas) Heaven on his back
Flies not with feathers of a Buzzard kind,
Does reverence, not fear the Thunder crack.
Sups up his sighs, and swallows down his grief,
Beggs but of God, or of his great Vicegerents,
Cannot endure to name the word, Relief,
And serves but Honor, or her loved Adherents.
Knows his Deserts, and yet cannot Importune,
Bites on bare need, and yet laments no lack,
Hates to be called or thought the Child of Fortune,
Stoops not to Death, until his heart strings crack.
Lives like himself, and at his latest breath
Dies like himself, a Conqueror of Death.
EPIG. 32. To his Excellency, the Lord General Cromwell.
SIr, Power is proud, till it look down to Fear,
Though only safe, by ever looking there,
Kings Thrones were ever like enchanted fires,
Mighty to see, and easy to pass over:
The Torrid Zone of Tyranny retyres
Into the Frigid, and can never recover
Its Pristine Station, when to is dislocated
By Providence, and Power ingemminated:
Sir, ^ confess when one man rules all,
There Fear and Care, are secret ways of Wit,
Where all must rise, and only one must fall,
Safety aspire, and care must manage it.
Dead men are only trusted by the wise,
On speechl^sse Forms we may securely rise.
Those Spirits of Practice that contend with Fate,
Must by their Deaths do Honor to a State,
New counsels must be had, when Plannets fall,
Change has her Periods, and is natural.
EPIG. 33. To the profoundly Learned, and unparalleld Antiquary, John Seldom
Esquire.
THou living Library, the admiration
Of this our Borean Clime; who know each Nation
Their Origin, Laws, Ceremonies, all
Their ^ustomes trivial, or authent call,
All which thou have narrated with such skill,
That more then Camb^ens) all admier thy Quill,
Scalliger's but a Puple unto thee,
(The very Basis of Antiquity)
Sufficient Characters to express all things
Thou have, nor need'st thou Metaphorick wings:
For all the Earth is thine a Caspi^n Sea
Thou art, and all Brooks sally into thee,
But like the Ocean, thou giv'st back far more
To those clear springs, then thou receiv'st before;
From thee true living Wisdom does proceed,
Thou have the art of Floquence (indeed)
What bold presumption is it (then) in me
To dedicate my Epigrams to thee,
Yet so I dare to do, that all may know
I wish the censure of the rigid'st brow.
EPIG. 34. Not to wonder at the Monstrositie of these times.
Men's Vices, Beasts chief Virtues are,
^he shames of ^eace, the pride of War.
EPIG. 35. To Mall my Wife.
DEarest Love, I pray thee tell,
Is not he an Infidel,
That conceiv's thy dainty sex
Were only made for to perplex
Wretched mankind, and that the Gods,
Framed the first woman, when at odds:
The Whore Pandora with her Box
Brought healing medicines, not the Pox.
Hesiod was beside his sense
When he divulged with impudence
All the Plagues that fall on man
From Pandora first began.
O my Dear, whom I prefer
Above my Life, my wished Star,
In whose embraces I do sleep,
When I have folded up my Sheep,
Let not any casualty,
Any harsh Adversity
Dull thy noble sense, or yet
Force thee against thy stars to fret,
Philemon, and poor Baucis, who
Lived in penury, and woe,
By Saturnus and his Son
Were visited and Favors won,
When mighty Kings their Persons wanted,
Let naught make thee and I be daunted.
But what need I advertize thee,
Whose copious Ingenuitie,
Athenia makes more jealous far
Then when Arachne challenged her,
The Gods, IN me sure, appointed thee
As only fit, my Wife to be:
Juno, and Hymen, both delight
To wait on us, let Fortunes spite
But give us cause of mirth, the Graces
Do wait on us, and our Embraces.
EPIG. 36. The Conclusion.
It Is done, but (Englishman) if thou will it sit
As Judge, be sure thou have a Latin wit.
The end of the Sixth and last Book.
THE SOCRATICK SESSION, OR The Arraignment and Conviction, OF JULIUS SCALIGER.

By S. SHEPPARD.



LONDON. Printed by G. D. for Thomas Bucknell, at the Sign of the Golden Lion
in Duck-Lane, 1651.

The Persons in this PARLIAMENT.
ORPHEUS. LINUS. HESIOD. MUSEUS. MENANDER. ARISTOPHANES. SOPHOCLES. EURIPIDES.
PINDAR. ANACREON. THEOCRITUS. AESCHELINUS. APOLLONIUS. JUVENAL. VIRGIL. SENECA.
MARTIUS. CAPELLA. LUCRETIUS. HORACE. PERSIUS. MARTIAL. OVID. LUCAN. STATIUS.
CLAUDIAN. TIBULLUS. MANTUAN. PROPERTIUS. CATULLUS. AUSONIUS. PALINGENIUS.
MANILLIUS. BOETHIUS. HOMER, (as a mute) SCALIGER, the Delinquent. APOLLO,
President. NEMESIS, A Fury employed. THE CONVOCATION HOUSE. CASTALIA. MERCURY,
Crier of the Court.
To the truly judicious, my much honored Friend James Yate, Esquire.
Sir,
THe many Favors that have been put upon me by your profuse Palm, command at
least a manifestation of what gratitude I owe to your much meriting self:
(Sir) I know this Poem, (though concise) yet for the rareness and solidity of
the Subject, will find welcome with you. It castigates him, who has censured
all the Wits of the World, (from the Creation to his time.) Scaliger was indeed
a man of profound Learning, and admirable Elocution, but (sure) much besides
himself, when he jeeres (with his French wit) so grossly, and vituperatively,
the Master of all Learning, and Science, Divine HOMER.

Poetarum omnium, and praestantissimum, and Divinissimum,

(according to Plato) -- Cujusque ex ore profuso, Amnemque in tenues ausa and
deducere rivos, unius foecundia bonis. --

Manil. Astrol. LIB. 2. From whose large mouth for Verse, all that since live
Drew water, and grew bolder to derive
Into thin shallow Rivers his deep flood,
Richly luxuriant in one man's good.
The Fount of Wit was Homer, Learnings Sire,
And gave the Liberal Arts their living fire,
Apollo stood amazed, and did confess
Himself was equaled in Maeonides.
Out of him (says Learned Plutarch) are all Arts deduced, Angelus Politianus,
nominates him the true and only Apollo: His Iliads, and Odysses (says
Eusthatius) for their Excellency, may be worthyly called the Sun, and Moon of
the Earth: out of the entire affection that I bear to the Name, and Honor of
that most Divine and inimitable Wit, as also in the vindication of Poesy, so
deeply wounded by this Crittick, in detracting from Homers incomparable worth)
I have summoned (by Apollos Writts) most of all the ancient Greek, and Latin
Poets to a full Session, (as in Parliament) The manner of their meeting with
their various Votes, and Dissolution. Your self, may inform your self, in
half an hour.

Sir, Your humble Servant, S. SHEPPARD.

To the Author on his Socratick Session.
'TWas boldly ventured (Friend) what, to defy,
And fight with him, with whom all do complie,
Most out of fear, and others of affection,
This it is to have Apollo's grand protection:
Such a Dilinquent Scaliger was ever,
He has been blamed, (till now) arraigned never:
How does the grand Moeonian Bard rejoice
To hear the sound of thy Stentorian voice,
Reverberated by the Trump of Fame,
Purging his Honor, Deifying his Name:
Such power is in thy spell, (not like Medea
To raise up Pluto) but call down Astrea,
That at thy summons all the wits do come,
And for thy sake, forsake Elysium:
Their censure's just, and so is mine, thy Praise
Should not be Thanks, but Anadems of Bays.
Edward May.

THE SOCRATICK SESSION, OR The Parliament of Poets, Containing, The
Arraignment, and Conviction OF JULIUS SCALIGER.
MERCURY. O Yes, O Yes, come on, come on,
Ye tiplers of clear Helicon,
Here take your seats, ye wise, and grave,
And cramme up this Castalian Cave,
No matter though you sit all night,
Since countenanced by the god of light.

APOLLO, WITH A TRAIN OF BARDS. APOLLO to Homer. SIt here (grave Sir) or else
more rather
Fill that Throne, my most honored Father,
Thy Dorick Lyre
Made the Heavenly Quire
More wonder, and more joccund far
Then when sung the Giants War:
The rest (Hermes) I leave to thee,
Place each man, as is his Degree.

MERCURY. Orpheus, Linus, Hesiod,
Who gav'st a birth to every God:
You three
Accompany,
Unless you please for to prefer
This ancient Schoolmaster
To your ^ocietie; ORP. LIN. He merits it,
Is not this Musaeus
he Leander writ?

MERCURY. The same, why here is Menander too,
Faith (Sir) we did look for you.
Please (Sir) to be
Alone, You ere loved singularity,
Pray take your ease,
Sir, Aristophanes,
With Sophocles,
And Euripides,
You need not brawle --
For room, this Form will hold you all,
This seat must be reserved alone
For Pindar, and Anacreon,
They come amongst the rest for to discuss,
What! my smooth Theocritus,
Most accute in every Page,
Possessed with Lymphatick Rage,
Here are no Neat-heards -- sit thee down,
Whence comes this muffled Clown?

PINDAR. Oh it is our Friend
Aeschelinus, see his head
Is wounded, some Malevolent Feind
Shaped like an Eagle. MERCURY. Tread
Softly, for fear
Hyperion hear,
Whose wrath I must expect to bear,
If any I admit to come
With a cracked (...).
Good Sir come in,
The game is ready to begin,
Here only wants
You, and your Argonantes.
APOLLONIUS Enters. The Grecians all are marshaled for the Fight,
Now let me rank Aeneas offspring Right.
VIRGIL Enters. Stay (Sir) have you the face
To claim a place
Before Juvenal, we know your Muse
JUVENAL preferred before VIRGIL by MERCURY. Did the Moeonian, and Ascraean use,
Him no supply,
All sprang from his own Ingenuitie.
Now you may sit
Having done homage to his Wit,
Make way
For Seneca.
SENECA Enters. A Scuffle for Superiority. Nay be not angry (Sirs) for you
must know it,
He Is a Peripatetick, and a Poet.
MARTIUS CAPELLA Enters. The like to us
Art thou (sweet Martius,)
LUCRETIUS Enters. And thou Lucretius,
Sit ye together, be not vex't
Dear Horace, thou art next.
HORACE Enters with PERSIUS.
HORACE. I cannot Persius brook,
H'as such a crabbed look.

MERCURY. Still jeering, Flaccus, (Sir) sit down,
Wear (next to Juvenal) the Crown.
MARTIAL Enters. -- You have been mist
Quaint Epigrammatist.
OVID Enters. Oh Sir, y've lost the Day,
By your too tardy stay,
Admired Naso to would not please,
If we should Metamorphose these
Already seated, 'twould become
Another Tristium.
Therefore, though great
In worth, there take thy seat.

APOLLO. Active Cylenius
Bring hither next to us
Lucan, and Statius.
LUCAN AND STATIUS next APOLLO. Ye worthy pair, who did great Acts rehearse,
In far more mighty and Immortal Verse,
It is your due,
That I should honor you. -- here sit.

MER. Hoe stay, bear back there, -- it is not fit
That every gay Poetic man
Should press before sweet Claudian,
Though elder in degree,
You Are lesser far then he.
CLAUDIAN Enters, with TIBULLUS, PROPERTIUS, CATULLUS, AUSONIUS, PALINGENIUS,
MANILLIUS, BOETHIUS. Sit Claudian, now approach Tibullus,
Propertius, Mantuan, and Catullus,
Ausonius, Palingenius too,
(Sir) here is hardly room for you,
Yet enter, thou have a throat
Will help make up the Vote.

MERCURY. By the faith of gods, and men
You have undone us Gentlemen,
You cannot now inherit
The places which you merit.

MANIL. We Will only be spectators. BOE, We
Will not disturb the Company.

MERCURY. Your assent,
Must mix in this great Parliament,
Sweet Naso is alone
Without Companion,
You two sit next him.

APOLLO. Are all placed?

MER. Yes Sir, with much ado, at last.

APOLLO. Hear then (great Homer
Rival) and my honored Sonns,
(Beloved by the gods, and sacred Nine)
Whom I am proud to call Companions,
We convocated are by aid Divine,
To castigate a Critic Elfe,
Who Censured all men but himself,
Who has blasphemed the three times three,
Taxing the Master of all Poesy.
Great Homer, from whose mouth came all
That we can rare, or learned call,
To hear whom I amazed often have stood,
Listening to him, as some god:
All Rivers from the great Oceanus spring,
From him all Verse, he is the Poets King.
Bring the Delinquent (Atlantiades)
Unto the Bar, place him upon his knees.
Nemesis enters with Scaliger, places him at the Bar.
MER. Rhamnusian Nemesis -- appear
With the Cur'st Critic Scaliger.
Great light, he does refuse to kneel.

APOL. Whip him (stern Feind) and let him feel
Thy strokes. SCAL. Scalliger tormented.
Hold, hold, I am content,
Oh, wherefore am I hither sent?

APOL. Injurious Frenchman, know thou not the cause?
Thou Traitor to our Fundamental Laws,
Whose envious Treason's hurld
Through all parts of the World.
Have thou not uttered horrid Blasphemy,
Against my Crown, and the Muses Dignity?
What moved thee to belch forth
Aspertions against the worth
Of Divine Homer? making Maro far
(Although his Ape) 'bove him superior,
And therewith not content
Voted'st Museus much more eminent.
Do we not know when twenty years of Age
Thou could not give the meaning of one Page
Of the Phrygian Fabulators,
Though with the help of Commentators,
Yet afterward we do confess,
Thou understood'st twelve Languages,
Which makes thy crime the greater,
By consequence thy punishment compleater.
He Is Planet struck.

-- SCAL. My guilty sense
Cannot afford me so much impudence
For to deny
My treachery.
Great Phoebus, I acknowledge my offense,
By thy bright self, I swear,
I held great Homer dear:
His Poesy
As sung by thee,
Above all humane wit did seem to me,
Yet by Ambition lead,
I rashly censured
His most incomparable works; as low
That by eclipsing him, I great may grow.

APOLLO. This Ingenious free confession
Mitigates much of the Transgression,
But must not Anticipate
The destined rigor of thy fate.
You hear (great Rival) and the rest
Of my loved Sonns, this Critic has confessed
His Treachery, but there is no reason,
Acknowledgement should expiate a Treason,
Great Homer must not be
His Judge, do you decree
Each give his verdict,
But Impartially. -- Speak dearest Son --

SCALIGER CENSURED. ORPHEUS. Unto a Rock of ye.
Let him be chained. LINUS. To expiate his vice
With Ixion, give him torture on a wheel.
HESIOD. Tantalus torment let him feel.
MUSEUS. I still must sing as I was wont,
Plunge him (Leander like) in the Helespont.

MENANDER. Let Cerberus still worrie him, or let
Him to the chin in Phlegeton be set.

SOPHOC. Let him be given into Aenyos hand.

EURIPIDES. Let fell Maegera lash him with her brand.

PINDAR. In a steep gulf of fire
Let him howl, and nere expire.

ANACREON. Falling ever
From on high,
Wishing still
A greater ill,
And yet never,
Any other torture try.

LUCAN. Lucan, and Statius give their verdict amongst the Greeks is order to A
pollos appointment, who has preferred them to a place amongst them.
His Critic Soul into some flesh prefer.
Destined by Fate to be a Schoolmaster.

STATIUS. Or else by power Divine,
Seclude it in some Swine.

AESCHELINUS. Titius Kites still tear his heart.

APOLLONIUS. Horror from him never part.

JUVENAL. Beneath mount Aetna give him place
With the Ringleaders, of the snakefoot-race,
Once darted mountains at Joves face.

VIRGIL. Sysiphus snow-ball let him roll.

SENECA. Let the three Furies tear his Soul
Eternally, with furious ire.

MARTIUS CAPELLA. Confine him to that Lake of fire
Gyrts Erebus. LUCRETIUS. I confirm his Vote.

HORACE. Let Sulphur down his throat
Continually be powered.

PERSIUS. Let him give ease
Unto the Belides,
And ever mourn,
Filling the fatal Urne.

OVID. Let him still curse his Fate,
While he the Elizian Joys does contemplate.

CLAUDIAN. Charons assotiate let him be
To ferrie,
Souls in his Wherrie,
And tug the oar, till the earth dissolved be.

TIBULLUS. And then be cag'd with swart Tysiphone.

PROPERTIUS. Sodoms destruction still inviron him.

MANTUA. Ever in black Cocytus let him swim.

AUSONIUS. Seat him where Nero sits.

CATULLUS. Place him on
Some ever-flaming Grydion. PAL. The like I Vote.

MANILUS. Let him still melt, and never expire
In THIESTES sickly fire.

BOETHIUS. With Homers Momus (Lucian) seat him,
And let his Fancy ever cheat him.

APOLLO. These are your Votes. OMNES They are.

APOLLO. Then thus,
I crown your censures. Japetus
Sits where my peircing Rays never shoot
With sullen Saturn, dark as soot
All about them is the sky,
There place this Critic (Mercury.)
Every day let him torment tastes
Varying, as their Votes have past.
A SHOUT. So let him ever ban his Birth.

OMNES. Thanks great Apollo, Heaven and Earth
Still bless thy Beams.

APOLLO. Now all be gone,
Thus ends our SOCRATICK SESSION.

MERCURY. Hyperion, a name of APOLLO.
Hyperion, and Homer all alone,
Are flown up to the milkie path,
And now every Bard that has
Place in Elysium, follow me along,
Each Prophet chaunting a Triumphant song.

The End.
A MAUSOLEAN MONUMENT, Erected By a SORROWFUL SON over His Deceased Parents:
With THREE PASTORALS.

Two of them alluding to some Late Proceedings between Parties.

By S. SHEPPARD.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Thomas Bucknell, at the Sign of the Golden Lion
in Duck-Lane, 1651.

To the worthy, my much honored Kinsman, Christopher Clapham of Beamsly
Esquire.
SIR,
I Know you are as far from pride as Ignorance, and not only understand, but
love endeavors of this kind; the ensueing Ellegies (memorizing my much
honored Parents) I present to your Patronage: for that you were well
acquainted with their persons (when on Earth) and can witness (with me) to the
World, that I am not partial in my praises: Sir, I have a hope that reason ere
long may clear your eyesight, that so at length you may look up, and view
him, whom hitherto you have unkindly neglected, to hasten which desired day, I
have not only allarumed you with groans from graves, but do also sound Pan's
Pipe in your ears, dedicating unto you also the following Eglogues, and I
beseech you, assure your self, that as they cannot prove disgraceful to me,
so they must needs be esteemed, an addition of Honor to you: among all the
Poets in that wise age wherein Moecenas lived, Virgil, and Horace were the
only the only two, whose mean Fortunes needed his liberallitie, as well as
their virtues deserved his acquaintance, how liberal he was, their
acknowledgements in their works have testified to the World. Sir, you are
blessed with much substance, you cannot better provide for your name, then to be
kind to those, in whose power it is either to cajol, or canonize you to all
posterity. I may safely aver that it was happy for Moecenas (not only that
Virgil, and Horace lived in his time, but) that those two famous men should
live in such estates as to need his bounty, though that excellent
Epigarmmatist, Martial, could say, Sint Moecenates, non deerunt Flacce Marones.

Yet the contrary (by experience) has been found: Maroes have been borne, when
no Moecenasses have lived to cherish them. As Homer, the wonder of Posterity,
in his own time little esteemed, and Moecenasses have lived and wanted Maroes.
Alexander the great (then whom none more desirous of Fame, or more able to
requite, yet (if we may credit Arianus) found not one Poet to memorize his
actions. I have been Sir) some thing prolix on this subject of Poets and
Patrons, to make you sensible, that your liberality to the Muses, will be
retributed with double advantage, you may as you please determine of me, that
as I never had, I care not how soon I loose.

Sir, I am Yours, Affectionately devoted, S. SHEPPARD.

FUNERAL ELLEGIES.
AN ELLEGIE ON THE DEATH OF MY MOST DEAR AND REVEREND FATHER, DOCTOR HARMAN
SHEPPARD, who Deceased July 12. 1639.
IN what words shall I cloth my Verse whilst I
(O Father) do weep out thy Ellegie?
Stab me some one that loves me, that my blood
Spouting from forth my veins, like to a flood
I may take thence my Ink, and so proceed
To write a line for every ounce I bleed.
Prompt me some Ghost, Melpome thy aid
Afford, O thou most sad dejected Maid,
I court thee now, as chiefest of the Nine,
And truth to say, thou only art Divine,
And Lovely in my eyes, help me to moan,
Thou that for fifty slaughtered Sons did groan
Whiles thy fair City sparkled to the skies,
And thou each minute anxious of surprise,
Thy grief as mine was most transcendent sure,
And mine with thine shall evermore endure.
What direful Plannet, enemy to man,
Usurped the Hemispheare, what influence ran
Over the Earths surface, and produced that day
On which my Reverend Sire was snatched away?
Ye Fatal Sisters, whom all mortals dread,
Oh how durst you in fury cut his thread
Who was Joves darling, and whose single skill
Curbed iron Mors, and slav'd him to his will,
While (like another Aesculapius)
He redeemed souls destind for Erebus,
And by the working mineral alone
Gave them from death a sure redemption:
Great Paracelsus Son, he called was,
And by his skill, as strange things brought to pass,
He knew the motions of the Heavens, how far
Extent Jehovah has assigned each star,
Orions progress, and the hidden cause
Makes Cynthia vary, gives Oceanus Laws:
Sleep blessed Spirit in thy gellid urne,
All I can do is thy great loss to mourn,
And by this deathlesse Verse to raise thy fame,
That after times may reverence thy name.
HIS EPITAPH.
GReat Aesculapiu's Son here lies,
A Leech that cured all malladies,
A Paracelsian, and yet knew
Better then Gallen how to do,
He taught the operations
And virtues of most herbs and stones,
The day and hour he did impart,
That Mors would strike him with his dart,
Three years before his Soul went hence,
Age laid him here, no impotence:
Grim Death, it to the soul did grieve,
His skill so many should reprieve,
Destined to Charons Boat, in ire
With Atropos he did conspire,
And contrary to Joves Decree,
Robbed him of his Mortality,
When he had numbered ninety years,
Sighed for with sobbs, condol'd in tears.
AN ELLEGIE ON THE DEATH OF MY DEAR AND TRULY VIRTUOUS MOTHER, Mis.
PETTRONELLA SHEPPARD, Who Deceased September 10. 1650.
ALL I can do I will, Nature alone,
Does not enjoyn't, the valluation
I set on Virtue does command my Quill (Tryumphant Saint) these lines for to
distill:
Thou gav'st me life, now thou have lost thy breath,
^et me at least preserve thy Name from Death.
^ will not tax the stars, or on pretense
Of grief defy each heavenly influence,
Quarrel with Atropos, give Mors the lie,
And denounce war against each Destiny,
For snatching thee away, a special Fate
From hence to Heaven did thy Soul translate,
This dirty orb, not worthy for to bear
A Soul so matchless, so Divinely fair.
Vriell did Eliah's Chariot guide,
In which up to Olympus thou did ride.
As Sol beneath a Cloud, as Gold in dung,
So were thou conversant on Earth too long,
Prosperity could not beguile thy sense,
Nor Fortunes frown cause thy impatience,
I am not partial in what I aver,
I would be Truths, and not thy Chronicler.
Had thou survived in those imperfect times
When He find wrote, and Homer sang his rimes,
Thou had been VESTA, or some Dietie,
More glorious, more divinely chaste then she:
^^r had those of that age thy virtues seen,
The first and greatest Sybill thou had been:
Or had the Romish Faith thy soul surprizd,
Most sure ere this thou had been canonized,
And placed it Rubric, found as fair a day
As Agnes, Agathe, or Vrsula.
What though the pomp, and that affected state
Which many a Lais does accumulate,
Was wanting at thy death, and in the dark
(Perhaps without the Priest, or Parish Clarke)
Thou were but half inhum'd, this is thy glory,
That both in life and death things transitory,
Were thy contempt and scorn (perhaps to was so)
Decreed above thou to thy grave should go
Like Moses wrapped in Mysts, least after days
Reading this story of thy lasting praise,
Should erect temples to thy virtuous Name,
Search for thy body, and adore the same.
Rest, Rest thou glorious Saint, the feigned praise
Which does unto the skies the glory raise
Of Aria, Portia, and Lucretia,
Evadne, or famed Artimesia,
Suffers eclipse in thee. O sad (...),
That thou whose Virtues were so Paramount,
Should find so little Room in the book of Fame,
Yet this shall serve to keep alive thy Name,
I would say more, did not my tears prevent,
Be this thy Pyramid and Monument.
HER EPITAPH.
WIth reverend awe this earth tread on,
It merits your Devotion.
Beneath this turfe lies Chastity,
Wisdom, and real Piety
Kneaded together, buried here
(Though without Tomb or Sepulcher)
Lies Arias, Loyal love and all,
That we can rare, or precious call.
A woman, who for wit might vie
With Pallas, for sobriety
With the famed Lucrece.
Wife of Collatine,
Her gesture grave, her words Divine,
No Fortune could her thoughts divide,
A Saint she lived, a Saint she died.
THE ADVENTUROUS BARD. OR (UXORIOUS) ORPHEUS HIS DESCENT.
While Sweet Euridice in flight
Invoked the sad and shady night,
For to abscond her from the eye
Of Aristaeus.
him that sought her lustfully,
The chaste soul as she fled never spide
A Snake (by whose fell sting she di'd)
Lurking in the rank grown grass, but all
The Dryad's at her funeral
Wept on high Pangaea, and
The Rodopeian Towers, the Land
Of Rhaesus, yea the Gets for woe,
Athenian, Orythia too,
But he his sick soul solacing,
Often to his instrument would sing
Of his loved Wife o'th shore alone,
Morning, nor night could end his moan,
He through the gloomie wood did venture,
Plutos greisly cave to enter
To The Ghosts, and their grim King he went
Hearts that to prayers did never relent:
From Hells dark nookes the Ghosts do throng,
Even shadows moved by his song,
Came forth by thousands, as a flight
Of little Birds in the woods, whom night
Or showers, do thither drive in shoales,
Ghosts of both sexes, the great souls
Of Heroes, and of Virgins there,
Youths buried ere their parents were,
Whom swart Cocytus banks enclose,
And that black poole that never flows,
Styx nine times 'bout it rowles his waves,
Hells inmost Vaults, and torturing Caves
Were op't, the Eumenides forbear
To menace with their snakie hair,
Yea, Cerberus to bark refraines,
Ixions wheel unmoov'd remains,
Returning not least touched had he
Behind him, his Euridice
Restord to life (for this accord
Proserpine made with her black Lord)
Forgetful love a frenzy wrought,
But trivial, could Fiends pardon ought
Near to the light forgetful he
Must needs vie with Euridice:
Which frustrates all the pains he took,
The Tyrants Covenant is broke,
And thrice Avernus lake resounds
Thus she,
EURIDICE TO ORPHEUS.
What madness thus confounds
Thy self and me, stern Fates surprise
Me bcak, Deaths slumbers close my eyes,
Farewell; Im'e summond, and must go
Back to the iron Isle of Woe:
As smoke fleets, so she vanishd there,
And left him for to claspe the air,
He Would try again no more, alas,
Will churlish Charon let him pass.
What should he do, the Fiends do move
With tears, with Prayers, the Gods above:
His cold Wife serried thence away
In Charons boat, seven Months they say
Weeping nere Strymons forfeit waves
In dark and solitary Caves,
To hard Rocks did his Ills lament,
Trees moved, and Tigers did relent,
So Philomel on an Orange Tree,
Wailes her youngs loss, whom cruelly
A Husbandman ere fleg'd for flight,
Snatched thence, she spends in grief the night,
From a bough sings her sorrow there
With moanes filling the places near,
Now heavenly Muse with Art relate
The Thracian Poets future fate,
Nor Venus, or bright Hymen's rites
Moved him, wandering in woeful plights,
Ore Riphaean fields, where frost er'e lies
Scythian ye, snowy Tanais,
Bewailing Plutos bootlesse boon,
And that again his Wife was gone.
Those Dames whose beds he did despise,
Raging in Bacchus Sacrifice:
His limbs they strowd ore the fields abroad,
When swift Oeagrian Hebrus flood,
His ravishd head did bear along
Euridice, his dying tongue
Ah poor Euridice did resound,
Which words, the banks did ecchoe round.
His Father Phoebus made more moan,
Then when he lost his Phaeton:
(Some do avouch that for three days
He left his Carre, put off his Rays)
To see his Orpheus rudely rent,
Up to Olympus straight he went,
Fell at Joves feet, of him desires
A Tomb, he grants what he requires:
His Sonns torn limbs he up does gather
(Wailing like to some earthly Father)
Burying them in the milkie-way,
Caused by a bright refulgent ray,
He darts with a Paternal care
On his loved Orpheus Sepulcher,
Here Orpheus sits, and sweetly sings
And strongly strikes the quavering strings,
When Jove, and all the gods do come,
(For they must reeds pass by this Tomb)
Unto their Senate House, and there,
Determine for to smight or spare:
Still-ever-clogd-vicious-mankind
Here the sweet singer is confined:
Yet in no worse a prison lies
Then what immures the Dieties.
The End.
PASTORALS.
THE FIRST PASTORAL.
Amarillis. Claius.
The ARGUMENT.
Amarillis does discover
Her desires unto her Lover,
Showing how her nature scorns
Those whom Virtue not adornes,
After which the swain and she
Intend by Hymen linkt to be.
IN the merry month of May,
When the Birds on every Spray
Sat chirping Amarillis fair,
Softer then down, sweter then air,
Drove her floks from forth their fold
Which when Claius did behold,
He said, loved Nymph, be pleased that I
May you this day accompany,
Our flocks together feeding, we
Beneath some broad-branch'd Myrtle Tree
Will sit, where with my pipe will I
Make you pleasant mellodie,
And when Sol our shades shall lengthen,
We with Cates our selves will strengthen.
Within my bag (by me is put)
As good sowse as ere was cut,
With Butter made of purest milk,
And of Curds as soft as silk,
And in my bottle nappie Ale
Made of sweet Malt, and two months stale.
And though my buskins are not painted,
Nor I with Courts and Kings acquainted,
Yet, gentle Nymph, take note that I
Am not born ignoblly:
I have seen the Graces three,
When my pipe made mellodie
To dance about me, and the Faeries
(Who so often nym our Daries)
In a Ring to compass round,
Queen Mab.
Obera, tripping on the ground,
Leave behind them to be seen
A perfect Ovall on the green,
The Satyrs rude and full of ire
Have sat and listened to my Lyre,
And when my pipe has ceased to play
Have discontented gone away.
Then, sweet Nymph be pleased that I
May you this day accompany.
Quoth Amarillis, So may PAN
Preserve my flocks from harm and wan,
So may the Woulfe keep from my Fold,
As I thee (Shepherd) dear do hold.
Although Myrtillus seek my love,
And Palemon, the same do prove,
Although Thomalin much me gives,
And by his wealth to win me strives,
Yet I Myrtillus hate, for he
Coming the other day to me,
As I sat beneath the shade,
Which a broad spreading Beech-tree made,
Had words, and gestures so uncivil,
I see his tongue and heart are evil.
Palemon too, although his flock
Be great, and greater far his stock,
Yet I affect him not, for though,
He has the art to shroud it so,
I am acquainted with his mind,
And that he is to ills inclind:
For the other day within the wood
My flocks by chance having strayed for food,
As I to gather them was going,
Under a tree I found him woing
A Shepherdess unto his Lust,
But seeing me, himself he thrust
Amid the thick and shadie boughs:
And though Thomalin much allows
In gifts to win me, so to more
Besides my self he gives store.
Thus (gentle Shepherd) none of these
So well as thee my fancy please,
If thou art mine, as I am thine,
In Hymen's joys we will combine.
Quoth Claius, Shepardesse I ween
The god of love my Friend has been,
That thou do motion my desires,
And that so mutual are our fires:
May Woulves burst in unto my fold,
And kill those Ewes I dearest hold,
And may my wreath-hornd Rams decrease,
Nor yield to me their wonted fleece,
As will love thee till I die,
But see Titan apace does hie,
Driving his fiery Carre amain
The brinie Ocean to attain:
Now lets depart, to morrow we
Will sing to Hymen merrily.
THE SECOND PASTORAL.
AMYNTAS. ADMETAS.
The ARGUMENT.
Distressed Amyntas sits and mournes,
All proferd joy, and solace scorns,
He tells the story of his woes
Piteous to hear. Admetas does
His utmost to assuage his grief,
But Counsel yields him no relief
Naught will assuage it, to the skies,
He sadly shoots a look, and dies.
ADMETAS. A Mintas wherefore do thou moan
As if all thy joys were gone,
Up man, leave this uncouth shade,
This tenebrous and fatal glade,
Where none but Satyrs used to prance,
And the nimble Faeries dance;
See, thy sheep go all astray,
Thy belt and scrip is stolen away,
Thy pipe lies near the Brook in twain,
Cheer up, O thou dejected Swain.

AMYNTAS. Cease (good Admetas) thy harsh din,
And know I suffer for my sin,
Under this broad spreading Beech,
Whose curled front to Heaven does reach,
I Will lie, and listen to the Owl,
And languishing sigh out my Soul.

ADMETAS. So to dare thy frowning Fate,
Argues thee madly desperate,
Most loved Shepherd, what may be
The cause of thy great misery?

AMYNTAS. O Friend, to will but augment my grief,

ADMETAS. To breath one woe is some relief,
All the Shepherds of the plain
Mourn for thee delicious Swain,
They sorrow that thy Pipe is still,
Which came so near to Astrophill,
Yea, wont as well to please the route,
As the rare Lays of Collin Clout:
Their Oaten Reeds they also break,
And make great sorrow for thy sake.

AMYNTAS. May they be happy, I am lost,
Split when I hope to harbor most,
I feell the frozen hand of death,
But yet before I yield my Breath,
I Will tell thee (dear Friend) ere thou go,
The cause and progress of my woe.

ADMETAS. Here I Will lie down, proceed to tell,

AMYNTAS. Admetas hear and mark me well,
Thou knewst fair Cloris, lovely fair,
Who tied winged Cupid in her hair,
The little god being glad to stay,
Did with his golden-fetters play,
Lovely as Hebe, fairer far
Then she the plumpe god made a star;
As coldly chaste as ere was she,
Titan turned to Laurel tree,
Wise as Tritonia, her bright eyes,
Dazzled Apollo in his rise,
Her forehead cheerful, corrall lip'd,
Her cheeks were Roses in milk dipped,
Fingers such as Aurora fair
When pleating her old Tythons hair,
This goddess of my life and I
(Joynd in mutual amity)
By Hymen to the Temple led,
Dame Flora having deckd our bed,
To add unto our active sports
Fortune who still our wishes thwarts
Joining with Atropos conspired,
To kill the thing I so desired,
Chloris in the Temple dies,
Her Nuptials are her Obsequies.

ADMETAS. Most gentle Shepherd I confess,
Thou have great cause of heaviness,
But wise men have concluded still
It Is vain to wail an helpless ill.

AMYNTAS. Her memory remains with me,
Although her body buried be,
Ye purling brooks, who murmuring
Still run on errands to your King,
Earth-shaking Neptune, bid him rore
Until he do eat up the shore,
And let his Tritons loud resound
The cause, and dolor of my wound,
Both Death, and Destiny, and Hell,
Avernus, where the Furies dwell,
With the loathsome stream of Stix,
In their Counsels do commix
For to rob me of my Bliss,
Staying my Love in shadie Dis.

ADMETAS. What frenzy does possess thy brain,
O thou late most honored Swain?
But Love I know no Law abides,
Since his great power, Heaven guides,
And all things that on earth survive,
Without they love they never thrive.
"Love alters nature, rules Reason,
"Makes vice a Virtue, Virtue Treason.
Jove, whose voice Olympus shakes,
Love, to be transformed makes.
Love caused Hypollitus with briers
(Shunning Phaedras lustful fires)
To be out of his Chariot born,
And into many pieces torn.
Love laid Absyrtus limbs o'th Strand,
Scattered by his Sisters hand,
Forced Pasiphae that impious trull)
To the embraces of a Bull.
Love great Alcides did betray,
And while upon Polixena
Achilles doated, he was slain,
(Rhamnusia so her will did gain.)
Love, smooth Leander did compel
To swim the Helespont so well.
No marvel then that thou art taken
(Admintas) thus unto thy bane,
These were with living beauties fired
By thee a dead Maid is desired.

AMYNTAS. Admetas, cease to upbraid my will,
'Lesse thou have Podalyrius skill,
And with thy ointments can assuage
The fire that in my heart does rage,
In direful sobbing, sighs and tears,
Perpetual plaints I Will spend my years,
On Rocks, in Dens, and deserts I
Will breath my woes incessantly,
Farewell for ever, my dear Flocks,
Ye Woods, ye Rivers, and ye Rocks,
A black stone ever on this day,
Let each true Lover cast away;
On which let Titan never shine.
But let the clustering clouds combine
For to obscure the sight of day,
And dim the glories of his ray,
Let loathsome snakes loud hissing keep,
And scaly fishes leave the deep,
To come on shore, let scritch-owles sing
Myrtles wither, Willowes spring;
Dearest Chloris, see I come
To meet thee in Elysium.

THE THIRD PASTORAL.
LINUS. CORIDON.
The ARGUMENT.
Linus a Shepherd does explain
To Coridon, a rigid Swain,
What learned Shepherds once there were,
And who do now the Laurel bear,
And (as he is able) yields praise
Unto their most admired Lays.
LINUS. COme Coridon sit down by me,
Our flocks securely feeding be,
While Phoebus beams do parch the earth,
Giving the slime of Nilus birth,
An hour weel wholly spend in chat,
Finding discourse of this, and that.

CORIDON. I list not spend my time so ill,
But yet because it is your will,
I Will sit, though much against my mind,
Now -- what talk with me will you find.

LINUS. Indeed I know thou love to hear
Of naught, but how thy Ox will bear
His yoke, and when thy sheep to sheare,
That thou may make a gainefull year,
But yet to me more pleasant is
To hear Tytirus play I wis
Upon his oaten Reed, while he
Does make delitious mellodie,
(As once to Orpheus Harp) each tree
Does nod, Beasts of the wood agree
To cast aside their furious kind,
And take to them a gentle mind,
While he records in pleasant verse
Sweettales of Love, and does rehaerse
His dreams and songs, the stones do move.

CORIDON. O fool with fancies much in love,
I wot not what Tytirus was,
Nor for his tales and songs, do pass,
But yet I pray thee let me hear
Yet more of this fantastic gear,
If they were Shepherds like as we.

LINUS. O Coridon that cannot be,
They pass us Swainlings all as far,
As does the Moon the smallest Star,
But I to thee will now display
What I have heard my Father say.
Next unto Tytirus there came
One that deservd a greater name,
Then was bestowed, but when She swaid,
Whom to this day some call a Maid,
Then Collin Clout his pipe did sound,
Making both Heaven and Earth resound;
The Shepherds all both far and near
About him flocked his lays to hear,
And for his songs he was so famed,
He was the Prince of Shepherds named:
And next to him was the sweet quill
Of far renowned Astrophil
Admired, who whether that he chose
To pipe in Verse or else in Prose,
Was held the bravest swain to be,
Ere folded Flocks in Arcadie:
After him rose as sweet a Swain,
As ever pip'd upon the Plain,
He sang of wars, and Tragedies
He warbled forth, on him the eyes
Of all the Shepherds fixed were,
Rejoicing much his songs to hear.
And then lived He who sweetly sung,
Orlandos fate in his own tongue,
Who would not deigne to divulge his own,
But by another would be known,
O gentle Shepherd we to thee
Are bound in a supreme degree.
And after him a swain arose,
In whom sweet Ovids Spirit chose
For to reside, he sang of Love,
How Cupid Ladies hearts can move,
And each how large the Continent
Of Arcadie is in extent,
He praisd his maker in his Lays,
And from a King received the Bays.

CORIDON. Although thy words a mystery
Include, not understood by me,
Yet these I think our Fathers were,
Have we none now their names to bear?
And able are their Pipes to sound
As loud as those so much renownd.

LINUS. Yes Coridon, I Will tell thee then,
Not long ago lived learned Ben,
He whose songs, they say, outvie
All Greek and Latin Poesy,
Who chanted on his pipe Divine,
The overthrow of Cataline,
Both Kings and Princesses of might,
To hear his Lays did take delight,
The Arcadian Shepherds wonder all,
To hear him sing Sejanus fall,
O thou renowned Shepherd, we
Shall never have one again like thee,
With him contemporary then,
(As Naso, and famed Maro, when
Our sole Redeemer took his birth)
Shakespeare trod on English earth,
His Muse does merit more rewards
Then all the Greek, or Latin Bards,
What flowd from him, was purely rare,
As born to bless the Theater,
He first refined the Commick Lyre,
His Wit all do, and shall admire,
The chiefest glory of the Stage,
Or when he sung of war and Strage,
Melpomene soon viewd the globe,
Invelop'd in her sanguine Robe,
He that his worth would truly sing,
Must quaffe the whole Pierian spring.
And now -- (be gone ye gastfull fears
Alas I cannot speak for tears)
There is a Shepherd cag'd in stone
Destined unto destruction,
Worthy of all before him were,
Apollo him does first prefer,
Renowned Lawreate be comtent,
Thy works are thine own Monument.
Apollo still affords supply,
For the Castalian Fount's nere dry,
Two happy wits, late brightly shone,
The true sons of Hyperion,
Fletcher, and Beaumont, who so wrote,
Iohnsons Fame was soon forgot,
Shakespeare no glory was alow'd,
His Sun quite shrunk beneath a Cloud:
These had been solely of esteem,
Had not a Sucklin Rivald them.
Sir John Sucklin.
SUCKLIN, whose neat superior phrase
At once delights, and does amaze,
Serene, sententious, of such worth,
I want fit words to set it forth,
Exactly excellent, I think,
He used Nepenthe stead of Ink,
In this he all else does outdo,
At once he is grave, and sportive too.
And next to him well rankt may be
He, whose Pipe melodiously
Does sound, who for his well-tuned Lays,
May before Plautus claim the Bays,
Whose Commick strains, and Tragic sounds,
Do ecchoe all about our grounds:
O gentle Shepherd still pipe on,
Still take deep draughts of Helicon,
And thou wilt be rankt I make no doubt
With Tytirus and Collin Clout.

CORIDON. Come let us rise, I wonder why,
Thou Wilt spend thy time so foolishly,
By this we might our traps have set,
The Wolf within our toiles to get,
Have made new Hurdles for our fold,
While we have heard these stories told,
That are not worth a lock of wool,

LINUS. Wisely to speak unto a Fool
Is madness, come, bright Sol declines,
And glimmering on the Hills he shines.
Lets fold our flocks, which done, then I
My self will to my pipe apply.

The End.
ANINTOR. MARTAGON.
This fragment (because Pastoral) though of a deeper sense then the other, was
at the earnest entreaty of some Friends inserted by the Author, who was forced
to maime his own, etc.

MARTAGON. NOw Titans heat the mountains Snow dissolves,
All pleasing Ver in her smooth arm involves
Meadows, and Woods, and like some gaudy Queen
Wears various colors, but delights in green,
Here let us sit, and descant on our Fate,
This Poplar to Alcides dedicate.

AMINTOR. Rather beneath you branched balefull Yew,
That Pitch tree, or black Yvie in our view,
Lets throw our selves, and with alternate cries,
Force audience from the deafned Dieties,
Who seem to fly from our complaints and us,
As once from Typhon, and great Iapetus.

MARTAGON. Here we hunt Bores with a loopt Spanish Dart,
Take Cranes in springes by the Phrygian Art,
Far from our Native, etc. -- Ol -- Isle,
On which when thou Olympic Jove did smile,
Nor fertile Egypt, nor rich Lydia more,
Nor Medes, nor Parthians did their -- adore,
Divine Amintor change thy oaten Pipe,
For the shrill Trumpet, and the solemn Fife,
To Panopea, Glaucus, Inoes boy,
Whole herds of Beeves, and sheep, we will destroy,
When thou imbarkst with thy Iberian train,
To win thy own Ruina back again,
Fair Opis, Deiopeia, Cydippe
Ligaea, Spio, and Cymodoce,
Ar' thusa, Clio, and Lucothoe,
By Amphitrites side, shall waft thee ore,
Dancing before thee to Ruinas Shore.

AMINTOR. Farewell then Pales, and thou god whose Sire,
By a wronged Goat did in the waves expire,
Tysiphone assume thy knotted snakes,
Which with the surfeit of Aechidna makes
Earth tremble, and the pines of Ossa nod,
Piercing the Palace of the Stygian god,
Thou Patroness of Rhamnus help thy Priest,
My wrongs thou know, my innocence thou see.

MARTAGON. But on what soil, in what Illustrious Coast,
Shall we discourse with thy great Fathers Ghost?
As once the witty, famed Dulichian guide
Did with Tyresias shade, when terrified
With fear of future woes, the hand of Fate
Crushing him (under Aerycinas hate.)

AMINTOR. If Orpheus had the power Hells gates to see,
Entering in search of his Euridice,
(Caught by Avernian Juno's wise) if he
Who conquered Latium, peopled Brittanie,
(As once Amphitrios Son) by Sybill led,
Viewd Plutos Palace, and with arms out-spread
Courted his Fathers shade, why may not I,
With (Atlas Grandchild) wingd-foot Mercury
Hyperion ayding, pass black Erebus,
Still burning Phlegeton, and Tartarus,
Not ceasing till with happy speed I come,
And kiss my Sire in blessed Elysium.

To the Reader on the Errors of the Press.
I Gave the Bullion good into the Mint,
Do thou cement the fractions of the Print.
FINIS.

