THE Justice of Peace His CLERKS CABINET: OR, A Book of Presidents, or
Warrants, fitted and made ready to his hand for every Case that may happen
within the compass of his Masters Office.

FOR The ease of the Justice of Peace, and more speedy dispatch of Justice.

By WILLIAM SHEPHARD Esquire.

LONDON: Printed by D. Maxwell, for William Lee, Daniel Pakeman, and Gabriel
Bedell, and are to be sold at their Shops in Fleet Street. 1660.

The REASON Of the Printing of this BOOK.
WHen we laid down and gave you the learning of the Office of the Justice of
the Peace without Warrants, we showed you what they might do: but did not show
you how they might do it: By the want whereof it has been found, in our own
and other men's experience, that Justice has been sometimes hindered; for the
Justice of the Peace, well knowing the danger of sending abroad a Warrant not
warranted by the Law, both to himself, and the inferior Officer that shall
execute it, and not having a safe Warrant in readiness, he has not
(especially in a case not common) thought it safe to trust his Clerk herein,
and oft-times by this means the offender has escaped. We have been therefore
much pressed to make a supply herein, and did purpose to have done it in the
next Edition of the Office of the Justice of Peace, which (if God will) may ere
long with many additions and alterations be dispatched, but that it would then
have made the Book too big. Wherefore we have thought it best to let the
Reader have them asunder, that they may be fit Pocket-books for the Master and
his Man, as they please. We know that something has been done of this subject
before by others, But by that time it has been seen what we have done, we are
well assured it will be said, That which we have done herein was not without
need, and will be very pleasing and profitable to the Justice of Peace his
Clerk, and his Master also: and will be well accepted of all men.

The TABLE
A.
Alehouses and Drunkards. Warrants about them. Chap. 10. Mittimus concerning
this, Chap. 21. Numb. 6. Apprentices. See Poor, Master and Servants, in Chap.
11.
B.
Bailment and Mainprise, See Recognisances. Bastard, See Poor. Behavior.
Warrants of the good Behavior, Chap. 7. Numb. 2. See Mittimus for it, in Chap.
21. Numb. 3. See Recognisances for it, in Chap. 20. Numb. 14. Bind over.
Warrants to bring in to bind over, Chap. 18. Bridges, See High ways.
C.
Certificate. Some Presidents for it, Chap. 2^. Constables. Warrants for making
new Constables. Chap. 16.
F.
Felony. Warrants concerning this. Chap. 4. Mittimus concerning this. Chap. 21.
Numb. 1. Supersedeas, in Chap. 22. In Recognisance, Chap. 20. Numb. 8. Forcible
Entry. Warrants in it. Chap. 5.
H.
Highways. Warrants about it. Chap. 17.
I.
Indentures for Apprentices, See Poor. Chap. 6. Numb. 11. Indictments. Chap.
26.
L.
Liberate, Presidents for it, Chap. 23. License, Presidents for it, Chap. 24.
Lords Day: Warrants about this, Chap. 3.
M.
Masters, Servants, Laborers and Apprentices: Warrants concerning these, Chap.
11. Misdemeanor. A general Warrant for Misdemeanor. See it in Chap. 19. Numb.
1, 3. Mittimus, Some Rules for, and some Presidents of it. Chap. 21. Forcible
Entry. Chap. 5.
O.
Orchard: Warrant for Robbing Orchards, in Chap. 19. Numb. 2.
P.
Peace, Warrants concerning it, and against Tumults. Chap. 2. A Warrant of the
Peace. Chap. 7. In supersedeas. Chap. 21. Numb. 2. See in Recognisances, Chap.
20. Numb. 1, 3. Plague, Warrants about it. Chap. 15. Poor, Warrants concerning
this. Chap. 6. Prisoner, Warrant to sell his own goods, to pay the charge to
carry him to Gaol. Chap. 13.
R.
Rates: Warrants to make Rates. Chap. 12. Riot, Warrants about it. Chap. 5.
Rogues, Warrants concerning them. Chap. 13. Mittimus concerning them. Chap. 21.
Numb. 8. Recognisance and Bailment, the Rules of it, and Presidents for it.
Chap. 20.
S.
Sabbath, See Lords Day. Supersedeas. Chap. 22.
T.
Testimonial, See License Trespass. Warrant for small Trespasses, in Orchards,
Hedges, Woods. See it in Chap. 19. Numb. 2.
W.
Warrants in general. Chap. 1. About Felony. Chap. 4. About the Poor. Chap. 6.
About a Riot. Chap. 5. About a forcible Entry. Chap. 5. About the public
Peace. Chap. 2. About a Bastard. Chap. 6. Numb. 4. About Alehouses. Chap. 10.
To sell the Goods of a Prisoner. Chap. 13. About Masters, Servants and
Apprentices. Chap. 11. About Rates. Chap. 12. For good Behavior, and Peace.
Chap. 7. About Highways, and Bridges. Chap. 17. About making Constables.
Chap. 16. About the Lords Day. Chap. 3. For Misdemeanor. Chap. 19. Number. 1.
About the Plague. Chap. 15. For robbing Orchards. Chap. 19. About Rogues. Chap.
14. Weights and Measures, Warrants about it. Chap. 19. Numb. 5. Watch and Ward,
Warrants about it. Chap. 9. Witnesses, Warrants to call them in. Chap. 8.
Recognisances to bind them. Chap. 20. Numb. 2, 3. Wood. Warrants for stealing
Wood. See it in Chap. 19. Numb. 2.
CHAP. I. Of a Warrant and Order of the Justices of the Peace in general.
A Warrant of the Justice of Peace is his Command What it is.
to an inferior Officer to do something belonging to his Office. And this in
some special cases may be good by word of mouth without writing. But of this we
speak not here. Or it may be and must be in most cases in writing. And herein
these Rules and Advises are to be observed and heeded.

1. The Justice is to take care to pen his Warrant Rules concerning it.
plain and clear, and not ambiguous and doubtful, so that the Officer must be
forced to enquire what may be his meaning by his words.

2. Let the Warrant be complete when the Justice of Peace does put his hand to
it; for it is dangerous to let it go with blanks, and give other men leave to
fill it up.

3. The style of his Warrant, it may be in the name of the Kings Majesty, thus,
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, etc. with the Test under the name of
the Justice that makes it (which is not usual) or it may be styled and made in
the name of the Justice of Peace, thus. W. S. Esquire, one of the Justices,
etc. and this is the usual form. Or it may be made without any style, only
under the Tes^e of the Justice of Peace, thus, Complaint being made to me, etc.
These are, etc. Witness the said W. S. etc. Or it may be without any Test of
the Justice of Peace, being subscribed by him, and sealed where sealing is
necessary.

4. We do not conceive it necessary to use these words in the Warrant, These
are (in the name of the Kings Majesty) to require: but it is sufficient to say,
These are to require you: howbeit the Warrant does carry the more majesty in
it, when th^se words are used in it.

5. The Title of direction may be either above the Warrant, thus, To the
Constable of Dale: o^ in the body of the Warrant, thus, W. S. Esquire, etc. to
the Constable of Dale. Whereas, etc.

6. The Warrant may be directed to any Officer, as the Sheriff, his Bailiffs,
Constables, Tything-men, or to others that are no Officers, thus, To the
Sheriff of the County of G. or to the Bailiff Itinerant of the County of G. or
to the Bailiff of the hundred of R. or to the Constable of the hundred of R. in
the County of G. or to the Constable of the Town or Village of Dale, or to the
Tything-man of Dale; as the Officer there is called, if it can be known.
Otherwise, the best way is to direct it to all the Constables and Tything-men
of Dale within the County of G. and every of them. Or it may be directed to all
these Officers together, to the Sheriff, and to all Bailiffs, High-constables
of Hundreds, and Constables and Tything-men of Towns and Parishes within the
County of G. and every of them jointly and severally. Or it may be directed to
these Officers and to others that are no Officers together. Or to them that are
no Officers alone, thus. To I S. and W S. both of Dale in the County of Glouc.
and to either of them. But this must be understood of Warrants of the Peace,
good Behavior, and such like Warrants, wherein the Justice of the Peace is
left at liberty to direct his Warrant to whom he will: For if the Law does
direct him to whom he must send his Warrant, as diverse Acts of Parliament do;
some of them appointing him to direct his Warrant to the Constables, some to
the Constables and Churchwardens, some to the Churchwardens, some to the
Constables or Churchwardens, some to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the
Poor; He in these cases that makes the Warrant must take great care that he do
pursue the direction of the Statute punctually; for it is dangerous to vary
from it ever so little: And therefore the Title set down in the Presidents for
the Warrants must be followed, and not altered. And when the Title of direction
is to more then one, there it is good to add these words, [And to every of
them] and to say in the body of the Warrant, These are to authorize and require
you, and every of you. But the best way is, to direct it to the common and
known Officer, which is the High-Constable of the Hundred, or Constable of the
Town, in all cases where it is left to the Justice of Peace to direct it to
whom he please.

7. The word [greeting] To I S. etc. Greeting, used in Warrants, may be left
out: so may these words of Addition, To the Justices of our Lord the King,
assigned to keep the Peace, and to hear and determine Felonies, etc. and it is
enough to say, Justices of the Peace of (or within) the County of Gloucester.

8. It is not amiss to say the place wherein the Officer dwells to whom the
Warrant is directed is within the County. To the Constable of Dale within the
County of Gloucester. And so of other places named within the Warrant, to say
they are within the same County.

9. It is not amiss, if the Warrant recite a Conviction of an offense, to let
it express where the offense was done, thus; I S. being convict before me that
he was drunk (at Dale in this County;) because in many cases the forfeiture is
given to the poor of the place where the offense is done.

10. It is good also now to express the time when the offense was committed,
thus; I S. being duly convict before me that he was drunk at Dale in this
County (the first day of May last) or within three months last past, or since
the first of May last past, that it may appear the offense was done since the
general Pardon: and in some cases this is, if not necessary, yet very
convenient, when the offense is by the Law to be punished within a certain
time, or not at all, there it is good to say that the offense was done within
that time.

11. It is good also to express the place of the making of the Warrant, and it
must be some place within the County, thus; Dated at Dale, given under my Hand
and Seal at Dale in the same County. But if it say it was dated at one place,
and be dated at another place, yet the Warrant is good, and it shall be taken
to be dated where the Warrant does say it was dated.

12. The day and year also, being the time of the making of the same Warrant,
must be expressed in the Warrant.

13. The Warrant (being a Warrant of Arrest) may be to require the Officer to
bring the offender before the Justice that makes the Warrant, or before him or
some other Justice of the County; and either of these forms is good: but the
best form is, to require the Officer to bring him before the Justice of Peace
himself that made the Warrant.

14. In every Warrant for the Peace, or good Behavior, where Sureties are to
be found or required, the Warrant ought to contain the special cause or matter,
to the intent that the party arrested may be provided with Sureties. But if it
be for some great crime, the cause may be concealed.

15. In every Warrant to command an Officer to carry a man to Goal, it is not
amiss to insert a clause at the end of the Warrant to command the Jailer to
receive him, to this purpose. That you him convey to the common Gaol of this
County, and him deliver to the Jailer or his Deputy there, who are hereby
required him to receive and detain in their custody as a Prisoner, until he
shall be from thence delivered by a due course of Law.

16. There is a necessity in it, that the Justice of Peace do subscribe his
name to his Warrant. But that he should put to his Seal in every case, is not
needful; for in a Warrant of the Peace, or good Behavior it is not needful,
nor where an Act of Parliament says, That the Justice by Warrant (or by
Warrant under his hand) may do such a thing. But if the Law say, He may or
shall do it by Warrant under his Hand and Seal, there the Warrant must be under
his Hand and Seal, or it is not good. And therefore heed must be given to our
Presidents herein, where we say, Given under our Hands and Seals; and in those
cases the Justice must put his Hand and Seal to the Warrant, or it is not well
done. And for this cause we do advise the Justice to put his Seal to every
Warrant.

17. There is little difference between a Warrant of Commitment, and a
Mittimus; for both are to do one thing, and they differ a little only in the
form. It will be easy therefore to make one of them by the other.

18. It is usual to grant Warrants against offenders upon penal Laws to bind
them over to Sessions before they be indicted of the offense, in cases where
there is no special power or direction given by the Statute so to do. But we
dare not advise men so to do, being unsatisfied of the lawfulness thereof. But
we agree it to be clear and safe, that after the offender is indicted of the
offense, and the Bill found, or after the offense found by Presentment of the
grand Jury, to be bound over to the next Quarter Sessions to answer it, and
also to put in Sureties for his good Behavior in the mean time, if the offense
for which he is indicted will warrant it. As if he be indicted for selling Ale,
contrary to the Justices order, or the like. So also in cases where a Law does
give a special command and power to any Justice of Peace to bind over an
offender to the Sessions, as the Statute of 5 Eliz. 4. touching Masters and
Apprentices; the Law of 23 Eliz. 10. touching Hawking in eared or codded corn;
1 Ed. 6. chap. 1. 23 Eliz. chap. 10. and some others do. In these cases they
may bind them over before Indictment. But then it is best first to send a
Warrant of Summons to call in the party offender before the Justice to answer
the matter; and then if he appear, and he see no cause to forbear to bind him
over, to do it. And if he do not appear, then he may send for him, and bind him
over, and bind him to the good Behavior also for his contempt. For which there
are Presidents prepared amongst the Presidents set down in this Book.

19. Where a Statute does give power to a Justice of Peace to compel men to do
any thing, in order hereunto he may send his Warrant to require them to come
before him, and in case of their refusal, proceed in the law.

20. The Justices of the Peace may send their Warrants for any thing that does
relate to a special Sessions, either to compel appearance or attendance there,
or execution of any thing there done, under their own Hands, if they pl^ase; or
they may let it be done by the Clerk of the Peace, as the business of the
Quarter Sessions is done.

21. What may be done by the Warrant of one Justice of the Peace alone, may be
known by the penning of the President; for if it be penned to be made by one
Justice, (as, W S. etc. Whereas it has been proved before me, etc.) then you
may be sure that one Justice of Peace alone may do the thing contained in the
Warrant. And where two are named, there in most of the cases two are necessary.

22. The same President that serves upon a conviction by witness, will serve
upon a conviction by view or hearing. For I S. being lawfully convicted before
me, is appliable to either, and will serve to both.

23. It is a good close of every Warrant sent to an Officer, to require him to
give an account how he has executed it, after this wise. And that you be then
there with this Precept to give us an account of your execution of it. Or thus;
And that you give me an account within fourteen days next following, of your
execution of my Warrat.

24. Where a Statute is penned thus, That the Constables or Churchwardens by
Warrant from a Justice of Peace shall be enabled to do an act, in this case we
conceive the Justice may justify the making of that Warrant.

1. Warrants and Presidents which concern the exercise of the Office of a
Justice of Peace out of the General Sessions, are of several sorts, viz. They
concern either Treasons, Felonies, Misprisions, Praemunires, forcible Entries,
forcible Detainers, Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies, Security of the
Peace, and good Behavior, or other misdemeanors or offenses of several sorts.

2. As concerning Treasons and Felonies, upon Information made of any Treason
or Felony committed, any one Justice of Peace may direct his Warrant to the
Sheriff, or to the High-Constables, or Petty Constables, or to all or any of
them, to make search for the Traitors or Felons, and also for the stolen goods.

A Warrant to apprehend a Traitor may be thus.
A B. Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace within the County of E.
To the Sheriff of Comitat. Essex.
the said County, and to all High-Constables, Petty-Constables, and other his
Majesty's Officers, Greeting, etc. Whereas M N. and S T. are vehemently
suspected to have committed Treason, whereof I have received Information: These
are therefore in His Majesty's Name straightly to charge and command you, and
every of you, upon sight hereof, without any delay, within your several
Bailiwicks, Hundreds, and Constablewicks, to make diligent search for the
bodies of the said M N. and S T. and them or either of them so found, to arrest
and attach, and immediately upon such arrest, to bring before me at my house at
D. in the said County, whereof you may not fail at your peril. Sealed with my
Seal, and dated the first day of J. in the twelfth year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, etc.

The like Warrant may be made for the apprehension of Felons, mutatis mutandis.

When any such Traitors or Felons shall be so arrested and brought before the
Justice of Peace, the Justice must take the Examination of the Traitors or
Felons in writing, but not upon Oath, and must examine them upon all
circumstances whereof he shall receive Information from the Accusers, and upon
such other circumstances as he in his own discretion shall think fit, for the
discovery of the Treason or Felony.

The form of the Examination may be thus.
The Examination of A B. etc. taken before me C D. one of his Majesty's
Justices of Peace in the County of M. the first day of S. in the twelfth year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second by the Grace of God King,
etc.

The said Examinate being duly examined, says, etc. and so set down every
particular answer that the prisoner shall make to the questions that shall be
demanded of him.

This being done, the Justice of Peace must take the Examination of the
Accusers, and such other as can give any Evidence material against the
prisoner; and their Examinations must be taken in writing severally, and that
upon Oath.

The form whereof may be thus.
The Examination of D E. taken before me G H. Esquire, one of his Majesty's
Justices of Peace in the County of E. the first day of M. in the twelfth year
of the Reign of, etc.

This Examinate being duly sworn upon the holy Evangelists, and examined upon
his Oath, says, etc. and so set down at large all the material circumstances
that he shall declare to prove the Treason or Felony.

This being done, the Justice of Peace must make a Mittimus to convey the
prisoner to the County Gaol, several forms whereof you may see toward the end
of this Book.

A Warrant for the bringing forth of Corn in the time of dearth.
To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of D. and to every of them.
Whereas we have lately received Letters from the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, commanding us thereby in his Majesty's Name, to cause
a diligent and exact survey to be taken of all the Corn and Grain within this
Hundred; now for so much as they whose names are here underwritten, are
presented to us, by such as have enquired thereof, to have Corn to spare more
then is needful for the maintenance of their Families: These are therefore to
command you, to summon and warn all the said parties to be and appear before us
at M. the 16th. of this instant July, by one of the clock in the afternoon of
the same day, there to receive such further directions as then and there shall
be given them in charge, according to such Orders as are appointed by his
Majesty to be straightly observed in that behalf.

Hereof fail you not at your peril. Dated at P. this 10th. of July, in the
twelfth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles, etc. Anno Dom. (...)
To all Constables, Bailiffs, and other his Majesty's Officers within the
Hundred of M. and to every of them.
Sussolk ss. A License to beg.
A C. and L B. Esquires, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the
County aforesaid assigned, Greeting. Whereas the Bearer hereof, T W. of E. in
the County aforesaid, being a very poor man, and blind, by reason whereof he is
not able to labor, nor get to live of himself, without charitable relief of
others, and being now resident in the same Town, is therefore to be relieved;
and being likewise informed, that the Town is at this present charged with more
poor and impotent folk then it is able to relieve: Know you therefore, that We
the said Justices have licensed and allowed the said poor man and his leader to
go abroad and beg, gather and receive the charitable Alms of well-disposed
people, inhabiting and dwelling within the said Hundred of M. in the said
County, requiring you not to molest or trouble the said poor man or his leader
for so doing; but desiring you rather to relieve him and his leader in their
necessity, as to you shall seem meet. This our License to remain in force one
whole year next ensuing the date hereof, and no longer. In Witness whereof We
have hereunto set our Hands and Seals, the of, etc.

A Pasport.
Sussex ss.
T P. Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in the County aforesaid;
To all Constables, Bailiffs, and other of his Majesty's Officers of the same
County, and to every of them, Greeting. For as much as the Bearer hereof E D.
being brought into great poverty and necessity, has desire to travel unto the
City of C. in the County of where he says he was born, and has some friends
yet living, by whose means he hops greatly to be relieved and helped; in
consideration whereof, Know you, That I the said T P. have licensed the same E
D. to travel and pass the direct way from L. unto the said City of C. so that
his journey be not of longer or further continuance then thirty days next after
the date hereof, praying you, and every of you, to permit, and also to aid and
relieve the said E D. in his journey, so that he show himself in no respect
offensive to his Majesty's Laws. In Witness whereof I have, etc.

Note, That in Pasports it is necessary there be a description of the parry,
lest that he make any other partaker of the use of his Pasport; unless he be a
Rogue, for he always remains in the Constables hands. See the Statute of 39
Elizabethae cap. 4.

To the Constables of B. their Deputies, or either of them.
These are to will and require you, and in his Majesty's Name straightly to
charge and command you, that presently upon the receipt hereof, you bring
before the next Justice of Peace unto your Town, the bodies of these persons
hereunder named, to give an account for their refusing such Apprentices as were
appointed unto them heretofore by his Majesty's Justices; or else to stand to
such Order as shall be agreeable to Law, and his Majesty's pleasure declared
therein. Herein fail you not, as you will answer the contrary.

Given under our Hands this present day, being the third day of June, 1660.
The form of a Warrant to enlarge a Prisoner that is bailed, may be thus.
Middles. ss.
A B. and C D. two of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in the said County, To
the Keeper of his Majesty's Gaol there, Greeting. For as much as L M. of, etc.
Brick-layer, has before Us found sufficient mainprise to appear before the
Justices of the Jail-delivery at the next general Jail-deliver to be holden in
the said County, there to answer to such things as shall be then on the behalf
of our said Sovereign Lord objected against him, and namely, to the felonious
taking of two Kine of the goods of I S. for the suspicion whereof he was taken
and committed to the said Gaol: We command you on the behalf of our said
Sovereign Lord, that if the said L M. do remain in your custody for the said
cause, and for none other, then you forbear to grieve or retain him any longer,
but that you deliver him thence, and suffer him to go at large; whereof you may
not fail at your peril.

Given under our Seals the day of, etc.
CHAP. II. About the Peace.
Glouc. ss. To raise the Power of the County.
VV S. and A B. Esquires, two of the Justices of the Peace within the County of
Gloucest. Or thus, largely, W S. and A B. Esquires, two of the Justices of the
Peace of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, assigned for the keeping of the
Peace, and hearing and determining of diverse Felonies within the County of
Gloucest, to the High Sheriff of the same County, and to all High-Constables,
Petit-Constables, and other Ministers and Officers appointed to keep the Peace
of the same County, Greeting. It being given us to understand, that diverse evil
doers and disturbers of the public Peace of this Commonwealth are assembled
together in conventicles, and being armed, and in a warlike posture, are
together in and about W. in this County, where they do riotously and forcibly
enter into the houses, and take away the goods and cattle of diverse of the
peaceable people of the Country, and where they have made a manifest commotion,
and committed diverse other Felonies and other outrages, to the terror of the
good people thereabouts, the hazard of the whole Kingdom, in contempt of our
Lord the King, and against the form of the Laws in that case provided;
Therefore you, and every of you, the said Sheriff, High-Constables, and
Petit-Constables, are hereby straightly charged, so long as the same commotion
and danger shall continue, to take especial care of the Peace of the County
within your several Precincts; and in order thereunto, to keep a strong watch
by night, and a good ward by day, and to apprehend all the breakers thereof.
And you the said Sheriff are hereby by us commanded and authorized to come your
self unto us armed, and to bring with you an hundred able men, and armed men,
to Dale in this County, on the first day of February next, to assist us in the
suppressing of the same commotion, and in keeping of the Peace. And all other
persons are hereby commanded to be obedient to you the said Sheriff, and the
said Constables therein at their peril.

And hereof you are not any of you to fail at your peril. Given under our Hands
and Seals at S. within the same County, the first day of (...)
Observations upon this first Warrant.
1. The Style and Test of all the Warrants that do follow, may be after the
same manner as this is.

2. A Warrant may be sent to the High-Constables, to cause so many armed men to
come armed to such a place from every Hundred, and so an Army may be had; and
these the Justices may lead or send any where in the County to make o^ keep the
Peace. And by this Warrant you may know how to make such a Warrant.

Glouc. ss. To command the keeping of the Peace.
W S. and F B. Esquires, etc. To the Sheriff of the same County, and to all
High-Constables and Petit-Constables, and other Ministers and Officers
appointed to keep the Peace within the same County, Greeting. Whereas we are
informed, that there is a great meeting appointed to be had at D. within this
County, upon the first day of May next, under pretense of a Fair then and there
to be kept, (or under pretense of a Cock-fighting to be there had) (or under
pretense of a Race to be there run) when and where, by occasion or under color
thereof, it is suspected there may be some notorious breach of the Peace, by a
Fray, Riot, Insurrection, or otherwise: For the preventing whereof, and the
keeping of the Peace, These are to authorize and require you, and every of you,
that you, calling to your assistance and aid such a number of persons as you
shall think fit, all which persons are by us required to assist you, and that
you be then there provided during the same meeting, and by all the lawful ways
and means you can, see that the public Peace be kept and preserved, and the
breakers and disturbers thereof punished. And hereof, and to give us an account
of your doings herein, within fourteen days after the same day be past, you are
not to fail at your peril. Given, etc.

Observations upon this Warrant.
What ever the Justices of the Peace may do, or the Sheriff or Constables ought
to do in order to the keeping of the Peace, the Justices may by such a Warrant
as this is command them to do.

CHAP. III. About the Lords day.
1 Glouc. ss.
Against merry meetings.
VV S. Esquire, etc. To the Constables and Tythingmen of Dale within this
County, and every of them, (or it may be directed to the Churchwardens of
Dale,) Whereas the persons undernamed, all of your Parish of Dale, within this
County, have been lawfully convict before me, that they, the first day of May
last past, being the Lords day, Either of these are sufficient.
(so that they upon a Lords day within a month past.) did cause, or maintain,
or keep an assembly, meeting, This Warrant is grounded upon the Stat. of 1 Car.
1.
or concourse at Sale in this County, being out of their own Parish, for sports
and pastimes, viz. for Football, and for Wrestling, (or caused an assembly,
meeting and concourse of people, and were present at it, or caused an assembly,
meeting and concourse of people, without the other words,) for a Bear-baiting,
or for a Bull-baiting, or for a common Play, or for Cards and Dice, or for
Dicing, as the case is, contrary to the Act of Parliament in that case
provided. By which either of them has forfeited three shillings and four pence
a piece for the use of the poor of your Parish, to be levied by the Constables
or Churchwardens by distress and sale of the goods of the offender, and in
default of distress, to be put in the Stocks three hours, These are therefore
to authorize and require you, forthwith to levy the same sum of three shillings
four pence of every of the said named persons, and of their goods respectively,
by distress and sale thereof, rendering to them the overplus. And in case of
lack of distress, that then you see that the same person or persons lacking
distress, be set publicly in the Stocks by the space of three hours. And the
same money forfeit being by you received, that you take care the same be by you
employed to the use of the Poor of your Parish, according to the said Act.

And hereof fail you not, etc. Given under my Hand and Seal, etc. W S. of Dale,
Husbandman. I S. of the same, Yeoman. K L. of the same, Labourer. N M. of Sale,
Husbandman.


2 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. To the Constables, etc. as in the last. Either of these is
sufficient.
It being duly proved before me, that I S. of your Parish of Dale, a Carrier,
or Waggoner, the first day of, etc. being the Lords day, in your Parish of Dale
aforesaid, did (being then a Carrier) with his horse or horses; (or being then
a Waggonman) with his Wagon; (or being then a Carter) did with his Cart; (or
being a Waynman) with his Wayn, or a Drover with his Cattle, as the case is,
travel into, and through your said Parish of Dale, contrary to the Statute in
that case provided, by which he has forfeited twenty shillings to the use This
is grounded upon 3 Car. 1.
of the Poor of your Parish of Dale. These are therefore to authorize and
require you forthwith to levy the same twenty shillings of the goods of the
said I S. by distress and sale thereof, rendering to him the overplus. And the
same so by you received, that you see it to be employed to the use of the Poor
of your Parish, according to the intent of the same stature. And hereof, etc.

Given under my Hand and Seal, etc.
3 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. To the Constables and Tythingmen of D. and every of them, (or it may
be to the Churchwardens of Dale.) It being duly proved before me, that I S. of
your Town, Butcher, did in Dale aforesaid, the first day of May last past,
Either of them is sufficient. This is upon 3 Car. 1.
being the Lords day, kill, or caused to be killed victuals (to wit) one Calf,
or did sell victuals, contrary to the Act of Parliament in that case provided,
whereby he has forfeit 6 s. 8. d. to the use of, etc. as in the last. And the
same so by you received, that you see it be employed to the use of the Poor of
your Parish. And hereof, etc.

Given under my Hand, etc.
To the Constables, as in the last.
4 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. It being duly proved before me, that I S. of your Parish did the
first day of May last (being the Lords day) at Dale aforesaid, without
reasonable cause, carry burdens, viz. a bushe^ One of these is enough.
of Wheat to a Mill there, or do worldly labor and work, viz. drive his Cattle
from one groun^ to another, half a mile distant, contrary to the Act of
Parliament in that case provided. By which he has forfeited five shillings to
the use of, etc. as it is in the last, word by word.

Given under my Hand and Seal, etc.
We give you no Presidents here to levy the forfeitures upon them that serve
Process, use Coaches or Boats, that come in late Saturday night, or g^ out
early on a Monday morning, nor against then that are singing, dancing, or
tippling in an Alehouse, or Miller grinding on this day, nor against the
Officers that neglect to punish them, because we conceive none can be granted
against them til^ they be convicted, which cannot be but by Indictment.

5 Glouc. ss.
W S. and I S. two, etc. To all the Constables, Churchwardens; and Overseers of
the Po^ of the Parish of Newent in the County of Glouc* Information and
Complaint being given in and made unto us, That the Prosanation of the Lord
day is very much and frequently practiced within your Parish, by the disorderly
meetings of young people, by gaming, sports and pastimes, drinking, tippling,
and by other means, contrary to the Laws in that case provided, and that you
are negligent in the duties laid upon you by the same Laws. These are therefore
straightly to charge you henceforth to look to it, that no such disorders be
hereafter among you, but that you forbid the same, and that you do from time to
time, acccording to the duty of your places, make diligent search for the
finding out, apprehending and punishing of all them that shall be found
offenders herein. And that you do inform us hereof as occasion shall be: And
that you, or some one of you, appear before the Justices of the Peace, at the
house of, etc. upon to bring in the names in writing of those persons who shall
in the mean time offend in the premises. Letting you to know, that if you fail
hereof, we shall not fail to inflict the punishment appointed by the same Laws
upon you for your neglect therein.

Given under our Hands at the Castle of Gloucest. this 21 day of, etc.
CHAP. IV. About Felony.
To all Constables and Tythingmen within the County of Gloucest.
1 Glouc. ss. To search for a Felon.
W S. etc. Whereas information has been given to me, that there has been ten
Sheep lately taken away from I S. of D. in this County, the which he does
suspect to be stolen, and the Felon is suspected to lie hid in some one of the
places or Parishes adjacent. These are therefore to require you, and every of
you, forthwith to make diligent search in all suspected places with in your
Parishes for the said Felon: And in case you shall find the Felon, or any of
the same sheep, or shall find any other just cause to suspect any person
whatsoever of the same Felony, tha^ you cause the same sheep to be secured, and
the said Felon to be apprehended and brought before me, or some other Justice
of the Peace of the said County, to be examined concerning the premises. And
that you warn the said I S. to be, and that you your self be also before the
same Justice, at the time of his examination.

Given under my Hand this, etc.
To the Constable of Dale within this County.
2 Glouc. ss.
Whereas complaint has been made to me by N O. that of late he has had
feloniously taken from him certain goods, or six Oxen, or a gray Mare, etc. as
the case is, and that he has in suspicion Another of the same
diverse and evil disposed persons within your Parish of Dale. These are to
require you, that immediately upon sight hereof, you make diligent search in
all and every such suspected houses and places within your Parish, as you and
the said N O. shall think convenient. And if upon your search, you find any of
the said goods in the hand of any person, or shall have any other just cause of
suspicion of any person, that then you bring such suspected person before me or
some other, etc. to answer the premises.

And hereof, etc.
Observations on these Warrants.
Some have disliked these Warrants, and upon some good reasons also: for it is
a Rule, that no man can arrest for Felony upon the suspicion of another, but
upon his own suspicion. And some unhappy use is oft-times made of these
Warrants, and honest men abused by them. But we conceive that common usage has
made these Warrants justifiable at this day; and that the same Justice of
Peace, upon information, may take up the suspicion, and proceed upon his own
suspicion.

To the Constable of Dale within this County.
3 Glouc. ss.
Information being given to me upon the Oath of I S. that he has of late two
sheep feloniously taken from him, and that he has in suspicion one To
apprehend a Felon.
T K. of your Town, Tailor. These are to require you presently upon receipt
hereof, to apprehend the said T K. and thereupon to bring him before me to
answer to the premises.

And hereof, etc.
Observatians upon this Warrant.
This Warrant has been also excepted against, but we conceive at this day
there is no cause to doubt of it. And that Warrants may be granted by a Justice
to attach persons suspected of Felony, before they be indicted for it. But upon
an indictment of Felony, without question any Justice of Peace may arrest the
party indicted by such a Warrant as this which follows.

To all Constables, as at the first.
4 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. These are to will and require you, presently upon receipt hereof to
attach the body of A B. who stands indicted for a Felony, by an Indictment
taken at the last general Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County of
Glouc. And him to bring before me, or some other Justice of the Peace of this
County, to be dealt with according to the Law. Or thus, And him to carry to the
common Gaol within the Castle of Glouc. there to be kept until he be delivered
by due course of Law. It may be made both these ways.

And hereof, etc.
5 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. To the Constables of, etc. These are to require you upon sight
hereof, to warn to To bind men to give in evidence against a Felon.
be before me, or some other Justice of Peace of this County, within three days
next following, the persons undernamed, to the end that they may be bound
before him to make their personal appearance at the next general Gaol delivery,
or Quarter Sessions to be holden for this County, then and there to testify
their knowledge concerning a Felony supposed to be done by A B. now a Prisoner
in the Castle of G. And that you do then go with them to the same Justice with
this Warrant. And hereof, etc. Or thus: W S. etc. You are hereby required
forthwith to warn the persons undernamed of your Parish, to be before me at my
dwelling house in D. upon Monday next, by nine a clock in the morning, to
testify their knowledge concerning certain felonious acts supposed to be done
by A B. and C D. of, etc. And that your self be then there with this Warrant,
to show how you have executed it.

And hereof, etc.
Observations here.
We have seen a President in this form for this purpose, That you cause to come
before me the persons undernamed, to ^estifie, etc. which we cannot but
disallow for it is ambiguity: For how shall he cause him to come? Besides, the
word seems to import, that he shall bring him in the nature of a prisoner,
which is not lawful to do in this case.

To all Constables, and other his Majesty's Officers, as well within the County
of Gloucest. as elsewhere in the Kingdom of England.
6 Glouc. ss.
To command hue and cry.
W S. etc. Whereas complaint has been made unto me by L M. of, etc.
Husbandman, That upon Tuesday at night last (being the tenth day of this
instant November) he was robbed of certain Linen, taken out of his house, with
some other things, and that he has manifest cause of suspicion of one N K. a
lewd rogue, (here describe his personage and apparel;) These are therefore to
require you, and every of you, to make search within your several Precincts for
the said N K. and also to make Hue and Cry after him from Town to Town, and
from County to County, and that as well by Horsemen as Footmen. And if you
shall find him the said N K. that then you carry him before some one of the
Justices of the Peace within the County where he shall be taken, by him to be
dealt withal according to Law, etc.

And hereof, etc.
To all Constables and Tythingmen of the Parishes and Tythings within the
County of Gloucest. and every of them, etc.
7 Glouc. ss.
To apprehend one that has dangerously hurt another.
W S. etc. Forasmuch as I am credibly informed, that I B. of your Town,
Blacksmith, has now lately dangerously hurt one T G. of your said Town,
Husbandman, by a blow which he has given the said T G. on the face, and
another on the back, so as the said T G. is in dange^ of death thereby. These
are therefore straightly to charge and command you, that immediately upon the
sight hereof, you, or one of you, do bring the said I B. before me, or some
other of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County, to find sufficient
sureties, as well for his appearance before the Justices at the next
Jail-deliver to be holden for this County, then and there to answer unto the
premises, and to do and receive therefore that which by the Court shall be
enjoined him; as also, that he the said I B. shall in the mean time keep the
Peace toward our Sovereign Lord the King, and all his Liege people, but
especially toward the said T G.

And hereof fail you not at your peril. Dated, etc.
In some cases, where any Statute does give power to the Justices of Peace, out
of their Sessions, to hear and determine, either upon the confession of the
offenders, or upon examination of witnesses; in all such cases, it seems, the
Justices of Peace may grant out their Warrants against such offenders, to
appear before them, to answer to their offenses, and thereupon may proceed to
examine, hear and determine the offense, as being convict thereof, upon such
confession or examination, without any indictment or process.

But where process are requisite, they may be as follows.

First, if the offender be absent, a Venire facias shall be awarded by the
Justice or Justices of Peace under his or their own Tests; and if thereupon the
offender be returned sufficient, (and makes default) then a Distringas must be
awarded, which Distringas shall go forth infinite, till the offender come in:
But if a Nihil habet, etc. be at the first returned, then after the Venire
facias, first a Capias, then an alias, and after a pluries shall issue, and
after that an Exigent, till the party be taken or yield himself, or else be
outlawed. And these are the ordinary Process upon all Indictments of Trespass
against the Peace, or of other offenses against penal Statutes, not being
Felonies, or greater: But these several Processes are usually grounded upon an
Indictment, to cause the offender to come in, and to make his answer; and
therefore if he be present, and confess such indictment, information, or
offense, then needs no process; for he must be committed to prison until he
has paid his Fine, or given Sureties for it.

And these Process must be directed to the Sheriff, except he be party; and if
so, to the Coroners of the County, and must be in the Kings Name, and with a
Non omittas, but the Test thereof may be under the Name of the Justice of
Peace.

The form of these Process out of Sessions, you may see in the Treatises of
Justices of Peace at large.

Nevertheless, all such process (as well of Capias, etc. as of Outlary) may be
stayed by a Supersedeas, issuing from other Justices of Peace (out of Sessions)
testifying, that the party has come before them, and has found Sureties for
his appearance to answer to the Indictment, or to pay his Fine, etc.

CHAP. V. About a Riot and forcible Entry.
The Record of a force found by the Justices own view.
1 Glouc. ss.
MEmorand That the first day of March, I S. complained to me W S. one of the
Justices of Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King for the County of Gloucest.
that I D. of S. in the said County, Yeoman, and diverse others unknown persons,
troublers of the Peace of the Kingdom, the first day of May, into the dwelling
house of the said I S. in Dale, in the said County, with strong hand did enter,
and him the said I S. thereof disseised, and the same house with strong hand
and armed power does yet detain and hold; and therefore desired of me relief on
this behalf to be yielded: Whereupon I the said W S. immediately in person came
to the said dwelling house to view the same. And in the same house I then found
the said I D. E F. of, etc. and G H. etc. the same house with force and arms, a
strong hand and armed power, to wit, with Bows and Arrows, Swords and Daggers,
Guns, and other Arms defensive and offensive, holding against the form of the
Statutes in that case provided. And therefore I the aforesaid W S. the said I
D. E F. G H. did then there arrest, and cause to be sent to the next Gaol of
his said Majesty for the said County within the Castle of Gloucest. as convict
of the said forcible detaining by mine own view and record, there to abide till
he shall make Fine to his said Majesty for his offenses aforesaid.

Dated at Dale aforesaid under my Seal, the day and year aforesaid.
The Record of a Riot upon the view of the Justices.
2 Glouc. ss.
Memor. That the first day of March, we W S. and K L. Esquires, two of the
Justices of our Sovereign Lord the King, now assigned to keep the Peace in the
County of Gloucest. at the complaint of I S. of W. in the County aforesaid,
Yeoman, in our proper persons came to the dwelling house of the said I S. at W.
aforesaid, and there we found certain persons, A B. etc. and other evil doers
and disturbers of the Peace of our Lord the King, to the number of eighty
persons in a warlike manner arrayed, to wit, with Swords, Staves, Bows and
Arrows, riotously and unlawfully gathered together, and the same house so
keeping, to the great disturbance of the Peace of our said Lord the King, and
the terror of his People, and against the form of the Statutes in that case
provided. And therefore we the said Justices of the Peace, the bodies of the
said A B. etc. did then arrest, and to the next Gaol of our Lord the King did
then cause them to be carried by our Record of the Trespass aforesaid, convict
in our presence, there to abide till they shall make their Fine to our said
Lord the King for their trespass before said. In testimony whereof, w^ have put
our Seals to this Record. Dated at W. aforesaid, the day and year aforesaid.

The form of the Mittimus to the Gaol.
W S. one of the Justices of the Peace of ou^ Lord the King within his said
County of Gloucest. 3 Glouc. ss.
To the Keepers of his Highness Gaol within the Castle of Glouc. within the
same County, and to his Deputy there. Complaint being made to me this present
first day of May, of a forcible and riotous detainer of a House made by K L.
etc. and M N. of, etc. the which having viewed, I find to be true, against the
Peace of our* said Lord the King, and the Statutes in that case provided:
Therefore I send you, by the bringers hereof, the bodies of the said K L. and M
N. convicted of the said forcible holding, (or Riot) by mine own view,
testimony and record, commanding you in his Majesty's Name, them to receive,
and safely keep in your said Goal, until such time as they shall make their
Fines to our said Lord the King for the said trespasses, and shall be thence
delivered by order of the Law of the Land, at your peril.

Given at W. aforesaid, under my Seal, the day and year aforesaid.
The Precept to the Sheriff to return a Jury.
4 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. To the Sheriff of the said County of Glouc. I command you, that you
make to come before me at, etc. (time and place) twenty four honest,
sufficient, and lawful men of the neighborhood of W. within this County,
whereof every one shall have forty shillings of Lands, Tenements and Rents by
the year at least, above reptises, (or to enquire if A B. etc. and other
malefactors and disturbers of the Peace of our Lord the King, in one Message,
and twenty acres of Land of C D. of, etc. with a strong hand, upon the
possession of the said C D. did enter, or the same with force do yet hold and
occupy) to require upon their Oaths for our said Lord the King, of a certain
entry (or detainer) made with strong hand in the Message or dwelling House of
A B. at W. aforesaid, against the form of the Statutes in that case provided.
And you are to see that you return upon every one of the Jurors by you to be
impannelled, twenty shilling of issues at the same day of return.

And hereof you are not to fail, under pain of twenty pounds, which you know
you are to bear, if you be negligent in the premises. Witness me the said W S.
the first day of, etc.
The Verdict of the Jurors.
5 Glouc. ss.
An inquisition for our Lord the King taken at Dale in the County of Gloucest.
the first day of May, by the Oaths of A B. C D. good and ^awfull men of the
County, before W S. one of ^he Justices of our said Lord the King, to keep the
Peace in the said County assigned, and to hear and determine diverse Felonies,
Trespasses, and other evil deeds committed in the same County; who say upon
their Oaths, that C L. of, etc. Yeoman, was lawfully and peaceably seized in
his demesne, as of Fee, of and in one Message, etc. with the appurtenances in
Dale aforesaid, and his possession and seisin aforesaid so continued, until A
B. etc. and other unknown persons, the first day of May, by Force and Arms, to
wit, with Swords and Staves, Bows and Arrows, into the said Message entered,
and the said C D. thereof disseised, and with a strong hand him expelled; and
him the said C D. so disseised and expulsed from the said Message, etc. from
the aforesaid first day of May, until the day of the taking of this
inquisition, with the same strength and armed power have hitherto kept out, and
yet does keep out, to the great disturbance of the Peace of our said Lord the
King, and against the form of the Statutes in that case made and provided;
whereas none of them, nor any other, whose state they or any of them had or
have, or any thing in any parcel thereof had or have, within three years last
before his said Entry, nor at any time before, to the knowledge of the said
Jurors.

Warrant for Restitution.
6 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. To the Sheriff of the said County, Greeting. Whereas by a certain
inquisition of the Country taken before me at Dale in the County aforesaid,
the day of, etc. upon the Oath of A B. C D. etc. and according to the form of
the Statute in that case of forcible entry provided, It was found, that A B.
etc. and others, etc. as it is in the Inquisition (under those words in that
case provided) as by the said inquisition does more fully appear of Record.
Therefore on the part of our said Lord the King, I command and require you,
that you all together (with the power of the County) if need require, go to the
said Message and other the premises, and the same with the appurtenances do
cause to be res^ised, and the said C D. to and in his full possession there of,
as he was in before the same Entry, you cause to be restored, according to the
form of the aforesaid Statute.

And hereof you are not to fail at your peril, etc. Given under my Seal, etc.
The like Warrant may be made for Lessee for years, Tenant by Elegi^,
Statute-Merchant, Statute-Staple, Guardian in Chivalry, and Copyholder, mutatis
mutandis.

CHAP. VI. About the Poor.
1 Glouc. ss.
To make Overseers of the Poor.
WE the Justices of the Peace and Quorum of the County of G. next adjoining to
the Parish of D. within the same County, whose Hands and Seals are hereunto
annexed, do nominate and appoint I S. and W S. of the same Parish of D.
together with the Churchwardens of the same Parish, to be Oversee^ of the Poor
of the same Parish for this present year, according to the Act of Parliament in
that case provided. These W^rrant^ are grounded upon (...).


Da^ed, etc.
There is another form to command Overseers of the Poor to undertake the
Office: But this seems to me needless, and that the former Order is sufficient;
for being duly chosen according to the Statute, they must undertake it.

W S. and L S. Esquires, two of the Justices of 2 Glouc. ss.
the Peace of the County of Gloucest. To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the
Poor of the To distrain for money for the poor.
Parish of D. in the County of G. Whereas the persons here undernamed, all of
your Parish of D. have been duly assessed the sums of money here under at their
names appearing, and set down and rated upon them toward the maintenance a^^
relief of the Poor of you Parish, the which ra^^ has been duly confirmed by
two of the Justices of the Peace of the said County, according to the form of
the Statute in that case provided. The which sums they are in arrear, and
refuse to p^y although the same have been demanded of the^. These are therefore
to authorize and require yo^* once more to demand the said several sums of the
said several persons respectively: And in case they refuse to pay the same,
that then you lev^ it by way of distress and sa^^ of the goods and chattels of
the persons refusing to pay the same respectively, r^ndring to them the
overplus accordi^^ to the said Statute. And that you the same money pay and
distribute to the use of the poor o^ your Parish according to your Office. And
hereof, etc.

3 Glouc. ss.
W S. and I S. Esquires, etc. two of the, etc* (as in the last) To the, etc.
(as in the last) These are to authorize and command you presently Another for
the same.
to demand of I S. of your Parish of Dale, the sum of five shillings, being
duly assessed and rat^ upon him, for and toward the relief of the Poor of your
said Town, according to the form of the Statute in that case provided. And if
he refuse to pay the same, that then you presently levy the same by distress
and sale of the offenders goods, rendering to him the overplus of the money made
by sale thereof. And this shall be your Warrant herein.

Dated, etc.
4 Glouc. ss.
To warn all persons to appear to examine the matter of a bastard child.
W S. and I S. two of the Justices, etc. near to the Parish of Dale in the
County of G. To the Constables, Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor of the
same Parish, and to I K. of, etc. and M S. of the same Parish of D. and every
of them. It being proved before us, that the said M S. is delivered of a
bastard child, likely to be chargeable to your Parish, which she does father
upon the said I K. who is therefore at the request of the said Officers, and on
the behalf of the said Parish, bound to the good Behavior, and to appear at
the next Sessions. These are therefore to give you notice, that we have
appointed on Monday the first day of May next, at the house of K L. in T. to
meet to examine the said matter, and to take order for the punishment of the
said parties, and relief of the said Parish, in case the same child shall
become chargeable to it, and the keeping of the same child. You are therefore
all of you hereby required to attend us, with such witnesses as you please to
produce, in the place, and at the time aforesaid. And you the said Constables
are in due time to give notice hereof to all the rest of the parties,
Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, to the said I K. and M S. And that you
your self be present at the time and place aforesaid, to give an account how
you have executed this our Warrant.

And hereof not to fail, etc. Dated, etc.
5 Glouc. ss.
An Order for a bastard child.
W S. and T W. Esquires, etc. two of the Justices of the Peace of the said
County. Imprimis, upon the examination of the said M S. duly by us taken, we do
find that the said I K. is charged to have had diverse times bodily and carnal
knowledge of her (between such times) and to be the only Father of the said
Bastard-child, etc. And having some other proofs to induce us to believe the
truth hereof, therefore we do adjudge him to be the reputed Father of the said
Child.

We do further order as follows: First, That the said M S. shall keep her
said Child till it come to eight years of age.

Secondly, That the said I K. upon notice of this our order, shall after such
notice, pay into the hands of one of the Overseers of the Poor of D. for the
time being, after the rate of 12 pence every week, to be paid monthly, every
year toward the relief of the said Child, until it comes to eight years of age.

Thirdly, And after the said Child shall come to eight, etc. that the said I K.
pay to the Overseers, etc. 5 l. toward the putting out of the same Child to be
an Apprentice.

Fourthly, That the said I K. presently give good Security to one of the
Overseers, etc. to perform this our Order.

To the Constables of S. in the County of G. and to every of them.
6 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. Information being given, and complaint being made to us, that the
persons undernamed of your Parish, have been duly taxed and assessed toward
the raising of money for the relief of the Poor of your Parish, these several
sums at their names set down, the which they have refused to pay upon demand.
And a Warrant having been sent to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor,
to levy the same by distress and sale of the offenders goods; and information
being given to us by the said Churchwardens and Overseers concerning the said
persons undernamed, that there is no distress to be had of their goods, whereby
the same assessments may be levied of them, and that they do still refuse to
pay the same rate. These are therefore to authorize and require you, in case it
be so, that no distress be now to be found or had, and that they do still
refuse to pay the same rate, that you do apprehend the said To commit to prison
for lack of distress.
persons, and them do convey to the common Gaol in the Castle of Glouc. there
to remain without Bail or Main-prize, till they pay all the same money taxed,
and the arrears thereof from them due respectively.

Dated, etc. I. S. -- 10 s. W. S. -- 5 s. etc.




This Warrant we think to be scarce warrantable by Law, and shall not advise
any Justice to make it without good advice. But if he will adventure, let him
be sure that the thing is true, that he does refuse, and there is no distress.

To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of Dale in the
County of Gloucest.
7 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. Information being given, and complaint being made to us, that I C.
and L M. of your Parish, the late Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of
the said Parish, did at the end of their year make and yield up to the Justices
of the Peace of the County, an account of the sums of money by them received
and paid: To distrain for arrears of accounts in the Officers hands.
And that it appeared by the same account, that there was ten pounds in money
in the hands of the said Churchwardens and Overseers, the which they have not
paid and delivered over unto the Overseers and Churchwardens newly nominated
and appointed for this year, contrary to the Statute in that case provided.
These are therefore to authorize, etc. that you levy the same of the goods of
the said I C. and L M. and in case no distress can be had, that then, etc. (as
in the last, changing that which is to be changed) leaving out respectively
every where.

Dated, etc.
8 Glouc. ss.
To compel the Overseets to account.
W S. etc. For as much as A B. and C D. of the Parish of E. the late
Churchwardens of the same Parish, and F G. and H I. the late Overseers of the
Poor of the same Parish, have been duly required to come before us, and bring
in an account of their receipts and disbursements in the time of their Office,
according to the Statute in that case provided, and they refuse so to do: These
are to authorize and require you to apprehend all the said late Churchwardens
and Overseers of the Poor, and them to convey to the common Gaol within the
Castle of Gloucester, there to abide without Bail or Mainprise until they have
made a true account, and paid to the present Overseers and Churchwardens all
the money that upon their account shall appear to be remaining in their hands.

And hereof, etc.
Observations upon this Warrant.
I shall not assure you that this Warrant i^ legally to be granted by the
Justices, or may be safely executed by the subordinate Officers; for the
Statute does not direct how the Offenders shall be convicted. However, if the
Justices grant such a Warrant as this, or that before for lack of distress,
they must be sure they do it upon a sure ground, to wit, that the thing be true
they do go upon, viz. That they do refuse to account, or that there does want
distress, etc. Otherwise it is dangerous.

To the High Constable of the Hundred of W.
9 Glouc. ss.
To call in the old Overseers of the Poor, and to name new ones.
W S. etc. These are to authorize and require you to send your Warrants to all
the Petit Constables and Tythingmen of your Hundred, to give notice to all the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of their several Parishes respectively,
that they or some of them be at the house of, etc. (day and place) with a true
and perfect account in writing of all the sums of money by them received, or
rated and sessed, and not received, as also of such stock as is in their hands,
or in the hands of any setters of the Poor to work, and of all other things
concerning their Office, and the same first examined and allowed by some of the
most substantial persons of their Parishes under their hands. And also that
they do then and there give us in writing the names and sirnames of three or
four of the most substantial inhabitants in their several Parishes, that we may
choose some of them to be Overseers for the Poor of each several Parish for the
next year.

And hereof, etc.
To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of G.
10 Glou. ss.
To levy 20^ for their neglect in their Office.
W S. etc. Complaint being made to us against I H. one of the Overseers of the
Poor of the Parish of Dale in this County, for this year, that he has not met
with the rest of the Officers there monthly in the Church on the Sunday,
according to the Act of Parliament in that case provided, whereby he has
forfeit 20 s. These are therefore to require and authorize you to levy the
same twenty shillings of him by way of distress and sale of his goods, rendering
to him the overplus. And the same money so received, that you ^mploy to the use
of the Poor of your Parish.

Given under our Hands, etc.
Observations upon this Warrant.
This Warrant is commonly made, but I cannot tell how warrantably, for there is
no way of conviction set down in the Statute for this offense, and then I take
it, it must be by indictment, and can be no way else. But let him that grants
this Warrant be sure that the cause thereof be true, and let him be well
advised that the Warrant be good.

2. The same Law will be if they do not accept the Office, set their Poor on
work, make rates to raise money, and place poor children Apprentices, and the
like. Such a Warrant must be, if any be: But I conceive its safe to do it by
way of Indictment, and being convicted upon a traverse, then two Justices may
send their Warrant to levy the twenty shillings according to the Statute.

To the High Constable of the Hundred of W. and to all the Churchwardens, and
Overseers of the Poor, of all the Parishes within the same Hundred.
11 Glou. ss.
To bind poor children Apprentices.
These are to require you, to send your Warrants, and give notice to all the
Churchwardens and Overseers of all the Parishes within your Hundred, that they
are to be and appear before us, some of the Justices of the Peace of this
County, upon Monday next, the day, etc. at the house, etc. with a Note in
writing of the names of all such poor people within their Parishes
respectively, as are overburthened with Children, so that they are not able to
keep their children by their labor, and what children they have that are fit
to be placed Apprentices, and the names of such men of worth within their
Parishes respectively that they think fit to make Masters for such poor
children; to the end that we may then and there take a course to ease them by
binding them to such Masters. And the said Churchwardens and Overseers are
hereby required to take notice hereof by your Warrant, and to see they do
attend us in the execution of the contents thereof. And you also the said High
Constable are to bring with you to us then, and there, another Note in writing
of all such persons within your Hundred, as you know or judge fit to make or
take such kind of Apprentices.

And hereof you are not to fail, etc.
Name all the Overseers and Churchwardens.
Indenture to bind a poor child Apprentice.
This Indenture made the day of, etc. witnesses, That A B. and C D. etc.
Overseers of the Poor in the Town of D. in the County of O. and E F. and G H.
Churchwardens of the same Town, by and with consent of W S. and I S. Esquires,
two of the Justices of the Peace for the County of Glouc. have by these
presents put, placed and bound I H. (being a poor fatherless and motherless
child, or the child of W H. a poor man) as an Apprentice with R S. of, etc.
Baker, and as an Apprentice with him the said R S. to dwell from the day of the
date of these presents, until the said I H. shall come to the age of four and
twenty years, (and if it be a woman, then it must be, Until her age of twenty
one years, or day of marriage, which shall first happen) according to the
Statute in that behalf provided. By, and during all which time, the said I H.
the said R S. his Master shall faithfully and obediently serve, and in all
things behave himself honestly and orderly as does become such a servant. And
the said R S. for his part promises, That he the said R S. during the said
time, the said I H. in the craft and occupation the which he uses, after the
best manner he can or may, shall teach and inform, and to him shall find meat,
drink, and apparel, and all other things necessary and meet for an Apprentice
of his condition, etc. In witness, etc.

12 Glou. ss.
W S. and I S. Esquires, two of the Justices, etc. To the Constables, etc.
Information being given to us upon Oath, that I S. of, etc. a poor child, being
by the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of Dale in this County, and two
of the Justices of the Peace of the County, bound Apprentice to L M. according
to the Statute in that case provided, and that he does refuse to take him.
These are therefore to authorize and require you to apprehend him the said L M.
and bring him before some Justice of the Peace of this County, to enter into
Bond to appear at the next general Jail-deliver, or at the next Quarter
Sessions to be held for the County of Glouc. to answer his contempt. And in
case he refuse so to do, that then ye do him carry and convey to the common
Gaol of the County of Glouc. there to remain till he shall so do. And hereof,
etc.

See more in Warrants to bring in and bind over, Chap. 18. All these Warrants
in this Chapter are grounded upon 43 Eliz. 2.

13 Glou. ss.
Information being given unto us, that I S. a poor child of W S. of your Parish
of D. being placed an Apprentice with K L. by the Churchwardens, Overseers of
the Poor, and Justices of the Peace, that the said W S. will not suffer him to
serve with his Master, but does entice him from his service. These are
therefore to require and authorize you to apprehend the said W S. and him to
carry to the common Bridewel within the Castle of Glouc. until he do conform to
the order of the Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor, and Justices of the
Peace herein. And hereof, etc.

CHAP. VII. About the Peace and good Behavior.
1 Glouc. ss.
For the Peace.
VV S. Esquire, one of the Justices, etc. To all Constables and Tythingmen
within the County of G. and especially to the Constable of Dale in the same
County. For as much as I S. of D. aforesaid, has taken his Oath before me,
that M O. of the Parish of D. aforesaid, has assaulted and beaten the said I
S. and further has threatened him, (or thus only) has taken his Oath before
me, that M O. of, etc. has threatened him in such sort that he is afraid that
the said M O. will beat, wound or kill him, or do him some other bodily hurt,
or burn his house: And thereupon the said I S. has prayed security of the
Peace to be granted against the said M O. These are therefore to authorize and
require you, and every of you, that immediately upon sight hereof you cause him
the said M O. to come, and in case of his refusal, to bring him before me, or
some other Justice of the Peace of this County, to find sufficient Sureties, as
well for his personal appearance at the next General Sessions of the Peace to
be holden for this County, as also for the keeping of the Peace toward our
Sovereign Lord the King, and all his good People, especially toward the said I
S. And if he shall refuse so to do, that you carry him to the common Gaol of
the County of Glouc. and deliver him to the Keeper thereof, who is hereby
commanded him to receive, and keep a Prisoner until he become bound as
aforesaid.

And hereof fail not, etc.
Some say that this Warrant may be granted against any man that has broken the
Peace, but I cannot consent to i^, unless the Peace be broken in the presence
of a Justice of Peace. But upon Oath it is grantable always.

2 Glouc. ss.
For the good Behavior.
W S. etc. To all, etc. (as in the last.) It appearing to me by the proofs of
credible and substantial witnesses, against I S. and M S. both of your Parish
of Dale, that they are people of ill name and fame, and of very lewd lives and
conversations, Either of these are sufficient.
or are common Barreters, or are common Rioters, or common Breakers of the
Peace, or common Ale-house-haunters, or common Drunkards, or common Swearers,
or common Wood-stealers, or do keep a common Stews or Bawdie-house, or common
Hedge-breakers, or common Tale-bearers, or common Slanderers, or common
libellers, or common Whoremongers; or common Whores, or common sowers of
discord, and makers of strife amongst their Neighbors, or common
Night-walkers, or common Cheaters, or common companions of Thieves, or common
Messengers for Thieves, or common Pilferers, or commonly suspected to be
Thieves, or do commonly practice Poisoning, or common Evesdroppers, or common
Night-walkers, or are commonly suspected of incontinency, or common harbourers
and entertainers of Whores, Rogues or Thieves, or common Robbers of Orchards,
or have sold Ale (or Beer) without License, and contrary to the command of the
Justices of the Peace, or are idle persons wandering up and down, fare well, and
spend much in Alehouses, and having no known and visibl^ estate to maintain
it; or that I S. has begotten a bastard child on the body of the said M. an^
that the same is like to be chargeable to the Parish of Dale, or that he had
his hand in the sending away of L M. the reputed Father of a bastard child,
there left to the charge of your Parish These are therefore to authorize and
require yo^ and every one of you, forthwith to cause to come and in case of
refusal to apprehend and arrest the said I S. and M. and them to bring before
me, or some other Justice of the Peace of this County, ^^ the end that they may
find sufficient Sureties f^^ their appearance at the next General Sessions of
the Peace to be held for the County of Gloucest and in the mean time to be of
good behavior toward our Lord the King, and all the People of this
Commonwealth. And if they shall refuse ^^ do the same, that then you carry,
etc. as in the last, to the end.

And hereof, etc.
3 Glouc. ss. Another of the same.
W S. etc. To, etc. These are to require you that immediately upon sight hereof
you cause to come, or bring before me I S. of, etc. to answe^ to such matters
as on the behalf of the Kings Majesty shall be objected against him by the
complaint of M M. And also that you require him t^ bring Sureties with him for
his good appearing til^ the next General Sessions of the Peace to be held for
the County of Glouc.

And hereof, etc.
4 Glouc. ss. For the reputed father of a bastard child.
W S. Esquire, etc. To the Constable of, etc. Whereas it is proved before me,
that M S. of, etc. single woman, is with child of a bastard child, and that I
S. is the reputed Father of it: These ar^ therefore to authorize and require
you, and ever^ of you, that presently upon the receipt hereof, yo^ cause to
come, or bring the said I S. and M S. before me, or some other Justice of Peace
of this County, to find sufficient Sureties, as well for their appearance, etc.
(as in the last.)

And hereof, etc.
5 Glouc. ss. Against one indicted.
W S. etc. To, etc. It appearing to me by the Records of the Sessions of the
Peace for this County, that I S. of your Parish of D. stands indicted there for
selling Ale and Beer, contrary to the command of the Justices of the Peace: And
that he has not as yet appeared nor pleaded to the same indictment, and that
the same is still depending and in force against the said I S. These are
therefore (as in the last.)

And hereof, etc.
And thus may any Justice of Peace do upon any Indictment for such an offense
as for which a man does deserve to be bound to the good Behavior, as for
Incontinency, common Swearing, common Drunkenness, and the like.

6 Glouc. ss. Another very short for the good Behavior.
W S. etc. To, etc. I S. of your Parish of D. being duly convicted before me of
such matter of misbehaviour as for which he ought to be bound with Sureties for
his good behavior. These are therefore, etc. as in the rest.

This last Warrant may serve in any case, or for any cause whatsoever, for
which a man is to be bound to the good Behavior, unless it be where the
offender is to be bound for a limited time only, And then the Warrant may say,
I S. being convict before me of such an offense, for which he is to be bound to
the good Behavior seven years. These are, etc. as in the rest; but say, To the
end he may be bound with Sureties, etc. for seven years, etc. And hereof, etc.



A Warrant for the Peace upon a Supplicavit.
G M. one of the Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty
within the County of L. To the Sheriff of the said County, the Constables of
the Hundred of W. the Borsholde^ of the Town of M. and to all and singular the
Kings Majesty's Bailiffs, and other Ministers, as well within Liberties as
without in the said County, and to every of them, Greeting. Know ye, that I
have received the Commandment of ou^ said Sovereign Lord in these words,
(reciting the whole Writ of Supplicavit, which many times differs in form,
because it is sometimes directed to all the Justices of Peace, sometimes to
them and the Sheriff, and sometimes to one Justice alone) or reciting only the
effect of the Supplicavit, thus.

Know ye, that I have received the Commandment of our said Sovereign Lord, to
compel A P* of M. in the said County, Yeoman, to find sufficient Surety for
his Majesty's Peace by him to be kept toward C D. of the said Town of M.
Tail^r* And therefore on the behalf of our said Soveraig^ Lord, I command and
charge you, jointly and severally, that immediately upon the receipt hereof,
you cause the said A B. to come before me a^ M. aforesaid, to find sufficient
Surety and Mainprize, for the Peace to be kept toward our said Sovereign Lord,
and all his liege People, and especially toward the said C D. And if he the
said A B. shall refuse thus to do, that then you him safely convey, or cause to
be safely conveye^ to the next Gaol of his Majesty in the said County, there to
remain until that he shall willingly do the same; so that he may be before the
Justices of the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord within the said County, at the
next General Sessions of the Peace (to be holden at N.) there to answer to our
said Sovereign Lord for his contempt in this behalf. And see that you certify
your doing in the premises to the said Justices at the said Sessions, bringing
then with you this Precept. Given at M. aforesaid, under my Seal, etc.

The Return upon the back of the Supplicavit may be thus.
The Execution of this Writ appears in a certain Schedule to the same Writ
annexed.

Then may that Schedule be thus.
I G M. one of the Keepers of the Peace of our Lord the King in the County of
L. certify into the Chancery of our said Lord the King: That, by virtue of
that Writ (unto me by C D. in the same Writ named, being first delivered)
personally before me (such a day and year) have caused to come A B. in the said
Writ named, and the same A. have compelled to find sufficient Surety and
Manucaptors for the Peace according to the form of the said Writ. In testimony
whereof, to this my present Certificate I have set my Seal. Dated at, etc.

The like proceedings may be made into the Kings Bench, if it issue thence,
mutatis mutandis, but the Justice ^eed not return it, nor make a Certificate,
till a Certiorari come.

CHAP. VIII. About Witnesses.
Glouc. ss.
To call witnesses.
VV S. etc. To the Constables of Dale You are hereby required forthwit^ to warn
I S. of your Parish to come before me on Monday by 9 a clock in the mor^ing; to
testify his knowledge on the behalf of the Kings Majesty. And not to fail, etc.

Another of the same.
You whose names are subscribed, are hereby required to appear before me, etc.
to g^ve in evidence on the behalf of the Kings Majesty. And not to fail, etc.

To the Constables of Dale.
For as much as I S. of your Town, Yeoma^ is thought to be a fit and necessary
Witness to ^^ Or thus.
examined on the behalf of the Kings Majesty. These are to command you, that
you do forthwith warn him personally to appear before the Justices of the
Peace, at the next Sessions of the Peace t^ be holden for this County, then and
there to testify his knowledge on the behalf of his said Majesty, to and upon
such matters as he shall be then and there examined of. And hereof, etc.

CHAP. IX. About Watch and Ward.
Glouc. ss.
VV S. and I S. two of the Justices, etc. To the High Constable of the Hundred
of W. and all the Petit Constables within the same Hundred. Information being
given to us, that very many suspicious persons do wander about the County
without controlment or question: For the preventing therefore of this in time
to come, It is by us ordered, and you are hereby all of you straightly charged to
look to your Offices herein, and to see that you keep a careful and strong
Watch by night, and Ward by day from Sun to Sun, in all the Parishes and places
within your Hundred, by able and well armed men, and to charge them that they
do pose all men, and arrest vagrants and persons that are suspicious, and bring
them to a Justice of Peace to be examined and dealt with according to the Law.
And all persons whatsoever are by us hereby commanded to be aiding, assisting,
and obedient to you herein, under pain of contempt. And you the said Officers
are to present to us the default of the refusers, and them that are otherwise.
And you the said High Constable are to give notice hereof, and a strict charge
herein to your Petit Constables, as you will answer the contrary.

Given under our Hands, etc.
It being proved to me by I K. of the Parish of D. that the first of May, etc.
he the said I K. being then the Constable of Dale, commanded I S. etc.
aforesaid, to keep watch with the inhabitants of the Town of Dale, from
Sunsetting of that day, till Sunrising of the next day; but he refused and
denied so to do, and made default therein, by which the watch at that time was
not kept, etc. These are, etc. To bind him to the good Behavior.

CHAP. X. About Alehouses, Ale-house-keepers, Drunkards, etc.
To all Officers whatsoever.
1 Glouc. ss. A license to keep an Alehouse.
WE the Justices of Peace and Quorum for the County of Glouc. do license and
authorize I S. of Dale in the said County to keep a common Alehouse, or
Tipling-house, and to use common selling of Ale, Beer, This is grounded upon 5
and 6 of Ed. 6. 25.
o^ Cider in the said Town of D. according to the form of the Statute in that
case provided, under the Orders and Articles hereunto subscribed, for one year
only, next after the date hereof. Witness our Hands and Seals, this, etc.

Orders to be observed by all the Inne-keepers and Ale-house-keepers.
1. That they suffer no persons to be Tippling in their houses against the Laws
herein provided.

2. That they suffer not any persons to play at unlawful games, in their
houses.

3. That they suffer none but such that have necessary occasion, to be or
remain drinking in their houses on the Lords day.

4. That they suffer none to be drinking there at unseasonable times of the
night.

5. That they suffer none other disorder or misrule in their houses.

2 Glouc. ss.
To suppress an alehouse.
W S. and K S. two of, etc. To the Constables of Dale within the County of G.
Whereas we are informed, that I S. of your Town, Ale*house-keeper, is himself a
man of evil behavior, and does also suffer ill rule and disorder in his house,
contrary to the Laws in that case provided. These are therefore to require you
forthwith to repair to the house of the said I S. and to charge him from us,
and in our names, to surcease from common selling of Ale or Beer, at his peril.
Given, etc.

3 Glouc. ss.
To commit an alehouse keeper for selling without license. Upon 5 and 6 Ed. 6.
25.
W S. and K S. etc. To the Constables of D. in the County of G. and every of
them. Whereas I S. of D. in the said County, has of his own authority taken
upon him to keep a common Alehouse in D. aforesaid, and still continues so to
do, contrary to the Statute in that case provided, albeit he has been duly
discharged and forbidden so to do by the Justices of the Peace of the County.
We therefore do hereby command you, that you do him apprehend, and convey him
to the common Gaol of this County, and him deliver to the Keeper there, who is
hereby charged to receive him at your the said Constables hands, and him safely
to keep for three days, and afterward till he become bound with good Sureties
befere some Justices of the Peace of this County, that he shall not keep a
common Alehouse or Tipling-house any more, according to the Statute in that
case provided. And hereof, etc.

Observations upon this Warrant.
We find this President amongst their Printed Warrants, but do not find a good
ground for it: Nor can we see how the Justices may safely make it; for we know
not how the offender may be convict upon 5. and 6. of Ed. 6. but by Indictment.
But if the Ale-house-keeper sell after he is discharged, this is a contempt;
and then we conceive, upon proof of this, any Justice of Peace may send for
him, and bind him to the good Behavior, and to appear at Sessions; and if he
cannot put in Sureties, may send him to Gaol. And by this way Ale-house-keepers
may be made to give over their selling of Ale. Or he may proceed against him
upon the Statute of 3 Car. 3. by the Warrant that comes after here, Numb. 10.

4 Glouc. ss.
Against the Ale-house-Keeper for suffering tippling, and he tipler or tippling.
W S. Esquire, etc. To the Constables of Dale in the County of G. and every of
them; Or it may be directed to the Churchwardens of Dale in the County of G.
For as much as it has been duly proved before me, that the persons here
under-named, inhabitants within your Parish of D. upon the first day of May
last, were and did continue drinking and Tippling in the house of Grounded upon
2 Jac. 9.
G. W. an Inne-keeper, or an Ale-house-keeper within your said Parish, and that
the said G W. did then suffer it, contrary to the Statutes in that case
provided: By which the said persons undernamed have forfeit each of them three
shillings four pence a piece, and the said Innekeeper has forfeit ten
shillings to the use of the Poor of your Parish. You are therefore hereby
required to take notice thereof, and according to the duty of your place
forthwith to levy of the goods of the said G W. to the use of the poor of your
Parish, ten shillings, by distress, apprisement, and sale thereof, according to
the Statute, rendering to him the overplus. And likewise to levy by distress
and sale of the goods of every of the said persons undernamed three shillings
four pence a piece, in case the same persons shall refuse or neglect to pay the
same three shillsngs four pence to the Churchwardens of the Parish within one
week after the demand thereof, rendering back the overplus. And in case the said
last offenders, or any of them be unable to pay the same forfeiture, that that
then you put the same persons so unable in the Stocks, there to remain the
space of four hours. And you are further to give notice to the said G W. that
he is by this offense disabled to keep any common Alehouse by the space of
three years next following. And hereof, etc. A B. C D. E F. G H.

This offense of tippling must be punished within six months, and therefore the
Warrant shall do well to express the offense to have been done within six
months.

5 Glouc. ss.
Another.
Either of them will serve.
W S. etc. To, etc. (as in the last.) It being duly proved before me, that I S.
of, etc. an Inne-keeper, or Victualler, or Ale-house-keeper, or Taverner, or
one that does sell Wine in his house, did upon the first day of May last, in
his house there, being an Alehouse, or Inn, or Tavern, (as the case is,)
permit and suffer diverse unknown persons to be and remain tippling, contrary to
the Act of Parliament in that case provided, by which he has forfeited ten
shillings, etc. (as in the last.) And hereof, etc. Grounded upon 1 Car. 4. and
1 Jac. 9.


6 Glouc. ss. For no^ keeping the assize.
Grounded upon 1 Jac. 9.
W S. etc. To the Constables of D. in the County of G. and every of them, (or
it may be to the Churchwardens.) Whereas I S. an Ale-house-keeper, or an
Inne-keeper of your Parish of Dale, has been lawfully convicted before me for
selling Ale and Beer by unlawful measures, and less then a quart of the best
for a penny, within three months now last past, at D. aforesaid, contrary to
the Statute in that case provided, whereby he has forfeit twenty shillings to
the use of the Poor of your Parish. You are therefore hereby required to take
notice thereof, and according to the duty of your place forthwith to levy of
the goods of the said I S. by distress, apprisement and sale thereof, according
to the Statute in that case provided, to the use of your Poor, the same sum of
twenty shillings. And you are hereby required to give notice to the said I S.
that he is disabled for three years next coming, to keep any such common
Alehouse again.

7 Glouc. ss.
Another.
W S. etc. To, etc. (as in the last.) Every of the persons here undernamed
being lawfully convicted before me, for selling Ale and Beer, the first day of
May last, at the places of their several abodes hereunder mentioned, contrary
to the Statute in that case provided. Upon 1 Jac.
These are to require you to levy by distress and sale of the goods of every
of the said persons so named, the sum of twenty shillings. And if they shall
refuse to pay the said sum, you are to detain the said goods so distrained six
days, and then for default of satisfaction, to prize and sell the same,
rendering the overplus; which several forfeitures shall be by you employed to
the use of the Poor of your Parish. And if any of them refuse to pay their
several fofeitures, and that you find not a sufficient distress wherein to
levy the same, That then you the Constables, or one of you, commit every such
offender to the Stocks, there to remain by the space of four hours. And hereof,
etc.

Observations upon these four Warrants.
In case of selling less then measure, and tippling, we conceive the Justice
cannot command the Officer; for the Statutes do not give him power to make any
Warrant: But the Officer is ex officio of his own power to do it. Therefore
this last Warrant, however we find him in Print, yet we cannot justify him,
especially the last branch, of putting the Ale-house-keeper in the Stocks; for
we do not find it warranted by any Law. My advice to the Justices of Peace
therefore is, that they do not use it.

8 Glouc. ss. For Drunkards, upon 1 Jac. 5.
W S. etc. To the Constables of D. and every of them. I S. of your Parish of
Dale being lawfully convicted before me, for being drunk the first day of May
last, at Dale aforesaid, contrary to the Statute in that case provided, this
being the first offense, for which he is to forfeit five shillings, or to be
put in the Stocks six hours. These are therefore to authorize and require you,
and every of you, forthwith to demand the same five shillings of him; and in
case he pay it not to the Churchwardens of your Parish within one week after
demand, that then you levy the same by way of distress and sale of his goods,
giving back the overplus. And in case he be not able to pay the same, that then
you put and keep him in the Stocks by the space of six hours.

And hereof, etc.
9 Glouc. ss. Another.
W S. etc. To the Constables, etc. It appearing to me by my own view, that I S.
of your Town was on Wednesday last drunk, contrary to, etc. By which, etc. (as
in the last.) These are, etc. (as in the last.)

This offense also must be punished within six months after it is done; and
therefore the Warrant is to say when it was done.

10 Glou. ss. For selling Ale without license; upon 3 Car. 3. The first offense.
W S. etc. To the Constables of Dale in the County of G. or it may be to the
Churchwardens of D. The persons undernamed, all of them of your Parish, being
lawfully convicted before me, for an obstinate keeping and maintaining of a
common Alehouse or Tipling-house the first of May last, in the places there
mentioned, without lawful License, against the Laws in that case provided, for
which each of them are to pay twenty shillings a piece, to the use of the Poor
of your Parish, or to be openly whipped. These are therefore to authorize and
require you, forthwith to levy the same of each of them by distress,
apprisement, and (after three days the money not paid) by sale of their goods
respectively, giving back the overplus. And in case of lack of distress, or not
payment thereof within six days now then next following, that then you see them
openly whipped for the same. And the money by you received, you are to see to
be employed to the use of the Poor of your Parish. And hereof, etc.

I S. of M. for keeping an Alehouse in M. in this County. L M. of K. for
keeping an Alehouse in K. in this County. N O. of S. for keeping an Alehouse
in S. in this County.




To the Constables of Dale.
11 Glou. ss.
For selling Ale without license the second time.
W S. etc. Whereas I S. of your Parish of Dale has been duly convicted before
me the second time, for selling Ale and Beer without License, and for keeping a
common Alehouse and Tipling-house; for which second offense he is to be
committed to the Bridewel for one month, according to the Laws provided in
that case. These are therefore Grounded upon 3 Car. 1.
to require you forthwith to apprehend the said I S. and him to carry to the
Bridewel within the Castle of Glouc. to the Governor thereof, who is hereby
commanded to receive him, and there to keep him, by the space of one month,
and to deal with him as an idle, lewd and disorderly person. And this shall be
your Warrant. Dated, etc.

So by this the Warrant may be made upon the third conviction to commit him to
the house of Correction, there to remain till by order of the Justices in their
General Quarter Sessions he be from thence delivered.

No Warrant can be made (as it seems to me) by a Justice against the Officer
that does neglect, or refuse to levy the twenty shillings upon the
Ale-house-keeper for selling without license, to commit him, or force him to
pay the forty shillings upon 3 Car. 3. For there can be no conviction of him,
and therefore no punishment of him thus, bue by way of Indictment. So the
Officer upon 1 Jac. 9. that shall not execute his Office against
Ale-house-keepers, for suffering tippling, or selling less then measure, or
others for tippling. And the Officers that shall upon 4 Jac. 5. neglect to
execute their Offices against Drunkards, cannot be punished upon the Justices
Warrant, because the Justice is not to command, but the Officer in the first
case ex officio to do execution, and because the Justice cannot convict by
witnesses: And yet it seems reasonable, that upon 1 Jac. for lack of
certificate of want of distress, that the Justice should send his Warrant for
that which is in his own knowledge. But if any Justice in these and such like
cases will adventure to send his Warrant, he must be sure that there is such a
neglect: And then if he will adventure, we conceive his Warrant must be after
this form.

12 Glou. ss.
W S. etc. To I S. and W S. of Dale in the County of G. Whereas W S. of your
Parish, Ale-house-keeper, was duly convict before me for selling less then one
full quart of his Ale for one penny, and of the small less then two quarts so
one penny; and I did thereupon send my Warrant to the Constable of your Parish,
I S. being then the Constable there, to give him notice thereof, and to call
upon him to do his duty in levying the sum of twenty shillings, forfeited by
him for his said offense, by way of distress to be taken of the goods of the
said W S. and that the same being detained six days, and no satisfaction made
to him, that then he did presently apprise, and sell the same goods, and render
the overplus, according to the power to him given by the Acts of Parliament in
that case provided. But the said I S. has not levied the same money, as is
said, nor has certified to me any lack of distress, albeit my said Warrant was
sent to him more then twenty days since; by which the said Constable has
forfeited forty shillings, to the use of the Poor of your Parish. These are
therefore to require you the said I S. and W S. forthwith to levy the same
forty shillings of the goods of the said I S. the then Constable, in this wise,
viz. to take and detain his goods by way of distress for six days, within which
time if he pay you not, that then you presently apprise and sell the same,
rendering to him the overplus. And if no distress can be had, that then you
carry the said I S. to the common Gaol of the County, there to remain until he
shall pay the same.

And hereof, etc.
CHAP. XI. About Masters, Servants, Laborers, Apprentices.
WE have seen diverse Presidents of Warrants by one Justice of Peace to
apprehend a fugitive Servant, and one that refuses to serve, and carry him to
Gaol, unless he put in security to serve his Master, etc. We shall not give you
any President hereof, because we understand not upon what Law it is grounded.
But some of those we conceive may be warranted upon the Laws in force, we have
hereafter set down. For placing of the poor Apprentices, see in Poor.

To the Constables of D. in the County of G.
1 Glouc. ss. To command one that works at her own hands to go to service.
W S. and K S. two of the Justices, etc. Information being given to us, that I
S. of your Town of Dale, is a person of an able body, and has nothing whereby
to live that can be seen, but her work, and lives by working at her own hands,
and refuses to go to service: You are hereby required forthwith to give her
notice, that she is before Michaelmas next to put her self into service,
according to the Statute in that case provided. And she is hereby required to
conform her self hereunto at her peril. Given, etc. All these warrants are
grounded upon 5 Eliz.


To the Constables of D. in the County of G.
2 Glouc. ss.
To punish for disobedience to the last warrant.
Whereas upon information given to us, that I S. of your Parish of Dale, a
person of able body, not having any visible means whereby to maintain her self
but her labor, did refuse to go to service, and did live by work at her own
hands: We did thereupon order her to put her self in service before Michaelmas
last; the which she has not done, in contempt of authority. These are
therefore to require you to take her the said I S. and to convey her to
Bridewel in Glouc. and there to remain, until she be from thence delivered by
order of Law. Given, etc.

Observations on this Warrant.
It seems to me a safer way in this case, to bind her to the good Behavior for
this contempt; for there is no way of conviction of this contempt. Given, etc.

There are diverse offenses in Servants, Apprentices, and Laborers, and some in
Masters, punishable by the Law of 5 Eliz. But because the Law is doubtful in
the sense of it, in relation to these things, it seems to speak that they are
only punishable at a Sessions of the Peace; therefore we give you no
Presidents of Warrants for a Justice of Peace but of Sessions. In all
differences between Masters and Servants, we think it best for the Justice to
warn the parties only to be before him, and see if he can end the matter
between them, after this manner.

To the Constables of D. in the County of G.
3 Glouc. ss. Against a Master for wages.
I S. of, etc. having made his complaint to me, that he being hired by I D. of
your Parish; he has turned him away within his time, and also refuses to pay
him his wages for the time he has served him. These are therefore to require
you to warn the said I D. to be before me (such a day) to answer the premises,
and to warn the said I S. to be then there also to make good his complaint, etc.

To the Constables of D. in the County of G.
4 Glouc. ss. Against a Servant that departs being an Apprentice.
I D. having complained to me, that I L. being his hired Servant for one year
to be ended at Michaelmas next, has wilfully departed out of his service
within the time, contrary to the Laws in that case provided. These are (as in
the other) changing the things to be changed.

To the, etc. as in the last.
5 Glouc. ss. Against a Master that does abuse his Servant Apprentice.
W S. etc. Complaint being made to me by I S. an Apprentice, against I D. his
Master, both of your Parish of Dale in this County, That the said I D. does not
allow to his said Servant, competent meat, drink, and apparel, or does
immoderately correct him, and without any cause at all, (or refuses to receive
and to keep him) as the case is. These are to require you to warn both the same
parties to be before me at W. (such a day) to the end that I may then examine
the same matter, and end it, if I can, etc.

Given under my hand, etc.
To the, etc. as in the last.
6 Glouc. ss.
Against a Servant.
W S. etc. Complaint being made to me by I D. a Master, against I S. his
Apprentice, both of your Parish of Dale in this County, that the said I S. is a
disobedient and stubborn Servant, and does very much miscarry himself toward
his Master, or that the said I S. has departed out of his service. These are
to require you, etc. (as in the last.) Given, etc.

7 Glouc. ss.
Discharge of an Apprentice.
W S. I H. L M. N O. four of the Justices, etc. Complaint having been made to
us by I S. an Apprentice, against I K. his Master, both of your Parish of Dale
within this County, That the said I K. his Master has not allowed to his said
Servant competent diet, and apparel befitting such Apprentice, and has
sometimes corrected him without any just cause at all, and when he had cause,
corrected him above measure; and we having called the same parties before us,
and examined the Complaint, find it to be true: And therefore we do think fit
to discharge the said Apprentice of his Apprenticeship, And therefore do by
these presents, under our Hands and Seals, pronounce and declare, That we have
for the causes aforesaid, discharged the said I S. the Apprentice of his
Apprenticehood, the first day of May.

All these are grounded on the Statute 5 Eliz. 4.

CHAP. XII. About Rates.
1 Glouc. ss. To have contribution for a sum charged upon a Hundred for a
Robbery.
W S. and I S. two of the Justices, etc. To the High Constable of the Hundred
of W. in the County of G. and to all the Petit Constables and Tythingmen of the
several Parishes and Tythings within the said Hundred. Whereas one I S, was of
late robbed of an hundred pounds, within the said Hundred of W. and has
thereupon sued the same Hundred of W. and has a Judgment to recover an hundred
pounds against it, the which has been levied of, and charged upon I S. This is
upon 27 Eliz. cha. 13.
and L S. two of the inhabitants of D. within the said Hundred. And upon their
complaint to us hereof, we have according to the Act of Parliament in that case
provided, for the raising of the same money, set a rate upon the Parishes and
places with in the said Hundred, which rate is hereunto subscribed and annexed.
These are therefore to require you the said High Constable, to give notice
thereof to the Petit Constables and Tythingmen of your Hundred. And thereupon
all the said Petit Constables and Tythingmen are required forthwith equally to
distribute and set the same rate upon the inhabitants of their Parishes and
Tythings respectively, according to the rule of rating for their Poor. And the
same being rated, that they do demand it, and in case of non-payment, levy it
by distress and sale of goods upon every of the inhabitants not paying it
respectively. And having levied and received the same, that they do forthwith
bring and pay it in to us, or one of us, to the end that the same may be paid
over to the said I S. and L S. And that you do within fourteen days next
following, give to one of us an account of your execution of this Warrant at
your peril. Given, etc.

The rate above mentioned in this Warrant, to be annexed thereunto.

Then let the rate be affixed, and see that it be handsomely done, with an apt
title above it, after this manner.

A Rate made by I S. and W S. Esquires, two of the Justices of the Peace, etc.
for the raising of an hundred pounds, upon the Hundred of W. charged upon it,
and levied upon I S. and L S. two of the inhabitants, upon a Judgment had by
one I S. against the Hundred, after a robbery.

The Parish of Dale.
I S. six d. I L. six d.


2 Glouc. ss.
To carry a Prisoner to Gaol.
W S. Esquire, etc. one of, etc. To the Constable of D. in the County of G. A
rate being made by you the Constable and Churchwardens of your Parish of Dale,
and two of the inhabitants there, the which rate is annexed and subscribed, for
the raising of money of your Parish, for This is upon 3 Jac. chap. 10.
the carrying of certain offenders within the Parish to Gaol, that had not
ability in goods or chattels to defray their own charge, and the which you the
said Constable have laid out of your own purse. And this rate having been duly
allowed by a Justice of Peace under his hand, according to the Statute in that
case provided: These are to require and authorize you the said Constable to
demand the same; and in case of not payment, to levy it by distress and sale
of goods, the same goods having been first apprised by four of the
Parishioners, upon every of the persons not paying the same upon demand. And
the same money when you have received you may keep, and retain to satisfy your
self for your disbursement aforesaid. And these shall be your Warrant for the
same.

Given, etc.
A Rate made by the Constables, Churchwardens, and two of the inhabitants of
Dale, etc.

And by these, other Rates (if need be) for Quarter Sessions, Pavements,
Bridges, and other things may be made.

As for the Rating for Poor, Churches, Highways, and in the Plague time, see
it in those Titles and other places.

CHAP. XIII. About the Charge of carrying a Prisoner to Gaol.
1 Glouc. ss. For the sale of his own goods. Upon 3 Jac. 10.
VV S. Esquire, etc. To the Constable of the Parish of Dale in the County of
Glouc. I S. a malefactor, being of late by me sent through your hands to the
common Gaol of this County, in the convey of whom thereunto (as you have
informed me) you have been necessarily enforced to lay out in charges and
expenses upon him, and those that guarded him thither, the sum of twenty
shillings, for which ye have not as yet received satisfaction, albeit the said
I S. has an ability of goods and chattels to make you satisfaction. These are
therefore to authorize and require you, forthwith to take and s^ll such and so
much of the goods of the said I S. within your Parish, or elsewhere in this
County, as shall satisfy and pay you the same money by you laid out; but that
you do before you sell the same, cause the same to be apprized by four of the
inhabitants of the Parish where the goods are. And that you keep so much of the
money as to satisfy your self, and deliver to the said I S. all the overplus
of the money made by sale of the same goods.

And hereof, etc. Given under my Hand and Seal, etc.
Or it may be directed to the High Constable of the Hundred, thus.
Having received information, that I S. of D. being late sent from a Justice of
Peace by the hand of L M. a Constable of D. within your Hundred, to the common
Gaol of this County, and that in the convey of him thither the same Comstable
was forced to lay out in expenses upon the Prisoner and those that did attend
and guard him, twenty shillings; which the said I S. did refuse to pay at that
time, and does still refuse to pay the said Constable, albeit he has an
ability of goods and chattels to do it. These are therefore to authorize and
require you forthwith to take and sell such and so much of the goods of the
said I S. within your Hundred, as shall satisfy and pay the same Constable the
charges so by him laid out. But that you do, [as in the last,] (with this,) And
the same twenty shillings so by you made of the sale of the same goods, that
you pay it over to the said L M. And this shall be your Warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal at S. in the same County, etc.
CHAP. XIV. About Rogues.
To the High Constable of the Hundred of W. in the County of Glouc. and to all
the Petit Constables within the same Hundred.
1 Glouc. ss.
For a general search.
W S. and L S. Esquires, two of, etc. These are to require you the said High
Constable and Petit Constables, that you (taking sufficient assistance with
you) do make a general privy search within all the Towns, Parishes, and Hamlets
within your Hundred, upon Monday night the first day of May next, at night, for
the finding out, and apprehending of all Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandering, and
idle persons, in, or about your said Towns, Parishes, and Hamlets. And such as
you shall find in the same search, that you do apprehend and bring, or cause to
be brought before us the next day, being the second day of May, to the house
of, etc. in D. to be by us dealt withal according to the Statute in that behalf
provided. At which time and place, you are all of you further required to
appear before us, and then and there to give an account upon Oath in writing,
and under the hands of the Minister of every several Parish within your
Hundred, what Rogues, Vagabonds, wandering and disordered persons have been
there apprehended, as well in the same search, as also since the last meeting
of the Justices of Peace, made for this purpose, being upon, or about the tenth
of October last.

And hereof, etc.
2 Glouc. ss.
Grounded upon 39 Eliz. 4.
W S. etc. To the Constables of Dale in the County of Glouc. Forasmuch as one I
S. a wandering, idle and misorderly person, was taken begging in Dale in this
County, and brought before me. These are to require you forthwith him to
correct, and by a Pass to convey, according to the Statute in that case
provided.

Given under my Hand and Seal, etc.
3 Glouc. ss.
Grounded upon 39 Eliz. 4.
W S. and K L. etc. To the Constable of Dale in the County of Glouc. It being
duly proved before us, that I S. the Minister of your Parish of Dale, does not
keep a Register-book there, according to the Law in that case provided, to
record the correction and pass of Rogues, by which he has forfeited five
shillings to the use of the Poor, or the Bridewells of the County, at our
election. These are therefore to require you to levy the same five shillings
of the goods of the said I S. by distress and sale thereof, and to pay over the
same money (so by you levied) to the Overseers of the Poor of your Parish, to
be employed to the use of the Poor of your Parish. And hereof, etc.

Given under our Hands and Seals, etc.
To the High constables of the Hundred of W. in the County of Glouc.
4 Glouc. ss.
This is grounded upon 1 Jac. 7.
W S. and K L. etc. It being duly proved before us against I S. the Constable
of Dale, that he has been negligent in his Office, in the apprehending and
punishing of Rogues, and that upon the first of May now last past, he being the
Constable there, did willingly suffer an unknown wandering Rogue, to pass
through his Town; and albeit he had timely notice given to him of him, and he
might easily have apprehended him, yet he did not apprehend, correct, and pass
him, as by the Law he ought to have done, whereby he has forfeited ten
shillings to the use of the Poor of the said Parish, or to the use of the
Bridewel of the County, at our election. These are therefore to require you to
levy the same ten shillings of the goods of the said I S. by distress and sale
thereof, and to pay over the same money so by you levied, to the Overseers of
the Poor of the said Parish of Dale, to be employed to the use of the Poor
there.

And hereof, etc. Given under our Hands and Seals, etc.
To the High Constable of the Hundred of W. in the County of G.
5 Glouc. ss.
So ^s this.
W S. etc. It being duly proved before us against I S. the Constable of Dale,
that he has been negligent in his Office, in the correction and convey of
Rogues and Vagrants, and that upon the first day of May last past, one I S. a
vagrant idle person, being taken begging in Dale aforesaid, and brought and
offered to him to be punished, he did not correct and pass him, as by Law he
ought to have done, but did willingly suffer him to escape unpunished, whereby
he has forfeited, etc. (as in the last) to the use (as in the last to the end.)

Given under our Hands and Seals.
To the High Constable, etc. (as in the last.)
6 Glouc. ss. Either of these are sufficient, This is grounded on 39 Eliz. 4.
W S. etc. It being duly proved before us against I S. Constable of Dale, that
he has been negligent in his Office, in the correction and punishment of
Rogues and Vagrants. And that the first day of May now last past, he sent one W
K. a Rogue to be conveyed to the place of his birth by a general and illegal
Pass; or, that one I K. a Rogue being passed according to the Law, and tendered
to him, he did willingly refuse to receive him, and did suffer him to escape,
or shift him away, or did not pass him to the next Parish, according to the
Statute in that case provided, by which he has forfeited five pounds to the
use of, etc. (as in the last.) These are (as in the last,) and to bind him to
the good Behavior.

Given under our Hands and Seals, etc.
5 Glouc. ss.
The like may be made against the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, for
refusing to take one duly sent unto them, thus: That whereas one I W. a poor
person, was by a Sessions order sent to be settled in your Town, and received
there by the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor there, I S. etc. being
then Overseers, and tendered to them accordingly, they wilfully refused.

To the Constables of Dale in the County of G.
6 Glouc. ss.
Upon 1 Jac. 7.
It being duly proved before us, that I S. of your Parish, the first day of May
now last past, did entertain an unknown person, a vagrant begging person at his
doors, and did not bring him to the Constable of the Parish, as he ought to
have done, but gave him an Alms, by which he has forfeited ten shillings to
the use of, etc. (as in the last.)

Given under our Hands and Seals.
To the Constable of Dale in the, etc.
7 Glouc. ss.
Upon 1 Jac. 7.
It being duly proved before us against I S. of your Parish, that one K L. a
vagrant Rogue, being apprehended, corrected, and duly sent to your Parish, and
delivered to the said F B. the Constable of the said Parish, the said I S. did
rescue and shift him out of the Constables hands, whereby he escaped; by which
the said I S. has forfeited, etc. (as in the last.)

Given under our Hands and Seals.
To the Constables of Dale.
8 Glou. ss.
It being proved before us against I S. of your Parish, and M. his Wife, that
they being able to work, do threaten to run away out of the Parish, and leave
their Family to the Parish. These are therefore to require you, that unless
they shall forthwith put in sufficient Sureties for the discharge of your
Parish, that you do forthwith apprehend the said I S. and M. his Wife, and them
to carry to the common Bridewel of the County in G. there to be dealt with and
detained as sturdy and wandering Rogues, until they shall be discharged by order
of Law, etc.

Given under our Hands and Seals.
All these eight Warrants (but the fifth) must be made by two of the Justices
of the Peace, and one of the Quorum, and under their Hands and Seals.

9 Glou. ss.
W S. etc. To the Constables of Dale, I S. of your Parish, having left his
Family on the Parish, and being run away from them, and being by you brought
before me for an incorrigible rogue; These are to require you to keep him safe,
till by order of two Justices of the Peace he shall be delivered. Upon 7 Jac. 4.


I am not satisfied in the safe granting of this Warrant, because there is no
way of conviction of the offense set down in the Statute on which it is
grounded. But for an incorrigible Rogue, taken and brought before a Justice of
Peace by a Constable, in this case I take it warrantable. Thus.

10 Glou. ss.
W S. and T S. etc. To the Constable of Dale. Forasmuch as I S. of your Parish,
being brought by you before me for an incorrigible Rogue, was by me committed
to you, to be secured till by order of two Justices of Peace you were delivered
of him: These are now to require you, him to convey to the common Bridewel, and
there to deliver him to, etc. there to remain till the next Quarter Sessions,
and till he shall be delivered by order of Law.

Given under our Hands and Seals.
Observations upon these Warrants.
In case where any are brought as Rogues, or incorrigible Rogues, to a Justice
of Peace by an Officer, as such as will not work, or run from their Fam^lies,
or have a Bastard Child like to charge the Parish, or the like: In these cases
it seems the Justice may send them to Bridewel, or to Gaol, as the Law is.
There be no^ ^ays of conviction set down by these Statutes; for the Constable
does first apprehend, and he must see that he have good cause to do it. But I
should choose rather to put them to find Sureties for their good Behavior, and
send them to Gaol upon this account.

11 Glou. ss.
It having been duly proved before me, that I S. late of, etc. being an idle
wandering person, has counterfeited a false Testimonial under the name of W S.
supposing him to be a Soldier, landed at Dover, and that he was allowed to
travel to the place of his birth, etc. whereas in truth he never was a
Soldier, neither did he land at Dover, nor was he allowed to travel, etc.
These are, etc. to bind him to the good Behavior. Or perhaps two Justices may
make a Warrant, to send him to Bridewel, but one Justice may bind him to the
good Behavior.

CHAP. XV. About the Plague.
To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of M. N. O.
within this County.
1 Glouc. ss.
On the same
W S. and I S. two of the Justices, etc. Information being given to us, that
the Parish of Dale within this County is infected with the Plague, and that it
has need of relief from the adjacent places five miles about it, according to
the Statute in that case provided. The which, because we intend to provide for
them, we command you, and every of you, to be before us upon the first day of
May next, at the house of, etc. with your Church-books of Rates for the Poor,
to the end that we may then make an equal weekly Rate and Assessment for the
purpose aforesaid. And hereof, etc.

A weekly Rate made the first day of May, by W S. and I S. Esquires, two of,
etc. with the assistance of the Overseers of the Poor of the Parishes within
five miles compass of the Parish of Dale, at this time infected with the
Plague, for the relief thereof during the time of the infection, to be paid by
the inhabitants of the same Parishes weekly, according to the Act of Parliament
in that case provided.

The inhabitants of the Parish of S. to pay weekly as follows.
I S. 6 d. W S. 3 d. T S. 2 d. N O. 3 d. L M. 2 d. K N. 2 d.


The inhabitants of the Parish of M. to pay weekly as follows.
S T. 6 d. etc.


To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of Dale.
2 Glouc. ss.
W S. and I S. etc. There being a Rate made which is for your Parish, the Rate
subscribed to this Warrant, for the relief of the inhabitants of the Parish of
Dale, at the present infected with the Plague, according to the Act of
Parliament in that case provided. These are to authorize and require you
forthwith to levy and collect the same On the same.
of the persons therein named respectively, by distress and sale of their
goods, rendering to them the overplus. And the same money so by you received,
that you pay over to the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish of Dale, and
give in the same upon your account at the end of your year.

Given under our Hands and Seals, etc.
To the Constables, Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of Dale in the
County of G.
3 Glouc. ss.
Whereas we are credibly informed, that the Plague is in the house of I S. of
your Parish, whereof one died. And whereas also we are informed, that diverse of
the inhabitants of your Parish have resorted to the said house, both before and
after the said party was dead, and especially two children in the house of I P.
by reason whereof it is feared that they are sick, and so by reason thereof the
sickness is like to increase and spread further in the Town, unless there be
speedy provision made for the preventing thereof. These are to require you the
said Constables forthwith to cause the said house so infected to be shut up,
and that you appoint one or more Warders at the door, to keep them from coming
forth, and others from coming at them. And if any shall wilfully disobey your
orders and directions herein, attempting to resist their keepers, and go
abroad, that then you and the said Wardsmen force them to keep their houses.
And if any wilfully go abroad, having the Plague Sore upon them, that you and
they apprehend them for, and deal with them as with Felons: And if they have no
sore, that then you bring them before some Justice of Peace, to be dealt with
as Vagabonds, and to be bound with Sureties to the good Behavior. And that you
the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor be careful that the parties shut
up be sufficiently provided for, for their present relief and sustentation. And
further, that you cause the said I S. and his Family to keep themselves within
their own doors, and that in the mean time, he forbear to victual, or to let
any come into his house, till he has further order. And of your care,
diligence and proceeding herein, that you do from time to time give us account,
that we may give further direction herein. And we are further to advise the
Parishioners, that they be very careful not to mingle themselves amongst them
that have been in the same infected house. And of this our advertisement that
you give them speedy notice, etc.

Oath of Searchers.
4. Grounded upon 1 Jac. 31.
4. You shall swear, that you shall carefully search, enquire, and examine all
such persons as shall die within this Parish of M. And you shall truly publish
and declare, whether any such person do die of the Plague, by any sign that
shall appear thereof, without any conniving in any manner whatsoever, to the
uttermost of your skill and ability, or of what other disease they shall die.
So help you God.

Oath of the Bearer.
etc.

Oath of the Examiner.
you shall truly enquire and labor to know, from time to time, what houses
within the said Parish be visited with sickness, and who therein are sick, and
of what diseases they are sick, and upon doubt, command restraint of access,
until it shall appear what the disease is. And if you find any person sick of
the Plague, you shall give present order to the Constable, forthwith to shut up
the house wherein he is. And if you find the Constable careless herein, you
shall forthwith acquaint some Justice of Peace therewith. And you shall see
that the visited persons be weekly provided for; and in every other thing shall
do as belongs to your Office, So help you God.

CHAP. XVI. About making of Constables.
A Warrant for the making of a new Constable.
To our loving friend, A B. of Dale, Yeoman.
THese are to require you, to make your repair to us, or to some other Justice
of the Peace of this County, to take the Oath of a Constable, to serve within
your Town of Dale, you being chosen and ordered by the Leet of your Town to
undertake the same Office.

Or thus.
Whereas A B. of your Town, the new Constable thereof, is by reason of his age
and impotency very unable and insufficient to execute the said place. These are
to require you whose names are underwritten, to be before me at my house at W.
to morrow by eight a clock in the morning, that I may make choice of one of you
to be sworn to undertake the same Office.

And hereof, etc.
Observations upon this Warrant.
We do not approve the making of Constables by one Justice of Peace, but in
case of necessity only; when a Constable dies, and it is long to the Quarter
Sessions, or Leet, at which Courts these Officers are regularly to be made. The
Tythingman and Constable is now become all one Officer in most places, and it
were well they were so sworn, called all of them Constables, or else Constables
and Tythingmen both.

CHAP. XVII. About Highways and Bridges.
FOr the form of the Presentment of a Justice of Peace of a Highway in decay
upon his own view. It differs not from a Presentment of a Jury, or Indictment;
but only in the Title. I S. etc. one of the Justices does present upon his own
view, That, etc. But this the Clerk of the Peace is to draw up for the Justice.

We give you no President for the repair of Bridges by four Justices of Peace,
or for the repair of Chepstow-bridge; for we suppose no Justices will care to
do this out of the Quarter Sessions, from which Court it is best to get these
things done.

The wages appointed and set by the Justices, to be allowed to men that work at
the Highways, for themselves, servants and plows, for this year, according to
the new Ordinance; as follows.
To the laboring man for himself the days work, from 8 in the morning to 3 in
the afternoon, 6 d. To the Plowman for his Plow with four Oxen, or three
Horses, and two Men the same time, 2 s. 6 d. And so after this rate for the
rest.


W S. I S.
CHAP. XVIII. About Warrants to bind over.
To the Constables of D. in the County of G.
1 Glouc. ss.
A Warrant to bring a man in to be bound over.
Master and Apprentices.
W S. etc. Complaint being made, and Information being given to us against I S.
of your Parish of Dale, that I F. of the same Parish, being a poor child, and
his Parent^ unable to maintain him, was by the Churchwardens and Overseers of
the Poor there, and by allowance of the Justices of the Peace, duly and legally
placed with, and bound to the said I S. according to the Laws in that case
provided, and the said I S. ordered and appointed by the Justices to entertain
him: But that he (albeit he has had notice thereof) does wilfully refuse so to
do, in contempt of Authority. These are to require you forthwith to warn him to
be before us, etc. at, etc. the first day, etc. to answer the premises, and to
be then there your self with this Warrant.

Given under our Hands, etc.
If he come not, then make this Warrant.

To the Constable of D. in the County of G.
W S. etc. Whereas complaint has been made to us, etc. Recite the effect of
the first part of the 2 Glouc. ss.
former Warrant, and then say, And the said I S. having been duly summoned
before to come before us to answer the premises, has made default herein.
These are therefore to require you, to apprehend the said I S. and him to bring
before me, or some other Justice of Peace of this County, to put in Sureties
for his appearance, at the next General Sessions of the Peace to be held for
this County, to answer the premises; and in case he refuse so to do, that then
you him convey to the common Gaol, etc. as in other Warrants of the Peace.

To the Constables of D. in the County of G.
Complaint having been made to me against I S. of your Town, Gent. that he in
August last past did hunt with his Spaniels in the ground of I M. where Corn
did then grow, at the time when the same Corn was eared or codded, and
standing, and without the consent of the said I S. then owner of the same
ground, contrary to the Statute in that case, etc. By which he has forfeited
forty shillings to the said I M. the owner of the same ground. These are to
require you (as in the first.)

So for the next, if he come not, recite this. These are to require you to
take, etc. and bring to put in Sureties to appear, and to answer the offense,
and to pay the penalties, or receive the punishment by the Act appointed. And
hereof, etc.

So the like may be made against a Master that miscarries himself toward his
Apprentice, and will not obey the Justices Order. And so against them that
refuse to repair Churches upon the Justices Order, or that have Church Lands,
and will not account for the profits; changing that that is to be changed.

CHAP. XIX. Warrants for other things.
1 Glouc. ss.
For Misdemeanor.
W S. and I S. etc. To the Constables of Dale in the County of G. and every of
them. These are to require and authorize you, and either of you, that upon
sight hereof, or that upon Monday next by eight of the Clock in the Forenoon,
you apprehend and bring before me to my house in Sale, I S. of your Town,
Butcher, to answer to such matters of misdemeanour as on the behalf of our
Sovereign Lord the King shall be objected against him. And not to fail.

Given, etc. at Sale in the said County, etc.
Another.
That you attach the bodies of all and every the persons hereunder named, etc.
Or thus: That you apprehend and bring before me, or some other of the Justices
of the Peace of this County, the body of I S. of, etc. of whom C D. the bearer
hereof will give you particular notice, to answer to such matters as on the
part of the said C D. shall be objected against him.

And hereof, etc.
Observations upon this Warrant.
This Warrant is very common, but not much approved by learned men; nor is it
discretion in a Justice to grant, but in case of some great crime, which the
Justice is not willing to name in his Warrant. But if it be for the Peace or
good Behavior, or any ordinary matter, it is very harsh not to give the party
notice of it, that he may provide himself with Sureties, etc.

2 Glouc. ss.
For robbing Orchards, etc.
Either of these things are enough.
W S. Esquire, etc. To the Constable of D. in the County of G. and to I S. of
D. aforesaid, Labourer, and I B. of Dale aforesaid, Butcher. It being duly
proved before me, that I S. of your Town, Labourer, has within three months
last past, cut and carried away the Corn and Hay of I K. of your Parish, or
robbed his Orchard of Apples, or cut his Hedges, Pales, or Fences, or dug
and pulled up his Fruit Trees, or cut and spoiled his Trees and standing wood
in Dale aforesaid, to the value of ten shillings; and that I B. of your said
Town, Butcher, has procured and abetted him so to do, and received from him,
and bought of him diverse of the same things, to the great damage of the said I
K. contrary to the Act of Parliament in that case provided. I do therefore
hereby require and order, that the said I S. This is grounded upon 43 Eliz.
chap. 4.
shall within eight days after notice to him given of this Order, pay to the
said I K. ten shillings; and that the said I B. do within three days after
notice to him given of this Order, pay to the said I K. twenty shillings, in
recompense to him for his wrongs aforesaid. And that these payments be made in
the presence of the said Constable, hereby commanded upon request to see it
done. And hereof you are forthwith to give them notice; and if either of them
shall not pay the same, that then you give me notice thereof, to the end that
they may be whipped, according to the Statute in that case provided.

And hereof, etc.
Dated at D. etc.
We think it not safe to give a Warrant to the Constable for non-payment to
whip: for how shall the Constable take conusance of it, or the offender be
convicted of it? But rather let the Justice give his Warrant at first to whip
him, after this manner.

3 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. (as in the last) to those words [in that case provided.] Wherefore
the premises considered, and that I judge the said offenders, I S. and I B.
unable to make satisfaction for the said wrong, I do hereby order, that they be
forthwith committed to you the said Constable of Dale, to be whipped, the which
you are hereby required forthwith to do at your peril.

Given at L. in the said County, under, etc.
The Officer is here to be punished by imprisonment for his neglect, if he do
it not. But how he shall be convicted of the offense out of a Sessions, and by
Indictment, we know not any way, and therefore offer no Presidents of Warrants
for this.

4 Glouc. ss.
For unlawful weights and measures.
W S. Esquire, etc. To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor within the
Parish of D. in the County of G. and to every of them. I S. of your Parish of
D. being lawfully convicted before me, for selling by unlawful weights, or
unlawful measures, and that he, the first day of May last, at Dale aforesaid,
sold a pound of Currants Either of them w^ll serve.
by a pound weight, or for selling a yard of Holland by a yard, not being
according to the Standard of the Exchequer, contrary to the Act Grounded upon
16 Car. 19.
of Parliament in that case provided; whereby he has forfeited to the use of
the Poor of your Parish five shilling, to be levied by the Churchwardens and
Overseers of the Poor. The Churchwardens and Overseers are to do it without
Warrant.
These are therefore to give you notice hereof, and that you and every of you
are by your Office forthwith to levy the same five shillings of the goods of
the said I S. by distress and sale thereof, rendering to him the overplus. And
in case you do receive the same money, that you do employ it to the use of your
Poor, and give account thereof in the end of your year accordingly.

And hereof, etc.
Another.
Either of them is sufficient.
W S. etc. To, etc. I S. etc. being lawfully convicted before me, that he (such
a time and place) did keep in his house or shop a pound weight, whereby he did
usually buy and sell; or for keeping a yard-measure, whereby he did usually buy
and sell; the same not being according to the Standard of the Exchequer, etc.

We know no other Warrant touching this matter to be made by the Justices of
the Peace out of their Sessions of the Peace.

For shooting in Guns.
If any man desire to put the Laws in execution against any man for shooting in
a Gun, he may see the form of the Warrant and course of proceeding in Daltons
Just. of Peace, Chap. 126.

CHAP. XX. Of Recognisances, and Bail and Mainprise.
1. Recognisance, what it is.
A Recognisance is a Bond of Record, testifying that the Recognisor does owe a
certain sum of money to our Sovereign Lord the King, with Condition that the
Recognisor shall do some other thing, for the which he is bound in that sum in
the nature of a penalty. Wherein these things are to be known.

1. Justices of the Peace do take Recognisances for the Peace, good Behavior,
to bind men to appear at the Assizes, at the Sessions, and for many other
causes. And for this any one Justice may do it. But to Bail a Prisoner for
Felony, take a Recognisance of an Ale-house-keeper, and de some other things,
there must be two Justices to do it, and one alone cannot do it.

2. What sum the parties shall be bound in* or what Sureties the Recognisor
shall have to be bound with him, it is left to the discretion of the Justice or
Justices that does take the Recognisance, in cases where the Law does not set
down the certainty, as in some cases it does; and there they must not vary from
what is prescribed, in the persons bound, sum, or manner of the Recognisance.
But for the Peace and good Behavior, appearance at the Assizes and Sessions,
to give Evidence, and the like, the Justice may bind with what Sureties, and in
what sums he pleases.

3. It is said, that Justices of Peace cannot bind over an offender against a
penal Law, within their conusance, (not within the Commission of the Peace, nor
committed to the power of any Justice of Peace,) except it be in a special case
where the Law it self does enable them to do it.

4. All such Recognisances must be made to our Sovereign Lord the King himself,
and to none other, and in his own name.

5. The Justice of Peace need not affix his Seal to the Recognisance, but he
must put his Name to it, and then it is good enough.

Of Bail and Mainprise.
Bailment what it is.
BAilment or Mainprise (which is one kind of Recognisance) is the saving or
delivering of a man out of prison, before that he has satisfied the Law, by
taking Surety of him that he shall appear and do it. Wherein these things are
to be known.

1. The Justice of Peace must not bail one that is not bailable by Law. And on
the other side, he must bail him that is bailable by Law, or he may be punished.

2. In case of Felony, there must be two Justices of Peace, and they two
together present with the Felon to bail him.

3. The Sureties and the Sum are in his discretion; but if it be in case of
Felony, he must see he take good Sureties for the Prisoners appearance, and
bind him in a good sum to do it, or he may be fined for his neglect herein. If
any Law appoint what the Sureties, and what the Sum shall be, that the party
bailed must give, that must be pursued.

4. If the Justices shall at any time judge the Sureties insufficient, they may
compel the party bailed to put him in better Sureties, or commit him to Gaol
for lack of Bail.

5. It is said, That if the Sureties doubt the Prisoner, that he will run away
and not appear, that they may take him and carry him to the Justice* and desire
to be discharged, and that the Justice must discharge them, and that the
principal is then to be committed till he put in new Sureties.

The Forms of Recognisances.
3 Glouc. ss.
Md. That the first day of May, I S. of D. in the County of G. Yeoman, came
before me W S. Esquire, one of the Justices of the Peace of the County of G. at
K. in the same County, and acknowledged himself by way of Recognisance, to owe
unto our Lord the King, and his Successors, twenty pounds of lawful English
money, to be levied of his lands and tenements, goods and chattels, to the use
of our said Lord the King, and his Successors, if he fail in the Condition
indorsed.

If there be more then one to be bound, then it is thus: Md That the first day
of May, I S. of, etc. C D. of, etc. and E F. of, etc. all three of them came
before me, and acknowledged themselves severally to owe our Lord the King, and
his Successors, ten pound^ a piece, to be levied, etc. if I S. fail in the
Condition indorsed.



Another of the same.
4 Glou. ss.
Md. That I S. of, etc. G D. of, etc. and E F. of, etc. the first day of May,
etc. came before us W S. and L S. two of the Justices of the Peace within the
County of G. And the said I S. did assume for himself in the sum of twenty
pounds of lawful money of England, to our Lord the King: And the said C D. and
E F. became bound for the said I S. either of them in the sum of ten pounds a
piece, of like lawful money, to our said Lord the King, to be levied of their
lands and tenements, goods and chattels, by way of Recognisance, under the
condition following, viz.

Another of the same
5 Glouc. ss.
Md, (As in the former) which several sums of money every of them has
acknowledged to owe to our Lord the King, and his Successors, if the said I S.
shall make default in the Condition following, viz.

Another of the same.
6 Glouc. ss.
Md. That the first day of May, etc. at Dale in this County, I S. of, etc. C D.
of, etc. and E F. of, etc. came before us W S. etc. two of the Justices, etc.
and did undertake for L M. of, etc. each of them under the pain of twenty pound
a piece of lawful English money: And the said L M. did then and there assume
for himself in pain of forty pounds of like lawful money, and all of them to
our Lord the King, and his Successors, to be levied of their lands and
tenements, goods and chattels, by way of Recognisance, to the use of our Lord
the King, if the said L M. shall fail in the Condition hereafter following, viz.

If the party to be bound be within age, or a Woman married, then he or she
must be bound by others after this manner, (as in the last, leaving out the
last clause, And the said L M. etc.) And by these all other Recognisances may
be made, for they are after one form, and the difference is in the Conditions,
which do now follow.

It is best to make them in Parchment; and yet being in Paper they are good
enough in Law.

If the Condition be on the back of the Parchment or Paper wherein the
Recognisance is, as it must be to the two first Presidents abovesaid, that
conclude (if he fail in the Condition aforesaid.) Then it must be thus:

7. To prefer a Bill of Indictment.
The Condition of the Recognisance within written, is such, that if the within
bounden I S. shall at the next general Jail-deliver to be holden in the County
of Gloucest. prefer, or cause to be preferred one Bill of Indictment against
one A B. late of G. in the said County of Gloucest. Labourer, now a Prisoner in
the Castle of Glouc. for the felonious taking of twenty sheep, of the goods of
the said I S. (or for the felonious killing of T S.) and shall also then and
there give the best evidence he can concerning the same, as well to the Grand
Jury that shall then make enquiry of the Felony, as also to them that shall
pass upon the Trial of the said A B. and not depart without license of the
Court; That then the same Recognisance shall be void.

Or thus.
The Condition, etc. That if the said I S. shall personally appear at the next
general Jail-deliver to be holden for the County of Glouc. before the Lords
the Justices of Assize and Jail-deliver, and shall then and there prefer, etc.
(as in the last.)

8. To give in evidence.
The Condition of the Recognisance within written, is, that if the within
bounden I S. do and shall personally appear at the next general Jail-deliver
to be holden in the County of G. before the Judges there, or at the general
Sessions of the Peace to be held for the County of G. (as the case is) before
the Justices of the Peace there, and then and there pursue and give the best
evidence he can against one A B. late of C. in the said County, Labourer, now a
prisoner in the Castle for the felonious taking away of a Mare of the goods of
the said I S. and not depart without license of the Court; That then, etc.



Or thus.
That if the within bounden I S. shall personally appear before the Justices of
the Peace of the County of Glouc. at the next Quarter Sessions in the County
aforesaid to be holden, then and there to inform the Court against one A B. of,
etc. now a prisoner in the Castle, and not depart without license of the Court;
That then, etc.

9. To appear to answer a Felony upon a Bail.
The Condition of this Recognisance is such, that if the within bounden I S.
shall make his personal appearance before the Justices of the Peace of the
County of Glouc. at the next general Sessions of Peace to be holden for the
same County, then and there to make answer to our Lord the King, for and
concerning the suspicion of stealing certain corn; That then, etc.



Another of the same, and to keep the Peace.
10. The condition, etc. That if the within bounden I S. shall personally
appear before the Justices of the Jail-deliver, to be holden in the said
County of Glouc. at the next Assizes and Jail-deliver there, (or before the
Justices of the Peace of the County of Glouc. at the next general Sessions of
the Peace to be held in the same County,) to do and receive that which by the
Court shall be then and there enjoined him, and shall not depart thence without
leave of the Court. And that in the mean time he be of good Behavior, and do
keep the Peace of our Lord the King, toward his Highness and all his People,
etc. that then, etc.

Another to the same purpose.
11. The Condition, etc. That whereas the within bounden I S. has now lately
dangerously hurt one L M. of, etc. so as the said L M. is thereby in danger of
death: If therefore the said I S. shall make his personal appearance before the
Justices of the Jail-deliver, at the next General Jail-deliver to be holden
in the County of Gloucest. then and there to make answer to the premises, and
to do and receive that which then by the same Court shall be enjoined him. That
then, etc.

Another.
12. The Condition, etc. That if the within bounden I S. shall personally
appear, etc. then and there to make answer to such matters as on the behalf of
our Lord the King shall be objected against him by I D. of, etc. concerning,
etc. [then show the matter briefly, and conclude as in the rest before,] That
then, etc.

So in the Condition for the Peace, and good Behavior, they may be made after
the same manner, by changing only that which is to be changed.

But if the Condition be annexed to the Recognisance, as it must be to the
latter sort of Recognisances above named, that conclude thus, Under the
Condition following, viz. then must they run in this manner.

For the Peace.
13. That the said I S. shall personally appear at the next general Sessions of
the Peace to be holden for the said County, and in the mean time that he shall
keep the Peace toward our said Lord the King, and all other the people of this
Commonwealth of England, and chiefly toward L M.

For the good Behavior.
14. That the said I S. shall personally. etc. (as in the last,) and in the
mean time that he shall be of good Behavior toward our Lord the King, and
all, etc. (as in the last.)

Where diverse Recognisances are to be taken at once, some have ^sed to put them
all in one Roll of Parchment together, after this form.

15 Glou. ss. For Alehouse keepers.
15. Md. That at Dale in the County of Glouc. the first day of May, etc. I S.
Victualler of, etc. came before me W S. Esquire, etc. and did acknowledge that
he did owe to our Lord the King, and his Successors, by way of Recognisance,
twenty pounds of lawful, etc. And G H. of, etc. and I K. of, etc. did then
also acknowledge to owe to our said Lord the King ten pounds a piece of lawful
English money, by way of Recognisance* to be levied of each of their, etc.
under this Condition following, viz. That the said I S. being licensed to keep
an Alehouse in the Town of Dale for one year now next following, shall not
during the said term, suffer within his said house any play at unlawful Games;
but shall there use and maintain good order and rule.

And then write under this.
16. G H. of I. etc. did then and there acknwledge to owe to our said Lord the
King ten pounds; and N O. of, etc. and P Q. of, etc. did then and there
acknowledge to owe to our said Lord the King five pounds a piece, in manner as
aforesaid, and under the condition aforesaid. And so for the rest.

Observations upon this Warrant.
I cannot warrant the latter end of these Recognisances to be good, but am
rather inclined to believe, they are all of them, but the first, naught. And
therefore do advise the Justices of the Peace, and their Clerks, to make them
at length, and to decline this form.

Another form for the Peace, or good Behavior.
17. Memorand. That A B. of C. etc. D E. of F. etc. G H. of I. etc. (such a
time and place) came before me W S. Esquire, etc. and became Manucaptors, and
undertook for T O. of, etc. That he should keep the Peace (or be of good
Behavior) toward our Lord the King and all his People, and especially toward
I D. every of the Manucaptors under pain of ten pounds a piece, and T O. under
pain of twenty pounds; and that the said T O. shall appear before the Justices
of the Peace, etc.

The Form of the Release of the Peace.
Memorandum, quod primo die Julii, etc. prafatus E F. xenit noram me praefato T
P. and gratis remisit and relaxavit (quantum in se est) praedictam securitatem
pacis per ipsam coram me versus supra^^^inatum B C. petitam: In cujus eg^
Testimonium ^^ praefat T P. etc. Dat. etc.

CHAP. XXI. Of a Mittimus.
What it is.
A Mittimus is an Order of Commitment of the person of a man to Prison, by a
Justice of Peace, to an inferior Officer, for the time the Law appoints, for
some offense by him done. And as touching this in general, you may obser^^
these things.

1. In every Mittimus care must be had to set down these two things: First, the
offense; Secondly, the true manner and time of punishment.

2. That there is very little difference between a Mittimus, and a Warrant of
Commitment. This is to the Officer to take and carry a man to Prison, and that
to deliver him to the Jailer, which does imply a taking and carrying, both are
to carry to Gaol: It may be easy therefore to change the form, and the one
President may serve for a light by which to make the other.

3. The Title and form of one of these hereafter set down, may serve to direct
all the rest.

4. By these forms hereafter set down, any other may be easily drawn, with very
little alteration.

5. If the Mittimus be for a Felony, and the Felon has confessed it upon his
examination, the Mittimus must say so, for then he is not bailable.

Diverse Forms of Mittimus.
A Mittimus for Felony to the Gaol.
1 Glouc. ss.
W S. and I S. Esquires, two of the Justices, etc. To the Keeper of the Gaol
within the Castle of Glouc. or his Deputy there being. We send you herewithal
the bodies of A B. and C D. charged before us with the felonious using, and
practicing of Witchcraft upon the body of a child of K L. (or charged before us
by T C. of K. in the County of G. with robbing him on Friday last, and the
taking of ten shillings from his person, which the said A B. and C D. upon
their examination confessed.) Or thus; who stand charged before me upon the
suspicion of stealing six Ox^n, being the goods of Sir I E. Knight. Or thus;
Who is charged before me with the suspicion of a certain Felony by him
committed, as it is said: Or otherwise, as the case is. Commanding you to
receive the same A B. and C D. into the said Gaol, and them there safely to
keep, until they shall be from thence delivered by due order and course of Law.

Hereof fail you not at your peril. Given under our Hands and Seals at C.
within the said County, the day, etc.
A Mittimus for a disturber of a Minister in the Service of God.
2 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. To the Constable of S. I send you herewith I S. of, etc. whom you
are to take into your custody, and safely to keep for six days, for that he
has maliciously disturbed W S. of K. a Minister, in doing the service of God.
Or thus; For that he caused W S. of K. a Minister, to be maliciously disturbed
in doing the service of God. Or thus; For that he has rescued L M. out of the
hands of S T. an Officer, being by him apprehended for his malicious
disturbance of W S. of K. a Minister, in doing the service of God.

W S. and L M. etc. To the Keeper of the Gaol, etc. We send you herewith I S.
of, etc. whom you are to take into your custody, and safely to keep in your
said Gaol for three months, and til the next Quarter Sessions, for that it
has been proved before us by the Oaths of two Witnesses: Or thus, (by his own
confession) if the case be so: that he has maliciously disturbed W S. of K.
Minister, in doing the service of God.

And hereof, etc.
Observations upon this Warrant.
It is good to be well advised upon this Commitment, for some think the Statute
upon which it is grounded is determined.

A Mittimus for the good Behavior.
3 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. Whereas C D. has been, for matter of misbehaviour proved before me,
by me required to find Sureties for his good Behavior, which he has refused
to do. These are to require you, that presently upon sight hereof you receive
him the said C D. herewith sent into your custody, and him to keep, and not
deliver, till he shall find sufficient Surety for his good Behavsour, and
appearance at the next general Sessions to be holden for the said County.

And hereof, etc.
So for the Peace, changing that which is to be changed, after this manner.
4 Glouc. ss.
Whereas C D. has been for good cause by me required to find Sureties for the
Peace, which he has refused to do. These are, etc. (as in the last) till he
shall find Sureties for the keeping of the Peace, and his appearance, etc.

A Mittimus of the reputed Father of a Bastard-child.
5 Glouc. ss.
W C. etc. I send you herewithal the body of I S. of D. in the said County,
Labourer, brought before me this day, and charged by F O. of the same Town, to
have gotten her with child: And for that the said I S. refuses to put in
security for his appearance at the next Quarter Sessions, and to the end he may
be forthcoming, when as Order shall be taken for the relief and discharging of
the said Town of G. and for the keeping of the said child, when it shall happen
to be born, according to the Statute in that case provided. These are to
require, that you do immediately receive the said I S. and him safely to keep
in your Gaol, until such time as he shall be thence delivered by due course of
Law.

Dated, etc.
A Mittimus for selling Ale, contrary to Command.
6 Glouc. ss.
W C. and C D. etc. Whereas I S. of, etc. a common Ale-house-keeper, upon
complaint lately made to us, of the evil rule kept and suffered by him in his
house, was by Warrant under both our Hands and Seals, discharged of his
Ale-house-keeping, and forbidden to sell any more Ale or Beer. And we are
credibly informed, that the said I S. does notwithstanding obstinately, and of
his own authority keep a common Alehouse, and commonly sell Ale and Beer. We
do therefore herewith send you the body of the said I S. commanding you to
receive him into your said Gaol, and there safely to keep him for three days
without bail or mainprise, and afterward, until he shall with two sureties
enter into Recognisance, that he shall not keep any common Alehouse, or use
common selling of Ale or Beer, and pay his Fine of twenty shillings, according
to the Statute in that case provided.

And hereof, etc.
An Observation on this Mittimus.
It is good to advise well upon this commitment, whether upon a bare complaint
or information that a man does sell after he is discharged, he may be
committed? and whether there must not be before this a legal conviction of him
for the crime.

A Mittimus of an Overseer that refuses to account.
7 Glouc. ss.
W S. and L M. Esquires, two of the Justices, etc. To the Keeper of the Gaol
within the Castle of Gloucest. We send you herewith I S. and W ^. the late
Overseers of the poor of the parish of Dale, for that they being called before
us, to give in a true account of the moneys by them received and laid out in
the time of execution of their said Office, they did in our presence wilfully
refuse so to do: We require you therefore them safely to keep without bail or
mainprise, until they shall make a true account thereof, and satisfy and pay
to the present Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor of the same parish, so
much as shall thereby appear to be remaining in their hands.

And hereof fail you not, etc.
An Observation upon this Mittimus.
This Commitment seems to me warrantable, because the offense is in the
presence of the Justices, and there needs no conviction of it: But if he refuse
to appear before the Justices, it may be doubtful.

A Mittimus of a dangerous Rogue to the Bridewel.
8 Glou. ss.
W S. and L M. etc. To the Master of Governor of the house of Correction, or
his Deputy there. Whereas I S. a sturdy vagrant Beggar was this day brought
before the Constable of Dale, and charged as well with begging and idle
wandering abroad, as also with other disorderly behavior, so as he appears to
us to be dangerous to the inferior sort of people, contrary to the Laws of the
Nation in that case provided. These are therefore to require you to receive the
said I S. into your custody, and him safely to keep in your house of
Correction, until the next Quarter S^ssions to be holden for this County. And
that during all the time he shall continue with you, and be in his good health,
you do hold him to work, and punish him by putting fetters and gyves upon him,
and by moderate whipping of him. And that you give him no more for his
maintenance, then what he shall deserve or earn by his labor. And that you
have the said I S. and this Precept at the said next Quarter Sessions.

A Mittimus of a vagrant or disorderly person.
9 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. We have sent you herewithal the body of E C. of G. in this County,
being an idle, dissolute and disorderly person, and one that lives idly, and
wandreth begging about the Country, and brought before us by the Constable of
Dale, whom you are hereby required to receive, and him to keep in your Bridewel
to work, until he shall be from thence duly delivered by order and course of
Law: And in the mean time you are to keep him to work, and see to it, that he
have no more for his maintenance, then what he can get by his work.

And hereof, etc.
A Mittimus for one thae runs away, and leaves her Charge to the Town.
10 Glou. ss.
W S. etc. We have sent you herewithal the body of I L. of W. in the said
County, single woman, being lately delivered of a child, and one that is able
to labor, and thereby to relieve her self and her said child, and has
notwithstanding lately run away, and left her child upon the Parish, to the
charge of the same Parish, contrary to the Statute in that behalf provided.
These are therefore to require you to receive her, etc. (as in the last.)

W S. etc. We send you herewith the body of I S. of, etc. for that she being a
poor woman, able to work, and having a great charge of children, and like to
charge the Parish, she does threaten to run away from her charge, and leave it
to the Parish. These are therefore, etc. (as in the last.)

A Mittimus of the Mother of a Bastard-child.
12 Glou. ss.
W S. We send you herewithal the body of I C. of W. in the said County, single
woman, lately delivered of a Bastard-child, likely to be chargeable to the
Parish of W. aforesaid; and for that the said I C. is able to labor, and that
thereby she may the better relieve her self and her said child. These are to
require you, to receive the said I C. in your Bridewel, there to be punished
and set on work, during the term of one whole year, acccording to the Statute
in that behalf provided.

Observations upon these three last Presidents.
These three last Mittimus being grounded upon 7 Jac. 4. it is good to advise
upon them; for the Statute does not prescribe any way of Conviction, unless it
come under the general words of 39 Eliz. 4. that these be taken for idle and
disorderly persons; for that being proved before by two witnesses, before two
Justices, one of them being of the Qu^rum, this is a Conviction of Law.

For a Mittimus for a forcible Entry, see it in Chap. 6.

CHAP. XXII. About a Supersedeas.
The Form of Supersedeas.
1 Glouc. ss.
W S. To the Sheriff, Bailiffs, Constables, and other the Officers and
Ministers of our Lord the King, for the keeping of the peace within the County
of Gloucest. and every of them. Forasmuch as A B. of, etc. has personally come
before me at Dale in this County, and has found sufficient sureties, that is,
C D. of, etc. and E T. of, etc. either of which has undertaken for the said A
B. under pain of ten pounds a piece, and he the said A B. has undertaken for
himself under pain of twenty pound, that he the said A B. shall well and truly
keep the peace toward our Lord the King and all his people, especially toward
G F. of, etc. Yeoman; and also that he shall personally appear before the
Justices of the peace of the said County, at the next general Sessions of the
peace to be held for the same County. Therefore I command you, and every of
you, that you utterly forbear and surcease to arrest, take, ^mprison, or
otherwise by any means for the said cause, to molest the said A B. And if you
have for the said cause and none other taken or imprisoned him, that then you
do cause him to be delivered and set at liberty without further delay.

Given at Dale aforesaid, under my Hand and Seal, etc.
Another for the same.
2 Glouc. ss.
2. For the Peace.
W S. Esquire, etc. To the Sheriff of the County of Glouc. etc. and to all
Constables, etc. Forasmuch as I S. of, etc. has come before me, and found
sufficient surety, that he shall keep the peace toward our Lord the King and
all his people, especially toward I K. of D. aforesaid, and that he shall
personally appear before the Justices of the Peace of the said County, at the
next general Sessions of the peace to be holden for the said County. Therefore
I require and command you, and every of you, that you do altogether forbear and
surcease to attach, arrest, or imprison him the said I S. or otherwise to
molest him by any means for the said cause. And if you have upon any Precept
for the peace, and for that cause and none other already taken and imprisoned
him, that then you do cause him to be delivered and set at liberty without
further delay. And this shall be your Warrant.

Given, etc.
For a Felony.
There may be a Supersedeas in case of Felony, where the prisoner is bailed,
thus: Because A B. of, etc. has come before us, etc. and put in sufficient
bail to be before, etc. to answer the Felony wherewith he is charged, etc.

Or thus.
3 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. To, etc. Forasmuch, etc. I do therefore require you, that from
compelling and imprisoning the said A. and his Wife, or either of them any
security for the peace toward our Lord the King, and all the People of this
Commonwealth, before you or any of you again to find, you do supersede, or
cause to be superseded. And if, etc. that then you do immediately them out of
such prison, in which they, or either of them are detained, deliver or cause to
be delivered, etc.

Observations upon these Warrants.
This last Supersedeas is good, though it name neither the sureties, nor the
sums wherein they are bound; but it is held the better Form to express both.

4 Glouc. ss. Upon a Supplicavit against an Infant.
W S. and. To the Sheriff, etc. Know ye that I have received a Writ of our Lord
the King, in these words; Charles, etc. (reciting all the Writ word for word.)
Forasmuch as C D. of, etc. and E F. of, etc. and the said A B. (being the
Infant against whom the Writ of Supplicavit was granted) have personally
appeared before me the said W S. and the said C D. and E F. have undertaken for
the said A B. who is within the age of 21 years, (to wit) either of the said
manucaptors in twenty pounds a piece, which each of them have acknowledged to
owe to our said Lord the King, by way of Recognisance, to be levied on their
lands and tenements, goods and chattels, to the use of our said Lord the King,
(to wit) that the said A B. no damage or ill shall do, or procure to be done to
any of the people of this Commonwealth, in their bodies, or burning of their
houses, and especially to T R.

Therefore I require you, and every of you, to forbear, etc. (as in the rest.)
This may also be to stay proceedings of Arrest or Imprisonment against a man
upon good Behavior, or upon a Capias, upon an Indictment for Trespass, or the
like, thus,

5 Glouc. ss.
W S. To, etc. Forasmuch as I S. of, etc. came before me this first day of,
etc. at Dale in this County, and has found sufficient Manucaptors to be at the
next General Sessions of the Peace to be held in this County, before the
Justices of the Peace there, to answer to our Lord the King of certain
trespasses, contempts and offenses whereof he is indicted.

Therefore I command you, etc. (as in the rest.)
CHAP. XXIII. Of a Liberate.
1 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. To the Keeper of the Gaol in the Castle of Gloucest. Forasmuch as I
S. of, etc. has before us found sufficient mainprise to appear before the
Justices of the Jail-deliver, at the next general Jail-deliver to be holden
in the said County, there to answer the things that shall be objected against
him touching the felonious stealing of two sheep, for the suspicion whereof he
was committed to your Gaol. These are to require you, in case he be there
detained in prison for this and no other cause, that you forthwith deliver him,
and let him go at large.

Given under our Hands, etc.
2 Glouc. ss.
W S. etc. To the Keeper, etc. I S. being by me committed to your custody in
your Gaol, till he put in sureties for the peace or good behavior (as the case
is.) These are, etc. (as in the last.)

Observations on this.
If one Justice of his own head commit a man to Gaol or Bridewel, he may again
deliver him, and he need not show the cause: or if it be for the peace or, good
behavior, to tell the Keeper that he has taken Sureties: we think it safe for
a Keeper to have this from a Justice always when he delivers his prisoner. By
these other Liberates may be made.

Of a Release.
I have seen a Release of the Peace by a Justice of Peace that took it, and
Presidents of Releases of the Peace and good Behavior; but I understand not of
what use they are; for the party must appear: only the Release of the Peace,
etc. is an evidence that the Prosecutor is not afraid of him, and therefore the
Court will not probably continue him bound.

CHAP. XXIV. Of a License and Testimonial.
1 Glouc. ss. To sell Ale.
W S. and I S. Two of the Justices, etc. Know all men by these presents, That
we do hereby license I M. of, etc. to keep a common Alehouse in L. aforesaid,
in the house there where he now dwells, for one whole year next ensuing the
date hereof, so that he do not, during that time, suffer any unlawful Games to
be used, nor any evil rule or disorder to be done in the same house.

Dated, etc.
So to brew and sell Beer, and keep a common Alehouse, etc.

2 Glouc. ss. To travel on the Lords day.
W S. etc. To all, etc. I S. of, etc. where he now lives, having informed me
that he had a Father living at D. in the County of S. where he lies now very
sick, and he has a desire to visit him. Now know ye, that for this cause I do
hereby license him to travel upon the next Lords day the direct way to him;
willing and requiring you not to molest him for the same, so he behave himself
orderly in his travel.

Dated, etc.
3 Glouc. ss. Describe him. To convey a Rogue.
I S. a sturdy vagrant beggar of low personage, red haired, etc. and about
twenty years, was this first day of May openly whipped at W. in the said
County, according to the Law for a wandering Rogue, and is assigned to pass
forthwith from Parish to Parish, by the Officers thereof, the next straight way
to P. in the County of W. where (as he confesses) he was born, (or dwelled
last for one whole year, if the case be so) and he is limited to be at P.
aforesaid within ten days now next ensuing at his peril.

Given at W. under the Hands and Seals of W S. Esquire, one of. etc. and I D.
the Constable of W. aforesaid.
4 Glou. ss. For one that has suffered shipwreck, etc. Soldier, etc.
W S. etc. one, etc. To all Constables, Tythingmen, etc. Forasmuch as I am
credibly informed, that I S. the bearer hereof, of low personage, etc. has
been at Sea, and there the first day of May last suffered shipwreck, and has
not wherewith to relieve himself in his travel to the place of his birth (or
last dwelling.) These are to desire you to suffer him to pass the next way to
the said place, where he is limited to be within forty days next after the date
hereof, and not to trouble, but rather to relieve him.

The like may be for a poor Soldier.

5 Glouc. ss.
To travel.
W S. and I S. two of the Justices, etc. To all, etc. The bearer hereof, I S.
of etc. having [shew the cause of his travel] desired our Testimonial or
License for his safe travel to the City of B. [shew whither he is to go]
wherefore we (as much as is in us) do license him to travel the direct way from
H. in the County of G. to the said City, so as his journey be not continued
longer then twenty days next after the date hereof; and pray you to suffer him
to pass in peace, so as he demean himself orderly.

And by these a Testimonial may be made for other things; as, for a Labourer in
Harvest-time to go into another Country to work, or a Servant departing at the
end of his year.

CHAP. XXV. Of a Certificate.
A Certificate of the Presentment, or Verdict of the Jury may be made into the
Kings Bench; the like may be made of the Record of a Force viewed by the
Justice.

These Certificates (and the like) may be made by the Justice of Peace by way
of a Letter, enclosing therein the Presentment of the Jury, or the Record of
the Justice, except the same be removed by Certiorari, the forms whereof see in
the end of this Cabinet, and Fitz. Not. Brev. 242, etc.

Or the Justice of Peace may deliver the same into the Kings Bench without
Certiorari, he being a Judge of Record.

Of a Record or a Certiorari.
It may be done on the back of the Writ, thus: I W S. etc. one of the Justices
of the Peace of our Lord the King in the County of Gloucest. The tenor of the
security of the Peace, of which there is mention in this Writ, (or whereof
there is mention herein) to our said Lord the King into his Chancery under my
Seal distinctly and openly, do send, as appears in the Schedule to this Writ
annexed. Then write the Recognisance verbatim. Md. that the first day of May,
etc. came before me, etc.

in witness whereof, I the said W S. have put to my Seal. Dated, etc.
And let him set his Seal, and then file all this to the back of the Cerciorare.

Write upon the back of the Supplicavit thus: The execution of this Writ
appears in the Schedule to the Writ annexed. And put his name to it.

A Binding by Supplicavit.
Then the Schedule may be thus, and filed to the back of the Writ. I W S. etc.
certify in the Chancery to our Lord the King, That I by virtue of this Writ
(to me first delivered by A B. in the Writ named) caused to come before me the
first day of May, T R. in the same Writ named, and have compelled him to find
sufficient security and manucaptors, according to the form of the said Writ (as
the Writ does appoint.)

In witness whereof I have put my Seal to this present Certificate. Dated at C.
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, the said first day of May.
And herewith the Justice may, if he will, send the Recognisance, or he may
keep it till it be sent for by Certiorari.

For Swearing,
For Swearing.
I W S. Esquire, one of the Justices, etc. do certify to the Clerk of the
Peace for the County of Glouc. that the persons whose names are hereunto
subscribed, were since the last Quarter Sessions convicted before me for
swearing one profane oath a piece.

Given under my Hand and Seal, this, etc.
By these forms you may the better see how to make other Certificates.

The Certificate of a Riot, see Dalt. Just. of P. Chap. 130.

CHAP. XXVI. Indictments of Treason of several sorts, and the nature of the
Judgments thereupon.
For counterfeiting a Protection, and putting to it the Great Seal taken from
other old Letters Patents.
Juratores, etc. Praesentan^ quod A B. nuper de C. in Com. H. Husbandman, and D
E. praedict. Yeoman, machinantes quomodo populum Domini Regis nunc subtilissime
possent decipere, vel defraudare, and Dominum Regem, de his quae ad ipsum Regem
pertinent, and Regalia sua ut de feodi Magni Sigilli and hujusmodi exhaeredare,
and veram Legem Angliae a toto tempore usitatam and approbatam subvertere and
adnullare, 10o. die Janu. Anno, etc. apud R. in Com. S. deceptive, fals^, and
proditorie quasdam falsas Literas Patentes ad similitudinem scrip. Cancellar.
Domini Regis, contrefect. quasi essent Literae Patentes de protectione ipsius
Regis, sub nomine J C. Clerici Hanaperii Domini Regis ac unius Clericorum
Cancellariae praedictae script. hunc tenorem continent, viz. C. Dei gratia,
etc. (reciting the Letters Patents verbatim.) Ae cum idem A B. and D E. dictas
falsas Literas Patentes sic ut praemitt. contrafecissent, non habentes Magnum
Sigillum Domini Regis, deceptive, falso, and proditorie machinant: qualiter
ipsi falsas and fictas Literas Patentes hujusmodi subtilius possent sigillare,
and Magnum Sigillum Domini Regis contrafacere, dicto 10o. die Janu. Anno
supradict. apud H. in Com. praedict. quoddam Magnum Sigillum Domini Regis,
super quasdam Literas Patentes ipsius Domini Regis praeantea pend. and debite
impositum, acceperunt, assumentes sibi Regiam potestatem, and ipsum Regem
regali sua authoritate (quantum in eis fuit) privant. adtunc and ibidem cum
quodam cultello arripuerunt, and illud dictis falsis, fictis, and contrafactis
Literis Patentibus, deceptive and proditorie apposuerunt and annexerunt, and
easdem literas sigillaver. sigill. ill. subtiliter recludend^ quasi sic non
fecissent, and sic Magnum Sigillum Dom. Regis, adtunc and ibidem proditorie
contrafecer. and cum praemissa sic fecissent, dictas falsas, and contrafactas
Literas Patentes, (ut praedicitur,) sigillat. 7o. die Martii, Anno, etc. apud
Villam de N. in Com. M. ac in diversis aliis locis ejusdem Com. tanquam Literas
Patentes ipsius Domini Regis de protect. deceptive, falso, and proditorie
publicaverunt, and diversas pecuniar. summas de diversis ligeis Domini Regis
receperunt color dictarum falsarum, fictarum, and contrafact. Literarum
Patent. in deceptionem Domini Regis, ac populi sui praejudicium, and
exhaeredationem dicti Domini Regis manifestam, contra pacem ejusdem Domini
Regis, Coronam and Dignitatem suas, ac contra formam Statut. in hujusmodi casu
edit. and provisi.

Judgment, to be drawn and hanged, for a man; and for a woman, to be burned.

An Indictment for clipping of Gold and Silver, and uttering the same.
Juratores, etc. quod E B. de Civitat. Lincoln. Pedlar, die and anno, etc. ac
diversis diebus antea and postea apud Civitat. praedict. 40 pec. auri vocat. P.
ac 400 pecias argenti voc. Groats, bonae and legalis monetae Angliae, and
cunagii dict. Domini Reg. pro lucri causa falso, felon. and proditorie totondit
and filavit, i^a quod per tonsionem and filationem illas quaelibet pecia auri
inde de 12 d. in suo debito pondere diminuebatur, and quaelibet argenti inde de
un^ obulo in debito suo pondere diminuebatur, and monet. ill. in forma
praedict. tonsam and filat. diversis li geis dict. Dom. Regis apud Civitat.
praedict. in Com. praedict. falso, felon. and proditorie exposuit and
utteravit, contra formam Statut. etc. ac contra Pacem, etc.

Judgment ut supra.

For a Jesuit, and his Receiver.
High Treason in the Jesuit, and Felony in the Receiver, without Clergy.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege: Si A B. nuper de C. in Gomitatu praedicto
Clericus, natus apud D. in Comitatu praedicto, atque infra annum jam proxime
praeteritum factus and prof^ssus Jesuita per authoritatem a Sede Romana
derivatam, proditorie apud D. praedict. in Comitatu praedict. septimo die Apr.
anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Caroli, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
and Hiberniae Regis, fidei defensoris, etc. duodecimo, a partibus transmarinis
applicuit, and dicto septimo die anno supradicto, and nonnulliis aliis diebus
tunc proxime sequentibus apud D. praedict. in Comitatu praedict. proditorie
moram fecit, ac remansit, contra formam cujusdam Statut. in Parliamento nuper
Dominae Reginae Elizabethae tunc tente apud Westm^nasterium in Comitatu
Middlesexiae, anno Regni sui vicesimo septimo, in hujusmodi casu provisi and
editi, ac contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis, Coronam, and Dignitatem suas s Etsi
N P. de D. praedict. in dicto Comitatu generosus scienter, voluntary, and
felonice, postea scilicet, dicto septimo die dicti mensis Aprilis anno
supradicto, praedict. A B. apud D. praedict. in Comitatu praedicto receptavit,
and comfortavit: dict. N P. ad tunc and ibidem ad largum, and extra prisonam
existent. ac Praefat. A B. hujusmodi Jesuitam esse, tunc and ibidem sciente,
and cognoscente; contra formam Statuti praedicti, ac contra Pacem, Coronam, and
Dignitatem dicti Domini Regis nostri.

Indictments for Felonies of several sorts.
For killing a man by Witchcraft.
Felony, without Clergy.
Juratores praesentant pro Domino Rege; Quod S B. de C. in Comitatu praedicto
Spinster, 19 die Augusti anno regni dicti Domini nostri Caroli, Dei gratia
Angliae, etc. duodecimo, ac diversis aliis diebus post dictum 29 diem, quasdam
arts detestandas, Anglice vocatas Witchcraft and Sorcerie, nequiter and
felonice practicavit and exercuit apud C. praedict. in Comitatu praedict. in,
super, and contra quendam Jacobum M. de C. praedict. in dicto Comitat. Yeoman,
per quas quidem arts dictus I M. a praedicto 19. die Augusti, Anno 12o.
supradicto, periculosissime ac mortaliter agrotabat and languebat: Ac 25 die
dicti Augusti, Anno supradicto, idem I M. per arts praedictas apud C.
praedict. in dicto Comitatu obiit. Et sic Juratores praedicti praesentant, quod
eadem S. ipsum Jacobum M. apud C. praedict. modo and forma supradictis, ex
malitia sua praecogitata, voluntary, diabolice, nequiter ac felonice per Arts
praedict. occidit ac interfecit, contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis nostri, ac
contra formam Statuti in Parliamento Domini nostri nuper Regis Jacobi (tento
apud Westminster. in Comitatu Middlefexis, Anno Regni sui primo) in hujusmodi casu
provisi ac editi.

For Burghlary in a Church.
Clergy denied.
Juratores praesentant pro Domino Rege, quod W B. de D. in Comitatu praedict.
Tailor, secundo die Maii Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Caroli, Angliae, etc.
12o. vi and armis Ecclesiam parochialem de D. praedict. in dicto Comitatu,
felonice and burghlariter fregit and intravit noctanter, viz. inter horas 10
am. and 11 am. post meridiem ejusdem diei, ac unum Calicem Argenteum, (Anglice
vocat. A Communion Cup,) ad valentiam 70 Solidorum, de bonis and catallis
Parochianorum de D. praedict. ad tunc existentem in eadem Ecclesia, and tunc
ibidem inventum felonice cepit, and asportavit, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis
nunc, Coronam and Dignit atem suas.

For the Rape of a Woman-child, under ten years of age.
Clergy denied.
Juratores pro Domino Rege praesentant, quod T S. de N. in Comitatu praedicto,
Labourer, primo die Junii, Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Caroli, Dei gratia
Angliae, etc. 12o. apud N. praedict. in dicto Comitatu (in domo mansionali
ibidem cujusdam R B. Yeoman) vi and armis in quandam M O. de N. praedict. in
dicto Comitatu puellam, infra aetatem december annorum tunc existentem, insultum
fecit, ac tunc and ibidem, eandem M O. felonice, ac carnaliter cognovit, ac
eadem M O. nequiter abusus est, contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc, ac contra
formam Statuti in Parliamento nuper Dominae Reginae Elizabethae (tento apud
Westminster. in Comitatu Middlesex, Anno Regni sui decimo octavo) in hujusmodi casu
provisi ac editi.

For taking away a Widow (against her will) that has Lands.
Clergy denied.
Juratores praesentant pro Domino Rege, quod A B. de C. in dicto Comitatu
Taverner, nono die Maii, Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Caroli Dei gratia
Angliae, etc. 12. vi and armis in domum mansionalem cujusdam B H. de C.
praedict. in Comitatu praedicto viduae, infra Parochiam de C. praedict. in
Comitatu praedict. intravit, (quae quidem B H. tum setsitae fuit in dominico
suo ut de feodo, de and in diversis terris and tenementis in C. praedict. in
Comitatu praedict. clari annui valoris december librarum ultra omnes reprisos
existentibus) ac immediate postea, viz. dicto nono die Maii, anno supradicto,
idem A B. praedictam B H. tunc ibidem in dicta domo sua in pace Dei, ac dicti
Domini Regis existentem, ex dicta domo sua mansionali contra voluntatem ipsius
B H. illegitime ac felonice extraxit, eripuit and abduxit, ac eandem B H.
postea (scilicet duodecimo die dicti mensis Maii, anno supradicto) in Ecclesia
parochiali de C. praedict. in Comitatu praedicto cepit in Uxorem suani; ubi
idem A B. dicto tempore extractionis and abductionis praedictae, non clamavit,
nec clamare potuit eandem B H. tanquam wardam suam, aut tanquam nativam suam:
In magnam pacis dicti Domini Regis nunc perturbationem, ac contra formam
cujusdam Statuti in Parliamento Domini Henrici nuper Regis Angliae septimo,
tento anno Regni sui tertio, in hujusmodi casu provisi ac editi.

See 39 Eliz. cap. 9. whereby Clergy is taken away from Principals, Procurers,
and Accessaries before the offense committed only.

An Indictment for marrying a second Wife, the former being alive.
Juratores pro Domino Rege, etc. praesentant, quod A B. de C. in Comitatu
praedicto, Yeoman, die and anno, etc. apud D. in Comitatu praedicto secundum
leges sanctae Ecclesiae cepit in Vxorem and maritavit quandam I F. modo in
plena vita apud K. in Comitatu praedicto existentem. Et quod idem A B. postea,
scilicet die, etc. anno, etc. timorem nec honorem Dei omnipotentis prae oculis
suis non habens quandam M B. apud L. in Comitatu praedicto nequiter and
felonice in Uxorem duxit and maritavit (praedict. I F, tunc vivente, and nullo
divertio inter ^as praehabito) contra formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu editi
and provisi, and contra Pacem, etc.

An Indictment for acknowledging a Recognisance in the name of another 21 Jac.
c. 26.
without his privity.
Clergy denied.
Juratores pro Domino Rege, etc. praesentant, quod A B. de C. in Com. D. genesis
die, etc. anno, etc. apud S. in Com. praedict. venit coram I H. Ar. uno
Justitiariorum Dom. Regis nunc ad Pacem in Com. praedict. conservand. assignat.
and tunc and ibidem coram praefato I H. in nomen cujusdam R P. Ar. quandam
Recognitionem pro conservatione Pacis dicti Dom. Regis in summa viginti
librarum Sterling. dicto Dom. Regi nunc absque notitia, aut consensu praedict. R
P. felonlce recognovit, contra formam Statuti, etc.

The like for a Stat. Merchant, Staple, etc. upon 21 Jac. mutatis mutandis.

An Indictment of Trespass De mulier^ abducta cum bonis viri.
Fine and Imprisonment.
Juratores pro Domino Rege, etc. praesentant, quod I P. de, etc. die, etc.
anno, etc. vi and armis, etc. quandam M. Vxorem cujusdam A. apud S. in Com.
^raedict. rapuit, and eam cum bonis and catallis ipsius A. viz. una toga, etc.
ad valentiam, etc. cepit, and ^bduxit, and ea ei adhuc injuste detinet, contra
Pa^em Dom. Regis nunc, Coron. and Dign. suas, and con^ra formam Statut. in
hujusmodi casu editi and provisi

Against Bakers conspiring to make small Bread.
Judgment, Fine and Imprisonment.
Juratores pro Dom. Rege, etc. praesentant, quod A B. C D. E F. and G H. de M.
in dicto Com. pistores, secundo die mensis Maii, Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri
Caroli, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Reg. fidei
defensor. etc. 12. apud M. praedict. in Com. praedict. insimul convenerunt,
conspiraverunt, ac mutuo inter se promiserunt, quod panis den^ari^, vocat. The
penny Loaf, de integro frumento, per eos seu eorum aliquem tum d^inceps
faciendus ac vendendus, non amplius quam sex uncias Trojae ponderis habebit and
ponderabit, quodcunque in posterum foret unius quarterii ^r^^ium: in dicti
Domini nostri Regis subditorum gravamen, nec non contra formam diversorum
Statutorum in bujusmodi casu provisorum and editorum, and contra Pacem, etc.

An Indictment against a Vintner for selling of Wine and Ale by false measures,
and breaking the Affize.
Judgment Ut supr^.
Juratores, etc. dicunt and praesentant, quod A B. de C. in Com. M. Vintner,
die, etc. anno, etc. assisam Vini and Cervisiae nimis cara venditione, and
falsis mensuris eorundem apud C. praedict. fregit; contra formam Statut. in
bujusmodi casu editi and provist, and contra Pacem, etc.

Against a Butcher for selling unsound Meat.
Judgment Ut supr^.
Juratores, etc. praesentant, etc. quod A B. de C. in Com. D. praedict.
Macellarius, die, etc. anno, etc. apud C. praedict. carnes insalubres, (viz.
putrid. corrupt. and ventilat) fraudulenter, subdole, and deceptive venditioni
exposuit; in malum exemplum, and magnum periculum subditorum Dom. Regis nunc,
and contra Pacem, etc.

The like against a Fishmonger, or any other that sells corrupt Bread, Wine,
Ale, or, etc. mutatis mutandis.

FINIS.

