THE OFFICES OF Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Supravisors
of the Highways, Treasurers of the County-Stock; And some other lesser
Country Officers, plainly and lively set forth.

The third Edition, with diverse Additions and Alterations, agreeable to the
late Acts and Ordinances.

By WILLIAM SHEPPARD, Esquire

LONDON, Printed by Ric. Hondgkinsonne, for Nath. Ekins, at the Gun in Paul's
Churchyard.

To all his Loving Countrymen.
MY Deer Friends, whose welfare as I much desire, so shall I, as I may,
endeavor. And having considered within my self, how commonly the most of you
are necessarily called to take upon you the offices of Constable,
Churchwarden, Over-seer of the Poor, Supravisor of the Highways, and some
other like offices, how large the extent of these offices are, amd how little
knowledge and skill the most of you have therein; whence it comes to pass,
that in execution of them, sometimes on the right hand you exceed your
authority, and fall into the hands of the merciless Malefactor; and sometime
(and more commonly) on the left hand, you fall short of your authority, (for he
that goes in the dark knows not where he goes) and do not so much as you
may, which proves a discouragement to the officer, and encouragement to the
offender, and hindrance of Justice. For the Cure hereof, I did heretofore in
one Book, give you a draught of all these lesser Country offices, and therewith
also an Epitome of some of the most common and useful Statutes referring
thereunto. This Book I have now again revised, corrected, and by many
alterations and additions fitted to our present time, and so I deliver it into
your hands, as a Looking-glass for you. And oh that I could now persuade you
all to buy it and read it, to know what you, may, and what you are to do. And
when you know it, in the name of God do it, and fear not: for in so doing, you
shall do God much service, and your Country much good. And this that you may
do, shall be always the prayer of

your Loving Countryman, W. S.

CHAP. I. Of Offices and Officers in general.
AN Office is that Function, Office and Officer, what.
by virtue whereof a man has some employment in the affairs of another. And an
Officer is he that is so employed.

There are diverse kinds The kinds of Officers.
and distinctions of Officers and offices in this Nation: we have had Officers
and Offices Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical, such as were conversant about
Ecclesiastical matters, as Ordinances, and such like, which are gone; and
Ministers, Church wardens, and the like, which do yet continue.

SECT. I.
OR Civil, such as were conversant about Civil matters. The Civil Officers
and Offices are again, some of them, judicial, that is, such as are to
administer Justice upon the Bench, and in the highest place, and have judicial
voices in some of the Courts of Justice, as the Lords Commissioners of the
great Seal, Judges in the two Benches, Barons in the Exchequer, Justices, of
the peace in their Sessions, Stewards in Leetes and diverse others. And others
of them are ministerial only, that is, such as do attend upon the judicial
Officers, and serve, either to prepare and make ready matters for the judicial
Officers to determine; so all the ministerial Officers in and about all the
Courts of Justice: or else they serve to execute what the Judges have before
determined; such were Constables, Keepers of Prisons, and diverse others: And
some again are partly judicial, and partly ministerial, who have in some
things a judicial power, and act as Judges; and in other things, only a
ministerial power, and can act but as Ministers; so are Sheriffs, and other
officers in diverse particular acts of their Office: And some Officers and
Offices are, and serve for all the Nation; and some are, and serve for one
County only, and may be called County Officers; so Sheriffs, Coroners,
Treasurers of the County stock, and others; And some serve for one Hundred
only, and may be called Hundred Officers; and some are and serve for one
Parish only, as the Parish Constable, Churchwardens, Overseers of the poor,
^urveiors of the highways, the Register, Parish-Clerk, Hayward, and the like:
And some for one place or house only, as the Master of the house of correction
for that house, the Keeper of a Prison for that Prison only, and so of others;
some are for the public administration of justice, as Sheriffs, Constables,
and such like Officers: and some are, and serve only for, and to the private
interest of some men, as the office of Parkers, Bailiffs, and such like. As to
Officers and Offices, that concern the public administration of justice,
these things are to be known as to their qualification.

1. They must be fit for their office, that are chosen into it.

SECT. 2.
ANd therefore none that are by law privileged and exempted, are to be chosen
as the Officers, whose personal attendance is necessary in any of the Courts
at Westminster, or in the Court of White Hall, may be chosen to an office in
the Country, wherein his personal attendance is necessary, as Constable,
Churchwarden, or the like. Atturneys therefore, of the Courts at Westminster,
the ordinary servants of the Lord Protector in his house, are exempted; so are
ministers, also Physicians, and Surgeons in London are exempted, and some
others.

2. They must be fit in body, and mind to to do their work, and duty of the
office, or else in some cases they are to be removed, and others put in their
place.

3. The Lord Protector, as it seems, may, by his Letters Patents, exempt any
man from serving of any of these Offices. And as to their coming into their
Offices,

1. They must be duly and orderly chosen, according to the law in that case
provided, otherwise all that they do in the execution of of their Offices,
will be illegal, and they may be sued for it. And therefore if a Constable, by
consent of Neighbors only, shall be chosen and sworn in a Court Baron only,
and not in a Leete, or by Justices of Peace, and he shall arrest, or do any
thing as Constable; he may be sued as any other man that shall take upon him so
to do. So if Churchwardens, Overseers of the poor, shall be chosen at any
other time, or in any other manner, than is by the Statutes and Ordinances
provided; or being duly chosen, shall not be confirmed by the Justices of the
Peace, according to the Laws in that case provided: all that he does is
unlawful, and he may be sued for it.

2. They must come freely to such Offices, for if they give or promise to give
any reward or fee for them, they are disabled to execute or exercise the same
Office. Stat. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. 16.

SECT. 3.
3. THey must attend their charge and Offices and if they be negligent therein,
sometimes they may be punished by special penalty as the Laws appoint. And in
some ^^^s, if any man have any special prejudice by their neglect, he may
perhaps have a special action of the case against him for this neglect.

4. And as to their demeanor in their Offices,

1. They must in the execution of their Offices, pursue the order prescribed by
the Law in every particular; otherwise they may be liable to Actions for what
they do, as another man may be; and therefore if Overseers of the Poor shall
make a Rate upon one man that does owe another poor man money as much as the
debt, and give it to the poor man for his debt, or the like, he may be sued for
this, when he does distrain for the money Rated. And if any such Officers
shall, by color of their Offices, and by conspiracy together, or with others
oppress any man, or charge him otherwise then the Law does authorize them, the
party grieved may have an Action of the case against him for it. But if any
Rate made to the right and they over Rate, the party grieved cannot sue them,
nor have other remedy, but by appeal to the Justices or the Sessions, as the
Statute and Ordinance does appoint.

SECT 4.
2. THese Officers cannot make a Deputy to execute their Offices, but another
man may assist them, and do some of the work under them, but they must answer
for them; nor can such Servant or Deputy take any man's person, or goods, as
Officers, but as assistant to the proper Officer, and by his command; therefore
let such Deputies take heed how they meddle herein.

3. And they must be content with the Fees appointed them by law, for any thing
they do in their Offices: for if any Officer, by color of his Office, shall
require, or take a fee where none is allowed, or take more than the fee
allowed, where any fee is allowed: this is extortion and punishable by fine and
imprisonment. And yet if any man shall gratis give an Officer any thing, for
the doing of any part of his Office; this is no extortion, nor can he be
punished for it

SECT. 5.
BUt as to this point of the Officers execution of his Office, and all the
cases of law that refer thereunto. These things are further to be known.

1. That every Officer, that does by virtue of his Office arrest any man's
person, or take Arrest.
any man's goods; he must be sure to look to all these things.

2. That he has a good authority so to do, either by a good warrant from some
superior Officer at the time of the act done, for a warrant after gotten will
not do, or ex officio, That is by his own authority as Officer, or otherwise
his act will be unlawful, and be liable to an action for the doing of it.

3. That he do arrest or take the goods of the right party, and not of another
man by mistake, for if he do he will be liable to an action for it: And herein
he is to know, that though he be led into the mistake by the Prosecutor,
Plaintiff, or Party arrested himself, or a third man, this will not excuse him:
but if there be two of one name, and there be no note of distinction, and the
Process be served upon the wrong, and not the man intended, the Officer is
excuseable: And yet if the Officer arrest the party intended, but he is named
by another name in the Warrant; this is actionable.

4. He must do it at a seasonable time. And for this, these things are to be
known. 1. That an arrest of a Man for Felony, or the Peace, or good Behavior,
or otherwise, in case of the Lord Protector, may be in the night as well as in
the day. 2. No Officer may execute any Writ, Order, or Warrant on the Lords
day, or any day of Humiliation, or thanksgiving (but in case of Treason,
Felony, breach of Peace, and profaining of the day.) 3. If an Officer have a
Warrant to arrest; and bring a man to the next Sessions, he cannot arrest him
after the Sessions, and if he do, he may be sued for it. 4. In case of
distress of goods, it is safe for the Officer to do it by day. 5. If he do
it out of time, he may be sued for it.

5. He must do it in the right place, for this he must know.

SECT. VI.
1. THat he cannot, regularly, take a Man or his goods, without the place or
Parish where he is Officer, and yet perhaps if a Man be coming to take his
Goods, and drive them out of the place, or Parish, he may follow them and take
them, or if a Man be arrested by the Officer, and escape into another Parish,
there, upon a fresh suite, he may follow him and take him there: And yet let
the Officer be well advised herein: for we cannot assure him, that the Law will
excuse him in these cases.

2. No Officer may arrest the Person of a Minister, going to, or returning from
his Church, in an ordinary course, about the service of God, much less, when
and whiles he is exercised about divine things.

3. And yet in this case, the arrest is deemed to be good, and no Action will
lie against the Officer: but they may be punished by the Justices for it.

SECT. VII.
4. THe arrest of any other Man, whiles he is at Church, is punishable, by
Justices of Peace; yet the arrest is good, not actionable: but an arrest of a
Man going to, or coming from Church, on a weekday is very lawful.

5. That after he has arrested him, or attached his goods, he do not abuse
him or them; and therefore he can do or use no more violence therein, but what
is necessary to the safe custody, and convey of the Person, and his goods; and
if he use more, he will be liable to action: so also, if he keep the Person or
Goods longer than the Commitment, and when the Prisoner shall be discharged,
upon any pretense whatsoever: so also when he keeps the Person arrested,
longer than he needs, from the Justice or the Gaol, this is actionable.

6. If a Warrant from a Justice be to three or more jointly, and severally,
that they shall arrest or levy goods, they may all do it, or any one of them
may do it; but it will not be safe for any two of them alone to do it.

7. If an Officer do any way misdemean himself, and do otherwise then as
before, in any of these things, if it be with the agreement and consent of the
party arrested, or whose goods are taken, this will excuse and take away the
Action. Now having said somewhat of Officers and Offices in general, We shall
say something to some of these Officers and Offices in particular; and first of
County Officers, and then of Parish Officers, and then of Officers of some
special places.

CHAP. II. Of the Treasures of the County Stock, for relief of Poor Maimed
Soldiers and Mariners, and the Widows and Orphans of such as died in the
Service of the Parliament, and their Office.
THe Treasurers of the County What they are, and how they are chosen.
Stock for the relief of Poor maimed Soldiers and Mariners, are certain
Officers yearly appointed by the Justices of Peace, to have the charge of the
Receipt and disbursment of the money taxed and levied upon the whole County
yearly for the relief of poor maimed Soldiers and Mariners: For the Justices
of the Peace are yearly at their Quarter Sessions, about Easter, to choose or
appoint one or two persons (according to their discretion) of the County, for
the taking and distributing of the moneys of the County, collected for the
relief of the poor maimed Soldiers and Mariners: And the men so appointed (by
the words of the Statute) must be such Men as, at the last Taxation before for
the Subsidy, were valued at Ten pounds in Lands yearly, or Fifteen pound in
Goods (but if they be sufficient men, this it seems is not stood upon.) And
these are to continue in their Office one year, and no longer, and then others
are to be chosen in their room, 43 Eliz. 3.

The Office and Duty of these Officers Their Office and Duty.
does consist in these things.

1. They are to receive of the High Constables of the Hundreds quarterly the
sums of money rated and taxed by the Justices of the Peace upon every Parish,
for the relief of sick, hurt, and maimed Soldiers and Mariners; and if in case
there be any defaults by the petty Constables, or High Constables, in the
levying of the sums, or in the payment of them over, so as thereby they make
any forfeiture. These Officers (and as it seems) without any Warrant from the
Justices of Peace, may levy the same forfeitures by sale of the offenders
Goods, rendering to him the overplus for the Parishioners; and in their default,
the Petit-Constables and Churchwardens are to set the Justices Rate: And this
Rate, if men pay not, the Churchwardens and Petit Constables may levy it by
distress and sale of their Goods: And if neither the Parishioners, nor
Constables and Churchwardens do set the Rate, then any Justice of Peace in or
near the place, may do it.

2. Every Soldier or Mariner, impotent, sick, and disabled by the public
service, having a Certificate to any of these Officers, under the Hand and Seal
of the General of the Camp, or Governor of the Town where he served, or of the
Captain of the Bond under whom he served, or his Lieutenant; or in the absence
of the said General or Governor; from his Marshall or Deputy, or from any
Admiral; or in his absence, from any other General of the Ships at the Seas,
wherein the said Soldiers or Mariners did serve, setting down the particulars
of their Hurts and Services; The Certificate being also allowed by the General
Muster Master for the time being, in the Realm, or Receiver General of the
Muster Rolls, the Treasurer and Controller of the Navy; This Soldier or
Mariner may repair to any one of these Officers of that County, out of which
he was pressed; or if he were not pressed, to this Officer of that County where he
was born or last inhabited, by the space of three years at his Election: And if
he be not able to go thither, he may repair to any one of these Officers of
the County where he does land. And if any such Soldier or Mariner shall thus
make to any of these Officers, it is the duty of this Officer, to give such a
portion of relief to him at his present necessity, as he shall think fit;
having respect to his need, and the commendation of his service; and this to
sustain him until the next Quarter Sessions, and then the Justices of Peace by
a kind of Instrument, may grant him a pention to be paid by this Officer, so
long as the Statute does continue, if the party so long live, and it be not
duly revoked. And this must be always paid by succeeding Treasurers quarterly.
But the same present sum so given, or yearly Pention so granted, must not
exceed Ten pound in gross, or Per annum, to a common Soldier, nor the sum of
fifteen pound to any that has born Office under the degree of Lieutenant, nor
the sum of Twenty pound to any that has been a Lieutenant. And these Pentions,
the Justices at their Quarter Sessions, may upon causes alter at their
pleasures. And these Mariners and Soldiers, when they Land in the way of their
travel, before they can get the confirmation of their Certificate, must have
competent allowance from the Treasurer of every County as they pass from the
place of their Landing.

3. They are to keep a book, and therein to Register all the Certificates they
do receive and allow, and all their receipts and disbursments. And if any of
them do refuse any Certificate, he must set down the reasons of his refusal
under it, or on the backside of it.

4. They are at the end of their year, to give up a just account to the
succeeding Treasurers, of all their receipts and disbursments, within the time
of their Office, and then also, if they have any money in their hands, they are
to deliver up the same to the succeeding Treasurers; And this they must do
within ten days after Easter Sessions. And if any such Officer so chosen,
shall refuse to execute his Office, he may be fined for it by the Justices of
the Peace: And if any such Officer shall wilfully refuse to give relief to a
Soldier or Mariner as aforesaid, the Justices of the Peace may fine him for
the same, according to their discretion: And if any such Officer, his Executors
or Administrators, shall not give up his account within the time aforesaid, or
shall be otherwise negligent in the execution of his Office; The Justices of
the Peace at the Sessions, may assess such fine upon him, his Executors or
Administrators, as they think fit, so it be not under five pounds. And all the
fines and forfeitures happening for the breach of this Statute, must be
employed by these officers to the uses aforesaid. And if any of the County
Stock, shall be left in their hands, it must be disposed to the use of the
poor, in such sort as the Justices of Peace shall appoint. Stat. 43. Eliz. Chapter
3.

5. These Officers now by the Ordinance of May, one thousand six hundred forty
seven, are also to receive the money Rated upon the County by the Justices of
the Peace, at their Sessions, for the relief of the maimed Soldiers and
Mariners: And the Widows and Orphans, of such as have died in the service of
the Parliament during the late Wars; And this they are to pay out thus.

1. To any such maimed Soldiers and Mariners, as by Warrant under the Hand of
two Justices of Peace they shall be appointed, until the next Quarter Sessions.

2. And then as by the Pention, there it shall be settled.

3. To the Widows and Orphans so much as two Justices of Peace shall set down.

4. In cases where the High Constables of hundreds, or Petit Constables of
Parishes, fail of their duty herein, and they are for for this neglect, to be
fined by the Justices. For which see chap. 8. sect. 2. chap. 10. Numb. 12.
chap. 7. sect. 8. It will be the duty of these Officers to see those inferior
Officers indicted for it, that so they may be fined for it, for without
indictment they cannot be fined, Ordin. 10. August. 1647. and 20. of May 1647.
Stat. 43. Eliz. Chapter 3.

CHAP. III. Of the Treasurers of the County Stock, for relief of the Prisoners
in the Kings Bench and Marshalsey.
THe Treasurers of the County What they are, and bow they are chosen.
Stock, for the relief of Prisoners in the Kings Bench and Marshalsey, and for
the relief of Hospitals and Almshouses within the same County, are certain
Officers yearly appointed by the Justices of Peace, to have the charge of the
Receipt and Disbursments of the money, taxed and levied upon the whole County
yearly, for the relief of the Prisoners in the Kings Bench and Marshalsey; and
for the relief of Hospitals and Almshouses within the same County; for the
Justices of Peace are yearly at their Quarter Sessions, about Easter, to choose
and appoint two persons of the County, Officers for this purpose; and the men
so appointed [by the words of the Stature] must be such men, as at the Tax of
the Subsidy last before were taxed at five pounds Lands, or ten pound goods at
the least, or near of that value. And these are to continue in their Office but
one year, and then others are to be chosen. The Office and Duty of these
Officers does consist in these things.

1. They are to receive of the High Constables Their Office and Duty.
of the Hundreds quarterly, the sums of money rated and taxed by the Justices
of the Peace, upon every Parish, for the relief of the poor prisoners in the
King's Bench and Marshalsey; and for the relief of the poor within the Hospitals
and Almshouses within the County: And if in case there be any default by the
Petty-Constables, or High Constables, or by the Churchwardens in the rating,
levying, or payment of these sums, so as thereby they make any forfeiture:
These Officers (and as it seems, without any Warrant from the Justice of Peace)
are to levy the same by sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering to the party
offending the overplus, if there be any, for the Parishioners; and in their
default, the Petit-Constables and Churchwardens are to distribute the Rate of
the Justices of the Peace. And this Rate, if neither the Parishioners, nor
Constables and Churchwardens do make, any Justice of Peace, in or near the
place may make it; and being made, the Constables and Churchwardens may levy
it by distress and sale of Goods: And for lack of distress, the Justice may
send the party to Prison, there to abide till it be paid, without Bail or
Mainprize.

2. This money so by them recived, they must pay over (and, as it seems, in
convenient time after the Receipt thereof) to the Lord Chief Justice of
England, and Knight Marshal for the time being, equally to be divided to the
uses aforesaid, taking their acquittance for the same; or in default of the
said Chief Justice, to the next ancientest Justice of the Upper-Bench.

3. They are to pay yearly, by a quarterly payment, such a sum of money as
shall be set down by the Justices of Peace, at their Quarter Sessions, unto the
Masters and Governors of the Houses of Correction; The which if they do refuse
or neglect to do, the same Masters or Governors (without any other Authority)
may levy the same of the Goods of the same Treasurers, by sale of their Goods,
rendering to them the overplus.

4. The surplusage of the money, by them received, they must distribute and
bestow for the relief of the poor Hospitals of the same County, and for the
relief of those that shall sustain losses by Fire, Water, the Sea, or other
Casualties, according to the discretion of the Justices of the Peace of the
County.

5. They are at the end of their year, at Easter-Sessions, to give an account
to the succeeding Treasurers of all their Receipts and Disbursments in the time
of their Office: And then also, if they have any money in their Hands, they are
to deliver up the same to the succeeding Treasurers. And if any Treasurer so
elected, as before, shall wilfully refuse to take upon him the same Office of
Treasurership, or to distribute and give relief, or to account according to
that Order the Justices shall set down, the Justices may fine him for the same,
at their Sessions, according to their discretion, so it be not under three
pound: And all the Fines and Forfeitures for the breach of any Branch of the
Statute 43 Eliz. c. 2. must be employed to the uses last aforesaid, as the
Justices shall appoint.

6. In cases where the Constables and Churchwardens of Parishes, or Constables
of hundreds fail of their duty herein, and they for this neglect are to be
fined, by the Justices (for which see chap. 8. sect. 2. chap. 10. numb. 12.)
chap. 7. sect. 8. It will be the duty of those Officers, to see those inferior
Officers indicted for it, that so they may be fined for it; for without
indictment, they cannot be fined, Stat. 43 Eliz. 7. Jac. 4.

CHAP. IV. Of the Collector of the money for the relief of the Prisoners in the
Common-Goal, and his Office.
THe Collector of the money What he is, and how he is chosen.
for the relief of the Prisoners in the Common-Goal, is an Officer appointed by
the Justices of the Peace, to have the charge of the receipt and disbursment of
the money taxed and levied upon the whole County, for the relief of the
Prisoners in the Common-Goal. For the Justices of the Peace at their
Quarter Sessions, are to choose and appoint some sufficient person, living near
to the Common-Goal of the County; as a Collector to receive and distribute the
money assessed by them upon the County, for the relief of the prisoners in the
Common Gaol: And this Officer may be in his Office for longer time than one
year. 14 Eliz. 5.

The Office and duty of this Officer, does consist only in these things.

1. That he be ready at every Quarter Sessions, His Office and Duty.
to receive from the High-Constables of the Hundreds, the moneys Rated by the
Justices of the Peace on every Parish, for the relief of the prisoners in the
Common-Gaol of the County.

2. That he do weekly pay and distribute the same to the same prisoners in
such sort as the Justices of Peace shall appoint. And if he offend in either of
these things, he shall forfeit for the same offense five pounds.

3. In cases where the Churchwardens do not their duty, or the Constables of
Hundreds do not their duty herein, and they may be fined by the Justices for
their neglect herein, (for which see chap. 8. sect. 2. and chap. 10. numb. 12.
It will be the duty of these Collectors to see them indicted before the
Justices that so they may be fined; for without indictment they cannot be
fined, Stat. 14 Eliz. 5.

CHAP. V. Of the Governor of the House of Correction, for the County and his
Office.
THe Governor or Master of the What he is, and how he is chosen.
House of Correction, is an Officer appointed by the Justices of Peace, to have
Oversight and Government of the House of Correction, and of persons committed
to the same. For such Houses are to be, and are provided and maintained with
Mills, Turns, Cards, and such like necessary implements in every County, for
the Keeping, Correcting, and Setting to work of Rogues, Vagabonds, Sturdy
Beggars, and other idle and disorderly persons. And the Justices of the Peace;
or the greater part of them, at the Quarter Sessions, are to choose and appoint
one or more sufficient and honest persons to be Governors, or Masters of the
said House, and to take sufficient security from the said Governors for the
continuance and performance of the said Service; and to set down what allowance
they shall have yearly for their pains (which they may charge upon the County)
and for the relief of such as shall happen to be weak and sick in their
Custody; and for the Stock to set on work such persons as shall be committed
thither; and to set down other Orders touching the same, according to their
discretion: And this Money so allowed, they shall have according to the
appointment of the Justices of Peace as aforesaid, to be paid quarterly
beforehand by the Treasurer of the County, for the relief of the prisoners in
the King's Bench and Marshalsey. And if the Treasurer refuse or neglect to pay
it thus, the Master of the House of Correction may levy the same, or so much
thereof as shall be unpaid upon the Treasurers account, by distress and sale
of his Goods, rendering unto him the overplus of the Money, 39 Eliz. 4. 7 Jac.
4. The Office and Duty of this Officer, is in these things.

First, To look well to the same House and His Office and Duty.
the backside thereof, and all the Implements and Goods he does find there; he
is also to look to all the persons he does find there, or that shall be
afterward committed to him.

Secondly, To receive such Rogues, Vagabonds, Idle, or Disorderly Persons, as
by any of the Justices of Peace shall be sent thither.

Thirdly, To keep safely all such as are committed to him, and not to suffer
them to wander about the Country, or to escape away without Order of the
Justices.

Fourthly, To see and take care, that amongst the persons committed to his
charge, if there be any sick or otherwise impotent, etc. that have need of
relief, That he do relieve them according to their necessity.

Fifthly, To see and take care, as for the rest that are able to work, that he
do from time to time, as they shall remain there, set them to work and labor;
for during that time they must in no sort be chargeable to the Country for any
allowance, either at their coming in or going forth, or abode there; for they
are to have such and so much allowance only, as they shall deserve by their own
labor and work.

Sixthly, To punish them (as he sees cause) with putting on Fetters or Gives
upon them, and by a moderate whipping of them.

Seventhly and lastly, At every Quarter Sessions to give an account of all such
persons as have been committed to his custody. And if they shall offend in any
of these particulars, or any other incident to the duty of their Office; the
Justices of the Peace may impose such Fines and Penalties upon them for the
same, as they shall think fit. And these fines must be paid unto, and accounted
for, by the Treasurer of the County for the King's Bench and Marshalsey.

CHAP. VI. Of the Keeper of the Jail of the County, and his Office.
THe Jailer or Keeper of Jailer what.
a Prison, is one that has the Custody of the place and Prison wherein
Prisoners are kept; and of these, there are as many as there be Gaoles and
Prisons.

As to the Power and Office of these Officers; His Power and Office.
these things are to be known.

1. They are to receive such Prisoners as are duly sent, or offered to them,
and all that are sent by a Justice of peace Warrant, they must receive. If any
Officer arrest a man upon suspicion of Felony, and carry him to the Jailer, he
must receive him without a Justice Warrant; and if any man that is no Officer,
take a Fellon doing the Felony, and bring him to the Jailer; it seems also
that in this case, he is to receive him also.

2. His duty and charge is, to look well to the Prisoners that are in his
custody; for if he suffer any of them to escape, he will be punished for it: If
they be Prisoners for debt, and he let them escape voluntarily, or negligently,
he must pay to the Creditor his debt. If they be in for Fllony, and the Keeper
suffer them wilfully to escape, he is a Fellon, if negligently he is finable:
and so he is for the escapes of lesser Offenders.

3. It has been held by some Judges therefore, that a Jailer may justify the
putting of Bolts upon the Legs of any Prisoners committed to him.

4. Keepers they are to see, that their Prisoners have necessary provision.

5. For this the Law does give an action of debt to the Jailer, against his
Prisoner; nor can the Prisoner in this action, be suffered to wage his law.

6. They are to take care, that such Prisoners as are in their custody in
execution for debt, be kept in strait custody, and have not too much liberty:
for by this means, they will be forced the sooner to pay their debts.

7. They may not compel, or procure their Prisoners to become approveres, that
is accusers of others; for this is Felony.

8. If a Prisoner of debt get away from a Jailer against his will, he may
follow him and take him again, and bring him to, and put him in, the Jail
again. And so he may any Prisoner that is in for any Crime or offense. But if a
Keeper do voluntarily deliver a Prisoner of debt, there he cannot retake him
and put him in Prison again, for he is discharged of his imprisonment, and the
Jailer must satisfy the debt. Coo. 9. 87. Dier. 249. Stat. 1 Ed. 3. Stat 1, 7,
5 Ed. 3. 14 Ed 3. Stat. 1, 10. Br. Faux Impr. 24. 27.

CHAP. VII. Of Constables, Tithing-men and the like Officers, and their Office.
SECT. 1. What they are, and how many sorts of them there are.
TO omit to show the Etymology Statute of Wixchester, 1. La^b. of the Duty of
Constables. Finches Law 306. Sir Tho. Smith de Repub. l. 2. cap. 25. 12 H. 7.
18.
and diverse acceptance of the word Constable, the Antiquity and Original of
the Office of the Constable we are now to treat of, and the diverse kinds of
Officers of this name in the Commonwealth, and to take up so much only as may
serve to our present purpose. The Constables (whose Offices we intend to speak
of) are said to be Officers of the Commonwealth, appointed for the maintenance
of the Peace thereof, and to be attendant to Court-Leetes, Justices of Peace
and Coroners, for the execution of their Warrants within their Precinct and
Liberty: And Master Lamberd says the name of a Constable in a Hundred or
Franchise does mean, that he is an Officer that did support the Kings Majesty
in the maintenance of his Peace, within the Precinct of his Hundred or
Franchise: And of these Constables, there are now said to be two sorts I he
first sort are the high-Constables, which are for the whole Hundred, Lathe,
Rape or Wapentake, the which do comprehend many Parishes, Tythings and
Villages; and therefore these Officers, in respect of Place, have a more large
command than petty-Constables have. These Officers were ordained by the Statute
of Winchester, which does appoint (amongst other things) That for the better
keeping of the peace, two-Constables in every Hundred or Franchise shall make
the view of Armor; and they are called high-Constables, in comparison of the
Constables or pety-Constables, that be in the Towns or Parishes within their
Hundreds or Franchises, whose duty is likewise to maintain the Peace, within
the several limits of their Towns or Parishes. And of these high Constables
there were to be, and were anciently, two in every Hundred, but at this day
there is but one in many Hundreds. The other sort of Constables, are the
petty-Constables, or the under-Constables, who are only for some part, as for a
Town, Parish, Village, Tything or Hamlet within the Hundred (for every hundred
has his high-Constable, and every several Tything within the Hundred has his
petty-Constable, Tythin-man, or the like within it,) so that the Command of the
petty-Constable is only in one part of the Precinct of the high-Constable, but
otherwise for his Authority, by the ancient Common-Lawes; his Office (as far as
his Precinct does extend) is the same with the Office of the high-Constable
over the whole Hundred. The Tything-man, Borsholder, Borrow-Head or
Head-Borrow, Third-Borow and Chiefe-Pleadge, or by whatsoever names they be
called in any Towns, Parishes, Tythings, Burrowes, Hamlets or other places,
and their Offices are in effect, in most places, but one and the same: For in
some Counties this Officer is called by one name, and in other Counties by
another name, as in Kent he is called Borsholder; in Warwickshire Third-Borow,
and in other places he is called Constable, and in some places he is called
Tything-man; for he that is called and sworn the Tything-man of any Place, is
(in effect) the Constable of the Place: and therefore in such places, for the
most part, there is no other Officer called or sworn by the name of a
Constable; for, as petty-Constables about the beginging of the reign of Edward
the third, were devised in Towns and Parishes for the aid of the Constables of
the Hundred, so afterward Borsholders, and such like, were used as
petty-Constables within their own Tythings and Burrowes. But if it be so (as it
is in some few places) that there is one Constable for the Commonwealth, and
there is also one or more Tything-men, and the Constable does execute all the
Office, and the Tything-men are but as attendants on him, and seem to have but
little power; or it be as in some places, the Tything-man is to do service to
the Lord of the Manor, rather than to the Commonwealth, and he is a customary
Tything-man chosen at the Lords Court. Or if it be so that there are two or
more Tything-men, and one of them is for the Commonwealth, to execute the
Office of Constable, and is always chosen at the Leet, and this Tythingman,
time out of mind, has been used to do nothing about the Office of the
Constable, but to do other things; in these Cases the custom of the place may
and must be continued, and such Tything-men shall not be compelled to do more
than by custom they have used to do: Howbeit otherwise, and in all other
places, all these Officers are comprehended within this word Constable, and all
these Offices are contained within this Office.

SECT. 2. Of the choice and swearing of High-Constables, and Petit-Constables.
THe High-Constables are and may be chosen and made, either by the Justices of
the Peace, at their quarter Sessions, or at the Leet, and there, either by the
Steward of the Leet himself, or by the presentment of the grand-Inquest, in the
Leet, as the course and custom of the place is: And these were heretofore
chosen and sworn in the Sheriffs turn. The Petty-Constables are and may most
properly be chosen by the Steward of the Leet himself, or the Presentment of
the Inquest in the Leet; But these also are chosen by the Justices Dalt. Just.
of P. 37. 38.
of the Peace at their Quarter Sessions. And all these Officers are and may be
chosen for one or two years, according to the custom of the place. And when
they are chosen at the Quarter Sessions, or at the Leet, they do usually take
their Oaths there where they are chosen; or they may, and sometimes they do
Resol. of the Judges.
take their Oaths before one Justice of Peace, at another time and place. A
Petty-Constable also in some special Case may be made and appointed by one
Justice of Peace, and that out of Sessions, as in case where one that is chosen
Constable does refuse the Office, or one that is made Constable is removed out
of his Office, or is dead; in these cases, in respect of the necessity, and for
a present supply, one Justice of Peace alone may Elect and Swear a new Coo. 8.
41. 42. Titz. off. Just. of P. 201. Lamb. in the Constable. duty 10. 11. Dalt.
Just. P. 322. 323 18 H. 6. 13. 21 Ed. 3. 2. 12 H. 7. 2 H. 4. 15. Marb,
Officer, and then especially when the Quarter Sessions, and the Leet are far
off, and not to be kept in a great time after: And as touching this matter
these things are to be known.

1. Where the custom of the place is, for the Jury in the Leet to choose these
Officers, there they may and must be chosen still; for this is a good way and
custom, and the best way of choosing these Officers; but where the custom is
otherwise, there it may be otherwise.

2. Which way soever they be chosen, there must be great care had that those
that are chosen Cap. 10. Fitz. Leet in toto. Marb. cap. 10.
be fit persons to execute the Office; and therein these things must be
observed. 1. The person chosen, must be a Lay, and not a Clergy-person, for all
Clergymen are exempt from this service, as they are from attendance at the
Leet; and therefore if any such person shall be chosen to this Office, he may
get himself discharged by a Writ; whereof see afterward. 2. The party chosen,
as he must be a lay person, so he must be a layman, not a lay-woman, and
therefore a widow or maid, albeit she keep House of her self, and dwell in a
House whose owner has been used to serve in this Office, is not to be chosen
to this Office, no more than she is to do suit to the Leet. 3. The party
chosen, as he must be a man, so he must be idoneus homo, i. e. a fit man, and
that first for his knowledge, that he does in some good measure understand what
he does and ought to do. And therefore a man that is non compos mentis, as an
Idiot or mad man, an Infant, or the like, cannot be a fit man. 2. He must be
fit for his honesty, that he may be likely to execute his Office truly without
ill affection or partiality, and therefore it seems a scandalous liver, a
malicious and contentious man cannot be a fit man. 3. He must be fit for his
abilite of Body and Estate. And therefore an old, weak, sick, or otherwise,
impotent man; or a poor needy man that lives only by his labor, cannot be a
fit man. It was therefore by special direction from the King, in An. Dom.
1630. given in charge, that the Constables in all parishes should be chosen of
the able sort of parishioners; and that the Office should not be put upon the
poorer sort, the which if it were well observed, would no doubt much further
the execution of Justice through the Nation. And if because the common course
is every where to put these Offices upon the meaner sort of men, the more able
sort do think themselves thereby exempted, they are therein much deceived; for
it is not much to be doubed but that all persons that are bound to do suit in
the Leet, are bound to serve in these Offices, that are after a sort appendant
to the Leet; and therefore if any such person be called and chosen thereunto,
he must and will be compelled to execute the same: Howbeit it is deemed an
unfit and indiscreet part to elect any to these Offices, that in respect of
their o her Offices, Callings or Professions, are presumed to have so much
other employment that they have not leisure to attend upon this so much as is
required. And hence it is that the Justice of Peace, Sheriffs, Lawyers,
Atturnies, and such like Persons, are seldom or never chosen to these Offices;
For if any Steward or J^^y in a Leet should be so indiscreet as to cho^^e any
such men to these Offices, the Justices of Peace, upon complaint to them
hereof, will no doubt be so discreet as to discharge them again, and elect
others in their place; for he cannot be fit for that Office which he has no
leisure to wait and attend upon: But otherwise it is not only lawful, but
convenient also, that these Officers be chosen, in all places, of the abler
sort of men. And therefore it has been of late resolved by the Judges, That if
a man had made himself one of the Kings servants extraordinary, that this would
not exempt him from the execution of this office, but he must have been made
Constable notwithstanding. 4. An Infant under the age of twenty one years may
not of right be compelled to serve in these offices. And yet if such a one be
chosen and sworn, it seems he may execute the office as another man may do:
And therefore if a young man of the age of twenty years, or thereabouts
(especially if he be such a one as has the growth wisdom, and courage of an
elder man, as sometimes it falls out) be chosen to this office, he shall do
well to take it upon him and execute it. An old man also aged sixty, or
thereabouts, (especially if his strength of body and mind be not much abated)
may be compelled to serve in these offices. 5. If a man live within one Hundred
or Tything, and have land only within another Hundred or Tything, he may not be
chosen to serve in this office in the place where his land is; for if he have
no House upon his Land, it seems neither he nor his Tenant is bound to serve in
these offices at all, in respect of the Land^ For men are bound to serve in
these offices in respect of their Persons and Resiancy, and not in respect of
their Land: But if he have a house upon his land, and a Tenant dwelling in it,
and he be a sufficient man and able to serve the office, he may be chosen and
made to serve it, but not the Landlord, for perhaps he may be chosen to this
or some other office in the place where he dwells, and a man can do service
with his body but in one place at one time. And yet if the Case be so that a
man has two several Houses in two several precincts, and within several
Leets, and he do live sometimes at the one house and sometimes at the other
house, in this case he may perhaps be made an Officer at either of the Leets,
within either of the places, if he be there dwelling at the time when the Leet
is kept; for a man may do corporal service at two places, at several times.
But if two Tythings be within one Leet, and one man has houses in both the
Tythings, in this case it seems doubtful, whether albeit he do live in the
one Tything, he may not be compelled to serve in this Office for his House in
the other Tything, especially if the Tythings be near, and he keep no Tenant in
his House fit to undergo the Office when it shall come to his turn; wherein,
as in all other such like cases a due consideration must be had of all
circumstances.

3. By that which has been said it may appear, then how unreasonable a thing
it is, that these Offices should follow the Houses, or that two or three in a
Tything, and no more, should always execute the same (as in some places has
been used) and therefore it has Removing of a Constable.
been well and wisely altered by the Order of the Justices in some if not in
all places.

4. If there be a man unfit, for any of the causes aforesaid, chosen and
appointed to this Office in a Leet, either by the Stewards nomination, or by
the Presentment of the Jury, or by one Justice of Peace, only, out of Sessions,
such a man may be removed and discharged again, by Order of the Justices of
Peace, at their Sessions, and another man more fit may be by them, then and
there, elected and sworn in his room that is so removed. But if the man elected
and made Constable in a Leet, be a fit man, the Justices of the Peace may not
remove him and appoint another: And so it has been agreed by the Judges. And
yet if the Justices of the Peace shall remove such a man chosen in a Leet, that
is a fit man, it seems there is no remedy but by complaint to the Lord chief
Justices, or the Judges of the Circuit, etc. If the Constable be chosen by the
Jury in a Leet, and the man chosen be unfit, and the Steward of the Leet does
perceive it; in this case it seems the Steward himself may elect and swear
another man, more fit, and refuse and discharge him that is so chosen by the
Jury. And it is held also; That in default of the Leet, or otherwise, where
there shall be just cause, every Justice of Peace, ex officio, may remove the
old Constable and choose and swear a new one; and that for this purpose he may
send forth his Warrant to require such Person to come in and take his Oath
before such Justice of the Peace. Also there was (as it seems) another way of
discharging and removing of this Officer, by a Warrant from the King to the
Custom. Prescription.
Sheriff of the the County, and to the High-Constable of the Hundred, whereof
see a president in Daltons Just. of Peace, fol. 322.

5. No custom or prescription to exempt any man not exempted as before, or to
warrant an undue election, contrary to the rules before laid down, will avail
or shall be allowed unto any person or Tything.

6. If a man be chosen to this Office in a Leet, and he refuse to take the
charge thereof upon him, he may be fined for this contempt in the same Leet.
And if he be chosen at the Sessions, or by one Justice of Peace out of
Sessions, and he refuse to take his oath, he Numb. 1. Deputy.
may be Indicted and fined at the Sessions for this contempt.

7. A Constable chosen and sworn, may make what Deputies he will, under
himself, to execute his Office; for there is no doubt but in time of sickness,
and at other times also he may, if he will, execute his Office by Deputy, but
the Officer himself must expect to answer for all the mis-doings of his
Deputies. And if one man be chosen an Officer, and he desire to have a Deputy,
and to have him sworn and allowed, if the Deputy be sufficient, and be allowed
and sworn, in this case the Deputy, and not the other, is the Officer; and
therefore the Duputy must answer for himself, and his doings, and not the other
for him. But the making of a Deputy in this case, is rather by tolleration than
by Law, and so has it been delivered by the Judges.

The form of the Oath of a Constable.
YOu shall swear well and faithfully to serve the Commonwealth, in the Office
of a Constable. You shall see the public Peace to be well and duly kept and
preserved, to the utmost of your power. You shall arrest all such persons as in
your presence shall ride or go armed offensively, or shall commit or make any
Riot, Affray, or other Breach of the public Peace. You shall do your best
endeavor, upon complaint to you made, to apprehend all Fellons, Barators and
Riotors, or persons riotously assembled; and if any such offenders shall make
resistance with force, you shall levy Hue and Cry, and shall pursue them
until they he taken. You shall do your best endeavor that the watch in your
town be duly kept, and that Hue and Cry he duly pursued according to the
Statutes: And that the Statute made for punishing of Rogues, Vagabonds, and
Night-walkers, and such other idle and wandering persons coming within your
liberties, be duly put in execution. You shall have a watchful Eye to such
persons as shall maintain or keep any common house or place where any unlawful
games or plays are or shall be used; as also to such as shall frequent or use
such places, or shall exercise or use any unlawful games or plays there or
elsewhere, contrary to the Statute. And you shall have a care for the
maintenance of Archery according to the Statute. At your Assizes, Sessions, or
Leet you shall present all and every the offenses committed or done contrary to
the Statutes made and provided for the restraint of the inordinate haunting and
tippling in Taverns, Innes, Alehouses and other Victualing-houses, and for the
repressing of drunkenness and profane swearing. You shall true Presentment
make of all Bloodshedding, Affraies, Outcryes, Rescues and other offenses
committed or done against the public Peace within your limits. You shall well
and duly execute all Precepts and Warrants to you directed, from the Justices
of the Peace and others in Authority in this County. And you shall well and
duly, according to your Knowledge, Power, and Ability do and execute all other
things belonging to the Office of a Constable, so long as you shall continue in
the said Office.

So help you God.

Or thus more briefly.
YOu shall swear that you shall well and duly execute the Office of Constable
[or Tything-man] for the Parish [or Tything] of S. for this next year [or half
a year, as the Case is] and until another be sworn in your room, or you shall
be legally discharged thereof.

So help you God.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Power and Duty of the High-Constable and petty-Constable in
common, and one with another; And of some few things the petty-Constable, and
not the High-Constable, is to do.
THese Officers and their Offices, as they had a far greater Authority than now
they have, so have they been of far greater account than now they be. For by
the ancient Common-lawes, before there were any Justices of Peace made, the
Constables of every Village had a kind of Rule within the same Village, and
were to keep the Peace there; and therefore the Constable was called the Ruler
of the Village, and it is thought, that at that time the Authority and account
of these Officers was much like to the Authority and account of the Justices of
the Peace at this day; and therefore they had then the same Titles of
Conservators of the Peace given unto them, which is given to the Justices of
Peace at this day, Sed tempora mutantur and nos mutamur in illis: For this is
vanished now, and there is but little sign of it: for at this day they do for
the most part but execute the Commands of others and yet somewhat there is
remaining, as the footsteps of what formerly they had, the which to set forth
is our labor in this place: For the opening whereof we shall observe his
method. First, we shall show what all Constables, High and Low Tything-men,
Borshollers, etc. may and must do, and what is their common and equal Duty
and Authority, and then next what the High-Constable may and must do more than
the petty-Constable, etc. and wherein these Officers have a distinct and
several duty one from another; and then we shall show what the Constables of
some great Towns may do in some special Cases.

SECT. 1. Certain general Rules and Cases about these things.
FOR the further clearing and opening of these things, observe these Rules and
Cases following.

1. Every of these Borsholders, Tything-men, Borow heads, Head-borowes,
Third-borowes and Lamb. in the Duty of Constables f. 6.
Chief-pledges, has two several Offices at this day, the one being his
Ancient and first Office, and the other his later made Office; his first Office
began thus. By the ancient Laws of this Nation (before the coming in of King
William the Conqueror) it was ordained for the more sure keeping of the Peace,
and for the better repressing of Thieves and Robbers, That all free born men
should cast themselves into several Companies, by ten in each Company; and
that every of those ten men of the Company should be surety and pledge for the
forthcoming of his fellows; so that if any harm were done by any of these ten
against the Peace, then the rest of the ten should be amerced, if he of their
Company that did the harm should fly and were not forthcoming, to answer to
that wherewith he should be charged; and for this cause these Companies be yet
in some places of England called Boroes, of the word Borhes, Pledges or
Sureties; albeit in the Western parts of this Nation they be commonly named
Tythings, because they contain the number of ten men, with their families; and
even as ten times ten do make an hundred, so because it was then also
appointed that ten of these Companies should at certain times meet together for
the matters of greater weight, therefore that general Assembly or Court was,
and yet is, called a Hundred. And it was then also ordained, That if any man
were of so evil credit that he could not get himself to be received into one
of these Tythings or Boroes, then he should be shut up in prison, as a man
unworthy to live at liberty amongst men abroad; and whereas every of these
Tythings or Boroes did use to make choice of one man amongst themselves to
speak and to do in the name of them all; he was therefore in some places
called the Tything-man, in other places the Boroes-Elder, now called Borsholder
in some places, in other places the Boroe-Head or Head-Borow, and in some other
places the Chief-Pledg, which last name does expound the other three that are
next before it; For Head or Elder of the Boroes, and Chief of the Pledges are
all one, and in some Shires where every Third-Borow has a Constable, there the
Officers of the other two are called Third-Borowes. Moreover in these Tythings
or Boroes, sundry good orders were observed, and amongst others: First, That
every man of the age of twelve years should be sworn to the King. Then that no
man should be suffered to dwell in any Town or place unless he were also
received into some Suretyship and Pledge as is aforesaid: And that if any of
these Pledges were imprisoned for his offense, then he ought not to be
delivered without the assent of the rest of his Pledges. Again, That no man
might re^ove out of one Tything or Boroe, to dwell in another, without lawful
Warrant in that behalf. Lastly, That every of these Pledges should yearly be
presented and brought forth by their Chief-Pledg, at a general Assembly for
that purpose, which at this day is called The view of Frank Pledge. And of this
ancient Office there is yet some show in our Leets or Law days, and well were
it for us if the very substance thereof were thoroughly performed at this day.
The latter Office of these Officers, is in manner all one with the Office of a
Petty-Constable. Secondly, some things these Officers are to Ex Officio, and by
the duties of their places, without any command from others, and for other they
must do them by command from others, and without this they need not do it,
not can they justify the doing thereof. Thirdly, Some Petty-Constable and
High-Constable is one and the same for most things, only the High-Constable is
over all the Hundred, and the power of the other is only in his Parish or
Tything, Fifthly, That whatsoever the Daltons J. P. 28. 296. Fitz. Just. P. 30.
Lamb. Just. of Peace 240.
to do, and whatsoever the Law does give them authority to do, that for the
most part the Law does enjoin them by the duty of their place to do. Sixthly,
Whatso^^er any other man may do in those things whereabout the Constable is
conversant, the Constable What every man may do in the Constables Office.
may much more do: And therefore a Constable may without doubt part Affrayors,
or keep them asunder in a Room of his own or of another man's house, for a time,
to prevent mischief. And if he see one coming with a weapon drawn, or the like,
intending to take part in the Affray, he may lay hands on him and stay him, and
he may Arrest or Imprison one he Arrest.
does know or suspect to have committed a Felony, Fellons.
or one that is apparently about to commit a Felony, or one that has
dangerously wounded another, or night-walkers that are Nightwalkers.
dangerously suspicious, or one that keeps or uses any Gunne, etc. contrary
to the Statute, or the like; for in all these cases any other private man that
is no Officer, may do the same and justify it. Seventhly, That High-Constable
of the Hundred, and of the head Constable of a Town are in some few things
singular. So that as the Constable of a Parish is to labor to keep the Peace,
suppress Fellons, execute the Justice of Peace his Warrant, and the like: So
is the Tythingman, Borsholder, Borohead, Thirdborow and chief Pledge of a
Parish to do the same; and this Officer, where he is called by this name
within his Precinct, has the same authority in all things as the Constable
has within his Precinct. Eighthly, Hundreds, Parishes an^ Tythings only,
within which only they have authority and power; except it be in some special
cases, showed after; for out of the Compass of their Hundreds, Tythings and
Parishes, they have no more authority than a private man, neither are they more
bound there to do any of the things that do belong to their office, than any
Aid. Broo. Ry. 3. Tresp. 431. 3 H. 7. 10. 13 H. 7. 10. 38 Ed. 3. 8. Dalt. J.
P. 303.
and apprehension of Fellons, and carrying them to Jail, in case of
suppressing Insurections, allaying of Affrayes, keeping of the Peace, execution
of the Warrants of Justices of the Peace, and the like, any of these Officers
(when need shall be) may require the aid and assistance of so many of his
Neighbors, or others, of all sorts of able men, above fifteen years of age, as
he shall think meet; and so also he may do in case where a man is hurt and
dangerously wounded, for the apprehending and arresting of him that gave the
wound; and so also he may do when a Warrant is sent unto him, for the
apprehending of a popish Recusant, by special provision of the Statute of 3
Jac. cap. 4. And if any such person being required by any of these Officers, in
any such case, shall refuse or neglect to aid them, he may be fined and
imprisoned for it at the Quarter Sessions. Tenthly, these Officers, if they
cannot otherwise Breaking of a house. Coo. 5. 92. Dalt. J. P. 176. 177. 13 Ed.
4. 9. 3. Jac. 4.
any man's house in these Cases following (viz.) to search after or arrest any
Person for Treason or Felony, or suspicion thereof, that is or is thought to be
in the House; to take a man that has dangerously hurt another, and is fled
into the House; to appease an affray that is in the House; to apprehend a
Popish Recusant, upon a Warrant to break open the house, and upon a Warrant for
the Peace or good Behavior, by the opinion of Popham and Clerk, Judges of
Assise at Cambridge. And so generally in all cases wherein the Keepers of the
Liberty are Party, or where they have any Interest in the business. And yet it
seems in case of a Warrant to apprehend an Alehouse-keeper for selling without
license, and to carry him to Bridewell upon the second Conviction; it was
doubted by the Judges, in their Resol. 1633. Sect. 11. But in all these cases
the Officer, Fresh pursuit Pl. 37. Dalt. J. Peace. 23. Arrest out of the
Officers precinct. To what Gaol a Prisoner may be carried.
must signify the cause of his coming, and require them to open the doors.
Eleventhly, where an Officer has power to arrest a man, and being coming to
do it, the party does fly into another County or Hundred; in this case the
Officer may presently pursue him whithersoever he shall so fly, and arrest him
there, albeit it be in another Hundred or County, out of his own Precinct.
Twelfthly, if a man commit a Felony in one County, and be arrested Daltons J.
P. 297. 298.
pursuit of the Officer, or some other, pursuing him thither: in this case the
Prisoner must be carried to the Jail of the County where he is taken, and not
to the Jail of the other County: And if a Constable be coming to arrest
Affrayors, and they fly into another County, and he pursue and take them there,
in this case he must bring them before a Justice of Peace of the same County
where they are taken; where the Officer can do no more than a private man: But
if the flight be only into a privileged, or other place in the same County; in
this case the Officer may in his fresh pursuit thither take him, and di^pose of
him as an Officer, and as if he took him within the limits of his own Parish.
And if a Constable arrest a man upon a Warrant from a Justice of Peace, and
after the arrest, the party (of his own wrong) gets away and flies into
another County: in this case the Officer may pursue him and take him there, and
bring him back to the same Justice of Peace from whom the Warrant came.
Thirteenthly, Resisting an Officer. Coo. 4. 40. 9. 96. Broo. Tres. 296. 21 H.
7. 39. Lamb. J. P. 29. 298. Dalt. J. P. 297. Murder. Trespass. Good behavior.
these Officers in the doing and execution of their office: For to kill any one
of these officers in the doing of his office, is wilful murder, and causes
unavoydable death? or to beat or wound any such Officer, in the doing of his
office, is a great Trespass to be recompensed with great Damages: And
otherwise to abuse any such Officer, in the doing of his office, is a great
Misdemeanour, that may cause the offender to be bound to the good Behavior.
And if the party that is to be arrested shall make resistance, make an assault
upon the Officer, or labor to get away, the Officer may justify the beating,
yea and the Beating.
wounding of him also, or he may imprison him in the Stocks for the same. But
upon a Stocks.
Warrant of a Justice of Peace, for the Peace or good behavior; if the party
resist or fly before he be arrested, it is said the Officer cannot justify
the beating of him; yet if the Officer please he may soon arrest him, for if he
be a known Officer, and do but say to the Party: I arrest you in the name of
the Keepers Arrest.
of the liberty of England, albeit he never And so was the opinion of the Lord
Keeper, and the Lord Chief Justice 5. Car. Murder justfiable.
lay hands upon him; this is an Arrest in Law. And if a Warrant be sent to any
of these Officers to Arrest one Indicted of Felony, he may justify the
killing of the Party, if he cannot otherwise take him, or being taken, if he
resist and fly when he is taken. Fourteenthly, Where any of these Fitz. Cor.
61. 288. 328. When an Officer may imprison a man in another place then the
common Prison.
to imprison him, it is held that he may not imprison him in his own house, or
in any other place but the common prison, and the prison also of the same
County; for he may not carry him to the Gaol of another County, except it be in
some special Case, as where one Gaol does serve for diverse Counties, or the
like; and yet upon reasonable request, as Fitz. Barra. 202. 20 E. 4. 6. 10 Ed.
4. 17. 22 Ed. 4. 35. 3 H. 4. 9. Kelw. 45. 11 E. 4. 7. Stocks.
because it is night, or because the Officer does want streng^h enough to carry
him to the Goal or to the Justice, or because he does fear a Rescue will be
made upon him, or the like; in these Cases the Officer may put the party in the
Stocks, and keep him there for a reasonable time, viz. until the morning, if
it be at night, or until he can be conveniently provided for strength and aid
to carry him to prison, or to the Justice of Peace. But some Lamb. J. P. 2.
cap. 3.
say that an Officer may keep a Prisoner in the Officers own, or in another
man's house, for a time convenient, and justify it; whereof others much doubt:
And therefore the safe way is to keep him in the Stocks, or carry How an
Officer may use a Prisoner.
put in the Stocks be taken for Felony or suspicion of Felony; in this case
the Officer may lock the Stocks; and if need be, he may also put Irons upon the
Prisoner. And if the Dalt. J. P. 300.
Officer be to convey him to the Gaol, or to the Justice of Peace, he may
pinion him, or otherwise make him sure, that he shall not escape. Sixteenthly,
If a private man, that is 10 Ed. 4. 17. Fitz. Office of J. P. 201.
suspicion of Felony, within the Precinct of any of these Officers, and bring
and deliver the Ptisoner to the Officer of the place: in this case the Officer
is bound to see the Prisoner safely conveyed to the Gaol: for if he suffer him
to escape, he must answer for him: Escape.
And so also it is, if there be no Officer in the place where the Fellon is
taken, and the party carry him and deliver him to the Officer of the next
place: for it seems this Officer also in this case, is bound to look to him at
his peril.

Seventeenthly, As touching the execution How far these Officers are bound to
obey the Warrants of the Justice of the Peace. 31 H. 8. 9, 6. See the
Constables Oath, Kytch. 47.
things are to be known. 1. In all cases, where any Warrant is sent from any
Justice of Peace, to any of these Officers, touching any matter whatsoever,
concerning the Office of the Justice of Peace; it seems he is bound to execute
it: And therefore it seems, that in all cases where any Statute does enable a
Justice of Peace to apprehend any Person to be brought before him, or to commit
any person to the Gaol, as in the cases of those that keep unlawful Games in
their houses, or haunt such houses, or in the case of men that shoot in, or
carry Gunns, or the like; That in all these cases the Justices of Peace are to
command these Officers, and they are to obey them. 2. These Officers must with
all respect, receive How they must receive and excute the Warrants of the
Justices. Dalt. J. P. 291.
the Warrants of the Justice of Peace: for if any Warrant be sent from a
Justice of Peace, to any one of these Officers, and he shall show any neglect
or contempt of it, as by casting it into the dyrt, etc. or do not with all
care, secrecy and diligence exeecute the same; these are misdemeanors
punishable: and for either of these misdemeanors, the party offending may
either be bound to the good behavior, or be Indicted and fined. And by the
Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 5. there is a special charge laid upon the officers,
within the Counties of Wales, That they be careful to execute the Warrants of
the Justices of the Peace there. 3. Let him then consider what he has to do:
For howsoever this be true that he is not bound to, nor may he dispute the
authority of the Justice of Peace, and whether his Warrant be lawful or not.
For if the Justice mistake, and go beyond his authority in the manner of
proceeding in a thing, wherein for the matter he has Conusance; As if he send
a Warrant to him to arrest any man for the Peace or good behavior, without any
cause; or to take a man for a Felony when none is done; yet in these and such
like cases the Officer is bound to execute it, and he shall be excused therein.
But if the thing whereabout the Warrant is, be such a matter as is out of the
jurisdiction of the Justice of Peace, and wherein he is no judge; As if he send
his Warrant to the Constable, to levy of the goods of J. S. 10. l. Debt, which
he does owe to him, or owe to another, and all this appears upon the Warrant
it self; That in this and such like cases, it is agreed, That the Officer may
refuse to execute it, and may (not without danger) obey it. And truly to me it
seems necessary we distinguish again between things apparent, and things
concealed, and between lesser and more notorious mistakes: and it is reasonable
to affirm, that if the mistake and error of the Justice of Peace be set down in
the Warrant and be gross and notorious; As if he send a Warrant to levy of a
man 10. l. because he has sworn an Oath; Or send his Warrant to one of these
Officers, to command him to sell the one half of the Goods of a man convict
before him for swearing. 6. Oaths, when perhaps these Goods may be worth 100.
l. or he send a verbal Warrant only, to one that is absent and out of his
presence; or send his Warrant to the Constable of the Parish of Dale, as
Constable of Dale, to levy a forfeiture upon an offender, for an offense in
Sale, out of his Precinct, or send his Warrant to a Constable, to carry J. S.
to Gaol, because he will not pay him a Debt he does owe him; That in these and
such like cases, the Constable is not bound to obey him, or execute it; nor
shall he be excused if he do it. But if the Justice of Peace, where he has
power to send a man to Prison after ten days, give Warrant to send him to
prison before the ten days be out: Or if by an Act of Parliament, he is
directed to send a Warrant under his hand and seal, send it only under his
hand, or contra: And where he is to send it to the Constables and
Churchwardens, he send is to the Constables or Churchwardens; or on the other
side, and in such like petit mistakes, it seems reasonable to me the Officer
should be excused, if he do execute it; for it is a very hard thing to require
of him an exact knowledge of the many Acts of Parliament, so variously and
incertainly penned herein, as belong to his Office; and he is in danger to be
punished if he do not execute the Justice of Peace Warrants. So that my advise
herein to the Officer is, to consider well of the Warrant; and if he find the
thing to be done, nothing but what is ordinary, and has been used to be done
by these Officers, he is to do it: but if it be to do any thing unusual,
new, strange, and extraordinary, to be well advised e're he do it. Coo. 10.
76. 6. 54. 14 H. 8. 16. Broo. F. Impr. 8.

And if a Justice of Peace send a general Warrant to an Officer, to carry J.
S. to Gaol, or to bring him before him, and express no cause why, it seems to
me reasonable in both these cases, the Officer in the doing hereof is
excusable. But if the Justice have not good cause for it, he may be sued for
it: And so perhaps he may be, though he have cause for the not expressing of it
within his Warrant.

If this Officer do arrest any man under Warrant.
pretense of a Warrant, let him be sure he have the Warrant first. For if the
Officer first arrest, and bring the man to the Justice, and then get a Warrant
to do it, this will not make the arrest lawful. 5. A Warrant of a Justice of
Peace by word of mouth, is as good in some Cases as a Warrant by writing: As if
a Riot, or other breach of the Peace, be in his presence, he may by word of
mouth command the Officers, or any other, to arrest the offenders, to find
Sureties of the good Behavior in the first, or Peace in the last Case; and if
they refuse to put in Sureties, he may by word of mouth command to convey them
to the Jail. But in other Cases he cannot give warrant to an Officer that is
absent and out of his presence; and if he send a Warrant by Message only to an
Officer to arrest a man and carry him to Jail, the Constable may refuse to do
it. 6. If any Warrant come from a Justice of Peace to one of these Officers, to
do a thing, the Officer himself must do it, and he cannot by word or writing
make a Deputy, or Deputy.
command another to do it, but he may call what aid he will. 7. In the
execution of these Warrants, he is to take great care that he follow the
contents of his Warrant, and not to exceed it, for that may be dangerous. And
yet this must be understood, that when any thing is commanded, all that does
necessarily conduce to the doing of that thing, and without which it cannot be
done, is commanded also; and therefore all that, and so much, may be done,
albeit it be not set down in express words in the Warrant. And it is said that
if a Warrant be made to J. S. and J. K. to arrest J. D. In this Case either of
them alone may make the Arrest. 8. A Constable or other Coo. 9. 69. 6. 54. 8
Ed. 4. 15. Dalt. J. P. 28.
sworn or known Officer (albeit he be not known to the party arrested) needs
not to show his Warrant to the man when he comes to serve it upon him, although
he demand it, but otherwise it is when he that is no Officer shall arrest a man
upon a Justice of Peace warrant, for he must show his warrant, and the sworn or
known Officer also must upon the arrest of the party declare the contents of
the Warrant to him. 9. A Constable or the Coo. 9. 69.
like Officer gives sufficient notice what he is, when he says to the Party,
I arrest you in the Arrest, what it is.
name of the Keepers of the Liberty of England etc. for this is an arrest in
Law, and therefore in this case the party arrested, at his peril, must obey,
though he know him not to be an Officer; for if he have no lawful Warrant, the
party grieved may hereupon have his Action of false imprisonment against him.
10. The Officer must take care that he take the very party named in the
Warrant, and not another; for if a Warrant be intended against J. S. (who is
the Delinquent) but it be sent against J. D. another man; in this Case the
Officer cannot arrest J. S. but must arrest J. D. 11. If the Prosecutor for the
Peace or good Behavior, after the Warrant sent, agree, yet the Officer must
execute his Warrant.

18. When any one of these Officers has Dalt. J. P. 292. Escape.
especially if the arrest be for matter of Felony; for in this Case, if he
willingly suffer him to escape, this offense is Felony in the Officer. And be
the cause of the Arrest whatsoever it will, if the Officer do willingly or
unwillingly, and negligently suffer him to escape, and do not take him again,
he shall be fined for it according to his offense, by the discretion of those
that shall be Judges of the cause; 11 H. 4. 25. Stamf. 35.
for Officers in these Cases may require what help they will. And lest any
Officer should flatter himself, that he may escape with an easy Fine; he is to
know that the Judges of his fault, may set his Fine equal to the value o^ all
his goods, if his offense so require. And if an Officer take a man upon a
Warrant from a Justice of Peace, and then lets him go, and takes his word
that he shall come again to him such a day, to go to the Justice of Peace,
Arrest.
and the party comes not; this is an escape in the Officer, for which he may
be punished, and the Officer (as it seems) cannot now arrest him upon this
Warrant. But if the party in this, or any such like Case, escape of his own
wrong, without the consent of the Officer, the Officer in a fresh pursuit may
take him again, albeit he be out of his sight and out of his Precinct, as is
before showed. Nineteenthly, Duty of the Jailer. 4 Ed. 3. 10. 11 Ed. 4. 7. Bro.
Faux. Impr. 24. 25. 27.
unto him, freely, and without taking any thing of them that bring him. But it
is said, that a Jailer is not bound to receive any Prisoner from an officer
immediately, but by a Justice of Peace Warrant. But it is not safe for a Jailer
to refuse such a Prisoner; for if a Constable may, and in some cases must, and
is bound by the duty of his place, to bring some Offenders to Gaol without any
Warrant of a Justice of Peace, (as he is) the Jailer is bound to receive them
so brought. And if a man be arrested for Felony, and the Constable carry him
to the Gaol, and the Jailer will not receive him, it is said the Constable must
bring him back to the Town where he was taken, and that the Town must be at the
charges of keeping him, until the next Jail-deliver. But howsoever the
Officer must look to him for fear of an escape: and in this case the best way
for the Officer, is, to get a Justice of Peace his Warrant to send the Prisoner
to the Gaol, and hereupon the Jailer doubtless will receive him. Twentiethly,
In what case an Officer maey set a Prisoner at liberty again. Fitz. Office of
J. P. 130.
These Officers, albeit they have power, in diverse cases before and after
showed to imprison a man; yet have they not power in any case to deliver a man
imprisoned again. And therefore if a Constable in case of an Affray commit an
Affrayor to the Prison, the Constable may not afterward set him at liberty
again: Or if he take a man upon a suspicion of Felony and he does afterward
perceive some cause to make him believe the party apprehended is Innocent in
the matter; yet may not the Constable deliver him, but he must continue in
Prison until he may be delivered by order of Law, either at the Sessions or
otherwise, as the cause shall be. And yet if an Officer shall only put the
Affrayors apart into the Stocks, or into some House or Room (as it seems he
may) until the hear be past; in this case the Officer of his own head may set
them at liberty again. 21. Every person that shall be Allowance. Charge of a
Prisoner.
sent to Gaol by a Justice of Peace, having means and ability of his own, must
bear his own charges to be levied of his Goods and Chattels by the Constable
upon a Warrant to him, sent by a Justice of Peace; and not having goods, then
to be born by the Parish where the Fellon is apprehended, by an indifferent
Assessment to be made by the Constables and Churchwardens, and two or more of
the Inhabitants, by allowance of a Justice What Pleas these Officers shall have
being said. 21 Jac. 12. 7 Jac. 5.
shall be sued for any thing done by them in the execution of their Offices; or
if any suit be brought against their Deputies, or any others which in their
aid or assistance, or by their commandment, shall do any thing touching
their Offices, this Action must be laid in the County where the thing was done;
otherwise the Defendant shall be found not guilty, howsoever the case be: And
in all Actions brought against them for the causes aforesaid, they need not
plead the special matter, but may plead the general issue, and give the
special matter in evidence. And if the Verdict upon trial pass with the
Officer, or the Plantiff be Nonsuit, or suffer his Action to be discontinued,
the Defendant shall recover his double costs sustained in Costs.
the said Suit. 23. These Officers, and all the rest hereafter named, must take
care that they take nothing of any man for any work they do in the Extortion.
execution of their office, more than is allowed them and is their due; for
this offense in them is extortion, and punishable by Fine and Imprisonment. 24.
These Officers, as well as other, Account.
are to give an account to the Parishoners of the moneys they do any way
receive: And this, if they refuse to do, they may no doubt be compelled unto
by the Justices of the Peace, at their Quarter Sessions. 25. And as touching
Expenses and disbursments of Officers.
of their Office, as for the carriage of Prisoners to Gaol, the conveying of
Rogues, and the like, whereby any special Act of Parliament they are to be
allowed it, or any thing toward it, and the means of recovering it is set
down; there they shall have the same allowance; and they must pursue that means
for the recovery of it. And so in all cases where the offender is sent to Goal
by a Justice, there is a means appointed by the Statute of 3 Jac. 10. by the
sale of the offenders Goods, or a Rate by the Parish as before. But in other
cases also, it seems very reasonable that they should be allowed it again from
the Parish: and if the Parish will not allow it, perhaps the Justices of Peace,
upon the complaint of the Officer, may devise some way, and doubtless they
will do what they can to relieve him. And therefore he is to call his
Neighbors, or as many as will come, and with them, or without them, if they
refuse make an equal Rate sufficient to pay all his necessary charges and
expenses in the doing of his Office; and it will be good to get a Justice hand
to it, if he can: and if any refuse to pay it, let him complain to the Justice
of Peace, who will either bind him that refuses to the Quarter Sessions, or
find some other way to bring him to reason. But as touching their ordinary
expenses, for meat, drink, etc. in their travells; for this it seems, there is
no remedy, but that the Officers themselves must bear it: Howbeit in these
things the custom of the place is to be continued.

SECT. 2. Of the Office of the High and Petit-Constable, about the Peace.
THe authority and duty of all these Officers, High-Constable, and
Petit-Constable, by the Common Law, consists much about the Peace of the
Commonwealth; and herein in three things. First, In foreseeing that nothing be
done that tends either directly or by means, to the breach of the Peace.
Secondly, in quieting or pacifying those that are occupied in the breach of the
Peace. And thirdly, In punishing such as have already broken the Peace.

And here, lest any man should be deceived Breach of the Peace, what it is.
in the not understanding what is meant by the breach of the Peace, it must be
known, That by the breach of the Peace is to be understood, not only that
fighting which we commonly call the breach of the Peace, but also that every
Murder, Rape, Manslaughter, and other Felony whatsoever, and every Affraying
or putting in fear the People of this Commonwealth, whether it be by unlawful
wearing of Armor, or by assembling of people to do any unlawful act, are
taken to be disturbances and breaches of the Peace.

For the better preventing of the breach of Warrant from a Justice of Peace, ex
officio, Against suspected persons, as Nightwalkers and the like. Stat. of
Winchester 13 Ed. 1. 4. 5 Ed. 5. 14. 13 H. 7. 10. Fitz. Office. J P. 200. 1 H.
7. 7 Bro. Tres. 432.
and of his own authority, by night or day, arrest suspected persons,
strangers, and others, that walk in the night, and sleep in the day, or haunt
Bawdy-houses, or other suspicious places; or shall do, or commit any outrage
or misdemeanor: For if a Constable be informed of a lewd man and woman that are
together and about to be incontinent and lewd, he may take with him so many of
his neighbors as he will, and arrest the same man and woman, or any such
disorderly person, and bring them to a Justice of Peace to be bound to the good
behavior. 2. And the better to apprehend such persons, Bawdrie.
they are to see and take care that Watch and Ward be duly kept. And for this,
these things are to be known. 1. None but Inhabitants of the same Town are
compellable to Watch and Ward. 2. It must be by men of discretion, Watch and
Ward Kitch. 47. 48. 49.
must be by turn, or by the house, according to the custom of the place. 4.
The Constable, ex officio, is to order it, and he may enlarge it as there is
occasion; but he cannot change the course of it at his pleasure, and make some
Watch, and excuse others. 5. If any neglect or refuse to do his duty, the
Constable may present this default at the Assizes or Sessions, or complain of
it to a Justice of Peace: And some hold the Constable may put him in the Stocks
for his contempt. 6. This Watch is from Assention to Michaelmas, and must be
from Sun to Sun; And the Warding then (in congruity of reason) must be the rest
of the twenty and four hours day. 7. These Watch and Wardmen, are to pose all
men, to arrest and secure till morning Rogues and others suspicious, and them
to bring to a Justice of Peace to be examined: Or, if they will, they Dalt. J.
P. 60. Winch. 13 Ed. 1. 4. 5 Ed. 3. 14. Hue and Cry.
may deliver them to the Constable, who must take care of them. And if any
resist them, and go away, they may send Hue and Cry after them: and upon this
any man may arrest them. 8. For default of this Watch and Ward the Township may
be punished. So that all that the Constable has to do in this case is, to
appoint it in an orderly way, who when, and how it shall be done, and to see it
be done; and if it be neglected to complain of it, and get it punished. The
Watchmen thus appointed, may have from the Constable these or the like
instructions, (viz.)

To keep the Peace amongst themselves; to Watchmans charge.
continue their Watch diligently until the Sun rising, without noise and
disturbance of the Inhabitants: That they abide and frequent the common
passages; but so as they have regard also to all other places: That they
examine all such persons as they shall see stirring, or shall pass by them,
what they be? and whence they come? whether they go; and the reason of their
late travel, or being abroad? and if cause of suspicion be found in them, to
stay them; if they obey not, but resist, to constrain them by force, and to
beat them, if it cannot be avoyed, for resisting the Peace of the Nation; if
they be too strong, or fly them, to levy Hue and Cry for the apprehending of
them, and to set them in the Stocks until the morning; and then to have them
before some Justice of Peace, to be dealt withal according to Justice: To
resort to such places where they behold any Candle or fire-light, to know the
cause; or where they here any noise of People especially in Taverns, Innes, and
Alehouses; and finding any there, to admonish them to depart; and refusing, to
compel them, as aforesaid. And if any unknown Person, hors-man or footman,
shall pass by them, or that shall drive any Cattle, Horse, or the like; or that
shall carry any burden on Hors-back, Cart, or otherwise, to stay them till the
morning to justify themselves, unless they can render good account, both of
themselves, their company, and carriage: And if any Post come by them, to know
what number they have, lest Offenders also pass under that pretense. And the
Constables are also to be aiding and assisting to these Watchmen upon all
occasions.

3. In an action of Trespass of an assult and Night-walkers
diverse Felonies committed in those parts where he dwelt; and he being watching
in his house came into the high street, where the Plantiff was at eleven of the
clock in the night; and the Defendant came unto him and laid his hands in
peaceable manner upon him to see his face, and when he perceived he was a true
man he left him and departed. And this was allowed to be a good justification;
for by the Statute of Winchester Watchmen may arrest Night-walkers, and may
appose them from whence they come, and what they be? Also any other man may
arrest Night-walkers, because it is for the good of the Commonwealth. 4. If
any Person whatsoever, except the Keepers of the Liberties, Servants and
Ministers of Against persons that ride armed or make Insurrection. 2 Ed. 3. 3.
2 R. 2. 13. Fitz. J. P. 202.
Justice in executing Precepts or their Offices, or such as shall assist them,
and except it be in pursuit upon Hue and Cry made to keep the Peace (and that
in places where Acts against the Peace do happen) shall be so bold as to go
or ride armed by night or by day, as to carry any Dags or Pistols; or to be
apparrelled with privy Coats or Doublets in any Faires, Markets, or any other
place to terrify the people; And if any do so, or if any great Assembly, Riot,
or Rumor be made in any outrageous manner, in nature of an insurrection. In the
first of these Cases the high-Constable or petty-Constable may, and must take
their Armer from them, and seize it to the Seize Arms. Arrest.
use of the Keepers of the Libertyes, and arrest the parties, and carry them to
a Justice of Peace, or (as it seems) to Gaol, there to abide during the
pleasure of the Keepers of the Liberties. And in the last of these Cases, they
may and must take with them the power of the Power of the County.
County, and suppress them, and arrest the Offenders, and carry them to a
Justice of Peace, or commit them to Prison till they put in Sureties Aid.
for their good behavior.

5. And if one man do threaten to kill another, Against him that does
threathen Murder. Fitz. Bar 202. 2 Ed. 4. 36. per. Briam, 3 H. 4. 9.
do, and he who is so threatened does complain to any one of these Officers
(being Officers of the place wherein the party threatening is abiding or does
dwell) and entreat him to arrest the party to find Sureties of the Peace: In
this case the Officer may and must arrest him forthwith to find Sureties; and
therefore carry him before a Justice of Peace; or being there, to get Sureties,
the Officer may presently carry him to Gaol. But some say that this threatening
must be in the hearing of the Constable, or else that he cannot do it. But if
the thing be true, it seems in both cases alike: And in such Cases the
Constable, if the party have no Sureties ready, may carry him to Jail, of his
own Authority.

2. As these Officers are to take care to prevent To suppress the breach
thereof in case of Affrayors. Fitz. J. P. 130. Lamb. J. P. 173. Dalt J. P. 28.
29. 22 Ed. 4. 35. 21 H. 7. 21. 13. H. 7, 10,
So are they to take care to suppress and alay it when it is: And therefore in
case of Affrayes, they are to labor carefully and speedily to appease them;
wherein these things are to be known. 1. If any of these Officers shall see a
man presently bent, and in fury going about to break the Peace, as by using of
hot words, or the like, by which an Affray is like to grow, he may, and must
straightly charge and command the Persons at debate, in the name of the Keepers
of the Liberties of England, to keep the Peace, etc. and to avoid upon pain of
imprisonment: And if there be nothing but words between the parties, it seem
the Constable can do no more but this, and may not lay hands on them, unless
they go further. But 2. If the parties at variance will not hereupon obey the
Officer, and depart, but go on further to threaten to beat, hurt, or kill, and
especially if either of them draw weapon, or give, or attempt to give any blow;
then the Officer may, and must keep them assunder by force; and for that
purpose, if there be need, may use his Aid.
his own weapon, amd may call and require others to help him, who at their
perils must do 21 H. 7. 21. Fitz. J. P. 130.
so. 3. And if the affrayors shall still proceed, and go from words to blows,
the Officer and his assistants may by force apprehend the Affrayors, and cause
them to render themselves, and put them in the Stocks, or in some other Prison
or place until the heat be past; or if it be in the night, until the morning;
or they may carry them unto the next Jail, or to a Justice of Peace. 4. If the
Affray be great and dangerous, the Officers may make Proclamation that the
Affrayors shall depart; and if they refuse or resist, they may commit them to
prison in the Stocks, or other fit place, till the heat Imprisonment.
be over, or that they can carry them to a Justice to find Sureties,
especially if any man be hurt in the Affray. 5. If the Officer, or 21 H. 7. 21.
Lamb J. P. 141. 142.
any of his Assistants in this service shall be hurt by the Affrayors, they
shall have good remedy against the Affrayors. But if the Affrayors be hurt by
the officers or their Assistants, in doing of their duty herein, the Affrayors
shall have no remedy against them: For if the Affrayors shall resist, and
refuse to obey the Officer; In Officer may beat, etc.
this case he may beat or wound them and Justify the doing thereof. And yet if
another man (that is no Officer) of his own head shall take upon him to part
Affrayors (as he may) and in the parting of them he hurt one of them; In this
Case he that is hurt shall have an actiof Trespass against him that did hurt
him. 6. If he that does make the Affray, when he does see the Officer coming to
arrest him, shall fly into a house, the Officer may in the Breaking open of a
house, lawful. Fitz. J. P. 130. Dalt. J. P. 28. 29. Lamb. J. P. 143. 144.
Arrest out of his Precinct.
fresh pursuit of him, break open the doors upon him to take him, and justify
it; and if he fly out of the Officers libery into another Hundred or Tything,
or into a Franchise in the same County, when he sees the Officer coming to
arrest him, the Officer may upon a fresh pursuit follow him, and take him
there; and so may he also where he does fly out of one County into another:
But in this last case, when the Officer does apprehend the party in another
County, he can do no more with him than a private man may do (viz.) carry him
before some Justice of the Peace of that County wherein he is taken, to cause
him there to find Sureties for the Peace. Eliz. J. P. 130.
7. If two men be fighting together, in either of their own or another man's
house (the doors being shut) in this case the Officer, if he cannot otherwise
get in, may break open the doors, to get in to keep the Peace, albeit neither
of the parties be hurt. 8. In these cases before, the Officer may and ought to
carry them before some Justice of the Peace, to find Sureties for the Peace,
because they have broken the Peace already, and are meet to be bound that they
shall not break it again. 9 Ed. 4 26. 10 Ed. 4. 17.
9. It is said that the Constable carrying the Affrayors to Jail, may himself
take bond of them, to the use of the Keepers of the Liberty, for the keeping of
the Peace (the which bond he is to certify into the Fxchequer or Chancery,
from whence the Process is to be made if the Peace be broken) and thereupon
deliver them; and that if they will not find Sureties, the Constable may
imprison them until they do find Sureties: But this is not used any where;
It is thererefore safe to carry them to a Justice of Peace. 10. When the
Officer does carry the Affrayor to Prison, or to a Justice of Peace, so that he
is bound over to appear at the Quarter Sessions, or Jail-delivery to answer it;
in these Cases the Officer must see then that he appear at the next
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, or the next Goale-delivery, there to object
against the Affrayor, as there shall be cause. 11. If one make an assault and
affray upon the 21 H. 7. 21. 5 H. 7. 7. 6. Lamb. J. P. 14. Fitz. J. P. 14.
Officer himself, he may take the Party and carry him to a Justice of Peace or
to prison, as he may in case of an Affray done upon another man. 12. If an
Affray be made in the presence of the Constable, and he do not his endeavor to
pacify it, he may be fined for it at the Sessions, according to the discretion
of the Justices: But if the Affray be in another place, and notice be given
thereof to the Constable, and he do not his best to pacify it, it is said he
shall not be fined for this: but let this be doubted, and Constables advised
not to trust to it, but to do their utmost to suppress all Affrays and keep
the public Peace every where within their Precincts. And in this Case every
private man, being present, and during the time of the Affray, may and must do
his best to quench and alay it. But he may not hurt or imprison the Affrayors
unless some man be hurt in the Affray.

3. For the duty of these Officers after the After the peace is broken.
Peace is broken. If the Peace be but newly and freshly broken by an Affray,
and the officer Bro. Faux. Imp. 6. Fitz. J. P. 131. Dalt J. P. 29. 38 Ed. 3. 6.
12. Ass. 56. 10 H. 7. 20. Poult de pace 13.
have notice of it, it has been said he may arrest the parties, and carry them
before a Justice of Peace, to find Surety for the Peace, because they have
broken the same already, and are meet to be bound that they shall not
thenceforth break it again: But it seems this is not Law at this day, for it
has been resolved that a Constable ex Officio, and without a Warrant from a
Justice of Peace, may not imprison any man for an assault or affray, except he
be present at the affray himself. In Skarrets Case, Hll. 37 Eliz. C B. But in
all Cases where an Affray is past, this Officer may by Warrant from a Justice
of Peace, take and imprison the Affrayors, and in case where Arrest.
one is hurt in the Affray, and thereby in peril of death, he may ex Officio,
and without any such Warrant arrest and imprison the Affrayors: For in this
Case when one has received a dangerous hurt in the affray, the officer after
the Affray is past, may and must arrest and imprison him that did the hurt till
he give Surety, to appear at the next Jail-deliver; or otherwise he may, with
less labor than to carry him to Jail, carry him to a Justice of Peace, who
ought to take such order as the party may give such Surety: For the Fact may
fall out to be Felony, if he that is hurt happen to dye within a year and a
day next after the hurt done. And if the Officer do not so, or suffer such a
Person to escape, he may be deeply fined for it. And in this Case also it is
said, that the officer may, after he has arrested him that gave the wound,
keep him a while in some other place out of the common Prison until it may be
known whether the party will live or not.

If Fellons or Murderers be in the Village, Against persons committing Felony,
or suspect of Felony. Fitz. J. P. 201. 1 R. 3. 3. Lamb. Office of Constable. 17.
them; it is their duty to gather men together, and to apprehend them: And if
any Fellon be taken, it is the Constables office to see him conveyed safely to
Gaol: And any other man, as well as an Officer may arrest and keep in hold such
a man as he does know to have committed any Felony. And as touching persons
suspect of Felony, it is said, That if any man does suspect any other man of
any Felony that he has committed, and do declare the same to any one of
these Officers, that thereupon he may, if the party suspect be within the
limits of his Office, arrest and bring him (and with him he shall do well to
bring the other party that did suspect him) to the Justice of Peace to be
examined. But as touching the arresting of another man upon the suspicion of a
third Person, it seems the Law is otherwise: For it is the opinion of the whole
Court, in the 17 Ed. 4. 5. 11 Ed. 4. 4. Bro. Faux. Impr. 24.
and in 5 H. 7. 4. That one cannot imprison another man upon the suspicion of a
third man for Felony, unless he himself have some cause of suspicion also. And
that one man, albeit he be an Officer, cannot justify the imprisonment of
another man susppcted by a third man, and at his commandment that does
suspect: And of this opinion was Mr. Justice Bridgman, and the whole Court of
the Marches of Wales. And therefore it was held there, that if I suspect a man
for Felony, and give notice hereof to the Constable, that he cannot arrest him
upon my suspicion. And yet when I have arrested him upon mine own suspicion,
and delivered him to the Constable, that in this case the Constable must look
to him at his peril. And if the Constable from this do receive a suspicion of
him (as he may) upon a fame or any flight report; I think it reasonable and
justifiable in him to arrest him. But as touching this matter, and for the
clearing of this point, these things are to be known.

1. That any one of these Officers, or any other 9 Ed. 4. 26. 17 Ed. 4. 5. 20
Ed. 4. 6. Bro. Faux. Impr. 27.
private person whatsoever, having cause to suspect another of a Felony
committed by Murder, or Theft, may himself arrest and apprehend such person
suspect; but herein he (whosoever he be) must take heed to three things. 1.
That there be a Felony committed, or at least confidently reported to be
committed; for otherwise there can be no good cause to suspect any man. 2. That
there be some cause to suspect the party arrested more than another. 3. That
after the arrest, the party that does arrest him, does carry him to a Justice
of Peace or to the common Jail, to the end that the party accused may be
Indicted or acquitted at the next Sessions, etc. Or if it be a private man that
does make the arrest, that he do deliver the party arrested to the Constables,
etc. of the place.

2. These, or any, or either of these, are Causes of suspicion of a man for
Felony. 29 Ed. 3. 39. 9. 4 H. 7. 4. 7 H. 4. 35. 27 H. 8. 21. 14 H. 8. 16. 2 H.
7. 15. 11* Ed. 3. 44. 21 H. 7. 27. Fi^z. J. P. 201. Numb. 9.
held to be sufficient causes of suspicion. 1. That the person suspect is
Indicted for the same Felony. 2. If the Felony be a Murder; that he was
present at the time of the Murder committed with a Sword drawn in his hand. 3.
That the person suspect, is a person of evil name; or is a Vagarant in the
Country where the Felony was done. 4. If the Felony be a Robbery, and the
party suspect is found with some part of the goods in his hands. 5. If one
apprehended for the same Felony, has taken his oath upon a Book, that the
party suspect is one of the Fellons. 6. That it is the common fame and report
of the Country, that the party suspect did the fact. 7. If the party suspect
does fly upon the Felony committed. 8. If there be a Hue and Cry, out against
the Fellon, and the person suspect and apprehended, is such a person as is
described by the Hue and Cry; or if the Felony be for stealing of Cattle, and
the party suspect is taken driving such Cattle as are set forth by the Hue and
Cry to be stolen: And yet hereby an honest man may be apprehended; for a Hue and
Cry may be raised where no Felony is done. But in this case he that raised it
may be punished, and he that does arrest the party is to be excused; or there
may be no other cause to suspect this man but the possession of the goods, and
he might come by them lawfully; howsoever this is cause enough to give him that
does arrest ground of suspicion. 9. If J. S. would have arresteh one that had
robbed him, and the party suspect forbid him, and says he shall not arrest
him; this is sufficient cause to make him to be suspected for an accessory. And
therefore in all these and such like cases a man may justify the arresting of
the party suspected.

3. What shall be said a sufficient cause of suspicion, Trial.
what not, and shall be tried by the Judges.

4. It is the duty of these Officers, to do their utmost endeavor, with all
diligence, to find out, and apprehend Fellons: And if there shall be herein
any neglect found in them (especially if it be for favor or reward) they may
be grievously punished. And for this Search.
cause they may, and they must after a Felony is done, either by, or without
the Warrant of some Justice of Peace, make diligent search for him that did it,
in all such places within their Braking of a house open, lawful.
it seems the Officer may break open the doors upon him to come in to search,
And so also it seems the Officer may search for goods stolen, as he may for the
Fellon himself that does steal them; and if the Officer, upon search, cannot
find the Fellon, it is his duty to raise a Hue and Cry and send him, directing
it to these Officers, whose duty it is carefully to Hue and Cry.
pursue them as soon as they receive them; and it is the duty of all other men,
being called upon by Officers, and at the Cry of the Country to be ready to
pursue and arrest Fellons, and upon the Hue and Cry any man may atrest him that
is taken with the things (be he never so honest) and he may deliver him and the
goods to the Constable of the Town to be kept safely.

5. If they be about to arrest any man suspected of Felony, they may require
the aid Aid.
and help of others, both to arrest and carry to prison the party suspected;
and the parties required must in this case help them at their peril.

6. If a private man arrest another man (as he may) upon his own suspicion, and
then deliver him to the Constable of the place, he 10 Ed. 4. 17. Fitz. J. P. 21.
must then look to him that he suffer him not to escape, at his peril, but
that he bring him, and the party with him that did arrest him, to Carrying of a
Prisoner to Ga^l^.
a Justice of Peace, or that he bring the party arrested to the Jail; for in
this case the Constable may not refuse to take charge of a Fellon so brought
unto him by another: And if there be no Constable of the place where the party
is apprehended, and the party that does arrest, does bring the prisoner to the
Constable of the next Parish, it seems this Constable, in this case, is bound
to take charge of him at his peril.

7. If a man fly for Fellonie, the Constable Seiz^re of Goods. Fitz. J. P. 201.
of the Village where his Goods are, must seize them, and keep them safe, and
not part with any of them, but so much only as is needful for the sustentation
of the Prisoner, and if the

8. An Action of Trespass was brought by a man for an Assault and Battery of
his Servant, whereby he did lose his service three days, and the Defendant
pleaded that A was robbed at midnight of Goods to the value of two pounds,
whereupon the said A came to the Constable, and prayed him to search for the
Search.
suspicious persons, and to apprehend and arrest them; and accordingly he did
search, and Arrest.
found the same servant walking suspiciously in the street in the night, and
therefore he would have arrested him, but the said servant fled, and would not
yield to the arrest; and the Defendant, by the Constables commandment pursued
and took him. This was adjudged a good Plea in Bar: For when a Felony is
committed, the Constable, or any others, upon suspicion of persons that are
suspicious, may arrest them; and if they will not yield to the arrest, but
assault him or them that does arrest him, they may justify the beating of him,
for that he does resist the Peace Beating justifiable. Hue and Cry. 29 Ed. 3 9.
Pulton de Pace 12. 5 H. 7. 4.
and Justice of the Commonwealth, when he does forcibly strive to fly, and
not to be justified by it. If a Hue and Cry be levied and pursued, that a Horse
of such a color or mark; so many Beasts of such a sort, or age; or so many
Sheep of such a brand be stolen, and Hue and Cry accused him, he must be by a
course of Law again acquitted and discharged: And in this case, he that is so
taken shall not have an Action of Trespass, Fals-imprisonment, Arrest.
or other remedy, against him that pid apprehend him, or against the Constable
to whom he was committed, albeit he be afterward acquit of the Felony. In an
Action of Fals-imprisonment, the Defendant pleaded, 27 H. 8. 13.
That there was a Felony done, and he suspected the Plaintiff to have done it;
and therefore he arrested him: In this case this was held no good Plea; for he
should have showed some ground and cause of his suspicion. And in an Action of
fall-imprisonment it is no Plea for the Defendant to plead, That it was told
him, that the Plaintiff had brought the Cattle to the Town, and put them in a
blind corner, and that there was great cause of suspicion that the Plaintiff
had stolen them, whereupon he did arrest him: for suspicion only, without a
Felony committed, is no cause to arrest another. And in an Action of
false-imprisonment the Defendant pleaded, That J. S. was poisoned, and that the
common voice and fame of the Country was, That the 5 H. 7. 4. 2 H. 7. 15. 11
Ed. 4. 4.
Plaintiff had poisoned him; whereupon the Defendant apprehended the Plaintiff,
and committed him to prison as was lawful for him to do. And this was
adjudged a good Plea in Bar of the said Action; for common voice and fame of
the Country is cause of suspicion of Felony when a Felony is committed: but
when there is no Felony done, it seems this is not cause sufficient to warrant
the arresting of such a person. And yet, as before it appears, the accusation
of a man (where no Felony in truth is done) by Hue and Cry, is cause
sufficient to warrant the arresting of such a person as is described by the Hue
and Cry. In an Action of Fals-imprisonment the Defendant did plead, That before
the imprisonment, A. B. was slain at C. and that the Plaintiff was in the 7 H.
4. 10. Dyer 276.
company of those who killed him, at the time of the Felony committed, and the
common voice and fame of the Country at C. was, that the Plaintiff was party
to the Felony; whereupon the Defendant finding the Plaintiff at C. arrested
him for suspicion of Folony, and committed him to the Sheriff, etc. and this
was allowed a good and sufficient Plea.

9. If a man do assault another in, or neet Imprisoning him that does attempt
to rob. Fitz. Bar. 202. 2 Ed. 4. 26. Numb. 13. Carrying one to a Justice or to
Jail.
the highway, to rob him, and he that does make this assault, is taken and
brought to the Constable of the place: In this case the Constable must take him
to his ward, and carry him before a Justice of Peace to give sureties for his
good behavior. In an Action of Trespass of Assault and Battery, and
Fals-imprisonment the Defendant pleaded, That the Plaintiff lay in wait in a
highway, to rob such persons as traveled that way, and assaied to rob one L.
and drew his sword, and commanded the same L. to deliver his purse, whereupon
L. fled, and levied Hue and Cry, and this Defendant be ing traveling that way,
pursued the Plaintiff, and took him, and committed him to the Constable Arrest.
to be put in the Stocks, who did it accordingly: and this was adjudged a good
justification; for every man may arrest him that does a Felony, or him who
makes it apparent that he does intend and go about to commit a Felony, for
that he does thereby manifest himself to be a principal breaker of Law and
Peace of the Nation.

10. The Constable is to levy Hue and Cry Hue and Cry.
when there is cause, and to send it East, West, North, and South; and it is
best to express in the Hue and Cry, the nature of the thing stolen, color, and
marks, and to describe the number of Fellons, their Horse, Apparel, etc. And
this Officer receiving a Hue and Cry after a Fellon, must, with all speed, make
diligent pursuit, with Horse and Foot, after the offenders from Town to Town
the way it is sent, and make diligent search in his own Town: And the Constable
and Hundred both may be punished for neglect herein. And all other men must
hereupon be industrious to take them. Hitherto for the most part we have showed
you nothing but what is of the primitive and immediate authority and duty of
these Officers, and what they may and must do, ex Officio, without any
commandment or authority from others. But for as much as a great part of their
duty (especially concerning the Peace) rests in making of due execution of
the Precepts of higher Officers, and especially of the Justices of Peace, who
be (as it were) immediately set over them: We are therefore in the next place
to show you some part of that which they are to do in that behalf.

Albeit these Officers be subject to the commandments In executing of the
Precepts of others.
of the justices of Gaole-delivery, of Oyer and Terminer, and of some higher
Justices; yea, and to the Precepts of Sheriffs, Lamb. Constable. off. Numb. 14.
Coroners, and Stewards of Leets, and of other Officers in some certain Cases:
yet because they are called upon most commonly by the Justices of Peace, so as
at this day their Office is for the most part conversant about the execution of
their Warrants: For if the Justice of Peace does understand by complaint, that
any man has stolen or slain, or any Servant or Laborour without License has
departed out of his Masters service; or any that lives idly or suspectedly,
knowing once in what Parish he is, he does write to any one of these Officers,
to command him to bring this person before him, and then he does examine him,
and if he find cause, he does commit him to some Constable or Officer to
convey him to the Jail, there to abide till the Justices meet at their
Quarter Sessions, or at their Gaole-delivery, that the Law may either condemn
or acquit him: And to these Precepts these Officers ought especially to show
themselves obedient, and then also especially when their Aid is called for, to
suppress Ryots, unlawful Assemblies, and such like notorious breaches of the
Peace. And 1. howsoever it be so, that if a Fello^. Search. Dalt. J. P. 289.
man have Goods stolen, and he does suspect that such a man has stolen them, and
he complain thereof to the Constable, so that now the most part the Constable
not knowing his authority, or the danger, is so fearful and remiss herein,
that he does nothing until he have a Warrant of a Justice of Peace to provoke
and enable him so to do. And if such a Warrant be sent to him from a Justice
of Peace, to search Search.
after Goods stolen and the party that is suspected to steal them; the Constable
may, and must execute this Warrant accordingly. 2. If a Warrant come to any of
these Officers, from a Justice of Peace, to bring such a man before him, to
give Sureties for the Peace or Good-behaviour: In this Case the Officer cannot
make a Deputy, or command another to do it, Deputy. Dalt. J. P. 290, 291.
Dalt. J. P. 291. Coo. 5. 59. Broo. Faux. Impr. 2. Warrant.
but he may require the aid of others to help himself in the doing of it. 3. If
a Warrant be directed to this Officer from the Justice of Peace, to bring any
person before some Justice of the Peace of the County, for the Peace or
Good-behaviour, and the cause (as it ought to be) is set down in the Warrant:
In this Case the duty of the Officer is first to find out the party; and
having found him, to require him in the name of the Keepers of the Liberty of
England to go with him to a Justice of Peace to put in security according to
the Warrant: The which if he refuse or delay to do, or if he offer to ^un away
from him or resist him, then must the Officer forthwith arrest him and convey
him to the Prison (if the Warrant Arrest.
be so, as usually it is) or put him in some Stocks until he can conveniently
have strength to go with him, without carrying him to Stocks.
a Justice of Peace; and then must the party remain in Prison until he shall
voluntatily offer and find Sureties, according to the Warrant And if the
party, upon the first demand thereof made by the Officer, do yield to go and
find Sureties, then may not the Officer absolutely arrest him: And if he be
obstinate and will not yield to the Officer, but resist him, the Officer may
justify the beating Beating.
or hurting of him. And of this Warrants execution and of his proceedings upon
it, the Officer must give an account to the Justices of the Peace at their next
Sessions of the Peace. And if the party does yield to go to a Justice of Peace
to give Surety, according to the Warrant, but will not go to the same Justice
that made the Warrant, but to some other Justice he does name; herein the
Officer may, if he please, suffer him to have his will, howbeit in this case
the Law does give the election to the Officer, and he may bring the party
before what Justice of Peace he please: And yet if the Warrant be to bring the
party before the same Justice of Peace that made it: In this case the Officer
must bring him before the same Justice, and cannot bring him before any other.
And if the party being before the Justice of Peace, refuse to give Surety
according to the Warrant, and the Warrant have words of authority to the
Officer, to carry him to the Gaol (as most commonly every Warrant has) then
Carrying to Jail.
may the Officer carry him to prison without any new Warrant from the same or
any other Justice of Peace so to do. And in these Cases also the Officer is to
consider whether the Warrant do come directly from the mere authority of the
Justice of Peace, or else be grounded on a Writ of Supplicavit, sent down from
the Warrant.
higher authority (which difference ought to appear in all well made Warrants:)
For if the Warrant be grounded on such a Writ, then may the Officer compel the
party to go to the very same Justice or Justices of Peace that made the same
Warrant, or else he may carry Dalt. J. P. 137.
him to Jail. Neither is it requisite in this case, that the Officer should
dance up and down after the party until he can find out Sureties, but he may
detain the prisoner until he can 5 Ed. 4. 6.
bring Sureties to the Officer. And the Officer that does arrest a man upon
such a Warrant of the Peace or Good-behaviour, must see that he do afterward
bring the party to the Justice of Peace to give Sureties, or to the Gaol; for
if he do not so, he may be punished for it by fine at the Sessions; and as it
seems also) by Action of Fals-imprisonment; at the suit of the party arrested.
And if the party against whom such a Warrant is granted, hearing thereof,
Westminster, and so has a Supersedeas out of Supersedeas.
the Chancery, upper-Bench, or from any Justice of the upper-Bench, or from any
Justice of Peace of that County, directed to all the Officers of the County to
discharge the same Surety of the Peace or Good-behaviour, and he has the same
ready to show to such Officer as shall come to him with the Warrant, as Arrest.
aforesaid, and does show and deliver the same to him when he is about to
execute the same Warrant: In this Case the Officer is not to meddle with him:
For if the Officer shall require the party to obey the arrest, he may refuse
it; and if the Officer shall arrest the patty, he may have an Action of
False-imprisonment against the Officer for it. And by this Supersedeas the
Officer is discharged of any duty touching the Warrant of the Justice of Peace
directed to him: But let the Officer see that he keep his Supersedeas safe for
his discharge, if he be questioned for not serving the Warrant. And it is not
amiss for him to give notice of the same to the Justice of Peace from whom he
received the commandment of service, that thereby he may see the cause why the
same was not done. But in these Cases some say that another Justice of Peace
cannot discharge the Warrant of the first Justice of Peace, until the party be
bound indeed. Howbeit if such a Supersedeas come to the Officer that has the
Warrant to arrest; it seems that by this he is discharged, and that he is to
obey the Supersedeas especially, if he know not whether the party have given
Bond or not.

Hitherto we have spoken of the Office of these Officers, set forth by the
ancient common Laws of the Nation. And now we come to speak of the same as it
is enlarged by diverse Statutes, wherein also we shall find the same difference
we had before: That by the same Statutes they are required and enabled to do
something as of their own authority, and without any commandment or authority
from ^^hers: and other things they are required and enabled to do when they
have commandment from the Justices of Peace, or some other superior power, so
to do.

SECT. 3. Of the Office of the High-Constable and Petit-Constable against
Prophaners of the Lord's Day.
FOR the better understanding of their Duty herein, these things are to be
known. 1. This day is by every one to be sanctified and kept holy; and men must
be careful herein to exercise themselves in the duties of Piety and true
Religion, publicly and privately; and every one on this day (not having a
reasonable excuse) must diligently resort to some public place where the
service of God is exercised, or must be present at some other place, in the
practice of some Religious duty, either Prayer, Preaching, Reading, or
Expounding the Scriptures, or conferring upon the same. 2. None may on this day
meet out of their own Parish at any sports whatsoever, nor may they meet within
their own Parish for Boar-bayting, Bull-Bayting, Enterludes, or other unlawful
exercises, under pain to forfeit three shillings four pence for every offense,
to be levied by distress and sale of Goods, and for lack of distress, to sit
three hours in the Stocks: Nor may any one on this day keep or be present at
any Wrestlings, Shootings, Bowlings, Ringing of Bells for pleasure, Masque,
Wake, Church-Ale, Dancing, Games, Sport or Pastime whatsoever, under pain to
forfeit five shillings, if he be above fourteen years old; and twelve pence by
him that has the government of him, if he be under fourteen years old, to be
levied by distress and sale of Goods; and if no distress be to be had, to sit
in the Stocks three hours. 3. No Carrier may go with his Horses, no Waggoner,
Carter, or Wain-man may go Carryers.
with his Cart, Wagon, or Wain, or Drover with his Cattle, on this day, under
pain to forfeit twenty shillings for every offense, to be levied by distress
and sale of his Goods, if he be questioned within six weeks after the offense
done. But there shall be but one twenty shillings forfeited for one journey,
although he pass through twenty Parishes, and this twenty shillings that Parish
shall have where the distress is first taken. 4. No Butcher may kill Butchers.
or sell any victuals on this day, under pain to forfeit six shillings eight
pence, if it be questioned within six weeks after the offense done, to be
levied by distress and sale of Goods. 5. None may Cry, show forth, or put to
sale Tradesmen.
any Wares, Merchandises, Fruits, Herbs, Goods, or Cattle, on this day, unless
it be in an Inn, or Victualing-house, and for such as cannot otherwise be
provided for; and unless it be the crying and selling of Milk before nine in
the morning, and after four in the afternoon, from the tenth of September to
the tenth of March, and for the rest of the year before eight in the morning,
and after five in the afternoon, under pain to forfeit the things so cried or
offered to sale. 6. None may on this day, without good cause by allowance of
one Travellors.
Justice of Peace, travel, under pain to forfeit ten-shillings; nor carry any
burden, nor do any worldly labor, under pain to forfeit five shillings, both
these forfeitures to be levied by distress and sale of Goods: and if no
distress to be had, to sit in the Stocks three hours. 7. None may on this day,
or the days of Humiliation, Drinking, Tippling.
or Thanksgiving, use Dancing, profanely Singing, Drinking, or Tippling in any
Tavern, Inn, Alehouse, or Tobacco-house, nor be there: Or grind any Corn at
a Mill, but upon cause to be allowed by one Justice of Peace, under pain to
forfeit ten shillings a piece, both he that is in the Inn, and he that keeps
the Inn, the Millar and he that owes the Corn, to be levied by distress or
sale of Goods; and for lack of distress, to be set six hours in the Cage or
Stocks. 8. No Traveller, Carryer.
Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, Drover, or their Servants, shall come into their
Inn or Lodging on Saturday night after twelve a clock; Nor go from thence
Monday morning before one a clock, without necessary cause to be allowed by one
Justice of the Peace, under pain of the forfeiture of ten shillings by the
Inne-keeper, and ten shillings by the Traveller, and to be levied by distress
and sale of Goods; and for lack of distress to sit six hours in the Stocks or
Cage. 9. None may execute Serving of Process.
any Writ, Order, or Warrant on this day, days of Humiliation or
Thanksgiving, but in case of Treason, Felony, breach of the Peace, and
profanation of the day, under pain to forfeit five pounds, to be levied by
distress and sale of Goods; and for want of distress, to sit six hours in the
Cage or Stocks, and the serving of the Process is void. 10. None (but Coaches,
Boats.
in case allowed by one Justice, or for Gods Service) may travel with a Boat,
Wherry, Lyter, Barge, Horse, Coach, or Sedan, on this day, under pain of
forfeiture of ten shillings by him that is carried, and five shillings by him
that does carry, to be levied by distress and sale of Goods; and for lack of
distress to sit six hours in the Stocks or Cage. 11. All Constables,
Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Governors of Companies of Watermen,
Officers.
and other Officers, must, upon sight and knowledge or information of any of
these offenses before named committed, seize and secure Seize Goods.
the Goods and Wares cried, showed forth, or put to sale, and make diligent
search for the discovering, finding out, and punishing Search.
of the offenders, under pain of twenty shillings, to be levied by distress and
sale of Goods, and this punishment they must (as it seems) endeavor, by
carrying the offender to a Justice of Peace.

And this, it seems, is hereby lawful to be done by one of these Officers ex
officio, and without a Warrant, hearing or seeing any one profane this day, by
any of the particular offenses aforesaid. Also if a Warrant be sent to the
Constables, Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish or place,
to levy the forfeitures, or to inflict the punishment aforesaid, they must
pursue their Warrant, and do it under pain of twenty shillings forfeiture.
Stat. 1 Car. 1. 3 Car. 1. Ordin. 6. April 1644. Act 19. April 1650.

SECT. 4. Of the Office of High-Constables and Petit-Constables, against
Swearers.
AS touching this, these things are to be premised. 1. The former Act is
repealed. 2. Every one that swears is to forfeit for the first offense as
follows. The Lord and all above him in degree thirty shillings: The Barronet
or Knight twenty shillings: The Esquire ten shillings: The Gentleman six
shillings eight pence: Any other Man or Woman, single or married, three
shillings four pence: And for every offense afterward, twice as much. And for
the tenth offense, being proved by verdict or confession, he is to be bound
with Sureties to the Good-behaviour for three years: And for lack of payment or
giving security, to pay it, and distress to levy it. If he be above twelve
years old, he is to sit by the heels in the Stocks three hours for the first
offense, and six hours for every offense after: If under twelve years, he is to
be whipped by the Constable, or Master, or Father, in his presence. 3. Swearing
after the Surety for the Good-behaviour given, is a breach of the Bond. 4. Any
Officer, Constable, Churchwarden, or Overseer of the Poor, may, ex officio,
that hears it, bring the offender to a Justice to be punished. And if any one
Justice of Peace send his Warrant to any high-Constable or petit-Constable, to
do execution upon this Statute, they are to see it done accordingly. 5. He
that is sued for doing any thing on this Law, may plead the general issue, and
if it go Pleading. Costs.
with him, shall recover treble cost. Act. 22. Junii 1650.

SECT. 5. Of the Office of the High-Constable and Petit-Constable against
Adulterers and Incontinent Persons.
FOR the knowledge hereof take these things. 1. If any shall marry or have the
carnal knowledge of the body of his or her Grandfather or Grandmother, Father
or Mother, Brother or Sister, Son or Daughter or Grandchild, Father or
Mothers Brother or Sister, Fathers Wife, Mothers Husband, Sons Wife,
Daughters Husband, Wifes Mother or Daughter, Husbands Father or Son, and
confess it within twelve months after, or if it be found by verdict before
Justices of Assize and the Peace, it is Felony wherein is no Clergy. 2. If any
married Woman whose Husband have not been three years absent beyond Sea, or by
common report reputed to be dead, or three years together from her, and she
does not know him to be alive, shall be carnally known by any but her Husband,
except she be ravished, it is Felony, and both Man and Woman shall dye without
Clergy. 3. If any shall carnally know any unmarryed Maid, or Widow, they both,
if they confess it, or it be found by verdict, shall be committed to the
common-Goale, without bail, for three Months, and until they respectively
give security before some Justice to be of Good-behaviour for one year: the
second offense is Felony without Clergy. 4. If any man or Woman be committed
for a common Bawd or keeping a common Bawdy House, for his first offense he is
to be openly whipped, set in the Pillory, and marked with a hot Iron in the
forehead with this letter B, and then sent to Prison or Bridewell for three
years, without bail, and until they give surety for their Good behavior for
life. The second offense is Felony without Clergy. Act 10. May. 1650. and 9.
Aug. 16. 8. 5. No party to be believed against the other, not Husband against
the Wife, nor Wife against Husband. 6. If any of these Officers be informed
that a Man or Woman be committing of Adultery or Fornication together, he may,
and ought to take company with him; and if he find it so, he may arrest them
and carry them both to prison, till they give surety of their good behavior.
7. If any Warrant come from a Justice of Peace to any one of these Constables,
to apprehend 1 H. 7. 7. 13 H. 7. 10.
any such lewd person, that he may put in sureties for his good behahiour, he
must execute it duly, according the contents thereof.

SECT. 6. Of the Office of the High-Constable and Petit-Constable in common,
about Rogues.
IT is the duty of all these Officers to punish Rogues and Vagabonds: As
touching this part of their Office, two things are to be known. 1. What a Rogue
is, and who is to be accounted Against Rogues and Vagabonds. 39 El^z. 4. 1 Jac.
7. Dalt. J. P. 96. Lamb. J. P. 192. 39 Eliz. 17. Who a Rogue is.
a Vagabond. Secondly, What is to be done unto him.

As touching the former of these, these things are to be known, that all the
persons hereafter mentioned, being above the age of seven years, and offending
as hereafter is mentioned, shall be adjudged Rogues, or at the least shall be
punished as Rogues (viz.)

1. All persons going about begging, upon any tellers, or Juglers, or using any
such crafty Science. Thirdly, Stage Players declared to be Rogues, and to be
punished by Ord. Feb. 1647. 4. All persons that be, or utter themselves to be
Proctors, Procurers, Patent-gatherers or Collectors for Gaoles, Prisons or
Hospitalls. And yet Pattent-gatherers for fire, or the like, albeit perhaps
they may be within the words of the Statute, yet are they not had or reputed as
Rogues, nor so to be dealt with; for such Patents are always made with a non
obstante the Statute. 5. All Fencers, Beare-wards and Minstrels, wandering
abroad. 6. All Tinkers, Pedlers, and petty-Chapmen, and also Glasse-men, that
wander up and down the Country to sell Wares: But if they be going to a Fair
or Market only, they are not to be taken as Rogues. 7. All wandering Persons and
common Laborers, being Persons able in Body, using loytering, and refusing to
work for such reasonable wages as is taxed, or commonly given in such parts
where such persons shall dwell or abide, not having living otherwise to
maintain themselves; and yet such persons as be of any Parish, and have able
bodies to work, and do not wander abroad out of the Parish, though they refuse
to work for the wages given or taxed, are not to be sent to their place of
birth or last habitation, etc. but to the house of Correction. 8. All poor
Lamb. J. P. 97.
persons that are appointed to ask relief in the Parish where they dwell, by
the Overseeers thereof, if they shall beg in any other sort than is so
appointed them, or shall beg by the highways, though in their own Parish. And
yet these persons are not to be sent to their place of birth or out of the
Town, except it be to the house of Correction; and so also it seems of all
other persons that beg in the Parish where they dwell, without the appointment
of the Overseers; in these cases they are to be sent to the house of
Correction. 9. All persons (not being Fellons) wandering and pretending
themselves to be Egyptians, or wandering in the habit, form or attire of
counterfeit Egyptians. 10. All such persons, as being punished for Rogues, and
having a testimonial, through their own default shall not pursue the order
appointed by the Testimonial aforesaid; for so often as they shall break the
same, they are to be taken and whipped again, until they come to the place
appointed them by the Testimonial. 11. All such poor persons diseased and
impotent that (being Licenced) travel from their home to the City of Bathe or
Town of Buxton, to the Baths, for ease of their griefs, or from thence homeward
that shall beg; or if such persons be not lycenced by two Justices, or shall
not return home again according as they are limited by their License, or shall
not be provided of relief for their travel. 12. All Soldiers or Mariners that
shall beg or shall counterfeit any Certificate from their General or Governor
(but this in some cases is Felony, Stat. 39 Eliz. 17.) And yet it has been
held that if a Sea-fating man suffering Shipwreck, or a poor Soldier or
Mariner, not having wherewith to relieve himself in his travel homewards, and
having a Testimonial under the hand of some one Justice of Peace, of, or near
the place where he landed, setting down therein the place where, and the time
when he landed, and the place of the parties dwelling and birth, whither he is
to pass, and a convenient time for his passage, that if in this time and way
they had begged, that they were not to be accounted Rogues; But it seems the
Law, at this day, is taken by most men to be otherwise, and that this License
will not serve for the Soldier or Mariner (especially if he be hurt or maimed)
for then he may and ought to be relieved with money by every Treasurer of the
County where he passes (viz) a convenient sum of money to carry him through
the same, to the next County. And it is thought that at this day, no Justice of
Peace can license a man to beg in any case; Howbeit in some cases he may
license a man to wander, as in the cases before. The Justices of Peace may
license poor men to travel to the Baths, and poor Soldiers and Mariners to
travel to their place of birth, and one Justice of Peace may license a
Labourer in the Harvest time to go out of his own Country into another
Country to work; And therefore if at this day a Soldier or Mariner shall be
taken begging, or shall counterfeit a Certificate, Dalt. J. P. 92.
he is to be accounted a Rogue. 13. A Rogue, etc. That shall go with a
general Pasport (viz.) such a Pasport which is not directed from Parish to
Parish, is still to be accounted a Rogue, and may be punished, by whipping
again, and so also may such a Rogue as shall carry his own Pasport without a
Guide. 14. All Servants departing out of service without a Testimonial, etc.
or which shall be taken with any counterfeit 5 Eliz. 4.
or forged Testimonial. 15. All persons 7 Jac. 4.
that are able to labor, and thereby to relieve themselves and there Families,
and shall run 1 Jac. 31.
away, or threaten so to do, and to leave their Families to the Parish^ 16.
And all persons infected of the Plague, and commanded by any of these Officers
to keep in their Houses, that do notwithstanding go abroad amongst their
Neighbors. What is to be done to him.


2. As touching the latter question, what is to be done to a Rogue these things
are Numb. 2.
to be known. 1. Every one of these Officers 39 Eliz. 4. 1 Jac. 7.
must do his best endeavor to apprehend every one of these Vagabonds, Rogues,
or sturdy Beggars which shall be found and taken Begging, Vagarant wandering or
misordering themselves within their Hundred, Parish, or Tything. And if any
other man bring any such Person to any of these Officers, he must take hold of
him. 2. After he has apprehended any such Rogue (except it be the Rogue that
does run or threaten to run from his Family) he is to take order (with the advice of the Minester and one of the Parishoners of the place) that he be
stripped naked from the middle upwards, and that he be openly whipped until
his or her body be bloody. 3. After this whipping the party must have a
Testimonial subscribed with the hand, and sealed with the seal of the same
officer and Minister testifying that the same person has been punished
according to this Statute, and mentioning the day and place of his other
punishment, and the place whereunto such person is limited to go, and by what
time the said person is limited to pass thither at his peril after this manner.

John a Style a sturdy Vagarant Beggar (of low personage, red haired, and
having the nail of his right Thumb cloven, aged forty years, was this sixth
day of April An. Dom. 1650. openly whipped at W. in the County of Gloucester
for a wandering Rogue, according to the Law, and is assigned to pass forthwith
from Parish to Parish by the Officers thereof, the next strait way to Sale, in
the County of Essex, where (as he confesses) he was born [or dwelled last by
one whole year and if the case be such] and be is limited to be at Sale
aforesaid, within ten days now next ensuing at his peril. Given under the
Hand and Seal of A. B. Minister of the said Parish of W. and of C. D.
Constable of the said Parish.

And this Testimonial must be Registered in a Book provided for that purpose by
the same Minister under pain of five Shillings. 4. The party must be then
forthwith sent by the same Officer to the next Parish that from thence he may
be conveyed from Parish to Parish by the Officers of the same Parishes, the
next straight way to the Parish where he was born, if the same may be known by
the parties confession or otherwise: And if the same may not be known, then to
the Parish where be or she last dwelled by the space of one year before the
time of the same punishment done, there to put him or her self to labor, or
not being known where he or she last dwelt or was born, then to the Parish
where he or she last passed through without punishment and thence to be
conveyed from Officer to Officer to the house of correction of the limit
wherein that Parish does stand, or to the Gaol of the County. And in these
cases it is the duty of these Officers also, to take and convey these persons
from hand to hand, each of them from his own to the nex Tything accordingly:
And in this time they are not to beg but are to be provided for at the charge
of the Parishes through which they are conveyed, the Officer laying out the
same for the Parish. And upon this part because the execution of these Laws is
required in these Officers, for their better direction herein these things
(said to be resolved by the Judges at Westminster soon after the making of the
Statute of 39 Eliz. 4.) are to be observed. 1. If a Rogue say he was born at
such a place and it cannot appear that he was born elsewhere, he must be sent
thither. 2. If the Husband or Wife have a house, and the Husband or Wife rogue
about, they ought to be sent to the Town where the house is, and so of an
Inmate. 3. The Wife and Children under seven years of age being Vagarant must
go and be placed with the Husband, and if the Husband be dead, then with the
Wife, where she was born or dwelt. And the Vagarant Children above seven years
of age must be sent to the place of their Birth: And if the Vagarant Parents
with their Children under seven years, be placed at the place of Birth of the
Parents, or at the place of last dwelling (as the case shall fall out) i^
afterward the Parents or either of them dye, or run away, yet the Children
once settled must remain there still, and may not be sent to their place of
Birth though after they grow to the age of seven years. 4. The wife being a
Vagarant Rogue, ought to be sent to the Husband, though he be but a Servant in
another Town. 5. The Rogue whose place of Birth or dwelling cannot be known,
having Wife or Children under seven years of age; they must go with the
Husband to the place where they were last suffered wilfully to pass through
without punishment, where the Children must be relieved with the work of their
Parents, though their Parents be committed to the house of Correction. 5. If
any of these Officers do not their utmost endeavor to take, punish, and
convey such Rogues according to the Statute, they forfeit ten Shillings for
every default; and if any other man shall bring any such Rogue to the Officer,
and he refuse to take and punish him as aforesaid, he does forfeit twenty
Shillings for every time he so does; and if any man hinder the punishment or
conveyance of Rogues after this sort, as if any man shall make rescues against
any person authorized for the execution of this Statute, or any man convey
Rogues by a general Pasport, without conveying them from Parish to Parish, or
if any Constable will not receive a Rogue when he is brought to him in the
right way, according to his pass, or if he accept him and do not convey him to
the next Officer; for every of these offenses, the offender does forfeit five
pounds, and is to be bound to the good Behavior; and if the Rogue be brought
and delivered, or offered to the Churchwardens or Overseers of the poor, or
either of them (to whom he is to be offered) they must accept him and look to
him, or else they do forfeit for every default herein five pound, and they are
to be bound to the good Behavior; and if these Officers do take him, it seems
they may deliver him over to the Constable presently. For, it seems the Rogue
is to be delivered or offered to the Churchwardens and Overseers (who are to
see him relieved there) but he is to be carried and conveyed by the Constable;
and yet if the Constable will not receive him at their hands, the
Churchwardens and Overseers themselves must, at their peril, see him conveyed
to the next Parish. 6. Constables are not to post away such persons as shall
come or be sent unto them, that are desperately sick, or women with child,
ready to be delivered, but are to keep such till they recover strength, for by
this means many have perished; neither are they to deliver any Vagabonds or
Cripples to the next Constables, after Sunset, or to convey such, especially
Cripples, by horse or cart upon the Lords day, upon pain of punishment. 7. If
any of these Rogues shall appear to be dangerous Incorrigible Rogues.
to the inferior sort of people of the place, as if he shall threaten, or
offeer any violence to them, or will not be reformed by this means of his
Roguish kind of life, as in case where he has been punished and sent to his
place of Birth, and does then fall to his roguish kind of life again, or when
he shall say he was born, or last dwelt in such a place, and in truth it is not
so; in these cases such a person is to be accounted an incorrigible Ord. 11.
Febr. 1647.
Rogue, so also is him that acts as a Stage player the second time after
conviction. And it is the duty of these Officers, if any of them meet with such
persons within his liberty, to carry him before some Justice of Peace, there to
be ordered by him according to the Statute. 8. If any warrant be sent from the
Conveying him to the house of Correction.
Justices of Peace to any of these Officers, to convey any Rogue or other idle
or disorderly person unto any house of Correction within the said County, they
must be careful, at the charge of the Hundred to do the same, under pain to
forfeit for every default, what Fine (not exceeding forty Shillings) the
Justices shall impose upon him that does offend 9. The Justices of the Peace of
every Division, Private Sessions.
are to keep a private Sessions twice a year, at the least, to look to the
execution of Statutes Search.
four or five days before, send their Warrants to all these Officers within
the Division, to require them that they, being assisted with some others
sufficient men of the place, do make privy search in one night within their
precincts, to find out and apprehend such Rogues and idle persons, and to
bring them, if they find any, before the said Justices at their meeting; and
this these Officers must be careful to do accordingly. And all these Officers
must appear at the said meeting, and then and there certify upon their
oaths, in writing, under the hands of the Ministers of the places where they
dwell, what Rogues and Vagabonds they have taken in the same search, or since
the last meeting of the Juwices, and whom they have punished and sent to the
house of Correction, under pain to forfeit for every default whatsoever the
said Justices (under 40. ^.) shall assesse. 10. These Officers are to take and
punish, and convey to other Officers every Rogue and Beggar that shall be
brought and set on the Land here from Ireland, Scotland, or the Isle of Man,
till he come to the next Port or Parish, in or near where he was first landed,
under pain to forfeit ten 1 Jac. 7.
shillings for every default. 11. It is every man's duty, as well as these
Officers, to cause to be apprehended such Rogues as he shall see or know to
resort to his house, to beg or receive any Alms, and him or them, shall carry
or cause to be carried to the next Constable, 1 Jac. 4.
or else shall forfeit, for every default herein ten shillings. 12. The person
that shall run from his Family, and leave it to the Parish, is to be punished
as an incorrigible Rogue: And he that does threaten so to do, is to be sent to
the House of Correction, unless he can give Sureties for the discharge of the
said Parish,

SECT. 7. Of the Office of the High-Constables and Pettit-Constables, about
Search for, or Seizing on Persons or Goods.
1. THey may search Alehouses, Tobacco-houses, for Typlers, and Idle Persons
on the Lords day, Act. 29. April 1650. 2. A Felony being newly committed, the
Constable within his limits may (ex officio, and without any Warrant from a
Justice of Peace) and ought to search for the Fellon or the goods. See more for
this in Sect. 2. of this Chapter before. 3. These Officers are to search houses
suspect to dress meat in the Lent and to seize it and give it to the poor, 1.
Jac. 29. 4. These Officers are once every fifteen days to search and enquire
the 23 Eliz. 10. 7 Jac. 11.
defaults of Innes and Alehouses. 5. They may search suspect places for Nets
and Dogs to take Partridges and Phesants. ^9 Eliz. 10.
6. The High-Constable may search for Engines used for stretching of Cloth and
deface them. 7. They may search for bad Moult. 8. If any man fly for a
Felony, the Constable of the Town may and ought to seize on, and keep safely
his goods, because the Town is to answer for them, and it is best to be done by
Indenture taken by the Test and before the Inhabitants. So upon the
apprehending of the Person for Felony, the Officer may seize on all his Goods
and Chattels, and keep them safe, letting the owner have so much of them as is
for his necessary maintenance, until his conviction, for til then the property
is not altered.

SECT. 8. Of the Office of the High-Constable and Petit-Constable, about making
and levying of Rates.
THe Justices of the Peace, or the more Rates for the Upper-Bench an^
^^^shalsey 43 Eliz. 2.
part of them, may at their general Sessions holden after Easter, yearly (if
they think meet) rate every Parish weekly at their discretion, so as no one
Parish be rated above six or in default thereof by the Churchwardens and
Petit-Constables of the place, or the more part of them; and in default of
their agreement, by the order of the Justice of Peace within the same Parish
(if there be any) or if not, of the next Justice of Peace in the next parts
adjoining. And if any person of the Parish so taxed, refuse or neglect to pay
the same rate, the Churchwardens and Constables, or any of them; or in their
default, any Justice of Peace of the said limit may levy the same by distress
and sale of the offenders Goods, rendering to him the overplus. And these sums
taxed by the Justices on every Parish, the Churchwardens of the Parish must
collect and pay over to the high-Constable of the Hundred quarrerly, ten days
before the end of every quarter. And if the Churchwardens or Petit-Constables,
their Executors or Administrators, fail to pay this money, the Churchwardens,
their Executors or Administrators, shall forfeit ten shillings. And after this
the High-Constable must pay over the same at every Quarter Sessions, to the
Treasurers of the County, or any of them. And if he, his Executors or
Administrators, do not so, they shall forfeit twenty shillings: And these
forfeitures the Treasurers may and must levy by distress and sale of their
Goods, rendering the overplus to the party; and when he has recovered the
money, he must employ it to the uses aforesaid: And if any Action shall be
brought against any Officer, for doing any thing by virtue of this Act, he may
Plea.
plead in general, that it was done by authority of this Statute, without
showing any other special matter; and if it pass with the Defendant, Costs.
or the Plaintiff be nonsuit after appearance, the Defendant shall recover
treble Damages.

Two Justices of Peace may rate a Hundred Rates for money recovered against a
Hundred for a Robbery.
for the money recoved against the same, and levied upon one man of the Hundred
for a Robbery; and then these Officers of the several places, Towns, and
Parishes may, and must, rateably and proportionably tax and 27 Eliz. 13.
the same place, according to his ability, toward the payment of the Rate and
Assessment made by the Justices. And this money so rated, they must afterward
collect: And if the parties so taxed refuse to pay this Rate, these Offices
may, of their own authority, distrain every person by his Goods and Cattels
that shall refuse to pay the same, and may fell the same Goods, and retain so
much of the money, made thereof, as his taxation shall come unto, and the
overplus of the money made of the same Goods, they must deliver to the person
so distrained. And within ten days after the collection of those moneys, they
must pay over the same to one of the Justices of the Peace that made the same
Rate, to the use of the party robbed.

If any person be sent to the common Gaol Rates to carry an offender to Jail.
of the County by any Justice or Justices of the Peace for any offense, the
same person, if he have ability and estate of his own to do it, 3 Jac. 10.
Dalt. J. P. 298.
and this if he refuse to defray, then such Justice or Justices of Peace that
so sent him to Jail, may by Warrant under his or their Hands and Seals give,
power unto any of these Officers of the place where such person shall be
dwelling, or from whence he shall be committed, or where he shall have Goods,
by the appraisment of four of the honest Neighbors of the place, to sell so
much of his Goods as to discharge it, and to render him the overplus: And in
case such person shall not have any Goods known within the County, whereby to
make satisfaction, then that the Constables and Churchwardens, and two or
three others of the honest Neighbors of the place where the said offender
shall be taken (if there be any such Officers there) or otherwise four of the
principal Inhabitants of the place shall make a Rate, which being confirmed by
the hand of one or more Justices of the Peace, shall bind the Inhabitants. And
if any so taxed shall refuse to pay the rate, the same Justice or Justices that
did commit the offender, or any other Justice of Peace near adjoining, may give
Warrant to any of these Officers of the place to distrain his Goods there, and
to sell the same. And then, and thereupon this Officer may and must take some
of his Goods, and apprise them by four substantial Neighbors, and afterward
he may sell so much thereof as to pay the same rate; and if there be any
overplus, he must deliver the same to the party taxed. It is fit this Officer
should be paid his charge for the convey of Rogues, Resol. Judges 1633. sect.
20. But Quaere how it shall be done. If the Officers of the Parish agree in it,
the best way is to fetch it in upon the rate for the Poor, or Church, by the
help of Justices.

Every Parish shall be charged to pay weekly such a sum of money, toward the
relief of Rates for the maimed Soldiers and Mariners.
Sick, Hurt, and Maimed Soldiers and Mariners that have lost their Limbs or
disabled their bodies in the public Service, as by the more part of the
Justices of the Peace at their 43 Eliz. 3.
general Quarter Sessions holden after Easter of the Division, ten days
before every Quarter Sessions. And the high-Constable also, at the same
Sessions, must pay over the same moneys again to any one or two of the Justices
of Peace, or to the Treasurer or Treasures of the said collection, under pain
of forty shillings to be forfeited by the high-Constable for every default;
and under pain of twenty shillings to be forfeited by the pety-Constable for
every default of his, the same money to be recovered by the said Treasurer, by
sale of the Offenders Goods, as aforesaid, and to be employed by him to the use
of the Poor, maimed Soldiers, and Mariners.

They are to make a Quarterly-payment of all such sums of money as are raised
in every Rates for the Prisoners in the Jail.
Parish and paid to them by the Churchwardens of the Parishes, for the relief
of the poor prisoners in the common Jail, under pain 14 Eliz. 5. 2 Jac. 25.
in some places do pay to the high-Constable.

They are to be aiding and assisting to the Rates for the amending of Bridges.
22 H. 8. 5.
four Justices of Peace, appointed and authorized for the making of Taxes for
the reparation of Bridges, according to the Statute of 22 H. 8. For these
Justices are to make the Taxation by

The Justices of the Peace at the Quarter Sessions Rates for the house of
Correction. 39 Eliz. 4.
may Tax the County toward the erection and maintenance of houses of
Correction. And all these Officers must do their uttermost to put the same
Statutes in execution.

These Officers must levy such moneys as Rates for persons having the Plague. 1
Jac. 31.
they are commanded by Warrant of Justices of Peace having taxed the same for
the relief of the Poor infected with the Plague) under pain to forfeit twenty
shillings for every

SECT. 9. Of the Office of High Constables and Petit-Constables about
Innkeepers, Alehouses, Drunkards, Tiplers, etc.
1. IF an Inne-keeper, etc. refuse to receive a Traveller when his house is not
full, and having no good reason for it, this Officer may compel the
Inne-keeper to receive him: But how he may compel him is doubted: For it seems
all he can do, is to cause him to be indicted at the Sessions, or to be
suppressed for it. 2. If any person without lawful license take upon him
(except it be at Fair times only) to keep a common Alehouse or Tipling-house,
or use commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Cider, or Perry, he shall forfeit for
every such offense twenty shillings, to the use of the Poor of the place (the
offense being viewed by one Justice of Peace, or confessed by the party, or
proved by one witness before him:) And this forfeiture may be, or is to be
levied by the Constable or Churchwardens of the place, by Warrant from a
Justice of Peace, etc. And they by virtue of such a Warrant may, and must by
distress take into their hands so much of the offenders Goods to pay the same.
And if he pay not the money within three days after the distress taken, they
must apprise and sell the same Goods, and keep up the same money; and if there
be any overplus, they must render the same to the party. And if the party
shall not have Goods, etc. or shall not pay the same within six days after
conviction, then the Justices of Peace, etc. may commit the offender to any of
these Officers to be openly whipped, according to the discretion of the
Justices of Peace. The which these Officers (being charged herewith) must see
they carefully do; for otherwise they may be committed to Jail by the same
Justice of Peace, there to abide without Bail or Mainprise until they do
procure the same offender to be whipped according to the Warrant of the Justice
of Peace, or until they pay forty shillings unto the use of the Poor of the
Parish. 3. If any person lycenced shall utter or sell less than one full
Ale-quart of the best Beer or Ale for one penny, and of the small two quarts
for one penny (the same being proved by one witness, before one Justice of
Peace) shall forfeit twenty shillings. And if any person whatsoever, Townsman
or Stranger, shall be and abide tippling in any such house (the same being
proved by one witness or the parties own confession, before one Justice of
Peace:) In this Case, and for this offense, the Inne-keeper, etc. owner of the
house, for suffering this in his house, does forfeit ten shillings for every
such offense. And the party that does so tipple, does forfeit for every such
offense three shillings four pence, and these sums are to be levied by the
Constables and Churchwardens of the place where the offense is done, by
distress and sale of the offenders Goods, upon Warrant from one Justice of
Peace. And if the Inne-keeper, etc. have no Goods to be distrained, he may be
by the Justice of Peace committed to the Jail, there to be kept until he pay
the money: And if the Tipler be not able to pay his forfeiture, he is by
Warrant from a Justice of Peace to be made to sit in the Stocks four hours.
And all these sums are to go to the use of the Poor of the Parish where the
offense is committed. And in cases of forfeiture by Inne-keepers, etc. for
selling by unlawful Measures, or for suffering Tiplers in their houses, if the
Constables or Churchwardens shall neglect to levy, or shall not levy the said
several forfeitures, or in default of distress shall neglect by the space of
twenty days to certify the same defaults of distress to the Justices of
Peace; then every such Churchwarden or Constable shall forfeit for every such
default forty shillings to the use of the poor of the same place, to be levied
by Warrant from the Justices of Peace to some indifferent men. And for want of
distress, the same Constables and Churchwardens may be by any Justice of Peace
committed to the common Jail, there to abide until they pay the forfeiture.
And for all these moneys so recovered by the Churchwardens or Constables, they
shall be accountable to their successors and other the Parishioners in such
sort as they usually be in other Church reckonings or accounts. And for the
forfeitures levied by others upon the Officers, they that levy the same shall
be accountable therefore. And if any man be drunk, and thereof convict, he is
to forfeit five shillings for the same, which he is to pay within a week after
the conviction to the Churchwardens, to the use of the poor of the place, to
be levied (on the neglect or refusal of the party to pay it) by Warrant from
the Court, Judge, or Justices, before whom the same conviction was, upon the
offenders Goods. And this Warrant may be made to the Constables or
Churchwardens. And if the party be not able to pay it, then he is, by Warrant
from the Justice of Peace, to be set in the Stocks, and there to sit six
hours. And for the second offense, he is to be bound to the good Behavior.
And all these Officers are in their oaths, incident to their Offices, to be
charged to present the offenses against the Statute of 1 Jac. and 4 Jac. which
are for selling by unlawful measures, tippling, or suffering tippling and
drunkenness, and in cases of forfeitures for drunkenness, and for tippling
against the tiplers themselves, and for not making presentiments, being
required; If these Officers or the Churchwardens shall neglect their duties in
levying the said penalties, and due correction of the offenders as aforesaid,
they shall forfeit for every default ten shillings, to the use of the Poor, to
be levied, as aforesaid, by Warrant from the Justice of Peace, etc. But for
drunkenness or tippling no man may be prosecuted after six months after the
offense committed: And yet for suffering tippling and selling by unlawful
Measures, the Alehouse-keeper, etc. may be punished at any time. In all these
cases and upon all these Statutes, the Officers are to take care when any
Warrant is sent unto them from any Justice of Peace, Major, Bailiff, etc. that
they see it duly and carefully executed, for fear of the several punishments
aforesaid.

SECT. 10. Of the Office of the High-Constable and Petit-Constable about
May-Poles, Stage Plays, Cloathiers, Disturbance of Ministers, Laborers and
Servants; Moneys forfeit about Highways, making Supravisors for Highways;
such as have the Plague, Hedg-breakers, Maulters, etc.
1. NO May-Poles may be set up, and May Poles.
if any be, they must be forthwith, of the place, to levy this money on the
Offender, he must do it. Ord. 9. Dec. 1646.

2. No Stage Plays may be acted, the Stage Plays.
Actors are to be punished as Rogues: The Ord. 11. Febr. 1647.

3. He that shall espy and prove defaults in Clothiers. 7 R. 2. 9. Fitz. J. P.
203.
any Cloth set to sale, against the Assize appointed for Cloths, and against
the form of the Statutes, shall have the third part of every such defective
Cloth for his travel, by the delivery Michael into the Exchequer, to the
intent to charge the Aulvegers and Collectors, by whom such defaults should be
searched and amended. By which Statute this Officer being required, is to take
and deliver a third part of all such Clothes as are found so defective by
Indenture.

4. None may purposely by word or deed Disturbance of Ministers. 1 Mar. 3.
[as by talking, laughing, hemming, or the like] without authority, disturb a
Minister in his preaching of the Word, praying, or administering of the place
may of his own authority presently apprehend him and carry him to a Justice of
Peace of the same County, who may (if he think it meet) commit him to safe
custody; and within six days after, taking with him another Justice of Peace,
must examine the matter; and if by proof of two witnesses they find it true,
they must commit the party to Jail, where he is to be for three months.

5. Any one of these Officers may, and must Laborers and Servants. 5 Eliz. 4.
in the time of Hay or Corn Harvest, upon request to him made by any man, and
for the avoiding of the loss of Corn, Grain, and Departing without a
Testimonial. 5 Eliz. 4.
by the Statute of Laborers, made in 5 Eliz. may depart after the time of such
retayner expired, out of the Town or Parish where he last served, to serve in
another, unless he Memorandum, That A. B. late Servant of C. D. of E. in the
County of G. Husbandman (or Tailor, etc.) is licenced to depart from his said
Master, and is at liberty to serve elsewhere, according to the Statute in that
case made and provided. In Witness whereof, etc. Dated the day, month, year,
and place of the making thereof. The which Testimonial, the Minister of the
Parish where such Master, Mistress, or Dame does dwell, ought to register,
taking only twopence therefore. And if any such person be admitted into any
other service without showing any such Testimonial to the Constable, or such
other Officer, Curate, or Churchwardens of the place where he shall be
accepted, he shall be imprisoned until he procure such a Testimonial; the
which if he do not within twenty one days, next after the first day of his
imprisonment; or if he shall bring a counterfeit Testimonial, he is to be
whipped as a Vagabond, and he that shall receive any such person into his
service does forfeit five pound for every such offense.

6 First, The pety-Constables, etc, are to join Monyes forfeit for high ways
and making Supravisors for the highways 2. and 3. Ph. and M. 8.
with the Churchwardens to take the Estreats of the forfeitures of offenders
against the Statures for the High ways: And they are to call the
high-Constables to account for the Moneys they have received of such offenders,
and to take the same monyes into their hands, and to bestow the same upon the
reparation of the men of their Parish to be Surveyors of the work for amendment
of the highways within their Parish, leading to any Market Town; and then
ought also to appoint six days for the amendment of those ways, before
Midsomer then next following, and ought also openly in the Church, the next
Sunday after Easter, to give knowledge of the same six days, upon pain of
fine, making to be assessed by the Steward of the Leet: or in default thereof,
by two Justices of the Peace, in open Sessions, as in their discretion shall be
thought meet

Any one of these Officers [in times and About persons that have the Plague. 1
Jac. 31.
places of infection with the Plague] (if the infection be out of any City,
Borough, Town, Corporate, privileged place, or Market Town) may command or
appoint, which contrary to such commandment wilfully and contemptuously goes
abroad and converseth in company, having any infectious sore upon him uncured,
becomes Fellon: But if such person have not such sore found about him, then
for his said offense he is to be punished, as a Vagabond, and ought to be by
Stat. 36 Eliz. 4. and further to be bound to his good behavior for a year. 2.
The Constable, etc. that shall wilfully make default in levying such money as
they shall be commanded to levy by the Warrant of two Justices of the Peace,
upon the Statute for the relief of any Town infected with the Plague, shall
forfeit for every such offense ten shillings.

8. If a Justice of Peace, send his Warrant, Hedg-breakers. 43 Eliz. 7.
to any one of these Officers, for the whipping of any person, convicted before
the

9. The Constables, also of every Borough, Maulters.
or Town, may search, and survey, all such June, July, and August, only
excepted) but that the same shall have the space of three weeks, at the least
in the Fat, Floor, steeping, and sufficient drying thereof. And in these three
months the space of seventeen days at the least: or if he find any person to
put to sale any good Malt mingled with Malt not sufficiently made, or with
Malt made with Mowburnt or spired Barley; or that put to sale any Malt not
sufficiently well trodden, rubbed and fanned, whereby half a peck of dust or
more may be fanned out of one quarter thereof; then may such Constable, with
the advice of one Justice of Peace of that Shire, cause the same Malt to be
sold to such persons, and at such reasonable prices, under the common price of
the Market, as to his discretion shall seem fit. But some say this does not
belong to ordinary Constables, but to the head Constables of Corporations. It
seems to me otherwise.

SECT. 11. Of the Office of High-Constable and Petit-Constable about Recusants,
Dressing meat in Lent, Purveyors, Soldiers departing from their Commanders,
abjured Persons, employment of Money given to Charitable uses, Takers of
Pheasants, etc. Fish, High ways in Kent, stoned Horses, College of Physicians.
1. THe Constable and Minister of the Recusants.
Parish, must take and enter into a Book, and certify to the next
Quarter Sessions, the names of all Recusants sent thither by order, 35 Eliz. 8.
2. These Officers, if required by lawful Warrant, must apprehend Popish
Recusants excommunicate, 3 Jac. 4.

No Butchers may kill or sell meat in Lent, Lent.
under pain to forfeit it. And these Officers may seize it, and give it to the
Poor: 1 Jac. 29.

If any Cator, or other, shall (without lawful Purveyors.
bargain) take upon him to purvey, or take up any thing whatsoever of another,
against his will, to the use of any great Lord, or other person, and the party
grieved give notice thereof to the Constable, or such Officer of the place; In
this case, and hereupon the Officer (viz.) the Constable or Tything-man of the
place, must, under pain of twenty pounds arrest such Taker, and carry him to
the next Jail, where he is to remain without Bail or Mainprise, until he
redeliver the things so taken or the value thereof.

Any one of these Officers may arrest Soldiers Soldiers.
arriving here, that they suspect to have been in the service of the State, and
are departed from their Captains without leave, 18 Eliz. 19.

Persons abjured to go to any Port, it seems Persons abjured
must be conveyed by these Officers.

These Officers are to join with the Minister, Money given to charitable uses.
Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor, where money is given for the
placing of poor children apprentices in the employment thereof.

These Officers may search suspect places for Takers of Pheasants, etc.
setting Dogs and Nets to take Partridges and Pheasants. And the Churchwardens
may sue for and recover the forfeiture, 23 Eliz. 10. 7 Jac. 11.

These Officers and the Churchwardens Takers of Fish.
being commanded by a Justices Warrant must levy the forfeitures upon such as
take Fish with unlawful Nets, 3 Jac. 12.

The penalties of the Statutes, for repair of Highways in Kent.
Highways in the wealds of Kent, Surrey, and Sussex, are to be levied by
these Officers, by Warrant from the Clerk of the Peace, or two Justices, one of
the Quorum, 39 Eliz. 19.

Constables in Cambridg-shire, and the Isle of Stoned horses.
Ely, being desired, must measure the stone-horses that go in the Common; and
must yearly drive the Common, 32 H. 8. 13. 8 Eliz 8. College of Physicians.


These Officers in London, and within seven miles thereof, are to attend upon
the College of Physicians, being thereunto required, 14 H. 8. 5.

SECT. 12. Of the Duty of High-Constables and Petit-Constables in attending the
Justices, setting and making of Presentment.
THe High-Constables and Petit-Constables are to attend upon, aid, and assist,
and execute the Warrants of the Judges of Assise at their Assizes and Jail
delivery. And the Justices of Peace, at their general and special Sessions,
and other meetings, and there (upon Oath, and in writing if it be required) to
make presentment unto them of such things, and to such Articles as these. 1. If
Hue and Cry, for apprehending of Fellons, have been duly made and followed,
and by whom neglected 2. If Watch and Ward have been duly ordered and
observed, and who is faulty therein. 3. If Rogues have been duly apprehended,
punished and conveyed away to their place appointed, and who is faulty therein.
4. If the Statute of Laborers be observed, as if the Rates of wages be
observed, what Servants or Apprentices have put themselves off, or are put away
before their term be ended, and what is become of the Servant or Apprentice;
what unmarried persons of able bodies live out of Service, not having means
otherwise to live then by their Service. If they work, who sets them to work:
What persons live idly and will not work, or not for reasonable wages, or spend
all at the Alehouse, 5. Of such as lodge and harbor dangerous and suspicious
persons, for whom they will not answer. 6. If Bakers and Brewers keep due
Assize of Bread and Beer: or that sell unwholsom Bread or Beer. 7. Such as sell
by false weights and measures. 8. Forestallers, Regrators, Ingrossors. 9. What
Cause-wayes, Bridges, and Highways are in decay, and by whose means. 10.
Millars. 11. They must also present the offenses done contrary to the Statutes
made for the repressing of Drunkenness, and other disorders, and such Articles
as these: 1. What number of Alehouses are within their limits. 2. Which of
them are licenced, and which not, and by whom. 3. Which of them licenced are,
in regard of their persons and dwellings, fit to sell. 4. Who keep ill order by
keeping Gaming, harboring Rogues and Thieves, suffer Tippling, Drunkenness,
etc. selling by unlawful measures, measures unsealed, or less than a quart of
the best, and two quarts of the small for a penny. 12. Of the Defaults of
Highways not enlarged, and of Ditches, Underwoods, and Bushes there, to cover
Thieves, within two hundred foot. And if they be charged, they must give
account to all the particulars of their Office: And for any neglect or fault
herein, the Justices may punish them by Indictment or otherwise, as in other
like cases of neglect or contempt of them.

CHAP. IX. The Power and Duty of the High-Constable alone, and in special; and
beyond the Power of the Petit-Constable.
SECT. 1.
THe High-Constables Office Against Cloathiers and their Workmen. 4 Ed. 4. 1.
Fitz. J. P. 203.
lies further in these things following. The Makers of Cloth shall pay to
their Carders, Spinners, and other Laborers in lawful money, [and not in
Pinns, Girdles, or such other things] for their, work, under pain to forfeit
three times so much as their wages. And they must deliver them their Wool by
due weight: And the Carders, Spinners, Fullers, Dyers, Sheremen, and other
Laborers shall do their work faithfully, under pain to forfeit double damages.
And the Constable of the Hundred may hear and determine the complaints of every
such Cloathier and Draper, as well for not payment of the wages of the
Laborers, as of the forfeiture and damages by due examination of the parties.
And hereupon also, for not payment of the said Duties, Forfeitures, and for the
Damages, to commit the Trespassers to the next Jail of the same County, until
the said Duties, Forfeitures, and Damages be paid. Also they may enter into any
House, Land, or other place, to search for any Tenters, Ropes, Rings,
Head-wrinches, or other Engines for stretching of Cloth, and deface them: And
if the owners shall afterward use them, these Officers may take and sell them,
and give the money to the Poor.

SECT. 2. Of the High-Constables Office in receiving and paying of the Rates.
1. THe Justices of the Peace or the more Rates for the Prisoners in the
common-Gaole. 14 Eliz. 5.
part of them, at their Quarter Sessions, may Rate every Parish within the
Shire at such sums as they shall think fit, toward the relief of the poor
Prisoners within the common Jail of the County, so as it exceed not eight
pence a week in every Parish; and this the Churchwardens must levy [within
their Parishes] on the Sundays, and once every quarter they must pay the same
to the High-Constable, who must also pay over the same again at the next
Quarter Sessions of the same County, to such Collectors living near the same
Jail as the said Justices shall there appoint to receive it; the which
Collectors are to distribute the same weekly, according to the said Justices
appointment, under pain of forfeiture of five pounds, by every one of these
Officers making default herein.

2. They are to receive the moneys rated by Rates for the Upper-Bench and
Marshalsey. 43 Eliz. 2.
the Justices upon the County, for the relief of the poor Prisoners in the
upper-Bench and Marshalsey quarterly, from the Churchwardens of the Parishes
within their Division ten days before the end of the quarter, and then they
are at the next Quarter Sessions, to pay over the same to the Collectors
appointed by the Justices, under pain of twenty shillings for every default.

3. They are also to receive the moneys rated Rates for the maimed Soldiers.
43 Eliz. 3.
by the Justices of Peace on the County, for the relief of maimed Soldiers and
Mariners, ten days before every Quarter Sessions, from the Churchwardens and
Constables of every Parish within their Division. And then the High-Constable,
at the same Sessions, must pay over the same money to any one or two of the
Justices of the Peace, or to the Treasurer of the County, for this purpose,
under pain of forty shillings to be forfeited for every default. But in these
three last cases, it seems the High-Constables do now usually send out their
Warrants to the Petty-Constables and Churchwardens, to require them to bring
in the moneys aforesaid.

SECT. 3. The High-Constables Power and Duty about High ways.
EStreats indented, ought to be made by About highways. 2. and 3. Ph. and M.
3. 5 Eliz. 13.
the Clerk of the Peace, and by the Steward of the Leet, of all forfeitures
arising in the Sessions of the Peace, or in the Leet, upon the Statutes of
Highways; of which Estreats, one part ought to be delivered yearly within six
weeks after Michaelmas, to the High-Constable of the Hundred wherein the
defaults were committed; and the other part to the Constables and Church
Wardens of the Parish wherein the defaults were, to the end that such
High-Constable may thereby levy by distress the same forfeitures, or the double
thereof if no distress can be found, or if such forfeitures be not paid within
twenty days after a lawful demand of the same by the Officer, and to the
intent also that the said Constables and Churchwardens may thereby call the
said High-Constable to an account before two Justices of Peace (the one being
of the Quorum;) for the said High-Constable is once every year, between the
first day of March and the last day of April, to make a true account and
payment of all such sums of money as he has received by means aforesaid, to
the Pety-Constables or Churchwardens of the place where the offense is
committed, or any two of them, under pain of forty shillings. And this if they
refuse to do, they may be compelled unto by the Churchwardens, by the help of
any two Justices of the Peace (the one being of the Quorum:) And this money is
to be bestowed by the Churchwardens on the Highways of the Parish. And upon
this account the High-Constable is to have for his pains eight peace for every
pound he has levied and paid.

SECT. 4. Of the Power and Duty of the High-Constable alone, about keeping
petty-Sessions, Sea-banks in Northfolk, presenting of Recusants.
THe High-Constables in all such Shires Keeping petit Sessions. 5 Eliz. 4.
where the petit Sessions for Servants and Laborers (otherwise called Statute
Sessions) were used to be kept before, 5 Eliz. may yet still hold their
Sessions; so that nothing be done in them contrary to the Statute of Laborers
and Servants, made 5 Eliz. 4.

The High-Constables of Hundreds there, Sea-banks in Norfolk. 29 Eliz. 24.
must overlook the work for amending the Sea-banks, according to the order of
the Justices of Peace at Sessions.

The high-Constable in default of the Church Making Presentment of Recusants. 3
Jac. 4.
Wardens and Constables of the Parish, is once a year to present at the
Sessions, the names of Popish Recusants, their Children, and Servants.

CHAP. X. Of the Office of Constables of Towns that are head Officers, and have
others under them, about Weights and Measures, unlawful Games, Coopers,
Merchandise, making Malt.
THere are also in some places Constables of Towns or Parishes that are head
Officers, and have others under them. And these in some Corporate Towns are
part of the name of their in corporation. And in some places they have other
Officers under them. And this Officer is in some Statutes called a
High-Constable. And to him do some of the things aforesaid belong in common
with other Constables, as to make a Testimonial for a Servant to go into
another Parish; to compel an Artificer to work in the Harvest time; and some
other things. And some other things there are, that are said to belong to the
Constable of a Town only, and to none other of the Officers aforesaid, as the
things hereafter mentioned, viz.

1. Every City, Borough, and Market Town Weights and Measures. 8 H. 6. 5. 11 H.
7. 4.
that has a Constable, ought also to have common measures sealed, and also
common weights sealed, at which the Inhabitants may freely weigh.

2. The Major, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Uunlawfull Games. 13 H. 8. 9.
and other head Officers within every City, Borough and Town where any such
Officers be, ought under pain of forty shillings for every default, once every
month at the least, to make search (as well within Liberties as without) in
all places where any unlawful Games shall be suspected to be kept, and may
arrest and imprison as well the keepers of such places as the haunters to the
same, till they be bound no more to keep and haunt such places. And if any such
Head Officer shall find, or know, that any Artificer, Crafts-man, Husbandman,
Apprentice, Laborer, Servant at Husbandry, Journy-man, or Servant of Artificer:
Or that any Mariner, Fisherman, Water-man, or Serving-man, does play at the
Tables, Dice, Cards, Tennis, Bowls, Closh, Coyting, Logating, or other
unlawful Game out of Christmas time, or out of their Masters house or presence
in the Christmas time, unless it be by the license of such Masters as have 100
l. by the year, or above and then also that playing be within the precinct of
such Masters House, Garden, or Orchard, then such head Officer may commit such
offender to Ward, till he shall be bound by such obligation to the use of The
Keepers of the Liberty, etc. in such sum, as to the discretion of such Officers
shall be thought fit, that he shall not from thence forth use such unlawful
Games.

3 In all Cities, Boroughs, and Towns, Coopers. 23 H. 8. 4.
wherein no Wardens of Coopers be, the Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constable,
or other head Officers there, have power to search, view, and gage Barrels,
Kilderkins, Firkins, and other vessels to be made there, and to take such
advantage thereby, and in such manner as the Wardens of Coopers, within the
City of London, may take on every behalf.

4. If any Woolls or other Merchandises, Merchandise. 14 H. 6. 5.
be shipped to the Staple in any suspected place adjoining to the Coast of the
water, then Indentures ought thereof to be made between the owner and the Major
or Constable of that place; or otherwise such Merchandise shall be forfeited.

5. The Constable of every Borough or Making of Malt. 27 Eliz. 14.
Market Town, or other Town may view, search, and survey all such Malt as
shall be made or put to sale there: And if he shall find any Barley-Mault made
at any time (the months of June, July and August only excepted) but that the
same shall have the space of three weeks (at the least) in the Fat, Floar,
Steeping, and such sufficient Floar, Steeping, and such sufficient drying
thereof, and in these three months, the space of seventeen days at the least.
And if he find any person to put to sale any good Malt mingled with Malt not
sufficiently made, or with Malt made of Mow-burned or spired Barley; or put to
sale any Malt not sufficiently well trodden, rubbed, and fanned, whereby half
a peck, or more, of dust may be fanned out of one Quarter thereof: then may
such Constable (with the advice of one Justice of the Peace in that Shire)
cause the same Malt to be sold to such persons and at such reasonable prices
(under the common price of the Market) as to his discretion shall seem
expedient.

All these things last aforesaid appertain only to the head Constable of Market
and great Towns, and, as it seems, the High-Constables of Hundreds, and
petty-Constables, and Tything-men of Parishes and Tythings, have no power nor
charge at all therein. And yet beware of this, for perhaps they may be
otherwise taken.

It is said upon the Statute of 7 Jac. 3. for the employment of money given for
the binding of Apprentices. The Statute of 3 Jac. 12. against the destroying of
Fish. The Statute of 1 Jac. 4. for the presenting of Recusants. The Statute of
1 Jac. 21. against them that are infected of the Plague. The Statute of 1 Jac.
29. against them that dress meat in the Lent, and some others; that upon these
Statutes Borsholders, Tything-men, Head-Borows, and such like Officers being in
Towns or Parishes (underneath Constables that be there) have not to do, nor
may meddle, because such Constables be in comparison of them called head
Officers; But where no such head Officers are, nor any Officers in the place
that are called by the names of Constables, but that they are called
Tything-men, Chief-Pledges, Borsholders; or by some other name there, out of
doubt these Officers are intended by the word Constable within the Statutes,
and they have the same authority and charge by the same Statutes as the
Constables have.

CHAP. XI. Of Churchwardens, and their Office.
Churchwardens are Officers What they are, and how they are chosen.
part of the Parishioners, according to the custom of the place, to look to the
Church and Churchyard, and things thereunto belonging. These now by the new
Ordinance of the ninth of February 1647. where they have been used to be, are
to be chosen every year on the Monday or Tuesday in the Easter week, by the
major part of the Parish, at a public meeting; And they may choose one, two,
three, or four, as they please. And if the Parish do omit this Election, it
loses forty shillings to the use of the Poor of the Parish. This choice also
must be allowed under the Hands and Seals of two of the next Justices of Peace.
And being thus chosen, they are to continue in their Office but one year, and
no longer, except there be a custom for longer time, and except they be chosen
again in the same manner at the years end, otherwise they are to be changed
every year. And in case of miscarriage in their office, they are to be put out,
and others chosen within the year. And albeit there be a Custom within the
Parish, that the Churchwardens shall continue in their Office by the space of
one year, two years, or more, (as in some places there is) yet in case of
misdemeanor found in them, about the execution of their Office, the
Parishioners may at any time proceed to a new election of new, and remove the
old Churchwardens; for there is no other remedy against this evil. In the
choice of these Officers care must be had, as in the choice of Constables, that
there be none but honest and able men chosen to the Office.

For the discovery of the Office and duty Numb. 2.
of these Officers, these things are to be Their Office and Duty.
known. 1. That for some things belonging to their Office, they have a power
and Office therein by the ancient Common Law: And for other things belonging to
their Office, they have a Power and Duty therein, by certain Acts of Parliament
newly made, by which their Office is enlarged. And for this last also, some
things hereof do concern the Church and Church matters. Other things do
concern other matters. Some things also they may do Ex Officio, and without
any warrant from others. Other things they may do only by warrant from others.
We shall speak first to the matter concerning the Church.

2. By the ancient Common Law, the In providing and keeping the Church Goods.
these things. 1. They are to see to, and preserve the Goods of the Church
(viz.) the Books, Communion Cups, Linen Clothes, and other decent Ornaments
and Furniture of the Church which they do find there, when they enter into
their Office. And if there be any lack in these things, they are to see and
provide them, and being provided, preserve and keep them also. And for this
purpose (in favor of the Church) the better to enable them herein, the Law
does make of them a kind of Corporation (viz.) Corporation.
persons enabled by that name to take moveable Goods or Chattels, and to sue
and to be sued at Law concerning such Goods, for the use and profit of their
Parish. For the property of the Goods of the Church is in them, and they are by
that name enabled to take them, and to be sued for them, for the use and profit
of the Parish. And therefore these Officers may have and enjoy Goods to the use
of the Church. And a Man may well, in his life time, or by his last Will, give
or grant money or other movable things to the Churchwardens, or to the
Parishioners of a Parish, for the Reparations of a Church, or for the buying of
Books, Communion Cups; Linen Clothes, or other decent Ornaments or Furniture
for the Church. And this kind of Gift is so much favored in Law, that it is
not needful therein to have any Writing or words at all. For if a man do but
buy a Bell, and hang it up in the Steeple; or make a Pew, and set it up in the
Church, and do make no words or writing hereof; by this the Bell and the Pew
are so dedicated and given to the Church, that the party Actions by, or against
them.
that did owe them, can never have them again. And if any Goods or Chattels be
devised to the Church, and be kept from it, the Churchwardens may by Suit
recover it in a Court of Equity. But they can have no Action by the Common Law,
to recover any such thing given, of the which they never had the possession:
But if the Churchwardens be once possessed of any Goods or Ornaments belonging
to the Church, and afterward the same things be taken from them; they shall
have the same remedy for these things, as other men have for the Goods taken
from them; And therefore if such Goods be stolen, the Churchwardens may have
an Appeal of Robbery against the taker of them. And if they be otherwise taken
away or abused, as if a Bell be broken, or the like, the Churchwardens may
have an Action against him that does it, albeit he be the Parson or Vicar
himself. And in this Action they shall recover damages to the use and benefit
of the Parish, and not to their own use. And yet these Officers have no such
property in the Goods of the Parish, as thereby to have power to give, sell,
release, hurt, or impair them; for they are Officers trusted for the behalf of
the Parish; and therefore have no power in the Goods of the Parish, but for the
good and profit of the Parish. And therefore if they shall so do, or otherwise
unprofitably waste or mis-imploy the Goods of the Parish, the Parishioners may
remove him, and choose another, although it be before his year be expired. Also
it seems the party that does steal or take away any Goods belonging to the
Church, may be punished for it, as for a Sacrilegious offense. And if these
Churchwardens, from whom the Goods be taken, dye, or be out of their Office;
their successors (as some think) may sue for and recover them, or the damages
for them: Or if these Churchwardens may not, the old Churchwardens may sue
for, and recover the same. And if anything have been used time out of mind, to
be paid toward the Church, and it be now withheld, the Churchwardens may sue
for the same in a Court of Equity. But as touching any Estate of Lands, or the
profits of any Lands, the Churchwardens are not to meddle at all; insomuch,
That if the Walls, Windows, or Doors of the Church be broken down, or the Trees
in the Churchyard cut down, or the Grass thereof be eaten up; the Parson or
Vicar, nor the Church-wardems shall have an Action for it; for they are a
Corporation only as to moveable Goods. And therefore they cannot take Estates
of Lands to them, by name of Churchwardens only, in Fee-simple, for life or
years, to the use of the Church. And if a Feoffment be made of any Land to
others, to the use of Parishoners, or to the use of the Churchwardens of a
Parish: this is a void use in Law, and they shall take nothing by this
conveyance. 37 H. 6. 30. 11 H. 4. 12. 8 Ed. 4. 6. F. N. B. 91. 11 H. 7. 27. 12
H. 7. 10. F. N. B. 52. 54.

2. These Officers are bound by the very In making of Reparations.
Body of the Church and the Tower, that the same be sufficiently repaired, kept
and maintained; and that if any of the necessary Ornaments therein appointed
for the worship of God, he decayed, that they be repaired again; for there must
be always in a readiness, all things necessary to the preaching of the Word
and Administration of the Sacraments. And they are to see that their Bells be
in case, and fit for use. But if the Chancel, (the which in most, if not in all
places, is to be repaired by the Parson) or any Isle in the Church, the which
any man does claim by prescription to himself, or his house in particulat be in
decay, the Churchwardens are not bound to repair this. And now by the new
Ordinance of Parliament they may raise money, not to build a new Church quite
down, nor to repair a Cathedral or Collegiate Church, but they may raise money
to maintain or repair a Parochial Church, provide Books, Bread and Wine for
the Sacrament, repair Bread and Wine.
the ^nclosures of the Church yard, or burying place, and to all other things
that do belong to their Office. And further, they must make such reparations
as any Justice of Peace shall under his Hand and Seal appoint about any part of
the Church.

3. These Officers (as it seems) by the In disposing of Seats.
Church, and to appoint every man and woman where they shall sit. And yet if
any man have an Isle, or a seat in an Isle, or by-place out of the body of the
Church, unto which he may make a right by prescription, as that which time out
of mind has belonged or appertained unto his house; in this case, neither the
Church wardens nor any other can turn him out of it. And albeit one may not
prescribe to have a Seat in the body of the Church, as belonging to his house,
yet if the case be so, that a man has time out of mind had such a Seat or
Seat-place in the body of a Church as appertaining to his house; in this case
the Church wardens ought not without very good cause to remove him. 12 H. 7. 27.

4. These Officers also may by the very In making and levying of Rates.
execution of their Office in the Particulars aforesaid, may set Rates and
Taxes upon the Parishioners for the payment of money. And as touching this
point, and to show how the law is at this day upon the new Ordinance, these
things are to be known. 1. These Officers with the Overseers of the Poor of
the Parish, or the greater part of them together, must now make these Rates;
for if they be otherwise made, there is no means to recover them. 2. These
Rates may be made before there be present need, as before the Church fall, or
be in danger of ruin, or the like. 3. These Officers may by these Rates raise
money for the buying of Books, providing of Bread and Wine, repairing of the
Churchyard or Burying place; for the Kings Bench and Marshalsey, and other
Payments. And so also, as it seems, for the repair of the Church, the Tower,
and the Bells. 4. For this, they may rate In making Rates.
every Inhabitant and Occupier of Lands, Tithes, Impropriate Woods, or other
Hereditaments within the Parish. 5. The Churchwardens must give public notice
in the Church, when and where the Rate is to be made. Howbeit, if the
Parishioners after such notice given, will not come, or coming, will not agree
to the Rate; in this case the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor alone,
or the major part of them, may make the Rate: But a Rate made now without
giving notice thereof before hand to the Parish, is not good. 6. This Rate must
be equal, and for this cause, It must be upon every Parishioner, and not upon
some of the Parishioners only; and it must be set upon every one of them
equally, (viz.) according to the quantity and quality of his Estate and Lands
within the Parish, wherein they may rate by the Yard, Acre, or otherwise, as
they think fit; so as it be equal and according to the true value, by an
equal proportion. And if one of another Parish have Lands in the Parish where
the Rate is made, in his own occupation; in this case they may rate him to
Church Payments, according to the value of his Land. And this, Albeit there be
no house upon it, and albeit the Owner and Occupier dwell in another Parish;
for as to this purpose he shall be called a Parishioner; and therefore he may,
Parishioner.
if he please, come unto, and frequent the Church of that Parish, as he does
the Church of the Parish wherein he lives. And where the Landlord and Tenant
both do live out of the Parish, it seems, the Curch-wardens may rate either of
them at their Election. And yet some hold, that in these and such like cases,
the Rate must be always set upon the Occupier of the Land, and not upon the
Landlord. And if the Farmer or Occupier of the Land do live within the
Parish, where the Rate is made, there he only, and not the Landlord, shall be
rated; and the Tenant is to be rated for the whole value of the Land; and
therefore the Landlord is not to be rated again for the Rent he does receive
out of the Land; for then the Land would be twice rated: And in this case there
is a Parishioner and Inhabitant chargable. And Receipt of Rent out of a Parish
for Land within the Parish, by a man that lives in another Parish, will not
make him a Parishioner. But if he have Land in the Parish in his own
occupation; there he may be rated with this difference, he may be rated toward
the repire of the Church only. For as to the repair of the Seats of the Church
providing of Church Ornaments, Sextons wages, and the like, he shall not be
charged therewith, Browal. 2. part 10. And yet, in case where the Landlord and
Tenant both live within the Parish where the Rate is made, there the Raters may
set the Rate upon which of them they please; yet so as they be not both rated
for the same thing: but a man that does neither dwell within the Parish, nor
has any Land within the Parish, cannot be rated at all toward the Church
Payments. And therefore, if a Butcher come thither, it being a Market Town, to
sell Meat, and have a fixed Stall there; this will not make him a Parishioner,
nor chargeable to the Church. 7. After the Rate is thus made by the may by
Warrant under the Hands and Seals of the two next Justices of Peace, levy them,
and all the arrears thereof; and two shillings six pence for the neglect upon
the Goods of the party appointed to pay it. 10. If any be Over-^ate.
grieved with the Rate, relief is to be had before the Justices of Peace, at
their Quarter Sessions. Or if the Rate be read by practice and conspiracy to
oppress a man, as for Alimony, or to pay a debt, and in cases where the
Churchwardens or Overseers have no Power, there perhaps they may make
themselves liable to an Action of the Case or Action of Trespass.

5. These Officers are to relieve, and dispose of the Rents of Lands or
Annuities, given toward repair of Churches and Church duties according to the
intent of the Donor.

6. The next thing these Officers by the In delivering over the Church goods,
and making an Account.
they are going out of their Office, they are truly to deliver up to the
Parishioners, whatsoever Money or other things of right, belonging to the
Church or Parish, they have in their hands; and it is the best way to deliver
them by Bill indented to the succeeding Churchwardens.

7. The last thing these Officers are bound by the Common Law to do, is, to
give up a true and perfect Account of all their Receipts and Disbursements in
the time of their Office: The which, it is best to do to the succeeding
Churchwardens. And this if these Officers refuse to do, their succeeding
Churchwardens may now compel them to by an Action of Account at the Common
Law. But now by the new Ordinance, they are bound within four days of their
Office ended, and new Churchwardens chosen, to give an Account to their
Successors and the two next Justices of Peace, and to pay over the Money, in
their hands, to their Successors. And refusiing this, they are to be committed
without Bail, till they do Account, and pay the Moneys in their hands. And by
this Writ of Account, at the Common Law, the present Churchwardens may compel
their Predecessors to give an Account of, and to answer for their doings,
during the time of their Office: And if they have done the Parish any wrong, to
make amends and satisfaction for the same, to the use of the Parish, for the
harm it has received by their default. And in this Account, the old Officers
shall have Allowances.
allowances for all the needful sums of Money laid out, or spent by them,
either upon the Reparations of the body of the Church, Tower, or Bells; or for
relief of the Prisoners in the Gaol, or otherwise where the Law does enjoin
them to pay or disburse them.

And now having dispatched the Duty and Power of these Officers, commanded, and
given to them, especially by the ancient Common Law; we come to see wherein
their Office is enlarged by some Acts of Parliament: And this we shall find to
be in these particulars following.

First, We have showed before, how by In making and levying of Rates and
Forfeitures etc.
may without warrant, Ex Officio, make and set Rates; and that by warrant under
the Seals and Hands of two Justices of Peace, they may levy the same, and the
arears therereof, and two shillings six pence by distress and sale of Goods.
And that they, may, and must also execute the Warrants of the Justices of
Peace, in levying all the penalties appointed for any offense within that
Ordinance of Parliament; and also, in levying of all such money as shall be
remaining in the hands of any of their Predecessors upon their Account, by
distress and sale of Goods.

Secondly, These Officers are to join with In employment of money given to
charitable uses
in the employment of money given for the binding of Apprentices, upon the
Statute of 7 Jac. 3.

Thirdly, Any one of these Officers may Against Prophaners of the Lords day.
upon sight and knowledge of any offense done against any Law made for the
observation of the Lords day, days of Humiliation, or Thanksgiving, do the
same execution as Overseers of the Poor may do.

Fourthly, these Officers together with Against May-poles.
the Constable, may take down a May Pole: And either of these Officers, by
Warrant from a Justice of Peace, must levy the forfeiture appointed to be paid,
for the setting and keeping up of a May Pole. Ord. April 6. 1647. Against
Stage Plays.


Fifthly, These Officers alone may levy the forfeiture appointed to be paid by
such as are present at Stage Plays. And these Officers, and the Constables
together, may levy all the Money Collected of the Comers to it, to the use of
the Poor. Ord. Feb. 11. 1647.

Sixthly, They must, being commanded Against superstitious Relics.
by any Justice of Peace, take care with the Overseers of the Poor, to take
down and demolish all superstitious Relics at the charge. And the
Churchwardens being required by the Justice of Peace, must repair it as
before, at the Parish charge. Ord. May. 1644.

Seventhly, These Officers may apprehend Againct Swearers.
Peace to be punished, as Overseers of the Poor may do.

Eighthly, If any of his own Authority Against him that disturbeth a Minister
or abuses the Sacrament.
shall willingly, and of purpose, by open and overt word or deed, maliciously
or contemptuously molest, or by any other unlawful ways, disquiet or abuse
any Preacher lawfully Authorized in his Preaching or Divine Service; or
otherwise contemptuously, or of his own Authority abuse, deface; or otherwise
unreverently handle, or order the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ in
any Church or Chapel: Such persons, their Aiders and Abettors, may immediately
after the thing done, be forthwith Arrested by the Constable, these Officers,
or any other person then present, and carried to a Justice of Peace, to be
proceeded against according to the Statute. Stat. 1 M. Chap. 6.

Ninethly, If any one do without lawful Against them that eat Meat on
Fasting-dayes.
license, eat any Flesh upon any days, now observed for Fish days [the which
(as it seems) are Fridayes and Saturdayes in every week in the year, but in
Christmas and Easter week, and the four Wednesdayes in the four Ember weeks] he
does forfeit Twenty shillings for every time, and one Months imprisonment
without Bail or Mainprise. And every person, in whose House the same shall be
eaten, knowing thereof, and not disclosing it to some Officer that has power
to punish it, shall forfeit for evey such offense Thirteen shillings four
pence; and one third part thereof, is to go to the Poor of the Parish where
the Offense is done, to be levied by the Churchwardens of the place, by
Warrant from the Justices of Peace, etc. So that by this Statute, If any such
Warrant be directed to these Officers, they are to execute the same. Stat. 5
Eliz. 5. 27 Eliz. 11. 35 Eliz. Chap 7. And the License to be given for eating
of Flesh to any person for notorious Sickness, by the Minister of the Place,
must be Registered (if the Sickness continue above eight days after the License
granted) in the Church Book. And this must be done, by the knowledge of one of
the Churchwardens there.

Tenthly, These Officers are to join with About the Poor.
of their Office throughout; for they have an equal Authority and Charge with
them in the Execution of the whole Office; nay these in truth are the
principal Officers in this Office, and the Overseers are but Assistants to
them; For so are the words of the Law, that they shall be joined with the
Churchwardens, etc.

Eleventhly If any forfeiture be by any offense, About killing of Hares,
Phesants, etc.
about killing Hares, Phesants, or Partridges, and the Justices of Peace force
the payment thereof to these Officers, they are to receive the money, and see
it employed to the use of the Poor of the Parish. Stat. 1 Jac. Chap. 27.

Twelfthly, These Officers are to join with In levying money upon Rates, for
the Prisoners in the Kings Bench, and Marshalsey
the Constables of the place, to rate the whole Parish toward the payment of
the County Rate of the Justices of Peace, for the relief of the Prisoners in
the Kings Bench, and Marshalsey. And being rated, to pay the same to the High
Constable of the Hundred once every quarter, under pain to forfeit ten
shillings for every default. 43 Eliz.

Thirteenthly, They are also to join with For Mariners and maimed Soldiers.
the Constables, to rate the whole Parish toward the payment of the Justices
Rate, for the County; for the relief of the Poor Mariners, and maimed
Soldiers. And to collect and pay the same to the High-Constable, ten days
before every quarter Sessions: under pain to forfeit twenty shillings, for
every default. 43 Elz.

Fourteenthly, These Officers alone are For the Prisoin the Gaol.
to rate and levy the County Rate, made by the Justices, for the relief of the
Prisoners in the Common Jail, and to pay the same quarterly to the
High-Constable of the same Hundred, under pain of five pounds; and this money,
if the Churchwardens do pay before they do Collect it, it shall be allowed
them again upon their Account.

Fifteenthly, Where an Offender that is To carry a Prisoner to Gaol.
committed to Prison, has not Goods sufficient to defray the charges of
conducting him thither; The Constables and Churchwardens, and two or three of
the Parshioners, may make an indifferent Rate for the same. And any one of
these Officers, by warrant from the Justice of Peace, that did commit the
Offender, may levy the same Rate on the Parishioners Goods.

Sixteenthly, These Officers are, upon a Against Drunkards.
power, to levy the forfeitures for the breach of any of the Laws, touching
Drunkards and drunkenness: And they are then also to see that they do employ
the same, to the use of the poor of the place.

Seventeenthly, These Officers are to join Against them that destroy Fish.
with the Constables, to execute warrants for the levying of the forfeitures,
against them that destroy Fish, etc.

Eighteenthly, They are also to join with To choose Surveyors for the
Highways.
the Constables in the choosing of Supravisors for the Highways; and in the
setting down of days for the work; and in the oversight of the High-Constables
Account, for the moneys they do receive by any forfeiture. They may also with
the help of two Justices of Peace, Quorum Vnus, force Force High-Constables to
account.
High-Constables that have received any money forfeited for defaults of
Highways, to account for it; and pay in what is in their hands, to be
employed about the Highways.

Nineteenthly, If a Rogue be brought and About a Rogue.
tendered to these Officers, they must receive him, or else they forfeit five
pounds. Stat. 39. Eliz.

Twentiethly, 1. These Officers being required, About Presentment.
must attend the Justices of Peace, and with the Overseers of the Poor, give
to the Justices an Account of what stock of money has been raised by Rates, or
is otherwise settled amongst them, and how they are employed; and what
Apprentices are placed, or fit to be placed; and of the rest of the things
concerning their Office. 2. They must also present upon their Oaths, all
Offenses that are done within their Parish: against the Statutes made for the
suppressing of Drunkenness, and other disorders of Alehouses. 3. They are to
join with the Constable in presenting of Popish Recusants.

CHAP. XII. Of the Overseers of the Poor, and their Office.
THe Overseers of the Poor, What they are, and how they are chosen.
yearly to be joined and assistant to the Churchwardens of the Parish, in the
oversight and ordering of the Poor of the Parish. And they are to be chosen
and made by two or more of the Justices of Peace of the County (whereof one of
them must be of the Quorum) dwelling in or near the Parish or Division, etc.
who are yearly, under their Hands and Seals, at Easter, or within a month
after, to appoint four, three, or two substantial Householders (according to the
greatness of the Parish) to be joined with the Churchwardens of the Parish:
And all these together, are to look to the Poor of the Parish, Stat. 43 Eliz
chap. 2. 3. 1 Jac. chap. 25. 3 Car. 1.

For the discovery of the Power and Duty Their Office and Duty.
known. 1. Some things they are to do in their Office; they are to do it, and
may do it Ex Officio, without any Warrant from any other. And some things they
may do only by Warrant from others: And some of these things concern the Poor:
And some of them do concern other matters. As to the first of these, we are to
know these things. 1. That in this Office, the Churchwardens of the place have
an equal Authority and Charge with the Overseers of the Poor; and therefore,
howsoever it be the common course in most places, for the Churchwardens to
neglect it altogether, and not to meddle at all with it; yet it is a common
neglect punishable upon the Churchwardens, and fit to be redressed. But if
there be but one Churchwarden within the Parish, this does suffice; and the
Overseers of the Poor, and this Churchwarden together, may execute the Office
well enough. 2. The major part of them, without the rest, may do any thing
belonging to their Office. 3. They must have the consent of two Justices of the
Peace (one of which must be of the Quorum) either in general or in particular,
to every thing they do in their Office: And yet, it seems, they may set up and
use a Trade, by the consent of one Justice of Peace, where there are not two
Justices within the limits; Nor is this consent otherwise necessary, then as
herein is after set forth.

4. The Office of these Men lies in these things. 1. In general: They are to
take In setting the Poor on work.
order with the consent of two Justices of Peace, one of the Quorum) to set
their Poor awork, and if need be, for that purpose, to set up a Trade, place
out their Apprentices, relieve the impotent, and such as cannot work, or cannot
live by their work. But more particularly, 2. They, with the consent of two or
more Justices, may set up and use any Trade, only for the setting awork and
relief of the Poor of their own Parish, without breach of any Statute. 3. They
are to set to work the Children of such, whose Parents shall not, by them, be
thought able to keep and maintain their Children, and such persons, married and
unmarried, as, having no means to maintain themselves, use no ordinary and
daily Trade of life to get their living by; all those that cannot get work
elsewhere: And if any person so appointed by them to work, shall refuse so to
do, or any others that are able, if they refuse to work for the wages
assessed, he may be sent by any Justice of Peace to the common Jail, or House
of Correction; not to their place of birth or last dwelling.

2. The more part of them, with the consent In binding Apprentices.
ought to bind forth and place to be Apprentices the Children of such, whose
Parents they judge unable to maintain their Children; But they may not bind
any other men's Children so: And they unto whom they are so bound, may, and must
recive them, and keep them as Apprentices: In which particular, these things
are to be known. 1. Two Justices must be agreeing to what they do herein. 2.
So they do bind them to Weavers, Masons, or any such like Trade; or they may
bind them to Husbandry or Houswifery. 3. It is said they may bind any above
seven, and under Thirteen years: And the Man-child may be bound until he be of
the age of twenty four years, and the Woman-Childe until she come to the age
of one and twenty years, or be married. 4. These Officers may, with the Justice
of Peace, help to compel any man within the Parish, that they think fit, to
take such a poor Child to be his Apprentice, and that without any money at
all, howbeit in this case it is meet that some respect be had; for if the
Child be young, and the party to whom they would place it be not very able,
they may give him money if they will; and it is fit that some money be given,
as the Overseers and the party can agree. And if they cannot agree, as the next
Justices of Peace, or the Justices of Peace at the Sessions shall set down. And
this has been the Resolution of the Judges. 5. All men that have, or may have
use for Servants, are bound to receive such Apprentices themselves, or
contribute toward the placing of them with others. And albeit a man be not a
Tradesman, but a Knight, Gentleman, Clergyman, or Yeoman; and albeit he do
not keep House, but be a Sojourner, if he use Husbandry, Clothing, Grasing, or
the like: or howsoever his case be, if by his Calling and Profession, he must
entertain and use Servants of like quality; he may be compelled to take such an
Apprentice. Resolved by the Judges. 6. If a wealthy man live so privately, that
he heep few or no Servants, and leads such a life, that he has no need of
such a Servant; yet he may be compelled to take such an Apprentice himself, or
to give money toward the placing him with some other. And this
notwithstanding, they must bear their ordinary Rates to the Poor, as other men
do. Rates.
Resolved by the Judges. 7. If there be not Masters enough within the same
Parish, to entertain the poor Children there, the Justices of Peace may compel
men of other Parishes within the same Hundred to take them: And if there be not
enough within the Hundred, the Justices of the Peace, at their Sessions, may
compel them of any other Parishes, within the County, to take them. Resolved
by the Judges. 8. These Apprentices may be bound to a man, either in regard of
his ability, or in regard of his Farm. And in the last case it seems reasonable
that he go with the Farm. 9. This binding must be Indenture
by Indenture, or it is not good. 10. The Indentures thus made by the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, with the allowance of the Justices;
and this binding by them, are as effectual to all purposes, as if the Children
were of full age and did bind themselves by Indentures. 11. All such as are so
bound, according to 43 Eliz. may be safely received as Apprentices, 12 Car. 4.
If any man refuse to accept of an Apprentice being thus placed to him, he is by
the Justices of Peace, to be bound to appear at the next Sessions or
Gaole-delivery: And if he refuse so do, he is to be sent to the Jail, till he
do so. And if he be bound to appear at the Sessions, and do appear, and then
refuse (without a sufficient excuse to be allowed of the Justices of Peace) he
is by them to be bound to the good behavior; or if he refuse so to do, to be
imprisoned till he do so; and he may also be Indicted and Fined for his
contempt. Resolved by the Judges. 13. If a special Rate be set on any man to
help place a poor Child Apprentice, it may be levied upon his Goods as other
Rates are levied. Resolved by the Judges. 14. If the Parents of such poor
Children, refuse to let their Children go to be Apprentices, or entice them
away, being bound; the Parents themselves may be sent to the house of
Correction.

3. The next main part of their Office is, In relieving the Poor. And what Poor
they are to relieve.
help them that are poor, and not able to live by their work: For this we must
know, that there are three sorts of Poor: 1. Such as are poor by impotency; as
first, the aged decrepit persons, that are past labor; Secondly, the Infant
Fatherless and Motherless, not able to work; Thirdly, the person naturally
disabled in Wit or Member, as the Idiot, Lunatic, Blind, Lame, etc. Fourthly,
the person visited with sickness, who thereby, for the time is impotent. All
these being impotent, and not able to Work, are to be found and provided for,
by the Overseers, or necessary relief.

2. Such as are so by Casualty; as first, he that is casually maimed in his
Calling, as the Soldier, Laborer, etc. Secondly, the person that is decayed by
Fire, Water, Robbery, Su^etiship, etc. Thirdly, the poor man overcharged with
Children. All these, and such like, having no sufficient means to maintain
themselves, are to be helped and set on work by the Overseers; and being not
able to live by their work, are further in Charity to be relieved in some
reasonable proportion, according to their wants.

3. The thriftless Poor; as first, the riotous and prodigal person that
spends at play, drinking, etc. Secondly, the dissolute person, as Strumpet,
pilferer, etc. Thirdly, the sloathfull person, that does refuse to work, or
does wilfully spoil or imbezle his work. Fourthly, the Vagabond that will abide
in no service or place. Fifthly, such as will work but for the wages taxed or
usually given And for all these latter sort, the House of Correction or Common
Jail is the fittest place; and to the House of Correction is he to be sent,
and not to his place of Birth, that will not work at the wages assessed or
usually given: but if they have able bodies, they are to be compelled to labor;
for the Rule of Christ is, That such as will not labor, must not eat, 2 These.
3. 10 And yet if these prove unable to work, then it seems they must have
relief from the Parish as well as others.

2. They are not to take care for houses or other relief, for such as are able
to work, and have, or may have work, nor yet for their Children; for they are
by their work to maintain them also: But if such be over-burthened with
Children, it will be good for the Overseers to place some of their Children
Apprentices: and if these cannot have work, the Overseers must procure them
work; for none may beg in the Highways within or without their own Parish,
nor at any man's doors without their Parish, by any license whatsoever, nor at
any man's door within the Parish, without order of the Overseers of the Poor. 3.
Nor are they to take care of such as are able to live; and therefore if any
such person travel through a Parish with Children, and the Father dye and leave
them; in this case the Parish is not bound, but in Charity, to relieve them. 4.
Nor for such as, having nothing to live by, have able bodies, may have work and
will not work: They are not to take care to relieve Rogues, for they are to be
sent away.

6. They must take care for such Poor as In settling of Poor, and where they
shall he settled.
Grandchildren, able to relieve them as well as others, till they can be
forced to help them. For the Justices of the Peace, at their general Sessions,
may rate the Father or Grandfather, Mother or Grandmother, Children or
Grandchildren, being able to help relieve any poor People, and force them to
pay it, if they live within the County. And yet if a Woman, having a Bastard
take a Husband, it seems he is not bound to keep the Bastard, unless he have an
Estate by her. And if the place be not able to relieve their Poor, two
Justices, Quorum unus, may charge any other place within the Hundred to help:
And if the Hundred be not able, the Quarter Sessions may charge the whole
County.

7. They must take care for all such as are lawfully sent to, and settled
amongst them, if they prove impotent. But by the way, as to the point of
settling these Rules and Cases following, are to be known.

1. He that is a Native, Householder, Sojorner, Apprentice, or Servant, within a
Parish, and does live there in Peace but three weeks or a month together, is
said to be settled there: But he that passes through a Town only, or is in
another Man's House, as an Inmate two or three days together; or lies in an
out-House or Barn, for a longer time, having no house to dwell in; or a Child
at Nurse there; or a Scholar at School there; or in the place being an
Uuniversity; or as a Traveller in an Inn there, is not said to be settled there
by this. And therefore if any impotency happen to any such, the place shall not
be charged, but they shall be sent to the place where they or their Parents are
settled, or where the Children were settled. Resolved of the Judges.

2. If a person be once duly settled in a Parish, he may not be after removed,
but there he must be relieved, or set awork, as his case is; for no man is to
be put out of the Town where he dwells, nor to be sent to his place of Birth
or last habitation, but a vagarant Rogue; And therefore they that have Houses
or Services in Parishes, when their Estates or Services are ended, are to get
new Houses or Services, and work if they be able: for in this case the Parish
is not to provide for them: But if they be impotent, they must be there
relieved, for they may not (in these cases) be sent to their places of birth,
or last dwelling. And yet it is said in these cases, if any of these persons
shall be taken begging abroad out of the same Parish, that in this case such
person may be sent from the place where they are taken begging, as a Vagabond
to the place of his birth. Resolved of the Judges. But if he go of his own
accord into that Parish, and do not beg there, they cannot send him back; for
none but a Rogue can be sent back to any place from whence he came. Pasch. 7.
Car. B. R. per Chapter Just. And those young Children whose Parents are dead, are to
be set a work, relieved or maintained at the charge of the place where they are
dwelling at the time of the death of their Parents, and are not to be sent to
their place of Birth, etc. For if the Parents be not Rogues, the Children
cannot be Rogues till they wander and beg.

3. For further opening this matter, take these Rules. First, the Law
unsettleth none who are lawfully settled. Secondly, none may be settled by
practice. Thirdly, none can be said to be settled in that place where he is in
no quiet, but continually interrupted by complaints to Justices of Peace, their
warrants or other disturbances of the Parishioners, or Overseers of the Poor.
Fourthly, no settlement can be made by composition and agreement. Fifthly, no
settlement can be made by an illegal remove. Sixthly, nor can any settlement be
by any man's being in a Parish obscurely, and in a skulking way, that the Parish
cannot take notice of him

4. For the opening and illustrating of these Rules, take these Examples and
Cases. 1. If a Rogue be taken at A. and he will not confess, nor can they find
the place of his Birth, but he says that his last habitation was at B.
whereupon he is whipped sent to B. and there he confesses the place of his
Birth to be at C. In this case, without any new vagarancy, they of B. may send
him to C. Resolved of the Judges. Secondly, If one that has a Family, take a
house in a Parish for one year, and before the end of the year, he is forced
out of the possession of it, and then goes into another Parish and take part
of a house, and is there as an Inmate but one, two, or three days, he is put
out from thence; and then for want of a house lies in a Barn in a third
Parish, and there the Husband is sick, and Wife delivered of a Child: Now in
this case they shall be sent to, and settled in the first Parish, where his
house is, and from whence he was lawfully removed; for none may be so forced to
turn Vagarants. Resolved of the Judges. Thirdly, a Soldier maimed in the late
Wars before May, one thousand six hundred forty seven, must be settled in the
place where he was settled when he took up Arms. Ord. May one thousand six
hundred forty seven. Fourthly, If an Apprentice or a Servant go out of that
condition, he cannot be thrust out of the place, but must continue there, and
be disposed of as his case requires. And if the Master of an Apprentice die
before, or within the time, his Executors or Administrators must provide for
him (if they be able) otherwise; and how^oever if the Apprentice become
impotent, the Parish must do it; and so it is if he be placed by the
Churchwardens. Resolved of the Judges. And if a Servant be got wi^h Child, and
then goes out of her Masters Service, before or after it appear she is with
Child, and the reputed Father is run away, or poor; in this case, not the
Master, but the Parish shall be charged. Resolved of the Judges. Fifthly, The
Wife regularly is to go with the Husband, albeit he be a Servant. Resolved of
the Judges. And if a Husband and Wife be Roguing, and they have a house in
another Parish, though as an Inmate, they may be sent thither. Resolved of the
Judges. And general Children Seven years old, and vagarants, must be sent to
and settled with the Father or Mother, or Mothers Husband; and if he be dead,
the Mother where she was born or last dwelt the space of a year. And being thus
settled, they must there remain, and not be sent away from thence to their
place of birth; though after their Parents die or run away, or the Children be
above Seven years old, or do turn vagarant in that Town; for they must be
there set on work. Resolved of the Judges. If a woman have a Bastard, and then
take a Husband; it is said he is not bound to maintain this Child, unless he
have a sufficient Estate by his Wife to do it, 10. Car. So held by the
Sessions in the County of Wilts. And if a Rogue, whose last place, or place of
birth cannot be known, have a Wife, and Children under seven years old, they
must go with the Husband to the place, through which they were last wilfully
suffered to pass without punishment, where the Children are to be maintained by
their Fathers work, though they be sent to the House of Correction. Dalt. J. P.
14. If one hire a House in A. or have no House in A. and live there with his
Wife and Children, and bind himself to serve one in B. In this case, the Wife
and Children must remain in A. But if he hire a House in B. then they must be
all in B. And Children, whose Parents are dead, are not to be sent to their
place of ^irth, etc. If they be like to be a charge; for the Parents not being
Rogues, the Children cannot be Rogues, unless they wander or beg: in this case
therefore they must be maintained at the charge of the Parish where the Father
dyed. But if a traveling woman that has a Child sucking on her, be sent to
Gaol and then hanged for Felony, the Child shall not be charged on the Parish
where she is hanged; but it shall be sent to, and settled in the place where
she was born, if it can be found, otherwise to the place where she was taken.

The Bastard Child, the Mother, or reputed Father, being not able to maintain
it, must be with the Mother so long as it is in the condition of a nursing
Child, and then it must be sent to the place of its birth: And if one be
delivered of a Bastard Child in one Parish, and after the Mother go into
another Parish with it, or become vagarant, so that she is sent to the place of
her birth; the Child being under seven years of age, is to be sent to the
place of his birth, and not settled with the Mother. Resolved of the Judges.

If a Woman settled in a Service, hap to be with Child, which is like to be a
charge, the reputed Father being gone or poor, the Parish where she is must be
charged; but if she be in another Parish and settled, there she must continue.
Resolved of the Judges. And therefore if a Woman unmarried be hired Weekly,
Half-yearly, or Yearly, in one Parish, and there is begotten with Child; and
then goes into another Parish, where she is settled in service or otherwise,
two or three months; and then she appear to be with Child, and it is like to
be charge to the Parish, the reputed Father being gone or poor; in this case
she is to be settled in the Parish where she is not, where she was begot with
Child. Resolved of the Judges. And if such a Servant be got with Child, and
then go or be legally put out of her Masters service, the Parish, not the
Master, must be charged with it. Resolved of the Judges. So if a Servant be
with Child when she is retained, and for this she is afterward by a Justice of
Peace discharged of the service within the time, or she be with Child and her
time be expired, and she not able; the Parish, not the Master, shall be charged
herewith. Resolved of the Judges.

4. The Justices of the Peace in their Quarter Sessions, if any question be
about these things, do settle it according to these Rules.

5. Such as do remove any contrary to these Rules, may be fined; and if any be
sent to any place against these Rules, they are to be sent back again to the
place from whence they came. Stat. 43 Eliz.

These Officers must provide houses as well as victuals for their Poor, and
therefore they may by order of the Quarter Sessions, and leave of the Lord of
the Manor, first had in writing under his Hand and Seal, build any house for
the impotent Poor of the Parish in any waste part of the Manor, and they may
place more Families than one therein, as Inmates, without any danger: but then
this house must not be afterward converted into any other use; for so it may
become a Cortage afterward.

They are to do their work by and with Tenters default of Cloth^ers, the Flesh
in Lent in a Victualling house, for taking Partridges, profaning the Sabbath or
Gods name; and such as offend against the Statute made for the Poor, and
against Rogues.

The next main thing wherein the duty In making of Rates.
Rates. For to this purpose, it is provided, that the Churchwardens and
Overseers of the poor, or the greater part of them, with the assent of two
Justices of the Peace, may raise weekly or otherwise (by Taxation of every
Inhabitant, Parson, Vicar, and other, and of every Occupier of Lands, Houses,
Tithes impropriate, or propriation of Tithes, Coal-mines, or saleable
Uunderwoods in the said Parish, in such competent sum and sums of money as they
shall think fit) a convenient stock of Flax, Hemp, Wool, Thread, Iron, and
other necessary Stuff to set the poor on work: and also competent sums of
money, for and toward the necessary relief of the Lame, Impotent, Old, Blind,
and such other among them being poor and not able to work: And also for the
putting out of the Children of poor persons to be Apprentices: And also for the
setting up of houses for the Poor, to be gathered out of the same Parish,
according to the ability of the same Parish, and they may do and execute all
other things, as well for the disposing of the said Stock, or otherwise
concerning the premises as to them shall seem convenient. For the better
understanding of which branch of the Statute of 43. Eliz. and discovery of the
Law, concerning Rates in general, these things must be known.

1. That when Officers are to make any Rates, they shall do well the first of
all to give public notice in the Church, of the time and place when and where
they intend to make the same (for this in the case of Church Rates is
necessary;) and then if the Parishioners will meet they may, if not, the
Officers and those that do meet, may make the Rate. 2. The Rates must not be
ext^^ded beyond the Parish, neither may the Overseers Rate other Parishes
toward the Rates of the Poor of their Parish. For in Hill. Term. 10. Car.
inter Nichols and Walker, was this case in the Kings Bench. Totrige was time
out of mind, within the Parish and parcel of the Parish of Hatfield, in the
County of Hertford; and the Parson of Hatfield, had time out of mind, had all
the Tithes out of Totridge, as within the parish of Hatfield, and had always
placed Curates there to say Divine service in the Chapel of Totridge; and that
for sixty years before Totridge was reputed a parish of it self, and during
that time, had parochial Officers; and that of late the Overseers of the poor
for the Parish of Hatfield, had taxed the Plaintiff Nichols (being an
Inhabitant of Totridge) to pay to the poor of Hatfield, which tax was confirmed
by the Justice; and the money being unpaid, the Defendant Walker, being an
Over-seer by Warrant from the Justices of Peace, distrained the Plaintiffs
Goods; and for this taking of his Goods Nichols brought an Action against
Walker, and in this case it was adjudged for the Plantif, and Resolved by the
Judges, that Totridge being but a Parish in reputation only, should not be
liable to the Taxation made by the Overseers of the Poor of Hatfield. 3. Every
man must be rated for his Land to all Rates according to the quality and yearly
value, and not according to the quantity thereof. And so was the opinion of the
Lord Chief Justice, and Baron Denham, at an Assizes at Sarum. 8. Car. 4. He
that does occupy Land in his own hands, lying in several Parishes, must be
charged in every Parish for his Land there, only proportionably and no more. 5.
The Farmer is to be rated for the Lands he has in Lease, not the Lessor. 6.
The Lord or Lessor shall not be charged for the Rent issuing out of the Land,
because the Tennant is chargeable for the whole Land. 7. If there be some other
Lands within the Parish that be ancient Demesne, and some that be Guildable, it
seems they must be all rated, and so also of Copyhold Lands. 8. Impropriations
(by the very Letter of the Statute) are to be rated to the Poor as well as
other Lands. And in the rating of them, it seems reasonable, that where they
have the Tenth of the whole Parish, they bear the Tenth of the charge of the
Rate to the Poor. And so has it been of late Resolved by the Judges. 9.
Saleable Underwoods (by the express Letter of the Statute are rateable, and by
these are intended generally, all Woods for Firewood, albeit they be not cut
in thirty or forty years (as the Beech-wood of many Countries is used to be
cut) for it seems there is no wood to be exempted from this Rate but
Timber-wood only: Also Coal-mines are chargeable to this Rate, and for these
things they must be proportioned to a yearly benefit. So that if a man have a
hundred Acres of wood within the Parish, it must be considered what wood he may
sell, and what benefit he may make thereof yearly, to the Worlds end; and
according to the same the Rate must be made: And for Coal-mines it must be
considered what benefit a man does make by them, and according to the same, he
must be rated. 10. Parsons, Vicars, and such like persons (as Inhabitan^s)
within the intent of this Statute, are to be rated toward the relief of the
Poor as well as other men; and so has it been Resolved of late by the Judges.
11. Any man that dwells within the Parish, albeit he have no Land within the
Parish, may be rated toward the relief of the Poor of the Parish. And so has
it been also Resolved by the Judges. 12. In some cases a man may be taxed for
his Goods, as well as for his Lands; and in case of a Rate for the Poor, men
may be taxed for their visible Estate of goods, viz. their Oxen, Kine, Sheep,
etc. as well as for their Lands and not only for those goods that are within
the same Parish, where a man does dwell, but also for those goods which he has
in any other place: for a man shall not be rated for his goods in any place,
but in the place where he does dwell. Nay it is held in this case of Rating for
the poor, some respect may be had to men's invisible Estate of money; for the
case may be so, that the Raters may know a man within the parish that has no
other Estate, and yet perhaps has an annuity of one hundred pounds by the
year, or has hundreds of thousands of pounds of money owing to him; and in
such a clear and certain case, they may no doubt Rate him according to that
value. 13. In some special case a man may be Rated beyond his ability: for if a
Parishioner for his own gain, or otherwise, shall bring into the parish,
without the consent thereof, a Stranger who is, or is apparently like to be
burthensom to the parish, in this case the Parishioners (because they have no
other remedy against him) may Rate him, not only according to his ability of
Lands and Goods, but according to the Damage he brings, or is like to bring
to the Parish by his folly: For if any person shall find himself grieved with
any such Rate to the Poor, or other such like act done by the Overseers of the
Poor, or the Justices of the Peace, he has no other remedy but to complain to
the Justices of the Peace at the Quarter Sessions, where (the case appearing to
be as aforesaid) he shall have a little relief. 14. If any man refuse to pay
his Rates for the poor, the present or subsequent Overseers of the Poor shall
have a Warrant from the Justices of the Peace to levy the same of the parties
Goods; And thereupon they may and must sell the parties Goods, and pay
themselves their Rate, and give the party the overplus of the money if there
be any; and if he have no Goods, then to carry him to Gaol, there to abide
until he do pay it. It seems to me, that for relief of the poor that they have
not places for in case of necessity, that they may Rate the parish to build a
house, and to buy a piece of ground in some of the Parishioners names to set it
upon: For it is in their discretion which way to provide. And if they over-rate
any man to these ends, they cannot be sued by the party grieved: But if there
be any conspiracy in the case, to oppress a man, or he be rated to pay debts,
or for Alimonie, or for any other purpose by these Officers, an Action will lie
against them.

These Officers, with the Churchwardens, the Parson or Vicar, and the
Constables of the place, or the most part of them (where any money is or shall
be given, to be continually employed for the binding out, as Apprentices, the
poorest sorts of Children) shall within the same places, have the nomination
and placing of such Apprentices, and the guiding and employment of such moneys
as have been heretofore so given, or which hereafter shall be so given to and
for the continual binding forth of such and so many Apprentices; and in such
sort as is already or shall hereafter be so given and appointed, either by the
last Will or any Writing under the Hand and Seal of the givers of such moneys.
And if any of them wilfully forbear or refuse, according to their duties, to
employ such moneys, by means whereof, the said money shall not be employed
accordingly, then every of them so offending, shall forfeit three pounds for
every such offense. And the Master, Mistress or Dame of such Apprentices shall
be bound with one or two sufficient Sureties, in double the sum they have
received with such Apprentices, to such persons as aforesaid, appointed to
dispose the same moneys, to repay the money so received at seven years end, or
within three months next after the same seven years ended. And if the
Apprentice, Master, etc. happen to die within the said seven years, then within
one year next after such death. And these Officers and the rest ought to put
forth and employ such moneys within three months at the furthest, after the
same shall come to their hands. And if there shall not be found fit persons to
be bound out Apprentices in the Towns and Parishes where such moneys are or
shall be given, to be employed as aforesaid, the poorest Children of any of the
Parishes next adjoining may (by the discretion of the said Parson, Vicar, etc.)
be bound Apprentices, taking such Bonds as are before mentioned. And choice
must be always made of the poorest sort of Children; and that no Apprentice be
above fifteen years old when he shall be first bound. And the said Parson,
Vicar, etc. are once every year in Easter week, or within a month after Easter
day, to be accomptable before four, three, or two Justices of the Peace,
dwelling in or next the said Towns or Parishes, for all such moneys as they
have employed in binding of Apprentices; and of all Bonds and Obligations taken
for payment thereof, and of the money remaining in their hands, and are at such
account or within ten days after, to deliver to their Successors, or to such
as have been in their times or places, all the said Bonds and Obligations, and
such moneys as remain in their hands not then employed.

They must, being required by the Justices Numb. 8.
of Peace, attend them, and with the Churchwardens, In making Presentment.
give them an account of these things; what Stocks of money are in their Parish
by Rates or otherwise; what Apprentices they have placed; and what they have
done in all the rest of their Office.

These Officers and the Churchwardens, are to meet monthly in the Church, on
Sunday after Evening Prayer (except they be let by Sickness or other cause, to
be allowed a good excuse by two Justices of the Peace) to consider of all these
things.

They are always, within four days after the end of their year, and after
other Overseers named and allowed by the Justices, to give up to any two such
Justices of the Peace as aforesaid, a true and perfect account. 1. Of all sums
of money by them received or rated, and not received. 2. Of all such stock of
Ware or Stuff as they or any of their poor have in their hands. 3. What
Apprentices they have put out. 4. What poor they have set on work, or relieved.
5. Whether they have suffered any of their poor to wander and beg out of their
Town, or in the Highwayes, or in their Town without their direction. 6. Whether
they have not monthly met to consider of these things. 7. Whether they have
Assessed the Inhabitants and Occupiers of Lands, etc. in their parish, viz. all
such as are of ability, and with indifferency. 8. Whether they have indeavored
to levy and gather such Assessments. 9. Whether they have been any way
negligent in their Offices, in executing the Justices Warrants about any thing
touching their Office.

And if any Churchwarden or Overseer shall refuse to give up his account as
aforesaid, and to pay over the Arrearages due (if any be) upon the same
account, unto his Successor, he may be committed to the Jail by two Justices
of the Peace, until he do account and pay over the same money. And if any of
these Officers shall offend in any other of the particulars aforesaid, he shall
forfeit for every default twenty shillings.

All these forfeitures are to go to the use of the poor of the parish, and may
be levied as follows, viz. The money forfeited by the Father, Grandfather,
etc. of any poor person taxed by the Justices, toward the maintenance of such
poor person that will not pay that Rate, may be levied of the offenders Goods
upon a Warrant from two or more Justices of Peace as aforesaid, by sale of the
same Goods, rendering to the party the overplus of the money. And if there be
no distress to be had, the Justices of Peace may commit the offender to prison,
there to remain without Bayl, until the forfeiture be paid: The money forfeited
by the Churchwardens or Overseers, for not receiving or taking care to convey
a Rogue, etc. may be levied upon the offenders Goods, upon a Warrant from two
or more Justices of the Peace: The money forfeited by the Churchwardens and
Overseers for offending in any of the particulars aforesaid, may be levied by
the subsequent Churchwardens and Overseers upon the offenders Goods: Also in
the same manner by a Warrant from any two Justices of the Peace: And if there
be no such distress to be found, the same Justices may commit the same
offenders to Ga^le, until they do pay it. And if any man shall in any wise
disturb the Execution of the Statute of 30 Eliz. 4. he shall forfeit five
pounds, and be bound to the Good-Behaviour by any two Justices of the Peace.

We have done with the Office of these Officers, so far as it concerns the
poor; now we come to that wherein their Office lies about other matters; the
which is given them also by ce^tain Acts of Parliament, and lies in these
particulars following.

For the better understanding of the Law Against such a profane the Lords Day.
1. This day is by every one to be sanctified and kept holy, and men must be
careful herein to exercise themselves in the duties of Piety and true
Religion, publicly and privately: and every one on this day (not having a
reasonable excuse) must diligently resort to some public place, where the
Service of God is exercised, or must be present at some other place in the
practice of some Religious duty, either Prayer, Preaching, Reading, or
expounding the Scriptures, or conferring upon the same. 2. None may on this day
meet out of their own Parish at any Sports whatsoever; nor may they meet within
their own Parish for Bear-baiting, Bull-baiting, Enterludes, or other unlawful
exercises, under pain to forfeit three shillings four pence for every offense,
to be levied by distress and sale of Goods; and for lack of distress to sit
three hours in the Stocks. Nor may any one on this day keep, or be present at
any Wrastlings, Shootings, Bowlings, ringing of Bells for pleasure, Masque,
Wake, Church-ales, Drinking-games, Sport or Pastime whatsoever, under pain to
forfeit five shillings if he be above fourteen years old, and twelve pence by
him that has the Government of him if he be under fourteen year old, to be
levied by distress and sale of Goods, or if no distress be to be had, to sit in
the Stocks three hours. 3. No Carrier may go with his Horses, Wagoner,
^^rriers.
Carter, or Wain-man, may go with his Cart, Wagon, or Wain; or Drover with his
Cattle on this day, under pain to forfeit twenty shillings for every offense,
to be levied by distress and sale of Goods, if he be questioned within six
weeks after the offense done. But there shall be but one twenty shillings
forfeited for one journey, although he pass through twenty Parishes; and this
twenty shillings that Parish shall have where the distress is first taken. 4.
No Butcher may Butcher.
kill or sell any victuals on this day, under pain to forfeit six shillings
eight pence, if it be questioned within six weeks after the offense done, to be
levied by distress and sale of goods. 5. None may Cry, show forth, or Tradesmen.
put to sale any Wares, Merchandises, Fruit, Herbs, Goods, or Cattle on this
day, unless it be an Inn or Victualling-house; and for such as cannot otherwise
be provided for, and unless it be the crying and selling of Milk before nine in
the Morning, and after four in the Afternoon, from the tenth of September to
the tenth of March; and for the rest of the year, before eight in the Morning
and after five in the Afternoon, under pain to forfeit the thing so cried or
offered to sale. 6. None may on this day Traveller.
without good cause, by allowance of one Justice of Peace, travel, under pain
to forfeit ten shillings, nor carry any burden, or do any worldly labor,
under pain to forfeit five shillings: Both these forfeitures to be levied by
distress and sale of goods; and if nondistress be to be had, to sit in the
Stocks three hours. 7. None may on this day or the Drinking. Tippling.
days of Humiliation, or Thanksgiving, use Dancing, profanely Drinking, or
Tippling in any Tavern, Inn, Alehouse or Tobacco-house, nor be there, or
grind any Corn at a Mill but upon cause, to be allowed by one Justice of
Peace, under pain to forfeit ten shillings a piece; he that is in the Inn, and
he that keeps the Inn; the Milard, and he that owes the Corn, to be levied by
distress and sale of Goods, and for lack of distress, to be set six hours in
the Cage or Stocks. 8. No Traveller, Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, Drover, or
their Servants, shall come into their Inn, or lodge on Saturday night after
twelve a clock, nor go from thence Monday morning before one of the clock,
without necessary cause, to be allowed by one Justice of the Peace, under pain
of forfeiture of ten shillings by the Traveller, and to be levied by distress
and sale of Goods, and for lack of distress to be set six hours in the Stocks
or Cage. 9. None Serving of Process.
may execute any Writ, Order or Warrant on this day; days of Humiliation, or
Thanksgiving (but in case of Treason, Felony, breach of the Peace, any
profaning of the day) under pain to forfeit five pounds, to be levied by
distress and sale of Goods, and for want of distress to sit six hours in the
Cage or Stock^; and the serving of the Process is void. 10. None (but in case
allowed by one Justice, or for Gods service) may travel Coaches, Boats.
with any Boat, Wherry, Lyter, Barge, Horse, Coach, or Sedan on this day, under
pain of forfeiture of ten shillings by him that is carried, and five shillings
by him that does carry, to be levied by distress and sale of Goods, and for
lack of distress to sit six hours in the Cage or Stocks.

Any one of these Officers, upon their own sight or knowledge of any Offense
done, by selling, crying, or offering of Wares to sell on the Lords day, as
before, may seize and secure the Wares and Goods, till Justice may be done
against the Offender therein. Also any of these Officers may search for the
discovery, finding out, apprehending and punishing of all the Offenders,
against any of the Laws aforesaid. And all that this Officer is to do, as it
seems by this Law, is only to search; and if he find any thing, to inform the
Justice of Peace thereof: for it seems to me he cannot do more without a
Warrant from a Justice of Peace. Act. 9. April, one thousand six hundred and
fifty.

Every one that swears, is to forfeit for Against Sweaters.
and all above him in degree, thirty shillings. The Baronet or Kinght, twenty
shillings. The Esquire ten shillings. The Gentleman six shillings eight pence.
Any other man or woman, single or married, three shillings four pence, and for
every offense afterward twice as much: And for the tenth offense, being proved
by verdict or confession, he is to be bound with Sureties to the Good-Behavior
for three years: and for lack of payment, or giving security to pay it, and
distress to levy it, if he be above twelve years old, he is to sit by the Heels
in the Stocks three hours for the first offense, and six hours for every
offense after; if under Twelve years, he is to be whipped by the Constable, or
Master, or Father in his presence: three swearings after the Surety, for the
Good-behavior given, is a breach of the Bond.

Any one of these Offcers may without Warrant apprehended, or cause to be
apprehended, and carry or cause to be carried to a Justice of Peace, to the end
he may be there punished, any one that does swear or curse against the Law.
Act. 28. June, one thousand six hundred and fifty.

Any one of these Officers may also take About superstitious Monuments.
down superstitious Monuments and Pictures upon the Ordinance of May, one
thousand six hundred forty and four.

If a Rogue be tendered and brought to any About Rogues.
one of the said Officers, to be conveyed to any place, he is to receive him
and look to him, as well as the Constable, or he may forfeit the five pound
penalty appointed, by the Statute of 29 Eliz.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Supravisors of the Highways, and their Office.
THe Supravisors or Surveyors What they are, and how they are chosen.
Officers yearly chosen by the Constables and Churchwardens of the Parish, to
look to the amendment of the Highways within the Parish. For the Constables
and Churchwardens of every Parish, must yearly upon the Tuesday or Wednesday
in the Easter week, call together some of the Parishioners, and then choose two
honest persons of the Parish, to be Orderers and Overseers of the works, for
the amendment of the Highways of the Parish leading to Market Towns. But now
by the new Ordinance, the choice is to be made the first Tuesday after the
twenty fifth of March yearly. And the safe way is to choose them the first, and
to choose them or approve them the second day again. The which persons so
chosen, shall have power to order the persons and carriages appointed for the
work, ac^^^ding to their discretion: And if either of the said persons so
chosen and appointed, shall refuse to take on him and execute the said Office,
he shall forfeit twenty shillings for this refusal. Stat. 2 and 3 Phil. and
Ma. c. 8. 18. Eliz. 9. 5 and 13. 29. and 5.

For the discovery of the duty of these Officers, Their Office and Duty.
are to be known.

1. That they have to do with no ways, but the public Highways. And so
has it been resolved by the Judges in the Upper Bench: For the Statute is
Highways leading to Market Towns.

2. The Constables and the Church wardens of the Parish are at the time of
choosing of these Officers, to name and appoint six days, to be before the
Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, then next following, set apart for the
amending of the Highways; and they are to give notice thereof the next Sunday
after in public in the Church: And this being done, these Officers, viz. The
Surveyors of the Highways are to see that the same be observed, and that all
the Parishioners do their work on the same days in manner as follows.

3. Every person having a Plough, Land in Tillage, or in Pasture, in the same
Parish, or keeping there a Plough or a Daught, shall find and send on every
day to the place appointed, one Wain or Cart, provided after the fashion of the
Country, with Oxen, etc. fit for the carriage, and with necessary Tools fit for
the work, and with two able men; and then and there these men must do such
work with their Plough, etc. as they shall be appointed to do by the Surveyors
aforesaid, by the space of eight hours on every of the said days, under pain
to forfeit for every default ten shillings. And every other Householder,
Cottager, and Laborer of the Parish (able to labor, and being no hired Servant
by the year) must by himself, or some other able man, be then and there ready
to work, and work every one of the said six days by the space of eight hours,
as they shall be appointed by the said Surveyors, under pain to forfeit twelve
pence for every day they shall make default herein. In the Explication of which
Branch, these things are to be known.

First, That a Plough land is not of any certain content, but ordinarily so
much as one Plough may plough in one year; which in some Countries is more, in
some less, according to the heaviness of the soil. Cook. 4. 37. and 9. 124.

Secondly, That so many Ploughs as men usually have, and use in the Summer
about their own business, so many they are to bring with them to this work: So
that (for example) if a man with one Plough, and five or six horses, shall
plough seven or eightscore Acres of Errable Land, and shall usually go in the
Summer with two Carts or Draughts; in this case, it seems he is to come with
two Carts or Draughts to this service. And he that occupies forty or fifty
Acres of Land, and keeps only three Horses, and one Draught or Cart, he is to
come with one Draught or Cart.

Thirdly, If a man keep only two Horses and a Cart for his own business; In
this case it seems, he is to come with his Cart and two Horses, provided with a
man or men to manage them.

Fourthly, He that has a Plough-Land, and has no Plough, but does suffer his
Land to lie fresh, yet is to find and send a Plough to this work: And so it
was agreed by the Judges in the Upper-Bench. Mich. 21 Jac.

F^fthly, A Plough-Land may contain House, Meadow, Pasture, and Wood; and
therefore, if one have so much of this, as will keep a Plough, and yield
Tillage for it, if part of it were Eared up: In this case, it seems, he is
bound to send his Plough, or else to pay for the same the penalty appointed by
the Statute, for his neglect.

Sixthly, He that keeps a Plough or Draught for carriage albeit he occupies
little or no Land or Pasture, in his own hands; yet such one, it seems, is
bound by the Statute to send his Plough to this service.

Seventhly, He that does occupy a Plough Land lying in Tillage or Pasture, in
several Parishes, shall be chargeable to the amending of the Highways in the
Parish where he dwells, as far as any person having a Plough-Land in any one
Parish is chargeable.

Eighthly, Every person keeping in his hands and possession, several or diverse
Plough-Lands, shall be charged to find in each Town or Parish where the
Plough-Lands (being in his occupation) do lie, one Cart, etc. furnished for
the reparation of the Highways in the several Parishes where his Land does
lie, as if he were a Parishioner dwelling in the Parish where the Plough-Land
does lie.

Ninthly, If a man be chargeable but as a Cottager, yet if he be in the Subsidy
five pounds in Goods, or forty shillings in Lands; so long as he stands at
that Rate, he is to send two able men to the work every one of the six days.

4. If the Surveyors shall think any of the Ploughs or Carts to be needless any
of the days, they may spare them, and instead thereof require two able men;
the which must come under pain to forfeit twelve pence a man for every default.

5. These Officers must see that the work be done according to the direction of
the Statutes; and every man is to see that he does his part therein. But if the
Surveyors themselves shall license any man to do less then his work, this will
excuse him.

6. The Owners of the grounds adjoining to the Highways, are to take care
that all the Fences, Hedges, and Ditches, next adjoining on either side of the
same, be from time to time Dicked, Scoured, Repaired and kept low; and that all
the Trees and Bushes therein be cut down, under pain to lose for every default
ten shillings. And if any man has any Ditch in his own Ground that does serve
to lead away the water out of the Highway, and he does not scour and keep the
same clean, so as to convey away the water; he shall forfeit for every Rood not
so scoured 12 d. And if any man that has a Ditch lying by the Highways side,
does cast the same up into the Highway, and then suffer the same to lie there
by the space of six months, to the annoyance of the Highway, he shall forfeit
for every Load so cast up, twelve pence.

7. These Officers may, if they see cause for the amendment of the Highways,
take and carry away so much of the Rubbish, and smallest broken Stones already
dug of any man's Quarry lying within the same Parish, without leave of the
owner, as they shall think needful: But they may not without License dig in
any man's Quarry for new Stones, much less take away any man's Stones already
dug. And if there be no such Rubbish to be found in any man's Quarry, within
the said Parish, then may they enter into any man's several ground (within the
Parish) lying near the place where the ways are decayed, and there, if they
see hope of finding Materials fit for reparation thereof, may dig a new Quarry
without any leave of the owner of the Grounds; or they may enter upon any man's
Ground, and gather the Stones that lie dispersed there: But they may not
without leave dig for any new Quarry in the House, Garden, Orchard, or Meadow
of any man; nor (albeit it be in other Ground) dig more then one pit, and the
same in breadth or length not above ten yards over at the most; and then also
they must take care that the same be within one month after filled up again at
the charge of the Parish, under pain to forfeit five Marks to the owner of the
Ground. And if there be any Spring or Water in the Highway that does annoy the
Highway, they may turn the same out of the Highway into any man's Ditches,
according to their discretion.

8. They must within one month after any default is made in any of the
particulars aforesaid, present the same to the next Justice of Peace, under
pain to forfeit forty shillings for every neglect And this Presentment that
Justice of Peace must present to the next Quarter Sessions, under pain of five
pounds.

9. If any man offend against the Statute of 2 and 3 Phil. and Mary, (i.) If
the Constables and Churchwardens shall not make a due election of these
Officers, and set down and give notice of the times and days for the Work; or
if the Surveyors do not look to, and order the work; or the Parishioners do
not wait upon the Work, as aforesaid: In all these Cases, the Offender may be
punished by Fine or Amerciament in the Quarter Sessions or Leet, according to
the discretion of the Justices of the Peace, or the Steward. And these Fines
and Amerciaments are to be levied and employed by the High-Constable, in such
sort as is set forth in Chap. 1. of the Constables Office in the beginning. And
if any man offend against the Statute of 5 Eliz. (i.) If these Officers, after
they have dug in any man's enclosed Ground, shall not fill the Pit again; or
if they shall not present the defaults to the next Justice of the Peace as
aforesaid; or if any of the Highways shall be unrepaired; or the owners of
Grounds shall not cut up the Bushes, and scour their Ditches adjoining to the
Highways: In these Cases the Offender may be punished by Fine at the Quarter
Sessions, according to the discretion of the Justices of the Peace. And these
Fines are to be levied and employed as Fines and Amerciaments levied upon the
Transgressors of the former Statute. And if any man offend against the Statute
of 18 Eliz. chap. 9. (i.) If any man cast soil into the Highway, and do not
remove it within the time aforesaid; or do not scour their Ditches, etc. and
cut down their Bushes in their Highways: the forfeitures of these men (being
set down in certain by the same Statute) may be levied by these Officers
immediately by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, upon a Warrant sent
from the Justices of Assize, Justices of the Peace, or Steward of a Leet,
before whom the persons shall be convict. And if they be negligent, and do it
not within a year, then the Constables or Churchwardens of the place, may levy
the same as money is used to be levied upon an Amerciament in a Leet. But all
these Fines and Forfeitures are now by the new Ordinance of Parliament, to go
to the new Surveyors, and by them to be laid out about the Highways, Ord. 31.
March 1654.

10. If all this labor appointed by the Statutes to be bestowed on the
Highways, be not sufficient for the amendment thereof, the Parish must supply
it: For the Parishioners of every Parish are to look to their Highways, that
they be well repaired and kept at their peril. For an Information or Indictment
may be (by the very Common Law preferred for the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, etc.) against the Inhabitants of a Parish for not repairing of their
Highways; and thereupon they may be fined to the Keepers of the Liberty, etc.
And in this case the Fine shall not go to the use of the Highways, as the
Forfeitures and Penalties for the breaches of the Statutes shall do.

See more for the amendment of the Highways in Sussex, Surrey, and Kent,
Stat. 39 Eliz. c. 19. 27 Eliz. c. 19.

And now as touching the new Ordinance, Of the new Surveyors, upon the new
Ordinance, and their Office and Duty. Who must be chosen.
made for the repair of Highways, and the new Surveyors Power and Duty
therein, and the Law at this day in this point, these things are to be known.

1. That there must be two or more sufficient Householders of every Parish,
severally holding Lands of twenty pounds, or more, a year, March yearly: (And
upon this day also it seems now the Surveyors 20 l. forfeit by the Parish, for
want of choice.
also are to be chosen: And if no such choice be made of these new Officers
this day, then the Overseers of the Poor for that present time must be the
Surveyors of the Highways also upon this new Law. Also Scavengers (where any
are) or (as it seems) they may be made in any Parish as new Officers: And there
they are to be Surveyors, and have equal power with the Surveyors by this new
Law. And now, at this day, by this we do perceive that there are to be
Supravisors for the Highways, upon the former Laws, to oversee all the Work
required to be done by them; which is to be continued and performed still. And
there are to be new Surveyors, by this new Law, to oversee the Work to be done
thereby; and these are distinct Officers one from the other. And if these
Officers execute their Offices faithfully but a while, their ways will be so
good, that there will be little to do for either of them, for a long time
afterward.

The men of the Parish chosen to this Office, What they may and must do.
by this new Law, they are to see to these following things. 1. They must take
upon Numb. 4.
them the Office, and procure themselves, within ten days after their choice,
to be sworn before some Justice of Peace, or forfeit ten pounds for their
refusal. 2. They must repair and cleanse, and keep repaired and cleansed all
the Highways, common Bridges, Watercourses, Streets, and Pavements, belonging
to the Parish. And in Cities and Towns corporate, all the Streets and Pavements
therein, or the Suburbs thereof of near adjoining to the same. And in other
places where Pavements and Streets are, they are to look to them: And they are
to reform common Nusances herein. They are also to prosecure all such as have
straightened the Highways by Hedges, Ditches, Walls, or the like, within
twenty years past; and such as do not scour and dress their Hedges, Ditches,
etc. and such as have any Pavements defective, or suffer any Nuisance by filth
or otherwise. 3. They are for this purpose, within ten Twenty shilings forfeit,
if neglected.
days after they have taken their Oath, to view all the common and public
Highways, and Roades where Carts and Carriages usually pass, and consider
what is to be done, and what money to be raised to do it. 4. They are, within
six days after this view, to give notice in their Parish Church or Chapel;
of a time and place of meeting, to be within three days after, to meet to make
a Rate to raise money to do it. 5. At that time and place they, with their, or
the greater part of their Neighbors present (if they can agree together) if
not, by themselves are to make a pound Rate in writing upon all the Occupiers
of Houses, Lands, Tithes, Cole-Mines, saleable Woods, Tenements, and
Heraditaments within the Parish; and upon all the dead Goods, Commodities, or
Stock in Trade, accounting twenty pounds therein, to be equal to twenty
shillings a year in Land. And herein they may rate over and above all such men
as do suffer any Nusances in, or do any hurt to the Highways: And so they
may rate as often as they please, so as they do not exceed herein twelve pence
in the pound for one year, 6. If these Officers and the rest of the
parishioners present, cannot within two days of this meeting agree, then they
themselves may make it: And being made, they must get it to be confirmed by the
hand of one Justice of the Peace. And being thus made, it is become a perfect
Rate, and not to be altered but by the Justices of the Peace in their Quarter
Sessions, or by two of the Justices then present at the Quarter Sessions: And
this Rate, if every man does not pay it within seven days after it is made,
and after public notice is given for the payment of it, is to be doubled. 7.
They are to hire Ploughs and Men, so many as they think fit: And the Men so
hired must work, being required, for the wages that any two Justices of the
Peace shall set down. 8. They may cause the Dytches adjoining to Highways, or
serving to lead the water from them, that are undressed or unscoured, to be
dressed and scoured. And for any watercourse that does run into or stand in
any Highway to annoy it, they may stop it or turn it into any adjoining Ditch;
or they may make new Ditches in convenient places through the grounds
adjoining, for the conveyance thereof another way. And they may cut, plash, and
keep low all the Trees, Bushes and Hedges standing in Highways, or that are
suffered to grow up by them, to keep the strength of the Sun from them. 9. They
may dig and take Stones, Gravel, Sand, Cynder, Chalk, or any thing fit for the
mending of the Highways in any common ground. And if none be to be found
therein, or no such Common there, then they may take it in any private man's
Ground, Pasture, or Fallow in or near the Parish. And they may take a
convenient way to carry it through any man's ground at seasonable times: but for
this way, and for materials taken out of a private man's ground, they are to
give to him reasonable satisfaction such as they can agree upon; and if they
cannot agree upon it, then such as any one Justice of Peace not interessed in
the thing, and indifferently chosen between them shall set down. 10. If the
Parish by the Rate of twelve pence in the pound in the whole year, cannot
sufficiently amend their Highways, the Surveyors may by the help of the
Justices of the Peace get them help from other Parishes, that are under that
Value in the whole year, until their whole charge come up to this Rate. And if
there be any thing given Charitable uses.
toward the Repair of their Highways, which is not employed or mis-imployed,
they are to seek to the Justices of Peace for relief herein. 11. These Officers
also may, and so may any Constable or other man within the Parish, take all the
Horses, Mares, and Oxen that are in Carts and Wagons laden, drawn through the
Parish, that are over and above five Horses or Mares, or six Oxen and one Horse
in one Cart or Wagon. And Supernutrerarie Cattle in a Plough.
if the Owner do not within seven days after the taking thereof, pay twenty
shillings to the Parish wherein they were taken, for every Ox Mare or Horse,
over and above the number aforesaid, with the charge laid out about it, and for
the keeping of it; then he may sell the same and deduct so much of the money.
But the overplus he must give back to the Owner. 12. If all this will not do,
to redress the defects Bylaws.
of pavements and watercourse, and to make them run freely; and for the
removing of filth and other Nusances in streets, and other by places, the
Inhabitants of the Parish may make by-Lawes for a special Rate upon the
Parish, and make special Officers, and put penalties upon Offenders, and other
things to do it. And these Rates and penalties may be levied by distress and
sale of the goods of the party, by warrant from any Justice of the Peace: and
these By-lawes they may have confirmed by the Justices of the Peace in their
Quarter Sessions. 13. They are to employ and bestow all the Rates, Penalties,
Fines and forfeitures, arising by this new Ordinance, or by any other laws
touching Highways and Streets; and all Issues to be forfeit for not appearing
to any Information or Indictment for not repairing of Highways, or not
removing or reforming of Defects or Nusances in Streets or Highways; and all
Fines and Amercements to be set upon any place or person for not repairing
Highways, Streets, or Watercourse, to pay for Workmen and Ploughs, and to
do other things to be done by this Ordinance. 14. Those Rates and Distress.
penalties these Surveyors, or any of them, may levy by distress and sale of
goods of the party, by a warrant from any one Justice of the Peace: and for
lack of distress or not payment thereof within ten days after demand made or
left in writing, under the hands of the Surveyors, or either of them at his
house, who is to pay it, the party may, by warrant of the Justice, be committed
to Gaol without Bail till he pay double the money to be paid, and the charges
of prosecution for the recovery of it. 15. They are within a month of the
Account.
end of the year in their Office, to give in to the Parish at some meeting, to
be by them appointed, a just and perfect Account of all the money by them
recived, and laid out, in the time of their Office; and they are to pay over
the money then remaining in their hands to their Successors. And herein they
may deduct the money they have laid out in the prosecution of such as do any
Nuisance in the Highway; and upon his neglect or refusal that is a Surveyor,
any Justice of Peace may commit him to Gaol without Bail, till he make such
Account and payment, and such satisfaction to the Parish for the wrong, as any
one Justice of the Peace shall set down. 16. And if any of these Officers, or
any other, be sued for any thing done in these things, the Action must be laid
in the County where it was done, he may plead to it the general Issue: and if
the case appear so, the Jury must fine for the Defendant; and then, or if the
Plantif be nonsuit, or discontinue his Action, the Defendant shall have his
full costs he has laid out, to be set down by his own oath, and ten pounds
more to make him amends for his vexation, Ordinance of the Lord Protector and
his Council, March 31. 1654.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Register of a Parish and his Office.
The Register of a Parish What he is, and how he is chosen.
is a new Officer chosen by the Parish, and allowed by the Justices of the
Peace, for the publication of Contracts of Marriages, and for the taking and
keeping of the entries of all the Marriages, Burialls and Christnings of the
Parish. He is to be chosen by the Parish, and approved and sworn by a Justice
of Peace, and the same entered upon the Register book of the Parish: And then he
is to continue three years in his Office and longer, till another be chosen;
unless the Justice of Peace, or Justice of Peace and Parish together, put him
out in the mean time.

This Officer is to receive a note in writing His Office and Duty.
from any one or both of his Parish, or one of his, and one of some other
Parish, that intend Marriage, of their Names, Sirnames, Additions, and places
of abode, of the parties to be married, and of their Parents, Guardians, and
Overseers.

2. This he is to publish, or cause to be published three several Lords days
then next following, at the close of the morning exercise, in the Church or
Chapel; or, if the parties to be married desire it, in the Marketplace next
thereunto, on three Market days, in three several weeks next following,
between the hours of eleven and two of the Clock.

3. Upon request of the parties concerned, he is to make a true Certificate of
the due performance hereof.

4. If any exception be made against the same intended marriage, he must insert
the same, with the name of the person making the exception, and his place of
abode in the Certificate of publication.

5. It were very convenient for him to be present at the Marriage; for he is to
attend the Justice of Peace to subscribe the entire of the Marriage.

6. He is to call for, receive, and keep the old Church-Book; and to call for,
of the Parish, a new Register parchment Book, which the Parish must provide,
and he must keep; And therein he is fairly to enter in writing all the
publication of Marriages, Marriages, Births of Children, and Burials of all
sorts of persons, and the names of every of them, and the days of the month
and year of publications, Marriages, Byrths, and Burials, and the Parents,
Guardians, or Overseers names. And for this his Fees are as follows: For the
publication and Certificate of a Marriage twelve pence; and for the entry of
the Marriage, twelve pence: And for the entry of the Birth of a Child four
pence; And for the entire of the death of any man four pence. And for all this,
for poor People that live upon Alms, nothing: But by the Ordinance of 3. Jan.
1644. it was ordained, That such a Book should be provided by every Parish, and
kept by the Minister and other Officers of the Church; and that therein the
names of all Children and their Parents, the time of their Birth and Baptism;
and of all persons Married, and the time of all Buried, and the time of their
Birth and Burial be written and set down by the Minister there. And that the
same Book shall be showed forth by such as keep it, to all persons reasonably
desiring to search for any such thing, or take a Copy, or procure a
Certificate thereof.

So that now by this the Minister must take care of this also; for this power
is not taken from him by the new Law, being in the affirmative: Therefore he
and the Register must do it together, or else he must be made Register; and
this is the best way.

CHAP. XV. Of a Parish-Clerk, and his Office.
THe Parish Clerk is a Lay Officer of a Parish, chosen according to the Custom
of the place, to attend upon the Minister and Churchwardens, about holy
things. This Officer may be a Lay man, and is to be chosen according to the
Custom of the place; if usually the Parish have chosen him, so he must be
chosen; and that election will stand, and no Canon of the Church, when Canons
were in force, could have altered it: And therefore in this Case if the Parish,
according to Custom, had chosen one man; and Minister of the Parish, and the
Bishop, or Chancellor of the Diocese had chosen another, according to the
Canon, the Clerk chosen by the Parish should have stood; And the ordinary might
not have deprived him. Jac. Co. B. Candict and Plom case Hughs Rep. 163. Nor
can the Parson of a Parish put a Clerk so chosen out of his place without
cause, or interrupt him; he may have an Action against him, as another man that
is interrupted in any Lay Office, March. Rep. 101. pl. 174.

His Office lies only in and about these things; To set the Bread and Wine and
Cups decently upon the Communion Table, to provide water for Baptising, make
and keep clean the Church, put the Bible and C for the Minister, begin the
Psalm, ring the Bell or Bells, and such like things. See the same case.

If any of the Parishioners withhold his wages, His wages.
he may be relieved herein by any two Justices of Peace, who may by Warrant
require payment thereof: And these two Justices may, by Warrant, under their
Hands and Seals, order the Parishioners to pay it: And if they refuse, as it
seems, send their Warrant to levy it by distress and sale of Goods, and for
lack hereof, send the party to Jail till he pay it. But without Question the
two Justices may bind the Parishioners over to the Quarter Sessions one year;
if the Parishioner refuse to obey their Order, the Sessions may bind them to
the Good-Behaviour; or upon Indictment for their contempt, fine and imprison
them, Ordin. 9. Feb. 1647.

CHAP. XVI. Of a Hayward of a Parish or Manor, and his Office.
THe Haward or Hayward of a What.
Parish is an Officer of a Parish chosen and sworn in a Leet, for the Town, to
be the common Heard of the Town, Kytch. 46.

The Law takes not His Office.
much notice of this Officer, but it is said, He is to keep the Hedges of the
enclosed Grounds of the Parish, so that they be not cropped nor broken down, and
the Grass of the Parish from the destruction of Cattle, so that Hay be made
thereof: That he is to execute such Process of the Lords Court, as do come
from the Lord or his Steward of his Court there. That he is to present all
Pownd breaches made there, and all Wayffs and Estrays that shall come there.
But if he do not so, we know no Law to enforce him to it, nor to punish him
for neglect of it.

But the best use that we know is, or can be made of him is, to look to the
common Fields and Commons of the Parish; and to do his best to prevent and to
restrain Trespasses and spoil. But herein he can do nothing more than any
other Servant, nor otherwise then as a Servant to the parties trespassed, and
by authority or allowance from them.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Bailiff or Reeve of a Manor, and his Office.
THe Bailiff or Reeve of a Manor What he is.
is an Officer of a Manor chosen by the Lord of a Manor, to dispose of his
Affairs concerning the Manor.

Of this Officer the Law does take some more notice. And his Office is said to
lie in these things.

1. He is to collect the Lords Rents, Fines, His Office.
Haryots, Amercements, and other profits happening within the Manor, as they
grow due.

2. He may seize or distrain for them, Ex Officio, where seizure and distress
is justifiable, as Bailiff, without any special command of the Lord.

3. He may also pay any Rent due, out of the Manor, to any other person.

4. It said said, He may also order his Masters Husbandry, distrain Beasts,
damage fesant, repair any houses, hayes, or pales, and for that purpose cut
down any Timber or Trees. That he may take any Cattle for his Master to compast
his ground as an Agistment. That he may cut down Underwoods that have been used
to be cut, and do any other such like thing for the bettering and improving of
his Masters Land and Manor. But it is not safe for a Bailiff (as we conceive)
to take too much herein upon him without some special authority from the Lord;
nor very safe for others to join with him herein, unless they be sure of his
authority, or he has been long Bailiff there, and has been used always to
do such things as Bailiff. But it is agreed of all sides, That if he build any
new house, or set up any old house that is fallen, or make any new additions or
alterations, as tyle the house which before was thatched, or pale it where
before it was hedged, or the like, without a special command from the Lord so
to do, he will be a Trespassor to the Lord by it.

5. These also are to oversee and order the labors of other Laborers and
Servants that are under them, about their Masters work.

6. And lastly, They are to give account to their Lords, of all their Receipts
and disbursments, and pay into them the money remaining in their hands, being
required. And if they refuse, the Lord may compel them hereunto by an especial
Action of Account given to him for his relief in the Case, Broo. Bailiff 31. 8
Ed. 4. 13.

CHAP. XVIII. Of such Watchmen as keep watch and ward.
THe Office and Power of a The Power and Duty of them.
Watchman and Wardsman lies in these things.

1. They are, being required by the Constable, to watch and ward from Ascension
till Michaelmas; the Watchmen from Sun set to Sun rising; and the Wardsmen from
Sun rising to Sun set.

2. These Officers are to pose all men, and to arrest and secure all Rogues and
suspicious persons, and if it be in the night, to keep them till the morning,
and then bring them to a Justice of Peace to be examined; or if they will, they
may deliver them to the Constable, who must take care of them. And if any
resist them and break away they may send Hue and Cry after them.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Minister of a Parish.
THe Minister of a Parish his His Office and Duty.
Office about civil matters, lies in these things only.

1. He must keep a Register Book

2. He must herein enter a Testimonial, or Pass, of all the Rogues that are
taken up and whipped in the Parish.

3. He must herein enter all the Licenses he gives to sick persons, to eat
flesh in lent.

4. He must also enter therein all Testimonials of Servants, departing from
their Masters.

CHAP. XX. Of Owners and Rulers of Faires and Markets, and their Deputies.
THe Office of Rulers, and Their Office and Duty.
Owners of Fairs and Markets lies in these things.

1. they must appoint one certain open place in the Fair or Market, for sale
of Horses, Geldings Mares and Colts, and one sufficient person to take toll,
and keep the place.

2. This Deputy or person so appointed, must take Toll there from ten a clock
to Sunset, upon the Market or Fair day.

3. And he may take Toll after or before or in another place.

4. when any Contract is made about the sale of any horse, the parties
contracting, and the horse about which the Contract is made, must be present.

5. He must have and keep a Book to enter all Contracts of Horses.

6. He must there enter and write down the names of the Persons contracting,
the place of their dwellings, and color, or some other special mark of the
horse.

7. If he know the Seller himself, he may enter it as upon his knowledge, the
name of the Seller and place of his dwelling, mystery, price, and otherwise he
must take the same knowledge from some one credible person that will testify
it; and then he must enter also in the Book the Names, Mystery, and place of
dwelling of the Testifier.

8. He must give a note of this entry out of his Book to the Buyer, so he will
pay him twopence for it.

9. This Clarke or Register is, within a day after the Fair or Market, to
bring his Book to the Governor or Master of the Fair.

10. This Governor is then to cause a Note to be made of all the Horses sold,
and to subscribe his name or mark to it. Stat. 31 Eliz. 21. 2 and 3 Ph. and M.
7.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
Account. Where Constables and such like Officers are bound to Account, chap.
7. numb. 20. sect. 1. chap. 11. numb. 8. Adultery, see Bawdrie.
Affrayes. What Constables and others may and ought to do, to prevent and
allay an Affray, chap. 7. sect. 1. numb. 5, 6, 7. sect. 2. numb. 1, 5, 6.
Aid. What Aid Constables may require of other men in the execution of their
Offices; and what aid such men are bound to yield them, chap. 7. sect. 1. numb.
9. sect. 2. numb. 4, 6, 10. Allowances, see Account.
Arrest. What Arrest is, and where it is lawful, chap. 7. numb. 6, 11, 18.
sect. 2. numb. 3, 4, 8, 12, 13, 15, 16.

B
Bailiff or Reeve of a Manor. How be is made, and his Office, chap. 17.
Bawdrie. How it is to be punished, chap. 7. sect. 2. numb. 1, 5.

C
Churchwardens. How made, chap. 11. numb. 1. Their Office and Duty, chap. 11.
numb. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Clerk or Sexton of a Parish. How made, chap. 15. His Office, chap. 16.
Constables.
What these Officers are; and who may be chosen thereunto; and how; and their
Oath, chap. 1. sect. 2. chap. 7. sect. 1, 2. Their Office and Duty about the
Peace, and in case of Affrayes, chap. 7. sect. 1. numb. 5, 6, 7. sect. 2. numb.
1, 5, 6. About Fellons, chap. 7. sect. 1. numb. 6. sect. 2. numb. 1, 2, 8, 9.
About Adulterers, chap. 7. sect. 2. numb. 1. About them that threaten Murder,
chap. 7. sect. 2. numb. 5. Or Attempt to Rob, chap. 7. sect. 2. numb. 13. About
Night-walkers, chap. 7. sect. 1. numb. 6. sect. 2. numb. 2. About them that
make Insurrections, Ryots, chap. 7. sect. 2. numb. 4. About an Innkeeper
refusing to receive a Traveller, chap. 7. sect. 9. About Swearers, chap. 7.
sect. 4. About Purveyors, chap. 7. sect. 11. About the Profaners of the Lords
day, chap. 7. sect. 3. About Cloathiers, chap. 7. sect. 16. sect. 9. About
Alehouse-keepers, Drunkards, etc. chap. 7. sect. 9. About him that does
disturb a Minister in preaching, chap. 7. sect. 10. numb 4 About Stage Plays,
chap. 7. sect. 10. numb. 2. About a Rogue, chap. 7. sect. 6. About Hue and
Cry, chap. 7. sect. 2. numb. 10. 13. About Servants departing out of their
Masters service without a Testimonial, chap. 7. sect. 10. numb. 5. About
May-Poles, chap. 7. sect. 10. numb. 1. About Recusants, chap. 7. sect. 11.
About Maltsters, chap. 7. sect. 10. numb. 10. About them that dress meat in
Lent, chap. 7. sect. 11. About Hedg-breakers, chap. 7. sect. 10. numb. 9. About
Laborers that will not work, chap. 7 sect. 10. numb. 3. About suspicious
persons, chap. 7. sect. 1. numb. 1, 8, 9, 14, 15. sect. 2. sect. 6. numb. 4.
About Watch and Ward, chap. 7. sect. 2. numb. 2. About Rates, chap. 7. sect. 8.
chap. 8. sect. 2. About an Abjured person, chap. 7. sect. 11. About Takers of
Pheasants, chap. 7. sect. 11. About Highways, chap. 7. sect. 10. numb. 7.
chap. 8. sect. 3. About them that have the Plague, chap. 7. sect. 10. numb. 8.
About taking Fish, chap. 7. sect. 11. About a Presentment, chap. 7. sect. 12.
About carrying a Prisoner to Jail, chap. 7. sect. 2. numb. 5, 6, 7, 10, 13,
15. sect. 6. numb. 8. About the receiving and paying of money, chap. 7. sect.
8. About the petit Sessions, chap. 7. sect. 7. numb. 4. About the Executions of
Precepts from others, chap. 7. sect. 1. numb. 17. sect. 2. numb. 14. Where they
may justify the breaking of a House, chap. 7. sect. 1. numb. 10. sect. 2.
numb. 10. Arrest a man out of their Precinct, chap. 7. sect. 1. numb. 11. sect.
2. numb. 6. chap. 1. sect. 6. Where they may beat, wound, or kill a man, chap.
7. sect. 1. numb. 14. sect. 2. numb. 6, 5, 11, 15. Where they may Arrest the
body of a man, chap. 7. sect. 1. numb. 6. 11. 18. sect. 2. numb. 12. Where, and
how they may search, chap. 7 sect. 2. numb. 9, 11, 14, 15. sect. 1. numb. 6,
11, 18. Where they may imprison a man, chap. 7. sect. 1. numb. 14. Where they
may seize Goods, chap. 7. sect. 2. numb. 11. sect. 3. sect. 2. numb. 4. chap.
1. sect. 4, 5, 6. Where they may Fetter or Pinion a man, or put him in the
Stocks, chap. 7. sect. 1. numb. 11, 12, 13. Where they may let a Prisoner go,
chap. 7. sect. 2. numb. 10. What Account they must make, chap. 7. sect. 1.
numb. 19, 20, 21. The Office of constables of Towns, chap. 10. The Office of
High-Constables, chap. 9. Correction House, see Governor.
Custom. What Custom or Prescription is good in choice of Officers, chap. 7.
sect. 2.

F
Faires and Markets. The Owners and Rulers of Fairs and Markets, and their
Office, chap. 20.

G
Jail, see Keeper. Governor of the House of Correction. What he is: His
Office and Duty, chap. 5.

H
Hayward. How he is made: His Office, chap. 16.

K
Keeper of the Jail. His Office and Duty, chap. 6.

M
Ministers. The Ministers Office about Civil things, chap. 19.

O
Officers. Of Officers in general, chap. 1.
Overseers of the Poor. What they are, and how made, chap. 12.

R
Register of a Parish. How he is made: His Office and Duty, chap. 14.

S
Supravisors or Surveyors of the Highways. How they are made: And their
Office, and Duty, chap. 13.

T
Treasurers of the County Stock. For maimed Soldiers, Widows, and Children,
chap. 2. For relief of Prisoners in the Kings Bench and Marshalsey. For the
Prisoners in the Jail.

W
Watchmen. Their Office and Duty, chap. 18.

FINIS.

