IMPRIMATUR

Geo: Stradling, Rev. in Christo, Pat. Gilberto Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.
Ex Aed: Sabaud. 3o Jul. 1662.
THE EXCELLENCE Of the ORDER of the Church of England, UNDER EPISCOPAL
GOVERNMENT.

Set forth in a SERMON AT THE Visitation at BLANDFORD, Anno 1640.

By William Sherley, B. D.

Printed for Tho: Robinson of Oxford. 1662.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, GEORGE, By Divine Providence, Lord Bishop
of WINCHESTER.
My Lord,
THis being the only VVriting of the Author, that is found to survive both
him, and the iniquity of those times that oppressed him, I am bold to make it my
humble suit to Your Lordship, that for our security, least after all the rest,
this Relick, which I may properly say, was saved, (...) should perish also, You
would give us leave to inscribe Your great Name to so small a Piece; So, as by
Providence it has escaped the fiery Ordael; being upheld by Your Name, no
otherwise then the anti-diluvian Memoir's by the Pillars of Seth, shall it be
secure from any future Deluge, and transmitted to Posterity as a remainder, by
which they may esteem the greatness of their loss in those many Papers both of
him, and other worthy Persons, rifled in the common Calamity. My Lord, it is
the confidence we have, that had God preserved till now the Life of our
Relation, You would have accepted his Person, that makes me thus forward to beg
Your Lordships Patronage to this little Orphan, that some are pleased to think
is too good to perish: nor (however unable my judgment is in matters of this
moment) will my affection and nearness to the Author, give me leave to have a
less then the common estimation of it, That am

Your Lordships most humbly devoted Servant, Ri: Harris.
From the Inner Temple, June 25. 1662.
Text, 1 Cor. c. 11. v. 34. And the rest will I set in order when I come.


THe Church here on Earth, however She be the Spouse of Christ, has never yet
been so fair, but that according to St Ambrose, instar Lunae, Amb: 3. Hexaem.
like the Moon in the full, she has always had her Spots: These being one of
those Notes whereby She is to be known from that Elder Sister of Hers,
triumphant in the Heavens, the Church above. Some evidence whereof may be here
observed in the Church of Corinth, which being planted by no meaner an hand
then that of St Paul, how could it but be imagined, that the Harvest would
prove very good where there was such a Seeds-man? and that few or no Weeds
would have there grown up, where the Soil in its self being first well
prepared; the Grain likewise was so clean. But as in the Parable, so likewise
here, the Husbandman had no sooner sown good Seed in his Field, but the Enemy
came and cast on Tares: for the rooting up whereof, St Paul composed this
Epistle; an Epistle hereupon so full of bitter reproofs, Tertull: Li. de
pu^icit. c. 14.
as that Tertullian deems it to be totam conscriptam, written all over from the
beginning to the end, non Atramento sed Fell, not with Ink, but Gall. I list
not now to indite anew these Corinthians of those Schisms and Heresies, for
which my Apostle already has, even in this Epistle, long ago, both arraigned
and condemned them also. That only, what you for the present ought rather to
take notice of, is this, That St Paul having throughout this whole Chapter
taxed them for diverse irreverent behaviors of theirs in the Church; and
understanding too withal, that for want of decent Ceremonies in matters of
Religion, many other things were amiss amongst them, he conceives it not so
convenient to commit all to Ink and Paper, but reprieving the rectifying of
these unto a farther day, he promises, upon this employment, to come himself
amongst them: for so far has he been pleased to express his mind in the Text,
saying here to them, in these words which now have been read to you, The rest
will I set in order when I come.

The words then, you see, are the words of St Paul, who being now at Philippi,
writes unto the Corinthians, That for the redress of some certain matters in
their Church, which were out of order, he would, by taking a Journey thither,
vouchsafe them a visitation: So that they cannot but be conceived, to be very
apposite for that occasion, which has called us likewise at this time
together: The Face in the Glass, answering not the Face that looks upon it,
after a more exact proportion, then these two seem to comply each with other.
But that I may not be thought without method and Order, to handle a Text, the
main end whereof is nothing else but Order, give me leave to quarter it out
unto you with what evenness I may, into just four parts; which too, as having a
respect not only to the words themselves, but to this our meeting also, shall
be no other then these that follow. Namely, First, The Person visiting, who
promises here to visit, and that is St Paul, intimated here in the Pronoun, I.
Secondly, His Visitation, expressed in the word, Come. Thirdly, The end of his
Visitation, To set in Order. Fourthly, The Object, or those things that he
meant to have ordered, which here lie veiled under this indefinite term, (...),
the rest.


Of all these, and that too, according to the method that has been proposed;
beginning with the Person visiting, St Paul, whose worth was such, as that he
may very well be thought to have deserved so far, as to have even at your
hands, in the first place, an hearing.

Order, as it is conceived by Nazianzene, Naz. Ora. 26.
(...), the very Mother of Beings, and Womb of all Things: that (...),
mentioned by Aristotle in his Book De Mundo; that Universal Soul, whereunto the
World owes the benefit of its Preservation: This being so eminent throughout
the whole Universe, as that Pythagoras, from the mere Contemplation hereof,
(...), Stob. l. 1. c. 25.
christened first the World by the name of (...): Nay, so great an observer of
Order, is God Himself to be acknowledged, as that Clemens Alexandrinus is
pleased to derive the Etymology of the Greek Word (...), Clem. Alex. 1. lib.
Stro.
from his methodical placing and disposing of all such Bodies as have been
created by Him: whereas, much to the same purpose also, it is a Note of
Nazianzen's, Naz. Orat. sup. citat.
in that Oration of his which but now was cited, That the Almighty, being able
in Himself to have made all things in an instant, chose nevertheless, to
produce them one after another; some on the first day, others on the second,
and so on forward, until the seventh, (...), to the end that Order might be of
one and the same standing with the World it self. So that however St Austin
has raised a Question, Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 9. c. 15.
whether or no, in case Adam had not fallen, there should have been a Sub and a
Supra, any Subordinations at all in the Societies of Men; and seems likewise to
incline to the Negative, for that the very first time we meet in Scripture with
the word Servant (which too, according to the forecited Fathers observation, is
in the 9th of Genesis and the 25th) it being there spoken by way of a Curse; he
from thence collects, that Nomen istud Culpa Meruit, non Natura, Sin alone, and
not Nature, gave a Being unto that Condition: Yet for certain, ever since the
Fall, as matters have stood, without an orderly Series of Men, wherein, as in a
Predicament, some may be Summa Genera above, others Species Infimae beneath,
and a third between both, Genera subalterna, there can be no subsisting for any
one Society whatsoever: This being so necessary for all Commonwealths, as that
without this, so many Men being but as so much confused Rubbish, or like a
multitude of Stones lying in an heap together, come to be without any benefit
at all each of other; whereas, being once disposed of to such diverse uses and
several places, as they by their education have been fitted for, they then may
make, not an handsome only, but a good serviceable piece of Building. And if
it be thus in the State, then doubtless must it be more then so in the Church;
She having ever been esteemed an Hierarchy, whose Members ought, in that
manner, to be ranked and sorted into higher and lower Classes, as that hereupon
upon at the 6th of the Canticles, and the 4th, she is likened to an Army with
Banners; nay, however an Army having once displayed her Banners, and going on
upon a March, be a great Desciple and Servant unto Order; yet is it conceived
by St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. 10 Hom. in 1 Ep. ad These.
(...), that the Church in Her Discipline, is and ought to be more precise and
regular, then the Field Military is in its. For hence, Beloved, came it here to
pass, that my Apostle Saint Paul, having planted now a Church in Corinth,
suffers not those Elders whom he had there ordained, to be their own Bishops,
or reciprocally, and by turn, as it were, to be Governors each to other; but
knowing, that in the Church especially, nothing could be more unequal then such
an equality, He therefore holds in his own hands the reigns of Government, he
himself reserves unto himself Episcopal Jurisdiction; which too, he did not
only exercise for that year and half alone (mentioned in the 18h of the Acts,
and the 11th) that he lived amongst them, all which time (...) (as the word
used there by the Holy Ghost in the Orignal, is most observable) he sat there
and governed, as a Bishop in his Cathedral; but being once removed and absent,
he grew even in this respect the bolder toward them: whilst in this very
Epistle, at the 4th Chapter, and the 21 Verse, he threatens them a whipping
with his Apostolical Rod; at the 5th Chapter, and the 5th Verse, he sends out a
thundering Excommunication against the Incestuous Person: at the 11th Chapter,
and the 2d Verse, he constitutes Canons and Ordinances; whereas at the
sixteenth Chapter, and the first Verse, he enacts a special Edict for the
observation of them. Nay, finally that it might appear, that he was not wanting
in any one particular that might declare him to be their Bishop, he acquaints
them here in the Text, that for the Ordering of all such matters, as in that
Church of theirs were yet out of Order, he himself would come and visit them;
and who is there but will acknowledge, that without all contradiction, the less
ever has thus been visited by the greater? So that if we lay all together, and
add to this his visiting here, those other Episcopal Acts of his, but now
spoken off, which he did otherwhere; and then, however that illiterate,
ignorant Scotchman (for before so Learned an Assembly as this, Scoti (...)
Paraclesis contra Pan. Tileni Paraenesin.
to whom now I speak, the Author, otherwise then so; is not worth a naming)
has in a jeer, as silly altogether as himself, been pleased to snear it out,
that Profecto Paulus fuit Pessimus Dominus Episcopus, Verily Paul was but an
ill Lord Bishop, yet will it hereby appear, that Saint Paul (for however the
Man, for fear of Idolatry, dur'st not bestow the Saint on the Apostle, yet
Religion has taught us better manners then not to do it) that I say, even
Saint Paul himself, did in his Authority Lord it as much, as any of those our
Reverend Prelates; whom he, out of the depth of his ignorance, can by no means
fancy.

Neither ought it to be conceived as a Marvel, that my Apostle, so early now at
the first, erects this kind of Church Government amongst the Clergy here at
Corinth; since as if this were in a manner natural and essential to her, the
Church seldom or never has anciently been observed to have stood without it.
Thus in the old Testament we find, that amongst the Jews, there were not only
Priests and Levites, but an High Priest also, who was even then so lively an
Emblem of Episcopacy, as that hereupon, (...), and Summus Sacerdos, have since
familiarly been used, in the Writings of the Ancients, no otherwise then as
Synonoma's with the word Bishop. Whereas in the New it is to be read, that our
blessed Savior, whom Ignatius is not afraid to call (...); Ignat. Ep. ad
Magnes. Tertull. l. 4. co^tra Mar. c. 35.
and after him too Tertullian, Authenticum Dei Patris Pontificem, all other
Bishops being, as it should seem, but Copies only taken from him; like one of
that Order licenceth the Twelve, together with the Seventy, to Preach the
Gospel; until at last, immediately before his ascension, lifting up his hands
and blessing the Apostles, Luke 24.51. Aug. 97. quaest. de Novo Test.
Per istam manuum impositionem (as St. Austin seems to believe) Apostolos
ordinavit Episcopos: By that laying of his hands upon the Apostles, he ordained
them to be Bishops. Sure I am, that Antiquity thought it no prejudice at all to
the Apostles to have this Opinion of them, and therefore, Theodoret. l. 4. c.
18. Basil. Cyprian: Ep. 65. Hierom: ad Marcellum.
as the Greek Fathers were wont to call Episcopal Government, (...), and (...):
So likewise, who knows not but that it is as usual with the Latin to style the
Apostles themselves, in plain terms, Bishops; as having no meaner authority for
this, then that of St. Peter's own example, who in Acts 1.20. speaking of Judas
his Apostleship, calls it there by no other name, then by (...), his Bishopric.

But though Episcopacy lived in these Renowned Worthies, yet may we not
imagine, that it died likewise with their Persons; whilst they, like those
that ran in the Olympian Games, delivered that Light into the Hands of
Posterity, which such as went before had put in their's. Hence St. Paul
ordained Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and (as there is good record to be shown
for it) Titus of Crete; both which, even by St. Paul's Commission, exercised
that measure of Jurisdiction in each of those their Diocesses, as that it may
be made to appear, that the Reverend Prelates of the Church, do, at this day,
own no farther a degree of Authority, then that which Saint Paul in those his
Epistles afforded them.

Neither went this Fire out in later Ages, which at the first was so well
kindled: insomuch that as Irenaeus speaks it of himself, Irenaeus, l. 3. contra
Val. c. 3.
Habemus annumer are cos qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi, and
successores little usque ad nos: That he was able, for his own particular, to
give a Catalogue of those Bishops, that from the Apostles times had sat before
him in the Sea of Lions: Epishan. 66 Haeres. Enseh. l. 5. c. 6 and 11. l. 6. c
9. l. 7. c. 31. l. 8. c. 1.
So likewise Epiphanius, and Eusebius, taking in hand this Performance, have
deduced from the Apostles, until the Council of Nice, a Succession of Prelacy
in all the most famous Churches in the World, that then were extant. Whilst
Modern Chronologists, having brought down the Line near unto this present
Century, have hereby given unto the Pens of succeeding times, the occasion of
going on with that Story, which God, out of his mercy unto his Church, will, I
doubt not, but continue unto the Worlds end.

And shall this Sacred Order thus now be questioned, which having in all Ages
hitherto, so fair Evidences to show for its Title, has ever yet been thought
to be out of question? Shall the Rochet it self be yet at last disclaimed for a
Rag of Popery? and for this very Reason, be thrown off by those very Arms
themselves that once did wear it? How unhappy may we deem our selves, that so
unworthy an Act as this, has been reserved for the disgrace of these days of
Ours. Whilst it may be said of those, that have committed this infamous kind
of Church Murder upon themselves, Isidor. l. 1. Ep. 118.
what Isidor once spoke of a certain dissolute Churchman, one Zozimus, (...),
that These two alone have herein done enough, to draw a scandal upon all the
whole Clergy of the Christian World. But it is impossible to speak so loud, as
to reach their ears whom this concerns: and therefore I turn from them, and
address my self unto you, my Brethren, to whom I cannot but signify, and that
too in some such manner, as St. Paul once bespake his Philippians, telling
them, as he at least says himself of a matter weeping; that when I look into
Ancienter Times, and read in Pelusiot, that the People, Isidor. l. 1. Ep. 490.
as often as they met in the Streets with the Sacred Robe, were wont ever, in
all humble manner, for to cry out, (...), (it sounds well I am sure in Greek,
but knowing not how it would take with some of our Mother wits in English, I
therefore spare the Translation) when I observe, that they reverenced the
Ephod, Isidor. l. 1. Ep. 136.
(...), according to the same Author, as one that did bear the Image and Place
of Christ; and afterward cast mine eyes upon this our Age, wherein many think
they have Religion enough, if they can but hate a Bishop, and abhor a Ceremony;
how can I then but even from thence collect, that these our days are the very
dregs of time, and that the World, running now as it does stark naught, is come
to its Lees? But however such shallow heads as these esteem of our Reverend
Prelates, no otherwise then as of a gay useless Pageant, serving merely for
Pomp and Glory; yet deeper Judgments know how to demonstrate plainly, that the
Church her self is not able to stand without these Pillars: I, for mine own
particular, should be very jealous of the validity of mine Orders, had I not
known my self to have received them from the hands of some one Reverend Paul or
other. Whatsoever those Transmarine Sons of the Presbyterial Board, may think
of themselves, yet were they to be tried at the Bar of Antiquity, they would
scarce be found to be of the Tribe of Levy. St. Hierom, who, being but a
private Priest at Bethlehem, and discontented therefore with the meanness of
his own Condition, grew hereupon, amongst all the Fathers, the only Man that
spoke hardly, at least if not evil, of Dignities, does nevertheless in that
Epistle of his unto Evagrius, where he pleads most for the honor of Priests,
appropriate the Power of Ordination, wholly and altogether to a Bishop only:
Quid facit, Hierom: Ep: ad Evag.
says he, excepta ordinatione Episcopus, quod non facit Presbiter? as
conceiving this to be an act utterly beyond the Sphere of a Priests performance.

Whereas in after-ages; a Bishop being on a time for to Ordain, and being
enforced, by reason of a pain which he himself had in his Eyes, to suffer his
Chaplain to read the Words of Consecration, Binius, tom. 4. p. 559.
the second Hispaline Council, that was held then at Sivil, thought it
requisite to sit on those Persons who had been thus Ordained; who finding a
Nullity in their Orders, by reason the Words of Consecration were not uttered
by the Bishop himself, in the fifth Canon of that Council, adjudg'd them for no
Clergy men.

But whither am I now gone, or whither have I been carried, being called abroad
by my Text, and these Times together? Whilst the Person Visiting, having had
by this his allotted Minutes, if not more then comes to his share, to speak for
himself, It will concern us now to hasten him to his Visitation, which too,
being at hand in my next Particular, comes now in the second place, and that
too in the Word, Come, immediately to be treated of.

Si Judicas cognosce, Knowledge ought ever to be the Usher, the Needle as it
were, Seneca Trag.
that is to make way for the Thread of Justice: Whilst he that shall adventure
upon the executing of the later of these, without sufficient Instructions first
in the former, may well be likened to those Preposterous Governors, which
Munster makes relation of, Munster, Cosmogra: cap. de Hungar.
who in an Hysteron-Proteron Custom that they had, as Barbarous altogether as
themselves, were wont, upon a suspicion, to condemn the Party whom they
conceived to be a Malefactor, and then afterward to try the Carcass. And
therefore that my Apostle, being now as an Ecclesiastical Judge to sit upon the
state of the Church of Corinth, might the better have sufficient informations
of those things, that he was there to Order, he intends to make his own Eyes
their overseers; whilst for that purpose he here does promise, by way of
Visitation, to come himself first amongst them.

Neither may we imagine that my Apostle came to write so well as he did without
a Copy, as having many good precedents, which directed him to this particular
course of proceeding, which here he took. Thus in that very first Visitation
which ever was held, for the setting in Order again our first Parents, after
that irregularity of their's which they had committed, Venit Omnipotent, the
Almighty Himself comes in Person to view the Delinquents; For they heard the
voice of the Lord walking in the Garden, Genesis 3.8. Nay, however this All
knowing Visitor, by reason of his Omniscience, might justly have sentenced them
without a Trial; yet before he proceeds so far as the Act of Excommunication,
for the expelling them out of a Paradise, he vouchsafes, as Chrysostom very
well observes, (...), Chrysostom. 17 Hom. in Genesis
To ask questions, receive their answers, and then again to question them
farther: And why all this? but only to teach such as sit at the Stern of the
Church this Lesson, That they draw not suddenly the Spiritual Sword upon every
trifle: But as often as there is just occasion given to unsheath it, that they
forget not the Words of the forecited Father, (...), Chrysostom. loc. suprae
citat.
, to use much deliberation, and have themselves an inward seeling of heart
before they strike; as being at such times for to consider, that even in this
very act, they cut off a Limb from the Body of that Church whereof they
themselves are Members.

I list not to mention the Lords ordering of Cain for the Blood of his Brother
Abel; the doom that he passed on Sodom; the punishment wherewith he confounded
Babel: Though in all these God had his Venit, and his Visitavit also, for he
went down to see whether their defaults were answerable to that Cry that came
up unto Him. Having only begun with the first Visitation which the Lord ever
held, I shall end my Observation with that last Visitation which He intends to
make; that general one I mean, when (...), for so it is styled by St. Peter, 1
Pet. c. 2. v. 12.
as in the day of an Episcopal Visitation, both quick and dead shall be
summoned to appear before his Consistory. And though I dare not, with the
boldness of the Schoolmen, resolve on the Ubi, or the place where the Lord
shall then sit and Visit, and therefore cannot direct you to what particular
part of the World, that great Visitor of Heaven and Earth shall then bend His
Progress; yet that the Lord, even then, shall have his Venit, a coming
likewise, you have the Authority of an Apostle for it; 1 Thessalonians. c. 4. v. 16.
the Lord himself, says St. Paul, shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God; the Saints arising out
of their Grave to meet Him in the Air, shall welcome Him, as those Ancients did
their Prelates coming into their Cities, with Acclamations and Shoots of Joy;
an Archangel shall be His Voice, His Crier, and Heaven it self shall sound
that summoning Trump, more powerfully then that Bell, which ere while for this
purpose you all heard rung, to call you together.

And since that God Himself has had His Comings, His Visitations, no marvel
that the Church of God, in imitation hereof, has had Hers; whereby She
endeavors to heal those Breaches, which that great Compasser of Sea and Land,
Latimer.
the Devil ( quo non habet Anglia Episcopum diligentiorem, as old Father
Latimer was pleased once to express it) in those his Visitations likewise
inflicts upon her. A practice of that Antiquity, as that even in the Old
Testament may you find some plain footsteps of it: thus Eliah, you read at
the 2d Book of Kings, and the 2d Chapter, went from Bethel to Gilgal, from
Gilgal to Jericho, and from that to Jordan, visiting the Children of the
Prophets in all those places; which doing too, immediately before his being
taken up to Heaven, He seems to intimate by the very time it self wherein He
did it, that the Act was Divine and Heavenly, which He left till then to be
performed. Neither stood Eliah in this Point alone, whilst in this one
particular undertaking of his, the later Prophets succeeded him, no less then
they did in his office; and therefore at the 3d of Zachary, and the 7th, are
they, as it is at least in the Hebrew, styled (...) Walkers. Whereas in the New
Testament it said of our Savior, that Great Bishop of our Souls (for so is he
called in 1 Pet. 2.25.) that he visited us from on High, Luke 1.78. nay, that
he went about all the Villages and Cities of the Jews, teaching in their
Synagogues the Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 9.35. upon which place the Note of
St. Hierom is, Hierom. Comment. in 9. c. Mat.
Quod aequaliter vicis and urbibus and magnis, and parvis praedicavit, That our
Savior preached equally the Gospel to the villages and cities, both to the
great and the small alike: Non considerans Nobilium Potentiam, sed salutem
Credentium, Not considering or having respect to the Power of the Noble, but to
the Salvation of Believers. And where the Master of the House was such, it may
be well imagined that his Servants, the Apostles, would endeavor to show
themselves like unto him; who were in this Point so active, as that their Life
seemed little else but a kind of a continued Visitation, and the whole World
but one great Diocese, which they traveled over. Isidor. Pel. l. 2. Ep. 251.
The time would fail, should I tell you with what expedition those (...) (for
so are the Apostles styled by Isidor) those winged Husbandmen did fly from
this place to that, from one Nation to another Country, scattering the Seeds of
Discipline in diverse Regions; planting some Churches, confirming others,
reforming a third, and visiting all. That Book which is written of their Acts,
is full of no one thing more then of this Act of theirs. Amongst whom
nevertheless, we may not, but in an especial manner, make a particular
Remembrance of this my Apostle here in the Text St. Paul, who having by his own
acknowledgement, in 2 Cor. 11.28. the care of all the Churches, with so an
indefatigable an endeavor went from each to other, as that he appeared hereupon
unto St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. 34 Hom. in Genesis
(...), a kind of somebody, nobody, a body without a body, an Incorporeal
Man. The Sun it self seems hardly to go a larger Circuit, then that which he,
visiting, as his manner was, the Brethren, went over: Read but this Itinerary,
as it is drawn out partly by St. Luke, in the 20. and 21. Chapters of the Acts;
and partly by himself, in the 15th Chapter to the Romans, and verse 9. and you
will then acknowledge, that there may a large Map be made of his Journals only.

But the Church being all this while without enclosure, lay hitherto nothing
else but as so much Common: and therefore that it might appear how this so
Ancient an Order went not out, when once distinction of Diocesses was brought
in; look but upon those seven Churches of Asia, whom the Holy Ghost himself, in
the second Chapter of the Revelation, has been pleased so far as to take
notice of: The Bishops of which several Churches, as it is Interpreted by a
Learned Commentator, Mendoz. in 1 Samuel 2. Tom. p 523
are therefore there called Angels, that so being put in mind of their Office
by their Name, they might be ready, no otherwise then as those Ministering
Spirits the Angels, to go hither and thither for the better ordering of that
particular Diocese which they were to govern.

And where the Wheel had so many good Hands to stir it at the first, how can it
be expected otherwise then that it would keep long a going; which too it did in
after Ages with that force and vigor, as that for the better keeping of it up,
even beyond an usual height, The Church thought it meet to create a new kind
of Order of Ecclesiastical Persons, who being by their Office to go about, and
ever and anon for to visit those little Vilages that it stood not with the
Dignity of the Episcopal Robe, to come to himself, were therefore called (...),
Circuiters: whose name, as I first find mentioned by Justinian, so likewise is
the reason why they were first ordained, set down by the Fathers of the
Laodicean Council, De Episc. and Cleric. lib. 4. Zonaras Council.
in the 57 Canon thereof: whereas Zonarus, in his Expositions of that very
Canon, explaining both their place and their name together, signifies that they
were therefore styled (...), in regard, for the keeping the Church in Order,
they went continually round the Country, having in no particular place any
settled Mansion.

But since the Heavens themselves which now rejoice as a Giant to run their
course, shall yet, at the last, wax old, as does a Garment, how could it but be
imagined that this motion likewise should in time begin for to languish? The
decay whereof, diverse Councels taking notice of, endeavored by their Canons and
Constitutions to put new life into it; as knowing, that the Church in Her
Discipline and Doctrine both, would soon feel a Winter, should not those Lights
of Hers, like that great Light above, the Sun, come yearly, by the Beams of
their Authority, at a nearer distance then at other times to shine upon Her:
which Councels, if you desire to know what they were, Vid. Bin^u^ Council. Hic
citat.
are Concilium Toletanum quartum. Canone 35o. Concilium Bracarense secundum.
Canone 1o. Concilium Aralatense. Canone 17o. with diverse others, whom I am not
ambitious here to quote. The Edicts of all which Councels, being taken into the
Body of the Canon Law by Gratian, have grown hereby to be of that Authority,
Gratian. C. 10. q. 3. C. placuit.
even in this our Church, as that the Year it self is not more constant in the
return of her Yearly Seasons, then this our Church in Her as Yearly Visitations.

Thus have I, you see, Beloved, from the example here of St. Paul, and from
this his coming, which my Text makes mention of, presented you with the Story
of Ecclesiastical Visitations: which since, for many Ages together, they have
been much observed, it cannot, without infinite prejudice to the Wisdom of the
Church, be conceived, but that there may diverse weighty reasons be given for
them.

And indeed who knows not, how the Ear of Authority may easily be abused in her
Informations, concerning such Particulars as lie remote, distant from her?
Tertull. Apol. cap. 7.
since that all Allegations passing per Aurium and Linguarum Traduces (as
Tertullian phraseth it) through the hearsay of diverse Tongues and Ears; like
Waters running through Mines of a several nature, loose usually their own
genuine relish, changing their taste now for the better, and now again for the
worse, by having a strong tang ever of that Man's disposition who at the last
hand relates them. Hence, when the cry of Sodoms Transgression traveled so far
as from Earth to Heaven, the Lord seems not, at that distance, to give credit
to it, but resolves to go down and see, and then to judge her, Genesis the 18th
and the 21. in imitation of which Example, Chrysostom. Hom. 13. in Genesis
Saint Chrysostom presumes to counsel those that have the Authority either of
Church or Commonwealth put into their hands, (...), not to account every crying
information that rides Post unto them, sufficient Evidence whereon for to pass
a Sentence; but at some certain appointed Season for to go themselves, that so
those Fallacies, which distance otherwise might impose upon them, being thus
prevented, Falsehoods may not then dare to appear before them.

And as Authority, were it not for these Visitations, might in some Particulars
hear too much; so likewise in other-some might it hear too little: whilst
diverse defects of the Church, here and there abroad, come hereby alone
oftentimes to be known: Even as Saint Paul at the 17th of the Acts, going
through the Streets of Athens, observed thereby some such Superstitious Custom,
which had he not been there himself, might for ever, happily, lain
undiscovered. For albeit some, like Hermogenes in Tertullian, think it officium
bonae Conscientiae, the part of a good Conscience to be blabbing ever all that
ill which they know of any; yet to be an Informer, is somewhat in it self an
odious Office: from which too, some dispositions are so averse, as that many a
Churchwarden (the more the pity) giving up an Omnia been, when as indeed an
Omnia Pessime had been of the two the truer, has been known at such Meetings
as these, to have chosen to be guilty, rather of Perjury it self, then in this
Particular to discharge his Oath and Duty. Whence the Ear of Government, by
reason of these blank Presentiments, can never hope to have so exact
Intelligence as is needful for her; and therefore how requisite is it that the
Eye of Government, like His at the first of the Revelation and the 13th,
walking in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, should endeavor, in
part, to be its own Informer: Whilst she might by these means observe here,
the House, even of God Himself, in this or that part so ruinous; as that were
it but an House for a Man to dwell in, it would scarce be thought Tenantable;
and there a Churchman, as little going, as living suitable to the gravity of
that Holy Profession which he has undertaken. In one place, the Ceremonies of
this our Mother all dis-used,; and in another, the Canons themselves made no
otherwise then a dead Letter, to be of no force or power. In this Congregation,
that most Heavenly piece of Devotion, the Litany, for many Years since banished
as Apocryphal; and the rest of Divine Service so curtailed, upon every
occasion, and like the Garments of David's Servants, so cut off at the wast, as
if the Prayers of the Church were of little other use then to serve only, as
Music before a Play, to entertain the Company till the Seats be full: Whereas
it may so fall out, that in the very next Parish, a Sermon on the contrary has
been such Dainties, as that the People, unless it be upon some great Solemn
Feast or other, have not had that Dish served up unto them. Thus, thus may he
that travels over a County, observe here and there the noysom Smells, the
Boggs, and the Mire of it, whereas by viewing of it at a distance, or in a Map,
he shall see only the Towns and the Woods, the Rivers and the Hills, nothing
but what is fair in it self, and a Pleasure likewise to the Eye for to behold.
How singular therefore a design of this was Saint Paul's, worthy altogether of
such an Apostle as He for to undertake: who, the better to finish that
Reformation which he had begun, concludes upon a Coming amongst his
Corinthians; that so, as for those matters which in that Church of theirs were
not as yet redressed, he might by this his Visitation put likewise in Order, as
being the end of my Apostles Coming or Visitation, and therefore in the next
place now to be treated of.

Will I put in Order: The Word in the Original is (...), which signifies
Ordinabo, Constituam, Praescribam; so that my Apostle here in this place,
according to the Judgment of the best Commentators, aims wholly at such things
only as belong unto outward Order and Discipline; or as St. Aug. 1. Ep ad
Januar.
Austin is pleased to express it, ad Ordinem Agendi, to the Ordering of all
such Services, as in the Church were to be performed. A matter, it should seem,
of no small consequence, in regard my Apostle beats so often and so much upon
it: who having here spent no less then a whole Chapter upon this one Business,
falls nevertheless upon it again in as ample a manner, as here he does in the
4th Chapter of this very self-same Epistle: where, having insisted likewise
upon the Ordering of diverse other Particulars in the Church, his conclusion
there at the last is this, (...), Let all things be done decently, and in
Order, ver. 40. Nay, that he might the better mould his Son Titus to this his
temper in Church Affairs, he lays his Commands upon him, in the first Chapter
of that Epistle, and the 5th, to Order the things that were wanting in the
Church of Creet, such it seems as St Paul himself had not disposed of at his
being there.

And no marvel neither that my Apostle both here and other where, in himself
and others, seemed so zealous for Order: The Church being, as anciently she
has been styled, Constit. A. post. l. 8. c. 31.
(...), The very School of good Order, wherein Lessons of Order are daily to be
taught, and learned, and practiced also: Nay, Order has heretofore been
conceived so proper unto the Church, as that by this, no otherwise then as by
some peculiar badge or cognizance, She anciently has been known. No sooner had
Jacob, in that Vision of his, beheld the Orderly ascending and descending of
the Angels from Heaven, together with the Lord Himself, standing at the top of
that Ladder whereon they went; but being once awaked from this his seeing of so
much Order, he presently makes to himself this peremptory Conclusion: This is
no other then the House of God, Genesis 28.17. Whereas our Savior, out of the
great desire he had to see no irregularity at all in the Temple, vouchsafed
oftentimes to heal the Blind, the Dumb, the Deaf and the Lame, even in the
Temple; as if it had been so great an eye-soar to Him, that any in that place
especially, should want either an Eye to read, or an Ear to hear, or a Tongue
to speak, or a Knee to bow, when the Discipline of the Church required these
Duties of them, as that he chose rather to be at the expense of a Miracle
Himself for their redress. And were our Savior yet still on Earth, as indeed
He is now in Heaven, how many such Cures as these might He meet with in most
Congregations? Some being blind, by reason of a Cataract of wilful Ignorance
that is grown over their eyes; others lame, in regard of a strong Convulsion,
which Rebellion and Inconformity have caused in their Knees; whereas a certain
prejudice against the Liturgy of the Church has so far possessed a third, as
that this alone to them is a dumb and a deaf Spirit also, making them
oftentimes to have the use neither of Tongue nor Ear in these our Assemblies:
The Fancies of whose Humors, were they but once fed and cherished, the Church
would soon leave of to be what at the 4th of the Canticles, and the 12th, She
is styled, A Garden enclosed: A Garden being ordinarily a place of so exact
contrivance, as that here may be observed a Knot, there a Square; next to that
a Bank; and above that again a Walk, hemmed in with Trees that stand in a row,
at an equal distance each from other; all things being done there by line and
measure, and disposed of to the best advantage by method and Order: whilst the
Church would be then a Wilderness, or a Forest rather, where without any
distinction at all, a Lilly, a Thorn, a Bryar, Straw-berries and Thistles, good
and bad might be seen to grow all upon one piece of Turf together: insomuch
that Babel it self, no nor the Primitive Chaos neither, were never guilty of a
greater Confusion then that which would be then acknowledged for to be in Her.

But the Text speaking as here it does, not of Order simply, but of putting in
Order, may not but be conceived to look equally two ways at once; whilst
hereby it does not only point at the Necessity of Orders in a Church, but it
reflects likewise upon their Persons, in whose hands it lies to enact these
Orders: so that as from the one side it is to be gathered, that there is no
subsisting for a Church without the having of Order, in regard that Ceremonial
Circumstances, being absolutely necessary for the performance of all outward
Acts whatever, without rules given and observed concerning times, places,
manner, and the like, there can be no outward Worship done unto God: So
likewise from the other is it to be understood, that every one is not Master of
the Mint so far, as to presume to stamp this Coin; this being a Prerogative
wherein they are to be sharers only, to whom the Government of the Church
belongs: which is the reason that here in the Text, it is not one ( I) that
comes, and another (I) that puts in Order; but it being the same (I) in both,
it is the same numerical St. Paul that divides himself between both these acts.

And indeed, many are the Orders which we find St. Paul to have made for the
Meridian of the Church of Corinth, diverse whereof are to be read in the
preceding Verses of this present Chapter: all which he enacted to make use of a
distinction which he himself so much harps on in the 7th Chapter of this
Epistle) not by commandment, and as from the Lord, but by permission, and as
from himself, giving herein his Judgment, as one that had obtained mercy of
the Lord to be faithful. Wherein, that I may not be thought to have delivered
any private Opinion of mine own, know that you have all this warranted unto you
under the hands of the deservedly Honored Angel of the Church of Sarum: Bishop
Davenant, de Jud: Controv: cap. 16.
Apostoli (says he) quatenus erant ordinarii Ecclesiae Rectores de hisce
ritibus externis pro sua sapientia statuebant, quod ad adificationem Ecclesiae
facere videbatur: The Apostles, as they were ordinary Governors of the Church,
prescribed, as concerning outward Rites, such things which they in their Wisdom
thought to make most for Edification; which Words are in that incomparable Work
of his, De Judice Controver siarum, Cap. 16. Rat. 2a.

So that my Text being thus opened, affords us in this place such a parcel of
Divine Truth as this, namely, That the Authority of making Orders, whereby to
govern each particular Church, is a Prerogative, which those that sit at the
Stern thereof may rightly challenge: St. Paul, you see, after an ordinary way
did it here in the Church of Corinth; and therefore those that are his
Successors in the like condition, may lawfully assume to themselves the like
employment. A Doctrine of that Evidence and Consequence both together, as that
this Church of ours, in those few Articles of Hers which She has published,
has thought it in Her Wisdom meet, See the Book of the 39 Articles.
to avouch it no less then twice in two several Articles, Article the 20th, and
the 34th. Nay, before ever that Book of Hers saw light, those great Reformers,
under King Edward the sixth, concluded as much, which too, was done with that
measure of zeal, Fox in his Book of Acts and Mon.
as that Bishop Bonner was enjoined, by the Kings Council, to Preach at
Pauls-Cross this Doctrine; my Authority for both these, is Fox in his Acts and
Monuments, 2o Edvardisexti. Neither has it been given to Men of this Climat
only to be of this Opinion, since those Reformed Churches that have been
beyond the Seas, have herein yielded unto us the right Hand of Fellowship.
Witness the Confession of the Reformed Church of France, Ext^t haec confessio
apud Calvinum, lib. opuscul.
published in the Year, 1562. Fatemur (says She) tum omnes, tum singulas
Ecclesias hoc jus habere, ut leges and statuta sibi condant ad Politiam
communem inter suos statuendam: Witness likewise the consent of the Lutheran
Divines, set down in that Auspurge Confession, whereof Melancton was the
Contriver; whose words, much to the same purpose, are Licet Episcopis and
Pastoribus Canones constituere, Ausourg. Coufess. art. ult.
ut singula in Ecclesia siant secundum Ordinem. Nay, Reverend Calvin however
conceived by some, to be none so the greatest Friends which the Church ever
had, stickles nevertheless so earnestly for this, in the 4th of his
Institutions and the 10th Chapter, as that those who shall cast an eye one what
he there has written, cannot but judge him to be very zealous for it.

Niether ought it to be conceived, that these Sons of the Church in honor of
their Mother, have endeavored herein to flatter her into a greater Privilege,
then that which by right belongs to her. (...), Basil. lib. de Spiritu. quinto
cap. 27.
is an ancient distinction made heretofore by St Basil, Predications and
matters of Faith are one thing, and Placits or matters of Order another. (For
so is the Greek word (...) there, as I conceive to be understood, the word
Ceremony being not of so ancient a standing in the Church, as to be found in
the writings either of the Greek or of the Latin Fathers. St Austin in his
Retractations, Austin. l. 2. Ret. c. 37.
makes in his own behalf an Apology, for that it once dropped unawares from
his Pen.) And however the Church of Rome dare extend her Commission so far, as
in respect of the former of these, to make new Creeds, (for so Pope Pius the
fourth did;) and to blot out one of the Commandments of the Decalogue, for
that it gain-sayes those Images which they are resolved to set up and worship,
Nos vero talem non habemus Consuetudinem, we have no such custom, nor the
Church of God; we cannot find in our hearts for to be so cruel, as for the
satisfying of our own causeless Fancies, to mangle thus the body of Religion,
which our Forefathers to the least Tittle thereof, have even with the loss of
their own blood preserved entire. All the Power which we assume to our selves,
is only about the outward dress and attire of the Churh, in causing that to be
suitable always to her Condition: This being a liberty which in all ages has
so far been Challenged, as that a great part of that apparel it self,
wherewith the Apostles thought fit to cloth Her, within a Century or two, grew
to be cast off and antiquated; insomuch that the Holy Kiss, the Feasts of
Charity, Abstinence from things strangled, the employing of Widows in
Ecclesiastical Services, with the like (however Orders all of the Apostles
own Composing,) in some short time came for to be difused. Whereas we read
likewise of St. Ambrose, Vid. Ludo. Viv. in Aug. de Civit. dei l. 6. c: 26.
that in his own Church at Millaine, abrogated an old Order which they had of
Feasting at the Tombs of the Martyrs; in regard the People in his time made it
an occasion to draw on drunkenness. Nay, however Trina Mersio, the threefold
dipping in the Sacrament of Baptism, was at the first established upon no
meaner a Ground, then for signification of the Three Persons in the Blessed
Trinity, yet by reason the Arians took the advantage thereof to countenance
their Heresy, Binius. Con. cil. Tolet. Can. 5to.
the Fourth Toletan Council blotted that Order out of the Rubric. And why may
not the Church still be Mistress of so much Power as to do the like, as long as
those Sons of Heirs, who are set for to rule, are engaged in the Action:
whereas, if every Private Member should be suffered to have therein a Finger,
how might we then in time look to have as many Editions of Service-books, as
there is of Almanacks, every year a new one? as also, there would be then, here
in the Temple, as much Variety of Gesture as there is of Faces, whilst one
disliking this Ceremony, another that, a third questioning all, nothing of
Order would be then agreed on. Bernard lib. de interi: domo.
St. Bernard notes it of the People in his days, that whereas the Lord (in the
twelf Chapter of Exodus) commanded the Israelites in token of their deliverance
out of Egypt, to kill a Lamb, and to sprinckle the blood thereof on the door
posts with a Branch of Hyssop, and after that (in the fifteenth Chapter of
Numbers) enjoined them further, to make Fringes in the borders of their
Garments, to mind them hereby of his Commandments, and to put upon the
Fringes, a Ribband of Blew silk; They grew so bold as to ask, why the
Remembrance of the Israelites deliverance was to be done by the blood rather of
a Lamb, then of a Goat, or a Calfe, or a Bullock, or of Turtle doves, and why
with a Branch of Hyssop, rather then with Rose mary; as also, why the minding
of Gods Commandments was to be exercised rather by Fringes then by Laces, in
the borders of the Garment rather then in the midst, with blew Ribbands rather
then yellow or green; Thus were the People there so great over-weeners of their
own Particular private Fancies, as that hereupon they proceeded so far, as to
question the Lords own Ordinances. How much more would they pick a quarrel at
each others Orders, were they but once admitted unto such composures? it being
usual with Persons of that Quality, who have not been beholding to Education
for so much judgment, as might serve them to correct their Fancies; to think no
Music so good, as that which they make themselves, and to conceive their own
Children, though never so ill-favored, to be nevertheless very fair.

And here, Beloved, we have all great reason to bless the Lord God of Heaven,
for that he has been pleased to be so Favorable to this Chuch of Ours, as
ever since the Reformation, to continue to her such Nursing Fathers, who have
in that manner Ordered all Things, as that for Doctrine and Discipline both,
she may now be very well conceived to be the wonder of the Christian World. For
to say nothing of the Former of these, and the unparalleled Purity thereof, in
regard my Text gives me not here any hint to reflect on that, how has her
Discipline been in that manner contrived, as that whereas there are required,
Calvin l. 4. inst. c. 10. ^. 14.
even by Call. vin himself, in Church Rites but three Conditions; namely, In
Numero Paucitas, in Observatione Facilitas, in significatione Dignitas; these
Three are all so Eminent in our Rites and Ceremonies, as if none but Calvin had
been at the first, the Composer of them? For however, there are many great
Clouds of Ceremonies in use with the Church of Rome, 1o. in numero Paucitas.
a Number of those are by us at this day dispelled; So that now there seems to
be left no greater Quantities of leaves, then may be thought requisite to
preserve the Fruit. Whilst our Church her Orders likewise are of that easy
Performance, 2o. in observatione Facilitas.
as being such as concern our kneeling at this part of the Leiturgy, our
standing at that, our Hearing now, then our Singing of an Hymn, with the like;
as that I know not how Ease her self could possibly wish for a more favorable
employment. And as for signification, 3o. in fignificationc dignitas.
she is in that most remarkable, whilst there is not scarce any one Rite or
Order of Hers, but is a kind of visible Sermon, putting us in mind of some one
good lesson or other, as often as we are to use it; insomuch that they who will
not be brought to hearken to what we teach, by looking on what we do in such
places as these, may in a manner read what we believe.

Neither is this Church of ours so far indebted, as some think she is, to the
Sea of Rome, for many of those Ceremonies that fill her Rubric; since that
however they have been, it may be, in use with the Romish Faction, yet being
the Rites of ancienter Primitive times, why may not we by a Right of our Own,
lay as good claim to them, as those Sons of the Papacy have done before us?
they I confess, by fastening their foul hands first upon them, have sullied
and soyled them greatly; which Pollution nevertheless of theirs, we by freeing
them from that abuse which they have put upon them, have washed off: whereas,
should our Primitive Reformers for this reason only quite have cashiered them,
this indeed might have seemed Curatio, a Cure to the purpose, sed Curatio
Carnificis non Medici, as says that great Oracle of Wisdom Cassander
excellently, Cassand. Consult.
But the cure of an Hangman not of a Physician, not of one that destroys only
the diseas, and keeps the man alive that had it, but of one that makes a
riddance of both these at a clap together.

No Marvail then, all things being so ordered with us as they are, that even
strangers and Forrainers have been so far taken with the heauty of this our
Mother, as that they, like so many Voluntaries have pressed their own Pens to
do Her Service by way of defense; Bucer lib. de Refor: Eccles. Pet. Mart. cp.
ad Hooperum. Calvin cp. 200.
Such as have been Bucer, and Peter Martyr, and Calvir, who as they were Men of
Renown and famous all in their Generations, so likewise have they in their
several writings fought against such as have opposed Her Discipline: nay, a
certain French Ambassador, one Marquess Rogncy, in the beginning of our late
Kings reign, of blessed Memory; veiwing of our Church Orders, first at the
Cathedral in Canterbury, and then at his Majesty's Chapel royal at Court,
said hereupon, that if the reformed Churches in France had kept the same Order
as we have done, he was assured there would have been in that Country many
thousands more Protestants then now there are: Dr. Barlow Conf. Hampt. Court.
p. 38.
which Passage I should not peradventure (in this place that now I here stand
before you in) have taken notice off, had not his Reverend Pen who compiled the
story of the Conference at Hampton Court, thought it meet for to have published
it unto the World.

But alas, how has this our Mother, who has been admired thus by strangers,
been despised nevertheless by Her own Children? so that it will be an hard
matter to say, whether Her happiness in the One, or Unhappiness in the other,
be of the two the greater: whilst some unnatural Sons of Her own, suckled
by Her in Her Bosom have traduced Her so far, as to call Her Church-Musick
Meretricious, See T. C. apud Archwhitgift. The view of the Popish abuses
remain. 1. Oxford Answer to the humble Petition.
Her Responsals and Readings of the Psalms alternatim, the tossing of
Tennis-balls; her Collects because but brief, Cuts and Shreds of Prayer; her
Choice of Epistles and Gospels, the mangling of the word of God; insomuch that
neither the Hymn of Glory, the Creed, the Nicene I mean, and that of
Athanasius; no, nor the Lords Prayer it self, have escaped them without a most
bitter censure; all which seem to me, at least for to be so strange, as that
common Charity would not have suffered me to have believed the least Tittle
thereof, were not all this and more to be read in their own Books and Writings.
Nay, because our Temples begin now to appear somewhat like, what they are, the
Houses of God, wherein the Lord ought to be worshipped in the beauty of
Holiness; because our Sanctuaries have of late been entered with that lowly
Reverence as becomes the Courts of the most High; how has this our Virgin
Mother been lately scandalized, as if she were turning Harlot, in going a
whoring after Popish Vanities? But what Credit do these silly Libellers do in
the mean time to the Sea of Rome, in calling that Popery, which the ancienter
Purer times will not be ashamed to own as theirs; amongst whom, as there is
mention made of Churches that have been (...), Cyril. 14. Catech.
so adorned and even embossed with Silver and Gold, as that they seemed (...),
Eusebius. 10. lib.
a kind of wonder to as many as beheld them: So likewise is there to be read
(in the Jus Orientale) of some such thing as (...). Nay in St Austin of a
Terram Front concutientes, men not entering then the Church, as ordinarily now
many do, with that gesture and countenance, as if they went thither, rather
with authority to dispossess God of his House, then to humble themselves before
him; whilst in the words of the Psalmist rather, they then came and worshipped,
and fell down and kneeled before the Lord their Maker: And therefore what shall
I say to these, or how may I hope to move them? Shall I endeavor to unbend
their stiff spirits by gentle Persuasions and loving exhortations? but
presuming that such Physic will be too weak to move their tuffe Tempers, I may
not but think of some such strong Doses as that, which I meet with in the
Writings of an Italian Prelate, who has a saying, that where God comes, and
sees his House for to ly neglected, Frederic Borrom. Synodal. 13.
even in that dust that he finds there, he writes the sins of those, by whose
default it was kept no better: And what the Finger of the Lord once writes, be
it but in dust, is to be conceived to be as durable, as if it were engraven
with the pen of a Diamond in a Pillar of Marble. And thus hahing now declared
unto you at large, the end of my Apostles coming or Visitation, which was, for
to put in Order, and withal, taken the occasion of discharging that duty in
mine own Particular, Can. 8.
which the Canons of our late Holy Synod has laid on us, in showing the
laudibleness of the Orders and Ceremonies of the Church of England. It remains
that we now proceed to those Things, which my Apostle meant for to put in
Order; and they as I told you are here veild up in this Indefinite Term (...),
the Rest, The Rest will I set in Order, when I come.

What those, Rest, Things were, which my Apostle intended at his coming amongst
the Corinthians for to have Ordered, I find neither here nor otherwhere
expressed; so that Commentators by reason of this my Apostles silence, having
but a cold sent to hunt by, are generally all of them at a Loss: some running
this way, and some that, as their own private Fancies, and such conjectures as
they make to themselves, shall seem to lead them. Seeing therefore it is
somewhat dangerous, there to set up Sails for a further Journey, where neither
Sun nor Star appears for our Guidance, and whereto we have no certain Card of
our own to steer by; I hold it the safest course here to cast mine Ankor,
shutting up all in one Word only of Exhortation, which also shall be no other
then that which this very point it self may be made to yield us; whilst this
word (...) the Rest, however it be indefinite in it self may serve,
nevertheless to Teach you all your duties.

First, then as for you the Wardens, who being, Lindwood Constit. l. 3. de
Cler. non Resid.
as you are told by Lindwood, Ecclesiae Occonomi, the Churches Oeconomists,
that are by your Place, to provide for Her Wants; nay, who have been conceived
to be so far the Hand of the Bishop for the putting his Mandats in Execution,
Council. Gangr. C. 7. and C. 8.
as that in some of the Ancient Councels you are styled (...) the men employed
by him, and (...) Men ordered by him, let this (...) here in the Text be your
Remembrancer so far as to cause you to Present all those things, which you in
your several Churches know yet still to be out of Order. Which that you may not
think to be merely a Freewil business, or a matter at pleasure only, know, that
in case you do it not, by Virtue of the Oath which for this purpose has been
taken by you, you are guilty of Perjury, and so (for that I conceive will work
most with you) liable to the heavy Censures of higher Courts.

And as for you, Much Honored (for as Commentators upon good grounds conceive
St Paul went not himself, as he here resolved, to Corinth) who are in the place
of our Reverend Diocesan, and now come to order such grievances as shall be
made known to you, if there have been with you a (...), Nos qui vobis videmur
loqui de superiori loco, sub p dibus vestris sumus August.
any such things I mean, which in those bills as have been preferred, you have
not taken sufficient notice of, he that here stands on high, casts himself so
low as your feet, for to beseech you that admitting such things into your
further thoughts, you would be pleased to send out your edicts for their
Reformation.

But as for you, My brethren, since you at your very first entry into the
ministry, all took Orders, and are therefore now all men of Orders: There is
nothing I hope with such as you, that is out of Order; but if there be, let
this (...) here in the Text have so much influence likewise on you, as to cause
you to be your own Ordinaries so far, as by amending in your own Persons what
is amiss, to put all that in Order. Thus shall these our yearly Meetings be
freed from those Jeers and Scoffs, which some envious Tongues have been ready
to cast upon them; whilst these our Visitations then shall be to the Reforming
of every one of us in Particular, to the Honor of the Church in general; and
finally to the Glory of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost;
to which Blessed Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity be ascribed all
Majesty and Worship, both now and eyermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

