MASTER St. JOHN HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT On Monday, the 17th. of January.

CONCERNING The Charge of Treason then exhibited to the BISHOPS, Formerly
accused by the House of Commons, Anno Domini, 1641.

LONDON, Printed for R. B. in the Year, 1641.

Mr. St. JOHN HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT.
Mr. SPEAKER,
THis Charge of Treason which has been now read unto these Persons accused,
is (as I conceive) a sufficient Confirmation of our former Accusation; not
only their endeavors to procure their own desires in an unlawful and
irregular manner but the very Action of their Attempt proves them guilty of
treason: this treason wherewith they stand charged is matter of Fact not to be
answered by witnesses or circumstances, but by answering guilty or not; and
being proved against them, to receive their sentence: This manner of proceeding
is congruent to the Common Laws of this Land; from which Parliamentary
proceedings in such cases never derogates.

These Persons some of them have wisely recanted their Fact, and submitted
themselves to this House representing the whole Body Politic of this
Kingdom, and the rest does yet stand in they error presuming to undertake to
justify their Actions: and the chiefest inducer of these to continue their
Resolutions, is generally conceived to^^ the now Bishop of York, late Bishop
of Lincoln. This man Master Speaker, has been well reputed and thought of by
most of this Kingdom and by this Honorable House enlarged from his long
imprisonment formerly endured in the Tower, restored to his former Dignity and
Honor, admitted to his place in the Lords House; what good then might this
Prelate have done to his Country so well respected and favored by most of the
Lords, and his vote with them well esteemed, by his endeavors to avert the
intentions of the rest of the Bishops, for putting in execution their future
wicked Actions, by endeavoring to setlle true Reliction and punish delinquents
in the same, he always seeming to be the best affected of any in these times of
that function, in places of authority and jurisdiction in the Church. And by
endeavoring rightly to inform His Majesty and his Lords, that did but a
little disfavor the same, concerning the Antiquity and purity of the true
Protestant Religion, the danger and sin in innovating the same, and not the
Antiquity of Bishops and their power in Ecclesiastical causes, nay in civil
as well as Ecclesiastical, that in the first their jurisdictio^ was the
chiefest and highest, yea above the Kings; that in the second they were in
Courts of civil judicature, if by the King called thereunto, of equal power
with the Privy Counsel and Judges of the Land, nay their Votes must be above
and against them all to pass for sentences and right judgments; no opposition
or contradiction must be against them by any of what degree soever; nay so high
and proud were these Prelates grown that they dare adve^ture to abridge and
abrogate the Kings royal prerogative in issuing forth warrants and process in
their several Courts, which ever was used to be read, Carolus Dei Gratia etc.
Now must be read, Gulielmus Divina providentia Dei, Archiepistopus etc. In
their names must writs amd process issue, and not in the Kings. I say these
things should not have been by this Prelate defended and maintained, but
rejected and detected; Voted against as well by himself as the rest of the
Lords of that House, and the offenders herein as well by his endeavors as
other the faithful Counselors of the State, brought to deserved punishment:
but contrariwise this Bishop has not only refused to consent to the rectifying
things amiss in the Clergy, but opposed the same; has not only been
retrograde in voting for their punishment that have abused both themselves,
professions and power, but obstinatly Voted against their punishment, has not
only refused to assent to regulate the office of Episcopacy; but likewise
opposed the same, and in persuance of these his Actions has as it is strongly
to be presumed, drawn many of the other Bishops to be of his resolution and
evil opinion, that the Parliament cannot consist of the House of Lords
temporal and Commons: although they cannot produce any Presidents or Act of
Parliament, that there was ever four degrees congruent to the holding of a
Parliament, as of necessity since we professed the Protestant Religion, and
admitted of a Reformation in this Kingdom, but only in the time of
Superstition; in which time the Clergy increased to that height and Dignity
they are now attained unto, and procured to themselves the denomination of
Lords spiritual; but neither of late, nor ( ab initio) it was so, only three
degrees of Counselors have been sufficient in Parliament to regulate the
Affairs of this Kingdom, and make Laws for the good government thereof.
Indeed, I confess that it may be as necessary for Bishops to sit in Parliament
to give their advice in Points of Divinity concerning Religion, as Judges sit
there to give their opinions in Points of Law concerning judicature; but
otherwise it is no way expedient, but altogether unnecessary, (as I under
favor conceive) either to have their Votes concerning Religion, or any ways
to intermeddle, or give advice touching temporal Affairs. And thus having
showed you the first step to this Treason, their opinion of the inconsistencie
of Parliament, without their assistance; I come to the second Step; That a
Parliament is forced and illegally assembled, if the same does continue to
agitate or determine of any thing whatsoever in the absence of the Bishops. And
lastly, which completes and makes up the whole Treason, their protestation
against the proceedings of the Parliament in their absence: These things have
been sufficiently already debated on, and concluded by general vote to be high
Treason. Therefore I conclude, having only showed you in what manner I conceive
is best to proceed to their trial (by the rules of the Common Law joined with
the power and wisdom of the Parliament for this their Fact of Treason;) and
also showed you diverse of their enormous and wicked Actions, making much for
proof of their Ambitious and treacherous intentions from the beginning; humbly
leaving the same to the further consideration of this Honorable House, and
desire we may prefix a certain day within some short time, for the final
determination of their trial.

FINIS.

