

A VIEW Of all the Laws and Statutes of this NATION Concerning the Service of
God or Religion.

Viz.
The holy Scripture. The Lords day, or Sabbath. Prayer. Preaching. Sacraments.
Pluralities. First Fruits. Tenths. Residence, or Non-residence, etc.
By William Sheppard, Esquire.

Published by command.

London, Printed for J. Wright at the Kings head in the Old Baily. 1655.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber



The Contents.
OF the Service of God or Religion.
Scriptures. Sect. 1. Lords day or Sabbath day. Sect. 1. Holy days. Sect. 1.
Preaching. Sect. 1. 2. Heresy. Sect. 1. 2. Prayer. Sect. 1. 2. Blasphemy.
Sect. 1. 2. Sacraments. Sect. 1. 2. Common prayer Book. Sect. 2. Churches and
Churchyard. Sect. 2. 3. Directory. Sect. 2. Chapels. Or free Chapples. Sect.
1. 2. Union and Division of Churches. Sect. 6. Monasteries. Sect. 2. Abbeys.
Sect. 2. Chauntries. Sect. 2. Clergy or Spirituality, or Ministers. Sect. 2.
3. Metropolitan, or Archbishop. Sect 6 Bishop. Sect. 6. Archdeacon. Sect. 6.
Conge Se Eslier, or leave to choose a Bishop. Sect. 6. Regio Asscusu. Sect. 6.
Consecration. Sect. 6. Suffragan. Sect. 6. Dilapidations. Sect. 4. Institution
and Jnduction Sect. 3. 4. First fruits, or Annates. Sect. 4. Tenths, Sect. 5.
Pluralities, or more Benefices then one. Sect. 4. 5 Residence and non
residence. Sect. 4. Simonie. Sect. 4. 3. Deposition or Ejectment. Sect. 3.
Chaplain. Sect. 4. Subscription of Articles, Sect. 4. Quod clevici non
eligantur, etc. Sect. 5. Quod personae nec Prebendarij etc. Sect. 5.
Convocation and Convocation house. Sect. 5. Augmentation. Sect. 3. 5.
Scandalous Ministers, Sect. 3. 5.
Of the Service of God, or Religion.
AS touching the 1, The great regard the law has of Religion.
service of God, or Religion, and the Laws of the Nation now in force, and of
use relating thereunto, these things are to be known. First, That the Christian
religion contained in the Scriptures, is held forth and Commended as the
profession of these Nations, yet so as no man is to be Compelled to it by
penalties, or otherwise then by Sect. 1.
the endeavor of sound Doctrine, and the examples of good Conversation, and by
the encouragement of painful, and able teachers for instructing of the people,
and Confutation of error, and heresy. Government, Acts 35.36. 37. 2. That
such as profess faith in God by Jesus Christ, though differing in Judgment
from the Doctrine, Discipline, or worship publicly held forth, shall not be
restrained, but protected in the profession of the faith, and exercise of their
Religion, so that they abuse not this liberty to the Civil Injury of others,
and to the Actual Disturbance of the peace on their parts. Provided that this
liberty be not extended to Popery, or Prelacy, not to such as under the
profession of Christ hold forth and practice licentiousness. Government, ACts
36. 37. 38. 3. That the law has a special regard of it, and therefore it
holds forth these religious principles.

That Religion, and Justice are the main pillars of the Common wealth. 2. And
that that is the best reason that makes for religion Coo. 5. 14.

The main things the law does take care of in order to the advancement, and
preservation of Religion, are Religious Times, or days; Religious things, as
the holy Scriptures, holy Ordinances, or worships, and an orderly performance
of them; Religious places, and religious orders of men and officers, such as
are the ministers of the Gospel, and as to them their due Qualification,
Election, Disposal and reward.

As touching religious 2. Lords day.
Times, these things are to be known.

1. That by our law there is no day now ordinarily to be kept holy but the
Lords day. Act 27. Sept. 1650. The Common and statute law also does highly
advance the Authority, and severely enjoin the Sanctification, and forbid all
manner of profanation of this day. Stat. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. chap. 3. Plow. 265.
Coo. 9. 66.

And therefore all works (but works of Piety, Charity, and other works of
necessity) are forbidden on this day. And for this Cause it is, that if any
part of the proceedings of a suite in a Court of Justice be entered, and
recorded, as done this day, it makes it all void, and all serving warrants, or
process on this day, but in special Cases, is void: and it is a rule Dies
Dominicus non est juridicus. And if a Keepers Deer be stolen out of his Park,
whilst he is at Church serving God (though this in another case be a
forfeiture of his office) yet in this case, and at this Time it is not at all
penal to him. 5. Edw, 3. 27.

2. But this not withstanding, it is lawful to pursue and arrest felons such as
break the peace, suppress uproars, quench fire in houses, visit sick people,
and the like. Coo. 5. 83. Plow. 265.

See more of this in my office of the Justice of peace cap. of the Lords day.

3. But as to the other holy days called Holy days
feast days, they are now totally abrogated and at an end Act 27. Sept. 1650.
But the 5th. day of November. we are to meet once to thank God for our
deliverance from the Gunpowder Treason. State. 3. James. chapter 1.

As touching the holy 3. Holy Scriptures
Scriptures these things are to be known (1) the maxims of the law concerning
them, which are these. 1. That they are of sovereign Authority, 34. H. 6. 40.
2. That the Gospel of J'esus Christ is of infallible truth. 3. That any
Statute, Prescription, Custom, or Cannon against it, is void and not to be
Admitted. 4. To maintain, 4. Blasphemy and Heresy.
and publish by preaching, printing, writing, or teaching any thing contrary to
them, as in the first place, That there is no God, that he is not present in
all places, that he does not know, and foreknow all things, that he is not
Almighty, that he is not perfectly holy, that he is not eternal, or that either
of the three persons of the God head is not God, or that these three are not
one Eternal God, or that Christ the Son is not equal with the Father, or shall
so divide the manhood of Christ, as that his Godhead and manhood are several
natures, or deny that the manhood of Christ is without sin, or that Christ
died, rose again, or did not ascend into heaven bodily, or that his death is
not meritorious Sect. 2.
to believers, the Resurrection, or day of Judgment, or that the Scriptures
are not the word of God, or that Christ is not the Son of God, and shall be
obstinate herein, it is felony. And in the second place if any man affirm as
before that all shall be saved, that man has free will, that God may be
worshipped by Images, Purgatory, or that the soul dies or sleeps after
death, that the revelations or workings of the spirit are a rule of faith,
though against the word, that man is not to believe above reason, that the
moral law is at an end, that a Christian need not pray nor repent, that
baptizing of Infants is void and unlawful, or deny the Lords day, or
Sacraments, or the Ministers, and Magistrates office, or are rebaptized, and be
obstinate herein, is to be imprisoned, till he give sureties not to do so
again. And in the third place, if any seriously maintain (he being not
distracted) by word or writing, any creature to be God, or to be equal with God
in his Attributes, or that God dwells in the Creature or shall deny the
holiness, and righteousness of God, or say that wicked persons, or
wickedness, or wicked acts of swearing, drunkenness, or lewdness, are not
unholy against Gods word, or are approved by him, or that such things, or such
persons therein are like God, or shall say that these acts of denying or
Balspheming God, or the holiness, or righteousness of God, or that the acts
of cursing God, or swearing profainly or falsely by the name of God, or the acts
of lying, stealing, cousening and defrauding others, Sodomy, Drunkenesse,
filthy and Lascivious speaking, are not things in themselves shameful, wicked,
and abominable in any person whatsoever to be practiced, or shall affirm that
the acts of Adultery, Drunkenness, and the like open wickedness are in their
own nature as holy, and righteous, as prayer preaching, or giving thanks to
God, or shall maintain, That whatever wickedness is acted by them may be done
without sin, or that such acts are acted by God, or the Majesty of God, or
eternity that is in them, that heaven and happiness is in the acting of these
things, or that such men as act them are most like to God or Eternity, which do
commit the greatest sins with least remorse, or sense: or that there is no such
thing really and truly as sin, unrighteousness, or unholinesse, but as a man
or woman judges thereof, or that there is neither heaven, nor hell, salvation
or damnation, or that these are one and the same thing etc. For the first
offense herein he is to be imprisoned in the Jail, or Bridewel 3. months
without Bail? for the second offense to be banished, and if he return to
suffer as a fellon. Ord. 2. May. 1648. 9. August 1650. But now we must examine
how the punishment of men upon these will stand with the Articles of the
Government, which wills that men be not punished for their opinions that hold
the head-faith in God by Jesus Christ, and do not Injury, nor make disturbance,
nor hold forth nor practice Popery nor Licentiousness. It seems then necessary
here to distinguish amongst these opinions, and to make these only punishable
by these Acts and Ordinances, which deny the Godhead in his Essence, or
Attributes, or Christ in his natures, or offices, of which sort are most of the
first, and last rank: And all those that tend to Licentiousness, as all those
of the last rank. And those that are popish, as Freewil, Purgatory, Images,
and the like, such as are against the Scripture, as that revelations and
workings of the spirit are the rule of faiththough against the word of God and
such like. And those that are against Magistracy, and Sect. 2.
Ministry altogether, and such like, which are against peace, and tend to
licentiousness: that these only are to be punished: And that the Lesser, and
not Dangerous opinions, Denying Presbitery, baptizing of Infants, and affirming
that men must be rebaptized, and the like, That these are not punishable now by
these laws. Quere therefore well of this.

As touching the external worship of God, 5. The Preaching and Hearing of Gods
word: Prayer to, and praising of God: And Administration of the Sacraments.
by preaching and hearing Gods word, prayer to, and the praising of God, and
the Administration of the Sacraments, these things are to be known.

1. The Law requires that these things are to be done.

2. That they be solemnly, constantly, unanimously, purely, reverently, and
Devoutly done, and performed both by the Minister, and the people: see it in
the Stat. 5. and 6. Edw. 6. 1. 1. Eliz. 2. 23. Eliz. 1. 13. Eliz. 1. but most
lively and excellently in the preamble of the statute of 5. and 6. Ed. 6. cap.
3. and cap. 1. 1 Ed. 6. cap. 1. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. 1.

3. But men are not by law bound now to, but forbidden the use 6.
Commonprayer-book.
of the book of Common prayer, nor are men now bound in the worship of God to
the superstitious rights thereby enjoined and formerly used, as the Cross in
Baptism, kneeling at the Lords Supper, and bowing at the name of Jesus: But
these are sent after the Abominable Mass to the place from whence they came,
Act 27. Sep. 1650. Ordinance 3. Jan. 1644. Ordi. 23. August 1645. But the
external form, and Order 7. Directory.
now by the law set forth, and Commended to the Nation for the doing of these
services of God is the Directory. For this by a law is to be put in execution
for public worship in all places, Ord. 23. August 1645. And as to these things
this is here to be known. 1. He that uses the Commonprayer book in public or
private, forfeits for the first offense 5 l. for the second offense 10. l. for
the third offense Imprisonment for a year without Bail. 2. He that does not
use the Directory, or by writing, or otherwise does deprave it, shall be fined
by the Judges at their discretion, not under 5 l. nor above 50 l. This law
seems now to be altered by the Government. Art. 36. 37. 38. And that no man now
is to be molested about forms of Religion: And that this is the sense of the
present Authority appears by the Ordinance for ejecting of scandalous
Ministers Aug. 29. 1654.

As touching Religious places, such as are Churches, and Chapels, 8. Churches.
which are greater, and lesser meeting places of parishes, only these things
are to be known.

1. That the law does not own them as places capable of holiness by any
Consecration, but as convenient places for the meeting of the people, and does
therefore take care for the keeping of them repaired, For which see my Book of
the office of Churchwardens, and Act 9. Feb. 1647.

2. The law does take order for keeping of the Congregations there about Gods
worship in peace without Disturbance, and therefore any Disturbance done there
is very penal, 2. and 3. Ed. 6 chapter 1. 1 Eliz. 2. 1 Marie 3. And all fighting,
quarrelling, or striking there, or in the Churchyard, is to be severely
punished, Stat. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. 4. Churchyard.


3 For the better securing hereof, the Churchyard is also to be defended in
peace. Stat. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. chapter 4.

It is therefore ordered, that if any do maliciously strike another, or draw
his weapen of purpose to strike another in any Church, or Church yard, he is to
have one of his ears cut off. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. chapter 4.

4. But the parishioners are not now bound as heretofore to come to their own
Assemblies, or parish, or to any parish Church to serve God, but so as Going to
Church,
they serve him, they may join themselves unto what Assembly, and in what
place they please. Act 27. Sep. 1650.

5. As for other places called heretofore religious houses, such Monasteries,
Abbeys, Chantries
as were Abbeys, Priorys Monasteries, Chantries, being places of superstitious
chanting or singing, and such like houses they are abolished, and gone, and
Conventual Cathedral Churches, for Bishops, Deans and such, like are going
after them, but it is parish Churches and Chapels the law takes care of. See
Free Chapel.

As touching Religious 9. Religious Persons, or Clergy.
persons, that is Ministers, and preachers of the Gospel sometimes called in
our law by the name of religious men, sometimes by the name of Clergymen,
sometimes Ecclesiastical persons, sometimes spiritual persons, sometimes (but
improperly) the Church, and sometimes Parsones, Curates, and Vicars, as to
these, and the law concerning them, in order to the preservation of religion,
these things are to be known. 1. That they are to be well qualified Sect. 3.
for, and orderly Called, and Admitted into the office, and then being called
to any people or parish their duty is to look to, and watch for the souls of
these people, to dispense the bread of life by preaching, to pray for the
people, to use and show charity toward the poor, and hospitlity toward all;
and that this may be the better done, the law does require they should be
resident, and will not allow them to be absent from their Charges, but by some
special dispensation. And for this they are to have the profits of the Church,
and churchhay the Glebe land, and the Tithes of all the yearly increase within
the parish, also the oblations, obventions, and mortuaries usually paid in the
place, And all encouragements; And that the present maintenance by Tithes be
not taken away, nor impeached, until a better provision can be made:
Government: Art. 35. And in respect of their continual Attendance upon their
sacred function, they are freed from all personal charges that may hinder them
in their calling, for such shall not be chosen, Baliffs, Beedles, Reeues, or
other such like officers, nor be compelled to come to the Sheriffs Leete, and
they may have an action of Trespass for any Trespass in the Trees, or Grass
of the Glebe, or Church hay, they may make any lease of their Tithes, or their
Glebe during the time they are Parsons, but they can do no Act to bar their
successors now, unless it be within the statutes of Ecclesiastical persons:
for they have not the mere right of the land in them in right of their
Churches, but the feesimple is in Abeyance, and therefore they cannot
Discontinue, but every Act they do will be avoided, when they cease to be
incumbents, except such as be done by consent of Patron and Ordinary which
will bind for ever, if none of the statutes touching Ecclesiastical persons
hinder. But for the particular opening of these things and the setting forth
the law herein, as it stands at this day we shall speak something to these two
things. 1. What he is to be and do. 2. What he is to have and receive; For the
first of these.

1. The law requires Quallification of Ministers.
that such as enter into the office of a preacher of the Gospel be duly
qualified, that he be unblamable in Conversation, found in opinion, able to
teach, and for this the Bishop was carefully to examine him, and by information
from others to satisfy himself herein: and now there are called commissioners
specially appointed to try, examine, and Admit such as are presented to any
place: And as touching them, and this thing, know these things: First, that
none can come into any Benefice, or Lecture now, but he must pass through this
examination, and have their Approbation under seal of their office. Secondly,
this being done, it will be as much, and as Institution and Induction.
good as Institution, and induction. Thirdly, These Commissioners, before they
approve any must have a Certificate under the hands of three persons at least,
whereof one a Minister of known Godliness and integrity, of the holy and good
Conversation of the man. Fourthly, Augmentation.
All persons that will receive any Augmentation, by Parliament provision must
be thus Approved, and Allowed. Ord. 20. March 1653.

2. He ought to be Admitted, and Allowed: he was therefore to be Called,
Approved, and allowed by a Bishop or by one of the Universities. And with out
this no man was to have taken upon him Presentation.
the office. Stat. 13. Eliz. 12. 31. Eliz. 26. 3. And he that is to come to a
Benefice at this day must have some kind of presentation to it, such as the
time does yield, if it be from the LORD PROTECTOR, or the Keepers of the great
Seal by the great Seal, from any other, he must have a gift, or collation: but
here by the way for a third thing it must be noted, that the presentation;
Collation must be free, and the Incumbent must come in without corruption. And
it is therefore provided by the 13. Eliz. cap. 1^. that if any sell any
spiritual living, as if a patron take money, or other reward to present his
Clerk or a clergy man to any parsonage, or Vicarage, or take upon him the
Parson, or Vicar, or promise for any reward to resign again upon request; all
such presentations and the Institutions and Inductions thereupon gotten by this
means are void, and the party giving, and taking do each of them forfeit the
double value of the church for one year, And the party that does give is hereby
made incapable of 10. Simony.
that Church for ever. Stat. 13. Eliz. chap. 6. wherein these things are
farther to be known.

1. That if a man give the reward himself he is said to be simoniacus, but if
it be given by another without his privity, he is said to be simoniace
promotus, and in both cases it is alike Dangerous and penal, Coo. on Litt. 120.
2. A (the Church being void) contracts Simoniacally with the patron to have the
presentation, and upon this Corrupt Agreement he presents R, a man ignorant of
this agreement: in this Case he was removed: Calverts Case in the Exchequer in
Brownlows Rep. 2. part. 164.

3. This law of Simony does hold as well where the patron that does present is
an usurper, as otherwise, but in this case the rightful patron, and not the
LORD PROTECTOR shall have the next presentation, but otherwise it is where the
rightful patron does make such a corrupt contract. Coo. on Litt. 120.

For in this case albeit he that comes in upon this corrupt contract be
admitted, and die in the Parsonage, Sect. 4,
yet the LORD PROTECTOR has not lost his Turn, but shall present: but if he
had resigned, or made cession, and then another had been presented, and then
the first Clerk had died, then the LORD PROTECTOR had lost his presentment.
Brownlows Rep. 1. part. 164.

4. But to Sell or buy for onesself, or for some other the next Avoydance of a
Benefice for reward, it seems is not symony M. 8. Jac. B. R. And yet see
Winch^ombes case 14. Jac. C. B. the case was, A, a Clerk, when the Church was
full, agree with the patron to give him 98. 1. when the Church should become
void, the then Incumbent being a very old, and sickly man, and Agreed that the
patron should grant the next Avoidance to a friend of the Clerks who did
present him, this was held a Simonical contract. see in this Rep. 2. page. 7.

A contract by one with the Patrons brother (the Church being then full) that
if he could procure three grants of the next Avoidance to be surrendered, and
the patron to present him when it became void, he would make him a leaf of
parcel of the Tithes of the Rectory, and he during the life of the Incumbent
got the grants to be surrendered, and all the rest was done, and it was Agreed
to be void.

5. And in this case the Church will be void without deprivation or sentence
Declaratory: March 84. pl. 139.

6. An Incumbent presented by Simony cannot sue a parishioner for Tithe. March
84. pl. 139. see more Coo. 3. part. Inst cap. 71.

But the law at this Subscription and reading of Articles.
day does not require that he should read and subscribe the Articles of
Religion, nor Oath of supremacy.
take the Oath of Supremacy, nor observe any of the Orders, forms, or
Ceremonies contained in the Book of common prayer, or in the Cannons, nor that
he should be Instituted and Inducted into a Benefice when he is to receive it,
but it is sufficient that the same be given to, or Conferd upon him.
Commonprayer.
And now by the new Ordinance March 20. 1653. it is declared that all those
that come into any Benefice according to the rules thereof, shall be as fully
entitled to the Institution and Innuction.
same, as if they had been instituted, and inducted into it: and by another new
Ordinance, 30 August. 1654. it is provided, That where one was formerly Evicted
or sequestered, and yet he keeps in the place, and none was put in by the 30th
of August 1654. the Patron may present within four Months after the 28th of
August 1654. to the Commisioners for approbation, and they may admit him. And
in places of all such Ministers as the Commissioners of the Counties shall
eject for scandal etc. the Patron must present within four months after the
Ejectment to the Commissioners for Approbation. And if he that is ejected die
or resign, these Commisioners for approbation may give the Minister admission,
and this is as good as Institution and Induction in all these cases.

2. Being in the office, and a charge in his hands, he ought then to be
resident, and abiding amongst his people, and there to 2. Non-Residence what it
is.
watch over, and look to their souls, and there to be an example of piety,
sobriety, honesty, Charity, and hospitality to them. And it is forbidden him to
be non resident And therefore plurality Plurallitie, what it is.
(that is) that such a man should have two or more spiritual livings, or
promotions is generally forbidden to such a man; And the Consequence of it is
this, that by the taking of the second the first does become void, and cession,
what.
he loses the first by Cession. And this is against the Ancient common law it
self; And it is now forbidden by diverse statutes, except only in some
Chapplaine, who.
special cases, to some great men's Chaplains (that is) such Ministers as depend
upon them for the service of God in their houses, where commonly they have a
Chapel. But if any such person having a Benefice (be it Where a Minister may
be non resident and have plurality of livings. Or not.
parsonage or vicarage) shall not be resident upon it, but wilfully absent
himself by the space of one month for a time, or two months at several times
in one year, he loses 10. 1. by the Stat. of 21 (...). 8. 13. and no
dispensation will serve in this case. But such persons as were in the Kings
service beyond the sea during that time only, scholars under forty years old
studying at the University, that have ofsice, or do exercise there, and are in
the University, and present at their house Excrcises, and such as did exercises
themselves, the Chaplains of the King, and diverse other great persons might
have been non resident so long as they were Attending upon such great men in
their houses; so such as are imprisoned, or sick or attending upon, and by
order of any Court, are excused of their residence. And if there be a Parsonage
house, some hold that he must be resident upon it, but if not he may reside
else where in the place. Coo. 4. 79. 118. 9. Ed. 3. 22. F. N. B. 34. Articuli
cleri. 8. 9. Ed. 2. 14. H. 8. 17. Co. 6. 21. Stat. 28. H. 8. 23. 26. H. 8. 14.
15. 11. 8. 16. 33. H. 8. 28. If any man that has a Benefice with Cure of souls
of the yearly value of 8. l. or above do accept of, and shall be duly put into
another Benefice with cure of souls, and be in possession thereof, the first
shall be Adjudged void, and the patron may present again; And no dispensation
can be in this Case.

2. He is amongst his people to teach nothing but sound doctrine and purely to
administer the holy Sacraments, he is to take care of the holy worship of God.
For this see Coo. 11. 70. 6. 21. Stat. 13. Eliz. chapter 12. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. 1. 5.
and Sect. ^.
6. Ed. 6. 6.

3. He is to preach once the 5th of Novem. Stat 3. Jac. 1.

4. But he is not bound now to, but forbidden the use of the Common Prayer Book
Common Prayer.
nor is he bound now to any Ceremonies therein, Ceremonies,
nor any thing enjoined concerning the same, or by the Bishops Canons, or
touching the reading of the Articles of Religion, or the statute of 5. and 6.
Ed. 6. to persuade men to come to their parish Church, for these laws are
abrogate Ordi. March 5. 1653. Act 27. Sept. 1650. Ordi. 3. Jan. 1644.

5. He is to take care 12. D lapidations.
to keep up, and maintain in good repair the houses, and buildings standing
upon, and belonging to his Benefice. For if there be any dilapidations (that
is) wilful, or negligent ruin, or decay therein, the executors, or
Administrators of the persons in whose time the same was done or suffered, must
make amends to him that does succeed in the same spiritual living, And he might
have sued for the same in the spiritual court. And if the offender in this case
had made a deed of Gift, to defeat the successor of the effect of his suit, it
had been void Stat. 13. Eliz. 10. The spiritual court being now gone, we know
not what remedy may be had in this case, unless the Chancery will give relief
herein. But by the new Ordinance Aug. 29. 1654. The Ministers put into places
in the room of others put out for scandal etc. are to look to the repair of the
houses, and be forced by Justices of the peace thereto. Also the sequestrators
whilst they have it in their hands must repair out of the profits.

He is to take care to 13. First fruit and Annates what.
Discharge the Firstfruits and Tenths, that the charge thereof be not left upon
his successor; The first fruits are the profits of every spiritual living for
one year. And this had now been given to the LORD PROTECTOR, the Ordering of
which is in the Exchequer. For every one that is chosen, appointed, and
presented to any parsonage, or vicaridge which does exceed the value of 8.
Marks must before he intermeddle with the profits thereof, pay unto, or agree,
and give security for to the LORD PROTECTOR, or such as he does appoint to take
the same, the first fruits of their spiritual promotion, under pain to forfeit
the double Value thereof. And if the Benefice be under 8. Marks in value, then
he is to give security to pay the same first fruits three years after his
induction thereunto Stat 27. 8. 7. and 3. Ed. 6. 20. 7. Ed. 6. 4. 1. Eli. 4.
34. 35. H. 8. 17. Stat. 26. H. 8. cap. 45. 5. March chapter 10. 1. Eliz. chapter 4. But
it seems all this now is set a part for the maintenance of the Ministry. See
Act 8. June 1649.

So also he is to discharge Tenths what.
the tenths; the tenths are a yearly portion of Tribute to the value of the
tenth part of all the profits appertaning to a spiritual living. And this is
now reduced to a Certainty, and known. And this every parson, and vicar must
have paid before the first of April, yearly to the use of the Lord Protector.
It was wont to be paid to the Bishop, and by him into the Exchequer, but now it
is paid immediately into the Exchequer; and by that Court the same is forced in
Stat. 26. H. 8. 3. 32. H. 8. chapter 45. 5 Mary 1 Eliz. 4. But this also it seems
is now employed as the first fruits are Act. 3. June 1649. and Ord. 2.
September 1654.

7. He may not meddle with any temporal Jurisdiction or Authority, to the
exercise whereof he is disabled, 16, 17. Car. 17. And he is forbidden the
taking of Farms, or taking of Parsonages, or Vicarages, and the involving of
himself in secular affairs, see for this 21. H. 8. 13. Dyer. 358.

8. He is forbidden by Law to make a destruction upon the Benefice, or to
lessen the Revenue, and therefore he can lay no charge nor make any estate upon
any part of it for longer time then his own life, except only of such Lands as
have been usually let, which he may let for three lives, or 21 years. Stat.
13. Eliz. 1. 14. Eliz. ^. 18. Eliz. 10. And no Lease he can make of such a
Benefice with Cure is good longer then he is ordinarily resident, and serving
the cure there without absence above fourscore days in one year, Stat. 13.
Eliz. 20. 18. Eliz. 10. 14. Eliz. 11. And yet he that is allowed to have two
Benefices, may let one of them to his Curate that shall serve that cure. But
that Lease will be good only so long as the Curate shall be resident there
without forty days absence in one Rat^.
year, 13. Eliz. 20. 18. Eliz. 10. 4. Eliz. 11.

9. He is as another man to pay his share of rates to the poorer Church, and
highways* And now for the second thing what these persons are to have and
receive, these things are to be known: they have to their persons diverse
privileges above other men. For First, such a man cannot be Arrested upon a
Statute Merchant, or Staple; and if he be, he may have a writ called Quod
Cle^cus capes virtute ^atui deberetur* that
Quod clericus captus and deliberetur, nor may he be Arrested for any cause but
felony, whilst he is bona fide in the doing of his office and about his
divine function. And if therefore he be taken out of the Pulpit, whilst he is
Preaching or praying some have said that for this he may have an Action of
false imprisonment against them that do it: But whether it be so or no, this
is certain, that for this the persons that do it may be indicted and fined.
And for Arresting a Minister in the going to, or coming from Church about the
service of God, the Bayliffes and those that have any hand in it may be bound
to the good behavior. But if the Minister shall keep himself in the Church of
purpose to prevent such Arrests this privilege will not hold, Regist. Orig.
147* st. 50. Ed. 3. chapter 5. 1. R. ^. 15. 1 M. 3. Secondly* He is to be freed,
and exempt from, and not bound to serve in any office that may disturb or
distract him in his calling. And therefore he is not bound to serve the office
of Gonstable, Constable, Tythingman, bailiff, beedle, churchwarden, overseer of
the poor, or the like Office; and albeit he has secular Lands besides his
spiritual promotion, and in respect thereof chargeable if he were another man,
yet he is exempt for this also: And if any such office be put upon him he may
be relieved by a writ called, Quod clerici non eligantur in officio Quod
Clerici non eligantur in officio what
etc. And by this writ he may be discharged, F. V. B. 177.

3. He is not bound to appear or do service in a Leet, or Law day, as other
men are, Marlb. chap. 10. and to discharge them if they were, they had a writ
to relieve them, F. N. B. 160.

4. They ought not in person to serve in the wars: Also they ought to be quit
and discharged of Toles and Customs, Average, Pontage, Paviage, and the like
for their Ecclesiastical goods: And if they had been molested therefore, they
might have had remedy by a writ provided for the purpose: But this and many
others are gone and lost, see Coo. 2. part of his Inst. 4. 121.

4. And as they have privileges for their persons, so for their possessions of
Lands and goods, therefore it is provided that no distress be taken in the
ancient Fees or Lands belonging to the Church, as in the Glebe of a Parson; or
the like, that their goods be not distreined for a fifteenth due from the whole
Parish; if they be, he may be relieved by a writ called, Quod personae, nec
prebendarii Quod personae nec prebenda^ij distringantur etc.
distring antur; etc. That neither themselves nor their Farmers; or Tenants
were to be forced by Surveyors for the Kings use, see for this 9 Ed. 2, chapter 9.
F. N. B. 173, 176. Cromp: Jur. 38.

4. They are to have a competency of maintenance: And for this the Law gives
them these things: First, they are to have the houses belonging to the
Minister, the Glebe, the Tithes, the profits of the Churchyard, the oblations,
obventions, and Mortuaries thereunto belonging; but for all this see my Book of
Tithes; and the profits sequestered and received during the vacation are to be
paid unto the Parson succeeding, save only the charge of taking in, etc. And
for serving the cure in that Erublements.
time, 21. H. 8. 11. They are to have the Corn growing upon the Glebe when
they dye, and may by their will give it to whom will.
they will, 21. H. 8. chapter 11

3. They may make Leases.
any Lease of, or charge upon their Benefice for their own lives, and Leases
for three lives, and one and twenty years of the Land that has been usually
so let, Stat. 13. Eliz. 10.

4. There are now diverse 14. Augmentations.
additional helps for their maintenance by way of Augmentation, as touching
which these things are to be known.

1. There is a great Revenue given to be employed to this purpose, and
Commissioners especially appointed to take and receive account thereof, and to
look to the improvement thereof; see the Acts and Ordinances June 8. 1649.
April 5 1650. Sept. 2. 1654. 2. These Laws judge an hundred pound a year
competent for Ministers, save only in Towns and Cities; 3. These
Commissioners are to overlook all the Augmentations, and by, and with the
Approbation of the LORD PROTECTOR, and his Counsel they may make, add to, and
take from what they please. 3. For their help of maintenance, they may divide,
or unite Churches; as touching which take these 15. Union and Division of
Parishes and Churches.
things. The Commissioners may procure from the Chancery the Return of all the
former Commissions executed, and have new Commissions where they please, for
the discovery of the value of parsonages and vicarages, with, or without cure
of souls, the Incumbents situation of the Churches, etc. 2. When they are
informed of the Case, by and with the approbation of the LORD PROTECTOR and his
counsel out of Parliament Time, they may unite two or more Churches together,
and all the profits thereof, if one of them be not maintained at the charge of
the Parishioners, and appoint which Church shall be the meeting place, and then
they must be taxed altogether to repair, but other taxes shall go as before,
and have their Church wardens as formerly; the patrons shall present by turn,
as the Commissioners shall set down. 4. In this case where they see good they
may pull down one of the churches, and keep the materials for public use* 4.
They may also, by, and with the Approbation aforesaid, sever and divide
Parishes, and fix the maintenance out of the profits of the Church where they
think fit. See the Ordinance at large for these things.

5. And now in the last place, if being in 15. Scandalous and ill affected
Ministers and Scholmasters.
this office he be found insufficient, or ill affected, or be scandalous there
for his life or doctrine, he is to be ejected by Ordinance, 29. Aug. 1654. And
for this these things are to be known. There are Commissioners of every county
to put in execution this Ordinance. 2. Any five of these Commissioners may
convent before them any scandalous, ignorant, negligent, insufficient, and
disaffected Minister, preacher, schoolmaster, and examine Witnesses against, and
put him out of his place, if they find him guilty of matter of scandal, or ill
affection to the Government in any of the Particulars here mentioned. 3. The
things for which he is to be put out are* 1. If he has been formerly ejected,
or sequestered, and yet keeps in his place. 2. If he has held, and maintained
any of the Blasphemous opinions of the third and last rank before named at
Sect. 1. or have held, taught, and maintained the Popes supremacy,
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, worshipping of Images* that the Consecrated Host,
Crucifixes, or Images are to be worshipped. That Salvation may be merited by
works; or be found guilty of profane swearing, or cursing, Perjury, or
subordination of Perjury, Adultery, fornication, Drunkenesse, common haunting
of Taverns, or Alehouses, frequent Quarrelling or fighting, frequent playing at
Cards, or Dice, profaning of the Sabbath day, or allow the same in their
families, or countenance it in their parishes, or scholars, or have publicly,
and frequently read, and used the book of commonprayer since 1. Janu. 1653. or
have been publicly profane scoffers at, or revilers of the strict profession,
and professors of Religion, or Godliness; or do encourage, or countenance by
word, OF practice Whitson Ales, Wakes, Morrice-dances, May poles, Stageplaies,
or such like licentious practices, or have by writting preaching, or otherwise
declared their disaffection to the present Government, or are negligent,
non-resident, and careless of praying, preaching etc: or of their scholars if
they are schoolmasters having no excuse for it 3. If he be put out for
insufficiency, it must be with consent declared of five Ministers also. 4.
Where they put out a schoolmaster they may put in anoother as long as he lives,
as often as the place shall be void. 5. They may sequester the profits livings
out of which they put out any Minister in the hands of some of the Parish, to
provide for the place, repair the houses, and to keep for the next Incumbent.
6. If the party put out be gone, they may allow his wife and children a fifth
part, and force payment there of by sequestration. 6. None may keep school in
the place where he was put out, under pain of 10 s. a day; see the Ordinance of
2. Sept. 1654 at large. And now as touching all the rest of the Rabble of the
men, and orders formerly called religious, of the Regular and secular Clergy,
such as were the Abbots, Priars, Monks, Friars, Canons, Nuns, Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Prebens, and the like, these are abolished, and
gone, and not owned by our Law at this day, Ord. 9. October. 1646. We
Metropolitan. Bishop. Suffragan! Consecration. Congede Estier. Regio Asssensu.
are silent therefore about Metropolitans, Bishops, Suffragans, and say nothing
of Conge de Estier, Consecration, regio Assensu, and such like abolished
things, See Name.

The Convocation house Convocation hourse
was the house wherein the whole Clergy, did assemble to consult of matters
Ecclesiastical in time of Parliament. It did consist of two houses, an upper
house where the Archbishops and Bishops alone did sit, and a lower house, where
all the rest of the Clergy did sit; And the lower house, was made up of Clergy
Proctors of the Clergy.
men Chosen for Cathedral, and Collegiate Churches; and for the common Clergy
of every Diocese, which were called Proctors of Prolocutor.
the Clergy, like to the members of the house of Commons, And in both these
houses they had one they called a Prolocutor, like to the the speaker in the
Parliament. But these Cannons.
things are now gone and abolished. And yet it seems the provincial, or
Sinodal Cannons, and Constitutions formerly made by the Clergy in the
Convocation house, or in their other convocations that are not contrary to the
royal Prerogative, or the Laws, and Customs of the Realm are still in force,
if there were any way to put them in execution, as there is not, for the
Bishops and their Courts are gone, and therefore the cannons can be of no force
at this day Stat 25. H. 8. chapter 19. 27. H. 8. 15. 8. Ed. 6. chapter 17.

As to Discipline by Church Censures, th^^ Discipline
is now left to the Regular, and orderly Churches to be used and Ordered
amongst themselves in Christ, and his Gospels way. But for National discipline
by way of Excommunication, suspension, and the like, there can be none such
used in these days, Bishops being gone, for there is no Law, nor way for it.

S^^ the old Statutes of the Clergy and that (...) them. (...) H. 6. 1. (...)
5. Westminster. 1. (...) 5. 1. (...) H. 4. (...) and (...) Act (...)

(...) of (...) 2^. (...) (...) Sale of their Lands. 25. June 1649. 23: June
1649. 2. June 1649. 20. June 1649.

FINIS.
Sheppard, of the Laws concerning Religion.


