THE THIRD PART OF THE PRACTICAL CHRISTIAN: Consisting of Meditations, and
Psalms illustrated with Notes, or Paraphrased; relating to the Hours of Prayer,
the ordinary Actions of Day and Night, and several Dispositions of Men.

By R. SHERLOCK, D. D. Rector of Winwick.

Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous Judgments.

Psalm. 119.164. LONDON, Printed by R. Flesher for R. Royston, Bookseller to His
most Sacred Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-corner, MDCLXXV.

THE PREFACE; OF Continuing in Prayer and frequent Meditation and the Design of
this Second Part.
holy Catholic Church, which is one of the XII. Articles of the holy Christian
Faith, is partly Triumphant in Heaven, and partly Militant on Earth: both make
but one Spouse of Christ; and therefore the true Members of both are alike
minded and alike employed in reference to the worship of the common Lord of
both.

above Exodus 25.40. Act. 7.44. Heb. 6.11.
: They do the will of God on earth as it is done in heaven Mat. 6.11
: and that is undoubtedly the way to Heaven: we cannot possibly lose our way
thither, whilst we follow their steps who are thither gone before us.

rest not day nor night, saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty Isa. 6.3.
Rev. 4.8.
. Whereunto conforms the man after God's own heart, saying, O Lord God of my
Salvation, I have cried day and night before thee Ps. 88.1.
. Our Lord commends it as a Duty incumbent, that men ought always to pray Luke
18.1.
. And by his Apostle commands it positively, Pray without ceasing 1 Thesl. 5.13.
. Giving thanks always Ephesians. 5.20.
. Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication Ephesians. 6.18
.

we should do nothing else but pray, S. Aug. l. de haer. Theod. Eccles. hist.
l. 4. c. 10.
which was an old Heresy of the Messalians, and Euchites, long since condemned
by the Church of Christ, as being a thing impossible to pray without ceasing in
the bare literal sense; because this corruptible body presses down the Soul,
and corporal necessities do call for supply: Neither yet,

That we should make long Prayers, which is the new Error and great mistake of
these Times: The which, though generally the most used, and best liked, as
being set off with the paint of seeming zeal, and pretense of the Spirit; yet
the unlawfulness of such long Prayers will appear, if we will without prejudice
and partiality consider, that

1. They are forbidden by our Lord, saying, When you pray, use not vain
repetitions, Matthew. 6.7. in which words, our Lord means not, the same Prayers
repeated, (as is falsely objected against the Prayers of the Church;) for thus
our Lord prayed himself, Matthew. 26.39, 44. Where his Prayer was short and three
times repeated.

And therefore undoubtedly, by vain repetitions in Praying is understood
multitude of words, and variety of expressions to the same purpose, or rather
to no purpose; since our desires both may and ought to be expressed in few
words and pertinent, according to the Pattern our Lord has given us.

And that it is the meaning of our Lord, when he says, After this manner pray
ye, that our Prayers should be generally formed to the length of his Prayer
prescribed, will appear

1. From the Context, if seriously weighed and rightly understood; wherein is
manifest, that the manner of Praying by such a short Form is commanded, in
opposition to the heathenish use of much speaking in Prayer.

2. From the parallel Text in the Margin, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with thy
mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, for God is
in Heaven, and thou upon earth; therefore let thy words be few.

3. From the Prayers of Christ's Church, which are in all Liturgies of the
Christian World, for the most part of the same length; and surely the general
practice of the Church is the best interpreter of holy Scripture.

4. Such are generally also all the Prayers of the holy Spirit of God which
stand upon record in holy Writ [viz. the Book of Psalms, with many more] we
meet with none that are of such a continued length, as are in use amongst us;
but they are all divided, by distinct Verses, into so many several shorter
Prayers.

Matt. 6.7.
as (the Heathen do) who mind more the Oratory and Language, Tone and
Pronunciation, than the Humility and Devotion of the Soul in Prayer: and it is
much misbecoming Christians to worship the true God as the Heathen do their
false and feigned Deities. And

misbelief of his divine perfections; as if he were asleep and must be
awakened, or did not understand our wants and desires, or, being otherwise
employed, he could not intend our petitions, except in multitude of words
expressed, and loud talking for audience: So prayed the Priests of Baal, 1 King.
18.27. and so says our Lord of all Heathen people, That they think they shall
be heard for their much speaking; which is directly contrary to the true Faith
of a Christian, who believes and acknowledges the Omniscience and
Omnipresence of God; as it follows in the 8. verse. Your heavenly Father knows
what things you stand in need of before you ask: which divine Truth is
implicitly denied by loud and long Prayers.

Matt. 6.5. cap. 23.14. Mark 12.40. Luk 20.47 Joh. 12.43.
as the custom of the Heathen, but also frequently reproved by him as the
practice of Hypocrites, who love to stand praying in the Synagogues, and in the
corners of the Streets, that they may be seen of men, that they may be taken
notice of for godly men, desiring rather to seem, than really to be religious,
loving the praise of men more than the praise of God.

To pray continually then, is neither to be understood of doing nothing else
but pray, nor yet of using long Prayers; the one being prohibited by our Lord,
and the other condemned by his Church: but in this and the like expressions is
commanded

The intense Devotion of the Soul in prayer: So our Lord expounds his own
Cammand, that men ought always to pray, viz. that they faint not Luke 18.1.
, to wit, for want of that holy fervor and devout Zeal, which is the Life and
Soul of an effectual Prayer: and this same celestial fire of holy zeal in
Prayer, spends not it self in multitude of words and much babbling of the lips,
but is expressed in sighs and groans which cannot be uttered Romans 8.26.
: which are tru^ (...) breathings of the holy Spirit of God in Prayer, who
dwells not upon the Tongue, but in the Heart.

To pray continually, enjoins the constant and continued returns of this holy
Duty; that we lose no time, neglect no opportunity either of public Prayers of
the Church, or of private Prayer and Closet-devotions, upon the set, solemn and
accustomed times thereof: remembering that the time only which is employed in
the sacred acts of Piety toward God, and Charity toward Man, is redeemed Ephesians.
5.6.
out of the all-devouring jaws of death, and dark oblivion, to be the Seminary
of a blessed Eternity, Gal. 6.8.
when Time shall be no more.

That we ought always to pray, i. e. say the Fathers upon the Text, at those
appointed Hours, observed by the Church of God both under the Law, called
therefore the hours of the Temple, and under the Gospel, called the Canonical
hours: so generally observed formerly of all devout Christians, that S.
Hierome, with his Quis nescit? takes it for granted, that no godly Christian,
is either ignorant or negligent in the observation of such hours, as being
probably observed by holy David, saying, Psalm. 119.164.
Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments.

To continue in Prayer, is to have our hearts so inflamed with the love of God,
as to be in a continual disposition to Pray; and this not only at all set and
accustomed times, but at all times and upon all occasions, and objects
presented, to raise up our Souls upon the Spiritual wings of holy Meditations,
celestial affections, devout colloquies, and ejaculatory converses with Heaven.

Thus Enoch walked with God and was translated Genesis 5.24. Heb. 11.5.
. Thus King David professes, I have set God always before me Ps. 16.9.
: And, I will give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in my mouth
Ps. 34.1.
: no time omitted; Evening and Morning, and Noonday Ps. 55.17, 18.
: early and late Ps. 63.1, 7
: no place pretermitted; in the Wilderness, in the land of Jordan, and the
unbeaten paths of Hermon Ps. 42.8.
.

S. Hierom professes of himself, that often on the tops of Mountains, and in
hollow Valleys and craggy Rocks, with eyes lifted up to Heaven and flowing with
tears, he poured forth his Soul in holy Prayers and Meditations S. Hierom. Ep.
ad Eustor.
. So Meditates S. Austin also; Te Domine mediter per dies sine cessatione; Te
sentiam per soporem in nocte; Te alloquar Aug. Medit.
-- O that I could Meditate upon thee, O Lord, through the whole day, and not
cease to be affected with thee in the night: my Spirit speaking unto thee, and
my mind conversing with thee always, and alone: Blessed are they who think of
nothing, speak of nothing but the Lord; who love nothing above thee, desire
nothing besides thee: Blessed are they whose hope alone is the Lord, and all
whose work is Prayer. And several of the devout Fathers computed all that time
lost, wherein God was not in their minds and memories: and there is great
reason for it, as the same S. Austin meditates; For as there is no moment of
time, wherein we enjoy not the sweet influences of the divine goodness, and
stand in need also of God's protecting presence with us: So there should be no
time wherein we have not God in our thoughts Aug. Marcu.
. Wait on thy God continually Hos. 12.16.
: Seek the Lord, and his strength; seek his face evermore Ps. 105.4.
. Thus S. Paul, and all truly devout Christians with him, have their
conversation in heaven Phil. 3.20.
, whilst they are upon earth; and that is the way surely to have our
conversation in Heaven, when we shall be taken from the earth.

This Second Part of the Practical Christian consists of Ejaculatory Prayers
and Meditations, with several Psalms paraphrased and illustrated; relating to
the hours of Prayer, and to other subjects, both useful and necessary to be
considered by every such devout person as seriously minds the eternal Salvation
of his Soul. It Is not hereby intended magisterially to impose upon any persons,
either at what hours they shall pray precisely in their Closets, or that they
should thus, or thus punctually Meditate and Pray, at all such times, and upon
every such subject prefixed: But





recall, if possible, the Devotion of the present times, to the ancient and sure
way of Religious exercise; which was, and is still by all sound and Orthodox
Devotaries, in the devout use of the Psalms of David: 'twas thus that all the
triumphing Saints in Heaven have prayed themselves thither, as far forth as
their Religious practices appear unto us upon record in Ecclesiastical Story:
and it is a safe way to follow their steps, rather than the fanciful conceptions
of our own heads; especially remembering that it is acknowledged by all
Christians, that the Psalms of David, are the Treasury of all Devotion: It Is
known, that they are, and ever were, the constant Prayers of the Church and
People of God at all times, and upon all occasions. It cannot be denied, but
that they are the immediate Dictates and Prayers of the holy and true Spirit of
God; and therefore it must surely follow, that they are of higher dignity,
greater efficacy and acceptance with God, than the most seemingly-zealous and
pathetical expressions in Prayer, which flow from the spirit of the most
learned and ready tongue'd man.

It is to be lamented even to astonishment, at the madness and folly of many
persons professing to be godly, that they do so highly extol the Praying by the
Spirit; and yet altogether neglect the use of those Psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, commanded, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. and are the infallible and
undeniable Prayers of the Spirit of Truth and Holiness: But it is the fond
imaginations of their own hearts, that such do mean by the Spirit, if they
blaspheme not; and it is these indigested conceptions of their own brain, which
blinds their Zeal, and darkens their Understanding, to slight both the Prayers
of David, and of the Son of David also; even all the immediate Dictates of
Heaven, when they come in competition with the conceived Notions of their own
brain, which they call a praying by the Spirit.

But that you may truly and indeed pray by the Spirit, and pray with the
Understanding also; and, which is all one, you may sing with the Spirit, and
sing with the Understanding also; (for the Psalms, whether said or sung, are
the same Prayers, when they are rightly Translated) is the great reason of many
Psalms paraphrased and illustrated with Notes and Prayers: And these Psalms
also are not of my own choice affixed to any of the ensuing Chapters of
Meditation; but such as have been so selected and disposed, either by the
Church of Christ, or some of the most eminent Governors and Fathers of the
Church.

The Reader may take notice, that in the last Chapter of this PRACTICAL
CHRISTIAN imprinted, are many of the general Heads, and hints of several the
ensuing Chapters of this SECOND PART; and therefore he cannot but meet with
several expressions formerly published; but revised, and more methodically
disposed both for use and memory.

PAge 310. line 3. read, where thou art absent.

THE CONTENTS.
The Preface; of continuing in Prayer; of frequent Meditation, with the design
of the following Meditations. I. CHapt. Of Meditations and Psalms for the
Morning. Page 1. II. Chap. Meditations for the Third hour of Prayer. p. 21 III.
Chap. Of Meditations for the Sixth hour. p. 41 IV. Chap. Of Meditations for the
Ninth hour. p. 61 V. Chap. Of Meditations for the Evening. p. 81 VI. Chap. Of
Meditations for Bedtime. p. 101 VII. Chap. Of Meditations for the
Night-season. p. 121 VIII. Chap. Of Meditations fitted to every days ordinary
actions, etc. viz. When you go forth of your Chamber, I p. 151 When you walk
abroad, I. p. 152 When you stand upon soms high place, I. ibid. When you behold
pleasant Fields, I. p. 153 When you hear or see any thing extraordinary, I. p.
155 When you hear or see the time of the day, I. ib. When you go to read or
study, I. p. 156 When you are wearied therewith, I. p. 157 When you go about
any worldly Employployments, I. p. 158 When you are sad or discontented, I. p.
159 When you sit idle, I. p. 160 Upon wandering and wanton eyes, I. ibid. When
you are tempted to any sin, IV. p. 161, 164 When Temptations prevail, I. p. 165
When you have escaped a. Temptation, I. p. 166 When you hunger or thirst, III.
p. 167, 168 After you have eaten or drunk, III. 169, 170 When you are asked an
Alms, II. p. 171 When you hear others evil spoken of, I. p. 172 When you hear
your self reproached p. 173 When you are crossed in any your worldly desires or
interests. p. 174 When you suffer several kinds of trouble. p. 175 When you
suffer any bodily pains. p. 176 When you are sensible of your want of Knowledge
and Wisdom. 177 When you are dull and averse from holy Duties. p. 179 When
sensible of your sins, and the mispending your time. p. 180 When you resolve to
be more religious for the future. p. 181
Holy Breathings of the Soul after God, II. p. 183-186 A Meditation of Fasting
and Alms giving to be joined with Prayers. p. 187 Meditations upon Unity and
the Public Worship of God. p. 171 OF the Four last things in general. p. 201
Of the shortness and frailty of this present Life. p. 205 Of the frequent
remembrance of Death. p. 210 Of the Horror of Death. p. 215 Of the uncertainty
of Death, and preparation for it. p. 219 The 39. Psalm illustrated with notes.
226 The 90. Psalm illustrated with notes, 230

The 2. general Head, Of Judgment. Of particular Judgment, III. 235-242 Of the
general Judgment, V. 243-253 The 26. Psalm paraphrased. 254 The 43. Psalm
paraphrased. 258

The 3. general Head, Of the pains of Hell. 263 Of the pain of loss. 264 Of the
darkness of Hell. 267 Of the fire of Hell. 270 Of the extent of Hell pains. 273
Of the bonds and chains of Hell. 277 Of the Laments of Hell. 279 Of the
perpetuity of Hell torments. 282 The 86. Psalm paraphrased. 285 The 88. Psalm
paraphrased. 291
The 4. general Head, Of the joys of Heaven. 297 Of the place called Heaven,
300 its greatness, its brightness and splendour, its tranquillity and peace.
300-303 Of the good things of Heaven, 1. Honor, 2. Power, 3. Riches, 4.
Pleasure. 304-308 Of the Company of Heaven, 1. Gods presence there, 2. of the
Angels of Heaven, 3. of the Saints in Heaven. 309-316 Of the perpetuity of
heavenly Joys. 316 The 24. Psalm paraphrased. 321 The 84. Psalm paraphrased. 326

Meditation upon the Vow in Baptism. 333 Meditation of the cure of the Soul
before that of the Body. 336 Meditation upon the Tears of the devout Soul. 340
Meditation of the dwelling of God in the hearts of his people. 344

CHAP. I. Of Meditations and Psalms for the Morning.
WHen I awake up, Psalm. 139.18.
I am always with thee; who sleeping and waking am preserved by thee: And it is
just, and my bounden duty to return back my first breath in praise to him from
whom I have received it. So the Angels of Heaven, those Morning-stars, being
first made, even in the Morning of the worlds Creation, no sooner received
their Being, but all with one accord sang with joyful acclamations, the praises
of their Creator: Job 38.7.
When the Morningstars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy.
Say then,

As soon as you awake,
Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity, now and for evermore; and thrice
blessed be the great and glorious Majesty of Heaven, who has preserved me the
Night past, and saved me from the sleep of death: It Is of the Lords mercy that
we are not consumed, Lam. 3.22, 23.
even because his Compassions fail not: they are new every morning: Great is
thy faithfulness.

II.
O holy Jesus, the Morning Star, the dayspring from on high, who came down to
visit us, Luke 1.78, 79.
to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to
guide our feet into the way of peace: Mal. 4.2.
Arife, thou Sun of Righteousness upon my darkened Soul, with healing in thy
Wings; 1 Thessalonians 5.5.
make me a child of the light and of the day, not of the night nor of darkness:
Let the Light of thy Truth direct me, and the Light of thy Grace support me, in
the way to Light and Life everlasting, Amen.

III.
Lighten mine eyes, O Lord, Psalm. 13.3.
that I sleep not in death; either spiritual, in sin; or eternal, for sin: but
from all sin and wickedness, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation,
good Lord deliver me.

Show thy servant the light of thy Countenance; Psalm. 31.18
and save me for thy mercies sake.

O let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the morning, Psalm. 143.8
for in thee do I trust: Show thou me that I should walk in, for unto thee, O
Lord, do I lift up my soul.

At your Vp-rising.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection, for on such
the second death has no power: but they shall be Priests of God, and of
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years. Rev. 20.6.
O holy Jesu, who early in the morning did raise up thy self from death to
life for me, raise me up, I meekly beseech thee, from the death of sin unto the
life of Righteousness.

Grant me by the power of thy Death, and virtue of thy Resurrection, early and
betimes, even to day while it is called to day, to arise out of the mire of
sensuality, and out of the dust and rubbish of worldly vanities, unto newness
and all holiness of life; that when that long day of Eternity shall dawn, I may
be raised up out of the grave of death, to live and reign with thee for ever.
Amen.

I laid me down and slept, Psalm. 3.5.
and rose again, for the Lord sustained me.

Blessed be the name of the Lord, Psalm. 113.2, 3.
from this time forth and for evermore.

The Lords name is praised from the rising of the Sun unto the going down of
the same.

A Morning Hymn.
NOw that the day light does arise
Breaking through the azure skies,
To heaven I lift my heart and eyes,
Begging of God with humble cries,
All hurtful things to turn away,
Whilst I duly spend the day;
And from his Laws go not astray,
But of true virtue keep the way:
To turn away my wandering eyes
From the beholding vanities;
To guard my lips from speaking lies:
To keep my heart both pure and clean
From all desires wicked or vain,
And my unruly Passions rein:
To tame proud flesh, whilst I deny it
A full cup, and wanton diet,
Avoiding all excess and riot:
That when the day light shall go out,
And darkness clouds the earth throughout,
Time bringing on the night about,
The Light of thy bright face may shine
Upon my Soul, and Beams divine
Display into this heart of mine.
Whilst leaving wicked worldly ways,
I in silence sing thy praise,
Chanting forth these following Lays.
All glory to the Trinity,
Which I adore in Unity,
The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
One Lord which is of mighties most,
As it has e're been heretofore,
Is now, and shall be evermore,
At your Apparrelling.
I Put on Righteousness, and it clothed me, my judgment was a robe and a
diadem. Job. 29.14 And to the Spouse of Christ it was granted, that she should
be arrayed in fine linen clean and white: for the fine linen is the
righteousness of the Saints.
Blessed Jesus, cloth my soul with thy spotless Robes of Righteousness, and
beautify me with the celestial ornaments of the graces of thy Spirit.

Let it be my constant desire and endeavor to appear more amiable in thy
sight, than in the censorious eyes of men.

II.
ANd why take ye thought for raiment? Matthew. 6.28,
consider the Lilies of the field; they toil not, neither do they spin.

And yet I say unto you, 29.
that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.

How then, fond Soul, can thou be proud of thy bodily apparel, wherein the
grass of the field excels thy utmost bravery?

To be proud of thy gay clothing, is to glory in thy shame; to cover which
shame and nakedness, as the issue of sin and disobedience, the use of Garments
was given by God.

The true ornaments of a Christian consist in that which is not corruptible,
even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of
great price.

At your Washing.
I.
BLessed be the Lord God my Heavenly Father, who has washed me from my
Original pollution in the sacred waters of Baptism, and has therein called me
to the state of Salvation, through Jesus Christ; And I pray God to give me his
Grace, that I may continue in the same unto my life's end.

This I promised by my Undertakers, when I was Baptized, 1 Pet. 3.21. Chapter Cat.
but I have not been so careful as I ought to make good my promise?

O wash me thoroughly from my wickedness (as in the Laver of Baptism) and
cleanse me from my sin, Psalm. 51.2,
whereby I have unhallowed those saving Waters.

Thou shall purge me with Hysop (through the bitter sorrows and sufferings of
my dearest Savior) and I shall be clean: 7.
Thou shall wash me (in the fountain of thy inexhaustible mercy) and I shall be
whiter than Snow.

II.
It Is the clean hands and pure heart wherewith God is well pleased; even the
heart that is pure from all evil affections, and the hands that be clean from
all sinful actions: Blessed are the pure in heart, Matt. 5.8.
for they shall see God: see him in Grace and Mercy here, and in Glory
hereafter.

Make me a clean heart, Psa. 51.10.
O God, and renew a right spirit within me: A Spirit cleaving steadfastly unto
thee, my God, and to thy Covenant with me in holy Baptism.

Water the dry barren ground of my Heart, with the dew of Heaven, the celestial
influences of thy holy Spirit; that I may bring forth the fruits of good works,
to the glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Upon the Use of the Creed.
I Have many Enemies to encounter, and such as are not corruptible flesh and
blood, but spiritual and invisible, quick and powerful, active and vigilant to
ensnare me in all my thoughts and desires, words and actions: And therefore
it is necessary (O my Soul) before thou go forth to enter upon any worldly
affairs, that thou be well armed, as with fervent Prayers, and the Sword of the
Spirit, so with the shield of faith, Ephesians. 6.12, 13.
to quench all the fiery darts of the Devil.

Confess then the holy Christian Faith with Understanding and affectionate
Devotion.

I. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth. II. And in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, III. Who was conceived by the holy Ghost:
Born of the Virgin Mary: IV. Suffered under Pontius Pilate: was crucified, dead
and buried. V. He descended into Hell: the third day he rose again from the
dead. VI. He ascended into Heaven; and sits on the right hand of God the
Father. VII. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. VIII. I
believe in the Holy Ghost. IX. The holy Catholic Church; the Communion of
Saints. X. The forgiveness of Sins. XI. The Resurrection of the Body. XII. The
Life everlasting. Amen.
I believe, Lord, help my unbelief: And grant a right and a full understanding
of all these Articles of the most holy Faith, and Grace to square all the
actions of my life according thereunto. Let this Faith be my shield from all
errors in Judgment, and miscarriages in Conversation, and from the Devil and
all his Instruments that would seduce me to either.

Before you go forth of your Chamber or undertake any employment; first, in all
holy Humility and Reverence prostrate upon your knees offer unto God your
Morning sacrifice, 1. Of Thanksgiving for your preservation and refreshment the
night past.

2. Confessing with all godly sorrow your sins and failings, even in the best
of your performances; and more particularly in what the night past you
offended, either by thought or desire, word or deed, in your dreams, sleeping
or waking, and humbly beg pardon for the same.

3. Imploring God's gracious assistance, to direct you in all your intentions
and undertakings; to strengthen you against all Temptations, to enable you to
fulfill and put in execution all your good purposes and holy resolutions.

PSALMS for the MORNING, or First Hour of Prayer; with Notes for Illustration.
The CXIX. Psalm,
The First Part.
1. BLessed are those that are undefiled in the way, and walking in the way of
the Lord.

This present life is called the way, because it is the thorough fare to Life
eternal: and to keep unspotted of this world, is the way to be blessed in the
world to come.

2. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies; and seek him with their whole
heart.

That we may keep Gods Laws, which is the way to blessedness, we must with all
fervor of Spirit implore the assistance of divine Grace.

3. For they who do no wickedness, walk in his ways.

To do wickedly, is to walk every one in the ways of his own heart, which are
contrary to the ways of God.

4. Thou have charged that we shall diligently keep thy Commandments.

It Is not enough to decline the ways of wickedness, except we be also diligent
in doing the good works God has commanded.

5. O that my ways were made so direct, that I might keep thy statutes!

So directed by thee.

6. So shall I not be confounded, while I have respect unto all thy
Commandments.

Disobedience to God's Commands is the highway to confusion.

7. I will thank thee with an unfeigned heart, when I shall have learned the
judgments of thy righteousness.

Unfeigned thanks are to be given unto God, as the chief author of all our
knowledge and obedience.

8. I will keep thy ceremonies: O forsake me not utterly.

Or, that I may keep thy Laws in every circumstance thereof, O Lord, forsake me
not: or if for a while thou leave me, that I may be sensible of my frailties,
yet forsake me not utterly.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
WIth my whole heart do I seek and sue unto thee, O Lord, that thy Truth may so
direct me, and thy Grace support me in the way of thy Laws and in the works of
thy Commandments; that being holy and undefiled in the way of this Life, I may
be for ever blessed with thee in the Life to come, through Jesus Christ.

The Second Part.
Verses,

1. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? even by ruling himself after
thy Word.

The regenerate or new Man preserves himself clean and pure, by squaring all
his intentions and actions by that infallible Rule of Righteousness which God
has prescribed.

2. With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not go wrong unto thy
Commandments.

Either by misunderstanding thy word, for want of divine Illumination; or by
disobeying the same for want of divine Grace.

3. Thy word have I hid in my heart; that I should not sin against thee. That
we sin not, is the great end why the Word of God is given us.
.

4. Blessed art thou, O Lord: O teach me thy statutes.

To bless God for gifts already received is the readiest way more fully to
understand his Will.

5. With my lips have I been telling of all the judgments of thy mouth.

Divine knowledge must not be buried, as the Talent in a Napkin, but be
outwardly expressed to the glory of God, and edification of others.

6. I have had as great delight in thy testimonies, as in all manner of riches.

The highest delight of man is the pleasure of his highest Faculties, the
Understanding and the Will, which consists in the knowledge of the truth and
obedience thereunto.

7. I will talk of thy Commandments; and have respect to thy ways.

True Religion will manifest it self both in words and deeds.

8. My delight shall be in thy Statutes; and I will not forget thy word.

Whilst I delight to obey my God, I cannot forget the Rule of that obedience
which he requires.

The Prayer.
GRant me, blessed Lord, to delight in thee, and in obedience to thy Laws, more
than in all earthly treasures; devoting both my youth and ripe age hereunto:
That so keeping thy Commandments I may enter into life, thorough Jesus Christ.

The Third Part.
1. O do well unto thy servant, that I may live and keep thy word.

To do the good works God has commanded in his Word, is to live the life of
Grace, which is the way to the life of Glory.

2. Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law.

Without the right understanding of the excellency of those duties God
commands, there can be no true Religion either in the heart or in the life.

3. I am a stranger upon earth: O hide not thou thy Commandments from me.

Not the earth but Heaven is our native home; whereunto the knowledge of, and
obedience unto, Gods Commandments, does entitle us through Christ.

4. My soul breaks out, for the very fervent desire it has always unto thy
judgments.

The beginning of true Wisdom is the fervent desire thereof.

5. Thou have rebuked the proud; and cursed are they that do err from thy
Commandments.

Spiritual pride is hateful before God, as being inconsistent with obedience to
his Laws.

6. O turn from me shame and rebuke; for I have kept thy testimonies.

Or, turn from me that shame and curse which thou have threatened to the proud
and disobedient.

7. Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant is occupied in
thy Statutes.

8. For thy testimonies are my delight and my counselors.

Against all the powers of earth and hell, God's Word is our counsel by its
direction, and our comfort in its practice.

The Prayer.
O Lord the giver of all good things, vouchsafe unto thy servant, fervently to
desire, rightly to understand, and constantly to persevere in the practice of
all thy Evangelical Precepts: Let not any Powers upon earth, nor all the
Princes and Powers of hell withdraw my heart from thee, or my actions from the
Rule of Righteousness: but let thy testimonies be ever both my Counsel and my
Comfort in my pilgrimage upon earth; that in the end I may safely arrive in my
native Country of Heaven, to ascribe for ever, Glory to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


The Fourth Part.
1. My soul cleaves unto the dust: O quicken me according to thy Word.

or, My soul is too much set upon earthly things, do thou quicken me with
spiritual wisdom, and heavenly affections, according to thy promise in thy Word.

2. I have acknowledged my ways, and thou heardest me: O teach me thy Statutes.

After confession of sin, and prayer for pardon, new obedience is required.

3. Make me to understand the way of thy Commandments: and so shall I talk of
thy wondrous works.

To talk of Religion without a right Understanding is but vain babbling.

4. My soul melts away for very heaviness: Comfort thou me according to thy
Word.

Godly sorrow is the inlet to divine Consolation.

5. Take from me the way of lying; and cause thou me to make much of thy Law.

Errors in judgment must be corrected and abandoned, that we may obey God
sincerely and cordially.

6. I have chosen the way of truth, and thy judgments have I laid before me.

What the Word of God does judge to be true or false, is to be ever chose or
refused.

7. I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O Lord, confound me not.

Steadfastly to cleave unto what God has testified to be the way of truth and
holiness, is a sure way to avoid confusion.

8. I will run the way of thy Commandments; when thou have set my heart at
liberty.

While the heart is enfettered with sensual or worldly lusts, we can neith run
nor walk in the ways of God's Commandments we ought.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
O Raise up my Soul, bless Lord, out of the dust and rubbish of earthly
desires: quicken my dullness in thy service; comfort me in all my sadnesses;
dispel all those mists of Ignorance and Error which cloud my Understanding:
enlarge my heart from the bondage of Sin and Satan, and out of the fetters of
all Temptations unto evil; and so strengthen me to run in the ways which thou
have Commanded, that I may obtain what thou have promised through Jesus Christ.

Our Father which art in, etc.

CHAP. II. Of Meditations for the Third Hour of Prayer; or Nine a Clock in the
Morning.
THis is called, The holy hour in the Decrees of the Church, and generally the
hour of public Assemblies in the Worship of God; and not without very great
reason; For,

1. Matthew. 27.20.
'Twas at this hour my blessed Redeemer underwent the bitter sentence of death;
whilst Barabbas, a Thief, a Rebel and a Murderer was acquitted.

And I vile wretch am as guilty as Barabbas in many respects, and justly
obnoxious to the dreadful sentence of condemnation to death eternal: but by the
infinite Merits and Mysteries of thy Condemnation, Good Lord deliver me.

2. Matthew. 27.26.
'Twas at this hour of the day my blessed Redeemer exposed his tender breasts
and delicate back and shoulders, to be rased, rent and torn with forked whips,
by cruel blood-thirsty soldiers, until his innocent Body was all over gore
blood.

And my sins deserve the scourges and mine offenses the rod of the Almighties
just indignation: but blessed Lord, I humbly beg, that I may so wash my
polluted soul with the penitent tears of holy compunction, through Faith in the
blood of my Savior; and so chastise and keep under that body of sin which is,
and too much reigns in my Members: Eccles. 39.28.
that being delivered from the guilt and tyranny of sin in this life, I may
escape those fiery whips and scourgings of the spirits of vengeance, which are
the portion of the disobedient and impenitent in the other life.

3. Act. 2.15.
'Twas at this hour of the day the Holy Ghost descended upon the holy Apostles
and Disciples of Christ, and by his celestial influences replenished them with
extraordinary Gifts and Graces, for the propagation of his holy Gospel, and the
plantation of his Church through the World. And,

Vouchsafe, holy God, vouchsafe unto me also thy unworthy servant, the guidance
of the same spirit; by whose Illumination and Sanctification I may both
perceive and know what things I ought to do: and also may have Grace faithfully
to perform the same through Jesus Christ.

And the Earth was without form and void, Genesis 1.2.
and darkness was upon the face of the deep: And the Spirit of God moved upon
the face of the Waters.

Such was thy condition, O my Soul, in thy state of Nature, without form or
comeliness; the image of God, wherein thy beauty consists, was defaced by
original corruption: void, both of Grace and Truth: an Abyss of darkness, and
in the shadow of death: till the all-quickning Spirit of God, moving upon the
hallowed waters of Baptism, caused the light to appear. But still the dregs of
thy natural corruption remain, and the darkness of ignorance ever hovers upon
the face of the Deep: But where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty, both
rightly to understand, and acceptably to perform his Will.

COme Holy Ghost eternal God
Proceeding from above,
Both from the Father and the Son,
The God of Peace and Love:
Visit my Mind and into me
Thy heavenly Grace inspire,
That in all Truth and Godliness
I may have the desire:
Kindle my heart with fervent love
To serve God day and night.
Strength and stablish all my weakness,
So feeble and so frail,
That neither flesh, the world nor devil
Against me do prevail:
And grant, O Lord, that thou being
My Leader and my Guide,
I may eschew the snares of sin
And from thee never slide.
ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts are open, all desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid: cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of
thy holy Spirit; that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy
holy Name through Jesus Christ.

Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, This Hymn is prescribed to be used in
the Morning by the Apostolical Constit. l. 7. c. 47. and at the Third Hour of
the Morning; because then the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles, and
replenished them with glory, exultation and joy. Dur. Rat. l. 4. c. 13.
good will toward men

We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we worship Thee, we glorify Thee, we give
thanks to Thee for thy great Glory, heavenly King, God the Father Almighty.

O Lord, the only begotten Son Jesus Christ; O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of
the Father, that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. Thou
that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us: Thou that take
away the sins of the world, receive our prayers: Thou that sit at the right
hand of God the Father, have mercy upon us.

For Thou only art Holy, Thou only art the Lord, Thou only O Christ, with the
Holy Ghost art most High in the Glory of God the Father, Amen.

PSALMS for the Third Hour.
Legem pone. Psalm. 119. Part. 5.
Hora tertia Psalmus [Legem pone] dicitur, quia tunc lex nova data est
Apostolis, Dur. Rat. l. 5. c. 6. Verses,

1. TEach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end.

The Understanding must first be enlightened, that the Affections of the Heart
may be inflamed with love and obedience.

2. Give me Understanding and I shall keep thy Law; yea I will keep it with my
whole heart.

The Understanding must first be enlightened, that the Affections of the Heart
may be inflamed with love and obedience.

3. Make me to go in the paths of thy Commandments, for therein is my delight.

And because all holy desires are not but by the influences of God's holy
Spirit, therefore it follows, Incline my heart.

4. Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not unto covetousness.

God is to be obeyed not for any earthly ends: and therefore a sincere
obedience is inconsistent with covetousness.

5. O turn away mine eyes lest they behold vanity; and quicken thou me in thy
way.

The way of the world is vain and unsatisfying; and Christ the Way, the Truth
and the Life.

6. O stablish thy Word in thy servant; that I may fear thee.

God's Word must not be slightly heard; but deeply settled in the heart, to
beget therein the true fear of God.

7. Take away the rebuke I am afraid of; for thy judgments are good.

We would fear reproach for our sins, did we seriously consider the
righteousness of God's Judgments.

8. Behold my delight is in thy Commandments: O quicken me in thy righteousness.

The more active we be in all holy obedience, the greater delight shall we find
therein.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
It Is the desire of my Soul (O Lord) to know and obey thy Commands, as being
the way of true delight, and give me a right understanding thereof, with a firm
adhesion, and obedience thereunto. Mortify the exorbitant lusts of mine eyes,
and of mine heart, whose issue is shame and reproach: Ecclus. 23.1, 5.
Leave me not to their counsels, and let me not fall by them, but turn away
from me vain hopes, and concupiscence, and thou shall hold him up, who is
desirous always to serve thee through Jesus Christ.

The Sixth Part.
Verses,

1. Let thy loving mercy come also unto me, O Lord: even thy Salvation
according to thy Word.

In the Word of God mercy and salvation is promised to his people.

2. So shall I make answer to my blasphemers: for my trust is in thy Word.

The manifestation whereof shall stop the mouths of all evil speakers.

3. O take not the word of thy Truth utterly out of my mouth: for my hope is in
thy judgments.

He that hopes for Mercy in the day of Judgment, must now profess the truth in
the day of Trial and Temptation.

4. So shall I always keep thy Law: yea for ever and ever.

Charity, which is the end, or Love, which is the fulfilling of the Law,
continues for ever.

5. And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy Commandments.

The love of God diffused in the heart, does enlarge our steps in the ways of
obedience to his Laws.

6. I will speak of thy Testimonies even before Kings: and will not be ashamed.

And animate us undauntedly to profess the Truth before the greatest Powers
upon earth.

7. And my delight shall be in thy Commandments: which I have loved.

These are inseparably urited, the Love of God, and the Love of whatever he
Commands.

8. My hands also will I lift up to thy Commandments, which I have loved: and
my study shall be in thy Statutes.

The love of the heart sets the hands on work, and both in holy Actions, and
divine Contemplations is the pious Soul delighted.

The Prayer.
GReat is thy mercy, O Lord, in promising, and great is thy Righteousness in
performing the promise of Salvation to all them that trust in Thee: let this
thy Mercy and Truth appear in my Salvation. Set my heart at liberty from all
extravagant lusts which tyrannize there: and grant that thy Laws may be so much
my delight, that I fear not to profess the same even before Kings when called
thereunto. Let thy holy Will revealed be my daily study, and my hands lift up
carefully to perform the same all the days of my life through Jesus Christ.

The Seventh Part.
Verses,

1. O think upon thy servant as concerning thy Word: wherein thou have caused
me to put my trust.

A holy confidence in the promises of God is a good ground of Prayer to be made
partakers thereof.

2. The same is my comfort in my trouble: for thy Word has quickened me.

and of consolation in the greatest extremities.

3. The proud have had me exceedingly in derision: yet have I not shrinked from
thy Law.

And of perseverance in spite of all the scoffs and contradictions of Sinners.

4. For I remembered thy everlasting judgments, O Lord: and received comfort.

To remember the joys of Eternity supports the pious soul in the greatest of
temporal afflictions.

5. I am horriby afraid for the ungodly: that forsake thy Laws.

The impiety of others does more terrify a godly person than his own
sufferings by their injustice.

6. Thy Statutes have been my songs: in the house of my pilgrimage.

The equity of the divine precepts is the most proper subject of melodious
poely upon earth.

7. I have thought upon thy Name, O Lord, in the night season: and have kept
thy Laws.

Night meditations do much conduce to the right ordering all the actions of the
day.

8. This I had: because I kept thy Commandments.

Obedience is rewarded with Grace for Grace.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
O Think upon thy servant in great mercy, (O Lord,) and let no external
troubles, no reproaches of the proud and scornful withdraw my heart from that
love and obedience which I owe unto thee: But let thy Grace so prevent me in
all my doings, that I fail not of thy following Grace to continue thy faithful
servant and soldier to my life's end through Jesus Christ.

The Eighth Part.
Verses,

1. Thou art my portion, O Lord: I have promised to keep thy Law.

The Covenant betwixt God and his people, is reciprocal: God promises to be
their exceeding great reward: and they promise to keep his Commandments.

2. I made my humble petition in thy presence with my whole heart: O be thou
merciful unto me according to thy Word.

And that this Covenant may stand firm, we must heartily implore both the
assistance of divine Grace to keep our promises unto God, and his mercy to
perform his promises unto us.

3. I called mine own ways to remembrance: and turned my feet unto thy
Testimonies.

The iniquity of our own ways must be frequently remembered: that we may walk in
the ways of God.

4. I made haste and prolonged not the time, to keep thy Statutes.

He that has any care of his soul will not put off his conversion from the
errors of his ways, and the practice of new obedience.

5. The Congregation of the proud have robbed me: but I have not forgetten thy
Law.

The heart of the faithful continues firm in holy affections, even when through
violence of temptation, he is defective in some exterior acts of obedience.

6. At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto Thee: because of thy righteous
judgments.

Davine Praise is to be celebrated night and day: and our failings of divine
Worship in the day, may be supplied in the night

7. I am a companion of all them that fear thee: and keep thy Commandments.

The society of holy men is both a great comfort, and a great furtherance in
the way of godliness.

8. The Earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: O teach me thy Statutes.

Gods common blessings are extended unto all: but his special favors are
reserved for them that keep his Commandments.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
WHat ever my part or portion be upon earth, be thou my portion, O Lord, and
the lot of mine inheritance: Preserve me in the Unity of the Holy Catholic
Church, and in the Communion of Saints to the hopes of eternal glory, through
Jesus Christ.

The Ninth Part.
Verses,

1. O Lord thou have dealt graciously with thy servant: according to thy Word.

Gods gracious promises do move him to be merciful in his dealings with us far
beyond our merits.

2. O learn me true understanding and knowledge: for I have believed thy
Commandments.

In the mysteries of godliness what we cannot believe by Understanding, we must
understand by Believing.

3. Before I was troubled I went wrong: but now have I kept thy Word.

The rod of affliction and good discipline keeps the Soul in humility and
obedience.

4. Thou art good and gracious: O teach me thy Statutes.

Even in adversity God is no less gracious than in prosperity.

5. The proud have imagined a lie against me: but I will keep thy Commandments
with my whole heart.

Though the Devil and his instruments invent and suggest lies to subvert the
truth; yet by a sincere obedience they are discovered and rejected.

6. Their heart is as fat as brawn: but my delight has been in thy Law.

Through pride and luxury the heart of the wicked is fatted with delight: but
humility and obedience is the joy of the righteous Soul.

7. It is good for me that I have been in trouble: that I may learn thy
Statutes.

Temptations and troubles yield the peaceable fruits of righteousness to them
that are exercised thereby.

8. The Law of thy mouth is dearer unto me than thousands of gold and silver.

Grace excells gold as much as heaven excells earth, or the soul the body.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
THou art good and gracious, O Lord, even in the chastisements of thy servant:
Let both thy favors and thy frowns be sanctified unto me: and all the
temptations of my ghostly enemies make me cleave more steadfastly in my
obedience to thy most holy Laws: esteeming thy Commandments far above all
earthly treasures, as being the way to those never-failing treasures of
Celestial glory through Jesus Christ.

The Tenth Part.
Verses,

1. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: O give me Understanding that I may
learn thy Commandments.

To know God, and obey his Laws is the End of our Creation after the Image of
God: and the perfection of our Being is thereby attained.

2. They that fear Thee will be glad when they see me: because I have put my
trust in thy Word.

Examples of piety rejoice the hearts of them that truly fear God.

3. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right: and that thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled.

It Is most righteous and just that they who fall from God by pride and
disobedience, be first humbled by afflictions before they be restored to his
grace and favor.

4. O let thy loving kindness be my comfort: according to thy Word unto thy
servant.

Let this be my comfort in all my troubles, that they are sent (according to
thy Word) in mercy to humble, not in fury to consume and destroy me.

5. O let thy loving mercies come unto me that I may live: for thy Law is my
delight.

Both the life of grace and glory are the issue of God's loving mercy, and the
soul is qualified for this mercy by love and delight in the Laws of God.

6. Let the proud be confounded, for they go wickedly about to destroy me: but
I will be occupied in thy Commandments.

A constant regular obedience to God's Commandments confounds all the
machinations of the devil, and all his instruments.

7. Let such as fear Thee and have known thy Testimonies: be turned unto me.

Wherein the Prayers and example of the godly are both strength and consolation.

8. O let my heart be sound in thy Statutes, that I be not ashamed.

The sincerity of the heart in the performance of Religious duties will
preserve us from that confusion which is the portion of Hypocrites.

The Prayer.
THat I may attain that perfection and felicity whereunto thou have created me,
O Lord, I humbly beg the spirit of wisdom and understanding both to know, and
in all things to obey thy most holy will: In all my Humiliations for my sins,
and temptations of the devil, let thy loving mercies support me; the prayers
and examples of thy Saints and Servants assist me. O let my heart be sincere,
and sound in thy service, that I may escape that everlasting confusion which is
the portion of Hypocrites, and my lot may be with thy faithful servants for
ever to sing, Glory to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc,


Our Father which art, etc.

CHAP. III. Of Meditations for the Sixth hour of Prayer, or twelve a Clock.
AT Evening and Morning and at Noonday will I pray -- So resolved holy David,
Ps. 55.18. Dan. 6.10.
and so prayed holy Daniel: and at this hour prayed S. Peter also. Act. 10.9


And shall not such eminent examples move thee also at this hour to converse
with heaven? especially remembering

I
The arrow that flies by day -- and the destruction that wastes at the
noonday: Ps 91.5, 6.
The Arrows of Temptation fly thick about us, and the devil as a roaring Lion
continually goes about, seeking whom he may devour. 1 Pet. 5.8.
Fly then to the God of thy refuge, upon the sacred wings of devout Prayers,
and holy Meditations. Call to mind

II.
That 'twas at this hour our first Parents for their Pride and disobedience
were driven out of Paradise; and let this consideration humble thy Soul (at
this Hour) under the mighty hand of God, that he may draw thee out of that mass
of corruption wherein with the rest of mankind thou art originally involved:
and exalt thee to the hopes of admittance into the celestial Paradise, which
being lost by the disobedience of the First Adam, was regained by the obedience
of the Second Adam: who

III.
As at this hour of the day was listed up on the Cross, as was the Brazen
Serpent in the Wilderness, Luke 23.44. Numb. 21.9. S. Joh. 3.14.
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish but have everlasting life.

And my soul is wounded by the frequent bitings of that old Serpent the Devil,
but mine eyes are ever looking up unto thee, Holy Jesus, the great Physician of
Sin-sick Souls, who have made a salve for such, of thine own wounds and blood.
Heal, O heal my Soul, Ps. 41.4.
for I have sinned against thee: Blessed Lamb of God that take away the sins
of the world, take away mine also: O blessed Lamb of God that take away the
sins of the world, grant me thy Peace: even that Peace which as at this hour
thou so dearly purchased for me.

IV.
At this Hour my dear Redeemer was expanded upon the Cross, as on a tormenting
rack, where wounded, nailed, and bleeding he continued for three long hours
together: whilst the Sun being in its full strength withdrew the influence of
its Light from those merciless wretches who Crucified the Lord of Glory: S.
Mark 15.33.
And when the Sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole Land. --
The Sun hid his face being as 'twere ashamed to behold the Sun of Righteousness
eclipsed, and in the shadow of death.

And this most justly ought to represent to my Conscience my manifold deeds of
darkness, which were the cause of my Saviors death; and do daily eclipse the
light of Gods countenance from shining upon me.

O Holy Jesus, who did humble thy self unto death upon the Cross for us
miserable sinners, who sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death: vouchsafe
to illuminate my darkened Soul with the light of Grace and Truth, which lead to
that everlasting Light which is not liable to any Eclipse in the least degree
of diminution.

The great Captain of our Salvation having by his painful sufferings, and
meritorious death, vanquished him who has the power of death, the Devil: having
overcome both the first and second Death, and showed himself alive to his
Apostles by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and
speaking of all things pertaining to the Kingdom of God: having, in a word,
perfected the great and mysterious work of our Redemption, for the which he
invisibly descended from Heaven. 'Twas

V.
At this Hour he visibly ascended again into Heaven. Now then raise up thy
self, O my Soul, and let thy most ardent affections, thorough thy gazing eyes
be thither enwrapt, whither thy glorious Redeemer at this hour ascended,

Shall not the heart be there where the Treasure is? Act. 1.11.
All thy Treasure surely, all thy hopes of life and happiness are treasured up
in thy blessed Savior, who is gone into Heaven.

GRant, I beseech Thee, Almighty God, that like as I do believe thy only
begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ to have ascended into the Heavens: So I also
may in heart and mind thither ascend, and with him continually dwell, who
lives and reigns with Thee and the Holy Ghost, one God world without end,
Amen.

PSALMS For the Sixth Hour of Prayer. Psalm. CXIX.
Part 11.
Verses,

1. MY Soul has longed for thy Salvation: and I have a good hope because of
thy Word.

God's promise of Grace and Salvation in his Word, inflames the pious Soul with
longings thereafter.

2. Mine eyes long sore for thy Word: Saying, O when will thou comfort me?

Which is expressed by the frequent elevation of the Eyes, which are the
windows of the heart, unto Heaven, waiting for the Consolation thereof.

3. For I am become lik a bottle is the smoke: yet do I not forget thy Statutes.

Contemplation is not to be so dry and withered, as to be forgetful of holy
works commanded.

4. How many are the days of thy servant: when will thou be avenget of them
that persecute me?

The more short and uncertain our days be, the more vigorously should we
resist, and more earnestly implore the divine assistance against our ghostly
adversaries.

5. The proud have dug pits for me: which are not after thy Law.

Whose temptations to assault and entrap the Soul, are such as tend continually
to the transgression of Gods Commandments.

6. All thy Commandments are true, they persecute me falsely: O be thou my help.

The more such suggestions oppose the Truth, the more earnest we must be in our
prayers unto God for his help to resist them.

7. They had almost made an end of me upon Earth: but I forsook not thy
Commandments.

And to continue constant in our obedience to the divine precepts: though the
oppositions do even destroy all our earthly interests.

8. O quicken me after thy loving kindness: and so shall I keep the Testimonies
of thy mouth.

But such a holy obedience proceeds from the power of Gods quickening Spirit:
which is therefore constantly to be prayed for: Qui conservat legem multiplicat
orationem. Ecclus. 35.1.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
BOth my heart and mine eyes do I lift up unto Thee, O Lord, longing greatly
for that Grace and Salvation, which thy Word does promise: Let no persecutions
either from my bodily, or ghostly adversaries rob me of the hopes thereof: Let
no false suggestions either withdraw my heart from the love of thy Truth, or
from the practice of it in all the actions of my life; but of thy loving
kindness vouchsafe so to quicken all my holy desires and endeavors, that when
the few days of this life take end, I may inherit that life which knows no end,
through Jesus --

The Twelfth Part.
Verses,

1. O Lord, thy word endures for ever in Heaven.

The Counsels of God are immutable in Heaven, though they seem variable in
their respective dispensations upon Earth.

2. Thy Truth also remains from one generation to another: thou have laid the
foundation of the Earth and it abides.

God's revealed Truth to his Church and People upon Earth is successively
continued from one generation to another, whilst the world continues.

3. They continue this day according to thine ordinance: for all things serve
thee.

There is a law imposed upon all men, and upon all things, who both by their
obedience and disobedience thereunto, do serve the ends of Gods ordinances and
decrees.

4. If my delight had not been in thy Law: I should have perished in my trouble.

Which Lawchearfully obeyed is a sure support in the worst of troubles.

5. I will never forget thy Commandments: for with them thou have quickened me.

He therefore forgets himself, who forgets Gods Commandments, which quicken the
soul to life eternal.

6. I am thine, O save me: for I have sought thy Commandments.

I am devoted thy servant by solemn promise in my Baptism, and I am resolved to
continue thine; and therefore vouchsafe as thine to preserve me to keep thy
holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in the same all the days of my life.

7. The ungodly laid wait for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy
Testimonies.

By devout Meditations upon those truths God has testified, we may be armed
against all temptations.

8. I see that all things come to an end: but thy Commandment is exceeding
broad.

We see by daily experience, that all those worldly things and carnal delights
whereby we are tempted to sin, do quickly vanish; but he that does the Will of
the Lord abides for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
I Am thine, O Lord, not only by Creation, but also solemnly devoted by
regeneration in Baptism: and I am resolved to continue thine: O save me from
every transgression of any of thy most holy Laws, which all creatures in their
several kinds do obey: Let not the secret underminings of the Devil, or the
open flattering felicities of the world cozer and ensnare me: for these shall
suddenly come to an end, but obedience to thy Commandments is the way to life
without end, through Jesus Christ.

The Thirteenth Part.
Verses,

1. Lord, what love have I unto thy Law! All the day long is my study in it.

He that truly loves God, loves also what he commands, and frequently meditates
thereupon.

2. Thou through thy Commandments have made me wiser than mine enemies: for
they are ever with me.

God's commandment extending to the love of our enemies, exceeds the utmost
wisdom of the heathen who have not the knowledge of his Laws.

3. I have more understanding than my Teachers: for thy Testimonies are my
study.

But he that will be truly wise must not cursorily read the Letter, but
studiously consider, and dive into the spirit and life of the Law.

4. I am wiser than the aged: because I keep thy Commandments.

Wisdom is increased and perfected by obedience to the dictates thereof.

5. I have refrained my feet from every evil way: that I may keep thy Word.

He that will do what God commands must refrain from all that he forbids:
First, cease to do evil, and then learn to do well.

6. I have not shrunk from thy judgments: for thou hear me.

It Is the secret teaching of God's Spirit in the heart, that keeps the feet
firm from backfliding.

7. O how sweet are thy Words unto my throat! yea sweeter than honey unto my
mouth.

The fruits of a true Faith or sincere Obedience is more sweet to the soul,
than honey to the mouth.

8. Through thy Commandments I get Understanding: therefore I hate all evil
ways.

The right Understanding of good and evil, discovers both the beauty of
obedience, and the deformity of every sinful action.

The Prayer.
ALmighty God the fountain of all wisdom, give me, I humbly beseech thee, a
wise and understanding heart, hating and refraining from every evil way; loving
Thee; and thy Laws, and mine enemies also in obedience thereunto: Let me never
shrink from thy judgments, but steadfastly believe the Truth of thy revelations,
and regularly obey the same, that I may reap the sweet fruits of holiness in
eternal happiness through Jesus Christ.

The Fourteenth Part.
Verses,

1. Thy Word is a Lanthorn unto my feet: and a light unto my paths.

Gods Word as a Lanthorn in the night, directs us in our passage through the
darkness of this life to the light of life eternal.

2. I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous judgments.

Therefore every truly wise man resolves steadfastly to follow and obey the
directions of this holy Word according to his Vow in Baptism.

3. I am troubled above measure: quicken me, O Lord, according to thy Word.

But the flesh lusting against the spirit, disturbs such holy resolves and
endeavors: but by the grace of God, the pious soul is quickened, and the spirit
fortified against all such encounters, and this God has promised in the same
Word.

4. Let the freewill-offerings of my mouth please thee, O Lord: and teach me
thy judgments.

For the which grace it is our duty to pray and that more willingly and
cheerfully, and more frequently than at ordinary and accustomed times.

5. My Soul is always in my hand: yet do I not forget thy Law.

The continual dangers of the souls safety should engage us often to meditate
upon divine Truths.

6. The ungodly have laid a snare for me: but I swerved not from thy
Commandments.

From the which all the temptations of wicked spirits should not make us to
swerve.

7. Thy Testimonies have I claimed as mine heritage for ever: for why they are
the very joy of my heart.

It Is obedience that entitles to the inheritance of Heaven, which fills the
hearts of the righteous with joy unspeakable and glorious.

8. I have applied my heart to fulfill thy Statutes always unto the end.

Therefore are the hearts of the godly inclined to persevere in their obedience
unto the end of their lives.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
WHen I was first enrolled a member of thy Church, O Lord, I solemnly vowed,
and have often since renewed this Vow to keep thy holy Will and Commandments,
and to walk in the same all the days of my life: but the lustings of the flesh
against the spirit, and the snares of Satan do daily trouble such my holy
resolutions and promises. Vouchsafe, blessed Lord, to quicken and fortify my
spirit against all the crafts and assaults of my ghostly adversaries, that I
may have power and strength to get the victory, and to triumph over the Devil,
the World, and the Flesh, and to continue thy faithful Servant, and Soldier
unto my life's end, through Jesus Christ.

The Fifteenth Part.
Verses,

1. I hate them that imagine evil things: but thy Law do I love.

He that truly loves God and his Truth will detest, not the persons of any, but
the sinful imaginations of all men.

2. Thou art my defense and my shield: and my trust is in thy Word.

Whilst we sincerely trust in the Truth of God's promises in his Word, we need
not to doubt of his protection, and defense.

3. Away from me ye wicked: I will keep the Commandments of my God.

The society of wicked men must be avoided by every one that rightly resolves
to keep God's Commandments.

4. O stablish me according to thy Word, that I may live: and let me not be
disappointed of my hope.

It Is by the divine assistance continually implored, that we are so established
in the life of grace that we be not disappointed of our hopes of the life of
glory.

5. Hold thou me up and I shall be safe: yea, my delight shall be ever in thy
Statutes.

Being supported by the divine Grace, this hope stands firm, and it is
strengthened by holy love and delight in the service of God.

6. Thou have trodden down all them that depart from thy Statutes: for they
imagine but deceit.

They are justly deprived of this blessed hope, who transgress the laws of
God, their own fond imaginations deceiving them.

7. Thou put away all the ungodly like dross: therefore I love thy
Testimonies.

The judgments of God pursuing the wicked to their ruin, delight the
righteous, not for the destruction of their persons, but for the justice of God
thereby testified.

8. My flesh trembles for fear of Thee: and I am afraid of thy judgments.

The best of men do most fear the judgments of God, as being most sensible of
their sins.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
GIve me a heart, O Lord, I beseech Thee detesting all sinfulness and error,
and inflamed with the love of holiness and truth; to trust in thy mercies and
stand in fear of thy judgments: incline my will and affections to live the life
of obedience to thy Word, that I may not be disappointed of my hopes to live
with thee for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Sixteenth Part.
Verses,

1. I deal with the thing that is lawful and right: O give me not over to mine
oppressors.

He must deal righteously with all men, who desires not to be oppressed by any.

2. Make thou thy servant to delight in that which is good: that the proud do
me no wrong.

To delight in what is good is a sure preservative against all the assaults of
the spirits of pride and wickedness.

3. Mine eyes are wasted away with looking for thy health: and for the word of
thy righteousness.

We must wait diligently upon all the blessed means of that grace and Salvation
God has promised in his word, how troublesome soever this may be to the flesh.

4. O deal with thy servant according to thy loving mercy: and teach me thy
Statutes.

'Twill be sad if God deal not with the best of us after his loving mercies,
and not after our deserts.

5. I am thy servant: O grant me understanding that I may know thy Testimonies.

It Is impossible to be the true servant of God, without understanding aright
the service he requires.

6. It is time for Thee to lay to thine hand: for they have destroyed thy law.

When he Laws of God are trampled under foot, he will not long forbear his
punishing judgments.

7. For I love thy Commandments: above gold and precious stone.

When wickedness most abounds, the righteous do most value the Laws of God even
above all earthly treasures.

8. Therefore hold I straight all thy Commandments: and all false ways I
utterly abhor.

They that are most sincere in the service of God, do most abhor what is false
and contrary thereunto.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
I Am thy devoted servant, O Lord: and that I may serve thee acceptably, give
me a right understanding of all the ways and parts of thy service, and an
upright heart in performing the same, abhorring all falsehood both in opinion
and conversation. O deal not with me after my sins, neither reward me after
mine iniquities, but according to thy loving mercy in Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all honor, glory, etc.

Our Father which art in, etc. CHAP. IV. Of Meditations for the Ninth Hour of
Prayer, or Three a Clock.
IT is very seasonable at this Hour to pay thy Devotions to thy blessed
Redeemer as the necessary effects of true Faith and Repentance, since

I.
'Twas at this hour the Thief upon the Cross believing and repenting received
the joyful promise from the mouth of the Lord, Luke 23.43.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

And my life I confess has been no better than the life of this Thief, even my
whole life has been a trade of robbery, robbing God of his honor, and of that
obedience which I owe to his holy Laws: and robbing my self also of peace of
Conscience here, and of the hopes of Heaven hereafter. Blessed Jesu, who had
mercy on the Thief even in the very hour of his death repenting, have mercy
upon me, even upon me also, who now though too too late repent me of my
manifold misdoings. Shut not up the gates of Paradise against me when I shall
depart hence, since having overcome the sharpness of death thou have opened the
kingdom of Heaven to all Believers.

II.
'Twas at this hour the Son of God made man, commended his spirit of man into
the hands of God the Father: Luke 23.46.
And into thy hands, O Lord, do I now commend my spirit, my soul, my body, my
all, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of Truth. And the very God of
peace vouchsafe to sanctify me wholly. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
And I pray God that my whole spirit, and soul and body be preserved blameless
unto the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

III.
'Twas at this hour, wherein my blessed Redeemer, Mat. 27.46, 50.
after he had cried with a loud voice, gave up the Ghost, and dyed for us
miserable sinners. 'Twas for me, and my sins, my dearest Savior both suffered
and dyed, he having no sins of his own to suffer or die for; but He was wounded
for my transgressions, Is. 53.5.
He was bruised for mine iniquities.

And now then remember, holy Jesus, in great mercy remember that hour wherein
with a torn body and broken heart Thou did show forth the bowels of thy mercy
in dying to deliver me both from spiritual and eternal death.

Pardon, good Lord, pardon all my sins, the cause of all thy painful
sufferings: and grant that both I and all who love thy Cross and Passion in a
devout and thankful remembrance, may by the virtue and power thereof crucify
the old man, and utterly abolish the whole body of sin, that being dead unto
sin, 1 Pet. 2.24.
we may live unto righteousness, and by thy stripes be healed.

IV.
Upon the death of my Savior, S. Mat. 27.51.
the Earth quaked, the Rocks clave asunder, the veil of the Temple was rent in
twain from the top to the bottom: And yet upon the meditation hereof my heart
is not broken within me, it is harder than the stones of that Temple which was a
figure of it, harder than those Rocks that rent upon the expiration of my Lord:
more insensible and stupid than the Earth that quaked at the death of her
Maker. O Blessed Jesus, let thy precious blood shed for me soften my stony
heart into tears of Compassion to bewail thy Passion, into tears of Compunction
for my sins the cause of thy Sufferings, and wholly melt my Soul into a
throughout Devotion to the love and service of thy Sacred Majesty who have so
infinitely loved me as to die for me.

V.
At this hour the side of our Lord was pierced, whence issued the two
Sacraments of his Church; the Water of Baptism, and the Blood of the Eucharist:
And O that that precious blood and water which is the price of my Redemption,
may be the meritorious cause of my sanctification in this life, and eternal
Salvation in the life to come.

Amen.

PSALMS For the Ninth Hour. Psalm. CXIX.
Part 17.
Verses,

1. THy Testimonies, O Lord, are wonderful: therefore does my Soul keep them.

The wonderful depth of Wisdom, admirable equity and purity of the divine
revelations engage all men to observe them.

2. When thy word goes forth: it gives light and understanding to the simple.

The word of God explained dispels the darkness of ignorance, error and
sinfulness.

3. I opened my mouth, and drew in my breath: for my delight was in thy
Commandments.

The revelation of divine Truths are the longing and delight of the righteous,
for the which they pour forth their souls in ardent prayers.

4. O look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me: as thou usest to do unto
those that love thy Name.

And such persons may with a holy confidence beg, and also reasonably hope for
the mercy and propitious favor of God.

5. Order my steps in thy Word: and so shall no wickedness have dominion over
me.

Temptations to evil shall not prevail where the steps, or affections of the
soul are regulated by the laws of God.

6. O deliver me from the wrongful dealings of men: and so shall I keep thy
Commandments.

The injuries of men must not cause us to disobey the Laws of God.

7. Show the light of thy Countenance upon thy servant: and teach me thy
Statutes.

It Is the light of divine grace that teaches both the knowledge and obedience
of Gods holy Will and Commandments.

8. Mine eyes gush out with water: because men keep not thy Law.

Not only our own sins, but the transgressions of others also are to be
lamented.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
LOok upon me, O Lord, with the eyes of Grace and Mercy, and not in the rigor
of justice: Let not the wrongful dealings of others, or any wickedness of mine
own, get so much dominion over me, as that I swerve from those steps which Thou
have commanded me to observe and follow; from the which I cannot fall whilst
the light of thy Countenance shines upon me, and that mercy is extended unto
me, which thou show unto them that love thy Name, through Jesus Christ.

The Eighteenth Part.
Verses,

1. Righteous art thou, O Lord: and true is thy Judgment.

2. The Testimonies that thou have commanded: are exceeding righteous and true.

God's Commandments are called his Judgments, because they are the Rule by
which he will pass judgment upon all: And he is most just both in his Laws, and
in his judgments according thereunto.

3. My zeal has even consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy
Words.

Great therefore is the zeal of the righteous against all transgressors of such
just and holy Laws whom he esteems his enemies, because the enemies of truth
and justice.

4. Thy Word is tried to the uttermost: and thy servant loves it.

But his heart is inflamed with the love of God's Word, the truth and equity
whereof has appeared upon trial at all times.

5. I am small, and of no reputation: yet do I not forget thy Commandments.

The most strictly conscientious persons do in all Humility acknowledge
themselves to be the meanest of his servants.

6. Thy Righteousness is an everlasting righteousness: and thy Law is the Truth.

Obedience to the Law of God is truth everlasting, or the true way to
everlasting blessedness.

7. Trouble and heaviness have taken hold upon me: yet is my delight in thy
Commandments.

No troubles whether outward or inward can rob the righteous of that delight
which is the issue of their obedience.

8. The righteousness of thy Testimonies is everlasting: O grant me
understanding and I shall live.

The practical understanding of those holy truths God has testified or
revealed, is that righteousness which is immortal.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
MOst Righteous Lord God, give me a right Understanding of thy revealed Will,
as the path that leads to everlasting Righteousness: inflame my soul with an
ardent love and delight in thy Laws, and with a discreet zeal against all the
transgressors thereof: let a very humble and mean esteem of my self be the
foundation of all my righteousness, lest it evaporate into vainglory, and lose
its reward which thou have promised, through Jesus Christ.

The Nineteenth Part.
Verses,

1. I call with my whole heart: Hear me, O Lord, I will keep thy Statutes.

So prays the devout Soul for Grace and obedience, not only with the lips,
but with the whole heart.

2. Yea even upon Thee do I call: help me, and I will keep thy Commandments.

The discipline of the Law, and the devout use of Prayer do support each other:
the Law commands the use of Prayer, and Prayer obtains grace to keep the Law.

3. Early in the Morning do I cry unto thee: for in thy Word is my trust.

An holy confidence of Gods promises in his Word prefers the duty of Prayer
before all other actions or concerns.

4. Mine eyes prevent the night watches: that I may be occupied in thy Words.

Holy Meditations and Prayers are both night and day, early and late the
employment of the Righteous.

5. Hear my voice, O Lord, according to thy loving kindness: quicken me
according as thou art wont.

Whom God will vouchsafe to hear, and quicken their zeal, and holy endeavors,
whilst they beg it upon the account of God's loving kindness, not for their
demerits.

6. They draw nigh that of malice persecute me: and are far from thy Law.

Our ghostly enemies are ever at hand to disturb our holy resolutions and
devotions in opposition to God's Commands.

7. Be thou nigh at hand: for all thy Commandments are true.

To disappoint their assaults God's assisting presence is to be implored, who
will not be wanting to his own Truth.

8. As concerning thy Testimonies I have known long since, that thou have
grounded them for ever.

The foundation of which Truth, which is the Word of God, is from everlasting,
and the true way to that blessedness that shall last for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
NIght and day will I call upon Thee, O Lord, and that not from the rind of my
lips only, but from the root of my heart: beseeching Thee to be ever nigh at
hand to disappoint the subtle practices of the Devil and his Angels, who are
ever at hand to entrap me in the paths of thy most holy Laws which from
everlasting do lead to life everlasting through Jesus Christ.

The Twentieth Part.
Verses,

1. O consider mine adversity, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy Law.

That we may be delivered from the temptations of our spiritual adversaries, we
must be mindful both of the precepts and promises of God's Word.

2. Avenge thou my cause and deliver me: quicken me according to thy Word.

According to these promises we must pray to have the cause of our contest with
the Devil to be vindicated, and our endeavors to resist him to be quickened.

3. Health is far from the ungodly: for they regard not thy Statutes.

These endeavors for the health of the Soul are not regarded by such persons
as have not God in their thoughts and desires.

4. Great is thy mercy, O Lord: quicken me as thou art wont.

But the righteous are frequently sensible of God's mercy in quickening them
unto their duty. And

5. Many there are that trouble me and persecute me: yet do I not swerve from
thy Testimonies.

Even in the greatest, and most troublesome temptations of their numerous
adversaries continue firm, and upright in their innocence and obedience.

6. It grieveth me when I see the transgressors: because they keep not thy Law.

And are grieved also to see others in the time of temptation to fall away.

7. Consider, O Lord, how I love thy Commandments: O quicken me according to
thy loving kindness.

And this their love of obedience unto God, moves him the more to quick and
increase their zeal therein.

8. Thy Word is true from everlasting: all the judgments of thy righteousness
endure for evermore.

All the acts both of Gods mercy and judgment are according to the equity of
his precepts most righteous and immutable.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
COnsider, O Lord, how adverse to my holy resolves are the continual
temptations of my ghostly enemies: and withal remember the love I have to thy
Law, and zeal to thine Honor, and deliver me from the one, and quicken me in
the other, that I neither swerve from thy Testimonies, or be dull and
dead-hearted in my obedience thereunto: Give me a heart to lament both my own,
and the transgressions of others: that I may escape that bitter weeping and
wailing of the nether hell: from the which, good Lord deliver me, through the
merits and mediation of Jesus Christ.

The One and Twentieth Part.
Verses,

1. Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart stands in awe of
thy Word.

Stand in awe, and sin not, whatever persecutions may arise from any of the
powers either of earth or hell.

2. I am as glad of thy Word: as one that finds great spoils.

The spoils of our ghostly enemies are taken through delight in God's Word.

3. As for lies I hate and abhor them: but thy Law do I love.

The love of the Truth, and hatred of all falsehood whether in opinion or
conversation, are the inseparable qualifications of a righteous Soul.

4. Seven times a day do I praise Thee: because of thy righteous judgment.

The righteousness of God's Laws, and of all his judgments according thereunto,
excite the devout Soul to praise him continually.

5. Great is the peace they have who love thy Law: and they are not offended at
it.

The fruit of Righteousness is Peace, which cannot be disturbed by whatever may
befall for Truth and Righteousness sake.

6. Lord, I have looked for thy saving health: and done after thy Commandments.

He hopes for salvation in vain, who lives not in obedience of Gods most holy
Laws,

7. My Soul has kept thy Testimonies: and loved them exceedingly.

It Is zealous affections to do whatever God Commands, which product a sincere
and constant obedience thereunto.

8. I have kept thy Commandments, and thy Testimonies: for all my ways are
before Thee.

Both holy affections and holy actions do flow from the serious consideration
of Gods omnipresence.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
MOst blessed Lord, before whom are all the ways of men; let this consideration
make me sincere and upright both in all the affections of my heart, and the
actions of my life: standing more in awe of sinning against Thee, than to incur
the greatest of troubles from all the Princes and Powers of darkness: And grant
unto thy servant that peace, which is the fruit of righteousness, even peace
and saving health through Jesus Christ.

The Two and Twentieth Part.
Verses,

1. Let my complaint come before Thee, O Lord: give me understanding according
to thy Word.

A right understanding of what God commands and promises in his Word, is
continually to be begged by Prayer.

2. Let my supplication come before Thee: deliver me according to thy Word.

As also to be delivered from all ignorance and error whether in opinion or
conversation.

3. My lips shall speak of thy praise: when thou have taught me thy Statutes.

As the praises of God do best become the obedient and wise: so they misbeseem
the lips of sinners.

4. Yea my tongue shall sing of thy Word: for all thy Commandments are
righteous.

The equity of Gods Law is the exultation of all holy men, and the constant
burden of divine Songs.

5. Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy Commandments.

To obey God's Will by the assistance of his Grace, is the choice of every wise
man.

6. I have longed for thy saving health, O Lord: and in thy Law is my delight.

He that loves his Souls health, and longs for it, will also love and delight
in the Commandments of God, as the way thereunto.

7. O let my Soul live and it shall praise Thee: and thy judgments shall help
me.

God is praised by the life of grace and obedience, and such shall be supported
by his righteous judgments.

8. I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost: O seek thy servant, for I do
not forget thy Commandments.

Though the best men do sometimes err from the sacred paths of God's
Commandments, yet they are not withal unmindful of that obedience they owe
thereunto.

The Prayer.
BLessed Jesu, who came into the world to seek and save that which was lost:
vouchsafe to seek and save me too often wandering like a lost sheep in the by
and too much beaten paths of vanity and iniquity: Bring me home into thy fold,
who art the great shepherd and Bishop of our Souls; that being saved with the
remnant of the true Israelites, I may sing thy Praises with the celestial quire
of holy Angels and Saints for ever saying, Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Our Father which art in heaven. etc.


CHAP. V. Of Meditations for the Evening.
THe light of Nature dictates an Evening and a Morning Sacrifice due unto God:
not only Jews and Christians, but Heathens and Turks, all men of all
persuasions observe it: The holy Patriarch Isaac applied himself to holy
Meditations in the Evening. Genesis 24.63.
At this time prayed holy David also Ps. 55.18. and 141, 2.
. And so did the Son of David our blessed Lord himself Luke 6.12.
And he commands us to do so also, both by precept Mar. 13.35.
, and by that Parable of the laborers sent out into the vineyard by the Lord
thereof, as at other times, so at the last hour of the day: and these were as
well paid as the former.

Despair not then (O my Soul) of the forgiveness of thy sin, if thou do truly
repent, though it be in the evening of thy life: but then it concerns thee to
be active and industrious in the service of thy Lord, having been all the day
of thy former life idle, and negligent therein: And as at other times then, so
neglect not to offer up thine evening Sacrifice unto God. for

I.
'Twas in the evening of Time, the blessed Son of God came down from Heaven for
the Redemption of the world. If then Christ be a new formed in thee, now and
every evening bless God for thy Renovation, and with all joyful exultation say
with the blessed mother of our Lord:

St. LUKE I.
Verses,

46. MY Soul does magnify the Lord: and my spirit has rejoiced in God my
Savior.

It Is the greatest joy of the devout Soul to praise the Lord: my Soul shall be
satisfied as with marrow and fatness, when my mouth praises Thee with joyful
lips. Psalm. 63 6.

47. For he has regarded the lowliness of his hand-maiden.

'Twas a great respect our Lord had to the humble and gracious disposition of
this blessed Virgin, to humble himself to be made man in her sanctified Womb.

48. For behold from henceforth, all generations shall call me blessed.

Since all the nations of the earth are blessed by the holy Seed of her
immaculate body.

49. For he that is mighty has magnified me: and holy is his Name.

God's Almightiness is most manifested by his mercifulness, and in respect of
both, his name is great, wonderful and holy.

50. And his mercy is on them that fear him, throughout all generations.

In every nation he that fears God, and works righteousness is accepted of
him. Act. 10.35.

51. He has showed strength with his arm: he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts.

By the arm of the Lord is meant the Son of God, Isa. 53.1. the strength of
whose wisdom appeared in confounding the fond imaginations of the proud
Pharisees and all such as justify themselves.

52. He has put down the mighty from their seat: and has exalted the humble
and meek.

And in casting out the Prince of this world, Joh. 12.31. and all the spirits
of pride and vengeance, and in raising up fallen man from under the power and
tyranny of the Devil and his Angels.

53. He has filled the hungry with good things: and the rich he has sent
empty away.

Such as hunger and thirst after righteousness shall be satisfied: but they who
are pure in their own eyes and justify themselves are rejected: for he came
not to call the righteous, in their own conceit, but sinners to Repentance,
Mat. 9.13.

54. He remembering his mercy has helped his servant Israel: as he promised to
our forefather Abraham and his seed for ever.

To all the spiritual Sors of the faithful Abraham, do the promises of God in
Christ appertain.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesus, the eternal and only begotten Son of God; who for us men and
for our Salvation came down from Heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of
the Virgin Mary, and made man: By the merits and mysteries of thy holy
Incarnation, and miraculous Birth of a spotless Virgin, I humbly beg a lowly,
humble, pure, and virginheart, for it is only such a heart thou regardest for
thy habitation and abode, and it is only such a heart cleaves steadfastly unto
thee, by the ardent love, awful fear, and sincere service of thy Sacred
Majesty, who live and reignest with the Father, etc.

The XCVIII. Psalm PARAPHRASED, Being A Thanksgiving for the Redemption of the
World by the Son of God.
Sing unto the Lord a new Song: Praise him for the renovation and redemption of
the world wherein he has done mavelous things: even such as the Angels of
heaven desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12.

With his own right hand by his works of righteousness, and with his holy arm
the extent of his Piety: He has gotten himself the victory over the world, the
flesh and the Devil, sin, death and hell.

The Lord declared his Salvation, which under the Law was shadowed in types and
figures, but now under the Gospel his righteousness, whereby he justifies, and
saves: He has openly showed in the sight of the heathen, not to the Jews only
but to the Gentiles also.

He has remembered his mercy in the promise of Salvation, and his truth in the
performance of this promise toward the house of Israel, to them was the
promise of the Messiah: but upon his appearance all the ends of the world have
seen the Salvation of our God. And therefore

Show your selves joyful unto the Lord, all ye lands; fince all have seen his
Salvation, it is very meet and just and our bounden duty, that all should sing,
rejoice and give thanks; for Salvation from eternal death to life everlasting
is the greatest cause of joy and thanksgiving.

Praise the Lord upon the harp, which mystically represents the heart of man:
sing to the harp, open your lips to show forth his praise, with a Psalm of
Thanksgiving, as wherein the praises of God are divinely celebrated.

With Trumpets also and Shawms, all kind of musical instruments to elevate the
heart, to show your selves joyful before the Lord the King, who is best pleased
with joy, exultation and delight in his service.

Let the Sea make a noise, and all that therein is, even all the inhabitants of
the Isles of the Sea: the round world and they that dwell therein, they that
dwell in the Continent also.

Let the floods clap their hands, and let the hills be joyful together before
the Lord, both they that dwell in the low valleys, and they that inhabit the
hilly countries have equal cause of joy and thanksgiving unto the Lord of all
men and all places: for he is come to judge the earth, to separate the precious
from the vile, the elect from the reprobate, which is done in this life by the
preaching of the Gospel in truth and purity, and exercising the power of the
keys: for thus

With righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity,
absolving from their sins the penitent and contrite, but binding upon their
souls the sins of the obdurate.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
It Is thy duty, O my Soul, as to praise God for the Redemption of the world, so
to pray unto him that he would have mercy upon all men, and display the sacred
beams of his holy Gospel over all the Nations of the earth, that they may come
to the knowledge of Grace and Salvation through Jesus Christ. Pray we therefore
for all men and with all Christian people in the words of Gods holy Spirit.

PSALM LXVII.












Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


II.
'Twas at this Hour my blessed Lord having first washed his disciples feet, did
institute, consecrate and administer the blessed Sacrament of his most holy
body and blood: and the next day at the same hour he was taken down from the
Cross.

I have very great reason then at this hour, with all thanksgiving and devotion
to commemorate the infinite love of my Redeemer in giving himself to be not
only the price of my Redemption by his death upon the Cross, but also to be the
food of my Soul in that blessed Sacrament: humbly beseeching his gracious
Majesty that the merits of the one may be applied to my Soul in the devout and
reverent participation of the other.

But I will not presume to come to thy Table, O merciful Savior, having not
first washed my polluted feet, and the disordered affections of my soul with
the tears of godly sorrow: having not by true Repentance taken down the pride
of this corruptible flesh, laid aside and abjured all my sins, that so with
clean hands, and a pure heart, I may receive the holy Communion of thy precious
Body and Blood not to my condemnation, but to the eternal salvat on of my Soul.

O blessed Jesu, Savior of the world, save me and deliver me from all mine
offenses; nail them to thy Cross, bury them in thy grave, that they never rise
in judgment against me at the last great day.

And O that now upon the remembrance of my dearest Saviors burial in the
grave, I could from the bottom of my heart bid adieu to the world, and to all
the pomps and vanities of this life, to the assured hopes of the joys of the
life to come.

The XV. Psalm PARAPHRASED.
LOrd, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, be entitled to the solemn worship of
thy house, and continue a true member of thy Church militant here below? or who
shall rest upon thy holy hill, be admitted into the rest and felicity of thy
Saints in heaven above?

Even he that leads an incorrupt life, unspotted of the world, unstained by
the flesh, uncorrupted by the Devil: and does the thing that is right:
Beneficence, or to do good, as Innocence to do no evil are equally necessary to
Salvation: and speaks the truth from his heart: whose heart thinks, and
whose mouth speaks the truth: without which knowledge and profession of the
truth, there can be no righteousness either of Innocence, or of Beneficence in
the actions of life.

He that has used no deceit in his tongue, nor done evil to his neighbor: who
has neither in his words deceived, nor in his deeds wronged any: and has not
slandered his neighbor, either First, being too credulous to believe an evil
report of any, or Secondly, aggravating and making worse the mistakes and
miscarriages of others, or Thirdly, blazoning them abroad to his disgrace.

He that sets not by himself, is not conceited of his own worth, or esteem,
wisdom or holiness: but is lowly in his own eyes, has a mean and low opinion
of himself, of his deserts, parts and performances: or (as according to another
reading) discountenanceth a vile person in his wickedness; and makes much of
them that fear the Lord by commending and giving all respects and encouragement
to such.

He that swears to his neighbor in the promise of any benefit whether by
love, or gift, and disappointeth him not, but is as good as his word unto him,
though it be to his own hinderance in respect of his present worldly interests.

He that has not given his money upon usury, neither lending, nor giving ought
unto any upon the hopes of temporal advantage thereby, forbidden by our Lord,
Luke 6.35 nor taken reward against the Innocent, that will not be fee'd, or
bribed to speak, or act any thing against truth and Innocence.

Whosoever does these things carefully, conscientiously, constanly, shall never
fall from the state of Grace, but pass through that to the state of Glory to
rest upon Gods holy hill, or to enjoy eternal rest in the high and holy
Heavens, where the Language constantly used, is, Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


III.
'Twas at this time of the day my Blessed Lord being risen from the dead
appeared to two of his Disciples going to Emaus: Luke 2.13, ad 31.
with whom discoursing, and by whom being entertained he was known of them by
breaking of bread.

O how good and profitable a thing it is to speak of the holy Jesus with
affectionate desires and devotions! but much more effectual are good deeds,
than good words. Friendly discourses upon Divine subjects are profitable, but
charitable entertainments are more acceptable to the Court of Heaven.

To hear from the blessed mouth of our Lord himself the holy Scriptures
expounded, did undoubtedly ravish the minds of these Disciples: but yet their
eyes were not opened to know the Lord, till charity enlarged their hearts to
invite, nay to compel their fellow traveller to eat bread and lodge with them.
Tene hospitem si vis agnoscere Salvatorem, Aug.

It Is divine Charity that passes all things for illumination, were my heart
thoroughly infir'd with this Celestial flame, I could not be destitute of the
light of Truth; for fire and light, both spiritual, and material are
inseparable.

To these hospitable Disciples, our Lord was known in the breaking of bread:
and thus he is especially known and entertained also in that Celestial bread of
the blessed Eucharist, to the great and endless comfort of every worthy
Communicant.

Lord, evermore give us this bread, feed our Souls with thy most precious Body
and Blood, as a pledge and assurance to eat bread with Thee, in the Kingdom of
God for ever, Amen.

IV.
An evening Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving is due unto thy God, as well
as the morning Praise: and a better Sacrifice cannot be offered unto him either
evening or morning with the calves of our lips than in the words of the CXLV.
Psalm, which is an Epitome of the Praises of God diffused through the whole
Book of God, and 'twas therefore one part of the daily service of God in his
Temple: and therefore it is most meet it should daily by every good Christian be
devoutly used: say then with thy most ardent desires to extol the glory of God:

PSALM CXLV.
I Will magnify thee, O God, my King: and I will praise thy Name for ever and
ever.









































Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
An Evening Hymn.
NOw that the sable mantle of the night,
O're-spreads the earth, and vailes the cheerful light;
O Lord, who art of light and life the spring,
Of Grace and Glory the eternal King:
Upon thy servant cause thy face to shine,
And save me for thy mercies sake divine.
Forgive me what I have offended in
This day by thought, or word, or deed of sin:
For my sweet Saviors sake propitious be,
To him who now pours forth his soul to thee.
All Glory be to thine eternal merit,
Most blessed Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Amen.
CHAP. VI. Of Bedtime Meditations.
I.
I Am Alpha and Omega, Rev. 1.8. Is. 44.6.
the Beginning and the End, the First and the Last, says the Lord: from the
Lord I have my Beginning, and he is the end of my Being.

It Is therefore meet and just, and thy bounden duty, as to begin so to end the
day with the service of thy God: to make the outgoings of the Morning and of
the Evening to praise him, who has made the Night, and the Day.

The day is thine, Ps. 79.17,
and the night is thine: Thou have prepared the light and the Sun.

Thou have set all the borders of the earth: Thou have made the Summer, 18.
and the Winter.

II.
'Twas at this hour my dear Redeemer was in a bitter Agony, Luke 22.44. Luke
23.53, etc.
and sweat great drops of Blood under the pressure of the sins of men, and out
of a sad apprehension of his ensuing sufferings for the same.

'Twas at this hour also, our Lord was laid in the Grave, and lamented by the
women that followed him to his Death.

Now then let tears distill from thine eyes in the devout remembrance of that
precious Blood, which flowed from thy Saviors veins: Thy miscarriages and
offenses this very day, of omission and commission; of ignorance and knowingly;
of negligence, and wilfully; of thought and desire, word and deed; if they be
not washed away in this Blood of thy Lord, they will involve thee in blackness
of darkness for ever, and in the horrid sleep of death from whence there is no
awaking. O then cast them out of thy heart by a plenary particular Confession
of all thy this days enormities, wash away the filth and pollution of them
with the tears of godly sorrow, which being intermixed with Faith in the Blood
of Christ, makes an healing salve for thy sin-sick Soul.

O blessed Jesu, Savior of the world, save me and deliver me from all mine
offenses: nail them to thy Cross; bury them in thy Grave; let them never rise
up in judgment against me to my condemnation at the last great day.

And O that now upon the Religious contemplation of my Saviors burial I could
bid adieu to this wicked world, and to all the pomps and vanities thereof: that
being delivered from the iniquities of this sinful life, I may escape the
bitter wailing and weeping of the wicked in the life to come.

PSALMS For the Compline or Bedtime.
The IV. Psalm Paraphrased.
God, the donor, preserver, and rewarder of my righteousness, thou have set me
at liberty from the bondage of sin, and of Satan, when I was in trouble through
the tyranny they exercised over me: have mercy upon me, and hearken unto my
prayer, that I be no more involved in that sad condition, which it highly
concerns all men to avoid.

O ye sons of men, of the old Adam, how long will ye blaspheme mine honor,
advancing the creature above your Creator, and have such pleasure in vanity,
take such delight in what is empty, vain, and satisfies not, and seek after
leasing, pursuing the lying vanities of this wicked world?

Know this for your instruction, that the Lord has chosen to himself the man
that is godly, has selected from among the children of men, certain vessels of
honor devoted to his service: and were I so happy as to be one of these elect
people of God, holy and separate from the vanities of the world, I could not
doubt but when I call upon the Lord he will hear me.

Stand in awe and sin not, or fear the Lord and depart from evil, and that you
may do so, Commune with your own heart, examine what thoughts, what desires do
harbor in every corner of your heart, in your Chamber, and be still, in the
silence of the night recollect the actions of the day silently and closely that
ye may do it exactly: and having cleansed your hearts,

Offer unto God the sacrifice of righteousness, vow unto him a new obedience to
his holy Will and Commandments, which is the rule of righteousness, and if you
perform this vow you may with some assurance put your trust in the Lord,
especially for spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: nor greedily
desiring with most men the good things of this life.

There be many that say, who will show us any good? meaning worldly goods: but
the man that is godly does say,

Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us: by the Lord, (says
one) is meant the Father, by his Countenance the Son, and by the light of his
Countenance the Holy Ghost, whose light of Grace and Truth embeams our souls to
the hopes of the eternal light of Glory.

Thou have put gladness in mine heart: Cordial joy is a beam displayed from the
light of God's Countenance: since the time their corn and wine and oil
increased: such increase adds nothing to the true joy of the heart, which
consists in being rich toward God, not to the world.

I will lay me down in peace and take my rest: being confident of thy grace and
favor I shall sleep securely, not fearing the worst of evils this night can
befall: for it is thou, Lord, only that make me dwell in safety: to whom be all
Glory even to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


PSALM XXXI. To the Seventh Verse.
IN thee, O Lord, as a powerful protector, have I put my trust, that my hopes
in thee may prevent my fears, against which I also pray, let me never be put to
confusion, not eternally, though I temporally suffer for my due correction:
deliver me in thy righteousness, not for mine, but for thine own righteousness
sake, who have promised deliverance to them that trust in thee.

Bow down thy ear of mercy, and hear me, being bowed down in misery, and the
proper object of mercy: make haste to deliver me: Come holy Jesus my Redeemer,
come quickly to deliver me, that I fail not in my temptations and troubles.

And be thou my strong rock that I may stand firm against every shock of
temptation, and my house of defense, like a house built upon a rock, sure is my
defense, whilst my sure trust is in thee, that thou may save me: In no other
do I seek for Salvation,

For thou art my strong rock and my castle, which renders me inexpugnable by
all the assaults of my adversaries: Be thou also my guide, that I neither
presume too much upon thy favor, nor yet despair of thy mercy, but betwixt
these extremes lead me in the right way for thy names sake, not for any desert
in me, but that thy name may be glorified by me.

Draw me out of that net of inveigling temptations, which they, my ghostly
adversaries, have privily laid for me, suggesting evil under the show and
pretense of what is good: for thou art my strength against which no powers of
earth or hell can prevail.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit: So prayed my blessed Redeemer, when he
gave up the ghost, and so will I ever say to him who dyed for me. Into thy
hands who art mighty to save, I commend my spirit in all the concerns of its
health and Salvation. For thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of Truth. O
suffer not that Soul to perish which thou so dearly purchased.

Glory be to God the Father who has Created me and all the world.
Glory be to God the Son, who has Redeemed me and all mankind.
Glory be to God the Holy Ghost, who has Sanctified me, and all the elect
people of God.
PSALM XCI. To be used at this time by the direction of St. Basil.
Whosoever dwells, and flitteth not, but continues under the defense of the most
high in a holy and humble confidence of the protection of the most high God of
Heaven: shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty, be continually protected
by him who has all might and power to defend: And therefore,

I will say not with my lips only, but with an affectionate heart unto the
Lord, who sees and inclines to the secret desires of the Soul: Thou art my
hope, even all the happiness I hope for: and my strong hold against all my
weaknesses and defects: my God in him will I trust: not presuming upon any
power that is either in or from my self, or from any other: doubt not then, O
my Soul;

For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the hunter, that great pursuer of
Souls unto death, the Devil: and from the noysom pestilence, the pestilential
tongues of scoffers, detractors, slanderers, etc.

He shall defend thee under his wings of merciful protection, and thou shall be
safe under his feathers, as the hen gathers her chickens under her feathered
wings, when any storm or danger appears: His faithfulness and truth in keeping
promise with his people shall be thy shield and buckler against all the fiery
darts of the Devil.

Thou shall not be afraid for any terror by night, of any terrifying dreams, or
black illusions suggested by the spirits of darkness: nor for the arrow that
flies by day, more open, and daytime assaults of the Devil.

For the Pestilence that walks in darkness, such diseases as secretly and in
the night season do unperceivably infect either the soul, or body: nor for the
sickness that destroys in the noonday, which do more openly and in the
daytime seize and consume this mortal life.

A thousand shall fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand, many
shall fall away into destruction, that presume to be numbered among the Sheep of
Christ on his right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee, thou shall not thus
fall either into sin or condemnation.

Yea with thine eyes shall thou behold, and see the reward of the ungodly, to
thine unspeakable consolation, not for their distress, but that thou have
escaped the same recompense of evil works.

For thou, Lord, art my hope, and whilst he is so, O my Soul, thou have set thy
house of defense very high, for it is settled in him who dwells in the high and
holy Heavens: and therefore thou may be confident that,

There shall no evil either of sin that is mortal, or of punishment that is
eternal, happen unto thee, casually befall thee, but through thine own fault:
neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling, any temporal evils to afflict
thee but for thy good.

For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways:
Are they not all ministering Spirits sent forth to minister to them that shall
be heirs of Salvation? Heb. 1.14.

They shall bear thee in their hands, be ready at hand powerfully to assist
thee, that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone, stumble and fall not upon
any rock of offense.

Thou shall go upon the Lion and Adder: the young Lion and the Dragon-shalt
thou tread under thy feet. All the apostate crew of evil angels, with all their
poisonous infusions, thou shall overcome and subdue: so the Lord promises also,
Luke 10.19. Behold I give you power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions -- And
the reason is added, in the name of the Lord, saying,

Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: All things
work together for good to them that love God, Romans 8.28. I will set him up
above his enemies round about: because he has known my name, his knowledge
being enspirited with love and obedience.

He shall call upon me: to have a heart to pray rightly and reverently is a
great blessing: and I will hear him, so as to grant the requests of such as
call upon me faithfully: yea, I am with him in trouble, and when his faith and
patience, humility and obedience is thoroughly tried, I will deliver him out of
all his troubles, and bring him to honor, promote him in the land of the
living, for,

With long life will I satisfy him, a life replete with all fullness of
satisfaction, and show him my Salvation, or manifest my self unto him, in whose
presence is fullness of joy --

O remember me according to the favor thou bear unto thy people: and visit
me with thy Salvation.

That I may see the felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice in the gladness of thy
people, and give thanks with thine inheritance, who cease not day and night,
saying, Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


THE SONG of SIMEON, Which is said by the Church at this hour, as wherein we
commend our selves unto the Lord: and desire we may both sleep, and dye in
Peace.
1. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, Peace in life and
death, sleeping and waking is the portion of the Lords servant alone: for there
is no peace, says the Lord, to the wicked, Isa. 48.
according to thy Word;

'Twas Gods promise he should not dye till he had seen the Messiah in the flesh.

2. For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation.

The Savior of the world is seen as Man only with the eyes of Flesh, but as
both God and Man by the eye of Faith.

3. Which thou have prepared before the face of all people:

God was made man, that the eyes of all flesh might see in whom to believe, and
whom to follow as the light of the world.

4. To be a light to lighten the Gentiles Who sat in darkness and in the
shadow of death.
: and to be the glory of thy people Israel.

The greatest of all the wonderful mercies showed by God to his old people the
Israelites, was, that of them Christ was born, and exhibited in the flesh.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
LIghten my darkness, O Lord, whose mysterious Incarnation, and Nativity is the
Light of the Gentiles, and the Glory of Israel: and by thy great mercy defend
me from all the perils and dangers of this night. O blessed Lamb of God that
take away the sins of the world, grant me thy Peace, even peace with God, and
peace with man; peace of Conscience, at home upon Earth, and the peace of the
long home of Heaven: Such a peace the world cannot give; it is only attainable
from thee, and by thee, and through thee the Prince of peace, who live and
reignest with the Father and the Holy Ghost one God, etc.

IN the order of our Church Devotions, after this Song of Simeon, follows the
Creed: for since the end of our Faith is the Salvation of our Souls, it is very
fit then that we both begin and end the day in the Confession of the Faith: And
as the Church in public, so every devout Christian in private, who resolves to
dye in the true Faith, will not go to sleep without it: but will say before he
go to bed, not slightly and customarily, but reverently and understandingly,

I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and in Jesus
Christ, etc.

All this I steadfastly believe: into this Faith I was baptized, and in this
Faith it is the hearty desire of my Soul, and shall be my constant endeavor to
continue unto my life's end.

Grant me, blessed Lord, in the profession of this Faith, to war a good
warfare, and to finish my course, that after this mortal life is ended, I may
receive from the author, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
and finisher of our Faith, the crown of righteousness, which is laid up, I
believe, and hope, for me, as for all those that love his appearing.

After these or other Bedtime Meditations, your usual Prayers, Confessions and
Thanksgivings, relating to the day past, Meditate

As you Vndress your self.
This Body of mine I am now striping of its clothing, is but the clothing of my
Soul, that is the man in me, my body is but the garment my soul does wear.

And it is not long ere I shall put off this body of flesh, as I now do the
garments which cover its nakedness: And that I may do this in peace, and to my
future happiness, my soul must be stripped, and put off concerning the former
conversation the old man, Ephesians. 4.21, 22.
which is corrupt according to deceitful lusts, and put on that new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

Put on the Lord Jesus: To. 13.14.
That Is thy clothing, that is thy ornament, O my Soul, to obey the doctrine, and
follow the example of the holy Jesus: making no provision to fulfill the lusts
of the flesh: For, Gal. 6.8.
he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that
sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

When you lay aside your Garments.
Assist me, blessed Lord, wholly and altogether to cast away the works of
darkness, and to put on the armor of Light: that when my Body shall lie down in
its bed of darkness, my Soul may pass into the Regions of Light to live and
reign with Thee for ever.

When you go into Bed.
I will lay me down in peace and take my rest, for it is Thou only that make
me dwell in safety.

Or, II.
In the Name of my Lord Jesus Christ, who was Crucified on the Cross, and laid
in the Grave for me, I lay me down to rest, and to sleep: He vouchsafe to bless
me, save and defend me, sleeping and waking: And may I evermore, blessed Jesus,
rest in thy Peace, live in thy Fear, dye in thy Favor, and be raised by thy
power unto life everlasting.

Amen.

CHAP. VII. Of Meditations and Psalms for the Night season.
I.
'TWas in the Night the Angel of the Lord destroyed all the firstborn in the
Land of Egypt: Exodus 12.29. Wisd. 18.14, 15. 2 Kin. 19.35.
And the host of Senacherib that besieged Jerusalem: Now then arise from thy
bed of sloth and drowsiness, O my Soul; begging of God with humble Prayers,
Heb. 1.14.
that those Celestial Spirits who are sent forth to minister for them who shall
be heirs of Salvation, and more particularly that thy guardian Angel may both
guide and protect thee, that no destroying Angel, no terror of the night, no
pestilence that walks in darkness, no fiery darts of the Devil, no arrows of
Temptation, by any filthy dreams, or noisome lusts, may infect and taint thy
innocence, or disturb thy peace in the Lord.

For ye were sometimes darkness, Ephesians. 5.8.
but now are ye light in the Lord: walk therefore as children of the light.

And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, ver. 11.
but rather reprove them.

O blessed Father of Lights, Jam. 1.17.
with whom is no variableness nor shadow of turning; show the light of thy
Countenance upon thy servant, and save me for thy mercies sake.

II.
It Is in the Night we generally believe the Son of man shall come to judge both
the quick and the dead: Mat. 25.6. Mar. 13.36, 37.
and he has commanded thee to watch for his coming, that he find thee not
sleeping: remembering that his coming shall be in flaming fire, rendering
vengeance to them that obey not his Gospel, whereof this is a part, watch and
pray: confirmed by his own example, who continued all night in prayer unto God:
by the example of holy David frequently at his prayers in the night: Luke 6.12.
Ps 6. and 63 and 119. Isa. 26.9.
of the Prophet Isaiah, With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with
my spirit within me will I seek thee early: and of the Prophet Jeremiah. Arise,
Lam. 2.19.
cry out in the Night in the beginning of the watches, pour out thine heart
like water before the face of the Lord.

Thy heart may now most opportunely, most intensely, most freely and fully be
poured out unto the Lord, whilst the cares and businesses of the day distract
thee not: whilst no external objects, or tumultuous noise disturb thy wandering
imaginations, to withdraw thy heart from divine, and celestial Contemplations.

Tu Christ somnum discute,
Tu rumpe noctis vincula:
Tu solve peccatum vetus,
Novumque lumen ingere.
III.
'Twas in the deep silence of the Night thy blessed Savior was born. And the
Shepherds who kept watch over their flock, Luke 2.7, 8
had therefore the happiness to receive the first tidings of Salvation by an
Angel from Heaven. It Is now very seasonable to Meditate upon those great
mysteries of Salvation, the Incarnation and Birth of thy Redeemer, the Holiness
and Innocence of his Life, his whole nights Devotions and Prayers, the many
conspiracies against his life, which he purposely assumed to lay down for the
sins of the world.

'Twas in the night (as being the cursed deeds of darkness) that thy Lord was
apprehended in the Garden, and then bound with Cords of violence, and by rude
hands dragged, and hurried to be arraigned as a Malefactor, falsely accused, spit
upon and buffeted, examined with intents of blood, judged and condemned: say
then now in the words of the holy Spirit of God,

PSALM II.
Verses,

1. WHy do the heathen so furiously rage together: and why do the people
imagine a vain thing?

By the heathen is meant Infidels and such as be without the pale of the
Church: By the People Heretics and Schismatics within.

2. The Kings of the earth stand up: and the Rulers take counsel together
against the Lord, and against his anointed: This Prophecy is remembered to be
fulfilled by the Conspiracies, and practices of the Chiefs both of the Jews and
Romans against Christ, Acts 4.25, 26, 27.
Saying,

3. Let us break their bonds asunder: and cast away their cords from us.

By Bonds are meant the Laws of Christ, and by Cords those promises, threats,
exhortations, examples -- which draw our hearts to obey his Laws.

4. He that dwells in Heaven will laugh them to scorn: the Lord will have
them in derision.

The neglect, and contempt whereof God is said to deride, as seeing it to be
the highway to destruction.

5. Then shall he speak unto them is his wrath: and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

For when he shall call such proud contemners to account, it shall be not in
mercy, but in wrath, to their eternal vexation and torment.

6. Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Sion.

It Is not the utmost malice of men or Devils can weaken the power or frustrate
the Government of Christ in his Church.

7. I will preach the Law whereof the Lord has said unto me: g Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee.

Not hinder the publication of his Gospel received from God;

Founded in the eternal and temporal Sonship of Christ, who was both begotten
from all eternity as the Son of God, and born in fullness of Time as the Son of
Man.

8. Desire of me and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance: and
the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

In respect of his Godhead he is Lord of the whole earth: in respect of his
manhood he obtained by intercession as Mediator betwixt God and Man, that all
people both Jews and Gentiles be called to the state of Salvation through him.

9. Thou shall bruise them with a rod of iron: and break them in pieces like a
Potters vessel.

Whom he governs by subduing and mortifying their rebel lusts both sensual, and
worldly.

10. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings: be learned ye that are Judges of the
earth.

Which is that true wisdom, which chiefly all that are in authority should
learn, as by whose power and example others may be conrerted.

11. Serve the Lord with fear: and rejoice unto him with reverence.

Both fear and joy are necessary qualifications in Religious duties, that we
neither be affrighted with the difficulty, nor puffed up with the consolation
that attends his service.

12. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and so ye perish from the right way: (if
his wrath be kindled, yea but a little) blessed are they that put their trust
in him.

There is a Kiss both of Love and Honor, and of Obedience, the which in all
respects is due to our Redeemer, the neglect whereof is the way to perish by
his wrath, as to obey him and trust in him is the way of true blessedness.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesus, in Thee have I put my trust: let me never perish from the
right way of that love and obedience I owe to thy Sacred Majesty: and let all
the Nations of the earth submit to thy Scepter of Righteousness, that they
perish not in thy wrath, but may inherit the blessings of them that put their
trust in Thee, who art only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

IV. Meditations for the Night.
THe Angels of Heaven rest not day and night crying, Holy, holy Lord God of
Hosts. And if thou desire to serve God upon earth according to the pattern of
his worship in Heaven, then let not thy sensual inclinations to sleep and ease,
defraud thee of the happiness to join in the night as well as in the day with
the Celestial quire in the praises of God.

For if this be done cordially, cheerfully and constantly in this life, there
will be no question of being admitted into that blessed society to glorify God
in a higher degree of perfection and joy in Heaven.

PSALM VIII. Which is believed to be divinely composed, for the praise of God
in the night, because therein is mention of the Moon and of the Stars, and not
of the Sun.
Verses,

1. O Lord our Governor, The Lord is Governor of all men, and of all things
by his power and providence, but especially of his Church and people by his
Righteousness and Truth.
how excellent is thy Name in all the world? The glory of God's name is
celebrated in all the parts of the world, more especially in the Heaven above.
Thou have set thy glory above the Heavens.

And yet it is far above what those most intelligent Beings, the Angels of
Heaven, are capable to behold, or conceive.

2. Out of the mouths of very babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength,
because of thine enemies: that thou might still the enemy and the avenger.

The most imperfect Beings have in them strength of argument sufficient to
maintain both the providence of God over all; and the d spensation of Grace,
and Salvation through Jesus Christ, against the most bitter enemies of either:
witness the cry of little children, Mat. 21.26. and the conversion of the World
by illiterate Fishermen.

3. For I will consider the Heavens, the work of thy Fingers: the Moon and the
Stars which thou have ordained.

To consider the excellent workmanship, influences and revolutions of the
heavens, and all the hosts thereof ordained for the service of man, and the
highest heaven also for his everlasting abode, enwraps the devout soul with
admiration of the love of God to man.

4. Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him: and the son of man that
thou visitest him?

Especially that frail sinful man should be so regarded by the great Lord of
heaven, as to be visited by him in the likeness of humane flesh.

5. Thou made him lower than the Angels: to crown him with glory and worship:

Though man be lower than the Angels above, yet is he adorned with eminence
above all earthly things: and with respect, subjection and obedience from them.

6. Thou make him to have dominion over the works of thy hands: thou have put
all things in subjection under his feet:

God having given him power over all sublunary creatures, and made to submit to
his Command and service:

7. All Sheep and Oxen, yea and the beasts of the field,

8. The Fowls of the Air, and the Fishes of the Sea, and whatsoever walks
through the paths of the Seas.

Even all the inhabitants of the air, and of the Sea, and of the dry land.

9. O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the world!

And therefore with Angels and Archangels, and all the Company of Heaven and
Earth, I will magnify God's holy Name, and praise him, saying, Glory be to the
Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


V. Meditations for the Night.
HOw aptly does the darkness of the night represent the gloomy shades of death;
wherein all those lightsome Consolations, which this vain world affords, are
buried in the grave of dark Oblivion? That Is the land where all things are
forgotten. Ps. 88.12.


The living know that they shall die, but the dead know not any thing: Eccl.
9.5.
and Sleep is the image, the brother of Death; in many respects they resemble
each other: for

1. In both thou art blind, deaf, dumb; only Death is a longer and more perfect
privation of sense.

2. Rev. 14.13
In both thou art at rest from thy labors, and thy works follow thee; being
often represented to thy fancy by way of Dream; but more fully and clearly to
thy Conscience, when thou shall awake to Judgment.

3. Both are temporary: For as thou do daily awake from thy natural Sleep,
and arise from thy Bed, upon the approach of the day: So certainly shall thou
awake from the sleep of death, and be raised out of thy bed of clay (the Grave)
when the day of the Lord shall come: And since that day will come as a Thief in
the night, 2 Pet. 3.10 Psalm. 119.148.
let mine eyes prevent the night (O Lord) that I may be occupied in thy words.

4. As Sleep is the brother of Death, so Death is the sister of Sin: And this
also in Holy Writ is called a Sleep: Ephesians. 5.14. 1 Cor. 15.34.
Awake thou that sleep -- Awake to Righteousness and sin not.

It Is fabled that Somnus tempting Palinurus, when he fell asleep, tumbled him
into the Sea, and drowned him: And if the sleep of Death find thee securely
sleeping in any known Sin unrepented, he that has the power of death will hurl
thee headlong into the bottomless Abyss of death eternal. Ps. 13.6.
O lighten mine eyes, O Lord, that I sleep not in death: lest mine enemy say, I
have prevailed against him.

Grant me, blessed Lord, Aug. med.
so to order govern, and end my life, that death may seize me but as a sleep;
and this sleep may be in rest: this rest in Security, and Security in eternity,

Amen.
PSALMS For the Night season.
PSALM. XCII.
Verses,

1. IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord: and to sing praises unto
thy Name, O most Highest.

To praise the Lord, is good in both the kinds of goodness, viz. of Profit and
Pleasure.

2. To tell of thy loving kindness betimes in the morning: and of thy truth in
the night season.

In the morning which represents the rising prosperity of man, it is good to
give thanks for the loving kindness of the Lord, and in the night of adversity
also to praise him for his truth and righteousness at all times and in all
conditions.

3. Upon an Instrument of ten strings and upon the Lute: upon a loud Instrument
and the Harp.

To employ both our hearts and voices as the loud instruments of his praise.

4. For thou, Lord, have made me glad through thy works: And I will rejoice in
giving praise for the operation of thy hands.

The works of God do then truly delight the Souls of the righteous, when in
them they both see the goodness, wisdom -- of the Lord, and praise his name
that made them.

5. O Lord, how glorious are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.

The pious Soul is ravished with love and admiration in contemplation of Gods
works, as excelling in glory and depth of wisdom her frail capacity.

6. An unwise man does not well consider this: and a fool does not understand
it.

And it is the extremest of folly, not so to consider the superexcellency of
the divine wisdom in his works as to see, and love him in them, and for them.

7. When the ungodly are green as the grass, and when all the workers of
wickedness do flourish: then shall they be destroyed for ever: but thou, Lord,
art the most highest for evermore.

The wicked that do not this, though they may flourish for a time, yet their
punishment proceeding from the decree of the most high God shall be everlasting.

8. For lo thine enemies, O Lord, lo thine enemies shall perish: and all the
workers of wickedness shall be destroyed.

and unavoidable, because all wicked persons are the enemies of God.

9. But mine horn shall be exalted like the horn of an Unicorn: for I am
anointed with fresh oil.

But the strength and vigor of the righteous shall increase through the
Unction of the Holy One, or the Graces of Gods Spirit;

10. Mine eye also shall see his lust upon his enemies: and mine ear shall hear
his desire of the wicked that rise up against me.

Whereby all the sinful lusts of the flesh are mastered, and all the assaults
of ghostly enemies are subdued.

11. The righteous shall flourish like a Palm tree: and shall spread abroad
like a Cedar in Libanus.

Like a Palm the righteous man sinks not under the weight of afflictions, or
violence of temptations, but grows the more in Grace thereby.

12. Such as be planted in the house of the Lord: shall flourish in the courts
of the house of our God.

Whilst they are and continue to be true members of Christ's Church against
which the gates of hell shall not prevail.

13. They also shall bring forth more fruit in their age: and shall be fat and
well liking.

They shall increase in Grace as in years, being fruitful in all good works,
acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ.

14. That they may show how true the Lord my strength is: and that there is no
unrighteousness in him.

And such happy people do truly praise the Lord, both with their lips and in
their lives: as from whom all their strength in Grace and goodness is derived.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
I Know, O Lord, that it is a thing both joyful and profitable, and my bounden
duty to give thee thanks both night and day, in prosperity and adversity: for
the great mercy and truth of thy promises is manifested at all times, and in
all conditions: Let me never forget to meditate in thy works: and though I
cannot fathom the depth of thy wisdom in them, grant me the more to love and
admire thy transcendent perfections appearing in all the operations of thy
hands, works of Wonder: for and in the which I humbly beg, I may continually
praise thy Name, not only in word, but also in deed and in truth, and that as
the night of my life comes on, and I grow more full in days, so I may be also
more fruitful in all good works to the glory of thy Name through Jesus Christ.

PSALM CXXXIV. To be used in the Night, as wherein the people of God excite
each other to the praise of God in their night Assemblies in his house.
Verses,

1. BEhold, now praise the Lord: all ye servants of the Lord.

Divine praise being the highest of Religious duties, becomes the lips of such
only as are devoted to the service of God.

2. Ye that by night stand in the house of the Lord Who both night and day are
intent upon this high and holy employment.
: in the Courts of the house of our God.

But especially such as be ordained to the administration of Holy Offices in
the House of God. Mystically: God has 3 Courts, through which we must enter
into his House, the Church; and be entitled to his Praise: 1 Faith, which is
the outer Court: 2 Hope gives a nearer admission into his presence: 3 Charity
unites our hearts unto God and inflames them to his praise.

3. Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary: and praise the Lord.

Not by our words only, but by the works of our hands God must be glorified,
Mat. 5.16. And to do this worthily,

4. The Lord that made heaven and earth: give the blessing out of Sion.

Is a blessing that descends from above, but is conveyed by the ministry of
the Church.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
O Lord, who have made Heaven and Earth for the service of man, and man more
immediately to serve Thee: Give unto all thy servants Grace, and to me also, to
lift up holy hands, and pure hearts to praise thee night and day in the Courts
of thy house, and in all the works of our hands to glorify thy Name: And to
this end let thy blessing through the ministry of thy Church descend upon us
in this life, that we may inherit the blessings of thy Church triumphant in
heaven through Jesus Christ.

The CXXXIX. Psalm PARAPHRASED,
Lord, the Righteous God, who tryest the very hearts and reins: Thou have
searched me out, through all the windings and turnings of my deceitful heart,
and known me in all the most hidden, and inmost of my thoughts and desires:
Thou know my down-sitting, both withwhat company, and when alone, both with
what intentions, and what affections; and my up-rising, with what guilt, or
innocence I arise from every of my actions: in all which thou understandest my
thoughts long before, even before they be conceived in my mind, as knowing my
inclinations to entertain such or such thoughts.

Thou art about my path, wherein I walk, and about my bed, wherein I rest; and
spiest out all my ways, seeing both the equity and iniquity both of my
affections and actions, in all my ways both of rest and motion, ease and labor.

For lo there is not a word in my tongue but thou know it altogether; both,
First, Its original conception in my mind; Secondly, My intention in its
utterance with my mouth; Thirdly, Its good or bad influence upon others: O set
a watch over my mouth, and guard the door of my lips, that I offend not in my
tongue.

Thou have fashioned me behind and before, molded me throughout into this
goodly shape and proportion of parts whereof I consist: and laid thine hand
upon me, supported me in this being thou have given me.

Such knowledge as appears both in my Creation and preservation is too
wonderful and excellent for me, I cannot attain unto it: it excells the reach
of my apprehension even to wonder and astonishment.

Whither then shall I go from thy Spirit which fills the world, and
contains all things? or whither shall I go from thy presence, who art every
where by thy Essence, Power and Presence both within, and without the world?

If I climb up into heaven thou art there in highest Majesty and Glory: if I go
down to hell, thou art there also: in the nether hell by the execution of thy
righteous judgments, and in the grave also, for that very dust whereinto the
dead bodies of men are dissolved, is preserved from annihilation by thy
essential presence therewithal.

If I take the wings of the morning, which even in a moment overspreads and
embeams the face of the whole earth, and be conveyed as swift as lightning to
remain in the utmost parts of the Sea, beyond all the habitable parts of this
inferior world.

Even there thine hand of powerful influence shall lead me: I should not
otherwise live and move, and have a being: And thy right hand which renders to
every man according to his works shall hold me to give an account of all my
ways and doings. I will not therefore assay to fly from thee, though justly
displeased for my sins; but rather upon the wings of true Repentance, I will
fly unto thee: even into the arms of thy unspeakable mercy, through the merits
of my dearest Savior.

If I say, through the deceitful imaginations of my darkened heart, surely the
darkness, which hides all things from the sight of men, shall cover me from
the sight of God also: I shall soon be convinced of the folly of such a gross
conceit, for then shall my night, the most secret of my thoughts, and closest
deeds of darkness be turned unto day, be as clearly seen as in the noon day Sun.

Yea the darkness, that which is such to us, is no darkness with thee; the
darkness and light to thee are both alike, who see all things in the
brightness of thine own transcendent Essence, without the mediation of material
light.

For my reins are thine, my innate and most secret lusts and pronenesses to
evil escape not thy scrutiny, and view: Thou have covered me in my mothers
womb, by the influence of thy Power and Providence I was in the materials of my
being preserved from abortion.

I will give thanks unto thee as for my being, so also that I am fearfully and
wonderfully made, my Formation in my mothers womb being a prodigious piece of
workmanship: and indeed mavelous are all thy works both of Creation,
Preservation --

My bones though hid from the eyes of men, under the covering of flesh and
skin, are not hid from thee, for they are framed by thee, though I be made
secretly; both invisible, and inconceivable is the way of my Formation, and
fashioned like some curious Embroidery, or Network through the variety of my
spreading Veins, Arteries, Sinews, Ligaments, beneath in the earth or in my
mothers womb, than the which the earth affords not a more secret shop or
workhouse.

Thine eyes of Prescience, Power and Providence did see my substance yet being
unperfect, decree me to be a living man, when I was yet but an unshapen Embryo:
and in thy Book were all my members written, every joint, sinew, vein, were
delineated as in a Book by thy hand of power, goodness and wisdom.

Which day by day were fashioned, grew up by degrees into a perfect shape, and
proportion of parts, when as yet a little space before there was none of them,
they did not exist in nature, or were no other than a deformed Lump of unclean
Seed.

How dear and precious, yea mysterious and profound are thy counsels unto me, O
God, when I consider with what an unfathomed depth of wisdom, mercy and justice
thou do order all things in heaven and earth: O how great is the sum of them,
the number, variety, use, and beauty of them cannot be sum'd up.

If I tell them, I undertake an impossible task, for they are more in number
than the sand upon the Sea shore which cannot be numbered: and therefore when I
awake up I am present with thee in contemplation of thy mavelous works, and
of thy good providence over me, both sleeping and waking.

Will thou not slay the wicked, O God, who forget thee, and the wondrous works
which thou have done? Depart from me ye blood-thirsty men: I will not
communicate with you in your sinful desires, and doings, which tend to the
murder and everlasting destruction of immortal Souls.

For they speak unrighteously against thee: If they speak of thee, O Lord, it is
nor aright and as becomes the honor of thy Name: And thine enemies take thy
Name in vain. And therefore they are thine enemies, because thy Name which is
great, wonderful and holy, is profaned by them.

Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? I should not otherwise love thee,
O Lord, did I not hate all them, not in their persons, but in their sinful
actions, whereby they are hateful and offensive to thy Majesty. And am not I
grieved with those that rise up against thee? Their rebellion and disobedience
is a great grief, and a wound unto my spirit.

Yea, I hate them right sore, as though they were mine enemies, even because
they are thine enemies, through the iniquity of their doings: And herin,

Try me, O God, as the silver is tried, when the dross is purged thence: that I
may both love mine enemies as they are mine, but hate them as thine: and seek
out the ground of my heart, purge out that Core of corruption from whence all
unlawful love, and hatred issues: Prove me, and examine my thoughts: Purify my
Soul in all her imaginations, affections and intentions, that no dregs of
sinful pollution cleave thereunto.

Look well if there be any way of wickedness in me: Assist me by thy all-seeing
Spirit to look into mine heart, and diligently to search, and try my ways, lest
in any respect I swerve from thy most holy Laws: And lead me in the way
everlasting; the way that leads to the full enjoyment of thee, my God, the
fountain of everlasting Life and Happiness, that without distraction or
cessation, I may ascribe Glory to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


CHAP. VIII. Of Meditations fitted to every Days ordinary Actions, and several
Dispositions of the Soul of men.
When you go forth out of your House or Chamber, Say,
THe Lord preserve my going out, and my coming in: Ps. 121.8.
from this time forth for evermone.

He shall give his Angels charge over thee: Ps. 91.11,
to keep thee in all thy ways:

In their hands they shall bear thee, 12.
lest at any time thou hurt thy foot against a stone.

O hold thou up my goings in thy paths: that my footsteps slip not. Ps. 17.5.


Hold thou up my goings in thy paths: that I may daily perform my Vows.

Lead me forth in thy Truth, Ps. 25.4.
and learn me: for Thou art the God of my Salvation, in Thee has been my hope
all the day long.

As you walk or travel by the way.
I am the Way, Joh. 14.6.
the Truth, and the Life, says my blessed Redeemer: The Way I must follow; the
Truth I must believe; the Life I must hope for: the Way which leads me; the
Truth which teaches me; and the Life whereunto he brings me: the Way is
undefiled, the Truth is infallible, and the Life without end.

Blessed are they that are undefiled in this Way, and walk in this Truth, that
leads to life everlasting.

As you stand upon some high Place.
Thy mercy, Ps. 36.5,
O Lord, reaches unto the heavens: and thy faithfulness unto the clouds.

Thy righteousness stands like the strong mountains: 6,
and thy judgments are like the great deep.

Thou, 7,
Lord, shall save both man and beast, how excellent is thy mercy, O God! and
the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

They shall be satisfied with the plenteousness of thy House: 8.
and thou shall give them drink of thy pleasures, as out of the river.

For with thee is the Well of Life, 9.
and in thy Light shall we see Light: even the light of joy unspeakable and
glorious in the light of thy Countenance.

As you behold pleasant Grounds, and variety of Objects.
O Lord, Ps 104.24.
how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all: the earth is
full of thy riches:

So is the great, and wide Sea also: 25.
wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts,

These wait all upon thee, 26.
that thou may give them meat in due season.

When thou give it them, 27.
they gather it: and when thou openest there hand, they are filled with good.

When thou hidest thy face they are troubled: 28,
when thou take away their breath they dye, and are turned again to their
dust.

When thou let thy breath go forth, 29,
they shall be made: and thou shall renew the face of the earth.

The glorious Majesty of the Lord shall endure for ever: 31,
the Lord shall rejoice in his works.

The earth shall tremble at the looks of Him: 32,
if he but touch the hills they shall smoke.

I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: 33,
I will praise my God while I have my being.

And so shall my words please him: 34,
my joy shall be in the Lord.

As for sinners they shall be consumed out of the earth: 35.
and the ungodly shall come to an end: Praise thou the Lord, O my Soul, praise
the Lord.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
When you hear or see any thing extraordinary.
Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty: Rev. 15.3,
just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints.

Who will not fear thee, O Lord, 4.
and glorify thy Name? For thou only art holy.

Blessed be the Lord God, Ps. 72.18,
even the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things.

And blessed be the name of his Majesty for ever: 19.
And all the earth shall be filled with his Majesty, Amen, Amen.

When you hear the Clock, or see the hour of the Day.
How fast does hour after hour come on! time hasting to be swallowed up of
Eternity.

Man is like a thing of naught: Ps. 144.4.
his time passes away like a shadow.

Our days upon earth are as a shadow: Ps. 90.9,
and we bring our years to an end as a tale that is told.

So teach me to number my days: 12.
that I may apply my self unto wisdom: wisely providing for that long day,
wherein the Sun of Righteousness shall shine without setting.

When you go to Read or Study.
Study to show thy self approved unto God, 2 Timothy 2.15.
a workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the truth.

Open thou mine eyes, Ps. 119.
O Lord, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law, in the true sense and
meaning of thy holy Spirit therein, being not deceived by any false glosses,
and misinterpretations of men.

Grant, blessed Lord, that what I Read or Meditate may conduce to a more clear
understanding of thy Will: Jam. 1.25.
and that I may confirm the same by the holiness of my Life: being not a
forgetful hearer, but a doer of thy work.

Being wearied therewith.
Much study is a weariness to the flesh: Eccl. 12.12
And of making Books there is no end.

Turn again unto thy rest, Ps. 116.17.
O my Soul, return to converse with thy God, who is the center in whom alone
the immortal Soul finds rest: Hearken unto the sweet refreshing call of thy
dear Lord and Savior, saying,

Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11.18
and I will refresh you.

Behold, I come, holy Jesus, relying upon this, and that other gracious saying,
S. Joh. 16.33.
In me ye shall have peace, but in the world ye have tribulation: but be of
good cheer I have overcome the world.

Lord, let me never be weary in well-doing, but when I may do better: and
prevent me in all my doings with thy most gracious favor, and further me with
thy continual help, that in all my Prayers and Meditations, studies and
endeavors begun, continued and ended in thee, I may glorify thy holy Name:
and finally obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ.

When you go about any worldly Employment.
God shall bring every work into judgment, Eccl. 12.14.
with every secret thing: whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

O let not mine heart be inclined to any evil thing: Ps. 141.4.
let me not be occupied in ungodly works, with the men that work wickedness:
neither let me be ensnared with their delights.

Deliver me, 2 Timothy 4.18.
O Lord, from every evil work, and stablish me in every good word and work.

Blessed Jesus, let all my works be accepted through the merits of thy sacred
and renowned actions, and the imperfections thereof pardoned through Faith in
thy blood, Amen.

When you are sad, or discontented.
When I am in heaviness I will think upon God: Ps. 77.3.
when my heart is vexed I will complain, even unto God will I make my moan.

Why art thou so full of heaviness, Ps. 42.6,
O my Soul: and why art thou so disquieted within me?

Put thy trust in God: 7.
for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his Countenance.

Put thy trust in God and be doing good: Ps. 37.3.
whilst I do the thing that is good, and abstain from evil, I may reasonably
hope (upon my devout Prayers) for the return of God's favor unto me: and that
the light of his Countenance shall dispel all my darksom imaginations, all my
gloomy fears, and the perturbations of my Spirit.

Return, return, O Lord God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine upon thy
servant: O show the light of thy Countenance, and I shall be whole.

When you sit idle.
Why stand you here all the day idle? Mar. 20.6.
the Devil who tempts unto all other sins is himself tempted by idleness.

Watch ye therefore, Mat. 13.36.
for you know not when the master of the house comes: at Even, or at
Midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the Morning.

Lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping. 37.


Upon wandering, wanton Eyes.
A Wicked eye is an evil thing, Ecclus. 31.13.
and what is created more wicked than an Eye? and therefore it weepeth upon
every occasion.

How dare I look up unto Heaven, which is the throne of Gods Purity, with those
eyes that have been set upon vanity and iniquity?

A wise man's eyes are in his head: Eccl. 2.14.
but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.

I have made a Covenant with mine eyes, not to look upon a maid. Job 31, 1.


For whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her, Mat. 5.28.
has already committed adultery with her in his heart.

But mine eyes shall be ever looking unto the Lord: Ps. 25.15.
for he shall pluck my feet out of the net; my affections from being ensnared
with unlawful objects.

When you are tempted to any Sin.
Meditat. I.
Avoid Satan, thou wicked and unclean spirit avoid: Thou have no part or lot in
me.

I am solemnly devoted to the service of my God, and my Jesus, and thy sworn
adversary. I have solemnly abjured thee, and all thy works: and must not now
yield to any of thine unclean suggestions.

Be merciful unto me, Ps. 57.1.
O God, be merciful unto me, for my Soul trusts in Thee, and under the shadow
of thy Wings shall be my refuge until this tyranny be overpast.

I will call unto the most high God: 2.
even to the God that shall perform the cause I have in hand.

He shall send from Heaven and save me: 3.
from the reproof of him that would eat me up.

God shall send forth his mercy and truth: 4.
my Soul is among Lions: the Devil and his Angels have too great a hank upon my
Soul.

But my trust is in the tender mercy of my God: therefore I shall not fall.

Meditat. II.
When I am tempted to any evil, I complain of the Devil: but my self is the
greatest Devil to my Soul, whilst I do not deny my self the fulfilling of its
irrational appetites.

All the forces wherewith the enemy fights against my Soul are within me: It Is
from those warring members within, they are both raised, armed and maintained.

But whenever I call upon God, Ps. 56.9,
then shall mine enemies be put to flight: this I know, for God is on my side.

In Gods word will I rejoice: 10.
in the Lords word will I comfort me.

Yea in God have I put my trust: 11.
I will not fear what man (or Devil) can do unto me.

Meditat. III. Being Tempted, Say,
It Is the Lords cause I must now maintain, it is his quarrel I must fight: for
the grand enemy of God and Man, would now rob God of his Honor, and of that
Obedience which is due to his most holy Laws: and I being Tempted am thereby
challenged to be the Lords Champion.

But I will not trust in my Bow, Ps. 44.7,
it is not my Sword that shall save me.

But it is thou, Lord, 8.
that savest us from our enemies: and put them to confusion that hate us.

Arise, Ps. 74.23,
O God, maintain thine own cause: remember how the foolish man blasphemeth thee
daily.

Forget not the voice of thine enemies: 24.
the presumption of them that hate thee increases ever more and more.

Meditat. IV. Upon Temptations.
The victory over the Devil, and all his temptations were easily obtained,
could I but once get the mastery over those lusts, which war against the Soul.

In which spiritual warfare, the banner under which I must fight, is the Cross
of my Redeemer: by the virtue whereof all my intestine foes may be vanquished in
the Crucifixion of them: and the old man with all his mutinous troops of
deceivable lusts be subdued, and led captive in the Chains of holy
Mortification.

O blessed Jesus, the Captain of my Salvation, strengthen and encourage me,
manfully to fight under thy banner against all my ghostly adversaries: And let
thy Grace so prevent and follow me, that I may follow thee by the Cross to the
Crown, through the School of Grace to the Throne of Glory. Amen.

Upon the Prevailing of any Temptation.
I will say unto the God of my strength, Ps. 42.11.
why have thou forgotten me: and why go I thus heavily, while the enemy
oppresses me?

My bones are smitten asunder as with a Sword; 12,
while mine enemies that trouble me cast me in the teeth.

Namely, 13.
while they say daily unto me: where is now thy God?

Have mercy upon me, O God, Ps. 41.10.
have mercy upon me: raise thou me up again and I shall reward them: being more
careful to resist the Devil, and all his suggestions.

Forsake me not, O Lord my God: Ps. 38. ult.
be not thou far from me.

Haste thee to help me, O Lord God of my Salvation.

Having escaped a Temptation.
The snares of death compassed me round about: Ps. 18.3.
and the overflowings of ungodliness made me afraid.

The pains of hell came about me: 4.
the snares of death overtook me.

If the Lord himself had not been on my side I may well now say: Ps. 124.1,
if the Lord himself had not been on my side,

The waters of Temptation had drowned me, 3.
and the stream had gone over my Soul.

Yea the deep waters of the proud had gone even over my Soul: 4.


But praised be the Lord who has not given me over for a prey unto their teeth.

My Soul is escaped even as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowler: 5.
the snare is broken and I am delivered.

Our help stands in the Name of the Lord: 6.
who has made heaven and earth: To whom be all Glory.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
When you Hunger, or Thirst.
I.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness: Mat. 5.6.
for they shall be satisfied. They shall receive such a satisfaction, as the
most delicious of bodily meats and drinks cannot give.

He that drinks of this water shall thirst again: Joh. 4.13.
but whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst.

But the water that I shall give him, 14.
shall be in him a Well of living water springing up to everlasting life.

Lord, evermore give me this water that I thirst not.

It Is the Graces of thy holy Spirit I humbly beg: which alone can satisfy the
vast desires of my Soul.

II.
Labor not for the meat that perishes: Joh. 6.27.
but labor for that meat which endures to everlasting life: which the son of
man shall give unto you: for him has God the Father sealed: sent into the
world to be the incorruptible Food of our immortal Souls.

This is the Bread that came down from Heaven,

III.
The Souls of just men made perfect hunger not, thirst not, but are as the
Angels in Heaven, who neither eat, nor drink as we mortals do upon earth: And
yet they feast continually, being satisfied with the blissful presence of God.

It Is thy imperfection and infelicity (O my Soul) to desire corporal meats and
drinks, to sustain thy frail tabernacle of flesh.

But blessed be the Lord my God, who has not made me like the beasts that
perish, capable only of a sensual happiness in sowing to the flesh from whence
only corruption is reaped; but of a felicity perfect, solid, everlasting in the
beatifical vision and fruition of his divine goodness: in whose presence there
is fullness of Joy: and at whose right hand there is pleasure for evermore.

After you have Eaten, or Drunk.
I.
I have now allayed the importunate craving of my appetite; and my body is
satisfied with material food: but nothing can satisfy my Soul but to behold
the presence of God in righteousness.

Awaken, blessed Lord, awaken up my Soul after thine own likeness: for that
only can give me a true and lasting satisfaction, Ps. 17 ult.
when I awake up after thy likeness I shall be satisfied with it.

II.
Praise the Lord, Ps. 103.1,
O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name.

Who satisfies thy mouth with good things: 4.
making thee young and lusty as the Eagle.

O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness: Ps. 107.8,
and declate the wonders that he does for the children of men.

For he satisfies the empty Soul: 9.
and fills the hungry Soul with goodness.

But I am less than the least of all the mercies showed unto thy servant,
unworthy to have my heart filled with food and gladress, having too frequently
abused thy good creatures of meats and drinks to Riot and Excess therein.

O satisfy me with thy mercy, Ps. 19.14.
and that soon; so shall I rejoice and be glad all the days of my life.

When you are asked an Alms being able to Relieve.
I.
How much am I bound to the good providence of my heavenly Father who has
raised my condition in this world to be of the number of those that abound, and
not of them that want, Act. 20.35
since it is more blessed to give than to receive?

Blessed Lord, vouchsafe to give me a heart full of Compassion, an eye full of
pity, and a hand open and bountiful, according to my ability toward my poor
needy Brethren: 2 Cor. 9.6
He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly: and he that sows bountifully
shall reap bountifully.

II.
I have not deserved to enjoy more worldly wealth, than this poor person who
now begs to be supplied out of my store: But such is the great goodness of my
God toward me, that he has not only given me Food and Raiment, but also
wherewithal to express my gratitude and love to God by my ready relief of my
Christian Brethren. Blessed be God, who has not only given me ability, but
this opportunity also, to lay up in store for my self a good foundation against
the time to come, that I may lay hold on eternal life.

When you hear others evil spoken of.
Lord, if I be not as bad, or worse than these persons I now hear traduced, I
have the more reason to praise thee, who by thy grace and goodness have
preserved me from such miscarriages.

But did I truly reflect upon mine own misdemeanors I should have little reason
to intend the reproaches of others.

Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, or who shall rest upon thy holy hill?

He that has used no deceit in his tongue: Ps. 15 3.
nor done evil to his neighbor, and has not slandered his neighbor.

When you hear your self reproached.
As for me I was even as a deaf man, and heard not: Ps. 38, 13,
and as one that is dumb, that does not open his mouth.

I became as one that hears not: 14.
and in whose mouth are no reproofs.

I will patiently bear my reproach because I have sinned against the Lord.

The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord. Mat 10.25


It is enough for the Disciple to be as his Master, 26.
and the servant as his Lord: if they have called the master of the house,
Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household?

For what glory is it, 1 Pet. 2.20
if when you be buffeted for your faults you take it patiently?

But if when you do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God.

For even hereunto were ye called: 21,
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should
follow his steps.

Who did no sin, 22,
neither was any guile found in his mouth.

Who when he was reviled, 23.
reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to
him that judges righteously.

When you are crossed in any your worldly desires, or interests.
Whatsoever is brought upon thee, take cheerfully; Ecclus. 2.4
and be patient when thou art changed to a low estate.

For gold is tried in the fire, 5.
and acceptable men in the furnace of adversity.

Blessed Jesus, since thy kingdom is not of this world, let not me, thy devoted
servant and subject, either desire or hope to be happy upon earth: but grant me
so to love what thou command, and desire what thou do promise, that among
the sundry and manifold changes of the world, my heart may surely there be
fixed where true joys are to be found.

When you suffer several kinds of Affliction.
This, O Lord, is the portion of thy people: and I know, O Lord, and do verily
believe it is of thy goodness thou have caused me to be troubled.

But far, very far short are my sufferings to those of thy blessed Apostle,
professing of himself, 2 Cor. 11.23,
In labors abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in
deaths often.

Of the Jews, five times received I forty stripes save one. 24,


Thrice was I beaten with rods: 25,
once was I stoned: thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and day I have been in
the deep.

In journeyings often, 26,
in perils of waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils by my own Countrymen, in
perils by the Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in
perils in the Sea, in perils among false Brethren.

In weariness and painfulness, 27.
in watching often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and
nakedness -- Such a heap of troubles betiding an innocent, active blessed man,
may surely move me to bear patiently my smaller proportion of affliction, To.
8.28.
remembering that all things work together for good to them that love God.

When you suffer any bodily Pain.
Both this, and the greatest of the pains my corruptible fiesh can possibly
suffer, are but as a Hea-biting to the least of the pains of the nether hell:
And these my sins have justly deserved: but, blessed Lord, let me have my
punishment in this life, and spare, O spare me in the life to come.

I am not master of my self, except in patience I possess my Soul, in spite of
what flesh can do unto me.

A furious man cannot be justified, Ecclus. 1.22,
or escape punishment: for the sway of his fury shall be his destruction.

A patient man will bear for a time: 23,
and afterward joy shall spring up unto him.

He will hide his words for a time: 24.
and the lips of many shall declare his wisdom.

I know, O Lord, that thou do not willingly afflict the Sons of men: S. Paul
had his thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.77
but 'twas to prevent the swelling of his heart with spiritual pride and
vainglory: And I humbly beg, O Lord, that my present pain in body, may through
my patient sufferance conduce to the better health of my Soul.

And O that I were as feelingly sensible of the many sores and diseases of my
Soul, as I am now of my bodily pains: I should then more affectionately and
with greater devotion apply my self to the great Physician both of Soul and
Body.

Being sensible of your want of Knowledge and Wisdom.
Who will set scourges over my thoughts: Ecclus. 23.3, 2,
and the discipline of wisdom over my heart? that they spare me not for mine
ignorances, and pass not by my sins.

Lest mine ignorances increase, 3.
and my sins abound to my destruction.

That it may please thee, O Lord, to forgive me all my negligences and
ignorances, and to endue me with the Grace of thy Holy Spirit, to amend my life
according to thy Word.

O God of my Fathers, Wisd. 9.1, 4,
and Lord of all mercy, give me wisdom that fitteth by thy Throne: and reject
me not from among thy Children.

O send her out of thy holy Heavens: 10.
and from the Throne of thy Glory: that being present she may labor with me:
that I may know what is pleasing unto thee.

Though I have the gift of Prophecy, 1 Cor. 13.2.
and understand all mysteries, and have all knowledge: and though I have all
Faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not Charity it profits me
nothing.

Being dull and averse from holy Duties.
How long will thou forget me, Psalm. 13.1
O Lord, for ever? how long wilt thon hide thy face from me?

How long shall I seek counsel in my Soul, 2,
and be so vexed in my heart? how long shall mine enemies triumph over me?

Consider and hear me, O Lord, 3,
my God: lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death.

Lest mine enemy say, 4,
I have prevailed against him: for if I be cast down they that trouble me will
rejoice at it.

But my trust is in thy mercy: 5,
and my heart is joyful in thy Salvation.

I will sing of the Lord, 6,
because he has dealt so lovingly with me: yea I will praise the Name of the
Lord the most high.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Upon the sense of your Sins: and the mispending of your Time.
When I call to mind the days of my vanity, and the sins of my younger and
wanton years: when I commune with mine own heart, and search out my spirits.

When I remember how little a portion of my Time has been employed in the
service of my God: and how much has been spent in the service of Sin and
Satan, and the fulfilling of mine own unruly Lusts.

When I consider how small, or no treasure of good works I have laid up in
Heaven, and what a mass of sinful works I have treasured up against the day of
wrath; my spirit is wounded within me, and my heart within me is desolate: my
flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.

Call to remembrance, Psalm. 25.5,
O Lord, thy tender mercies: and thy loving kindness which have been ever of
old.

Oh remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, nor of my riper years: 6.
O deal not with me after my sins, neither reward me after mine iniquities: but
according to thy mercy think thou upon me, O Lord, for thy goodness.

And as thou tellest my flittings: Ps. 56.8.
so put my tears into thy bottle: that as my sins, so my sorrows for sin may be
noted in thy Book.

Assist me to redeem that precious time, which I have too much misspent in
vanity and iniquity.

Oh spare me a little, Ps 39.13.
that I may recover my strength: before I go hence and be no more seen.

Holy Resolves of future Holiness.
Unto thee, O God, Ps. 56.12,
will I pay my vows: unto thee will I give thanks.

For thou have delivered my Soul from death, and my feet from falling: 13.
that I may walk before God in the light of the living: that enlightened with
divine Grace, I may enjoy the light of life immortal before God for ever.

Teach me thy way, Psalm. 86.11
O Lord, and I will walk in thy Truth: O knit my heart unto thee, that I may
fear thy Name.

I will thank thee, 12,
O Lord my God, with all my heart, and will praise thy Name for evermore.

For great is thy mercy toward me: 13.
and thou have delivered my Soul from the nethermost hell: adding day after day
unto my life, and space for repentance unto my days.

O God my heart is ready, Ps. 108.1.
my heart is ready: I will sing and give praise unto the Lord, Romans 2.4.
for the riches of his goodness, forbearance, and long-suffering, leading me to
repentance.

And my heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready to do thy will, and to keep
thy Commandments: only strengthen me with thy divine Grace to do what thou
Command, and then Command whatsoever pleases thee.

My heart is ready both to serve thee in all the duties of holy Religion, and
to serve my neighbor also, in the duties of Innocence and Beneficence, and to
watch over myself against all irrational desires: that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, I may now for the future, Tit. 2.12,
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

Looking for that blessed hope, 13.
and the glorious appearance of the great God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Holy Breathings of the Soul after God.
As the Heart hunted and wearied pants after the water brooks for refuge and
refreshment: Psalm. 42.1.
so my Soul in her weary pilgrimage pursued by her ghostly enemies, longs
after thee, O God, in whom the weary finds rest and the persecuted succor
and support.

My Soul is a thirst for God, 2.
even for the living God the fountain of living waters: when shall I come to
appear before the presence of God?

Oh my God, when will that happy hour come, wherein I shall be fatisfied with
thy presence? wherein I shall praise thee according to my duty and desire?
wherein thou will be all in all to my Soul? When I awake up after thy likeness,
I shall be satisfied with it: till then, I must not hope to enjoy any real,
solid contentment. For,

Whom have I in heaven but thee? Ps. 73.24,
and there is none upon earth, that I defire in comparison of thee: There is
none in heaven or earth that can satisfy the desires of my Soul, which being
stamped after the image of God, and capable of her Creator, cannot be filled
with the greatest sufficiency of all created Beings.

My heart and my flesh fails: 25.
my flesh will soon wither, and fail to be the habit tion of my Soul, and my
heart will be also swallowed up of sorrow and despair, but that God is the
strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

II.
O God, Psalm. 63.1.
thou art my God, my God, and my All: all that I am, and all that I have, and
all that I hope to be; and therefore, early will I seek thee: in the morning of
the day, in the morning of my life, in the morning or light of divine Grace;
for it is thereby I am excited both early and late to seek thee.

My Soul thirsts for thee, 2,
my flesh also longs after thee: my flesh, that being in subjection to the
Spirit, both Soul and Body may rejoice in thee, in whom alone true joy and
satisfaction is attainable: for I am here in a barren and dry land, where no
water is: such is the wilderness of this world, it affords no waters of
refreshment to satisfy the desires of the immortal Soul.

Thus have I waited for thee in holiness. 3,
And O that I could wait for thee, and wait upon thee, with such separate
affections from all sensuality and earthiness, that I might behold thy power
which is chiefly manifested in showing mercy and pity: and thy glory, even the
Glory of thy Grace and Favor.

For thy loving kindness is better than the life it self: 4,
without thy loving kindness, O my God, my life of nature is but a living
death, and my life of Grace with the hopes of the life of Glory are but the
glimpses and scattered rays of thy loving kindness; and therefore my lips
shall praise thee, and this also is an effect of thy loving kindness, that my
heart dictates to my lips to praise thy Name.

Blessed is the people, Ps. 89.16,
O Lord that can rejoice in thee: they shall walk in the light of thy
Countenance.

Their delight shall be daily in thy Name: 17,
and in thy righteousness shall they make their boast.

For thou art the glory of their strength: 18,
and in thy loving kindness thou shall lift up our horns.

For the Lord is our defense: 19.
the holy one of Israel is our King.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from everlasting and world without end: and
let all the people say, Amen: even so Amen.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
MEDITATIONS Of Fasting and Almsgiving to be practiced with holy Prayer and
Meditation.
THat my Prayers and Meditations may ascend into Heaven, and be there treasured
up to my comfort in the day of my account, it is necessary that the Christian
duties of Fasting and Almsgiving be frequently intermixed; for these are the
Two Wings whereupon Holy Prayer is mounted into Heaven, and graciously accepted
in the presence of God.

These Three are those spiritual Sacrifices acceptable unto God by Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5.
whereby every sincerely devout Christian as a member of the holy mystical
Priesthood, sacrifices all that he is, and all that he has unto God, from whom
he has received all. Heb. 13.15.16. To. 12.1. Phil. 4.18.
His Soul is poured forth by Prayer: his Body is sacrificed by Fasting: and his
Goods are offered by Almsgiving.

We have no more to give; and not in some considerable proportion to give them
unto God, is to rob him of that tribute which is due unto him, as an
acknowledgment that all we are, and all we do possess is held from him in
Capite, as the chief Lord of all.

To pretend that all these Christian duties are implied, and may be supplied
through the fullness of Faith in Christ, is a false and mistaken notion of the
holy and true Christian Faith, which both Commends and Commands, not the aerie
empty notions, but the real performance of all these Religious duties.

Our blessed Lord, in his heavenly Sermon on the Mount, joins these together,
and we may not without danger to our Souls presume to part them, or vainly
conceive that any one without the other will be accepted of God: but being all
sincerely practiced as our Lord directs, Mat. 6.1, 5.16. we shall then as he
Commands, lay up for our selves treasure in Heaven, where are neither moth nor
rust. ver. 20.

Thus devout Cornelius sent up such a plentiful treasure into Heaven, Act.
10.2, 3. and v. 30.
as brought down thence one of those Celestial Spirits for his guidance and
direction in the ways of life,

Holy Prayer is that whip which drives the Devil and all his Temptations out of
the Temple of the heart, leaving it to the possession of the Holy Jesus: and
Fasting is as that Scope or Besom which sweeps and keeps clean this spiritual
Temple of the Lord: Mar. 9.29
by both conjoined, the strongest Devil is mastered and ejected: Prayer is as
the Chain which ties up Satan, and by Fasting the Chain is strengthened and made
to hold.

But a Threefold Cord is not easily broken: if with your Prayers and Fastings
you conjoyn the Christian acts of holy Charity also: a Chain of these several
links composed, will not only tie up the Devil, that his temptations shall not
reach to hurt your Soul, but also secretly bind the hands of the Almighty, that
they be not stretched out for the punishment of your bypast Transgressions:
for Charity shall cover a multitude of sins. 1 Pet. 4.8.


Let not the lust of the flesh, or the lust of thine eyes so bewitch thee (O my
Soul) as to rob thy God of what is due unto Him, both from thy Body and Estate.

Whilst thou courtest thy God with Prayers alone, thou servest him with what
does cost thee nothing; nothing but the labor of thy lips: It Is my self, my
whole self the Lord requires with my Prayers: my Soul in its devoutest
affections; my Body in the mortification of all its exorbitant Lusts; my Goods
in the relief of my wanting Brethren: otherwise my Prayers will flag and grovel
here below, when they want these spiritual Wings whereupon to mount to the
Throne of Grace to find Mercy and to obtain Grace in the time of need.

MEDITATIONS Upon Unity in the Public Worship of God.
The holy Catholic Church, do conceive that they ought to be unanimous in the
service of God, as the only way upon earth to partake of the benefits of the
Communion of Saints.

Mat. 6.9. but also in the use of the same words, Luke 11.2. whereunto also we
are admonished, Romans 15.6. that ye may with one mind, and with one mouth
glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Religion have bred such a contrariety of affections as has dissolved all the
bonds of Christian Charity.



are not to please God but to please men, to tickle the itching Ears of men of
corrupt minds: and it is the scratching of these Ears that has brought such a
scab upon the Church, as has fester'd, and eaten into her bowels, and
endangered the very life and being thereof.



Being is Unity, is the Author and great lover of Unity, especially in the
Worship of his divine Majesty: and the Devil is the author and great promoter
of all Division: it is his very Being as he is a Devil, for he became so, by
dividing from the Church of God, viz. from the Church which is now Triumphant
in Heaven: and therefore his Instruments they are, who either in Doctrine or
Worship, divide from the true Church of Christ here Militant upon Earth.

The CXXXIV. Psalm PARAPHRASED.
BEhold how good and joyful a thing it is, both profitable and pleasant, for
brethren, Sons of one God the Father, and of one Church the Mother, to dwell
together in Unity, in the house of God to join as members of the same mystical
body, in the profession of the same Doctrine, and Practice of the same Worship.

It Is like the ointment, which being composed of many rich perfumes, sent forth
a most sweet odor: fitly representing that sweetness of joy and complacerce,
which flows from the Union of many hearts and voices in the service of God:

Upon the head, which went down to the beard, even Aarons beard: Aaron was a
type of Christ, and the ointment upon his head, typified the spiritual Unction
of Christ our head, Psalm. 45.7. Heb. 1.9. which Unction of the Spirit from him
descended upon his Disciples, mystically signified by the High Priests beard:
and from thence went down to the skirts of his clothing, even to all the other
parts and members of his mystical body: for of his fullness we have all received
Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16.

As the dew of Hermon which fell on the hill of Sion: as both these hills
become fruitful by the dew of heaven descending on them: so the sons of Sion,
or people of God, become fruitful in the gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit,
through their Unity and Unanimity in the devout service of God: for whilst they
glorify God with one heart, and with one mouth, after one way, and one manner,
they mightily prevail with the one only God, to dwell amongst them according to
his promise, 2 Cor. 6.16. and so it follows.

For there the Lord promised his blessing, in all assemblies thus united in the
service of his Majesty, Mat. 18.19, 20. which is undoubtedly the way to life
for evermore, which is the height and perfection of all the blessings of God:
in the Quire of Heaven, to sing with concordant hearts and voices,

Glory to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
O God who art the author of Peace, and lover of Concord, who make men to be
of one mind in a house, and art best pleased with the unanimous agreement of
thy people in thy House of Prayer: that it may please thee to rebuke that foul
spirit of discord and division intermixed amongst us, which dictates the
building of Babel by the confusion of Languages in our addresses to the Throne
of Grace: And vouchsafe to send the Holy Ghost the Spirit of love and unity, to
unite our hearts and tongues in the public Service of thy Sacred Majesty: make
us all as brethren to dwell together in Unity, to join in our Prayers in one
way, and after one manner, to glorify thee with one heart, and with one mouth,
that the celestial dew of thy blessing may descend upon us so plentifully, to
bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, that we may reap in time of harvest life
for evermore through Jesus Christ.

MEDITATIONS, WITH PSALMS Illustrated or Paraphrased, Upon the Four last
Things: I. Death, II. Judgment, III. Hell, IV. Heaven.

By the Author of the PRACTICAL CHRISTIAN.

O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.29. LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, Bookseller
to His most Sacred Majesty. 1675.

OF The Four last Things in GENERAL.
THe clean Beast which was only commanded to be offered in Sacrifice unto God
under the Law, was such as chewed the Good, Lev. 11.3.
and divided the Hoof, mystically representing the qualifications of the clean
and pure Christian, who is himself that spiritual Sacrifice God requires under
the Gospel. To. 12.1. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5.


By chewing the Cud, holy and divine Meditation is intimated: by dividing the
Hoof, may be mystically meant the last end of man; which is a dividing asunder
the Soul from the Body by Death, and a separation of the holy from the wicked
by Judgment, which shall assign to either their everlasting habitations either
in Heaven or in Hell.

Of the Four last things S. Bernard says, that First, Death is of all thidgs
to flesh and blood most formidable.

Secondly, Judgment, than the which there is nothing more terrible and dreadful.

Thirdly, Hell, the Torments whereof are insupportable.

Fourthly, Heaven, the Joys whereof are beyond apprehension most Blissful and
Ravishing.

And these subjects of holy Meditation would prove the most prevalent to turn
all persons professing Christianity, from all the errors of their ways, whether
in opinion or conversation, would they but seriously consider the punishments
that attend the erroneous and sinful, and the blessings wherewith all the
Orthodox and Holy shall be Crowned everlastingly.

The wicked shall be turned into hell, Ps. 9.17.
and all the people that forget God.

But the Souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, Wisd. 3.1.
and there shall no torment touch them.

They that have done good, Ath. cr. Mat. 25. ult.
shall go into everlasting life: and they that have done evil into everlasting
fire.

This Faith is professed by many, but by few believed with the heart: for he
that cordially believes these principles of his Religion, will stand in awe,
and sin not; he will not dare in defiance of this Faith, knowingly and
willingly to transgress the Laws of the great Majesty of Heaven: and it is such
a Faith attended by Fear, and this Fear by Care and Caution, that must preserve
the Soul from the Torments, and entitle the same to the Joys of the other
world.

O that they were wise, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end.

It is the greatest and most comprehensive of all the parts of true wisdom, so
to consider as rightly to prepare for our latter end: for to end well is the
sum of all our hopes, and of all the happiness we can hope for.

MEDITAT. I.
HAve mercy upon me, Ps. 9.13,
O God, and consider the trouble I suffer of them that hate me, my spirit is
troubled for the daily incursions of my ghostly enemies: Thou that liftest me
up from the gates of death: Such is this frail mortal life, all the ways
whereof are vanity and iniquity, even gates leading to death eternal. From the
which I humbly beg to be raised up, and exalted by thy right hand.

That I may show all thy praises within the ports of the daughter of Sion: 14.
glorify thee with thy Church Triumphant in Heaven: I will rejoice in thy
Salvation: to be thus lifted up and saved, is a joy unspeakable and glorious.

Remember me, Ps. 106.4,
O Lord, according to the favor thou bear unto thy people, and visit me
with thy Salvation.

That I may see the felicity of thy chosen, 5.
and rejoice in the gladness of thy people: and give thanks with thine
inheritance.

MEDITAT. II. Of the Shortness and Frailty of this present Life.
MAn that is born of a woman is of few days, Job 14.1,
and full of trouble.

He comes forth like a Flower, 2.
and is cut down: he flees as a shadow, and continues not -- In the midst of
life we be in death, whilst every day we live is one day nearer to the end of
life.

For what is your life? Jam. 4.14.
it is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

For all flesh is grass, 1 Pet. 1.24
and all the glory of man, as the flowers of grass: the grass withers, and
the flower fades --

Not to consider this shortness and frailty of humane life, is to make my life
yet more short and frail.

Lord, make me to know mine end, and the number of my days, that I may be
certified how long I have to live: that the length of my days is of the
shortest measure: for behold thou have made my days as a span -- Verily every
man living is altogether vanity: The most high and mighty, the most honorable
and wealthy are not exempt from this character: for Honors, Riches, Friends,
all the Delights of the Sons of men, with all the Pomp and Pleasure, and power
of the world, depending upon the Shortness and frailty of humane life, renders
every man in all that he is, in all that he has, and in all that he hopes for,
in this world, a vanity of vanities, an universal vanity.

St. Augustines Meditations on this Subject.
THe time of my pilgrimage here upon earth is tedious, wearisome -- for this is
a miserable life, a frail life, an uncertain life, a bitter life, a laborious
life, a sinful life: it is the mistress of error and sinfulness, and the
handmaid to death and hell --

This life is rather to be called death than life, as being through the whole
course thereof, a passing from Life to Death: for whilst we pass from Infancy
to Childhood, from thence to Manhood, and so to Old age, every such change in
Life is but a passage to Death.

There is no condition in this life certain and settled; now we are glad and
anon sad; now we are well, and anonsick; now we are at ease, and anon in pain;
now we laugh, and anon weep; now in hunger and thirst, anon in fullness and
excess: in honor and dishonor, in wealth and poverty, in heats and colds, in
evil report and good report, in fear and terror, and much amazement: and all
this and much more than can be expressed, is too often attended by a sudden,
unexpected death; and which is yet more miserable, though there be nothing more
certain than death, yet vain foolish man knows not, considers not his end:

So the Preacher: Eccl. 9.12.
For man also knows not his time, as the fishes that are taken in an evil
not, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men
snared in an evil time when it falls suddenly upon them.

O senseless mortals, especially being called Christians, and yet to be of so
little Faith, as to dote upon a life so frail, short and uncertain, so
changeable and calamitous, in defiance of what we daily profess to believe,
Life Everlasting.

Blessed are they, and they are but a few, who in hopes and desires to enjoy
the unchangeable blessings of the life to come, do slight and despise the
fallacious, flattering enjoyments of this world, lest being deceived by the
charms and fawnings thereof, the Deceiver and the deceived perish together.

It Is a general complaint, that the world is deceitful, and unsatisfying in all
her most alluring enjoyments; and yet so mightily the flesh prevails against
the spirit, that most men love, (and I am a great fool among the rest) yea
dotingly love to be thus deceived: too passionately desiring to enjoy still
this mortal life how frail soever, and attended with a numerous train of
miseries.

But forget not, O remember and forget not, that thou art Immortal (O my Soul)
and that death is but the change of a troublesome for a quiet life, of a frail
for a fixed and permanent being; of an uncertain for a certain abode, and of a
temporary for life everlasting. It Is but the falling in pieces of an earthly
Tabernacle, and when it is dissolved, 2 Cor. 5.1.
thou have a building of God, a house not made with hands eternal in the
Heavens.

The Prayer.
O Almighty God, who alone can order the unruly wills and affections of
sinful men, grant unto thy people (and to me with them) to love the thing which
thou command, and desire that which thou do promise; that so among the
sundry and manifold changes of the world, our hearts may surely there be fixed,
where true joys are to be found through Jesus Christ.

MEDITAT. III. Of the frequent Remembrance of Death.
1. CLimacus records a story of a Brother that had lived negligently for many
years, Clim. scal. grad. 6.
and was at last surprised with such a desperate disease, that he continued for
a long space of time deprived of his senses, and supposed to be dead: but
recovering again he immediately secluded himself from all society and continued
for twelve years together, which was the remainder of his life, lamenting the
sins and negligences of his bypast life, and seriously pondering the sad
condition of all such persons as dye in their sins unrepented. And when the
time of his death indeed approached, many of his fraternity flockt to him,
desiring to hear some more than ordinary instructions and directions from him
for the good of their Souls: but all that he would say unto them was this, as
the sum of Christian wisdom, If you desire so to live that ye may dye happily,
then meditate continually upon death: for it is scarce possible for that man to
sin, who with due regard remembers Death the wages of sin.

This is also the advice of the wise Syracides, Remember thy end, Ecclus. 28.6.
and let enmity cease: Remember corruption and death, and abide in the
Commandments. 1 Cor. 15.31.
And 'twas surely thus S. Paul dyed daily.

2. To dye the death of the righteous, is the desire even of the wicked: but
his last end shall be very unlike the others: for he that will dye the death,
must live the life of the righteous.

The only way to dye well, Numb. 23.10.
is to live well, and he that will live well, must live by dying principles,
saying with holy David, Psalm. 119.109.
My Soul is continually in my hand, and for ought I know it may expire at my
next breathing: since many thousands in this very moment, do breath their last.

And it is only this moment I can call mine; what is past cannot return to be
again enjoyed, and what is to come is not in mine but in the Lord's hand: Ps.
31.17. Act. 17.28.
My Time is in thy hand. In him we live, and move and have our Being,

Ask thy self then in every thing thou do, Would I now do this, were I ready
to dye? It Is the Wise man's advice, Ecclus. 7. ult.
Whatsoever thou take in hand, Remember the end and thou shall never do
amiss. From the forgetfulness of my end, and of the uncertainty of my Life,
from every evil work, and from a sudden and an unprovided death, good Lord
deliver me.

3. The Lord clothed our First Parents with the skins of beasts, to put them in
mind of that mortality and corruption of the flesh they had contracted by their
disobedience to his Commandments: The which as we their sinful offspring do
daily bear about us, so ought we also to have the same in a continual
remembrance, for the keeping under the unruly lusts of the flesh, that we pass
not from a spiritual to death eternal.

And thus, O that I may thus daily remember the imminent, the unavoidable death
of my corruptible body, so as to keep my Soul unspotted of the world, and alive
from the death of sin: continually mortifying all my evil and corrupt
affections: and daily proceeding in all virtue, and godliness of living.

4. With the holy Apostle of our Lord, to dye daily, is not only daily to
remember death, but also so to dye unto sin, and live unto righteousness, as
thereby to live up to the hopes of eternal life and happiness, slighting all
the false and flattering felicities of this fawning world, as being not only
empty and unsatisfying, but also mortal and dying.

A holy confidence to dye well, De imit. Christi. lib. 1. ca. 23.
and in hopes to enjoy eternal life after death, is begotten in the heart
(says the spiritual Akempis) 1. By a perfect contempt of the world. 2. By a
through self-denial, 3. By a fervent desire and endeavor of proficiency in
Grace, 4. By the love of Discipline, or strict corporal austerities, 5. By the
unwearied labor, of true Repentance, 6. By a willing and ready obedience to
all Gods Commands, 7. By suffering contentedly and joyfully all adversities for
the love of Christ. And thus prepare for thy Change to come, looking not (as
becomes an Immortal Soul) at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which
are not seen are eternal.

The Prayer.
O God the Protector of all that trust in thee, without whom nothing is strong,
nothing is holy: Increase and multiply upon us thy mercy; that thou being our
Ruler and Guide, we may so pass through things temporal, that we finally lose
not the things eternal. Grant this, O heavenly Father, for thy Son Jesus Christ.

MEDITAT. IV. Of the Horror of Death.
1. SAint Augustine being with his Mother Monica invited to Rome by Pontianus
the Prefect, to view the stately Edifices, and ancient Monuments of that
eminent City, amongst other rarities he saw the great Caesar's Sepulcher, and
therein his Carcass of a livid, ghastly color; his Face fallen away to such a
meagre leanness, as scarce of skin and bone consisting; his Lips being rotted,
his Teeth were seen black and corrupted; his Nose so consumed, that only the
wide hollows of his nostrils appeared; his Belly burst, and swarming with Worms
and Serpents; his Eyes sunk into his head, and in the two holes thereof two
loathsome Toads were feeding -- Then turning toward his Mother he said: What
now dear Mother is become of the great Caesar, whose Pomp, Power and Policy,
whose Riches, Honor and Dignity, whose many Victories, Conquests and Triumphs,
rendered him the most admired Hero the world afforded? Where now is all his
glory, where the conquering Armies he commanded? The Nations, Countries, Cities
he subdued? The numerous train of Nobility, Gentry, Soldiery that attended
him? The vast Riches and boundless Authority he acquired? -- Whereunto the
pious Matron answered: O my Son! no sooner did his spirit fail, and his breath
expire, but all his splendid enjoyments, all his flattering worldly felicities
forsook him: his Riches, his Friends, his Attendants, all his Conquests and
Triumphs, all the Honor which through so many perils he acquired, have all now
left him alone in this ghastly silent Sepulcher, accompanied only with Worms,
Stench and Corruption -- Such is the end of all flesh: -- It Is as true of the
greatest Prince, as of the meanest Peasant; When a man is dead, Ecclus. 10.11.
he shall inherit creeping things, beasts and worms: All the difference in the
grave, betwixt the dust of the rich and of the poor, of the honorable and the
base, is this: that the dust of the rich through the luxury, lasciviousness and
intemperance of their life, is more corrupt and loathsome after their death,
than is the dust of the poor, whose food and nourishment was more course and
sparing.

Why then (my Immortal Soul) art thou so fond of thy corruptible companion, the
Body? Remember its beginning is uncleanness, and its end rottenness? It Is thy
servant for the present, but if thou too much cocker and pamper it, 'twill
rebel, subdue, and lead thee captive to a worse death than that whereunto its
self is liable, even the death of the nether Hell, Mar. 9.44
where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

2. Death is the wages of Sin: And I have sinned, vile wretch that I am, I have
sinned, and what shall I do, or what shall I say unto thee, O thou preserver of
man? Job 7.20.
All that I can say is the same still; I have sinned, and as long as I have a
day I will say it: I will confess my wickedness and be sorry for my sins.

Mercy, 21.
good Lord, mercy I humbly beg: O why do thou not pardon my transgression,
and take away mine iniquity?

Are not my days few? Job 10.20,
cease then and let me alone that I may bewail my sins, and take comfort a
little in the hopes of the pardon of them, through Faith in the blood of my
Redeemer, before I go from whence I shall not return, 21.
to the land of darkness, and the shadow of death.

3. Job 18.14. 1 Cor. 15.55 56, 57. Heb 2.14.
I know that to flesh and blood death is of all terribles the most terrible;
but my blessed Redeemer by his bitter death has pulled out the sting, and
quelled the terrors of death; and has also enchained him who has the power of
death, the devil: so that now when death approaches, through Faith and a good
Conscience I shall have hope, with all patience and contentment to drink off
that Cup how bitter and painful soever, saying with my blessed Lord and Master
upon his approaching death, Mat. 26.42.
Father, not my will, but thine be done.

The Prayer.
ASsist me mercifully, O Lord, to subject my rebellious flesh to the guidance
of the Spirit, and my spirit to the laws of my Redeemer, that when my body
shall be the inheritance of worms and creeping things, my Soul-may possess an
inheritance uncorruptible and undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.4.
that fades not away, reserved in the heavens through Jesus Christ.

MEDITAT. V. Of the uncertainty of Death, and preparation for it.
1. AS there is nothing more certain than death, Ps. 89.47.
for what man is there that lives, and shall not see death? So there is
nothing more uncertain than the Time: Mat. 24.36.
for of that day and hour knows no man -- the uncertainty of Death engages
every wise man to a certainty in his preparation, and provision for it.

Remember that death will not be long in coming, Ecclus. 14.12,
and that the covenant of the grave is not showed unto thee.

Do good unto thy friend before thou dye: 13.
put it not off to thy last Will and Testament: but according to thy ability
stretch out thy hand and give unto the poor.

That the poor when charitably relieved are our best friends, and that thus we
are to prepare for death, is commanded by our Lord, Luke 16.9. Make to your
selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness in the pious and charitable
distribution of your worldly goods; Luke 16.9.
that when you fail, your bodies corrupt and moulder into dust, your Souls may
be received into everlasting habitations.

2. In this life our condition is changeable from better to worse, and from
worse to better: but in death all hopes of bettering our condition are buried
with the liveless corpse. 2 Cor. 6.2.
Now is the acceptable time, now is the day of Salvation, i. e. the day of this
life, wherein I am commanded to work out my Salvation with fear and trembling;
Phil. 2.12.
for the night (of death) comes wherein no man can work. Eccl. 9.10.
There is either work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave,
where thou go: It follows therefore, whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do
it with all thy might: be active, be vigorous, be zealous, Col. 1.10.
be fruitful in every good work.

It Is the Soul that is laden with the fruits of well-doing, 1 Pet. 4. ult. Rev.
14.13 Luke 16.9.
which in deaths approach may cheerfully commit her self unto the will of God
as to a faithful Creator? It Is these good works that follow the Souls of the
righteous to the Tribunal of Heaven, to plead for their admission into
celestial habitations: And these are,

1. Devout Prayers: Mat. 6.1.5.16.
which do indeed, and more immediately commend our Souls unto God, and render
them amiable in his sight, especially when accompanied

2. With Religious Fastings often, To. 12.1.
whereby we present our bodies also unto him, and withal do

3. Heb. 13.15, 16.
By charitable Alms-deeds dispense our Goods, to our wanting brethren: for with
such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

Lord, I pray thee that thy Grace may always prevent and follow me, and make me
continually to be given unto all good works: which are the never failing fruits
of a true Christian Faith: and by these inseparably conjoined to make my
Calling and Election sure, sealed in the blood of my dear Redeemer.

3. There are three general messengers of Death: 1. Chance, 2. Sickness, 3. Old
age: Chance renders the life of man doubtful and uncertain; Sickness makes it
grievous, and troublesome; Old age makes life tedious and death inevitable.

Some persons are stifled in their mothers womb, and dye before they see the
light of life: some dye in their Infancy, some in their youth, some in their
man's estate: And some there be, but these are of all others the fewest in
number, that dye in their old age: and yet most of men do not only desire, but
fondly conceit they shall live to be old, and yet never think themselves old
enough to dye, which makes so many millions of men dye unpreparedly, and so
pass from a Temporal to death Eternal.

For the prevention of so great and general a mischief, and perdition of
ungodly men, the all-wise and good providence of Heaven has ordained, that in
all ages, estates and conditions of men this life shall take end; that so none,
how young and lusty soever, with his bone; full of marrow, might yet dare to
live unprepared for death: presuming still upon further time and space for
Repentance and amendment.

Lord, make me ever mindful of my latter end: that I may so live in thy fear,
as to dye in thy favor, and a well grounded hope to live with thee for ever.

It Is to little purpose to remember my death, except I remember also the sins
of my bypast life, both the sins of my youth, and of my riper age, mine
ignorances, my negligences, my manifold omissions of my duty toward God,
toward my neighbor, toward my self: and these to bewail with the tears of
godly sorrow, that my polluted Soul being washed, I may through Faith in the
blood of my Redeemer, cheerfully commend the same into his merciful hands and
say: Into thy hands I commend my Spirit; for thou have redeemed me, O Lord,
thou God of Truth.

Every change in my frail constitution, every little pain and ache in my
corruptible flesh, all distempers, diseases, -- are as so many memorials of my
mortality: but the older I grow, the nearer still is the approach of my
dissolution by the hand of death, Heb. 8. ult.
for that which decays and waxes old is ready to vanish away.

The Prayers.
LOok graciously upon me, O Lord, I beseech thee, in the time of my approaching
dissolution: and the more the outward man decays, strengthen me so much the
more continually by thy Grace and Holy Spirit in the inner man: give me
unfeigned repentance for all the errors of my life past, and a steadfast Faith
in thy Son Jesus, that my sins may be done away by thy mercy, and my pardon
sealed in Heaven, before I go hence and be no more seen.

II.
IN the midst of life we be in death: of whom may we seek for succor, but of
thee, O Lord, who for our sins art justy displeased?

Yet, O Lord God most holy, O Lord most mighty, O holy and most merciful
Savior, deliver us not into the bitter pains of eternal death.

Thou know Lord the secrets of our hearts: shut not up thy merciful ears to
our Prayers, but spare us, O Lord most holy, O God most mighty, O holy and most
merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not at our last
hour for any pains of death to fall from thee.

III.
IN my last hour, O Lord, I humbly beg thy protection from the busy
suggestions and direful insultings of my grand enemies, the Devil and his
Angels: Oh let not then my Faith fail, or my Hope wither, or my Charity wax
cold with the waining flesh: But when all my joints shall tremble by the
batteries of death, mine eyes be darkened, and my tongue falter, then, O then
let my heart be enlarged toward my God, waiting upon thee, longing for thee,
and incessantly praying, show me thy mercy, O Lord, and grant me thy Salvation.

The XXXIX. Psalm.
Verses,

1. I Said, I will take heed to my ways: that I offend not in my tongue.

The meditation of death makes every wise man careful of all his ways, and
more especially to avoid the offenses of the tongue.

2. I will keep my mouth as 'twere with a bridle: while the ungodly is in my
sight.

The tongue is an unruly evil, and must be tamed as a wild horse with a bridle,
when provoked by captious, contentious and quarrelsome persons.

3. I held my tongue, and spoke nothing, I kept silence, yea even from good
words: but it was pain and grief unto me.

Reproaches are best answered with a discreet silence, so was our Lord, as a
Lamb, dumb before the Shearers --

4. My heart was hot within, and while I was thus musing, the fire kindled: To
abstain from good words is sometimes necessary for the avoiding of an evil
construction: but such silence is grievous to the pious Soul, which burns with
the fire of divine love, and zeal to God's glory. The zeal of thine house bath
even eaten me.
and at the last I spoke with my tongue.

Though it be often inconvenient to speak before wicked men, yet it is always
necessary to speak unto God by Prayer.

5. Lord, let me know mine end, and the number of my days: that I may be
certified how long I have to live.

It Is a blessing we ought always to pray for, to be feelingly sensible of the
shortness of our life.

6. Behold thou have made my days as 'twere a span long; and mine age is
nothing in respect of thee: and verily every man living is altogether vanity.

The life of man if compared with God's everlasting being, is rather to be
called a death than a life, a vanity, not a verity of being.

7. For man walks in a vain shadow, he disquieteth himself in vain: he
heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.

The hearts of men are darkened with the shadows of happiness, whilst they
vainly care for worldly wealth, which is as transitory and uncertain as the
life it self.

8. And now, Lord, what is my hope? truly my hope is even in thee.

It Is not in riches, nor in all the world affords, but in God alone that all
hope of true happiness is attainable.

9. Deliver me from all mine offenses: and make me not a rebuke to the foolish.

Our sins deprive us of all true weh-grounded hopes in God: and make us liable
to the scorn even of foolish men.

10. I became dumb, and opened not my mouth: for it was thy doing?

We must with a patient silence suffer the reproaches of others, because
occasioned by our offenses, and because sent from God for our amendment.

11. Take thy plague away from me: I am even consumed by the means of thy heavy
hand.

And confess withal, that we deserve to be consumed by the just judgments of
God.

12. When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to
consume away, as 'twere a moth fretting a garment: every man therefore is but
vanity.

Whose lightest chastisements do easily deface the beauty, and decay the
strength of this corruptible body.

13. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and with thine ears consider my calling: hold not
thy peace at my tears.

Therefore the devout Soul is poured forth in Prayers, with tears of godly
sorrow for her offenses, from whence all the miseries of this life do flow.

14. For I am a stranger with thee: and a sojourner as all my fathers were.

The earth is a strange land to the Immortal Soul, whose native home is heaven,
where she was framed by the hands of the Almighty after his own Image.

15. O spare me a little that I may recover my strength: before I go hence and
be no more seen.

Which Image being defaced by her sins, she humbly begs with tears, time and
space, by Repentance, Faith and new obedience, to recover her native strength
and beauty, before she leave her tabernacle of flesh.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
SInce my days are but as a span, short and uncertain, I humbly beseech thee,
O Lord, to wean my heart from the disquietude of worldly cares: and that I may
be fruitful in all the good works of obedience and charity, to repair the
breaches of thy blessed image which mine offenses have made, before my
departure hence: that so recovering the spiritual health and strength of my
Soul, I may dye in thy Grace and favor through Jesus Christ.

The XC. Psalm.
Verses,

1. LOrd, thou have been our refuge from one generation to another.

Holy men have in all ages of the world applied themselves unto the Lord, for
succor, support and protection in all conditions.

2. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world
were made: thou art God from everlasting and world without end.

Who being eternal is also immutable in his mercy, goodness, power and
providence over all.

3. Thou turnest man to destruction: again thou say, Come again ye children
of men.

Dispensing both health and sickness, prosperity and adversity, life and death
to the sons of men, according to his all just, all merciful, all wise good
pleasure.

4. For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday: seeing that is past
as a watch in the night.

The longest course of man's life in respect of Gods eternal praevision, is but
as a day that is already past, or as one of the nightwatches, which is both
swift and short, and also dark and gloomy through frequent cross and adverse
occurrents.

5. As soon as thou scatterest them, they are even asleep: and fade away
suddenly as the grass.

As sleep is the image of death, so the life of man is but the image or shadow
of life, for as a shadow it flees the pursuer and fades as the grass.

6. In the morning it is green, and grows up: in the evening it is cut down,
dried up and withered.

Which the same day beholds both growing and cut down, flourishing and withered.

7. For we consume away in thy displeasure: and are afraid at thy wrathful
indignation.

This frailty of humane life is the punishment of sin, which incurs most justly
God's indignation and wrath.

8. Thou have set our mis-deeds before thee: and our secret sins in the light
of thy countenance.

Whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun, both seeing and
recording the most secret of our sinful ways.

9. For when thou art angry, all our days are gone: we bring our years to an
end, as it were a tale that is told.

It Is through Gods just anger for our sins, that our days are shortened, and
our years are spent in vanity and trouble.

10. The days of our age are threescore years and ten: and though men be so
strong that they come to fourscore years: yet is their strength then but labor
and sorrow: so soon passes it away and we are gone.

The miseries of man's life are not so great through the shortness thereof, as
that his sorrows, and troubles are increased with his days.

11. But who regards the power of thy wrath? for even thereafter as a man
fears, so is thy displeasure.

Gods displeasure for our sins is either more or less, according as we do less
or more stand in awe thereof.

12. So teach us to number our days: that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

True wisdom is attained by the serious contemplation of the frailty of life
and certainty of death.

13. Turn thee again, O Lord, at the last: and be gracious unto thy servants.

Intermixing with our meditations devout Prayers for the propitious grace and
favor of God.

14. O satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon: so shall we rejoice and be
glad all the days of our life.

Which alone can satisfy the desires of the immortal soul, and thoroughly
rejoice the same.

15. Comfort us again now after the time thou have plagued us: and for the
years wherein we have suffered adversity.

We may reasonably allege our sufferings though for our sins, as motives to
implore the consolations of Gods Spirit.

16. Show thy servants thy work: and their children thy glory.

Gods proper work is mercy, and it is his glory to be gracious, for the which
the righteous do pray both for themselves and their children.

17. And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper thou the
work of our hands upon us, prosper thou our handy work.

God's glorious Majesty appears by the gracious influences of his holy Spirit:
whereby we work the works of God to his glory, and our own eternal happiness.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayer.
ALmighty God, the fountain of all Wisdom, grant me so wisely to number and
compare the short and sorrowful days of this mortal life, with that joyful and
never ending day of a blessed eternity, that despising the vanities of the one,
I may zealously aspire to the happiness of the other. O satisfy the panting
desires of my Soul, with the sense of thy mercy in the pardon of my sins: and
let the glory of thy grace appear, in prospering me to perform all those good
works of Faith and Obedience, which conduce to my eternal Salvation through
Jesus Christ.

THE Second general Meditation Upon JUDGMENT, And first the PARTICULAR JUDGMENT.
IT is appointed unto man once to dye; and after that the Judgment: Heb. 9.27.
no sooner shall this house of flesh, wherein the immortal Soul does now
inhabit, be shattered in pieces by the hand of death, but in the same moment
the departing Soul shall be conveyed by the Angels of God before his
Judgment Seat: and this is called The particular Judgment, that shall pass upon
every person in particular immediately upon his death: Eccl. 12.7,
when the dust shall return to the earth as it was, then shall the Spirit
return unto God that gave it: 14.
To give an account of the works done in the body, whether they be good, or
whether they be evil.

That grand enemy of man, Ille enim tunc saeviens capit quos nunc blandiens
decipit. Greg.
the Devil, awaits thy Souls departure hence, to dog thee to the great Tribunal
of Heaven. In this life he fawns to seduce, but in the other he will roar to
devour, as a Lion over his prey: to this end he will vehemently accuse thee,
aggravating all thy miscarriages through his suggestions committed, and
claiming thee as one of the subjects of his kingdom of darkness: saying to the
great Judge of all, as several Fathers observe:

This person (thou Judge of the world,) Eusebius. Emiss. Hom. Aug. orat. cont.
Judaeos, Bag.
though he be thine by Creation, yet he is mine by Depravation: He is thine by
nature, but mine by sin, for he has obeyed my suggestions, and disobeyed thy
laws: and therefore though he belong to thee by right, yet he is fallen to me by
default: he is thine in respect of his workmanship, but mine by the rebellion
of his will, and disorder of his affections: having yielded himself to follow
my temptations, and to forsake the paths of thy Commandments. But it is not the
Devil alone that shall thus accuse thee when arraigned at the bar of divine
Judgment: but (as S. Chrysostom says) the heavens and the earth, and the sea,
the Sun and the Moon and the Stars, both nights and days, and all the creatures
thou have abused, shall bear witness against thee: but above all

Thine own Conscience shall be as a thousand witnesses; for being then freed
from this clog and damp of the corruptible flesh, all thy imaginations and
desires, all thy words and works spoken and done in the body, shall appear to
thy conscience in their native, genuine and proper colors, without any
ignorance or oblivion, misperswasion or misprision, which now blinds the minds
of many thousands to their eternal ruin on that day.

O who shall then be able to answer thee one of a thousand (thou most worthy
Judge eternal) if thou should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, Job 9.2.
Ps. 130.3.
and thy great mercy intervene not to mitigate the rigor of thy Justice?

But in thee have I put my trust: Ps. 38.15,
Thou shall answer for me, O Lord my God. I have no other Advocate to plead my
cause, but my righteous Judge himself from whom in my daily prayers I have
required that they, when I stand to be judged before the Tribunal of Heaven.

Who will set scourges over my thoughts, Eccl. 23.2, 3.
and the discipline of wisdom over my heart, that they spare me not for mine
ignorances, and pass not by my sins? Lest mine ignorances increase, and my sins
abound to my destruction: And I fall before mine adversaries (in the day of my
trial,) and mine enemies (the spirits and powers of darkness) rejoice over me,
whose hope is far from thy mercy. Meditat. II.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, Ps. 119.120.
and I am afraid of thy Judgments: when I consider the severity of many of thy
temporal judgments, which are now intended to drive sinners to Repentance, that
thou might spare them hereafter, I cannot but foresee the unconceivable
rigor of thy eternal judgments, which intend punishment only, without any
thought of future mercy, to spare and to forgive as in this life.

And I vile sinner have great cause to fear, as a strict examination which all
must undergo, so a severe sentence to pass upon me, having not so
conscientiously as I ought obeyed the sacred dictates of the saving grace of
God, teaching us, Tit. 2.11, 12,
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live foberly,
righteously and godly in this present world.

With what face then shall I look for the blessed hope,

I have a greater cause to fear, than to hope, to wave, than to await his
coming.

But how shall I avoid, or whither shall I flee from the face of my Judge?
whither but from an offended God, to a merciful Redeemer? from the Throne of
thy Justice, to thy Mercy-seat? To meet thee now with Repentance in my heart,
and the fruits thereof brought forth in the actions of my life, and with such
spiritual wings cemented with the blood of my Redeemer, I may hope to flee from
the wrath to come.

O God who art justly displeased for our sins, Mat. 3.7, 8.
and pacified by our true and sincere Repentance; spare, O spare all those who
confess their sins unto thee: that they whose consciences by sin are accused,
by thy merciful pardon may be absolved through Christ our Lord.

III.
Before Judgment examine thy self: Eccl. 18.20.
and in the day of visitation thou shall find mercy.

And I, upon the examination of my self do find my heart foul and polluted, and
my life stained with manifold offenses: but that I may escape the judgment of
God, I judge my self to be a miserable sinner, I judge my self to have incurred
the Lords just indignation, to have deserved the dismal sentence of
condemnation to pass upon me. For I have sinned, and I have done wickedly, and
I have committed iniquity, and have rebelied against the Lord by departing from
his most holy Laws and judgments.

Many will be my accusers when I come to my great Trial upon life or death
eternal: and many and great accusations have they to lay against me: the Devil
and his Angels, whose suggestions unto evil I have too often followed; many
men, and many women too who have been conscious of my sins, and of whose sins I
have been many ways guilty: All the good creatures of God I have abused, and
his mercies in them: all those evil deeds I have committed, and the many good
offices I have wittingly omitted, all which stand upon Gods record in Heavens
black book of remembrance: and mine own Conscience shall bear witness to all
these undeniable Evidences.

These are the Books that shall be opened against me: and I have not what to
answer for my self: But my trust is in the tender mercies of the Lord,
therefore I shall not fall, and be cast in my trial: Holy Jesus, who wast
condemned being innocent, acquit me though greatly nocent through Faith in thy
Blood.

Judge me, Ps. 35.24,
O Lord, according to thy righteousness, not after mine, for it is little, and
good for little: but it is thy righteousness, Holy Jesus, both active and
passive, I must plead for my acquittance when judged by thee: then, O then let
not mine enemies trimuph over me.

Let them not say in their hearts, But in the hour of death and in the day of
Judgment,

Good Lord deliver me.

MEDITATIONS upon the GENERAL JUDGMENT.
WHen the Son of man shall come in his Glory, Mat. 25.31.
and all his holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his
Glory.

And before him all nations shall be gathered -- 23.


This is called The day of the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2
by way of Eminence as being of all days the greatest.

1. In respect of the great appearance upon this day, even of all the men that
ever lived, or shall live upon the face of the earth; and of all the Angels
also, both good and bad, which are more numerous than men: for there are as
many of spiritual (says the Schoolman) as there be of corporeal Beings. T. Aq.
p. 1. q. 50. Art. 3.


2. A great day in respect of the multitudinous Trials, even of all the works
that ever have been done, from the Creation to the dissolution of all things
under the Sun: And not our works only, but

3. Of all our words, even of every idle word an account must be given: By thy
words thou shall be justified, Mat 12.36, 37.
and by thy words thou shall be condemned.

4. Not our words and works only, but even the inward thoughts, intentions, and
desires of our hearts shall be exposed to open view and censure: the Lord will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, 1 Cor. 4.5.
and will make manifest the counsels of all hearts.

The most seared Conscience of the wicked, and the most subtle secret
Conscience of the Hypocrite, shall by the all-piercing light of the divine
Majesty be displayed, and appear as manifest and open, as if all the counsels
thereof had been written with a beam of the Sun: Ps. 90.8.
For thou, O Lord, have set our misdeeds before thee, and our secret sins in
the light of thy countenance.

O who is so holy, who so pure, and innocent, as to stand with any confidence
in that all-discerning light of the Sun of Righteousness? Eccl. 23.19.
Whose eyes are a thousand times brighter than the Sun, beholding all the ways
of men, and considering their most secret parts.

I have been guilty (most merciful Father) I have been guilty of manifold
miscarriages, which I have now forgotten, nor can I through the strictest
examination of my self, recall to my memory many of mine offenses. But although
I cannot, yet thou remembrest my steps: Job 14.16 17.
do thou not watch over my sin? -- my transgression is sealed up in a bag,
and thou sowest up mine iniquities. So surely are all my transgressions kept in
store against the day of my Trial: whilst I sensual and secure think all is
well enough with me, that my sins are forgotten: Ps. 19.12.
O cleanse thou me from all my secret faults: and as they are hid from my
memory, Ps. 51.9.
so hide thou thy face from them; blot them out of thy Book of remembrance,
that they appear not to my confusion on that great and last day.

II.
Sad and dismal is the sentence that upon this great day shall pass upon all
such whose Faith has not according to ability and opportunity been fruitful in
the good works of Charity: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire --
For I was an hungered and ye gave me no meat -- Mat. 25.41, 42.


And if these shall be eternally damned, who have not given of their own goods
for the relief of others: what shall become of the Oppressor, the Extortioner,
the Cheater, the Thief, and of every one who either by force, or fraud,
publicly or secretly has either taken, or detained what of right belongs unto
others? surely if the one shall go, the other shall be driven, hurried with a
vengeance into everlasting fire. Ver. ult.


Great, unconceivably great shall be the perplexity and anguish of the
impenitent sinner in this great day: beholding (as Anselm meditates) on the one
side his sins accusing him, and on the other the strict, and impartial justice
of heaven, ready to pass sentence upon him: seeing below him the mouth of hell
gaping to devour him; and above him an angry Judge condemning him to that place
of horror: feeling within an accusing Conscience tormenting him, and without
the whole world in consuming flames: And if the righteous shall scarcely be
saved, 1 Pet. 4.18
where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? or where shall he hide himself that
he may not appear? For any wicked one to ly hidden on that day is impossible,
and to appear is dreadful and intolerable.

This is that dismal day foretold by our Lord himself wherein they shall say,
Blessed are the barren, Luc. 23.29,
and the womb that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck.

Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, fall on us, and to the hills,
30.
cover us.

And hide us from the face of him that sits upon the throne, Rev. 6.16,
and from the wrath of the Lamb.

For the great day of his wrath is come: and who shall be able to stand? 17.


Woe is me that I have sinned: woe, woe is me, that I have offended this great and
terrible Judge of all the world: but as is his Majesty, so is his mercy great
and wonderful.

Have mercy upon me, O God, on that great day, have mercy upon me: and deliver
me now in this world from the society, from the temptations, from the guilt of
the wicked; Let me not be occupied in any ungodly works with the men that work
wickedness, Ps. 141.4.
that I be not reckoned and ranked amongst them in the world to come.

III.
The day of Judgment is not only of all days the most dreadful, but the most
joyful also.

To the impenitent and wicked of the world, it is a day of the greatest terror,
but to the holy and humble of heart and life a day of jubilee and greatest joy.

How great then shall be the glory of the holy Christian; and how great the
shame of infidelity and Atheism! how great the joy of the true Believer, whose
Faith has been fruitful in all good works; and how great the sorrow of the
Heretic, Hypocrite, the profane and dissolute! for then, and not fully till
then shall God render to every man according to his works. Romans 2.6,


To them who by patient continuing in well doing, 7,
do seek for glory, and honor, and immortality: eternal life.

But to them who are contentious, 8,
and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness: indignation and wrath.

Tribulation, 9,
and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil: of the Jew first, and also
of the Gentile.

But glory, honor and peace, 10,
to every man that works good.

For there is no respect of persons with God. 11.


What heart can worthily think of these things, without trembling and great
astonishment if not purified, and sincerely devoted to the service of God?

Teach me, O Lord, thy way, Ps. 86.11.
and I will walk in thy truth: O knit my heart unto thee that I may fear thy
name: fear to offend thee the great and righteous Judge of the world, in the
least particular of thought or desire, of word or of deed.

O Lord, who never failest to help and govern them whom thou do bring up in
thy steadfast fear and love: keep us, we beseech thee, under the protection of
thy good providence, and make us to have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy
name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

IV.
When the Son of man comes, Luc. 18.8.
shall he find faith upon the earth? All we who are called Christians, profess
to believe both the certain coming of Christ to Judgment, and the uncertainty
of the time: That we must all stand before his dreadful Tribunal and receive
every man according to his works: but this is generally a dead Faith, it
quickens not the affections, it excites not to such holy conscientious actions,
as the firm and cordial Belief of all this does imply and command: and so will
prove as dangerous to the Souls of such Believers as if they had no faith at
all.

Thou art summoned, whosoever thouart that read these Meditations, thou art
hereby summoned particularly as by name to make thy appearance at this general
Assizes to be held at the great and last day; and there to give an account of
every passage through thy whole life: which shall be as strictly and thoroughly
sifted and examined, as if there were none but thy self to be tried, as if no
cause but thine alone were to be heard.

Prepare then, prepare thy self now; now that thou have time and leisure
prepare thy self for that great day: for upon thy Trial then depends either thy
everlasting well-being, or miserable undoing for ever. Now then cast up thy
accounts carefully; examine, try, 1 Cor. 11.31. Jam, 4.8, 9, 10. Act. 10.4.
Luc. 2.37. 2 Cor. 11.27. Eccl. 7.17.
and judge thy self; confess thy manifold amisses: Humble thy self greatly
under the mighty hand of God: Appease the wrath of the great Judge of the world
by Prayers and Tears, and all the sacred offices and acts of true Repentance,
by Alms and Offerings and Fastings often: and in a word, by all the kinds of
those spiritual sacrifices that are acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ. 1
Pet. 2.5.


Stir up, we beseech thee, O Lord, the wills of thy faithful people: quicken
our dead, and cold Faith with the sacred fire of holy Charity, the very bond of
perfection and all virtue, that we plenteously bringing forth the fruits of
good works, may of thee be plenteously rewarded at the last day through Jesus
--

V.
And there was a cry at midnight, Mat. 25.6.
Behold the bridegroom comes: Woe unto me then (faith a devout Father) if I be
found sleeping in my bed at midnight, Ambr. in Luc.
when the great Judge of all the world shall appear: it concerns me much rather
to resolve with holy David: At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee,
Ps. 119.62
because of thy righteous Judgments.

Happy are those servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find upon their
watch; Mar. 13.33, 34.
awaiting his coming with their loins girt, their lusts restrained, and their
Lamps burning: The light of the holy and true Faith flaming by divine Love, and
shining through all the actions of their Life: that others seeing their good
works may glorify God the Father of Heaven. Mat. 5.16.


I will stand upon my watch to guard the innocence of my Soul: I will watch and
also pray, Mat. 26.41.
that I fall not in o the snare of the Devil when tempted by him: and that day
come upon me unawares.

There be two sorts of sins especially, against which my blessed Redeemer has
commanded me to watch, that the day of the Lord surprise me not: First,
Surfeiting and drunkenness, or the pleasures of the flesh: Luc. 21.34
Secondly, The cares of the world, or Ambition and Covetousness: against these
grand enemies, which continually war against my Soul, it concerns me
continually also to watch and pray.

Blessed Lord, let not, I humbly beseech thee, any importunate cravings of this
corruptible flesh seduce me, nor the flattering false felicities of worldly
wealth and dignity deceive me; but grant that I being free from all pollutions
both from the one, and the other, may await thy coming in all holy but humble
confidence, to be ranked not amongst the cursed goats on thy left hand, but
amongst thy blessed Sheep on the right hand, and hear that joyful sentence
saying, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning of the world: Grant this O heavenly Father -- Our Father which
art in, etc.

The XXVI. Psalm, PARAPHRASED.
BE thou my judge, O Lord: not to condemn me for my sins, but to approve my
services, though imperfect and weak: for I have walked innocently: not
according to the Innocence of thy Saints in Heaven, but according to that of
frail Man upon Earth. Neither do I herein presume to justify my self, but my
trust has been also in the Lord: it is not my innocence, but the Lord's mercy I
rely upon, and therefore shall I not fall in the day of Judgment.

Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; now is the time assisted by thy all piercing
Spirit, to examine my self, in order to my grand examination that day: Try out
my reins and my heart; as the silver is tried when the dross is purged out, and
this even in the furnace of affliction if it so seems good unto thee: that my
reins and my heart may be cleansed from all filthiness both of flesh and
spirit; and yet even so I dare not undergo thy strict and severe examination of
me, but with reflections upon thine immense goodness.

For thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes: It Is my constant meditation,
my hope and my refuge: and I will walk in thy truth: inwardly delighting and
outwardly performing the commands thereof: and that I may do this,

I have not dwelt with vain persons, made my abode with such as follow the
pomps and vanities of this wicked world: neither will I have fellowship with
the deceitful: I have not so delighted in the society, as to be tainted by the
evil examples of such as through their deceivable lusts keep not the Covenant
they have made with their God: nor is it enough to avoid the society, but

I have hated the congregation of the wicked: not their persons, but their
wickedness and all their consultations to do evil: and will not sit among the
ungodly, so as to continue and be delighted with the errors of their ways.

I will wash my hands in innocence, O Lord: with the tears of true Repentance I
will wash the sinful works of my hands, and keep them clean and innocent for
the future: and so, not in my sins unrepented, will I go to thine Altar to
offer up my Vows and Prayers also.

That I may show the voice of thanksgiving: publicly declare the great Thanks
and Praise which is due to thy divine Majesty: and tell of all thy wondrous
works: joining with the Ministers of thy Temple in Psalms and Hymns and
Spiritual songs, wherein thy great works both of Mercy and Judgment are
celebrated.

Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, the place where thou
inhabitest more especially than any other houses: and it is my delight to come
to this house, because it is the place where thine honor dwells: where the
honor of thy Name is continually celebrated: for in his Temple does every man
speak of his Honor.

O shut not up my soul with the sinners: though in this world I cannot
altogether escape their temptation and trouble, yet rank me not amongst them in
the world to come: nor my life with the blood thirsty: let me not perish with
the cruel, uncharitable and covetous of the world.

In whose hands is wickedness: the works of whose hands are unjust, and
destructive: and their right hand is full of gifts: even their righteous
actions are for bribes, and sinister ends transacted: and such are all they who
make a gain of godliness.

But as for me, though others pursue their worldly interests through injustice
and bribery: yet I will walk innocently: that is the desire and resolution of my
Soul: O deliver me, through the precious blood of my Redeemer, which was shed
for my deliverance; defend me from all my ghostly enemies that would destroy
mine innocence: and be merciful unto me: let thy mercy both pardon my bypast
transgressions, and support me through all the perils of this mortal life.

My foot stands right fixed in my affections to cleave unto thee, and I will
praise the Lord in the congregations: in the assemblies of the Lord's people,
in the house where his Honor dwells: and so shall I hope to be hereafter
admitted into the blissful company of Angels and Saints to Praise the Lord for
ever: saying, Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


The XLIII. Psalm, PARAPHRASED.
GIve sentence with me, O God: when I stand before thee to be judged according
to my works done in the body whether good or evil, O then defend my cause
against the ungodly people: Plead for me against all the accusations of men,
women, devils, in whose company, or by whose temptations I have done any evil:
O deliver me from the deceitful and wicked man, that I be not ranked amongst
such upon the left hand of unrighteousness and infelicity.

For thou art the God of my strength: By whom I am enabled to resist all my
ghostly enemies: why have thou put me from thee, leaving me to mine own weak,
frail and sinful self? And this is the reason, why go I so heavily, in the ways
of thy service and of mine own salvation: whilst the enemy oppresses me: being
destitute of thy help, the grand enemy of God and man overpowers me with his
temptations and assaults: But that I may manfully resist and overcome

O send out thy light, and thy truth, the light of thy Grace, and the truth of
thy righteousness, which discerns the cause of the righteous from the ungodly,
that they may lead me out of all the errors of this sinful life; that being
separated from the allurements and society of the ungodly, they may bring me to
thy holy hill, where thy Temple is situate, and to thy dwelling, the place
where thine honor dwells.

And that I may go to the Altar of God both Sacramental, and Mystical: upon the
Altar of my heart to offer up my whole self, to be a living Sacrifice, Holy,
acceptable unto God, even the God of my joy and gladness, who makes glad my
heart by the consolations of his Holy Spirit, when I approach his Altar: and
upon the Harp, which is an instrument of a Triangular figure, and represents
the heart of man: wherewithal I will give thanks unto thee, O holy and ever
blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one God over all blessed for
ever, and my God, even the God of my joy and worship, my glory and my Crown; O
then

Why art thou so heavy, O my Soul? There is no sorrow but for sin, because this
alone separateth the Soul from the God of all consolation: and why art thou so
disquieted within me? It Is thy unquiet passions, and unruly lusts, which
disturb thy reason, and withdraw thee thus disquieted from a sincere dependence
upon thy God: but return, return unto thy rest, O my Soul:

O put thy trust in God: all thy sorrows and distempers are from thy self, thy
health and joy is from the Lord: and for this I will yet give him thanks: who
is to be praised in both the seasons of sadness and joy: for in both

He is the help of my countenance, the lightsome gladness of my heart, and my
God, both of my Being and Well-being, even the God of all that I am, and all
that I have, and all that I hope to be; which is to enjoy the beatifical vision
of his divine Majesty: for ever to sing Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


THE Third general Meditation Upon the PAINS of HELL.
MAny are the opinions, and disputes, and too curious also the disquisitions,
touching the place, and nature, matter, manner, and duration of the pains of
Hell: But it would be more Christian prudence strictly to search and find out
those crooked, deceitful and polluted paths which lead to that dismal place of
torments, that we may decline and avoid them.

It Is surely better by much not to feel by woeful experience the miseries of the
damned, than exactly to know, and accurately to discourse of them. And may this
be ever my study, blessed Lord, my continual care, and fear, and constant
endeavor not in the least particular to sin against thee: for thy wrath and
indignation which rests upon sinners, is a fierce wrath, and a terrible, it is
not in the power of frail man to sustain the fury of it.

MEDITAT. I. Of the pain of Loss.
THe first, and it is esteemed by many holy Fathers the greatest of Hell
Torments, is that which is called by Divines, The pain of Loss, whereunto the
wicked of the world are sentenced in these several expressions: Mat. 22.13 and
25.30, 41. Luc. 13 27.
Take him away -- Cast him out -- I know you not -- Depart from me ye cursed --

The Pains of Sense in hell, are intolerable (says Chrysostom.) yet for a man to
suffer a thousand Hells is less irksome, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 28.
than to be banished from Heaven, to be driven from the presence of God, to be
exiled out of the regions of Light and Joy, to be rejected of the Lord, and to
hear from him, I know you not -- Depart from me --

The Loss of Heaven must needs be the greatest of evils, because it is the Loss
of the greatest and most perfect good, and of all that is truly good.

To lose good things we do now enjoy in the world, may be recompensed with
advantage by the gain of heaven, but to lose Heaven it self, to forfeit the
right and title we once had happily obtained to be inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven, is a loss irreparable, Nothing can compensate, nothing can equal,
nothing to be compared to this Loss, Id. Sermon.
it is hell enough it self if there were no other.

In this life the most wise and holy understand not thoroughly the fullness of
Heavenly joys, and so cannot be sensible of the torment of their Loss: but in
the next life our eyes shall be opened, and the veil upon our hearts removed,
and then shall the ungodly see, to their unspeakable grief and anguish of
spirit the vast difference betwixt the never fading pleasures of the right hand
of God, and the empty transitory pleasures of sin; betwixt that fullness of joy
in the presence of God, and the deplorable sorrow of its loss and absence.

I have called but ye have refused, Pro. 1.24. Ezck. 33.11.
says the Lord: called saying, Turn ye, turn ye unto me with all your heart --
Come unto me all ye that are weary -- But we vain men slight and neglect, Mat.
11.28 Joh. 6.37, 44, 56.
nay too many contemn such gracious invitations: they are not affected or
delighted with the presence of God, or if they come to his house, and approach
his presence there, it is not either with that internal Devotion, and external
Reverence, it is not with such pure hearts and clean hands, as becomes the
presence of so great and glorious, so holy and pure a Majesty: and is it not
then most just and equal, that all such irreligious, irreverent and profane
persons be banished the blissful presence of God for ever?

But though this be the guise of the multitude, to walk every one after the
lusts of their own hearts, and to follow their own imaginations in the contempt
of the Lords admonitions and commands, Ps. 5.7.
yet as for me whilst I have life and liberty I will come into thy house, even
upon the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy
holy Temple --

My heart has talked of thee and of this gracious command of thine, Ps. 27 9.
Seek ye my face -- Thy face, Lord, will I seek: 10.
O hide not thou thy face from me under the cloud of my sins and the thick
cloud of my transgressions, nor cast away thy servant in displeasure: but
vouchsafe that my approaches to thy divine Majesty may be so frequent and
fervent, and with such Humility, Reverence and Devotion performed, that my
person and my services may in this life be accepted before thee, that I hear
not at the last day that dismal doom of the wicked, Depart from me ye cursed --

MEDITAT. II. Of the Darkness of Hell.
TO be banished the presence of God, who is the Fountain of Light is to be
involved in the terrors or Darkness: and therefore after, Take him away, it
follows, Mat. 22.13.
cast him into outer darkness: And so is the place of Hell described: ca. 25.30.
A land of darkness and of the shadow of death, a land of darkness as darkness
it self, and of the shadow of death, Job 10.21, 22.
without any order, and where light is as darkness. And this must needs be so,
because Hell is farthest remote from Heaven the Region of Light, being seated
(as it is generally believed) in the center of the earth, where neither Sun,
Moon nor Stars display the least ray or glimmering of their Light.

There is Fire indeed in Hell, but such a Fire as burns without shining, a Fire
without light, not unlike whereunto is the fire of blind Zeal, Jam. 3.6.
the tongue whereof sets on fire the course of nature and is set on fire of
Hell.

All the light which the sulphurous Fire of Hell affords, serves only to
discover the ghastly sight of infernal Fiends, reviling, scourging, tormenting
the damned without mercy, without intermission: and there perhaps may the
wicked see some of their friends, and acquaintance, and of their companions in
their sins involved with them in the same punishment, which are sights so
dreadful as shall augment their torments.

This dismal darkness of Hell is called The outward darkness, respecting the
inward darkness of humane Souls, and those manifold deeds of darkness which
issue from the one, and run headlong to the other.

If then thou have followed the lusts of thine own darkened heart, and obeyed
the suggestions of Satan the Prince of darkness, if thou have loved and acted
the works of darkness (of sinfulness and error) more than the sacred acts and
influences of Grace and Truth, it is most just that thy portion be with
blackness of darkness for ever. Joh. 3.19.


Vouchsafe, blessed Lord of light and life, vouchsafe to display the sacred
beams of thy Celestial light into my darkened Soul, dispel and dissipate thence
all the black stain and guilt of sin contracted by my daily backsliding from
thee, all those clouds of ignorance and error, which darken my understanding,
all those noisome lusts of the world and of the flesh which incessantly infest,
and infect my Soul, that I pass not from these inward to that outward darkness
where is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.

MEDITAT. III. Of the Fire of Hell.
OF all the torments invented and practiced by the malice of men or devils,
that by Fire is the most fierce and frightful: How does it amaze the minds of
men, when they see it flaming in their houses, and consuming their habitations
and estates? and yet the Fire of Hell is far more dreadful and tormenting, as
differing from our ordinary fire especially in three respects.

1. Our fire feeds only upon gross and corporeal substances, but Hell fire
feeds upon spirits and damned souls; and it is therefore as much more fierce and
piercing than our fire, as a spirit is more quick and active, than a gross
heavy body.

Be not deceived (O my Soul) with any fond conceits of vain men, that this fire
is only metaphorical, or fantastical, or poetical, because it is prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, who are spirits, and not liable to visible flames:
But the word of God which cannot lie, and many undeniable reasons by the
learned deduced thence, do confirm it to be a real, yea a material fire, Mat.
3.12, ca. 13.42. ca. 25.41. Mar. 9.43 47. Mat. 3 12, Isa. 66. ult. Isa. 30. ult.
but more spiritual and refined, and so more eating, piercing and tormenting
than the fire which burns upon our hearts.

2. Our fire may be quenched, nay 'twill quench it self when its fuel is
wasted: but the fire of Hell is unquenchable: because First, The breath of the
everlasting God like a stream of Brimstone does enkindle it. Secondly, The fuel
that feeds this fire shall never be consumed, viz. Immaterial, immortal Beings,
of whom being tormented in these flames it is affirmed, that they shall seek
death, Rev. 9.6.
and shall not find it, they shall desire to dye, but death shall fly from
them. Miserable wretches! whilst they had time and leisure to seek life, they
neglected it; nay it is too common, that when life in Christ is offered unto
many in the blessed food of their Souls, they slight and contemn it, Vt cujus
vita mortua fuit in culpa, illic mors vivat in poena. Greg.
and therefore it is most just as the Father observes, that they whose life in
this world was no other than a death in sin, their death hereafter should be a
life in punishment for sin everlastingly.

But as to the unquenchable fire of Hell, Remember (O my Soul) that there is
now a fire within thee, the which if it be not quenched in this life, will bring
thee to fire unquenchable in the other world: and this is the rank and fulsome
fire of concupiscence. Thy carnal lusts, and thy worldly lusts being now
followed and fulfilled, are the fuel that feeds that dismal fire of the
infernal lake: and the Worm also that never dies, is bred of the same
corruption, even in the dunghill lusts of the heart, actuated by the hot
suggestions of Satan.

And as the fire of concupiscence does now more or less rage in thy heart, so
as to follow the sway thereof; so shall the fire of hell be, more or less
raging hereafter, if these lusts do not dye within thee, before the death of
nature seize thee.

Take then the advice of the wise Syracides, Eccl. 7.17.
Humble thy self greatly, for the vengeance of the wicked is fire and worms.
And of S. Paul: Col. 3.5.
Mortify therefore your members that are upon earth, fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is Idolatry --
For which things sake, the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience.

Blessed Jesus, by the merits and mysteries of thy Circumcision I humbly beg
the true Circumcision of the spirit: and by the virtue of thy Crucifixion
strengthen me to crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts, lest any of
those exorbitant fires being not opportunely quenched, involve me in those
flames of hell which are unquenchable.

MEDITAT. IV. Of the extent of Hell pains.
WHen I consider righteous Job on the dunghill, Greg mor.
the holy Baptist hungring in the wilderness, S. James beheaded, S. Peter
crucified, the Torments and deaths of innumerable Martyrs, the manifold
afflictions of the holy and elect people of God, I cannot but consider and know
assuredly that very great and many shall be the torments of the wicked in the
world to come: since God suffers those whom he dearly loves to be so much
afflicted in this life. The Pains of Hell in the extent of them do herein
differ from all present bodily pains: that these are partial only in some
particular parts, joints and members of the body, whilst other parts are free
from pain: But in Hell the whole man in all the senses internal and external,
in all the parts of his body and powers of his soul, yea the most spiritual
faculties shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone, rage and despite, grief
and anguish, misery and malediction. The pains of Hell are a concourse of all
kinds of pain, and of all at the same time, and of all of them for ever.

The Taste shall be punished with bitterness, the Appetite with hunger, and the
Tongue with thirst, the Sight with horror, the Hearing with astonishment, the
Smell with stench, the Heart with anguish, the Imagination with fear, the
Reason with madness, the Judgment with confusion, and in the very Bowels fire
unquenchable.

And this is most just, that as the wicked have employed all the powers and
parts both of Soul and Body, as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin; so should
their punishment be in all their senses, members, faculties -- that as each
has transgrest by sinful pleasure, and inordinate delight, so each should have
its peculiar afflicting torment.

It Is undoubtedly true, that all persons condemned to the flames of the nether
hell are not equally tormented therein: for though the fire of hell be one and
the same, yet it torments not all after the same manner, nor in the same degree
of torture: but every man shall therein more or less feel the smart of its
fury, as by the nature, quality and frequency of his sin, he has less or more
deserved the same: Genesis 18.25
for shall not the Judge of all the world do right?

The more high, peremptory and presumptuous, as also the less obstinate and
impenitent sinner shall both suffer under the torment of the same fire, but not
in the same degree of pain and suffering: But alas the lowest degree of
suffering in that place of horror is punishment enough, if seriously
considered, to affright the sinner from all the errors of his ways.

There be many who now think this or that to be severe commands, Love your
enemies -- Deny thy self, Fast, and Watch and Pray -- Take up thy Cross -- but
surely 'twill be much more hard and bitter to hear, Tho. a Kemp.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire --

O let not then the severest commands of the Gospel, nor the difficulties and
labors of Repentance startle and affright thee: let not the breach or neglect
thereof, seem a light and a small thing unto thee; but Remember that to endure
the pains of Hell but one hour, is more exceeding painful and afflicting, than
a thousand years of the most strict, and severe austerities in Fasting and
Sackcloth and Ashes.

Here, blessed Lord, here in this life let me be punished for my sins, but
spare, O spare me in the life to come, and from those intolerable pains of the
nether Hell, good Lord deliver me through Jesus Christ.

MEDITAT. V. Of the Bonds and Chains of Hell.
RIghteous art thou, O Lord, Ps. 119.137.
and upright are thy Judgments: It Is a justice becoming the just Judge of the
world, that the licentious and profane who in this life would not be bound up
nor restrained from following and fulfilling their exorbitant lusts, but have
walked in the counsel of the ungodly and stood in the way of sinners; that they
who bound up their hands from doing the works of Gods Commandments, and bound
up their feet from walking in the paths of his most holy Laws; that they whose
sins are bound upon their Souls, and not loosed by true Repentance through
Faith in the Blood of Christ: it is just, I say, that such should incur this sad
and dismal sentence, Mat. 22.13.
Bind him hand and foot --

To be bound to one place, though in silken Cords, or chains of Gold, though
'twere on a bed of Roses, or the sweetest perfumes, to be so tied as not to be
able to stir hand or foot, is a very great punishment to the free, active and
stirring soul of man: How much more then a sorer punishment is it, to be bound
in fiery chains, eating through the flesh into the very bowels, nay through all
the most hidden and deepest recesses of the Soul, and be forced to lie down in
a bed of Flames, and therein not to be able to stir either hand or foot, not to
move or change from side to side for the least ease or mitigation of torment?

He must have a heart of stone, or rather of flint the hardest of stones who in
remembrance of his sins is not greatly terrified and humbled in the very
thought and apprehension of these fiery tormenting chains of Hell.

Blessed Jesus, whose innocent tender hands were rudely seized and bound with
cords of injustice and violence; vouchsafe to loose all the bonds and chains of
my sins, wherewith both my hands and feet, affections and actions are
infettered, and infested: and grant that the wounds they have made in my soul
being washed with my tears, may be healed by the sovereign balsome which from
thy Wounds and Stripes and Bonds does flow: Ps. 25.14;
Pluck my feet out of the net of every temptation to finfulness and error, Ps.
119.48
and let my hand be continually lift up unto thy Commandments to do them, that
I be not liable to be bound by any of the spirits of vengeance in the fiery
chains of the nether Hell where is weeping and wailing --

MEDITAT. VI. Of the Laments of Hell.
THere shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth: Mat. 25.30.
They shall deservedly weep in Hell, whose eyes upon earth have been full of
Adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14
lasciviousness and greediness of the creature: whose eyes have been set upon
their covetousness, Pro. 30.13
and their eyelids lifted up with scorn and contempt of others: who have been
guilty of any of these, or of any other sinful pollutions, and have not wept
and bewailed the same with the tears of Repentance.

Woe unto you that laugh now in your sinful pleasures, Luc. 6.25.
for ye shall mourn and weep either here or hereafter: And it is sad and sottish
to put off this necessity of weeping to the other world, where the tears of
sorrow and sad Repentance shall avail nothing.

And this is all the water that Hell affords, Luc. 16.24.
not a drop to cool the tongue tormented in those scorching flames, only those
driesly tears, which the violence of her torments do extort, which being salt
and brinish, and spent in vain, shall the more increase the bitterness and
augment the miseries of the condemned sinner.

O that now my head were waters, Jer 9.1.
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, by weeping here, to prevent the weeping in
Hell hereafter, now to bewail my sins, that I sorrow not when it is too late,
where weeping and wailing shall not assuage but augment my sorrows.

Lament, O sinner, and gnash thy teeth through a holy indignation, to be so
foolish and mad, as for a little sinful pleasure, or dirty delight, to run the
hazard of being obnoxious to never ending pains and sorrows.

Blessed are they that mourn, Mat. 5.4.
both for their own sins, and for the sins of others through the fear of Hell,
and desire of Heaven; for they shall be comforted, their fears prevented, their
desires obtained.

A broken and a contrite heart, Ps. 51.17.
O God, thou will not despise: A heart broken with godly sorrow for sin, and
venting it self in tears with Prayers, Humiliations and Confessions mixed with
Faith in the blood of my dear Redeemer. Thus Lord, thus I humbly beg to be
delivered from thy wrath, and from the deplorable wailings of a sad eternity.
Amen.

MEDITAT. VII. Of the perpetuity of Hell Torments.
THe Perpetuity of Hell torments is in the thought thereof a Torment
unspeakable: for in every instant of the Sufferings of the damned, they suffer
all the torments of those infinite thousands of years to come, the continuance
whereof is not measured by Time, but by the bottomless abyss of eternity, and
the immutability of divine justice: and what is time to eternity? Behold as a
drop of water is to the sea, Eccl. 18.10.
and a gravel stone in comparison of the sand: so are a thousand years to the
days of etcrnity.

In this life fear has torment: but torment has no fear, but hope rather of
release, and delivery: but in Hell the damned both fear what they suffer, and
also suffer what they fear, even the everlasting duration of their sufferings:
They that are cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone shall be tormented day
and night for ever, Rev. 20.10.
and ever.

Are not they then without understanding that work wickedness? Ps. 14.4.
who being endued with Reason, and capable of counsel, who knowing the
shortness of this life, and the uncertainty of the same, and withal believing
the everlasting duration of the life to come, do nevertheless bend all their
thoughts, and endeavors upon what concerns this present remporary Being, even
to the great hazard of being obnoxious to the Pains and Inrments of a sad
eternity: such madness in the hearts of men can never be thoroughly bewailed
even with tears of blood.

Who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Mat. 3.7.
That there is a wrath to come every Christian believes, and it is a fierce
wrath and a terrible, even indignation and wrath, Romans 2.8, 9.
tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, and has not
repented him of the evil, and of the iniquity he has done.

Of the coming of this wrath also frequent warning is given, both by the works
and by the word of God, by the Ministers of his Church: but who takes warning
given? who regards the power of this wrath? very few regard it; though the less
it be regarded, the more fierce it will be, for even thereafter as a man
fears so is thy displeasure. Ps. 90.11.


Fear thou the Lord, Pro. 3.7.
O my Soul, fear the Lord, and depart from evil.

Thou, Ps. 76.7.
O Lord, thou alone art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight, when thou
art angry?

The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, Pro. 14.27
to depart from the gates of death.

Fear not them that can kill the body, Mat. 10.28
but are not able to kill the Soul: but fear him who is able to destroy both
soul and body in hell.

Let us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly
fear. Heb. 12.28,


For our God is a consuming fire. 29.


The LXXXVI. Psalm, PARAPHRASED.
BOw down thine ear to him who now bows down his heart, and bear me, O Lord,
confessing, for I am poor, extremely wanting of the graces of thy Spirit, which
should make me rich toward God: I have little or no treasures laid up in
Hearen, and therefore I am in misery, liable to the eternal miseries of Hell:
But,

Preserve thou my soul from that dismal place of torments, for I am heby,
separate and devoted to thy service though a poor unprofitable servant: and
upon this account I make bold to call thee my God, whom I worship and serve,
and humbly beseech thee to save thy servant who puts his trust in thee, for
the riches of grace and salvation, wherein

Be merciful unto me, O Lord, who art rich in mercy, for I will call daily upon
thee, that it may please thee in great mercy to deliver me from that misery,
whereunto my poorness in grace, but abounding sins make me obnoxious.

Comfort the soul of thy servant that the sorrows of death overwhelm me not:
For unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul, being hereunto encouraged by thy
grace and goodness.

For thou, Lord, art good, even the inexhaustible fountain of goodness, and
gracious, propitiously inclined to hear the supplications of thy people, and of
great mercy against the greatness of iniquity, unto all them that call upon
thee, even to all that call upon thee faithfully, depending upon thee alone for
help, and safety.

Give ear, Lord, to my prayer, not slightly hearing the sound of my words, but
ponder the voice of my humble desires: the intense desires of my humbled soul,
I humbly desire to be considered.

In the time of my trouble, and that is the whole time of my pilgrimage here
upon earth, I will call upon thee for protection and deliverance, whereof I
will never despair: for thou hear me, if my prayer be pure and humble: and
therefore will I call upon thee as long as I live.

Among the gods that be either falsely so called, or be so called by
participation of divine power as the Angels in Heaven, and Kings of the earth,
there is none like unto thee, O Lord, either for power or wisdom: there is none
that can do as thou do: thy works do far exceed the power of any created
beings to do the like: and therefore in fullness of time.

All Nations whom thou have made, shall no longer make gods unto themselves,
but shall come and worship thee, O Lord, the maker of all men, and of all
things, and being admitted members of thy holy Catholic Church shall glorify
thy Name, both with heart and voice, and by the good works of their obedience
to the Gospel of Christ.

For thou art great, which all thy works declare, and do wondrous things, not
to be apprehended but admired, and it is therefore in all the parts of the world
confessed, that thou art God alone, all others being either falsely or feignedly
called gods: And that I may accordingly worship thee aright,

Teach me thy way, O Lord, that I neither mistake the right way, nor stumble
and fall therein, but steadfastly and constantly walk in thy truth: and this way
and this truth is my blessed Redeemer, who by his doctrine and example, doings
and sufferings, life and death, is the way that leads to life eternal: O knit
my heart unto thee, by the indissoluble bonds of a true Faith, firm Hope,
fervent Charity: that I may fear thy name, so as that I neither dare to sin
against thee, nor too much presume upon thy favor and grace.

I will thank thee, O Lord my God, as from whom both my whole self, and all the
little good that is mine does proceed, with all my heart, as being hereunto
excited by the fear and love of thy Name: and I will praise thy name for
evermore: And there is very great reason I should do so,

For great is thy mercy toward me, not only manifested in all the good things I
do enjoy, but in my deliverance from manifold evils, and especially from the
greatest of evils: for thou have delivered my soul from the nethermost hell, in
the broad way that leads thereunto I have a long time walked, and it is of thy
great mercy, that I have not long since been hurled headlong to that dismal
place of torments: And still I have great cause to complain,

O God, the proud are risen against me, proud Lucifer and his infernal fiends,
and the congregation of naughty men have sought after my soul: the wicked of
the world conspire with the Devil and his Angels by their sinful suggestions to
subvert the innocence of my soul, to have her portion with them in the
nethermost hell.

But thou, O Lord, art full of compassion, especially to all them who choose
rather to suffer than to do what is offensive to thy Majesty, and mercy, in
pardoning the offenses of the truly penitent, long-suffering, not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance, plenteous in
goodness, abounding in thy blessings and truth both in performing thy promises
of mercy to the penitent, and in rendering to every man according to his works.

O turn thee then unto me who by my sins have justly provoked thee to turn away
thy face from me; and have mercy upon me a miserable sinner: and that I may no
more offend thee, give thy strength unto thy servant, even ghostly strength and
fortitude, manfully to resist the Devil, and all his numerous troops of sensual
and worldly lusts; in all whose assaults vouchsafe to help the son of thine
handmaid, that I may overcome all their temptations unto evil, and carefully
keep my vow and promise made when I was first admitted to be a Son of thy
handmaid the Church.

Show some token upon me for good, let some sign of thy favor toward me
appear, that they who hate me, my ghostly enemies, may see it and be ashamed,
when they shall behold all their conspiracies and assaults against my soul
defeated by the assistance of thy divine grace: because thou, Lord, have helped
me and comforted me: thy help to overcome when I am tempted unto sin, is a
great comfort to my soul, for I have hereupon a good ground of hope, that thou will deliver my soul from the nethermost hell: and that being raised up from
the gates of death I may show all thy praises within the ports of the daughter
of Sion, saying Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


The LXXXVIII. Psalm, PARAPHRASED.
Lord God of my salvation, my corporal and spiritual, temporal and eternal
Salvation is from thee, and therefore I have cried day and night at all times
and seasons, and in all conditions prosperous and adverse before thee, as unto
whom alone the inmost intimate desires of my soul are naked and open: O let my
prayer enter into thy presence, be received and accepted by thee: incline thine
ear unto my calling, so graciously hear as to grant my humble requests.

My soul is full of trouble, which being the consequent of sin, is the
forerunner of death, and my life draws nigh unto hell, which opens wide her
mouth to swallow down such polluted Souls.

I am counted as one of them that go down to the pit, looked upon as a dead man
and a castaway: and I have been even as a man that has no strength, which is
derived from the Lord of life to escape the snares and terrors of death.

Free among the dead, not likely to be freed from my troubles, but by death
which puts an end to all the miseries of this sinful life: like unto them that
are wounded by the fiery darts of the devil, and lie in the grave of corrupt
conversation, which leads to the grave of death the wages of sin; and whosoever
thus lie there, are out of remembrance, both forgotten by the righteous, and
also are cut away from thy hand, repulst from amongst those blessed sheep,
which shall be rankt on thy right hand in the day of Judgment.

Thou have laid me in the lowest pit: I confess I have so far incurred thy
wrathful displeasure, as to be laid in the nethermost hell, which is a place of
darkness, even blackness of darkness for ever: and in the deep abyss of
inextricable torments.

Thine indignation lies hard upon me, whereto I have provoked thee by manifold
offenses, and thou have vexed me with all thy storms; those tempests of
affliction and trouble which disturb my peace are sent from thee to scowr the
rust of corruption off my Soul.

Thou have put away mine acquaintance far from me, and made me to be abhorred
of them: The invisible society of holy Angels, with the prayers and good wishes
of holy men I enjoyed whilst I was innocent, and heavenly minded; but now being
polluted, they are estranged from me, and abhor me in my sins.

I am so fast in prison, that I cannot get forth: I am so enfetter'd in the
bonds and chains of my sins, that without the help of a divine hand I cannot be
loosed from them.

My sight fails for very trouble; the bright eye of my mind is dimmed and
darkened through the pressures of my spirit: and in this sad condition, Lord, I
have called upon thee, as being my only refuge in danger, support in trouble,
and succor in all distress, I have stretched forth my hands unto thee, by my
practice according to my prayer.

Do thou show wonders among the dead? or shall the dead declare thy works of
wonder? or shall the dead rise up and praise thee? They must have part in the
first Resurrection (which is from the corruption of sin) who worthily show
forth thy praise.

Shall thy loving kindness be showed in the grave, or thy faithfulness in
destruction? both in the state of the first, and of the second death, there is
a deep silence of thy goodness and of thy truth.

Shall thy wondrous works be known in the dark, and thy righteousness in the
land where all things are forgotten? Thy righteous and admired deeds are not
once mentioned either in the grave of death, or in the pit of hell: in both
estates there is an utter forgetfulness of all thy goodness and truth. But that
I may be delivered from such a sad condition,

Unto thee have I cried, O Lord: and early shall my prayer come before thee:
Before I have made my peace with thee my God, or be surprised by death, let my
prayer for thy preventing and assisting grace be not rejected.

Lord, why abhorrest thou my soul? I am unclean I confess, and it is but just I
should be abhorred and forsaken; but being withal penitent and humbled, why
hidest thou thy face from me, as being still displeased with me, and deaf to my
petitions?

I am in misery, and like unto him that is at the point to dye: Death as the
wages of sin dogs me at the heels: even from my youth up thy terrors have I
suffered with a troubled mind: The terrors of my Conscience for sin, have been
always accompanied with a troubled and contrite spirit, which thou have promised
not to despise.

Thy wrathful displeasure goes over me: The apprehension of thy wrath and
displeasure invades, and overflows my soul: and the fear of thee has undone
me: the fear of thy wrath in the day of judgment, and of the never dying
torments of hell the effects thereof, has ruined all my worldly consolations.

They come round about me daily like water overflowing all the powers and
passions of my Soul, and compassed me together on every side, leaving no
visible means of evasion and peace.

My lovers and my friends, who professed themselves to be such in my worldly
prosperity, and amidst my carnal delights, have thou put away from me, they are
alienated and estranged in time of my trouble: and hid mine acquaintance out of
my sight, they will not now see me who formerly frequented my company.

And therefore being thus desolate, and deeply endangered, unto thee as my only
hope and refuge, O Lord God of my Salvation I have cried day and night
continually, for deliverance and Salvation, that my soul may continually bless
thee and say, Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


THE Fourth general Meditation, OF HEAVEN.
1. THe land of Canaan was promised to Abraham the Father of the faithful in
these words of command: Genesis 13.14
Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art, Northward and
Southward, Eastward and Westward -- For all the land which thou see, to thee
will I give it,

The celestial Canaan is herein promised unto thee if a true son of the
faithful Abraham: Lift up then thine eyes, O my Soul, and contemplate the
ravishing Felicities of this Land of promise. This is thy native country,
where thou wast at first framed by the hands of the Almighty after his own
Image; Why then do thou not pant and breath and sigh and long to be at home?
Why art thou so well pleased with a strange land, and delightest rather to be a
Pilgrim in the valley of Tears, than a free Denizon in the land of Peace? a
Foreigner in the city of Babylon than a Citizen in the heavenly Jerusalem?
Away, away from Lebanon, O my Soul, thy beloved calls thee away from the dens
of Lions, Can. 4.8.
and the mountains of the Leopards: Ps. 55.6.
O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I flee away and be at rest.

2. We read that the Lord brought Moses to the top of mount Pisgah, and showed
him the promised land; where having the wilderness behind him, and the happiest
of all lands before him, he represents the devout and heavenly minded Soul, who
considering the manifold troubles in the wilderness of this world, and the joys
and felicities of the world to come, is highly ravished in the contemplation
and desire of the one to the extreme contempt of the other.

3. The happiness of Heaven is the end of all Holiness upon Earth, and that
must needs be the greatest good, which is the end of all that is good, for the
end is more noble than the means. It Is the last good we hope for, and so the
most perfect, as being the perfection and accomplishment of all the good we can
imagine or desire; nay, it is a blessedness beyond our frail imaginations to
comprehend: as it is written, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. Quod Deus praeparavit diligentibus se, fide non capitur, spe non
attingitur, charitate non comprehenditur, desideria and vota transgreditur:
acquiri potest, aestimari non potest. Aug. 1 Cor. 2.9.


4. Raise up thy affections (O my Soul) as to be ravished with the love of
Heaven, so to lament with tears of sorrow and shame thy sloth and negligence,
thy coldness and indevotion, thy sinful security and earthly mindedness, and
what obstructs thy way, and slackens thy pace toward this place of joy
unspeakable and glorious.

O how slight and trivial, how inconsiderable are all the most strict and rigid
labors of Repentance and mortification, of the most profound Piety, and ample
Charity, in respect of those celestial joys whereunto they lead thee!

And if it shall once please God through the merits of Christ to receive thee
into Heaven, thou will then think all thy prayers and tears, sighs and groans,
fastings and watchings, all thy labors of love both to God and man, very well
spent, that they have wafted thee over the troublesome waves of this worlds
vast sea, into the haven of eternal peace and felicity.

MEDITAT. II. Of the place we call Heaven,
and first, its Greatness.

THat Empyreal Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. Dent. 10.14. 2 Chr. 6.18.
which is the seat of God and of all his holy Angels and Saints for ever, is
called also the Third Heaven, and the Highest Heaven, and the Heaven of
Heavens; and it is of all the places of the Universe the most spacious, large
and ample: for it contains all the heavens, and the earth also, even the whole
Creation within its verge and compass.

Do but consider the vastness of the Sun, and of the Moon, with the multitude
and magnitude of all the Lights of Heaven, most of which are greater, and some
of them far bigger than the whole body of the Earth: Consider also that besides
the vast number of Stars, there are empty spaces in the firmament for as many,
nay for many more than as many yet: and then admire with astonishment the vast
extent and amplitude of the Heaven of Heavens, which contains all these, and
all that is above, and all that is below all these, within its circuit and
circumference.

Secondly, Its Brightness and Beauty.

The brightness of the Sun, the Moon and the Stars do but imperfectly represent
the Beauty and Brightness of Heaven as it is described Rev. 21.23. Rev. 21.23.
And the City had no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon to shine in it, for the
glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, which exceeds
as much the light of the Sun, as the Suns light transcends that of a glimmering
Taper.

The Air of this country of Heaven is continually pure, and clear, bright and
splendid; it is not capable of any clouds, mists, or vapors, not liable to any
rains, storms and tempests, no thick infectious air offends the inhabitants of
this happy land; whilst the wretched miscreants of the nether hell are involved
in blackness of darkness, stifled with the suffocating fumes of sulphurous
fire, without the least hope of any purer air wherein to breath for ever.

Thirdly, Its Tranquillity.

All in this City of God is peaceable and quiet, tranquil and secure, and free
even from the fear of the least disturbance; no evil comes nigh this dwelling.
Ps. 90.10.


What the Lord promises to his Church Militant is fulfilled in his Church
Triumphant, The Lord has made fast the bars of thy gates: Ps. 147.13.
they are inexpugnable by any, by the utmost force and fury of all the Spirits
and powers of darkness.

The Lord makes peace in thy borders: 14.
Blessed peace dwells here without the least fear or danger of interruption:
For the grand enemy of Peace is hence cast down, fallen like lightning from
Heaven, Luc. 10.18
there is no room here for that author of all division, nor yet for any of his
instruments: Ps. 68.30.
The people that delight in war: It Is the inheritance of Peacemakers, Mat. 5.9.
and of the peaceable minded, and of such only as live in peace upon earth.

And O that it might please the God of Peace to allay that rancour, to depress
that tumor, to assuage that itch of contention which now so much disturbs the
peace of his Church upon earth, and obstructs the way to this heavenly
Jerusalem, the City of peace: Follow peace with all men, Heb. 12.14.
and holiness without which no man shall see the Lord.

O God the author of peace and lover of concord, in knowledge of whom stands
our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom; defend us thy humble
servants in all the assaults of our enemies, that would disturb our peace: that
we surely trusting in thy defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries,
through the might of Jesus Christ --

MEDITAT. III. Of the good things of Heaven.
1. HONOR.
Honor in Heaven is not that which swells with vainglory, and is pust up with
the infectious breath of Flattery, and the praise of men, but the honor that
comes from God only. Joh. 5.44.


Honor is the reward of virtue, and he who is the donor of virtue and
obedience has promised to Honor the obedient and virtuous, saying. If any man
serve me, Joh. 12.26
him will my Father honor: What, and how great this honor is, we read Rev.
3.31. To him that overcomes will I give to sit with me in my throne: Rev. 3.31.
even as I have overcome, and am set down with my Father in his Throne: There
cannot be surely an higher Honor than this, to be exalted by the right hand of
the most High, and placed in the same Throne with the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords: O what Hymns of divine praise, what applauses and exultations, what
shouts of joy shall sound through the whole Court of Heaven, when thus it shall
be done to the man whom the King delights to honor! Esth. 6.11.


2. POWER.
2. Honor without Power is but a titular empty aerie happiness: and the Power
of the Saints in Heaven is promised by the Lord of all power, saying of the
faithful and wise servant, Mat. 24.45, 47.
he will make him ruler of all his goods: implying a power given to his Saints,
not only over all that is called good upon earth, but also over all the joys of
heaven, which are an aggregation of all that is good, Gloss. ord. in loc. Rev.
21.7.
and He that overcomes shall inherit all things: wherein are implicitly
promised,

3. RICHES.
3. The Riches of Heaven, are not such corruptible things as Silver and Gold,
gorgeous Attire, delicious Fare, large Demesnes, fair Habitations -- but
without any such frail deceitful pelf there shall be abundance of peace, Ps.
72.7. Cor. 4.17. 2 Cor. 15.28.
a fullness of perfection and felicity, an exceeding and eternal weight of
glory: and in a word, in heaven God shall be all in all: He who is the Fountain
and Wellspring of all good gifts and graces upon earth, will be himself the
reward and crown thereof in heaven; than the which there can be nothing more
high and honorable, nothing more great and powerful, nothing more rich, full,
eminent, perfect, joyous, and all that can be desired conducing to true
happiness.

Happy then, and thrice happy are they who now in this life covet chiefly,
covet only to have the Lord for their portion, saying not from the teeth only
but from the bottom of their hearts, Ps. 16.6,
The Lord himself is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou shall
maintain my lot. 7.
The lot is fallen to me in a fair ground, I have a goodly heritage: And surely
he must needs be most exorbitantly covetous, that will not be content with such
a heritage: and to possess the Lord himself, who possesses all things, is the
riches of Heaven.

4. PLEASURE.
Pleasure consists in the union of the Soul with an object of Delight: and in
heaven the Soul shall be united with the most beautiful, and blissful object,
viz. The Lord of glory, The light of the World, The God of all Consolation, We
read 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit, which is the
height of pleasure, and perfection of Delight to be so intimately joined to the
Lord as to become one spirit with him: such do deliciously taste and fully see
how gracious the Lord is. Ps. 34.8.


There is no earthly pleasure like the taste and fense of the Lords grace and
favor to us: It Is yet a greater pleasure to enjoy the Lord as the only object
of Love and Delight: It Is yet more sweet and pleasurable to acquiesce and be
fully satisfied in the enjoyment of the divine Majesty. But the fullness of joy
is not only to enjoy, but to know that we shall ever enjoy the beatifical
vision, and have the fruition of the supreme beauty, and divine goodness for
ever and ever.

Now then, O my Soul, Delight thou in the Lord, Ps. 37.4.
and he shall give thee thy hearts desire: In the satisfaction and peace of thy
desires does thy happiness consist, and this is alone in the Lord obtainable:
Blessed are the people, Ps. 89.16,
O Lord, that can rejoice in thee; they shall walk in the light of thy
countenance: 17,
-- Their delight shall be daily in thy name, and in thy righteousness shall
they make their boast: 18.
For thou art the glory of their strength --

But the soul that will rejoice in God must be stamped after his image, and be
like unto him, pure as he is pure, holy as he is holy, merciful as he is
merciful.

Be ye followers of God as dear children and walk in love: Ephesians. 5.1, 2.
and so thou may hope to enjoy the Lord as the supreme object of love and
delight in heaven.

O Lord, who have prepared for them that love thee such good things as pass
man's understanding; Pour into our hearts such love toward thee, that we loving
thee in and above all things may obtain thy promises which exceed all that we
can desire, through Jesus Christ.

MEDITAT. III. Of the Company of Heaven.
1. Of Gods presence there.
1. GOd who is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is the chief and principal
Inhabitant of the Heaven of heavens: God indeed is every where in respect of
his Essence, Presence, Power, but in Heaven in respect of his Glory, and the
supereminent brightness of his Majesty, which is in heaven most conspicuous,
full, and ravishing: nor could Heaven be called so, it were not heaven, if not
enlightened, and enhappied by Gods superlative presence there: And where ever, O
Lord, Tho. a Kom.
thou art present, either in grace or glory, there is heaven: and death and
hell is every where where thou art.

2. But what does it avail the company of Heaven that God is there especially
present, since God dwells with the light which no man can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6.17.
whom no man has seen or can see? The very Angels of Heaven cover their faces
with their wings in the presence of God, that the excessive brightness of his
Majesty and great Glory overwhelm them not? Isa. 6.2.
It Is true, but however so much of this eminent glory shall appear, and so
fully the splendid Rays thereof be displayed in Heaven, as shall ravish all
the blessed beholders thereof with a joy unspeakable and glorious. 1 Pet. 1.7.


They shall be satisfied with the plenteousness of thy house, Ps. 36.8,
( viz. of Celestial glory) and thou shall give them drink of thy pleasures as
out of a river: so full and overflowing shall be their satisfaction and
contentment.

For with thee is the Well of life, 9.
and of all the joys and consolations of life: and in thy light shall we see
light, even the ravishing light of glory in the light of Gods countenance: in
whose presence is fullness of joy.

2. The Angels of Heaven.
Next to the blissful presence of God, the society in Heaven is Angels and
Archangels, Cherubims and Seraphims, Thrones and Dominions, Col. 1.16.
Principalities and Powers, and all the several Orders of celestial Spirits.

The very sight of one blessed Angel upon earth, would be more joyous and
ravishing than to behold the greatest beauty, and most splendid excellency that
is liable to the eyes of flesh: yea all the pomp and glory of the world is not
comparable to such a sight: how much more joyful and glorious will it be, not
only to behold, but to enjoy the society of those innumerable ministering
spirits of whom we read, Thousand thousands ministered unto him, Dan. 7.10.
and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him.

These rest not day and night, crying, Is. 6.3. etc. Rev. 21.10
Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath: Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty
of thy glory: To make one in this Hymnidical Quire, and to be received into one
of those Mansions of Glory from whence the Apostate Angels fell, is such an
astonishing joy as cannot by the tongue of men and Angels be expressed.

3. The Saints in Heaven.
To these Angelical spirits are joined in society as members of the same Church
Triumphant in Heaven, The glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly
fellowship of the Prophets, the noble army of Martyrs, the innumerable train of
holy Confessors, Priests, and people of each Sex, and of every condition of
whose numberless number we read, Rev. 7.9, 10.
Rev. 7.9. And I beheld and lo a great multitude which no man can number of all
nations, and kindreds, and people, and Tongues, stood before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with white robes and Palms in their hands -- and cried
with a loud voice, Salvation to our God --

Into this glorious Communion of Saints in Heaven, there daily are, and daily
shall be for ever received all such true servants of God, and stout soldiers of
Jesus Christ, who under his banner have overcome the Devil and all his works,
the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, all the sinful lusts of the flesh:
who have warred a good warfare over these their ghostly enemies, and kept the
Faith, whereinto they were baptized, without any tincture of Heresy, or
Schism, observed God's holy Will and Commandments, and walked in the same all
the days of their life.

All of these returning from their wearisome pilgrimage through the wilderness
of this world to their native home of Heaven shall be received into and rejoice
in their proper and peculiar mansions of peace: each differing indeed in the
degrees of glory, according to their difference in the degrees of grace, but
all shall enjoy their full proportion of happiness, and with common joy shall
sing together perpetual Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne and to
the Lamb for ever. Rev. 5.13.


Happy and for ever happy were I, if with a flood of Tears and incessant
Prayers, if with the devout surrender of all that I am and all that I have to
the service of God, I might be admitted into this celestial Society: Heb.
12.22, 23, 24.
To come unto Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, To the general assembly
and Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge
of all, and to the Spirits of just men made perfect, And to Jesus the Mediator
of the new Covenant --

All this I believe as a Christian, but my Hope to be admitted into this
blessed Society is too weakly grounded: and this because my Charity both
toward God and his Saints is too cold and benumbed.

I do profess to love God, and do desire that my heart may be every day more
and more inflamed with the same fire of his love: but doubtless I must have
withal a due regard and veneration for his Saints; for as God is praised in his
Saints, so is he dishonored in their disrespect, Ps 150.1. Zach. 2.8.
He that touches them touches the apple of his eye.

If the zeal of some persons toward the Saints in Heaven exceed its due bounds
and limits, I must not therefore throw off that devout respect which is due
unto them; remembering that it is the end of my Faith, the sum of my Hope to be
by divine Charity joined with them in the same mystical body of Christ our
common Lord, and Redeemer, and with them to love, and to praise the Lord: yea
to praise and love him for ever, which is the happiness of the Saints in
Heaven: Ps. 84.4.
for blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will always be praising
thee:

But I am unworthy, too much unworthy sinful dust and ashes to make one in this
heavenly quire: But I will not despair since my dear Redeemer has 1. purchased
this happiness for me Heb. 9.12, 15, 24.
; since 2. he has promised to receive me thereinto Joh. 14.3
; and 3. he has prayed also for my actual possession thereof saying, Father, I
will, Joh. 17.24
that they whom thou have given me, may be with me, where I am, that they may
behold the glory which thou have given me.

O sweetest Savior, who to save and redeem man vouchsafedst to be made man,
and to appear in the likeness of sinful flesh; O when, when will that happy
hour come, wherein I shall be admitted to behold thy blessed Face, which the
Angels in Heaven behold with joy and wonder? When I shall awake up after thy
likeness, I shall be satisfied with it, Ps. 17.16.
satisfied to the greatest height and fullness of content, when I shall behold
that glory thou had with the Father before the world was: Joh. 17.5.
even so come Lord Jesus come quickly.

MEDITAT. IV. Of the perpetuity of Heavenly joys.
THe most full enjoyment of all the good things this world affords, is not to
be called, or accounted Happiness, because they are not only vain and empty of
true satisfaction, but also not permanent and lasting: To every purpose under
the Sun tending toward satisfaction and happiness there is time and judgment,
Eccl. 8.6.
a Time limited for its prosecution and enjoyment, and Judgment also shall pass
upon the actions relating thereunto: it must needs follow, therefore the misery
of man is great upon him.

But the good things of Heaven are durable, permanent and lasting, hereunto
shall no Time succeed, no Judgment follow.

The Glory of them that dye in Grace, is Immortal, Eusmirier^
their Happiness Immutable; their Crown immarcessible; their Life everlasting;
and their Reign with God, and the Lamb for ever and ever. No day does pass with
these blessed Souls, without its fullness of joy and content: This joy shall be
ever new and yet ever the same: This glory shall never wither or decay, but
flourish for perpetual eternities. And this must needs be joy; because
celestial joy consists as in the blissful vision of God, so in an assimilation
to him: for just men made perfect, are immutable in their perfection and
felicity by beholding him who is unchangeable: so the Apostle, We all as in a
Glass, beholding the Glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18
are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory even as by the Spirit of
the Lord.

The Moon and the Stars receive their light from the Sun, and become like unto
him, by being opposite, and in a sort beholding the Suns bright face: So the
pure Souls in Heaven by seeing God who is the Light of lights, are from him
enlightened and made like unto him. So says the beloved Apostle: Beloved, now
are we the Sons of God, 1 John 3.2.
and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know when he shall appear,
we shall be made like him, for we shall see him as he is: And that is not as
now in a glass darkly, 1 Cor. 13.12.
but face to face, i.e. as fully as our measure will contain, our proportion
bear, and our degree in Grace require.

That the inheritance of Heaven is for ever, is manifest from the dearness of
its purchase: it cost no less than the precious blood of the Son of God: how
then shall that life of Glory ever fail or fade away, since the Lord of life
himself vouchsafed to dye for its acquisition and purchase?

The joys of Heaven (says Gran.) Gra. medit.
shall continue as many Millions of years as there are Stars in the Firmament,
and many more: They shall last as many hundred millions of years as there have
been drops of Rain fallen from Heaven since the beginning of the world, and more,
much more: In a word, they shall endure as long as there is a God in Heaven,
and this God the same which was, which is, and which is to come, from
everlasting to everlasting. Shall not then my heart be fixed where such lasting
joys are to be found? And thither my heart must first be sent by way of
Harbinger, before my person can arrive there: I must now have my conversation
in Heaven, before I can have my consummation there: I must now be heavenly
minded, or else never hope to be admitted into the joys of Heaven.

But O the heavy burden of my sins! These do depress and weigh down the mind,
and make her affections grovel in the dust: And yet even these shall not hinder
thy ascent into Heaven, if thou tread them under thy feet: For every sin, and
vanity trodden down, Genesis 28.12.
subdued and mortified is one step, one scale or round of that celestial
Ladder, which being set upon the earth reaches up unto Heaven: which the
Angels of heaven rejoice to behold. Luc. 15.7.


And may the right hand of God assist me to lay aside every weight, Heb. 12.1,
and the sin that does so easily beset me, and to run with patience the race
that is set before me.

Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, 2.
who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, and despised the
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God.

Blessed Lord, who have made me after thine own Image to attain the perfection
and felicity of my Being in the beatifical vision and fruition of thy Majesty
in heaven, vouchsafe here to guide me with thy Counsel and after that to
receive me with glory through the merits and mediation of thy blessed Son and
my dearest Savior Jesus Christ --

Our Father which art in, etc.

The XXIV. Psalm, PARAPHRASED.
THe earth is the Lords and all that therein is, the compass of the world, and
they that dwell therein: The heavens are the Lords chief dwelling place, the
earth and all the nations thereof he has given to his Son Jesus as he is
Redeemer of the world: as Ps. 2.8. Desire of me, and I shall give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy
possession.

For he has founded it upon the seas, and prepared it upon the floods: As God
has so wisely ordered the earth, and the water, that the one may refresh, not
overflow the other: so he has founded his Church upon a rock above the floods
of secular cares and turmoils, and all the rising waves of this worlds vast
sea, which is signified by the situation of his Temple on a hill: And

Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, or who shall rise up (or stand) in
his holy place? who is he that shall be qualified to appear and stand in the
presence of God, and to join with his people in that solemn worship which in
his holy Temple is exhibited unto him? Such a one is also qualified to ascend
and raise up his Soul to those mountains of joy in the celestial Sion.

He that has clean hands: The works of whole hands are clean from all
injustice and impurity, and washed with the tears of true penitence from the
filth of all former pollutions: And a pure heart, to all outward an inward
holiness is required, which consists in the purity of the heart, viz. to be
pure from all sordid and vile affections, to be sincere and without hypocrisy
in all Religious performances: that has not lift up his mind to vanity, who
follows not those pomps and vanities of this wicked world which he once so
solemnly renounced: nor sworn to deceive his neighbor, that will not say, much
less swear an untruth, nor yet break his word, especially when confirmed with
an oath. Such is the holiness, and innocence that entitles a people to the
presence of God in his Temple upon earth, and in his House in heaven, 1 the
holiness of the heart, 2. of the hands, 3. of the tongue; or Holiness in
thought, word, and deed.

He shall receive the blessing from the Lord: The blessings of the Lord shall
descend upon him, when he ascends into the hill of the Lord: and righteousness
or mercy in the pardon of his sins, or the reward of righteousness, i. e.
Salvation not of or from himself, or from any but from the God of his Salvation.

This is the generation of them that seek him: these are those holy and happy
people, who so faithfully seek the Lord, that they find him, viz. in grace
here, in glory hereafter, which is the double blessing of them that seek thy
face, O Jacob: All that be true Israelites indeed thus make their holy and
humble addresses to the God of Jacob for his grace and favor.

Lift up your heads, O ye gates, or, lift up your gates, O ye Heads, or Princes
of the heavenly Jerusalem: and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors which open
the passages to life everlasting: and the King of glory shall come in: he who
has vanquished and gloriously triumphed over the gates of everlasting death,
over all the spirits and powers of darkness, is ascended to open the gates of
the kingdom of heaven to all Believers.

Who is the King of glory? in whose glorious conquests we may glory, and in
whose righteousness we may make our boast? it is the Lord strong and mighty:
who although he submitted himself to be betrayed, apprehended, arraigned and
condemned to death, yet is he even the Lord mighty in battle, who naked and
unarmed, has vanquished by his sufferings: and by his death overcome death,
and him who has the power of death the Devil: for which victory he rides in
Triumph upon the clouds of Heaven: and therefore

Lift up your heads, O ye gates of the celestial paradise, which have been shut
against the sons of men from the fall of the first Adam: and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors: Raise up your selves ye immortal souls, open and be enlarged
in your desires and affections unto him who has opened unto you the
everlasting doors of glory: and the King of glory shall come in: He who is
ascended, will also descend into you, if pure and heavenly minded, and thither
enwrap and raise you whither himself is gone before: if yet for your further
satisfaction you desire to know.

Who is the King of glory: by whose triumphant ascent into Heaven we believe
and hope thither to ascend also? It is even the Lord of hosts, he who has the
command of all the powers of Heaven, Earth, and Hell, who has the command
especially of all the powers and operations, virtues and graces of the Holy
Spirit of God, and dispenses them accordingly unto all that love and fear his
name: He is the King of glory: he is glorious indeed above all, and God over
all blessed for ever: and therefore to him, as is most meet, be all glory
ascribed.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The LXXXIV. Psalm, PARAPHRASED.
How amiable are thy dwellings, especially in the high and holy place, thou
Lord of Hosts, even of the numerous troops of Angels and Archangels, and of all
the powers of Heaven!

My soul has a desire, which is more than ordinary, it is a longing even to a
separation from its self, to enter into the Courts of the Lord, to view those
several Mansions of glory, and the blissful condition wherein all the Courtiers
of the King of Heaven do praise him for ever: my heart and my flesh when
subdued to the spirit rejoice in the living God: there is no joy like the joy of
his presence who gives life, and a heart to pant and breath after the joys of
life eternal.

The sparrow has found her a house, and the swallow a nest where to lay her
young, even thy Altars: And O that my Soul could mount as does the Sparrow upon
her wings with inflamed affections after the pleasures of thy house, and that
my flesh might be instrumental to my Soul in bringing forth the fruits of the
Spirit, to be sacrificed upon the Altar of Praise and Thanksgiving unto thee, O
Lord of hosts my King and my God, whom alone I desire to adore, worship and
obey.

Blessed are they here in hope, hereafter in fruition, who dwell in thy house
of Grace below, of Glory above: They will always be praising thee: It Is our
principal errand to the house of God upon earth, and shall be our only
employment in his house of Heaven always to praise the Lord.

But we of thy house and family here below, like the young birds near thine
Altar are unfledged, and empent in the nest of this corruptible body which
weighs down the Soul, so that mount to Heavenward we cannot without the
divine assistance; therefore

Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, who derives strength of Grace
from thee to praise and glorify thee, and this not only with their mouths, but
in whose heart are thy ways, cordially resolving and uprightly walking in the
ways of thy service, and of their own salvation.

Who going through the vale of misery, in their pilgrimage through the miseries
of this sinful life below, use it for a Well, even the deep fountain of a
broken heart, from whence the Pools are filled with water, the eyes flow with
tears of that godly sorrow which works Repentance unto Salvation not to be
repented.

They will go from strength to strength, from one degree of grace to another,
adding to Faith Virtue, to Virtue Knowledge, to Knowledge Temperance, to
Temperance Patience, to Patience Godliness, to Godliness Brotherly kindness,
and to Brotherly kindness Charity, 2 Pet. 1.5. Unto the God of gods appears
every one of them in Sion, each person thus qualified shall appear in the
presence of the supreme Majesty of Heaven: which being the felicity whereunto I
am created, and earnestly long for, I therefore humbly beg

O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer, thou art the Donor of all those powerful
Graces which mount up our Souls to Heaven; and the Lord of all those hosts of
Heaven amongst whom my Soul longs to be enrolled: Hearken O God of Jacob:
assist me in all my wrestlings with my ghostly enemies, that I may prevail and
obtain thy blessing, which is to be called Israel: Seeing God the felicity of
Heaven.

Behold, O God, our Defender against all the crafts and assaults of the Devil,
the world and the flesh: Look upon the face of thine anointed our blessed
Redeemer sitting on thy right hand, and interceeding for us: and may the sacred
beams of his celestial light shine in our hearts and appear in the holiness and
righteousness of our lives; that going from strength to strength we may appear
before the Lord in Sion.

For one day in thy Courts amongst the Quires of Heaven, where the day is but
one, as knowing no morrow day, is better than a thousand of the fliting
transitory days of this mortal life.

I had rather be a doorkeeper, lie at the threshold, submit to the lowest
condition in the house of my God, the place where his Honor dwells who is the
God of my worship and joy: than to dwell in the tents of ungodliness, be
conversant amongst the ungodly of this world, in the most splendid condition
with all the delights of the sons of men: for it is not all the pomp and glory,
all the pleasures and treasures of this life can give any solid satisfaction to
the vast desires of my immortal Soul.

For the Lord is a light and defense, a light for direction in the way of
peace, and a defense for perfection, against all whomsoever, or whatsoever
might disturb the innocence and peace of my Soul. He will give grace and
worship, Grace to serve him truly here, and Worship or Glory to crown our
services hereafter: and no good thing will he withhold from them that lead as
godly life: who truly love and fear God, and wait for his promises in the
obedience of his precepts shall enjoy all that is truly good, or conducible to
their eternal happiness in heaven: And therefore

O Lord God of hosts, blessed is the man that puts his trust in thee: not
roving in his hopes and desires after the exterior empty, transitory
consolations of the creature, but among the sundry and manifold changes of the
world has his heart surely fixed there, where true joys are to be found,
which is alone in the presence of the God of Heaven: where all do rejoice
together and sing for ever Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


AS an Earnest of this everlasting joy and felicity,

One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require: Ps. 27.4.
even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to
behold the fair beauty of the Lord and to visit his Temple.

A MEDITATION Upon the VOW in BAPTISM, Out of S. Chrysostom de Martyribus,
SERMON. II.
REmember the Covenant, Attend the Condition, Acknowledge the Warfare: The
Covenant thou have made with God; the Condition whereby thou wast received into
this Covenant; the Warfare unto which thou art hereby engaged. The Covenant is
to be a member of Christ, a child of God, and an heir of Heaven; or, the
Covenant of Grace and Salvation: the Condition is to renounce the Devil, and
all his works, the pomps -- the Warfare thou have undertaken, is manfully to
fight under the banner of Christ against these ghostly enemies; to this end thy
Christian name is enrolled amongst the musters of the Church Militant, wherein
thou have promised to continue Christ's faithful servant and soldier, unto thy
life's end.

Thou art too delicate a Christian to dream of a Victory, without fighting for
it, of a Conquest without exercise of arms, of a Triumph without trial of
strength: Phil. 3.14.
The price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus is not to be obtained but
by contest with, and mastery over all our ghostly adversaries. Rev. 2.7, 17,
26. and chapter 3.5.
To him that overcomes only is the promise made.

Rowse up then thy self thou secure and slothful Christian: stir up the Grace
of God within thee, and which was communicated unto thee, when first by holy
Baptism thou wast enlisted a Christian soldier under the Captain of our
Salvation: draw not back thy foot from the combat, but take courage, and put
thy self on manfully to resist the Devil and all his works of temptation unto
sin: Thou need not to be afraid of all his fiery darts, for these cannot
pierce, but when enflamed by the fire of thine own concupiscence, Covetousness
and Pride, or the Pomps and vanities of this wicked world, with Luxury and
Voluptuousness, or the sinful lusts of the flesh; these are the weapons
wherewithal the enemy wars against the Soul: By the steadfast belief of all the
Articles of the holy Christian Faith, and a constant obedience to God's holy
will and Commandments, they are renounced, resisted, beaten back, and overcome.

This thou have solemnly vowed in the open face of Christ's Church, whosoever
thou be that art rightly called Christian: and though thy Christendom was not
thus right, Orthodox and Legal, yet this must be performed, if thou will be, or
being, continue within the Covenant of Grace to the eternal Salvation of thy
Soul.

Raise up, O Lord, we pray thee, thy power, and come amongst us, and with great
might succor us; that whereas through our sins and wickedness we are sore let
and hindered in running the race that is set before us, by thy bountiful grace
and mercy we may be enabled to withstand the temptations of the Devil, the
world, and the flesh, and with pure hearts and minds to follow thee the only
God through Jesus Christ our Lord --

MEDITATION Of the Cure of the Soul before that of the Body.
THere is a vast difference betwixt the Soul and Body in the dignity of their
nature: the Soul is of a heavenly descent and original; but the body is of
earthly mould and making: the Soul is framed by the hands of the Almighty,
after his own Image; but the Body is begotten of earthly parents, after the
likeness of sinful flesh: the Soul is of the same nature with the Angels of
Heaven; but the Body is of kind and constitution with the beasts of the earth:
the Soul being the infusion of Heaven, represents the beauties and perfections
of the most high and holy God; but the Body being the result of carnal
copulation, assimilates only the fading shadows of beauty in irrational beings:
Lastly, whatever beauty, strength, motion or Life it self the Body enjoys, is
by the virtue, vigor, and actuation of the Soul which manifests its
immortality, and separate subsistence from the dying Body.

Very pertinent then is that question of S. Augustine to fond senseless man:
Laboras ut non moriatur homo meriturus: and non laboras ne peccet in aeternum
victurus? Why art thou so solicitous to preserve the body from death, which
must dye, and do not endeavor rather to preserve from sin thy Soul which
will live for ever?

If but a finger of the Body ach, it is bemoaned and lapt, and every petty sore
is salv'd, and carefully kept from the least touch, that may annoy it: and to
cure the diseases of the Body no cost or pains is spared, the most bitter drugs
are swallowed; lancing, burning, fasting, any trouble or torture is willingly
endured: but the sores of sin are suffered to fester, and the diseases of the
Soul are slighted, without any regard had to the devout use of those holy
means, which the great Physician of Souls has prescribed for their recovery.

O remember, and wisely consider, that by how much thy Soul transcends thy Body
in purity of nature, and dignity of condition, by so much thy spiritual
diseases are more mischievous, and destructive, than any bodily distempers can
be.

The ilness of the Body tends only to the disanimation of the corruptible
flesh: but the maladies of the Soul render her both loathsome in the eyes of
God, and all good men, and also obnoxious to the Second death, the
unsupportable torments of the nether hell.

O that the blessed Spirit of God would vouchsafe to anoint the eyes of my mind
with the eye salve of celestial grace, Rev. 3.18.
that mine eyes may be opened to see mine own vileness and nakedness, and to
discover all the sad distempers of my Soul: to see them in their stain, guilt
and pollution, in the loathsome and destructive nature of them: that seeing I
may wash them with my tears, lance them with the knife of holy Mortification,
rip them up by Confession, and lay them open to the view of the great lover of
Souls: and pray

Arise, blessed Jesus, Mal. 4.2.
Arise thou Sun of righteousness, upon my darkened diseased Soul, with healing
in thy wings: whither shall I fly for spiritual health, but to the God of the
spirits of all flesh, Number. 16.22. 1 Samuel 2.6 Ps. 147 3.
who kills and makes alive, who brings down to the gates of death, and
brings up again, who heals those that are broken in heart, and gives
medicine to heal their sickness? Whither shall I go for health and salvation,
but to the Savior of the world, who came to visit the sons of men, when sick
in sin, and sick unto death the wages of sin, who is both our Physician and our
physic, both our Doctor and healing medicine: who after a wonderful manner,
has made a salve for the sores of sin, of his own stripes, and wounds, and
blood? Through Faith in this blood, intermixed with my penitent tears, will I
bathe my diseased Soul and ever pray by these stripes to be healed. 1 Pet. 2.24


I said, and I will ever say it, whilst I have a day to live: Ps. 41.4.
Lord, be merciful unto me, and heal my Soul, for I have sinned against thee.

MEDITATION Upon the Tears of the devout Soul.
MY Tears have been my meat day and night: Ps. 84.6.
this present life is to the truly devout Christian a valley of Tears, whose
broken heart is the Well from whence the Pools are filled with water, the eyes
with Tears; wherewithal the religious soul is fed and fatned as is the body
with meats and drinks.

These Soul-saving waters are of two sorts; 1. Such as flow from the heart
wounded with the love of Christ, and enflamed with desires of a nearer and more
immediate union and communion with the Triune God: saying, Ps. 42.2.
My Soul is a thirst for God, even the living God, when shall I come to appear
before the presence of God? when shall I be so happy, as to see my God, not as
now in a glass darkly, but face to face, to the ravishing of my Soul with joy
unspeakable and glorious? Or,

2. Such Tears as do flow from the heart pierced with godly sorrow for sin,
which separates, and exiles the Soul from God, whilst the Devil and his Angels,
insulting daily say unto me, Where is now thy God? ver. 3.


Both these sorts of Tears S. Augustine humbly begged of God under the notion of
the upper and lower springs, Jos. 15, 19.
both Tears of divine Love, and Devotion to Heaven above; and Tears of godly
sorrow for sin upon earth below.

Blessed are they that thus sow in tears, Ps. 126.6,
for they shall reap in joy --

He that now goes on his way of holy Religion, 7.
weeping, and bears good seed, such tears of godly sorrow as bring forth
fruits meet for Repentance, shall doubtless come again with joy and bring his
sheaves with him, being treasured up in the granary of heaven. Such devout
penitents go from strength to strength, adding to their Faith virtue, 2 Pet.
1.5, 6.
and to virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, to temperance patience, and
to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly
kindness Charity: Thus they ascend as by steps, and to the God of gods appear
every one in Sion.

Blessed Lord, who fashionest the hearts of all the sons of men, and turnest
them as the rivers of water; vouchsafe by the celestial influences of thy holy
spirit, to turn the stream of my corrupt affections from all the pomps and
vanities of this wicked world, and from the sinful lusts of the flesh: Strike
the rock of my hard heart, with the rod of thy fatherly correction, that both
the upper, and the lower springs may issue thence, and the graces of thy holy
Spirit may there spring up to everlasting life. Joh. 4.14.


I am a great sinner, I confess, and O that my heart were so deeply wounded
with the sense of my sins, as to lament them with that godly sorrow for sin as
works repentance unto salvation not to be repented of. 2 Cor. 7.10. Ps. 39.12.


I am a sojourner upon earth as all my fathers were, O pierce my soul with the
dart of divine love, to bewail the deadness of my affections toward thee, to
lament that I am so much a stranger to my native home of Heaven, that my heart
is not surely fixed there where true joys are to be found, but grovels in the
dust of worldly vanities; to grieve that I walk in the midst of manifold
temptations, and my ghostly enemies do daily prevail against me, and daily cast
in my teeth my daily backslidings from the love, and service of my God: But be
thou merciful unto me, O Lord: Ps. 41.10.
Raise thou me up again, and I shall reward them, by my future conquests over
all their temptations.

MEDITATION Of the dwelling of God in the hearts of his People.
WHosoever desires that the Lord would vouchsafe to come unto him, must himself
first prepare his heart to come unto God: And this not by Faith alone, but by
divine love, and obedience to his most holy Laws: If any man love me he will
keep my Sayings, Joh. 14.23.
and my father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with
him.

How, and when the Lord comes, and abides with us, must be known by the
influences and operations of his presence, as the tree by its fruits, or the
cause by its effects.

1. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all: 1 John 5.7.
and such are the blessed Souls in whom he abides, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5.
they are all children of the light, and of the day, not of night, and of
darkness: Their understandings are enlightened to know God, both in himself, and
in the ways of his service, and of their own Salvation: and this light of their
Faith shines before men, in all the good works of Soberness, Righteousness and
Godliness to the glory of God the father of lights.

2. God is a consuming fire: Heb. 12.29.
and accordingly the Souls possessed by him are purged as with fire from all
the sordid lusts of the flesh, and of the world, their affections are purified,
the rust of sloth and negligence in the ways of life is scowred off, their
hearts as with fire are inflamed with the sacred ardors of divine Love, of a
holy and discreet Zeal, of a fervent Devotion in their Prayers unto God, and
praises of him, and with earnest defires of a nearer, and a more immediate
Communion with his divine Majesty.

3. God is the fountain of living waters, and accordingly where he dwells, Jer.
2.13.
he does allay the heat of carnal concupiscence, subdue the inordinate love of
riches, quench the fire of strife and contention, of blind Zeal and Faction,
and of every exorbitant lust: being in himself a full satisfaction to all the
vast desires of the immortal Soul.

As water he satisfies the desires of all who hunger, and thirst after
righteousness, and by the influence of his divine grace, makes the barren
ground of the heart to be fruitful unto every good word and work.

4. God is all purity and holiness, goodness and mercy, justice and truth; and
in a word, the summary of all perfection and felicity: and therefore all those
happy Souls where he dwells, are holy as he is holy, pure as he is pure,
merciful as he is merciful, just and good, gracious and long-suffering; and in
a word, perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect.

It Is such divinely enspirited persons, and only such can say with the heavenly
inspired Psalmist: I will love thee, O Lord, my strength; the Lord is my stony
rock, and my defense, my Savior, my God, and my might, in whom I will trust,
my buckler and the horn of my salvation, and my refuge, Psalm. 18.1. and Psalm.
27.1. The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord
is the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? and Psalm. 28.8. The
Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart has trusted in him and I am
helped: therefore my heart danceth for joy, and in my song will I praise him --
The Lord is my strength, and he is the wholesome defense of his anointed -- O
save thy people, and give thy blessing to thine inheritance, feed them, and set
them up for ever.

Our Father which art in, etc.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. Line 12. read, show thou me the way. p. 5. after line 7. add, From
this vain world my affections wein. p. 10. l. 9. r. grant me. p. 14. l. 15. for
unto r. out off. p. 24. after l. 8. add, O holy ghost into my mind: send down
thy heavenly light. p. 27. l. ult. dele And. p. 52. l. 2. for hear r.
teach. p. 63. l. 19. for Love. r. Have. p. 66. l. 5. r. should engage. p.
93. l. 26. for love r. lone. p. 131. l. ult. r. made them. p. 181. l. 18. dele
Holy. p. 188. l. 3. for them r. each of these. p. 201. l. penult. for the r.
these. p. 317. l. 24. for joy r. so. p. 330. for perfection r. protection.


