The Loves OF AMANDUS AND SOPHRONIA, Historically Narrated.

A Piece of rare Contexture, Enriched with many pleasing Odes and Sonnets,
occasioned by the Jocular, or Tragical occurrences, happening in the progress
of the HISTORY.

Disposed into three Books, or Tracts By Samuel Sheppard.

Horace,

-- Quod fi meliora novisti,
Candidus Imparti, si non, his utere mecum.
LONDON, Printed by G. D. for John Hardestie, to be sold at the Black
Spred-Eagle in Ducklane, 1650.

LEt the Reader be pleased to Censure mildly of the Printer, by whose
oversight, are these Erratas.
Page 2. for Permitias read Premitias.
Page 9. for Lunary read Luminary.
Page 25. for Uronea read Pronea.
Page 73. for desert read Dissect. for Rapide r. Rabbide.
CANDIDO ET CORDATO
Amico foelici Genio, perspicaci, Ingenio, Johan. Mane De( --) Baronetto Eoque
titulo, vere digno

SAMUEL SHEPPARD, hosce extremos Amatorum Amplexus Animi permitias, Solennique
officio perfunctas humill

i am.

Dedit, Dicavit, Dedicavit.

Cloth-Faire, August 20. 1650.
To the Author on his Excellent Romantic Piece.
THe Privilege that pens do find
Amongst men, comes short unto the mind,
For mental Cabinets do yield
No jot unto the Critics shield:
If thoughts might crown deserts, I dare
Give to my Pen the largest share.
But when our Vultures 'gin to gnaw,
I Will cease for fear, and say it is Law;
Its better fail of debt, then be
Honest, in terms, of flattery;
I hate the thought, I Will freely give
My Verdict, which perhaps may live
Against Calumny. If Learning may
With Wit, win Fame, thou have the day.
Crowned be thy brows with lasting Bays,
Who giv'st a Form to future days:
If witness may be lawful, then
I Will swear 't shall fear no Vote of men;
But to thy ever-shining Glory,
The times to come shall hug thy Story.
J. BOURNE.

To my much honored Friend, the Author, on his History of Amandus and
Sophronia. In a Dialogue, between Menander and Museus.
Menan. MUseus, how do brook to be
Thus rivaled?

Mus. Fate does find I see
It Is fit, all Glory should not die
Entailed unto our memory,
Where Is thy Aglaia?

Men. Where is laid
Thy much renowned Sestian Maid?

Mus. Beneath a myrtle.

Men. So is mine
Prattling, with Queen Proserpine.
Mine laughs.

Mus. Mine weeps.

Men. Mine joys to find
Another of as rich a mind.

Mus. But Venus Priestesse is in grief,
She now no longer shall be Chief,
But with Leander must give way
TO Amandus, and Sophronia.

JOHN HALL Collegij Regnalis Canta. in Artibus Magistro.

In Authorem Amicissimum suum, Encomiasticon.
LAdies, you that hug the Quill
Of Renowned Astrophil
Here, behold a second Birth,
Tasting of Sydnean worth.
For Pyrocles, here, you may
Find an Amandus, every way
His Rival; in Clodomer view
Basilius, and his humor too:
This is so like in every lim
To Sydney, that 'twas got by him
IN de swear, but I should injure then
One of our noblest Shepherds Pen.
See how the Learned shades do meet,
And like Aeriall shadows fleet,
More in number then were spide
To flock 'bout the Dulichian Guide.
The first, Museus, then Catullus,
Then Naso, Flaccus, and Tibullus;
Then Petrach, Sydney, none can move
Shakespeare out of Adonis Grove,
There sullenly he sits; but these
Admire thy novell Rhapsodies.
Dear Friend, which ever shall subsist,
Spite of Oblivion's hiding-mist.
ANTHONY DAVENPORT.

THE LOVES OF AMANDVS AND SOPHRONIA.
The First Book.
CHAP. I.
Ambassadors (from diverse parts of Europe) arrive at Verona, the occasion
thereof. Rhoxenor courts Sophronia. Her Reply. He resolves her Ruin.

ANciently there Reigned a very Potent King over the Kingdom of Lombardie,
named Clodomer, who, by his Queen (Lucinda) had one only Son, called Rhoxenor,
a Prince of Exquisite Feature, who, as he attained years, became Splendidly
Eminent, for his Inclination to, and his unparralleld Industry in, the Study of
the Sciences; to which, (that nothing might be wanting, to make him more then a
mere mortal) his Deportment commanded an expectation of Majestic
Magnanimity, and Magnanimous Majesty, to the envy of neighboring Kings, and
to the ineffable joy of his Princely Parents.

Coming unto years of maturitie (so that now without prejudice to Truth he
might write himself, Man) he seemed, some golden Casket repleat with Diamonds:
the eyes of all men were fixed on him, as ordained by Heaven, for a
Super-excellent Mirror, whose very reflection should dim the Splendour of all
Former, and Future Kings: Their expectations, laboring with an ardent desire,
to see their young Prince fettered, in the pleasing Bands of Matrimony, the
main Remora (in their apprehensions) being his high Descent, and innate Worth,
which seated him on so proud a Pinnacle, that nothing, save a continuance in his
single Capacity, could preserve his Splendour unsullied, and his Glory
un-eclipsed, they could have been content, that their Phoenix should have made
himself his own Mate, and his own Heir, save that they were sensible,
another Rhoxenor would not spring out of his ashes.

But what Mortality had ever yet a durable existence of it self? What more
virtuous Prince then Nero, the first five years? The Father of us all,
retained his pristine purity for some hours in the Garden. The Effigy of
Byancha, Daughter to the King of Hungary: The Resemblance of Leonora, Heir
apparent to the King of Poland; and the lively Portraicture of Dulciana, (whose
living substance was courted by the most famous Princes of Europe) Daughter to
the Emperor of Almaine, brought by several Ambassadors, sent from the
aforesaid Kings, all using their utmost Oratory to win Rhoxenors assent, in
the behalf of their several Masters, bringing with them (as Advocates) many
rich presents, were frustrated of their hopes, by his peremptory negation, to
their exceeding grief and astonishment,

Now, if you demand the reason of this strange averseness in Rhoxenor, I shall
tell you, that Lust, outrageous, injurious, destructive Lust, was the
impediment that hindered his compliance, which had taken such sure hold on his
heart, that it was impossible for the hand of Temperance to dislocate the
Usurper, without pulling the panting lump from its strings; nor was Rhoxenor
able (though he indefagitably endeavored it) to conjure down this Fiend, that
his own indiscreet passions had raised, so that he was every way surrounded
with inevitable dangers, Scylla on the right hand, and Charibdis on the left;
Aetna on the left hand, and Avernus on the right; (with Maedea) he saw, and
knew the horror of his Crime, and yet (thrust forward by unavoydable destiny)
he could not but proceed in the perpetration thereof.

And that, though he knew this would occasion his own loss of former Honor;
his Royal Parents Rage and Grief; Amandus (once his alter idem, having been
bred up with him from his Cradle, now upon his return from castigating the
Girpides, the Soldiers unanimously and cordially affecting him) his assured
hate and vengeance, besides the ugliness of the Act, in wronging so noble a
friend, together with the hazard of the Nobilities, Gentries, and Peoples
revolt; yet to enjoy (indeed force) Sophronia (already affianced to Amandus) he
is content to lose all, and to make himself wretched, for the fruition of that
(which if forced) is (in truth) the worst of misery.

Long (during Amandus absence) he conversed with the chaste Sophronia (whom the
King for Amandus sake had appointed a residence near his own lodgings) rather
like a Brother then a Lover. [So the Wolf, and the Lamb, converse in amity,
till maturitie divulge how differently Nature has allotted them] Love, (if I
may call it Love) by degrees (like supplanting Ivy) wound about his heart,
till at last it mastered his Senses, overtopping and triumphing over all his
Powers; so that [after many apparent signs of his inward Ardour, more then
ever Naso prescribed in his Art of Love, which Sophronia did, but would not
seem to apprehend] he burst out into a plain language, thus uttering his
desires.

Madam,

I Have endeavored (with a more then masculine resolve) to suppress those
passions, and to extinguish those flames, which have a long time hovered about
my heart, but find it beyond my force, not to write, when Nature her self
dictates. (Lady) I love you, love you above Heaven, or Honor (both which [in
all probabilities] I am like to forfeit for your sake) I am not ignorant of
your affiancing to Amandus, but (dear Mistress) consider my Birth with his
Fortunes, and my Estate with his Wealth, and you cannot (sure) relinquish the
gold, and desire the brass; this heavenly beauty was not ordained for less
then a Throne, and it were an injury to Divinity it self, to have these
Temples adorned, with ought save a Diadem; it is in you (excellent Mistress)
to make Rhoxenor, more than man, or to uncreate him, (which alone your denial
can do) and to precipitate him, from an Heaven of content and happiness, to
an Hell of distraction and misery.

You may imagine, how this unlooked for narration, amazed poor Sophronia, (a
Lady excellently virtuous) and whose heart was as immoveably fixed on Amandus,
as ever the Sestian Heroes on her adventurous Leander, or the unfortunate
Thysbes, on her hapless Pyramus, whose blood gave the first tincture to the
Mulbery, her cheeks dyed in more perfect Purple, then Monarchs put on when they
mourn, she returned him this answer:

Sir,

Your language (which I wish I had been deaf to) gives me cause to suspect,
that some saucy Devil (to be thought an Angel of light) has cheated Rhoxenor,
of his form; for sure, Prince Rhoxenor (I mean King Clodomers Son) whom Fame
canonizeth, for the storehouse of Virtue, and the Mirour of mankind, cannot
be such a Traitor to his own fame, and his friends honor, or imagine
Sophronia, so light of soul, as to prove false to her faith, to be the
greatest Princess in the world.

Having thus said, (the vehemence of her expression, well denoting the
perplexity of her mind) she flung from him, in a (sober) rage, and the Garden
door being open (for Rhoxenor the more opportunely to discover himself, had
invited her into the privy Garden, adjoning to the Palace) she forsook the
Prince, and retired to her Chamber.

He, as much astonished at her stern reply, as she greived, for his dangerous
solicitation, stood a while, like one Planet struck; you would have taken him
(had your eyes visited him in that agony) for some shaped Statue, carved by
some cunning Dedalus: but at length, his lost senses (like trewant Servants)
returning to their obliged exercises, smiting his hand on his breast (quoth he)
I perceive, I may sooner catch a falling Star, or make a bonefire in the Seas
bottom, then win the favor of this icie piece; and therefore (for the future)
I shall (with Aesops Fox) despise the fruition of that, which in affecting, I
cannot attain; yet shall she know, that Princes must of necessity, either love
affectionately, or hate deadly; and since my self must not enjoy her, I will
so contrive, that Amandus shall not: having uttered this, in a great rage, he
left the Garden, and departed toward the Palace, in so moody a manner, that
none of his Attendance, durst speak to him; and to those Lords that saluted
him, he returned no answer, to the exceeding amazement of the Court, who wonder
at (but cannot guess) the cause of his change of cheer; the people whispering
variously, but nothing truly, according to the wildness of their fancies.

Thus he, who not many months since, seemed to rival that Prince of Planets,
the Sun, for translucency, and clearness, will now scarce serve for a Lunary
in Archimedes Sphere, So great is the folly, that comes of Wisdom, and so
dreadful is the wickedness, that arises out of the ashes of a dead virtue.

CHAP. II
Rhoxenor exceedingly perplexed, Cheribrert discovers the cause of his dolor;
his wicked counsel, he undertakes the business about Sophronia.

SO great was Rhoxenors anguish, conceived, for the late repulse offered him by
Sophronia, agravated by his innate assurance, that his hopes were for ever
buried in the Lathe of her chaste Love to Amandus, that he scarce refrained to
offer violence to his own Person; and though Cheribrert his creature (though
his Fathers Counselor) and to whom he had hitherto unbowelled himself upon
all occasions, was importunately solicitous, to gain from him the least part of
that which occasioned his sorrow; yet it seemed he had exchanged tongues with
some Fish, no answer was returned to any of his demands: so that it was all
one, as if he had entered into dialogue with a Statue, or expected a responsion,
from the painted mouth of a Picture on the wall, to the great grief of
Clodimer, and Lucinda, who mourned for their Son as he were now to be
inhumed, or were already sleeping in a sheet of Lead.

In this dolourous distracted condition, he abode the space of eight days,
eating little, and sleeping less, till one day (as he was tossing himself on
his Couch) Cheribrert, unawares entering in, and standing a while at the door,
to listen if he could hear the Prince pronounce the least particle, that might
give him an hint of that which afflicted him, he heard him use these words to
himself;

Ah Sophronia, thus thy unkindnesse, will procure the certain ruin of thy
self, and me, and endanger the devastation of a flourishing Kingdom.

Cheribrert, glad of this Intelligence, as if he had heard nothing, enters in,
after his wonted manner, and (as his usual custom was) besought him, now at
last to discover his grief; for (quoth he) be confident (Sir) of cure, if it
be in the power of Heaven, Earth, or Hell to afford it: But finding him still
wedded to his wonted taciturnity; (quoth he) my Lord, you are conscious (I am
sure) of the knowledge I am famous for in Astrology; and having calculated your
Nativity, and otherwise used my Art to the utmost, I find that you are in
Love; Rhoxenor, starting from his Couch, at that word, stood upon his feet,
(quoth he) but though (perhaps) by thy Art, thou have found out the cause, it
is not in the power of gods, or men to prescribe the cure: My Lord (quoth
Cheribrert) (having ever born a deadly hate to Amandus.)

Trees, that will not bend, are as easily broken; it is at your discretion,
though you cannot take in the Town by Seige, to shake it to dust, with your
battery; by all that is sacred, and the bright Genius of this place, I vow to
sacrifice soul and body to purchase your content, though your commands
extended to the killing of my Father.

Quoth Rhoxenor) and therewith fetched a deep sigh, grating his teeth) Take
then the dreadful secret into thy bosom, I love Sophronia (Amandu's betrothed
wife) but her Person I must never expect to enjoy, which though I am content to
believe; yet such is the rigor of my temper, that the damned endure not more
unexpressable torments in hell, then I, when I but entertain a thought, that
Amandus, or any else, shall have the fruition of that Paradise, from entering
into which, a Cherubin (with a flaming Sword) is my Remora; I would fain work
the coy Sophronia, some deep disgrace, and so contrive, that Amandus may be
made incapable of her embraces.

To this Cheribrert (laughing aloud) answered; And has this slight business
(my Lord) occasione^ all this ado, to the dishonor of your self, the grief
of Clodomer, and Lucinda, and the general discourse, and destraction of the
whole Realm? by the Soul of the world (my Lord) you have most indiscreetly
fooled your self.

Why (quoth Rhoxenor) do thou make so slight of it?

Yes, (quoth Cheribrert) for is it not in you, to dispose of Sophronia, and
Amandus, as you shall think fit? are they not your Subjects, and Servants, are
not (or ought not) their lives and estates, to be at your appointment, as other
your Fathers Subjects, whose Heir aparent you are? Depute me (my Lord) for the
managing of this business, and if I act not like another Mercury, wittily, yet
like another Saturn, malevolently, decapitate me, and fix this head on the
chief Gate of the City.

I ever (quoth Rhoxenor) have found thee cordially fidelious, do but do as
thou have indented, and expect what wealth, or honor thou can covet, while
Clodomer lives, and when his death, puts the Diadem upon my head, to be my only
favorite.

I (quoth Cheribrert) shall esteem the fulfilling of your commands, rewards
sufficient. I joy that Fate has found out away for me, to express the loyal
duty I owe to your Highness.

And so for that time they departed one from another, the Prince to the Court,
and Cheribrert to his own mansion.

CHAP. III.
Cheribrert (by the aid of Flavia, Sophronias Woman) betrays Sophronia to the
censure of the Law, the manner thereof.

Wonderful it is to consider, how great an influence the interior parts of
man, have on his exterior; Rhoxenor had almost vexed himself to a Skelleton,
but now [relying on Cheribrerts abillity, for the accomplishment of his wicked
designes] his mind being calmed, his whole Microcosme resumed its wonted
vigor.

[So the vegitables of the earth, when the frosty hand of Hyems has dispoyled
them of their verdant garments, remain (for a time) as it were, saplesse; but
when Hyperion brings on the spring, they are again adorned in their summer
glory] Rhoxenor has the same health (though not the same purity) he formerly
enjoyed, to the general rejoicing of all men.

But now was Cheribrert devizing how to express himself a faithful Servant,
to his ignoble Master, sometime he resolves on this, but then another
consideration proves it abortive: now he proposes that, as the surest, and
most facile way; but cogitating how it may prove in the Catastrophe, he waveth
it, as suggested by the Feinds to his own ruin; at length he concluded on a
way, most probable, for the effecting of his designs, which was this:

The virtuous Sophronio had an Handmaid, whom she peculiarly reflected on,
named Flavia; her he had a long time endeavored to win to his lascivious
embraces, with all manner of rich gifts, and fair promises, but had still
failed in his hopes; the Virgins breast being Armor of proof, against all the
fiery assaults of this Fiend; yet in case he could affect her honorably, in
the way of marriage, she denied not, to meet his love with equal Fervor: By
this Virgins means, he doubted not (though one would think he had cause enough
to be diffident) to fulfill his engagement to Rhoxenor, and attain his
proposed ends.

With all speed therefore he resorts to Flavia, (who was hardly drawn to
accompany him, imagining he yet came to demand that which she never meant to
give) and having declared unto her his (seeming) noble intents (to make her his
Wife, and sharer with him, in all he could call his) she looked upon him with a
more pleasing aspect then hitherto she had done; her gesture proclaiming, she
applauded his intents, and with him would cheerfully accord to sing Paeans to
Hymen.

Having assured her his reality, with many oaths and imprecations, calling the
immortal Gods to witness the Integrity of his heart (quoth he)

My dear, since now nothing wants, save some few ceremonious Forms, to make
us one flesh, Heaven forbid we should deny to accomplish any thing one for
another, not beyond our ability to perform. So it is, that the Prince Rhoxenor
(upon thy life, wear the secret next thy heart) is deeply enamoured on thy
Mistress, who he has solicited in as quaint Oratory, as ever Demosthenes,
Quintilian, or Tully were masters of, yet neither his words, presents, or
promises, have proved of force enough to thaw her frosty chastity: Now, it is
in thee, to gain him the fruition of his desires, and to make me (thy Husband)
great in Riches and Honors; I know, she permits none to have natures best
benefit by her save thee; too morrow night therefore, the Prince Rhoxenor,
adorned with these very garments thou have on, shall slip into thy Mistress
bed, which happiness, when he has once attained, if he lose the fruition of
his bliss by Cowardice, let Cupid break his head with his Bow, or Venus
strangle him with her Ceston.

Flavia, stood a while in a Dilemma, not knowing what answer to return, yet at
length (Oh the frailty of woman kind, who, if they resist the assault the one
way, are easily surprised by the other) she consented to act according to his
prescription.

Thus she whose chastity could not be undermined by lust, or gain, had her
fidelity blown up by the hope of conjugall Wealth, and matrimonial Honor.

Night now drew her Curtain over the World, and the chaste Sophronia preparing
for Bed, was enforced to use the aid of some other Handmaid, Flavia (by
Cheribrerts advice) keeping out of the way on purpose. Sophronia entering her
Bed, seemed like Bow-arm'd Diana, stripping her self of her ornaments,
intending to bath her Deifide body in some Crystal Fountain, she was
(indeed) an Adornment to that which Adorned her; the Arts, which other Ladies
use to add to the Luster of their Beauties, would have dimmed her natural
exquisite Splendour: So great were her outward Perfections, that, not Paetrarch,
or Sydney, (were they alive) could find pertinent Elocution, suitable to her
Eulogie: So glorious were her inward endowments, that none save Apollo himself,
or rather the tongue of some Cherub, can speak them.

By this time pernicious Cheribrert had so dealt with a servant of his (no
worse Officer then the Groom of his Stable) whom he had decked (with the Jay
recorded by Aesop) in Flavia's Plumes, and with fair words, and rich promises,
had so fortified his courage, that he resolutely entered Sophronia's Chamber,
(having received the key of the door from Flavia, in whom Sophronia reposed so
great confidence, that she made her [as it were] the Guardianesse of her
person) the fellow being entered, found the Excellent Lady fast asleep (so
fatal was her chance, and so direful her destiny) rejoicing thereat, he
beckned to Rhoxenor and Cheribret (who stood at the staire-foot) to come up,
who did so, and with easy motion planted themselves in a corner of the room,
behind the Arras, while the fellow went to bed; no sooner in, but Cheribrert
and the Prince left their station, and with loud cries, awaked the Chaste Lady,
who, amazed at the suddenness of the thing, and wondering to behold Cheribrert,
and Rhoxenor, by her beds side, also perceiving the door of her Chamber wide
open, but looking upon the slave that had adventured into her bed, and finding
him not to be Flavia, with a loud shreitch she leaped out of the bed, and was
entertained by the Prince, into his Arms, though not with a Lovers embraces

O horror (quoth Cheribrert) calling his man by his name) what saucy Fiend
prompted thee to this villainy, to the never to be obliterated infamy of our
Noble General, Amandus, the deep disgrace of all Ladies in this Kingdom;
Heaven knows how often she has sated her salt lust with this stallion, and
therewithal, he thrust a poniard to the fellows heart.

Thou may report it in the other World (quoth he) but never in this, that
thou have had to do with so beauteous a Lady*

O Heaven (quoth Rhoxener) is this your love to Amandus (Lady) what woman may
be trusted? We give our Souls to the Devil for a little Letchery, and a woman
makes the Contract. Was this the occasion I appeared so despicable in your
eyes, an horse-heel-rubber your Paramour; by all the Gods, I tremble to think
of your degenerate dotage, and had not mine eyes been witnesses of this
horror, I should not have credited the Narration, had Apollo pronounced it:
But be your sin to your self, your Letcher has paid for his wharfage
already, and is now entering into Charons boat: For your part (though your life
be forfeit by the Law) both trial, and execution shall be adjourned, till
Amandus have resigned his Wreath at the feet of Fame, and shall have opportune
leisure to hear the History of his own shame.

The betrayed Sophronia, was so vassalized to terror, that she could not speak
one word, but swouned away, so that they were forced to show her some small
courtesy against their wills, (such as the Spanish Inquisitors extend to those
they put to the Rack, give them some respite to recover their limbs anew, and
more fiercely to torment them) and to put her into her bed, for her recovery.

Cheribrert, uncasing his dead Hireling, left him on the floor, throwing his
own habit (which he ware under his woman's weed) over him, and putting Flavia's
gown under his cloak, departed, with Rhoxenor to the Palace, of whom, read
more in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Sophronia (by the Kings command) carried Prisoner to Castle Angellina: Her
Deportment there.

THe Prince, having finished this unprincely work (by the help of his wretched
Instrument, Cheribrert, to whom he promised great rewards for this service)
resorts to the King his Father, to whom he declares the debauchery of
Sophronia, Cheribrert seconding the same, and adding, that he was so
exasperated, and vassaliz'd to passion at the knowledge thereof, that he had
justly (though unadvisedly) slain his own Servant (her Paramour) with his
poniard. Clodomer (who little suspected the treachery of Rhoxenor, and
Cheribrert) after some dispute with those about him, concluded to commit her
prisoner to Castle Angellina, there to remain, till time should further their
intents for her trial, and punishment.

Unfortunate Sophronia was hardly reconciled to her gadding Senses, when the
Captain of the Guard (furnished with plenary power to apprehend, and seclude
her person) came to convey her to the place appointed; to whose power, she
willingly submitted, like some innocent Lamb, environed by a crew of ravenous
Wolves, her Innocence, was her Shield; her Purity, her Defense; her Chastity,
her Solace; and her Sanctity, her Sanctuary.

Being come to the Castle, (or rather Casket, appointed to retain so
inestimable a Jewel) she was received by the Keeper thereof, whose wife, an
old Crone, more deformed of mind, then body, took upon her to provide for her,
lodging her in a chamber on the North-side of the Castle, so near the Sea, that
sometimes Neptune watered the very windows thereof, where, taking a coal from
the hearth, she wrote these verses on the wall.

Ye fair Nereides, who love to sweep
(In sedgy Chariots drawn) the foaming deep;
Thou chaste Actea, and Uronea sage,
Cymodoce, that Neptune can assuage,
Themiste, Nemertea, Spio, all
Ye seed of Doris, hearken to my call.
I am Sophronia, by base lust betrayed
By Prince Rhoxenor, in a dungeon laid:
Chant you my name aloud in Thetis Court,
And wealthy Rhea, she will thank you for it;
Or else convey the Story of my woe
To my Amandus (oh) did he but know
My Innocence occasions me this ill,
Clodomer, and Rhoxenor both, he would kill;
But do not as I wish, I speak in passion,
Clodomer is the Father of my Nation,
His Son our Hope and Prop, here let me die;
Yet if I hap to have an Obsequie,
This Epitaph insculpe upon my Tomb.
Here by the destinies injurious doom
Hapless Sophronia lies, killed in her prime
For to be truly chaste was all her crime.

After she had finished these Verses, she sat her down, resolved to bear
patiently whatsoever the will of Heaven should appoint, with as little
repining, as her causeless sufferance, and womanish frailty would permit; where
for a while I must leave her, for it is high time we visited Amandus, and
accompanied him into his own Country.

CHAP. V.
Amandus (having conquered the Girpids) returns Victorious to Verona. His
Solemn Entertainment.

WHile Rhoxenor and Cheribrert were applauding their fortunate success in the
late business, managed against Sophronia; Rhoxenor pleasing himself with the
thought of Sophronia's dolor, and Cheribrert promising himself that this
would prove the praeludium to Amandus downfall, knowing how strongly he was
persuaded of his Mistress Chastity. Amandus (having approved himself the
Master of Mavors, and taught the Girpids, who, being tributary to the Lombards,
had rebelled, that the Lombards merited the Supremacy, excelling them both in
Wisdom, and Valor) with his chief Captains, Venantius, Palladius, Pallante,
and others (after 11 months absence) returned toward his own Country, with
many Prisoners, and rich Spoil, the people strowing Flowers, and presenting
him with Gifts all the way, calling him their PRESERVER, his COUNTRIES
CHAMPION, and the WARS GLORY; all which, he accepted with such a Deportment, as
neither manifested he was proud of their Applause, or scorned their Kindness.

In this manner, he marched toward Verona, not far from whence, the King
Clodomer, Queen Lucinda, Prince Rhoxenor, Cheribrert, and all of the Council,
with infinite numbers of the Gentry on Horseback, and an innumerable number of
the Vulgar on foot, came out to meet him, in this manner.

First came the King Clodomer, wrapped in Ermins skins, on his head, the Diadem
of Lombardie, on a stately Gennet, trapped with Gold, a Canopy of Tyrian Silk,
with Gold Fringe, borne above his Head, by four Noble men of especial note,
on each side of him (for he was a lover of learning, and learned men) a
venerable Bishop, the one named Otho, the other Othello, in their pontifical
Attire, mounted on red Horses (to signify, that by them the Almighty power
dispenses his Judgments and mercies.)

Then followed all the Nobillity of that Kingdom (according to their several
Gradations) clothed and mounted like petty Princes, as you see in a sharp
winter night, when the lesser Luminaries of Heaven are congregated [as if met
in counsel, to contrive the ruin of their Sovereign Lady Phoebe] one far
exceeds another in luster; so was it amongst this Noble train, all strove for
precedence, so that there could not be a parity: after these, came five Troops
of Celestial Choristers on foot, habited in black, with Palms in their hands,
singing Paeans all the way, and playing on several sorts of Instruments, to
which their tuneable voices, so admirably accented, that some would needs
conceit, they were now taking their journey to Elysium, with their King and his
Council.

After these, came the Prince Rhoxenor, with Cheribrert and two more, all clad
(like himself) in black, their Horses of the same color, to the exceeding
wonder of all men.

After whom, came the Queen Lucinda, mounted on an Unicorn (a woman though in
years, of exceeding comeliness, tall of stature, majestic of countenance,
having the work Queen, written in her forehead) with all her train of Ladies
following her, decked in all the spoils of nature.

Like so many Constellations, convened in the upper Region of the Air, their
contracted luster forced the Sun (that greedily gazed upon them, to confess,
that his own Climine was rivalled by the meanest there) to muffle his glorious
head in a Cloud, so that Lucinda, attended by these, seemed another Latona,
glyding ore the Spartane Tageytus, with all her train of Nymphs.

Amandus, with Pallante, Venantius, Palladius, and the chiefest of his
Commanders, drawing near the King, deserted their Horses, and standing on
foot, were honored with Clodomers hand, which they affectionately laid their
lips to; the two Churchmen, Otho, and Othello, congratulating Amandus
arrival, briefly, but pithily.

Then came the Prince Rhoxenor, who salluted Amandus at so great distance, as
(considering their affectionate intimacie formerly, beyond that of Pylades, and
Orestes, or Damon, and Pythias) much amazed him; Cheribrert seemed so much
ravished with joy, that the Organs of his speech, were quite damned up, yet he
made many humble and obsequious congees. Amandus found it no fit time, now, to
enter into dialogue with Rhoxenor, or to enquire the cause, that had so
incredibly estranged him, and therefore he refrained himself, and
counterfeited a mirthfull cheer, and the rather (for that the Prince having
joined himself to his Father) seeing Lucinda came on, with all her beauteous
train, (in the principal rank of whom, he assuredly expected to have blessed
his eyes, with the sight of his divine Lady Sophronia) who likewise offered
Amandus, and his associate Friends, the same honor that Clodomer before had
done, which they submissively accepted.

But Amandus (none blame him for it) was in great anxiety of mind (as the
oddness of his gesture well denoted) at the strange carriage of things, he
perceived the King beheld him, but with half a face, seeming more to reflect
upon his Officers (Venantius, and Palladius) then himself; then, the Prince to
meet him (at such a time) in swarthy weeds, salluting him at more distance,
then a country Gentlewoman would view the Lions at first time; and what was
more horrible then Hell, not to have the sight of Saphronia his souls life
(whom he had left to Clodomers tuition, and protection) these several ill
boading Omens: his jealous Fancy contracted into one ominous apparancy, which
prompted him to prognosticate some strange Revolution had happened during his
non-residency from Verona, yet such was the noble temper of his soul, so great
his Magnanimity [imboldned by his Innocency] that heresolved, not so much as
tacitly to repine, but to wait patiently, and (to humane veiw) contentedly,
till time should make a discovery, to the clearing of all doubts, and so
fortified with this (truly heroic) resolution, he set forward to the City.

CHAP. VI
Venantius, and Palladius, having bargained with an English Curtezan, etc. are
very Scurvily handled.

NOW for that the Reader will have enough of dolourous discourse, ere the
History be brought to a period; it will not be amiss, if I recite one pleasant
passage, that happened to the two Colonels, Venantius, and Palladius.

The Girpids thus subdued, by the blessing of heaven, upon Amandus prowess, it
was thought fit, no longer to keep the Army in pay (the maintenance of which,
must needs prove an intolerable burden to the Subject, especially the
Kingdom not needing a visible force) and therefore Clodomer having bestowed
great gratuities, and rich gifts (befitting his own magnificence, and their
merits) upon the several Commanders of the Army; with a largis to be
distributed amongst the common Soldiers, commanded them Immediately to be
disbanded, with a Proclamation of thanks, for their good service.

Venantius, Palladius, Paradine, and Anselmus, the four principal Commanders
under Amandus (I mention not Pallante, for he kept close to the General,
entirely loving, and entirely beloved of him) these Disciples of Mars, who
subsisted by blood and sweat, having now no further employment, in this
Kingdom, resolved to put themselves, under the governance of the Duke Medina,
General of a potent (Spanish) Army, for the invasion of Fertile France, but
ere they left Verona, they swore to make trial, what Wine and Women the City
afforded.

Being much of the mind of too many Martiallists, managing the Army of the late
King of England, whose vinall and venereall appetites have ruined the glory of
all former and future Princes.

In order to this resolution, they resort to the sign of the Goddess Venus,
situate on the east side of the City, (it seems, that Pest houses, and Bawdy
houses there, have equal appointment) a Tavern, kept by one Antonio Ronsardo,
a Venetian, who had to wife an English woman (a Renegado from her first Mate,
of comely feature) named Mariana (one, who when in England, was more afraid of
a Shrove-tuesdayes Battery, then a guilty Wretch to view the face of an angry
Judge) here being arrived, they were soon conducted into a tippling Tenement,
where they began to drink like Dutch men, Clodomers, Lucindas, Rhoxenors, and
Amandus healths were deeply cellebrated, and now being well heated with Wine,
they knockd for Mariana the Mistress of the house, who came simpring into
their company, like some nice Sister of the new edition; and yet ere she
parted, received her Sallary, to make the Beast with two backs, with one and
the other that night.

Having received her Coin, viz. forty Crowns, she left them to their mirth,
who began to roar and sing, no English Royster beyond them; Venantius (as well
as his new conceived hyccup would permit) began to sing this Catch:

Let the Camp stay,
and the Knapsack-bearers want their pay
till to morrow;
We all are agreed
that Bachus shall bleed,
till drinking has drowned our sorrow.
What gaind Phillips Son, such Conquest and Fame,
And great Julius Caesar so glorious a Name,
But tippling in Triumph, sans limit or aim.
Pewh (quoth Palladius) there is no mellody in these Madrigals, no Songs please
me, save those that are dedicated at least by a Cupid; hear mine, and with
that he began to sing this.

Song.
Why so coy and nice dear Lady,
Pray you, why so nice?
You long to make your Lord a Daddy,
Is kissing then a vice,
pray you, why so nice
Why those Pearls fetched from the Ocean
And those Gems of price?
You know we men have heat and motian.
These must needs entice
maugre all advice.
Why this Tire with care contorted,
Why this Silkworms toil,
And why these hairs curiously sorted
Bedewed with sacred Oil
save our bloods to boil?
If Resolution arm your heart
It Is horrid Tyranny,
For to transluce us with Loves Dart
And yet no cure apply
you are our mallady.
By this time they had sufficiently fudled themselves; the vapourous steam of
both Ellements, I mean, the fumosity of Wine, and the reaking sent of that
Indian Weed, now so common in use, began to foment a civil war in their crazed
noddles, to the infinite prejudice of their feeble brains, who now no longer
able to stand upon their guard, yielded themselves captive, to the disposal of
their merciless Conquerours; Paradine and Anselmus (the only moderate men of
the four) made a shift to grope the way to their lodgings, but Venantius and
Palladius, resolved not to give their money for nothing, although they were
very diffident of some imbecility already seized on their nether nerves.

Well, it now grew late, Mariana comes up to give them notice, that it was high
time, to betake them to their rest.

Sweet beauty (quoth Venantius) we shall not tantalize long, in expectation of
your society.

Do you doubt me (quoth Mariana) be confident, I will be better than my word
to you; and so departed. They imagining, by the word Better, she intimated,
that she would be with them sooner then perhaps they thought, not imagining
what after happened, and doubting nothing, went to bed together.

Now you must understand, that Mariana perceiving Venantius and Palladius, to
be Commanders of the Army under Amandus (by whose Proclamation, it was death
for any Officer, or Soldier, to solicit another man's wife) and well knowing,
that they durst not attempt any thing afterward, should she use them for the
present never so coursely, had resolved to receive their money, but not to
yield them the Commodity they bargained for; and therefore had told them, that
though her husband Ronsardo was out of town, yet there were so many Lodgers in
the house, (who took strict notice of her actions) that she could by no means
wait upon them in their own Chamber; yet (said she) if you dare run a little
hazard, for the thing you seem so to affect, all my Lodgers being in bed, the
lodging where you are to rest to night, stands just over my Chamber, where is a
Trap-door, of which I have the key; and when I perceive all quiet, will steal
up, and open it my self (but take heed you preserve no Candlle unextinguisht)
descending with you into mine own Chamber, where you may enjoy your wishes till
morning.

This they were so foolish to believe, and waited her approach accordingly.

Venantius was the better Servant to Venus of the two, and therefore he
enforced himself to watchfullnesse, but Palladius (having drank hard) was no
sooner in bed, but he fell fast asleep, when not long after, up comes Mariana
in the dark and finding no Candle in the Chamber.

Oh (quoth she) this is well done, to put out the light: (quoth Venantius)
although I could have wished a veiw of that ground I am to till, yet (for your
sake Lady) I am content to act all things in tenebris: come (quoth she) all
things are prepared below, there we may enjoy the reflection of a Taper without
fear, which that we might do, I have on purpose planted one, in a dark
lantern under the table.

Excellent creature (quoth Venantius) this shall for ever bind me to thee,
body, and soul, let us descend: then perceiving Palladius snoring by him, he
endeavored to rowz him, with pushing, and pinching, and at last, with much
ado, did so.

You are a sure card (quoth Mariana) I perceive, and in a fit capacity to cut
capers.

Hang him dullard (quoth Venantius) let him ene snore till morning, I Will
warrant you (Lady) you will find enough of me.

By no means (quoth Mariana) for so we may be betrayed; the Gentleman may
perhaps wake, and finding himself alone, make a clamor.

Palladius, half drunk, half sober, between sleeping and waking, leaping out
of the bed, would needs be the first that descended, which he did, departing so
silently (as Venantius imagined) down the stayres, that he much marveiled
thereat.

(Quoth he) sure Palladius is acquainted with those steps, and is not so drunk
as I thought him to be.

May be so (quoth Mariana) now (Sir) take your progress, I must go last,
because of locking the door, that nothing may be discerned in the morning.

Venantius, hastily putting one of his feet forward to find a staire, was
cheated of his expectation, and violently precipitated into a Jakes, adjacent
to the common shore, where he found Palladius swearing and cursing, as he were
mad.

Mariana having lodged her Lovers, departed (laughing) to her bed.

But Venantius and Palladius were in a very stinking condition, and almost
suffocated with the norsome steame, evapourating from that heap of dung with
which they were environed, almost up to the chins, so that the fear they were
in, quite expelled their drunkenness, and they began now to cogitate how they
might find delivery out of that dirty labyrinth, which with much ado they
attained, wandering so long till at last they came to the head of a clear river,
where they bestowed some time to cleanse themselves, and then joined noddles, to
consider which way to take (naked as they were.) But that which was the
greatest corasive to their minds, they concluded it impossible to recover any
damages of Mariana, or to plague her for their punishment; and therefore
resolving to make the best of a bad matter, they set forward very fairly
toward Paradines lodging, of whom (after some dispute) they gained admittance,
where I leave them.

THE LOVES OF SOPHRONIA AND AMANDVS The Second Book.
CHAP. I.
Great Revelling, and a Masque at Court, its Presentation: Amandus, in great
sorrow for his Mistress.

ARrived at Verona, Amandus gave thanks to the people for their forward zeal,
who with loud Acclamations, (so that the Earth rang again) praying the Heavens
to shower down their choicest blessings upon him, departed to their homes.

This popular Applause, as it no whit contented Clodomer, so it put Rhoxenor,
and Cheribrert, into a cold sweat: The King seemed highly to honor Amandus,
whom the Nobles and Courtiers (who, as in a clock, are the lesser wheels, all
pliable to the circular motion of the great one) generally imitated. Amandus
was lodged the next Chamber to the King, who feasted him with all variety of
Cates, and curious Wines: The Earth, the Sea, and Air, were all plundered of
their eatable Inhabitants, so that Lucullus (had he been there) would have
repined at such expensive prodigality; so that for sumptuous, and luxurious
fare, not Ninus Successors; nor Cleopatra when she feasted Julius Caesar; or
Mark Anthony, was comparable. Without, was continually heard the sound of
Cornets, Shagbots, and Flutes: Within, the pleasing melody of Lutes, Vials,
and Virginals; yet all this while no speech of Sophronia. The Prince associated
Amandus, (it is true) but so, as if he had come on Embassage to denounce war, and
not as his (sometime) dear and bosom friend.

This, Amandus seemed to take no notice of, knowing things could not long hang
in suspense: This was the twelfth day that Amandus had been a Courtier, when
the King commanded Linus, his chief Poet, to devise a Masque, suitable to the
present occasion (to be presented on the morrow, in the golden Theater) which
Linus accordingly performed: And the King, with Rhoxenor on his Right hand, and
Amandus on his Left, with all his Nobility at distance: And Lucinda, with all
her Train of Ladies at her feet, all things in readiness,

There was discovered

The Nymph Parthenope appearing, laid along on the brinke of a calm Sea, and
there awaked by the noise of Trumpets and Drums; after her regreet (upon her
former repose, and present miseries) Courage, and Fidelity, appeared to comfort
her, who, having made a fair promise for the time to come, departed, and,

Jupiter appeared from above, in a calm and Serene Sky, sending her, for the
more assurance of his word, his Messenger, Mercury, who descended from Heaven
in a Cloud, bringing with him, Peace, and Public Tranquillity, and joining
with Parthenope in a dance,

The Scene closed.

This Device was exceedingly applauded by the King, and all there present.
Amandus (though he seemed attentive) could give but a very slender account of
what he had seen, and heard, the reflection of his eyes being reversed inward,
and his thoughts wholly busied about Sophronia, so that (to him it appeared) he
beheld a Matachin, and not a Masque.

Yet though Poison, and Poniards, and all Instruments of ruin, were obvious to
the eye of his mind, he cries, rarely plotted, and excellently presented. Sol
then giving place to Diana, put his horses to pasture, in Neptunes watery
Meadows.

CHAP. II.
The Kings Discourse with Amandus in private. A Discovery of his Fathers
wrongs. The Prince, and Cheribrert, justify his Mistress lewdness. His
distemper.

THE King perceiving by Amandus countenance (however imbellished with feigned
smiles) and his gesture, (however modellized into a pliant Garb) that he was
much troubled about somewhat, that he would be glad to hear, and yet was
afraid to ask, carrying him with him one day alone into the Privy Garden,
(commanding that none whatsoever should dare to interrupt him for an hour) he
entered with him into a pleasant Arbor, situate beneath a Mulbery tree, whose
Fabric was fashioned of creeping Vines, intermingled with blushing Roses;
sitting him down (willing Amandus to accompany him, since they were alone) he
began thus to express himself.

Amandus,

YOu cannot be ignorant (I am sure) what a tender regard I have ever discovered
toward you, from your infancy, even unto this present; I need not mention how
I found you at first, with what Indulgence I have nurtured you, and to what an
height of honor my smiles have raised you; though I could say your Father (I
confess a Peer of great Magnanimity, and of a vast Estate) left you, a
desolate Orphan (his prodigality having reduced him to such penury, that I was
forced to support him out of my own Revenew* and I could say, that I have
given you education, no whit inferior to my Son Rhoxenor; and for your
capacity at present, I think I need not tell you; you cannot but find your self
to move in the Apogaeum of Honor.

The King would have proceeded farther; but Amandus (who could no longer keep
silence) thus interrupted him.

Royal Sir,

I Know not to what Port the wind of your praeludium may design you, nor am I
greatly timorous to stand the shock of that thunder this lightning portends:
But I must tell you (Sir) it is not Kingly in you, to upraid him (whom I have
hitherto thought) your virtuous Candor prompted you to pitch upon, with those
benefits, which you voluntarily were pleased to think him worthy of. My Father
Sir, you did ill, and (were you not my King, I would tell you) basely beneath
your self, to mention, your self occasioning his ruin, first by Banishment
(so fearful were you of his growing greatness) and next by a State project,
procuring a forfeiture of his goods; then indeed, having made him a Beggar, you
made it your charity to afford him honorable relief, while the virtuous
Euphrania, my Mother, and my fair Sister, Eudoxia, were forced to rely on an
Annual Pension, stated upon them by my Uncle, then Duke of Fridland. For me, I
acknowledge my self obliged in all the bonds of Gratitude, to your Princely
care: But give me leave to be sensible, that my Fathers Inheritance, (though it
equalled not the extent of an Imperial Monarchy in limits) had he enjoyed it,
had been a Dowry sufficient (in all respects) to have afforded me the same
qualifications that you have bestowed: And for the Sphere wherein I now move,
I know I enjoy it altogether by your suffrage, but I should injure Heavens
ordination, if I should make my self ignorant, that my actions have merited
more then has hitherto been conferred upon me.

How often (Sir) have I been your Bulwark, and Brazen wall, suppressing
Intestine Commotions, and repelling foreign Invasions; how often have I
thrust my person betwixt you and danger? the very scars, (the memorial of
those once gaping wounds) which in sundry mortal Battles I have received for
your sake, may plead my deserts to be far above your rewards: Have I not (now
lately) vanquished, and vassalized, your ancient irreconcilable enemies, the
Girpids, proffering to undertake so desperate a service, when all your paper
Hero's, and curtain Champions, were devising how to abscond themselves, like
timorous hares, and not to meet their enemies, like undaunted Lions? Have not I
-- Hold (quoth the King) I perceive thou will soon shoot up (by the help of
thine own fancy) from a pigmey, to a Piramid.

All thou have done, has been but a subjects duty, but I would have told you
(Amandus) had not your passion been too predominant, over the reverence due to
my person, that Sophronia, your Mistress, (at this Amandus started) is [since
your absence] grown a foul loose whore.

At this, Amandus stood like another Phineas, having viewd the head of some
Gorgon, which the King perceiving, (quoth he)

I say (Amandus) that your Mistress, Sophronia, is a traytresse to your love,
and her own honor.

You would have thought Amandus had been trans-elemented (had you beheld him at
that instant) but at length, recollecting himself a little, he answered in a
distracted tone.

But dares Clodomer report this, and not fear a Thunderbolt (with saucy
Salmoneus) should pound him (as Anacharsis once in a mortar) to pieces? You are
my King (Sir) I know you bear Divinity about you, which is your protection,
else by the wronged innocence of that abused Lady, were you ingirt with
circular flames, and managed oaks, with as much facility as children wield
bulrushes, the hilts of this sword should kiss your heart. Sophronia falls, I
will sooner believe a Panther may be made to fetch and carry like a Spanniel;
the Moon drawn down by the beating on a kettle; or conceit with a Perspective
Glass to peep into Heaven, as once harbor a thought, that Sophronia can be
perfidious.

The King seeing him in such a rage, began to doubt, that his Person might be
endangered, and therefore thought it best to expostulate in a calm Dialect:
(quoth he)

I now see the old Proverb verified; facile credimus, quod volumus, but let not
Amandus fool himself, into a faith of that which is not, if I bring thee not
apparent proof, such strong evidence, that thy self (unless madness make
thee incredulous) shall acknowledge, thou have to long been an Heritick.

Proof (quoth Amandus) for Heavens sake (Sir) delight not to torture him, that
honors you; why the Angels retain not more immaculate purity, than that
excellent Lady lays claim to.

I see (quoth the King) it will be hard to dis-inchaunt thee, if thou dare
not give credit to my Allegation, my Son Rhoxenor, and honest Cheribrert, shall
give thee more ample Testimony.

He had no sooner uttered this, but Rhoxenor, and Cheribrert came into the
Garden, the King beckning to them to approach, which they did; Amandus not
having patience, to wait the leisure of time, went to meet them, with so
irefull a countenance, that they might easily guess the horror he had within,
meeting them half way (quoth he) to Rhoxenor,

Sir,

I expect to find mercy at your hands, as you are noble, and have ever
entertained a pleasing thought of Amandus, tell me plainly, and possitively, is
it in your knowledge, that my Sophronia is lost to that goodness, which once
diefide her humid substance.

Yes (quoth Rhoxenor) these eyes have seen that libidinous Strumpet, folded in
the Arms of Cheribrerts Groom.

Too true my Lord (quoth Cheribrert) I must needs acknowledge, her Letcher was
my Servant, a tall steel chind fellow (the reason perhaps, why she affected
him) but such was the devotion I bare to your name and honor (whose love I
knew to be grounded on the firm foundation of real worth) that I slew the
Caitiffe with my own hands.

Peace Screitchowle (quoth Amandus) I know thee to be Serquilinium mendaciorum,
what woman may be trusted, if Sophronia be false?

Come (quoth Clodomer) let us depart to the Palace, and there discourse
further of this business.

No (quoth Amandus) the constitution of my Soul agrees not with that Climate,
the Palace is situate in a very noisome pestilentiall Air, the Lake Avernus
is Paradise to it.

And so (with a distracted look, without taking leave of any) he fla^g away
from them, departing to his Chamber, (where he found his friend Pallante;) the
King, Rhoxenor, and Cheribrert (not knowing how to conster his words at
parting) departed to the Palace, concluding (all the way they went) that
Amandus must be sent to his grave, or themselves expect to lie in the Dust.

CHAP. III.
Sophronias complaint in prison; her Mothers Ghost appearing, forewarnes her,
of future events.

I Fear I have too long forgotten to mention the unfortunate Sophronia, and
therefore (if the Reader please to visit a Prison with me) we will walk to
Castle Angellina, and make enquiry, how that excellent Lady brooks her
restriction.

Who having been under the power of Janitorius (for so was her Keeper called)
his Keys, almost the space of twenty days, began (like some caged Philomel) to
be in love with Sollitude.

Sorrow sat in so lovely a shape upon her brow, that he that had seen her sit
in that sollemn posture, would have been enamoured on Adversity, and (contrary
to the practice of all mankind hitherto) have courted affliction with more
affectionate desire, then young Virgins haste to meet their beloved Paramours;
she belched not forth execrations against Rhoxenor, or Cheribrert, nor taxed
the Celestial Powers of Tyranny, and Partiallity, Invoking Demogorgon, or
Proserpina, but bore her Injuries like some captive Saint, with so resolved and
mild a Sufferance, that the most Inoxerable Phalaris, or Esilino himself,
would have been moved with compassion to have seen her.

One day, weary with walking to and fro in her Chamber, she laid her self down
on her Bed, which she abundantly watered with her tears, numerously distilling
from the Lymbecks of her bright and heavenly eyes.

Which as they fell, Juno gave command to Cupid (by the power of his Godhead)
to thread on a part of that string, which loving Ariadne gave to the faithless
Theseus (which conducted him out of the Cretan Laberinth) which she wound about
her Arm, tucking up her sleeves, to show her gaudy Wrists.

I say, casting her delicate Body on her homely Bed, she began thus to
complain.

Ah my dear Amandus, little do thou know, to what misery thy faithful
Sophronia (for thy sake) is exposed; O let the whispering Winds convey the
story of my woe into thy ears, or some heavenly Cherub instruct thy intellect
(for certainly, without a miracle thou can not have notice) of my abode, in
this dreadful ominous Den; ah Rhoxenor, can thou imagine the Olimpick
Dieties, will ever remain deaffe to my complaints, and not (at length in
vindication of my innocence) rain Sodoms destruction, on thine, and that
Villain Cheribrerts head; for if such wickedness escape unpunished, then let
no man tremble (for the future) to provoke the vengeance of Heaven, by all
manner of vile, and impious Acts.

Having thus said, she forsook the bed, and departed to that window, opening
toward the Sea; she had not been there long, beholding the billows dance
quarrelling lavaltoes, but up comes (the Kepers wife) the old Crone that
attended her, (named Morpa) with a nosegay in her hand, a bottle of wine, and a
dish of fruit, (for Rhoxenor had commanded she should have all civil respect)
and setting them down, making a curtsie, departed.

Sophronia looking behind her, and viewing the bunch of flowers, (after she had
smelt to them) took pen, ink, and paper, and wrote this

ODE
For to perfume our burying,
All the flowers of the Spring
Do meet; man flourishes a time,
And these have but their growing prime.
Wee'r set, we grow, we turn to earth,
Such is our progress from our birth.
Adieu all sensual appetites,
Adieu ye Courts, and all delights;
The sweetest breath, and clearest eye,
Have no perpetuity.
As shadows wait upon the Sun,
This is consequently done.
Who'd seek by Trophis, and dead things,
(Like some vain, ambitious Kings)
To leave a living name behind?
Hoping in bags to catch the wind.
Having finished these verses, she threw away the paper, and in a very pensive
manner sat her down in a chair, leaning her Alablaster Face on her Ivory
Hand, on one side of the Table, finding her self much disposed to sleep.

Morpheus had scarce seized on his leaden Mace, with an intent to make prize of
her senses, when she heard the noise of many instruments, conspiring in one
concord, to make a Celestial harmony, to her great admiration, which caused
her to listen very attentively, when on a sudden, the perfect shape and
similitude of her deceased mother, the (sometime) excellent Euphrania, appeared
to her view, apparralled all in white, her countenance the same when living,
but more bright and polished, who spoke to her after this manner.

From high Olimpus I am come,
Ever blessed Elysium,
For to forewarne thee what shall be
Thy Fate, for the futuritie.
Amandus (thy espoused Lord)
Has quel'd the Girpids by his sword;
Now Is in Verona, feels much smart,
And woe, not knowing where thou art.
Rhoxenor triumphs in his ill;
Cheribrert laughs, to have his will:
But all the heavenly powers agree
Punishment for their treachery.
Lucinda shall, forfeit her breath,
While she bewailes Rhoxenors death:
And then, if thou applaud the thing,
Thou shall be partner with a King.
When many sorrows thou have past,
Expect triumphant joy at last.
Having said this, Euphrania's Genius departed from her (so shadows glide, and
clouds vanish) leaving her in a very pleasing Rapture; where also I am
compelled to let her remain a while without notice, for Amandus deeds call
upon me for divulgement.

CHAP. IV.
Amandus (believing Sophronia to be false) is very invective against women.
Pallante defends them. Flavia (poisoned by Cheribrert) ere she dies, discovers
the villainy of Rhoxenor and Cheribrert, to Amandus. His Resolution thereupon.

YOU heard before, that Amandus had left the King, the Prince, and Cheribrert,
in the Privy Garden, and was returned to his chamber in great perplexity.

Where being arrived, he found his friend Pallante busy in making verses, (for
he was an indifferent good Poet, affecting the Muses more then (perhaps) they
affected him) who, seeing him approach in so distracted a manner, looking as he
had been affrighted with some hellish Feinds, he began to enter into dialogue
with him, imploring him to discover, what uncouth accident had so amazed his
Senses, but not one word did Amandus retribute, but throwing himself upon the
bed, he tore his hair, and smote his breast, in so ruthful a manner, that
Pallante could not forbear to shed store of tears, to behold his friend in
such anguish.

After he had a long time wrought his own distemperature, he burst forth into
these expressions.

Oh wretched Sophronia, thy faithless heart has wrought my temporal and
eternal ruin; I might have been forewarned, by the Example of King Philip and
Olympia; Paris and Helena; Alexander and Rosana; Hercules and Dejanira;
Hannibal and Tamyra; Anthony and Cleopatra; Nero and Agrippina; how I reposed
confidence in so weak a piece, as Sophronia: who would give credit to the
protestations of so frail, and foul a thing, as woman?

Whose lives are filthy; whose persons without shame: false in their words;
doubtful in their acts; in whom, wise men ever found peril, and fools suffer
injury.

I now am content to credit that fond legend of the Egyptians, amongst whom it
is a received opinion; That the River Nilus breaking forth, overrun the Earth,
and that certain pieces thereof, cleaving together, the Sunbeams fervently
reflecting thereon, produced many wild beasts, and amongst them, was found the
first woman.

Fie for shame (said Pallante) are you not ashamed to vent forth such execrable
blasphemy, against that Divine, and more then Angelical Sex.

Oh (quoth Amandus) could thou be capable (friend) of the misery that I
suffer, (exeeding that of Ixion, or Titius) thou would say I had cause to be
Satyricall. Could hell contrive a more superlative mischief, then that she,
whom I affected dearer then my own life, a Lady of such high Birth, and (ere
this) of such superior Eminency, that Princes have contested for her favor,
glad to purchase her smiles with the forfeiture of their Crowns, should
prostitute her silken limbs to the sordid use of a dirty droyle, whose living
sprung out of the horsedung? Horror, horror.

Having thus said, he began anew to practice violence upon his own person,
raving, and foaming so, that Pallante began to fear the loss of his senses;
and therefore sitting down by his beds side, he began thus to speak.

My Lord (quoth he) I beseech you, be not so much the Author of your own
dolor; how know you, but your Sophronia is guiltlesly calumniated, and abused?

(Quoth Amandus) Hell, and Furies, the Prince Rhoxenor, and Lord Cheribrert,
surprised her in the very act of shame.

My Lord (quoth Pallante) because they say it, therefore will you credit it?
Observe the circumstances, and you will find you have great cause, maturely to
deliberate, and strictly to scrutinize, ere you give your censure. I cannot,
nor dare not suspect the Prince, as conscious of any ignoble Act: But for
Cheribrert, I dare call him villain to his face; (you know that he has ever
hated you) and who knows whether that malicious Caca-daemon has not contrived
this complot? I am sure you have not yet seen Sophronia, since your return to
Verona; what injustice then is it, for you to denounce your doom, ere you have
heard the party accused speak.

Thou speak very well, and notably to the purpose, my excellent Friend,
(quoth Amandus) I confess I was too rash, although (I fear) not too confident.
Having said this, he deserted the bed, calling for wine, and drinking freely
with his friend, both sitting down by a Table, where Amandus found Pallante's
paper of Verses, in which (himself now being in Love) he had made Aericina's
armed Son, to give this Invitation, to all Lovers, within a flight shot of
him.

CUPIDS Invitation to his BOWER.
ODE.
LOve expels all cares and fears,
With music that out-vies the Spheres;
And with Soule-melting Lullabies,
Does calm all passions that arise;
Which give a motion to the Stones,
With their sweet alluring Tones.
Hands, and lips, and eyes invite,
See the snowy Virgins white.
Here Is many Alexanders brave,
As many Hellens fair I have,
Only for to wait on me,
They attired richly be.
You shall have her in plenty, lavish
Whatsoever the Sense can ravish.
The Driades have stolen by theft
To me, and their green Groves have left;
And in this my Bower green,
Sol, Neptune, Thetis, have been seen.
I can give you Tagus Sand,
Never sail out of the Land.
I have golden Fleeces store,
Never go to Cholchos shore.
The Elizian Fields are in my plain,
Therefore the shades you haunt in vain.
Jove to me his Court does bring,
With his Ganimeds to sing.
Careless of Argus hundred eyes,
Or of jealous Juno's Spies.
For nothing else the Gods made night,
But for to screene Eovers delight.
Amandus having read these Verses, (quoth he) I find (friend Pallante) that you
are very amorously inclined, and write with a Quill, plucked even from Cupids
wing. My Genius ever led me to (that with which my present condition best
suites) Solid and Grave Subjects, dressed in Prose: But that you may see I have
sipt off Hellicon, and slept some minutes on Parnassus; I will endeavor, (by
the help of the nine) to write some few numbers. I have now to do with Tombs,
and Deathbeds; Funerals, and Tears; so fetching a Deaths head, which he
always gave a residence (nocturnally) by him, he set it down before him on the
Table, and wrote these Verses;

Though here on earth men differ, in the grave
There Is no distinction; all alike they have.
Then must the Conqueror, with the captive spread,
On one bare earth, as in the common bed
The all commanding General has no span
Of ground allowd, more then a common man.
Folly with Wisdom has an equal share,
The foul, and fair, to like dust changed are.
This is, of all mortality, the end:
Thersites now with Nereus dares contend;
And with Achilles he has equal place,
That living, durst not look him in the face.
The servant with his Master, and the maid,
Stretched by her Mistress; both their heads are laid
Upon an equal pillow; subjects keep
Courts, with Kings equal, and as soft they sleep,
Lodging their heads upon a turfe of grass,
As they on Marble, or on figured brass.
He had scarce finished these Verses, when Flavia, (Sophronia's quondam waiting
woman) came in, in great have, and falling down at his feet, besought him to
hear her a few words, and to give credit to her last breath, for (quoth she) I
feel the poison powerfully to opperate. Speak (quoth Amandus) ere thou catch
an everlasting cold, and shall be heard no more, what important matter does thy
tongue labor with.

(Quoth she) it is not unknown to you, that I once served your virtuous
Sophronia (I must be brief in my discovery) as became her, in whom she reposed
so great confidence, and had still continued her loyal Servitrex, had not the
black Soul'd Cheribrert deluded me, to my destruction and her ruin; who
knowing himself not able to win me to satiate his lust (and knowing I would
not deny him lawful love) persuaded me he meant to make me his Wife, enjoining
me (as the first trial of my love) to aid him in the prosecution of a
business; for the fulfilling whereof, he had strongly engaged himself, which
was, (O Sir, pardon my trercherous Levity) to admit Prince Rhoxenor [who, he
said, was greatly enamoured on Sophronia] to her Bed; this I was won to, but
the devilish Cheribrert, did but feign this device to me; for he so ordered
it, that his Groom (whom he afterward slew with his own hands, for fear his
villainy might be detected) entered the Chamber, and the Innocent Sophronia.

She would have proceeded, but the venomous potion had by this time so
enfeebled her facculties, that she fell down all along, and (with a feeble
tone, using these words; My Lord, be assured, that Sophronia is the most
virtuous Lady in the world. I would discover more, but the Poison has
dispersed it self all over my heart; I am the occasion of all this ill, and
go, I know not whether) with a grievous groan dyed.

What pen can express, or what heart think, the extreme astonishment that
happened to Amandus, to hear these dying words of Flavia.

Oh ye Immortal Powers (quoth he) what fatal end have ye reserved me for,
have I escaped the Girpids fury, and swam a Sea of blood (like another Coesar,
with one hand cutting my passage through the Waves, and holding in the other, a
Proclamation of Peace and Tranquillity) to my native Country, to be put upon the
defiance of my Sovereigns Son, whom to challenge I dare not [the Law making
such a proposal, the highest Treason] was this Rhoxenors revenge for
Sophronias denial, to prostitute her immaculate Chastity, to his rapide
Luxury, conspiring with that Hell hound Cheribrert, to ruin her life and fame,
and in her, my name and honor.

This I Prognosticated (quoth Pallante) and durst have divulged it, though I
could not desert the several circumstances, according as you have heard them
narrated.

Oh (quoth Amandus) can Rhoxenor be so treacherous, he that was once so
excellently good, now so diabollically vicious; Heaven knows where they have
disposed my souls life, and the glory of her Sex, the virtuous Sophronia; but I
procrastinate the time too long, dares Pallante swear to join with his friend,
in a noble and just revenge.

Dares (quoth Pallante) you wrong your own judgment and my fidellity; if you
are master of one anxious thought, were I to follow thee (like another Theseus
with his Hercules) to the black and dismal shades of Dis; or (with Orestes and
his other self) to give and receive Death, we falling by mutual wounds, to
put a period to our terrestiall terrors, Amandus should find me every way
pliable to his own wish.

Spoke like a true friend (quoth Amandus) and then kneeling down (Pallante
accompanying him) he drew forth his Sword, and laying their hands upon the
Weapon [like another Brutus, and Collatine] they jointly Swore.

Never to permit the closure of their eyes, till they had wiped away Sophronias
stain, with Spunges, made of the hearts of Rhoxenor and Cheribrert.

So kissing the Hilts, they arose, of whom read more in the following Chapter.

CHAP. V
Amandus kills Rhoxenor, the manner thereof; he and Pallante escape.

IT was somewhat late in the evening, when Flavia made her escape to Amandus,
and therefore it was unknown, whither she had conveyed her self, though
Cheribrert had sent Inquisitors all about the City; and being conscious of his
own guilt, and timorous, that Flavia had discovered all she knew, he resolved
to steal forth the City that night, only himself and one Servant, on
horseback, taking with him, store of Gold and Treasure (the occasion of his
after ruin,) where I leave him to the horror of his own thoughts, and return
to Amandus and Pallante.

Who imagining (as indeed it was) that (perhaps) Flavia was not noted (because
of the darkness of the night) to take her journey to them, they resolved to
bury her privately (which they did, throwing her into a deep Well, near
adjacent to the house) and to take no notice (for the present) of her
discovery, till they should find opportune admittance to Rhoxenors person.

That night they passed away, discoursing on various Subjects, sometimes
wondering at Rhoxenors pravation, another time plottiug, how they might
infranchise Sopbronia; but Aurora appearing [in the Horizon, with her purple
hair hanging about her ears, which she was soon forced to seclude, under an
azure cawle, for fear Sol should findge them with his beams] they both armed
themselves; Amandus commanding his Caroach to be fitted (with his friend)
entered therein, commanding the Chariot driver, to direct his way toward the
Palace.

There arived, they disburthened the Caroach of their persons, and walking on
foot to the Palace Gate, the Guard (knowing them to be Personages eminently
gracious in the Kings eye) gave them free admittance.

So they passed forwards, toward Rhoxenors lodgings with like facillity, all
offering them conduct, till they came even to Rhoxenors Chamber, who the day
before (O the fatallity, that governes some men's actions) had been guilty of
that, which he never before was noted for, viz. excessive tippling, which he had
so profoundly plied, that he was conveyed to his Palace (the night before) in
a drunken dream, to which stupidity, he was yet vassalized; Amandus (presuming
on his own eminent familiarity with the Prince) comes to the Chamber door,
demanding entrance, the Chamberlain wondered at such an unwonted demand (more
Ceremonies usually observed, ere the Prince was to be spoke withal) demanded
who was there.

It Is I (quoth Amandus) and my friend Pallante, who desire permission to speak
with the Prince, about important business.

The Chamberlain (knowing Amandus voice) opened the door, and Amandus and
Pallante entering in, the Chamberlain (to show himself too obsequiously
officious, as not daring to pry into their privicies) left the room, and so
(as it happened) said his life.

Amandus (perceiving Rhoxenor asleep) at his entrance used these words to
Pallante.

See (quoth he) how supinely this perfidious Prince sleeps, who could immagine
this beautiful Image, included such an ugly Feind within it? I will kill him
thus sleeping, and send his leprous soul to Hell, ere Pluto expect it.

By no means (quoth Pallante) let his own tongue first doom him, ere you give
him his pass for the other world.

With that Amandus endeavored to awake him, crying, my Lord, my Lord, the
Prince.

Rhoxenor opening his eyes, and beholding Amandus, and Pallante, by his Beds
side, a strange and unwonted fear seized on him (as if by instinct he had
known their intents) but he would not seem to be amazed, and therefore replied.

Noble Amandus, worthy Pallante, welcome, what business more then ordinary,
has brought you hither, so early in the morning?

Your highness (quoth Amandus) errs in the computation of time, for the Sun
has already measured almost a thousand leagues; the reason of my abrupt
approach, is occasioned by a Dream I had this night, concerning Sophronia.

Sophronia (quoth Rhoxenor) let the name of that Purple Strumpet be lost to
your memory; I wonder you are so slow to bring her to condign punishment.

Oh the Devil (quoth Amandus) do thou hear this Pallante, and with that word
pulling a Dagger out of his pocket, thou stain to the Stock of Kings (quoth
he) the hand of Truth has pulled of thy Vizard, I am acquainted with thy
clandestine projections, with that villain Cheribrert, I know thy attempting
Sophronias Chastity, her denial, and thy ignoble revenge.

And with that word he stabd the Ponniard up the hilts in his short ribs, which
wounded him greiviously but not deadly.

Oh hold thy hand (quoth Rhoxenor) I confess I have been (as thou thy self art
at present) to much a slave to my passions, and have endeavored the ruin of
the most noble Lady in the world.

For which (quoth Amandus) I thus sacrifice thee on the Altar of revenge (no
other way vissible suiting with my intents) and therewith again stabbed him
with his Ponniard, through the throat, which occasioned an egression of all the
breath in his body, so that after a little struggling, he became soullesse.

By this time the Chamberlain was returning* to know the Princes pleasure, in
order to his Apparel for that day, coming to the door, and perceiving
Amundus, his face besprinkled, and his hands bedewed with blood, he took a
large leap backward, more then twenty paces, crying, Treason, Treason, Treason,
the Prince is murtherd, the Prince is murtherd: whereat the Kings Guard, in
great astonishment, drawing their swords, came toward Rhoxenors lodgings, and
were encountered half way by Amandus, and Pallante, with their weapons drawn,
the Guard not doubting to make prize of their persons, cried out to them to
yield themselves, but were soon taught to know, that Desperate men, go doubly
Armed: Some had their hands, others their legs, and some their noses pared
away; others lay vomiting out their heart bloods; none, but either disabled by
wounds, or by death.

So that Amandus and Pallante, had time to make their escape into the City,
where arrived, Amandus cried all the way, Those that love me, follow me. The
people, (who entirely affected him) arming themselves, followed him in heaps.
Venantius, and Palladius, (as luck was, not having yet made riddance of their
lately received Arrears) were tippling in a Tavern, and hearing the noise of
the people, and espying Amandus (all bloody) with his sword drawn, waited on
by an armed multitude, they began to sing paeans to the blind Goddess,
Fortune, and the great Sword-man, Mars, that once again they were like to have
employment in the heart of their native Country; and thrusting themselves into
the midst of the prease, they proffered their service to Amandus, who kindly
accepted them; with whom I leave them, and return to the body of dead Rhoxenor.

CHAP. VI.
The Confusion of the Court and City, upon the Rumor of Rhoxenors Death.
Lucinda dies (with grief) over her dead Son. The City being divided, the one
part for Amandus; the other for Clodomer; there happens a sour Skirmish.
Amandus, and Pallante, taking an Arm of the Sea, recover the Kingdom of
Polonia.

SUch a confused clamor as men make when eager fire has fallen upon many
Fabrics at once, in some populous City, Mulciber challenging the Heavens; or
such a Tragic tone, as the Inhabitants of some besieged Town accord in, when
their Furious Enemies are already entered their Chief Fort; Slaughter, and
Rapine, Revelling in each corner: Such, and no other, was the wild Alarm given
throughout the Court, and City, men mingled together in multitudes, but the
more part knew not wherefore they were met together, the Courtiers being afraid
every man of his fellow, and the Citizens expecting every minute to be buried
in their own ruins.

News being brought to Clodomer and Lucinda, of the murder of their Son,
(by their General Amandus hand) Grief, and Wonder (like two contrary winds
striving for Sovereignty) a long time maintained a Civil War within them; but
at length, Grief got the upper hand, and so prevailed over their Senses, that
for some minutes, their tongues wanted the use of their Creation; but at
length, recovering themselves, (like another distressed Priam, with his
forlorn Hecuba) they set forward, to visit their dead Son, whom when they
beheld, what griping pangs their hearts endured, only those can imagine, whom
Fate has exposed to the like affliction. Clodomer could not speak for weeping;
but Lucinda, falling upon her dead Son, tore her hair, bathing his bloody
wounds, with briny drops, making this pitiful complaint over him.

Ah my dear Son (said she) is this the fulfilling of that expectation, my
Self, thy Father, and all Lombardy had cause to have of thee? Could the cruel
Destinies find no other subject whereon to practice their Tyranny, save thee?
Poor Lucinda! why did Lucina (pitying thy pangs) propitiously aid thee, for
the production of a Son, predestined to so direful an exit?

She would have said more, but the greatness of her grief, at once bereft her,
both of speech, and life, so that she fell down dead by her murdered Son.

This to behold, so exasperated the King Clodomer, that like one bereft of his
wits, he ran raving up and down the City, beseeching his subjects to take pity
on their distessed Sovereign, and unanimously to aid him, in the discovery of
Amandus and Pallante, who had at once bereft them of a most hopeful Prince,
and a gracious Queen.

It was not long ere he had levied a Power, which he put under the command of
Lucius, and Pamelius, (sometimes renowned Captains, though now by reason of
their Age, they affected privacie) who marshalling his Forces, marched toward
Amandus, and Pallante; who, with their handful of men, had entrenched
themselves on a plain, three Leagues distant from the City: The King himself
(resolving to fight in person leading them on as their chief Guide, and Captain.

Amandus perceiving their approach, resolved to give them Battle, and disposed
his Forces accordingly.

Both Armies being now so near one another, that they might easily hear the
disputes passing on both sides; the King choosing a piece of ground, by nature
elevated above the rest of the continent, so that he might see (and be seen) of
his whole Army, began to say as follows.

I Dare be confident, that none of my loyal Subjects here, who (according to
their duties) are congregated with me, for the captivating, and punishing the
treacherous, bloudy-minded Amandus, and his traiterous Associate, Pallante, but
are able and willing to attest, with what Gentleness, and Paternall care (as
becomes the Father of his Country) I have hitherto governed them: As also,
what an hopeful Prince, and what promising Virtues were obvious in my Son
Rhoxenor; and that my Queen, Lucinda, excelled all former Queens, for the
Love, and affectionate Zeal she demonstrated to me, her King, and Husband, and
to the Subjects of this Nation; both which, are made away by means of the
aforementioned Traitors. Therefore, I shall not endeavor with elaborate
orarory (my loyal Subjects) to kindle courage in your hearts, or to make you
sensible, that (besides the loss) great, and infinite shame, not to be
expiated by any after performances, will brand us all with the deepest tincture
of infamy, unless we take just (but severe vengeance) on these sanguine
homicides. Not doubting therefore of your courage in so good a cause, go on,
and may Heaven crown your attempts with Victory. Neither was Amandus slack to
encourage his men, but standing in the midst of them, made this Oration.

My fellow Subjects,

Whom Love to wronged Amandus, (and in him to Justice, and Honor) has
invited to hazard your Lives and Fortunes; be confident, that I desire not War,
or have requested your Aid, for the Vindication of any private grudge, or
sinister ends of mine own, but merely for the preservation of my own Person,
and your Rights; both which (unless defensive arms prevent it) are like to be
swallowed up, in that bottomless gulf of Kingly Prerogative, and Arbitrary
Power. It is not unknown to you (I am sure) with what faithfulness I have ever
served this faithless King; how often I have brought him home conquest,
putting the necks of his enemies under his feet: And is it my reward, to have
her, whom I love dearer then my life, (whose Virtues are so splendid, that envy
it self cannot fully them) thrown into a nasty Jail, and branded with the
ignominious Epethites of Whore, and Strumpet, and all, because she denied to
satiate Rhoxenors beastly Lust, whom Justice, and not my hand, has sent to the
other World. If this be tolerated, not one of you here present, shall claim
the least propriety in her whom he affects. Time will not permit me to dilate
my self, suffice, you fight with me in a just and righteous cause; the truth
whereof, I hope your swords will prove, (though your enemies treble you in
number) On then courageously in the name of Heaven.

Having finished this Oration, he led on his Army to join Battle with the
Kings, dividing them (being all foot) into four Battles: The first, himself
guided; the second, Pallante took charge of; and the third, and fourth,
followed Venantius, and Palladius.

Clodomer ordered his Army (after the old Roman manner) in the fashion of an
half-moone; the horns whereof, were managed by Lucius, and Pamelius, and the
main Body, by himself.

Both Armies joining, it was Amandus hap to encounter Lucius; and Pallante,
Pamelius; all (save the King, being on foot on both sides, for the suddenness
of the action would not permit the mounting of men, or to observe the method of
Martial Discipline.) Amandus had soon made an end of Lucius, cleaving his
head, that his brains dropped out at his feet; and Pallante had given Pamelius so
deadly a blow on the face, that he cut his jaws clean in sunder. The King
Clodomer showed himself very valiant, with his own hands having killed
Venantius, and Palladius, and massacred above an hundred of the vulgar sort,
white Amandus, and Pallante, mowed down all before them, so that their hands
were weary of the work of death, their weapons were drunk with blood, and their
bodies were burdened with blood and sweat; so that, notwithstanding their
forces were clean cut in pieces, (being raw, unexperienced soldiers, mere
Citizens, who till now had never been accustomed to the rigor of War) they
had, by their single valors, vanquished the Kings forces, and taken himself
Prisoner, had not an huge multitude (from the City) appeared to his relief,
armed with prongs, pitchforks, and bills, who come on so furiously, that it was
impossible, (and had been madness) to oppose them: And therefore (overpowred
with numbers) Amandus having even then encountered Clodomer on foot, and forced
him to forsake his horse (who was presently protected by those about him) leapt
into the Saddle, taking Pallante up behind him, being forced (on a desperate
adventure) to take an Arm of the Sea, and swam over, to a part of that
continent belonging to the King of Polonia; and Clodomer having gained this
bloody Victory, returned (with those of his Army, whom the late conflict had
spared, to the City.

THE LOVES OF AMANDVS AND SOPHRONIA. The Third Book.
CHAP. 1.
Rhoxenor, and Lucinda, are sumptuously Interred. Alphonsus (King of Poland)
refuses to deliver up the persons of Amandus, and Pallante. Sophronia, brought
to her Trial, is acquitted. Clodomer loves her.

CLodomer, having thus vanquished, but (to his great vexation) not captivated
his enemies, cladding himself in purple, (as the manner of Kings is to mourn)
and commanding his whole Court to put on Sables, caused his Son, and Queen,
to be embalmed, by the Skill of his ablest Physicians, who involved them in
lead, the King causing two Stately Tombs to be erected (of the purest Pharian
Stone) framed by the hands of cunning Architectors, who adorned them so
sumptuously, that either of them equalled Mausoleus his Sepulcher, (reputed one
of the wonders of the World) in the Cathedral Church, dedicated to the memory
of St. Sebastiona, and Albovino, (two ancient famous Kings of that Country)
which having finished, he dispatched Ambassadors to Alphonsus, King of Poland,
to let him know, that he harbored his deep enemies, viz. Amandus, and
Pallante, Traitors to his Crown and Dignity, whose persons (as he tendered the
perpetuity of the Amity betwixt the two Crowns of Lombardie, and Poland) he
willed him to deliver up to condign punishment.

But Alphonsus, retaining a noble temper, (knowing Amandus to be a man every
way accomplished) and sensible of the wrongs offered by Rhoxenor, (the
perpetration whereof, had occasioned his death, and Amandus Infortunity)
permitted Amandus, and Pallante lest the protecting of their persons might draw
a war upon him) to depart his Kingdom without molestation, furnishing them
with horses, and Arms, and all things befitting the use of such Knights of Fame.

But Clodomer, finding he could not get their persons into his hands, resolved
(like another salvage Neoptolemus, who Sacrificed an Innocent Princess on his
Fathers grave) to be revenged on Sophronia, (Amandus Mistress, and for his
sake imprisoned) for his Sons death; and therefore he appointed a day, when
(accompanied with all his Nobles) he would cause her to be brought as a
Delinquent, and proceeded against as a Strumpet, to public censure.

And therefore he caused many Scaffolds to be erected in the Palace yard, with
a Seat of Judicature for himself, and his Peers; where coming (with those
whom he had nominated for her Judges) he commanded her to be guarded from
prison, thither, as the place appointed for her trial.

The most virtuous Sophronia, having news brought her the night before, that
she was to prepare her self against the morrow, to plead before the King, and
Council, was not a whit daunted thereat, (so great courage does Innocence
inject, and so strongly are those fortified against mundane calamities, whose
souls assure them they are falsely calumniated) but attired her self all in
black, with a veil of the same color cast over her head, which habit was so
far from eclipsing, that it added to her excellent Splendour; as Diamonds set in
Jet, are not a whit darkened; nor does the Topaz lose its Luster, though set in
lead.

In this manner, she set forward with her Guard, (never was so sweet a prisoner
brought to the Bar, a thousand Cupids (though unseen) waited on her all the
way; Venus her self wept, and the Graces, condoled her afflictions, in sanguine
tears; the people thronging in heaps to see her, yet amongst that multitude,
not a dry eye: Such a silent mourning as the Grecians practiced, when they
beheld Agamemnons daughter, fair Iphigenia, in funeral attire, standing at
the Altar, ready to be Sacrificed to Aeolus, was heard amongst this people;
every one assoiling her Innocence, and bewailing her misery.

Coming to the place appointed, she was placed at the Bar, where turning up
her veil, and discovering her rare Beauty, which was so celestially splendid,
that it cast a light round about her, (all men's eyes being fixed upon her, as
if some shaghair'd Comet had thrust forth his head in the Hemisphere.) The King
was exceedingly ravished to behold her, the fire of love burnt about his heart,
by degrees corroborating more and more, till it became one flaming lump of
flesh; his color went and came, a kind of trembling seized upon all his body:
But disguising his passions as well as he could, he commanded her Charge to be
read, which contained these two Heads;

1. That she had been guilty of Incontinencie with Lord Cheribrerts Groom,
being taken in the very act of shame.

2. That she had plotted, and conspired with Amandus, and Pallante, (Capital
Traitors and guilty of the horrid murder (possitively) of Prince Rhoxenor,
(consequently) of the Queen Lucinda, and (probably) of Lord Cheribrert) for the
perpetration and performance, of the aforesaid treasonable, devilish, and
unparell'd crimes.

To this, after a little pause (making obeisance to the King and Counsel) she
answered.

That I may not be condemned as a Mute, and because the Party silent, is
thought to assent to what ever is proposed; I will briefly, though sincerely,
make my defense in the presence of the high Immortal Truth, and this Assembly,
else I could have been contented to have suffered in silence, assuring my
self, that before the Judge of Souls I appear immaculately Innocent.

My conversation from my Infancy, till of late months (assure my self) is not
unknown to many here; I have endeavored always, to accrue an unspotted Fame,
and (I doubt not) had retained the same, to this very minute, had it not thus
happened.

Here she surveyed the Counsel (and being ignorant of what had lately
happened) not seeing Rhoxenor there, demanded that he might be brought before
her, face to face.

To which the King *though his thoughts told him she was innocent) returned
answer.

That her policy could not wipe away her guilt, she knew, that Rhoxenor (as
she had plotted with the cursed Traitor Amandus) was cruelly murdered.

To which (with a sober smile) she answered.

Be it known unto all here, that Lord Amandus, being absent in the wars,
against the Girpids, in the defense of his Country (unto whom I acknowledge my
self affianced) the Prince Rhoxenor, finding that all his persuasive
allurements were to weak, to remove my firm fixed constancy (conspiring with
Lord Cheribrert, a man superlatively wicked) by a treacherous wile [having
corrupted the faith of my waiting-womon Flavia] has wrought the present ruin
of my fame and honor (by Flavias aid) they one night entered my Chamber (my
self fast asleep) bringing with them, a fellow (whom they had subborned for
that purpose) who entered my Bed, which he had no sooner done, but Rhoxenor and
Cheribrert (as before they had plotted) with loud cries awaked me, upbraiding
me with lewdness, and terming me the blot, and stain of all Ladies in the
world.

And lest the fellow (moved with remorse or otherwise) should reveal their
cursed complot, Cheribrert with his own hands, immediately stabbed his hireling
to the heart.

Rhoxenor having wrought this villainy, so wrought, that I was committed (as a
vile person) to Castle Angellina, where I have ever since resided.

For the murder of Rhoxenor, Lucinda, and Cheribrert (if it be so, which
Heaven forbid) the straitness of my restraint, none having been suffered to
come near me, save my Keeper, since my restriction, may plead my innocence in
that matter.

This Sophronia uttered with a very audible voice, and having finished, the
people gave a shout, crying, She is innocent, she is innocent; which also was
the sense of the whole Counsel, Clodomer himself (though he seemed otherwise)
being glad of it, for he was extremely in love with her.

The Court rising, Sophronia (by the Kings command) was conducted to the
Palace, of whom more hereafter.

CHAP. II
The dreadful end of Cheribrert. Amandus and Pallante, leaving Poland [being
bound for Venice] by an angry Storm, are forced on the coasts of Grecia (the
Ship and all else swallowed in the Waves) they save themselves by swimming, and
arive on the Flowery Island.

NOw it is high time that I made mention, what became of Cheribrert, after his
deserting Verona (as you have heard) by night, accompanied only with one
Servant.

He had not travailed many miles, intending to take his journey, to the
uttermost borders of the Kingdom of Lombardy, and so take shipping for Spain,
but a crew of Robbers, who subsisted by spoil and rapine, set upon him
(imagining to find, as indeed they did, a good booty) plundering him of all
his Gold and Treasure, and stripping him, and his Servitor (who making some
resistance was slain) to the bare Skins.

Being brought to this miserable exegency (inflicted upon him by divine
vengeance) he began to think of his many damnable crimes (yet so, as he not
repented of them) and to curse the hour, that ever he engaged himself (with
Rhoxenor) to injure the virtuous Sophronia; he would have cast his eyes up to
heaven, and have implored the remission of his charnell contrivances, but he
dispaired of attaining audience, at the ears of the incensed Diety, and
therefore sitting him down upon the earth, he began to wish, that a thurderbold
from Heaven might pash him in pieces, or the earth open and receive him, when
he might hear an hollow murmuring voice, sing him this summons.

Orcus yawnes, the furies yell,
Descend accursed Soul to Hell;
Earth hates, thy loathed Trunk to have,
The Wombs of Wolves shall be thy Grave.
Let all take warning, by thy Fate,
How they thy crimes, do perpetrate.
This infernal Invitation, so much amazed him, that he would fain have slain
himself, but wanted fit means to accomplish it, and therefore the reprobate
wretch, with his own nails, began to tear, and rend the ground, intending to
dig his own grave; when (as if sent by some avenging Diety) a crew of ravenous
Wolves came running upon him, and tearing him all in pieces, buried his loathed
body in their hungry mawes: a dreadful end, worthy so devilish a wretch.

And now since we have rambled so far from Verona, let us speak a little of
the noble Knights, Amandus and Pallante, who having left the Kingdom of
Poland, imbarqued themselves in a Ship bound for Venice (where Pallante had an
Uncle, named D' Francisco Mendoza, a famous Sennatour of that renowned City)
intending to reside there for a time in private (though they would not have
found it easy, so to have done, Amandus acts having made him so renownedly
famous, throughout Europe) and to wait with patience a while, to see what end,
Fortune would put to her own prankes.

They had not sailed far from the Port, but the Winds began to blow very
eagerly, the Mariners hoysed all their Sails a trip, imagining to have found
certainty, amidst the uncertain Waves, when the Skies on a sudden, were
obscured, with black and pitchie Clouds; Eurus whispering sad tales in the
Sea-mens ears; from the Altantick Ocean came Notus, bringing with him Thunder
and Lightning, when to encounter him, out flies Boreas, bearing Storms, and
Tempests on his wings, the high wrought Seas, fronted the Skies, wrapping their
liequid curles in the clouds, no Sun, nor Moon, or Stars appearing, so that
had Palinurus self been Pilot, he could not have steered aright; the furious
waves, rushing together with imbatled power, plow large furrows in the sides
of the Ship; the boystrous billows, invade, and pass over her hatches,
dashing her against the Rocks; nor could all their pumping prevail, but that
each man stood up to the knees in water, the passengers all crying to heaven
for help, in such doleful manner, that it would have compelled an heart of
flint to compassionate them, while the Ship (droven by furious winds many
thousand leagues) was forced on the Coast of Grecia.

But Amandus found not so great toil without, as he found terror within; his
heart beat louder Alarms then the angry Seas, when he thought upon his dear
Sophronia, imagining this punishment was sent from Heaven for his sake, for
that he forsook Verona, ere he attempted to infranchise the person of his
dearly loved Lady.

Oh Sophronia (said he) who knows what misery thou endurest for my sake!
Clodomer will not fail to shed thy innocent blood, in revenge of his wicked
Son, whom I justly slew. Ah, unfortunate Lovers! thou (I fear) art snatched
away already, by the hand of violence, upon the Land; and I (by destiny droven)
must, ere long, perish in this barbarous element.

Pallante endeavored all he could to comfort him. But (quoth he) it is no time
now, to practice a lovers passion, when we expect every minute to become a prey
to the devouring waves.

By this time the waves came in so fast, hat the Ship began to sink; and the
Master, and Pilot, seeing there was no hope, let down the cock-boat into the
Seas, intending (with Amandus and Pallante only) to trust to the mercy of the
watery element, in that dimunitive vessel: But so numerous and eagre, were
those perishing passengers in the finking Ship, (every one desirous to preserve
his life) that though they endeavored to hinder their approach with their
swords drawn, they could not, but that the little Skiffe, being overcharged
with numbers, chose rather to be choked with the salt Seas, then harbor such
merciless oppressors.

But Amandus, and Pallante, (being well skilled in swimming) perished not
amongst the rest, but bore up above water, making way with their hands and
feet, (while Neptune with all his Tritons gazed upon them, imagining, another
Melicerta, with Saron accompanied, had divided the dusky waves) not ceasing to
brush the blue billows, till at length they espied a very fair harbor,
situate between two Rocks, near adjacent to a very pleasant Island, where grew
(in seemly ranks) great store of pleasant trees, laden with fruit, the ground
being garnished (like another Tempe) with all sorts of fragrant flowers,
Zephire seeming continually to breath upon them; but no house, or humane
substance could they view: To this delectable Paradise they directed
themselves, coming on shore exceeding faint, and weary, of whom more
hereafter.

CHAP. III.
The King (being exceedingly enamoured on Sophronia: would feign seem
youthful, making himself monstrously ridiculous. His courting of Sophronia. He
invites her (hoping to enjoy her) to Ziva. She kills him there, and escapes.

YOu heard before, that King Clodomer was become a subject to Cupids
Sovereignty, (notwithstanding his late loss) to whose Deity he was now so
obsequiously devoted, that (hoping thereby to appear amiable in Sophronia's
eyes) he cast off all former gravity, befitting the estate, and Majesty of a
King, apparrelling himself in youthful habit, shaving away his beard to the
very stumps, and poudering those hoary hairs on his Scalp abundantly, that
they might seem whitened by Art, and not by Nature; moreover, he put a silver
hilted rapier by his side, and to his bandstrings he annexed rings of several
forms, decored with stones of various hewes; and (that nothing might be wanting
to make him every way extraordinary) he often exercised his Genius, in ruthful
Rimes, melancholy Madrigals, and doleful Ditties, bewailing the cruelty of
Cupid; that fit over, he compiled many horrible Hymns, in the praise of his
Mistress Celestial Feature.

The brightness of her Hair, the highness of her Forehead, the neatnsse of her
Nose, the handsomnesse of her Hand, the finenesse of her Foot, and the gravitie
of her gesture.

But this fantastic dotage of Clodomer, was no whit pleasing to his Lords, nor
was it well resented by the vulgar (who are ever for the most part, glad of all
occasions, that may warrant them to think meanly of their Superiors) some
saying he was mad; others, that he was a fool; others, that he was no longer
fit to govern.

But Clodomer, (though he were sufficiently sensible of the various
whisperings, and repinings against him) was so wedded to his fancy, that he
could as easily cease to be mortal, as cease to be a Lover, yet all this while
he made no discovery to Sophronia, only some amorous glances often banqueting
with her, and sometimes griping her moist palm; appointing her lodgings near
his own, where she was attended, as she had been the greatest Princess in the
World.

Sophronia perceived (well enough) what wind filled the Kings Sails, but took
not the least notice thereof, ever appearing disconsolate, pensive, and
desirous of solitude. Clodomer would fain have had men to have thought that he
afforded Sophronia such accommodation, merely out of love to her inherent
virtues, and eminent worth, and not as desirous to win her to his embraces:
But now, being resolved to languish no longer, but to break the matter unto her
(after banqueting, as was his usual manner) he led her alone with him into
the Privy Garden, where he thus solicited her.

Madam,

I Am sensible, it cannot but seem more strange to you, then an Africa
monster, hat I, who (by reason of my wrongs) am an implacable enemy to
Amandus, whose mandate has imprisoned you so many weeks, and whose rage would
have bereft you of life, should implore your smiles [aged as I am] and be
solicitous to win your love; but such is the all-commanding power of Venus
Son, that except I may enjoy your sweet society, (though a King) I am the
most miserable wretch under the Cope; nor can I despair, but the softness of
your temper, (considering the worth of my proffer) will prompt you to embrace
that heartily, which is by me proposed fervently.

Sophronia having heard him, burst forth into a great laughter.

I see (quoth she) that Letchery (like the plague) takes in a blood; though
Rhoxenors Sire (Sir) you are his heir (I mean to his affections) the truth is
(speaking far from heart) I am obliged, Royal (Sir) to you, in all the bonds of
love, and gratitude; and (since I see Amandus slights me) shall prostrate all
is mine to be disposed of at your pleasure.

Clodomer was so over-joyed to hear this, that (sure if he had not lost them
long before* he had now forfeited his wits; but taking her about the waste, he
so embraced her, and beslavered her, that the penance she endured then, was
worse then the imprisonment she lately suffered. Clodomer imagined all
Cock-sure now, and after many assurances of his fidelity, and entire affection,
he besought her, that they two, with one Castril, his creature, (a slave that
for pence would have prostituted his own mother, or wife) might take their
journey in a close Chariot, to a Village some five leagues from Verona, named
Ziva, and there (quoth he) we may have opportune occasion, to take the full
fruition of our loves.

Sophronia, though she hated his person, more then poison; and his love, worse
then Lucifer; yet consented to accompany him, which was performed the next
morning accordingly.

The chaste Lady being put upon this peril, (which she accepted, knowing it was
in vain for her to withstand Clodomers power) who, in case she had given him a
denial, [would have procured her certain ruine] had conveyed that morning into
her tresses, her bodkin, which (to avoid suspicion) she had folded up in her
curles, over which she cast a white veil.

Arrived at Ziva, they were received at a Country Farmers house (whom Castril
had prepared before hand for that purpose) where entering the best chamber that
Graunge afforded, after a repast with wine, and junkets, so hasty was Clodomer
to have his bane, that he would needs anticipate the approaching night, (like
another Heliogablibus, who made day his night, and night his day) the Sun
having yet scarce attained his altitude.

The chaste Sophronia (whose heart hung heavy on its strings) (seeming)
[willingly to yield her assent] the King [having sent Castril to Verona, with a
command to wait on him toward night] entered the baleful bed, Sophronia
accompanying him, where he soon began to show himself very active; but
Sophronia (pulling the bodkin out of her hair) with a ghastly look, and a
troubled voice, rising up, uttered these words.

Can thou think, thou foolish Tyrant, that what I denied thy wicked Son, I
will afford thy villainous self, and that I dare yield up that Fort to thy
feeble use, which all the Warriors in the World (Amandus excepted) can never
conquer.

[Clodomer would have called out for help, but he was so amazed at the
suddenness of this unexpected carriage from his Mistress, that he became lost
to speech] and having said this, also adding;

Bear witness, thou Supreme ever-living Power, that I am forced to this
outrageous Act, for the preservation of my chaste Honor, she stabbed him to
the heart, who struggling to arise, she again lodged her bodkin in his breast,
which prevented his arisall, and dismissed his soul.

Having done this dreadful deed, she threw the bed clothes clean over him,
and locking the door, and taking the key with her, she departed; of whom more
ere long.

Sol driving his Carre toward the Antipodes, and night arising in sullen
mists, Castril, (according to the Kings command) arriving where he left his
Master, finding the door locked, imagined the King had not yet enough of sport,
and therefore he went and walked for the space of two hours, in a neighboring
Grove; returning again, and finding the door as he left it, he began to call,
saying, My Lord, My Lord, but receiving no answer, he grew extremely perplexed,
and began to doubt some danger, and therefore he resolved to force open the
door, which he did; entering, and approaching the bed, seeing the curtains
decently drawn, and the clothes stretched at full length, he began to think,
the King, and his Mistress, being tired with active recreation, might be both
sound asleep, and began to curse his hasty intrusion; but drawing nearer, he
perceived the Kings countenance very much altered, of a pale, ashy, and
bloudlesse hew, and turning down the clothes, he beheld him almost covered in
his own gore, having two wounds, the one on his side, the other betwixt his
paps; whereat he flung out of the room (like a man distracted) tearing his
hair, and scratching his face, crying, Treason, Treason.

But of the issue of this, read more hereafter, for I must now return to
Amandus, and Pallante, whom we left in the Flowery Island.

CHAP. IV.
The description of the Flowery Island. Amandus and Pallante (having resolved
Agenors Riddle) are received, and entertained by him, in his Castle.

I Have informed you, that the noble Knights, Amandus, and Pallante (by
miraculous supportance) escaped the danger of drowning, and that (with great
difficulty) they at length arrived on a very fertile Continent.

The Species of things appeared so glorious round about them, that they were
warranted to think they had lighted upon that Eden which Adam lost, but they
wondered they found no Inhabitants, assuring themselves, that so happy a place
could not be devoid of those who were appointed to enjoy those benefits, that
nature (who does nothing in vain) had there prodigally bestowed.

Having gathered some grapes, dates, oranges, and pomgranates, (plenteously
produced in that plat of ground) they sat them down under an Almond tree, and
(as well as their weakness would permit) began to refresh themselves with those
excellent fruits.

It was now twilight, neither day, nor night; they had not sat long, but they
might epsy a comely Knight, mounted upon a stately Steed, clad in the habit of
a Grecian, (for indeed that Island was part of Grecia) a great company
following him, on horseback, (all seeming men of worth and quality) who with
Agenor, (for so was the Knight called) had been hunting of the Badger, who
espying two men naked (with fruits before them) under a tree, imagined (as
indeed it was) that they were shipwrack'd on that Coast.

Amandus, was tall of Stature, big of limbs, of a stern (yet pleasing)
countenance.

Pallante, something lower, not so well set, yet of a more feminine aspect.

Their persons (though naked) gave Agenor cause to think, that they were above
the degree of common men, and pitying their calamitous condition, he alone rode
up to them, enquiring of Amandus (who understood the Greek tongue very well,
being a man excellently learned) what accident had exposed him (and his
associate) to such a direful distress; Amandus returned him answer.

That they were Knights of the Kingdom of Polonia, (for he would not discover
his capacity, and condition) and being bound for Spain, by the wilfulness of
the winds, had their Ship swallowed in the merciless waves, and themselves
forced (swimming for their lives) upon that Continent; adding, that he had a
hope, they were thrown among a people, who were acquainted with Civility, and
knew how to be hospitable.

Fear not (said Agenor) but I will so provide, that you shall have
entertainment, be fitting Knights of worth, (such as in my esteem you are) only
I fear I shall not be able to afford you the courtesy I would, for that by a
Law, ratified by my Predecessors, none may have the entertainment due to
adventurous Knights, in my Castle, but such as can unfold the Riddle that shall
be proposed to them.

At this, Amandus, and Pallante, greatly wondered, Amandus desiring him to
propose his Riddle, for (quoth he) I doubt not but to explain it.

Apollo and Mercury aid you (quoth Agenor) and so calling his company unto
him, he pulled a Schedule out of his pocket (included in a silken bag on which
(in capital letters of gold) was engraven this;

RIDDLE.
What Is that a fair Lady most of all likes,
Tet ever makes show she least of all seeks:
That's ever embraced, and affected by her,
Yet is never seen to please, or come nigh her:
But a poor man's thing, yet does richly adorn her,
Most served in her night-weeds, does her good in a corner:
Most cheap, and most dear, above all worldly pelf,
Is hard to get in, but comes out of it self.
To this, Amandus (after a little pause) answered;

Good Fame, is that which a virtuous Lady most of all desires.

Yet makes it not known that she affects to accrue it.

It is ever embraced and affected by her.

For she must persevere in virtue, or her Glory dies.

Served in her night-weeds.

For Ladies that wear their night-weeds come least abroad.

But a poor man's thing.

For many of mean fortune attain to honest Fame.

Richly adornes her.

For nothing is more excellent in a woman then virtuous chastity.

Is hard to get in, and comes out of it self.

It Is no easy thing, for a Lady so to demean her self, that she shall be
esteemed virtuous; but being attained, whether she will or not, she shall be
well spoken of.

You are witnesses (quoth Agenor to his Associates) that this Knight, in the
behalf of himself, and his friend, has resolved the Riddle. All replying they
were.

You are nobly welcome (quoth Agenor) to the Flowery Island; then dispatched he
one of his Train to his Castle, commanding him to bring two suites of Apparel,
with their appurtenances, with two horses, the one for Amandus, the other for
Pallante; which being performed, they having clothed themselves, and being
mounted, departed with Agenor to his Castle.

CHAP. V.
Sophronia, entertained by the Shepherd Crates, and his wife Phillida. The
description of his Cottage. Sophronia becoming a Shepherdess, sings the praise
of the Country life.

SOphronia (as you heard) having made riddance of her Royal Remora (in great
fear) travailed so long as her tender limbs were able to bear her delicate
body, till at length she arrived near a large over-growne Wood, whose aspiring
branches almost kissed the Clouds; toward which, directing her way, she saw
where a shepherd was making melody to his fleecie Flock, on his oaten reed,
singing this song.

Thus work we Fortunes discontent,
To behold our merriment.
We harmless Shepherds do despise
The anger of the Destenies.
That which makes the Gown man pine,
The Soldier curse Wars discipline,
Begets our solace, no austere
Phalarian Tyrant is our fear;
Secure content, and quiet rest,
No groans, or cries of men oppressed;
Age is no trouble, Death but sleep,
And we till Death, our vigor keep.
Sophronia, with great delight, listened unto the Shepherds Song, and
approaching near him, the good old man thought that some Diety, masked in a
humane form, was making toward him.

Hail gentle Shepherd (quoth Sophronia) Silvanus, Pryapus, Pan, Pales, and all
the Silvan dieties (and indeed, in naming one, I name all) be propitious unto
thee and thy fair flock; and heaven (said Crates) for so was the Shepherd
called, give thee (fair Lady) the full fruition of all thy desires: My present
condition (quoth Sophronia) will not permit me (gentle Sir) to be tedious in my
orratory, for that I expect every minute to be surprised, by a barbarous Earl
of this Country, from whose hands I have this day escaped (for the preservation
of my chaste honor) be pleased therefore, to afford me an homely russet Coat,
in exchange, for these gaudy Garments, together with shelter for some few days
in thy Cottage, till this storm be blown over, and to gratify thy love, take
these Jewels (of sufficient vallue, to make thee Lord of all this champion
Country) as my gift.

For your Jewels (quoth Crates) I must not, dare not accept of them, they are
the Plague and Poison of honest minds, but if my homely Cottage, may be worthy
of the acceptance of so divine a creature; command it (Lady) as my self, and
all I am master of.

Away went Sophronia with Crates to his Cottage, which was builded by a bank
side, at the root of a Sycamore Tree, whose broad branches quite overshadowed
his shallow roffe; the Cottage it self was erected of grass Turfes, so
curiously contrived, that it seemed rather framed by Nature then by Art, being
all over of a verdant hew. Entered therein, she espied many shelves of Cheeses,
and pans of Milk, with large flitches of Bacon; Phillida (Crates wife) was
exceedingly abashed, to behold a creature of such bright beauty, so gloriously
apparalled, enter her homely habitation, imagining that Juno, or Latona, had
descended from Heaven (as of old, when the Innocence of Shepherds, made them
worthy the society of the deathlesse Dieties) to visit their humble dwelling:
but Crates soon took off her wonder, informing her the occasion of her
arrival; then Phillida heartily welcomed her, and spreading a homespun cloth
upon an unpolished Table, she adorned it with Cream, with Butter, with her
choysest Cheese, and finest Bread, and taking a brown Bowl (borrowed out of
the body of an Almond Tree) repleated it brimfull of healthful Sider, Crates
and Phillida (with many congeis and ducks) proclaiming her welcome.

Having refreshed her self with these rural Cates, she put off her gorgeous
habbit, and atired her self in a Coat of russet-gray, binding up her golden
hair in a packthread Cawle, and putting homely Buskins upon her feet, taking a
hook in her hand, she led forth her Sheep day by day, folding them each night,
in as seemly a manner, as if she had been Crates, not Almonios Daughter.

Exceedingly pleased with this rustic life, sitting one day, upon a bank of
Flowers, her Flock grazing by her, she sang these verses, in the praise of the
country life.

While I the glad and smiling ground do strew,
In these most pleasant Groves, whose verdant hew,
Allure great Pan and Pales here to sport,
Forgetting quite the pleasures of the Court;
Resting securely, void of ghastly fear,
How well were I, were my Amandus here
No Soldier here does wipe his Sanguine Blade,
Made drunk with blood, no Lording does invade
The poor man's House, or Land; no foul Sedition,
No Edict, Remora, or Inhibition,
Vexes my quiet peace, my Flocks I keep
Secure, and dreadlesse of all danger sleep.
The fruitful Vine the Poplar tall does clip,
W^o bows his head, sweet Nectar for to sip.
The lowing Herds, far off I do behold,
Feeding on Meadows all off burnishd Gold.
My head with mellow Apples I adorn,
And Pears more ruddy then the blushing morn.
When Jove forces his Thunder through the Sky,
To empt the store of his Artillery,
Into a Grove of Bay I do retire,
And reverence (not fear) his noise and fire.
O happy country life, thrice blessed they are,
Who are contented with their household Lare.
And wrapped in Goats skins, as securely rest,
As those that do on Tyrian Ta^stry feast,
And sleep on quilted Down Beds, all the Pride
Of Norimberge, or Turkey sought to hide,
Their glorious nakedness; oh happy Fate,
That still attends the humble Shepherds state.
Crowns are composed of cares, and Honors be,
But the ins^aring Gins of Destiny;
The purblind Goddess takes delight to wrong,
None save the rich, the haughty, and the strong:
Here without show of fear, securely I
Do rob the earth of her Embroyderie.
The Primrose, Lilly, Calaminth are here,
The Violet, Paunsy, Pagle, and Kings-Speare,
Smooth Ladies Smocks, with Hare hels, and the Flower,
That chiefly springs in Adonis Bower;
The Myrtle, Spiknard, Gowlands, and the Rose,
Sops dipped in Wine, Ox eye, the lips of Cowes;
This is the life that's free from cares, and fear,
Oh that my sweet Amandus were but here.
Here leave we Sophronia, and look back to Verona, and see how the rumor of
Clodomers death is resented.

Castrill having declared the time when, the place where, and by whom Clodomer
was made away, the Nobles were so far from deploring that heavy Accident
(being now grown weary and ashamed, of Clodomers absurd unkingly deportment)
that they lift up their hands to heaven, thanking the great power, that had
benignly bereaved them of so besotted a Prince; and the common people (who are
ever delighted with change) sang Paeans to Providence, that had taken off their
burdensome Head, without hurt to the Body politic; but neither the one nor
the other, had any true cause of rejoicing (though Clodomer had forfeited the
essence of a King, by giving too much scope to his fond loving Lunacie) for the
Girpids being assured that Amandus was wandering about the world, and that King
Clodomer was dead, resolved to break in pieces the yoke of bondage, that
Amandus had put upon them, and to invade those that had vassalized them.

CHAP. VI
The description of Agenors Castle; he declares to Amandus, the reason, why he
proposed the Riddle, as also, that no Women inhabited there, containing the
History of Sinoris, and Eugenia, Agenors Kinsman ariving from Spain, declares
news very pleasing to Amandus; he and Pallante (furnished with a Ship, and all
other necessaries) set sail for Verona; the Lombards receive him triumphantly
as King. Sophronia (having been much sought after by Amandus) at length
discovers her self; the mutual joy of the two Lovers; the cellebration of
their Nuptials, and Cororonation.

NOw if my compass, and my card be true, I shall ere long, put in at the
wished Port.

You have heard before, of the strange entertainment that Amandus and Pallante,
found in the Flowery Island, and that Agenor (the Lord of that Country)
courteously conducted them to his Castle; which was situated on an high
promontory, surrounded with all sorts of Trees, set in seemly ranks, in the
midst whereof, ran a demi-River, watring those pleasant plants. The Castle
was framed all of Median stone, of Ovall form, yet so vast of extent, that it
seemed a petty City; it was surrounded with a Wall of Marble, on which at
equal distance, and of just proportion, were an hundred Towers: before the
Castle lay a Pond (environed with a living Wall of Eglantine, fed by a
Christaline Spring) repleat with all sorts of Fish; in it (most lively carved
in stone, by the skill of some cunning Dedalus) sat the Rector of the Seas
(according to the Poets) earth shaking Neptune, on a Sea Horse, his Trident in
his hand, all his Tritons (bestriding several Fishes) about him, who (by
wondrous Art) sounded their silver Trumpets, as they had been living
substrnces, to their great admiration.

Being entered the Castle, they found it exceeding glorious; the walls were hung
round with cloth of gold, in which were represented many famous ancient
Stories; the destruction of Troy; the renowned intercourse of the Loves of
Hero, and Leander; to the exceeding delight of all that beheld them; they were
brought by Agenor, into a large Hall, paved with Aggats, and most richly
garnished, where entreating them to sit down, he began to say as follows.

I assure my self (my noble guests) that you much admire the reason that
occasioned my proposal of the Riddle, as also, (that in so happy an Island as
this) what is the cause, your eyes have hitherto not visited one Female; the
Origin of both these, I shall declare to you, briefly, and truly.

About an hundred years since, there ruled as Governor over this Island, a
Lord of great Fame (my Fathers Father) named Sinoris, who had to wife, a Lady
nobly descended, of great Beauty, and passing Wit, named Eugenia.

Now it happened, that Sinoris became exceedingly intimate with a Lord (of a
neighboring Isle) called Alsatia, [himself nominated Ariaspes] they mutually
feasted each other, nothing of note being acted in either Isle, without the
joint assent one of another, their Friendship being knit so strongly, that it
seemed impossible for the hand of Fate to dissolve it.

Long time they maintained this Amity, till it happened, that Ariaspes became
greatly enamoured on Eugenia, who, at first seemed to abhor his lewd desires,
but at length was won to let him enjoy that, which she had sworn to preserve
only to the use of Sinoris; yet carried they the matter a long time so
clandestinely, that Argus could not have discovered their private compliance.

Now it happened, that a Lady of this Island, of excellent Feature (a great
Enchantresse) was no less taken with Sinoris, then Ariaspes with Eugenia, and
by Letters, and otherwise, manifested the same; but Sinoris so entirely loved
his Wife, (whom he esteemed superlatively virtuous) that he could not be won
to hearken to her allurements. Cassandra, (for so was the Enchantresse called)
perceiving her endeavors were fruitless, on a time appearing to Sinoris
(sitting alone in study) told him, that he neglected her love, to dote upon one
that was false as a falling Star, or glowwornes fire, who secretly (yet
frequently) cornuted him, by the help of Ariaspes, Lord of Alsatia.

You may imagine how exceedingly Sinoris was amazed to hear this, neither did
he give credit to her words, yet with much entreaty, was won to make trial
thereof: Cassandra (by the power of her Spells) having transformed him at all
points like Ariaspes, he was easily admitted to ride in his own Saddle, which
he had no sooner attempted to do, but Cassandra restored him to his own shape.

What tongue, or pen, can express how exceedingly Eugenia was astonished at
this accident: She would have fled away from the presence of her incensed
husband, but he laying hold on her, shut her up in prison for some days, and
then (with the assent of all about him) caused her to be torn in pieces by wild
horses; the rage he conceived for her abuse, being so great, that he immediately
banished all women out of the Island, ordaining for the future, that none of
that Sex should inhabit here; he also devised the Riddle that you lately
resolved, commanding, that none save those who could give the meaning thereof,
should have entertainment in this Castle, but to be lodged else where in the
Island.

Amandus, and Pallante, could not choose but smile, to hear of this strange
Law, and that the execution thereof should be so strictly observed: But (quoth
Amandus) how then is this Island replenished with Inhabitants, (women being
excommunitated from among you?) Our women (like us) said he, have an Island of
their own (surrounded by the Sea) whom once every year we accompany, and if
men-children be brought forth, we receive them; but if females, they abide with
their mothers.

But (quoth Amandus) were it not better that this absurd Law were abrogated.

No (quoth Agenor) that we dare not do; for our forefathers being sworn to it
by the virtue of the same oath, (we believe) all their posterity are engaged,
and obliged successively.

And besides (quoth he) we ave experimentally found, that Heaven is exceedingly
pleased with the observation of this Law; for before this was decreed by
Sinoris, this Island was but indifferently fertile, but now it exceeds all
the Islands in the World, for fatness, and richness of soil.

Fie (quoth Amandus) that you should be so grossly superstitious, to imagine,
that the absence of women, occasioneth you bliss; by the immortal power, I
admire, that your fruits are not blasted, and your Land cursed to a barrenness,
that is destitute of such celestial creatures, as women are.

While they were thus discoursing, the Tables were furnished with all manner of
curious, and luscious wines, and choysest cates; which while they were feasting
with, behold Agenors Kinsman, a young man, of rare beauty, and gallant
deportment, was newly arrived from Spain, (his Ship laden with very rich
commodities) whom Agenor, bringing in by the hand, presented to Amandus, and
Pallante, who saluting him (as Agenors Kinsman) and understanding he came from
Spain, besought him to afford them his presence a while, and to relate what
Intelligence he had received in those parts; who presently told them, that
while he resided in that Kingdom, Ambassadors arrived there from Lombardy,
(Emissaries being dispatched for the same purpose into all parts of the world).

To make enquiry for one Lord Amandus, sometime General to Clodomer, King of
that Country (who was dead) for that they resolved, to make the said Amandus,
their King; which they were the rather induced to do, for that the Girpids had
rebelled, and were now upon the borders of that Kingdom.

This News made Amandus, and Pallante, look one upon another, like men dropped
from the Clouds. Dear Sir (quoth Amandus to Agenor) I am that Amandus, so
greatly sought after, now if my Sophronia be but safe, I am every way happy.

Agenor (starting to hear this) and are you that Amandus (quoth he) whose
name, Fame so delights to celebrate; give me your pardon (Sir) that I have
yielded you no greater respect, and let my ignorance plead my excuse.

Oh (quoth Amandus) you excel in all nobleness: what think thou, (quoth
Amandus to Pallante) may not Fortune yet make us amends, for all her
unkindnesse.

I doubt it not (quoth Pallante) I beseech you (Sir) make all the have you can
into your native Country, you know not (despairing to find you) but they may
otherwise determine then you have heard.

But how (quoth Amandus) may we find Transportation? Take no care for that
(quoth Agenor) I will furnish you with a winged Vessel, able Mariners, and all
things requisite for your voyage.

You heap favors upon me (quoth Amandus) which if I fail to retribute, my
strength, and sense, forsake me at once; but dear friend, let all things be in
readiness by to morrow morning.

They shall (quoth Agenor) and having so said, (after he had accompanied them
some few minutes) he departed to prepare all things in readiness for their
journey, which he punctually performed, appointing them a strong, but nimble
Vessel, and Seamen, lusty of body, and well skilled in marine Affairs.

Amandus and Pallante, were lodged that night in a rich chamber, but took
little rest, their thoughts were so busied, in devising how to manage affairs
for the future; rising early in the morning, Agenor had prepared a stately
Banquet for them, (himself honoring Amandus, as if he had been the greatest
Prince in the World) after which, he (with a chosen Train) brought them on
Shipboard, where they again, were richly feasted; and then with tears in his
eyes (so great was Agenors love to Amandus, who could hardly forbear, as also
Pallante, to afford him the like womanish Responsion) he committed them to the
mercy of the Winds, and Seas, returning to his Castle.

So calm were the Waves, and so favorable the Winds, (as if, with the
Dulichian Guide, Amandus had them in a bag) that within three days, they had
sight of their native Country: Amandus, all the way (as indeed he had reason)
highly extolled the Noble disposition of Agenor.

Does Fame Record (quoth he to Pallante) greater Hospitality ever extented
hitherto, by any stranger, to unknown Guests, then Agenor has manifested to us?

I should blaspheme truth (quoth Pallante) should I not confess it, and
strenuously endeavor (at least in some part) to compensate it.

The Winds, and Seas proving so favorable, that they arrived (without least
preturbance) at the Famous City Verona, putting in at the Harbor called
Neptunes Cave. No sooner was their approach bruted abroad, but the Inhabitants
of the City ran unanimously to meet him, saluting him their Lord and King, the
Peers and Nobles of that Kingdom resorting to him with great Joy, of their
own accords, swore fealty and homage unto him, conducting him (and Pallante)
in great Pomp and State, to the Palace of the late King Clodomer.

But Amandus (though exalted from the dunghill of Affliction, to a Throne of
happiness) found no content within; nor could he have conceived any comfort,
had he been made the Sole Monarch of the World, without the society of his
dear Sophronia; whom enquiring for, answer was made, that (in the defense of
her chastity) having slain King Clodomer, she had ever since absconded her
self, none knew where; which caused Amandus to send Inquisitors all about the
Kingdom, to make strict search for her, but all their labor proved to no
purpose, to Amandus exceeding discontent.

Sophronia perceiving by the discourse of Crates, and Phillida, that Amandus
was returned, and received as King, and had sent Messengers into all parts of
the Kingdom to make discovery of her, was so overcome with joy, that she
swouned away, and became dead, but was soon recovered by Crates, and his wife,
who laying her upon an heap of wool, so chafed her temples, plying her with
warm clothes, that they quickly restored her to (...) wonted strength; which
she was no ^oner Mistress of, but she besought the Shepherd Crates, to afford
her his company to the City, to the which he willingly assented: Sophronia
having deserted her gown of gray, and put on her own apparel, made Crates her
Guide to Verona.

Arrived there, she directed her way toward the Palace; some of the Courtiers
knowing her, strove, which first should be the Messenger of such happy news;
but Amandus hardly credited their words: But ophronia being brought unto him,
(who was sitting very pensive under a Canop^ ^f State) he no sooner had sight
of her, but leaping from his chair, (letting fall his mantle for have) he ran
unto ^r, and embraced her in his arms, (nei^er of them able to speak a long
time for ^eeping) for, as the greatest grief, so no ^ubt the greatest joy, has
the least ut^erance; breathing their souls into each other, and enjoying such
mutual happiness, that none, save those that have proved the (...) ^assions,
are able to express, they ag^ ^o consummate their long disturbed ^ptials, the
morrow.

Whi^ as accordingly performed, in great Pomp, and State, befitting the dignity
of a King and Queen. And here, out of the affection I bear to their memories,
I cannot but afford them this Nuptial Song.

EPITHALAMIUM
HEavenly fair Urania's Son,
Thou that dwel'st on Hellicon;
Hymen, o thy brows empale
To the Bride, the Bridegroom (...)
Take thy Saffron Robe, and c^
With sweet flowred Marjorum
Yellow socks of woollen wear,
With a smiling look appear:
Shrill Epithalamiums sing,
Let this day with pleasure spring:
Nimbly dance the flaming the Pi^
Tree,
Only dedicate to thee.
Take in that fair hand of thine,
Let good Auguries combine,
For the pair that now are Wed,
Let their joys be nourished,
Lik a Myrtle, ever green,
Owned by the Cyprian Queen,
Who fosters it with Rosy dew,
Where her Nimphs their Sports pursue.
Leave the Aonian Cave behind,
(Come, o come with willing mind)
And the Thespian Rocks, whence drill
Aganippe watens still.
Chastest Virgins, you that are
Either for to make, or mar,
Make the Air with Hymen ring,
Hymen, Hymenaeus sing.
Amandus and Sophronia, being thus incorporated by holy Church, to the General
Joy of the whole Realm, all Hymns mixing in one concord. Shortly after, they
were in Solemn manner, Crowned King and Queen of Lombardy, Reigning long, and
happily.

FINIS.

