Action upon the Case FOR SLANDER.

OR A Methodical Collection under certain Heads, of Thousands of CASES
Dispersed in the many Great Volumns of the LAW, of what words are Actionable,
and what not. And of a Conspiracy, and a Libel.

BEING A Treatise of very great use and consequence to all men, especially in
these times, wherein Actions for Slander are more common then in times past.

With an exact Table annexed, for the ready finding out any thing therein.

By W. Sheppard Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Chapter Adams, J. Starkey, and T. Basset and are to be sold at
their Shops, at the Talbot in Fleetstreet, the Mitre near Temple Bar, and in
St. Dunstans Churchyard, in Fleetstreet, 1662.

TO THE Right Honorable the Lord Chief Justice of the Court of the Kings
Bench, The Lord Chief Justice of the Court of the COMMON PLEAS, The Lord Chief
Baron of the Court of the EXCHEQVER: And the rest of the Reverend Judges of the
same COURTS.
Honorable Lords, and Reverend Sages of the LAW,
TO whom should I present this Piece, but to Your Selves? And of whom should I
beg the Patronage thereof, but of Your Selves? The Work being about the LAW,
and nothing else, but the Grave, and Learned Judgments, Resolutions, and
Opinions, of Your Eminent and learned Predecessors; By which they being dead,
yet speak. And though it must be confessed, that neither the Author, nor the
Work have any thing in them to merit Your Approbation, yet Your Goodness, and
condiscention will be the more eminent, and singular, in affording both him and
it Your Countenance and Protection, and lay greater Obligations upon

Your Lordships most humble Servant W. SHEPPARD.

To the READER.
Judicious Reader,
IT is not improbable, but we are fallen into the last age of the World, foretold
by our blessed Savior, Wherein the love of many shall wax cold, and Iniquity
shall abound. And among the abounding Iniquity of this Age, the iniquity of the
Tongue, that little Member, set on fire by Hell, is not the least: And among
the evils of the Tongue, is there any more pernicious and deadly, and yet more
common and epidemical then Backbiting and Slander? May we not now say, with
the Prophet. Jer. 6. That men walk with Slanders: And with the Royal Psalmist,
Psalm. 50. Thou sit, and speak against thy Brother, and Slanderest thine
own Mothers Son. It is true, that in former times, we find Actions of the
Case for Slanderous words very rarely brought; which speaks thus much, that
such words were then very rarely spoken. But in these days they are become
almost as natural to men, as their language and discourse; and therefore the
disease, so deeply rooted, and over-spreading, calls for the application of the
Remedy, which our Law does abundantly furnish us withal. And hence it is, I
have been encouraged to engage in this work; which is nothing else but a naked
and Methodical Collection of the remedies prescribed by the Law against this
Malady. And herein (for brevity sake) you may find in some Rules in the first,
and in some (especially in some of the last) Examples answering to those Rules;
in the last Chapter of the Book, an Epitome of the whole work. Wherein we have
thought it best to name (amongst others of more Authority) some of the Cases in
the Books of uncertain Authors lately published, and leave the same to the
Judgment of the Reader. You may, perhaps, find herein some seeming
Impertinencies, Superfluities, Contradictions and vain Repetitions, the which
upon mature Deliberation will be found otherwise. And there will be,
doubtless, by reason of the shortness of time, and haste of the Press, many
Erratas of mine and the Printers escaped. But this notwithstanding, I doubt
not, but it may be found very useful to the ends I have proposed to my self
therein, viz. For Lawyers, to lead them to the Cases, that they shall have
occasion to look after therein. For others, to teach them to set a watch before
the door of their Lips. And if now you will but cover the Defects of the work,
and accept of the pains of the Author, this is all that is desired by your
Friend, a lover of his Country, and well wisher to the Laws thereof.

W. SHEPPARD.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Chapters contained in this BOOK.
Chapters. Pages. 1 OF an Action of the Case in general. 1 2 Some general
things of Actions of the Case for Words. 3 3 Of the Slander of a Title to Land.
14 4 Of the Scandalum Magnatum. 16 5 Of Actions for Slanders of all kinds. 19 6
Of words of Slander about matter of Treason. 32 7 Of words of Slander about
matter of Murder. 35 8 Of words of Slander, about matter of Witchcraft. 40 9 Of
words of Slander, about Rape, Sodomy, Buggery, and house-burning. 42 10 Of
words of Slander, about matter of Theft. 43 11 Of words of Slander, that may
bring a man in danger, of other corporal punishment besides death. Of Petit
Larceny. 60 12 Of Perjury. 61 13 Of Forgery. 66 14 Of words of Slander, about
matter of Incontinency. 68 15 Of other words, importing some charge of
transgression of a Penal Law. 71 16 Of words Spiritual, Passionate, and Vain,
for which no Action is given. 74 17 Of other words, that have another import in
them. 75 18 Of words that hinder ones Preferment. 77 19 Of words, importing a
charge of Deceit and Couzening. 79 20 Of scandalous words, that relate to men
in their Offices, Professions, and places of Trust. 82 21 Of scandalous words
that relate to men in their Trade, and Way of Living. 94 22 Of an Action of
the Case for a Conspiracy. 100 23 Of Pleadings in Actions of the Case for
Words. 106 24 Of a Libel. 115 25 Some Cases for the illustration and
confirmation of all that is before laid down in the whole work. 117



Advertisement.
THere is in the Press an Exact Collection of Approved Forms of Judicial Writs,
fitted for the use of all Practicers, in the Court of Common Pleas. Collected
by a very able hand; And to be sold by C. Adams, I. Starkey, and T. Bassett, at
their Shops in Fleetstreet.

ACTION OF THE CASE.
CHAP. I. Of an Action of the Case in general. Action of the Case.

AN Action of the Case, is a Writ brought against one What it is Sect. 1.
for an offense done without force, as for not keeping promise, for breaking
Trust, for slanderous words, or the like Misdemeanour: And is called an Action
of the Case, because the whole Cause or Case, so much as is in the Declaration
(save only the time and place) is set down in the Writ: And there is no other
Action given in the Case, save only in some few Cases where the Plaintiff has
his choice to bring this or some other Action.

This Action is sometimes about Defamations or Slanders; and this may How many
kinds of it there be
be by words spoken. Or it may be by a deed done. By words spoken; it is either
for words spoken against the Title of a man's Land, or for words spoken against
the man himself. This Action is in some Cases for other things. And so it is
also either for not doing what the man ought to do, or it is for doing of
something a man should not do, or it is for doing of something otherwise than
he should have done it. This for the not doing of what a man ought to do, is
either upon his own undertaking to do it; or it is upon the requiring of Law,
without any personal undertaking of his own.

The Action for Defamation is either for a Defamation by words, where one
speaks any thing to the prejudice of the Life, Estate, or Name of another, or
for a Defamation by deed, where one does any thing that will vehemently imply
an Accusation of some great Crime against another. This also is either of great
men, called Scandalum Magnatum, or it is of Scandalum Magnatum.
ordinary men. The Action of the Case for deeds, is either upon an Assumpsit,
or Promise, or upon a Nuisance, upon a Trover and Conversion, upon a Deceit,
upon a Conspiracy, or it is upon some other Non-feasance, or Mis-feasance.
Amongst Slanders and Defamations, also some of them For Words and Acts of
Slander.
tend to the disgrace of the person of another: Some to the disgrace of the
Title of his Land. Those against the person also, do some of them tend to the
peril of his life; some to the prejudice of a man in his Livelihood and Estate,
and some to his reproach in his Name only. Coo. 4. 92, etc. Dyer. 8. 72.

A Defamation may be also by deeds, as by the doing of something against a man,
which will be Tant-amount, or more than a Slander by words, as to call a man in
question, and prosecute a man in a course of Justice, for a supposed Crime,
whereof he is innocent, bringing of an Action, etc. Bulst. 3. Part. 272. Coo.
4. 14, 15. If the Lord shall please to give time and strength, we may give you
an account of the Law touching this subject in both, the one after the other.

Some Defamations also may be said to be temporal or civil; as to call one
Traitor, Murderer, Thief, Bankrupt, and the like.

Some spiritual, as to call one Adulterer, Baud, Whore, Heretic, and the like.

And as to those Slanders called Spiritual, no Action will lie in a Civil Sect.
2.
Court, unless the party slandered have some special loss by them, but the
proper place for relief for these is in the Spiritual Court; And there are
other Slanders that may be said to be Civil or Temporal. And for these the
proper remedy is to be had in the Civil or Temporal Courts, as for calling
Traitor, Thief, Murderer, Bankrupt, and the like. And yet in some cases he may
bring his Action at the Common Law for that which he may also have his Remedy
in the Ecclesiastical Court; for the Common Law is to be preferred where they
stand in equal degree in respect of the matter to be tried. Mich. 23. Car. 1.
B. R. Styles Register.

We might here have distinguished Slanders by Public, and Private, Finches
Law, 185. 43. Aff. Pl. 381. Jenk. Cent. 1. Case 93.
or Personal: For there is a Slander of the State, as to report any thing about
the Affairs thereof that is false, and may be to the prejudice of it, as that
the Coin is abased, the Wool transported, or the like. And this is punishable
upon Indictment by Fine and Imprisonment. But we shall not have to do with
this at all. But with private and personal Defamations, which are either of
eminent, or common persons.

There are some Slanders by words that are Actionable, albeit the party of whom
the words are spoken have no special loss by them, and such generally are all
the Slanders that bring a man in question for his life, as to call a man
Traitor, Murderer, Thief, or the like. And some others, for speaking of things,
that if they were true, he might be fined or imprisoned for them.

And there are other Slanders that are not Actionable, but in case where the
party slandered does suffer some special loss by them; As to call one Whore,
Bastard
Whore, Bastard, or the like. Croo. 1. 99, 100.

There are also some slanderous words, that being spoken of any person
whatsoever are Actionable, as to call a man Traitor, or Thief, or the like.
Treason, Theft.
And there are others that will not bear Action, unless they be spoken of some
certain men, as Merchants, Tradesmen, or the like; as to call a man Bankrupt,
or the like. Goldsb. 126. 84. Croo. 1. 99, 100.

We shall begin with Actions about words, the which we shall dispatch in this
piece, and then shall speak to Actions about deeds: And in our labor about
words, to open the Law herein, we shall first lay down some general Rules
about all kind of Slanders, and the Slanders of all kinds of men, and then
descend to particulars.

CHAP. II. Some general things of Actions of the Case for Words.
WE shall first give you in sundry Rules, and a few Cases, the Sect. 1.
general Doctrine of Actions of the Case touching Slanders; And these like the
veins in the body run through the body of all the Cases hereafter following,
wherein the words are, or are not actionable, as they fall within these Rules.
And then we shall give you the Cases themselves as examples answering to these
Rules. The Rules are these.

1. That all scandalous words which touch or concern a man in his life, as to
say he is a Traitor, Thief, or the like; or which touch him in his Liberty, as
heretofore to have said of one, He was Villain to J. S. or which concern a man
in member in any corporal punishment, as to say, A man has stolen sixpence
(which is Petit Larceny) or the like: or which Theft.
scandal a man in his office, or place of Trust, as to say to a Judge or
Justice of Peace, He is a corrupt Judge or Justice of Peace, or the like; Or
Corruption in an office. Deceit in Trade
which slander a man in his Calling or Trade, by whith he gets his living, as
to say to an Attorney, You are a cheating Knave, of a Tradesman, that lives by
buying and selling, he is a Bankrupt, or the like; or which tend to the loss
of a man's preferment, as to say to a man about to be preferred to a Benefice,
That he is an Heretic; or of a woman like to have a Husband, Heretic. Whore.
Infectious Disease.
that she is a Whore; or the like, if by this means they lose their
preferment; or which charge a man to have any dangerous disease, by reason
whereof he ought to separate himself, or be separated by the Law from the
society of men, as to say a man has the French Pox: or the Plague, or the
like, or which tend to the slandering of a man's Title, as to say, He has no
Estate in his Manor, when he is about, and has need to sell it, or the like:
Or which tend to a man's dis-inheritance; as to say to an Heir to Land, He is a
Bastard, or the like: Or which tend any other way to the Bastardy.
infamy, discredit, or disgrace of a man; or that may any way import any damage
to a man. All such words regularly are Actionable, Coo. 4. 13, 14. etc. Coo.
10. 130. Dyer. 26. 72. Styles Regist. 6. Kitchen. 172. Bulstr. 1. Part. 40.
This General Rule for the clearing of it, does admit of many Extensions, and
many Exceptions and Limitations, which we shall lay down in the Rules that
follow. The Rules of Extension may be these.

1. That albeit some of the words spoken at the same time are, and others Some
words Actionable, others not. Sect. 2.
of them are not Actionable, yet an Action may lie for the Actionable words,
and the Action may be brought for them altogether. Dyer. 75. Plow. 118. Trin.
8. Jac. B. R. Lukers Case. Jenk. Cent. 7. Case 70. Coo. 10. 131. Styles 112.

2. That many words (though of themselves they be not Actionable) yet Words
aequivalent to Actionable words.
being equivalent to words that are Actionable, may bear an Action; for they
may prima facie, sound from the mouth of the speaker, in the ears of the
hearer, as bad as any Actionable words. Pasche. 15. Car. 1. B. R. Agreed.

3. That it matters not how the words (if they be Actionable) be published
Which way soever published.
or divulged, whether by writing, or speech; for the Action is maintainable in
both Cases. So a man might have been charged in this Action for a slander, by a
Bill in the Star Chamber, and so he may be now by a malicious Indictment. Coo.
4. 14, 15. See in Huttons Rep. 10. In Owens Rep. 30.

4. That it is all one as to the maintenance of the Action, if the words
Spoken to, or of a man all one.
be spoken or written to the person slandered before his face, or of him
behind his back, Old Book of Entries. Coo 4. 14. 15. and Hob. P. 292.

5. That it is not material whether the words be spoken in the second person
Spoken in the second or third person, all one. Theft.
to the party slandered himself, as thus. Thou art, or you are a Thief, or in
the third person behind his back, thus; J. S. is a Thief, for the Action is
alike maintainable in both Cases. Coo. 4. 14, 15, 16.

6. Nor is it material in what language the words are written or spoken, Words
written or spoken in another Language.
whether in Latin, or Welsh, or in the Native Language, they be scandalous in
all, if they be spoken so as the hearers do, or may attain to understand the
meaning of them. And yet if the words in their Native Language be such as are
not Actionable, no Action will lie for them; And if in another Language in the
hearing of them that do not understand them, it seems they are not Actionable;
And yet if one speak words in another language that are Actionable, and he
English them himself by words that are not Actionable, it is said, the words
shall not bear Action. Croo. 1. Part last published. 496, 497, 865. 15. Car. 1.
B. R. in Hetleys Rep. 175. In Huttons Rep. 8. in Hobb. Pl. 155, 351, 236. See
in Marches Rep. Bendlows Rep. 134. Styles Rep. 263. Yet see Brownl. Rep. 6.
Hobb. 126, 291.

7. Nor is it material how the words be uttered, whether directly, or
indirectly, Spoken after any manner of Speech. Sect. 3. Theft.
and obliquely; and whether by way of Affirmation, as A. is a Thief, or by way
of Interrogation; as where is the piece you stole from me? Has that Bastard
B. caused you to be arrested? Have thou been at London to change the money thou
did steal from me? or by way of Argumentation, as, I will prove J. S. to be
a Thief: Or by way of Negation, when it does imply an Affirmation, as You are
no Thief; or by way of Irony, as, You are no Thief, are you? Or thus, I have
said that J. S. is a Thief, and I Theft.
will justify it, and have told him so much to his face; or the like. For in
all these Cases they are Actionable, Pasch. 15. Car. 1. Appletons Case. B. R.
Hill. 4 Jac. B. R. Lady Morrisons Case. Croo. 2. 275. Croo. 1. last part
published. 273. See in March. Rep. fol. 7. pl. 18. and 58, pl. 19. And so in
like Cases. March. 19. pl. 44, and 55. pl. 9. Goldsb. 186, 139. Croo. 2. 103,
569, 406, 422. Coo. 12, 134. 30. Ass. 10. Jenk. Cent. 8. Case, Nelsons Case.
Croo. 2. 275. Hobb. Rep, pl. 276, 289.

8. Nor is it material whether it be spoken as from the Speaker himself, As
from a man's self, or from the Report of another.
or by hearsay, or by Relation, or by the Report of another, if the other did
not report it. As when one says, J. S. said A. B. is a Thief; if J. S. did not
say so, the words are Actionable, if he did say so, he may justify the
speaking of them. But if he report the words, as to say, one said A. B. is a
Thief, and not name the Author of the Report, the words are dangerous, and may
be Actionable. Croo. 1. part last published 400. M. 9. Jac. B. R. adjudged Croo.
2. 102, 406, 407. In March. Rep. 8. Coo. 12, 134. Jenkins Cent. 8. Case 7.
Leonard. Rep. 187. Croo. 2. 275, 422. Yelvertons Rep. 21. Bulstrode Rep. 3. 225.

9. Nor is it material whether they be uttered by way of earnest, or Spoken in
earnest, or in jest.
seemingly only in jest, but with a mind appearing to be malicious, and with a
purpose to slander, for the Action will lie in both Cases.

10. Nor is it material, whether the man that utters them be sober, or Spoken
by one sober or drunk.
drunk with Wine or Passion; for the Action lies alike in both Cases.

11. Nor is it material, whether the words be delivered in one, or more Spoken
at one, or more times, and in one or more sentences. Sect. 4.
sentences, or speeches, or at one, or more sentences or speeches, or atone,
times they may enure to the ag-or more times gravation of each other, or if the
words be all of them Actionable give several Actions. Croo. 1. 238. Bulstrod*
3. 283. Coo. 12. 134.

12. Nor is it material whether the Slander be raised and fixed by an
extra-judicial way, as by ordinary Talk, or by a judicial way, as by
Indictment, or the like, for in both cases they may be Actionable. Jenk. Cent.
7. Case 64. Kelw. 13. Coo. 4. 26. Dyer. 285. Leonard. Rep. 187.

13. That this Action will lie for words, though the words in a proper Taken
improperly. Theft.
speech cannot be true; as if a woman say to me, Thou have stolen my goods; for
she has no goods, but what is her husbands, adjudged. 9. Jac. Croo. Rep. 2.
60.

14. That the slander that does concern a man's Life, Liberty, Member, or any
corporal punishment, his Office, Trust, Calling, or the Charging with a foul
disease, to cause a separation; these Actions are maintainable without any
Averment in the Action of any particular damage that came Averment.
to the Plaintiff by it, but it is otherwise in the rest of the Slanders; For
if a man speak against another, words that are not in themselves Actionable,
Rogue. Knave. Couzener. Fornicator.
as that he is a Rogue, Knave, Couzener, Fornicator, or the like; for these
words he can bring no Action without Averment of some special loss he has
sustained by them.

15. That the Quality of the person of whom the words are spoken, does The
quality of the person of whom they are spoken considerable. Papistry.
much tend to the maintenance of the Action. And therefore some words that in
themselves are no Actionable; relating to some persons, may be Actionable. So
that albeit it will not kear an Action to call an ordinary man Papist, yet it
will bear an Action to call the Archbishop of Canterbury Papist. So albeit it
will not bear an Action to say of an ordinary man, He is no true Subject; yet
to say so of a Privy Counselor, Justice of Peace, Sheriff of a County, Captain
of a Troop of Horse, about the King, may be Actionable. As it is reported in
Leonards Rep. 335. So to say to one of the Privy Counsel, He is an untrue man
to the King. Trin. 32. Eliz. B. R. Walgroves Case. And yet it has been
adjudged not to lie for this, said of a Knight, and one of the Gentlemen of the
Kings Privy Chamber, That he was a couzening Knave, and lived by couzenage. In
Godb. Couzening.
Rep. 284. Croo. 2. 427. In Leonards Rep. 336.

16. That to charge a man with any Crime of Felony after a General, After a
pardon.
or special Pardon, albeit the Defendant know not of the Pardon, will bear an
Action. So to charge a man with a Crime after he has been indicted for it,
and acquitted of it upon his trial on the Indictment. In Hobb. Rep. pl. 71.
105. In Owens Rep. 150. Brownl. and Goldsb. Rep. 10. 1. Ed. 3. Corone. 15. 2.
Ed. 3. Corone 18.

17. That words that in, and of themselves, and in their own nature are Words
not Actionable in themselves, that are actionable by circumstances and
accidents. Treason. Felony.
not Actionable, yet relating to some Persons in their Offices, Callings, and
Conditions of life: Or by reason of some Accidents happening by them, they may
be Actionable. As if one by doubtful and uncertain words (that are not
Actionable) shall cast a charge of Treason, or Felony, or the like, and any
special loss come to him of whom the words are spoken by them; these words may
be Actionable, Coo, 4. 15, 17, 20. Mich. 19. Jac. B. R. Harrisons Case. In
March. Rep. 114, 115. In Brownl. Rep. 1. 11, 12. Croo. 2. 484. In Brownl. 2.
part. 166.

18. That if a man speak many slanderous words together of another, he Action
brought for part of the words.
of whom they are spoken, may have this Action for any part of the words alone,
and omit the rest of the words. In Owens Rep. 30.

19. That there are some words, uncertain and unknown, and of no use in Words
actionable in some Countries only.
some Countries, that may be certain and known in other Countries, and be
equivalent to slanderous words in another Country, and so be Actionable, being
spoken there. And therefore for any such words spoken in the Country where they
are used and known; or spoken elsewhere, if it be before them that understand
them, they may be Actionable. So to use any of these words, Thou art
mainsworn; or, thou art an out-putter; or, thou art a healer of Felons; or,
thou have strained my Mare; or that thou (being a Shooemakers Journey-man) wilt
cut thy Master out of door. Every one of these speeches are actionable in some
places. But then Averment.
some say, there must be this Averment in the Declaration, that they do carry
this sense in the Country where they are spoken. And yet others say it may be
proved at the Trial to have this sense. But it is most safe to aver it. And
thus, to say of one in Devonshire, and thereabouts, He is a healer of Fclons;
For there it is taken for a hider, or concealer of Felons; Healer of Felons.
Mainsworne.
where it is said, The healer is as bad as the stealer. So to say of one in
some Countries, He is mainsworn, where it is taken for, He is forsworn. So to
say of one in some Countries, He has strained a Mare, where it is taken for,
He has stolen a Mare, or, buggered a Mare. So to Strained a Mare. Outputter.
say of a man in Northumberland, Westmerland, and some other places, He is an
out-putter, where it is taken for a Horse-stealer. So to say of a man in
Westmerland, and some places, He is a Sheep-Theef, where it is taken for a
Stealer of Sheep. So to say of a man in some places that is Sheep thief.
servant to a Shoemaker, Thou will cut thy Master out of doors, where it is
taken for, Thou will undo him. So to say of a man in some places, as Cut his
Master out of doors. Daffidowndilly
in the North Country, He is a Daffidowndilly, where it is taken for this, He
is an Ambodexter: These, and such like words as these, spoken in the places
where they are known, will be actionable. But some hold that if they be not
spoken in the hearing of some that do understand them, that they are not
actionable; And yet this may be a little doubted; For he that hears them
spoken may ask the meaning of them of those that know it. And so the party will
be slandered, and have no remedy. See for all these things in Brownl. 1. part.
13. Hobb. Rep. 350. 236. 106. 126. 191. 394. Yelverton Rep. 153. Bulstr. 1.
part. 146. March. Rep. pl. 2. 17. Bulstr. 2. 146. Coo. 4. 25. Brownl. Rep. 4.
6. In Hetleys Rep. 123. Noys Rep. 98. 133. Bendloes Rep. 186, 187.

20. That where a Defamation is cast upon a man by deed, which is tantamount,
Slander by Act done.
or more than a slander by word; as where a man is maliciously indicted for
Treason, Felony, or the like; there the party grieved may have this Action;
Bulstr. 3. part. 272.

21. That where words are in themselves actionable, as tending to the Infamy,
Discredit, and Disgrace, and importing damage to the man of whom they are
spoken, there the Action will lie without any Averment of any special loss by
them. And so it is held for scandalous words that touch Averment.
a man in his Life, Liberty, or Member, or any corporal punishment, or which
scandalize a man in his Office, or Place, or Trust, or in his Calling, of
Function, by which he gets his living, or which do charge him with any great
infectious disease. All such words will bear an Action, without alleging or
averring of any particular damage by the speaking of them. But in all other
Cases there must be a special damage alleged to be sustained by the Plaintiff,
by the speaking of the words. And if that be in the Case, almost any words that
carry any thing in them of a foul aspersion, may be actionable. Bulst. 1.
part. 40. So much of the Rules of Extension.

22. The Rules of Exception or Limitation shall be these.

That actionable words in all cases (especially in cases where they may bring a
man in danger of his life, must have these qualifications and conditions in
them.

1. They must be false, for if the thing spoken be true, let the words be what
they will, the party that speaks them may justify them.

2. They must be malicious, and purposely; and intentionally to slander and
defame, for otherwise notwithstanding they be true, yet will they not be
actionable.

3. They must be particular and clear, for if they be so general, as thereby to
be ambiguous and doubtful, no Action will lie upon them.

4. They must be of a simple, single, and known sense; for if they be of an
indifferent meaning, no Action will lie upon them.

5. They must be certain, against which there may not be any intendment; for if
they be altogether uncertain, either as to the person slandered, or the slander
it self, no Action will lie upon them.

6. The words must have in them some matter of weight and substance; for if the
things spoken import no substantial matter, no Action will lie upon them.

7. They must be positive, affirmative, and direct, importing some peremptory
Accusation; for if they import a slander by way of Argument, Inference, or
Implication only, no Action will lie upon them.

8. They must import a thing possible to be; for if they import a thing simply
and apparently impossible, no Action will lie upon them.

9. They must import some Act done; for if they import only an Affection,
Inclination, or Intention to do something, and nothing done, no Action will lie
upon them.

10. They must carry in them, or cause by occasion of them something of damage
and prejudice to him against whom they are spoken; for if it be apparent, they
neither do, nor will bring any damage to him, no Action will lie upon them.

11. The words all of them spoken together must be actionable; for if some of
them only be actionable, and the rest spoken at the same time do qualify them,
and take away the force thereof, no Action will lie upon them.

12. They must be spoken in an extrajudicial way; for if they be spoken in a
course of Justice, and a judicial way, no Action will lie upon them.

13. They must be spoken in the hearing of some body that does understand them;
for if they be spoken in another language, which none of them that do hear them
understand, no Action will lie upon them.

14. The words, if they charge a man with a crime, must import that the man
charged has notice, or knowledge of the ground or occasion of the crime, or
they will not be actionable.

15. They must carry an Import of Slander in them, as they are taken and
understood in their vulgar and common sense and acceptance; for if they become
scandalous, as they are taken in a foreign, strict, and grammatical sense and
construction only, this will not bear an Action. For the first of these.

1. The words spoken, and the thing said against him of whom they are The words
must be false. Sect. 6.
spoken must be false; for the Writ is falso and malitiose, dixit, etc. And so
the Action must be laid, or else it is not well laid. For if the words spoken
be true, let them be what they will, the defendant in the Action may justify
the speaking of them. But in that case he must take heed he do not plead
Pleading.
not guilty; And if they be malicious, and false, an Action will lie upon them.
Dyer. 236. Broo. 104. Action of the Case. Huttons Rep. 73. Croo. 2. 91.

2. For the second thing; The words spoken must be malicious, and with The
words must be malicious.
an intent and purpose to prejudice him against whom they are spoken; For the
Writ is falso and malitiose, and it must be both false and malicious, otherwise
it is not good, it is therefore in this considerable Quo Animo. The words
therefore must be such, as importing something, that if true, may bring the
party against whom they are spoken, in danger for his Life, Liberty, Estate, or
Credit, and no good cause can be showed for the speaking of them. But for the
discovery of the malice, these things are to be known.

1. That where no other Cause can be showed of the speaking of the words; there
the Law will take it to be malicious. That which is chiefly therefore to be
considered, is Causa Dicendi. For if a Lawyer shall in the pleading of his
Clients cause, innocently, and pertinently to the cause in hand (which he must
look to) and according to his Instructions, speak such words as may charge a
man with a Crime, or be actionable in another Case; this shall not be taken to
be malicious, and therefore not actionable. And yet if the Lawyer shall speak
those words at another time, or in another place then when and where the Cause
is debated; this may be actionable. So where a Preacher in preaching shall
recite a History out of a Book, that does prove false and scandalous; this will
not be actionable. So if one advise his friend to forbear the Company of such a
one, for that she has the Pox, or tell his friend of somewhat that is
reported of him, and wish him to clear himself of it; In these Cases no Action
will lie, for these words. For here the cause, or occasion of the speaking of
the words, does show, that there was no malicious intent in the speaker when
he spoke the words. And yet if one shall make this but a Cloak for his malice
in any such Case as this, it will be otherwise. But by these and such like
Circumstances, it must be considered, with what mind he spoke the words, and
whether there were malice in them, or not. Bulstr. 1. part. 148. Hill. 21. Car.
1. B. R. Styles Regist. 5. Croo. 2. 91. 339. Trin. 7. Car. 1. B. R. Norman and
Simonds Case. Coo. 4. 16. Hobb. Rep. pl. 11. 399. Dyer. 236. Huttons Rep. 73.
Dyer. 236. Bustr. 1. part. 148.

3. For the third thing, The words spoken must be clear and perspicuous; The
words must be clear and perspicuous
as, Thou art a Thief, J. S. is a Bankrupt, or, thou have killed J. S. or, thou
was forsworn in the Kings Bench Court, or, in a Court of Record, and the like.
And not obscure and ambiguous. And therefore for such like words as these; as
to say, I have matter against him, for A. has found forgery, and can prove it
against him; or, I charge him with felony, for Obscure words. Forgery.
taking money out of the pocket of J. S. Thou wast cooped up for forging Writs.

Or, thou did forswear thy self in the Kings Bench; for this may be taken in
the Prison called the Kings Bench. Or thus, He has but one Perjury.
Manor, and he has gotten it by swearing and forswearing; or, thou have
stolen my Apples, or my Corn; for it may be from the Tree, or out of Theft.
the Field. No Action will lie for these, and such like words as these. Popham.
Rep. 211. Hobb. Rep. pl. 381. 382. Croo. 1. 195. Coo. 4. 15.

4. For the fourth thing; They must be of a simple, single, and univocal The
words must be of a plain and simple sense, or univocal.
sense in the vulgar acceptance of them: As, Thou did burn the Barn of J. S.
full of Corn; Or, Thou have the French Pox. Yelvertons Rep. 21.

For if they be of a double and indifferent sense, that may be taken one Words
of a double sense, or equivocal.
way or other; there if the words taken in either sense be actionable, they
must needs give an Action. But if the words will bear a good, and a bad sense,
or a worse, and better sense; there if there be nothing in the Case by that
which is said with them, and before, or after them, to guide them more to the
worser, than to the better sense, they shall be always taken in the better,
and not in the worser sense, and so not be liable to Action. For in this the
Rule is, verba sunt accipienda in mitiori sensu. And again, Benignior sensus in
generalibus and dubiis preferendus. It is therefore agreed, Burning a Barn. An
infectious disease. Felony.
That no Action will lie, for saying of a man, He did burn my Barn, for it may
be a Barn without Corn; Nor for saying, He has the Pox; for it may be the
ordinary, not the French Pox; Nor for saying, Thou art a Coyner of Gold; for it
may be his Trade, and he may do it by authority; Nor for this, I charge you
with Felony, for this may be such a Felony, as for which damages only are
recoverable as a Maihm is: Nor for this, Thou Perjury. Invendo.
art forsworn, for this may be in ordinary communication, or it may be in a
Court of Justice, or the like. And no Invendo in any of these Cases will make
any such like words that in themselves are not actionable to be actionable.
And yet if in this Case, the Common, Ordinary, and Violent sense of the words
in the Import thereof be the worse sense; and there be no other words spoken
with them to turn their sense the other way, there they may be taken in the
worser sense, and liable to Action; and therefore it has been adjudged to lie
for these words, A. has had the use of her body; Incontinency.
and for these words, A. has spoken Treason. Huttons Rep. 75. 76. Coo. 4. 20,
21. Godo. Rep. 1. 167, 181, 375. Hobb. Rep. pl. 351. Popham. Treason.
Rep. 211. Croo. 1. 352.

5. For the fifth thing, That the words that shall maintain an Action The words
must be direct and certain as to the person and thing. Sect. 7. Theft.
must be so apparent, direct, and certain, that there may be no intendment
against them; as J. S. is a Thief; or, your Husband, or, your Wife, or, your
Father is a Thief. For if they be altogether uncertain, either as to the person
slandered, or as to the slander it self, no Action will lie upon them. And
therefore if one say, One that is near you is a Thief, or, mine enemy is a
Thief; or, one of the Sons [or, one of the Servants] of J. S. (who has many
Sons or Servants) is a Thief, or the like; no Action will lie for these words.
And so if one say, A. deserves to be hanged; Or, A. Murder.
has taken away money from J. S. or, A. seeks my life; or, A. has a mind to
kill me; or, A. smells of the murder of J. S. or the like; no Action will lie
for any of these words. And no Invendo can in these Cases Invendo.
make the words certain and actionable. And yet if there be any thing else
spoken in the conference, by which there is a certain description of the person
slandered, as where the conference is about such a Son or Servant by name, and
therein the party say, He is a Thief, or by which the Theft.
thing intended by the slander is cleared, this may make the words certain, and
so actionable. Coo. 4. 17. Hobb. Rep. p. 382. Croo. 1. 127. Hobb. Rep. pl. 196.
Croo. 2. 184, 443. Brownl. 1. part. 2.

For the sixth thing, That the words spoken must have in them some matter of
weight and substance; and therefore the Law will not give this Action for every
light and trivial speech, nor for every passionate word or speech, but there
must be some such weighty and substantial matter in the words, that if true,
might be perilous, and prejudicial to the party of whom they are spoken. And
therefore it is agreed, That this Action will not lie, for any of these
following words; Thou art a Villain, Rogue, Varlet, Villain, Rogue. Varlet.
Rascal. Knave. Couzener. Cheater. Railer. Miscreant. Hypocrite.
Knave, Couzener, Rascal, Cheater, Railer, Miscreant, Hypocrite, or the like.
Nor for calling of another, any, or all of these names together. And yet any of
these words being joined with other words that are actionable, may aggravate
the slander, and so increase the damages. So to say of another, That he keeps
such a Dog, that his neighbors Cattle about him cannot go in peace; or, that
his Cattle are in every man's ground. For these, and such like words as these,
no Action will lie. For in this the Rules are Boni Judicis Interest dirimere
lites and Malitiae hominum est obviandum. Coo. 4. 15. Bulstr. 1. part. 40.

For the seventh thing, That the words (especially if they concern a man in his
life) must be so particular, positive, affirmative, and direct, that they may
import a peremptory Accusation. And not by way of Argument, Inference, or
Implication only, for if they so import a slander only, no Action will lie upon
them. And therefore it is agreed, that no Action will lie for Felony.
words thus spoken; I fear you will be charged with Felony; or, take heed you
be not arrested for Felony, or, I doubt whether your words may not be
treasonable words; or, thou have deserved to be hanged for Felony; Treason.
or, if thou had had thy Right, thou had been hanged for Felony before this
day; or, I shall call him in question for the murder of J. S. or, I shall
arrest him for flat Felony. For these, and such like words as these are, no
Felony.
Action will lie. Hobb. Rep. pl. 381. 286. Bulstr. 1. part 148. Coo. 4. 15.
Popham. Rep. 210.

For the eighth thing, That the thing said by the words, must be a thing that
is possible to have been done. For if it import such a thing done, as is
altogether and apparently impossible, no Action will lie upon them. And
therefore it is held, that no Action will lie for saying of another, that he
has Murder.
killed my Wife, for that the words themselves do show her to be then alive.
Coo. 4. 16. So to say to a Brewer, My Mare does piss as good Beer as thou do
brew, these words in themselves are impossible, and will bear no Action. And
yet if the Brewer in his Trade shall suffer any special loss Trade.
by them, for this he may have his Action. Coo. 4. 16. Mich. 15. Jac. B. R.
Dicks Case.

For the ninth thing, That the words must import some Act done. For if Not for
words importing only an inclination or intention to do a thing. Adjective words.
they import only an Inclination, Affection, or Intention to do a thing, no
Action will lie upon them. And therefore it is held, That no Action will lie
for such like words as these; He is a Theevish Knave; or, he is a Traitorous
Knave; or, he is a seditious Knave. And yet if these, and such like Adjective
words, shall import an Act done; as, He is a perjured Knave; or the like;
There this Action will lie, Or if they be Theft.
such words as do slander a man in his Office, Function, or Profession; as to
say of a Judge. He is a corrupt Judge; or, of such an Officer, Corruption in
an officer.
He is a corrupt Officer; or, he is a bribing Knave: Or if they be such words
as do slander a man in his Trade; As to say of a Tradesman, He is a Bankrupt
[or a Bankeruptly] fellow. For all these, and such like Bankerupt.
words the Action will lie. And so also it will where the Adjective word is
Theft.
added to an actionable word; As, Thou art a cunning Thief. And so also it will
lie where the intent of doing an Act, and the Act done are joined together. As,
He would have robbed me, and did rob me of my dagger. And so also it will
lie where the words import that he is doing of the Act, as where he says of
one, He is ravishing a woman, or, he is robbing a man; Coo. 4. 16, 19. Hobb.
Rep. pl. 17. Dyer. 72. Croo. 1. 301. Godb. Rep. 151. Bulstr. 1. part 134, 145,
138, 210.

For the tenth thing, That the words must carry in them, or cause by occasion
of them something of damage or prejudice to him against whom they That the
words must import somewhat of damage to him of whom they are spoken. Sect. 8.
Murder.
are spoken. For if the thing spoken being true, may not hinder, or hurt him by
hazard of his life, or by the infringing of his Liberty, or by the impairing of
his estate, or by the defamation of his Credit, no Action will lie upon them.
And therefore it is agreed, That to charge a man with a Crime by words in
another language, that none of the hearers understand, or to charge a man in an
Action brought with the killing of a man, where it does appear by the Record it
self, that the party supposed to be killed, is yet alive, is not actionable;
for he neither has, nor can have damage by it. So to charge a man with a
trivial light matter, as that he has erected a Cottage against the Law, or
has a Dog that will not suffer his neighbors Cattle to go in peace; these
things will not bear Action. Coo. 4. 16. Bulstr. 1. 148. Croo. 1. 350. Hobb.
Rep. pl. 11. 236, 145, 164. 154.

For the eleventh thing, That the words all of them spoken together That the
words must be taken altogether.
must be Actionable, for words that are in, and of themselves Actionable, may
be qualified by the precedent, or subsequent words joined with them, and spoken
at the same time, and therefore where part of the words rent asunder from the
rest are Actionable; but there are other words spoken before, or after them at
the same time, and in the same speech, or conference that do explain, limit,
and qualify them, in such cases they will not be Actionable; and therefore it
is agreed, that no Action will lie for the words in the Cases hereafter
following. For that thou have stolen my Apple, out of my Orchard, I will say
thou art a Thief; or, Art thou not a Thief that have stolen away my Evidences;
or, Art not thou a Murderer, that have killed so many Hares? Or, where two are
talking of Hunting, and one of them shall brag how many Hares he had killed by
Engines, and thereupon the other say to him, Thou art a Murderer, in these and
such like cases no Action will lie upon them. But these two Rules are given
herein.

1 That the words that shall qualify and extenuate such Actionable words, must
be full and clear, and not ambiguous.

2 That the words that must qualify and correct, must be such as do not
contain any matter of slander in them.

And 3 Some make a question of such kind of words, where they are subsequent to
the Actionable words, and are brought in by the word (And) as you are a Thief,
and you have stolen my Apples out of my Orchard; and in this case they argue
that they are additional, and cumulative, and shall not correct at all, as they
shall when they are brought in by the word For, as you are a Thief, for you
have stolen my Apples, etc. But see more of this hereafter. Coo. 4. 19. Hobb.
Rep. 97. 381. 406. Styles Rep. 115. 135. New Book of Entries, 22. 6. Croo. 1.
351. Godb. Rep. 89. Huttons Rep. 65. 109, 110.

For the twelfth thing. That the words must be spoken in an extrajudicial That
the words be not divulged in a course of Justice,
way, for if a slander shall be raised and spread only by occasion, and the
means of a prosecution, by one that does but pursue the course of Justice in an
ordinary way of Justice, no Action will lie for this, for in this it is held
for a rule, That for a Suit, or any other legal proceeding in a course of
Justice, if it be not out of malice, and touch not a man's life, no Action will
lie; and therefore this Action will not lie against a man for bringing a Writ
of Forger of false Deeds, nor for preferring Articles against Forgery.
a man to a Justice of Peace to have the good behavior against him, nor for
the prosecution of a suspected Felon, by indictment as there is cause; and yet
if in this case the prosecution shall prove to be malicious, as where an
Indictment is preferred against a man for Felony, or the like, and there be not
so much as probabilis causa for what is done, and the party be acquitted upon
it; he may have this Action, or an Action in the nature of a Conspiracy; for as
a Thief may be spared by the favor of Jurors, so Conspiracy.
an honest man may be much prejudiced in his reputation by such a malicious
prosecution, 41, 42. Eliz. Co. B. Sherington versus ware. See March of
slanders, 2 part 10. Styles Rep. 335.

For the thirteenth thing, That the words must be spoken in the hearing of some
body that does understand them, for if words of slander be spoken in Latin,
Greek, Welsh, or any other Language in the hearing of such persons, as whereof
not one amongst them does understand what they Words of another Language.
intend, or signify; no Action will lie upon them. Croo. 1. 65. 144. Hobb.
Rep. 63. 276.

For the fourteenth thing, That where a man is charged with a Crime by any such
words, and it does not appear, that he had notice of the ground or occasion of
the Crime, in this case no Action will lie for the words; As where one is
charged to keep Thieves about him, and it is not said that he knew them to be
such, no Action will lie for this, Mich 40. 41. Eliz.

And thus much for the Rules of Limitation, or Exception.

The Rules that follow are of another nature.

1 That if a man be charged with a Felony by a common fame, Arrested,
Imprisoned, or Indicted upon it, and yet be (as he may be) innocent, he may not
upon this ground be charged with this Felony, and therefore if any man in this
case shall charge him with it, he way by this make himself liable to this
Action, for in this case common fame will not excuse him that shall so charge
him for this slander. Brownl. Rep. 2. Hobb. Rep. 105. 238. 381. 112. March. 76.
26 H. 8, 9.

2 That if the words spoken be true, let them be what they will, the Defendant
may justify them, and excuse himself; Broo. Action of the Case, 104.

3 That in some cases, the words that are in their first utterance imperfectly
and incertainly spoken, and perhaps not Actionable, that these words may yet by
the pleadings of the Parties, and Verdict of a Jury for the Plaintiff be made
certain, and so become Actionable. The Pleadings therefore of the parties in
these Suits must be carefully heeded, for they may be of great advantage or
disadvantage to either party.

4 That words relating to a Person ought to be understood according to the
condition of the person to whom they are spoken; so that the same words spoken
to some meaner men, that will not bear an Action, yet spoken to a more eminent
person may be Actionable, Croo. 1. last published, 192, 193. As to say to a
Bishop, or a Judge, or Justice of the Peace, or the like man, he is a Vermin
in the Commonwealth, or a corrupt man, may be Actionable. See Scandalum
Magnatum.

For the better discovery, and more clear understanding of general ambiguous
and uncertain words, and when they are, or are not actionable, these Sect. 9.
things are to be known.

That the intent and meaning of the Speaker in them is as well to be heeded
(as far as it can be known) as the import of the words themselves. And for this
it is said, It must be heeded, Quo Animo, they are spoken, and sensus verborum
est attendendus. Et quae ad unum sensum [or, ad unum finem] loquuta sunt non
debent ad alium detor queri. Nor are these Actions to be maintained upon men's
words by a strained Construction; but where the words in themselves do import a
slander. And for the better finding out of the sense of men's words, and their
intent in them, this is to be known.

1. That words are not to be taken and understood in a strict and Grammatical
sense, or ex ei termini per se, in their natural and proper signification; but
in the vulgar and common sense that they are taken in the time when, and the
place where they are spoken. For in this the Rule is Loquendum ut vulgus.
Intelligendum ut sapiens. And hence it is that the same words that in one
Country are actionable, in another Country are not actionable. Coo. 4. 14.

2. They are not to be carried by a foreign Construction besides their most
natural likely, and common sense and meaning, into another sense and meaning.
Croo. 1. 352.

3. The cause, or occasion of the speaking of them is to be considered
according to the Rule; Sensus verborum sumen^ius ex causa dicendi. For upon
this difference it is, That the same words that will bear an Action in one
case, will not bear an Action in another case. And words that in themselves
will bear an Action, yet considered ex causa dicendi, will not bear an Action.
And therefore if one say of another, That he is a Bastard, Bastardy.
when this is to defend his own title, where he himself does claim to be heir
to the Land, that is now in question, or like to be in question. Or say of
another, that he has forsworn himself, where it is in a case wherein he has
taken his Oath against him, or where a Lawyer in the pleading of Perjury.
his Clients Cause, shall utter words according to his Instructions pertinently
to the Cause, or a man shall in an orderly course of Justice utter such words
as otherwise would be scandalous; In these, and such like Cases as these, no
Action will lie for words so spoken; albeit they be otherwise in themselves
actionable. Croo. 2. 90, 91. Coo. 4. 13, 14, 16. March. pl. 45.

4. The words must be considered by all the rest of the words spoken together
with them at the same time. And they are to be taken secundum subjectam
materiam, and conjunctim uno halitu, and not by a part of them rent asunder
from the rest: And therefore if one be talking about a Judge, Attorney; or
other such like Officer about his office, and in this discourse say, He is
known to be a corrupt man, and to deal corruptly; this will Corruption in an
office.
bear an Action. But if the discourse be about his dealings as a Usurer, or as
an Executor in the performance of a Trust committed to him by a Will, there the
words will not be actionable. So if two be talking together of Hunting, and one
of them confesses that he does kill Hares with Engines, and thereupon the
other does say to him, That he is a Murderer, So if Murder.
one say of me; He is a Traitor, for I trusted him to buy Land for me, and
he bought it for himself. So if he say, I robbed him, for I took away Treason.
his evidences, and a subpena. In these, and such like cases no Action will lie
for the words. Coo. 4. 16. 19. Brownl. 7. and 2. Godb. Rep. 89. Lievre de
Entries. 22. 6.

5. But where the sense is double, and indifferent, that it may be taken the
one, or the other way. But one of the senses is worse, and the other is better;
there the words shall be taken in the better, and not in the worser sense. But
of this see before.

6. That where the sense of the words is general, and may be taken diverse
ways, there it shall be understood with reference to the person of whom they
are spoken. For in this the Rule is, Sermo relatus ad personam intelligi debet
de Condition personae. And thus the same words spoken to one man, may be, and
spoken to another man, may not be actionable. to say to a Judge, or such like
Officer, You are a corrupt man, is actionable. But such words to another man
are not actionable. Coo. 4. 16.

And yet if in this case, there be other words spoken together with these
words, that do manifest them not to be intended with reference to his office,
but to some other thing, the words will not be actionable. Coo. 4. 16. Hetleys
Rep. 123. 139.

We have touched it before, That Slander is, and may be by word, or by deed.
And by word it may be either of the title a man has to his Land; or of his
Person. We shall first of all lay down something of the first of the slander
of titles; and then we shall enter upon the slander of persons. As to which it
may be easily discovered by that which is laid down in the general foregoing
Rules; That in this subject we are upon, these things are principally to be
considered.

1. The Person of the Slanderer. 2. The Person of the Slandered. 3. The way and
manner of divulging of the Slander. 4. The frame of the words, whereby the
Slander is raised and made. 5. The matter and quality of the slander it self.
We shall therefore after we have dispatched the first, and after we have
spoken a little to the Slander of great men; called Scandalum Magnatum, in the
next place say something to every one of these particulars.
CHAP. III. Of the Slander of a Title to Land.
THere are some words spoken that are in scandal and disparagement of Words
that tend to the slander of a man's title to his Land; or to a man's
disinheritance. Sect. 1.
a man's Title to his Land, or tend to a man's disheritance, for which an Action
of the Case may lie. And for the opening of this point, these things are to be
known. That in all cases where an Action will lie for a Slander of this nature
there must be these things in the Case.

1. The words must be spoken about such Land, as wherein I that am to bring the
Action, have some Title of Estate, or at least a possibility, or probability of
Estate or Title in Possession, Remainder, or Reversion. For if they be spoken
about Land that does not concern me, and wherewith I have not to do, they
cannot as they refer to the Land be actionable.

2. The words spoken must be false; For if what is said be true, be it what
it will, the speaker may justify the speaking of it where an Action is brought
against him for it.

3. They must be spoken by one, that neither has, nor pretends title to the
Land himself, and that is not of Counsel with him that has or pretends title
to it.

For if a man lay claim to Land that another has in possession, or to which
he does pretend title, as next heir, or otherwise. And he shall say any such
words as these, That the Land is his Land that claims it, and not the others;
or, that he has a good title to it, and the other has no title to it; or,
that he has such an Estate in it; or, such a conveyance of it, if in truth
he have such a conveyance of it, and if it be true, as he says, no Action
will lie for it. So if they both claim as heir, and the one of them say of the
other, That he is a Bastard, or, that he is not the rightful heir; or, that
his Father was an Alien, or the like; and that he himself is the heir. And so
if the Counsel of such a man shall use any such words as these in the agitation
of his Case about the Lands, these words will not be actionable. And yet if a
man shall pretend title to the Land another has in possession, and has no
color of title for it. And say, he has such a deed or conveyance of it,
where in truth he has no such deed, or conveyance at all; or, if he has any
such, it is a counterfeit, and a forged one, and he knows it to be so; in
these Cases the words may be actionable. But if there be any color for what is
said, the words will not be actionable. Coo. 4. 17, 18, Yelvertons Rep, 80. 88.
New Book of Entries. 20. 28. Trin. 25. Eliz. B. R. Banisters Case. Mich. 3.
Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 339.

4. The party that brings the Action must have, or be likely to have some
special damage by the speaking of the words; as that he is hindered in the sale
of his Land, was forced to fall his price, or in his preferment in marriage, or
the like, by it. And therefore where a man is not about the sale of his Land,
or about a match with a Wife or Husband, and another shall speak words to the
disparagement of the title of his Land; this will not bear an Action. But if by
the speaking of the words he has lost his Chapman, or otherwise suffered any
special prejudice (the which he must not fail to set forth in his Declaration)
there without question the Action will lie, Croo. 1. 99. 100. Croo. 2. 213.
397. 422. 484. Croo. 2. 642. 337. Owens Rep. 32. Popham, Rep. 187, Yelvertons
Rep. 88. Bulstr. 2. part 9^.

5 That where the words are spoken to the prejudice of his Inheritance, as
where he is denied to be rightful Heir, or the like, there the Averment.
Action may be maintainable without Averment of any present damage, and
therefore it is held that this Action will lie, for saying of a lawful Heir to
Land, before or after the Ancestors death, He is a Bastard; and so albeit the
words be spoken before, or after he has Land in possession, and though he be
not about to sell the Land, and although he have no special loss by the
speaking of the words, for by this the King, or other Lord may be moved to
search after the Title, and the Title of his Land (if he have any) may be
called in question, and so it may in time turn to his prejudice, Coo. 4. 17.
Croo. 2. 642. M. 20. Jac. B. R. Elborrows case.

6 That this Action will not lie for words that are too general and uncertain,
nor for words that are not malicious, sufficiently positive, and the like,
within the Rules of words spoken in other cases; for if they be incertaine, of
a double intendment, doubtful meaning, or the like, no Action will lie upon
them.

It is therefore agreed, That if I have Land, and am about the sale of Sect. 2.
it, in treaty with another, or about to settle it on a Marriage, and one that
has nothing to do with it, or makes no title to it shall say, That I have no
title to the Land, or, I have no right to it, or, I can make no good estate of
the Land, or, that it is another Land, or, that another has such an estate in
it, and set forth such a one as will disable the estate that I am now about to
make, this is Actionable. As if I be a Copyholder for life, of Land in a
Manor, and the Lord is making a Lease of it, after my life, and is bid five
hundred pound for it, and I shall say, I have a Lease for years of it after my
life, made by a former Lord, this will be Actionable, Coo. 4. 18. Croo. 2. 397.
337. Owens Rep. 32. Pophams Rep. 187. Croo. 2. 163. Yelvertons Rep. 88. Croo.
1. 99. But if it be so, that I have only a purpose to sell it, or to settle it
upon Children, and any man speaks such words about it, this will not bear
Action, Croo. 2. 397. 337. 444. Pophams Rep. 187. Owens Rep. 32. Croo. 1. 99.

And if one that claims this Land as his own, shall say, It is my Land, or, I
have a Lease of it; or, the other has no estate in it, or, has no right to
it, or the like; this is not Actionable, Coo. 4. 18. so if I pretend Title to
Land as Heir, and another claims it as Heir, and I say, He is a Bastard, and I
am next Heir, this is not Actionable, Coo. 4. 17. Yelverton Rep. 80, 88.

And if a Counselor shall say, That his Clyent has the better right to the
Land, or shall use other words in the course of his pleading pertinent and
necessary to be said in order to the advance of the cause, no Action will lie
for this. Coo. 4. 17. Trin. 25. Eliz. B. R. Banisters case. If I have a
Copyhold of Inheritance within the jurisdiction of the Court of another, and
he says, That I have not any Title to those Lands, if by this I have no
special prejudice, no Action will lie for it; Croo. 1. 99. and yet if such a
one that has no Title to, nor estate in it himself, shall say, that another
has an estate in it, or title to it, who has no good, but has a colorable
estate or title in it, this will be Actionable, so it is to say in such a case,
I know one that has a Lease of the Land, and he will not part from it at any
rate. Mich. 37. 38. Eliz. B. R. Pennimans Case. Mich. 20. Jac. Elborrows Case.
Croo. 1. 99, 100. Croo. 2. 397, 422, 642. Croo. 4. 17. Coo. 1. 175.

And if two have Leases of the same Land, and he that has the last Lease,
which is not good, shall say, That the Land is his, and the others estate is
not good; this is actionable. Coo. 1. 175. Coo. 4. 18.

And if I be about to sell my Land, and J. S. shall pretend to, and show a
Lease of it, and it is counterfeit, and he know it to be so, this is
actionable. Coo. 4. 18.

So if a woman shall publish a Lease of the Land of another, as made by her
Husband, and shall know it to be forged; if by it the party have any special
loss; he may have this action. Coo. 4. 18.

So if I be about to sell my Land, and another man shall say, the Land is
conveyed to J. S. and is his Land, or that he has a Lease of it for years; or
the like; this is actionable. And so it is, albeit there be a conveyance or
Lease made to J. S. in truth, if it be not a good Conveyance or Lease in Law.
Coo. 1. 175. Coo. 4. 18.

But for these words, I had rather to buy the title of the younger Brother,
than of the elder Brother, and the Plaintiff; and that he had seen an
Indenture to lead the uses of a Fine, whereby it did appear that the Plaintiff
had no authority to sell the Land; no Action will lie. Crush verse. Crush. M. 3.
Jac. B. R.

And so it has been agreed, That an Action will lie in the Cases following. To
say a man is a Bastard, and not a rightful Heir to Land.
As I have Land as Son and Heir of J. S. and another shall say of me, I am a
Bastard, if by this I suffer any special prejudice, there is no doubt I may
have this Action against him. Croo. 2. 642.

And if I be Heir apparent to my Ancestor, who intends to settle his Land upon
me, and by occasion of these words, he does give it away from me; I may have
this Action against him that speaks the words. Croo. 2 Bastardy.
642. Croo. 2. 213. Godb. Rep. 421, 451. pl. 519. Bulstr. 2. part 90.

Nay it seems the Law is, That if one shall say of me, that I am a Bastard;
albeit I do not claim any Inheritance, or to be Heir to any one person in
certain, and albeit I have not any present or special damage by it; yet that
these words are actionable. Croo. 2. 642. Croo. 2. 213. Godb. Rep. 421, 451.
pl. 519. Bulstr. 2. part 90.

And if I have but a remote possibility of Land, as where an entail is of Land
on my Father, and the Heirs of his body, whereof I am the youngest of many, and
he is about the sale of this Land, and I am bid money for this possibility, and
then one shall say of me, I am a Bastard, and after that the Purchaser refuse
to give me any thing; for my possibility in this case I may have this Action
against him for it. Croo. 2. 213. Godb. Rep. 421, 451. pl. 519.

CHAP. IV. Of the Scandalum Magnatum.
SCandalum Magnatum, is a wrong done to some eminent person of the Scandalum
Magnatum. What.
Land, as Duke, Earl, Baron, Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal, Justice of the
one Bench, or of the other, by false news, or false messages, whereby debates
and discords between them, or any scandal to their persons Sect. 1.
may arise, Stat. 2. R. 2. chap. 5. Westminster. 1. chap. 34.

In this Case the party defamed may have his Action in the name of the The
punishment of it.
King, and his own Name upon the Stat. of 2. R. 2. And hereby shall recover
damages for the wrong, and the party may also be otherwise punished. And if the
slander be divulged in the nature of a Libel, it is punishable by Indictment;
and great Fines are imposed for this offense, for that the reproach of such
persons is the reproach of the King and State it self. Coo. 5. 125. Old Book of
Entries. 593. Crompton. Jur. 35. 19. 13.

For the knowledge of this, wherein this Action is given to a great man, For
and against whom, and where this Action will lie or not.
for such a wrong these things are to be known.

1. That the King is within the Statute of Westminster. cap. 34. but not within the
Statute of 2. R. 2. cap. 5. and 12. R. 2. cap. 12. Dyer. 155.

2. That the persons that are to have this Writ, are declared to be Prelates,
Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other Nobles and Grandees of the Realm, and also the
Chancelour; Treasurer, Clerk of the Privy Seal, Lord Guardian of the Cinque
Ports, and of the Kings Privy Council, Steward of the Kings Household, Justice
of the one, and of the other Bench; and other the great Officers of the Realm.
2. R. 2. cap. 5. Westminster. 1. 34. Dyer. 155. in Hetleys Rep. 55.

3. That for this, it matters not for the manner of contrivance or publication
How this slander may be contrived and published.
of it, which way the words or reports be published, either by speech or
writing; either spoken or written from a man's own knowledge, and from himself,
or by the report of another. And by writing either delivered to the party
himself, or to another, or hanged up in any open place, or by Libels, or by any
other extrajudicial way whatsoever. See in Hetley. Rep. 55.

But this lies not against any man for any thing done by him in a judicial
way, as for bringing a Writ, or for having a Suit, for forging of deeds, or
other Cause in a legal way, or for preferring and prosecuting of a Legal
Indictment, or an Appeal of Murder, Robbery. or the like offense, albeit the
Charge be false; And whiles the Starr-Chamber-Court was in being, a Bill might
have been brought against any such great man for any thing whereof the Court
had Conusance as against another; but for preferring any Charge in that Court
for any thing whereof the Court had not Conusance, a man might have had this
Action; Or for a Conspiracy to indict such a man, the Defendant or party
indicted, may have the same remedy against the Plaintiff, and Conspirators as
another man may have. Crompt. Jur. 13. Coo. 2. part Just. 228. Coo. 4. 14.
Fitz. Disceit. 35. Dyer. 285. Kelw. 27. in Hetley Rep. 55. For what this Action
may be laid; Or not. Sect. 2.


4. For the Matter and Quality of this Slander, take this. That the words or
rumors uttered against great men, for which this Action is given.

1. Must be false and horrible.

2. Such as by which discord or slander may arise between the King and his
people, or the Grandees of the Realm. Westminster. 2. cap. 24. Or between the Lords
and Commons. 2. R. 3. cap. 53. by which great peril and mischief may come to
all the Realm,

3. Such as tend to the destruction of the Realm. Coo. 12. 134.

And if any do hear, or shall hear any such words by the report of another, it
will not be safe for him to report them again. Coo. 12. 136.

It has been adjudged and resolved for the words uttered, as in the Cases
following, viz. For saying, Thy Lord is a Traitor, and I will prove him a
Traitor, Vicount, Says Case, In Leyes Rep. 82. Croo. 1. 96. And for this, My
Lord of Winchester sent for me and imprisoned me till I entered into bond of
twenty pound to the Kings use. The Bishop of Twenty pound
Winchesters Case. Croo. 1. last published. See it in Leonard Rep. 336. 2. H. 8.

So for saying, My Lord is a base Earl, and a paultry Lord, and keeps none
but Rogues and Rascals like himself. Earl of Lincolns Case. Trin. 5. Jac. B. R.
Yet see Croo. Rep. 2. 196.

So for saying. You bring in Jesuits and Papists into the Realm, etc. Earl of
Northamptons Case. Coo. 12. 136.

So for saying, You maintain sedition against the Kings proceedings; Or, you
uphold and countenance them that do so. Coo. 4. 13.

So for this, You are a Traitor to your Prince, or Rebel against him, Lord
Monteagles Case. M. 9. Jac. B. R.

So for this, It is your grief that you are a subject. County of Salops Case.
M. 40. and 41. Eliz. B. R.

So for this, You charged them that transport, or import Merchandises to or
from such a place, that they should not pay custom for it, nor suffer the
customers to search them, Old Book of Entries. 593.

So for this, You have no more conscience than a Dog; so you have goods, you
care not how you come by them. Duke of Buckinghams Case. M. 4. H. 8. Rot. 659.
Or to a Chief Justice, You are a Corrupt Judge. Cromp. Jur. 35.

So for this, You said you would wind my guts about your neck; Lord
Abergavenie's Case. Cromp. Jur. 13.

So also it is thought of these words, You are used to do things against Law,
to impound the Subjects beasts, and keep them in a Castle that they cannot be
replevied; but to say that he did so once, will not bear an Action. Duke of
Buckinghams Case.

So for this, You have sent Commissioners to spoil the Country, where he sent
Commissioners to make Leases of his Land, and improve his Rents. Duke of
Buckinghams Case.

So for this, My Lord of Abergavenie sent for us, and put some of us in the
stocks, sent some of us into the Gaol, and put some of us into the house called
Little Ease. Hill. 19. Eliz. the Lord Abergavenies Case. See it in Croo. 1.
last published. 192. and Leonards Rep. 336.

And so generally, of any words of an ordinary man's spoken, will give him an
Action, being spoken to such an eminent person, will much more give him this
Action. Coo. 12. 132, 134. Leys Rep. 32.

But it is said, It will not lie in these Cases, and for these words following,
viz. The Earl of Lincolns men by his commandment did take the goods of one
Hoskins by a forged warrant, because it was not said, he knew the Warrant to
be forged. Goldsb. 115. See more of this Subject. Leys Rep. 82.

In the Case of the Earl of Northampton. Mich. 10. Jac. B. R. It was (as it is
said) amongst other things resolved in the Star Chamber.

1. That the publishing of false Rumors, either concerning the King, or of the
high Grandees of the Realm may in some Cases be punished by the Common Law. So
as

1. The words and rumors be false and horrible; by which discord or slander
may arise betwixt the King, and his People, or the Grandees of the Realm. West.
2. cap. 24. or between the Lords and Commons, 2 R. 2. cap. 53. by which great
peril and mischief may come to all the Realm.

2. The persons against whom the words be spoken, must be Prelates, Dukes,
Earls, Barons, and other Grandees, and Nobles of the Realm, and also the
Chancelour, Treasurer, Clerk of the Privy Seal, Steward of the Kings household,
Justice of the one, and of the other Bench. 2. R. 2. cap. 5. Westminster. 1. 34.
Dyer. 5.

2. It was resolved, that if one hear such false and horrible rumors either of
the King, or of the said Grandees, it is not lawful for him to relate to
others, that he has heard J. S. to say such false and horrible words, for if
it should, by this means it may be published generally, etc.

3. It was resolved, That if A. say to B. Did you not hear that C. is guilty of
Treason, etc. this is tant-amount to a scandalous publication. And in a private
Action for Slander of a common person. If J. S. publish that he has heard J.
N. say, that I. G. was a Trairor, in an Action of the Case, if the truth be so,
he may justify it. But if J. S. publish generally, without a certain Author,
that J. G. was a Traitor, there an Action of the Case lies against J. S. for
that he has not given to the Plaintiff any cause of Action against any but
against himself, who published the words, albeit he might hear such a report,
for otherwise this might tend to the great Slander of an innocent, it coming
first from a man's mouth of no credit, and being after in the mouths of persons
of credit, etc.

4. It was resolved, That the Judgment in an Indictment upon the said
Statutes, when the words are spoken generally, without Relation to a certain
Author, is that the Offender shall be fined and imprisoned. Also the party
grieved may have an Action de Scandalo Magnatum, and recover his damages. Coo.
12. 133. 134.

CHAP. V. Of Actions for Slanders of all kinds. Where it lies, and what words
will bear this Action; or not.

IN all Cases where this Action of the Case for the Slander of a common person,
shall be maintainable (as has been before touched) there must be these things
in the Case. As to the manner, contrivance, and publication of the slander.


1. The Slander must be published and contrived.

2. It must be so published and contrived, that there may be a certainty in it.

1. As to the persons of the Slanderer, and Slandered.

2. As to the manner of the utterance of the words, and charge of the Slander.

3. And as to the thing wherein the Slander lies, the which also must be such a
thing, as for which the Law does give this Action.

And for the first of these as to the manner of Publication and Contrivance For
the manner of contrivance of the slander. Sect. 1.
of the Slander, take these things.

1. If a Minister in a Certificate to his Ordinary, wherein he is bound to
certify other matter, shall insert scandalous matter, this is actionable.
Words in a certificate.
Reads Case. M. 7. Jac. B. R.

2. A Libel may have and contain such matter in it as may give advantage to the
party slandered by it, to bring this Action; and therefore to In a Libel.
write a Libel of Slander in Paper, and affir it to the Church door, men going
to the Church, is actionable. 17. Ed. 4. 3. lib. 13. sect. 4.

3. To write a Letter in private sealed, wherein is matter of Slander, is
actionable. And yet if the Writer shall deliver it to him who is slandered In a
Letter.
in his own hands, perhaps it may be otherwise. Hobb. Rep. 63. M. 9. Jac. B. R.
In the Lord Lumley, and Hoods Case. It was agreed, That where Ford in a Letter
written by him had written, It is reported the Lord Lumley seeks my life; and
in truth it was not reported, this is actionable. Leonard. 187. Bulstr. 3. Rep.
225.

4. To speak the words in a man's ear, and by him keep counsel, is actionable.
M. 9. Jac. B. R. Hob. Rep. pl. 63. Words uttered by a Counselor in pleading.


5. If a Counselor give in evidence, and enforce any thing in his Instructions
for his Client against his Adversary, or against the Testimony of a witness,
albeit it be false, if it be pertinent to the Case in question, which he must
look to, this is not actionable. But if it be not pertinent to the issue, or
matter in question, it will be his wisdom to forbear it, for if not true, or
if true, and not pertinent, he may be sued for it in this Action. So if he
shall speak the words at another time, and in another place, Mich. 31. Jac. B.
R. Brook Versus Mountague. And if the slander be by this information of his
Client, the Client may be charged in this Action for a slander thus published.
Croo. 9. 90. And yet by Glin. chapter Just. B. R. It was said, That if a Counselor
speak scandalous words against one in the defense of his Clients Cause, no
Action will lie for this; for he does but his duty, and it shall be intended
to be spoken according to his Clients Instructions. Styles Rep. 462.

5. If the Slander be contrived by way of Iudictment, Articles exhibited By way
of Indictment.
to procure one to be bound to the Good Behavior, or otherwise in a course of
Justice, it may be actionable; But for this know, That this Action will not lie
for any thing that is said, that may reflect upon another, if it be said or
done in a way of Justice, without any malicious intent. As where a Defendant in
a Spiritual Court amongst exceptions put in against the Plaintiffs witnesses,
one of them is, that such a one of them was perjured; so if one bring another
before a Justice upon a suspicion of Felony that is false. And where one does
exhibit a scandalous Bill in a Court that has Jurisdiction of the Things, and
they be false; or a man in pleading say, such a man was Bankerupt, and so he
seized his goods under a Commission, and the like. So where a witness does give
in evidence Bankerupt.
only. So for indicting a man for Felony, where there is ground for it,
although it be false; So for suing of a Writ of Forgery of a false deed;
Forgery.
so for to make a false Affidavit in Chancery, by which a man is imprisoned; So
for to put a slanderous Complaint into the hand of a Member of Parliament, no
Action will lie for any of these things. Noys Rep. 116. In Godb. Rep. pl. 333.
Kelw. 26. Dyer. 2. Coo. 4. 14. Pasch. 3. Jac. B. R. Marsham Versus Pescod.
Croo. 1. part last published. 230. 247. Dyer. 285.

But if a man shall so accuse a man in a Court, that has not jurisdiction
Sect. 2.
of the thing whereof the party is accused, or insert other things amongst
things wherein it has jurisdiction, or speak of other matters, which do not ^n
a Court of justice.
concern himself, but others with which he has nothing to do; As when the
Star Chamber stood, if one had charged another person, a stranger, with matter
of slander; Or had charged another there in a Bill of Piracy, Murder, or the
like, wherewith the Court had not Jurisdiction, as Sir Richard Buckly was
charged by a Bill in the Star Chamber to be a maintainer of Pirates, Thieves
and Murderers, and a Procurer of Pirates, and for this the Action was adjudged
to lie, for that Court had not Conusance of these things. Coo. 4. 14. Croo. 1.
last published. 230. 247. So also if one having a Bill in there against a Judge
for Corruption, or the like, and he had gone about and divulged what was in
the Bill to others to scandal the party; this had been actionable. Trin. 116.
Car. B. R. Vast. Crooks Case.

So if a Justice of Peace sent his Warrant to arrest a man pretended by the
Justice to be accused before him for the stealing of the horse of J. S. the
party is arrested and kept in Prison, till he give bond to answer it, and in
Theft.
truth the man was not accused, nor had the Justice any ground for it; this is
actionable adjudged. But if in truth he had been accused, albeit it had been
false. Contra Trin. 3. Eliz. B. R. Windhams Case. Leonard. Rep. 187.

If I have lost goods, and I suspect a man for it on some ground, and I Theft.
go to a Justice for a Warrant against him, and he say, take heed what you do,
and thereupon I say I will charge him with the stealing of my goods; this is
not actionable adjudged. Hatton. Rep. 113.

But if a Felony be done, and the rumor fained is, that A. did it, and
thereupon B. does inform a Justice of the Report, and before the Justice, or
elsewhere shall positively affirm, that A. did this Felony; this may be
actionable. For albeit one may charge a man with a Felony, or arrest a man for
it in such a Case of suspicion, yet he may not thereupon affirm that he did
it, for he may be innocent all this while. Hobb. Rep. pl. 238. 103. 381. 112.
105.

Or if one shall begin to charge another in the right place, and then prosecute
it elsewhere out of course, there the Action may lie. So if he do or Robbery.
say more than is necessary in the right rode of Justice. As if I be robbed,
and J. S. is suspected by the common report; now I may have him arrested, and
prosecute him for it; But if I shall report and affirm that J. S. has robbed
me, I may be liable to his Action; So where I have duly indicted a man upon a
suspicion of Felony, and I shall after tell of it boastingly in Alehouses, and
report of him, that he has done the Felony whereof he is suspected, or had
preferred a Bill in the Star Chamber of scandalous matter, and had after gone
and reported the thing in an Alehouse, or the like. Croo. 1. last published.
230. 247.

So if one shall indict or charge another legally for Felony, where there is no
ground of it at all, nor any color of guilt about him. So where a witness
shall go beyond the issue, or point in issue, and slandereth a third person, an
Action will lie for this. Croo. 1. part last published 230. 247.

6. A Bill of Indictment was falsely and maliciously without any color By way
of Indictment.
of guilt preferred by one to a Grand Jury against another for a Rape, and an
Ignoramus found by the Jury; this is actionable adjudged, and affirmed in
Error. Hill. 10. Jac. B. R. Horewoods Case. Jenk. Cent. 7. Case 64. 40. Dyer.
285. Winches. Rep. 28. 54. Marches Rep. 76. pl. 119. Styles Rep. 335. See in
March. of Slanders. 2. part 10.

And if there be malice and conspiracy in a Course of Justice, to take
Conspiracy.
away my life, I may be relieved by this in some cases by an Action of the Case
for a Conspiracy. 27. H. 8. 11. See after.

7. Mich. 28. 29. Eliz. B. R. Stanley versus Curson. One was brought in by
subpena ad testificandum, and upon his oath, uttered matter of Infamy against
the Plaintiff; and it was said no Action would lie for this. Croo. 1. part last
published. 230. 247. 248.

8. A. Exhibited Articles to have the good behavior against B. and took his
oath before a Master of the Chancery, after he ceased his prosecution there,
and did get a Supplicavit out of the Kings Bench, to have the good behavior
there.

In this Case it was resolved, that the Action did lie. But had he prosecuted
in the Chancery, although the Articles had been scandalous no Action would lie,
for a man shall not be punished for mistaking the Law, for he may be
misadvised by his Council. Brownl. 4. Mich. 27. 28. Eliz. B. R. Tuthill. versus
Osborne.

2. As to the persons of the Slanderer, and the Slandered, who may have this
Action, and against whom.

An Alien born under a King in Amity with our King, may have this Alien. Sect.
3.
Action. If therefore such an Alien Merchant who tradeth here be called
Bankerupt, he may have this Action against him that so called him. Bulstr. 1.
part 134. Yelvertons Rep. 198.

If one man slander two men at one time, they may not join in one Action, but
must have several Actions for this slander. Pasche. 1650. Croo. 1. 368. Dyer.
19. Goldsb. 76. Marches Rep. pl. 249. So if two men do slander one man, he
must sue them severally, and may not sue them jointly for this slander. M. 20.
Jac. Chamberlains Case. 2. H. 7. 16.

If the wife slander, the Husband and Wife may and must be sued for Husband and
Wife.
this, and the Wife may not be sued alone for it. But for slanderous words
spoken both of a man and his wife; the husband may sue one Action alone for his
own slander, and he and his wife may after sue another Action for the slander
of his wife. And so for any slander of the wife alone, the husband and wife
must sue; or perhaps the husband may sue alone, but it is safe to join his wife
with him. In Styles Rep. 113. Trin. 14. Car. 1. B. R. Styles Rep. 361.

If two have an office jointly, and a slander be of one of them in relation
Officer.
to his office, he may have this Action, and he must bring it alone. Winch.
21. Rep. 40.

If one say of a Jewry, All the Jewry is perjured; Every Iuror may Perjury.
have this Action against him, and they must sue asunder, and not together.
Mich. 7. Jac. Co. B. Deacons Case.

If the declaration be laid, that the Defendant dixit the words, and it say not
de Querente, it is naught, for now it appears not how the words were uttered.
Styles Rep. 70.

If the declaration be, he spoke these words of the Plaintiff, Thou art a
Thief, in the second person, it is good enough; for to say, de praefat. or, ad
praefatum, is all one. So to say to a man's face, He is a Thief, is actionable.
Croo. 2. 39. Bulstr. 1. part 5650. Brownl. and Goldsb. 5.

To say of A. B. Thou art a Thief, behind his back, or, he is a Thief, Theft.
to his face. And where two be speaking of A. B. and one of them say, He is a
Thief; this may be reduced to a certainty, and so be actionable. Coo. 4. 17.
For uncertain words may be made certain by reference, Id certum est Certainty.
quod certum reddi potest. Hobb. Rep. pl. 119. In Godb. Rep. 391.

To say to the Father, Thy Son J. S. or, thy Son J. is a Thief; if he Father
and Son.
have but one Son, and it is so averred, is no doubt actionable. Croo. 2. 635.
March. Rep. pl. 96. So to say to the Son, Thy Father is a Thief. Croo. 2. 635.
1. 635. And this needs no Averment. Bulstr. 3. 72. And yet it was adjudged to
lie for this, your Son Innuendo your Son William J. stole a horse, and sold him
for ten pounds. Styles Rep. 46. Theft.


But to say without any precedent communication of any person uncertain, one of
the Sons of J. S. is a Thief; and J. S. have more Sons than one, is utterly
uncertain, and not actionable. Coo. 4. 17. Croo. 1. 127. Hobb. pl. 351.
Bendloes. 134.

To say to the Wife, Thy Husband is a Thief; or, to say to the Husband, Husband
and Wife. Theft.
Thy Wife is a Thief, is no doubt actionable. Croo. 2. 635. Bulstr. 3. 226.

In say to the Servant, Thy Master is a Thief, is without doubt actionable.
Master and Servant. Theft.
Croo. 1. 127. and 2. 443. 635. Hobb. 351. 371. Leonard. Rep. 335.

This Action will lie for saying, Thou servest no true subject. And here an
Innuendo. J. S. such a man, will make it certain. Croo. 1. last published. 192.
193.

But to say without any precedent communication of a person in certain. One of
the Servants of J. S. (if he have more servants than one) is a Thief, is
utterly uncertain, and therefore not actionable. Coo. 4. 17. Croo. 127. Hobb.
Rep. pl. 331. Bendloes Rep. 134. Croo. 2. 443. But if he have but one servant,
and, it be laid to be spoken of him, it may be certain enough, and actionable.
Brownl. and Goldsb. 2. Brownl. 1. part 7. 9. 10. 13. Hobb. Rep. 351. 371.

To say to a woman, Thy Husband and his Master stole my Horse, will Theft.
not give Action to any one as his Master, but it may give Action to her
Husband. But if he say, Thy Husband and his Master J. S. stole my Horse; this
will give the Action to J. S. also, if J. S. were then re vera his Master.
Bulstrode 2. part 82.

To say to A. B. Thy Brother C. B. is a Thief, is without doubt actionable.
Brother.
So to say, Thy Brother, without more, if he have but one Brother, and it be
said to be spoken of him. But to say without any precedent communication of a
person uncertain, One of the Brothers of J. S. is a Thief, and J. S. has many
Brothers, is utterly uncertain, and not actionable. Theft.
Coo. 4. 17. Croo. 1. 127. Hobb. Rep. pl. 331. Bendloes Rep. 134. Hobb. Rep.
351. 371. So for one that has more Brothers than one, One of my Brothers is a
Thief. Bulstr. 3. 226. And yet to say to A. Thy brother is a Thief, and he
has but one Brother, which is B. in this Averment.
case B. may have this Action, but then he must aver himself to be his only
Brother; and therefore it was adjudged not to lie for these words spoken to the
Father, thy Son [Innuendo the Plaintiff] has murdered my child, Murder.
because it was not averred that the speech was about the Plaintiff, or that
he was his only Son. Croo. 2. 635. March. Rep. pl. 96. And yet see Brownl. 4.
and. Croo. 107. where for saying, My Brother is perjured, Averment.
upon not guilty, pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff, and said to be well
laid without any averment, and that it shall be now intended, he had no other
Brother.

To say, That one that is near to J. S. [or one that is about J. S.] or Sect. 4.
one that is mine Adversary, or one of you three (where there are three in the
company) is a Thief, or one of you two (where there are but two Theft.
in the company) is a Thief. These words are utterly uncertain, and not
actionable. Yet if in the first case it may appear by Averment, that such a one
was then his enemy, and he had no other enemy, it may happily lie, Coo. 4.
331. 17. Croo. 1. part last published. 497. Croo. 1. 127. Hobb. Rep. pl.
Bendloes Rep. 134. So to say to three that have given in evidence, one of you
three is perjured, Croo. Rep. 1. last published. 496. 497. and his fellows are
Thieves; this can be certain for none but the first, and no other person but
him may have an Action for these words. Styles Rep. 247. Croo. 1. part 127.
Hobb. Rep. 351. So to say, One I. S. stole the Horse that is lost, is
altogether uncertain, and not actionable. Mich. 7. Jac. B. R. Reads Case. But
to say of a man there present, this man is a Thief, is certain enough, and
actionable. Brownl. and Goldsb. 2.

To say of two others of one Surname Jones, and the one of them say to Theft.
the other, These Jone-ses are Thieves, this may be certain enough, and so
actionable; But if the words be, The Jone-ses are Thieves; the Case will be
more doubtful. Godb. Rep. 391. 344.

If a speech be about a Suit that is between A. and B. and sir others
defendants, and in this speech the defendant is charged to say, These
defendants Murder.
Jnnuendo. B. the Plaintiff, and the others, are those that did help to murder
J. S. this is certain enough, and all of them it was agreed might have Action
upon it.

To say, The Parson of Dale is a Thief, may be certain, and bear Action Theft.
with an Averment that he that sues was then Parson of Dale, when the words
were spoken. Per Just. Dodridge. Mich. 14. Jac. B. R. Bulstr. Rep. 3. 326.

To say, That murdrous Knave Stroughton lay in wait to murder me, Murder.
and after not guilty pleaded in an Action brought by Thomas Stroughton, and
verdict for him, has been adjudged actionable. As was said in Croo. 2. 101.

To say, that one Stamford (leaving out his Christened name) stole my Horse, is
altogether incertaine and not actionable. Croo. 1. 303. Theft.


If there be speech between two about scandalous words, and therein one of them
utters this speech, I know who spoke those words, Winnifle and Bell, I mean
to have their Ears cut off, and their Tongues cut out; it seems no Action will
lie for these by any one of either of those names. Bendlers Rep. 134. yet see
Golds. 76. which seems to differ somewhat herein.

To say, A. had a Child, and between her and her mother they murdered Murder.
it; it seems this is certain enough, and happily both of them may have the
action. But A. may doubtless have an action. Bendloes Rep. 152.

A. and B. were speaking together of C. and D. the Plaintiff, and the Theft.
Defendant spoke these words of C. and D. C. has stolen such goods, and she
(Innuendo the Plaintiff) was privy and consenting thereunto; in this Case it
was resolved to be certain enough, and that the word (She) shall have
reference to D. the Plaintiff, and not to C. and so that she may have an action
upon them. Croo. 1. 171.

To say these words, I. S. and I. D. is Perjured, is incertaine and not Perjary.
Actionable, but to say, He Innuendo, the Plaintiff, and one A. are perjured
Knaves, is certain and actionable. Croo. 2. 102.

An Action was laid, That the Defendant, Dixit de prefato Carolo, Where is
this Baker, Innuendo the said Carolus Baker, he has, etc. In this Case the
words were held to be certain enough and actionable; as Innuendo, or Averment.
to say of a Counselor, Where is this Counselor, Innuendo such a one, this
is actionable. Bulstr. 3. 72.

But here it must be observed:

1 That where the words are utterly uncertain in, and of themselves, there no
Innuendo or Averment can make them certain. and so actionable; but where the
words are so certain in themselves as that it may appear what person the
speaker did intend, there the words may be actionable. Croo. 2. 107.

2 That sometimes where there is such an incertainty in the words, by a Verdict
found for the Plaintiff after not guilty pleaded, the words may be ascertained
to be spoken of the Plaintiff, and so the Action maintainable. Croo. 2. 107.
Bridgemans Rep. 60. Styles Rep. 245.

3 That where the words are in themselves somewhat uncertain, there in many
cases they may by the precedent Conference, or by some Circumstances, and with
a special Averment thereof in the Declaration be made Actionable, and so it may
be done in many of the Cases before laid down, wherein the words will not bear
Action, without some such special Averment to help. Croo. 1. 303. Bulstr. 2
part, 227.

The Plaintiff does in his Declaration set forth, that there being talk Theft.
between his Father and the Defendant, who said to the Father, That Tailor did
steal the Mare of I. S. and thy Son was consenting to it; in this case the
Declaration was ruled to be naught, because it did not averr that the Father
had no more Sons but the Plaintiff. Trin. 14. Jac. B. R. Lewkner and Bodnams
Case, Bulstr. 3. 249. And yet see Croo. 2. 107.

In all these and such like Cases of Incertainty before named, where the
Plaintiff is to make a supply by his Averment, to maintain his own Action,
and he omit it, it will be the wisdom of the Defendant in his Pleading, to set
forth the Truth omitted for his own advantage; As where the words are about a
Son, a Brother, or Servant, and the Plaintiff does omit to show, that there is
but one Brother or Servant in the Case, to show that there are more Sons,
Brothers, or Servants in the Case then one.

And now as to the manner of the utterance of the words, and charge of the 3 As
to the manner of utterance of the words, and charge of the Slander. Murder.
Sect. 5.
Slander it is to be known (as is before touched) That slander may be uttered
by direct, express, and downright words, thus; Thou have killed I. S. or, He
has killed I. S. or, A. B. is a Thief, or the like; or by indirect and
implicit words, and in other forms of words, either by way of question, thus,
Are you not a Thief? Did you not kill I. S. or the like: or by way of report
from others, as, A. told me you were a Thief, or the like; or by way of
opinion, or thought, as, I think in my conscience you are a Thief, or the like;
or by way of threatening, as, I shall call you in question for killing of my
Aunt, or the like; or by way of comparison, as, You are as very a Thief as any
in Warwick Goal, or the like. And some are otherwise uttered, also some
slanders import a charge of an inclination, or a purpose only to do a thing;
and some import a charge of an Attempt, and an endeavor to do a thing, but no
Act done; but some import a charge of an Act done, and some have another import
in them. And therefore it is held it will lie for words of slander uttered
Theft. By way of Interrogation.
thus, What art thou a Bankrupt? etc. Croo. 1 Part last published, 273. what I.
S. that Thief? Croo. 2. 422. Pasche. 15 Jac. B. R. Nelsons Case, Hardwicks
Case, 40 Eliz. Co. B. or thus, When will you leave your stealing? or thus,
Have you brought again the Horse you stole from me? Theft.
or, Have you brought again the Money you stole from me? Maxies Case, Trin. 18.
Jac. B. R. or thus; Have you been at London to change the Money you stole from
me? It is said therefore that it will lie for Theft.
words spoken thus, Did you not kill I. S? and some think these words
Actionable, You might have known your own Sheep, and not have stolen mine.
Yelverton, 144. And these words also, Has A. B. the Bastard sued you, is that
all the spite the Bastard can do you? Croo. 2. 422. Bastardy. Felony.
Jenk. Cent. 8. Case 78. But if words be thus spoken, A, says to B. He is a
Felon, to which a stander by says. Take heed what you say; to which he says,
Is not he a Thief that does conceal Felons [or steal Trees, or takes my goods
in Execution] it seems these words are not Actionable; but if the Ironically
spoken.
last words were first contra, Hill. 17. Jac. Newlands Case. And it is said,
that an Action will lie for words spoken ironically, thus, You are no Thief.
Theft.


This Action will also lie for words uttered after this manner, viz. I have
said that I. S. is a Thief, and I will justify it, and I have told him so much
to his face, Croo. 2. 438, Or thus, I will justify that I. S. is a I have said
that I. S. is, etc. I will justify, etc. Theft. Uttered as a Dream. By way of
thought or opinion. Theft. Treason.
thief, Trin. 9. Jac. B. R. Barnes Case. Or thus, I did dream that I. S. did
steal a Horse, March Rep. pl. 90. Or thus, I think in my conscience I. S. is a
Thief, Hobb. Rep. 152. Or thus, I think thou would if thou could kill the
King, etc. Croo. 2. 407. Hobb. Rep. 152. Or thus; I think in my conscience if
thou might have thy will thou would kill the King, etc. Croo. 2. 407. Coo.
4. 19. See for this March of Slanders, the first part, 113. VVinches. Rep. 124.

But these words are held not to be Actionable.

It is reported A. did such a thing, and I fear it to be too true. And if
question be about a Robbery, and one say, He thinks the Robbery was done by
A. and he fears it is too true. Yelvertons Rep. 114. So if one ask why Mary S.
did not come to Church, and another said, It is thought I shall question him
for, and a Murder.
she is with child, and I fear it is too true. Yelvertons Rep. 114. So,

This Action will lie for words uttered after this manner, I shall call him in
question for poisoning my Aunt, etc. Noys Rep. 63. Sidenhams Case 16 Jac. See
Winches. Rep. 124. Pophams Rep. 210.

So for words thus spoken, It will be proved by many vehement presumptions, It
will be proved, etc.
that A. did steal the Horse of B. Pasche 7. Jac. B. R. Welbyes Case. Whitacres
Case. Pasche 5. Jac.

So for this, I can prove you are a Thief, and ten men will justify it, Theft.
I doubt not to prove, etc. Murder. Treason.
Pasche 15. Jac. B. R. So for this, I make no question but to prove that he
has poisoned my Aunt, etc. Noyes Rep. 63. So for words uttered thus, I doubt
not but to prove that he has spoken words of High Treason. Sergeant Hitchams
Case. Huttons Rep. 75. Winches. Rep. 124. Or thus, I will prove Fermon to be a
perjured Knave. Croo. 1. last published. 122. Or thus, I will prove you are a
Thief. Yelverton 126. Or thus, Perjury.
I did not know A. was your Brother, I will prove him perjured, or else I will
bear his charges. Popham. 210. For this, I doubt not to prove you are a Thief.
Croo. 1. last published. 420. Or thus, I will bring you before a Justice, and
prove that you have stolen, etc. And yet it is said, that it will not lie for
this, I will prove that A. was perjured. Winch. 124. And Perjury.
that it will lie for this, I could prove him perjured if I would. Yet see
Hobb. pl. 394.

This Action will lie also for words uttered by way of Report from others, By
way of Report. Theft.
thus (viz.) J. S. told me that A. was a Thief. And in truth J. S. did never
tell him so. But if in truth J. S. did tell him so, then the words are not
actionable. Croo. 2. 407, 427. 413. Bulstr. 3. 225. Croo. 2. 103. The Lady
Morrisons Case. 5. Jac. B. R. Lord Norths Case. 41. Eliz. B. R. But if in truth
a slander be raised of a man, and one that is his friend tell him of it, and
wish him to clear himself of it; this is not actionable. And yet if in this
case a man shall report such a thing generally, and not name the Author of the
Report, the words will be actionable; and therefore it is said, it iwll lie for
words thus uttered; I have heard A. B. is a Traitor, if he do not say by whom
he heard it. So for words thus spoken, Did you not Treason.
hear that A. B. was guilty of Treason. Coo. 12. 134. Jenk. Centurie 8. Case 7.
Leonards Rep. 187.

This Action will lie also for words uttered after this manner, viz. I charge
him with that Felony. Pophams Rep. 110. 111. 150. Croo. 2. I arrest you for
Felony, etc. I charge him with Felony, Sect. 6.
312. Or thus, Bear witness I arrest you for Felony. 17. Jac. B. R. Serles
Case. Coo. 4. 15. yet see the contrary, in Hobb. Rep. pl. 396. Popham Rep. 110.
111. Hobb. Rep. pl. 286. 381. Or thus, I charge you with Felony, and I charge
the Constable to take you; or, I arrest thee for high Treason; some say this is
actionable. Mich. 5. Jac. B. R. the contrary seems to be in Huttons Rep. 38.
And there held to lie for this. I accuse J. S. of High Treason. Huttons Rep.
131. It is held to lie for this, Bring Treason.
me to the Constables house, for I am robbed, and I will bring him to the
house of J. S. to arrest him, for he sets them to rob me from time to
Theft.
time. So to say to a Constable, There he is, take him, for I charge him with
that Felony. Styles 59 And yet for this it will not lie, I charge you, King,
with Felony, and you Constable [Innuendo. A. etc.] to apprehend him. Popham.
Rep. 210. Yet see Hobb. pl. 286. 381. Or thus, If I could find J. S. I doubt
not but within two days to arrest him of suspicion of Felony. Coo. 4. 15.
Albeit he do not say, He committed Felony. Felony.
Popham 150. And yet some say, that it will not lie for these words, I charge
him with Felony, etc. Nor for this, I have arrested A. for Felony, for stealing
sheep of mine. Pophams Rep. 210. Nor for these words, I charge you with Felony,
for taking money out of the pocket of J. S. Theft.
Huttons Rep. 38. Hobb. Rep. pl. 381. 394. And yet if no Felony be done, it
seems reasonable the words should be actionable. Brownl. 1. part 18. Hobb. Rep.
38. But in case where a Felony is done; And a man in a course of Justice shall
speak words to this purpose, I arrest thee for Felony; or, I will charge him
with [or arrest him for] Felony, there the words will not be actionable. Popham
Rep. 110. 111.

The Action will lie for words uttered after this manner, Thou have Thou have
been in Gaol for, etc. Indicted, etc. Theft.
been in the Gaol for stealing a Pan. Croo. 2. 155. Bulstr. 1. part 40. And yet
it is said, it will not lie for this, Thou wast in Warwick Gaol for stealing of
Horses. Noys Rep. 24. Bulstr. 1. part. Hutton. Rep. 2. Brownl. and Goldsb. 16.
And yet it is held, it will lie for this, Thou wast in the Tower for High
Treason. M. 9. Jac. B. R. if it be false that is said. Hobb. Rep. pl. 96. So it
is said, it will lie for this, She is a very Thief as any that robs by the
High way side. So for this, She is a worse Thief than any that robs by the
High way side. Croo. 1. last published. 224.

But it is said, it will not lie fot words thus spoken, Thou were arraigned
Theft.
for Felony, for stealing of a Horse. Bulstr. 1. part 40. Nor for this, He is
in Warwick Gaol for stealing of a Mare. Hobb. Rep. 196 But if Or he is in Gaol
for, etc. He is indicted, arraigned, etc. Felony.
he say, He stole them, and was in Gaol for it; this may be actionable. Nor
will it lie, for saying of a man, He was indicted [or arraigned] or impeached]
for Felony, if it be true; but if false, the words are actionable. Hobb. Rep.
pl. 190. 196. 286.

But it seems it will not lie for words thus spoken, viz. What is J. S. in Gaol
for? for murder. Huttons Rep. 2. Nor for this, J. S. was in Theft. Thou wast
whipped, etc. Thou wast burnt in the hand, etc. Thou wast detected for, etc. Thou
wast convicted for, etc. He held up his hand at the bar for, etc. Averment.
Newgate for forging of writs. Huttons Rep. 2. Nor for this, Thou wast whipped
about Taunton [or burnt in the hand, or shoulder] for stealing Sheep. Hills
Case. Mich. 8. Car. 1. B. R. Nor for this, He was detected for Perjury. Coo.
4. 16. Nor for this, Thou art a false Knave, thou wast arraigned for two
Bullocks; or, for thou wast arraigned for stealing two Bullocks. Croo. 1. part
last published. 279. Nor for this, He held up his hand at the Bar for Felony.
See Brownl. 2. part 272. And therefore, where the Action is laid for such like
words as these, He was indicted for Felony at W. Sessions; or, He was
impeached for Felony; or, He was accused for Felony; the Plaintiff must avert,
that there was re vera no such thing done, otherwise the Action will not lie.
Hobb. Rep. pl. 196. 289.

It is said, it will lie for this, I will indict him for stealing of my horse.
Huttons Rep. 58.

It is said, that this Action will lie for this, I will pawn my shirt, I I can
hang thee, etc.
will hang him for., etc Winches. Rep. 124. And yet it is said not to lie for
this, It is in my power to hang thee. Pasche 7. Jac. B. R. Brownl. 2. part. 280.

So it is held to lie for these words, As sure as you believe God Rules the
world, and the King rules the Kingdom, so sure did Whorewood Sure it is that
J. S. is a Thief.
steal my horse. Winch. Rep. 124. Hughes Abridgement. 37. So also for this, I
am sure J. S. is a Thief.

It is said, it will not lie for this, I have served thee with the Queens
Letter for stealing of goods out of my Mothers house. Croo. 1. part. last
published. 234.

So likewise for this, Masters, bear witness he is a Thief. Huttons Theft.
Rep. 39. But Quere of this.

It is generally held, That the words that shall bear an Action, must be Words
spoken in an unknown language. Sect. 7. Thief.
uttered in a language, that one of them (at the least) that do hear them do
understand. And therefore that to call a man Thief in Welsh, or in Latin,
before such persons, neither of which do understand the tongue; that this will
not bear an Action. And yet some doubt much of this, for they may remember the
word, and enquire, and so come to know what it is. Hobb. Rep. pl. 63. 276. 126.
Hughes Abridgement. 37. Croo. Rep. 1. last By way of Caution. Treason.
published. 496. 497. 865. It is said, that this Action will not lie for words
thus spoken; Take heed that you do not speak Treason. Bulstr. 1. 143.

It is said, it will lie for this, He has deserved to stand on the Pillory.
He has deserved, etc.
Bulstr. 1. part 147. And yet it is said, it will not lie for this, Thou
deservest to be hanged. Mich. 4. Jac. B. R. Nor for this, Thou have deserved
hanging. Croo. 1. last published. 470. Nor for this, He will come home if he
escape the Gallows, for he has deserved to be hanged. Nor for this, If thou
had thy Right, thou had been hanged. Brownl. 1. part. 3.

It is held, that the Action will not lie for these words thus spoken, I I fear
you will be arrested, etc. Felony. I doubt you will be found guilty, etc.
Treason. Treason.
fear you will be charged with [or arrested for] Felony. Nor for words thus
spoken, Take heed you be not arrested for Felony. Hobb. Rep. pl. 381. 286. Nor
for words thus spoken, I doubt [or I fear] whether your words be not Treason,
and I shall advise upon them. Bulstr. 1. part 143. 148.

It is held to lie for words thus spoken, I did tell Mr. Carne, that I am
neither Traitor to my Prince, nor Rebel to my Country, as J. S. and the words
are spoken to Mr. Coxell, albeit they were never spoken to Mr. Carne, nor to
any but to Coxell himself. And so for this, If I say to A. Go tell B. he is a
Thief, albeit A. do never tell B. of it. Mich. 9. Jac. Foxes Cases B. R.

It is held that this Action will lie for words thus uttered, Thou art as Thou
art as very a Thief as any in the Gaol. Averment. Theft.
very a Thief as any in Warwick Gaol [or as any in England.] So as he averr,
that there is a Thief in Warwick Gaol, or in England, and what Thief it is. But
not otherwise. Nor will it lie for these words, If ever man was perjured,
Williams was, because it appears not that any Perjury.
man was perjured. Bulstr. 1. part 40. Noys Rep. 116. Sed Quere of this last
Case. Winches. Rep. 70. 89.

It is said, this Action will not lie for words thus uttered, I suspect you I
suspect you, etc. Sect. 8. Theft.
for stealing of my horse. Huttons. Rep. 18. 19. Nor for this, I doubt not to
see J. S. indicted at the next Assizes for Barretry or Sheep-stealing, as
George Bland, for he was indicted at the last Assizes for stealing of Sheep.
Albeit it was not said by the Plaintiff, that he was not indicted. Barretry.
Huttons Rep. 18. 19.

But here we must and to the Cases before put upon this head, these following
Cautions to be observed.

1 That in many of the Cases before mentioned under this head, the words there
mentioned that are said not to be actionable in another Case; yet if they be
spoken to a Justice of Peace, or some such like Officer, with reference to his
Office, they may be actionable. Huttons Rep. 131.

2 That no Innuendo will alter the Case, or make the words not actionable in
themselves, to be actionable, by the Innuendo.

3 That in some of the Cases before cited (as to the frame of words) not to be
actionable, that there perhaps by the help of a special Averment, added by the
Plaintiff in his Declaration, the same words may be made actionable, and
therein especially, wherein the Plaintiff shall afterward have a verdict given
for him also in the Case.

4 That in some of the Cases noted not to be actionable for the frame of the
words, the precedent or subsequent words spoken at the same time with them, may
make them actionable, for as the precedent and subsequent words may make
actionable words spoken at the same time not actionable, so may they make words
not actionable to be actionable.

5 That in many Cases where the words originally spoken for their incertainty
may not be Actionable, yet after by the help of a Verdict for the Plaintiff in
the Case, the Action may become maintainable.

6 That the Plaintiff must be very careful how he Declare in his Action upon
any such words spoken, and the Defendant likewise how he pleads, for either of
them may much disadvantage themselves thereby.

7 That many of these Cases seem very difficult, and questionable, and
therefore it will be the wisdom of him that is to Sue in such a Case, to be
well advised by the Lawyers therein.

And now we shall come to the Matter and Quality of the Slander it self, and
herein we are to know, what we have before touched upon, That there are some
Slanders that bring a man in danger of his life, and there are other Slanders
that do not bring a man in danger of his life, but they do bring him in
danger of some bodily harm; and there are other Slanders that do neither bring
him in danger of his life, nor of other bodily harm; but they bring him in
danger of some other damage and prejudice in his Name, or Estate, or in both.
Those that bring a man in danger of his life, do carry in them some charge,
either about matter of Treason, or about some other Felony; but herein we are
to know, that there are some general words that may refer to both, or either of
these, and may be Actionable words, and therefore it is held, That this Action
will lie for saying of a man, He is a Traitor, a Murderer, a Thief, a Robber,
a Church-robber, Traitor. Murderer. Thief. Robber. Church-robber Sacrileger.
House robber. Buggerer. Sodomite.
a Sacrileger, a House-robber, a Buggerer, a Sodomite, or the like, 30 Ass. 19
Dyer 19. 236. 27 H. 8. 14. 22. So for saying of a man, He has committed High
Treason, or Treason, or Murder, or Robbery, or Burglary, or Buggery, or
Sacrilege, or the like. Dyer 19. 75. 236. Plow. 118. Jenk. Cent. 7. Case 70.
Croo. 116. 27 H. 8. 14. Coo. 10. 130. and 4. 15, 16. 30 Ass. 19. Croo. 2. 275.
424. Bulstr. 2. 272

It seems to be agreed also, that this Action will lie, for saying of a man
that He is a Felon, or that he has committed Felony, Coo. 4. 17. Bulstr. 1.
Felon.
148. Croo. 2. 312. And yet the contrary is affirmed by some, by whom it is
held, that it will not lie for saying of a man, He is a Felon, or, he has
committed a Felony, unless he show something wherein he is so, or has so
done, as that he stole a Horse, or the like, for that it is too general and
uncertain, for every maihme is a kind of Felony. But see for this, Huttons Rep.
38 Bendloes Rep. 202. Coo. 4. 15.

But this is agreed on all sides, that these general words may be so intermixed
with other words of explication, and qualification, that they may not be
Actionable at all; as to say, You are a Traitor, for I trusted you to buy Land
for me, and you bought it for your self. Or, You are a Thief, for you robbed me
of one of my Sentences out of one of my Books, or, of my Apples out of my
Orchard; or, You are a Murderer, for you killed forty Hares in one year, or
the like. Huttons Rep. 69. 110. 113. Yelvertons Rep. 10. 155. Coo. 4. 13, 14,
16. But for the further opening of this, see what follows in the next Section.

And as to the matter of the Slander it self, and the thing charged upon 4 As
to the matter of the Slander it self. Sect. 9. Murder. Robbery.
the slandered person, take these following Cases, referring to all kind of
slanders. This Action will lie for this, Thou have Sacrificed thy Child to the
Devil. So for this, He is infected of the Robbery lately committed, and smells
of it; for the former, but not for the latter words. Dyer 317. Huttons Rep. 58.

This Action will lie for this. Waterman and thou [Innuendo, the Murder.
Plaintiffe] have killed thy Masters Cook [Innuendo, etc.] And I will bring
thee in question for thy life. And that without any Averment, who was his
Master, or that he had a Cook, for it is certain enough without it. Pophams
Rep. 128. Bridgeman 60. Styles Rep. 66. So for this, Thou Theft.
art a Thief, and have robbed my Son; without Averment that he had, or has a
Son. Noys Rep. 55. So for this, Thou did kill a Woman Murder.
great with Child [Innuend. uxorem cujusdam. R. C. defunct. M. 2 Jac. B. R.

This Action will lie for this, Long is a Murderer, and has bewitched my
child, and was the death of my child, when a Verdict is found upon a not
guilty for the Plaintiff. So for this, Whosoever is the falsest thief, and
the strongest in the County of S. whatsoever he has Felony by Theft. Averment.
stolen or done, A. B. is falser than he; so it be applied by an Averment,
that such a Felon is in the County of S. but not otherwise. So for this, Thou
art a Thief, and have stolen one Passions Lamb, and marked and denied it, albeit
there be no Christian name to Passions; for the first words are Actionable.
Huttons Rep. 109. It is said it will lie for this, Thou Felony.
art a concealer of Felonies. Bulstr. 1. 148.

It is said to lie for saying of an Attorney, He was cooped for forging of
Forgery.
Writs. 31 Eliz. in Nowels Case. Huttons Rep. 58.

It will not lie for this, He has cousened the Town of S. [or, has Cousening.
made a false account.] But if he be an Officer of whom the words be spoken,
it is more doubtful. Bulstr. 1 Part. 228, 229.

It seems it will not lie for these words, He is a base beggarly Rascal and
has cousened the Parliament a hundred times, and deserves to ride on the
Wooden Horse on Sandhil. Styles Rep. 422. Nor for these words, Old Apthorp is
a perjured Knave, for he did swear that such wood Perjury.
was worth forty shillings, whereas it was dear of a mark. Bulstr. 3. 150.

This Action will not lie for saying, Thou art a false Thief, Rogue, or Theft.
In the Disjunctive Declaration.
some such like thing. Brooks Action of the Case, 112. and therefore where the
Declaration, That the Defendant spoke such words in certain, Vel verba similia;
this is naught. Nor will it lie for this, Thou have stolen my Mare, or
consentedst to the stealing of her. Croo. 1. last published. 780.

But where it is said in the Declaration, that the Defendant spoke of a
Cousening.
Merchant, Thou art a cousening Knave, and a Bankerupt Knave, ac eadem verba,
aut alia iis similia sepius repetivit, in this case it is good; for Bankrupt.
the first words are certain and Actionable, 41 Eliz. Co. B, March in
Slanders, 2 part 8. Golsb. Pl. 11. Hill 41. Eliz. Co. B.

Nor will the Action lie for these words, Thou have stolen my Mare, or Theft.
was consenting to it. Noys Rep. 172.

This Action will not lie for saying, He has killed J. S. where, there Murder
was never any such man known as I. S. Godb. 181. Pophams Rep. 188. Nor for
saying to a Bailiff, Thou do serve false Warrants, and deceivest Deceit.
the people. See it in Croo. 1. last published. 192. Nor for this, You make
false Records, and justify them for true. Nor for this, Thou Innuendo.
art a Papist, and not the Queens friend. Nor for this, Thou have broken my
shop, and taken my goods, and an Innuendo will not make them Theft.
Actionable. Croo. Idem.

This Action will not lie for saying, He has cut my Wives Purse, and his
Father knew it, and his Father knowing of it received it of him, and the Money
and Rings therein. But if he add this further, and therefore I Felony.
charge him with that Felony, it may be Actionable. And yet it is said it will
not lie for this, A. did see B. that had committed Felony, and did suffer him
to escape, I charge him of Felony, Popham. Rep. 111.

Nor will it lie for this, Thou art a Thief, and that will be proved by Theft.
the Apples thou had off my trees. Yelvertons Rep. 10. 34.

It is doubted whether it will lie for this, Thou art a Knave of Record,
Forgery.
and a forgering Knave. For forgering is altogether uncertain. Hill. 1. Car. B.
R.

This Action will lie, for saying of a man, He has been a Thief. So Words in
the preterperfect tense. Theft Sect. 10. Plague.
for saying, He has committed perjury. But for saying, J. S. was a Thief; Or,
J. S. had been a Thief: Or, of a Justice of Peace, He had been a debauched
man, etc. Or of any man, He has had the Pox, or the Plague; it seems none of
these words are actionable, for it may be otherwise with him now. Noys Rep.
151. Styles Rep. 22. 23. 210. 24. 25. Eliz. Co. B.

It will lie against a woman Covert, for saying, Thou art a Thief for Theft.
stealing my Corn out of my Barn, albeit it cannot properly be said to be her
Corn. Styles Rep. 135.

This Action will not lie, for saying, He did break open the Trunk of Theft.
A. with the tools of J. S, and took out twenty pound, for this way be a taking
as a Trespassor. So it is said of these words, He is an arrant Thief, for he
did break open the Trunk of A. with the tools of J. S. and took out twenty
pound, and that these latter words do mittigate the former. Winch. Rep. 70.

This Action will not lie for such words as these, Thou deservest to be Forgery.
hanged; or, thou wast cubbed up for forging of Writs. Croo. 1. part last
published. Or, it is in my power to hang thee; Or, thou seek my life. Theft.
Coo. 4. 15. Or, thou did bear away my goods; Or, thou did carry away my
goods. Hobb. Rep. 236. Or, he took my money with a strong Forgery.
hand. Mich. 15. Car. 1. B. R. Or, he forged a Writing [or a Warrant.] Huttons
Rep. 39. Hobb. Rep. 4. 48. Or, he has killed a man, not naming Murder.
any man. Popham. Rep. 188. Or, thou did cut my purse. Popham. Rep. 110. Or,
thou art a Cutpurse. For every Glover is so. Godb. 181. Cutpurse.
Nor for this, Thou wast the cause that J. S. did hang himself [or did cut his
own throat.] Hetlyes Rep. 70. For these words are all of them too general,
Murder.
and uncertain. Hobb. Rep. pl. 236. So it is said for these words, Thou
Witchcraft.
have bewitched a man; Or, thou have bewitched my good man. And yet it is said,
to lie for this, Thou have bewitched a man; Or, thou have killed a man by
witchcraft. Styles Rep. 106. It is said, it will not lie for these Filching
fellow
words, He is a filching fellow, and did filch four pound from me. Hutton.
34. Or, thou art a filching fellow, and did filch from A. B. one hundred
pound. Hobb. pl. 323.

Nor for this, He is a prigging pilfring Merchant, and has pilfred away
Prigging fellow
my Corn and my Goods from my Wife and my Servants, and this I will stand to.
Owens Rep. 57.

Nor for this, Thou have stolen a piece, and I will charge thee with Felony, for
it may be a piece of any thing; Popham. 187. Theft.


Nor for this, Thou did carry away my Sheep on thy back. Huttons Rep. 8. Some
Judges have held, That for saying, Thou have killed J. S. no Action will lie,
for the words are too general, and he may come to his Murder.
death by execution, Physic, battle, etc. But the general opinion of the
Judges is, that the words are actionable. See Croo. 2. 306. Godb. Rep. pl. 257.
Hetley Rep. 70. Coo. 4. 16. Snaggs Case. Popham. 187. Croo. 2. 438. Bulstr. 1.
42. Croo. 1. 352.

And yet to say to one, Thou art a Healer of Felonies, Mainsworne, Outputter,
Strange words.
Sheep-Theef, or the like in the Country where the use and meaning of the words
are known to be scandalous, will bear Action. And so for Another language.
Slanders in the Welsh, or in other languages, the Action will lie for them,
and that without Averment of the sense of the words in the Country. Averment.
Hobb. Rep. pl. 155. 236. Goldsb. and Brown. 4. 6. Croo. 1. part last published.
250.

This Action will not lie for these words, I have matter enough against Forgery.
thee, for J. H. has found Forgery against thee, and can prove it. Huttons
Rep. 39. Nor for this, Thou art a perjured Knave, and that will be Perjury.
proved by a stake that stands between the ground of J. S. and J. D.
Yelvertons Rep. 10. 34. Lewis Case. Pasche 1. Jac. B. R. Nor for this, said of
a man sworn in a Cause before a Judge, He was disproved before the Justices of
Assize at Darby before Kingsly. Owens Rep. 58.

For these words are some of them uncertain, and some of them insensible.

Nor for these words, That Prichard which serves Mris. Shelley did murder John
Adams child. And in the Count it is thus, Quandam Isabellam Murder.
Addams modo defunct. filiam cujusdam Johannis Addams of W. in the County of G.
Innuend.] for it should have been true, and not modo defunct. Coo. 13. 71.

The Plaintiff declares, that the Defendant dixit de praefat. The Plaintiff,
Thou [Innuendo the Plaintiff] have stolen goods, etc. and this after not guilty,
and a virdict for the Plaintiff was held good enough. Pasch. 5. Jac. Theft.
Stones Case.

And so where two talk of one Tooses wife, he being lately dead, and the one
says to the other, Tooses wife [Innuendo the Plaintiff] killed thy Husband
[Innuendo. one J. D. her Husband lately dead; this is actionable, Croo. 1. 352.
Croo. 2. 366. Murder.


But here we must also add to the Cases put upon this head, the same Cautions
we gave upon the last head.

1 That in many of these Cases where the words spoken to ordinary men are not
actionable, yet spoken to a Justice of Peace, or such like Officer, they may be
actionable.

2 That an Innuendo will not make any unactionable words actionable.

3 That an Averment, and especially if there be a verdict found upon it, for
the Plaintiff, may in some Cases make words otherwise unactionable, to be
actionable.

4 That precedent or subsequent words may make words in themselves doubtful,
and uncertain, and unactionable, certain and clear, and so actionable.

5 That in all Cases of uncertain and doubtful words, the Plaintiff must be
very careful how he does declare, and the defendant must be careful how he does
plead.

6 That there being same difficulty in many of these Cases it will be his
wisdom, that is to bring his Actions in the same Case for the same words, that
he be well advised in it.

It is said in Croo. 1. 201. That this Action was brought against a man for
that he had maliciously and falsely imposed a Crime of Felony upon the
Plaintiff, and caused him to be arrested for it, and that it was adjudged good.
Croo. 1. 201.

We shall now descend to the particulars before named. And 1 To slanderous
words about matter of Treason.

CHAP. VI. Of words of Slander about matter of Treason.
FOr the opening of this particular about slanderous words, that have an
Treason, what it is.
import in them of any matter of Treason, or of any thing about it, We are to
know first of all, That Treason (in the eye of our Law) is a great Crime, and
the punishment appointed by the Law to be inflicted on him that dath commit
this offense, is the loss of his life, and all his estate whatsoever. If any
man therefore shall by slanderous words charge another man with this Crime, or
any thing like unto it, the party slandered may have this Action to relieve
himself by damages to be recovered therein for this wrong.

And therefore it is held, that this Action will lie, for calling of another
Traitor.
Traitor, or Traitor-Knave. 30. Ass. 19. 27. H. 8. 9. 14. 27. 26. H. 8. 9. Coo.
4. 17. Or for saying of another, He has committed Treason -- or the like. So
for saying, There is no King in England. Croo. 2. 407. Committed Treason.
So for this, I doubt not out to prove that he has spoken Treason. Serjean.
H^tcham, Case. Huttons Rep. 75. So for this, Thou have spoken Treason, and I
shall bang thee for it. 9. Jac. Beriffords Case. B. R. Bulstr. 1. part 148. So
for this, Thou have spoken Treason, and I will prove it. Spoken Treason.
Croo. 2. 235. But it will not lie for this, Take heed you do not speak
Treason. Nor for this, I fear you have spoken Treason, and shall advise upon
it. Nor for this, I doubt you have spoken Treason, and I shall advise upon it.
Bu^str. 1. part 148. Trin. 9. Jac. Benefords Case. This Action will Killed the
King.
lie for saying, Thou have killed the King. Popham. Rep. 187.

So it will lie for saying, Thou have committed Treason beyond the Seas, and
did run away from thy Captain. Lewis Case. Croo. 2. 424.

So it will lie for this, Go tell Mr. Carns that I am neither Traitor to Rebels.
my Prince, nor Rebel to my Country, as J. S. is, it will lie for J. S. in this
Case. Mich. 9. Jac.

So it is said, it will lie for saying of a Justice of Peace, Deputy
Lieutenant, a Servant of the Kings Person, or any such eminent person, that No
true Subject.
he is no true Subject. But otherwise it is if they be spoken of an ordinary
person. See for this, Croo. 1. last published. 621. Croo. 2. 202. Walgraves
Case. Bulstr. 3. 221. Yelvertons Rep. 104. Mich. 32. 33. Eliz. Co. B. Smiths
Case. Goldsb. Rep. 441. But this, I am put out of the Parsonage house by
Fowler, the Patron, who is neither the Queens friend, nor a true Subject, was
held not actionable. Croo. 1. last published. 268.

So it is said to lie for this, Thou art an enemy to the State of this Rebel.
Realm. Croo. 1. last published. 602. Hill. 40. Eliz. Co. B. Chambers Case. 38.
Eliz. B. R. So for this, I was never a Traitor to the State, as you have been.
Lamplews Case. See Styles Rep. 435. But it will not lie Rebel.
for saying of a man, He is a Rebel. 44. Eliz. Fountain and Grimes Case. Croo.
1. last published. 621.

So it seems it will lie for saying to one, Thou art a Rebel, and all that keep
thee company are Rebels, and thou art not the Queens friend, for all this
together. And yet it seems it will not lie for either part of these words
alone. Croo. 1. part last published. 638. 876.

So it is said to lie for this, Thou do harbor and maintain Rebels Maintain
Rebels.
and Traitors. And this albeit he do not say, Knowing them to be such. Goldsb.
Rep. pl. 7. 48. See chap. 10. Sect. 10.

So it is held, it will lie for this, Thou wast partaker with the Rebels
Partake with Rebels.
in the North in their Rebellion. But not for saying, Thou wast partaker with
the Rebels in the North, without more words; for this is altogether uncertain.
Bulstrode 2. part 109. Incertainty.


So for this, My Lord President in the North showed Mr. Stapleton his hand set
to a Book, whereby he had consented to the late Rebels in the North, but by
the means of Mr. Fairfax, my Lord President was persuaded, and the matter was
suppressed. But if the words had been thus, He consented to A. and B. (who
were Rebels) and no more; perhaps they might not be actionable. As where it was
said of one, He was confederate with Campian the Jesuit; these words (it is
said) are not actionable, for he might not know him to be a Jesuit. Croo. 1.
last published. 251. 26. Eliz. inter Brown. and Lisle.

So it will lie for this, That John Peirse did say, that John Lewis [the
Plaintiff] did say, that there is no Prince in England; with this Averment, By
Report. Sect. 2.
that John Peirse never spoke any such words. Lewis Case. Croo. 2. 407. 413.
427. Bulstr. 3. 225. But to say, I have heard that A. B. is a Traitor. If he
say by whom he heard it, and re vera he did hear it; it is not actionable.
Croo. 2. 407.

So it will lie for a Master, for these words spoken to his Servant, Thou have
a Traitor to thy Master. Innuendo the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part last published.
906. So for this, It is well known that I am a true Subject, but thou servest
no true Subject. [Innuendo. W. W. Croo. 1. last published. No true Subject.
191.

So it is held, it will lie for this, I am persuaded in my conscience Opinion
only. Kill the King. Maintainest Rebels.
[or I think in my conscience] thou would, it thou could kill the King,
and all his Subjects, and thou art a maintainer of Papists and Rebellious
persons. Croo. 2. 407. Sydnhams Case. See Hobb. Rep. pl. 152. 180. Bulstr. 3.
260.

It is said in Godb. Rep. 147. to be adjudged not to lie for these words,
Inclination.
Thou art an arrant Papist, and it were no matter if such were hanged, and
thou, and such as thou, would pull the King out of his seat.

But this Action will not lie for such words as these, He is a seditious
Adjective words.
Knave, Nor as it has been said, for this, He is a Rebellious Knave, or he is
a traitorous Knave. Coo. 4. 19. Bulstr. 2. part 210. And yet it is said, it
will lie for saying of a man, He is a rebellious and traitorous Knave. See it.
Croo. 1. part last published. 171.

Nor will this Action lie for this, Thou have dealt treacherously with me. But
to say, Thou have dealt treacherously with the King, are dangerous words, and
may be actionable. Croo. 2. 80. Yelvertons Rep. 72.

Nor will it lie for these words, Thou art a Traitor, for I trusted thee Under
qualification by other words.
to buy Land for me, and thou boughtest it for thy self. Coo. 4. 14. 15. 16.
See in March. Rep. 20.

Nor for this, Thou art a Traitor, for thou did affirm that the Kings Coin
was fallen a noble in the pound. In Bulstr. 265. Nor for this, Thou have killed
thy wife, and art a Traitor for it. Coo. 4. 13. 16.

It is said, that it will not lie for this, He is one that does like of those
Sedition.
that do maintain sedition against the King. See Coo. 4. 13. 19. Croo. 2. 80.
81. And yet if it be of a great man, or the conference be about the great,
public, and violent Sedition, as the word does most properly import; they may
be actionable. Coo. 4. 13. Lord Cromwells Case. Nor will it lie for saying, One
of the servants of A. B. (if he have more than Incertainty in the person.
one servant) or one that is near to A. B. is a Traitor. For it is altogether
uncertain, who it is that is intended by this speech. And no Innuendo can
Innuendo.
ascertain it. Coo. 4. 17.

This Action will lie for these words, Thou art a Coiner of false money, About
coining of money. Sect. 3.
and I have money to show which thou coynedst. Croo. 1. part last published. 629.

So for these words, Thou wast in Lancaster Gaol for coining. To the which the
party accused answered; I was there, and answered it well enough. And then he
replied, You were burnt in the hand for it. Croo. 2. 536.

But it will not lie for saying any such words as these, Thou art a coyner of
Money, or, thou coynest gold, or, thou art a coyner of gold; or, thou may
well be rich, for thou coynest thirty shillings in a day; for a man may coin by
authority, and it may be his trade. Mich. 9. Jac. Burnels Case. See the Cases
reported in Godb. Rep. pl. 234, 375, 391.

It is said, this Action will lie for this, Thou have forged a Privy Seal,
About Forging the Kings Seal.
Croo. 1. 157. But not for these words, Thou have made the Great Seal. Hobb.
Rep. pl. 48.

But upon this Head these things are to be known.

1 That in some of the Cases, and for some of the words said not to be
Actionable, if so it be that the Party of whom they are spoken have any special
damage by them, he may perhaps in that Case have this Action for his damage.

2 In all the Cases before named, and in other Cases for words of the Averment.
like nature, with the words before mentioned that do bear Action, the
Plaintiff need not show any loss he has sustained by them, for his Action
will lie without this.

3 All the Actions that are brought for words of this nature, are and must be
subject to the general Rules before laid down, viz. they must be malicious,
false, particular, certain, positive, of a single, and clear intendment, under
a capacity of Qualification, by the precedent and subsequen words spoken with
them, and hold forth an Act done, and not an intent only; for albeit the words
in themselves be Actionable, yet if they be uncertain in the Person of whom
they are spoken, or the like, they may not be Actionable.

CHAP. VII. Of words of Slander about matter of Murder.
FOr the opening of this particular about Slanderous words, that have Murder,
what it is. Sect. 1.
an import of any matter of Murder in them, we are to know, That Murder is a
great Crime, and the punishment appointed by the Law for it is great, the loss
of the life, and the whole estate. If any man therefore do by slanderous words
charge another with this Crime, or any thing like unto it, he may have his
remedy against him by this Action.

And therefore it is held that this Action will lie against a man for saying of
another, That he is a Murderer; Or for saying, that he has committed
Murderer.
Murder. Coo. 10. 130. and 4. 15. Dyer 236. See Owen. 33. So for this, Thou
art a Murdering Knave. Croo. 1. 132, 133. So for this, Thou art a long
shag-haired Murdring Rogue. Greenes Case, 9 Car. 1. B. R. So for this, He is a
Manslayer, and has lain in wait to kill. 28 Eliz. B. R. Harris and Dixons
Case. So for this, He is a maintainer of Murderers. Coo. 4. 14. See Chap. 10.
Sect. 10.

So it will lie for saying this, Thou have killed J. S. Or, Thou have Murdered
J. S. or, Thou have poisoned J. S. or, Thou have killed thy Poison.
Husband, or the like. Croo. 2. 352. 438. Coo. 4. 16. And yet some have held it
otherwise for the first words, Thou have killed J. S. Croo. 2. 306. in Godb.
257. see after Sect. 3.

It is held it will lie for this, I will call him in question for the poisoning
For the manner of utterance of the words.
of my Aunt, and I make no question but to prove that he has poisoned her. In
a Case cited in Noys Rep. 63. 39 Eliz. Webbs Case. Croo. 1. part last published.
169.

So for this, It will be proved by many vehement presumptions, that A. B. was
the Plotter of the death of C. D. Pasche. 7. Jac. B. R. in Yelvertons Rep. 153.

It is held it will lie for this, I have said that J. S. has poisoned her
Poison.
husband, and I will justify it, and I have told her so much to her face.
Croo. 2. 438.

It is held it will lie for these words said by a Servant, Thou have killed
Incertainty.
my Masters Cook [with this in the Declaration, Innuendo, I. H. Servant to Mr.
Dingley, who was murdered; and the Count was held Averment.
good in this Case without any Averment who was his Master; or that Mr. Dingley
was Master to him that was slain. Croo. 2. 422. So for this, Sir Thomas Colt
has killed his Cook, without any Averment that his Cook is dead, Pasche. 1.
Jac. B. R. Sir Tho. Holts Case. So for this, Thou Averment.
did kill a Woman great with child, with this Addition in the Declaration.
Innuendo, uxorem cujusdam. R. S. defunct. and this was held to be certain
enough. Mich. 2. Jac. B. R. Certainty.


It has been held it will lie for this, He took my Wife by the hand and said,
Thou and I will be married shortly; and after that he dispatched his Wife out
of the way. Coo. 4. 16.

So for this said of A. A. [the Plaintiff Innuendo] was with child before she
was married, and betwixt her Mother and her they murdered it, which child was
born alive, and heard cry; it is said the Action lies. Eyes Case in Bendloes
Rep. 152.

So for this. He is infected with the Murder lately committed, and does smell
of it. Dyer 317.

So for this, Thou art a base Fellow, and did kill thy first Wife. Bernards
Case, B. R. in Styles Rep. 227.

So for this, Thou art a Murderer, for thou art the Fellow that did kill Mr.
Sydnhams Man. But then the Plaintiff must be sure in his Declaration, Averment.
one way or other to show, that one of his Servants was flaine. Croo. 1. last
published. 331.

It will lie for these words. Thou have sought the blood of thy Husband, and
wast his death, for if thou had been an honest Woman, he had been alive yet,
Croo. 1. part last published. 239. But in this Case in Averment.
the Action brought, the Plaintiff must aver that he is dead.

It is held it will lie for this, He came to such a house, where one lay sick
upon his bed, and got upon the bed, and with his knee did break his bloud-bulk,
and that thereby he had killed him. See Bulstr. 1. part 42.

So it is said it will lie for this, to say, A. is a Felon, and one standing by
said, Take heed what you say, and then he says, Is not he a Felon that knew
of a Murder and concealed it. And he knew of the Murder of Concealing Murder.
Sect. 2.
A. B. and did not reveal it till long after it was openly known. In Yelvertons
Rep. 154.

So for this, where two or three Colliers were burnt in a house, and some were
executed for it, and one said of the Plaintiff, Thou did bring Faggots a
mile and a half to the burning of the Colliers. It is said an Action will lie
for this. In Huttons Rep. 122.

So for this, There was a man killed in the house of A. and she concealed the
Murder. In Styles Rep. 392. and yet it is said it will not lie Concealing
Murder.
for this, He is a Felon, for he knows of a Murder and concealeth it.

So it will lie for this, The Knave, the Apothecary that married my Sister has
poisoned my Uncle, and I will have him taken up again to hang him. In Styles
Rep. 245.

So it is said to be held to lie for this, A. B. was found dead, and you killed
him, In Hetleys Rep. 70.

It is said, it has been held to lie for this, One told me that she heard By
Report.
say, that Megs wife poisoned her Husband, in a Mesle of milk, with this
Averment, that nullus dixit, etc. It is so reported by Goldsb. 139. Bendloes
Averment.
Rep. 152. So for this, A. said that B. did report, that your Wife sacrifized
her child to the Devil, to make away my mother. Pasche. 15. Jac. Locks Case.

It is said, it will not lie for this, Thou do lead a life in manner of a
Incertainty.
Rogue, I doubt not but to see thee hanged for striking of Mr. Sydnhams man,
who was murdered. Mich. 11. Jac. in Scaccario.

It is said, that it has been held to lie for this, Keynor is a base
Gentleman, he has four children by his servant Agnes, and he has killed
them, or caused them to be killed. In Pophams Rep. 187.

It will not lie for this, A. struck his Cook on the head with a Cleaver,
Incertainty.
and cleaved his head, the one part lay on the one shoulder, and the other part
lay on the other shoulder. Croo. 2. 184.

Nor for this, If two be speaking of the killing of Hares with Engines, Under
qualification.
and with reference to this; the one of them does say to him that has so done,
He is a murderer; in this case the subject matter of the discourse shows his
meaning, and will qualify the words, that they shall not be actionable. Coo.
4. 14.

It is said to have been agreed to lie for this, That where two are talking
Certainty in the person charged.
together of a Suit wherein the Plaintiff and others were Defendants; And in
that discourse the Defendants used these words, These Defendants [Innuendo the
Plaintiff and the other Defendants] are those that did help to murder H.
Parrer. [Innuendo H. P. lately deceased] who was murdered by one T. H. who was
hanged for it. In Hobb. Rep. pl. 118. And it was there held, that the words
were certain enough as to the persons charged. But if there be three present,
and one say to them, One of you Incertainty.
three killed J. S. Or if one say, One of the servants of A. B. (who has many
servants) murdered J. S. this is altogether uncertain, and not actionable.
Fleetwoods Case in Hobb. Rep. 375. 351.

It is said, that it has been held to lie for this. Mris. Paffield did write a
Attempt or endeavor of Murder. Sect. 3.
Letter to one to poison her Husband. In Bulstr. 1. part 2. Some doubt of this
Case. Yet see Finches Law. 186.

It is said, it has been held to lie for this, thou did place a woman in the
house of J. S. to the intent to poison her. In Bulstr. 1. part 201. Finches
Law. 186. So for this, She would have cut her husbands throat, and did attempt
to do it. But that it will not lie for the first words. Lanes Rep. 98.

So for this, A. sent a Letter to my Master, and therein willed him to poison
his wife. Croo. 1. part last published. 747.

So for this, thou did lie in wait to assault me, with an intent to kill [or
to rob] me. Mich. 4. Jac. and Pasche. 5. Jac. B. R. See in Bulstr. 2. part
206. Murreys Case.

So for this, thou did procure one to lie in wait to murder me. See Bulstr.
2. part 20. the contrary.

So for this, thou did hire one to kill me. Trin. 33. Eliz. B. R. Suttons
Case. Yet see Croo. 3. 1. part last published. 191. where the Court seemed to
hold the contrary to this. And yet there the Court agreed, that it will lie for
this. Tabbot and Gough agreed to have hired a man to kill me; And that Gough
should show me to the hired man to kill me. See the Report of one Murreys
Case, in Bulstr. 2. part 206. which seems to oppose this.

So for this, thou did lie in wait to kill me with a Pistol. Pasche. 5. Jac.
B. R. So for this, thou did send one to kill me. Trin. 33. Eliz. B. R. Or
thou did send one to my house to kill me. Yet see Murreys Case before named.

So for this, thou soughtest the life of J. S. If he be dead. Mich. 7. Jac.
Weblins Case. Yet see Coo. 4. 15. So for this, he sought my innocent blood.
Sir Edward Hertburyes Case. B. R. see Coo. 4. 15.

So for this, My Lord Lumley has gone about to take away my life against all
Christian dealing. Coo. 4. 16. 15. Hext Case. which seems in the case and
reason of it to be against these cases.

So for this, My Lady Cockin offered to give poison to one to kill the child
in her body. 32. 33. Eliz. Coo. 4. 16. See in this Bulstr. 2. part 206.

So for this, If I had consented to Mr. Cardinal T. H. had not been alive [or
had been dispatched out of the way.] Cardinals Case. Coo. 4. 16.

So for this. A. did prepare poison to kill me. Yelvertons Rep. 90.

But it is said, it will not lie for this, Sir Francis Beamont did come to the
house of Sir John Harper, and that he and his servants went about to kill Sir
John Harper, and that he did maintain them, and that Sir John Harper may not
have this Action for this. But if he say he did maintain them to that intent,
or that any thing were done that way, it might happily be actionable. Bulstr.
3. part 167.

And so generally in all cases, where the words do import an intent, joined
with any overt Act of Attempt, or Endeavor, there the words will be
actionable. But, a Charge of an Inclination, or Purpose only to do a murder
without any Act of endeavor or attempt, is not actionable. Coo. 4. Inclination
or purpose only.
18. And therefore it would not lie for this, He gave his Champion counsel to
make a Deed of Gift of his goods to kill me, and then to fly out of the
Country, but God preserved me. Coo. 4. 18. Bulstr. 2. part 206.

And it is said, it has been held not to lie for this, Thou would have
killed me. Trin. 4. Jac. B. R. for this is only punishable in case of Treason.
Croo. 2. 407. Hobb. pl. 152. 180.

Nor for this, She would have cut her husbands throat. Lanes Rep. 98. Bulstr.
2. part 206.

Nor for this, He had a mind to have killed me. Bulstr. 2. part. 206.
Incertainty in words. General words.


Nor for this, He has killed a man; For this he may do as a Minister of
Justice, or in the wars, or se defendendo, etc. Trin. 17. Car. B. R. And yet
see the contrary before Sect. 1. Croo. 2. 352. 438. Coo. 4. 16.

Nor for this, Thou have procured a perjured Knave to seek my blood. Words
general, and uncertain.
32. Eliz. B. R. Sir Edward Hastings Case. In Hobb. Rep. 196. 332.

Nor for this, Thou were the death of J. S. or, thou wast the cause of his
death; or, thou wast the cause that he hanged himself, or cut his own throat.
Croo. 1. last published. 239. See in Hetleys Rep. 70.

Nor will this Action lie for such words as these, Thou seek my life. Coo.
4. 15. Yet see before some Cases, that seem to contradict this. Nor for this,
He seeks my blood. Sir Edward Hurtburies Case. See March of Slanders. part
2. 6. Nor for this, Thou wentest about to poison a child. Eatons Case. Nor for
this, He smells of the Murder of J. S. Dyer. 317. Nor for this, To say of one
that is dead, J. S. was the cause of his death, and I will swear it on a Book.
And yet if the discourse which occasioned the words, were about the Murder of
him that is dead, the words are more dangerous. Bulstr. 2. part 10. 11.

For in all these latter Cases the words are too general and uncertain to
maintain the Action.

It is said, it will lie for these words, Thou have poisoned J. S. And Sect. 4.
this albeit he be alive, or it appear he is alive. For poison may break out
upon him, and he may escape. In Bulstr. 1. part 42. In Yelvertons Rep. 21.

So for this, Thou did poison J. S. and it shall cost me a hundred Poison.
pound, or I will hang thee for it. New Book of Entries. 25. Yet see Hobb. Rep.
pl. 11. And there it is held, that it must be said, that he did it willingly,
or it is not actionable.

It is said, it will not lie for this, A. B. gave C. D. money to shift him away
as soon as he had killed R. T. Parrants Case. B. R. Quere of this.

But it is held, that the Action will not lie for these words, Thou have Words
of contradiction.
killed my Wife, and art a Traitor for it. Nor for saying, thou have killed thy
Wife; for the words import that she is alive at the time of the words spoken.
But otherwise perhaps it may be if she be re vera dead, and the Plaintiff do
set it forth to be so in his Declaration. Coo. 4. 13. 16. Hill. 39. Eliz. Co.
B. Bulstr. 3. part 167. Pasche. 5. Jac. B. R. Holt and Tailors Case. So it is
in other Cases when it does not appear in an Action brought for such words
importing a Charge of killing another, that the party it is said he killed was
dead at the time of the words spoken. In Hobb. Rep. 8. Trin. 17. Car. 1. Co. B.

Nor for this; Thou art a blood-sucker, and seek my blood. Nor this,
Blood-sucker.
He is a blood-sucker, not worthy to live in a Commonwealth, and his child
not born is bound to curse him. As it is reported by Noy 64. and in Popham. 177.

Nor for this, Thou art a cutthroat. In Bulstr. 3. part. 265. Cutthroat.


Nor for this, Thou art a companion of cutthroats. Croo. 1. last published. 554.

But upon this head this also is to be known.

1 That in some of the Cases, and for some of the words herein said not to be
actionable, if so it be, that the party of whom they are spoken, have any
special damage by them, he may perhaps in such a case have an Action for the
words.

2 In all the Cases before named, and in other Cases of like nature with the
words before mentioned, that are actionable words, the Plaintiff is not bound
to set forth in his Declaration any special loss he has sustained by the
words, for the Action is maintainable without it.

3. That in all the Cases of actionable words, they must be under the general
Rules, viz. the words they must be false, malicious, particular, univocal,
positive, and certain, and such as import some Act done. For if they do not
appear to be so, but they be true, or spoken in a way of Justice, or the like,
that they appear not to be malicious, or be altogether uncertain, either in the
person, or thing, or be under a qualification by other words spoken at the same
time, or import only an intent to do something, but nothing is done, or the
like, no Action will lie upon them.

4. That the Plaintiff in his Action brought for such words as these, is
Averment.
not bound to say, or set forth that the Charge by the words did import a
malicious, voluntary, or willing Murder, or that the party said to be
murdered, is dead, or died within the year. But this is certain, That where
the Action is brought for words of import, to charge the Plaintiff with the
killing of a man, it will be the sure way for the Plaintiff in his Declaration,
to show that he is dead, and was so when the words were spoken. Or if he do
not so, then it will be the wisdom of the Defendant in his pleading, to show
he is yet alive, or was alive when the words were spoken; for then no Action
will lie upon them. Coo. 4. 16. Croo. 2. 252. Yelverton. 20. 21. Croo. 1. part
last published. 823. Croo. 2. 438. Bulstr. 1. part 42. Hobb. Rep. pl. 11. New
Book of Entries. fol. 24.

CHAP. VIII. Of words of Slander, about Matter of Witchcraft.
THis offense of Witchcraft, by the use of Invocation, or Conjuration
Witchcraft, what it is. Sect. 1.
of evil Spirits, to take up any part of a dead person to be used in any
Witchcraft, and used to kill, or lame any person is Felony. To take upon one by
Witchcraft, and such like ways, to discover any thing lost, or any treasure,
to provoke to unlawful love, or to destroy, or hurt any person, cattle, or
goods, is a great offense and very penal: If any man therefore shall by
slanderous words, charge another with this Crime, or anything like unto it, he
may have this Action for his remedy. Stat. 1. Jac. chap. 12. Coo. 13. 59. And
therefore it is held; that this Action will lie for the words as they are
mentioned, in the Cases hereafter following.

Some of the Judges have from time to time been of opinion; that this Witch.
Action will lie, for calling of a man or woman Witch; or saying, he, [or
shee] is a Witch, without the Addition of any other words to it: And some
Judgments are said to be given accordingly. For which see, Croo. 2. 306. 150.
639. 531. 205. In Godb. pl. 435. But the main current of the Judges opinions
and judgments are the other way, and the Law (as it seems) is now taken to
be; that this Action will not lie for saying one is a Witch; without the
addition of some other words, importing that he has bewitched some Person, or
his goods, etc. For which see, Finches Law 126. Croo. 2. 399. 150. 205. 236
531. 660. Croo. 1. 233. 205. 236. 340. 233. In Godb. Rep. 257. 341. 17. Jac.
Hawks Case M. 8. Jac. B. R. Shirdens Case. Brownl. 2. part. 14. Bendloes Rep.
23. 127. Hellenas Case. Styles Rep. 11. 47.

It is said, to be adjudged, to lie for the words in the Cases hereafter next
following. That is to say, The Devil appears to thee every night in the
likeness of a black man, [or a black horse] and thou conferrest with him, and
he gives thee what thou ask, and therefore thou have so much money.
Marshals Case, by Hobb. pl. 137. 162.

But it is doubted whether it will lie for the words in the Case, next
hereafter following, that is to say,

Thou art a Witch, and were the death of such a man's child, at whose birth
thou were Midwife. In Godb. Rep. 341. Bendloes Rep. 127.

And so whether it will lie for this; Thou art a hagg. in Hobb. Rep. 155. Hagg.


And so whether it will lie for this; Thou art a Witch, and have bewitched my
wives milk. Croo. 2. 600.

And so whether it will lie for this; A. did bewitch my goodman, Incertainty.
Innuendo my husband. Styles Rep. 106.

And so whether it will lie for this; Thou have bewitched one. Styles Rep. 106.

But there it is the opinion of two Judges, that it will lie for saying; Thou
have bewitched a man. Styles Rep. 106.

And for these words it is said it will lie; thou art a Witch, and did Sect.
2.
bewitch my Mothers drink, and being asked after why she did it, she said: If
I have called her Witch, we will prove her a Witch, and answer Witch.
what we have done. Hughes Case, Croo. 1. part 100.

And for this, thou art a Witch, and have bewitched J. S. to death. Croo. 1.
100. Godb. 341. Croo. 1. 341. And for this, he is a Witch Witch and Inchanter*
and an Inchanter, and has bewitched the children of one Strong. Hutton Rep.
13. yet see Bendloes 127. And for this, thou art a Witch, and thou have
bewitched children that they are wasted and destroyed. Stones Case, Brownl. 1.
part 2. 7. Croo. 1. part 341. Huttons Rep. 13. And for this, He is a Witch, and
a strong Witch, and has bewitched me and my Aunt A. S. Ceelies Case. Croo. 1.
341. Styles Rep. 106.

And for this, Thou and thy Wife [Innuendo, the Plaintiff and Agnes his Wife
[are both Witches. and have bewitched my Mare [Innuendo, the Mare predict.
Thome.] whereas it should have been, predict. Richardi. Tho. Smith versus
Cooker. Croo. 1. 368.

And for this thou art a Witch and a Sorcerer. Croo. 1. last published. 571. And
for this, She has bewitched J. S. by VVitchfraft and Sorcery. Witch and
Sorcerer.
Croo. 1. part 189. Goldsb. 341.

And for this, Thou art a VVitch, for thou have bewitched my Cow. Savils Case.
Styles Rep. 59. 65.

And for this, I. S. is a VVitch, and has bewitched two of the servants
Averment.
of I. S. to death, and there held that the Plaintiff need not to aver that
any person is dead, or how she did bewitch. Croo. 2. 639.

And for this, Thou do work by Nigromancy, and do work by the Devil.
Yelvertons Rep. 150.

And for this, Long is a Murderer, and has bewitched my child, and was the
death of my child. Mich. 23. Car. B. R. in Styles Rep. 65.

And for this, Thou art a VVitch, and dealest with VVitchery, and did procure
Mother Rale to bewitch the Cattle of I. S. Hill. 20. Jac. See in March of
Slanders, 1. part 15.

And it is said it will lie for this, Thou have killed a man by VVitchcraft,
Certainty.
and that this is certain enough. Styles Rep. 106.

But it is reported, and said to be held, that this Action will not lie for the
words in the Cases hereafter following (that is to say) for saying of I. S.
That he is a Sorcerer and Inchanter. Muttons Case. Coo. 13. 59. Sorcerer and
Inchanter. Conjurer.
Brownl. 2. part 276. Nor (as it seems) for saying of a man, He is a
Conjurer; but if he says, He is a Conjurer of the Devil, or, of any evil or
wicked spirit, the words are more dangerous. Godb. Rep. 341. and yet some have
held the contrary, and that all these words are Actionable, because they do,
as the Witch does, deal with the Devil, the one by agreement, the other by
prayer, and such like means. Some would have it Hagge.
for to lie for calling of one Hag, others doubt of it. Hobb. Rep. 155.

Nor for this, Thou art a Witch and Inchanter, and have bewitched Witch and
Inchanter. Witchcraft.
Strongs children. Brown. 1. part 2. 7.

Nor for this, He has bewitched my Wear that I can catch no Fish.

Nor for this, Thou art a VVitch, and have bewitched my child. Mellon versus,
Hern. Godb. 341. Styles Rep. 11. 66. 59. Huttons Rep. 132.

Nor for this, Mary Yates is a Sorcerer and a Witch, and a White Sorcerer and
Witch.
Witch, she can bewitch and unbewitch. Styles Rep. 47.

Nor for this, She is a Witch, and I will take my oath of it. Turners Case,
Styles Rep. 47.

Nor for this, Thou art a Conjuring Knave. Bulstr. 1. part 138. Nor Conjuring
Knave.
for this, Thou art a Witch, and a strong Witch, Croo. 1. 205. 236.

Nor for this, Thou art a Witch, and by thy means I have lost my Mare. Hawks
Case, Croo. Rep. 2. 531.

Nor for this, Thou art a Witch, and I will make thee come and say. God save my
Mare; I was forced to get my Mare charmed for thee Croo. Rep. 1. 233.

Nor for this, Mr. Lowes is a Witch, and I will prove it, for I have Sect. 3.
seen him, and his imps, and evil spirits appear unto me in my chamber, and put
me in fear of my life; and he said, Come, he will never be at quiet till we
have killed him, and he did bewitch a child of mine. Lowes Case, Bulstr. 3.
part 74.

But upon this Head, these things are also to be known.

1 That for these, and such like words before mentioned therein, that are not
Actionable, that albeit the words in themselves are not Actionable, yet if any
special damage shall come thereby to him of whom they are spoken, he may
happily have this Action for them. Croo. 2. 202.

2 That for all the words herein before mentioned to be Actionable in
themselves, and for all such like words, this Action will lie, without Averment
Averment.
of any special loss sustained by the party of whom they are spoken. Croo. 1.
101. See March Rep. pl. 2. 93.

3 That such kind of slanderous words as these are, must be under the general
Rules before laid down, Malicious, false, certain, etc. For if they be true, or
not malicious, too general, of a double intendment, or doubtful meaning, or not
sufficiently positive, or altogether uncertain in themselves, either as to the
person of whom they are spoken, or in the thing spoken of that person, or under
a Qualification by the precedent or subsequent words spoken at the same time,
or import an intent only of doing an act, and no act done, they may not be
Actionable.

CHAP. IX. Of words of Slander about Rape, Sodomy, Buggery, and House-burning.
THe Ravishment of a Woman is by the Law a very great Offense, and Rape.
very penal, and therefore if any man shall charge another with this Offense,
or any thing like unto it, the party slandered hereby shall have this Action
for his Relief therein. Stat. 13 Eliz. chap. 6. 39 Eliz. chap. 9. and therefore
it has been held, That an Action will lie for the words in the Cases hereafter
following (that is to say) for saying, Thou did ravish I. S. and for this, He
should have been hanged for a Rape, and it cost him dear. M. 39, 40 Eliz. B. R.
Redfernes Case. Croo. 1. part last published, 589. And for this, He is ravishing
of I. S. Croo. 1. 101. And for this, Thou [Innuendo the Plaintiffe] have
ravished a Woman twice, and I will make thee to stand in a white sheet for it.
In Godb. Rep. 287.

Sodomy in the eye of Law is a great Crime, and very penal; and therefore
Sodomy.
if any man shall slanderously charge another with this, or any thing like unto
it, this may be actionable, 25 H. 8. cap. 6. 5. Eliz. cap. 17. Coo. 12. 37. and
therefore this Action will lie for calling of one Sodomite, or for saying, He
has committed Sodomy. Coo. 10. 130. Sodomite.
and 4. 15, 16.

The like may be said of this offense of Buggery, and of words scandalous
Buggery.
about it; and therefore it is held that this Action will lie for calling of
one Buggerer, or saying of one, That he has committed Buggery. Buggerer.
Coo. 10. 130. and 4. 15, 16.

The burning of any dwelling House, or Barn full of Corn, or any Out-house
House-burning
adjoining to such dwelling House or Barn, is also by Law Felony, and very
penal to the Offender; and therefore if any man shall slanderously charge
another with this, or anything like unto it, this may be actionable; this
Action is therefore said to lie for saying, Thou did burn a dwelling house,
or thou did burn a barn with corn: But it will not lie for saying, Thou did
burn a barn, or thou did burn a barn with thine own hands. Nor may such words
be made Actionable by enforcing it with an Innuendo in the Declaration,
Innuendo a barn full of corn. Adjudged New. B. of entries. fol. 25. Coo. 4. 14.
20. In Yelvertons Rep. 21. Bulstr. 1. part 112. Croo. 2. 184. Hobb. Rep. 196.
332. 350. And yet it has been adjudged to lie for this, B. is a bad minded
man, and none but he did burn my fathers barn; and he does use to set fire of
barns about Michaelmas, when they are full of corn. In Noys Rep. 155. And see
in a Case where two or three Colliers were burnt in a barn, and some were
executed for it; where one said of J. S. Thou did bring faggots a mile and a
half, to the burning of the Colliers. Huttons Rep. 122. But it is said it will
not lie for this, thou have burnt my barn, for which thou will be hanged. In
Bulstr. 3. part. 267.

In an Action for these words, I am sure that A. B. did burn my Barn, Innuendo
a Barn full of Corn, and I will have a bout with him for it; If my Lord chief
Justice would have done me right, I would have hanged him for it; in this Case
the Judges did most incline, that the words were not Actionable. Croo. 1. part.
last published 834.

It is said, it has been adjudged to lie for this, he has harbored About
the receiving of a Priest.
and received his Son into his house, having notice of him before that he was
a Seminary priest; for this is Felony, see in Bulstr. 1. part 181.

And here this also is to be added to all the Cases before laid down in this
chapter, as in the former chapters; That in Cases where one shall slanderously
charge another with any Crime, made Felony by any Statute Law, or with any
thing like unto it: As with the having of two wives, the Imbezeling or razing
of Records, the wilful putting out of a man's eyes, or cutting out of his
tongue, the Levying of a fine, or acknowledgment of a Statute in another man's
name, conveying away of the Kings Ordnance, or Armor, or the like, this Action
may be maintainable for it.

And in all such Actions, the Rule before laid down in the Actions for Slanders
about matter of Murder, do held place here.

1 That if the words import any great slander, and be not in themselves
Actionable; yet if any special damage happen to the party of whom they are
spoken, by them; they may by this become Actionable.

2 That in Actions for such words as these, there will not need any Averment of
special damage by them.

3 That if the thing said be true, or not maliciously said, or too general, of
a double intendment, or of a doubtful meaning, or not sufficiently positive, or
altogether uncertain in themselves, either as to the person slandered, or the
slander it self, or under a qualification by the precedent or subsequent words
spoken at the same time, or import an intent only of doing an Act; and no Act
done, they may not be Actionable.

CHAP. X. Of words of Slander about matter of Theft.
AS to Slanderous words that have an Import in them of any matter of Theft; we
are to know, that Theft is the unlawful taking away of another man's goods from
him against his will, and this is a great offense and Theft, what it is.
very Penal: For by the greater Felony, which is the stealing of any thing
Sect. 1.
above Twelve Pence in value, the offender does in many cases loose his life,
and all his estate by it. And by the lesser Felony, which is the felonious
Petit Larcenie.
taking of any thing under the value of twelve pence (which is called Petit
Larceny) by this he will forfeit all his goods; and become liable to such
corporal punishment of whipping, and the like, as the Judges shall appoint. If
therefore any one shall charge another falsely with any crime of this nature,
he may have his remedy by this Action. It is therefore said to be agreed, that
this Action will lie for these words, and as they are set forth in the Cases
hereafter following, viz. for calling of a man Sacriledger, or Church-robbet;
or for saying, Thou have committed Sacrilege, Sacrilege and Sacriledger.
Church-robber.
or, thou have robbed the Church of Dale. Pasche. 5. Jac. B. R.

So it is said, it has been held maintainable for these words, A. is robbing
the Church of S. Or, Thou have robbed the Church of S. Croo. 1. 301. Dr.
Sibthorps Case. But for saying, Thou have robbed the Church, without more
words, it seems no Action will lie, for the incertainty of the words, what
Church he intended, a Visible, or Invisible Church. And Incertainty.
yet to say of one, That he has robbed a Church, is conceived, may be
actionable, and that it shall be intended to be spoken of a material Church.
See in March. of Slanders. 1. part 48.

It is said to be adjudged to lie for this, Thou have robbed the Church of A.
and thou have stolen the Lead from off the Church [Innuendo the Church of A. M.
4. Jac. Benson and Morlyes Case. Croo. 2. 153. But that it will not lie for
saying, Thou have robbed the Church of Dale, for thou have stolen away the Lead
of it. Coo. 10. 130. 4. 15. Croo. 2. 153.

It is said, that this Action will lie for this, He has robbed a Church, not
saying what Church, as the Chuch of Dale, etc. and that an Innuendo Certainty.
may make it certain. Croo. 1. 301. Croo. 2. 154.

This Action (it is said) will lie for calling of one Pirate. Or for saying of
him, He has committed Piracy. So for saying, Thou maintainest Piracy. Pirate.
Pirates, who rob upon the Seas. So for this, Thou art a Maintainer of Pirates,
and a procurer of piracies. Croo. 2. 629. Coo. 4. 14.

It is held to be out of question, That this Action will lie for calling of one
Thief, Robber, or House-Robber. So for saying of one, He has Other Theft.
Thief. Robber. House-robber.
committed a Robbery, or, he has committed a Burglary. Coo. 10. 130. 27. H.
8. 11. 14. Dyer. 112, 236. Croo. 1. 329. In Owens Rep. 33. 47. In Noys Rep. 10.
20. So for this, Thou art a Sheep-stealer. So for this, Thou art a
Horse-stealer, In Bulstr. 3. part 303. 260. In Bendloes Sheep-stealer.
Rep. 154. So for saying, Thou art a Welch-Theef. Croo. 1. 329. So for this, A.
has stolen my Sheep. In Huttons Rep. 8. So for this, A. Horse-stealer.
has stolen Sheep. So for this, A. has stolen Sheep from B. C. 27. H. 8. 22. N.
26. H. 8. 9. pl. 11. So for this, Thou art a Roguish Knave and a Thief. Bulstr.
2. part 134. So for this, Thou did steal the Horse of J. S. In Hobb. Rep. pl.
196. So for this, Thou art a cunning Thief. Bulstr. 1. part 146. 210. So for
this, He is a Thief to you, and to me, and has stolen twenty pound from me,
and forty pound from you. Croo. 2. 676.

So for this, Thou did meet me on the way, and askedst my purse, and I gave
thee five shillings for fear. Bonds Case.

So for this, A. did set on me, and took my purse from me, not saying in the
high way.

So for this, Thou did set upon me in the high way, and did take away from
me my purse, and I will be sworn to it. Stoners Case. B. R.

So for this, Thou did set upon me, and tookest away my purse, with twenty
marks in it, go with me before a Justice, and I will charge thee with Felony.
Lewis Case in the Chequer Chamber.

So for this, Thou did violently upon the high way take away my purse from
me, and four shiilings two pence in it, and did threaten me to cut me off
in the midst, but I was forced to run away to save my life. Lawrence Case.
Croo. 1. 102. M. 8. Car. 1. B. R.

It is said, it will lie for this, He has robbed J. S. And this albeit J. S.
were never robbed. Mich. 9. Jac. B. R.

So for this, He is a Thief, and has stolen my gold. Albeit he do not say
when he did steal it. Croo. 2. 622.

So for this, Thou did steal my Horse, and wast in Gaol for it. Hobb. Rep.
196.

So for this, He has stolen a horse, and it will be proved by twenty
witnesses. Hares Case.

And yet it is said, it will not lie for this, Thou did take away my money [or
the money of J. S.] Hobb. Rep. pl. 11. 106. 332. 350. Croo. 2. 184. Brownl. Rep.
1. 2. Coo. 4. 15. Nor for this, Thou have stolen by the high way side. Davis
Case. Pasche. 38. Eliz. Goldsb. 143. Bulstr. 1. part 112. Nor for this, Thou
did beat me, and took away my purse from me. 37. Eliz. Co. B. March. of
Slanders. 1. part 47. Nor for this, He did assault me, and take away my
money. Bulstr. 1. part 112. Nor for this, He took away money from him with a
strong hand. Mich. 15. Car. B. R. Nor for this, Thou did take away my money
with a strong hand. Bulstr. 1. part 112. March. Rep. pl. 91. And Innuendo
Felony in the declaration will not alter the Case. Godb. Rep. 181. Nor for
this, Thou Innuendo.
did take away my purse, and twenty shillings in it. Hobb. Rep. pl. 268. So
for this, Thou did set upon me in the high way, and take my purse from me,
and twenty marks in it, and I will be sworn to it. Croo. 2. 315. Holland and
Stoner. Bulstr. 1. 112. for there is no certain charge of Felony in it. Hobb.
Rep. pl. 268. 382. See in March. Rep. pl. 91.

Nor for this, I have a matter against A. who has stolen by the high way side.
Croo. 1. part last published. 459. See of this more upon the incertainty Sect. 2.
of the charge. Afterward in this chap.

It is said, the Action will lie for this, Thou have stolen my goods, and I will
have thy neck. In Brownl. 2. part 230. 280. So for this, Thou art a Thief, for
thou have stolen my Cock. In Brownl. 1. part 1. Or, thou have stolen my two Cocks
[or my two Hens. [or my other goods. Trin. 5. Jac. B. R. Bensers Case.

So for this, You, huswife, are a Thief, and have stolen my purse; and it
Certainty.
was said, that there was certainty enough in it. Styles Rep. 150.

So for this, J. S. did load a Ship of my Masters with Barley, and did steal
and cousen seven quarters thereof in measure. Mich. 20. Jac. Co. B. Winch. 41.
See Winch. 202.

So for this, Thou have stolen Plate in Cambridge, and we will charge thee with
Felony for it. Wilb. and Gunning. 2. H. 7. 16.

So for this, Thou have stolen a Sack, and a Curry-comb, and I will make thee
produce it. And thou did steal my Fathers Wood, and give it to a Whore.
Brownl. Rep. 2. Hobb. Rep. 192. Skarlets Case.

So for this, Thou art a Thief, and have broken my Chest. In Styles Rep. 115.
Wainwrights Case. Trin. 24. Car. B. R.

So for this, Thou art a Thief, for thou have stolen the Town-beam [Innuendo the
Town of W. per Sergeant Hutton. Brownl. 3.

So for this, Thou art a steal-gown, and the first Gown that thou did wear
thou stolest, and thou did walk up and down in the stole Gown, and had no
Gown till thou did steal one. New Book of Entries. 23. D. Sect. 20.

So for this, A. has stolen my Axe from my Wood-pan. Edwards Case, in Styles
Rep. 213.

So for this, That he stole two or three pound of Tobacco out of his Masters
shop, and yet there it is said, That it will not lie for this, He Averment.
stole the Tobacco out of his Masters shop, without a special Averment that
there was Tobacco there, and what it was. Wotherlies Case in Winches. Rep. 6.
15.

So for this, Thou art a Thief, for thou have cut off the Ear-mark of my sheep,
and set on thine own. See in March of Slanders. 2 part 4.

So for this, Thou would have stole a piece of cloth, or else thou would
have delivered it to my Wives daughter, thou art a thief, and an arrant thief,
and I will prove it. In Goldsb. Rep. 85. So for this. A. is robbing of I. S.
Croo. Rep. 1. 101.

So for this, A. is as very a Thief as any that robs by the Highway side.
So for this, A. is a worse thief than any that robs by the highway side.
Croo. 1. last published. 224.

So for this, to say of one suspect, and proseeuted for stealing of a Horse,
That he did steal him; for common fame of a man that he is a Thief, will not
warrant any man to call him so, or to say, He is a thief. Mich. 13. Jac. Co.
B. Cuddington against Wilkins. See Hobb. Rep. pl. 105. 112. 238. 381. So for
this, There is a great nest of Thieves at Pinton, and Sir John Bridges is the
maintainer of them, and he is a Thief himself, Dyer 75.

So for this, I. S. was questioned for stealing of a gray Mare with a Manner of
the speaking.
snip in her ear, and Hue and Cry went out after him, and he durst not show
his face hereabouts. Styles Rep. 159.

So for this, I did meet J. S. and others, such a day in such a place, and they
bid me deliver my Purse, and I being afraid, put my hand in my Pocket, and took
out two shillings six pence, and gave it over my shoulder Incertainty in the
person slandered. Sect. 3.
to one of them, I know not which, it will lie for J. S. but not for any of the
rest. Yelvertons Rep. 158.

So for this, Take heed how you lodge J. S. for he takes Purses. By two
Judges. Bulstr. 1. part 112. So for this, Thou art a Rogueish knave and a
thief. Bulstr. 134. So for this, Thou art a cunning thief. Bulstr. 2. part 146.

So it is said to lie for this, You do not well that you do not apprehend J.
S. for a Felon, and seize his goods, for he has stole a sheep from A. B. Croo.
2. 126. So for this, He would have robbed me, and did rob me of my Dagger.
Bulstr. 2. part 227.

It is said it will lie for this, There is not a Purse cut within twenty
Cutpurse.
miles but I. S. knows of it. and has a share in it. Balls Case.

So for this, Thou art a cunning Cutpurse Knave. Trevillians Case, B. R. But
not for this, He is a Cutpurse; Nor for this, He is a cunning Knave, and
acquainted with more Cut-purses than any man in Northamptonshire. Bulstr. 1.
147. Croo. 2. 536. Godb. Rep. 181.

Nor for this, Thou have cut my Purse, therefore I charge thee with Felony; but
if he say, Thou have cut my Purse feloniously, it may perhaps Pick-pocket.
be otherwise. Croo. 1. part last published, 890.

It is said to lie for this, Thou have taken out of my Pocket forty pound of my
Money, and I will cause thee to be indicted at the Sessions of the Peace, and to
hold up thy hand at the Bar for it. But that it will not lie for this, He has
picked out of my pocket silver and gold. Croo. 1. part 238. Yelverton. 136.
Dromants Case; or taken out of my pocket silver and gold, or picked my pocket,
and taken away ten shillings. Styles Rep. 127. Croo. 2. 498. And yet it is said
it will lie for this, Thou have Picked my Pocket, Quere thereof, and see Croo.
1. 238. In Godb. 287. pl. 413.

It is said it will not lie for this, He is a Pilfering fellow, and has
Pilferer, and Pilfering fellow.
Pilfered away my corn and goods from my wife and children. Huttons Rep. 14.
Owens Rep. 56. Carters Case. M. 37. 38. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. last published 424.
Nor for this, He is a Prigging Pilfering fellow. Nor A Prigging fellow.
for this, Thou art suspected to be a common Pilferer.

Nor for this, Thou art a Filching fellow, and have Filched away Ten Filcher,
and Filching fellow.
Pounds from me. Hobb. Rep. pl. 323. Croo. 4. 15.

Nor for this, Thou art a common Filcher. Croo. 1. last published 554.

This Action will lie for these strange words, where the use and meaning of
them is known; Thou art a healer of Felonies, and have showed such For strange
words used in some Countries.
a favor to a Horse stealer, that thereby both the Horse and Thief were
conveyed away, and it is in my Power to hang thee. Yelvertons Rep. 153. Healer
of Felons.
Hobb. Rep. 191. So for this, Thou art a healer of Felons. Hobb. Rep. 191. So
for this, spoken before them that know the use of it; Thou art a Sheep-Theef.
So for this, Thou art an Out-putter. So for this, Croo. Sheep-theef. Out-putter.
1. last published 250. Bulstr. 2. part 145. Brownl. 1. part 13. Hobb. Rep. 350.

And this also (as it seems) without any Averment in the Declaration, Strained
a mare.
that the sense of the words is so and so; for this may be proved at the Trial
by witnesses. Mores Case. 6. Jac. R. B. Hughes Abridgement page Averment.
37. part 47. And yet some hold this Averment necessary. Brownl. 1. part 13.
Croo. 1. 96. Benloes Rep. 134. Styles Rep. 296. March. Rep. 1. 18.

So it is said it will lie for this for the Father, Barber and his wife be
false thieves, men cannot have their cattle go upon the Common, but they will
kill them and eat them. Barbers Case.

So this Action (it is said) will lie for this, A. has half my goods, and
shall be hanged for it. 8. Jac. B. R. Long and Kings Case. Sed Quere of this.
For it is said, it will not lie for this; I had Forty Pounds worth of Plate,
and A. has it, and will be hanged for it. Trin. 12. Jac. Kings Case.

So it will lie for this, He is not fit to be a Constable, for he and his
Incertainty in the person slandered*
company, the last time he was Constable, stole five of my Swine, and eat
them: But it will lie only for him that is the Constable, and not for any
others. Croo. 1. last published 861.

So it is said, it will lie against a husband and wife, for these words By
improper words. Sect. 4.
spoken by the wife, Mr. Plunket did Steal my Plate out of my chamber. And yet
in propriety of speech, it was not hers but her husbands Plate. Croo. 1. 38.
and 2. 60.

So for this said by a wife, Thou art a theevish Queen, for thou have stolen my
Faggots, Innuendo five Faggots of the defendants husbands. Croo. 1. 88. and 2.
60. So for this spoken by the wife of another, Thou have stolen my two Cocks.
Mich. 9. Jac. B. R. See Croo. 1. part last published 279. Charnels Case. B. R.

It is said that this Action will lie for this said to a Father; I will take
Certainty and Incertainty of the person slandered, Averment.
my oath that your Son stole my Hens? So it be with this Averment in the
Declaration, that the Plaintiff is his Son, and that he has no other son, or
that the words were intended of him that brings the Action by some other words
spoken at the same time. Mich. 15. Car. B. R. Styles Rep. 46. So for saying of
J. S. That he was one of those that Robbed J. S. Goldsb. 85.

So for saying to the Son, Thy Father is a Thief, and has stolen more Averment.
goods then I am worth; this will lie for the Father, and that without Averment
of what he is worth that spoke the words. Bulstr. 2. part 141. Painters Case.
Mich. 11. Jac. B. R.

So it is said, it will lie for a Boy that is present for these words said of
him, This Boy is a Thief. Brownl. 1. part 2.

So if two be talking together of John Syms, and William Syms, and one of them
says, These Symses are Thieves, otherwise it is if he say, The Symses are
Thieves. In Haghes Rep. 39.

This Action (it is said) will lie for the Father, where these words are said
to the Son, Thy Father has stolen such goods. So it will lie for a Husband,
where these words are said to the Wife, Thy Husband has stolen Averment.
such goods; and that without any Averment at all. But in Cases where it is
said to a Father of a Son in general, no Action will lie for a Son, without
some special Averment, that he has no other son, or that the son that brings
the Action was intended in the words. Croo. 1. 127. and 2. 443.

It is said, it will lie for this, I have a Son in A. who had his Chest picked,
and a hundred pound taken out of it in the house of one B. and I think I have
found the Thief, who it is; it is one that dwells in the next house, called
Robert Kingston; If there be such a man there, he may perhaps Averment.
have this Action, but then he must averr that he does dwell in the next
house. Pasche, 7. Jac. B. R.

So it is said, it will lie for these words, Pritchards man has robbed
Averment.
me. But then the Plaintiff must in his Action insert this Averment, that he
was Pritchards man, and that he had no man but him, or that the conference was
about him, etc.

But it will not lie for this, said of any one without any precedent
Communication Incertainty of the person.
of any person uncertain, One that is mine Adversary is a Thief. Nor for this,
One that is near about J. S. is a thief. For the incertainty of the person
standered. Coo. 4. 17. Hobb. Rep. 375. pl. 35. Nor for this, One of the
Servants of J. S. is a thief, if he have more servants than one. Hobb. Rep.
351. 371. Coo. 4. 17. Croo. 1. 127. Brownl. 1. part 1. 7. 9. 10. 13. Certainty
and incertainty in the matter of the Slander. Innuendo. Sect. 5.


It will not lie for these words, You have committed Burglary in breaking of
his house [Innuendo the house of one Bennet] and stealing his goods; For this
may be but trespass. And it is not said, whose house he brake, but by the
Innuendo, which is not sufficient to make it certain. Croo. 1. part last
published. 889.

Nor for this, He is as arrant a Thief as any in England, and broke up the
chest of J. S. and took away forty pound out of it. Huttons Rep. 72. Yelverton
90. Croo. 2. 687. Foster and Browning.

Nor for this, Thou art drunk, and I never held up my hand at the Bar, as thou
have done. Nor for this, Thou wast arraigned for Felony etc. Nor for this, Thou
did hold up thy hand for Felony. Nor for this, Thou wast in the Gaol at G.
for robbing, etc. Nor for this, Thou did take away my money. Nor for this,
Thou did beat me, and take away my money. Nor for this, Thou did take away
my money with a strong hand. Bulstr. 1. part 112. March. Rep. pl. 91. Nor for
this, Thou did take away my purse, and twenty shillings in it. Hobb. Rep.
Lines Case. 268. Nor for this, I have an Action against J. S. who has stolen by
the high way side. Benizens Case. 37. Eliz. B. R. Quere of this. Yet see Hobb.
Rep. pl. 382. a Case somewhat like to it. Nor for this, Thou Cutpurse.
art a cutpurse; for so every Glover is. Godb. Rep. 181. Trin. 17. Jac. B. R.
Croo. 2. 536. Bulstr. 1. part 147. Pophams Rep, 180. Bulls Case.

Nor for this, A. was robbed of forty pound, and a hundred marks-worth of
Plate, and B. and C. had it, and for that, by God, they will be He will be
hanged.
hanged for it. for it may be they did not steal it, but came lawfully by it;
And the latter words, they will be hanged for it, are not actionable. Croo. 2.
302. 331. Bulstr. 1. part 147. Jenk. Cent. 8. Case 92. Bulstr. 1. part 147.

Nor for this, A. has received again his pieces of cloth, and bears with the
Thief; Innuendo quendam malefactorem ignotum. Noys Rep. 57.

Nor for this, A. has broken my shop, and taken away my goods. 29. Eliz.
George against Parker. In Noys Rep. 57.

Nor for this, Thou art as bad as thy Wife, when she stole my Cushion, Averment.
without some Averment, that there was such a Felony committed. Croo. 2. 331.
Goldsb. Rep. 242.

Nor for this, J. S. deserves to be hanged. Nor for this, J. S. deserves He
deserves to be hanged.
hanging. Nor for this, It is in my power to hang thee. M. 4. Jac. B. R.
Pasche. 38. Eliz. Hollands Case. 10. Jac. B. R. Pridhams Case. Trin. 16. I can
hang thee.
Car. 1. B. R.

Nor for this, Thy brother was whipped about Taunton Cross for stealing of sheep,
or, burned in the hand, or shoulder. Croo. 1. 106. Mich, 8. Car. 1. B. R. Hills
Case. And yet these words import something done, by which the party of whom
they are spoken had deserved hanging, etc.

Nor for this, He has stolen a Mare, or, J. S. is forsworn. Pasche. 17 Jac. B.
R. Barhams Case. And albeit he averr that J. S. did never swear any
Incertainty.
such thing, yet it will not lie. Croo. 2. 530.

Nor for this, Thou have stolen, without more words; And yet if he say, Thou
have stolen, for which thou will be hanged; these words are dangerous. Bulstr.
3. 266.

Nor for this, Thou art a breaker of houses. Mich. 9. Jac. Slaughters Breaker
of Houses.
Case.

Nor for this, Thou did steal my Piece [Innuendo, a Gun] and I do charge thee
with Felony; for the word is uncertain, and the Innuendo cannot Innuendo.
ascertain it. Bendloes Rep. 126. Wheeler against Appleton.

Nor for this, Thou usest me now, as thy Wife did when she stole my Cushions.
Goldsb. Rep. 242. Croo. 2. 331. Quere if it lie not for the Wife upon these
words, When she stole my Cushions.

Nor for this, Thou have stolen my Mare, or consentedst to the stealing of her.
In the Disjunctive. Croo. 1. last published. 780.

Nor for this, Thou did bear away my goods. Hobb. Rep. 236. Nor for this, He
bore away money. Hobb. Rep. 268. Nor for this, Thou did take my money from me.
Nor for this, Thou have theevishly taken my money out of my purse. Nor for this,
Thou have theevishly taken such goods. Croo. 2. 81. Yelvertons Rep. 82. Nor for
this, J. S. was robbed of twenty pound. and A. had it, and will be hanged for
it, by two Judges, Pasche. 9. Jac. Foord. versus King.

Nor for this, He is a Rogue, or a Thief, or some such like thing; for this is
altogether uncertain.

It is said, that this Action will not lie for this, said of a Jailer, He has
let forth prisoners out of the Gaol, and had his part and shares with them; and
by that means he came to his goods. He had not a sheet on his bed before he
let them out of the Goal, to steal them. Croo. 1. last published. 783.

This Action is said to lie also for the words in the following Cases, viz.
Attempt of endeavor of Theft. Sect. 6.
for saying J. S. and W. S. knowing that A. did carry money, did lie in wait to
rob him, and set upon him, but he raising the Country, they did fly a-away, and
J. S. lost his horse, and they both were driven to ride away with one horse.
Croo. 1. 99. In Huttons Rep. 58.

So for this, He set upon me to rob me in the high way, and had done it, had
not my horse the better escaped with me. In Bulstr. 2. part 206.

So for this, He lay in wait to assault J. S. with an intent to rob him. Mich.
4. Jac. B. R. Lanes Rep. 98. Finches Law. 186. So for this, He say in the
Highway to rob me. In Lanes Rep. 98. Yelvertons Rep. 90.

So for this, Thou layest in wait to rob me. Croo. 1. part last published, 888.
Pasche. 5. Jac. B. R. 191. of Croo. 1. part last published.

So for this, A. is a false Knave, and was at my house the Sessions day at
night, and would have robbed me, and did break my doors, and put me in jeopardy
of my life. In Bulstr. 3. 200. Dyer 26.

And yet it is said it will not lie for this, Thou have stolen by the Highway
side. Goldsb. Rep. 143.

So it will lie (as it is said) for this, Thou have hired one to rob me. Hill.
13. Jac. B. R. Bulstr. 3. 167. So for this, Thou have been a setter of Thieves
to rob me; and yet the contrary is affirmed.

And it is said by some that this Action will not lie for this, He would have
robbed me; nor for this, Thou have hired one to rob me; nor for this, Thou art
a setter of Thieves to rob me; nor for this, Thou keep men to rob me; nor
for this, Thou keep men with intent to rob me; nor for this, Thou keep
men which do rob me, or which have robbed me. Hill 13. Jac. B. R. But see the
first Section of this Chapter, how the Law is in these things.

So for this, That nine persons did set upon me to rob me, and I. S. was one of
them. Croo. 1. 99. Coo. 4. 16. Eatons Case.

An Action was brought for this, Bring me to the Constables house, for I am
robbed this night, and bring me to the house of A. Bond to Arrest him, for old
Bond does set his Sons to rob me. Innuendo C. and D.] from time to time; In
this Case it was adjudged that old Bond can have Innuendo.
no Action for these words, and that an Innuendo cannot acertain it. Croo. 1.
last published. 618.

It is said that this Action will lie for these words, A. does, or will prepare
to rob me. Mich. 14. Jac. Sydnham against May. But it is said that Inclination
or purpose only, no Act done.
it will not lie for this, Thou would have taken my Purse from me on the
Highway. Godb. Rep. 202. Nor for this, He had a mind to rob me, Bulstr. 2.
part 206.

Nor will it lie for such words as these, He is a theevish fellow, see more of
this, Chap. 7. Sect. 3. or, Thou art a Theevish Knave; Or, He is Adjective
words.
a theevish Rogue; or, He is a Roguish Knave. For these Adjective words import
only an inclination to do something, but nothing done. Nor will it lie for
this, Thou art a theevish Whore. Coo. 4. 16, 19. Bulstr. 1. part 134. 138.
Croo. 2. 514. And yet it will lie for this, Thou art a cunning thief. Bulstr.
2. 146.

It is said this Action will lie for this, You are a Thief, for you have stolen
a bushel of my Apples on the ground. Bulstr. 1. part 163. So, Thou art a Thief,
for thou have stolen a bushel of my Apples out of my loft, or, About stealing of
Apples. Sect. 7.
[out of my Cock-loft. So for this, Thou have stolen the Apples out of my loft.
Hobb. pl. 253.

But this Action will not lie for these words, Thou art a Thief, for thou have
stolen my Apples out of my Orchard. Nor for this, Thou art a thief, and that
will be proved, by stealing my Apples in my Orchard. Bulstr. 1. part 163. Mich.
43. 44. Eliz. Co. B. Dobbins and Franklin. Coo. 4. 19. yet see the Cases
following for this.

Nor for this, Thou have stolen my Apples out of my Orchard. Bulstr. 1. part
163. Nor for this, Thou art a thief, for thou have robbed my Orchard, or, for
thou have stolen my Apples out of my Orchard. Huttons Rep. 65.

Nor for this (as some judgments are) Thou art a Thief, and thou have Stolen my
Apples out of my Orchard, or from my Trees in my Orchard, Hobb. Rep. pl. 98.
106. 404. Nor for this, He is a Thief, and it will be proved by Stealing of my
Apples out of my Orchard. Coo. 4. 19. Hobb. Rep. 97. 406. 381. See afterward.

But other judgments are; that these words are Actionable where the words are
coupled together by the word And, after Thief. See them after, differing
opinions about this, and Bulstr. 2. part 142. Hobb. Rep. 106. Coo. 4. 17.

But it is said it will not lie for this, Thou have Stolen Apples out of my
Orchard, and art a Thief, for this is like the Case. Coo. 4. 15. Thou did
kill thy wife, and art a Traitor.

Nor for this, Thou have robbed my Orchard of my Apples, and wilt be hanged
for this. Bulstr. 3. part 267. About Stealing of Trees, Wood, and Timber.


It is said by some that this Action will lie for these words, Thou art a
Thief, and have Stolen my Trees; Or [And thou have Stolen my Trees.] Or [And thou
have Stolen Mr. Georges Trees.] Or [And thou have Stolen my Apple Trees.] Brownl.
2. Cowl and Gilberts Case. Co. B. Hill. 3. Jac. B. R. Minors Case. Or [And thou
have Stolen the Apple Trees out of my Orchard] Croo. 2. 114. 7. Jac. B. R. Hobb.
Rep. 77. Brownl. 2. Brown and Gilberts Case. But there are other judgments,
that it will not lie for these words. Goldsb. and Brownl. 2. Hobb. Rep 98. 404.
Godb. 335. Benloes. 137.

It is agreed by all that it will not lie for these words, Thou art a Thief,
Differing opinions and judgments about this.
for thou have Stolen my Trees, or Mr. Georges Trees, etc. Croo. 2. 114. Hobb.
Rep. pl. 19. 97. 106. 381. 406. 473.

And for the difference between [And] and For] and the Judgments that are
contrary one to another about this. See Hobb. pl. 98. 191. 404. 106. 476. Godb.
pl. 335. Bendloes 137. Coot. and Gilbert. Co. B. Coo. 4. 19. Hobb. Rep. 406.
381. Winch, Rep. 10. 113. Marsh. 211, 280. Bulstr. 1. 143. Croo. 2. part 39.
114. Yelverton 10. 34. Croo. 231. Noys Rep. 135. Hobb. Rep. 77. Brownl. 2.
Godb. 335.

This Action will lie for this, Thou have Stolen two armfulls of my wood,
Bulstr, 2. part 82. and 1. 163.

So for this, Thou art a Thief, and have feloniously taken my wood. Pasche. 38.
Eliz. B. R.

So for this, Thou have Feloniously Stolen my wood. Croo. 1. part last published.
471.

So for this, Thou have Stolen my wood. Croo. 2. part 166. 138. Hobb. Rep. pl.
258. Loes Case. Bulstr. 1. part. 81. 2. part 81. Styles Rep. 25.

So for this, Thou have Stolen my wood, and I shall charge thee with Felony.
Pasche. 38. Eliz. Co. B. Styles 25.

So for this, Thou have Stolen my wood out of my Baxton. Popham. Rep. 129.
Brownl. Rep. 2. Coo. 4. 19. Marsh. Rep. pl. 248.

So for this, He has Stolen a tree formerly cut down, which is Felony, and I
will cause him to be indicted for it. Croo. 1. 413.

So for this, He is a Thief, and Stole my timber. Huttons Rep. 38. And yet
some will not agree to this, but I know not the reasons of their doubt.

So for this, Thou have Stolen as much wood and timber out of thy Landlords
ground, as is worth Twenty Pound. Yelvertons Rep. 152.

And yet it is doubted whether it will lie for this, A. did Steal my wood, and
I will send him to Bridewel. Because of the last words. Styles Rep. 25.

But it is said the Action will not lie for this; Thou have Stolen my Trees [or
my Tree] or [a Tree] Styles Rep. 9. Hobb. Rep. pl. 77. Brownl. 2.

And yet some oppose this, Bulstr. 3. 267. Croo. 2. 136. Bulstr. 2 81. Howbeit
it seems to be clear, that no Action will lie for these words.

Nor will it lie for this, Thou have Stolen my Wood growing in my Coppice. Nor
for this, Thou have Stolen an Acre of my Wood. Nor for this, He came in my
Wood, and cut down ten load, and Stole it away.

It is said to be Actionable to say of one, He has Stolen a load of hoppoles,
Croo. 1. last published. 225.

This Action will lie also for this, Thou art a Thief, for thou have Stolen
About Corn.
my sheaf of corn. Bulstr. Rep. 1 part 163.

So for this, Thou art a Thief, for thou have Stolen my corn out of my barn.
Sect. 8.
Styles Rep. 135.

So for this, Thou have Stolen my corn, and made me no satisfaction Huttons
Rep. 64, Winches. Rep. 6.

So for this; Thou art a Thief, and have Stolen my corn. Croo. 2. 39. 424.
Winch. 6. 10. Bulstr. 1. part. 81. Styles Rep. 24. 73. Yet see Huttons Rep. 38.
Hobb. Rep. 97. 406. 381. Coo. 4. 19. And yet in some of these also there is
some Question. Hobb. Rep. 38.

So it will lie for this, Thou have Stolen the corn, or [my corn] out of my
barn. Hobb. pl. 258. Popham 129. Brownl. Rep. 2. So for this, Thou have Stolen
my corn and carried it to Market, Croo. 2. 422.

So for this, Thou art a false knave, and did Steal my corn. Harris Case.
Quere of this.

So for this, Thou art a Corn Stealer. Croo. 1. part last published 563. 39.
Eliz. Cooks Case B. R.

So for this, J. S. has Stolen so many loads, or [so many bushels] of my corn.
Owens Rep. 57.

But it is doubted whether it will lie for this, Thou have Stolen as much corn
out of my fields as is worth, Nine or Ten Shillings. Croo. 2. 457.

Some question also is made of this, whether it will lie for saying, He has
Stolen my corn, or Stolen away my corn. Trin. 37. Eliz.

It is said, that it will not lie for this, Thou art a Thief, and have Stolen my
corn in the field. Winch. Rep. 6. Styles Rep. 66. Croo: 2. 204. Nor for this,
Thou art a Thief, and Stolest the corn out of my field. Winch. Rep. 6. Hobb.
Rep. pl. 97. 106. 406. 473. And yet some judgments and resolutions seem to be
against these Cases. Nor will it lie for this, Thou art a Thief, for thou have
Stolen half an Acre of my corn, nor will an Innuendo corn severed, Innuendo.
alter the Case, and make the words Actionable, Croo. 1. part last published
428. Owens Rep. 57. Hobb. pl. 97. 106. 406. 473.

It is said this Action will lie for this, Thou have Stolen my Furzes out of
About Furzes.
my Barton. Hobb. Rep. 258. So for this, Thou art a Thief, and have Stolen my
Furze. Popham. 152.

But it will not lie for this, Thou art a Thief, and have Stolen Ten Cart load
of my Furzes; unless he say out of my Yard, for otherwise it shall be
intended Furzes growing, Huttons Rep. 113. 13. Hobb. Rep. pl. 97, 165. 406. 476.

It is said, it will lie for this, Thou art a Thief and have Stolen a About
Fatches.
bundle of Fatches. Huttons Rep. 65.

It is said, that it will lie for this, Thou have Stolen Hay from Mr. Bells
About Hay and Grass.
Racks. Popham. 129. Yet see Winch. 6.

So for this, He is a Thief, and has Stolen my Grass. Styles Rep. 231.

It is said it will lie for this, He is a Thief, and has Stolen my Hops: About
Hops.
But this is denied by some Judges to be Law. Huttons Rep. 38. But it is said
that it will not lie for this, Thou art a Thief, for thou have robbed my
Hop-ground. Coo. 4. 17. Nor for this, Thou art a Thief, and it will be proved
by the robbing of my Hop-ground. Coo. 4. 17. 19.

It is said it will lie for this, He is a Thief, and has stolen my Turnips.
About Turnips.
Styles Rep. 231.

It will not lie for this, Thou art a theevish Rogue, and have stolen About
bars of Iron out of Windows.
bars of Iron out of other men's windows; and yet if he shall say, Thou did
steal bars of Iron out of such a man's house, these words may be more
questionable.

Nor will this Action lie for this, He has stolen forty pound of Lead About
Lead from a house.
from the house of I. S. [or of the house of I. S.] if the words were out of
the house of I. S. it may be this may alter the Case. So to say, He has stolen
ten pound of Lead, it seems this is actionable. Brownl. 2 part 84.

It is said it will not lie for saying, He has stolen the tile off my house.
About the tile off a house.
So likewise it is said it will not lie for saying, He has stolen my Tiles. sed
quere of this last Case, yet see Styles Rep. 231.

Now out of all these Cases, about slanderous words, for stealing of Sect. 9.
Corn, Apples, Wood, Trees, Tile, Lead, and the like; some of which things as
the Tile, Timber, bars of Windows and the like, in a house, the Law does look
upon as parcel of the house. And others, as Trees, Corn, Grass, Turnips,
Fatches, and the like, growing upon the ground, Apples, Hops, and the like
fruit of Trees, the Law does look upon as incident to, and parcel of the thing
wherein they are, and whereon they grow, until they be severed, and till then
no Felony can be committed by the taking of any such thing away; and therefore
the Report of the doing of such a thing is Felony.
not so dangerous; but in many of the Cases it cannot but be observed, there
is (at least seemingly) much contradiction, the sum of all being put
together, seems to be thus much. That it is agreed on all sides, that if the
charge in the words be of such a Theft, as if true, may bring a man in peril of
his life, or member of his body, as where it does charge him with the stealing
of any of these things severed from that to which it is annexed, the words will
be actionable.

So likewise where the charge is thus, Thou art a Thief [For] Or, [And] thou
have stolen Corn out of my Barn, or the like, that for these, and such like
words as these, the words will be actionable.

So likewise where the charge is thus, Thou art a Thief, for thou have stolen my
Apples out of my Orchard, or stolen my Trees off my ground, or the like, the
words will not be actionable; for a man cannot be in danger of life, or member,
by the taking away of these things, for it is no Felony to cut and take away
standing Corn out of the Field, Apples from the Trees in an Orchard, nor to cut
and take away standing Trees, Wood, Furzes, and the like; or to take away the
bars or Irons of a Window, Tiles from off the house, and the like, and
therefore the charge of taking them away is no charge of Felony, or other great
Crime.

But where the words of the Slander are thus. Thou art a Thief, and Words of
qualification.
have stolen my Apples out of my Orchard, or the like, upon this Case the Judges
have been divided in their opinions, some of them maintaining that the words
subsequent to the actionable words may be qualified by the word [And] as well
as by the the word [For] others maintaining that the word [For] only, will
enure, and work to explain and qualify; and that when the words are brought
in by [And] they are, and shall be cumulative, and an additional slander; as,
Thou art a Thief, and have stolen my Apples out of my Orchard, or the like, that
in such Cases the Action shall lie for the word thief alone, and not be taken
away by the subsequent words, as in case where the words be, Thou art a Thief,
for thou have stolen my Apples out of my Orchard. But that it shall be alike in
both Cases.

Some of the Judges also have put a difference between words of qualification
uttered at the same time with other words, and words of qualification,
delivered at another time; as where one shall say, I. S. is a Thief, and a
stander by say to him, Take heed what you say, and then he say, Is not he a
Thief that has stolen my Apples out of my Orchard? some think in this Case that
the words do not qualify, others think that they have as much force herein as
if they had been spoken together at the same time. It behooves men therefore in
these Cases, that have need to know the Law, to take good advice herein.

It has been agreed that this Action will lie for these words, Thou
maintainest thieves to steal my goods, Croo. 2. 629. So for this, Thou About
the receipt, keeping, and concealment of Felons, and goods stolen.
maintainest Pirates to rob upon the Seas. See Croo. 2. 629. So it is said to
be adjudged to lie for this, He is a maintainer of Felons, albeit he does not
say, that he knew them to be Felons, or, that he was a Justice of Peace. Sir
Henry Leas Case, cited in Croo. 2. 268.

Some Reports have been, of judgments in Cases for these, and such like Charge
of a man, as an accessory to a Felony. Sect. 10.
words as these, Thou receivest thieves, thou keep thieves, thou keep
thieves about thee, thou keep thieves in thy house, thou maintainest thieves
in thy house. Let me say it with reverence, I cannot receive them as Law, nor
see reason for them: for such kinds of speeches have not an import of any foul
aspersion, they are ambiguous, why and how a man does receive and keep such men
about him, he may by occasion of business, relation, or other obligation, have
cause to keep such men about him, possibly he may not know them to be such; or
if he do, it is not against any Law to receive thieves, or stolen goods,
unless it be so as to countenance or cover the offense. or keep the offender
from punishment; nor is any man bound by the Law to discover any such offender
(except he be a Traitor) but at his pleasure, for a man may doubtless, in many
Cases, knowingly receive a thief, or the goods stolen by a thief, and justify
it by Law; and therefore in 42 Eliz. in the Exchequer Chamber, a Judgment upon
a Writ of Error was reversed, in the Case of Ball and Bridges; and it was
therein agreed by all the Justices and Barons, That this Action shall not lie
for these words, He is a maintainer of thieves, and keeps none but thieves in
his house, and I will prove it, etc. for one may Harbor or keep Traitors.
have and maintain thieves in his house, and not know them to be such, and
this is no offense. But there the Judges did seem to agree all of them in
this, that if the words be thus, That he did maintain, and keep such in his
house, knowing them to be such, that this would be Actionable. Croo. 1. last
published. 746. 888. and it is reported by Goldsb. 48. That in Easter Term, 29
Eliz. Co. B.

It was there agreed by the Judges, that this Action was maintainable for these
words, Thou do maintain traitors, or, thou do maintain thieves, see chap.
6. sect. 1, 2. But that no Action will lie for saying, Thou do keep thieves.
And that it has been agreed not to lie for this, He is a receiver of thieves,
Mich. 40. 41 Eliz. Co. B. Nor for this, He kept men that did rob upon the
Highway. Hobb. Rep. Nor for this, Thou keep thieves, without saying, or
knowing them to be such. Goldsb. pl. 7. Nor for this, He has thieves in his
house. Croo. 2. 331. Nor for this, Thou keep none but thieves [or,
Cut-purses] in thy house, and have their goods. Mich. 17. Jac. B. R. Nor for
this, Thou keep men to rob on the Highway. Nor for this, Thou keep men
that rob me, for all this may be unawares to him. Croo. 1. last published. 188.

It is said, it will not lie for this, of a man that had lost cloth stolen by
unknown persons. A. has received again his pieces of cloth, and bears with
the thief [Innuendo quendam malefactorem ignotum. Hall versus Hemsy. Trin. 38.
Eliz. Noys Rep. 57. Nor for this, He has three parcels of his cloth again of
the thief that did steal it from him, and if I receive any hurt henceforth, I
will charge him with it. Goldsb. Rep. 119.

Nor for this, A. keeps men to rob me; albeit he has been robbed by his
men. But if he say, He keeps men to that intent to rob me, and I was
robbed by them; these words would be dangerous. Sir Harbert Croft against
Brown. Pasche. 14. Jac. Bulstr. 3. part 167.

Nor for this, A. and his servants went about to rob me, and he did maintain
them. But if he say, that he kept them to that intent, and that any thing was
done, the words would be dangerous. Sir John Harpers Case. Bulstr. 3. 167.

This Action will lie for this, Thou have hoistred Thieves, and stolen goods,
and the thieves and goods were found in your house, and the thieves were had
before such Justices, and committed by them to prison, and were hanged; and if
the Justice had not been your friend, it had been hard with you. Bulstr. 2.
part 109.

So for these words, spoken by a servant, whose Master had lost goods, thou art
a maintainer of thieves to steal my Masters goods. Croo. 2. 629.

It will not lie for a Son for these words, A. has stolen a horse, and his Son
is consenting to it. Trin. 14. Jac. Lewkners Case.

Nor for this, I was robbed, and A. received part of the goods stolen, and I
could hang him for it. Pasche. 7. Jac. Newlins Case.

Nor for this, Thou art a favourer of thieves. Dyer. 75.

Nor for this, Thou did consent to the stealing of my Mare. Croo. 1. last
published. 780.

Nor for this, Thou art a companion of thieves. Croo. 1. last published. 554.

Nor for this, Thou did, and do receive theef-stoln goods, witness a
Feather-bed tick in thy house, and the cloth which thy man's Suit was made of,
and thou knew they were stolen. Styles Rep. 91.

Nor for this, Thou art an arrant Knave, thou have bought stolen Swine, and a
stolen Cow, knowing them to be stolen. Yelverton. Rep. 5.

Nor for this, You have taken stolen goods, knowing them to be stolen. Yelverton.
5.

But it is thought it may lie for this, A. stole a Mare, and thou B. knowing of
the same, conveyedst her into the Fens to my Brother B. his house. And it may
lie for A. and B. both. Goldsb. Rep. 132. Cutpurse.


And yet it is said, it will not lie for this, Thy Boy [Innuendo Ambrose
Latham, the Plaintiffs wives Son) has cut my purse, and thou have received it,
I charge thee with Felony.
knowing it, and have the Rings and Money that were therein in thy hand;
therefore I charge thee with Felony. Croo. 1. last published. 890.

Nor will it lie for saying, Thou art a Knave, and have received stolen goods,
and thou knew they were stolen. For all this, though it be true, is not
Felony, unless it be a Receipt to maintain the Felon, and a man may in diverse
cases receive such goods lawfully. Croo. 1. part last published. 888.

So for this, I was robbed, and you were privy thereunto, and had part of the
money. So it is said, it will lie for this, Thou have been a setter of Thieves
to rob me. Hill. 3. Jac. B. R.

So where there is talk between two of A. and B. and one of them that Sect. 11.
are talking together, say, A. has stolen away such goods, and B. was privy and
consenting thereunto; in this case A. and B. both are slandered, and may have
either of them this Action. Mot and his Wife against Butler. Mich. 7. Car. 1.
B. R. Croo. 1. 171. So it is said, this Action will lie for this, I was robbed,
and A. B. was privy to it, and had part of the money. Godb. Rep. 138. pl. 32.
38. Eliz. Redfords Case.

So it is said, it will lie for this, Thou have houstred [or received] goods
that were stolen, knowing them to be stolen. But it seems these words are not
actionable, except it be added, Ex scientia; And that the Action will not lie
for saying of a man, He received stolen goods, for he may justify that in
some cases. And if the Receipt be such as is not Felony, the Defendant is to
set it forth for the clearing of himself. Mich. 17. Car. 1. B. R. Haws Case.
Croo. 2. 331. Bulstr. 3. 167. Goldsb. pl. 7. But it will not lie for this, A.
has received three pieces of his cloth again of the thief, and bears with
the thief; and if I have any hurt hereafter, I will charge him with it. Croo.
1. part last published. 487.

So for this, Thou art a concealer of Felons, and have showed such favor
Concealment of felons and goods stolen.
to a horse-stealer, that he and the horse is conveyed away, and it is in my
power to hang thee. Rewdam versus Tooker Pasche. 7. Jac. B. R.

So for this, if one say, A. is a Felon, and a stander by, says, Take heed
what you say, And then he says, Why, is not he a felon, that knew of the
stealing of a horse, and did not reveal it till long after, that it was openly
known? Yelvertons Rep. 154.

So also (as it seems) for this only, Thou art a concealer of Felonies.
Pendants Case. Bulstr. 1. part 48.

So for this, it is said it will lie, You have bought a Roan stolen horse,
knowing him to be stolen. Godb. Rep. 212. 157. Briggs Case.

And it will lie for these words, He is a smotherer and maintainer of
Felonies, especially when they be spoken of a Magistrate. Croo. 2. 268.

But it will not lie for this, A. has picked five shillings out of the pocket
of B. and her husband was consenting to it. Dromants Case. Yelverton.
Pick-pocket.
136.

It is said, it will lie for this, A. is a thief, for he has stolen a Lamb from
B. and Geese from C. and killed them in my ground. So for this, He is a thief,
for he has stolen a Lamb from A. and killed it in my ground. Hill. 3. Jac. B.
R.

So it is thought it may lie for this, Thou have taken my money, and I will
carry thee before a Justice of Peace, and lay felony to thy charge, in Godb.
Rep. 202.

It is said, it will lie for this, He has no sheets in his house, but what
Averment.
were stolen for him. But not without this Averment, that he has sheets in his
house. Bulstr. 1. part 141. Sed Quere of this.

So for this, it will lie, He stole a Mare, and was in Gaol for it. Hobb. Rep.
pl. 196.

So for this, Thou have stolen horses in London. So for this, thou have Averment.
stolen as many horses, as I have fingers and toes. And in these cases there
needs no Averment, that horses were stolen in London, or how many fingers and
toes he had.

So it is said, to lie for this, He is a cunning Knave, and acquainted with
more cut-purses, than any man in Northamptonshire, and there is not a purse cut
within twenty miles of him, but he has his part of it. Cutpurse.
Bulstr. 1. part 147, 36. 37. Eliz. Buts Case. But in this case it seems there
must be an Averment, that there be cut-purses there, otherwise it Averment.
will not lie. Popham. Rep. 180. Huttons Rep. 58.

This Action will lie for words spoken thus, You are no Thief, are The manner
of the words spoken. Sect. 12. By way of Interrogation.
you? spoken by way of Irony. Apletons Case. B. R. Pasche. 15. Car. 1. Hill 4.
Jac. Lady Morrisons Case. See March. Rep. pl. 18. So for this, What J. S. that
Thief? Nelsons Case. Pasche. 15. Jac. B R. Hardwicks Case. 40. Eliz. Co. B.

So for this, I will justify that Barns is a Thief. Trin. 9. Jac. B. R. So for
this, Have you brought my Horse you have Stolen. Maines Case. Trin. 9. By way of
Interrogation.
Jac B. R.

So for this, Have thou been at London, to change the money thou did Steal
from me. Croo. 2. 569. So for this, Did you not hear that A. B. By way of
Opinion.
is guilty of Theft. Coo. 12. 134.

So for this, I verily think him to be a Horse Stealer, albeit he say not he
is one. In Goldsb. Rep. 186.

So for this, Go follow suit against Willimore [Innuendo the Plaintiff] for
Stealing the two Kine; and hang him, or I will hang thee, for this is as much
as to say, he Stole them. Croo. 1. last published 904.

So for this, He did better than many an honester man did, for there is
Opinion.
many an honester and truer man hanged. And there was a robbery committed,
whereof I think him to be one; and I verily think him to be a Horse-Stealer,
Albeit he do not say, He was one of the robbers. Goldsb. Rep. 186. Owens Rep.
18. Wisdoms Case.

So for this, Thou Mutton-munger Thief, bring home my Stolen Hay.
Mutton-munger-theef.
In Styles Rep. 70.

So for this, He is infected of the Robbery lately committed, and does smell
of the Robbery. Dyer. 317. 72. Godb. Rep. 91.

So for this, If thou had had thy right, thou had been hanged for breaking
of Patches House. Brownl. Rep. 3. Harris Case. 2. part 280. So for this, If my
Lord had done him right, he had been hanged. 43, 44. Eliz. Royal and virtues.
Bulstr. 3. 360.

So for this, I doubt not, but within two days to Arrest J. S. for suspicion
of Felony. Coo. 4. 15.

It is said this Action will lie for the words in the Cases following, viz I
will prove that thou have stolen, etc.
I will prove that J. S. has Stolen my Books. So for this, I will bring him
before a Justice of Peace, for I will prove that he has Stolen my Books. And
yet it is said the words, I will bring him before a Justice of Peace, alone are
not Actionable. Pasch 15. Car. B. R. See in March. pl. 44.

So for this, I will prove thee a Thief, and a plotter of theeverie, and I will
prove it by thine own Son, or I will send him to the Devil. Croo. 2. 214.

So for this, I will justify that A. B. is accessory to the Burglary for
Accessory.
which C. D. was hanged. Barns and Hunts Case. Trin. 9. Jac. B. R.

So for this, Take charge of him, and carry him away, for I lay flat Felony I
charge thee with Felony, etc.
to him. And again afterward for this, to the plaintiff himself, I will make
you hold up your hand at the Bar. Styles Rep. 235. Yet see Croo. 1. part last
published 889.

So for this, A. was in Gaol for the Stealing of the Beasts of B. But it is
Thou wast in Gaol for stealing, etc.
said, it will not lie for these words, A. was in the Gaol for suspicion of the
Stealing of the Beasts of B Goldsb Rep. 130. Humfrey Parloes Case. Yet see
Bulstr. 1. part 40. It was the opinion of most of the Judges, that it will ly
for this, Thou were in the Gaol for Robbing such a one in the Highway. And it
was said to be adjudged for this, Thou were in the Gaol for Stealing of a Pan.
And yet, See Hobb. Rep. pl. 196. It is said to be adjudged not to lie for
this, He is in Warwick Gaol, for Stealing of a Mare and other Beasts Hobb.
Rep. 235. pl. 196.

So for this, A. was indicted for the stealing of a Horse at a Sessions Thou
wast indicted, etc. for stealing, etc.
holden, etc. So for this, Thou wast arraigned at Warwick Assizes for stealing
of a Horse, and did make good friends, or else thou had been hanged. So for
this, He was arraigned for the stealing of twelve Hogs, and had he not made
good friends, it had gone hard with him. So for this, A. was indicted and
convicted for the stealing of a Horse, etc. But Averment.
in these Cases it seems the Plaintiff must, or it will be safe for him to
avert in his Action, that, it is not true which is said, that he was indicted,
etc. for if it be true, the words be not actionable. But in this Case let the
Defendant see to it, he do not plead not guilty, but justify the speaking,
and the truth of them. Croo. 2. 90. Hobb. Rep. 309. Croo. 1. 195. Bulstrode. 1.
part 40. And yet it is said to be agreed, not to lie for this, Thou art a false
Knave, and wast arraigned for two Bullocks. Nor for this, Thou wast arraigned
for stealing of two Bullocks. Croo. 1. part last published. 279. See Brownl. 2.
part 273. Huttons Rep. 2. Some oppositions are against some of these Cases.
Hobb. pl. 289. 296.

Some Cases there are that say, that this Action will not lie for saying, that
A. was indicted at such a Sessions for stealing a horse. Nor for this, He was
impeached [or accused] for stealing of a horse. Nor for this, He was arrested,
imprisoned, [or in a Gaol] or arraigned, or did hold up his hand at the Bar,
for stealing of a horse. Hobb. Rep. pl. 289, 296. Goldsb. 30. Bulstr. 1. part
41, 34. Eliz. Baylyes Case. Co. B.

But in all these and such like Cases, if the thing said be true that is said,
no Action will lie. But the Defendant must not plead not guilty, but justify
the words, or demur to the Declaration, whether the words be actionable, or
not, as his Case is.

So for this, Whosoever is the falsest thief, and strongest in the County
Averment.
of Salop, whatsoever he has stolen, or done, A. is falser than he. But then
it must be averred, that there is some thief or other in the County of Salop,
for if it may not appear there is a Felon there, the words are not actionable.
Pasche. 1. Jac. B. R. Haselwood and Garrets Case. And yet it is said by some,
that it will not lie for this, I can find in the Parish a falser Knave than B.
who was indicted for felony; And this Knave is J. S. In Haselwoods Case.

So for this, Thou art as very a thief as any in Warwick Goal, with an Averment.
Averment, that there is one there. Bulstr. 1. part 40. Yelverton. 90. Popham.
180.

So it is said, it will lie for words thus spoken, Thou art a Thief, and a
Words of qualification.
stander by says, Take heed what you say, and then he says, I will justify
he is a thief, for he stole away my evidences. But had they been spoken
together, uno halitu, it had been otherwise. But here it shall be taken for an
evasion, and so a double slander; and the last words shall increase the
damages. Yelvertons Rep. 154. 155.

It is said that words slanderous about this matter of theft, will be By way
of Report.
actionable, though they be uttered after this manner. A. says that B. is a
thief; Or A. told me that B. is a thief; Or a woman told me that B. is a
thief; Or I have heard A. say, that B. is a Thief; Or I have heard it said that
B. is a thief; Or B. is a thief, if the report of A. be true; Or I have heard
it spoken, that B. was one of them, that was at the Robbery of A. and that four
of the thieves went to his house the next morning.

But in all these and such like cases, the Plaintiff in his declaration must
over, that the party mentioned did never say, or report any such thing; for if
Avermen^
it be true, he said it indeed, the defendant may justify the speaking of
them. And if he report it is said by another, and can find no author but
himself, the Action will lie upon him. Croo. 2. 406. Goldsb. 139. pl. 5. See in
March. Rep. 8. Croo. 2. 350. Coo. 12. 134. Read against Saul. 40. 41. Eliz. Co.
B.

So it is said, it will lie for this, where one man does charge another Sect.
13.
with Felony, and the Constable being present, he says to him, I charge you
to arrest him for Felony. Croo. 1. 201. Styles Rep. 235. So for this said to a
Constable, Take charge of him, and carry him away, for I do lay flat Felony to
him, I will make him to hold up his hand at the Bar. And so for this, There he
is, take him, for I charge him with flat Felony; and then for saying further,
He has taken my Sheep with a felonious intent. Croo. 1. 201. Mich. 23. Car.
1. B. R. Nevils Case. Styles Rep. 60. 235. And so for this. I do charge thee
with the stealing of my horse. Croo. 2. 312.

So it is said, it will lie for this, I have served thee with the Queens
Letter, for stealing goods out of my house. Croo. 1. last published. 234.

But it is said, it will not lie for this, I fear you will be charged for I
fear, or I doubt, you are a thief, etc.
theft. Nor for this, I doubt you will be charged for theft. Nor for this, I
fear [or I doubt] A. is a thief. Nor for this, I fear [or I doubt] you will be
arrested for Felony. Hobb. Rep. 381. 286. 350. Croo. 1. 195. Nor for this, I
have Articles against you for theft [or for felony, etc.] Nor for this, J. S.
has found felony in A. B. and can prove it. Hobb. pl. 3. 395.

Nor (as it is said) will it lie for this, A. was charged with a felony, for
stealing, etc. Croo. 1. 195. Hobb. Rep. 381.

Nor for this, to go to a Justice of Peace for a Warrant against A. and there
to say to the Justice, I will charge A. with flat felony for stealing my Hops
from my shop. Ram. and Lumleys Case. Huttons Rep. 113. Words uttered by way of
opinion, or persuasion.


This Action it is said will lie for these words, I verily think J. S. to be a
horse-stealer. Goldsb. 186.

So for this, I dreamed this night that J. S. did steal a horse. See in By way
of dream. By way of threat.
March. 58.

So for this, I can prove you a thief, and two men will justify it. Pasch. 5.
Jac. B. R.

It is said, it will not lie for these words, I can find in this Parish a
falser Knave than Brisco is, the which Brisco is indicted of felony, and
Burglary, and is gone to Stafford Gaol. And that false Knave is A. B. Haselwood
against Brisco. Pasche. 1. Jac. B. R.

And finally it is agreed, that to call a man Thief, only; will bear an Sect.
14.
Action, unless the word be coupled with some other words of qualification, to
prove the thing to be no Felony, whereof the speech was intended. Croo. 1. part
last published. 857.

But this may be qualified by the precedent or subsequent words; and therefore
Words of qualification.
it is held, that no Action will lie for calling of one Thief, in the Cases
hereafter following, that is to say, Thou art a thief, and have stolen my
Maidenhead. Brownl. 2. Nor for this, thou have robbed me, and taken away my
evidences, and a subpena. Godb. Rep. 89. Nor for this, thou art a thief, for
thou have couzened my cousen Baldwin of his Land. Huttons Rep. 113. Herbert.
against Angel. Mich. 8. Car. 1. Nor for this, thou have stolen the Lead from off
my house, for which thou shall be hanged. Bulstr. 3. part 265. Nor for this,
thou art a thief, for thou have stolen the Tiles off my house. Bulstr. 3. part
265. Nor for this, thou art a thief, for thou tookest away my Cattle upon an
Execution, and I will hang thee. Mich. 7 Jac. Wilks Case. And the greater part
of the Judges seem to be of this opinion, That the words of qualification and
explication may be brought in as well by the word And] as by the word For] See
for And For.
this. Bulstr. 2. part. 141. Croo. 2. 39. 114. Hobb. Rep. 98. 106. 404. 476.
Godb. Rep. 335. Bendloes Rep. 137 Bulstr. 1. part 143. Yelverton Rep. 24.
Winch. Rep. 113. Brownl. 2. part 3.

It is said, that this Action will lie for this, Thou art a Thief, for thou
Dung.
have stolen my Dung. Styles Rep. 68.

And here we must add to all the Cases before, put of Slanders about matter of
Theft, these following Rules.

1 That in many of the Cases, of words not actionable in themselves, if by the
speaking of them, any special damage come to him of whom they are spoken by
them, there the words may be actionable. Croo. 2. 202.

2 That for all the words herein before mentioned to be actionable in Averment.
themselves, and such like, the Action will lie without any Averment of special
damage by them, to the party of whom they are spoken. Croo. 1. 101. March. Rep.
pl. 2. 93.

3 That these words in this chapter being such as bring a man in danger of his
life, they that bring Actions upon them, or any such words, they must take care
of these things.

1 The words (in the Action brought) must be laid to be spoken by the Defendant.

2 They must be laid to be spoken of the Plaintiff.

3 There must be a certainty in the description of the persons of the Plaintiff
and Defendant.

4 All slanderous words of this nature must be (as other slanderous words are)
under the rest of the general Rules for the Government of all sort of Actions
of the Case for words; malicious, false, certain, etc. For if the words be
true, or not true, but no malice appearing in them, too general, of a double
intendment, or a doubtful meaning, or not sufficiently positive, or altogether
uncertain, either as to the persons, or to the thing it self, or under a
qualification by the precedent or subsequent words, or import an intent only of
doing something, but nothing is done; no Action may lie upon them.

And so we have done with Actions of the Case, for words of Slander, that
bring a man in danger of his life, And in the next place shall come to Actions
for such words as do not bring a man in any danger of his life, but of the
loss of a Member, or some other corporal, or pecuniary punishment.

CHAP. XI. Of words of Slander that may bring a man in danger, of other
corporal punishment besides death.
Of Petit Larceny.

THere are some words that do not bring a man in danger of his life, but Sect.
1. Petit Larceny what.
they do, or may bring him in danger of the loss of his Liberty, or of some
other corporal panishment, such as are Petit Larceny, Perjury, Forgery,
Incontinency, and the like. And for this, these things are to be known.

That Petit Larceny is the stealing of a thing under the value of twelve pence,
or not above twelve pence. And the punishment appointed by the Law for this
offense, is the loss of all a man's goods whatsoever, and also to be whipped,
stocked, bound to the good behavior, or imprisoned at the discretion of the
Judge. If any therefore shall slanderously charge another with this Crime, or
any thing like to it, he may have this Action for his remedy. Therefore this
Action will lie for these words, J. S. has stolen six pence, or J. S. has
stolen a Hen, or a Hen and two Cocks, or any goods whatsoever under the value of
twelve pence. Hobb. Rep. pl. 258. 27. H. 8. 22. Brownl. page 2.

And the Actions of this nature will be maintainable, without Averment of any
special damage by the words. But they are to be subject to the general Rules of
Actions of the Case for other slanderous words.

CHAP. XII. Of Perjury.
PErjury is a great offense, and the punishment thereof great, for he What it
is. Sect. 1.
that is convict thereof within the Statute, is to forfeit twenty pound, to
have six months imprisonment, his testimony is to be invalid; and if he cannot
pay the twenty pound, he is to be put in the Pillory, and his ears to be
nailed. 5. Eliz. cap. 5.

Therefore it is said, this Action will lie for the speaking of these words, He
is perjured.
Thou art perjured. Coo. 4. 15. 19. Broo. Action of the Case. 104.

So for this, Thou art a perjured man. 25. Eliz. B. R.

So for this, Thou art a false perjured Knave; or the like. Broo. Action of the
Case. 104.

So for this, Thou wast perjured. Mich. 25. Eliz. B. R. Owens Rep. 62. Croo. 1.
144. 234. Kitch. 173.

So this Action will lie for saying, J. S. is [or was] forsworn in such a Court
before a Judge of Record. So it do appear to be intended in a judicial
proceeding in that Court. Coo. 4. 15. 19. Noys Rep. 34. Croo. 1. 307. But it
will not lie for saying, thou art a false man. Nor for this, Thou art forsworn,
or thou art a forsworn fellow. Croo. 1. part last published. He is false
forsworn.
572. Owens Rep. 62. Croo. 1. 144. Coo. 4. 15. 19. Nor for this, Thou art a
false forsworn Knave. Croo. 1. part last published. 429. Coo. 4. 15. March of
Slanders. 2. 13.

It will lie for this, I will prove J. S. to be a perjured Knave. Croo. 1. last
published. Croo. 1. 209. Croo. 1. last published. 374. 500. Nor for this, Thou
have taken a false Oath. Nor for this, Thou have forsworn thy self. Coo. 4. 15.
Novs Rep. 3. 222. Or thus, I will prove him to be a perjured Knave, or I will
bear his charges. Croo. 1. part last published. 429.

It is said, it will lie for this, Thou have taken a false Oath at the Assizes,
and art false forsworn. Styles. Rep. 452.

So for this, He has forsworn himself in the Common Pleas. Huttons Rep. 44.
So for this, thou wast forsworn at the Common Pleas Bar.

So for this, He is forsworn and perjured in swearing at the Common Pleas Bar;
Upon the deeds which he had in his hand. Hill. 34. Eliz. B. R. Crews Cases
Owens. Rep. 13. So for this, thou have taken a false Oath, or thou have
forsworn thy self in the Kings Bench Court. Noys Rep. 34. Croo. 1. 307.

So for this, Thou wast forsworn, and I can prove thee forsworn when I will
Bulstr. 1. part 40.

So for this, Thou art forsworn in a Court of Record, and that I will prove.
Croo. 367. So for this, He has forsworn himself in a Court Baron. Huttons
Rep. 44. March. 1. part 56. So for this, He is a perjured old Knave in the
Court of J. S. Pasche. 40. Eliz. Co. B. Hutchman and Southcots Case. So he
has forsworn himself in the Court of A. Coo. 4. 19. 15. Or in the Court Leet,
or in the Court Baron of A. Noys Rep. 3. Hobb. Rep. 114. pl. 107.

It is agreed; to be out of question; that the Action will lie for these Sect.
2.
words, A. was forsworn, in such, or such a Court, as in the Common Pleas, in
Hereford Assizes, in the Quarter Sessions of G. or in the Leet of J. S. But
some doubt of this, if the words be, that A. was forsworn at such a Court, for
this may be in ordinary discourse, and extrajudicially; but others take the
Law to be alike in both. For both these opinions, see 38, 39. Eliz. B. R.
Willis. Case. 38, 39. Eliz. Cockins Case.

It is said it will lie for this, He has forsworn himself, and I Will teach him
the price of an oath, for I will have his ears cropped. Hetleys Rep. 63.

So for this, He is falsely forsworn before the Justices of Assise, between A.
and B. Hetleys Rep. 188.

So for this, Thou art a false forsworn knave, and art indicted by twelve men
for Perjury, and thou have compounded for the same. Bendloes Rep. 155. Bulstr.
3. part 304.

So for this, That Perjured knave I. S. stands Perjured upon Record, at
Guild Hall London, and I will prove it. Bulstr. 3. part 283.

So for this, Thou art a Perjured knave, and standst Perjured upon Record for
denying of thine own hand, and I will prove it. Bulstr. 3. 283.

So for this, Thou have forsworn thy self at London, and there it appears
upon Record. Croo. 1, part last published 583.

So for this, Thou were forsworn, and I can prove thee forsworn when I will.
Bulstr. 1. part 40.

So for this, He is Perjured, and I will prove him so by two witnesses,
without saying, in what Court he is Perjured. Noys Rep. 61. Owens Rep. 62. So
for this, I will prove thee [or I can prove thee] Perjured. M. 7. Jac. B. R.
Roberts Case. So for this, I will prove thee a Perjured knave. Yelvertons Rep.
160.

So for this, He is a proper witness, he will swear any thing; he has
already forsworn himself in the Chancery, and was committed for it by the Lord
keeper. Goldsb. Rep. 444.

So for this, said to al witness, presently after he comes out of a Court of
Record, wherein he was sworn in a cause, He has forsworn himself: And yet if
it be in a Cause, wherein the speaker of the words is a party; it may not be
Actionable. Hughes Rep. 42. March. 20. See Chap. 2. Sect. 9. Godb. Rep. 445.

It will lie for this, Thou Perjured Beast. 18. Jac. B. R. Bensons Case. So for
this, Thou Perjured Beast, I will make thee to stand upon a scaffold in the
Star Chamber. Croo. 2. 613.

So for this, spoken of one that is to be a witness before a Justice of
Peace; Thou have been a contentious man this thirty years, and a breeder of
strife, and have taken a false oath against my Brother and Sister, in a matter
of innocence, and have taken twenty shillings for it, and I will show it upon
Record. Styles Rep. 335.

So for this, when the Star Chamber was, Thou wast Perjured in the
Star Chamber. So for this, Thou wast committed for Perjury in the Star Chamber.
Coo 4. 19. Hobb. Rep. pl. 107.

So for this, Thou have forsworn thy self, or [thou have taken a false oath] in
the Leet of J. S. Harrisons Case B. R. Noys Rep. 34.

So for this, Thou wast forsworn, or [thou tookest a false oath] in the Bishops
Court at Exceter. Hobb. Rep. 346. or in the Court of the Consistory of the
Bishop of Exceter. Leonards Rep. 131. So for this, Thou wast forsworn, or [thou
tookest a false oath] in the Quarter Sessions at Gloucester. 38. Eliz.
Carlemains Case. Coo. 4. 15. Hobb. Rep. 346. 360.

So for this, Thou art a forsworn fellow, for by thy false oath thou have
hanged as true a man as thy self. 39. Eliz. Brooks Case. Croo. 1. part last
published 572. So for this, He is a forsworn man, and has taken a false oath
in his deposition at T. where he waged his Law against me. Croo. 2. part 204.

So for this, spoken of a man that had preferred Articles against a man Sect. 3.
to a Justice of Peace, to have the good Behavior against him, and taken his
oath to them; He made a false oath before the Justice of Peace, and I have
that in my house can prove it. Croo. 1. 275.

So for this, He was forsworn before the Bishop of S. upon examination by him,
by virtue of a commission out of the Chancery. But it is said it will not lie
for this, He was forsworn before the Bishop of S. Noys Rep. 3.

So for this, Thou art a Perjured person, and thou wast forsworn in the Court
of Requests, and I will make thee to stand upon the Stage for it. Croo. 1. part
last published 135. Leonard. Rep. 13. Foster and Thorns Case. Or thou have
forsworn thy self in the Court of Requests. Huttons Rep. 34.

So for this, Thou art a forsworn knave, and I will prove thee to be forsworn
in the Spiritual Court. Croo. 1. part last published. 6. 9.

So for this, spoken of one that had taken his oath before a Judge upon
Articles in the King's Bench, He made a false oath before the Judge, and I have
that in my house to prove it. Croo. 1. part 275.

It is said it will lie for this, Thou art a forsworn man in Westminster Hall.
Sed Quere of this. So for this, J. S. has forsworn himself, and I will prove
him Perjured, or else I will bear his charges. Croo. 1. part last published 429.
So (as it seems) for this, He was Perjured, and will swear one matter to day,
and another matter to morrow. Bendloes Rep. 304.

This Action will lie in the North Countries, where the word mainsworn
Mainsworn.
is used and known, for such words as these; Thou art mainsworn, or thou art a
mainsworn man; you are a mainsworn lad, he is a mainsworn and forsworn fellow,
or the like. But then they must be spoken in the hearing of some body that
does understand them; but it need not (as it seems) be averred, that it was
spoken in the hearing of such a one, nor Averment.
that the meaning of the word is forsworn, etc. But it is the safest way for
the Plaintiff in his Declaration, to aver the sense of the words in that
Country. Brownl. Rep. 4. Hobb. Rep. 8. Brownl. Rep. 1. part. 9, 10, 14, 15.

So it will lie for this, He has forsworn himself before the council of the
Marches of Wales, in the Suit I had against him there for Perjury, and I will
sue him for Perjury. Hobb. Rep. pl. 283. 560. Brownl. 2. part 272.

So for this, Thou art a forsworn Jack in the court of A. Thou did swear away
twenty shillings from B. if he Aver that the Court of A. is a Court Baron.
Croo. 1. part last published 348.

So it will lie for this, He was Perjured in the Kings Bench Court. Albeit he
were never sworn there. Coo. 1. parr last published 569. But it will not lie for
saying, He was forsworn in the Kings Bench, for this is doubtful whether to
be taken, of the Court, or of the Prison called the Kings Bench. 41, 42. Eliz.
B. R,

This will lie for a Charge of Perjury, upon a voier dire, as well as upon an
Issue, for this is punishable by the common Law. Mich. 7. Car. 1. Lawdries Case.

But this Action will not lie for this, He is a proper witness, he will swear
any thing. Nor for this, He is a false man. But it will lie for saying, He is
a false Perjured man. Godb. Rep. 88. 89.

Nor for this, Thou art a forsworn Knave, and that I will prove, for thou wast
forsworn in the Hundred Court. Innuendo Staverton Hundred Court. Croo. 1. part
last published. 209.

Nor for this, A. has but one Manor, and he has gotten it by swearing and
forswearing. Coo. 4. 15.

Nor for saying this to a man newly sworn in a Court, You are forsworn, without
more words, as saying, in the testimony you have given, or oath you have taken,
or the like. Mich. 7. Jac. B. R. Cawdries case.

Nor for this (as it seems) Thou were detected of perjury in the Star Chamber.
Croo. 1. part last published. 371.

It is said it will not lie for this, Thou art a false forsworn Knave; and
General words and uncertain. Sect. 4.
that I will prove, for thou have forsworn thy self against A B. in the Hundred
Court. because it does not appear by the words that it was in any Suit wherein
he was a witness. Yelvertons Rep. 27. Croo. 1. 209. and yet this seems to be
contrary to some of the foregoing Cases, where it is said to be adjudged to
lie for saying, A man was forsworn in a Court Baron. Huttons Rep. 44.

It is said that it will not lie for this, Thou art a forsworn Knave, and was
forsworn at H. Court.

Nor for this, (as it is said) Thou art a false forsworn Knave, and did take
a false Oath against me at a Commission at E. [Innuendo, out of the High
Commission, for an Innuendo may not enlarge the sense of Innuendo.
the words. Huttons Rep. 44.

Nor for this, King is a false forsworn Knave, and took a false Oath against me
at a Commission at Witham, because it did not appear whence the Commission
came. Noys Rep. 2.

Nor for this said of the Side-man of a Parish, Thou have most perjuredly
presented me at the Visitation, before I. S. Official. Yelvertons Rep. 72.
Croo. 2. 80. 120.

Nor for this, Thou were forsworn in Canterbury Court, for no Court is so
called. Huttons Rep. 34.

Nor for this, Thou were forsworn in Whit-Church Court. Croo. 1 last published.
609. Nor for this, Thou art a forsworn man, thou were forsworn in Whit-church
Court. Croo. 1. 275.

Nor for this, Thou art perjured, for thou art forsworn in the Bishop of
Gloucester his Court. Croo. 2. 436. and yet in Croo. 2. 185. it is held to lie
for saying of a woman, Thou have taken a false Oath in the Consistory Court of
Exeter.

This Action will not lie for these words, Old Apthorp is a perjured General
and uncertain words.
Knave, for he did swear that such wood was worth forty shilli^gs, whereas it
was dear of a mark. Bulstr. 3. part 150.

Nor for this, A. is a perjured old Knave, and that is to be proved by a stake
parting the Land of A. and B. Coo. 4. 19.

Nor for this, I marvel you would marry your Daughter to such a forsworn man.
Bulstr. 1. 150. Incertainty.


Nor for this, I know who spoke those words, Winitte and Bell, perjured
Rascals, I mean to have their ears cut, and tongues cut out, for here being no
Christian name, Non constat de persona. Bendlows Rep. 134. Nor for this, Thou
art forsworn, and have taken a false Oath at Hereford Assizes, for this might
be out of a Court in an ordinary speech. But if the words be, He took a false
Oath in Hereford Assizes, it were more dangerous. Pasche. 15. Car. B. R. or it
be averred to be in a Cause there, then the Action will be maintainable. Cro.
1. 209. March. Rep. pl. 17.

Nor will it lie for this, He is detected for perjury in the Star Chamber.
Coo. 4. 16.

Nor for this; Thou have got thy living by swearing and forswearing, Mich. 9.
Jac. B. R.

Some have said that it would have lain for this, He has delivered an untruth
in a material thing in the Star Chamber. Croo. 1. part last published. 583.
And yet it is agreed not to lie for this, He has delivered an untruth in his
Answer in the Chancery. 38, 39 Eliz. Browns Case. Croo. 1. part last published.
375. 500. yet it was said to be agreed to lie for this, He is forsworn in his
Answer to Christmers Bill in the Chancery. Croo. 1. 234. Noys Rep. 36.

It has been held to lie for this, Thou art thrice perjured in thy Answer in
Chancery to my Bill. [Innuendo such a Bill, etc.] Croo. 1. last published. 907.

This generally is the Rule for these Actions of the Case for this kind of Sect
^.
Slander, That they must import a charge of a Perjury, in some judicial Court,
and in an oath taken in the Court, and in such a Court that has Conusance of
the cause wherein it is taken, and judicially taken there in the cause, and in
a thing material and pertinent, otherwise the perjury is not Innuendo.
punishable as perjury; for every untruth, in an answer, or evidence, is not
punishable; and therefore any charge of a Perjury, in any case wherein it is
not punishable is not Actionable; nor will an Innuendo make a supply, or alter
the case where the words are defective, as Innuendo a judicial Court, etc.
Huttons Rep. 44.

It is said it will not lie for this, He has forsworn himself at the Bar.
Huttons Rep. 44. Nor for this, Thou art forsworn in Collet Court, not showing
what this Court is, and in what Action it was. Croo. 2. 190.

Nor for this, The Plaintiff has forsworn himself, Innuendo before the
Justices of Assize, for the words not actionable, the Innuendo cannot make them
actionable. Croo. 1. part last published, 609.

If one call another Whore, and she Sue in the Spiritual Court for this
defamation, and the Defendant brings in witnesses to prove it, and to disparage
the witness, she put in an exception into the Court, That he had been
perjured, this was admitted lawful, Trin. 15. Jac. B. R. Westovers Case against
Davenet.

If a Cause be depending between Plaintiff and Defendant, and the Defendant
upon the reading of an Affidavit of the Plaintiffs made in Court, said openly
in the Court, There is not a word true in the Affidavit, which I will prove by
forty Witnesses; in this Case the Action will not lie for the words, for it is
in the defense of his title, Pasche 15. Car. B. R. Mutton against Clapham; nor
for saying to one that has newly given evidence against him in any Court, Thou
art much forsworn as God is true. Goldsb. and Brownl. 7. March. Rep. pl. 45.
Molton against Clapham.

It is said that it will lie for this, Thou art not so honest a man as thou For
suborning and procuring of Perjury.
take thy self, for thou have drawn I. S. into Perjury. Croo. 1. part last
published. 899. 906.

So for this, He is a suborner of perjury. Croo. 1. part last published. 308. So
for this, Thou art a procurer of perjury. 25. Eliz. B. R.

So for this, You have caused J. S. to perjure himself. Brownl. 1. part 2. and
2. 49.

So for this, Thou did suborn, procure, and bring in false Witnesses in such
a Court in Westminster, etc. Leonards Rep. 101.

So for this, Thou have procured eight or ten of thy Neighbors to perjure
themselves. Mich. 4. Jac. B. R. Fenner and Muttons Case.

So for this, Thou have procured [or suborned] one Smith to come thirty miles
to commit perjury, before my Lord of Winchester, and have given him ten pound
for that purpose. Croo. 2. part 158. Croo. 1. part 244. And yet if the words
had such an import that he did not take the Oath when he came, it may be
otherwise, Croo. 2. part 158.

So for this, Thou have given A. ten pound for forswearing himself in Chancery,
and thou have hired him to forge a Deed. Croo. 2. part 244, 245.

Parson Prits Case in Suffolk was this, in Master Foxes Book there is a
relation of one Greenwood of Suffolk, who is there reported to have perjured
himself before the Bishop of Norwich in the giving of evidence against a
Martyr, and that after by Gods Judgment upon him his bowels rotted away, and
all this was false. And the Parson not knowing the truth of it, preached
against Perjury, and cited this story of Gods Judgment upon Greenwood, who
brought his Action for this slander, but it was adjudged against him, because
it was not brought malitiose.

This Action for such like words as these, about matter of Perjury, is to be
subject to the general Rules annexed to the rest of the Cases at the end of
other chapters, that the words are actionable, without Averment of any special
loss by them; so as they be false, malicious, direct, certain, etc. See for
this. Croo. 1. last published. 169.

CHAP. XIII. Of Forgery.
FOrgery is also a great offense, and the punishment thereof great, by the
Sect. 1.
Statute of 5. Eliz. chap. 14. For the offender may for this be put in the
Pillory, have one of his ears cut off, and be imprisoned for a year. If any one
therefore shall charge another with this Crime, or any thing like unto it, the
party wronged by it, may have his remedy by this Action.

It is therefore agreed, that this Action will lie for saying of another, Of a
Deed.
Thou have forged a Deed. Owens Rep. 47.

That he has forged a Lease, Obligation, Release, Acquittance, Feoffment, or
other Deed. Croo. 1. part last published. 554. 607. Owens Rep. 47.

So for this, Thou art a forger of false Deeds.

So for this, Thou art a forger of false Writings.

So for this, Thou art a forger of Writings. Dyer. 285. Pasche. 39. Eliz. B. R.
Wades Case. 39. Eliz. B. R. Goodalls Case. Croo. 1. last published. 553.

But it will not lie for saying, One is a forging Knave. Goldsb. 25. pl. 5. Nor
for this, Thou art a Knave of Record, and a forging Knave. Popham. Rep. 177.
But it will lie for this, A. has procured such a Deed (Innuendo, Adjective
words.
such a Deed given in evidence) to be forged.

So for this, He falsely procured such a deed to be forged. Hetleys Rep. 31.

So for this, This is a forged deed, and you know it to be forged. So for this,
You made this deed under a hedge, and forged it. Owens Rep. 47.

So for this, Thou have forged the will of J. S. Pasche. 7. Car. 1. B. R
Mackenists Case.

So (by one Judge) for this, thou have forged my Fathers will. Popham. 177. But
in Winch. Rep. 40. It is said to be adjudged not to lie for this Mallard is a
Knave, and forged my Husbands will against his mind. 10. Jac. for then it was
not her Husbands will, if it were forged.

So for this, The deed which Sir George Reynel showed forth to Sir John Tindal
was forged, and made under a hedge. Bulstr. 2. part 132. 133.

So for this, Thou have hired A. to forge a Deed [or to forge a Bond.] Croo. 1.
part 244. 245.

So for this, He has forged an Obligation, and I will prove it. Croo. 1.
last. published. 603.

This Action (it is said) will lie for this, Thou have forged my Fathers hand,
whereby thou have received my Rent. Bulstr. 3. 265.

But this Action will not lie for words thus uttered, I have matter enough
against J. S. for Mr. Harley has found Forgery, and can prove it against him.
Hobb. Rep. 3. 467. pl. 395. 382.

Nor for this, I have found Forgery against thee, and can prove it. Huttons
Rep. 39.

This Action (it is said) will lie for this, Thou have forged a Record Of a
Record. Sect. 2.
in Abergaveni Court. Mich. 7. Car. 1. B. R. for this is punishable by the
Common Law, though not by the Statute.

So for this, Thou have forged a Recognizance taken before Fisher and others.
Croo. 1. last published. 883.

So for this, Thou have sued out a Writ against me, and got a counterfeit
Warrant of thine own making. Mich. 20. Jac. B. R. Stones Case. It lay for this.

So for this, Thou have forged a Privy Seal, and a Commission, why do not
thou break open thy Commission. Croo. 1. part 237?

So for this, A. has forged the last Queens Writ. Yelvertons Rep. 146.

So for this, Thou have forged a Writ of Quare impedit. Croo. 1. part last
published. 178.

So for this, Thou came with a counterfeit Commission; when he had a good
Commission. Yorks Case.

So for this, said of a Warrant on a Latitat that comes under the Sheriffs
name, This is a counterfeit Warrant made by Mr. Stone, Innuendo, the Plaintiff
had counterfeited it. Croo. 2. 648.

So for this, said of one that had got a License out of a Court to compound
with an Informer, That he forged it. Bulstr. 2. part 136.

So for this, Thou have couzened the state of two thousand pound, and have
foisted in words into the order of composition. Styles.

But this Action will not lie (as it is said) for this, Thou have made a Of a
Deed. Sect. 3.
false Bond. Nor for this, Thou have made a false Deed. Pasche. 39. Eliz. B. R.

Nor for this, This is the writing of J. S. he has forged this Warrant. Hobb.
Rep. pl. 3.

Nor will it lie for this, A. showed me a Bill of forty pound [Innuendo such a
Bill as White had made him] unsealed, and after he showed it him sealed, and
that A. had forged a Seal to the said Writing. Hobb. Rep. pl. 8. 48.

Nor for this, This is John Thomas his writing, he has forged this Warrant
[Innuendo, a Warrant made, etc.] for its incertainty in the Innuendo.
word, warrant, and the Innuendo will not ascertain it. Hobb. Rep. pl. 4.
Incertainty.
48. Thomas and Areworths Case.

Nor for this, He has forged a Warrant, for it may be a warrant for a Buck.

It was the opinion of some Judges, that it may lie for this, thou art a forger
of Writings. But of others not. Croo. 1. last published. 553.

Nor for this, Thou art a couzening Knave, and shewedst forth a forged Deed.
Bulstr. 2. part 132.

Nor for this, He has forged a Writing; For this is altogether uncertain.
Hobb Rep pl. 3. 30. and an Innuendo such a writing, will not make it certain
and actionable. Hobo. pl. 48. Harvey and Duckins Case. And yet it will lie for
saying, He has forged a Deed. Owens Rep. 47.

This Action will not lie for this, He has made a false Bond. Croo. 1. last
published. 607.

It is said to be adjudged not to lie for this, Thou art a forger of false
Writings. Yet see the contrary before said to be adjudged otherwise.

Nor (as it seems) for this, Thou have made false writings, thereby to get my
Land from me. Croo. 1. part lost published. 855.

Nor for this, One of you forged a Subpena out of the Chancery, Innuendo Of a
Record.
the Plaintiff, for this is uncertain, and the Innuendo will not make it
certain. Innuendo.


Nor for this, Thou have made the great Seal.

Nor for this, Thou wast cubbed up for forging of Writs. Croo. 1. part last
published. 234.

Nor for this, He has made false Records, and verifies them. Stanhops Case.

Nor for this, Thou gettest thy living by false Writs.

But here we must also annex the former Rules.

1 That for many of the words before named not actionable, if the party of whom
they be spoken have any special loss by them, he may have this Action for
them.

2 In this Action he need not allege any special damage by the words, where
the words are in themselves actionable.

3 But the words must be malicious, false, certain, and under the Rule of
qualification by other words, for by these things the words that otherwise in
themselves may be actionable, may prove unactionable.

CHAP. XIV. Of Words of Slander about Matter of Incontinency.
AS to this, these things are to be known. Sect. 1.


1 That Slanders are Defamations of this nature being said to be spiritual, and
properly to be heard and Determined in the Spiritual Court, and there the party
grieved by them is to have his relief.

2 That a charge of Incontinency is notwithstanding (in the eye of the Common
Law) a foul charge, and punishable in diverse cases by corporal punishment, for
if a woman have a Bastard, she is by this made liable to such punishment as
the Judges in discretion shall inflict, and they always inflict, whipping,
imprisonment, or the like.

3 That generally this Action will not lie for Slanders of this nature, but in
Cases where a man has, or is like to have some special damage by the speaking
of the words. And yet in some special Cases the Action is given, because it is
necessarily intended to be a damage to the party of whom they are spoken, and
that it cannot be otherwise.

4 That whiles there was a Law to punish more severely Adultery, Fornication,
Baudry, and the like offenses, the speaking of words of this nature might
happily be more dangerous than now it is, that this Law is removed. See Styles
Rep. 424. 452. 455.

It has therefore been adjudged, resolved, or ruled by the Judges. And it is
said by them, that this Action will lie for this, You are a Whore, and have
played the whore with so many men, you cannot number them. And that Judgment
was given in this Case for the Plaintiff without Averment Averment.
of any special loss by the words. Styles Rep. 328.

So for this, This is the Whore that my man C. did beget a Bastard upon, and
spent all my money upon, and the Qucan has been too long in Town for my case.
Styles Rep. 274, 277.

So it will lie for this said of one about to be married, She is a Whore, and
I will maintain it, and I will spoil her marriage. And it was said, it shall be
actionable, albeit she did not lose her marriage by it. Bendloes Rep. 148.
Godb. Rep. 273.

So it is said it will lie for this, Thou art a Whore, and I will prove thee a
Whore, and thou have made my house a Bawdy House. Williams Case. B. R. Trin.
1655.

So for this said to a woman married, Thou art a common Bastard-bearing Whore,
and had two Bastards by a Butcher, and I will prove it. Styles Rep. 424.

So for this said to a Maid, or Woman, Thou art a Whore, and have had a
Bastard; or to a man, Thou art a Whore-master, and have had a bastard. Bulstr.
2. part 90. And yet there in his 2. part 89. it is said to be agreed that it
will not lie for these words, Thou art a Whore.

Nor for these words, Thou art a Whore-master, or, thou did lie Sect. 2.
with such a woman, or, such a man did lie with thee, except he have some
special damage by the words. Coo. 4. 16, 17. Croo. 2. 163. Mich. 39. Eliz. B.
R. and that without any Averment of any special loss, for they are by Law
punishable for this. Coo. 4. 17.

So for this, He has got Mary Nob with child, and the child is his, Averment.
and I have tried it with a Sieve, and a pair of Sheeres; for the first words,
although the latter words be insensible. Styles Rep. 379.

So for this spoken of a Lady to whom the Earl of Kent was a Suitor, By report.
A. has reported that he had the use of her body [Innuendo, that he had carnal
Copulation with her] whereas A. did never make any such Report. Croo. 2. 162.

So for this, She is a Whore, and I will prove it, and her plying place is in
Cheap Side, and she gets forty shillings a night by playing the whore. Hills
Case, B. R. Styles Rep. 394. but it seems it was for the last words.

So for this, said of a Bastard child whereof A. B. was delivered, He,
[Innuendo the Plaintiff] is the reputed Father of the Bastard. Innuendo
Averment.
the said bastard child; if withal he aver, that he lost a preferment in
Marriage by it, or that it was the bastard of one not able to keep it, or that
it was some special loss by one way or other to him, and not otherwise. Croo.
1. 113.

So for this, Thou art a VVhore-master, and have lain with Browns Wife, and
had to do with her against a chair; if thereby he lose his marriage, etc.
Croo. 2. 323.

It is said to be adjudged to lie for this, My Wife is a Whore, and she was
naught with VV. S. [Innuendo the Plaintiffe] and had I had a Averment.
candle, I had taken them together doing the deed. With an Averment, that he
did by this lose his preferment in marriage. Bulstr. 3. part 48.

So for this, where a rumor is abroad of a Bastard drowned, for this, I do
verily believe the bastard child was thine; and this Action was laid Averment.
without any Averment that there was such a Bastard; and if there were none
such, let the Defendant plead it, and save himself. Styles Rep. 221.

It is said that this Action will not lie for this, Thou art a Whore, and I.
S. has had the use of thy body, the Cart is too good for thee, without the
averment of some special damage by the words. Croo. 1. last published 582. 583.
Goldsb. 172. So neither will it lie for this, A. is an arrant Whore, and would
have lain with me seven years since, and I would not unless she would go to
the hedge. For this is a spiritual slander only. Croo. 1. part last published
582. 587.

Nor for this, She is an arrant Whore, and has had two bastards in Ireland.
Sect. 3.
Brownl. and Goldsb. Rep. 16.

Nor for this, He is the reputed Father of that Bastards Child, Innuendo,
etc. Unless he aver that some temporal loss that came unto him by it, as a
loss of marriage, or that it is such a ones Bastard as is not able to keep it,
and so he by this is charged to keep it, or chargeable to the Parish, or the
like. Croo. 1. 315.

Nor for this, Thou art a common Queen, a base Queen, a pipperly Queen:
Winches. Rep. 14.

Nor for this, Thou art the hackny whereof J. S. Bodins Case. Nor for this,
Thou art a Queen and a theevish Whore. Hill. 17. Jac. B. R. Nor for this, Thou
wast rid up and down Stairs. M. 9. Jac. B. R. March. 2. part. 5. Noys Rep. 75.
Styles Regist. 8. Coo. 4. 18. And yet if these things were true, a man should
be punished for them with corporal punishment, as imprisonment, etc.

Nor will it lie for this, Thou art a forsworn Whore, and an old Baud. William
Read and his Wives Case. Hill. 15. Jac. B. R. Croo. 462. Nor for this, Thou art
Matcombes Hackny, thou art a theeving Whore, and a pocky Whore, etc. Croo. 2.
514. Godb. Rep. 278. Styles Rep. 100. But perhaps these words spoken in London
may lie.

Nor for this, Away you Pick-pocket, thou art a scurvy pocky Whore. Pick-pocket
Albeit a special loss may be averred by these words. Croo. 2. 499.

But it is generally held, that no Action will lie for calling of a woman (be
she married or immarried) Queen, Harlot, Whore, common Whore, Adulteress,
Pimpe, Baud, base Queen, common Queen, pipperly Queen, or the like. Nor for
calling of a man, Whoremaster, common Whoremaster, Whore-munger, Adulterer,
Fornicator, Whoreson, or the like. For any of these words alone, without other
words with them. Croo. 1. 168. 189. 239. 288. 315. 27. H. 8. 17. Coo. 4. 15.
17. Noys Rep. 75. 85. Winches. Rep. 14. Croo. 2. 499.

And yet to call one Whore in London, it seems is Actionable. Styles Rep. 229.
245. Coo. 4.

So also may any of the other words be Actionable, if by the speaking of them,
he of whom they are spoken have any special damage, as that he loses his
marriage, or a sparsonage, he is like to have: And this he must be sure to
aver in a Declaration, or the like, and not otherwise, Styles Rep. 287. Coo. 4.
16. Bulstr. 2. part. 90. Croo. 1. 293. Godb. Rep. 275.

It is agreed, that this Action will lie for any man or woman, (especially For
calling one Baud, or saying he keeps a Baudy-house. Sect.. 4.
such a one as keeps an Inn, Alehouse; Tabling-house, a common
Victualling-house; for these words; He [or shee] keeps a Baudy house. So for
this, He [or shee] keeps a house of Baudry. Bulstr. 1. part 138. Coo. 4. 14.
18. Styles Rep. 322. 326. Croo. 1. 189. 166. 239. 255. Croo. 1. part last
published 582. Brownl. 1. part 162. Kitch. 173. Noys Rep. 72. 73. etc. 117.
March of Slanders 2. part 5. Styles Regist. 8. Croo. 1. part last published 787.

And these words are most dangerous to be spoken in London; for, for London.
this offense a man may be Indicted, Fined, and Imprisoned; and in London
Ignominiously Carted also. Eliz. Thorns Case 24. Jac. B. R.

So for saying, A. the wife of B. is a Baud, and keeps a Baudy house. Croo. 1.
286. 350. March. Rep. pl. 249. Hughes Abridgement. 40. Trin. 16. Car. 1. B. R.
Morgans Case. Trin. 18. Car. 1. B. R. Chambers Case.

And to speak such words of one that keeps a Common house, Inn, etc. Averment.
this will bear an Action without Averment of any special loss sustained by
the words, but in other Cases it seems to be necessary. And yet it is said in
some Books, that the Action will not lie for this, He keeps a Common
Bawdy House. See for these thing. Croo. 1. 168. 189. 239. 288. 27. H. 8. 17.
Coo. 4. 17.

It seems that this Action will not lie at this day for saying of a man or
woman, That he [or shee] is a Bawd. And yet in London these words may happily
be actionable. Styles Rep. 322. 323. Croo. 1. 168. Noys Rep. 85. 27. H. 8. 14.

It is said to have been adjudged to lie for this, Thou art a Whore and a Bawd
to thy Daughters, and keep a Bawdy House. Styles Rep. 326. Hill. 3. Car. 1.
Elsey and Harrisons Case.

So for this, He is not sit to bear office in such a place, for he keeps a
Common Bawdy House in London. Bulstr. 1. part 138. 27. H. 8. 15.

But it is said, it will not lie for this, Thou art a Pander to Sir H. Vanyham.
Noys Rep. 74.

But here also, as in the other heads of Actions of the Case, for Slanderous
words, this is to be added, That where the Action shall be maintainable for
words of this nature, they must be malicious, false, certain, and under the
Rule of qualification by other words. For if the words be true, or without
malice, uncertain, or such as may be qualified by the rest of the words spoken
with them; no Action will lie upon them.

CHAP. XV. Of other words importing some charge of transgression of a Penal Law.
THere are some other words that may sound to the hazard of a man's Sect. 1.
loss of his liberty, or of the enduring of some corporal punishment, Speaking
against the book of Common Prayer.
for which this Action may lie. And therefore it is held, that this Action will
lie for saying of a man, That he spoke against the Book of Common Prayer, and
said it was not fit to be read in the Church, in case where he Averment.
can and does aver in his Action, that he has any special damage by it, as
that by this means he was cited into the Ecclesiastical Court, and there put
to trouble and expense, etc. otherwise not. Brownl. 1. part 10. 13. 2. part
100. 129. March. Rep. pl. 191.

It is said, that this Action may lie for calling of a great man Papist, or For
saying of a man, he is a Papist, or has been at Mass, or has said Masses, or
is a Priest.
Recusant; or for saying, that he has a pardon from the Pope; or, that he can
help any man to such a pardon. But otherwise it is of such words spoken of an
ordinary man. Brownl. and Goldsb. 12. Brownl. 2. part 166. March. Rep. pl. 191.
Leonards Rep. 335.

It will not lie therefore against a man for saying of another, That he
Papist. Recusant. Priest.
is a Simonist, a Recusant. Croo. 2. 284.

Nor for this, Thou art an arrant Papist, and it were no matter if such were
hanged, and thou, and such as thou would pull the King out of his Seat if
they durst. Hobb. Rep. pl. 187.

To say of one, He is a Mass-Priest, or has said Mass, or has heard Mass
diverse times, may be actionable. And to say of one, that he received a
Mass-Priest into his House, knowing him to be such a one, is dangerous. Bulstr.
1. part 181.

But to say of a man, He has received a Recusant, without more words is not
actionable. Godb. Rep. 106. Croo. 2. 484.

This Action will not lie for saying of a man, He has erected a Cottage
Erecting a Cottage.
contrary to the Statute. Godb. pl. 125. 106. March. Rep. pl. 191.

Nor for saying, You did eat meat on a Friday. Nor for this, You did Eat Flesh
Fishdaies. Sabbath-breaker. Strike in a Church
eat flesh Fridaies. Godb. pl. 125. March. pl. 191.

Nor for this, Thou art a Saboath-breaker.

It may happily lie for saying, Thou did strike another in a Church with a
weapon. But not for this, Thou did quarrel in the Church Godb. 125. March.
Rep. pl. 191.

It has been said, that it will not lie for saying of one, He is a
Champertor, Champertor. Maintainer of Suits. Buyer of Tites. Slander of an
Officer. Maintenance.
or a Common Champertor, or a Common Maintainer of Suits, or a Common Buyer of
Titles. And yet this said of a Judge, Justice of Peace, Attorney, or such like
officer, may be actionable. Hobb. Rep. pl. 145. and Hares Case. And yet in a
Case B. R. 35. Eliz It is said by Popham. Chief Justice, that it had been
adjudged to lie for this, Thou maintainest such a Suit. Croo. 1. part last
published. 297. See Hobb. Rep. pl. 188. Hetleyes Rep. 139. 143. Rioter. Maker of
forcible Entry.


Nor for this, Thou have made a forcible Entry into Lands. Nor for this, Thou
art a common Rioter, or thou have committed a Riot. And yet some think, that
this may be actionable. Mich. 8. Car. 1. B. R. Stones Case.

Nor for this, Thou art a Forestaller, Regrator, and Ingrosser. Forestaller.
Regrator. Ingrosser. Common Drunkard.


Nor for this, Thou art a common Drunkard, a Drunkard, or a drunken Fellow. And
yet some say it may lie for the first of these words. Croo. 1. 207. March. 1.
part of Slanders. 46. M. 8. Car. B. R. Finches Law. 186.

Nor for this, Thou art a common Swearer. Common swearer. Sect. 2.


Nor (as it seems) will it lie for any charge of an offense against a penal
Law, which does not inflict Corporal punishment, save only in case of
non-paiment of the penalty.

This Action will not lie for any of the words in the Cases Common Libeller.
Slanderer. Quarreler. Breaker of the Peace. Affrayer. Night-walker.
Eves-dropper. Hedge-breaker. Mis-feasor.
following, viz. for saying, Thou art a common Libeller, or, a common
Slanderer, or a common Quarreller, or, a common breaker of the Peace, or, a
common Affrayer.

Nor for this, Thou art a common Night-walker; nor for this, Thou art a common
Eves-dropper; nor for this, Thou art a common Hedge-breaker; Nor for this, Thou
art a common Misfesor. Kitch. 173. 22. Ass. 31.

This Action is said will be maintaineable against any man that shall say
Common Barretor.
of another, he is a convicted Barretor; and for saying of a great man, of a
Judge, Justice of Peace, Attorney, or the like Officer, He is a Barretor, or,
He is a Common Barretor.

But it will not lie for saying of a Common person, He is a Barretor, or, He is
a common Barretor. Hob. Rep. pl. 188. Hetlies Rep. 139. 143. Croo. 3. 171.
Croo. 1. part last published. 171. Kitch. 173. Goldsb. and Brownl. 11. Hobb.
Rep. pl. 188. Yelvertons Rep. 90.

It is said that it will lie for this, He has been indicted for Barretry, if
it were true, he was Indicted, and upon the Indictment acquitted. But had he
been found guilty upon the Indictment, then the speaking of the words are
justifiable. Styles Rep. 49.

But it will not lie for this, Thou art a common Barretor, and I will Indict
thee for it at the next Sessions. Hobb. Rep. pl. 188. Knave.


Nor will it lie for calling of one (that is an ordinary person) Knave, or
false Knave, or cozening Knave, or cheating Knave, or crafty Knave, or the
like, will not bear Action. But to call one Bankerupt-knave. Traytor-knave, or
Perjuted knave, or the like, Huttons Rep. 13, 14. Bulstr. 2. part 218. Styles
Rep. 17. Finches Law. 186.

Nor will it lie for this, Thou art a Villainous Knave; nor for this Thou art
an arrant Knave, Croo. 1. last published, 403. Finches Law. 186.

And yet it has been adjudged to lie for this, Thou art a Pillory-Knave.
Remember Brown, thou should have been set on the Pillory. Croo. 1. last
published 11. Brown and Dawks and 26. Griffiths Case. Co. B. But in B. R. the
Court seemed to be of another opinion. Croo. 1. part last published 31.

To have called a man Villain, when villenage was in force, would not Villain.
have born Action; unless he had said, Villain to such a man, or Regardant to
such a Manor. Finches Law 186.

It is said this Action will lie for this, You are a branded Rogue, and Rogue.
have held up your hand at the bar, and deserve to be hanged, and shall be
hanged, Styles Rep. 49. 50. Bulstr. 1. part 138. Popham Rep. 177.

So for this, Thou, Sirrah, art a Rogue, and a runaway Rogue, and did run
away from Oxford, and art a Rogue upon Record at Oxford. Branded Rogue.
For these last words only. Styles Rep. 220.

But it is said, that this Action will not lie for this alone, Thou art a
Vagabond Rogue.
Rogue. Coo. 4. 15. Kitch. 173. Nor (as some have held) for this, Thou art a
branded Rogue. M. 9. Jac. B. R. Harrisons Case. Nor will it lie for calling a
man Vagabond and a Rogue. Croo. 1. last published. 843. 157. Finches Law. 186.

This Action will not lie for all these words spoken together, Thou art
Villain. Rogue. Couzener. Blood-sucker. Vermin. False Brother. Liar.
Conspirator. Railer. Sower of Discord. Malefactor. Miscreant. Hypocrite.
a Villain, Rogue, Couzener, Villainous Knave, and Blood-sucker, Varlet,
Rascal, Vermin of the Earth, false Brother, Liar, Conspirator, Railor, Sower
of Discord, Malefactor, Miscreant, Hypocrite. And therefore a Fortiori, the
Action will not lie for the speaking of any one, or of some of these words.
Popham. Rep. 177. Bulstr. 1. part 138. Coo. 10. 131. Croo. 1. 352. Jenk. Cent.
7. Case 70. Kitch. 173. Croo. 2. 473. Huttons Rep. 13. 14.

And yet some of these words spoken of an eminent person, as a Peer of the
Realm, may be actionable. Leonards Rep. 335.

Nor will it lie for this, to say, Thou art of ill Name; For the Law looks upon
these but as hasty, passionate, and foolish words, not worthy of Action. But
here it is to be observed, that for many of the words not actionable, they do
notwithstanding import crimes subject to severe punishments, viz. Imprisonment,
Pillory, Fine, to be bound to the good behavior, and the like; And therefore
it is granted, that some of these words, when spoken to eminent persons, or to
ordinary men in Office, or Trade, with reference to their Offices, and Trades,
or to any man whatsoever, that is specially damnified by them, they may be
actionable. Coo. 4. 15. 17. 20. Mich. 19. Jac. B. R. Harrisons Case. March.
Rep. 114, 115. Brownl. 1. part 9. 10. 12. Leonards Rep. 335.

And now that we are fallen upon some words spiritual, whereof our Common Law
takes no notice to punish, and upon light, passionate, and vain words, not
actionable, we will give you the residue thereof in this place.

CHAP. XVI. Of words Spiritual, Passionate, and Vain, for which no Action is
given.
THere are some other words, that have an import in them of Infamy Sect. 1.
and discredit, but are said to be of a spiritual nature, and not under the
Conusance of the Common, but of the Civil Law. And there are other words that
are said to be only passionate, vain, and empty words, for either of which the
Law gives no Action.

It is held therefore, that to call one Bastard, Whore, Whoremaster, Spiritual
Slanders.
Advowterer, Fornicator, and the like, these Slanders (if any be in them) are
merely spiritual, and are properly examinable and determinable in the
Ecclesiastical Court. And therefore the Common Law does not intermeddle with
them, but in Cases where they are intermingled with some temporal damage
occasioned by them to any man; in which Cases the Law Averment.
does give him repair for his damage only by this Action. And therefore the
Plaintiff in such Actions is always to make in his Suit brought a special
Averment of his damage. Otherwise the Temporal Courts have no Conusance of the
Cause. For this see chap. 14, And therefore no Action will lie in any of our
Temporal Courts, for any charge of Incontinency (as a Defamation only) for
calling of one Whoremaster, or Whore, for saying, that one was naught with
another, that he or she has had children by another man, or by another man's
wife, or the like. But for this, he is to have his remedy in the Spiritual
Court.

So if one man call another Heretic, Schismatic, Bastard, Miscreant,
Heretic. Schismatic. Miscreant. Advowterer. Fornicator.
or the like, no Action will lie for this simply in any of our Temporal Courts,
except the Case be such, that there be withal some special damage a cerewed
thereby to the party of whom the words are spoken. It has been therefore
adjudged, that this Action will not lie for saying, that he had two Bastards,
and should have kept them; and that by reason thereof discord did arise between
him and his wife, and they were like to have been divorced. Croo. 2. 473. And
27. H. 8. 14. 17. Coo. 4. 16. 17. 20. Croo. 2. 163. 473. Bulstr. 2. 89. 12. H.
7. 22. Noys Rep. 85. Croo. 1. 107. 186. Goldsb. 36. Hobb. Rep. 376. 397. Coo.
5. 57. See chap. 3. chap. 14.

The words that follow are light and trivial, or hasty and passionate words;
And therefore (as we have showed before) they give no Action, as for any of
these words, Villain, Rogue, Knave, Bastard, Varlet, Cheater, Couzener, Railer,
Liar, Miscreant, Vermin, Hypocrite, and the like; except it be in case where
some special damage comes thereby to the party of whom the words are spoken.
And it must be a real and considerable damage also; for an imagination, or
suspicion of damage only will not serve. Croo. 2. 473.

And these following words are looked upon as trivial words, for which no
Vermin. False Brother. Rogue.
Action^ is given, viz. Thou art a Vermin of the Earth, a false Brother. 25.
Eliz. B. R. Thou art a Rogue, and I will prove thee so. Goldsb. 2. part 272. I
never held up my hand at the Bar as thou have done. Goldsb. 2. part 272. Thou
deservest to be hanged. Hobb. pl. 185. Yelverton. Thou deservest hanging.
Varlet. Hypocrite.
Rep. 90. Goldsb. and Brownl. 11. He does trade with Pirates. Bulstr. 1. 216.
He is a very Varlet, and seeks to suppress his Brothers will. He makes show
of Religion, he is a very Hypocrite. Popham. Rep. 148. That he keeps such
Dogs about him, that men's Cattle about him cannot go in peace, that his Cattle
are in every man's ground, and the like. Bulstr. 1. 40. Dyer. 18. So neither
will it lie for me for this, My Master has put me away, because I would not
be a Papist, for he will keep no servants but Papists. Croo. 1. last published.
308. for this is a trivial charge that has no weight in it.

CHAP. XVII. Of other words that have another import in them.
THere are yet other actionable words, that do not bring a man into the Sect. 1.
danger of the loss of his life, liverty, or member, or other corporal
punishment; but they are such as may bring him in danger of suffering in his
Name, or Estate, or both. Some of these may be such as have relation to an
infectious disease, which he is said to have. Some of them are such as may
hinder him in a present preferment, that he might otherwise have. Some of them
charge him with deceit, and cheating. Some of them may reflect upon him in
relation to his office, or profession. And some of them in relation to his
Trade, and way of getting of his living. For that which does concern words
relating to an infections disease, take these Cases, That if a man be charged
or reported to have any such great infectious disease, as for which he ought
to separate himself, or to be separated by the Law, from the society of men,
and this be not true that is reported of him, Words about an infections disease.
he may have his remedy for this wrong by this Action. It is held therefore
that this Action will lie for the words in the Cases hereafter fellowing, that
is to say.

It seems it lies for this, Thou art a Bankrupt Knave, and a Pocky Knave, let
them bear witness that stand by, and I will prove it. Croo. 1. Pocky Knave.
part last published 99. But it must be for the first, and not for the last
words, and that it will not lie for the words, Pocky Knave.

This Action will lie for saying of another, That he has the French Sect. 3.
French Pox.
Pox. But not for this, He has had the French Pox. Styles Rep. 64. Noys Rep.
151.

And yet it is adjudged to lie for this, of an Inne-keeper, A. had the
Inne-keeper.
French Pox. and has set it in the house [Innuendo the Plaintiffs house] and
W. S. [Innuendo the Plantiff] and his wife have it, and all you, and that the
husband alone may sue, Styles Rep. 112. Plague.


So it is said it will lie for this, Thou wentst to the Wells to be cured of
the Pox. Styles Rep. 219.

So for this, Thou art a Bastard getting Rogue, and have a Bastard at Oxford,
and art a Pocky Rogue, and for ought I know thou have filled my bed full of the
French Pox, and no such Pocky Rogue shall lie with me. Styles Rep. 283.

So for this, He has caught the French Pox and carried them home to his wife.
Hobb. Rep. 219. 290. Brownl. and Goldsb. 11.

So for this, Thou art an arrant Whore, and had the French Pox. Owens Rep.
34. So for this, Mrs. Miller is a Whore, and has had the Pox, and has holes
one may turn ones finger in them, Mrs. King the Apothecary gave her a drink for
it, and therefore take heed how you drink with her. Croo. 2. 430. 144.

So for this, A. B. is laid with the Pox, or the Pox does haunt him twice a
year. Croo. 2. 144. Coo. 4. 17. and Ludsains Case M. 2. Jac. Per Williams and
Fenner Justices.

So for this, Thou art a Pocky Whore, and the Pox has eat out the bottom of
thy belly, that thy guts are ready to fall out. Mich. 7. Jac. Co. B. Miles
Case. Trin. 15. Jac. B. R. Millards Case.

So for this, Thou art a Pocky Knave, get thee home to thy Pocky Wife, her nose
is eaten with the Pox. Croo. 1. part last published 878.

So for this, Thou art burnt, and have the Pox. Croo. 1. last published 2.

So for this, Thou art rotted with the Pox. Croo. 1. part last published 648.

And such kind of words are then most dangerous, and out of question
Actionable when they are spoken of an Inne-keeper, Vintner, Tabler,
Inne-keepers. Victuallers.
Ale housekeeper, or the like persons, whose life, and livelihood does depend
upon their society with men; and therefore it is dangerous to say, that the
Pox, or the Plague, or any such great and infectious disease is in such a
common house, as Inn, Alehouse, or the like, when it is not so; for if thereby
his Guests forbear to come to him, or he suffer any other damage, he may have
this Action, but otherwise not. Coo. 4. 17.

And therefore to say to a man going to such a house, Go not thither, for the
Plague has lately been there, is Actionable. Hetleys Rep. 70.

So to say of a woman Inholder, She is a Pocky unwholesome Woman, does wear a
Skarfe about her neck to hide her Blanches there: it is a Pocky household, is
thought to be Actionable. Mich. 9. Jac. Ludmans Case.

So it is held that this Action will lie for this, He is infected with the
French Pox. So for this, Thou have the Great Pox. 21 Jac. B. R.

So it is said, this Action will lie for this, Thou art not worthy to come into
any honest man's company, thou art a Leaprous Knave, and a Leaper Thou art a
Leaper.
Coo. 4. 17. So for this, Thou art a Leaper. Trin. 4. Jac. B. R. Tailor and
Perkins Case. Croo. 2. 144.

And for all these words in the precedent Cases, it seems this Action will
Averment. Sect. 3.
lie; And that (as some say) without any Averment of special loss sustained by
them; Sed Quere of this. But these kind of slanderous words also are liable to
all or some of the general Rules before named. And therefore they may for the
incertainty, doubtfulnesse, or other matter in the words be rendered
unactionable.

It has therefore been adjudged or resolved not to lie for the words in the
Cases hereafter following, viz. for this, Thou art a scurvy pockey Whore,
unless thereby she have some special loss, by way of Trade, or by way of
Marriage. Croo. 2. 498.

Nor for this, Hang him, he is full of the Pox, I marvel that you will eat or
drink with him. Coo. 4. 17.

Nor for this, J. S. has the Pox. Coo. 4. 15. 17. Hobb. Rep. 196.

Nor for this, He has had the French Pox, or Plague, for he may be well
again. Noys Rep. 151.

Nor for this, Thou art a pocky Whore. 44. and 45. Eliz. and M. 7. Jac. Co. B.

Nor for this, Thou have lain in Fullers Tubb. 37. Eliz. Chapel and Burrows
Case. Albeit this Averment be added, that none do lie there but such as have
the French Pox. M. 44. 45. Eliz. Boddin and Jones Case.

Nor for this, He has been in Fullers Tubb (meaning a Chirurgions Tubb,
wherein none were but such as had the Pox) I will not say of the Pox, but he
lay in the Tubb that time that Langhams wife was laid of the Pox, and his hair
falls from his head, and he is a pilled and a Rascal-knave, and a Villain, no
Christian, and thinks there is neither Heaven nor Hell. Goldsb. 135. pl. 34.
Croo. 2. 144.

Nor for this, Thou art Matcombes Hackney, thou art a theeving and a pocky
Whore. [Innuendo, that she had the French Pox, and I will prove thee a pocky
Whore. Croo. 2. 514. Godb. 278.

Nor for this, Thou art a scurvy, pocky Whore, and a Pickpocket.

Nor will it lie for saying of a man, He has the Falling Sickness. Hill.
Falling Sickness.
4. Jac. B. R. unless it may disable him in his Profession, as a Lawyer, or
the like. Hill. 4. Jac. B. R.

It is adjudged (as it is said) not to lie for this, to advise a man's friend
not to keep company with J. S. because he is full of the French Pox, because
there is no malice in this. James and Rudleys Case. 40. 41. Eliz. Co. B.

Nor will an Innuendo enforce any of these words beyond their native Innuendo.
sense, to make them actionable, that in themselves are not so. Coo. 4 17.

And yet in some of these Cases, if any special damage come to the party by the
words spoken, there happily they may be actionable, albeit they be not so in
themselves. And in other Cases albeit there be damage, yet may not the words be
actionable. Croo. 2. 499.

CHAP. XVIII. Of words that hinder ones Preferment.
THere are other words, that do, or may hinder a Preferment that a Sect. 1.
man, or woman, may be in a possibility, and likelihood to have. And this falls
out especially in one of these Cases, where a man is in likelihood to have a
wife, or a woman a husband, or one that is, or may be an heir to an Ancestour,
and in that Right, to have Land from him, or a Minister is in possibility and
likelihood to have a Parsonage by presentation, or one is in a likelihood to be
chosen to an office, or one is in likelihood to be preferred to a special
service, and by some scandalous words spoken by another against him to his
disparagement he is prevented of, and put besides it; in such a Case, and for
this Injury the Law gives him this remedy.

And therefore it is held, that this Action will lie for the words in the Cases
hereafter following; That is to say, where a woman is like to have a husband,
or a man is like to have a wife; and one say of him, or her, he, or she had a
Bastard, or lay with J. S. or J. S. had the use of her body, or the like, and
he or she lose the Match thereby; this Action will lie for him, or her that
is so disappointed. Hill. 4. Jac. B. R. Dame Morrisons Case. Hobb. Rep. 106.
236. 350. Croo. 1. 110. 111. 195. 134. Croo. 2. 163.

So if one say of a man, Thou art a Whoremaster, for thou have lain For a
hindrance in Marriage. Sect. 2.
with Browns wife, and had to do with her against a Chair. If by this he lose
a preferment by a wife. Bulstr. 2. part 90. So to say of a Widdower, being
about a wife, that he had lien with such a woman, and others carnaliter
cognovit, and that by this he lost such a match. Croo. 1. 293.

So for this, Has that Bastard A. B. caused you to be arrested? is this all
the spite the Bastard can do you? if by reason hereof he lose a match he was
about. Croo. 2. 422.

It will lie for these words, A. has had a child, for she was conveyed to B.
and there she laid her great belly, it is as true that she has had a child,
as that you sit there; For she was sent away with child, and if she had not
a child, she has made it away. Croo. 1. part 639. For an Heir, to hinder him
of Land.


If one be Heir to his Father, or Uncle, that has an Estate of Land, or Goods,
which in likelihood he may bestow upon him; or if Land be given to his
Grandfather, and the Heirs of his body, and he has children, the Father and
others that may be Heirs to the Entail, though in the second or third degree,
and the Land being at sale, he is offered somewhat for his possibility; and
after one shall say of him, He is a Bastard, and by this means he loses it;
he may have this Action, and not aver any special loss. Croo. 1. 337. Coo. 4.
13. 14. Coo. 10. 130. Owens Rep. 32. Yet see Popham. 187.

If a Divine be to be presented to a Benefice, and one say of him, He For a
Divine to hinder him of a Parsonage.
is a Heretic, or a Bastard, or Excommunicate; if thereby the Patron refuse to
present him, and he lose his Preferment, this is actionoble. Coo. 4. 16. 17.

If one be Heir to his Father, Brother, or other Ancestour, who intends For
an heir to hinder him of Land.
to settle his Land upon him; And another shall say of him, He is a Bastard,
and thereupon the Father, Brother, or Ancestour give away the Land from him,
this is actionable. Hughes Rep. 451. Bulstr. 2. part 276. 277. Croo. 2. 213.
And this Action, some say, it has been adjudged will lie, albeit the party
have no special loss by the words. N. B. Entries 28. Trin. 25. Eliz. B. R.
Godb. Rep. 519. Croo. 1. 337. Coo. 10. 130. Owens Rep. 32.

If some say of a Lawyer that stands for a Town-Clerks place, or any other For
an Officer to hinder him of an office.
place of preferment, He is an ignorant man, and unfit for the place, and
thereby he loses this place; this Action will lie. March. Rep. pl. 217.
Sandersons Case. 17. Car. B. R.

And so by the like reason, if any common servant be like to have a service,
and For a Servant, to hinder him of a service.
by some slanderous speeches he loses it. Agreed. M. 15. Car. B. R.

So it lies for this, He is not worthy to bear office in such a place, for he
keeps a Baudy-house in London; if by this he lose the place he stands for.
Bulstr. 1. part 138.

It is said, that this Action will not lie for saying of another, he is base
born. And yet that perhaps it may lie for saying of another, He is an Alien,
if he have any special damage by it. Godb. Rep, 327. 328.

This Action will lie, for saying of a Maid, or a Widow that has a Hindrance
of Marriage.
Suitor, I know her well enough, she did dwell in Cheapside, a Grocer did get
her with child; if by this report the Suitor fall off, and she lose the
match. Anne Davis Case. Coo. 4. 16. And there it was resolved, that if he had
charged her with bare Incontiuency, that this had been actionable, if she had
lost her Suitor by it. And for this said in such a Case, A. has reported that
he had the use of her body at his pleasure, ubi re vera, A. did not report it,
and if upon this the Suitor fall off, the Action will lie. Dame Morrisons Case.
Hill. 4. Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 103. Jenk. Cent. 8. Case 7.

So for this, (as it seems) to say of a woman about Marriage, that she is For
a Servant that is hindered of his service. Couzening.
mad, if she lose her Marriage by it. Bendloes Rep. 155.

So this Action will lie for these words spoken of a servant and Bailiff, to J.
S. who does much trust him, and thereby he had his livelihood. He is a
couzening Knave, and has couzened his Master [Innuendo the said J. S.] of a
bushel of Corn. Croo. 1. 345.

So for this, spoken to a Deputy, Clerk of one B. a Register, who trusted Sect.
3.
him much, and the Deputy Clerk got his living by him, he is a base couzening
Knave, he is a Cheater, and has couzened his Master, Innuendo the said B.
Croo. 1. 406.

So for this, said of a Shoomakers servant, that lives by the Trade under him,
He will cut his Master out of doors. But then he must aver, that Averment.
by those words in that place is understood, he will undo him. Bulstr. 2. part
146.

So this Action will lie for these words spoken of a Widdower, who was
Hindrance of Marriage.
like to have had a good match, He is a sharking fellow, and gets his
living by Deceit, and used himself violiently to his former wife, and denied
her necessaries, and is a needy fellow, and his conditions are wicked, and for
his Religion, he is a Brownist, etc. If by this he lose his Match. But there
it was agreed, that without an Averment of some special loss, the Action will
not lie in this Case. Croo. Rep. 1. 110. 195. 234. March. Rep. pl. 2.

So for this spoken of a Maid that has many Suitors, That A. Reading is with
child, and did take Physic to kill her child, and that by this she lost her
Suitors. Hetleys Rep. 18.

So for this, Southold has been in bed with Dorchesters wife; if by this
Southold lose his Match he is about. Croo. 1. 195.

So for this, She is a Whore, and her children [Innuendo, the children which
she had by B. her late Husband] are Frambishes Bastards, Innuendo Nicholas
Frambish; if by this she lose her Marriage. Croo. Rep. 235. And so fo for any
such like words spoken, by reason of which a man or woman does lose his or her
preferment in Marriage. Styles Regist. 7. Coo. 4. 16.

But this Action will not lie, for saying of a man that is a Suitor to a
Widow, Thou did cousen J. S. of her money, in procuring false witnesses to
cousen her; albeit he lose the Widow by the words spoken. Owens Rep. 47.

And for the words in the forementioned Cases this Action will lie, with
Averment of damage where it is necessary, as in most (if not in all) Cases it
is. Coo. 4. 13. Croo. 1. 13. 100. Bulstr. 2. part 270. 277. March. Rep. 93. But
all this kind of Action of the Case for such words as these, are to be subject
to the general Rules of the other actionable words; for if the words be
doubtful, uncertain, or the like, they may hereby become unactionable. See more
for this, chap. 14. chapter 21, chapter 22. And in some of the other chapters.

CHAP. XIX. Of words importing a charge of Deceit and Couzening.
THere are other Slanders, and Slanders in other Cases than these, Sect. 1.
which are before named; some of them import something of fraud and couzening,
for which this Action is given; It is therefore held, that this Action will lie
for the words in the Cases hereafter following; That is to say, for saying,
Thou Captain Greenfield have received money of the King About Couzening and
Deceit. Of a Captain.
to buy new Saddles, and have couzened the King, and bought old Saddles for the
Troopers. Pasche. 17. Car. B. R. Sir Richard Greenfields Case. March. Rep. pl.
135. So to charge an Officer, or Tradesman with couzening is dangerous; and
therefore it is held actionable, to say of an Inekeeper, There is no man comes
to thy house, but thou do cousen him. Of a Tradesman.
Hetleys Rep. 123.

And yet it is said to be adjudged not to lie, for saying of a Butchers wife,
that does use to sell meat in her Husbands absence, She is a couzening woman,
and has couzened one of her neighbors of four pound, and I will prove it.
Huttons Rep. 14.

To say of a Brasier, Thou have couzened me of a Pan, is actionable. Styles
Rep. 364.

It lies also for one that has the oversight of a Gentleman's Farm, Of a
Bailiff, or Servant.
and sells his Corn, for these words, Thou art a couzening Knave, and thou have
couzened me in selling false measures in my Barley, and the Country is bound
to curse thee for selling with false measures, and I will prove it; and thou
have changed my Barley which I bought of thee. Brownl. Rep. 1. part 4. Hobb.
Rep. pl. 93.

So for this, said of a Servant and Bailiff to J. S. who does much trust him,
by which he gets his living, thou art a cozening knave and have cozened thy
Master of a Busnel of corn. Croo. 1. 345.

So for this, said of a deputy Clark to one B. a Register, who trusted him
much, and by which he got his living, He is a base cozening knave, he is a
cheater, and has cozened his Master A. B. Croo. 1, 406.

So for this, You have Cozened the State of two thousand pound, and I Of an
Officer of the State.
will prove it; for you have received twenty five thousand pounds profit of the
Office, and not compounded for it, and have foisted in words in the order of
your composition. Styles Rep. 436.

So (as it is thought) for this, said of a Lord of a Manor, Thou art Of the
Lord of a Manor.
a cozening knave, and keep cozening courts, to cozen men of their fines. 4.
Jac. B. R.

So for saying of a Goldsmiths, I will prove thee a cozener, for selling me a
Saphyr for a Diamond. Brownl. 2. part 100 Kitch. 173.

It has lain for this, spoken in London, Thou art forsworn in the
Carpenters-Hall, Of an Officer in London.
and did rob the Hall, and deceive the company of twenty pound. Croo. Rep. 1.
last published 787.

So this Action will lie for a charge of cozening, imposed upon an eminent Of
an eminent person.
person; as to say of a Gentleman of the Privy Chamber of the King, That he is
a cozener, and lives by cozening. Croo. 2. part 427.

But in all, or most of these Cases to make such words as these Actionable,
there must be an Averment of some special damage to the Plaintiff by the
words: and in all Cases, if the truth be so, it is best so to set it Averment.
forth in the Declaration.

But it is held, that this Action will not lie for the words in the Cases
hereafter following; that is to say, it will not lie for calling of a common
Cozener.
person, cozener, cozening knave, cheating knave, cheater, or the like. Finches
Law 186. Bulstr. 1. 138. March. Rep. pl. 135. Cheater. Officer.


And yet perhaps to speak so of an eminent person, or of an officer in
reference to his office, it may be Actionable. Croo. 1. 345. Croo. 2. 427.
Eminent person.
Godb. 284.

It will not lie (as it is said) for this said of a man that is a suitor to a
Widow, Thou did cozen J. S. of her money in procuring false witnesses to
cozen her. Albeit he loose the Widow by these words. Owens Rep. 47.

Nor for this, said of an ordinary Gentlewoman, Thou art a cozener and live
by cozening. Croo. 2. part 427. Coo. 4. 16.

Nor for this, Thou hastcozened J. S. in buying Saddles for him. Godb. Rep.
284. pasche. 27. Car. B. R.

Nor for this, Thou have cozened me and my two kinsmen, and art a false knave.
26. Eliz. Kerby and Wallers Case Godb. Rep. 284.

Nor for this, said of a Mayor, He has cozened all his brethren, etc. See in
March. Rep. pl. 135. B. R. Mayor of Tibbortons Case.

Nor for this, Thou were a Suitor to a woman in Southwark, and did cozen her
of her goods, and procuredst certain false witnesses to be forged. Croo. 1.
last published 99.

Nor for this, Thou have used Juggling with me. Croo. 1. part last published
Juggling.
178. Sect. 2.


Nor for this, Thy credit has been called in question, and a Jewry being to
pass upon it, thou foistedst a Jewry early in the morning, and thy lands thou
have gotten by lewd practices. Croo. 1. part last published 348.

Nor for this, Mr. Crook came unto Cornwel with a blew coat on his back,
Cozening in sale of Fish.
and has now gotten together a great quantity of Wealth, by trading with
Pirates, cozening in the tale of Pilchers, and by extortion. Balstrod. 1. part
216.

Nor for this, He is a cozening knave, and cozened a poor man of one hundred
pound, and all the Georges are cozening knaves. Huttons Rep. 14. Nor for this,
He is a cozening knave, and has cozened me of forty pound. Incertainty.
Huttons Rep. 14.

Nor for this, He is a false knave, and keeps a false debt book; for he In a
false debt book.
charge me with the receipt of one piece of Velvet, which is false. Huttons
Rep. 14.

Nor for this, Thou art a pilfering Merchant, and have pilfered away my goods
from my wife and children. Huttons Rep. 14. Owens Rep. 56.

Nor for this, spoken of a man that is no tradesman, A. is a cozening In
selling a Saphir for a Diamond.
knave, and so I have proved him before the Lord Mayor, for selling of a
Sapphire for a Diamond. Huttons Rep. 13. Nor for this, Thou art a cozening
knave, and have cozened me of five hundred pound. Huttons Rep. 13. Nor for
this, Thou art a cozening knave and shewedst forth a forged Deed. Bulst. 1.
part 132. By showing a false Deed. Cozened a Town.


Nor for this, Thou have cozened the Town of B. of so much money, albeit he
were an Officer and to account. Bulstr. 2. 228. Nor for this, He has cozened
the Earl of H. of as much as he, Innuendo the Plaintiff, is worth. Bulstr. 1.
part 162, 163.

Nor for this, said of a Merchant, Thou art an arrant knave, for thou Of a
Merchant.
have cozened all Coventry. Bulstr. 1. part 162, 163.

Nor for this, spoken of a Merchant, a Gentleman of the Kings Privy Chamber, or
whosoever else he be, He is a cozening knave, and lives by cozening. Godb.
Rep. 407. Goldsb. 3, 4, 5.

Nor for this, You bought land when you cozened the Town in your Accounts.
Cozening of a Town.
Bulstr. 2. 228.

Nor for this, Thou are a varlet, and have suppressed thy Brothers will to In
the suppressing of a Will.
deceive others of Legacies. Trin. 17. Jac. B. R. Godfreys Case.

Nor for this, Thou have cozened me and all my kindred. 18. Eliz. B. R. Nor
for this, He has cozened all the Town of Coventry. Nor for this, He is a
very bad fellow, for he made A. drunk in the night, and Incertainty.
cozened him of one thousand marks. Goldsb. 125. pl. 12. Nor for this, Thou
getst thy living by cozening. Croo. 2. 427.

Nor for this, He is a cozening knave, for that he has sold me a chain of
Copper, for a chain of Gold, and that he is a cozening knave upon Record.
Deceit in trade
But if he be a Goldsmiths, and got his living by buying and selling of
Chains and such wares, there perhaps it may lie. Croo. 3. 171. Croo. 1. last
published 171.

See more in Chap. 18. Chap. 21. Chap. 22.

For all these last Cases of Vnactionable words, this is also to be added;
that if it be so that the party of whom they are spoken; sustain any special
damage by them, he may perhaps have an Action of the Case upon them; but then
he must be sure in his Declaration to Aver it. See March. Averment.
of Slanders 1. part 100.

This also is to be known herein; that The Slanderous words of this kind, are
also liable to the general Rules of other Slanderous words, that is, they must
be false, malicious, certain, and the like, or they will not be Actionable.

See more in Chap. 18. and 19. and in other Chapters.

CHAP. XX. Of scandalous words that relate to men in their Offices,
Professions, and places of Trust.
THere are other scandalous words that reflect upon men in their Offices, Sect.
1.
Professions, and places of Trust; and these are either such as charge them
with corruption and dishonesty, or with ignorance and unskilfulnesse therein;
and for this, it may go for a Rule, as to such Persons, generally that for any
words that shall import a charge of unskilfulnesse, or dishonesty and
corruption, in, and about their Offices, this Action will lie.

It is therefore agreed, that this Action will lie for a Bishop against him Of
a Bishop.
that shall say of him, He is a Papist, or Recusant; or that he has received
a pardon from the Pope, or the like. Brownl. and Goldsb. 12. and 2. Recusant.
Papist.
part 166. March. Rep. pl. 191.

This Action will lie also for a Judge, Justice of Peace, or such like Officer,
Of a Judge or Justice of Peace.
for the words in the Cases hereafter following spoken of him viz. That he is
a corrupt Judge; or he is a corrupt Justice of Peace; or he is a corrupt
Officer; or he is a corrupt Man; if it be spoken with reference to For matter
of corruption.
his Office. Coo. 4. 14. 16. 19.

So for this, He gave a corrupt sentence in such a cause. Popham. Rep. 35.
Popham. 177. Hobb. Rep. 35.

So for this, He does not administer true Justice. Croo. 1. part last
published. 358. So for this, He deals corruptly.

So for this, He is a false Judge, or he is a false Justice of Peace, or he
takes bribes. Coo. 4. 16. Broo. 112.

So for this, He is a lewd Justice of Peace. Croo. 1. part last published. 158.

So for saying of such a one, He is a Felon, or he is a common Barretor;
Fellon. Barretor. Champertor. Maintainer of Suits. Extortioner.
or he is a common Champertor, or he is a common Maintainer of Suits; or he
is an Extortioner, or he has committed Extortion, or the like. Hobb. Rep. pl.
145. 188. Goldsb. and Brownl. 11. 30. Ass. 19. Popham. Rep. 35. Kitch. 173.

So for this, He is a Basket Justice, a partial Justice, I will give him five
pound a year for his gifts about Justice matters; And yet it is said in this
Case, that none of the words but partial Justice are actionable. Croo. 2. 90.

So for this, He took forty shillings for a bribe. Yelvertons Rep. 142.

So for this, You have extorted twenty shillings above your due fees. Stanleys
Case. Pasche. 14. Jac. Coo. 10.

So for saying of such a Judge [or Iustice] He covers and hides Felonies,
and is not worthy to be a Judge [or Justice of Peace.

So for this, you cover and hide felonies. Dyer. 72. Stuckleys Case. Pasche. 7.
Jac. B. R. Coo. 4. 16.

So for this, There is a Nest of Thieves in Dale, and Sir John Bridges is the
maintainer of them. Pophams Rep. 180.

So for this, You, out of malice and spleen have perverted Justice, and have
wrested the Law many times, to serve your own turn. And in this Case there was
no Averment made in the Action, that the words were spoken with reference to
his office. Beamond versus. Sir Henry Hastings. Averment.
Mich. 7. Jac. B. R. Bulstr. 1. part 96. Croo. 2. 241.

So for this, He is but a half-eared Justice, he will hear but on the one
side. Croo. 1. 162.

So for this, He can hear but with one ear. Chomleys Case. Hetley. Rep. 123.

So for this, You are a sweet Judge [or Justice of Peace] you sent your Warrant
for J. S. to be brought before you for suspicion of felony, and afterward sent
J. D. to give him warning thereof, that he might absent himself. Burton versus
Tokin. Croo. 2. 143. 413.

So for saying these words, I have been often with him for Justice, but never
could get any at his hand, but Injustice. Croo. 1. 9.

So for this, You are an Ambodexter, and you take money on both sides. M. 2.
Jac. B. R. Dawtries Case.

So for this, Sir William Buttons men have stolen sheep, and he spoke to me
not to prosecute them. Popham. Rep. 180.

So for this, He has been the cause of the overthrow of a hundred men by
false and subtle means. In Brownl. 2. part 299. March. Rep. 8.

So for this, A. being arrested as accessory of Felony, Mr. Stafford [Innuendo
the Plaintiff] knowing thereof, discharged him by agreement of Sect. 2.
three pound, to which Mr. Stafford was privy, whereof thirty shillings was to
be paid to him, and was paid to his man by his appointment. Trin. 36. Eliz. B.
R. Croo. 1. part last published. 536.

So for this, He has received money of a Thief, that was apprehended and
brought before him for the stealing of certain sheep, to let him escape, and to
keep him from the Gaol. Pasche. 17. Eliz. B. R. Brownl. 1. part 11. Cottons
Case.

So for this, said of a Judge that had given his sentence in a Cause between
the Defendant and another, That the same sentence given by the Plaintiff]
Innuendo, etc. was corruptly given. Croo. 1. last. published. 305.

So for this, Mr. Gilbert has done me wrong, in returning the Recognisance of
Podger in twenty pound where it was taken in ten pound, and the Sureties in ten
pound a piece. Pasche. 4. Jac. Gilberts Case. B. R.

So for this, Thou have forged a Recognisance, taken before Fisher and others.
Croo. 1. part last published. 883.

So for this, said, where, upon Articles upon Oath before the Judge or Justice
against me, I say, By your means I had wrong at the Sessions, for you caused
Hickman to swear against me that which was not true [Innuendo the said Oath.
Croo. 2. 308. Yelvertons Rep. 221.

So for this, Mr. H. did put in of his own head these words into an examination
taken by him, viz. J. S. did steal twenty sheep of such a man's. And for saying
this further of the Justice, He is a debauched man, and not fit to be a
Justice of Peace. But it was said, the Action did lie for the first, and not
for the last words. Styles Rep. 22.

So it seems for this, where one is arraigned, and acquitted of a Felony, and
the prosecutor shall say, if A. and B. had done Justice, C. had been hanged for
robbing me. And that for this, A. B. and C. may have this Action. For Matter
of Ignorance.


This Action will lie, for saying of a Judge, Justice of Peace, or such like
Officer, He has no skill in his office. Hill. 16. B. R.

But this Action will not lie for such a person, where a discourse is about For
other Matters.
him, as to his body, and health, and therein, one of them shall say, He is a
corrupt man. Nor where the discourse is about his Estate, and therein one of
them shall say, He is a Bankerupt; Nor where a discourse is about his Words of
Qualification.
Usury, or his fraud, in an executorship, and therein one of them shall say,
He is a corrupt man, or he is a false man, or the like. And therefore in
these and such like Cases, where the Plaintiff shall set forth but part of the
words of the conference, the Defendant must set forth the occasion of the words
by the rest of the conference, Coo. 4. 14. But if the words be spoken without
any such references, as in the Case before, they will be Actionable, for they
shall be so intended, and taken in the worst part. Hob. Rep. pl. 351.

Nor will this Action lie for this, You do openly maintain and countenance the
worst people against Gods Laws and the Queens. Croo. 1. part last published, 297.

This Action also will lie for such an Officer for this, He is not worthy He
keeps a Baudy house.
to be in such an Office, for he keeps a common Baudy-house in London.
Simpsons Case, Bulstr. 1 part 138.

So for this, said to such a one, You are no true Subject, Or for this said to
his man, Thou servest a Master that is no true Subject Croo. 2. 202.

So for this, He and his Son sought to kill me, and his Son threw a Dagger at
me, and run me through the hose twice, and all this by the procurement of the
Justice of peace, Croo. 2. 56. Yelvertons Rep. 57.

But this Action will not lie for this, He is a false Justice, vel his
Incertainty
similia, Broo. Action of the Case, 112.

And it seems it will not lie for this, I heard it spoken that Mr. Read was one
that was at Burrels Roberie, and that four of them went to his house the next
morning; ubi re vera, the Defendant never heard any such words. Sed quere, for
the words have a sound of Actionable words. See Croo. 1. last published, 644.
645.

This Action will not lie for a Judge, or Justice of peace,, or such like
Officer, for this. He is a base Rascal, Villain, and by unjust means Sect. 3.
does most villanously take other men's rights from them, and keeps a company of
thieves and traitors to do mischief, and gives them nothing but base blew
Liveries, and this all the Country reports. And other good he does not. And
yet two of the Judges were for the action in this Case. Croo. 2. part 58. Dyer
75. 158.

Nor for this, He has delivered untruths upon his Oath, in his answer in
Chancery, at the suit of I. S. Croo. 1 part last published, 374.

Nor for this, He has but one Manor, and he has gotten it by swearing and
forswearing, Coo. 4. 15. Nor for this, He has gotten all that he has by
swearing and forswearing, New Book of entries, 4. 22.

Nor for this, For my ground in D. he seeks my life, Coo. 4. 15.

Nor for this, You have Couzened the Earl of Hertford, of as much Couzening.
as I am worth, Bulstr. 1. part, 163.

Nor for this, He is a Recusant and a Simonist, etc. Croo. 2. 484.

Nor for this, He is a Blood-sucker, and sucketh blood, Croo. 1. last
published, 306. 433. Blood-sucker.


Nor for this, said in a conference about him, and his Tenants of his Manor,
When your Tenant took his Land, you couzened him of his fine, Couzening.
and dealt corruptly, and I will make you appear where you dare not show your
face, for your base dealing, Trin. 4. Jac.

Nor for this, He is an Usurer, Nor for this, He has not dealt Usurer.
honestly about a Will. Coo. 4. 16. New Book of Entries, 22.

Nor (as it seems) for this, If any man will give him a Bribe, as a Inclination
or Affection.
Sheep, or a couple of Capons, he will take them; And yet this seems to be a
foul Charge, Croo. 1. part last published, 306. 433.

But in these kinds of Actionable words these things must be observed.

1 That the Plaintiff must be sure to set forth, that he was such a Judge,
Justice, or Officer at the time when the words were spoken of him, or the words
will not bear Action.

2 That he is not bound to set forth, that he had any special loss by the
words.

3 That words of this nature are subject to the Rules laid down in other Cases
before, for other Actionable words, they must be certain, false, malicious, and
not liable to qualification, etc. For if the Case be so that they be true, or
uncertain, or not malicious, or subject to qualification by the occasion of
speaking, or other words spoken at the same time, if so it be, they may by this
be unactionable. Croo. 1. part 97. 162. Bulstr. 1. part, 36. Yelvertons Rep.
153. 159.

This Action will lie for a Sergeant or Barrister at Law, that does practice in
the Law with words in the Cases hereafter following, spoken For a Sergeant, or
a Barrister at Law.
of him with reference to his Profession, viz. He has undone many. Osberton
and Stanleys Case Trin. 37. Eliz. Came. Scaver. Sect. 4.


So for this (as some would have it) Go not to him, for he will deceive For
his dishonesty.
you, Hettleys Rep. 70. yet see the contrary by March. pl. 217. Brownl. 1.
part. 11.

So for this, He has been the cause of the overthrow of 100. men, by his
subtle means, Yelverton Rep. 143. March 8.

So for this, You are a dishonest man in your profession, Trin. 37. Eliz.

So for this, you are a paultrie Lawyer, and use to play on both hands, Croo.
2. 267. So for this, He is a paultry fellow, for he does deal on both sides,
and deceive them that put him in trust. Noys Rep. 11.

So for this, He has done falsely with me being his Clyent, and has joined
with mine Adversary, Styles Rep. 231. 283.

So for this, He is a Bribing knave, and has twenty pound of J. S Bribing
Knave.
to cousen me. Brownl. and Golsb. 6.

So for this, Go you to him to be of your council, he will deceive you, he
was of council with me, and revealed the secrets of my Cause. Trin. 13. Eliz.
B. R. Coo. Lib. Entries. 22.

So for this alone, He being of my Council, revealed the secrets of my Cause.

So for this, He revealed the secrets of his Clyants Cause.

So for this, You did disclose my Council to mine Advesary. Snags Case. Trin.
13. Eliz. B. R. So for this, Thou did disclose my Council, See Croo. 1. part
last published. 358.

So for this, Thou did deliver my evidence to mine adversary, see there for
it.

So for this, He gives bad Council.

So for this, You are a couzening Knave, and showed a counterfeit Couzening
Knave.
or forged Deed knowing it to be so, Mich. 39. 40. Eliz.

So for this, You are a bribing Knave, or a Corrupted Knave, or Bartetor
Champertor. Maintainer of Suits.
you are a Corrupt man, or you are a common Barritor, or you are a common
Champertor, or you are a common maintainer of Suits. Hobb. Rep. pl. 17. 177.
188. 145. Brownl. and Goldsb. 11.

So this Action will lie for such a man for this, He a Barrister? he is For his
unskilfulness.
a Barretor and no Barrister, he was put from the Bar, etc. and durst not
show himself there, he has as much wit as a Daw. Coo. 13. 71. Godb. Rep. 441.
Hetley Rep. 71. Noys Rep. 98.

So for this, Thou have no more Law than a Monkey; or, thou have no more Law
than a Jackanapes, or thou have no more Law than a Jack-daw. Hetleys Rep. 71.
Owens Rep. 17. Godb. Rep. 441. Nor for this, He has as much Law as a Monkey,
etc. March. Rep. pl. 93 Goldsb. 126. pl. 17. Croo. 13. 71. Mich. 36. 37. Eliz.
Palmers Case B. R. Hetleys Rep. 71.

So for this, you a Counselor, a fool, an ass, a hangman, a Counselor at
Law, a fool in the profession. Popham Rep. 207. So for this, he is a dunce,
and will get little by the Law. Croo. 1. part 277. So for this, he is an
Ignorant man in the Law. So for this, he has no skill in the Law. So for
this, he is the simplest Lawyer toward the Law. 39. 40. Eliz. B. R. So for
this, he is no Lawyer.

So for this, he a councellor, he is a concealer of the Law. Coxes Case.
Trin. 2. Jac. B. R.

And yet it is held, the Action will not lie for these words, he is no
Scholar, or thou wast never any Scholar, or thou art an ignorant man in
general, without reference to his office. Or for this, he is an Ass. Cawdreys
Case.

And yet it is said by some to have been adjudged actionable to say of such a
man, he is an ignorant man. Trin. 17. Car. 1. B. R. Sandersons Case. But
without question it will lie for saying of such a man, he is an ignorant man
in the Law.

But it will not lie for this, to say, he has no more Law than J. S. and J. S.
is no Lawyer.

But it was said by Tanfield Judge, it may lie for saying of such a man, For
other Cases.
He has the falling Sickness.

So it may lie for saying, he gives bad council. Croo. 1. part last published
403.

It will not lie for saying of a Lawyer, and Judge of a Corporation Judge.
Court, He is a Puritan knave, a Precise knave, a Bribing knave, and I will
make him answer for what he has done. Popham. Rep. 139.

Nor for this, You have lost your Clyents cause. Hetleys Rep. 70.

Nor for this, you have send a counterfeit, [or a forged] Deed, Mic. 39, 40.
Eliz.

Nor for this, He mis-enters the name of his Clyent in his book. Croo. 1. part
last published 403.

Nor for this, He is a Drunkard, or a Drunken fellow.

Nor for this, Thou have nothing, but what thou have gotten by swearing, and
forswearing. New book of entries 22.

Nor for this, He is a Bankerupt. March. Rep. 8.

But these things must be added for the understanding of all these Cases Sect.
5.
also:

1 That he that brings an Action for such words as these, must set forth, that
he was a Lawyer at the time of the speaking of the words.

2 That in this Case, where the words are in themselves Actionable, there need
not be any Averment of any special loss by the speaking of them; but if in
truth the Case be so, it is best so to set it forth.

3 That for some of the words herein, set forth to be Vnactionable, if the
party of whom they are spoken, have any special damage by them, there perhaps
an Action may lie for some of these words.

4 That such kind of words as these, are to be regulated by the same general
Rules of other Slanderous words, that is, they must be false, malicious,
certain, and not liable to qualification by other words spoken with them, and
the like, or they will not be Actionable.

It is said that this Action will lie for saying of a Sheriff, He is an
Extortioner, Of a Sheriff. Extortioner.
or that he has by color of his office extorted twenty shillings above his
due Fees.

But it will not lie for saying, to the servant of the present Sheriff, of the
last years Sheriff, Your Master must not look to have such hudling and shufling
of matters this year, as he had the last year. Croo. 1. part last published 849.

Nor against an under Sheriff for this. Thou art a cozening fellow, as any
Cozening.
in the country, the last time thou were under Sheriff, as now thou art: thou
d^dst serve an Execution for a neighbor of mine, and did keep the money in
thy hands. Croo. 1. part last published 854.

This Action will lie also for a Preacher, a Parson of a Church, for Of a
Preacher, or a Parson of a Church. Sedition.
these words said of him, He has made a Seditious Sermon, and moved the
people to Sedition this day. Coo. 4. 19. Pasche. 24. Eliz. B. R. Phillips
versus Badby.

So it is said it will lie for him, for these words, He has had two
Incontinency.
children by A. the wife of B. and I will cause him to be deprived for it.
Parrets Case 38. 39. Eliz. Noys Rep. 64. Croo 1. part last published 502.

And yet it is held, that it will not lie for this, said of him, He is an
Adulterer. Nor for this, He is a Whore-master. Nor for this, He is Drunkard.
Swearer. Preach false Doctrine.
a Drunkard. Nor for this, He is a common Swearer. Nor for this, He is a
Preacher of false Doctrine. Styles Rep. 49.

And yet in Hill. 1650. B. R. in the Case of Drake: the Court did incline to
give an Action for these words, for saying of a Preacher, a Master of Arts, and
an incumbent of a spiritual living, Thou have Preached lies in the Pulpit.
Styles Rep. 363. 364.

And if a Preacher have any special damage by any such like words spoken
against him, in that Case doubtless he may have this Action for his remedy.

To say of a Schoolmaster, Put not your Son to him, for he will come Of a
Schoolmaster. Of a Clarke of Assizes. Bribing.
away as very a dunce as he went, this Action will lie. Hetleys Rep. 71.

This Action will lie also for a Clerk of Assizes, for saying of him, He has
taken a Bribe of forty shillings. Yelvertons Rep. 142. 143.

This Action will lie for saying of a Coroner, He is an Extortioner, Of a
Coroner. Extortioner. Cozener.
and has, color officii, Extorted forty shillings.

But to say of such a one, He is a cozening knave, and has cozened J. S. of
his land, is not Actionable. See March. 2. part of Slanders 4.

This Action will lie for a Town Clerk, that is an Attorney, and a Of a
Town-Clarke. Bribing.
Judge in the Mayors Court, for saying of him, He took forty shillings for a
Bribe. Godb. Rep. pl. 211.

But not for this, Thou have made many false certificates, for the Mayor and
Burgesses in that court, and the more thou stirrest, the more it will stink.
For that no speech was about his office, when the words were spoken, nor did it
appear that the making of the Certificates did belong to his office, nor
Averment.
was it averred that he knew them to be false, Huttons Rep. 123.

Nor for this, He is a common maintainer of Suits, and a Plague of God
Maintainer of Suits.
consume him; I hope to see his body rot upon the earth, like the carcass of a
Dog, and I will have him thrown over the Bar the next Term, and I will give a
Beech to hang him. Brownl. and Goldsb. 15.

It will lie for any Deputy of such officer as the King of Arms, that Of the
King of Arms.
has a Patent for his office, and power by Commission to make a Deputy to
inquire of matters about his office, when he has done it; to say of his
Deputy: He came and sat by force of a forged Commission, and he is a Forgery.
Scrivener and no Herald. Croo. 1. last published 329.

This Action would have lain for a receiver of the Court of Wards, upon Of a
Receiver or auditor of the Court of Wards.
these words, Mr. Deceiver has deceived and cozened the King, and dealt falsely
with him. Sir Miles Fleetwoods Case.

So to have said of an Auditor, He was a frauditor, and had deceived and
cozened the King. Hobb. Rep. 375. So to have said this, You have Sect. 6.
Cozening.
received money for the Engrossing of Foedaries, and I will prove that to be
cozening; and you are a cozener and live by cozening. Winches. Rep. 40.

This Action will lie for saying to a Steward of a Court, That he has Of a
Steward of a Court.
been the cause of the overthrow of a hundred men by his subtle means.
Yelvertons Rep. 142. 143. So for this, He has taken a bribe of forty
sh^llings. Yelvertons Rep. 142. Taken Bribes.


But it will not lie for saying of a Steward to a great man of his Courts, and
one that has been much trusted by him, He is a notorious liar and couzoner,
and has deceived the Parishioners of H. of five hundred pound, Couzener.
and I will teach him to cousen me of my house. Croo. 2. 619.

This Action will lie, for saying of a Steward of a Court Leete, and Court
Baron, Mr. Carve has put a presentment into the Jewries Verdict against me of
three shillings four pence, for suing of Peter West forth Forgery.
of the Court, without the consent of the Jewry. M. 4. Jac. B. R. Carves Case.

But this Action will not lie for an Arbitrator, chosen by consent to end a
matter of difference between men, That he is a corrupt man, or that he Of an
Arbitrator.
dealt corruptly in the making of such an award, or the like, by Williams
Justice. But such words spoken to a Judge or Justice of Peace, will give an
Action of an Action.

This Action will lie for an Attorney, or Clerk of the Court, or such like
Officer, for saying of him at large, or in relation to his office, the Of an
Attorney.
words in the Cases hereafter following (that is to say) for this, He is a
bribing Knave. Hobb. Rep. pl. 17. Coo. 4. 16. For corruption and dishonesty.


So for this, He has taken a bribe of forty shillings. Yelverton Rep. 143.
412. Hobb. pl. 17. Golsdb. 6.

So for this, He is a bribing Knave, and has taken twenty pound of Bribing.
A. to cousen me.

So for this, His credit is fallen, he deals on both sides. Noys Rep. 10.
Mich. 41. 42. Eliz. Co. B. Kings Case. Sect. 7.


So for this, He is an Ambodexter. Godb. Rep. 214. Finches Law. 186.

So for this, He has taken money on both sides in Suits.

So for this, He takes money on both hands in Suits.

So for this, He took money on both sides in a Cause between him and me. M. 2.
Jac. Dawtreys Case. B. R.

So for this, He is good Attorney, but he will play on both sides. Brownl. 1.
part Croo. 1. part 166.

So for this, He is a paultry fellow, his credit does begin to crack, he does
deal on both sides, and deceive many that trust him. But for the last words
only, he does deal, etc. is the Action grounded. Croo. 1. part last published.
914. Noys Rep. 11.

So for this, in the North, He is a Daffidowndilly, which there is an
Ambodexter. Hetleys Rep. 123.

So for this, Take heed and follow him well, for he will make you throw your
purse over your bosom. Winches. Rep. 40.

So for this, He is a base Rascal, and I say, I will make him to lose his
ears, and I will teach him, or any Lawyer of them all, to have a Writ served on
me. Leys Rep. 170. 176.

So for this, He has been the cause of the overthrow of a hundred men, by his
subtle means. Yelvertons Rep. 142. 143.

So for this, He is a false practiser. Pasche. 17. Jac. Moors Case. So (as
some say) for this, He is a false Attorney. So for this, He is a couzening
Attorney. Hetleys Rep. 140. 141.

So for this, You are a dishonest man in your profession. Noys Rep. 11. 7.

So for this, Thou did disclose thy Clients Counsel to his Adversary. Trin.
17. Jac. Andersons Case.

So for this, He revealed the secrets of my Cause. So for this, He did
deliver my Evidence to my Adversary. So for this, He did disclose my Counsel.
Croo. 1. part last published. 158.

So for this, You are well known to be a corrupt man, and to deal corruptly.
But in this case the words must have reference to his Calling, for if they were
occasioned by speech about him as a Usurer, or about an Executorship, and his
ill dealing therein, no Action will lie for such words. Coo. 4. 14. Finches
Law. 186. Godb. 214 Croo. 1. part 196.

It is said, it will not lie for this, He is a forger of Writings, and
deserves Forgery.
to lose his ears. Nor for this, He is a forger of Writings, by which he has
couzened fatherless children. Winches. Rep. 90. 91. Quere of these Cases. For
they import a very foul charge. But it is said, it will lie for this, Thou have
forged the Will of J. S. Huttons Rep. 29. And yet doubted whether it will lie
for this, Thou have forged Writings, for which thou should lose thy ears.
Bulstr. 3. part 265.

So for this, He has forged a Sheriffs Warrant, showing what it was. Brownl.
Rep. 4.

But it will not lie for this, He made false Writings. Winches. Rep. 40.

Nor for this, You were cooped up for forging of Writs.

Nor for this, He gets his living by false Writs. Croo. 1. part 195. For this
Quere. But this Action will lie for this; If a Suit be between A. Couzening.
and B. and B. say to A. Your Attorney is a bribing Knave, and has twenty
pound of you to cousen me. Mich. 1. Jac. B. R. Yardlies Case.

So for this, Thou did cousen J. S. of his fee, and I will sue thee for it in
the Starr-Chamber. Brownl. 1. part 2. 3. 6. 7. part 2. 253.

So for this, He is a couzener, and couzens his Clients in the Sheriffs Court
at London, where he is an Attorney, and was for that cause discharged of that
Court. Croo. 1. 190. 192.

So for this, Thou art a false couzening Knave, and have gotten all that thou
have by couzenage, and thou have couzened all those that have dealt with thee.
Croo. 2. 586.

So for this, He is a base Rogue, and cheating Knave, and does maintain
himself, his wife and children by cheating. Croo. 1. 171.

So for this, He is a couzener, and has couzened me of twenty shillings.
Hetleys Rep. 123.

So for this, Thou art a couzener, and have delivered couzening Bills. Hetleys
Rep. 123.

But it will not lie, for saying, He is a Cheater. Hetleys Rep. 139. Croo.
Cheater.
1. 139.

It will lie also for this, Thou art a couzening Knave, and gettest thy Sect. 8.
living by extortion, and did cousen one Pidgeon in a Bill of costs of ten
pound. But for the last words only, and not for the first words. Croo. 1. part
last published. 601. 602.

It will not lie for this, spoken to one that is speaking of retaining him, Go
not to him, for he will cousen you. Pasche. 18. Jac. Ratcleifs Case. Croo. 1.
29.

Nor for this, will it lie (as it is said) Thou art a false couzening Knave,
Words of qualification.
and have couzened my two Kinsmen of their Land, and deservest the Pillory. 26.
Eliz. B. R.

Nor for this, He couzened J. S. out of his Land. Nor for this, Thou have
couzened J. S. of his fee, and I will sue thee for it in thee Starr-Chamber.
Brownl. 1. part 3. 5. 6. 16. 2. part. 253.

And it is said, it has been doubted whether it will lie for this, He is a
base, cheating, couzening Knave, and has cheated me as never man was cheated.
Croo. 1. 112. 367. But these words seem to others clearly to be actionable.

So it will lie also for this, He is a Champertor. Hobb. Rep. 117. Champertor.
Barretor. Extortioner. Maintainer of Suits.
359. pl. 145. 351. Coo. 4. 16. Brownl. Rep. 17. Winches. Rep. 481.

So for this, He is a common Champertor, and I will have him turned over the
Bar. Hobb. Rep. 183.

So for this, He is an Extortioner. Hill. 40. Eliz. B. R.

So for this, He is a common Barretor. Brownl. and Goldsb. 11. Winchel. Rep.
166. Huttons Rep. 104. Croo. 1. 139. 406. Hobb. Rep. pl. 188. But it will not
lie for saying of him, He is a common Maintainer of Suits. Hobb. Rep. pl. 145.
Winch. Rep. 40. Forgery.


So it will lie for saying of him, He is a forging Knave. Brownl. 1. part 16.
Hetleys Rep. 140.

Soalso it will lie for this, He is a suborning Knave, or he is a suborned
Knave. So for this, He is a perjured Knave. Styles Rep. 17. Pains Case.

So for this, He is an extorting Knave, and did suborn one to be forsworn
Subornation of Perjury.
before the Lord Chief Justice. 20. Jac.

So for this, Take heed of him, for he is the falsest Knave in England, and
he will cut your throat. Hetleys Rep. 140.

And so it will lie for calling of him Knave only, as has been adjudged Knave.
after a Writ of Error brought. Nichols Case. Styles Regist. 8. 17. Trin. 12.
Car. 1. B. R. Yardlies Case 18. Eliz. 2. B. R. And therefore a fortiori it must
lie for saying, he is a couzening, or a forging Knave, or the like. Yet see
the whole Court. Co. B. against it. Croo. 1. last published. 601.

So for this, He is a common stirrer up of Suits, and a disturber of the Peace,
and so a mover of unjust Actions. Hetleys Rep. 140.

So for this, Thou art a Knave, and stirrest up Suits between parties to their
undoing, and it is pity such persons go unhanged. Croo. 1. 166.

So for this, said to a Client of the Attorney, I marvel you will employ such a
Knave as Nichols is, you will have but disgrace and discredit by employment of
him, for he is a proclaimed Knave in the Market. Croo. 1. part 331. 333.

So for this, He is a base Rascal, and I will make him to lose his ears. Leys.
Rep. 70. Sect. 9.


But it will not lie for saying this, of an Attorney, or such like Officer,
Cheater. Vipet. Villain. Judas. Brabler. Swaggerer.
He is a Cheater, a Judas, a Destroyer, a Viper, a Villain, a common Brabler, a
common Breaker of the Peace, and a Swaggerer, all together, or asunder. But if
an actionable word be joined with them, these will aggravate the slander, and
so the damages. Hetleys Rep. 140. 139. 143. Huttons Rep. 104. Winches. Rep. 166.

Nor for this, I think thou art no Attorney, but an Attorneys Clerk, and if
thou be, I shall have thee picked over the Bar the next Term, and thy ears
nailed to the Pillory. Hobb. Rep. pl. 159.

Nor will it lie for this, Thou art a Usurer; Nor for this, Thou have Usurer.
plaved the Knave with me about a Will. Coo. 4. 16.

Nor for this, He is a Recusant. Hetleys Rep. 140. 141. Recusant.


Nor for this, Thou art a flagging Jack, and a Couzener, and would have
couzened me. Hetleys Rep. 140.

Nor for this, I have matter enough against him, for M. H. has found Forgery
against him, and I can prove it against him. Hobb. Rep. 189. 395. Forgery.
Incertainty.


Nor for this, spoken to an Attorneys Son, My Father was not cast over the
Bar as thy father was Knightlies Case. Trin. 41. Eliz. B. R. Hobb. pl. 145.

Nor for this, Thou gettest thy living by extortion. Nor for this, Thou
Extortion.
gettest thy living by swearing and forswearing. Croo. 1. last published. 603.

Nor for this, I will have him thrown over the Bar the next term. Hobb. Rep.
1. 59. Box and Barnabies Case.

Nor for this, He was, or will be picked over the Bar. And yet it is said to
lie for this, He was picked over the Bar.

This Action will lie also for an Attorney, or such like kind of Officer, For
lack of skill.
for these words, viz. Thou art the simplest Attorney toward the Law. Mich.
39. 40 Eliz. B. R. Martins Case.

So for this, He is the foolishest Attorney toward the Law, and if he does not
overthrow your Cause I will give you my ears; he is a Fool, and an Ass, and so
I will prove him. Croo. 1. part last published. 589. Goldsb Rep. 128. Hobb. Rep.
pl. 117.

So for this, Thou have no skill in thy office. But it will not lie for saying
of him, That he has no skill in Husbandry, or the like.

But it is said, that it has been doubted whether an Action will lie for these
words, said of an Attorney, He is a Knave, and a couzening Knave, and did take
fees on both hands in a Suit between me and Green, and by knavery suffered me
to be condemned at Ipswich at Greens Suit wilfully, being Attorney for me. See
March of Slanders, 1 part 78. But this Case seems to others to be out of doubt
Actionable.

So it is said by some, that it will not lie for these words, Thou art the
dishonestest Attorney in England, and if any be more dishonest than thou, he
deserves to be hanged, unless the words be spoken with reference to his
office, or practice, and unless there be an Averment made, that Averment.
there is a dishonest Attorney in England. Croo. 1. 29.

And this also is here to be added:

1 That where the words in the Cases before named be Actionable, there will be
no need of any special averment of loss. Averment.


2 That where the words be not Actionable in themselves, yet if the party, of
whom they are spoken have any special loss by them, they may perhaps be
Actionable.

3 These kinds of slanderous words are to be subject to the Rules laid down in
other Cases for other Actionable words, they must be certain, false,
malicious, and not subject to qualification, etc. For if the words be true, or
not malicious, nor subject to qualification by other words, they may not be
Actionable.

4 The Attorney (it seems) is to show in his Suit, that he was an Attorney at
the time of the speaking of the words.

This Action will lie for saying of a Constable, He is a concealer of Of a
Constable Sect. 10.
Felons. Pridhams Case, Pasche. 7. Jac. B. R.

So for this, Thou hidest [or coverest] Felonies. So for this, Thou favourest
Felons. Stuckleys Case, Pasche. 7. Jac. B. R. and Bondmans Case.

But it is doubted whether it will lie for this, said of such an Officer, Thou
art a bribing Knave, and have couzened the Parish of W. in Rates Couzening
of thirty pound. Hetleys Rep. 36.

This Action will lie for over-seets of the poor of a Parish, for these Of
Overseers of the poor.
words said of them, viz. of any such Officer, He has couzened the poor of
their bread. March. Rep. pl. 135. 9 Jac. B. R. but some deny this Case, to be
Law, but the words have a verbal sound.

So for this spoken in relation to his office, That he is a cheating Knave, and
has couzened the Parish of forty pound. Styles Rep. 388. Couzening.


So it is said to lie for this, Thou do make Loanes, Taxes, or Assesments thy
self, and make five quarters in the year, and do cheat and cousen the
Parish. Styles Rep. 394.

Some say it will lie against such an Officer for these words, He has Couzened
the poor of their money, others deny it, but certainly they have the import of
a foul aspertion in them. 9 Jac. B. R.

It will not lie for saying of such a one, He is a notorious Liar and
Couzener, and has deceived the Parishioners of H. of five hundred pound, and I
will teach him to deceive me of my house. Croo. 2. 619.

It is said this Action will lie for saying of the Churchwardens of a Parish,
Of Churchwardens.
such like words as these, of one of them, He has couzened the poor of their
Bread; or he has couzened the poor of their Money. But others oppose this. 9
Jac. B. R.

It seems it will lie for this, spoken of such an Officer in relation to his
office, That he is a cheating Knave, and has couzened the Parish of forty
pound. Styles Rep. 388. 394.

But it will not lie for saying of such an Officer, He is a notorious Liar, and
Couzener, and has deceived the Parishioners of A. of five hundred pound, and I
will teach him to cousen me of my house. Croo. 2. 619.

This Action will lie for a Churchwarden, for this said of him that had made
his presentment at a Visitation, Thou have perjuredly presented me at the
Visitation before I. S. official. Croo. 2. 80, 81. 120.

It will not lie for these words spoken of a Scrivener, Thou art a Rogue, For a
Scrivener. Rogue. Couzener. Cutpurse. Of a Measurer, or Surveyor of Land.
and a Cony-catching Rogue, a couzening Rogue, a Cutpurse. Croo. 2. 536.

Nor for this, He made false writings. Croo. 2. 536.

This Action will lie for a Mathematical Measurer, or Surveyor of Land, a
Geometrician, or a Mathematician, for any words spoken of him to scandalize him
in his Art, Faculty, or Profession, as to say of him, He has no skill in his
Trade, or that he is a cheater in his Trade, or that he is a couzener in his
Trade, or that he is a cheating Knave, and that I can Cheater.
prove. But this must be for a man that is learned, and does his work by his
Art, for if the words be spoken of one that does measure by the poll only, it
seems they are not Actionable. Goldsb. Rep. 278. Hill 16. Jac. B. R. Londons
Case. Croo. 2. 504. It will lie also for a Surveyor or measurer Couzener.
of Land, that gets his living by it, for these words said of him, Thou art a
couzening and shifting Knave, and a cheating knave. Croo. 2. 504.

This Action will lie for saying of a Commissioner, that has a Commission Of a
Commissioner. Sect. 11.
to examine Witnesses, and to hear and determine a matter in Chancery, That he
is a corrupt man, or that he has taken bribes of R. K. and for saying after,
King has set Sir George Moore on horseback with bribes, whereby to defraud
Equity, Justice, and good conscience; and Popham took no difference to be,
where the Commission is to one, and where to many, and where the Commissioners
be named by the Court, and where by the Parties, or either of them, Sir George
Moore, and Fosters Case. So likewise for Commissioners that have a Commission
to examine witnesses out of the Exchequor.

And it is adjudged to lie for this said of a Commissioner, that had a
Commission out of the Exchequer to examine Witnesses, That he had returned as
the Depositions of Witnesses into the Exchequer, the Examination of diverse who
were never sworn. Croo. 1. part last published. 623.

This Action will not lie for the Mayor of a Town, for saying of him, That he
has couzened all the Town. 8 Car. B. R. Mayor of Tivertons Of the Mayor of a
Town.
Case.

This Action will lie for a public Weigher in a Market, Fair, or Town, Of a
public Weigher in a Town.
that is a public Officer there, for these words, That he has done corruptly;
of that he has taken bribes to make false Weights, or the like, by Williams
Justice.

This Action will not lie, for saying of a Bailiff, That he had made no Of a
Bailiff.
true Account. Bulstr. 2. 218.

This Action will lie, for saying of A. B. Clerk to the Company of
Merchant-Taylors Of a Clerk of a Company.
in London, these words, Before A. B. came to the service of the
Merchant-Tailors, he dwelt in Shrewsbury, and setthe Town together by the
ears, and so long as he was there, they were never in quiet, but afterward
they lived quietly, and he being Clerk to the Merchant-Tailors, was of consent
and counsel with W. G. to deliver the Books of the Corporation which he had in
his keeping, to the intent that thereby some of the Lands of the same
Corporation might be found concealed. Croo. 1. part last published. 358.

But if one shall say of another (that is an Officer) without any precedent
Communication about his Office, Place, Trust, or Profession. That Couzening.
Incertainty.
he is a couzening and cheating Knave; or that he has couzened and cheated
any man thus, and thus; this is so general and uncertain, that no Action will
lie for it. March. of Slanders. 1. part 72. 73.

Out of all which Cases touching Officers, and such like persons employed as in
the Cases before, That he that will charge a man for words spoken against
another, for any thing tending to defame him in his office or place of Trust,
these things must be in the Case.

1 The words must be spoken of him generally, and then will be by construction
of Law intendible, as spoken to, or of him in relation to it, or they must be
spoken with express reference to his office, or place, and employment; for if
they be spoken occasionally, about another subject, they may not be actionable.

2 The Plaintiff that sues, must set forth that he was such an Officer at the
time of the words spoken, or otherwise regularly the Action will not lie; for
it will not be sufficient to say, that he had been such an Officer, etc. But
it is not needful for him to say, that the hearers of the words did at that
time know him to be such an Officer.

3 The words must be subject to the general Rules of all other actionable
words; they must be certain, false, malicious, etc. And yet if they fail to be
actionable by any of these defects, if they occasion any special damage to him,
of whom they are spoken; they may be actionable, albeit they be not so of
themselves.

4 It is said, that in Actions for Slander, of this nature, that there must be
a special Averment of some damage by the words, and that otherwise they will
not be actionable: But it seems, the Law, and common practice is otherwise; and
it shall be presumed to be a loss, and therefore need not to be averred.
Howbeit, it is doubtless the sure and safe way (if the Case will bear it) to
allege a particular damage, and it is usual so to do, for merease of damages.
March. 59.

5 That the same actionable words, when spoken of a man in Office and Trust,
etc. spoken of another man out of this Office, or place of Trust, or of a man
in Office, without any reference to it, may not be actionable. Hobb. Rep. pl.
35. 93. 104. 351. Croo. 1. part 97. Bulstr. 1. part 36.

CHAP. XXI. Of Scandalous Words that relate to men in their Trade, and Way of
Living.
THere are other scandalous words, that have reference to men in their Sect. 1.
way of Trade, and that whereby they get their livelihood. And this lies
especially in three things.

1 When any thing shall be said of them to disparage their credit, as to their
estate, as when they shall be said to be Bankerupts, or the like.

2 When any thing is said against their honesty, and Justice in their Trading,
as when they shall be said to cheat in things, or in weight, or measure in
their buying, and selling.

3 When any thing shall be said to disparage their skill in their Trade. But it
may be in some other particulars, and wherein soever it is, that any man is
damnified by such talk, he must have his remedy by this Action.

It is therefore agreed, that this Action will lie, for saying of a Merchant, 1
To disparage the estate.
Mercer, Grocer, Shoemaker, Dyer, Weaver, one that does buy and sell Wool by
Retail, a Grasier, one that does trade for Lead in any County, and gets a
living by it, a Corn-Master, or Baker in London, a Country Farmer, that does
buy and sell, and live by it, a Millener in London. Or to say of any other
Tradesman that lives by buying and selling at present. or did so very lately,
and does so usually. To say of any such kind of man, That he is a Bankerupt.
Noys Rep. 158. Huttons Rep. 49. Bulstr. 1. Bankerupt.
part 267. Coo. 4. 19. Styles Rep. 75. Croo. 1. part last published. 268.

Or, He is a Bankerupt Knave. Bulstr. 2. part 210. Dyer 72. Croo. 1. part last
published. 911. Bulstr. 1. part 110. And yet some have doubted of this. Hutton.
Rep. 13. 14.

Or, He is a Bankerupt Rogue. Godb. Rep. 152. Croo. 1. 21. Huttons Rep. 52.

Or, he is a Bankerupt Scrub. Styles Rep. 75.

Or, he is a Bankerupt Slave. Croo. 2. 58. Popham. 184. Hutton. 13. 14. March.
of Slanders. 2. part 2.

Or, he will be a Bankerupt within two days. Dyer. 72. Coo. 4. 19.

And yet it is said, it will not lie for these words spoken to a Tradesman,
Thou art a Bankerupt Knave, or a Bankerupt Rogue, where they have relation to
something else besides his Trade. Styles Rep. 420.

So it is said, that this Action will lie for this, He is a Bankeruptly Knave,
and cannot be trusted in London for a Groat. Godb. Rep. 151. But for calling of
one Bankeruptly Knave alone, this is doubted. Croo. 2. 345. 578.

So it will lie for this, I will prove that he has been Bankerupt, and has
agreed with his Creditors for a Noble in the pound, and I will prove it. Hill.
3. Jac. B. R. Edmonds Case.

So for this, I will prove thee a Bankerupt.

So for this, I shall prove thee a Bankerupt by such a time. Croo. 1. 193.

So for this, He is gone, and dares not show himself for Debt, and he is a
Bankerupt for ought that I know. Styles Rep. 130.

So for this, He is a Bankerupt, and fled beyond the Sea for money, Trin. 9.
Jac. B. R. Trulocks Case.

So for this, He is not worth a Groat, he is a hundred pound worse than
naught. Croo. 1. 193. 231. Huttons Rep. 125. Bulstr. 2. part 267. Croo. 2. 578.
yet this is doubted by some. See afterward.

So for this. He came a broken Merchant from Dale.

But it will not lie for saying, He was a poor man within this seven years,
for he may be sufficient now, notwithstanding this. Croo. 1. 123.

So it will lie for this, He is a Bankerupt, and not able to pay his Sect. 2.
Debts, but will run the Country. Huttons Rep. 46.

So for this, He is a Bankerupt, and I will drive him out of the Country.

So for this, What art thou? a Bankerupt, and wast a Bankerupt. Croo. 1. part
last published. 273.

So for this, Thou do owe more than thou art worth, and art not able to pay
thy Debts. Styles Rep. 213.

So for this said of a Merchant, or the like. He is broken. Hill. 17. Jac. B.
R. Johnsons Case.

So for this, He is a poor fellow, and not able to pay eleven shillings in the
pound, and not able to pay his debts. Styles Rep. 273.

So for this, Thou art a base beggarly Rogue; and not able to pay thy debts.
Styles Rep. 217.

So to say of such a one as does merchandise for Lead in any County, and get
his living by it, he is a Bankerupt, and beggarly Gentleman. Bulstr. 1. part
41. Huttons Rep. 40.

So for this, said to a Corn-Master and Baker in London, Thou art a broken
fellow, and have cheated me of two hundred pound. Styles Rep. 429.

So for this, said of a Farmer in the Country, that does buy and sell, and get
his living by it, You are a beggar and bankeruptly fellow, and if every one had
his own, you are not worth a groat; with an Averment, that thereupon his
Landlord turned him out of his bargain, or he had any special loss.

So for this, said of a Millener in London, Thou art in a breaking and decayed
condition, and I will prove it; and if you question me, I will prove it to
your disgrace. Styles Rep. 425.

So for this, said of a Merchant, that is to have a Trial at Guildhall, He is
broken [Innuendo he is not able to pay for the wares he bought] and I warrant
you he dares not be at the Trial at Guildhall. Croo. 2. 562.

So for this, said of a Merchant, Thou art a Rogue, and a beggarly fellow, and
I shall prove thee a Bankerupt before the next Term. Croo. 1. 171.

So for this, said of a Grocer, He is a beggarly fellow, and not able to pay
his debts. Croo. 1. 339. Croo. 1. last published. 643.

And yet it is said, it will not lie for this, He is a base broken Rascal, and
has broken twice, and I will make him break the third time. But to say, he
will break the third time, may be more dangerous. Noys Rep. 77. Bendloes Rep.
170.

Nor will this Action lie for saying of an Attorney, Farmer, or other man that
is no Merchant, or other Tradesman, that lives by buying and selling, he is a
Bankerupt. March. 8. Croo. 2. 424. Goldsb. 84. Finches Law. 186. Bulstr. 1.
part 40. Jenk. Cent. 7. Case 70. Huttons Rep. 13. 14.

Nor for this, said of a Merchant, or Tradesman, Trust him not, for he will be
thy undoing. Nor for this, said of a Tradesman, he is a beggarly fellow. Croo.
1. 171. Nor for this, I will sue out a Commission of Bankerupts against J. S.
Nor for this, said to a Wooll-winder in London, or elsewhere; Nor of a Tailor,
or Fuller, he is a Bankerupt. Popham. 185.

Nor for this, Thou art an arrant Knave, for thou have couzened all Coventry.
Cozening.
Bulstr. 1. part 162. 163. Nor for this said of a Merchant.

This Action will lie for saying of a Shoemaker, He is a Bankerupt, and he
did set forth, that he was a Shoemaker, and did use buying and selling of
Leather. Croo. 1. part last published. 208.

Nor for this said of a Merchant, Does he owe you money? get it quickly, and
take heed how you trust him. Croo. 1. part last published. 541. Trin. 36. Eliz.
Vaspicks Case.

Nor will it lie (as it is said) for this, said of a Dyer, Thou art not worth a
great; Albeit he aver, that the speech in the Country where it was spoken, be
as much in the sense thereof there, as, thou art a Bankerupt. Pasche. 15. Car.
B. R. Axe and Moodes Case. For his credit may be good, albeit he be worth
nothing. And yet if a man have any special damage by such words, with an
Averment of it, he may maintain the Action. Yea, it seems there are some
Judgments, that the words themselves, Thou art not worth a groat, are
actionable. See before. Croo. 1. 193.

If one be but a Merchants Apprentice, and he does Merchandise for another
man, and be called Bankerupt; or if one have been a Merchant, and has given it
over, and a man call him Bankerupt; in either of these Cases the Action will
not lie. And yet if in the last Case, he have resumed his Trade again, and
then be called so; in this Case the Action will lie. Noys Rep. 33. Bulstr. 1.
part 267.

This Action will lie for saying of a Merchant, Mercer, Grocer, or any 2 To
disparage his honesty.
such like Tradesman, That he does buy and sell by false weights and measures;
or by false weights, or measures. But to charge another man so, that is no
Tradesman, is not actionable. Mich. 15. C^r. 1. Co. B. March. Rep. Sect. 3.
pl. 119. 197. Hobb. Rep. 93. Pasche. 17. Car. 1. Pains Case.

Nor to say of a Tradesman, That he keeps false weights and measures in his
house; this is not actionable, for perhaps he does never use them, nor know of
them. March. Rep. pl. 197. Hill. 6. Eliz. Co. B.

And yet to say, He keeps false weights and measures, by which he Deceit.
does cousen the Country, it seems, will be actionable. So it will lie for
this, Thou do keep, and sell by false weights, and in four and twenty
shillings bestowing, thy weights were false two ounces, and I will prove it.
Brownl. 1 part 4. 5.

So it will lie for this, said of a Merchant, He is a cheating Knave, and has
cheated his Father, by returning twenty pound for wares, etc. Croo. 1. 398.
Styles Rep. 388.

And yet it has been said to be resolved not to lie for a Wheelwright, for
these words said to him, Thou art a Couzener, and have couzened me of a pair
of Wheels. Hetleys Rep. 123.

This Action will lie for saying of a Goldsmith, and one that gets his living
Couzening.
by buying and selling of Chains, and the like wares, Thou art a couzening
Knave, for thou have sold me a Saphyr for a Diamond. Croo. 3. 171. Hill. 32.
Eliz. B. R. But it will not lie for saying these words of a Tailor, He is a
couzening Knave, for he has sold me a Chain for Gold, that is but Copper, and
he is a couzening Knave upon Record, and has been imprisoned for couzening.
Croo. 2. 171. March. of Slanders. 2. part 2.

So it will lie for this, for saying of a Farmer, that does use to sow his
Land, and sell the Corn upon it, and by this to maintain his family, he keeps
Couzening.
a false bushel, by which he does cousen and cheat the poor, and that by this
he lost his custom, etc. Pasche. 17. Car. 1. Co. B. Mirch. Rep. pl. 192.

To say of a Brewer, he makes and sells bad Beer, or of a Baker, he sells
naughty Bread, is actionable, if the party of whom it is said has any loss
by it. Mich. 15. Car. 1. B. R.

So to say of a Brewer, My Mare does piss as good Beer as he does brew; this
is said to be actionable, if he suffer any loss by it. March. 60. Dykes Case.
But otherwise not, for the words are insensible and impossible, and therefore
not actionable, but by reason of the especial damage. Mich. 15 Car. 1. B. R.

Nor will this Action lie for these words, said of a Merchant, He is a
couzening Knave, March. 8. 9. and yet if it be spoken with reference to his
Couzening.
trade, it is questionable. Palche. 15. Car. B. R.

Nor for this, He came to D. with a blew Coat on his back, but has now gotten
much wealth by trading with Pirates, couzening in the trade of Pilchars, and by
extortion. Bulstr. 2. part 216.

Nor for this, said of an Alderman and Merchant, He is a false Knave, and
keeps a false Debt-book, and charge me with the receipt of a piece of
Velvit, which is false. Croo. 1. part last published. 403. Hill 37 Eliz. B. R.
Brooks Case.

If I have a Bailiff on my Farm, that does buy and sell my Corn there, Sect. 4.
and by my service herein he has his livelihood, and any one shall charge him
with any deceit herein, whiles he is in the office and employment, he may
Servant to deceive his Master.
have this Action, but not after he is out of the employment. Hobb. Rep. pl. 9.
Winches-Rep. 40. March Rep. 190. 197.

This Action will lie for any servant that shall be by such words Servant.
charged to cousen or deceive his Master; as to say, A. does defraud [cozen, or
cheat] his Master, and will undo him. If the servant have any special loss by
it. Pasche. 15 Car. 1. B. R. March of Slanders. 1. part 99.

This Action will lie for saying of an Inne-keeper, No man comes to
Inne-keeper, Alehouse-keeper, etc.
his house but he couzeneth him. Hetleys Rep. 123.

And yet it is said to be adjudged not to lie for these words, spoken of a
Butchers Wife, who does use to sell meat in her Husbands absence. That she is
a couzening Woman, and has couzened one of her Neighbors Couzening.
of four pound, and I will prove it. Huttons Rep. 14.

So for this, said of a Co-partner in Trade, You are a couzening Knave, and did
cousen me of one thousand two hundred pound at one time, and that was in making
an Account in the year one thousand six hundred forty eight. Styles Rep. 388.

So for this, said of a Brasier, Thou have couzened me in a Pan. Styles Rep.
364. Pasche. 7. Jac. B. R. And so by the same reason it seems it will lie
against any man, that shall charge any other Tradesman with couzening another
in his Trade.

This Action will not lie for saying of a Merchant, He is a very Varlet,
Varlet. Hypocrite.
and seeks to suppress his brothers will, he makes a show of Religion, he is
a very hypocrite. Pophams Rep. 148.

Nor for this, Thou art a Cheater, and have cheated my husband of Cheater.
five hundred pounds. For the words do not refer to his trade. Croo. 1. 301.
Brownl. 1. part 4. 16.

Nor for saying of any Tradesman in London, Thou art a Cheater, and have
cheated I. S. of five hundred pounds, unless it be spoken of, and applied to a
cheating in his Trade. Croo. 1. 101.

Nor for this said of any Tradesman, He has deceived me in a reckoning for
Wares, and his Debt-book which he keeps in his Shop is a Deceit.
false book, and I will make him ashamed of his calling. Brownl. 4. Gold. Rep.
242.

Nor for saying of a Merchant, He keeps a false Debt-book. Winches. Rep. 40.
Croo. 1. part last published. 403. But to say of him, He deceives men by buying
and selling, may be actionable. Winches. Rep. 40.

Nor will this Action lie for this, said to a Merchant, Trust him not, he will
be thy undoing. Croo. 1. 171.

Nor for this, said of such a man, He is a Couzener. Croo. 2. 204.

This Action will lie for this, said of a Tradesman, to one that is about to
place his Son with him, Put not your Son to him, for he will starve him to
death. Hetleys Rep. 71.

So for this, said of a Tailor, and freeman of a City, He has cheated in his
Trade. Irelands Case, Trin. 15 Car. 1. B. R. Hetleys Rep. 123.

This Action will lie for saying of some Tradesmen, They have no 3 To
disparage the skill. Sect. 5.
skill or understanding in their Trades, as to say of a Tailor, Carpenter, or
such like tradesman, He has no skill in his trade, it seems clearly to be
actionable. But this said of a Mercer, or some such like Tradesman, that may
use his trade by one that has skill, may not be actionable.

So to say of a Baker, He knows not how to bake, or he does not make good
bread; or of a Brewer. He cannot, or does not brew good Drink, and the like,
this must needs be Actionable; so to say of such a Trade-sman, He wants
skill, or care about his trade. And yet to say of any such man, He had no skill
within this few years, may not be actionable, for he may have enough at this
time. Croo. 1. 231.

If one shall say of an Inne-keeper, Victualing man, or such like man 4 Or
otherwise to prejudice him of whom they are spoken. Inne-keeper, etc.
Infectious discase. Averment.
or woman, that keeps a common house, That he [or she] has in his, [or her]
house, any great or infectious Disease, as the Plague, Pox, or the like, and
thereby he or she lose their Guests, or suffer any special damage, they may
have this Action, otherwise not; and yet it seems the Action is maintainable
without Averment of any special loss. Coo. 4. 14. 17. Pophams Rep. 36.

So to say of such a woman, Inne-keeper, etc. She is a pockey Drab, does wear
a Scarf to hide her blanches in her neck, it is a pockey household; it seems is
actionable. Trin. 9. Jac. Ludmans Case. Styles Rep. 112. Hetleys Rep. 70.

But this Action will not lie for such words spoken of another that is no
Inne-keeper, That pockey Drab does wear a Scarf about her neck to hide her
blanches, I will not eat with her for ten pound. And yet it there be speech of
the French Pox, and therein the words be spoken, they may be the more dangerous.

So it will lie for this, said of such a man, He does keep a Bawdy House, Coo.
4. 14. 17. Bulstr. 1. part 138. 27 H. 8. 15. Keep a Bawdy House.


So to say of an Alehouse-keeping Woman, Hang thee Bawd, thou art worse than a
Bawd, thou keep a house worse than a Bawdy House, and thou keep a Whore
in thy house to pull out my throat. Hughes Rep. 40.

So to say of an Inne-holder, That he has buried diverse in his Garden, that
dyed in his house of the Plague. Regist. orig. 173.

But this Action will not lie, for saying of a Carrier, He is a common Barretor.
Barretor.

Nor for saying of a Cooper, He is a Varlet, and a Knave, and a false knave.
Hobb. Rep. pl. 188. Croo. 2. 104. 1. part last published. 403. Varlet.


Nor for this, Thou art a branded Rogue, and a Rogue by the Statute. Branded
Rogue
Croo. 2. 204.

This Action will lie for saying of a Physician in reference to his Of a
Physicia or Dhirurgion.
profession, He is a Mountebank, a base fellow, and an Emperike. Hughs Rep.
441. Pasche. 12, Car. B. R.

So for saying, He has no learning nor skill in Physic, 7, and 8. Car. Sect.
6.
B. R. So for this, He is a drunken fellow, a fool, and an ass, and was never
a Scholar, nor able to speak like a Scholar, is no Scholar, or has no
learning, in general without referring it to his office; But if the words be
spoken with reference to his office, they are the more unquestionably
Actionable, Croo. 1. 196. 197. Godb. Rep. 441. So to say, Go not to such a one
for Chyturgery, for he has no skill in Surgery. Hetleys Rep 70.

So it seems to lie for this, spoken of a Chyrurgion, and of one Matthews he
lately had in cure, Thou did kill Mr. Matthews, thou did kill him, and if
he say for lack of skill, then is the Case more clear. Hetleys Rep. 69.

But say of him, He has killed A. (now dead) with Physic, a Pill, Of a
Midwife.
and the Vomit was found in his mouth, and Doctor A. and Doctor B. found it;
so, and it is true, is not Actionable, albeit it be averred the Doctors never
found it so. Croo. 1. part last published. 620.

This Action will lie for saying of a Midwife, Many have perished for her want
of skill. Croo. 1. part 153.

So for this, Thou art a Witch, and were the death of the child of I. S. at
whose birth thou were Midwife. Trin. 21. Jac. B. R.

And to all this, we have said of these last kind of Slanders, we must Sect.
7.
add these things.

1 That he that brings an Action for this Slander, he must in his Action
brought, set forth himself to be a Merchant, Mercer, Baker, or of some one
Trade or other in certain; and it will not be sufficient for him to say he
was a Tradesman in general, for no other man can have this Action, Styles Rep.
420. 426.

2 That he must set forth, that he is a common Tradesman, as a common Baker,
or the like, and not a Baker for a time only. Huttons Rep. 49.

3 That he must set forth, he was such a Tradesman at the time of the
speaking of the words; and yet a Declaration saying that the Plaintiff, fuit
Mercator per magnum tempus, not saying he was so at the time was held good.
Croo. 1. part last published 273. Bulstr. 1. part 36.

4 That a man may not justify the calling of another Bankrupt, because he was
once a Bankrupt, unless he be a Bankrupt at the time he calls him so. Croo.
2. 578. Coo. 4. 17. 18.

5 That the words be spoken with reference to the Trade, or that be general
and relative words to the Trade, that must be so understood, as Bankrupt, or
the like, for being spoken of another thing, they will not be Actionable.

That in many of the Cases before, for words that are not Actionable, yet if
the party of whom they are spoken, have any special loss by them, the words
may happily bear an Action.

6 That in Cases of words Actionable, there must be (as some say) in the
Declaration an Averment of some special loss, that the party of Averment.
whom the words are spoken, has sustained by them: But it seems the Law, and
the Common practice (at least) in some of the Cases, is otherwise, howsoever if
the Case will bear it, it is best so to do. March. Rep. 96. Brownl. 1. part 10.
13. 2. part 100. 129. Croo. 1. 100.

7 That this Action for such kind of words as these, is to be subjected to
the general Rules of other Actions for Slanderous words, viz. they must be
false, malicious, certain, etc. For if they be true, or not malicious, or
subject to such a Qualification by other words, as they may possibly be, they
will not be Actionable at all.

CHAP. XXII. Of an Action of the Case for a Conspiracy.
A Conspiracy (strictly taken) is where two or more persons do purposly and
maliciously, conspire and labor together falsely, and unjustly, What it is
Sect. 1.
without any ground at all, to indict another for some Treason, Felony, or
other offense; and after he which is so Indicted, is upon that Indictment
after a lawful trial, purged and acquitted; in this Case, and for this wrong,
as he may have other remedy, so he may have remedy by an Action of the Case,
wherein the Plaintiff shall recover damages according to his harm. Coo. 9. 56.
F. N. B. 114, 115, 116.

The word Conspiracy, and the writ of Conspiracy, is sometimes taken more
largely (to wit) for any agreement, or combination between others, to vex and
molest me in any vexations Suit whatsoever; in which Case the Law gives me a
remedy by this Action, to which we may happily say more hereafter.

It two, or more, do falsely, and maliciously, Conspire to indict, or appeal
Where, and in what Case this Action will lie for a Conspiracy, or not. And how.
another of any offense against any Law, as Treason, Felony, Barretry, or the
like; and after he that is so indicted is acquitted, this writ lies for him.
Coo 5. 56. F. N. B. 114. Bendloes Rep. 152. Yelvertons Rep. 161. Bulstr. 3.
part 271. Bendloes Rep. 138.

And this Action is given to the party indicted, as well for the scandal that
both grow to him thereby, as for the trouble which may befall him, by reason of
the preferring of the Bill of Indictment against him. Styles Rep. 10. 11. Croo.
1. part last published 564. 724. 725.

But for the opening of this point, these things are to be known, that in all
Cases where this Writ of Conspiracy shall be maintainable, there must be
these things in the Case.

1 This lies as well upon an Indictment for Treason, as upon an Indictment for
Felony; and other matters. Bulstr. 2. part 271. 272.

But it will not lie for an Indictment of Trespass. Styles Rep. 157. 424.

2 There must be two or more in the Plot, for the Writ of Conspiracy will not
lie against one man alone, nor against a man and his wife (who are but one
person in Law) unless the Writ say that they Simulcum It must be by two or
more persons.
others did the thing. And hence it is that if the Suit be begun against
diverse, and all but one of them are discharged of it to all intents, as being
acquit by verdict, hereby he is discharged also. F. N. B. 114. 116. 18. Ed. 1.
Broo. Consp. 21 Bendloes 138.

But if the Writ be brought against two, and one of them does bar the
Plaintiff by a Demurre in Law, or one does appear and plead, and his plea is
found against him: in these Cases the other is not discharged but the Plaintiff
shall recover, though the other be not attainted: And yet in this Case he may
perhaps refuse to answer without the other; Or if all the Conspirators but one
be dead; there the Writ may be had against him alone. F. N. B. 116. 114. 40.
Ed. 3. 19. 38. Ed. 3. 3. 35. H. 6. 14. 24. H. 6. 25.

But an Action of the Case in the nature of the writ of Conspiracy will lie
against one. Croo. 1. part 173. Bulstr. 3. part 271. and 1. part 185. Godb. 76.
Croo. 1. part 173.

3 The party that brings this Writ of Conspiracy, must be indicted, arraigned,
and acquitted, for a purpose, or intent without the Act, (however in some cases
it was punishable in the Star Chamber) yet it is not punishable by our Law.
And therefore this Action will not lie for a Plot, or Preparation, without an
execution of it. Non officit conatus, nisi sequatur effectus. Coo. 9. 56. F. N.
B. 114.

4 The proceeding, and prosecution in question, must be voluntary, and not
compulsory. And therefore neither this Action, nor an Action of the Case Sect.
2.
in general, will lie against a man that does prosecute another upon an
Indictment by constraint, or compulsion in a Court, as where men are obliged to
it by their Oath, or Office, as Justices of Peace, or Jurors, sworn to present
such offenses, or witnesses called to testify their knowledge of such things;
or one that does come into a Court voluntarily, and there discover one that is
a Felon indeed; and yet if it be voluntary at the first, and after compulsory,
it may be unlawful and actionable.

And yet if one shall come into a Court voluntarily, and discover Felonies, and
it be true, which he does discover, and this be without any malice precedent,
no Action will lie for this. So, if one come into a Court, and by the command
of all, or one of the Justices, draw, or procure to be drawn an Indictment; or
if, being bound to prosecute, he do so, and cause an Indictment, etc. Or if
he be bound to give in evidence, and he do so; or he do give false evidence,
this will not make him liable to this Action. 27. H. 6. 12. 35. H. 6. 14. 27.
H. 8. 2. Fitz. 115. Leonard Rep. 107.

For if this Writ should lie against one that comes in, only to swear to the
truth of an Indictment, then would no man come in to do it. Coo. 4. 14. Bulstr.
1. part 185. Porter and Griffins Case. B. R.

This Action lies not against a Iuror, or witness that comes into a Court to
be sworn. Coo. 9. 55. And if a Witness, or Iuror had conspired out of Court,
and the Witness had sworn, or the Iuror had given a corrupt verdict, upon a
Conspiracy before out of Court, they might have been punished in the
Starr-Chamber. Coo. 2. 23. 24. And so also of the Judge, or Justice of Peace.
But neither Judge, nor Jury, nor Witness, will be liable to this Action, by
our Law, in such a Case. Coo. 12. 23. 24. 12. Ed. 4, 18. 21. Ed. 3. 17. 7. H.
4. 31. 35. H. 6. 14. 20. H. 6. 5. F. N. B. ^15.

And yet, if there be just cause, as that in truth there is a Felony committed,
and any man whatsoever, shall complain to a Justice of Peace of it, and
thereupon, he that does complain, is bound over to prosecute (which is the
ordinary course) and thereupon he does prefer an Indictment, and prosecute,
etc. this is not actionable. Croo. 2. 32. 130. 191. Bulstr. 1. part 150.

5 The proceeding, and prosecution must be malicious, for an unjust revenge, as
well as voluntary. For if one man do prosecute another in this way, upon good
ground; as where a Felony is done, and there is some cause of suspicion of that
person, more than another, either by the common fame, or otherwise; as where a
man is robbed, and the next Village, upon Hue and Cry, does make pursuit, and
take a man whom they have in suspicion, and thereupon the party robbed, does
indict that man, and upon the Indictment, in his Trial he is acquitted. Or a
Coroner, after a murder, sitting super visum corpor^s, cannot find out the
murder; and then enquiring of the first finders of the body, they present, that
J. S. killed him, and thereupon he is indicted, and acquitted; these
proceedings shall not be said to be malicious, nor are they as punishable, by
any Action, as in case where it appears he does begin and prosecute his work
maliciously. And whether there be malice, or not in such a prosecution, must be
judged by Circumstances, as his manner of prosecution, speeches, and the like;
and a Jury only must determine it. Bulstr. 2. part 2. 84. Broo. Cou^p. 4. Coo.
9. 55. Croo. 2. part 191. 194. Bulltr. 2. part 269 Leonard Rep. 107. pl. 146.
Bulstr. 1. part 149. Croo 1. part 96. Croo. 1, part last published. 724.

6 It has been held by some Judges, that it ought not only to be maliciously
contrived, but it must be false; and that if the party be guilty of the Crime,
whereof he is accused, and for which he is prosecuted, that this Writ will
not lie. By the two Chief Justices, and Lord Chancelour. Sed Quere, if this may
not admit of some exception. Huttons Rep. 73.

If one be robbed, by persons unknown, and one of the Thieves had a white Horse
and brown Cloak, and was like to the Plaintiff, and upon this was apprehended
and prosecuted; this was held lawful, and that this Action did not lie for it.
So where the Daughter complained to the Father, she was ravished by J. S. but
was not so, and thereupon he did prosecute him; that no Action lay for this.
So in like cases where there are good and seeming probabilities a man may
prosecute another after this manner, and justify it, albeit the party accused
be innocent, and the thing false.

But if there be no probabilities in the Case, or the Justice, in his
examination, find no cause to bind over, and yet he proceeds. Bulstr. 1.
part 149. 150. 185. Godb. Rep. 203. Huttons Rep. 73. Bulstr. 3. part 331.

And in this, it is said, that if the Charge and Accusation be true but in
part, as where the Writ does suppose a man to indict him for murder, and it was
upon his Arraignment found, that he did kill the man, but that the killing was
per infortunium, or se defendendo, in this case the Writ will not lie. Fitz.
Consp. 21. Stamf. lib. 3. cap. 12.

7 The party indicted, or appealed, must be legittimo modo acquietatus, Sect.
3. Acquittal by pardon.
(that is) he must be acquitted upon his Trial by the Petit Jury after an
Indictment found by the Grand Jury; or if he bring an Appeal, be nonsuit, or
the like. And therefore if the Acquital be by a general, or particular pardon;
or he is discharged for the insufficiency of the Indictment, and no Judgment
be given upon it; or the party is indicted, and an Ignoramus is found upon the
Bill; in all these Cases, this Writ of Conspiracy will not lie. Croo. 2. 131.
Bendloes Rep. 152. Yelvertons Rep. 161. Brownl. and Goldsb. 10. 9. Ed. 4. 12.
F. N. B. 114. Coo. 7. 45. 41. And yet the last of these Cases, upon an
Ignoramus found, is doubted of by some, and the contrary said to be twice
adjudged. 41. Eliz. B. R. 20. Jac.

And for the general Pardon, he is to plead it, and the Justices are to allow
of it. Brownl. 1. part 9. Bulstr. 1. part 150. 151. Croo. 1. 208. Dyer. 28. 85.
Goldsb. 51.

8 The Prosecution must be about some criminal matter, that may bring a scandal
upon him; for if it be but a matter of Trespass only, no Action will lie for
this. Styles Rep. 157.

9 This Action may lie, for procuring one to be indicted, although the party
himself do it not, for one may exhibit a Bill to the Grand Jury without oath.
Styles Rep.

10 To encourage one that is robbed to cause the suspected Felon to be
indicted: and to accompany him to the Assizes, is lawful to do, and will not
bring one in danger of this Action. But if when he shall so do, he knows
there was no Robbery done, it is dangerous. Goldsb. and Brownl. 9.

11 The Iudictment must be preferred before the Judge that has power to take
it, or else no Action will lie for it. Croo. 1. part last published. 125.

But upon all this, there may seem to arise a Question; If in any Case where
the party prosecuted is guilty of the offense for which he is prosecuted, be
there never so much of malice in it. Whether for this, this Action may lie, or
not against the Prosecutor?

If the offense about which the Prosecution is, be Treason, or Felony, it
should seem no malice shall be said to be in this, to make the Prosecutor
liable to Action, if the party be guilty of the offense. But if the offense be
only Barretry, or some small matter, and the party be guilty, there may happily
be so much of malice in the Prosecution, as to make him liable to this Action.
Yet see Bulstr. 3. part 331. Just. Crooks opinion otherwise in this. Bulstr. 1.
185.

In all Cases, where the practice, or procurement, being by two, or more,
Where, and in what case the general Action of the Case in the nature of a Writ
of Conspiracy will lie against one man. Or not. And how. Sect. 4.
will give cause or ground for a Writ of Conspiracy, there, if the same thing
be done by one alone, a general Action of the Case, in the nature of a Writ of
Conspiracy, will lie for it; so that if one man only do falsely and maliciously
cause another to be indicted for Felony, Barretry, or the like, who is
thereupon acquitted, as Action of the Case, in the nature of a Writ of
Conspiracy, lies for it. Hobb. Rep. pl. 11. 350. March. 130. Pasche. 7. Jac.
B. R. Marsham versus Pescod. 41. 42. Eliz Co. B. Sheringtons Case. Croo. 2.
193. 32. Bulstr. 3. part 331. Croo. 1. part 123. Croo. 1. part last published.
563.

And for the opening hereof, these things are to be known; That in all Cases
where this general Action of the Case against one man shall be maintainable,
there must be these things in the Case.

1 There must be somewhat done and acted, for the Action will not lie upon a
plot, or purpose only. And yet it is not needful in this Case, that there be so
much done, as there must be in the Writ of Conspiracy. For in this case, if one
do but procure another to be arrested, brought before Justices, examined, or
imprisoned for a Felony, and he be never indicted for the Felony; it seems
that for this only without more, this Action will lie in this Case. Coo. 9. 56.
57. Coo. 4. 14. 15. F. N. B. 114. 116.

2 It must be false, and malicious; For if the thing be true, for which the
Prosecution is, and there were probabilis causa, for what was done; no Action
will lie for this. And therefore it is held, That no Action will lie for
prosecuting another in a legal way and course of Justice; as for giving of
evidence in any Court against an offender, or for petitioning of a Judge to
have the Good Behavior, or the like. Bulstr. 2. part 269. Croo. 2. 193. And
so, as it is in the Cases before of a Conspiracy, it is in most things in this
Action also.

3 In this Case the Plaintiff has not need to set forth in his Writ, that he
was legittimo modo acquietatus, as he must in the Writ of Conspiracy. Pasche.
3. Jac. B. R. Marshams Case.

Nor is it necessary in this Case, that the Prosecution be to an Acquital by
verdict. For if the party do only charge him with a crime, and cause him to be
arrested upon it, and go no further, he may have this Action for the doing of
so much, and no more. Coo. 9. 55. Croo. 1. 223. And yet see Godb. 76. Croo. 1.
173. Hughes page 52. Where it is said, that this Action will not lie, no more
than the Writ of Conspiracy, unless he show in his Declaration, that he was
upon a Trial legittimo modo acquietatus. But the contrary hereof seems to be
the Law herein. Croo. 1. 197. 201. Coo. 9. 55. And in 3. Jac. B. R. Markam and
Pescods Case.

It is said to be agreed, that a Writ of Conspiracy will not lie, but where the
Plaintiff is legittimo modo acquietatus. And yet that if one prosecute another
to Indictment, and Imprisonment, falso and malitiose, and go no further, that
for this, the party prosecuted may have this Action, both for the Slander and
vexation both; for he is legittimo modo acquietatus, by the not prosecution.
Goldsb. 51. Hughes Rep. 54. Croo. 1. 223.

4 But in this Case, there need not be, as there must be in the Writ of
Conspirary, two or more in the Conspiracy, for this general Action of the Case,
in the nature of a Conspiracy, will lie against one only. Godb. Rep. 76. Croo.
1. 173.

5 It may, out of this, appear to be a safer way in these Cases, for a man
that has suffered such an injury, rather to bring the general Action of the
Case, than the Writ of Conspiracy for his releif herein.

It will be a good Plea in Bar of this Action, to Plead an accord with
Execution, between the parties. 21. H. 6. 28. What shall be said a good plea
in Barr^, in this Action. Sect. 5.


So to show that the Iudictment, upon which the acquittal was, was erroneous,
notwithstanding that the party indicted did not take advantage of it. Croo. 9.
26. 9. Ed. 4. 12. Bridgmans Rep. 132. Dyer. 286. 34. H. 6. 9.

So to say, that there is no such Record as the Plaintiff does set forth. 9 H.
6, 26. Croo. 2. 32.

So to show any of the things before set down, that it was done by compulsion,
in pursuance of their oath, as Judges, Jurors, and the like. 20. H. 6. 5. Croo.
1. part last published 724. 725.

So that one has had his goods stolen, and found them in the Plaintiffs
possession, and that he had other causes to suspect him, complained to a
Justice, who bound over the Plaintiff to appear, and the Defendant to
prosecute. Bulstr. 2. part 284. 285. Croo. 2. 193.

And if the Defendant has any of these or such like thing in his Case, Caution
to a Defendant.
it will be his wisdom to plead it specially, and not to plead, not guilty.
Leonards Rep. 107.

But it is no good plea to say, that the Plaintiff was guilty of the Felony
whereof he was so acquitted, or that one of the Defendants is dead since the
Writ brought; or that the Record on which the Action is grounded, is, that the
Plaintiff and diverse others besides him were indicted therein. 18. Ed. 4. 1. 9.
Ed. 4. 23.

Case 1.
1 One brought an Action in the nature of a Conspiracy, against another, Some
Cases for illustration and confirmation, of the things before laid down about a
Conspiracy. Sect. 6.
for procuring him to be indicted for the Ravishment of his Daughter, and the
Defendant (her Father) showed that his Daughter complained of it to him, and
he to the Justice of Peace, who bound the one to appear, and the other to
prosecute at the Jail-deliver, where he preferred a Bill of Indictment, and
gave evidence, etc. And this was held a good plea and excuse, without saying,
that there was a Rape; But if the Plaintiff had set forth, that there was no
Rape, and that the Defendant knew there was none, happily the Action might have
been maintainable. Croo. 2. 193. Coxe versus Wirral. The like Case is, Croo. 1.
130. Markams Case. And the like in Bulstr. 2. part 286.

Case 2.
2 Doggatee verse. Lawry. B. R. Croo. 2. part 190. This general Action of the
Case, was brought against the Defendant, for, that he did falsely, and
maliciously accuse the Plaintiff of a Felony, and caused him to be brought
before a Justice of Peace, and procured him to bind the Plaintiff, to appear
at the Jail-deliver, and there put in a Bill of Indictment against him, which
was found not true, etc. The Defendant pleaded, that he had Sheep stolen, and
missed others, which were found in the Plaintiffs possession, going with twelve
Sheep that were stolen, etc. And the Iewry upon the trial, found him guilty, and
he had Judgment, and could not get it staid, because the Declaration laid to
be false and malicious, and the Iewry found it also to be so.

Case. 3.
3 Huttons Rep. 49. Hord versus Cordery. The Plaintiff brought an Action of the
Case against C. the Defendant, and B. his Wife, and D for a malicious
confederacy, to charge the Plaintiff with the Felonious Rape of the said D. and
procured him to be examined before a Justice of Peace, and thereupon was bound
in a Recognisance to appear at the general Sessions, and from thence bound over
to the Assizes, and there they Indicted him, and he was acquitted, and he
averred that he did not ravish her: And adjudged for the Plaintiff after a
Writ of error, and twenty marks costs given for his delay.

Case 4.
4 Leonards Rep. pl. 146. s. 107. An Action of the Case of this nature was
brought by Joan Jerome against Knight, and she declared, that Knight had
maliciously caused the Plaintiff to be Indicted of Felony, and to be
Arraigned upon it, and that she was legittimo modo acquietatus, etc. And the
Case was this, that the Defendant came into the Court where the Sessions was
held, and complained of the Plaintiff for the said Felony, for which the
Justices commanded her, to cause an Indictment to be drawn; and the Plaintiff
had Judgment and could not avoid it by a Writ of error.

Case 5.
5 Smith versus Crashaw and others. B. R. M. 1. Car. 1. Croo. 1. 10. The
Plaintiff brought his Action of the Case in nature of a Conspiracy against the
Defendants, for that they had at T. etc. falsely and maliciously accused him of
Treason, caused him to be apprehended, brought to a Justice, to be committed
to Gaol, Indicted, and falsely and maliciously affirmed it to be true; and not
guilty was pleaded, and verdict given for the Plaintiff, and Judgment given
for the Plaintiff, two hundred and forty pound Damages, notwithstanding motions
to Arrest it, and after a solemn deliberation. The like Case was by Lovet verse.
Faulkner. 11. Jac. B. R. Bulstr. 3. part 270.

Case 6.
6 Smith versus Hodgeskins Pasche. 8. Car. 1. B. R. Croo. 1. part 201. An
Action was brought for this, that the Defendant malitiose et falso crimen
feloniae ei imposuit, and caused him to be arrested for Felony: and for these
words, and this work; it was adjudged the Action of the Case did lie.

Case 7.
7 Maning and his wife versus Fitzharbert. Hill. 7. Car. 1. B. R. Croo. 1. 197.
An Action of the Case was brought against the Defendant, for that he ex
malitia of the Plaintiffs wife, crimen feloniae imposuit, caused her to be
brought before a Justice, there charged her with Felony, required that she
might be bound over to the Assizes, which she was forced to do, etc. and this
was found for the Plaintiff, and had damages and Judgment, etc.

Case 8.
8 Williams versus Fletcher. Pasche. 10. Jac. In an Action of the Case in
nature of a Conspiracy, for indicting of a man for a common Barretor, and
making oath to the Iewry, that the Bill was true, upon which the Bill was
found, supposing it false and malicious. In this Case it was adjudged, that in
this Case no Action of the Case in nature of a Conspiracy will lie, Bulstr. 1.
part 185.

Case 9.
9 Three men conspired amongst themselves to charge J. S. with a robbery, and
to procure him to be Indicted, and procured diverse Warrants from Justices of
Peace, by which he was apprehended and examined, and after they preferred an
Indictment against him, whereupon an Ignoramus was found; in this Case it was
resolved, that an Action of the Case in nature of a Writ of Conspiracy lies.
Coo. 9. 55. Pasche. 5. Jac. in Camstellat.

Case 10.
10 It was resolved by the two chief Justices, and the Lord Chancellor, and the
chief Baron, That when the Grand Jury does indict one of Murder or Felony, and
after the party is acquitted; that no Conspiracy lies for him that is
acquitted, for this.

Case 11.
11 A man brought this Action of the Case in nature of a Conspiracy, for
causing him to be indicted of Felony, etc. for suffering a Prisoner to escape
that was convicted, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, for this is more
than trespass, Styles Rep. 157.

Case 12.
12 Hill 8. Jac. B. R. Wall and Hills Case. Bulstr. 1. part 149. An Action of
Conspiracy was brought for conspiring to indict the Plaintiff for a supposed
counterfeiting of a Letter, and for the malicious prosecution thereof at the
Assizes, and that he was acquitted. And he pleaded that the Letter was brought
to him by one unknown, and delivered to him, two others being in his company,
one of which afterward told him, that the Plaintiff was the man that delivered
it, and thereupon he prosecuted him for it; in this Case it was adjudged for
the Plaintiff, for that the prosecution was not upon the Defendants own, but
upon another man's suspicion, and his prosecution, and the justification thereof
must be upon good probabilities, and not upon the suspicion of others. Bulstr.
1. part 149. See Coo. 9. 26. Pasche. 9. Case 13. Car. B. R.

Case 13.
13 The Action was for that Falso and malitiose, he spoke these words of the
Plaintiff, He committed Felony, and procured him to be Arrested and Imprisoned
for three days, and had Judgment after a Plea by Verdict, etc. Croo. 1. 223.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Pleadings in Actions of the Case for words.
AS to the Pleadings in all Actions of the Case for words, this is first to be
known. Of the Declaration to maintain this Action, and what is requisite
therein.


1 That the pleadings of the parties to their Action, are in this Action much
to be heeded, for the Plaintiff or Defendant, either of them in this may, by
his Omission, or Commission, very quickly advantage or prejudice himself, and
therefore they must be very careful herein. Sect. 1.


2 If there be any thing in the truth of the Case, that may make to the
Plaintiffs advantage, it does concern him to insert it into his Count, and if
there be any thing that will make to the advantage of the Defendant, to defend
himself against the Action, and the Plaintiff omit it, the Defendant must be
sure to take hold of it, and to mention it in his plea.

As to Declarations in Actions of the Case for words, these general things are
to be known.

1 That the Declaration is good without the word [Malitiose. Noys Rep. 35. yet
some say, if falso, or malitiose be omitted in the Declaration, that it is not
good. Trin. 7. Car. 1. B. R. Norman and Simons Case, yet see the contrary in
Styles Rep. 59.

2 That if it be, dixit the words, and [de Querente] is left out, it is good.
Styles Rep. 69. Bendloes Rep. 143. if there be any thing to supply it. Croo.
2. 39. but if the words be not recited, to be spoken of the Plaintiff in the
Writ, or in the Declaration, and where he recites the words he says, Innuendo
the Plaintiff, this is defective. Croo. 2. 126. Brownl. etc. part 4.

3 That where these words [in Auditu cum plurimorum ligeorum,] etc. be left
out, it is held good enough, and yet if these, or other words of usual form be
omitted in the Declaration, there perhaps the Defendant may take some advantage
by it, and avoid the Action for that time, if he take exception to it before
he Plead, and before the Trial, for by his Plea, and the Verdict, many defects
in the Declaration may be cured Croo. 2. 33. 39. Croo. 1. 144. Hobb. Rep. 63.

4 That the words of the Declaration with in presentia diversorum. without in
Auditu is good enough, for that will be intended. Croo. 1. last published, 486,
487.

5 If a man sue, and declare of the loss of a Marriage, by words spoken, it is
not sufficient to say, He intended and endeavored to have a Wife, but he must
say, that there was a communication of Marriage, etc. Bulstr. 1. part 276.

6 If the Declaration set forth, that he spoke the words of the Plaintiff, and
in truth, they were spoken to the Plaintiff, it will be good enough, and that
Dixit de praefato, and dixit ad praefatum is all one. Croo. 56. and 2. 39.

7 The Declaration was laid thus, That B. that serves Mistress Shelly, has
murdered Adams his Child [Eliz. Addams filiam Johannis Addams modo defunct.
Innuendo] in this Case the Count was adjudged naught, for modo defunct.
refers only to the time of the Action. Coo. part 13 71. so if for these
words that the Count be, for saying, That the Defendant has poisoned I. S.
Modo defuncto, which referres to the time of the Count, this is not good, for
he is to aver him to be dead at the time of speaking of the words. Croo. 2.
part 343. Jenk. Century. 8. Case 58, 59. Cent. 7. Case 40.

8 Where the Action is laid for speaking of the Plaintiff, He verba, etc.
without saying, that there was any speech of the Plaintiff, or any Innuendo,
etc. it seems good enough. Croo. 2. 230. 241.

9 To say in the Count, Palam and public promulgavit, is good without in
presentia and auditu, etc. Croo. 1. part last published. 861.

10 It matters not whether the Plaintiff do in his Count set forth all the
circumstantial words, as they were spoken, so as he set forth the very words
truly that are actionable, and that he must be sure of, for a little variance
may mar all. And therefore it is wisely done of those, that where they doubt
they charge the Defendant with speaking of various words at several times, and
several ways, and by that are sure in one of them to hit upon the very words
themselves, or the substance thereof. But then he must take care that the Jury
do assesse damages only for the words that are spoken. Croo. 1. 238.

11 The Count was Quod propalavit quaedam verba scandalosa, prout in his
Anglicanis verbis sequend. and ruled to be good. Croo. 1. last published. 573.

12 If the Count be thus, That the Defendant Colloquium habens cum querent, in
the presence of others dixit [meaning the Plaintiff] Thou art a Thief, etc. and
this was ruled good. Styles Rep. 298.

13 That where the Declaration is laid thus, that the Defendant said of the
Plaintiff, Thy Father is a Thief [Innuendo the Plaintiff] that this is not
good, unless he allege it to be said to be spoken to the Son of the
Plaintiff, etc. Croo. Rep. 1. 65.

These things are to be known about an Innuendo in a Declaration. Of the
Innuendo in the Declaration. Sect. 2.


1 That the same may in many cases make certain, that which will otherwise be
uncertain.

2 That the use and office of an Averment, by an Innuendo, in a Declaration, is
either to contain and design the same person, which was named before
incertainly. As thus, two are speaking together of B. and one of them says,
He is a Thief, in this case B. may say in his Count, that they had speech of
him, and one of them said, He [Innuendo] the Plaintiff, is a Thief. Or to
declare the matter, or sense of the words themselves, which were certainly
expressed before, thus, A. and B. speaking of C. A. said, that B. was a Traitor,
to whom B. said, that he was so too: In this case, if A. bring Action for
these words, he may show in the Declaration, that there was a speech between
him and the Defendant of C. And that the Plaintiff said to the Defendant, that
C. was a Traitor, and that the Defendant said thereupon to him, that he
[Innuendo the Plaintiff] was so too. In both these cases it is good. M. 20.
Jac. B. R. Croo. 1. last published. 192. 193. But an Innuendo will never make
words actionable, which of themselves are unactionable. Brownl. and Goldsb. 7.
Coo. 4. 17. 20. Croo. Rep. 1. 303.

3 That this Averment by Innuendo, cannot change the nature of the words, and
make a person, or matter certain in particular, which in it self is so general,
that it is altogether uncertain. Nor can it alter the matter or sense of the
words themselves. As where the words are, He did burn my Barn; he cannot by
an Innuendo a Barn full of Corn, make the words actionable. So where the words
are, He is forsworn, by adding Innuendo in a Court of Record. So where the
words are, he has the Pox, by adding, Innuendo the French Pox. So where the
words are, he took my money from me with a strong hand, Innuendo Feloniously.
So where the words are, the servant of J. S. (who has many servants) is a
Thief, [Innuendo his servant J. S. So, one near about J. S. is a Traitor,
Innuendo, J. S. In these cases, the Innuendo will not make these words,
otherwise unactionable, thereby actionable. Coo. 4. 17. 20. Owens Rep. 58.
Hobb. Rep. pl. 3. 48. Goldsb. and Brownl. 7. 9. So if the words be of a double
and indifferent meaning, and in the one sense actionable, and in the other not
actionable, this will not make them actionable; or if the words be uncertain of
themselves, or in the person of whom they are intended, an Innuendo will not
make them certain, and actionable. Mich. 6. Car. 1. B. R. Hobb. Rep. pl. 4. 48.
Croo. 1. part last published. 496. 497.

4 Where the Action is for words, by which a Marriage is lost, it is not enough
to say, intendebat, or conatus fuit, to have such a woman. But he must say,
Quod colloquium habitum fuit de Matrimonio. Bulstr. 2. part 276.

As to this of Averment, these things are to be known.

1 That if the Declaration be for these words, That J. S. has killed a Of an
Averment in the Declaration. Sect. 3.
man; that it is not necessary to aver, that the man is dead. Winches. Rep. 40.
Bulstr. 1. part 42. So if the words be, for which the Action is brought, Thou
have robbed my Son, or stolen my Horse; there will not need an Averment, that
he had a Son, or that he was robbed, or that he had a Horse. Winches. Rep.
40. Bulstr. 1. part 42. Noys Rep. 55. 63. 116. Winch. 70. 98.

3 That where the words spoken, for which a man brings an Action, do Sect. 3.
(import a scandal of themselves) concern him, and may endanger his life,
liberty, or member, there need not to be an Averment of any special loss by
them; And therefore, for calling of one Traitor, Thief, or the like, there will
not need an Averment of any loss by it to be mentioned in the Declaration, as
where the Action is for calling of one Bastard, or the like. March. Rep. 1. So
where the scandal is about a man's Office, or Trade; so it is also where it does
charge a man with such a disease that must separate him from the society of
men; But in other cases generally there must be an Averment of special damage.
And it is best in most cases to aver it, if the case will bear it. March Rep
59. pl. 93. Brownl. 1. part 10. 13. and 2. part 100. 129. Mich. 17. Car. B. R.
And so it is also for words spoken, that are not in themselves actionable, of a
man or woman, whereby he or she loses a Match, Office, Service, or
Preferment, he or she stands for, and is like to have, there must be an
Averment of a special loss by it to maintain the Action, and warrant the
Declaration Pasche. 5. Car. B. R. Axes Case. Trin. 17. Car. 1. Co. B.
Sandersons Case. So also for any words of passion that may arise to be
actionable, as to call one Rogue, Villain, or the like; these Actions must be
made up by a special Averment. Coo. 4. 15. So, for any words that are called
spiritual, to make them actionable, it must be by a special Averment of loss.
Coo. 4. 17.

4 If the Action be laid, for saying of these words, Thou have killed J. S. it
need not in this case be averred, that J. S. is dead. Adjudged B. R. Coo. 4.
16. Hobb. pl. 11. And yet this has been denied, and the contrary maintained by
some. March. Rep. 109. pl. 187.

5 If the Slander be upon a report, it must be averred in the Court, that there
was no such report made. Hill. 4. Jac. B. R. Lady Morrisons Case. Pasche. 42.
Eliz. Co. B. Morleys Case. As if the Declaration be for this, That A. B, told
me that D. the Hostler, and he stole such a man's horses, he must avert that
A. B. did tell him so, otherwise if A. B. did not tell him so, the Action will
not lie. 42. Eliz. Co. B. Mowl. versus Skebington. Lord Lumleys Case. 10. Eliz.
March. of Slanders. 2. part 13.

6 The Brother of the Defendant spoke these words to the Plaintiff, Thou Thief,
thou Gaol-whelp, etc. And after this the Defendant said, That which my Brother
spoke is true, I will justify it. In this case it was agreed, that there must
be an Averment, that he had notice of his Brothers words. Brownl. 2. part 100.

7 That the word Scienter is a necessary word in some Declarations. Godb. Rep.

8 That where the Action is brought for such strange words as these, Thou have
strained my Mare, thou art mainsworn, or the like hard words, there needs no
averment what the sense thereof is in the Country where they are used, but it
may be proved by witness at the Trial. And yet some say otherwise; the sure
way is to do it by the Declaration. March. Rep. 18. Croo. 1. 96. in Hughes Rep.
page 37. And so it seems is the Law for a slander in another tongue. Hobb. Rep.
165. 268. pl. 236. March. Rep. 18. Bendloes Rep. 134. Styles Rep. 263. Pasche.
7. Jac. B. R Coo. 4. 25.

9 That if the Action be brought, for saying of the Plaintiff, He was in the
Gaol at S. for robbing, etc. it need not be averred, that he was not in the
Gaol, and yet it is the safest way so to set it forth. Sprat and Haines Case.

If one sue for this, said, He that dwells in the next house to J. S. one R.
L. did rob me; he that sues upon this, must averr, he dwells in the next
house to J. S. Pasche. 7. Jac. Clerks Case. B. R. So if it be for these words,
Pritchards man robbed me, he must averr he is Pritchards man. Coo. 4. 16.
Hobb. Rep. 16. Brownl. 1. part 13. and 2. part 100.

11 That in all these Actions for words, where there is any thing that is the
cause or ground of the Action, or tends necessarily to the maintenance of it,
in such Cases the Action is not maintainable, unless that thing be expressly
averred to be, or not to be, as the Case requires. As if it be brought for
this, Whosoever is he, that is the falsest Thief, and the strongest in the
County of Salop, whatsoever he has stolen, or whatsoever he has done, Thomas
Haselwood is falser than he. In this Case it was resolved, that an Averment
must be made, that there were Felons in the County of Salop, or the words will
not bear Action, for if there were no Felons there (which shall rather be
intended) then is it no slander. Hobb. Rep. 309. Pasche. 1. Jac. B. R.

So also if the words be, That he is as very a Thief, as any is in England;
that in this Case it is held that there must be an Averment, that there is such
a Thief in England, yet this Case is more doubtful. Noys Rep. 116. Winch. Rep.
70. 89, So if one say, My Son stole my Hens, if he sue his Father, he must
averr he is his Son. Mich. 14. Car. B. R.

It will be the wisdom therefore of a Plaintiff in his Declaration, not
Caution.
to omit any thing this way, for to averr any thing needless cannot hurt. But
not to averr any thing needful is dangerous herein, and destructive to the
Action.

12. If one had slandered a man by his Bill in the Starr-Chamber, and one had
brought an Action for it; and the party said his Bill was true; this had not
been sufficient without Averment, and showing of the particulars of the Bill.
Coo. 4. 14.

13. Where the Declaration is for this, Thou art a Thief, for thou stolest my
Sons goods, it needs not be averred that he had goods. 38. Eliz. Co. B. Eslin
and Moors Case.

14 Where the Count is for this, I will justify that Barnes is accessory to
the Burglary for which C. D. was hanged; there needs no Averment, that he was
hanged for such a Burglary. Trin. 9. Jac. B. R. Barnes Case. If the Action be
brought for this charge, He stole the Horse of J. S. it need not be averred
he had a Horse. If for this, He killed his Masters Cook, it need not be
averred, that his Master had a Cook. Bridgman Rep. 60.

15 Where the Count is for this, My Master. B. has robbed me of all my goods;
it need not be averred, that he was his servant. M. 15. Jac. B. R. Brown and
Low. So where the Count, is, for saying, Pritchards man robbed him; it seems it
must be averred, that he was Pritchards man.

16 If the Plaintiff declare, that there was a conference between the
Defendant, and one R. and he said, Your Master E. (meaning the Plaintiff) is a
forger of Deeds; he must averr, or it must expressly appear. that R. when he
spoke the words, was his servant. Brownl. and Goldsb. 10.

17 That it will lie for these words, Thou did kill thy Masters Cook,
[Innuendo J. S. late servant of J. D. without any Averment, that the Plaintiff
had a Master, or that J. D. was his Master. Bridgm. Rep. 60.

But if the Wife of the Defendant shall say to the Plaintiff, to A. B. Where is
that lying Thief thy Son [Innuendo the Plaintiff] he has murdered my Aunt
[Quandam D. S. [Amicam defendentis Innuendo] and I will prove it; in this case
it is doubtful, Croo. 1. 127.

18 That it is held by some, that if one bring an Action for words spoken
against him as a Justice of Peace, or Officer, that the Plaintiff is to averr
in his Count, that he was a Justice, or Officer at the time of the words
spoken. But otherwise it may be, if it be brought by a Tradesman for a slander
to him. And there, that it will be sufficient to say, That he has been of the
Trade for diverse years past; and that this will be sufficient. Yelvertons Rep.
21. 153. 158.

19 If the words be, Thou art a The^f, and have stolen more goods, than I am
worth; here needs no Averment of his worth. Bulstr. 2. part 141.

So where the words be, Thou have stolen more horses, than I have fingers and
toes; there needs none, of his fingers and toes. Bulstr. 2. part 141.

20 If the words be thus, He has no sheets in his house, but what were stolen
for him; there must be an Averment, that he has sheets in his house, or the
Action will not lie. 42. Eliz. B. R. Bulstr. 2. part 141.

As to this, the Plea in Bar, these things are to be known.

1 That the pleading of the Defendant, or the verdict of a Jury, or both in
many cases, may help to cure a defect in the Action brought. Croo. 1. 303. What
shall be said, a good plea in bat, or Justification to this Action. Sect. 4.


2 That where the Declaration, for the substance of it, is uncertain, and
naught, the Bar will not help it. But where the fault is in the form only, the
Bar may help it. As where J. S. declares for words thus, quod in presentia
diversorum, etc. dixit de prefat. querent. haec verba Anglicana, viz. thy
Father [predict. querent. Innuendo] is a Thief, for he stole my Sheep; the
Defendant does justify, and it is found for the Plaintiff; no Judgment can be
had; because it does not appear that the words are spoken of the Son of the
Plaintiff. Brownl. Rep. 1. 187.

3 That the Defendant may, in this Action, plead not guilty; or if the
Plaintiff declare upon some of the words only, where all of them together are
not actionable, the Defendant is to set them forth at large, as he spoke them,
and traverse, justify or plead not guilty to the rest of the words as the Case
is. Or if the words be true, and he be able to prove it, he may justify the
speaking of them. As for a charge of Perjury, to show he was perjured in the
Starr-Chamber, for calling of him Thief, that he was attainted of Petit
Larceny. Coo. 4. 13. 19. New Book of Entries. 24. 25. 26. And so in all cases,
where the Plaintiff shall omit any thing material on the Defendants part, the
Defendant may plead it by way of Bar. Coo. 4. 17.

4 To say, a man was indicted for a Felony, may be justified, if it be true;
but the words are not actionable, Hobb. Rep. pl. 89.

5 In a Charge of Perjury, it is not a good Justification, to say, That he
swore such a thing in a Court falsely, unless he add this, knowing it to be
false. M. 38. 39. Eliz. B. R. Willis Case.

6 If one call a man Thief, he may justify it, for that he stole a sheep.
Hobb. Rep. 258. 27. H. 8. 22.

7 If I say to another, A. B. is a Thief to J. S. and to me; and an Action is
brought for this, and I justify for a Felony done to me only; this is not
sufficient, for the Charge is of a double Felony, and the Justification is only
by a single Felony. M. 21. Jac. B. R.

8 An Action was brought against Husband and Wife, for words spoken by the
Wife, and they pleaded not guilty, and agreed to be naught, and that the Wife
aloke is to plead not guilty. Brownl. Rep. 6. Hobb. Rep. 126.

9 That where A. does call B. Thief, and he does justify that he stole
sheep, and the Defendant shall plead the general pardon after the words spoken,
that this is not good. M. 13. Jac. Com. B. Cuddingtons Case.

10 That it is not a good justification to a Charge of calling one Thief, that
a Robbery was committed, and the common fame was, that the plaintiff did it,
Dyer 230. Brownl. 2. nor is it a good justification for calling of one Murderer
to say, There was a Murder done, and the Plaintiff was indicted for it, or that
he was imprisoned for it; or, that the common fame was, that he did it. Dyer
236. Broo. 127. New Book of Entries, 26, 27. Nor can one justify the charging
of one with Felony after he has a pardon. Hobb Rep. pl. 106.

11 If in this Action, the Plea be not guilty, and part of the actionable words
only be found, this will maintain the Action. But if the Defendant take a
Traverse to the words, Contra. Noys Rep. 134.

12 The Action was for this, Thou did keep, and sell by false weights, and in
twenty four shillings bestowing, thy weights were false two ounces, and thy man
will be a witness against thee, and I will prove it. The Defendant justified
in pleading that the Plaintiff kept a Shop, and used unlawful weights, and by
such weights sold, by reason whereof he said these words, viz. Thou did
keep, and sell by unlawful weights, and in twenty four shillings bestowing, thy
weights were false an ounce and three quarters, and thy man, etc. and traversed
the words in the Declaration; and it was adjudged a naughty Traverse, for that
the words in the Bar, and justified by the Defendant, are acionable. Goldsb.
and Brownl. 5.

13 The Action was brought for this word perjured. The Defendant justified,
that it was found by Verdict, that the Plaintiff was perjured, but no Judgment
was entered upon that Verdict, and it was adjudged no Bar, because no
Judgment was given in the first Action. Goldsb. and Brownl. 11.

14 That where the words may be justified Ex causa dicendi, there the Defendant
may (if he please) take the general issue not guilty, Modo and forma, etc. and
give in evidence of the coherence, occasion, or connection of the words, or he
may (as the cause shall require) justify the speaking of other words, and
traverse the speaking of the words in question, and upon the evidence have the
words specially found.

15 And when the matter in fact will serve for the Defendant, albeit he may
suppose, that the Plaintiff has no cause of Action, yet is it not safe for him
to hazard his Case upon a Demurrer, but first let him take his advantage of the
matter of Fact, and leave the matters in Law, which arise upon the matters in
Fact to the last, for after trial the matters in Law shall be saved to him.
Coo. 4. 14. See more. Croo. 1. part last published. 239. 492.

As to this question three things are to be known. What shall be said a
sufficient Verdict of a Jury herein, upon which Judgment may be had.


1 That where the Action is laid for saying, I know him to be a thief, and the
Defendant pleaded other words, Absque hoc, etc. And the Jury does find it thus,
I think him to be a thief. this will not be a good Verdict to give judgment
upon. Hobb. pl. 213.

2 That where the words are laid to be spoken thus, That Nicholas Fenner
procured eight or ten of his Neighbors to perjure themselves; the Defendant
pleads not guilty, and the Jury does find, that the words are thus; That
Nicholas Fenner had caused eight or ten of his Neighbors to perjure
themselves; it is doubtful whether this be a good Verdict to give judgment
upon, or not. M. 4. Jac. B. R.

3 That where the words are said to be thus, That John Barber and his Children
be false thieves, men cannot have their Cattle going upon the Common, but they
will kill, and eat them, etc. and the issue is joined, whether the Defendant
spoke the words, modo and forma, etc. and the Jury does find the words spoken
to be thus, viz. Men cannot have their Cattle, etc. but they do not find the
first, which are the only Actionable words to be spoken; this is not a good
Verdict to have a Judgment for the Plaintiff, for the words found are not
Actionable. Dyer 118.

4 That where the words are laid to be spoken thus, A. is a Thief, for he has
stolen a Lamb from A. and Geese from B. and killed them in my ground, the
issue is, whether the words be spoken modo and forma, etc. and the Jury find
that the words spoken were thus, That the Plaintiff was a thief, for he has
stolen a Lamb from A. and killed it in my ground, and nothing said of the
Geese, this is good enough to warrant the Declaration, and to give him a
judgment upon it. Hill 3. Jac. B. R.

5 That where the words are laid to be thus, Burges is a maintainer of Thieves,
and a strongthief himself, and the issue is joined upon the words, Modo and
forma, and the Jury find all the words, but the word [strong] this is a
sufficient Verdict to ground a judgment for the Plaintiff, and by these Cases
we may observe, That if the Action be brought for more words than are found,
yet if there be some of the words that are actionable found, it is well enough.
Dyer 21. 75. And so it is if the Jury find other words than those that be in
the Declaration, if they do not find withal so much of the actionable words
for substance, as are set forth in the Declaration. Croo. 2. 407, 408.

6 Where an Action is brought for words, some whereof are, and some are not
actionable, and the Jury assesse damages for all together; this will be error.
And yet if words be spoken at several times, and the words spoken at one time
are actionable, and the words spoken at another time are not actionable, but
they have reference to the former words; in this Case, the damages may be
assessed for both entirely and good. Croo. 1. 238. And yet if an Action be
brought for calling of one Murderer, Bloodsucker, Villain, Rogue, Bankerupt,
some of which are, and some are not actionable, and the damages be assest by
the Jury entirely, this will be good enough, and it shall be intended to be
given only for the actionable words. Croo. 1. 238.

7 Where words are spoken at several times, and some are actionable, and some
not, and two Actions are brought for them, and both are found for the
Plaintiff, and damages are given entirely, this is not good. But otherwise it
is, where one Action is brought for words actionable spoken at one time, and
words not actionable, spoken at another time, for there it shall be taken to be
given for the actionable words only. Bulstr. 3. part 283. yet see the contrary
in Coo. 10. 131. Jenk. Cent. 8. Case 89. Croo 1. 471. Hobb. Rep. 6. Jenk. Cent.
7. Case 70. Croo. 2. 343.

8 The Plaintiff declares, that the words are spoken Falso and malitiose, and
the Jury find, that they were spoken Falso and injuriose; this is not a good
Verdict for the Plaintiff to have a Judgment upon it. Trin. 7. Car. 1. B. R.

9 The Declaration was for calling of J. S. thief, and the Record of Nisi prius
was quod predictus W. dixit de prefat I. S. haec scandalosa verba, etc. prefat
W. Innuendo, whereas it should have been prefat. I. S. Innuendo, and this was
amended by the Court. Croo. 2. 157.

As to this Question, these things are to be known. Where the plea in Bar, or
Verdict of the Jury will help to maintain the Declaration and Action, or not.


1 That the Writ and Declaration must set forth, that the words were spoken in
auditu, or in presentia quamplurimorum subditorum, etc. otherwise it is not
good, and the Defendant may take advantage of it; but if he do not except
against it, but plead to it, and it be put to a Jury that does find for the
Plaintiff, this may happily supply that defect. Croo. 1. 65. 144.

2 That where the words supposed by the Declaration are, That Eyres [Innuendo
the Plaintiff] is a Thief, And hereupon the Jury does find it for the
Plaintiff; this is good, and does make the uncertain words certain and
actionable. Eyres Case. M. 7. Jac. B. R.

So if one say to another, of a woman passing by, she is a Witch, and Sect. 6.
has bewitched my child [Innuendo, the Plaintiff] and verdict is given for
the Plaintiff; now it is out of question. Pas^he. 18. Jac. B. R. Roberts Case.

3 That where the words that are found by the Jury, do not agree with the words
in the Declaration, in the substantial and essential form; in this Case, they
will not warrant and maintain the Declaration. But if they do agree in the
substantial and essential form, though they agree not in every word, yet they
may warrant the Declaration, and maintain the Action. Hobb. Rep. pl. 213. M. 4.
Jac. B. R. Hill. 3. Jac. B. R. Dyer 21. 75. And although all the words in the
Declaration be not found, yet if the essential and substantial form of the
words be found, it will be good enough. Dyer. 21. 75.

4 In this Action, for words upon not guilty pleaded, the Jury found the words
laid in the Declaration, to be spoken by the Defendant of the Plaintiff. The
words were these: Thou art a Thief, and I will prove thee so. And the Jury
find, that he spoke the words de Querenti, not in his presence, but in his
absence, and so find it specially. And it seems it might be good. Bulstr. 1.
part 56.

5 In this Action against a Husband and Wife, if the Jury find the Husband
guilty, and the Wife not guilty, and a verdict be found in the Case. And albeit
that the Declaration be naught, it now is helped by the verdict, and the
Plaintiff may have Judgment. Styles Rep. 350.

6 If the Action be brought by the Plaintiff against the Husband and Wife, for
words spoken by the Wife, and the Jury find the Wife guilty; this is good, and
the Judgment shall be against them both. Styles Rep. 460. Brownl. and Goldsb.
7.

7 The Count was, that the words were spoken falso and malitiose, and Sect. 7.
the Jury found it falso and injuriose. And it was agreed to be naught, and
that they were not actionable. Trin. 7. Car. B. R. Norman and Simons Case.

8 The Count was, that the words were, That he is a maintainer of Thieves, and
a strong Thief. And the Jury found all the words, but the word strong. And it
was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Burgis Case. Dyer. 75. 21.

9 The Count was, That John Barker and his children be false Thieves, men
cannot have their Cattle going upon the Common, but they will kill them, and
eat them, etc. And the Jury found the last, but not the first words, viz. B.
and his children be false Thieves, which are the only actionable words, and it
was adjudged for the Defendant. Barbars Case.

If the Action be for words only, and the Plaintiff recover, he is to have
Costs recoverable.
no more costs, than the Jury have given damages. But if the Action be for
words and deeds together; as for slandering, and causing imprisonment, or the
like, there he is to have full costs. Croo. 1. part 223.

If the Plaintiff be nonsuit, the Defendant shall have costs. Hobb. pl. 286.

CHAP. XXIV. Of a Libel.
A Libel, called Famosus Libellus, seu infamatoria scriptura, is taken Libel.
What Sect. 1.
for a scandalous writing, or Act done, tending to the defamation of another.
And this may be, and sometimes is against a public, and sometimes against a
private person; sometimes against the living, sometimes against the dead.

This may be by writing, or by other Act done. By writing, when any Epigram,
Rhyme, or other writing is composed, or published to the note, or contumely of
another, by which his fame or dignity may be prejudiced. And this may be either
verbis, or cantilenis, as where it is maliciously repeated, The kinds of it.
or sung in the presence of others. 2. Traditione, when the Libel or any Copy
of it is delivered over to another, to the intent to scandalize the party; Or
it may be done by other ways. An infamous Libel without writing may be, either
by pictures, when the party is painted in any ignominious, or reproachful
manner. 2. Or, by signs, when one does make or fix a Gallows, or any other
reproachful or ignominious sign, at the door of the party, or elsewhere. Coo.
5. 126. Or the like.

Thus Jeffes exhibited an infamous writing, directed to the King against Sir
Edward Cook, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and against the Court for a
Judgment given in the Court, affirming the Judgment to be Treason, calling
him therein Traitor, and perjured Judge; and scandalizing all the Professors of
the Law, containing much scandalous matter in it. And fixed the Libel upon the
great Gate, at the entrance into Westminster Hall, and in diverse other public
places, and was indicted for it in the Kings Bench, and fined a thousand pound,
committed to the Marshal, ordered to stand on the Pillory at Westminster and
Cheapside, with a Paper of his offense on his back, to be detained in prison,
till he made an open submission, in all the Courts at Westminster, and to be
bound with sureties for his good Behavior during life. Croo. 1. 125.

And so an infamous Libel was composed and published in verse, against John the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and his successor, by Circumlocutions and
descriptions, and not in express terms, by which they were traduced and
scandalized, which was punished in the Star Chamber. Coo. 5. 225.

And so William Peacock did exhibit his Bill in the Star Chamber against Sir
George Reynel, for this, that the Defendant perceiving, that the Plaintiffs
Father was inclined to settle his Land upon him, that he, to take off his
affection, and that he might settle it upon himself; writes a Letter to his
Father, that the Plaintiff was not the Son of a Peacock, and was a haunter of
Taverns, and that diverse women did follow him from London, and that he longed
for his death, and that his Land would not be sufficient to pay his debts, etc.
And the Defendant was there fined two hundred pound, and imprisoned for it.
Brownl. 2. part 152.

And in this Case, it was agreed, That if the Letter had been directed to the
Plaintiff himself, and not to the third person, then it should not have been a
Libel; or if it had been directed to a Father, for Reformation of any Acts by
his children, it should not be a Libel; for if a Letter contain scandalous
matter, and be directed to a third person, if it be reformatory, and for no
respect to himself, it shall not be taken to be libellous As if one write to a
Father, and tell him of the faults of his children, and wish him to lock to it,
but here it appears to be done with respect to himself. Brownl. 2. part 152.

And so in Sir Baptist Hicks Case, who had done many pious and charitable good
works, and one A. B. did write him a Letter, that he had done these works, as
the proud Pharisee, for vainglory and ostentation, Action of the Case.
and to have popular applause; and further, opprobriously taxed him with other
unlawful Acts; And it was resolved in the Star Chamber, that for this private
Letter, that no Action of the Case would lie, but that it was punishable as a
Libel. But some of the Judges held, that such a private Letter was punishable.
And the party was there fined five hundred pound. Pophams Rep. 139. 140.

And so the Lord Darcy sued Markam in the Star Chamber, when Markam and the
Lords man had fought and the Lord had parted them, and took off his man from
him, and after Markam wrote five or six Letters to the Lord, and subscribed
them with his name, but sent them not, but dispersed them sealed in the fields,
the effect of which Letters was, That whereas the Lord said; that if he had
not been, his man had beaten him to clouts, he lied, and as often as he should
speak it, he lied; and that he would maintain with his life, and then said,
that he had dispersed those Letters, that he might find, or some body else
might bring them to him, and concluded, that if he were desirous to speak with
him, that he should send his Boy, and he should be well used, and he was
fined five hundred pound. Hobb. Rep. pl. 153.

So Lake against Hatton in the Star Chamber, supposing that he delivered to
his Daughter, the Lady Rosse, a writing purporting that the Countess of
Exceter had a purpose to poison both the Lady Rosse, and the Plaintiff her
Father, and to charge him with a Plot, etc. Hobb. Rep. pl. 334. 337. See
Hetleys Rep. 10.

And as to this, these things are further to be known.

1 That it matters not whether the things said be true or false. The Rules
about it, and wherein the offense lies.


2 It matters not whether the party against whom it is made, be of good, or
evil report.

3 It matters not how it be divulged, and whether secretly or openly.

4 The offense about this, lies either in the contriving of it, or in the
procuring of it, to be contrived; Or in the malicious publication of it after a
man knows what it is. But to read it, or hear it read; or when he reads or
hears it, to laugh at it, is no offense, or if he take a Copy of it only,
and do not publish it to others, this is no offense. But if after he has read
or heard it, he repeat the same, or any part of it in the hearing of others;
Or after he knows it to be a Libel, he reads it to others; this is an
unlawful publishing of it; And if he take a Copy of it, and do not after
deliver it to a Magistrate, to examine it, it is a great evidence, that he does
publish it. Coo. 9. 60.

That if therefore one write a Letter containing scandalous matter against
another, and send it not to him, but to a third person, this may be a Libel.
Brownl. 2. part 152. And so some hold of a Letter written to the party himself.
Popham. Rep. 139. 140.

And so it seems, of a Letter written to the party himself, and not sent to
him, but scattered abroad, that he might have notice of it. Hobb. Rep. pl. 153.

5 That albeit the party, of whom the words be spoken be dead; yet the Libeller
may be punished for it, be it against a private or a public person.

6 That therefore if one find a Libel, and will keep himself out of danger, if
it be against a private man, the finder is either to burn it, or give it
presently to a Magistrate; but if it concern a Magistrate or other public
person, he is presently to deliver it to a Magistrate, to the intent the author
of it may be found out.

Hobb. Rep. pl. 334. Coo. 5. 125. The offense, if it be against a public The
punishment of it, and the remedy of the party wronged thereby.
Person, a Magistrate, a Lord, or eminent man, is greater, and the punishment
will be greater, than where it is against a private person, or meaner man. When
the Star Chamber stood it was punishable there, now it is punishable by
Indictment in the Kings Bench, and in other Courts.

And if a great man be slandered by such a way, he may perhaps have his remedy
by the Writ De scandalis Magnatum; and if it amount to a slander, and fall out
to be within the Rules thereof, the party grieved may have an Action of the
Case for a Slander in this way as well as otherwise, Brownl. 2. Rep. 152. Coo.
5. 125. But for slander to them that be dead, it is to be enquired how this
should be punished. Coo. 5. 125. Coo. 12. 134. Hobb. Rep. pl. 334.

CHAP. XXV. Some Cases for the illustration and confirmation of all that is
before laid down in the whole work.
Case 1.
THe Lord Cromwells Case, 20 Eliz. He brought a Writ de scandalis Magnatum
upon 2 R. 2. cap. 5. against D. Vicar of S. for these words, It is no marvel
though you like not of me, for you like of those that maintain sedition
against the Queens proceedings. The Defendant Cansadicendi.
made a special justification, and showed that there was a Dialogue between the
Plaintiff and Defendant about the Book of Common Prayer, and that therein the
words were used, and therein it was resolved:

1 That this is a general Law, of which the Judges are to take notice. Sedition.
1. For it concerns the Kings Peer, and therefore the King. 2. It concerns
(by the words of the Statute) the whole Realm.

2 It was objected, That he might like those that maintain Sedition, not
knowing they did maintain it. To which was answered; That Sedition Words are to
be taken, secandum subjectam materiam.
is a thing public, of which it shall not be imagined that he is not knowing.
But it appearing by the discourse between the parties that the words upon which
the Action is founded taken according to the subject matter are not actionable.
As if A. and B. talking of how many Hares one of them had killed, and the other
therein say to him, You are a Murderer, this is not actionable. The Plaintiff
therefore was barred, Coo. 4. 12.

Case 2.
Cutler and Dixon. To prefer scandalous Articles against any man to In a Course
of Justice not actionable.
the Justices of the Peace, to the intent he may be bound to the good behavior
is in pursuance of justice, and not actionable. M. 27, 28. Eliz. Coo. 4. 14.

Case 3.
Sir Richard Buckley and Owen Wood: Sir Richard sued him for preferring diverse
scandalous Articles against him in the Star Chamber, not determinable there,
and for affirming the same to be true, [without naming any of the particulars
of the Bill] in the County of S. W. does traverse the affirmance before, or
after the day in the Count. In this Case it was resolved.

1 That the Traverse is not good, that the day in the Count is excluded.

2 That no Action lies for things determinable, in that Court where In a course
of Justice.
the Complaint is made, for it is in a course of justice.

3 For things not determinable there, it is otherwise, for an appeal of Murder
brought in the Common Pleas, no Action will lie, it is in nature of a just
Suit, though the Court be mistaken, but because the words in the County out of
which the Action is composed are not actionable, the hearers not being of
judgment to know what was in the Bill, Judgment was given against the
Plaintiff. Coo. 4. 15.

Case 4.
Stanhop and Bliss Case, 27 Eliz. An Action was brought by Master Words
general and uncertain.
Stanhop a Justice of Peace, Surveyor, for these words. He has but one
Manor, and that he has gotten by swearing and forswearing. It was Officer.
Justice of Peace. Perjury.
resolved, that the Action would not lie, for the words were too general, and
such words to ground this Action must have convenient certainty in them, he
does not charge the Plaintiff with swearing, etc. and he may recover a Manor
so, and yet not procure or agree to the perjury. It was resolved to say to
another, He has forsworn himself, is not actionable, for this may be in an
ordinary discourse; but to say, a man is perjured, or that he was forsworn in
such a Court, is actionable.

And resolved also, that for words of Passion and Choler, as to call one
Villain. Rogue. Varlet.
Villain, Rogue, Varlet, or the like, will not bear Action. Coo. 4. 15.

Case 5.
Heart and Yeomans Case. The Plaintiff being a Justice of Peace, sues Charge of
an endeavor of Murder.
for these words; For my ground in Alerton Heart, seeks my life, and if I
could find I. S. I doubt not but within two days to accuse H. of Felony. In
this Case it was adjudged, that for the first words for my ground in A. he
seeks my life, no Action will lie, for this may lawfully be done Justice of
Peace. Uncertain words
if he hold Land of him, and be an offender.

2 Seeks my life is too general, there is no punishment to be inflicted for
seeking only. But for the latter words, it was agreed they were actionable,
Words general. endeavor.
because for a suspicion of Felony, a man's life is brought in question, and he
may be imprisoned. Coo. 4. 16.

Case 6.
Byrchleys Case, 27, 28 Eliz. The Defendant said to B. C. a Clerk of Officer
charged to deal corruptly.
the Kings Bench (and sworn to deal duly without corruption) discoursing
together about his carriage in his Office, these words, You are well known to
be a corrupt man, and to deal corruptly. In this Case it was adjudged that the
Action did lie.

1 For the words Ex causa dicendi, imply that he meant, he did deal corruptly
Causa Dicendi.
in his office, and this touches him in his oath.

2 The words scandalize him in that whereby he gets his living; Skinner Justice
of Peace slandered.
of London said, That Manwood was a corrupt Judge, and it was adjudged
actionable; and in this Case it was resolved, That if the precedent talk had
been, that B. was a Usurer, or Executor of another, and would not perform the
Will. And upon this the words had been spoken, they had not been actionable.
Coo. 4. 26.

Case 7.
Weaver and Caridens Case. It was adjudged that no Action lies for saying, That
the Plaintiff was detected for perjury, for an honest man Detected for perjury.
may be detected, but not convicted. Coo. 4. 16. Slander of a Justice of Peace.


Case 8.
Stuckley and Bulheads Case, 44, and 45 Eliz. It was adjudged, That this Action
will lie for saying of a Justice of Peace, He covers and hides Felonies,
and is not worthy to be a Justice of Peace. For this is against his Oath, and
Office, and cause to put him out of Commission, and for this he may be
indicted and fined. Coo. 4. 16.

Case 9.
Snagg and Gees Case. An Action was brought for these words, Thou Charge of
Murder. Words Repugnant.
have killed my Wife, and art a Traitor; and it was adjudged that the Action
would not lie, for the Wife (as appeared) was alive, and so vain, and no
scandal, but otherwise it would be, if she had been dead. Coo. 4. 16.

Case 10.
Eaten and Allens Case. An Action was brought for these words, He is Charge of
Murder.
a Brabler, and a Quarreller, for he gave his Champion counsel to make a Deed
of Gift of his Goods, to kill me, and then to fly out of the Country, but God
preserved me. And it was strongly urged, that the Attempt and endeavor to
murder.
Action should be maintainable, and diverse cases cited. Lady Cockein. Mich. 32.
33. Eliz. B. R. for these words, My Lady Cockein offered to give poison to one
to kill the child in her body. Another between Tibbot and Heine in Gloucester,
for this, Tibbots and another did agree to hire one to kill S. B. Also
Cardinals Case. If I had consented to Mr. Cardinal. T. H. had not been alive.
And the Lord Lumleys Case, My Lord Attempts and endeavors.
Lumley has gone about to take away my life, against all Christian dealing.
But upon great deliveration it was adjudged, that the words were not
actionable, for a purpose, or intent to do an evil Act (unless it be in case
of Treason) is not punishable by Law, yet such a Conspiracy might have been
punished in the Star Chamber, when it was up. Coo. 4. 16.

Case 11.
Anne Davis Case. The Plaintiff was near to Marriage, the Defendant Charge of
Incontinency.
said of her, She had a Bastard, and by this she lost her Marriage; this is
actionable. 1. For she is punishable upon 1. Eliz. if true. 2. So upon any
naked charge of Incontinency, and special damage showed by it, and the ground
of the Action is temporal, viz. the defeating of her advancement Inne-keeper.
in Marriage. By Popham. An Action lies, for saying that a woman Inholder had a
great infectious disease, by which she lost her Guests. Infectious disease.
Banisters Case 25. Eliz. And it was resolved, that an Action lies, for saying
of the Son and Heir, He is a Bastard, for it tends to his dis-inheritance. But
if the Defendant too, be right Heir, and the other a Bastard, then it is not
actionable. Coo. 4. 16.

Case 12.
James and Rutlech. The Action was brought for these words, Hang Incertainty 1.
Of persons. 2. Of things, Pox.
him, he is full of the Pox [Innuendo, the French-Pox] In this Case it was
resolved, that two things are requisite in this Action. 1. That the person
scandalized be certain. 2. That the scandal be apparent by the words
themselves; and therefore if one say, One of the Servants of J. S. is a
notorious Thief, or Traitor; if he have more servants than one, no Action will
lie upon this. So, I know one that is near to J. S. is a notorious Thief, etc.
But if two speak of B. and one of them say, He is a notorious Thief, an Action
may lie for this, and B. may reduce it to a certainty by Innuendo Innuendo.
predict. B.] for the office of an Innuendo, is, for to design the person that
was named before in certain, and in effect, is instead of predict.] But this
will not make that certain, which was uncertain before, and subject to a
deceiveable conjecture. But if one say to B. Thou art a Traitor, an Action
lies, for constat de persona. So here, where two speak of the Plaintiff, and
one, as the Case is, says, Hang him; etc. there the Innuendo will denote the
person, but it cannot extend to make the intent to be the Frenchpox by
imagination, which is not apparent by the precedent words; and the words shall
be taken in mitiori sensu. Coo. 4. 17. Barhams Case. Coo. 4. 20. is to the
same purpose, which Case is also reported by Yelverton 21.

Case 13.
Oxford and his wife against Cross. The Plaintiff brought an Action in London
for calling the wife of the Plaintiff Whore. The Defendant removed it out of
London by habeas corpus. A procedendo was prayed, because Whore in London.
the Action was maintainable in London, though not at Common Law. But it was
denied by the Court; for such a Custom to maintain brabling words is against
Law. Coo. 4. 18.

Case 14.
Bittridge Case. B. R. Mich. 44. 45. Eliz. An Action was brought for these
words, M. B. is a Perjured old Knave, and that appears by a Stake Perjury
Adjective words. Uncertain words.
parting the Land of, etc. In this Case it was resolved, that Adjective words
are Actionable in Cases where they import any act committed, or Slander of a
man in his profession.; and here it appears, by the rest of the words, that
they were not meant of Perjury before a Judge, etc. 2. The discourse was vain,
etc. And there it was said, that upon all the words together no Action would
lie, but in Yelvertons Rep. 12. there is the same Case under the names of
Bretchley and Atkins, and the Judges are said to be divided in it, and no
resolution is said to be given in it, and in page 34. reported under other
names, to be adjudged not Actionable. And in the Case of Palmer and Crofts it
was resolved, that the suit, for Scandals in the spiritual Court, must have
three incidents. 1. It must Spiritual slanders.
concern matters spiritual. 2. And matters spiritual only. 3. It must not
demand damages. Coo. 4. 20.

Case 15.
Havely and Sidnham Mich. 14. 15. Eliz B. R. The Action was brought for these
words, Mr. H. is infected of the Robbery and Murder lately Infected of a Murder.
committed, and does smell of the Murder, [Innuendo predict felon, et murdre in
forma predict commiss. which was before alleged to be done. And it was
adjudged to lie, especially for the word Infected. Dyer. 317.

Case 16.
It has been adjudged to lie for this, He was in the Gaol at Norwich for
Robbing one by the Highway. Albeit he did not aver, that he was not Charge
of theft Indirect words. Averment.
in the Gaol, but it is most safe for the Plaintiff to say, he was not in the
Gaol, and albeit no Robbery were in the Case. So for saying, He was in the
Tower for High Treason. So for saying, He has Robbed J. S. albeit J. S. were
never Robbed. Sprat and Haines. Mich. 9. Jac. B. R.

Case 17.
It has been adjudged to lie for this, said to a Son in Law, of his Father in
Law, A. B. told me; that he was accessory of Stealing Tucks Sheep, and that
he was as very a Thief as any in Launson Gaol; and he averred Slander by
Report about theft Averment.
that A. B. did never tell him so, and that Tucks Sheep were stolen, and that
there were certain Felons in Launson Gaol; and that if A. B. did not speak the
words, or did not speak all the words, that are Actionable; this Action will
lie against the Defendant. Mich. 9. Jac. B. R.

Case 18.
It has been adjudged to lie for this of A. B. He was Perjured. Jacob and
Sugate. Perjury.


Case 19.
It has been adjudged to lie for this, said of a Shoo-maker, that lives by
buying and selling, Thou art a Bankrupt, and I will drive thee out of Bankerupt.
the Country for a Bankrupt. Day and Chandler. Mich. 9. Jac. B. R.

Case 20.
It has been adjudged (as it is said) not to lie for this, She is a Whore,
Charge of Incontinency. Spiritual.
Reads Whore, and she was ridden up stairs, and down stairs. M. 9. B. R.

Case 21.
It has been adjudged to lie for this, said to J. S. Go and tell A. B. he
Charge indirect.
is a Thief, and I will justify it. Albeit J. S. do never tell A. B. so. Mich.
9. Jac. Fox and Bell. B. R.

Case 22.
It has been adjudged to lie for this, said to Covell, I did tell Mr. Carus,
Charge indirect.
that I am neither Traitor to my Prince, nor Rebel to my Country, as J. S. is.
Albeit the Defendant did never say the words to Mr. Carus, but only to Covell;
and albeit he had spoken them so secretly to Covell, that By a Letter sealed,
sent to the party.
no other person heard them. And there it was said, that one was punished in
the Star Chamber, for sending a scandalous Letter sealed, and sent to the
party slandered, albeit it was never published, nor known to any other but
himself. Mich. 9. Jac.

Case 23.
It was adjudged to lie for these words, spoken by a woman that had a Charge of
Theft.
Husband, Thou do not live honestly, for thou have stolen my two Cocks, albeit
they were her Husbands, and not her Cocks. Mich. 9. Jac.

Case 24.
It has been adjudged, to lie for this, He came to my Wife, and took Charge
of Murder.
her by the hand, and said, thou and I will be man and wife within a year, and
shortly after he dispatched his wife, and rid her out of the way, and in what
case then stood I?

Case 26.
It was the opinion of three Judges, that this Action will not lie, for Charge
of an infections disease.
saying, Now that pocky drab does wear a Scarf about her neck, to hide her
blanches, they are a pocky, and an unwholesome household, and I would not eat a
b^t, on which she breathed, for twenty Nobles, and women that talk with her,
put Aprons before their mouths. But if their communication Pox.
were about the French Pox, it were otherwise. And yet if the Husband of this
woman were an Iun-holder, and lose his Guests by the Inne-holder.
words, then the words were actionable. And there it was said to be adjudged to
lie for this, Thou Whore, thou pocky Whore, Doctor Claytons Whore. Mich. 44.
45. Eliz. Boddin and Jones. But that it will not lie, for saying, Your Master
has lain in Fullers Tub. Albeit he averr, Fullers Tub.
that none lie there, but such as have the French Pox.

Case 27.
It has been adjudged to lie for this, I will justify that Barnes is
accessory Charge of Burglary. Averment. Indirect words of charge.
to the Burglary, for which K. D. was hanged. And that without any Averment
that K. D. was hanged for such a Burglary. Trin. 9. Jac. B. R. Barnes and Hunt.

Case 28.
It was agreed by the Judges, that this Action would lie for this, said of a
Bankerupt. Merchant. Attorney slandered.
Merchant, He is a Bankerupt, and fled beyond Sea for money. And for this, said
of an Attorney, He is an ignorant Attorney. Trin. 9. Jac. B. R. Trulock and
Morrison.

Case 29
It has been agreed, that this Action will not lie for this, Thou art a
Hornsby, Cuckoldly Knave.
Hornsby, and a Cuckoldly Knave. Trin. 9. Jac. Palmer and Palmer.

Case 30.
Charge of Couzening.
It has been adjudged, that this Action will not lie for this, Thou have
couzened the Earl of Hartford, as much as thou art worth. Trin. 9. Jac. B. R.
Tuck and Kirton.

Nor for this, Thou art a couzening Knave, and have couzened all the Town of
Coventry.

Case 31.
It has been adjudged to lie for this. He is mean-sworn, with an Averment,
Mean-sworn. Averment. Strained my Mare.
that it is taken in the place for perjury.

So for this. Thou have strained my Mare, with an Averment of the acceptance of
the word in the Country.

Case 32.
It was held by two Judges, that this Action will not lie for this. A. was
Charge of Robbery.
robbed of twenty pound in Silver, and one hundred Marks in Plate, and Words
incertaine.
Foord, and Anne Long had it, and, by God, will be hanged for it. Pasche 9. Jac
Foord and King.

Case 33.
It has been adjudged, that this Action will lie fo this, Thou art a Knave,
Charge of Robbery,
and a Rascally Knave, thou did set on me in the Highway, and did take
away my Purse from me, Innuendo Felonice] and I will be sworn to it. Stoner and
Holland. B. R.

Case 34.
A. came to a Justice of Peace, and informed against B. for Misdemeanors,
Charge of Burglary.
and wrote these words, A. does charge B. that he did commit Burglary in
breaking of my house; And it was adjudged actionable. p. 8. Jac. Pet and Finch.

Case 35.
Coxe and Morton. 44, 45 Eliz. B. R. The Action was brought for these Charge of
Perjury.
words, Thou art a false forsworn Knave, and that I will prove, for thou have
forsworn thy self against Peter Rumbal in the Hundred Court, and upon not
guilty, and Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was adjudged against him, that the
words were not actionable, for [forsworn] by it self, does not Forsworn.
import slander, as perjured does, and because it was not showed, that there
was any cause in the Hundred Court between Rumbal and another, Perjured.
wherein he was produced a Witness, by which the word forsworn was induced,
and so it might have been equivalent to perjured; for it might be in private
between them upon an oath out of Court. that he might say he was forsworn.
Yelvertons Rep. 27.

Case 36.
Shire and King, 45 Eliz. B. R. The Action was brought by an Attorney Slander of
an Attorney.
for these words, Thou art a Paltry Fellow, and thy credit is fallen. for thou
dealest on both sides, and do deceive many that trust thee. And upon error
brought, it was affirmed, that the words were actionable, and shall be taken in
Malam partem, for they sound to no other purpose, and yet he may be on both
sides as an Arbytrator. Yelvertons Rep. 32.

Case 37.
Sir John Harpur and Beamont. Hill 2. Jac. B. R. The Action was Charge of an
endeavor to Murder.
for these words, I was at Sir John Harpurs house, and John Harpur his Son drew
me forth to see a Gelding, and then Thomas Beamont did throw his Dagger at me
twice, and thrust me through the Britches twice with his Rapier to have killed
me; All this was done by the instigation of Sir John Hurpur, and I can prove
it. And it was adjudged for the Plaintiff that the words were actionable.
Yelvertons Rep. 58.

Case 38.
Style and Heap. Mich. 3. Jac. B. R. The Action was brought for these Charge
of Perjury against an Officer.
words, Thou have most perjuredly presented me at the Visitation against a
Sides-man of a Parish, one sworn to do his office truly, and to present the
offenses within the Parish. And the Judges opinion seemed to be against the
Action,

1 Because he did not charge him precisely with perjury, but by way of
similitude [perjuredly] as if one say, Thou have taken my money thievishly
Adjective words.
out of my purse; or, thou have dealt treacherously with J. S. these words are
not actionable. But to say, Thou have dealt traitorously with the King, perhaps
may be actionable.

2 Because the Plaintiff did not show what presentment he made at the
Visitation, so that it might appear, that what he did, was within the compass
of his office, for if he had presented any thing out of his office, as that one
was a thief, or the like, there is no perjury, albeit it be false. Yelvertons
Rep. 72.

Case 39.
Harris and Dixon. M. 3. Jac. B. R. The Action was brought for these words,
Francis Harris has procured and suborned one Smith to come Subornation of
Perjury.
thirty miles to commit perjury against his Father, before my Lord of
Winchester, and gave Smith ten pound to that purpose; upon not guilty, and a
verdict for the Plaintiff: and it was moved, and so agreed by the Court, that
the words were not actionable; for it does not appear, that my Lord of
Winchester had any Commission, or authority to take an Oath, and then it cannot
be perjury, for he is not a Judge known to be competent to give an Oath without
a Commission. Yelvertons Rep. 72.

Case 40.
Heak and Molton. Trin. 4. Jac. B. R. An Action was brought for this, Common
Barreter.
Thou art a common Barreter, and deservest to be hanged; and by the Court it
was agreed, that the words were not actionable, for the offense is Breaker of
the Peace and Forests. Rogue. Hunter of Deer
only finable, and to be bound to the good behavior, As to say, that a man
has broken the Peace, or is a common Rogue, or a common hunter of Deer, or a
common breaker of Forests, is not actionable.

So to say, I. S. would have killed me. But to say, He did lie in wait to kill
me, is actionable. So, He prepared Poison to kill I. S. but for this, Intent of
Murder Endeavor of Murder. General and uncertain word,
He deserves to be hanged. these are too general and incertaine to ground an
Action upon; and thereby, Fenner Justice, it was said to be adjudged to lie for
this, Thou art as very a thief as any in Warwick Gaol, with an averment, that
there is such a thief in particular. Yelvertons Rep. 99.

Case 41.
Action for these words, Master Toplife has forged and counterfeited Charge of
Forgery.
a Certificate to a Commission out of the Exchequer, and has forged and
counterfeited Mr. Birckets, and Mr. Savells hands, the Commissioners, and has
put their hands to it, by reason whereof he got a Verdict in the Exchequer,
whereas otherwise he must needs have had the foyl. Upon not guilty it was found
for the Plaintiff, damages ten pounds. And it was alleged in Arrest of
Judgment, that the Action does not lie, because it was not shown, what
Commission it was, nor in what Suit, so as the Defendant might give answer to
it; but Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1 part last published. fol.
72.

Case 42.
Action for words, that the Plaintiff being a Minister, the Defendant Slander
Spiritual of of a Minister.
said of him, That he had two Wives, to cause him to be deprived, upon not
guilty, it was found for the Plaintiff. Cook moved in an arrest of Judgment,
that the words were not actionable, Incontinency.
for it is a spiritual fault, as to call one Heretic, etc. but it was
answered, that for as much as the Plaintiff was a Minister, this is a
defamation, Heretic.
and cause of depravation, if true, yet Judgment was given against the
Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part last published. fol. 94.

Case 43.
Action for these words, (Thou art a Couzening Knave, thou have couzened
Couzening Knave.
me of twenty pound at such a place, and such a man of twenty pound, and there
is never a George in England, but he is a couzening fellow) upon not guilty,
it was found for the Plaintiff; and it was ruled, Words general and uncertain.
that the Action lies not, for Wray said, they are too general to bear an
Action; and a man is to suffer no plague or loss for those words, if they were
true; and one Egletons Case was cited to be adjudged, Thou art a couzening
Coroner, for thou have couzened J. S. of his Lands; no Action lies, and Wray
said, that in a Writ of Error between Warker and Middlemore, which does depend
in the Exchequer-Chamber, Action for these words, Thou art a Couzener, for thou
had me to Coventry, and did cousen me of eighty pounds; Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff in the Queens Bench; but it was never moved in that
Court, for if it had, they would not have given Judgment. Nota. Trin. 30. That
Judgment was reversed in the Exchequer-Chamber. Croo. 1. part last published.
fol. 95.

Case 44.
Action upon the Case. And declares that the Defendant was a Justice of Charge
of stealing of a horse.
Peace, in the County of N. and whereas the Plaintiff was a Loyal Subject, etc.
the Defendant maliciously intending to deprive him of his good name and fame;
did direct his Warrant, and shows it in certainty, etc. to diverse Constables to
attatch him, alleging, he was accused of the stealing Slander by Deeds.
of the Horse of A. B. by reason whereof he was arrested, till he put in bond
to appear, etc. ubi re vera, he was never accused, nor did steal the horse;
the Defendant did know him to be guiltless, by reason whereof he was greatly
discredited, upon non culp. pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff; and it was
held by Clench and Gaudy, the Action was maintainable; if a man be accused to a
Justice of Peace, for an offense, for which he causes him to be arrested by
his Warrant; although the accusation be false, yet he is accusable; but if the
party be never accused, but the Justice of his malice, and own head, cause him
to be arrested, it is otherwise; and they commanded Judgment to be given for
the Plaintiff. 14. H. 8. Croo. 1. part last published. fol. 130.

Case 45.
Action for words, for calling him a rebellious and traitorous Knave, after
verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Charge
of Treason.
Action did not lie; for rebellious may be upon a Proclamation of Rebellion out
of Chancery, or other Courts: and when traitorous and rebellious, are coupled
together, they are of the same sense, Curia: for the words, rebellious Knave,
Action lies not, but traitorous being joined with it, Action lies; and the
Plaintiff had Judgment. Croo. 1. part last published. 171.

Case 46.
Action for these words. Tibbot and one Gough agreed to have hired a Charge of
an agreement to kill a man.
man to kill me, and that Gough should show me to the hired man, to kill me;
and upon not guilty, it was found for the Plaintiff; it was moved in Arrest of
Judgment, that an Action lies for these words, and so held Gaudy; for it is
not alleged, that any Act was done by the Plaintiff, nor any thing put in re
by him. but only a Communication between him and G. but otherwise it is, if the
words had been, He has hired a man to kill me; Fenner contra, for it is an
ill part for which he might be bound to his good Behavior. Wray was absent,
but afterward Wray being present, he agreed with Fenner, and Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff, against the opinion of Gaudy. Croo. 1. part last
published. fol. 191.

Case 47.
Action for these words, Thou were laid of the French Pox, adjudged Pox.
actionable, and Fenner said, it was adjudged in this Court, that for these
words, Thou were laid of the Pox, Action did lie, for it cannot be intended
but of the French Pox. Croo. 1. part last published. fol. 214.

Case 48.
Action for these words, Thou art a mutinous and seditious man, and did
Charge of Sedition. Adjective words.
procure the Queens Subjects to sedition. Gaudy, the words are not actionable;
for it is not said, he moved them to sedition against the Queen; and to this
opinion the other Justices did incline, but this was only upon motion. Croo. 1.
part last published. fol. 214.

Case 49.
Action for these words, Thou have sought the blood of thy Husband Charge of
Murder.
and wast his death; for if thou had been an honest woman, he had been alive
yet. And averrs in facto, that her Husband was killed; it was moved, the Action
lies not, for it is not said, she did any unlawful act, and Averment.
it was cited to be adjudged. Mich. 18. and 19. Eliz. that for these words,
Thou were the death of J. S. Action lies not, for it may be by grief; but it
was ruled here, that the Action lies, for they shall be taken to be spoken in
malam partem, and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part last
published. fol. 239.

Case 50.
Action for these words. (ss.) Aid me to Stoner, for I have Felony to Charge
indirect.
lay to his charge, for he would have robbed me. After verdict for the
Plaintiff, it was alleged in arrest of Judgment, that the words are not
actionable, for perhaps the saying, I have Felony to lay to his charge, of
themselves are actionable; but when he says further, for he would have
robbed me, they prove no Felony, but extenuate the first words, and show what
he did intend, and the last words are not actionable, for to say, One would
have robbed me, an Action lies not, without showing Intent or will to do a
Felony.
some overt act put in ure, which is Felony, or cause to bind one to his good
Behavior; for though he had an intent, peradventure, he repented of it, and
did no evil act. And Lea cited a Case adjudged in 27. and 28. Eliz. inter
Tuttle and Osborne, that these words (scilicet) thou would have murdered
me, are not actionable, and for this cause the Court inclined, that an Action
did not lie. Sed adjurnatur. Croo. 1. part last published. fol. 250.

Case 51.
Action for words (ss.) My Lord President of the North showed Mr. Stapleton his
hand set to a Book, whereby he had consented to the late Charge of Treason.
Rebels of the North, but by the means of Mr. Fairfax, my Lord President was
persuaded, and the matter suppressed; after verdict for the Plaintiff, it was
moved in arrest of Judgment, that an Action lay not, for it is not said, that
he consented to the Rebels, but that his hand was set to a Book, whereby he
did consent, etc. but shows not who set to his hand; it might have been done
by another. Also it is not said, he consented to them in their Rebellion, but
the consent may be in some other matter; nor that he knew they were Rebels.
Also it appeared not in what they were Rebels if in Treason, or only upon
process of Rebellion; Cura contra in omnibus, for it cannot be his hand, if
he himself sets it not to the Book, but another may write his name; and when
he said, he consented to the Rebels, and showed not any certain person, this
cannot be otherwise intended, but that he consented to all the Rebels in their
Rebellion; but if he had said, That he consented to A. and B. which were
Rebels; this peradventure may be intended, that he consented to them in some
other matter, as it was ruled. 26. Eliz. inter Brown and Lisle, where the words
were, He was confederate with Campian the Jesuit; no Action lay, for it is
not said, he knew him to be a Jesuit, nor in what matter he was confederate
with him; and in this term it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part
last published. fol. 251.

Case 52.
Action for these words, Mr. Winckfield, you never thought well of me, since
Graves did steal my Lamb; adjudged actionable, although it Charge of Theft.
was alleged in arrest of Judgment, that it was not a direct affirmance that
G. R. did steal it. Croo. 1. part last published. fol. 289.

Case 53.
Action for words, and declared that the Plaintiff was an Inn-holder in
Inn-holder.
D. the Defendant spoke these words, Thy house is infected with the Pox, and
thy Wife was laid of the Pox, adjudged actionable; for it shall be intended
Infectious disease.
the great Pox, and if it were the small Pox, yet they were actionable; for it
is a discredit to the Plaintiff, and guess would not resort thither, and it
was adjudged for the Plaintiff, and fifty pounds damages given. Croo. 1. part
last published. fol. 289.

Case 54.
Action for these words, Thou art falsely forsworn in Bell Court, Innuendo,
About Perjury.
a Court Baron held at Bell, and per Curiam, with this Innuendo, the Action did
lie, otherwise not. Croo. 3. part last published. fol. 297.

Case 55.
Action for these words, Thou art forsworn and perjured; the Jury found About
Perjury.
a special verdict; that the Defendant, said the Plaintiff, was a forsworn
fellow, to whom the Plaintiff said, will you say I am perjured? the Defendant
said, yes, if you will have it, and the Court conceived, that upon this matter
an Action did not lie, and it was adjudged for the Defendant. Croo. 1. part
last published. 297.

Case 56.
Action for words, for that whereas the Plaintiff was a Justice of Peace,
Justice of Peace.
the Defendant said, You do openly maintain and countenance the worst people
against Gods Laws, and the Queens; after verdict it was moved, that an Action
did not lie for these words, for it is not shown who these people are which he
intended, were the worst people, viz. Rogues, Heretics, or the like; and it is
not shown that he did know them to be such persons, nor in what he did
maintain them, and of that opinion were Fenner and Clench, but Popham Chief
Justice contra, for they sound to his discredit, and he said it was adjudged
upon good deliberation: in a Case between Sir Henry Portman and Stowell, that
for these word, Thou maintainest such Charge of Maintenance.
a Suit, an Action did lie, for maintenance is unlawful and odious, and it is
here alleged to be spoken malitiose, and cannot be intended, but he
maintained them in their naughtiness, and afterward. Mich. 35. and 36. Eliz.
the Case was moved again, and it was held by the whole Court that the Action
did not lie, for the words are too general to maintain an Action. Croo. 3. part
last published. fol. 297.

Case 57.
Action for these words, Thou art a perjured Knave, for thou swarest Charge of
Perjury.
this day at the Leet, that I bake bread in my house, where I did not; after
verdict for the Plaintiff, upon not guilty pleaded it was moved, that an Action
lay not for these words, for perjury cannot (...) a Leet whereof the Law takes
any notice; but all the Court held that the words were actionable, for although
it be not a perjury punishable by the Statute of 5 Eliz. yet it is a discredit
for which an Action lies, wherefore it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1
part last published. 709.

Case 58.
Action for these words, Jo. Leversage (Innuendo the Plaintiff) would Charge of
Robbery.
have robbed the house of I. S. if I. D. would have consented unto it; he
persuaded I. D. unto it, and told him he would bring him where he should have
money enough. After verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved that these words
were not actionable, for there is not any act done by the Plaintiff whereby he
can be called in question; nor is it such a slander whereby he can have any
prejudice; but all the Court held them to be Endeavor.
words of great discredit and slander, and that the Action will lie, and it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1 part last published. 710.

Case 59.
Action upon the Case for these words, That the Plaintiff was a forsworn Knave,
the Plaintiff demanding of him where he was forsworn, he answered, In Ilston
Court (Innuendo a Court Leet there holden) and it was moved that an Action lies
not for these words; for the calling one Charge of Perjury.
forsworn Knave, (unless he says in Court,) is not actionable, which was
agreed per curiam. Then the Court here cannot know that Ilston Court was any
Court of Record, and the Innuendo cannot help that which was imperfect, and
therefore Williams said it was adjudged, that for saying, Thou were forsworn in
White Church Court, an Action lay not; but note this Case was shown to the
Court in writing, 28 Eliz. between Hern and Innuendo.
Hix, and the opinion of the Court there was, that the Action lay, and the
Defendant gave to the Plaintiff three pound, and he released his Suit, and no
Judgment was given; and all the Court here held, that the Action will lie, for
this Action is given by reason of the discredit of such words amongst the
Neighbors, and when he said, That he was forsworn in such a Court, it cannot
be intended but that it was a Court of Justice, and a president was shown.
Pasche, 37 Eliz. Rot. 370. in the Queens Bench, between Wildham and Copman,
that for these words, Thou art a false forsworn man, and were forsworn in such
a Court; adjudged that the Action lay, Croo. 1 part last published. 720, 721.

Case 60.
Action for these words, Thou have stolen my Mare, or consentest to the Charge
of Theft.
stealing of her. The Defendant pleaded not guilty, and found against him, and
after verdict it was moved, that an Action lay not for these words, for they
are in the disjunctive, and as to the last words it lies not, for he may be
said to be consenting, because he did not contradict it; and of that opinion
were Fenner and Clinch, being only in the Court, and awarded. Words incertaine.
Quod querens nil capiat per billam. Croo. 1. part last published, fol. 780.

Case. 61.
Action for these words, Thou art a forsworn Bailiff, and were forsworn Thou
art forsworn.
this day; after verdict for the Plaintiff upon not guilty pleaded, it was
moved in arrest of Judgment that an Action lies not for these words, for he
does not show that he was forsworn in any Court; it is not also shown, that he
was a sworn Bailiff at the time of the speaking, and the opinion of the Court
was, that the Action lay not, upon the first reason principally. Croo. 3. part
last published. fol. 788.

Case 62.
Action upon the Case for words; whereas he was of good name, etc. and
Bankerupt.
per multos annos jam retroactos fuit Mercator, and used the Trade of
Merchandising, tam infra Regnum, quam extra, that the Defendant spoke of him
these words, Thou art a beggarly Knave, and at Bankerupt, and thou art not able
to show thy face. It was moved, that an Action Merchant.
lay not for these words, unless it had appeared by the Declaration, that he
was a Merchant at that time, for being spoken of a Gentleman, or any who used
not the Trade of Merchandising, an Action lies not, and of that opinion was the
whole Court; but the Question was, whether by alleging, that he used the
Trade of a Merchant, per multos annos jam retroactos, it shall be intended,
that he was a Merchant at the time of the words spoken, and the Court seemed
to doubt thereof, because it is not precisely alleged, for it may be, he used
that Trade for a time, and left it afterward, wherefore they would advise
thereof. Croo 3. part last published. 794.

Case 63.
Action for these words, Thou have killed my Wife, after verdict for the Charge
of Murder.
Plaintiff, upon not guilty pleaded, it was moved, that an Action lay not for
these words, because he does not say, with what intent he killed her,
violently, or otherwise, and he does not aver, that his wife is dead, but
notwithstanding, it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, for it is to be intended,
if Repugnant words.
the contrary be not shown by the Defendant, that his Wife is dead, and it
shall be taken in the worst sense, viz. violently. Croo. 1. part last published.
fol. 823.

Case 64.
Action for these words, Thou art as couzening a fellow as any is in the Charge
of couzening. Officer.
Country; the last time thou were Undersheriff, as now thou art, thou did
serve an execution for a neighbor of mine, and did keep the money in thy
hand; hereupon the Defendant demurred, and after argument at the bar by Snag,
for the Plaintiff it was adjudged, maintained, that the words were not
actionable, for calling one couzening fellow, Action lies not, then the last
words be not actionable; for it is not expressed how long time he kept the
money in his hands; and it may be, he kept it only but until return of the
Writ, or by assent of the party, Plaintiff; wherefore it was adjudged for the
Defendant. Croo. 1. part last publishr. fol. 854.

Case 65.
Action for these words, Thou art a Rogue, and a Thief, after verdict, Rogue
and Thief.
it was moved in arrest of Judgment, that an Action lies not for these words,
for they are too general, but the Court held, that for the word Thief, it is
maintainable, unless it be coupled with other words, which proves it to be no
Felony intended; wherefore it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part
last published. fol. 857.

Case 66.
Action for these words, he (Innuendo the Plaintiff) is not worthy the office
of a Constable; for he and his company, the last time he was Charge of Theft.
Officer.
Constable, stole five of my Swine, and eat them, after verdict for the
Plaintiff, it was moved by Yelverton, that the Declaration was not sufficient,
for the words, he is not worthy, etc. may be spoken of any other, and the
Innuendo will not help it; also he does not say, that he spoke the words in
presentia and auditu aliorum, and if it were otherwise, it is not any slander;
but all the Court held, that the Action will lie; for hic and ille make a
demonstration, what person he intended; and it is also alleged, that he
spoke de querente, those words, etc. The words also, quod palam and public
promulgavit, imply, quod fuit in praesentia and auditu, etc. for it is not
palam, unless it be in praesentia and auditu aliorum, wherefore it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part last published. fol. 861.

Case 68.
Action for words, and declares that the Defendant spoke these words in Charge
of Murder in Welsh words.
Welsh (reciting them particularly) signifying haec anglicana verba, thou have
murdered my Wife, after verdict, and Judgment for the Plaintiff, error was
brought and assigned in hoc, that it is not averred, that the words were spoken
in the company of Welsh-men, or of such who understood the Welsh tongue, but it
is alleged, that they were spoken in presentia and auditu quam plurimorum
subdictorum Dominae Reginae; and the Action was brought in the County of
Monmouth, which was once parcel of Wales, but was now an English County; and
all the Justices and Barons held, that for this cause it was erroneous, for it
shall not be intended, that any there understood the said tongue, unless it
had been shown, and then it was not any slander, no more than if one spoke
slanderous words in French or Italian, an Action lies not, unless it be
averred, that some there present understood those languages; as it was held in
the Case between John's and Daux. Mich. 38. and 39. Eliz. in B. Reginae, but
because the damages were found to fifty pound, and if the Plaintiff should
begin de novo, he might not have peradventure so great damages, they moved him
to accept of ten pound, and to make an end without further proceedings; and so
it was done, and no judgment entered. Croo. 1 part last published. fol. 865.

Case 69. Cutpurse. Charge to receive stolen goods.

Action for these words, spoken of the Plaintiff, His Boy (Innuendo, one
Ambrose Latham the Plaintiffs Wives Son) has cut my purse, and he, knowing
it, has received it, it was moved, that an Action lay not for these words, but
adjudged that it was maintainable. Croo. 1. part last published. fol. 877.

Case 70.
Action for these words, Thou art a Rebel, it was demurred upon Declaration,
and without Argument adjudged for the Defendant, that the words Rebel.
be not actionable. Croo. 1. part last published. fol. 878.

Case 71.
Action for these words, Thou art a pocky Knave, get thee home to thy pocky
Wife, her Nose is eaten with the Pox; it was moved after verdict, Charge of an
infectious discase.
that the words were not actionable, for it shall not be intended by them, that
he is infected with the French Pox, and otherwise the Action lies not; but all
the Court held the Action was maintainable, for the word cannot be otherwise
intendible, but that he has the French-disease; for it is conceived, he is
accused to have the same disease, which his Wife has, and that the words
purport, that he has the French-disease, by saying that his Wives Nose is
eaten with them, wherefore it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part
last published. fol. 878.

Case 72.
Action for these words, Thou have cut my purse, therefore I charge thee Charge
of Felony. Cutpurse.
with Felony, after verdict it was adjudged, that the Action lay not, for to
say, thou have cut a purse, without saying feloniously, it appears not, that
he had committed any Felony, wherefore not actionable. Croo. 1. part last
published. fol. 890.

Case 73.
Action upon the Case, for these words used of the Plaintiff by the Defendant
to one Street; Go follow Suit against Willymote (Innuendo the Plaintiff) for
stealing thy two Kine, and hang him, or I will hang thee, Charge of Theft.
and on his further malice offered unto him, if he would exhibit a Bill of
Indictment for stealing the Kine, that he would procure him the value of two
Kine, and that he exhibited a Bill against the Plaintiff, etc. after verdict
for the Plaintiff upon not guilty pleaded, it was moved that the Action was not
maintainable: But Fenner and Yelverton (being only in the Court) held, that the
Action was well brought for the bidding him follow suit against him for
stealing thy Kine, and hang him, imports as much as that he had feloniously
stolen them, otherwise he could not hang him, wherefore it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff, Croo. 1 part last published fol. 904.

Case 73.
Action for these words; thou art a forsworn Knave, and that I will prove,
Charge of Perjury.
for thou wast forsworn in the hundred Court (Innuendo Stiverton hundred Court)
after verdict for the Plaintiff it was moved, that the Action lay not; for it
does not appear that it was a Court of Record, nor any Court whereof the
Justice should here take any cognizance, and of that opinion was the whole
Court. Croo. 1. part last published fol. 905.

Case 74.
Action for these words, to J. S. the Plaintiffs servant, thou have a Traitor
Traitor.
to thy Master (Innuendo the Plaintiff) adjudged that the Action lay, it being
moved after verdict in arrest of Judgment. Croo. 1. part last published fol.
906.

Case 75.
Trin. 11. Jac. B. R. Matthew versus Crasse. In an Action of the Case for these
words, Thou art a Whore-master, for thou have layen with Browns wife, and had
to do with her against a chair: and set forth that by reason thereof Charge of
Incontinency. Spiritual Slanders.
he lost his marriage, etc. ad damnum, etc. And it was objected, that the
words are not tryable here, but examinable in the Ecclesiastical Court, and
therefore not actionable: But it was answered, and agreed by the Judges, that
the Temporal loss, makes it actionable as in the Case of a woman, as where one
is callad Bastard alone; this is determinable by the He is a Bastard.
Ordinary; but if he add further to entitle himself to be heir, or shows some
possibility of being heir, this may make the words actionable. Bulst. 2. part
90.

Case 76.
Brian Nelson versus Staff. Pasche. 15. Jac. B. R. An Action was brought in
Slander of a Title Hindrance of preferment. Bastard.
Co. Banco, that whereas Thomas Nelson was, and yet is seized of Land in fee to
the value of one hundred pound a year, and married to Elizabeth, and had issue
between them the Plaintiff. And whereas there was communication between the
Plaintiff and Mary Cividal. concerning a marriage between them, and he was
offered with her six hundred pound, that the Defendant of purpose to scandalize
him, and to hinder him of his said marriage, speaking of the Plaintiff with J.
S. said these words of the Plaintiff, has that Bastard Brian Nelson caused you
to be arrested; is that all the spite the Bastard can do you. By reason of
which words he lost his marriage, etc. Upon not guilty it was found for the
Plaintiff, and damages given, and a Writ of error brought, and a Judgment
given for the Plaintiff, and so the first Judgment was affirmed, and agreed,
that the words were spoken affirmatively, and not by way of Interrogation, and
that the Action was given for the stain of his blood, and his special damage.
And that a man may, perhaps have this Action, albeit he have no Land at all.
Croo. 2. 422.

Case 77.
Trin. 15. Jac. B. R. Sr. John Tasburge versus Day. This Action was brought for
this, that whereas he was a Justice of Peace, etc. and that he upon the
seventh of March, and long before seized in Fee of the Advowson Slander of a
Title. Of an Officer.
of Sandcroft in the County of S. and intended to sell it toward the payment
of his debts, and the Defendant knowing of it, and intending to Slander him in
his Religion, etc. and to Slander his Title to the Advowson, and hinder the
sale thereof, the same day having speech with diverse persons about his Title to
the Advowson, and about his Religion; spoke these words, True it is, that Sir
John Tasburge was the true and undoubted Patron of Sandcroft, but now he has
lost that Patronage and presentation by being a Simonist and a Recusant, both
which I will prove him to be. By reason whereof he was hindered in the sale of
his Advowson. And upon not guilty pleaded, and a verdict for the Plaintiff, it
was adjudged for the Defendant, because it does not appear he was about the
sale of it, and so had any special damage by it, and for the rest of the words
they were held not Actionable, Croo. 2. 484.

Case 78.
Pasche. 13. Car. B. R. Humfreys and Studfields Case. In this Action for
Hindrance of preferment.
words, the Plaintiff declared, that he was heir apparent to his Father, and
also to his younger Brother, who had purchased lands, but had no Issue, either
male or female, and that the Defendant, with an intent to bring him in disgrace
with his Father, and also with his younger Brother, and thereby to make the
Father and younger Brother to give away their Lands from the Plaintiff, did
maliciously speak these words of him, Thou art a Bastard, which were spoken
before the Father and the Brother; He is a Bastard.
by reason of the speaking of which words, the Father and younger Brother did
intend, and afterward did give their Lands from the Plaintiff: and by the
opinion of the whole Court it was adjudged, that the words were Actionable, and
Judgment entered accordingly. Godb. Rep. 451.

Case 89.
Pasche. 15. Jac. B R. Cooper versus Smith. This Action was brought for this,
viz. waterman and thou [Innuendo the Plaintiff] have killed Charge of Murder.
thy Masters Cook [Innuendo, etc.] and I will bring thee in question for thy
life; And after Verdict for the Plaintiff, and motion to arrest the Judgment
for the Incertainty of the words, for that it did not appear, who was his
Master, or that his Master had a Cook, it was adjudged for the Plaintiff,
Incertainty. Innuendo.
and said, that albeit the Innuendo cannot make a thing uncertain, certain, but
shall serve only as a predict, yet the words import, that he had a Master, and
that his Master had a Cook, etc.

And another Action was brought for these words, viz. thou have sacrificed thy
Child to the Devil, and adjudged that the words were Actionable. Charge of
Murder.
Pophams Rep. 128. Bridgmans Rep. 60.

Case 80.
Mich. 44. 45. Eliz. B. R. An Action was brought for this, Thy Father By
Report. Averment.
said thou have murdered thy husband [Innuendo such a man by name] jam defunct,
and averred, ubi re vera, her Father spoke no such words. And Verdict for the
Plaintiff upon not guilty pleaded, and it was moved in arrest of Judgment,
because it was not averred, that the husband was dead at the time of the words
spoken, and diverse Cases cyted to the purpose. Yelvertons Rep. 20, 21.

Case 81.
Mich. 23. Car. B. R. Person and Dawson. An Action was brought for Charge of
Theft.
this, your Son [Innuendo your Son William] stole a Horse, and sold him for ten
pound, and a verdict for the Plaintiff, upon a not guilty, and after many
motions to arrest the Judgment, it was given for the Plaintiff. Styles Rep. 46.

Case 82.
Pasche. 33 Eliz. B. R. Buckley versus Wood. The Plaintiff in this Action
Slander in a course of Justice.
declared, that whereas the Defendant did exhibit a Bill against him in the
Star Chamber. 30. Eliz. containing (inter alia) that he was a nozeler of
Thieves, Murderers, and Pirates, etc. and recited a great part of the Bill,
that afterward the Defendant at P. in the County of Salop. 7, Maij. 31. Eliz.
Said he would justify his Bill to be true in every part, etc. The Defendant
pleads, that the seventh of May at Wellminster in the County of Middlesex, he
was demanded of the Lord Chancelour, if his Bill were true, and he said it was
true in all points. Absque hoc, quod dixit predicta Pleading.
verba, before or after the said day, Aliter vel alio modo. And upon this the
Plaintiff did demur; in this Case, albeit it was objected; For the first thing,
that it was in a course of Justice, and that his words after were justifiable,
and that the declaration containing this, that he had exhibited his Bill inter
alia, was not good, but that he ought to recite the whole Bill; yet it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff, for that they were matters not examinable in that
Court, and especially because he had spoken of them after in the Country.
Croo. 1. part last published. 230. 247.

Case 83.
Action for these words, Coals has strained a Mare, Innuendo carnaliter
Strained a Mare.
cognovit equam; the Jury found, that the Defendant spoke the words, C. has
strained a Mare, meaning that carnaliter cognovit, etc. And upon these words
the Plaintiff had Judgment, although it was alleged, that the words in
themselves had no sense; And the Innuendo will not help the Innuendo.
matter, but only denote the person; but because the verdict was found
prerisely, that this was his meaning, and it is a phrase of the Country; it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part last published. fol. 250.

Case 84.
Mich. 33. and 34. Eliz. B. R. Cole verse. Havilland. This Action was A. has
strained a Mare.
brought for these words, Coals has strained a Mare, Innuendo, Carnaliter
cognovit equam, and upon issue joined, etc. the Jury found the words, and the
meaning thereof to be as was declared, and Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part last published. 250.

Case 85.
The Bishop of Norwich against Pricket. Action de scandalis magnatum, Scandalum
Magnatum.
brought for these words, viz. You (predictum Episcopum Innuendo) have writ a
Letter to me, which I have to show, which is against the Word of God, against
the Queens authority, and to the maintenance of superstition, and that I will
stand to prove against you. And the Plaintiff recovered five hundred marks
damages. Croo. 1. last published. 2.

Case 86.
An Action was brought for these words, A. did wrap Gunpowder Endeavor to
burn a house.
in a piece of Tow, and laid it under my Window, and put fire to it, minding to
burn my house. And the Plaintiff had Judgment. Croo. 1. part last published. 6.

Case 87.
Griffith against Morrison. An Action was brought for these words. Bankerupt
Knave.
Where is that Bankerupt Knave? where is that Pillory Knave? And the Plaintiff
had Judgment. Croo. 1. part last published. 26.

Case 88.
Morgan versus Kiffe. Hill. 9. Eliz. An Action was brought for these words, A.
did maintain, victualled, and helped to let go certain Pirates contrary to the
Law of the Realm, and Proclamation made. And it was adjudged He maintains
Pirates.
for the Plaintiff, that the words were actionable. And there it was said, it
had been adjudged to lie for this, He maintained Thieves. Between Lea and
Pennistone.

Case 89.
An Action was brought for this, Thou have sitten upon the Pillory. And Pillory.
adjudged not to lie. 29 30. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last published. 62.

Case 90.
Prowse versus Carry. Pasche. 30. Eliz, B. R. An Action was brought Charge of
Subornation of Perjury.
for this, Thou have procured false witnesses to swear in such an Action; and
the Plaintiff had Judgment. But if the words had been, You brought in false
witnesses. It had been otherwise. Croo. 1. part last published. 93.

Case 91.
Charge of Attempt, and Endeavor of Robbery.
Mich. 36. 37. Eliz. B. R. Weeks Case. Action for these words, Week assaulted
me, and others, to have robbed us, but we were too strong for them, and
escaped. It was adjudged actionable; and agreed to lie for this, J. S. lay in
wait to do a Robbery, or Murder, although no Felony be done. Croo. 1. part last
published. 349.

Case 92.
The same year B. R. Line versus Backhouse. Action for these words, Charge of
Robbery. Doubtful words.
He has beaten me, and taken away my purse, and twenty shillings in money.
It was held per curiam, that the words are not actionable, for it may be
intended, he took them as a Trespasser, for he does not charge him with
Felony. Croo. 1. part last published. 353.

Case 93.
Pasche. 37. Eliz. B. R. Jinkinson versus Maine. Action for these words,
Indirect charge.
The Plaintiff deserved to have his ears nailed to the Pillory. Adjudged that
the Action lies. Croo. 1. part last published. 384.

Case 94.
Pasche. 39. Eliz. B. R. Goodale versus Castle. Action for these words Filcher.
Cutthroats.
Thou art a common Filcher, companion of cutthroats, and a Forger of Writings;
It was agreed, for all the words but the last, no Action will lie, by two
Judges it will lie for the last words. Croo. 1. part last published. 554.

Case 95.
Pasche. 39. Eliz. B. R. Ausly versus Mason. Action for these words, Charge of
Forgery.
Thou have made a forged Bond, and I will prove it, upon not guilty pleaded, a
verdict for the plaintiff, a motion to arrest the Judgment, it was adjudged
for the plaintiff. Croo. 1. part last published 554.

Case 96.
Mich. 39. and 40. Eliz. B R. Pollard and his wife versus Armshaw. Action for
these words, Thou art a Whore, and J. S. has the use of thy Charge of
Incontinency.
body; The Cart is good for thee. After verdict, and motion to stay the
Judgment. It was adjudged for the Defendant, and that the words were not
actionable. Croo. 1. part last published. 582. Goldsb. 172.

Case 97.
The same Term and Court. Harrisons Case. Action for these words, Charge of
Perjury.
Thou have forsworn thy self at London, and there it appears upon Record.
Upon a Demurrer it was ruled, that it will lie. Croo. 1. part last published.
583.

Case 98.
The same Term, and Court. Redferne versus Tod. Action for these Charge of a
Rape. Words indirect.
words, He should have been hanged for a Rape, but it cost him all the money in
his purse. After verdict, and Motion to arrest the Judgment, it was adjudged
for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part last published. 589.

Case. 99.
The same Term and Court. Shaw and Tompson, Action for these Charge of Perjury.
words, Thou art a forsworn Knave, and I will prove thee forsworn in the
Spiritual Court; after verdict, and motion to arrest the judgment for the
words, it was objected they were not actionable no more than these; Thou were
forsworn in Whit-Church Court, it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, Croo. 1 part
last published. 609.

Case 100.
The same Term and Court, Action for these words, The Plaintiff has forsworn
himself, [Innuendo before the Justices of Assize, etc.] and Charge of Perjury.
the whole Court held, That the words were not actionable, for the words are
not sufficient, and the Innuendo will not help it; wherefore it was adjudged
for the Defendant. Croo. 1 last published, 609.

Case 101.
The same Term and Court, Wells against Hemmerson, Action for Rebel.
these words, Thou art a Rebel, and no true Subject; after Verdict, and Motion
to stay Judgment, it was adjudged for the Defendant, that the words were not
actionable. Croo. 1 part last published, 622.

Case 102.
Mich. 40 Eliz. B. R. Blake versus Stanley, Action for words, Thou art Charge
of coining false money.
a Coyner of false Money, and I have Money to show which thou coynedst; after
verdict, and motion to stay the judgment, it was adjudged for the Plaintiff.
Croo. 1 last published, 629.

Case 103.
The same Term Co. B. Action for words, viz. That he keeps a Bawdy House. And
ruled, that the Action lies not, for by the Common Law Thou keep a
Bawdy House
he is not punishable, but by the custom of London; and therefore this Action
ought to be sued in the Spiritual Court. Croo. 1 part last published. 643.

Case 104.
Pasche 41 Eliz. Co. B. Slade versus Allen, Action for these words, Thou Charge
of Murder.
art a Murderer, and a bloody Fellow, and I am afraid of thee. Upon Demurrer
adjudged actionable. Croo. 1 part last published, 672.

Case 105.
Trin. 44 Eliz. B. R. Brown Versus St. John, Action for these words, You have
committed Burglary in breaking his house [Innuendo the house of one Bennet] and
stealing of his goods. After verdict, upon motion Charge of Burglary.
to arrest the Judgment, it was adjudged not actionable, for the breaking of
the house may be but Trespass, he does not say whose house he brake, and so it
is altogether uncertain. Croo. 1 part last published. 889. Incertainty.


Case 106.
The same term and Court. Cox versus Humfrey. The Action was Charge of Felony.
Receipt of stolen goods. Cutpurse. Incertaine words.
thus, Thy Boy [Innuendo Ambrose Lathum the Plaintiffs Wives Son] has cut my
Purse, and thou have received it knowing of it, and have the Rings and Money
that were therein, in thy hand, therefore I charge thee with felony. It was
adjudged that the Action lay not, for it does not appear that the Purse was cut
feloniously, and then the receiving of the things and Boy is not felony; it was
adjudged for the Defendant. Croo. 1. last published. 889.

Case 107.
The same Term and Court, Daws versus Bolton. Action for these Charge of
Receipt of stolen goods.
words, Thou art a Knave, and have received stolen Swine, and have received a
stolen Cow, and thou knewst they were stolen; upon not guilty, verdict for the
Plaintiff, and a motion to stay the Judgment; it was agreed by the whole Court
that the Action did not lie for these words, for the receiving of goods stolen
knowingly, unless it be to maintain the Felon, is not felony. And there
agreed that the Action will lie for this, Thou layest in wait to murder one;
and that he might receive the goods as Lord of a Manor, or his Bailiff, as a
waiffe or felons goods. Coo. 1 part last published. 888.

Case 108.
Trin. 26 Eliz. B. R. Smiths Case. Action for words, for that when as R. Charge
of Felony.
Smith was attained of Felony, and showed what the Defendant said. You
[Innuendo the Plaintiff] have done as ill and worse, and it will cost you as
Words incertaine.
much to be quit as it cost him; it was conceived the words might be
actionable, have certainty enough in them.

Case 109.
Trin. 28 Eliz. B. R. Sir Tho. Cockaine and his Wife versus Witnam. The Action
was, My Lady Cockaine did offer two shillings to a woman with Endeavor to
Murder.
child to get her a drink to kill her child, because it was gotten by I. S.
Sir Tho. Cockaines Butler. And it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, that the
words were actionable. Croo. 1 part last published. 49.

Case 110.
Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Action for this, If you had your deserts you had Charge
of Felony.
been hanged before now; and it was agreed to be actionable, and it must be
intended he had committed some offense for which he had deserved to be hanged;
and there it was said by Wray Justice, that it had been adjudged, Charge
indirect and incertaine.
That where one did write the name of another upon a wall, and writ also, That
if this man had his deserts he should have been hanged on the Gallows, and drew
a pair of Gallows on the wall; that for this the Action will lie. Croo. 1 last
published. 62.

Case 111.
Doctor Caesar versus Curseny, Mich. 35, 36 Eliz. B. R. An Action for Slander
of a Judge of a Court.
words, That whereas the Plaintiff was Judge of the Admiralty, and I. S. had a
Suit against the Defendant, and the Defendant said, That the sentence given by
the Plaintiff, Innuendo sententiam predictam, etc. Corruption.
was corruptly given, and upon not guilty, a Verdict, and a Motion to arrest
the Judgment, it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, Croo. 1 last published. 305.

Case 112.
Charter versus Peter. Hill 40 Eliz. Error was brought in the Exchequer Charge
of Treason.
Chamber of a Judgment in the Queens Bench, for these words, Thou art an Enemy
to the State; for that the words were not actionable. But it was adjudged that
they were actionable. Croo. 1 part last published. 602.

Case 113.
M. 6. Jac. B. R. the Action was brought for these words, Thou do Charge of
Witchcraft.
work by Negromancy, and do work by the Devil; and it was adjudged to be
actionable, for they are words of infamy and reproach, etc. Yelvertons Rep. 150.

Case 114.
Higgs against Austin. Pasche. 7. Jac. B. R. for this, Thou have stolen Charge
of theft of Wood.
as much Wood and Timber as is worth twenty shillings, and the Jury found the
words, and this further, off my Landlords grounds, and it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff; for these words do not gualifie, for Timber must needs be separate
from the ground, etc. Yelvertons Rep. 152.

Case 115.
VVeblin and Mayer, pasche 7. Jac. B. R. for these words, It will be proved by
many vehement presumptions, that the Plaintiff was a plotter Charge of Murder,
by words uncertain
and contriver of the death of one Powel, because he would not sell him his
Land; and it was adjudged not actionable, for he does not directly charge the
Plaintiff, but does refer to presumption, and slanderous words must be spoken
affirmatively. Yelverton, 153.

Case 116.
Newlin and Fa^^et. Pasche. 7. Jac. B. R. The Action was for these words, The
Plaintiff is a Felon. Take heed what you say, says a stranger, He is a Felon.
Why (says the Defendant) is not he a Felon, that knew of a Murder, and
concealed it? He (Innuendo, the Plaintiff) knew of the Murder of A. L. and did
not reveal it, till long after it was openly known. And it was adjudged
actionable. And that the first words were so, and the subsequent Words of
qualification.
words did aggravate the slander. And there a difference was taken between
words of qualification spoken at the same time, and spoken afterward. As one
says, Thou art a Felon, for thou have stolen my Apples off my Trees, is not
actionable. But if one say, Thou art a Thief, and a stander by say, Beware what
you say, and the other say, I will justify what I say, is not he a Thief that
stole my evidence; it comes too late now to qualify the former words. And
there it was said by one Judge, to say, J. S. is a Traitor, for he robbed a
man by the high way side, is not actionable. And by another Judge, that it is
actionable. Yelverton. Rep. 154.

Case 117.
Bury and Wright. Bear witness, Mistress, that he has stolen my Charge
indirect of steal-ing.
Hair-cloth. And it was adjudged against the Plaintiff, and that the words were
not actionable, for there is no direct Affirmation in the words, that import a
charge of his stealing of it. No more than if he had said, Mistress, you will
bear witness that he has stolen my horse, for by this, the party that speaks
does not slander, but rests in the testimony of others for the proof of it,
as if he had said, J. S. will prove you stole my horse; these words will not
maintain an Action. Quod nota. Yelvertons Rep. 126.

Case 118.
Nile and Swanson. Mich. 6. Jac. B. R. This Action was brought by a Slander of
an Officer. Bribing. Justice of Peace.
Town Clerk, and Steward of a Mayors Court in a Town, He has taken forty
shillings for a Bribe, and it was adjudged to lie, and that it shall have
reference to him in his office, So to say so of a Justice of Peace, or Clerk of
Assize. Yelvertons Rep. 143.

Case 119.
Blanchflower and Atwood. The Action was for this, I will hang him, Charge of
Treason.
for he has spoken words which be high Treason; and they were adjudged
actionable. Yelverton. Rep. 107.

Case 120.
Brinsby and Balgy. M. 5. Jac. B. R. The Action was brought by a Charge
indirect of a Robbery.
Maid in a Treaty of Marriage for this. It is no marvel she comes not to
Church, for it is thought she is with child, and I fear it is too true. And it
seems not actionable. And yet that such words used about a Robbery, would be
actionable. Yelvertons Rep. 113.

Case 121.
Tomson and Knot. M. 6. Jac. B. R. The Action was brought for these Charge
indirect of a Theft.
words, You might have known your own sheep, and not have stolen mine; In this
Case, by two Judges the words were not actionable, for they are no direct
affirmation of any stealing, but by way of Implication, and a slander may not
be drawn in by a strained construction. And two Judges, that they were
actionable. Yelvertons Rep. 145.

Case 122.
James Wilshire has forged the late Queens Writ; It was affirmed in Forgery.
a Writ of Error, that the words are actionable. Wilshire Case. Mich. 5. Jac.
B. R. Yelvertons Rep. 146.

Case 123.
Staverton and Relfe. M. 7. Jac. B. R. The Action was this, I will prove Charge
indirect of Perjury
thee a perjured Knave. And it was adjudged actionable, for these words, I will
prove, import a vehement affirmative of the thing, and the Plaintiffs guilt
therein. Yelvertons Rep. 160.

Case 124.
Dromant and Westofer. M. 6. Jac. B. R. The Action was for these Charge of
Theft. Pickpocket.
words, The wife of D. [Innuendo, the wife of the Plaintiff] picked five
shillings six pence out of H. Davis wives pocket, and her Husband [Innuendo,
the Plaintiff] was consenting to the same; and in this Case the Judgment given
in the Common Pleas, upon a Writ of Error, was affirmed in the King's Bench for
the Plaintiff, for the first words, to pick a pocket, etc. are slanderous, and
in the common phrase is in the worst sense a stealing. Yelvertons Rep. 136.

Case 125.
Tuerleote and Morrison. Hill. 8. Iac. B. R. The Action was brought for these
words, by an Alien Merchant, He is a Bankerupt, and fled beyond the Seas for
much money. And the Defendant pleaded, that the Alien.
Plaintiff was an Alien; but it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Yelvertons Rep.
199.

Case 126.
1 In an Action upon the Case for words, the Plaintiff did declare, That Case.
he was Heir apparent to his Father, and also to his younger Brother, who had
purchased Lands, but had no issue, either Male or Female; and that the Loss of
Preferment.
Defendant, with an intent to bring him in disgrace with his Father, and also
with his younger Brother; and thereby to make the Father and younger Brother to
give away their Lands from the Plaintiff, did maliciously speak Thou art a
Bastard.
these words to the Plaintiff, Thou art a Bastard, which words were spoken in
the presence of the Father and younger Brother; by reason of speaking which
words, the Father and younger Brother did intend, and afterward did give their
Lands from the Plaintiff. And by the opinion of the whole Court, it was
adjudged, that the words were actionable, and Judgment entered accordingly.
Godbolt. Rep. Case 519. Humfreys Case. 13. Car. B. R.

Case 127.
Mich. 20. Jac. B. R. Elborrow versus Allen. Action upon the Case. Whereas he
was the Son and Heir of John Elborrow, and Anne his Slander of a Title to Land.
Wife, Daughter and Heir of John Travel, and had diverse Lands by descent from
them, of the value of two hundred pound per annum, that the Defendant envying
his estate, speaking of the Plaintiff, and Katherine his wife, said these
words, Shall Elborrow his wife sit above my wife; he is but a Bastard? That by
this he was much scandalized in his Estate, and forced to great expense to
defend his Title, upon Nihil dicit, writ of Injury, and fifty pound damages,
and after motion to arrest the Judgment, it was given for the Plaintiff And it
was agreed, that the words in themselves were scandalous and dangerous, that
may cause his Inheritance to be questioned. Croo. 2. 642.

Case 128.
Banister sued Banister, for saying to him, being Son and Heir to his Father,
Slander of a Title to Land.
That he was a Bastard. And it was resolved that the Action would lie, for the
words tended to his dis-inherison. But if the Defendant himself had pretended
to be the next Heir, then the words had not been actionable. Trin. 25. Eliz. B.
R. Mich. 3. Jac. B. R.

Case 129.
Two men having speech together of John Syms, and William Syms, Slander
uncertain in the person slandered, and in the matter.
one of them said, The Symses make Half-crown pieces, and John Syms did carry a
cloak-bag full of clippings. And whether the Action would lie, was the
question, because it was uncertain in the person; for he did not say, these
Symses, but the Symses: Like unto the Case where one Farrer being slain, and
certain persons being Defendants in the Star Chamber, one having speech of
them, said, These Defendants did murder Farrer, and it was adjudged, that the
Action would not lie, for two causes. First, Because the words (these) was
uncertain in the person; And secondly, it was uncertain in the thing; for it
might be, that they had authority to do it; as in Mills Case. 13. Jac. in the
King's Bench, Thou Charge of coining of money.
have coined Gold, and art a Coyner of Gold. Thirdly, a Cloak-bag of Clippings,
that is also uncertain; for it might be Clippings of Wool, or other things, or
it might be Clippings of Silver from the Goldsmith; for the Goldsmith that
makes Plate, makes Clippings; and fourthly, it is not showed any certain
time, when the words were spoken. And for these causes it was adjudged that the
Action would not lie. Godbolt. Rep. Case. 477. Syms Case. Pasche. 3. Car. B. R.

Case 130.
Note it was cited by Chamberlain Justice 15. Jacobi, to be adjudged,
Hinderance of Preferment, Bastard. Slander of a Title For saying one is a
Bastard.
That where a man brought an Action upon the Case against another man, for
calling of him Bastard, that the Action was maintainable; the Defendant brought
a Writ of Error, and showed for Error, that the Plaintiff did not claim any
Inheritance, or to be Heir to any person certain: But notwithstanding that
Error assigned, the Judgment was affirmed. And he said, that if one says of
J. S. that his Father is an Alien, that an Action upon the Case will lie,
because it is a disability to the Son. Quere Godbolt. Rep. Case 421.

Case 131.
Mich. 6. Jac. B. R. Vaughan versus Ellis. Error of a Judgment in Slander of
a Title.
the Exchequer, in an Action of the Case for words, for calling of him Bastard.
And the cause of the Error was laid to be, that the Action lies not for these
words, without special cause shown, that he was damnified by them; as that he
was inheritable to some Lands, and by reason thereof he Hindrance of preferment.
is to have loss. And here it is shown, that such Land was given in tail to
his Grandfather, and that his Father had diverse Sons, whereof the Plaintiff is
youngest Son, and his Elder Brothers are living; and that such a one was to buy
the Land, and offered him so much for his Title. And by reason of those words,
refused to give him any thing. In this case it was For saying of one, He is a
Bastard.
agreed, that albeit he had no present Title, but a possibility; and being
offered money for it, and having lost this gain by the words, and in futuro,
might receive prejudice, in case he were to claim any Land by descent. And for
these causes they held the words actionable; and did affirm the Judgment.
Croo. 2. 213.

Case 132.
An Action of the Case was brought for speaking of these words, viz. J. S. For
saying, Thou have had Bastards.
34. years since, had two Bastards, and has paid for the nursing of them; and
the Plaintiff showed, that by reason of these words, contention grew betwirt
him and his wife, almost to a divorce: and it was adjudged, that an Action
would not lie for the words; and the Chief Justice said, that an Action upon
the Case does not lie for every ill word, but for words by speaking of which,
the Plaintiff is damnified, and that cannot be in this Case, the time being so
long past. And the causes wherefore a man shall be punished for saying, that a
man has a Bastard, are two; the one because by the Statute of 14. Elz. The
offender is to be punished for the same. And secondly, because the party by
such means is discredited, or hindered in his preferment. Godbolt. Rep. Case.
385. Pasche. 16. Jac. B. R.

Case 133.
Sir Gilbert Gerrard brought an Action against Mary Dickinson, and Slander of a
Title.
declared, that he was seized of the Land in Fee, and was in treaty to make a
Lease of it, for two and twenty years, at a hundred pound a year Rent to R.
Egerton; and that the Defendant knowing of it, said, I have a Lease of the
Manor and Castle of H. (which was the same Land) for ninety years, and
published it, etc. by reason whereof R. Egerton did not proceed. In this Case
it was agreed, that no Action would lie for the words, although they were
false, because the Defendant did pretend an interest in the Land. So if the
Defendant had said, that the Plaintiff had no right to the Land, but that she
her self had right to it; no Action would lie for this. Coo. 4. 18.

Case 134.
An Action upon the Case was brought for these words, viz. Thou art a For
saying, Thou art a Couzener and Bankerupt.
Couzener, and Bankerupt, and have an occupation to deceive men by; the words
were spoken of a Gentleman, who had a hundred pound Land per annum, to live
upon; and therefore although he used to buy and sell Iron, yet because he was
not a Merchant; nor did live by his Trade, the better opinion of the Court was,
that the words were not actionable, and so adjudged. Godb. Rep. Case 45. Hill.
28. Eliz. B. R.

Case 135.
Pasche. 15. Car. 1. Smiths Case. One said, Thou art forsworn, and have Charge
of Perjury.
taken a false Oath at Hereford Assizes against J. S. And the opinion of the
Court was against the Action. But it was said, it would have lain for this,
Thou art forsworn, and have taken a false Oath at the Assizes against J. S.
with an Averment, that he was sworn in the cause. March. Rep. pl. 17. Smiths
Case. Pasche. 15. Car. 1.

Case 136.
Easter 15. Car. 1. Molton versus Clapham. The Defendant upon reading Perjury.
Affidavids in Court openly, in the presence and hearing of the Justices and
Lawyers, said, There is not a word true in the Affidavids, which I will prove
by forty witnesses. March. Rep. pl. 45. Molton versus Clapham. Easter. 15. Car.
1.

Case 137.
Mich. 15. Car. 1. Johnson versus Dyer. The Case was this, The Defendant
Uncertain charge of Felony.
having speech with the Father of the Plaintiff, said to him, I will take my
Oath, that your Son stole my Hens; But did not averr that he was his Son, or
that he had but one Son; and it was held not good. March. Rep. pl. 96. Mich.
15. Car. 1.

Case 138.
Mich. 15. Car. 1. Just. Crooks Case. It was agreed, That if one had preferred
Manner of divulging of a Slander.
a Bill in the Starr-Chamber against a Judge, for Corruption in his office, and
then shall go unto a Tavern, or other place, and tell the effect of it, that
this is actionable. March. Rep. pl. 119.

Case 139.
Pasche. 17. Car. 1. B. R. Sir Richard Greenfields Case. The Action agreed
Charge of couzening.
to be maintainable for this, Thou have received money of the King to buy new
Saddles, and have couzened the King, and bought old Saddles for the Troopers,
for he may thereby lose his office or employment: So if he had said these
words of the Kings, Sadler. March Rep. pl. 135.

Case 140.
Trin. 17. Car. 1. Co. B. Action was brought for this, Thou have killed my
Charge of Murder. Lack of Averment.
Brother, Innuendo C. etc. fratrem nuper mortuum; and it was held by the whole
Court not actionable, without averment that he was dead, and that the Innuendo
will not do it. March. Rep. pl. 187. See Hobb. Rep. pl. 11.

Case 141.
Trin. 17. Car. 1. Hawes Case. The Action was brought for these words, Charge
of speaking against the book of Common Prayer. Averment Necessary.
My cousen Hawes has spoken against the Book of Common Prayer, and said, it is
not fit to be read in the Church; with an averment of a special loss by it,
that he was called into the Spiritual Court, and the Plaintiff had Judgment
in it. March. Rep. pl. 191.

Case 142.
Mich. 17. Car. 1. Co. B. Baine sued for these words, That he kept a Charge of
cheating and couzening. Averment.
false Bushel, whereby he did cheat and cousen the poor. But he set forth,
that he was a Farmer, did use to sow Land, and sell the Corn, and thereby
maintained himself, and his Family; and that the words were spoken to one that
did use to buy of him, and that by reason of the words, he lost his custom.
And it was adjudged actionable. March. Rep. pl. 192.

Case 143.
Mich. 17. Car. 1. Co. B. A. sued for these words, That he kept false
Couzening.
weights; and he set forth, that he got his living by buying and selling, but
did not show of what Trade or Profession he was, and agreed that the Action
will not lie. And if he had showed he had been of a Trade, it will not lie,
because he does not show that he did use them. March. Rep. pl. 197.

Case 144.
In Mich. 11. Jac. B. R. and Exchequer Chamber. Miles versus Jacob. For Charge
of poisoning a man.
these words, Thou [Innuendo, etc.] have poisoned Smith [quendam Sam. Smith ad
tunc defunct. Innuendo] and if it cost me a hundred pound I will hang thee for
it. And declared further, that of mere malice at the next Assizes, etc. he
procured him to be falsely indicted, that he had given poisoned drink to Smith,
to the intent to poison him, whereof he died, whereupon For procuring of an
Indictment.
Miles was afterward acquitted; upon not guilty, it was found for the
Plaintiff, and damages severally for the words. And Judgment seven pound a
piece, Costs entire. Upon a Writ of Error in the Exchequer-Chamber, it was
adjudged that the words would not bear an Action, for it does not appear that
he did it wittingly, or that he was dead at the time of the words spoken. And
the Innuendo will not supply it, it is no sufficient Averment. Innuendo.
But for the Iudictment it was adjudged, that the Action will lie. So that for
the damages for the words, the same being several, the Judgment being
reversed, for that part failed. But the Judgment for the Iudictment, and
damages for it, was affirmed, and for all the Costs. Hobb. Rep. pl. 11.

Case 145.
Mich. 7. Jac. in Co. B. Muttons Case. An Action of the Case was brought
Sorcerer. Inchanter.
against Mutton, for calling of the Plaintiff Sorcerer, and Inchantor, who
pleaded not guilty; and it was found against him to the damages of six pence,
and it was holden by the whole Court in the Common Pleas, that no Action lies
for the said words: For Sortilegium est rei futuri per sorts exploratio, et
Sortilegus sive sortilegista est qui per sorts futura prenunciat; Inchauntery
est verbis aut rebus adjunctis aliquid preter naturam moliri. And it was said,
that it was adjudged, that if one calls another Witch, Witch.
that an Action will not lie, for it is too general: But if one says, she is
a Witch, and has bewitched such a one to death; an Action upon the Case lies,
if in truth he be dead. And if a man be called a Conjurer, Conjuring.
he shall not have any Action upon the Case, unless he says, that he is a
conjurer of the Devil, or of any evil, or wicked spirit. Coo. select Cases page
59. Case 26.

Case 146.
Mich. 5. Jac. B R. An Action was brought by John Prichard against Robert
Charge of Murder, by words repugnant. Murder.
Hawkins for Slanderous words, published the last day of August, in the third
year of the King, viz. That Prichard, which serves Mrs. Shelley, did murder
John Adam's Child, (Quandam Isabellam Adams modo defunct, filiam cujusdam
J^hannis Adams of Williamstre in the County of Gloucester, Innuendo) upon which
a Writ of error was brought in the Exchequer-Chamber, upon a Judgment given
for Prichard in the King's Bench: and the Judgment was reversed in Easter Term
7. Jac. because it did not appear, that Isabel, was dead at the time of the
speaking the words; for tunc defunct, ought to have been in the place of modo
defunct. Coo. Select Cases page 71. Case 35.

Case 147.
Easter 8. Jac. B. R. Humphrey Dison said of Nicholas Bestney, Utter Barrester
and Counselor of Graies Inn, thou a Barrester? thou art no Barrester, thou
art a Barretor; thou were put from the Bar, and thou dare not show thy self
there; Thou study Law? thou have as much wit as a Daw. Upon not guilty pleaded,
the Jury found for the Plaintiff, and assessed damages to twenty three pound,
upon which Judgment was given, and in a Writ of error in the
Exchequer-Chamber, the Judgment was affirmed. Coo. Select Cases page 71. Case
36.

Case 148.
An Action of the Case was brought against one, for that he said to another, I
will give thee ten pound to kill such a one, and the Question Charge of words
of Attempt, and Endeavor to Murder. Murder.
was, whether the Action would lie. It was said, by Sir Thomas Cockain, that
such a Lady had given poison to such a one to kill her Child within her, that
the words were not Actionable. Also one said, That another had put Gunpowder
in the Window of a house, to fire such a house, and the house was not fired;
adjudged that the words were not Actionable, the Case was betwixt Ramsey of
Buchingham shire and another, who said, that he lay in wait to have killed
him; It was found for the Plaintiff, and he had forty pound damages given him.
But of the principal Case, the Court would advise. Godbolt. Rep. Case 51. Banco
Regis. Mich. 28. 29. Eliz.

Case 149.
Hill. 43. Eliz. Stich. versus Wisdom, for these words, He did better Charge
of Robbery. Manner of uttrance of words or Indirect charge. Opinion.
than many an honest man did; for there is many a truer and honester man
hanged. And there was a Robbery committed, whereof I think him to be one; And I
verily think him to be a Horse-stealer, and not guilty being pleaded, it was
found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment upon it. Goldsb. 186. and Owens Rep. 18.

Case 150.
Easter Term. 15 Car. An Action of the Case was brought by a Iourny-man,
Slander to a Tradesman, Shoo-maker.
and Foreman of a Shoomakers shop, which was his living, and livelihood, for
these words, viz. It is no matter who has him, for he will cut him out of
doors. And it was averred, that the common acceptance of the words amongst
Shoomakers, is, that he will make him run away, and beg, and alleged
special damage by it; and it was held actionable. In March. Rep. 2.

Case 151.
An Action of the Case was brought for speaking these words, Thou Charge of
Murder. Incertaine words.
do lead a life in manner of a Rogue, I doubt not but to see thee hanged for
striking Mr. Sydenhams man, who was murdered. And it was resolved by all the
Justices in the Exchequer Chamber, that the words were not actionable. At the
same day in the same Court a Judgment was reversed in the Exchequer Chamber,
because the words were not actionable; the words were these, viz. Thou usest me
now, as thy Wife did when she stole my goods. Godb. Rep. Case 331. Mich. 11.
Jac. in the Exchequer Chamber.

Case 152.
Mich. 21 Jac. Action for these words, the Defendant having speech with one
Chapman of the Plaintiff, spoke these words, She (meaning the Plaintiff) is a
thief to you and to me, and has stolen twenty pound Theft.
from me, and forty pound from you; the Defendant justified, that she was a
thief, and stole two Hens from her such a day, and year, feloniously; the
Plaintiff demurred upon the justification, because it is not a justification
Pleading.
of all the words, or of any part of the last words; adjudged, the
justification was not good, and therefore the Plea vicious; and judgment was
given for the Plaintiff. Hilsden and Mercers Case. Croo. 2 part, 676. Hilsden
versus Mercer.

Case 153.
Hill 43 Eliz. Humphry Parlor sued for this; Parlor was in Prison in a Manner
of the charge of theft.
Gaol for stealing of Mr. Piggots Beasts, and had a verdict and judgment upon
it. Goldsb. 130.

Case 154.
Mich. 39, 40 Eliz. Brough versus Dennison, for these words, Thou have Charge
of theft by words incertaine.
stolen by the Highway side, and the words were not held actionable. Goldsb 143.

Case 155.
Mich. Jac. B. R. The Defendant spoke these words of the Plaintiff, being a
Justice of the Peace, He (meaning the Plaintiff) for malice and spleen, did
many times wrest the Law, and pervert Justice to serve his Slander of a just^ce
of Peace.
own turn. It was moved, it was not alleged, That there was communication
with any other of the Plaintiff, or that it was about the execution of his
office; and then the words, [He did, etc. Non constat. whether the standers by
knew they were spoken of the Plaintiff, and the words [that he did many times
wrest the Law, etc.] might be spoken long before he was a Justice; but
adjudged, the Action does lie, the Declaration being that He, de prefate,
Thomas Dixit: And secondly, the words shall be taken in the worst sense, to
scandalize him in his office. Sir Tho. Beaumont, and Sir Hen. Hastings Case,
Croo. 2 part. 240.

Case 156.
Pasche, 30 Eliz. Cutts versus Robbins, this Action was brought, and Words
spoken in the time of another King.
they were at issue; and it was found for the Plaintiff, and he had judgment,
albeit the words were spoken in the time of Q. Mary, and perhaps the offenses
of that nature were pardoned. Goldsb. 85.

Case 157.
Hill. 43 Eliz. Hugh Hall sued for this, that whereas he had lost Cloth, and
searched after it, that the Defendant said, Hugh Hall has received Charge of
being Accessory to a theft.
three parcels of his cloth again of the thief, and if I receive any hurt
henceforth I will charge him with it; in this Case it was adjudged, that the
words were not actionable, Goldsb. 119. Halls case.

Case 158.
The same Term Richard Somerstailes sued for this; R. S. is a very Drunkenness.
bad fellow, for he made I. S. drunken in the night, and couzened him of an
hundred Marks; and judgment was stayed, for it was held, that the Couzening.
words were not actionable. Goldsb. 125.

Case 159.
Hill. 7 Jac. B. R. The Defendant at W. in the County of G. in the hearing of
diverse, spoke these words of the Plaintiff, being a Counselor Slander of a
Counselor.
at Law; You are a paultry Lawyer, and use to play on both hands; and at
another time before the Chancellor of the Bishop of Gloucester, for he spoke
to the Chancellor of the Plaintiff, I hope you will not believe Mr. Rich, for
he (Innuendo Mr. Rich,) is the furtherer and maintainer Maintainer of Felons.
of Felonies; adjudged the first words not actionable, but the last words. viz.
That he was a furtherer of Felonies, were actionable, and so was it adjudged in
Sir Hen. Leas Case, Rich and Holts Case. Croo. 2 part. 266.

Case 160.
Trin. 29 Eliz. an Action was brought for these words, Thou would Charge of
an Attempt, or Endeavor.
have stolen a piece of cloth, or else thou would have delivered it to my
Wives daughter, and thou art a thief, and an arrant thief; and it was adjudged
they were actionable upon the last words; otherwise perhaps it is where the
words are, And therefore thou art a thief. Normans Case, Goldsb. 56. and Hill,
30 Eliz. Edward Smith sued Warner for this, Theft.
I was robbed of goods to the value of forty pound, and they were stolen by
Smith, and his household [Innuendo, the Plaintiff, and A. his Wife, and B. their
Servant] and upon not guilty, it was found for the Plaintiff, and he had
judgment, and it was agreed, that each of them may have several Actions for
the slander. Goldsb. 76.

Case 161.
Pasch. 9. Jac. B. R. Action for these words. Mr. Berisford (meaning Charge
indirect of Treason.
the Plaintiff) has spoken Treason, and that I will prove; moved, the words
are not actionable; 1 Because there is no express affirmation, that the
Plaintiff is a Traitor. 2 The words, That I will prove, is quasi by way of
argument, which is not to be taken in ill part. But the opinion of three of the
Justices was, that the words shall not be taken argumentative, but affirmative;
and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff by consent of Parties, the Judges
being divided in it. Berisford and Cresses Case. Croo. 2. 275.

Case 162.
Hill. 10 Jac. Morton versus Leedel. The Action was for this, He is a Mainsworn
Fellow. Liar.
lying dissembling fellow, and a mainsworn and forsworn fellow; and judgment
was given for the Plaintiff, after diverse motions, Brownl. and Goldsb. 4.

Case 163.
Hill. 15 Jac. Harding versus Bulman. The Plaintiff declared, that before this
he brought an Action against B. for slanderous words, to which he Indirect
charge.
pleaded not guilty, and that the Plaintiff gave evidence to the Jury to
impeach the Plaintiffs testimony, that he was a common Liar, and so recorded
Manner of utterance.
in the Star Chamber, by which the Plaintiff gave him the less damage; in
this Case the Court agreed, that the Action would not lie. Goldsb. and Brownl.
2.

Case 164.
Pasche 29 Eliz. An Action was brought for this, Thou do harbor Harbor
Rebels and Traitors.
and maintain Rebels and Traitors; and it was adjudged to lie without this
averment, that he knew them to be such. Goldsb. and Brownl. 1 part 48.

Case 165.
Trin. 14 Jac. B. R. Rot. 39. an Action for these words, The 12th December.
Charge of Treason.
13 Jac. that John Piers did say, That John Lewis (meaning the Plaintiff) did
say, That there is no Prince in England, whereas re vera, J. Piers never spoke
any such words; and the Plaintiff adds, that the King, and his Son Prince
Charles were then in England; It was moved 1 That it was but the report of
another, and not his own speech. 2 It is not showed, when the words were used,
for it might be in the time of Q. Eliz. But it was adjudged, that the Action
lies, for it shall be taken, he spoke them in the worst sense to draw him in
question for his life; and they touch him in his Loyalty, which is a capital
offense, if true; and he adds, the words were never spoken, wherefore he
cannot show any time of speaking of that which was never spoken. Lewis and
Wal^ers Case, Croo. 2. 406. and 413. Bulstrode 3. 225.

Case 166.
Pasche 14 Jac. B. R. Smead and Badleys Case. The Plaintiff declared, Slander
of a title to Land.
That his Brother dyed seized of Land in Fee, and dyed seized thereof without
issue, and the Land descended to him as Heir, and that he had a purpose to
settle part of it upon his Son, and to make Leases of part of it, and that the
Defendant, to frustrate his intent used these words, The Plaintiff has no more
right to the Land than a stranger. It was adjudged against the Plaintiff,
because he did not show any cause of loss, that he was about to make a Lease
or assurance of it to his Son, but that he had an intent only. Croo. 2. 397.
337. Owens Rep. 32. Pophams Rep. 187.

Case 167.
Trin. 18 Jac. B. R. Action for these words; the Plaintiff alleged, That 1.
April, 17 Jac. he was a Merchant, and the said 1. April, 17 Jac. the Defendant
spoke these words of the Plaintiff, He is a Bankrupt Bankrupt.
slave; the Defendant justifies, because 1 April, 17 Jac. the Plaintiff became
bankrupt; but adjudged, the words actionable, and the Defendants Bar
insufficient, because he does not allege, he continues still a bankrupt; for
it may be, he afterward recovered himself, and became a good Merchant;
judgment for the Plaintiff. Usher and Bretts Case. Croo. 2. 578.

Case 168.
Trin. 22 Jac. in C. B. Action for these words Thou art as arrant a Indirect
words. Theft.
thief as is any in England, for thou have broken up I. S. his chest, and taken
away forty pound. After verdict, and motion to arrest the Judgment, it was
adjudged, the first words without any Averment, will not maintain an Action,
and the last words do not prove any Felony committed, and the money may be
taken away, and the Chest broken open upon pretense of Tithe, and in midday in
the presence of diverse, and then it is no felony. Judgment was for the
Defendant, and there this Case was put by Hobbard, Thou art a thief, for thou
have stolen away my corn, not actionable; but if he say, For thou have stolen my
corn. contra. Foster and Brownings Case. Croo. 2. 687.

Case 169.
The Plaintiff being an Attorney in B. R. for one Ecombridge, prosecuted for
him a Latitat against Lord, which he delivered to the Sheriff; Slander of a
Lawyer.
upon which Lord was arrested. The Defendant having speeches with Ecombridge
concerning the Plaintiff, and his honesty as an Attorney, and concerning the
said Latitat; ex malitia praecogitata, said these words of the Plaintiff; Go
tell your Lawyer Roberts, that I say, he is a base Rascal, and I will make him
lose his ears; and I will teach him, or any Lawyer of them all, to have a Writ
served on me. Upon not guilty, it was found for the Plaintiff. And upon debate
between the Judges, it was resolved, that the words were actionable. Trin. 3.
Car. 1. Rott. 1170. in B. R. Roberts and Lords Case. Ley. 70.

Case 170.
Action for words, The Plaintiff declared, that one named Carolus, being Charge
of Perjury. Incertainty.
of good fame, and name, the Defendant said, ^e prefato Carol^, Where is this
Baker? (Innuendo, Caroius Baker) he has taken a false oath, and I could make
him look through the Pillory. It was moved, that the Innuendo Innuendo.
will not make it good, there being no Baker spoken of before. But the opinion
of the Court was, The Declaration was good. And if one say of a Counselor,
Where is this Counselor, Innuendo, such a one, it is good. Adjudged for the
Plaintiff. Trin. 13. Jac. in B. R. Bakers Case. Bulstrod. 3. part 72.

Case 171.
Action brought for these words. Sir Herbert Crofts keeps men to rob me (the
truth was, that the Defendant was robbed by two of Sir Herbert He keeps men
to rob me.
Crofts men) and upon this the Defendant spoke the words: But the Defendant
does not say, That he did keep them so to do. It was agreed by Cook Chief
Justice, and all the Court, that the Action would not lie for those words; for
that there is done; and it is to be intended his keeping of them to be lawful;
and the words [to rob mee] this is but an intent, and Inclination and purpose.
no Act; and an intent without an act, is not punishable; and Hill. 39. Eliz.
in C. B. Snag and Gee's Case, was vouched by Cook; where the words were, Thou
have killed my Wife, and it appeared the Wife was then living. Adjudged, the
words not actionable; in the principal Case, it being found for the Plaintiff,
the Judgment was arrested, because the words were not actionable. Pasche 14.
Jac. B. R. Sir Herbert Crofts and Browns Case. Bulstr. 3. part 161.

Case 172.
In an Action upon the Case for words, it was found for the Plaintiff. Charge
of Theft.
It was laid in the Declaration, cum quidam malifactores ignoti, had
feloniously shorn the sheep of J. S. upon a Communication had between the
Defendant and another, touching the shearing of these sheep, the Defendant
spoke these words, I do know who did shear the sheep; (predict. J. S. Innuendo)
General and uncertain words.
the other desired of her, who this was? she answered, It was the Plaintiff
and M. that did shear them (Innuendo, Felonice) it was upon Innuendo.
motion, for stay of Judgment adjudged, that the words were not actionable,
and that the general words shall not be restrained to particular; and the
Innuendo will not help it: And in the Declaration it is laid, there was
Communication betwixt the Defendant and another, concerning the shearing of the
sheep (but not concerning the Felony) And it is not said, that she did know
who did shear the sheep feloniously, but who did shear them generally; and the
scandal grows out of an inference only, which ought not to be, to make words
actionable; but the words themselves ought to be directly scandalous. Judgment
was arrested. Mich. 13. Jac. B. R. Helly and Henders Case. Balstr. 3. part 83.

Case 173.
Hill 9. Jac. Rott. 832. B. R. Action for these words, Thou art a Bankerupt
Bankerupt Rogue. Knave. Thief.
Rogue, and accounted a common Knave; and thou art a Thief, and have stolen my
Corn. Adjudged, the first words were not actionable, but the second were: but
because the Judgment was entire, and the damages entire; the Judgment was
reversed upon a Writ of Error Damages entire.
brought. Lloyd and Pearses Case. Croo. 2. part 424.

Case 174.
In an Action upon the Case, for words; it was found, upon not guilty, for the
Plaintiff: The words spoken by the Defendant to the Plaintiff, Charge of
Forgery.
were these, viz. Thou have forged Writings, for which thou should lose thy
ears. It was laid in the Declaration, that the Plaintiff was a Practitioner,
Solicitor, and Steward of a Manor. The Court was divided in opinion: For
Mountague, Chief Justice, and Crook, were of opinion, that the words were
actionable; for although the first words of Charge indirect.
themselves, are not actionable, yet the subsequent words added to them, make
them actionable. Like the Case, if one says, Thou have stolen, no Action will
lie for these words; but if he does add these words, viz. for which thou
should be hanged; then an Action upon the Case will lie: and the precedent
words are to receive construction by the subsequent words. Haughton and
Doderidge, the Action will not lie; for the words here are uncertain, what
manner of Writings they were; and they may be Words uncertain.
frivolous Writings, for which he ought not to be called in question; and no
Indictment will lie for this Forgery, and then if he be not in danger of his
ears, and so no Action will lie for these words, Curia advisare vult, for
search of Presidents. And afterward the Case was not moved again, but was
ended by agreement between the parties. Pasche. 14. Jac. B. R. Frost and Airs
Case. Bulstrod. 3. part 265. 266.

Case 175.
An Action for these words, viz. Mr. Lowes is a Witch, and I will Witch.
prove it; for I have seen him and his Imps, and evil spirits appear unto me,
in my Chamber, and put me in fear of my life; and he said, come, they will
never be at quiet, till we have killed him: And he did bewitch a child of
mine. It was adjudged, that the words were actionable in the King's Bench. And
if one says of J. S. That he has conference with evil spirits, the words
will bear Action. But for one to say, That such a one is a Witch, in anger, the
words are not actionable, Judgment was for the Plaintiff. Trin. 13. Jac. B. R.
Rott. 114. and 130. Lowes Case. But yet afterward a Writ of Error was brought
upon this Judgment in the Exchequer-Chamber, and there holden by the Judges,
the words were not actionable, and the first judgment was reversed. Trin. 13.
Jac. Bulstr. 3. part 74.

Case 176.
Pasche. 10. Jac. Co. B. Iveland versus Smith, for these words, He is He is a
Papist.
an arrant Papist, and has a pardon from the Pope, and can help you to such a
one, if you will; and it was agreed that Action will not lie for them. Goldsb.
and Brownl. 2. part 166.

Case 177.
Edward Gibbs brought an Action upon the Case against Jenkin David, Slander in
another language.
for words spoken in the Welsh Tongue, and declared that the conference was had
by Baron Snigg with the Defendant, concerning the felonious stealing of three
Heifers, and the Defendant is supposed to answer to the question in Welsh,
Whether Thomas Jackson stole them; if he had them, I should have had them
again, but Edward Gibbs stole them: and upon Welsh.
not guilty pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff at Bristol; and it was
moved this Term in arrest of Judgment, that the words in Welsh did not
signify stealing, but carrying away upon ones back: and it appeared upon
examination of one Mr. Gunter upon oath, that it is properly the word for
carrying, though that there in the Intendment of the parties it might be taken
for stealing, it being joined with other precedent circumstances, yet it is not
actionable, for it shall be taken in the most favorable construction, and best
sense, as if one had said, That such a one had the No malice in words.
Pox, and forbid one to use his company, it shall not be intended of the
French Pox, and no Action lies. And judgment was given for the Defendant, yet
it was averred in the Court, that the words were spoken in the hearing of them
which understood the language. Trin. 15. Jac. Rott. 1634. Huttons Rep. page 8.
Hobb. Rep. pl. 236. and in Noys Rep. 19.

Case 178.
Stone brought an Action upon the Case against Roberts, for these words, Witch
and Inchanter.
The Plaintiff is a Witch, and an Inchanter, and has bewitched the children of
one Strong: And Judgment for the Plaintiff; for though Witch is a word of
malice, and familiarly used to old poor women, and therefore no Action lies;
yet here it is coupled with a deed, by which the Plaintiff is drawn in danger
of his life, by the Statute of 1. Jac. otherwise for the word Witch alone.
Mich. 15. Jac. Rott. 636. Huttons Rep. 13. Noys Rep. 22.

Case 179.
Gittings Plaintiff in the Exchequer against Redserve, Gittings is a Couzening
Knave.
couzening Knave, and so I have proved him before my Lord Mayor, for selling
me a Sapphire for a Diamond; the Action does not lie: and by Manwood, if A.
says of B. Thou art a couzening Knave, and have couzened me of five hundred
pounds; no Action lies, which the Court agreed. 26. Eliz. Huttons Rep. 13.

Case 180.
An Action of the Case was brought, for these words, I charge thee with
Indirect charge of Felony. I charge thee with Felony, etc.
Felony, for taking money forth from John Spacies pocket, and I will prove it.
Henden moved in Arrest of Judgment, that these words were not actionable.

First, Because it is not any direct affirmative, that he is a Felon; and for
that he vouched a Case (as he said) adjudged in the Kings Bench, Masters,
bear witness that he is a Thief. Bear witness he is a Thief.


The second reason was, because that the matter subsequent does not contain
matter, which must of necessity by Felony, but stands indifferent: for if it be
not privily and secretly, it is not Felony; and it may be, by way of sport, or
trespass: For as one said, That he is a Thief, and stole his Timber, it is
not actionable, for it might be Timber cut, or Timber growing: Theft about
Apples, Timber, etc.
So to say, That he stole his Corn, or his Apples, or his Hops: for in
mitiorem partem verba sunt accipienda. And it seemed to the Lord Hobbart, that
the first words, viz. (I charge thee with Felony) are actionable, for the
Constable (if he be there present) ought to apprehend him thereupon, and it is
a plain Affirmative, I arrest thee of High Treason; Justice Winch I arrest thee
of Treason, etc.
prima facie held, that the words were actionable, and not qualified by the
subsequent words, as it should be, if he had said, For thou have stolen my
Apple Trees standing in my Orchard, that could not be Felony, but it is not so
there, for it may be Felony, and ex causa dicendi, it shall be taken for
Felony; in these words for taking money, etc. Warburton and Hutton Causa Dicendi.
was of opinion that the Action lay not.

This Case was moved in Mich. 18. Jac. And then the opinion of the Court
(preter Warburton qui haesitavit) was, that the Action did not lie. Ideo
memorando quod querens nil capiat per breve. Pasche. 18. Jac. Huttons Rep. 38.
Mason versus Tomson. Pasche. 18. Jac.

Case 181.
Allen brought an Action of the Case against Swift, and declared, That whereas
Bankerupt. Tradesman. Merchant for Lead.
he bargained and sold, that is to say, Merchandized for Lead in the County of
Derby, and thereby has acquired money toward his livelihood, the Defendant
said of him, He is a Bankrupt, and is not able to pay his Debts, but will run
the Country; it was found for the Plaintiff, and moved in arrest of judgment
by Sergeant Harvey, that the Action lay not, because that the Plaintiff showed
not, that he used it as his Trade, nor that he gained his living by buying and
selling; also he is entitled Gentleman; but the Court held, that the Action
would well lie, and it had been adjudged 14 Eliz. that a Tanner shall have an
Action for such words. Mich. 9 Jac. Huttons Rep. 46.

Case 182.
Hugh Meredith a Justice of Peace in the County of Monmouth, Charge of Robbery
indirect. Slander of a Justice of Peace. I will indict him for, etc.
brought an Action upon the Case against Bonill for these words, I will have
him hanged for robbing on the Highway, and for taking from a man, five pounds,
and an horse; after verdict for the plaintiff, it was moved in arrest of
Judgment, that the words were not actionable, for they are not Affirmative or
Positive, but a supposition only; as if he had said, I will indict him for such
a matter; it was vouched to be alleged 31 Eliz. in Nowels Case, that to say of
an Attorney, That he was Cooped for Attorney Cooped for forging Writs.
forging Writs. maintained an Action; and 14 Eliz. H^e is infected of a
Robbery, and he smells of the Robbery, adjudged actionable, in Balls Case,
there is never a Purse cut in Northamptonshire but Ball has a Words general
and incertaine.
part of it, will not bear action; but the Court would not declare their
opinion, Quia sub spe concordiae. Hill. 10 Jac. Huttons Rep. 58.

Case 183.
Sir Robert Hitcham Sergeant at Law, and to the King, brought an Action upon
the Case against one Brook, a Justice of the Peace, and which had been Sheriff
of Suffolk, and Count, that he for diverse years last past, had been one of the
Kings Sergeants, and had demeaned himself well and loyally in the discharge of
his duty, and had gained good opinion, and had acquired by his practice a good
estate for the maintenance of him and his Family; the Defendant said, I doubt
not, but to prove that the Treason.
Plaintiff has spoken Treason (Innuendo Treason against the King) verdict was
found for the plaintiff; and it was moved in arrest of judgment, that these
words are not actionable.

1 Because no time is alleged when the plaintiff is supposed to speak Time of
speaking the words, when material.
Treason, and it might be when he was an Infant, or that it is pardoned; to
which it was answered by the Court, First, that these words ought to be
alleged as they were spoken, and that was indefinite. Secondly, the time is
not material, unless the Defendant make it material by his plea, viz. when he
was in giving evidence for the King against a Traitor, and then he repeated
such words; or when that the plaintiff was frantic, and of that he intended,
and so justify, there the time may come in question.

2 The second Exception was, that there is not any express affirmative; Charge
indirect, and not affirmative.
to that it was answered by the Court, That it was more than an Affirmative,
for he had (as he said) proof thereof, and not a Report or heresay; and if one
say, It is reported; etc. that will not bear Action, unless he justify the
Report, by charging it upon him, which was the Author of the Report.

3 Also it was objected, That the speaking of Treason was not Treason, but it
was holden clearly, that it is as well as preaching, or writing, Et index animi
sermo.

4 Also it is not said what Treason, and it may be High, or petty Treasan; To
which, it was answered, that when he speaks generally of Treason, it shall be
intended according to the common intendment, which is, Treason against the
King, vide Sir William Mulgraves Case, Coo. Lib. 4. And two Cases were vouched
to be adjudged in the Point, one between Johnson and Atwood, 8 Eliz. Thou have
spoken Treason, and I will hang thee for it, adjudged actionable. The other was
between Pewall and Vardoffe, 9 Jac. Thou have spoken Treason, and I will prove
it, adjudged actionable. And it was resolved by all, that the Plaintiff should
have his judgment. Pasche 1 Car. 1. Huttons Rep. 75.

Case 184.
John Daws Plaintiff against William Palmer, in an Action upon the Case, and
Count, That whereas he was a Fuller, and had used the Trade of Fulling, and
thereby acquired his livelihood, and was of good Bankrupt of a Tradesman. A
Fuller.
credit etc. The Defendant said of him, Trust him not, for he owes me a
hundred pound, and is not worth one Groat; and at another day he said, He is a
bankrupt Rogue; and upon not guilty pleaded, the Jurors found for the
Plaintiff, and gave entire damages; and it was moved in arrest of judgment,
that the first words were not actionable, and then Damages entire.
the Jury, having given entire damages, the Plaintiff should not have Judgment
for any part, vide Osbornes Case. Coo. lib. 10 but in this case, after many
debates, it was resolved by the Court, that the Plaintiff should have
judgment; for the first words are actionable at Common Law before the Statute,
Trust him not, he is not worth one Groat; Go not to buy of I. S. (a Merchant)
for he will deceive you. Of an Words that hurt a man in his Trade, or way of
living.
Iune-keeper, Go not to such an Inn, for he is so poor that you can have no
good entertainment. Of an Attorney, Use him not, for he will cousen you, all
these words are actionable, he will be a bankrupt within seven days; and for
the other words, That he is a bankrupt Rogue, that is resolved. Co. lib. 4. to
be actionable.

And it was a Case, Pasch. 10 Car. 1. in a Writ of Error, brought in the
Exchequer Chamber, upon judgment given in the Kings Bench, between Dunkin and
Laycroft, for words spoken of a Merchant, who had been at Hamborow, in partibus
transmarinis, and there had used the Trade of a Merchant and Factor Thou
(Innuendo tthe Plaintiff) came Broken Merchant.
over from Hamborow a broken Merchant, and adjudged actionable, and so affirmed
in the Exchequer Chamber, and upon all these Authorities the Court gave
judgment for the Plaintiff. pasch. 10 Car. 1. Huttons Rep. 124, 125.

Case 185.
One Widow Sower brought an Action of the Case against Burton for Old Witch.
Old Whore.
these words, Thou old Witch, thou old Whore, leave off thy Witching, or else
thou shall be hanged, or burned, if I can do it; and upon not guilty pleaded,
and verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in arrest of judgment, and it
seemed to Lord Finch, Hutton and Vernon that the Action lay not, without
showing, that she did act any Witchcraft, for which the pain of Pillory; and
imprisonment for two years should be inflicted, and the second time Felony;
and that the words, Thou art an Old Witch, or, Go away thou old Witch are
usual words, and Old Whore bears no Action; and as to say, Thou shall be hanged
if I can do it, it is not possible that he could do it.

But Justice Crawley doubted of it at first, because that it was alleged, that
it had been adjudged in the King's Bench, that an Action lies for calling one
Witch; but afterward he said, that he had spoken with the Witch alone not
actionable.
Justices of the King's Bench, of their reason, who said, that they adjudged no
such thing, unless that he had spoken further, that the party had done any act
of Witchcraft punishable by the Statute. Hill 12. Car. 1. Huttons Rep. 132.

Case 186.
Powel an Attorney, brought this Action for these words, I have matter Slander
of an Attorney Forgery.
enough against him, for Master Harley has found Forgery, and can prove it
against him; not guilty pleaded; it was found for the Plaintiff, but he could
not have Judgment. Hobb. Rep. pl. 382. 395. 399.

Case 187.
Pasche. 9. Car. 1. John Smith Town-clarke of Southampton, sued Cornelius
Slander of an officer, a Town-Clarke.
an Attorney, who set forth he was Town-Clarke to the Mayor and Burgesses
there, and was their Scribe, and had the keeping of their Rolls, Pleas, and
proceedings before them in their Court, etc. and Forgery.
that the Plaintiff spoke these words of him, Thou have made many a false
certificate to the Mayor and Burgesses in that Court, and the more thou
stirrest in it, the more it will stink; and it was adjudged not Actionable.

1 Because it was not alleged, that there was any colloquium concerning his
office.

2 Because it did not appear, that the making of Certificates did belong to his
office.

3 They might be false, and no fault of his, unless he knew of it. Huttons
Rep. 123.

Case 188.
Mich. 14. Jac. B. R. Sir John Sidnhams Case, for these words, If Sir Charge of
Treason.
John Sidnham might have his will, he would kill all the true subjects of
England, and the King too; and he is a maintainer of Papistry and Rebellious
persons: The Defendant pleaded, that he spoke other words, absque hoc, etc.
the Jury found these words to be the words, I think in my conscience, if Sr.
John Sidnham might, etc. and found all the other words Jury found other words.
verbatim, etc. And it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, and the Judgment
affirmed in a Writ of error, and agreed that the words are actionable, and that
the words found in the verdict, are the same in substance as they are in the
Declaration, and that the variance does not hurt. Croo. 2. 407. Hobb. Rep. pl.
213.

Case 189.
An Action was brought for these words, Thou art a healer of Felony, Thou art a
healer of Felonies.
and have showed such favor to a Horse-stealer in the time of thy
Constableship, that thereby both the Horse and Thief were conveyed away, and
that it lies in my power to hang thee: It was adjudged for the Plaintiff; for
Healer of Felony, is a word known in Devonshire, where the Action is brought to
be a Consealer or Hider of Felony: as in Yorkshire to say to one, Thou have
strained a Mare, will bear Action; for it is commonly Thou have strained a
Mare. Slander of an officer, when out of his office
taken to steal a Mare: And notwithstanding it he not laid expressly, that the
Plaintiff was Constable at the time of the speaking of the words. It is not
material, for albeit he be out of his office, yet he ought not to be
Slandered with any thing done in his office; as if a Justice of Peace be put
out of Commission, and one shall say to him, when thou were Justice, thou were
a Bribing Justice, this is actionable, for albeit it refer to a thing past,
yet it does defame him for ever, in the opinion of others, and will make him to
be accounted unworthy to bear office again. Quod nota. Pasche. 7. Jac. B. R.
Pridham against Tucker. Yelvertons Rep. 153.

Case 190.
The Plaintiff declared, that whereas he was a Freeman of Wells, and did
exercise the Art or Mystery of a Linnen-Draper within the same City, by the
space of five years past, and by his credit, etc. had gained much, etc. by
selling and buying, etc. That the defendant, the twenty eighth of July,
Bankerupt of a Tradesman, Linnen-^raper.
Anno quinto, etc. spoke to the same Plaintiff, and to A. B. viz. you both
(Innuendo) the Plaintiff and A. B. are Bankrupts, and not worth a Groat, ad
damnum, etc. And it was found by Verdict for the Plaintiff, and it was moved
that the Declaration is not good, because it was not laid precisely, that at
the time of the speaking of the words, that the Plaintiff was a Linnen-Draper,
but only by the space of five years past, to which Yelverton answered; That
there is a diversity between Slanders of one in respect of an office, and in
respect of a Trade or Profession, for if one say to a Justice of Peace, he is
a Briber, etc. He ought to show in an Action for these words, expressly in his
Declaration, that he was a Justice of Peace at the time of the words spoken,
because it sounds in Slander of his person in respect of his office only,
which office endures but at the will of the King, being by commission. But
where a man is Slandered in his Profession or Trade, there it need not be so
precisely alleged, that at the time of the words spoken he was a Lawyer,
Physician, Merchant, or Linnen-Draper, but it suffices to show that he is of
such a Trade, and has exercised it for diverse years past, without saying
(ultimo) Declaration, how, it must be that he was a Tradesman. etc.
or (jam) elaps^ for a man shall not be intended to alter his trade or
profession, but by presumption to continue it during his life. Quod fuit
concessum per curiam, quod nota. And the Judgment was affirmed, vid. Trin. 6.
Jac. Rot. 1272. For the Case. Accords. Trin. 38. Eliz. B. R. Rot. 546. Inter
Gardner Plaintiff, and Hopwood Defendant, upon the same words, Thou art a
Bankrupt, the Plaintiff alleging. Quod per multos annos jam retro actos artem
Merchandizandi videndi, et licite barganizandi exercuit et usus fuit, and
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. Tuthill verse. Milton. Trin. 7. Jac. B.
R. Yelvertons Rep. 158. 159.

Case 191.
The Action was brought for this. Thou art an arrant Knave, for thou Accessory
to Felony. Receipt of stolen goods.
have bought stolen Swine, and a stolen Cow, knowing them to be stolen;
adjudged against the Plaintiff; for the receipt or sale of goods stolen is not
Felony, nor will it make one accessory, unless it be joined with the receipt
or abetment of the Felon himself; For in some Cases it is lawful to receive
stolen goods; as if a Lord of a Manor that has, bona waivata, meet with the
Thief and the goods about him, and says, you have stolon these goods, and he
confesses it and fly. Per Gawdie, Fenner et Yelverton, Popham absente. Trin.
44. Eliz. B. R. Dawsons Case. Yelvertons Rep. 5.

Case 192.
Brook against Mountague, Recorder of London. And the Action was Charge of
Felony in a course of Justice. Slander of a Lawyer
for these words, spoken of the Plaintiff, That he had committed Felony, and
upon not guilty pleaded, it was found, that he was of counsil, with the
Defendant in an Action, and that he, in giving of evidence to the Jury spoke
the words, and that they were pertinent to the matter in issue, and it was
ruled against the Plaintiff, albeit the words were false. Mich. 31. Jac. B. R.
And agreed that so it will be in an appeal of Murder, if the Counnsel say the
Plaintiff did commit the Murder. But if it were in trespass for a Battery, that
such words were spoken, they may be actionable: And so also if the words were
never so much pertinent, if the Council speak them at another time, or in
another place, they may be Actionable. The Case of Parson Prit in Suffolk.
Croo. 2. 90.

Case 193.
Pasche. 12. Jac. B. R. Hutton versus Beck, for these words, spoken to
Constables.
a Constable, and Churchwarden of a Parish, viz. Thou have beguiled and
deceived the Town [Innuendo, the Inhabitants of the Village of A.] upon
Churchwardens.
thy accounts of four pound. And it is no marvel thou growest rich, when thou
deceivest the Town. And it was adjudged with the Defendant Charge of couzening
a Town.
against the Plaintiff, that the words were not actionable, for they were too
general. Croo. 2. 339.

Case 194.
Tailor brought the Action against Taliv, That whereas there was talk between
the Defendant, and J. S. such a day, in such a place, concerning a Marriage to
be had between the Plaintiff, and the Daughter of J. S. Super quod Colloquium;
The Defendant in present a diversarom personarum cum present. haec Anglicana
verba dixit to J. S. of the Plaintiff, Will you cast away your Daughter upon
Tailor, to which J. S. said, why? to Charge of a Rape, by which a match was
lost.
whom the Defendant answered, Tailor ravished the wife of J. D. upon which the
Marriage did not take effect, etc. Upon not guilty pleaded, it was found for
the Plaintiff, and moved in arrest of Judgment, that the place where the words
were spoken, was uncertain; for albeit it be said, that the talk was at such a
place, yet it is not said where the scandalous words were spoken, Richardson
contra, and that they were spoken at the same Place of speaking the words.
place, where the talk was, for the time and the place are conjoined by the
Adverb, Tunc present. and in a Court there need not that certainty, as in an
Indictment. Quod Car. Concessit, and so here the Super Quod is the Commencement
of a new sentence, and for the words supposed to be spoken, no place is
mentioned. Doderidge accord. Ergo per Car. quer. nil capiat per billam. Tailor
versus Tally. 21. Jac. Benlowes Rep. 128.

Case 195.
Davis brought an Action upon the Case against Ockham, for speaking these words
of him, The Knave, the Apothecary, that married my Sister, Charge of Murder.
has poisoned my Uncle, and I will have him taken up again, to hang him. The
Defendant pleaded an Accord betwirt him, and the Plaintiff, that whereas the
Plaintiff had done a trespass against him, that one trespass Acccord pleaded
pass should be set against the other. To this plea the Plaintiff demurred,
and Twisden said, the Plea was not good, and cited 16. Ed. 4. f. 89. and prayed
Judgment for the Plaintiff. Latch. of Counsel with the Defendant, said, that
the Accord was executed on the Defendants part and therefore may be pleaded in
Bar. To this Roll Chief Justice answered, how have you discharged the Accord?
for you do not show it. Latch took exceptions Poison.
to the Plaintiffs Declaration. Pleading in this Action.


1 That the words set forth, are not actionable, for it does not express that
the Plaintiff wittingly poisoned the Defendants Uncle, or that he did dye of
the poison, and cited Hobb. Rep. 8. Miles and Jacobs Case, and 275. Fleetwood
and Caveleys Case.

2 There is no Communication expressen in the Declaration to be of the Uncle,
and it may be spoken of another Uncle, and the Innuendo will not help it,
because he may have diverse Uncles. Twisden answered, that it is employed in the
sense of the words, that he poisoned him feloniously, and so consequently
wittingly.

And 3. He says, that he will have him dug up, and so it must be
intended; that he died of the poison; Roll Chief Justice held, that the words
are actionable.

And 4. That the Defendants plea in Bar is not good, Jerman Justice held the
plea in bar not good, but he doubted whether the Declaration was good, for it
does not appear thereby, whether the party died of the poison, and the latter
words help it not. Nicholas Justice, and Ask Justice agreed with Rolls in all,
and thereupon the Rule was, Judicium Nisi, Lundi Suivant. Styles Rep. 245.

Case 196.
Rosse brought an Action of the Case against Lawrence, for speaking these Welsh
words of him, viz. Dediagues Will. Rosse in Mudon, which are in English,
William Rosse has forsworn himself, upon issue joined, and Slander in another
language.
a Verdict for the Plaintiff, the Defendant moved in Arrest of Judgment, that
the words are not actionable, as they are rendered in English, Welsh.
and so the Action lies not. Roll Chief Justice, if the words found in Welsh
that the Plaintiff was perjured, yet if the Plaintiff do english them in
English, which does not amount to Perjury, it is ill, and an Action will not
lie for them. Therefore let Judgment be staid. Styles Rep. 263.

Case 197.
After a Verdict in an Action upon the Case, brought for these words, viz. I
was never a Traitor to the State, as you have been: It was moved in Arrest
Treason. Incertainty in the person slandered. Falso and malitiose.
of Judgment by Turner, for the incertainty of the Declaration, for that it
appears not thereby, that the words were spoken of the Plaintiff, or to the
Plaintiff, and because it is not said, that the words were spoken falso and
malitiose. Shafto of Council on the other side answered, that it appears the
words were spoken upon conference betwixt the parties, and thereby does appear
a sufficient Averment, that the words were spoken of Averment.
the Plaintiff. Roll Chief Justice. The Declaration implies, that the words
were spoken falso and malitiose, and there needs not an express Averment, that
they were so spoken, as there ought to be in an Indictment, and this
Declaration is laid two years after the words were spoken, Therefore take your
judgment, except better matter be shown. Styles Rep. 435.

Case 198.
Townsend brought an Action upon the Case against Barker, that had Couzening
Knave.
been a Co-partner with him in Trade, for speaking these words of him, You are
a couzening Knave, and did cousen me of twelve hundred pound at one time, and
that was in making an account in the year 1648. Upon a Verdict for the
Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, Trades man.
that the words are not actionable, because, though they be spoken of a
Tradesman, yet they are not spoken of him in reference to his Trade, but in
reference to an account: and although by way of reduction and consequence they
may reflect upon his honesty, yet they are not actionable; and though his
Reputation be impaired by speaking them, yet he cannot be indicted for
couzening in his Trade, by reason of them, because they are spoken of a
singular and particular abuse, and not of a general couzening used in his
Trade, and an Action of the Case lies not for words which are only scandalous,
by way of Reduction; and if the words should hinder the party to get a partner
hereafter, to trade with him, yet he may use his Trade, and so cannot be
prejudiced. Nor are the words, that he cheated him, but that he couzened him,
which are not of so violent a Construction. Wild on the other side said, that
here is a Partnership which is necessary to the driving of a Trade, and without
which it cannot be so well driven, and the account is incident to all
Partnerships, and prayed for Judgment. Copartners in Trade.
Roll Chief Justice; if the Co-partnership continued, the words were actionable
without doubt. For then they must be spoken of him in the way of his Trade; but
here the Partnership being ended, makes the matter more considerable; but yet
as it is, the words are scandalous, and may hinder from getting a Partner for
the time to come; and it may be he cannot manage his Trade without a Partner,
and although an account be a private thing, yet the Plaintiff is disgraced by
the speaking of the words, and none will deal with a man, that will cousen his
own Partner; and we must countenance Trade and Traffic, and men's Credits; and
the account is not so collateral a thing to trade as Hales objects, as is the
hiring of a shop to trade in, or the like. German Justice ad idem, and said,
that Co-partnership is necessary to support Trade, and the keeping of a true
account is the principal thing between Partners, Nicholas and Ask, Justices ad
idem. Judicium nisi pro quaerenter. Styles Rep. 389.

Case 199.
Sir William Walgrave brought an Action upon the Case against Agur. Upon these
words, spoken by the Defendant to a Servant of the Plaintiff, Treason.
it is well known that I am a true Subject, but thou (Innuendo, the said
Servant) servest no true Subject, and thine own conscience may accuse thee
thereof. It was moved in arrest of Judgment, that these words are not
actionable, for no slander comes to the Plaintiff thereby; for perhaps the
party served no man, but the Queen, and if the words may receive such sense,
which is no pregnant proof of Infamy, they are not actionable, as in the Case
betwixt Savage and Cook. These words, Thou art not the Queens friend, are not
actionable, for it might be they were Words uncertain as to the person
slandered.
spoken in respect of some ordinary mis-demeanours, as in not payment of
subsidies, or the like: Also it is not averted, that the party to whom the
words spoken, was the Plaintiffs Servant. Cook, where a man is touched in the
duty of his office, or in the course of life, an Action lies, although that
otherwise the words are not actionable, and here is set forth in the
Declaration. That the Plaintiff at the time of speaking of the said words, was
a Justice of Peace, and Sheriff of Suffolk, and Captain of a Troop of a hundred
and twenty horse, to attend the preservation of the Queens person: So in
respect of place and dignity in the Commonwealth, as 2. H. 8. The Bishop of
Winchestor brought an Action upon Scandalum Magnatiam.
the Statute of Scandal. Magnatum, upon these words, My Lord of Winchester,
sent for me, and imprisoned mue, until I made a release to J. S. and in
respect of his place and dignity, the words were holden actionable; and 9.
Eliz. Dyer, in an Action upon the Case by the Lord Aburgaveny against Wheeler,
My Lord of Aburgaveny sent for us, and put some of us into the Coal-house, and
some into the Stocks, and me into a place in his house called Little-Ease, and
the words were holden actionable: So in our Case (Jews said) it was the Case
of one Kinsey; one said to a Bailiff of a Franchize, Thou did execute false
Officer slandered.
Warrants, without saying, they were falsified by him, adjudged an Action did
not lie, Wray Chief Justice. These words in themselves are not actionable, for
the Plaintiff might be untrue in small things, which gave no discredit, but the
quality of the person of whom they were spoken, may add weight to them, as to
call one Bankerupt generally, Bankerupt
no Action lies upon it, but to call a Merchant so, is actionable. So to call
one Papist, no Action lies for it; but if one calls the Archbishop Papist.
of Canterbury in, an Action will lie, for he is Governor of the Church. Thou
art an untrue man to the Queen, gives not an Action to an ordinary Untrue man
to the King.
Subject, but such words spoken of one of the Privy Council, are actionable.
Corrupt man, of themselves are not actionable, but being spoken of a Judge, an
Action Iyeth.

It was Birchleys Case, an Attorney of this Court, Thou art a corrupt man and
dealest corruptly, and it was adjudged per curiam, that Slander of an Officer.
the words were actionable, for that refers to his Calling. Gaudy was of
opinion, that the words were actionable of themselves, without respect had to
the quality of the person of whom they were spoken, for the words are
particular enough, and to touch him in the duty of a Subject, which is to be
faithful to his natural Prince, is a great reproach and slander. Fenner
conceived, that the words were not actionable; Wray, as before, of themselves
they are not actionable, for they are in general, for if he be indicted of
Trespass he is not a good subject. Leonards Rep. Case 469. M. 32 Eliz. B. R.

Case 200.
Mich. 1 Car. 1. Co. B. Sir John Isham a Justice of Peace sued York Slander of
a Justice of Peace.
for these words, I have been often with Sir John Isham for justice, but could
never get any at his hand, but injustice. Croo. 1. 10.

Case 201.
Hill. 2 Jac. B. R. Sir John Hollis versus Briscoe and his Wife, for Slander of
a Justice of Peace.
this; first showing, That he was a Justice of Peace in the County of N. and
had been Sheriff of the County, and then for seven years before was Deputy
Lieutenant there; that the Defendants Wife said to A. and B. the Plaintiffs
servants, Your Master [Innuendo the Plaintiff,] is a base Rascally Villain,
and is neither Nobleman, Knight, nor Gentleman, but a most villainous Rascal,
and by unjust means most villanously, Keeps Thieves and Traitors about him.
take other men's Rights from them, and keeps a company of Thieves and Traitors
to do mischief, and gives them nothing for their labor but base blew
Liveries, and this all the Country reports, and other good he does not any; and
it was adjudged for the Defendant, yet two of the five Judges held them
actionable, but they all agreed none of the words could be actionable but
those, He keeps a company of Thieves and Traitors to do mischief. Croo. 2. 58,
59. and in Yelverton. 64.

Case 202.
Pasche. 3 Jac. B. R. Sir George Moors Case was this, That there being Slander
of a Commissioner out of Chancery with Bribery.
a Suit in Chancery between Richard King and two others, and a Commission by
assent of the parties thereunto to him and three others, Ad examinandum testes,
and audiendum and terminandum if they could, and if they could not to certify,
etc. the Defendant said of the Plaintiff these words, Sir George Moore is a
corrupt man, and has taken Bribes of Rich. King [Innuendo that he has taken
Bribes of Rich. King for the executing of that Commission] And said further,
That Richard King has set Sir George Moore on Horseback with his Bribes, to
pervert Justice and Equity; upon not guilty pleaded, and a verdict, the
Plaintiff had judgment. Croo. 2. 65. also in Yelverton 62.

Case 203.
Mich. 3 Jac. B. R. Kempe versus Howsegoe, for these words spoken of Slander of
a Justice of Peace Partial Justice.
him being a Justice of Peace, Kempe is a Basket Justice, a partial Justice, I
will give him five pound every year for his Gifts about Justice-matters; and it
was held that for the words partial Justice the Action will lie, but that none
of the rest of the words are actionable. Croo. 2. 90.

Case 204.
Pasche. 18 Jac. B. R. May versus Gibbons. The Action was for these Charge of
Theft. Slander by way of interrogation.
words, Have you brought home the forty pound you stole? and they were adjudged
actionable, though spoken by way of interrogation, and the judgment was
affirmed in a Writ of Error brought upon it. Croo. 2 part. 568.

Case 205.
Crumpe versus Barue. Pasche. 2 Car. 1. Co. B. The Plaintiff he was Bankrupt of
a Shoo-maker.
a Citizen of Gloucester, and had so been for twelve years, and all that time
used the Trade of a Shoemaker; and that the Defendant said of him He is a
Bankerupt Rogue; and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. 21.

Case 206.
Wicks versus Shepherd in the Exchequer. Pasche. 5 Car. 1. he set Loss of
preferment by words.
forth, That he was in Treaty for a Wife, and like to have her, and that the
Defendant to hinder him thereof spoke this of him, He is a sharking Fellow,
and gets his living by deceit, and used himself violently to his Couzening.
former Wife, and denied her necessaries, and is a needy Fellow, and his
conditions are wicked; and for his Religion he is a Brownist; by reason
whereof he lost his marriage. And it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, but agreed
that it was by reason of his loss only, and that otherwise the words were not
actionable. Croo. 1. 110.

Case 207.
Mich. 5 Car. 1. B. R. Shaliver sued Foster and his Wife, for these Charge of
theft. Incertainty in the person slandered
words, spoken by the Wife of the Defendant, of the Plaintiff to Anne
Rochester, the Plaintiffs Mother, Where is that lying thief thy Son, [Innuendo
the Plaintiff] he has murdered my Aunt [quandam Dorotheam Stoke Amitam
defendentis Innuendo] and I will prove it; and upon a not guilty, it being
found for the Plaintiff, it was doubted because it was not alleged, That
there was a precedent communication of the Plaintiff, or that he was the only
Son of Anne Rochester to whom the words were spoken, and the Court would
advise. Croo. 1. 127.

Case 208.
Trin. 8 Car. 1. B. R. Goodyear versus Bishop, for this, That whereas the
Plaintiff is, and for diverse years has been a Merchant, and used the Bankerupt.
Trade of a Merchant, that the Defendant speaking of him, said, to one
Tradesman.
Harris, He is not worth a Groat, he is a hundred pound worse than naught, and
it was adjudged actionable. Croo. 1. 193.

Case 209.
Mich. 8 Car. 1. B. R. Lawrence sued Woodward for this, Thou did Charge of
Robbery.
violently upon the Highway take my purse from me, and four shillings two
pence in it, and did threaten me to cut me off in the midsts, but I was
forced to run away to save my life; and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff.
Croo. 1. 202.

Case 210.
Trin. 1654. Henley and Bayntons Case, for these words, You have couzened the
State of twenty thousand pound, and I will prove it, for you Couzened the State.
have received five and twenty thousand pounds profits of the office, and not
compounded for it, and have foysted in words into the order of your
composition, and after a verdict for it, it was adjudged for the Plaintiff.
Styles Rep. 436.

Case 211.
Mich. 17 Jac. B. R. Califord and his Wife against Knight, for these Adjective
words. Whore. Pox. Innuendo.
words, Thou art Mutcombes Hackney, thou art a theeving Whore, and a pocky
Whore [Innuendo that the said Jones had the French Pox] and I will prove thee
a pocky whore; and it was adjudged against the Plaintiff, that the words were
not actionable, and that the Innuendo did not extend them beyond their common
sense. Croo. 2. 514.

Case 212.
Pasche. 16. Jac. B. R. Barmunds Case, for these words, he has had Charge of
Incontinency.
two Bastards, and should have kept them, by reason of which words discord did
arise between him and his wife, and they were likely to have been divorced: And
it was adjudged against the plaintiff, for that he did not set forth any
special damage that came to him by the words spoken. Croo. 2. 473. Averment.


Case 213.
Mich. 10. Jac. B. R. Tooses Case, for these words, Tooses his wife [Innuendo
the plaintiff] killed thy Husband [Innuendo] John Dunscombe her Charge of
Murder of a Husband.
husband lately dead. And after verdict it was adjudged for the plaintiff, and
that the words were Actionable; albeit it were objected, that the words were
too general, for she might kill him by physic, and it might not be Felony.
Croo. 2. 306. Words general


Case 214.
Foxcrost brought an Action of the Case against Lacy, and declared, that Charge
of Murder.
whereas Lacy and four others were Defendants in a suit, concerning
Conspiracies, etc. and that communication was moved between John Walter and
Richard Gwyn Esquires, concerning the said suit, that the said Defendant Lacy
upon the said communication in their presence spoke these words, These
Defendants, meaning the Plaintiff, and the other six, are those that helped to
Murder Henry Farrer, meaning one Henry deceased, who was murdered by one
Thomas Gulfield, who was hanged for it, to the plaintiffs damage, etc. The
defendant denies the words, and found for the Incertainty in the person
slandered.
plaintiff, and Judgment given, error was assigned generally, that the
Judgment should have been contrary, but Judgment was affirmed, for it was
holden, that it was sufficiently laid to entitle every one of the defendants to
a several Action, as if they had been especially named. Hobarts Rep. 119.

Case 215.
In the Exchequer an Action of the Case was brought by K. D. against Slander in
another tongue, Welsh.
W. T. for calling him Idoner in the Welsh tongue, and did not aver what the
word did import, and yet Judgment was given for the plaintiff, and the Court
took Information by Welshmen, what the word meant in English. And the like
Judgment in the Common Pleas, and upon the like form of Declaration, were
found in search in the Common Pleas, between William Verch Howel, against Evan
George, for a Slander in Welsh words. Trin. 43. Eliz. rot. 3024. and another.
Pasche. 44. Eliz. Rot. 8034. And at this time Sergeant John Moore informed the
Court, that Judgment had been given in the King's Bench, 6. Jac. in the Case of
one Tuch, Healer of Felons Averment.
upon these words, thou art a healer of Felons, without any averment how the
words were taken, because the Court was informed, and took knowledge, that in
some Countries, it was taken for a smotherer of Felons. Hobb. 155.

Case 216.
James Steward brought an Action of the Case against Bishop, for saying Charge
of Theft. Indirect words of charge.
of him, Innuendo, etc. is in Warwick Gaol, for stealing of a Mare and other
Beasts; and after a verdict for the plaintiff, upon diverse motions in Arrest of
Judgment, the whole Court gave opinion Seriatim, that the words would not bear
Action; for they do not affirm directly, that he did steal the Beasts, as if
he had said that he stole them, and was in Gaol for it; but they do only make
Report of his Imprisonment and the supposed reason of it, and it may very well
be, that the Warrant or Mittimus was for stealing expressly, as is the common
form of making of the Calendar, of the Prisoners for the Justices of Assize,
and the like. Hob. 196.

Case 217.
Mich. 6 Jac. B. R. Frank. versus Alsop, in the Exchequer Chamber upon a Writ
of Error, after a judgment given in the Kings Bench for these words, I will
prove thee a thief, and a plotter of theevery, and I I will prove thee a Thief.
will prove it by thine own Son, or I will send him to the Devil. And it was
adjudged that the words were not actionable, and therefore the former judgment
was reversed. Croo. 214.

Case 218.
Hill. 5 Jac. B. R. Smith versus Turner, for these words. Thou art no true
Subject to the King, and that I will prove; upon not guilty pleaded, Treason.
and a verdict found for the Plaintiff; upon motion for arrest of judgment it
was adjudged against the Plaintiff, and that the words were not actionable, for
they were too general and incertaine, Croo. 2. 202. and Yelverton 104.

Case 219.
Mich. 5 Jac. B. R. Sir Tho. Holts Case, for these words, Sir Tho. Holt struck
his Cook on the head with a Cleaver, and cleaved his head, the one part lay on
the one shoulder, and another part on the other; upon not Charge of Murder.
guilty pleaded, and a verdict for the Plaintiff, but moved in arrest of
judgment, and adjudged by the Court that the words were not actionable,
because it was not averred that the Cook was killed, but Argumentative, for
notwithstanding the wounding, the Party may be yet alive, and Incertainty in
the words.
the slander that is actionable must be direct, against which there may not be
any intendment. Croo. 2. 184.

Case 220.
Mildmay brought an Action of the Case against Standish, for saying, The Land
was lawfully assured to John Talbot for one thousand six Slander of a title to
Land.
hundred years, and that he was thereof lawfully possessed, whereas in truth
some such estate was made, but the same was not legally made, nor was John
Talbot thereby legally interessed in the Term; for it was true, that he had a
limitation of such an estate by a Will, which was the reason why he spoke the
words, yet because he took upon him the knowledge of the Law, and did meddle
with a matter did not concern him, judgment was given for the Plaintiff.
Mildmay versus Standish. Coo. 175.

Case 221.
Hill. 4 Jac. B. R. Edwards Case for these words, Thou art a Witch, and Witch.
I will prove thee a VVitch. And it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, Croo. 2.
150.

Case 222.
Mich. 3 Car. B. R. Turners Case for these words, He [Predict. quer. Innuendo]
and one Allen are perjured Knaves; upon not guilty pleaded, Charge of Perjury.
it was found for the Plaintiff, and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff; albeit
it were objected, that (He) cannot refer to two persons, and are perjured
persons, cannot be referred to one person; but the Court held it well, albeit
it be false english, for the sense appears; and that it is not like to the
Case where one says, that I. S. and I. D. is perjured; or if one say to thee,
that one of you is perjured, this is void for incertainty. Croo. 2. 101, 102.

Case 223.
Margaret Bliss, who was in remainder after an estate in Tail, did Slander of
a title to Land.
bring an Action on the Case against Edward Stafford, for slandering her Title,
in affirming, that A. had issue on B. who is alive, and the Defendant pleaded,
not guilty, and the Action adjudged by all. But did abate for an exception to
the Court. Owens Rep. 37.

Case 224.
Hill. 3. Jac. B. R. William Wisemans Case. For these words, that the Defendant
said, de praefato Querente existente fratri suo naturali, My Brother [praefat.
Querentem Innuendo] is perjured. Upon not guilty Perjury.
pleaded, and verdict for the Plaintiff, it was, after motion to arrest the
Judgment, adjudged for the Plaintiff. Although it were said, that the words be
uncertain, what Brother he intended, and it may be he had diverse Incertainty
in the person slandered.
Brethren, and that the Innuendo will not help, for that actionable words must
import in themselves precise slander, without ambiguousnesse, so that every one
that hears them may intend of whom they be spoken. For it was said, that he
spoke the words of the Plaintiff, and the Jury found him guilty. And this
difference was taken, where the words in themselves import apparent
incertainty, and when they may be ascertained by Intendment. In the first Case
no Averment will aid it. But in the last Case by Averment.
an Averment, and a Verdict, it may be aided. And therefore where the words be,
One of my Brothers is perjured, this is so uncertain, that neither of them can
bring an Action; and if he be found guilty by Verdict, it will not help. But
here it did not appear that he had more Brothers than one, and then it may be
certain enough, and here it is expressy averred to be spoken of him, and the
Jury has found him guilty; and therefore it is here certain enough. And this
Case was cited by the Court to be adjudged for the Plaintiff. That murdrous
Knave Stroughton lay in wait to murder me. And upon this one Thomas Stroughton
brought the Action, and said, they were spoken of him. And upon not guilty
pleaded, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was adjudged after diverse motions,
to arrest the Judgment for the Plaintiff. Croo. 2. 108.

Case 225.
Sir Thomas Gresham versus Grindsley, Thy Brother was a fool, and was never
born to do himself any good; for that he could not hold his hand from ratifying
and subscribing to his Fathers Will; notwithstanding I have that to show in my
house, that if his heir Elizabeth Gresham do not any such Act, as he has
done, it shall bring her to inherit Titsley. Sir Tho. upon this, sues the
Defendant, And shows how his Father was seized Slander of a Title to Land.
of the Manor of Titsley, and of other Lands, and by his will devised to A.
his wife for life, the Remainder in Tail to the Plaintiff, and how the Father
had issue William the eldest, which had issue Elizabeth his Daughter and Heir,
and this Plaintiff the youngest Son, and that A. is dead; and the Plaintiff
entered, and the Defendant to slander his Title, spoke these words before, and
showed further how he had an intention to make a Ioynture to his Wife, and to
pass diverse parcels of the Land devised to him to his younger children, for
their advancements, and that he was hindered in his intent, by these words, ad
damnum a hundred pound, and upon not guilty pleaded, it was found for the
Plaintiff, and twenty pound damages. But Judgment was given for the Defendant.

1 For that it does not appear by any thing in the Declaration, that the
Plaintiff is damnified, viz. that he was about to sell it, or has entered into
any Bond, to make a Ioynture to his wife, which by reason of these words would
not be accepted; and there ought to be some special matter showed, in which
damage may be apparent. Coo. 4. 18. For upon such general words, no special
slander may be imposed. As if a Lease for life be with a condition to re-enter,
and J. S. shall say, That he can show that which will bring him in Reversion
to the possession; this is no slander of the Title, for the very Lease it self,
by the Indenture by which the Land was devised, will bring him to it, either by
the condition, or by the determination of the estate.

2 For that it does appear by the Plaintiffs own showing, that Elizabeth is
Heir at Common Law, and that the Plaintiff himself had but an estate tail; and
upon the determination of it, Elizabeth will have Titsley as general Heir, and
the Defendant does not show any time certain, when Elizabeth shall have it, but
indefinitely, and this shall be taken in meliori sensu. Yelverton. Rep. 88.
Coo. lib. Entries 35.

Case 226.
Mich. 4. Jac. B. R. Earl of Northumberland versus Birches. In an Slander of a
Title to Land.
Action for the slander of a Title. The Plaintiff declared, that Henry Earl of
Arundel, was seized in Fee of the Manor of D. and gave it to the plaintiff in
tail, and that the Defendant was a Customary Tenant for life of a message,
parcel of the said Manor. And the Plaintiff was in Communication with J. S. to
make a Lease for years to him, to make a Lease for years of the Land to him, to
begin after the estate of the Defendant, for life was determined, for which J.
S. agreed to give him five hundred pound, that the Defendant intending to
hinder that bargain, and slander his Title, spoke these words, The late Earl of
Arundel, Lord of the Manor of D. did make a Lease of my Tenement to one J. D.
for sixty years, to begin after my customary estate ended, and the same is a
good Lease: Whereas the said Earl did not make such a Lease, by reason whereof,
neither J. S. nor any other person would give him ten pound for the Lease. The
Defendant justified, that Henry Earl of Arundel, before the Gift made to the
Plaintiff, made such a Lease to J. S. for sixty years, and that J. S. conveyed
the Lease to him. It was objected, that the words import not any slander, nor
is it alleged when the Earl made the Lease. But the opinion of the Court was,
that the words shall be taken in the worse sense, according to his intent which
he spoke, when he said it to be a good Lease. And the words themselves imply,
that he spoke them to countenance the Title of a stranger, which is not
lawful; and now he cannot excuse himself by intituling of himself, when at the
first the words did not import as much, and now he comes too late to
justify. Croo. 2. 163.

Case 227.
M. 3. Car. B. R. Law and Harwoods Case. In this Action for a slander of a
Title. The Plaintiff declared, that he was seized in Fee as a Coppy-holder
Slander of a Title to Land.
of Land in D. within the Jurisdiction of the Defendants Court, and that the
Defendant said, He had not any title to those Lands: It was found for the
Plaintiff, And upon a Writ of Error brought, the Judgment was reversed,
because the plaintiff did not show, that by occasion of the words, he had any
prejudice, as by any bargain of Inheritance, or Lease of the Land. And this
Action is not maintainable, without showing a special prejudice. Croo. 1. part
last published. 99.

Case 228.
M. 6. Jac. B. R. Vaughan versus Ellis. M. 6. Jac. B. R. Error of a Judgment
in the Exchequer-Chamber, in an Action of the Case for words, for saying, He
is a Bastard. The Error assigned was, that the Action lies not for these
words, without special cause shown that he was damnified by them; as to
allege, that he was inheritable to some Lands, and that by reason of those
words he is to have loss: And here it is shown that such Land was given to
his Grandfather, and that his Father had diverse Sons, Slander of a Title.
whereof the plaintiff is the youngest, and his elder Brothers are living. And
that such a one was to buy the Land, and offered him such a sum of money for
his title, and by reason of those words refused to give him any thing. So it
appears by his own showing that he has not any present title, and therefore no
cause of Action at all But the two chief Justices conceived, that although he
has not any present Title, it appears he is by a possibility inheritable to
those Lands, and being offered a sum of money for that possibility to join in
the assurance, although he has not any present title to the Land, yet by
reason of those words he had a present damage, and in future might receive
prejudice thereby, in case he were to claim any Land by descent. And for
these causes they held that the words were actionable; and the judgment was
affirmed. Croo. 2. 213.

Case 229.
2 Car. B. R. Reynor verse. Hallet. The Action was brought for these words,
(viz.) Reynor is a base Gentleman, and has four Children by his servant Agnes,
and he has killed them all, or caused them to be killed. And after a verdict
for the Plaintiff; and amotion for to arrest the judgment, judgment was given
for the Plaintiff; and there it was said to be adjudged not to lie for these
words, Agnes Knight is a Witch; and Witch.
by Dodridge these words, He has four Children by his servant Agnes, alone
are not actionable; but Whitlock contra. And by Justice Jones it Incontinency.
For saying one is a Bastard.
lies not for saying, One is a Bastard, and by him, it lies not for saying,
Thou have killed I. S. where in truth there never was any such man. But to say,
Thou have killed the King. Contra.

Case 230.
Mich. 40 Eliz. In an Action of the Case for calling one Bastard. Dyer and
Walsh Justices said, an Action would lie, but Brown on the contrary, For
calling one Bastard.
because it must be tried in the Spiritual Court.

And Dyer said, that at Barwick Assizes a Formedon in Dicender was brought, and
one said, That his Father by whom he claimed was a Bastard, and thereupon he
brought an Action against him for those words, and recovered.

Case 231.
The Clerk said, That he had a Son in Nottinghamshire, and that he Charge of
Theft. Incertainty. Averment.
had his Chest picked, and a hundred pound taken out of it in one Locksmiths
house, and I thank God I have found the Chief who it is, it is one that
dwells in the next house called Robert Kingston, whereupon Kingston brought
this Action, without averment that he did live in the next house, and had a
verdict for him, and it was held not good, for lack of this averment. Pasche 7.
Jac. B. R.

Case 232.
Action for these words, There was never a Robbery committed within Charge of
Robbery.
forty miles of Wellingborough but thou had thy part in it; after verdict, it
was moved in arrest of judgment that the Action did not lie, because it was
not averred there was any Robbery committed within forty Averment.
miles, etc. for otherwise it is no slander, and sicopinio cur, and judgment
for the Defendant. Mich. 36, and 37 Eliz. B. R. placito 12. Croo. 1. last
published. 308. 11.

Case 233.
Action for these words, You have sought to murder me, and I can Charge of an
endeavor to Murder.
prove it, adjudged that it lay. Croo. 308. 1. last published. 12.

Case 234.
Action for words, That he being a Counselor at Law, and Steward to Slander of
a Lawyer.
I. S. of his Mannours, the Defendant said of him, He is a paultry Lawyer, and
has as much Law as a Jack-a-napes; upon not guilty pleaded, it was found
against him, and damages twenty pound. And it was moved, and the Action lies
not; for it is not said, he had no more Law than a Iack-a-napes, but it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff, for the words are scandalous, and touch him in his
profession. Croo. 1. last published. 342. 9.

Case 235.
Action for these words, Thou art a forsworn Jack in the Court Baron Charge of
Perjury.
of D. thou have sworn me out of twenty shillings rent, and have me on thy
side; adjudged that the Action lay, and the Plaintiff recovered. Croo. 1. last
published. 342. 10.

Case 236.
Action for these words, There was never a Purse cut within twenty Charge of
Theft. Cut purse.
miles of VVellingborough, but thou had thy part in it; and avers, that such
a Purse was cut, etc. and he had no part in it. And it was moved, that an
Action lies not; for it is not said, he had a part of it as a partaker in the
Felony, for he may have a part in it in the loss, and so it is no slander; but
it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, for the words shall be taken to be spoken in
the worst sense, in disgrace and reproach of the Plaintiff. Nota, Sergeant
Yelverton cited a Case, Pasche. 32 Eliz. Sir Edward Hastings Endeavor.
brought an Action for these words, You have procured a perjured man to seek my
blood; and ruled, that an Action did not lie. But Fenner said the Case was not
adjudged, but ended by his Arbitrament. Vide Mich. 35. and 36. Eliz. Antea B.
R. placite 11. Croo. 1. last published. 342. 11.

Case 237.
Action for words, for that the Defendant said to I. B. Son of the Plaintiff,
in the presence of diverse, Thou (praefat. J. B. Innuendo) and thy Charge of
Perjury.
Father (Innuendo the Plaintiff) were both Perjured, and I (Innuendo the
Defendant) will prove you both perjured. Upon not guilty, it was found for the
Plaintiff damages twenty pound. And it was moved in arrest of judgment, that
it was not averred that I. B. was the Son of the Plaintiff; but it was held
well enough, for that it was alleged, that the Averment.
words were spoken to I. B. his Son, and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff.
Croo. 1. last published. 143. 11.

Case 238.
Action for these words, Many an honester man has been hanged, and Charge of
Felony. Indirectly.
a Robbery has been committed, and I think he was at it, and I think he is a
Horse-stealer; it was moved after verdict, that an Action lies not without an
express averment he was so; Curia contra, they are great Averment.
slander, if the Defendant shows not a good cause of his thinking; and it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. last published. 148. 20.

Case 239,
Action upon the Case was brought for these words, Thou art forsworn, and I
will make thee flower the Pillory, or else it shall cost me a hundred Charge of
Perjury.
pound, Et per totam curiam, an Action lies not; for Anderson said, There is a
great difference betwirt the words forsworn, and perjured; for forsworn is,
where he swears against the truth in ordinary discourse, but Perjurum est
quando jus alterius pervertitur, which is to be intended in judicial
proceeding; and this difference has been allowed of, quod curia concessit; but
to say, he was forsworn in such a Court, or betwixt such Parties, an Action
lies; wherefore it was adjudged for the Defendant. Croo. 1. part last published,
394. 20.

Case 240.
Action for these words, One told me that he heard one say, that Mistress Charge
of poisoning husband by Report.
Meggs had poisoned her Husband, Ubi re vera nullus dixit, etc. and upon not
guilty pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff; and now alleged in Arrest of
Judgment, that an Action lies not for these words, for it is but a report of
an hearsay, which cannot be any discredit; but notwithstanding it was adjudged
for the Plaintiff; for it is a great defamation; and is a cause of drawing her
name and life in examination, wherefore, etc. Croo. 1. part last published. 400.
7.

Case 241.
Action for these words, Thy Father (Innuendo, the Plaintiff) has Charge of
theft
stolen six sheep. The Defendant justifies, and issue taken thereupon, and found
for the Plaintiff, and it was alleged in arrest of Judgment, that the
Declaration was not certain nor sufficient to show, that he spoke those words
of the Plaintiff; for it is not averred that he spoke them to the Plaintiffs
Averment.
Son, nor that the Plaintiffs Son was there present, and then it cannot be
intended of the Plaintiff, and the Innuendo will not help this incertainty.
Pleading.
And although the Defendant has admitted it by his Plea, yet that never shall
help a Declaration which is defective in substance: but if Innuendo.
it were defective in form only, as by leaving out the place where a thing was
done, or by pleading a collateral plea, that may be made good, as 18. Ed. 4.
16. and 6. Ed. 4. 2. And of that opinion were all the Justices (besides
Declaration.
Gaudy) that the Declaration was not good; for it cannot be intended to be
spoken of the Plaintiff, more than of any other person, unless it had been
averred, that his Son was there present: And although the Defendant by his plea
confesses, that he intended them of the Plaintiff, yet that shall not help
the Declaration, which is insufficient. But Gaudy e contra, because it shall be
intended that the Plaintiffs Son was there, for otherwise he could not have
said, thy Father. But notwithstanding it was adjudged for the Defendant. Croo.
1. last published. 416. 11.

Case 242.
Action upon the Case, whereas he was seized of the Manor of Upton Slander of
a Title.
Gray, that the Defendant, to slander his title, spoke these words, Mr. Marvin
(Innuendo, the plaintiff) has not any title to Upton (Innuendo Upton Gray)
upon not guilty pleaded, it was found for the plaintiff, and now moved in
Arrest of Judgment. First, Because he does not show what estate he had
therein; for it may be that he has it but per anter vic, and then Cestuy que
vic being dead, he has not any title, he ought also to recover his damages to
his estate, etc. Secondly, The words are not spoken of Upton Gray, but of Upton
only; which cannot be intended of Upton Innuendo.
Gray, and it cannot be helped by the Innuendo. But all the Court resolved,
that the Declaration was well enough; for as to the first, he needed not show
what estate, etc. for his seizing of any estate is sufficient: And therefore
Fenner said in the case of Huddleston against the Lord Dacres in a Writ of
Annuity; The Defendant pleaded, that he granted it unto him to be his Steward,
and that he was seized of the Manor of D. and requested him to keep his Court
there, and he refused, etc. And exception was there taken, because he shows
not of what estate he was seized, and ruled well enough; for peradventure it
might be perilous to discover his estate. And to the second, they held, that
the Innuendo did sufficiently serve to show his intent, what he meant in
naming Upton: for it is usually Innuendo.
known without the addition, and might be called so: wherefore the Innuendo
stands well with his speaking. But if without the Innuendo it could not by any
intendment be taken so, it might have been otherwise, wherefore it was adjudged
for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part last published. 419. 14. He has deserved
hanging.


Case 243.
Action for these words, J. Halland (the Plaintiff) will come home again, if
he escape the Gallows, for he has deserved to be hanged; after Verdict it
was moved, that an Action lay not for those words. And so it was ruled
accordingly: for they are too general. Because the Country people might intend,
that he deserved hanging, although he never committed any Felony; wherefore
it was adjudged for the Defendant. Croo. 1. part last published. 470. 30.

Case 244.
Action for words, and declares, whereas he was a Merchant, That the Defendant
to discredit him, said to one Dudley, Does Vauspike (the Bankerupt.
Plaintiff) owe you any money? to whom he said, that he did, he then said to
Dudley, You had best call for it, take heed how you trust him; And it was
thereupon domurred, and adjudged for the Defendant: For it is not any slander
to the Plaintiff, but good Counsel to Dudley. Croo. 1. part last published. 541.
5.

Case 245.
Action for these words, I will call him in question for poisoning my Charge of
Poisoning.
Aunt, and I make no doubt to prove it; after Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the words were not actionable; for it is not
any direct affirmation, that he poisoned his Aunt, sed non allocatur; Indirect.
for it cannot be more direct, when he says, he will call him in question,
and makes no doubt to prove it. Secondly, It was alleged, that the Action
lies not, because it is not averred, that his Aunt was Averment.
poisoned, for otherwise it is not any offense, sed non allocatur, for his
credit is not impeached, although he never did any such fact: as to say, that
he was perjured in this Court, although he never were sworn, is actionable;
wherefore it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part last published. 569.
3.

Case 246.
Action of the Case was brought for these words, Thou have forged an
Obligation, and I will prove it; the Defendant justifies, because he had
Charge of Forgery.
forged such an Obligation in the name of Wendy, the issue de son tort demesne,
etc. and found for the Plaintiff; and now moved, that an Action lay not for
these words; for he does not show that this Obligation was sealed, and
delivered, but the Court held it to be well enough, for it cannot be otherwise
intended, for without those circumstances it is not an Obligation, but a
Writing only. But they held, that for saying, Thou have made a false Bond, an
Action lies not, for that may be upon false instructions. Secondly, It was
alleged, that this issue was not good; for there being a special forgery
alleged, it ought to be specially traversed. But the Court held the issue to
be well enough. And if it were not good, it is aided by the Statute. 32. H. 8.
Wherefore it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Croo. 1. part last published. 607.
7.

Case 247.
Action for these words, which the Defendant spoke to one Gurney, Bring me to
the Constables house, for I am robbed this night; and bring Charge of Robbery.
me to Bonaventure Theobalds house, to arrest him, for old Theobalds
(Innuendo, the Plaintiff) sets his Sons to rob me (Innuendo dictum
Bonaventure, and quendam Johannem, filium ipsius Anthonii) from time to time.
The Defendant pleaded not guilty, and found against him. And after Verdict, it
was moved in arrest of Judgment, that the words were not actionable, because
it is not alleged, that any of Anthony's Sons robbed him, and it is but an
intent of setting to rob, and no Action done, the words also are insensible.
But notwithstanding it was held by the Court, that the words were very
slanderous, and that the Action was maintainable; And so it had been adjudged
in this Court, that one such lay in wait to murder me, etc. Wherefore it was
adjudged for the plaintiff. Note, error Endeavor to do it.
was hereof brought, because it is not precisely affirmed of the plaintiff. But
it is said old Theobalds, and he does not name the plaintiff, and an Innuendo
will not serve, whereupon it was reversed. Croo. 1. last pub. Innuendo.
618 3.

Case 248.
Action for words, whereas the Plaintiff was, and is a Physician, that the
Defendant, intending to defame him and to prejudice him in his Art, falso et
malitiose, spoke of him these words, Mr. Poe (innuendo the Plaintiff) has
Slander of a Physician.
killed Mr. Pasfield of the old Jury with Physic, (quidam Johannem Pasfield,
late inhabiting within the old Jury, and now deceased; innuendo) which Physic
was a Pill, and the Vomit was found in his mouth, and D. Atkins and D Paddy
(quosdam Henricum Atkins and Johannem Paddy Doctors in Physic, (Innuendo) were
there, and found it so, and it is true, ubi re vera, neither the said Doctor
Atkins nor Doctor Paddy nor any other ever found any such thing to be committed
by him, et ubi re vera he never Administered any Physic unto him in Pills, or
otherwise, etc. The Defendant pleaded a concord in Bar, which plea was ill
pleaded, (as it was agreed on both sides) whereupon the Plaintiff demanded. And
now Cook Attorney general moved, that an Action lay not for these words, for
it is not any slander to a Physician, to say of him that he had killed one with
physic, for he might do it involuntarily in not knowing the disease, and no
discredit unto him, Popham and Fenner held, that the Action lay not, for it
cannot be any discredit to a Physician, to say that he killed one with physic,
for it is an usual and common expression, and it may be without any fault in
him; for they may mistake the diseases in their own bodies, much more in
others; and apply wrong medicines, which may be the cause of the Patients
death, and yet no discredit unto them. But if it had been, that he scienter et
voluntary ministered Physic to one to kill him, that touches him in his
profession, and the words had been Actionable, but not here. And although it
be said, that he never administered any physic unto him, that is not material,
wherefore they, without any argument on the plaintiffs side, (Clinch repugnate
et Gaudy absente) adjudged it for the Defendant. Croo. 1 last published. 620. 9.

Case 249.
Action upon the Case, for that he spoke quaedam scandalosa verba of the
Plaintiff, tenor quorum sequitur in haec verba, thou art a Cousening Knave, and
a Bankerupt, vel his similia, the Defendant pleaded not guilty, and found for
the plaintiff, and judgment uttered for him without privity of the Bankerupt.
Court, and the Court being now moved therein, held that an Action lies not.
And Walmsley said, it was by reason of the word consimilia as it was Couzening
Knave.
adjudged in Garters Case; it is not good also, for that it is said, that he
spoke diverse words, tenor quorum sequitur, wherefore it was commanded, that the
Roll should be amended Croo. 1 part last published 654. 52.

Case 250.
Action for words, viz. The Plaintiff was one of them, that brake Mr. Philips
house, and did take and carry away part of the money that was stolen. Walmsley
held, that an Action lay not for these words, for where Charge of Burglary.
words are ambiguous, so as they may be expounded in good or ill part, no
Action then lies, for they shall be expounded in the best sense, Incertainty in
the words.
and it may be here intended, that he brake the house upon just cause, and
brought the money to another place upon just cause. Wherefore, etc. And so was
the opinion of the other Justices Croo. 1. part last published 672. 33.

Case 251.
In Croo. 2. 144. This Action was adjudged to lie upon a Demurrer, for this,
Thou art a Leprous Knave. Tailor and Perkins. Hill. 4 Jac. Leprous Knave.
B. R. See Croo. 2. 430.

Case 252.
Action for these words, Thou art a Pillory Knave, remember, Brown, thou
should have been set on the Pillory; and the Plaintiff had judgment, Pillory
Knave.
though it was not said, He was set on the Pillory. Brown and Dawks. Mich. 24,
25 Eliz. Co. B. Croo. 1. last published. 11. And yet in Trin. 26 Eliz. B. R. in
Smiths Case, the Court was of opinion, that for these words, Thou art a Knave,
and a Pillory Knave, no Action lies. Croo. 1. part last published, 31. And in
Pasche. 26 Eliz. Co. B. an Action was adjudged to lie for this. Where is that
bankrupt Knave, where is that Pillory Knave, with an averment, that he was a
Merchant of whom the words Averment.
were spoken. Griffith and Morrisons Case, Croo. 1. last published. 26.

Case 253.
Action for this, Thou were a Suitor to a Woman in Southwark, and did cousen
her of her goods, and procured certain false Witnesses to be Charge of
couzening.
forged. And after verdict the judgment was stayed, for that the words are not
actionable. Engurst and Brown. Trin. 30 Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. last Forgery.
published, 99.

Case 254.
Action for these words, Thou have used Juggling with me, but thy Juggling Charge
of Juggling, and of Forgery.
shall not serve thy turn, and thou have forged a Writ of Quare Impedit,
Innuendo, a Writ of Quare impedit against him, and the Bishop of Coventry; and
the Plaintiff had judgment, for the last words, not the first, were agreed to
be actionable. Sale and Marsh. Pasche. 32. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last
published. 178.

Case 255.
Action for these words, She is as very a Thief as any that robs by the
Highway side; upon not guilty, the Jury found these words, She is Charge of
theft indirect.
a worse thief than any that robs by the Highway side. And the Court held
in both Cases, the words are actionable. But Gaudy and Fenner held, that the
words do not agree with the Declaration, for the Jury do not Verdict.
find, that the Defendant at the time mentioned in the Declaration, spoke the
words in the verdict, so that it may be he spoke them at several times, and it
differs from Bridges Case, Dyer, 3. Mar. where the Jury found he spoke part
of, but not all the words, for there they did acquit him of the residue, and
the words are not of one sense. Wray contra, as very a thief, and a worse
thief, are all one; the Lady Ratcliff and Shubley. Pasche. 33 Eliz. B. R. Croo.
1. last published. 224. See before Case 168.

Case 256.
Action for these words, I have served thee with the Queens Letter, for Charge
of theft by implication, or indirect.
stealing of goods out of my Mothers house. Upon not guilty, and verdict for
the Plaintiff, it was adjudged, that the Action did not lie for the words, for
he says not expressly, that he had stolen the goods, but that he served him,
etc. which may be thought he did not steal them, so it is only a charge by
implication. Periam cited a Case of one Nowel a Clerk of this Court He was
Cubbed for forging Writs. Certainty.
where the words were, Thou wast Cubbed up for forging of Writs, and ruled no
Action lay. Atkinson and Atkinson. Pasche. 33 Eliz, in scaccario. Croo. 1. part
last published. 4.

Case 257.
Action for these words, Thou have played the Thief with me, and have Charge of
theft
stol my Cloth, and half a yard of Velvet. The Defendant pleaded that the
Plaintiff was his Tailor, and that upon the day of, etc. he delivered to him a
yard and a half of Velvet to make him a pair of Hose, and he Pleading.
Traverse.
made them too straight, Ratione cujus, he spoke these words, Thou have stolen
part of the Velvet which I delivered thee, Absque hoc, that he spoke any words
aliter, vel alio modo, upon which the Plaintiff demurred. For the Plea and
Traverse do not confess any words of slander, and then the Traverse is merely
void. L. 5. Ed. 4. 26. 9. Ed. 4. 15. 37. H. 6. 34. 22. H. 6. 17. And of this
opinion was the Court, but a manifest fault was alleged in the Plea, for he
did not answer to the words, Thou have stolen my Cloth; and it was adjudged for
the Plaintiff. John's and Gittins. Trin. 33. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last
published. 239.

Case 258.
Action for these words, Thou art a forger, and art sued in the Star Chamber,
Charge of Forgery. Words general and uncertain.
for forging, by one Sedge. And after Verdict for the Plaintiff, and motion for
arrest of the Judgment, it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, albeit he did not
say, what thing he forged; and how he was sued, for it might be without
cause. For when he says, Thou art a forger, it is intended of such a thing,
as whereof Forgery may be, and to be spoken in the worst part; and when he
says, He is sued, etc. this does aggravate it, that he did such a Forgery,
as for which he is suable there. Monday and Cordall. Palche. 35. Eliz. B. R.
Croo. 1. part last published. 296.

Case 259.
Action for this, He was falsely forsworn in the Court of the Bishop of Charge
of Perjury. Certainty.
Exon, at Exon. It was moved in arrest of Judgment, it does not appear, he
was sworn in any Judicial Court, for it may be in the Bishops yard, called his
Court; yet the Plaintiff had Judgment. Lee and Secombe. Pasche. 35. Eliz. B.
R. Croo. 1. part last published. 297. See before, Case 35. 59. And after Cases.
266. 267. 273. 274. 276. 284. 286. 294. 315. 329. 337. 348.

Case 260.
Action for this, My Master has put me away, because I would not be Charge of
a Justice of Peace. with vain words
a Papist, for he will keep no Servants but Papists; and alleged, that he
was a Justice of Peace. Upon Demurrer, the Court held, that the Action did not
lie for these words. Perepoints Case. Mich. 35. and 36. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1.
part last published. 308.

Case 261.
An Action was brought by an Alderman, and a Merchant in York, for Charge of
couzening upon a Merchant.
these words, He is a false Knave, and keeps a false Debt-book, for he
charge me with the Receipt of a piece of Velvet, which is false. After a
Verdict for the Plaintiff, upon not guilty pleaded, and a motion to arrest the
Judgment, it was adjudged, that the Action lies not for the words. And against
the Plaintiff. Brook and Watson. Trin. 37. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last
published. 403. See before Case 142. 143. 198. 326. 327. 329.

Case 262.
Error of a Judgment in an Action, for these words, Thou art a prigging,
Prigging pilfring Merchant.
pilfring Merchant, and have pilfred away my goods from my Wife and Children,
that the words were not actionable. And the Judgment was reversed for this
cause. Charter and Hunter. Mich. 37. and 38. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last
published. 424. And in the Case of Bradshaw and Walker Filching Fellow.
for this, Thou art a filching Fellow, and did filch from William Parson a
hundred pound; the words were held by the Court Co. B. not actionable, and it
was adjudged against the Plaintiff. Hobb. Rep. pl. 323.

Action was for this, Thou art a Thief, for thou haststoln half an Acre of
Charge of theft of Corn.
Corn [Innuendo, the Corn growing upon half an Acre of ground, reaped, and put
into shocks by the Defendant; the Defendant demurred to the Declaration. And it
was held, the words were not actionable, and it was adjudged for him against
the Plaintiff. Castleman and Hobos. Mich. 37. and 38. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part
last published. 428. See after. 304. 305. 333. 341. 346.

Case 263.
Action for this, was brought by a Justice of Peace, He is a Blood-sucker,
Justice of Peace slandered. Blood-sucker.
and seeks others blood. Upon not guilty pleaded, and a Verdict for the
Plaintiff, it was moved in arrest of Judgment, and adjudged for the Defendant
against the Plaintiff, and that the words were not actionable. Sir Christopher
Hylliard, and Constable. Croo. 1. part last published. 306. 433.

Case 264.
Action for these words, spoken of one that was robbed of pieces of Cloth,
Charge of concealment of a Theft, and the Thief.
He has received three pieces of his Cloth again of the Thief, and bears
with the Thief: And if I have any hurt hereafter, I will charge him with it.
After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was adjudged for the Defendant against the
Plaintiff, that the words are not actionable. Hall and Hennesly. Mich. 38. and
39. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last published. 486. 487. See before Case 88. 106.
107. 191.

Case 165.
Action for this, Thou have feloniously taken my wood, and a verdict for Charge
of stealing of Wood.
the plaintiff, and motion to arrest Judgment, for that the words were not
actionable, it was resolved the words were actionable, and adjudged for the
plaintiff. Croo. 1. part last published. 471. See before. Case 114. And after.
304. 305. 333. 346.

Case 266.
Action for these words, Thou wast forsworn in the Leet [Innuendo, a Charge of
Perjury.
Leet holden in such a manner, such a day, etc. And all the Justices held that
the words were actionable. Mich. 38. and 39. Eliz. B. R. Wild and Cookman.
Croo. 1. part last published. 492. See before Case 59. 35. 54. And after. 277.

Case 267.
Action for this, Thou have taken a false Oath in the Consistory Court Charge
of Perjury.
of Exceter. And it was demurred whether actionable; and it was held
actionable, and adjudged for the plaintiff. Christian Plaice, and William How.
Trin. 32. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last published. 185. And yet Croo. 2. 436.
Page and Keble. Mich. 15. Jac. B. R. Action was for this, Thou art perjured,
for thou art forsworn in the Bishop of Gloucester his Court. After verdict, it
was moved that the words are not actionable; and of that opinion was the Court,
and gave Rule for Judgment accordingly.

Case 268.
Action for this, Thou have stolen a load of Hop-poles. And it was ruled, Charge
of theft of Hop-poles.
the words were actionable. Guyldeslew and Ward. Pasche. 33. Eliz. B. R. Croo.
1. part last published. 225.

Case 269.
Action for this, I am put out of the Parsonage-house, by Fowler the Patron,
Charge of Treason. Words general and uncertain.
who is neither the Queens friend, nor a true Subject; it was adjudged that the
words were not actionable; and said to be adjudged not to lie for this, He is
not the Queens friend. Fowler and Aston. Hill. 34. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part
last published. 268.

Case 270.
Action for this, What art thou? a Bankerupt, and wast a Bankerupt. Bankerupt.
Declaration. By way of interrogation.
And the Declaration was, quod cum fuit Mercator per magnum tempus, etc. and
says not, he was a Merchant at the same time of speaking of the words. The
Court held the Declaration good. And that his answer was a direct affirmance,
but they would advise, etc. Jordan and Lyster. Pasche. 34. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1.
part last published. 273. See Croo. 1. 205. Collys and Malin, where the
Plaintiff said, that he had used the Trade of buying and selling of Cattle per
magnum tempus, but did not say, he used it at the time of the words spoken, it
was adjudged against the Plaintiff. See also the like Case. Croo. 1. 231.
Leycroft and Dunker.

Case 271.
Action for this, brought by a Shoemaker, and one that used buying and selling
of Leather, He was a Bankerupt. And it was adjudged it did lie, Bankerupt.
albeit he were no Merchant, but he got his living by buying and selling.
Stanley and Osbaston. Hill. 34. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last published. 268.
See the like for a Dyer. Croo. 2. 585. Squire and Jones. Mich. 18. Jac. B. R.
See for this before, Case 181. 184. 190. 199. 205. And after. 244. 268.

Case 272.
Action was brought for this, by the Lord Mordant, My Lord Mordant did know
that Prude robbed Shotbolt, and bid me compound with Shotbolt Scandalum
Magnatum.
for the same, and said, he would see me satisfied for the same, though it
cost him a hundred pound, which I did for him being my Master, otherwise the
evidence I could have given would have hanged Prude. It was adjudged for the
Plaintiff, and a Writ of Error brought in the Exchequer-Chamber, and Error
assigned in the point adjudged. Croo. 1. part last published. 67.

Case 273.
Action for this, said to one newly sworn as a witness in a Court, as he
Charge of Perjury.
is coming out of the Court, Thou have forsworn thy self. And it was adjudged
actionable. Nedham and Corsellis. Hill. 35. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last
published. 293. See Croo. 1. 209 Drake and Cordery.

Case 274.
Action for this, He is a suborner of Perjury. After Verdict and Motion Charge
of subornation of Perjury.
to arrest the Judgment, it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Guerdon and
Winterflud. 35. and 36. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last published. 308. See here.
Case 298. 315.

Case 275.
One spoke of the Bishops Register of Gloucest. these words, amongst other
Slander of an Officer. Charge of Extortion. In another language. Averment.
Incertainty of the person.
actionable words, Inimicus meus, Innuendo, the Plaintiff] is an extortioner.
But laid it to be spoken in another language, and did not aver, that it was
spoken in the presence of any that understood the language. And it was the
opinion of the Court, it was naught; and so said to be adjudged before, that
without this Averment it will not lie. And Inimicus meus was uncertain, unless
it had been averred, that he was then the Plaintiffs enemy, and he had no
other enemy; or that there was speech about the Plaintiff in particular; and
there said to be adjudged. That where three were sworn in an evidence against a
man, and he said to them, One of you is perjured, that the Action lay not, and
an Innuendo cannot make it certain. Jones and Davers. Mich. 38. 39. Eliz. B. R.
Croo. 1. part last published. Innuendo.
446. For Extortoin, see chap. 20. before. For another language. See after.
284. And for the incertainty of the person slandered. See Case 199. 137. 197.
224. After Case. 309. 317. 320. 335. 336. 342.

Case 276.
Action for this, was in Communi Banco. Brown [Innuendo, the Plaintiff] has
delivered untruths upon his Oath, in his answer to the Bill Charge of Perjury.
of J. S. in the Chancery, and had Judgment; and brought his Writ of Error,
and assigned Error that the words were not actionable. And the Judgment was
hereupon resolved. Brown and Michael. Mich. 38. 39. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part
last published. 500. See after Case. 287.

Case 277.
Action for this brought by a Preacher, the Parson of D. Parrat [the Charge of
Incertainty.
Plaintiff Innuendo] is an Adulterer, and has had two Children by the Wife of
I. S. and I will cause him to be deprived for it. And it was held by the
Spiritual Slander.
Court to be a slander examinable in the Spiritual Court, and therefore
adjudged against the Plaintiff. Parrat and Carpenter. Mich. 38, and 39 Eliz. B.
R. Croo. 1. last published. 502. See Croo. 2. 625. See before Case 14, 20. 42.
76. and after Case 288. 293. 324.

Case 278.
Action by a Justice of Peace for this. One Webb being Arrested as accessory
Justice of Peace slandred.
of Felony for stealing of his own goods, Mr. Stafford [Innuendo the
Plaintiff] knowing thereof discharged the said Webb, by an agreement of three
pound, whereunto Mr. Stafford was privy, whereof thirty shillings was to be
paid to Mr. Stafford, and was paid to his man by his appointment, and the
Plaintiff had judgment; and Error was brought and assigned that the words were
not actionable, but the judgment was affirmed. Croo. 1. last published, 536.
See after Case 334.

Case 279.
Action for this, Thou art a Witch and a Sorcerer, and it was adjudged Witch
and Sorcerer.
for the Plaintiff to be actionable. John Rogers and Gravat. Trin. 39 Eliz. B.
R Croo. 1. part last published. 571. See before Case 145. 229: and after Case
319. 323. 337.

Case 280.
Action for this by an Attorney. I. S. Martin your Attorney, he is the
foolishest Slander of an Attorney.
and simplest Attorney toward the Law, and if he does not overthrow your Cause
I will give you my ears,; He is a Fool, and an Ass. It was held these words,
He will overthrow your Cause, were actionable, and it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff upon all the words. Croo. 1. part last published. 589.

Case 281.
An Action was for this, I arrest you for Felony; and the Court seemed to
incline to the opinion, that the words were not actionable. Hobb. Rep. pl. 286.

Case 282.
Action for this. Thou art a Corn-stealer; and if was adjudged for the
Corn-stealer.
Plaintiff that the words are actionable. 39 Eliz. Co. B. Croo. 1. part last
published. 563.

Case 283.
Action for this, I will call him in question for poisoning my Aunt, and I
Charge of Murder indirectly. Averment.
make no doubt to prove it. After verdict and motion to arrest the Judgment,
because the words were not a direct Affirmation, and because he did not aver
that his Aunt was dead, it was held that the words were actionable without any
such averment, and adjudged for the Plaintiff. So for saying, He was perjured
in this Court, although he were never sworn. Web and Poor. Trin. 39 Eliz. B. R.
Croo. 1. last published. 569. See Case 217. before, and 245. 299.

Case 284.
Error of a Judgment in the Common Bank for these words, Thou art a forsworn
Fellow, for by thy false Oath thou have hanged as true a man as Charge of
Perjury.
thy self; and the error assigned was because the words were not actionable; it
was adjudged that the words were actionable, and the Judgment was affirmed.

Exception also was taken to the Declaration, for that it was, Quod Declaration.
propalavit quaedam scandalosa verba, prout in his Anglicanis verbis sequend.
In another Language.
viz. Thou, etc. for that it may be they were spoken in another Language, etc.
sed nec allocatur, for it shall be intended they were spoken in English. Bate
and Rookwood. Trin. 39 Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. last published. 572.

Case 285.
An Action was for this, Thou have harbored and received thy Son, knowing him
before to be a Seminary Priest; the words were held actionable, and Harboring a
Priest.
the Plaintiff had judgment. Pasche. 10 Jac. B. R. Smith and Flint, Croo. 2.
300.

Case 286.
Action for this, spoken of an Attorney, Thou art a Couzening Knave, and
gettest thy living by Extortion, and did cousen one Pigeon in a Bill of Costs
Slander of an Attorney.
of ten pound, It was held by the Court, that for the first words, Thou art a
Couzening Knave, it lies not, nor for the next, thou gettest thy living by
Charge of couzening.
Extortion, no more than for saying, thou gettest thy living by swearing and
forswearing, etc. As in the Case of Stanhop, but for the last words that the
Action did lie; and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Stanley and Boswell.
Hill. 40 Eliz. Co. B. Croo. 1. last published. 602. And in Croo. 2. 586. Jenkins
and Smith. Mich. 18 Jac. B. R. It is adjudged to lie for this, said of him,
Thou art a false Knave, and a couzening Knave, and have gotten all that thou
have by couzenage, and thou have couzened all those that have dealt with thee.

Case 287.
Action for this, The Plaintiff was Perjured in his Answer in the
Star Chamber Charge of Perjury.
[Innuendo a Bill there exhibited by the Plaintiff against the Defendant] It
was held the words of themselves were actionable, and that the Innuendo being
repugnant, is void; and it was adjudged for the plaintiff. Innuendo.
Corbet and Hill. Pasche. 40. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. last published. 609. and in
the Case of Poultney and Wilkinson. Mich. 45 Eliz. B. R. an Action was brought
for this, Thou art thrice Perjured in thy Answer in Chancery to my Bill
[Innuendo a Bill by the Plaintiff there against the Defendant, and an Answer to
that Bill.] It was upon a Demurrer adjudged for the plaintiff without argument.
Croo. 1. last published. 907. See the like in Croo. 1. 234. Sir Richard Snowds
Case, See before Case 276.

Case 288.
In Norwoods Case. Trin. 41 Eliz. B. R. It was held, that for saying,
Incontinency. Spiritual Slander.
One has begotten a Bastard on such a Woman, is not actionable at Common Law.
Croo. 1. last published. 684, See Case 277. before.

Case 289.
Error of a Judgment in an Action of the Case, for words of Master Bridges,
He is a maintainer of Thieves, and keeps none but Thieves in Charge of
maintaining Thieves.
his house, and I will prove it, etc. For that it was said the words were not
actionable, because he does not aver, that he knew them to be thieves; and the
judgment was reversed, Ball and Bridges. Hill. 42 Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. last
published. 746. See before Case 264. 159. 164. 171. 201. and after Case 345.

Case 290.
Error of a Judgment for an Action for these words, Mistress Margaret Passy
[Innuendo the Plaintiff] sent a Letter to my Master, and therein willed Charge
of endeavor to poison.
him to poison his Wife; for that the words are not actionable. But the
Judgment was affirmed, and held that the words were actionable. Croo. 1. part
last published. 747. See before Case 109. 148. 160. And after Case. 335.

Case 291.
Action for this, by a Gaolor, for this said of him, Heath has let forth
prisoners out of the Gaol, and had his part and shares with them; and by that
means Slander of an Officer.
he came to his goods; he had not a sheet to his bed, before he let them out
of the Gaol to steal them; and it was held that the words were not actionable,
and adjudged for the Defendant. Heath and Pose. Mich. 42. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1.
part last published. 783.

Case 292.
Action for this, Whereas he was indicted, arraigned, and acquitted of Slander
of a Justice of Peace.
such a Felony, before the Justices of the Peace, of the County of Norfolk,
that the Defendant said of him, If Mr. Hasset, and one A. [Iustice of Peace, of
the said County] had done Justice, Royal had been hanged for robbing me. It was
adjudged for the Plaintiff. Royal and Peckham. Mich. 42. Eliz. Com. B. Croo. 1.
part last published. 786. See here 278. and 334.

Case 293.
An Action was brought for this, Thy Mistress is an arrant Whore, and Charge of
Incontinency.
would have layn with me seven years since, and I would not, unless she would
go to the hedge. And it was alleged, that she was in a communication with J.
S. of marriage, and thereby lost it; and upon not guilty Spiritual.
pleaded, and a verdict, it was moved in arrest of the Judgment, for that the
words were merely spiritual, and punishable in the spiritual Court. And that an
Action lies not for calling of one Whore, or Heretic, by our Law. But they
held, if the words had been spoken to him, who was in communication Loss of
Preferment.
to have married her, so as it had appeared he had done it purposely to hinder
the marriage, as in Anne Davis Case, the Action is maintainable for the loss;
and in this Case it was adjudged against the Plaintiff. Holwood and Hopkins.
Mich. 42. Eliz. Co. B. Croo. 1. part last published. 787. See Case 277.

Case 294.
Action for this, Thou art forsworn in the Carpenters Hall, and did Charge of
Perjury, of couzening.
rob the Hall, and deceive the Company of twenty pound. And he set forth that
the Company was a Corporation, and he Master of the Company, and had the goods
and money appertaining to it, and sworn to render an account. It was adjudged,
that it lay not for the first, but it lay for the last words; and that when any
of the words are actionable, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment. Thaxby and
Smith. Mich. 42. Eliz. Co. B. Croo. 1. part last published. 787.

Case 295.
Action for this, Thou art a Bankerupt Knave, a Vagabond, and a Rogue. It was
held by the Court clearly, that it lies not for Vagabond Bankerupt Knave.
Vagabond Rogue.
and Rogue. And of Bankerupt Knave, it is doubted. Robbinson and Mellor. Trin.
43. Co. B. Croo. 1. part last published. 843. But afterward in the Case of
Wolverston and Meres. Mich. 44. Eliz. B. R. It was adjudged to lie for saying
of a Merchant, He is a Bankerupt Knave, and affirmed in a Writ of Error.
Croo. 1. part last published. 911. And in Croo. 2. 345 Selby and Carrier.

Action was for this, He is a Bankerupt Knave, and upon not guilty, a verdict,
and motion to arrest the Judgment, because the words were not actionable; it
was held, being two Substantives, they were actionable: otherwise, if it had
been Bankeruptly Knave, or Adjectively spoken. And Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff. And yet see Croo. 2. 585. Squire and John's. It is adjudged to lie,
for saying of such a one, He is a Bankerupt Knave.

Action for this, brought by one that was Sheriff of a County the last Slander
of an Officer. Words general and uncertain.
year, and that is Sheriff also this year, for words spoken to his servant,
viz. Your Master must not look to have such hudling and shuffling up of matters
this year, as he had the last year, It was adjudged, that the words were not
actionable. Brown and Street. Mich. 43. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last
published. 848.

Case 296.
An Action was brought for words, and the Plaintiff declared after Declaration.
Incertainty.
this manner, that the Defendants Wife spoke of the Wife of the Plaintiff,
Quaedam falsa and scandalosa verba, quorum tenor sequitur in haec verba, Thou
art an arrant Whore, etc. And the whole Court held the Declaration ill. The
words were, Thou art an arrant Whore, an old wormeaten Jade, and one of thy
sides has been eaten out with the Pox. And the Court held them actionable.
Croo. 1. part last published. 857. See before Case 249.

Case 297.
Action for this, said of an Attorney, He is a paultry fellow, his credit
Slander of an Attorney.
does begin to crack, he does deal on both sides, in Com. B. And Judgment was
given for the last words, He does deal on both sides. And affirmed in a Writ
of Error, in B. R. Mich. 45. Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last published. 914.

Case 298.
Action for this, Thou art a lewd Fellow, for thou have drawn such a Caused one
to be perjured.
one to Perjury; upon a Writ of Error after Judgment for the Plaintiff, it
was held by all the Judges, that the words are actionable, as to say, Thou have
suborned a man to perjure himself, Clerk and Penkeven. Mich. 44. 45. Eliz. B.
R. Croo. 1. part last published. 899.

Case 299.
An Action was for this, He was indicted for Felony at a Sessions held He was
indicted of Felony. Averment.
at (...) And did not averr that he was not indicted; and judgment was staid
after a verdict for the Plaintiff, for lack of Averment. Also it was doubted,
whether the words be actionable, or not, for an Indictment is but a surmise.
Hobb. Rep. pl. 289. Blands Case. See here 283.

Case 300.
Action for this, Thou did steal a Sack. The Defendant pleaded, that a Sack
was stolen, and common fame was, that the Plaintiff had Justification.
stolen it, and upon this he informed against him to a Justice of Peace, but
before the Justice he used these words to the Plaintiff, Thou did steal etc.
whereupon the Plaintiff demurred in Law. And it seems the Justification is not
good. Scarlet and Styles. Hobb. pl. 238. See Brownl. Rep. f. 3.

Case 301.
A. sent a Letter closed, and sealed to Sir Baptist Hicks, which was so Libel.
delivered to his hands, containing many despightful scandalous words delivered
Ironice, as saying, you will not play the cheater, nor the Hypocrite, and in
that sort taunting him, for an Almshouse, and certain good works that he had
done, all which he charged him to do for vain glory, for which he was
punished in the Star Chamber. But it seems no Action will lie for this. Hobb.
Rep. 276. Hicks Case.

Case 302.
Action for this, I charge him [Innuendo, the Plaintiff] with Felony, I charge
him with Felony.
for taking money out of the pocket of Henry Stacy. A verdict for the Plaintiff,
yet Judgment was given against him, and the words held not actionable, for it
is no direct charge, and the latter words make them ambiguous, and qualify
them. Hobb. Rep. pl. 381. Poland and Mason. And yet see after Case 315. 339.
that to say, I charge thee with Felony, is actionable. Croo. 2. 312.

Case 303.
A prohibition was prayed by the Defendant, because he being of Counsel with
the Defendant, in an Action of the Case, for saying, the Plaintiff had
murdered three children, whereunto the Defendant pleaded not guilty, In a
course of Justice.
and at the Trial, the Defendant, to extenuate damages of his Client, did urge
and press the fact, to make the matter more probable, so far as might tend to
the defamation of the Plaintiff; and because it was in his profession, and
pertinent to the good and safety of his Client, though it were not directly to
the issue, a prohibition was granted. Hughes Case. Hobb. pl. 399.

Case 304.
Action for this, Thou art a Thief, and have stolen a Tree, upon not Charge of
stealing a Tree. And. For.
guilty, and verdict for the Plaintiff; yet it was adjudged against him. And
yet a Judgment was cited in the Kings Bench. 7. Jac. given for the Plaintiff,
for this, Thou art a Thief, and have stolen Trees out of J. S. his Orchard, etc.
Hobb. Rep. pl. 98. Adrian Coote. Co. B. See after Case. 333.

Case 305.
Action for this, Thou art a Thief, and have stolen twenty load of my Charge of
stealing Furre.
Furrs. Upon not guilty pleaded, and a verdict for the Plaintiff, and motion to
arrest it, and diverse Judgments cited in the Kings Bench. And for this, Thou
art a Thief, and have stolen my Corn; that Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, yet Judgment was given against the Plaintiff in this Case. Hobb.
Rep. pl. 406. Clerk and Gilbert. Co. B. See after Cases 333.

Case 306.
Thornton a Carrier against Jobson for this, He is a common Barretor. Common
Barretor.
The Court was of opinion, the words were not actionable; and yet for an
Officer, Justice of Peace, Attorney, or the like, that they were actionable.
Hobb. pl. 188.

Action for this, said of an Attorney, Thou art a common Maintainer of Suits,
and a Champertor, and I will have thee thrown over the Bar the Common
Champertor.
next Term; it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Co. B. Box and Barnaby Hobb. pl.
145.

Case 307.
In the Case of Cuddington and Wilkins, Co. B. It was held by the Court, that
after a general, or special pardon of Felonies, a man cannot To call one Thief
after a general or special pardon.
justify the calling of another Thief, that had committed a Felony before the
pardon; and therefore that an Action will lie for this, especially in the Cases
where the Slanderer does, or may know of the pardon. But if a man commit a
Felony, and get a secret pardon, that another man not knowing of it, may
justify the apprehending of him for the Felony, even as a common voice and
fame is a sufficient warrant to arrest for Felony, albeit Common fame a good
warrant to arrest for Felony.
the same be not true; for this is for the advancement of Justice, but so it is
not to call him Thief, for that is neither necessary, nor tending to advance
Justice, Hobb. pl. 71. and 106.

Case 308.
Action for this, that he being Bailiff to A. for three years last past, of
Charge of couzening.
his Land in C. and had the selling of his Corn and Grain, and that the
Defendant said this unto him, Thou art a couzening Knave, and thou have
couzened me in selling false measure in my Barley, and the Country is bound to
curse thee for selling with false measures, and I will Selling by false
measures.
prove it, and thou have changed my Barley. Upon not guilty, and verdict for
the Plaintiff, it was notwithstanding adjudged against him, but held that if
he had been a common Ridder, or Badger, and charged to sell by false measures,
this had been actionable. And so perhaps, if I have a Bailiff, to whom I commit
the buying and selling of my Corn, and I give him the greater wages in respect
of the trust and employment, and one shall charge him to have deceived me in
his office or trust, by buying and selling of false measure to my damage, this
may be actionable. Hobb. Rep. Bray and Haines, pl. 93. And in Mich. 13 Car. 1.
B. R. Seaman and Bigg, Action for this, whereas the Plaintiff was Servant in
Husbandry to I. S. and his Bailiff in great trust with him, and thereby got his
maintenance, that the Defendant to disgrace him said, Thou art a couzening
Knave, and have couzened thy Master of a Bushel of Barley; and this was
adjudged for the Plaintiff, and that the words are actionable. Croo. 1. 345.

Case 309.
Action for this, Thy Father is a Thief [Innuendo the Plaintiff. After verdict
Incertainty in the person. Innuendo.
for the Plaintiff it was adjudged against him, for that it was not alleged in
the Declaration to be spoken to the Son, etc. and it was adjudged. against the
Plaintiff, and the Innuendo will not help. Croo. 1. 65. Co. B Phelps and Lane.
See before Case 275.

Case 310.
In the Case of Eaton and Ayloff, Croo. 1. 78. Co. B. The Court declared,
Cuckold. Wittall. Queen. Hedge-Priest. Cuckoldly Knave. Cheating Knave.
That this Action will not lie for calling of one Cuckold, or Wittal, or
saying, That he had lain with the wife of A. Queen, or tainted Queen; or for
saying of a Parson, He is a Hedge-Priest. See Croo. 1. 247. Gobbets Case. That
it lies not for calling of one Cuckoldly-Knave, or cheating Knave. See before
Case 29.

Case 311.
Action for this, said of a Woman to a Woman, that whereas there was talk
between the Defendant and I. S. of the said A. and B. the Plaintiff, Charge of
Theft.
the Defendant said these words of A. and B. A. has stolen such goods, and she
[Innuendo the Plaintiff was privy and consenting thereunto; after verdict for
the Plaintiff, it was moved in arrest of the Judgment, for that it is
incertaine to which of them She shall refer; but it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff, and held that the words shall be referred to A. and not to B.
Singula Charge of consenting to theft
singulis; and that she was privy and consenting to the stealing of goods is
actionable. Croo. 1 part. 171. B. R. Mot and his Wife, and Butler.

Case 312.
Action for this by an Attorney, Thou art a Knave, and stirrest up Suits
Slander of an Attorney.
between Parties, and stirredst up a Suit betwixt such Parties to their
undoing, and it is a great pity such Persons should go unhanged; adjudged for
the Plaintiff that the Action lies. Croo. 1. 166.

Case 313.
Action for this, He was arraigned at Warwick for stealing of twelve He was
arraigned for stealing, etc.
Hoggs, and if he had not made good friends it had gone hard with him. Ubi re
vera, he was never arraigned, nor questioned for any Felony; it was held by
all the Judges seriatim, that the words are actionable, and it was Averment.
after verdict, and motion to stay the Judgment, adjudged for the plaintiff.
But that if the words were, Thou were arraigned for two Bullocks, or perhaps if
the averment had not been added, the words might not be actionable, and it was
said to be adjudged for this, Thou were in Norwich Gaol for a Thou were in a
Gaol for a Robbery etc. Averment.
Robbery committed on I. S. with an averment, that he never was in any Gaol for
Felony. See the Case, Croo. 2. 247. It was adjudged for the plaintiff, but
there is no such averment in the Case as is here mentioned. Croo. 1. 195. Hally
and Stanton and in Croo. 2. 155. Showell and Haman, Pasche. 5. Jac. B. R. an
Action was brought for this, Thou have been in the Gaol for stealing of a Pan,
and it was held that the Action well Lay. And in Croo. 1. last published, 279.
Baily and Churringtons Case is this. The Action was for this, Thou wast
arraigned for two Bullocks, and it was adjudged, that the words were not
actionable, for he does not say, He was arraigned for the stealing of two
Bullocks, which words had been worse, and yet not actionable, for a man may be
arraigned for Felony, and yet be no Felon, and in Hobb. Rep. pl. 196. is this
Case. Action for this, He is in Warwick Gaol for stealing of a Mare, and other
Beasts; and after verdict and motion to arrest the Judgment, it was held by
all the Judges seriatim, that the words were not actionable, for it is no
direct affirmation, that he did steal, as to say he stole them, and was in Gaol
for them; but a report of his imprisonment, Steward and Bishops Case. See after
Case 386.

Case 314.
Action for this, said of a Midwife about her profession, Many have perished
Slander of a Midwife in her Profession.
for her want of skill; it was adjudged for the plaintiff, and held, that the
words were actionable. Croo. 1. Flowers Case. 153.

Action for this, That whereas he was in treaty with such a Woman of Charge of
incontinency, loss of a Marriage.
good estate about a Marriage, that the Defendant, to hinder him, etc. spoke
thus; Southold has been in bed with Dorchesters Wife, whereby he lost his
marriage; after a verdict for the plaintiff, and motion to arrest the
Judgment, it was held that the words were actionable, because of his loss, and
the plaintiff had Judgment. Southold and Daunston, Croo. 1. 195.

See the like Case adjudged between Hawkins and Bilhead, 11 Car. B. R. Croo. 1.
292. And the like Case for a Widow, for slanderous words spoken of her,
whereby she lost her Suitor. Dame Morrison and Cade. Croo. 2. 162. And again,
Croo. 2. 323. Matthew and Cross. Trin. 11 Jac. B. R.

Case 315.
Action for this, That the Defendant Ex malitia upon the plaintiffs wife,
crimen feloniae imposuit, and caused her to be brought before a Justice Charge
of Theft.
of Peace; and falso and malitiose said before him, that he charged her with
Felony for stealing of a Hog from one H. and required her to be bound over,
etc. and it was adjudged for the plaintiff. Manning and his Wife, and
Fitzharbert. Croo. 1. part 1. 97. See Croo. 1. 116. Topsall and Edwards the
like Case.

Action for this, Thou have given I. S. nine pounds for forswearing himself
Charge of procuring Perjury, and Forgery.
in Chancery, and have hired him to forge a Bond. It was adjudged for the
plaintiff.

So for this, Thou have procured one Smith to come thirty miles to commit
Perjury before my Lord of Winchester, and have given him ten pound for that
purpose. Harris and Dixon. Croo. 2. 10. See Case 274.

Case 316.
Action for this said of a Lawyer, He is a Dunce, and will get little by
Slander of a Lawyer.
the Law; he was never but accounted a Dunce in the Middle Temple. It was
adjudged for the Plaintiff, and that the words are actionable. Peard and Jones.
Croo. 1. 278.

Case 317.
Action for this said to the Brother of the Plaintiff. Thy Brother was whipped
about Taunton Cross for stealing of Sheep, or burned in the hand Charge of
theft indirect.
or shoulder, After a verdict for the plaintiff, and a motion to arrest the
Judgment, it was adjudged for the defendant for the incertainty of the
Incertainty.
words. Stirley and Hill. B. R. Mich. 8 Car. Croo. 1. 206. See before Case 275.

Case 318.
Action for this, said in London, He is a Pimp, and a common Pimp, Pimp.
Common Pimp.
and notorious, which he would justify. After verdict for the Plaintiff, upon
a motion to arrest the Judgment, it was stayed. Croo. 1. 286. Dymock and
Fawcer. B. R.

Case 319.
Action for this, She is a Witch, and a strong Witch; after verdict for Witch,
and strong Witch.
the Plaintiff, upon motion to arrest the Judgment; it was held, the words
were not actionable, and adjudged for the Defendant, B. R. Mich. 8. Car. 1.
John George and his Wife, and Harvy. Croo. 1. 205. and 236. And there all the
Judges held, that the Action will not lie for calling of one Witch, without
alleging of some Act done. See after Case 323. 338.

Case 320.
Action for this, Thou did violently, upon the high way, take my purse Charge
of Robbery.
from me, and four shillings two pence in it, and did threaten to cut me off
in the midst, but I was forced to run away to save my life. It was held, the
words were actionable, and adjudged for the Plaintiff. Lawrence and Woodward.
Croo. 1. 202. See before Case 92. 108. 149. 151. 154. 160. 174. 250.

Case 321.
Action for this, Thou art a long shag-haired murdring Rogue. It was Charge of
Murder. Adjective words. Murdering Rogue. Bawd and Bawdy House charged.
held, the words were actionable, and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. Green
and Lincoln. Croo. 1. 232. B. R.

Case 322.
Action for this, Hang thee Bawd, thou art worse than a Bawd, thou keep a
house worse than a Bawdy House; and keep a Whore in thy house, to pull out
my throat. It was held, the words were actionable, and adjudged for the
Plaintiff. Peirson and his Wife, and Gooday. B. R. 9. Car. 1. Croo. 1. 239. See
Case 103. But see for this. chap. 14. sect. 4. chap. 20. sect. 2. chap. 21.
sect. 5.

Case 323.
Action for this, Thou art a Witch, and I will make thee come and sav, Witch.
God save my Mare: I was forced to get my Mare charmed for thee. After verdict
for the Plaintiff, upon motion to arrest the Judgment, it was stayed, until
etc. Croo. 1. 233. Broxon and Dager. Mich. 9. Car. B. R. Croo. 1. 233. See Case
319. 338.

Case 324.
Action for this, whereas such a one was delivered of a Bastard child, Charge
of Incontinency.
the Defendant speaking of it, said, That he, Innuendo, the Plaintiff, is the
reputed Father of it; and upon not guilty, and a verdict for the Plaintiff, he
had Judgment in the Common Bench. And a Writ of Error was Spiritual Slander.
brought, and it was reversed, and held, that the words are not actionable,
unless he have any special damage, or that it be such a Bastard, as is like to
charge a Parish, or the like. Croo. 1. 315. Salter and Brown. B. R. 11. Car. 1.
Hill. See before Case 277.

Case 325.
Action for this, said of one that is the Son of a man rich in Lands and Goods,
and in hope of part of it, He is a Bastard; and it was held actionable, For
calling of one Bastard.
without averment of any special damage. And a Judgment affirmed in a Writ of
Error, was cited in the Case. Croo. 1. 337. Humfrevs and Averment.
Stanfield. Pasche. 13. Car. 1. B. R. And after Croo. 2. 213. in the Case of
Vaughan and Ellis. Mich. 6. Jac. B. R. in case only, where one had but a
possibility and hope, for which he was offered some considerable recompense,
and by this slander lost it: the words were adjudged actionable, and the
Judgment was affirmed in a Writ of Error. See Croo. 2. 323. And see before
Humfreys and Studfields Case. Case 78.

Case 326.
Action for this, brought by a Freeman, and Tradesman in London, Charge of
couxening on a Tradesman.
Thou art a Cheater, and have cheated my Husband of five hundred pound. And it
was held, that the words being not spoken of his Trade, are not actionable. And
it was adjudged for the Defendant. Needler and Symnell. Mich. 11. Car. 1. B. R.
Croo. 1. 301. See Case 261.

Case 327.
Action for this, brought by a Merchant, That he was a cheating Knave, Charge
of couzening upon a Merchant.
and had cheated his Father by returning twenty pound for wares, etc. And it
was held, the words were actionable, and the Plaintiff had judgment, Croo. 1.
398. Arundel and Mare. Trin. 15. Car. 1. B. R. See Case 261.

Case 328.
In the Case of Pew and Jefferies. B. R. Pasche. 12. Car. 1. It was held, Welsh
Thief. Welsh Jade. Welsh Rogue. Welsh Whore.
that this Action will lie, for calling one Welsh Thief; but not for calling of
one, Welsh Jade, or Welsh Rogue, or Welsh Whore. Croo. 1. 329.

Case 329.
Error of a Judgment in the Common Bench, for this, Thou art forsworn in a
Court of Record, and that I will prove. And Judgment Charge of Perjury.
there given for the Defendant; it was reversed, the words held actionable, and
Judgment given for the Plaintiff, Banco Regis. Ceely and Hoskins. Mich. 14.
Car. 1. B. R. Croo. 1. 366.

Case 330.
Action for this, by an Attorney, spoken about him in his office, He is
Slander of an Attorney. Cheating.
a very base Rogue, and a cheating Knave, and does maintain himself, his wife
and children by his cheating; and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, in Co. B.
but by a Writ of Error, brought into the Kings Bench, and there it was
affirmed. Pasche. 14. Car. 1. B. R. Croo. 1. 371.

Case 331.
Action for this, Thou art a Rogue, and a Rascal, and have killed thy wife
[quandam Elizabetham nuper uxorem le Plantife Innuendo] upon Charge of murder.
not guilty, it was found for the Plaintiff, and moved in Arrest of Judgment,
that the words were not actionable, because it was not shown, that the wife was
dead, nor how she was killed, nor that she was violently killed. But it was
held, the words were actionable; for where it is said nuper his wife, it shall
be intended she is dead, and thou have killed her, Averment.
shall be intended according to the vulgar acceptance. And it was adjudged for
the Plaintiff. Wilner and Hoid. Trin. 13. Car. 1. B. R. Croo. 1. 352.

Case 332.
Action for words, whereas he was a Deputy Clerk under a Register to an
Archdeacon, and received diverse Fees by the Office, and was to account Slander
of an Officer.
for them, that the Defendant speaking of him; and his Office, intending to
deprire him of his place, and to bring him in the displeasure of his Master,
said of him, that He is a base couzening Knave, he is a Cheater, and has
couzened his Master [the said A. B. Innuendo] It was adjudged for the
Plaintiff, and all the Court held the words actionable, and that it shall be
intended, that they were spoken concerning his Office. Reynolds Case. Trin. 15.
Car. 1. B. R. Croo. 1. 406.

Case 333.
Action for words, that such a day in presentia and auditu quamplurimorum
subdictorum Domini Regis, he spoke, etc. Thou art a Thief, and have stolen my
corn. After verdict, and motion to arrest the judgment, it was held by the
Court,

1 That the Declaration was good in presentia, etc. albeit it may be
Declaration.
some of them might not understand the language.

2 Albeit it be said, that he spoke the words of the Plaintiff, Thou, etc.
which must be to the Plaintiff, yet it was good enough, for being spoken to,
they are spoken of him first, and it is all one.

3 That it shall be intended reaped Corn. And therefore that the words were
actionable, and judgment was given for the Plaintiff. Croo. 2. 39. Mich. 2.
Jac. B. R. Kellur and Menasby.

Action for this, Thou art a theevish Knave, and have stolen my wood. Charge of
Theft of wood.
After verdict for the Plaintiff, upon not guilty, and motion to arrest the
judgment, it was held by three Judges, the words were not actionable, and
adjudged against the Plaintiff for the Defendant. Robbins and Hildredon.
Pasche. 3. Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 65.

Action for this; Thou have stolen my wood. It was demurred in Law, Theft of
wood.
whether the Action lay, and adjudged without Argument for the Plaintiff. Lo
and Sanders. Trin. 5. Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 166.

Action for this, Thou art a Thief, and have stolen Master Saint George his
Tree. It was adjudged for the Plaintiff after verdict, and motion to arrest the
Judgment. Minors and Leeford. Hill. 3. Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 114.

Action for this, Thou have robbed the Church [Innuendo, the Church of Theft of
Lead.
St. Alphage: and thou have stolen the Lead from the Church, Innuendo, the
Church of St. Alphage aforesaid, upon not guilty pleaded, it was adjudged for
the Plaintiff, two Judges being against the judgment. Benson and Morley.
Pasche. 5. Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 153.

Action for this, Thou have stolen my corn, and carried it to Market; Theft of
Corn.
and upon motion to arrest the judgment, after a verdict, because the words
are not actionable, the Court held it otherwise, and it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff. Croo. 2. 442. Mich. 15. Jac. B. R. Turnor and Champion.

Action for this, Thou have stolen as much corn out of my fields, as is worth
nine shillings, or ten shillings, After a verdict, the Court doubted, and did
not give judgment. Ellis and Fitch. Hill. 15. Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 457. See
before Case 304. 305. and after Case 341. 346.

Case 334.
Action by a Justice of Peace for this, Kempe is a Basket Justice, a partial
Justice; I will give him five pound a year for his gifts for Justice matters.
Justice of Peace slandered.
It was held by the Court, that for the word partial Justice, and not for any
of the rest of the words, the Action will lie. Kempe and Howsgoe. Croo. 2, 90.
Mich. 3. Jac. B. R.

And so for this, You are a sweet Justice, you sent your Warrant for J. S. to
be brought before you for suspicion of Felony, and afterward sent J. D. to
him, to give him warning thereof, that he might absent himself. It was
adjudged for the Plaintiff, and that the words are actionable. Burton and
Tokin. Hill. 4. Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 143.

And so for this, that whereas he had upon Articles exhibited, bound another
to appear at Sessions, etc. That thereupon he spoke thus, By your means I had
wrong at the Sessions, for you caused Hickman to swear against me, a thing
that was not true; Innuendo, the said Oath. And it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff. Croo. 2. 308. Sir Walter Chetwid. and Meeston. M. 10. Jac. B. R.

And so for this, said of him, He has forged a Recognizance taken before
Fisher and others. It was adjudged actionable. Chitchly and Barker. Pasche 44.
Eliz. B. R. Croo. 1. part last published. 883.

Case 335.
Action for this, pretended to be said of the Plaintiff. My Brother [prefat
querend. Innuendo] is Perjured, and upon not guilty pleaded, it was Incertainty
in the Person.
found for the plaintiff, and upon motion to arrest the Judgment, it was held,
that there appearing to the Court no other Brother, and it being averred to be
spoken of him, and so found by the Jury, it was well enough; and it was
adjudged for the plaintiff; and there this Case was said to be adjudged,
Endeavor to Murder.
That murdrous Knave Stroughton lay in wait to murder me; and one Tho.
Stroughton sued upon them, and had Judgment, after upon not guilty he got a
verdict for him. Croo. 2. 107. Wiseman and Wiseman. Hill. 3 Jac. B. R. See Case
before. 275.

Case 336.
Action for this the Defendant, Hec falsa and scandalosa verba sequentia dixit,
and publicavit, (viz.) Mr. Price, you do my Lord Burleigh wrong, that you do
not apprehend Jeremy Johnson [Innuendo the Plaintiff] for a Felon, and seize
his goods, for he [Innuendo the Plaintiff] has stolen a Sheep from Incertainty.
Wright of Kirsby,] Innuendo John Wright, upon not guilty pleaded, and a
verdict for the plaintiff, it was adjudged against him, with the Defendant,
because it is not alleged in the Declaration, or writ, to be spoken of the
Declaration.
Plaintiff, but only in the Innuendo; and the Innuendo, without an express
allegation that the words were spoken of the plaintiff, will not maintain
Innuendo.
the Action. Johnson and Sir John Aylmen. Croo. 2. 126. See Case before, 275.

Case 337.
Action for this, Arthur Colome is a forsworn man, and has taken a false About
Perjury.
Oath in his deposition at Tiverton, where he waged his Law against me. It was
adjudged for the plaintiff, after motion to arrest the Judgment. Colomes case.
Croo. 2. 204. See before Case 259.

Case 338.
Error in the Exchequer Chamber, of a Judgment given in the Kings Bench for
this, Thou art a Witch, and that I will prove, I have seen thy Impes About
Witchcraft.
or Spirits in the night, and thou did unbewitch my child. Judgment being
given that the words were actionable, it was assigned for error, that it lay
not, and of that opinion were all the Justices and Barons. For to say, Thou art
a Witch, has been often adjudged not to be actionable, and the additional
words are but matter of Fancy, etc. wherefore the Judgment was reversed. Lloyd
and Cook. Pasche. 14 Jac. B. R. Croo. ^. 399.

Action for this, Thou art a Witch, and by thy means I have lost my Mare. And
it was moved in arrest of Judgment, that the words be not actionable, for they
are too general; and of that opinion was all the Court (absente Mountague) and
gave Rule that Judgment should be entered for the Defendant. Hawks and Awge.
Pasche. 17 Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 531. See Croo. 2. 600. Martin and his Wife, and
Studling. M. 12. Jac. B. R. the like opinion of the Judges, See Croo. 531.
Oliver and Steephens. Pasche 17 Jac. B. R.

Case 339.
Action for this, Thou did set upon me, and tookest away my Purse with Charge
of Robbery.
twenty Marks in it; go with me before a Justice of Peace, I will charge thee
with Felony. Adjudged that the Action well lay; and thereupon Error brought in
the Erchequer Chamber that the words were not actionable. All the Judges and
Barons agreed, that the words are very slanderous, and tant amount, as, I do
charge thee with Felony, wherefore the Judgment I do charge thee with Felony.
was affirmed. And yet in Croo. 2. 315, Holland and Stoner. Mich. 10 Jac. B. R.
The Case was Error of a Judgment in the Kings Bench in an Action for these
words, Thou art a lewd Fellow, thou did set upon me by the Highway, and take
my Purse from me, and I will be sworn to it; and the Error was, that the words
were not actionable, for he does not charge him with Felony, nor with Robbing
of him, or any felonious taking away his Purse, for it may be he took it in
jest, or for some other cause, and it is not any direct slander; and of that
opinion were all the Judges and Barons, wherefore the Judgment was reversed.
But for this, see before, Case 302. 315.

Case 340.
In the Case of Jacob and Mills. Pasche. 11 Jac. B. R. An Error was assigned
Charge of Poisoning.
for these words in the Declaration, viz. He has poisoned I. S. [Quendam I.
S. ad tunc defunct. Innuendo] because he did not aver he was dead at the time
of speaking the words; (for Ad tunc referres to the Averment.
time of the Declaration) And it was the opinion of all the Judges and Barons
that it was error. Croo. 2. 343.

Case 341.
Action for this, Thou art a Bankerupt Rogue, and accounted a common Rogue.
Charge of stealing Corn.
Knave, and thou art a Thief, and have stolen my Corn. To the first words, Thou
art a Bankerupt Rogue, and accounted a common Knave; The Defendant pleaded not
guilty, and to the last he justified. And both found against him, damages for
the first twelve pence, and for the last thirty nine Bankerupt.
shillings, and costs for both; the plaintiff having Judgment for both, was
for this cause reversed, For the first words are not actionable, the plaintiff
being neither Merchant nor Tradesman. And the Judgment being entire, it is
reversable in toto, for in the Judgment the damages Damages.
are joined, that are severed in the verdict, Croo. 2. 424. Pasche. 53 Jac. B.
R. Lloyd and Peirse.

Case 342.
Action for this, Thy Master Brown has robbed me of all my goods; and
Incertainty in the person.
verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in arrest of the Judgment, that it
was not actionable for the incertainty of the person; but it was adjudged for
the Plaintiff, for it is said he spoke it of the Plaintiff, and a man shall not
be intended to have more Masters than one; but agreed, that if one say to I. S.
Thy Son has robbed me, a Son cannot bring an Action, but he must aver he had
no more Sons. But if one say to a Son, Thy Father, or Averment.
to a Wife, Thy Husband has robbed me, the Action will lie for the Father or
Husband, without any such averment. Croo. 2. 443.

Case 343.
The Defendant was arrested by a Warrant upon a Latitat, directed to Charge of
Forgery.
the Sheriff of Midd. and the Defendant spoke these words, This is a
counterfeit Warrant made by Mr. Stone [Innuendo the Plaintiff had forged the
Warrant] and after verdict for the Plaintiff, and motion to arrest the
Judgment, that the words were not actionable, it was adjudged otherwise, and
for the Plaintiff. Stone and Smalcombe. Mich. 20 Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 648.

Case 344.
Action against two, for this spoken by them, Thou have the Plate of I. S. and
we will charge thee with that Felony. After verdict for the Plaintiff, it Words
spoken by two.
was moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Action lies not jointly against
them, for the speaking of one, is not the speaking of the other, but they must
be severally charged. And it was thereupon adjudged for the Defendants.
Chamberlain against White and Goodwin. Mich. 20 Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 647.

Case 345.
Action for this, that whereas the Master of the Defendant, Sir William Ayliffe
was robbed of goods by persons unknown; the Defendant said, Thou Charge to
maintain thieves.
art a Maintainer of Thieves, to steal my Masters goods, Innuendo, the goods of
the said Sir William Ayliffe, who was robbed. And albeit he did not say, that
he maintained them in the Felony, or knew them to be Thieves; it was adjudged
for the Plaintiff. And this said to be adjudged actionable, Thou maintainest
Pirates, who rob upon the Seas, Bennet and Tabram. Hill. 19. Jac. B. R. Croo.
2. 629. See Case 289.

Case 346.
Action for this, that the Defendant said of the Plaintiff, He [Innuendo, the
Plaintiff] is a Thief, for he has stolen corn from Mr. Key, Charge of Theft
[quendam Richardum Key, Innuendo] And after verdict for the Plaintiff, it was
moved in arrest of judgment, that it was not actionable; for he dath not show
that there was any talk about the Plaintiff, and without this it cannot be
applied to him; and it shall be taken for standing corn, yet the Plaintiff had
judgment, and that judgment affirmed in a Writ of Error. And there it was
agreed by the Court, not to lie for this, He is a Theft of Wood.
Thief, for he has stolen my Trees, or my Evidence, or my Lead off my house;
and they held this actionable, He is a Thief, for he has stolen my Theft of
Corn.
corn; and therefore that the Action here was maintainable. And so to say, Thou
have stolen my Wood; and the Court held the Declaration good, saying that the
Defendant spoke these words; and the Jury having found it for the Plaintiff.
And a judgment was cited to be had before in the like case, and affirmed by a
Writ of Error. Smith and Ward. Co. B. Mich. 21. Jac. Croo. 2. 673. See Case
333.

Case 347.
Action for this, that the Defendants Wife spoke of the Plaintiffs Wife, Charge
of Theft. Adjective words
Thou art a Theevish Rogue, and a theevish Queen, for thou have stolen my
Faggots [Innuendo, five Faggots of the said White, and his Wives] and upon not
guilty pleaded, and a verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in arrest of
Judgment. For the first words are adjectively spoken, and a Charge to steal a
Feme Coverts goods.
Feme Covert can have no goods; yet the words were held actionable, and it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff. Stamp and his Wife, against White and his Wife.
Croo. 2. 600. And in Pasche. 34. Eliz. B. R. Charnels Case. Action was brought
for these words, said by a Wife, My Turkies are stolen, and J. S. has stolen
them. And it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, against the Husband and Wife.
Croo. 1. part last published. 279.

Case 348.
Action for this, Thou perjured Beast, I will make thee to stand upon a
Scaffold in the Star Chamber, was adjudged actionable. Benson and his Charge
of Perjury.
wife, against Hall and his wife. Pasche. 19. Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 613.

Case 349.
Action for this, That he was a Thief, and had stolen his Gold; upon Charge of
Theft.
not guilty, and a verdict for the Plaintiff, and motion to arrest the
Judgment; for that he says, he was, for it may be long since, and that a
general pardon has since taken it away, etc. yet it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff. Boston and Tatum. Mich. 19. Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 622.

Case 350.
Action for this, Thou wast in Launceston Gaol for coining. To which the
Plaintiff said, If I was there, I answered it well enough; yea, Thou wast in
Gaol for coining.
said the Defendant, you were burnt in the hand for it; and it was held by the
Court, that the words were actionable. Gainford and Tuke. Trin. 17. Jac. B. R.
Croo. 2. 536. See Case 346. before.

Case 351.
Action for this, said to a Freeman and Scrivener in London, Thou Rogue.
Conny-catching Rogue. Couzening Rogue. Cutpurse Rogue.
art a Rogue, and a Conny-catching Rogue, a couzening Rogue, a cutpurse Rogue.
And after verdict for the Plaintiff, upon motion to arrest the Judgment, it
was adjudged against the Plaintiff, that the words are not actionable. Bets and
Trevaman. Trin. 17. Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 536.

Case 352.
Action for this, said of a Surveyor and Measurer of Land, that makes Charge of
an Officer.
his living by it, in reference to his Trade, Thou art a couzening and a
shifting Knave, and a cheating Knave. It was adjudged for the Plaintiff.
Blunden and Eustace. Mich. 16. Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 504.

Case 353.
Action for this, said of a Justice of Peace, and the Kings receiver of Charge
of Couzenage in an Officer.
the Court of Wards, Mr. Deceiver (Innuendo, the Plaintiff) has deceived the
King, and I have him in question for it [Innuendo, a supposed material thing by
him against the Plaintiff] and I doubt not to prove it, and upon not guilty, a
verdict was found, and judgment given for the Plaintiff in the Common Pleas,
and a Writ of Error brought in the Kings Bench, where the judgment was
affirmed. Sir Miles Fleetwood and Curse. Hill. 17. Jac. B. R. Croo. 2. 557.

Case 354.
In Hobb. pl. 335. It is held by the Judges, that a Libel, albeit the Libel.
Contents thereof be true, yet it is not to be justified. But the matters
thereof are to be legally discovered to some Magistrate or other, that may have
Cognizance of the Cause, in the right way. And yet in an Action Justification.
of the Case, if the things be true, it may be justified that it is spoken.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical TABLE FOR The ready finding out any thing contained in the
foregoing BOOK.
A.
ACtions of the Case, and the kinds thereof. chap. 1. Action of the Case, for
words, and the kinds thereof. chap. 1. Some general Rules concerning it. chap.
2. Accessaries to Felony, words about this, chap. 10. sect. 9. 10. 12. chapter 25
Case. 311. See maintaining Felons, receiving Felons and Felons goods. Adjective
words, Actions about them. chapter 2. sect. 7. chapter 6. sect. 2. chapter 8. chapter 10. sect.
6. chapter 13. sect. 1. chapter 15. sect. 2. chapter 25. Cases 14. 45. 48. 211. 347. See
Inclination. Advowterer, see incontinency. Affrayer, words about this,
Actionable or not, chapter 15. sect. 2. Alehouse keeper, see Innkeeper.
Ambodexter, where actionable or not, chapter 20. sect. 1. Apples, words about the
stealing of them, see theft. Attempt, see Endeavor Attorney, words of him,
where actionable or not, chapter 3. sect 2. chapter 20. sect. 7. chapter 25. Cases 28. 35.
182. 186. 280. 286. 297. 306. 312. 330. Averment, where necessary, or not, and
how it must be made chapter 2. sect. 4. 5. chapter 3. sect. 1. chapter 4. sect. 4. chapter 5.
sect. 4. 6. chapter 6. sect. 2. 3. chapter 7. sect. 1. 2. 3. chapter 8. chapter 9. sect. 2. chapter
10. sect. 1. 3. 11. 12. 14. chapter 12. sect. 3. chapter 14. sect. 1. 3. 4 chapter 15.
sect. 1. 2. chapter 16. sect 1. 2. chapter 18. throughout, chapter 19. sect. 2. chapter 20.
sect. 5. 9. 11. chapter 21. sect. 7. chap. 23. sect. 3. chapter 25. Cases 17. 27. 31.
49. 140. 142. 144. 197. 212. 224. 231. 232. 236. 238. 239. 245. 252. 275. 283.
299. 312. 325. 331. 340. 342. Bailiff slandered actionable or not, chapter 20.
sect. 11.
B
BAnkerupt, where this word is actionable, or not. chap. 2. sect. 7. chap. 5.
sect. 2. 9. chapter 20. sect. 4. chapter 21, sect. 1. 2. chapter ^25. Cases. 19. 28. 62.
87. 134. 167. 173. 181. 184. 190. 199. 205. 207. 244. 249. 270. 271, 295. 341.
Barretor. Where this word is actionable, or not. chapter 15. sect. 2. chapter 20. sect.
1. 3. 4. 6. 7. 8. chap. 21. sect. 5. chapter 25. Cases 40. 147. 306 Bastard and
Bastardie, words about this, Where actonable or not. chapter 1. sect. 2. chapter 2.
sect 1. 9. chapter 3. sect. 2. chapter 5. sect. 4, 5, 6. chapter 25 Cases 76, 77, 79. 126.
130, 131. 229. 230. 325. Bars of Iron. See Theft. Barister and Lawyer, words
of him where actionable, or not. chapter 20. sect. 4. chapter 25. Cases. 147. 159. 169.
192. 234. Bawd and Bawdy House, words about this, where actionable, or not. chapter
14. sect. 4. chapter 20. sect. 2. chapter 21. sect. 5. chapter 25. Cases. 103. 322.
Blood-sucker, where actionable, or not. chap. 7. sect. 4. chapter 15. sect. 2. chapter
20. sect. 2. 3. chapter 25. Case 263. Brabler, where actionable, or not, chapter 20.
sect. 9. Breaker of the Peace, where actionable, or not. chap. 15.
Bribes-taking, and bribing, words about this where actionable or not. chapter 20.
sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. chapter 25. Case 118. Brother-false, where action will lie
for this, or not. chap. 15. sect. 2. chap. 16. sect. 1. Buggery, and Buggerer,
words about this where actionable or not. chap. 5. sect. 8. chap. 9. Burglary,
and Burglarer, where action will lie for this, or not see Theft. Burning of a
House, words about this; where actionable, or not. chap. 2. sect. 6. chap. 9.
C
CHamperty, and champertor, words about this, where actionable, or not. chapter 15.
sect. 1, 2. chapter 20. sect. 1, 3, 4, 5, 8. chapter 25. case 57. 306. Maintainer of
suits, actions about this. chap. 15. sect. 2. Certainty, and Incertainty in
words, see for this. chapter 2. sect. 6. chapter 5. sect. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. chapter 7. sect.
1, 2, 3. chapter 8. chapter 10. sect. 1, 2, 3, 5. chapter 12. sect. 3, 4. chapter 13. sect. 2,
3. chapter 18. throughout. chapter 19. sect. 2. chapter 20. sect. 2, 9, 11. chap. 25. cases
4, 5, 12, 15, 40, 80, 106, 108, 128, 151, 154, 170, 172, 174, 182, 197, 199,
207, 214, 219, 224, 230, 250, 256, 258, 259, 275, 295, 309, 317, 342. Cheater,
and cheating knave, see cozener, and cozening, and knave. Church-robber, where
actionable, or not. chapter 5. sect. 8. chapter 10. sect. 1. Churchwardens, Slander of
them, where actionable, or not. chapter 20. sect. 10. chapter 25. case 193. Clarke of
Assizes, Slander of him, chapter 20. sect. 5. Commissioners, Slander of them, where
actionable, or not. chapter 20. sect. 10. Concealment of felonies, words about
this, where actionable, or not. chapter 7. sect. 2. chapter 10. sect. 10, 11. chapter 20.
sect. 1, 2. chapter 25. case 264. Conjurer, see Witchchraft. Constable, Slander of
him, where actionable, or not. chapter 20. sect. 10. chapter 25. cases 65, 193.
Conspirator, where actionable, or not. chapter 15. sect. 2. Conspiracy, where a
Writ of conspiracy lies, or not. chapter 2. sect. 8. chapter 22. throughout. Corn upon
the ground, words about the stealing of this, where actionable, or not. See
theft. Corn-stealer. chapter 25. case 282. Coroner, Slander of him. chapter 20. sect.
5. Cottage, for saying he has erected a cottage, actionable, or not. chap.
15. Coining of money, words about this, where actionable, or not. chapter 6. sect.
3. chapter 25. cases 129, 350. See Treason. Cozening, and cozener, cheating, and
cheater, words about these, and where they be actionable, or not. chapter 2. sect.
4, 5, 7. chapter 5. 9. chap. 8. sect. 2. chap. 18. and 19. throughout chapter 15. sect.
2. chapter 19. sect. 1, 2. and throughout chapter 20. sect. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. chap. 21. sect. 3, 4. chapter 25. cases 30, 65, 102, 134, 139, 142, 143, 158,
179, 193, 198, 206, 210, 249, 253, 261, 286, 294, 308, 326, 327, 330, 351, 353.
Cuckold, and cuckoldly knave, where Action will lie for this, or not, chapter 25.
case 29, 310. Cunny-catcher, Action about this, chapter 25. case 351. Cut his
Master out of doors, what, chapter 2. sect. 5. Cutpurse, words about this, where
actionable, or not, chapter 5. sect. 9, 10. chapter 10. sect. 3. 10, 11. chapter 20. sect.
10. chapter 25. cases 69, 72, 106, 236, 351. Cutthroat, where actionable, or not,
chapter 7. sect. 3. chapter 25. case 92.
D.
DAffidowndilly, what, and where actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 5. Damages,
in these Actions; for this see chapter 25. cases 173, 184, 341. Deceit in Trade,
and otherwise, chapter 18. throughout. See Couzening. Declaration, see Pleading,
and chapter 23. sect. 1. Defamation, see Slander. Disease infectious, Plague, Pox,
etc. where Action will lie for words about this, or not, chapter 2. sect. 1. 6. chapter
5. sect. 9. chapter 17. throughout, chapter 21. sect. 5. chapter 25. cases 12, 26, 47, 54,
71. 212. Discord, a sower of Discord, where this is actionable, or not, chapter 15.
sect. 2. Divine, see Minister. Drunkenness, and Drunkard, words about this,
where actionable, or not, chapter 15. sect. 1. chapter 20. sect. 5, 6. chapter 25. case
158. Dung, charge for stealing of it, where actionable, or not, chapter 10. sect.
14.
E.
Endeavor, purpose, or intent to do a thing. Words about this, where
actionable, or not, chap. 1. chap. 7. sect. 2. chap. 10. sect. 6. chapter 25. cases
5, 10, 37, 40, 46, 59, 86, 91, 109, 148, 160, 233, 236, 247, 290. Entry
forcible, charge of making it, chap. 15. sect. 1. Evesdropper, where
actionable, or not, chap. 15. sect. 2. Extortion, and Extortioner, where
actionable, or not, chapter 20. sect. 1, 5, 7, 8, 9. chapter 25. case 275.
F
FAtches, where a charge of stealing of them is actionable, or not, chapter 10.
sect. 8. See Theft. Felony, and felon, words about this, where actionable, or
not, chapter 2. sect. 4, 6, 7. chapter 5. sect. 5, 7, 8, 9. chapter 10. sect. 9, 12. chap.
20. sect. 1. chapter 25. cases 108, 116, 236. Filcher, and filching fellow, where
actionable, or not, chapter 5. sect. 10. chapter 10. sect. 3. chapter 25. cases 93. 262.
Forgery, and forger, words about this, where actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect.
6, 8. chapter 5. sect. 1, 9, 10. chapter 13. throughout; chap. 20. sect. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
chapter 25. cases 49, 95, 121, 174, 186, 187, 246, 253, 254, 258, 315, 342.
Fornication, and fornicator, words about this, where actionable, or not, chapter 2.
sect. 4, 5. chapter 16. sect. 1. See Incontinency. Fore-staller, Regrator, and
Ingrosser, words about this, where actionable, or not, chapter 15. sect. 1.
Forsworn. See Perjury. Fullers tubb, what, chapter 25. case 26. Furzes, words about
the stealing of them, where actionable, or not, chapter 10. sect. 8.
G
GRass, words about the stealing of it, where actionable, or not, chapter 10. sect.
8.
H
HAgg, where actionable, or not, chapter 8. sect. 1. Hay, words about the stealing
of it, where actionable, or not, chapter 10. sect. 8. Healer of Felons, what, and
where actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 4, 5. chap. 10. sect. 3. chapter 25. case
189. Hedge-breaker, where actionable or not, chapter 15. sect. 2. Hedge-priest,
actionable, or not, chapter 25. case 310. Heir, hindered of preferment by words,
where actionable, or not, chapter 18. sect. 1, 2. Heresy, and Heretic, words
about this, where actionable, or not, ch: 2. sect. 1. chapter 16. sect. 1. chapter 25.
case 42. Hornsby Knave, where actionable, or not, chapter 25. case 29. Hops, words
about the stealing of them, actionable, or not, chapter 6. sect. 8. See Theft.
Horse-stealer, where actionable, or not, chapter 10. sect. 1. House-robber, where
actionable, or not, chapter 5. sect. 8. chapter 10. sect. 1. Hypocrite; where
actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 7. chapter 15. sect. 2. chapter 16. sect. 1. chapter 21.
sect. 4.
I
Jade, Welsh Jade, actionable, or not, chapter 25. case 328. Incertainty in words,
see Certainty. Inchantor, see Witchcraft. Inclination, words importing an
inclination, in mind, intent, or purpose only to do a thing, where actionable,
or not, chapter 1. sect. 2. chapter 6. sect. 2. chapter 7. sect. 3. chap. 10. sect. 6. chapter
20. sect. 2. chapter 25. cases 40, 51, 171. Incontinency, words about this, where
actionable, or not, chapter 1. sect. 2. chapter 2. sect. 1, 6. chapter 14. throughout, chapter
18. sect. 1. chapter 20. sect. 5, 6. chapter 25. cases 11, 13, 20, 42, 96, 132, 212,
229, 277, 288, 293, 314, 324. Adulterer, and Advowterer, chapter 16. sect. 1.
Fornicator, chapter 16. sect. 1, Whore, where actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 1.
chapter 25. cases 13, 20, 96, 185, 211. Ingrosser, see fore-staller. Indictment,
Slander by it, where actionable, or not, chapter 5. sect. 2. Innuendo, how to be
taken, and used, chapter 2. sect. 1, 6, 7. chapter 4. sect. 4. chapter 5. sect. 4. chapter 7.
sect. 2. chapter 9. chapter 10. sect. 1, 2, 5, 6. chapter 12. sect. 5. chapter 14. chapter 23.
sect. 2. chapter 25. cases 12, 50, 60, 80, 144, 170, 172, 212, 242, 247, 275, 286,
309. Innkeeper, Vintner, Ale-house-keeper, etc. words of Slander about them,
for which Action will lie, or not, chapter 17. sect. 1, 2. chapter 21. sect. 4, 5. chapter
25. cases 11, 26, 54. Intent. See Inclination. Judas, where this word is
actionable, or not, chapter 20. sect. 9. Judge, words of Slander of him, where
actionable, or not, chapter 13. sect. 3. chapter 20. sect. 1. chapter 25. cases 4, 5, 8,
57, 110, 155, 182, 200, 203, 260. 263, 278, 292. 334. Justice of Peace, words
of Slander of him, where actionable, or not, chapter 20. sect. 1. chapter 25. cases 4,
5, 8, 57, 110, 155, 182, 200, 203, 260, 263, 278, 292, 334. Juggling, and
Juglers, where actionable, or not, chapter 19. sect. 1. chapter 25. case 254.
Justification. See pleading.
K
KNave, where actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 4, 5, 7. chapter 15. sect. 2. chapter
20. sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8. chapter 25. cases 29, 45, 173, 251, 252, 295, 310.
L
LAncery-petit, words about this, where actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 1. chapter
10. sect. 1. chapter 11. Lawyer, see Barrester. Lead of a house, words about the
stealing of this, actionable, or not, chapter 10. sect. 8. See Theft. Leaper, where
actionable, or not, chapter 17. sect. 2. chapter 25. case 251. Libel, how punishable,
chapter 5. sect. 1. chapter 24. throughout, chapter 25. cases 301, 354. Libeller, where
actionable, or not, chap. 15. sect. 2. Liar, where actionable, or not, chapter 15.
sect. 2. chapter 25. case 162.
M
MAinsworn, or meansworn, what, and where actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 5.
chapter 12. sect. 3. chapter 25. cases 31, 162. Maintenance, and mantainer. See
Champerty. Maintainors of Traitors and Felons, chapter 10. sect. 9. chapter 20. sect.
1. chapter 25 cases 159, 164, 171, 201, 289, 345. Mayor of a Town, Slander of him,
actionable, or not, chapter 20. sect. 10. Malefactor, where actionable, or not, chapter
15. sect. 2. Malice in words, where, chap. 2. sect. 5, 6. chapter 25. cases 177,
197. Master and Servant, words spoken about them, actionable, or not, chapter 18.
sect. 1, 2. chapter 19. chapter 21. sect. 4. Marriage hindered by such words, chap. 18.
throughout. See Preferment. Mass, words about this, actionable, or not, chapter
15. sect. 2. Merchant. See Trade. Measurer, or Surveyer of Land, Slander of
him, chapter 20. sect. 10. Midwife, Slander of her, where actionable, or not, chapter
21. sect. 5. chapter 25. case 314. Minister, words of him Slanderous, and
actionable, or not, chapter 18. sect. 1, 2. chapter 25. case 42. Miscreant, chapter 2.
sect. 7. chap. 15. sect. 2. chapter 16. sect. 1. Misfeasor, where actionable, or
not, chapter 15. sect. 2. Murder, and Murderer, words about this, where actionable,
or not, chapter 2. sect. 7, 8, 9. chap. 5. sect. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. chap. 7.
throughout, chapter 25. cases 10, 15, 24, 37, 40, 46, 49, 59, 64, 68, 80, 104, 109,
115, 140, 144, 146, 148, 151, 195, 213, 214, 219, 233, 283, 321, 331, 340.
Murdering Rogue, actionable, or not, chapter 25. case 321. Mutton-munger, where
actionable, or not, chapter 10. sect. 12.
N
NAme, thou art of ill Name, where actionable, or not, chap. 15. sect. 2.
Night-walker, where actionable, or not, chap. 15. sect. 2.
O
OFficers, and office, words about this, where actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect.
1, 7, 9, chapter 19. sect. 1. chapter 20. sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. chapter 25. cases 4, 5,
291. Charge of corruption therein, chapter 20, sect. 1. Charge of Ignorance
therein, chap. 20. sect. 2, 4, 5, etc. Loss of an Office, by slanderous words,
chapter 18. sect. 1, 2. For all this, See chapter 25. cases 62, 64, 67, 78, 118, 186,
187, 189, 199, 202, 248, 275, 295, 308, 332, 352, 353. Overseers of the Poor,
Slander of them, where actionable or not, chapter 20. sect. 10. Out-putter, what,
and where actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 5. chapter 10. sect. 3.
P
PAssion. See words of Passion. Papists, and Popery, words about this, where
actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 4. chapter 15. sect. 1. chapter 20 sect. 9. chap. 25.
cases 98. 179, 199. Peace-breaker, where this word is actionable, or not, chapter
15. sect. 2. chapter 25. case 40. Perjury, and subornation of Perjury, and
Forswearing, words about this, where actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 6. 9. chapter
5. sect. 4, 5, 6, 9, 10. chapter 12. throughout, chapter 20. sect. 8. chapter 25. cases 4,
7, 14, 18, 31, 35, 38, 39, 55, 56, 58, 60, 62, 74, 90, 97, 99, 100, 123, 135,
136, 162, 170, 222, 224, 235, 236, 239, 266, 267, 273, 274, 276, 284, 286, 249,
315, 329, 337, 348. Physician, slanderous words of him, where actionable, or
not, chapter 21. sect. 6. chapter 25. cases 248. Pick-pocket, where this word is
actionable, or not, chapter 10. sect. 3, 10, 11. chapter 13. sect. 3. chapter 14. sect. 3.
chapter 25. case 124. Pilferer, where this word is actionable, or not, chapter 10.
sect. 3. chapter 25. case 262. Pillory, words about this, where actionable, or not,
chapter 15. sect. 2. chapter 25. cases 89. 252. Pimp, common Pimp, where actionable, or
not, chapter 25. case 318. Piracy, and Pirate, words about this, where actionable,
or not, chap. 10. Plague, chapter 17. throughout, see Disease infectious. Pleading,
chapter 2. sect. 5, 6. chapter 23. throughout, chapter 25. cases 152, 196, 241, 255, 256,
270, 284, 296, 300, 336, 354. Poison, and poisoning, words about this where
actionable, or not, chapter 7. sect. 1. 3. chapter 25. cases 144, 195, 240, 245. see
Murder. Pox-French, words about this. Pocky Knave, where actionable, or not,
chapter 17. throughout. See disease infectious. Prayer, Common Prayer Book, words
about this, where actionable, or not, chapter 15. sect. 1. Preaching, and
Preachers, words about this, where actionable, or not, chapter 18. sect. 1, 2. chapter
20. sect. 5. chapter 25. case 42. Preferment lost by words spoken, where
actionable, or not, chapter 18. throughout. chapter 25, cases 293, 314. Priests,
Mass Priests, words about this, where actionable, or not, chapter 9. chapter 15. sect.
1. Prigging Merchant, where actionable, or not, chapter 25. case 262. Prigging
fellow, where actionable, or not, chap. 5. sect. 10. chap. 10. sect. 3.
Purpose, words importing a purpose, to do somewhat, where actionable, or not.
See Endeavor.
Q.
QUalification, where some of the words do qualify the rest of the words, or
not, chapter 2. sect. 8. chapter 6. sect. 2. chapter 7. sect. 2. chapter 10. sect. 9, 12, 14.
chapter 20. sect. 2, 8. chapter 25. case 116. Quarreller, where actionable, or not, chapter
15. sect. 2. Queen, where actionable, or not, chapter 25. case 310.
R.
RApe, words about this, where actionable, or not, chapter 9. chapter 25. case 194.
Rascal, where actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 7. Railing, and Rayler, words
about this, where actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 7. chapter 15. sect. 2.
Rebellion, Rebel, words about this, where actionable, or not. See Treason, and
Traitor, chap. 6. throughout. Receiving, and maintaining of Thieves, and stolen
goods, chapter 10. sect. 9. chapter 20. sect. 1. chapter 25. cases, 88, 106, 107, 157, 191,
264. Recusant. See Papist. Regrator. See Forestaller. Report, words spoken by
report from others, where actionable, or not, chap. 2. sect. 2. chapter 6. sect. 2.
chapter 10. sect. 13. chapter 13. sect. 2. Robbery, and Robber, words about this, where
actionable, or not, chapter 5. sect. 2, 8. chapter 10. sect. 1. and throughout. See
Theft. Rogue, and branded Rogue, words about this, where actionable, or not,
chapter 2. sect. 4, 5, 7. chapter 15. sect. 2. chapter 16. sect. 1. chapter 21. sect. 5. 6. chapter
25. cases 4, 40, 173, 295, 328, 341, 351. Riot, Ryotor, words about this, where
actionable, or not, chapter 15. sect. 1.
S.
SAbbath-breaker, where actionable, or not, chap. 15. sect. 1. Sacrilege, and
Sacriledger, words about this, where actionable, or not, chap. 5. sect. 8.
chap. 10. sect. 1. Scandalum Magnatum, where it lies, or not, chap. 2. sect.
4, 5, 8. chap. 4. throughout, chap. 19. sect. 1. chap. 25. cases 85, 199, 272.
Scrivener, Slander of him, actionable, or not, chap. 20. sect. 1. 10.
Schismatic, where actionable, or not, chap. 16. sect. 1. and throughout.
Schoolmaster, slander of him, chap. 20. sect. 5. Sedition, and Seditions,
words about this, where actionable, or not, chap. 7. sect. 2. chap. 20. chap.
25. cases 1. 48. See Treason. Servant and Master. See Master. Sheep-stealer,
where actionable, or not, chap. 10. sect. 1. Sheep-Theef, what, and where
actionable, chap. 2. sect. 5. chap. 10. sect. 3. Sheriff, Slander of him. See
Officer. Simonist, where actionable, or not, chap. 15. Slander and Defamation,
and words of Slander, where actionable, or not, chap. 15. sect. 1. General
Rules about it, chap. 2. How they must be uttered to be actionable. chap. 5.
throughout chap. 7. chap. 8. chap. 10. Of a Title to Land, chapter 3. throughout,
chap. 25. cases 76, 77, 78, 127, 128, 130, 131, 133, 166, 219, 223, 225, 226,
227, 228, 242. Who may bring it, and against whom, chap. 5. sect. 1, 2. About
matter of Treason, where actionable, or not, chapter 6. throughout. See Treason.
About matter of Murder, where actionable, or not, chap. 7. throughout. See
Murder. About matter of Witchcraft, where actionable, or not, chapter 8.
throughout. See Witchcraft. About Rape, Sodomy, Buggery, and Burning of houses,
chapter 9. See the several Titles of Rape, Sodomy, Buggery, and Burning of houses.
About matter of Theft, chap. 10 throughout. About petit Larceny, chap. 11. See
Theft. About Perjury, chap. 12. throughout. See Perjury. About Forgery, chap.
13. throughout. See Forgery. About Incontinency, chap. 14. throughout. See
Incontinency. About the breach of a penal Law, chap. 15. throughout. About
spiritual, passionate, and vain words, chap. 16. throughout. About other words
of another Import, chap. 17. throughout. As 1. About an Infectious disease,
chap. 17. sect. 1. See Pox, Plague. 2. That hinders a man's preferment, or tends
to a man's disinheritance, chap. 3. chap. 18. sect. 1, 2, 3. See preferment. 3.
About Deceit, and Cozening, chap. 19. throughout. See Couzening and Cheating.
4. About a man's profession, and place of trust, chap. 20. throughout. See
Officer. 5. About a man's Trade, and way of living, chapter 21. throughout.
After a pardon, chapter 25. case 307. Where it may lie for words in themselves,
not actionable, chap. 2. sect. 4. 5. Must be several and not joint, chapter 25.
case 344. Slander by an act done, chapter 2. sect. 5. chapter 5. sect. 2. Sodomy, and
Sodomite, words of Slander about this, chapter 5. sect. 8. chapter 9. throughout. See
Slander. Slanderer, where this word is actionable, or not, chapter 25. Sorcerer,
and Sorcery, words about this, where actionable, or not, chapter 8. See Witchcraft.
Sower of discord, where actionable, chapter 15. sect. 2. Steward of a Court
Slandred, actionable, chapter 20. sect. 5. Strained a Mare, what, where actionable,
or not, chapter 2. sect. 5. chapter 10. sect. 3. chapter 25. cases 50, 84, 189. Swaggerer,
where actionable, or not, chapter 20. sect. 9. Swearer, common-swearer, where
actionable, or not, chapter 15. sect. 1. chapter 20. sect. 5, 6.
T
THeft, and Thief, words about this, actionable, or not, chapter 2. sect. 2. chapter 2.
sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, chapter 5. sect. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. chapter 10.
throughout, chapter 25. cases 16, 17, 21, 23, 26, 32, 33, 34, 44, 51, 53, 61, 66,
67, 72, 73, 82, 91, 92, 104, 106, 107, 117, 120, 121, 124, 137, 149, 152, 153,
154, 157, 160, 168, 171, 173, 180, 182, 204, 207, 209, 231, 232, 236, 241, 247,
250 255, 257, 311, 315, 317, 320, 339 347, 349. About Grass and Hay, chap. 10.
sect. 8. About Corn upon the ground, chapter 10. sect. 7, 8. chap. 25. cases 262,
333, 341, 346. About Fatches, chapter 10. sect. 8. About Apples, chapter 2. sect. 8.
chap. 10, sect. 7, 8. chapter 25. case 180. About Lead of a house or Church, chapter
10. sect. 1, 7, 8. chapter 25. case 333. About Bars of Iron out of the window of
a house, chapter 10. sect. 8. About Wood, Trees and Timber, chap. 10. sect. 7, 8.
chapter 25. cases 114, 265, 304, 305, 333, 346. About the Title of a house, chapter 10.
sect. 8. About Furzes, chap. 10. sect. 8. chap. 25. case 305. About Hops and
Hop-poles, chap. 10. sect. 8. chap. 25. case 268. About Turnips, chap. 10.
sect. 8. See Words. Title of Land, Slander of this. See Slander. Buyer of
Titles, actionable, or not. See Maintenance. Town-clarke slandered, Action for
this, chap. 20. sect. 5. Trade, and Tradesman, words about this, where
actionable, or not, chap. 2. sect. 1, 7. chap. 19. sect. 1, 2. chap. 21.
throughout, chap. 25. cases 63, 150, 181, 184, 190, 199, 207, 248, 261, 326.
See Bankerupt, Innkeeper. Treason, and Traitor, words about this, where
actionable, or not, chap. 1. sect. 2. chapter 2. sect. 4, 5, 6, 7, 9. chap. 5.
sect. 5, 6, 7, 8. chap. 6. throughout, chap. 10. sect. 10. chap. 25. cases 22,
45, 52, 70, 75, 101, 112, 119, 161, 165, 183, 188, 197, 199, 218, 269. Coining
of money, chap. 2. sect. 6. chap. 6. sect. 3. chap. 25. cases 129, 350.
Turnips, chap. 10. sect. 8.
V
VAgabond, where actionable, or not, chap. 15. sect. 2. chapter 25. case 295.
Varlet, where actionable, or not, chap. 2. sect. 7. chap. 16. sect. 1. chap.
21. sect. 4, 5. chap. 25. case 4. Verdict in this Action. See pleadding.
Vermin, where actionable, or not, chap. 15. sect. 2. chap. 16. sect. 1.
Victualler, see Innkeeper. Villain, where actionable, or not, chap. 2. sect.
7. chap. 15. sect. 2. chap. 20. sect. 9. chap. 25. case 4. Vintner; see
Innkeeper. Viper, where actionable, or not, chap. 20. sect. 9. Usurer, where
actionable, or not, chapter 20. sect. 2, 9.
W
Welsh whore, Welsh thief, Welsh Queen, Welsh Rogue, actionable, or not, chapter
25. case 328. Whore; where Action will lie for this, or not, chap. 2. sect. 1.
chapter 14. throughout, chapter 18. throughout, chap. 25. cases 13, 20. 96, 185, 211,
328. see Incontinency. VVhore-master, where Action will lie for this, chap. 14.
sect. 2. chapter 17. sect. 1. VVittall, chap. 25. case 310. VVitchcraft, and witch,
words about this; where actionable, or not, chap. 5. sect. 10. chap. 8.
throughout, chap. 25. cases 113, 175, 178, 184, 219, 229, 279, 319, 323, 337,
221 Conjurer, chap. 8. sect. 2. Sorcerer, chap. 8. sect. 2. chap. 25. case 145.
Inchantor, chap. 8. sect. 2. chap. 25. cases 145, 178, 279. VVood, and Trees,
words about the stealing of this, where actionable, or not, chap. 10. sect. 8.
chap. 25. cases 114. 180. Words slanderous, where actionable, or not. Strange
words, as Out-putter, and the like, chap. 2. sect. 4, 5, 8. chap. 5. sect. 10.
chap. 10. sect. 3. Spoken by one drunken, or sober, chap. 2. sect. 3. In
another Tongue, or Language, chap. 2. sect. 2. 8. chap. 5. sect. 10. chap. 25.
cases 68, 177, 189, 196, 215. For the manner of publication of them, chap. 2.
sect. 2. chap. 5. 1, 2, 3. chap. 25. cases 16, 22, 137. 275, 284. By a Libel,
by a Letter, etc. For the manner of the words, directly, or indirectly uttered,
chapter 2. sect. 1. 3. chap. 5. throughout. chap. 10. sect. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
chap. 25. cases 16. 21, 22, 26, 34, 72, 73, 93, 98, 109, 115, 117, 120, 121,
123, 137, 149, 153, 256, 283, 299, 302. In a course of Law, or Justice, chap.
1. sect. 1. 2. chap. 2. sect. 8. chap. 5. sect. 1. chap. 25. cases 2, 3, 83,
138, 163, 192, 303, 350. By way of Interrogation, or Irony, chap. 5. sect. 5.
chap. 10. sect. 12. chap. 25. cases 270, 301. By way of indirect, or implicit
charge, chap. 2. sect. 6, 7. chap. 25. cases 161, 168, 174, 180, 182, 183. 217,
236, 243, 245, 255, 312, 317, 339. By the report of another, chap. 2. sect. 3.
chap. 6. sect. 1. chap. 7. sect. 2. chap. 10. sect. 12, 13. chapter 14. sect. 2.
chap. 25. sect. 238. Taken at one, or more times, chap. 2, sect. 4, 5. Spoken
in jest, or earnest, chap. 2. sect. 4. Taken improperly, chap. 2. sect. 4.
Spoken to, or of a man, chap. 2. sect. 1. chap. 5. sect. 3. Spoken in the
second or third person, chap. 2. sect. 1. For part of the words only, chap. 2.
sect. 4, 5. Words general, ambiguous, repugnant, insensible, and uncertain,
chap. 2. sect. 6, 7, 8. chap. 7. sect. 3. chap. 25. cases 4. 14, 43, 64, 92,
109, 146, 256, 258, 259, 295. Words spiritual, chap. 1. sect. 2. chapter 16. sect.
1. and throughout. chap. 25. cases 14, 20, 42, 76, 277, 288, 293. Words vain,
chap. 16. sect. 1. chapter 25. case 260. Words passionate, chap. 15. sect. 2. chap.
16. sect. 1. and throughout. chap. 25. case 4. What things are requisite to be
in all actionable words, chap. 2. sect. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. How such words shall be
expounded and taken, chap. 2. sect. 9. chapter 25. cases 1, 6.
A CATALOGUE OF LAW BOOKS, And such as appertain to the LAW.
ARguments at Law, at the Trial of Col. Eusebius Andrews Ashes Tables, two
Volumes, Folio Ashes Tables to Cooks Reports -- Epcicea, or Table of Equity --
Fasciculus Florum Arguments on the Writ of Habeas Corpus Assize of Bread
Attorneys Guide Attorney of the Common Pleas Acts of Parliaments, 12 and 13
Caroli secundi Abridgement of Acts
BRooks Abridgement -- Readings on Magna Charta -- Cases -- Reading on the
Statute of Limitations Boultons Justice Bulstrodes Reports, first, second, and
third Volumes Bracton Brownlows Reports, two Parts -- Pleadings, in two Parts
-- Judicial Writs Lord Bacons Elements of the Law -- Cases of Treason --
Ordinances -- Reading of the Statute of Uses Britton Book of Oaths Bellewes
Reports of Rich. the second Bridgemans Reports Bendloes Reports Bagshaws
Reading -- Rights of the Crown Blunts Glossographia, expounding Terms of the
Law Boones Examen Legum Angliae
COoks Reports, eleven Parts, French. -- Idem in English -- Twelfth Report
English -- Select Cases -- Entries -- On Littleton, the first part of his
Institutes, I -- On Magna Charta, 2. -- Pleas of the Crown, 3d. -- Jurisdiction
of Courts, 4th. -- Complete Copyholder -- Of Bail and Mainprise --
Declarations and Pleadings, Folio -- Reading on Statute De finibus lenatis
Cragge de Feudis Customs of No mandy Mr. Cooks Vindication of the Law* --
Poor-mans Case City Law Cromptons Justice. -- Jurisdiction of Courts Cowells
Interpreter -- Institutes Callis Readings on Sewers. -- Ignoramus Crook and
Huttons Arguments on Ship-Mony Complete Clark, and Scriveners Guide Calthrops
Relation of Manors and Copyhold -- Cases about the Customs of London Critica
Juris ingeniosa Chancellors Office Conference about the Liberty of the Subject
Clerks Vade Mecum Presidents Clerks Guide, in three Parts Collins Summary of
the Statutes Complete Justice Caries Reports in Chancery Claytons Reports --
Topics of the Law Complete Attorney, two parts Charter of Rumney-Marsh
Chancery Orders by the Earl of Clarendon Coutt-Leet Crooks Reports, first,
second, and third Volumes Common Law Epitomized Clerk of Assise Collection of
Writs used in Common Pleas
DAvis Reports -- Of Impositions -- Abridgements of Lord Cooks Reports Daltons
Justice -- Office of a Sheriff -- Abridged Dyers Reports -- Abridgement in
French -- Abridgement in English Doderidges English Lawyer -- Principality of
Wales -- Complete Parson Deggs Proposals Declarations and Orders, Quarto Doctor
and Student, in Latin -- Idem in English -- Abridged Davenports Abridgement of
Cook on Littleton Deerhams Manuel Dallison and Benlows Reports, with Ash
EDward the third in two Parts -- Quadragesimus -- Assiises of Edward the third
-- Abridged Edward the fourth Elmesmores Post-Nati. -- of the Chancery Exact
Lawgiver Edgars Charges Executors Office Exchequer-Practice Elsings Modus
tenendi P.
FItz-herberts, Abridgement -- Table to the same -- Natura Brevium in French --
Idem in English -- Justice -- English Finches Law, French -- English -- Table
to Hobart Fidels Presidents Fleta cum Seldeni notis Fulbecks Parallels --
Preparative to the Study of the Law Fruits of Pleadings Fortescue de Laudibus
Legum Angliae Fillacers Office Fees of Courts Fleetwoods Justice Freeholders
Grand-Inquest, Quarto
GOdbolts Reports Gouldsboroughs Reports Gregory's Moot-Book Grounds of the Law
Greenwoods Curia Comitatum Rediviva -- County Courts Glanvil of the Law Grotius
of the Law of War and Peace Godolphin of the Court of Admiralty in Octa.
HEnry the fourth and fifth Henry the sixth, two Parts -- the seventh --
Abridged Hobarts Reports. Huttons Reports Hackwells Liberty of the Subject --
Passing of Bills Hughs Commentaries on Original Writs -- Parsons Law -- Reports
-- Abridgement, Quarto. two Volumes -- Grand Abridgement two Volumes Hearns Law
of Conveyances -- Modern Assurances -- Lent Reading -- Of Charitable Uses --
Pleader, in Folio Hetlies Reports Horns Mirror of Justices in French -- Idem in
English
IVs fratrum per Page Judge Jenkins Tracts of the Law Jenkins Rerum Judicatarum
-- Pacis Consultum Idea of the Law Justice Restored Justice Revived Irelands
abridgement of Cooks Reports Judgments of the Upper Bench Instructions for the
Court of Wards
KElyweyes Reports, with Dallison and Benlows Kitchen Court Leet in French --
Idem in English
LOrd Leighs Reports, fol. Lamberts Saxons Laws. -- Justice -- Perambulation of
Kent with Cinqueports -- Archeion -- Duties of Constables Long Quinto Liber
Intrationum Linwoods Constitutions Lanes Reports in the Court of Exchequer
Lawyers Logic Littletons Tenures French -- in English Laymans Lawyer Leighs
Law Terms Lees Wards and Liveries Layers duty of Constables Leonards Reports,
first, and second -- Legis Fluvium Latches Reports, fol.
MAnwoods Forest Laws Marches Reports -- Actions of slanders, two parts --
Amicus Republicae -- Marches Cases Magna Charta Moyles Entries Moors Reports,
French Modus Tenendi Parliamenti, with Hackwel, in 12
NOys Reports -- Maxims of the Law -- Complete Lawyer Nusances Novae
Narrationes
ORdinances of the Lord Protector Ordinances in Parliament Owens Reports Orders
for the Poor Orders in Chancery Order and Method of passing Bills in
Parliament, in quarto
PHillips Principles of Law Placita Rediviva Pryns Parliamentary Writs -- Plea
for the Lords -- Records of the Tower Poultens Statutes -- Abridgement -- De
pace Regis Plowdens Reports -- Abridgement -- Quaeres French -- English Pophams
Reports Powels Attorneys Accademy -- Court Leet -- Repertory of Records --
Attorneys Almanac -- Search of Records Penal Statutes Perfect Conveyancer
Perkins Law in French Idem English Practice of the Chancery Presidents of
Instruments Placita Parliamentaria Parsons Answer to the fifth part of the Lord
Cooks Reports
RAstals Statutes large, two vol. -- Abridgement -- Entries Register of Writs
Rules of the Upper Bench -- Common Pleas -- Chancery Ridleys view of the Civil
Law Reformatio Legum Ecclesiast. Rights of the People Rights of the Kingdom
Scobels Collection of Acts and Ordinances Statutes of sixteen and seventeen
Caroli Styles Reports, fol. -- Practical Register Statutes of Ireland, two
Volumes Stathams Abridgement Scotch Laws, two Volums Sheppards Epitome of the
Common and Statute Law -- Touchstone of Common assurances -- Marrow of the Law,
or the Faithful Counselor, two parts -- Parsons Guide, or the Law Tithes --
Presidents of Presidents -- Justice of Peace -- Justices Clerks Cabinet
Presidents -- Office of Constables -- Court Keepers Guide -- Action on the Case
for Slander -- County Courts -- Proposals for regulating the Law -- Survay of
Justice -- Of Corporations -- Sovereigns Prerogative Spelmans Glossary --
Constitutions Smalls Declarations Swinburn of Wills Special Law Cases. Seldom
of Tithes -- Arguments about Liberty of the Subject -- Privileges of the
Barons in Parliament Sea-Laws, in Octavo Shearmans Estates Tail Ship-mony
Star Chamber Case Stamfords Pleas of the Crown Skein verborum significat Stones
Readings on the Statute of Bankrupts Smiths Commonwealth of England, in
twelves
TEnures of Ireland Table to Edward the 3d. second part -- Quadragesimus To
Henry the 6th. -- To Henry the 7th. -- To Dyer Three Readings, viz. of Sir
James Dyer, Sergeant Brograve, and Sir Tho. Risden. Judge Thorps Charge Tothils
Transactions in Chancery Treatise of Barons Trotmans Abridgement of Cooks
Report Theloalls Digest of Writs Terms of the Law Thesaurus Brevium, or a
collection of Writts used in the King's Bench Tything Table, in quarto
VErnons Regulation of the Exchequer
VVInches Reports Wests Presidents, 2 parts. Woman's Lawyer Wisemans Law of Laws
Wingates abridgement of the Statutes. -- Body of the Law -- Summary of the
Common Law -- Statuta pacis -- Maxims, or Reason of the Law Wilkinsons Office
of Sheriffs White of the praise of the Law -- Majestas Intemerata, in twelves
YOungs Vade Mecum Yelvertons Reports
ZOuch Elementa juris prudentiae -- Juris Fecialis -- Specimen Questionum --
Questions and Cases Resolved.
FINIS.

