S. PAUL'S CONFESSION OF FAITH, OR A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF HIS RELIGION. IN A SERMON
Preached at St. Warbroughs Church in Dublin, March 22. 1684/5.

By William Lord Bishop of Kilmore and Ardagh.

The Second Impression.

Dublin, Printed by Joseph Ray, at College Green, for William Norman,
Bookseller in Dames street. 1685.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
SInce the Preaching of the ensuing Sermon, I find that both it, and the Author
have undergone various Censures; some object Vnseasonableness against it, and
others Disloyalty; and for this reason, being not willing to lie under that
Imputation; and being conscious to my self, that I never entertained so much as
a disloyal thought, I am resolved the Sermon shall shift for it self: But I am
a little more concerned to satisfy the World, as to its seasonableness; because
even some of my Friends seem unsatisfied. What needed you, say they, meddle
with such a Subject? why at this time? Could you not let things run quietly?
and be content to preach (if you must be preaching) the Principles and Motives
of and to a good Life, without meddling with Controversies and Disputes?

I must confess, if those Principles, against which I preached, had no
influence on men's Lives, or were not pernicious to their Souls, I should be of
their Opinion; but being convinced of both, this alone is sufficient for
justifying what I have done. But I am resolved to be ingenious with the World,
and discover the true Motives that put me on this Subject. I found that one of
the Clergy of Dublin, though a very loyal person, for his imprudent meddling
with the State, had been justly suspended by his Diocesan; and that the People
(who seldom know or consider the true causes of things) thought this Punishment
was imposed on him, for arguing for our Religion; the tender sense they have
for that, put them into mighty Fears and Despondencies, and made them reflect
upon the Clergy; as if they must either decline the Defense of the Truth, which
they value above their Lives, or be silenced: I easily saw what ill effects
such Surmises might produce: and although several private Clergymen said enough
to satisfy the people of the falseness of the Conclusion they drew from that
accident; yet seeing them still dissatisfied, I considered, to remove their
Jealousies, was a work proper for one of an higher Degree in the Church; and
being invited to preach at St. Warbroughs, where there is generally a very full
Auditory; I was glad of the opportunity of discharging my Duty, and satisfying
the People, and convincing many Roman Catholics, who were then present to spy
out our Liberty, that we had, and would take the same liberty as ever to defend
our own Religion, and to show the Falsehood of theirs; and I have some reason to
believe, that what I then delivered had a good effect on their minds, both as
to the Government, and the Clergy.

But I must further tell these Gentlemen, That whatever policy may seem to be
in being silent at this time; it is too mean, and has too much of the World in
it ever to be expected from a Clergyman, especially it cannot from a Bishop,
whose very Consecration obliges him to preach and drive away all Erroneous and
False Doctrine contrary to Gods Word, and both privately and openly to call
upon, and encourage others to the same: such we believe the Doctrines of the
present Church of Rome to be: and while we do so, it is not to be expected that
any worldly consideration should prevail with us to be silent; our Vows oblige
us to the contrary; and the Charity which we owe to the Souls of Men is a
farther tie upon us to warn them of the danger they bring on themselves by
listening to such Doctrines, or persevering in them, though they have embraced
them.

We are persuaded our silence in this case would prejudice our own People
against Us, and the Truth, and flatter our Adversaries with hopes of our going
over to them, and so confirm them in their pernicious Errors; Let who so will
hold such Errors, Truth is Truth, and must be defended: And if the Romanists
will but do as they would be done by, they cannot take this ill at our hands;
especially, while we have not only the Law on our sides, but also the Word of
that King (who is famous for having never broken it) to defend our Religion:
and if they be angry for this, we cannot help it. Truth is dearer to us, then
their favor.

We look on the Supremacy of the Pope, and his unjust Usurpation over Kings,
and his fellow Bishops, as the fundamental Article of Popery: and it is
required by the second Canon of the Curch of Ireland of every Preacher to the
utmost of his Wit, Knowledge, and Learning, to preach against it four times a
year: And the twelfth Canon further requires, That the Ministers in all their
Preachings, etc. shall teach the People to place their whole trust and
considence in God, and not in Creatures, neither in the Habit or Scapular of
any Friar, or in Hallowed Beads, Medals, Relics, or such like Trumperies. And
while these Canons stand in force, we will, we must do our duty according to
them; and the Government would have just reason to take notice of us if we
should omit it: And till I seer better reasons then I have yet heard, I must
think my Sermon a very seasonable intimation of our resolution of being true
and steady to our Laws, Oaths and Duties, and that it will be impossible to
withdraw us from those Principles of Religion which we profess, and upon strict
and diligent examination know, not only to be true, but necessary also, even in
such a degree as to concern the Salvation of Mankind.

And let the Romanists take it as they please, they must expect a great many
such, and blame themselves that this does now appear in print: Because the
false representation they made of what was then said has made this publication
of it necessary; and these two following Letters written to me on that occasion
has convinced me of that necessity.

My very good Lord,
YOur Lordships late Sermon, preached at St. Warbroughs Church in Dublin, has
given me an occasion of representing the several Censures upon it to your
Lordship, and withal of freely communicating my thoughts to you concerning it.
The Gentlemen, who would pass for the only Catholics in the world, censure it
as disloyal, and tending to Sedition; the Phanaticks are offended because you
boldly tell them the truth, and lay the blame of our present misfortunes (where
it is justly chargeable) at their doors: and there is a third sort of men, whom
I may call the Politicians of the age, that do not condemn, but only censure
some things in it as unseasonable, and not fit to be spoken in these times.

It was my misfortune not to be present at the Delivery of it; but however,
upon the experience of above thirty years acquaintance with your Lordship, I
can vouch as much for your Loyalty as my own, and do really in my Conscience
acquit you from any design of insluencing the People; and when I reflect upon
the saying of St. Paul, Gal. 1.10. If I please men, I should not be the Servant
of Christ. I am well assured, you discharged a good Conscience toward God;
because you have been so little follicitous to study the Satisfaction of the
World.

However, because so many various Censures are past upon it already, and
neither you nor I can foresee what misconstructions may be made of it for the
future; and because some things are reported of it, which I hear, were not
delivered, to your prejudice; I think you cannot do your self, nor your Sermon
greater justice, than to expose it to the public view of the world, and let it
plead its cause against all Gainsayers: By this you will have an opportunity of
vindicating your Loyalty against the Exceptions of the pretended Catholics;
your Prudence against the temporizing Politicians; and your Doctrine against
all that are resolved to write against it: And I am confident, let them begin
when they will, if you need Succors, the Cause will not want those that shall
assist. I am

Your Lordships most affectionate humble Servant A. Midensis.


This was followed by this second Letter.

My Lord,
I Had the Happiness to hear your last Sermon at St. Warbroughs, and find by my
conversing amongst the people, that it gave general satisfaction, and has done
really a great deal of good. They imagine that your Lordship by your Station
and Correspondence understands much of Affairs; and they generally conclude by
your behavior in that Sermon, That we are very secure in the King's Royal
Word. You would hardly imagine how far this has quieted some suspicious minds;
and if your Lordship would let your self be prevailed with to make it public,
I am confident it would contribute yet more to secure the loyalty, and quiet
the fears of the People: and though this may seem unnecessary to your Lordship,
it being impossible any one of our Communion should be disloyal without
renouncing his Religion; yet give me leave to inform your Lordship, that there
neither does, nor will want those, that having nothing to say to it, as it is,
will not fail to misrepresent it: to prevent therefore them, if not to satisfy
your Friends, I hope you will be persuaded to comply with the request of

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and dutiful Servant W. King.


From these two Letters the Readers may see the sense of both Adversaries and
Friends, and what effect it had on them, and especially the People; and by
publishing of it, I hope at least, to get this advantage, that our Adversaries
will be afraid to misrepresent future Discourses of this kind, when they see we
have so ready and short a way to expose their Lies: And let them rest
satisfied, that notwithstanding their causless heights, and the confident brags
of some of them, That our Religion shall soon be suppressed; and the wheadles
of others of them, by which they think to prevail with us, if not to come over
to theirs, yet to speak nothing in confutation of it; we both dare and will
justify our Selves and our Religion against all the little petty arts of
Defamation or Calumny they can use against us; and that we believe the chiefest
of their strength consists in these.

I have only this one thing more to add, That this Sermon is printed as it was
preached, without any alteration; and that it is owned as the true sense and
real expression of the thoughts and heart of the Preacher.

St. PAUL'S CONFESSION of FAITH.
Acts 24.14, 15, 16. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which
they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things
which are written in the Law and the Prophets; and have hope toward God, which
they themselves also allow, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead,
both of the just and unjust. And herein do I exercise my self, to have a
Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward man.


TWo things are required in a Preacher, to be able to exhort with wholesome
Doctrine, and to confute Gainsayers; the one requires Rhetoric, the other
Logic. We cannot have a better president for this than St. Paul; Acts 14.
whom for his admirable Elocution the Infidels took for Mercury, their God of
Eloquence come down from Heaven; and for the profoundness of his matter he is
styled a chosen Vessel, Acts ^0.
to contain the Mysteries of Gods Kingdom: for proof of this I will only
instance to you from the 33d of the 8th to the Romans, to the end of that
chapter, whereof Doctr. Christian.
St. Austin and Annot. in N. Tossed.
Eras mus say, that never Tully nor Demosthenes could speak any thing like him;
there being nothing mean or low in the whole; for if we respect the persons,
here we have God, Christ at the right hand of the Father, Principalities and
Powers; if we respect the things; here we have life, height, depth, things
present, and things to come: and if we respect the Rhetorical Ornaments, what
Interrogations, what Gradations, what Antitheses, what contraries, and what
repetitions? So that this might justly make up the 3d part of St. Austin's
wish, that he had seen Christ in the flesh, Rome flourishing, and St. Paul
preaching. But I need no further Arguments, this very conflict with Tertullus
is a sufficient demonstration; whereof my Text is a part: for having cleared
himself from that most odious crime of Sedition, and evidently proved that the
Orators Accusation was not only improbable, but impossible: he now descends to
the other branch of his Calumny concerning his Religion; that as he was no
turbulent Fellow, nor raiser of Sedition in the Commonwealth; so he was no
setter forth, nor maintainer of heretical Doctrines, or Novelties in the Church.

In the words we have these two parts.

1. His Concession, in these words, [but this I confess] 2. His Confession, in
these words, [ after the way which they call Heresy, etc.]
And in his Confession we have these particulars; 1. The Act, I worship. 2. The
Object, The God of my Fathers. 3. The Manner, after that way which they call
Heresy. 4. The Rule of it, believing all things that are written in the Law and
the Prophets. 5. The principal ground of it, and have hope toward God, that
there shall be a Resurrection of the dead. 6. And lastly, the Effect of it, and
herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward Man.


So that if you would have a clear and perfect definition of St. Paul's
Religion, it is briefly this; A worshipping of one true God by Jesus Christ
according to the Scriptures, with a steadfast endeavor to keep the purity of
the Conscience unspotted, in hopes of the future Resurrection of the dead. But
to proceed.

1. Of his Concession, but I confess.

From which ingenuous Confession of his Faith before an Heathen, we may learn
our own Duty; Matt. 10.32.
whosoever will confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father
which is in Heaven: Romans 10.10.
and with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto Salvation. Isaiah prophesied of the times of the
Gospel, Chapter 44.5.
that one should say, I am the Lords, and another should be called by the name
of Jacob; and another should subscribe with his hand, and name himself by the
name of Israel: and it is required, Phil. 2.10.
that not only every knee should bow; but also that every tongue should confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of the Father. Psalm. 137.
The want of the means of this public confession made the Jews lament when they
sat by the Rivers of Babylon; and made Jeremy cry out, Lament. 1.4.
that the ways of Zion did lament, because no man comes to the public
Assemblies. And the Thief on the Cross, for confessing Christ, was that day
with him in Paradise; for the inward frame of the heart is discovered by
outward devotion; and he that does not confess his Religion when he is put to
it, either has none at all, or does not much care for it. God says not, I have
reserved 7000 that have not believed in Baal, but whose knees have not bowed to
Baal; which shows, that he expects a public owning of him, as well as a secret
believing in him; and the Devil himself did not tempt Christ to believe in him,
but to fall down and worship him; and the three Children chose to be burned,
rather than give adoration to Nebuchadnezzar's golden Image.

I know Naamans example [ when I bow my self before the Idol Rimmon] is much
objected against what I have said; 2 King. 5.
but for answer to this, consider first, that Naaman was then but a Novice in
Religion, and had not yet learned to deny himself for God. 2. Naaman speaks not
of any religious Worship to be performed to Rimmon: but of a civil Office to be
done to his Prince. 3. Because Naaman knew that this action could not but be
scandalous to others, and polluted with the circumstance of time and place, he
confessed it was a sin, and desires Gods mercy. Lastly, We do not find that
Naaman ever did it; but only feeling or fearing his own infirmity, he desires
the Prophets Prayers, either that he might not fall, or if he did, that God
would forgive him; to which the Prophet assents, and that only in such a form
of speech, as is an usual valediction, as Go in peace, or Gods peace be with
you.

There are two main impediments of this public Consession of Christ, Shame and
Fear. They that are ashamed, are such as love the Praise of Men more then the
Praise of God. When Ulysses taught young Neoptolomy the Art of Lying; the Youth
being of an ingenuous nature, asked him, how it was possible to tell a Lie
without blushing; he answered, him, that a man ought never to be ashamed of any
thing, whereby Profit may be had. And if we seriously consider it, it is
strange, that any Christian should be ashamed of his Profession, which brings
him so great Gain as an eternal weight of Glory. We have a common proverb; that
he that is ashamed of his Trade shall never thrive by it; and it is altogether
as true, that he shall never save his Soul by Religion, who is ashamed to
profess it. It Is confessed, the time was, when Nicodemus came by night to
Jesus; and when Joseph of Arimathea was a secret Disciple; but it was when they
were punies in Christianity; but when Religion was firmly rooted in them, they
joined openly in the honorable Interment of our Savior; Romans 1.16.
and thus St. Paul confessed he was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.

The second impediment is Fear. This caused Moses to stagger at the Commands of
God; this made Elisha fly from the womanish threats of Jezabel, and St. Peter
deny his Master. Fear is so bad a Counselor in the Service of God, Judge. 7.3.
that Gideon, when he was ready to join battle with the Enemy, proclaimed, that
whosoever was fearful should depart: and so timorous Christians are not fit to
fight the Lord's Battles: therefore it is said, the fearful, Rev. 21.8.
and the unbelievers, and the abominable, shall have their portion in the Lake
that burns with Fire and Brimstone.

I never heard nor read of a more resolute Band of Soldiers then those
seditious Followers of Cataline, Salust. Bello Catalini.
their Souls flitted from their Bodies before they moved from their stations;
and the place they fought on when alive, they covered with their Bodies when
dead: and the Historian tells you, the reason was, because they carried their
Diviti^^ Decus, Gloriam preterea libertatem, atque Patrium, in dextris vestris
port^re.
Riches, their Glory, their Life, their Liberty, their Country, and all their
hopes in their right hand. Change but the Persons and the Story is ours: for in
our Christian Warfare we bear a Crown of Glory, Eternal Life, Spiritual
Liberty, and our Heavenly Country in our right hand, and to him only that
overcomes, shall all this be given: for be thou faithful to the end, and I will
give thee the Crown of Life. Rev. 2.10.


Yet neither St. Paul's practice, nor my Discourse does encourage any to run
into unnecessary dangers: for he that loves danger shall perish in it. To
precipitate a man's self into needless peril is senseless folly; and to do it
out of ostentation, is mere vanity: But when a Man's Profession obliges him to
give Evidence for the Truth, to be then neither ashamed of Christ, nor of his
Gospel, nor fearful to suffer for it, is necessary true Christian Courage.

The ancient Law of governing the Roman Army was reduced to two heads: nec
sequi, nec fugere; not too ventersomly to make a rash pursuit without need; and
when there was occasion, nor by too timorously running away to betray the Cause
to the common Enemy and thus a Christian ought not to seek danger when he is
free, nor to shun it when it is offered. Behold, says Christ, I send you forth
as Lambs in the midst of Wolves, be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and innocent
as Doves.

There is a time when the Advice of Gellius takes place even in Religion; that
when the City labors with Sedition, it is not the part of a good Citizen to
profess himself a Newter, but to join with the party that has right on its
side, and so help to suppress the other; and again there is a time, when the
Example of Leontius Bishop of Antioch is more imitable: that is, to give
offense to neither party; for Wisdom is justified of her Children. And thus
much of the first thing, viz. the Concession, in these words, [but this I
confess]

Before I speak of the Confession, which is the next thing, I will only remark
this to you; that St. Paul first clears himself from being a Rebel against the
State, before he attempts to prove the Orthodoxy of his Faith, or the Purity of
his Religion: From whence I desire you to observe, that those men that profess
never so much of Religion with never so much of Zeal, are to be looked upon as
false Teachers, so long as they continue their rebellious and seditious
practices against the State: and therefore let our dissenting Brethren take
notice, that while they in contempt of Authority oppose the established and
known Laws, by their riotous, unlawful Assemblies, that their Religion and
Profession of Faith is false and erroneous, and quite contrary to St. Paul's
here in my Text: which is the next thing I am to handle, in these words, [ I
worship the God of my Fathers, etc.]

And in this I shall first speak of the Act Worship, and in doing thereof, I
will not spend time in consulting that frivolous distinction of the Papists, of
Latria, Dulia, and Hyperdulia; the first they say, is that Worship which is
proper to God; the second, which is due to the Creature; and the third of a
middle nature, less than what is due to God, and more than is due to the
Creature, and this (they say) is only due to the Virgin Mary. I know they have
borrowed this distinction from St. Austin; but have much wrested it from his
sense: For as they have added a third member to the distinction, (to wit)
Hyperdulia: so it is certain, that St. Austin by Dulia did not understand any
religious or spiritual Worship, which is only due to God; but an external civil
Worship, such as men give to Princes, Masters, and Pastors: Servitus corporis
non anim^ de vera Relig. c. 55. ibidem.
a service of the Body, but not of the Mind, as he speaks.

The Saints indeed are to be honored for Imitation: but not to be adored for
Religion. Neither does that Father say, that Saints are to be worshipped with an
inferior kind of religious Worship, called Dulia; but they express contrary;
for we honor them, Honoramus eos Charitate, non Servitute. ibid.
(says he) with the honor of Love and Fellowship, as our Brethren and Friends:
but not with Service, as our Masters and Commanders.

We do not deny that there are degrees of Honor: but to attribute the least
degree of the Service of the Spirit to any Creature, we abhor; because that is
solely due, and proper to God, who only, in all times, places, and things sees,
guides and disposes of all, us, and ours. God is not mocked; and therefore will
not suffer his own express Word to be eluded with such frivolous distinctions.

But as one complained, that the Law were like Spiders Webbs, wherein the
little Flies are taken; but the great ones break through; so we may say of
these Popish Subtilties, because, that though they cannot cast a mist before
the eyes of God, and rational considering men: yet they may deceive the poor
simple Lay Papist; who goes on roundly to work in his blind Devotion, he, poor
man, must needs remain entangled in gross Idolatry. And therefore these Popish
Ringleaders are not unfitly compared to Bawds, (it is King James his expression
in the like case) who though they do not actually pollute their own Bodies; yet
are a means of prostituting others to all filthiness. But I leave them and
return to our Apostles [I worship the God of my Fathers.] This Worship is
twofold. 1. External. 2. Internal. The external Worship is principally
threefold.

1. The preaching and hearing of Gods Word. 2. The invocating of his Name. 3.
The reverend use of the holy Sacraments.
1. As to the preaching and hearing of Gods Word, he requires nothing more
earnestly; than that the People be taught the knowledge of themselves, of God,
and of Religion, Isa. 58.1.
Son of man, says God, cry aloud and spare not, lift up thy voice like a
Trumpet; and Go and teach all Nations, says Christ; Matt. 28. 1 Cor. 1.16. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
and Woe is me, says the Apostle, if I preach not the Gospel, and he charges
Timothy before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge both the
quick and the dead, that he preach the Word, and be instant in season, and out
of season.

And as preaching is the Ministers Duty, so it is the Peoples to hear: Romans
10.14. Prove. 29.18.
for how can they believe in him, of whom they have not heard: and where there
is no Vision the people perish. Faith is like the Lamp, and the preaching of
the Word like Oil; and as the Lamp without a fresh supply of Oil does go out;
so Faith does decay without preaching: wherefore it is written of our Savior,
that when he found a multitude without a Pastor, he was moved with compassion
toward them. Mark 6.34.


The second part of this external Worship is Invocation of his Name, and this
is so natural to us, that we usually lift up our eyes to Heaven in any sudden
exigence, even before we consider the danger, or consult our reason; and God
commands us to call upon him in the day of trouble, and he will hear us. P^.
50.15.
This is so prevalent that it binds up the hands of the Almighty; ^^od. 32.10.
Let me alone, says God to Moses, that my wrath may wax hot against them. No
marvel then that St. James 5.16.
James says the Prayer of the Faithful avails much, if it be fervent. In a
word, he that does not pray, Ps. 53.2.
is an Atheist; for David says, that only the Fool, who says in his heart,
there is no God, does not call upon the name of the Lord.

I sear, if measures were taken of our being or not being Atheists, by the
frequency of our Prayers, there are too many amongst us, that could scarcely
free themselves from that imputation; unless to come to this place once or
twice upon a Sunday, and that too, more out of custom, than Devotion, and never
to think more of their Duty till Sunday come again, does acquit them from that
charge. But remember, God will be called upon; or he will not deliver.

The third part of this external Worship is the reverend use of the Sacraments;
and let me tell you, they are not indifferent things, which we may use, or not
use, at our pleasure; as Esther said, If I perish, I perish. There is a more
Christian [If] in the case, that is, Matt. 28.
If we obey the Commands of Christ, we must use them; for he says, Go teach all
Nations, baptising them, and take ye, eat ye, Matt. 26.2.27.
drink ye.

Licurgus the Lacedomonian Lawgiver (to oblige them to a more strict observance
of his Laws) made the Lacedaemonians take an Oath to observe them till his
return, and then took a journey, with a resolution never to go back again: and
caused his Ashes to be thrown into the Sea, least his People, finding them,
should think themselves absolved from their Oath.

And thus, our Savior Jesus Christ being to leave his Disciples, obliges them
to the use of his Sacraments, till his return, never intending to return again
in humility, but in glory: If a dying Friend should give you a Ring as a token
of his Love, and charge you to keep it for his sake, would you despise an
instance of so great Kindness? How comes it then to pass, that we so little
value so inestimable a Jewel, as the blessed Sacraments, which are the Badges
of our Christianity, whose Value and Dignity does not flow from the outward
Elements? For what is the sprinkling of a little Water, the eating of a bit of
Bread, or the drinking of a sup of Wine? But from the Ordinance and Institution
of Christ, just as a piece of Wax with the Kings Broad Seal stamped upon it, is
of more value, than a thousand times so much in the Merchants Shop.

And truly if we would be taken for Christ's Soldiers we ought not to be
ashamed of his mark, the Holy Sacrament of his Body and Blood.

There are two things generally objected by many that are called Christians,
against receiving of it; the one is, that if they partake of it unworthily, it
will prejudice them: Such would do well to consider; that until they put
themselves into a condition of Receiving it Worthily, they cannot be in a
condition of dying; and how dangerous it is not to be always so, the
uncertainty of this life does show.

The other Objection is, That they are not yet willing to part with their Sins,
to which the Receiving of the Sacrament obliges them, and therefore they will
defer Communicating until they are Old, and have a mind to repent and part with
their Sins. Such would do well to consider that they may fall short of the
time, they design for that work; or if they should not, that God may not give
them then Grace to Repent. And thus much of External Worship, which I told you
consists in Preaching, and Hearing, in Invocation, and the reverent use of the
Sacraments.

The other part of his Service, is, Internal; that is, the worship of the
Spirit, without which all our Preaching, Hearing, Praying, Christning, and
Communicating, are but like a Sepulcher outwardly, beautiful; but inwardly,
full of corruption: for though the outward Form is that which approves us to
Man; yet it is the inward frame that justifies us to God. Who does not like
such Professors as Cap. 7.8. Cap. 24.6. Joh. 4.24.
Hosea compares to a half baked Cake; and Ezekiel to a Pot, whose scum is
therein: For God is a Spirit, and he will, nay, he must be worshipped in Spirit
and Truth.

Some there are, who with Esop's Dog snatch at the shadow and lose the
substance, that is, place the whole worship of God in bodily Exercise, and
external Adoration; as bowing before a Crucifix, in creeping to a Cross, in
running a bare-leg'd Pilgrimage, in visiting the Relics of the Saints, in
hearing of so many Masses, in macerating the Flesh, in hanging down the head
for a day like a Bulrush, in Crosses, and Candles, in Holy Waters, and Holy
Oils, in Pixes, and Paxes, and such like fripperies.

And there are others, who (like Lapwings, make the greatest noise when they
are farthest from their young ones) though they pretend the greatest distance
from the Papists, yet come very near them in many things, and place their whole
Religion in running through thick and thin, three or four Miles on a Sunday to
hear a Man preach, or rather prate nonsense; in carrying a Bible under their
Arms, though they neither understand it, nor draw any Inferences from it, for
the amendment of their lives and practices: in condemning all as Reprobates,
that are not of their own Communion, and in applying the intricate and
misterious places of Scripture, especially such as denounce Gods Judgments, to
those that are not of their own persuasion. And if they can but prate like
Parrots in the Scripture phrase, and sing three or four Psalms upon a Lords
Day, and repeat at night the nonsense they heard the morning; nay if they
commend the Preacher for bawling loud, and making wry faces, and thumping the
Pulpit, and holding forth for two or three hours, and preaching off Book such
stuff as is impossible for a considering person to write; they conclude they
have worshipped God sufficiently, and that no more is required of them. And
truly though this is very far from being acceptable to God, yet I wish we had
not too just cause, on the other hand, to complain, that internal Worship is
too much slighted by us, and Prayers and Sacraments too much neglected; and
that as in times of Popery all Religion and Worship was in a manner reduced to
a Mass, so now amongst us to a Sermon, they seeing without understanding, and
we hearing without practicing.

Thus much for the first particular, to wit, the Act, in which I have spoken of
the external and internal Worship due to God. I now proceed to the second
particular in the Confession; and that is the Object of his Worship, the God of
my Fathers.

Observe no Saint, nor Angel, no Creature, nor Throne, no Dominion, nor Power,
no Heathenish Diety, but the only true God in Jesus Christ. Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, Exodus 20.
and him only shall thou serve. And, See thou do it not, Chap. 22.9.
(says the Angel in the Revelations to St. John;) I am thy fellow creature,
worship God.

The Manichees worshipped two Gods, a God of Good, and a God of Evil, and the
Tritheits three Gods, whence they had their Name; the Valentinians worshipped
thirty couple of Gods, and the Gentiles, as St. Austin observes, thirty
thousand Gods; thence they worshipped their adulterous Jupiter, their beastly
Apollo, their drunken Bacchus, their bastardly Aesculapius, their theevish
Mercury, their bloody Mars, their impudent Venus, and their spiteful Juno; De
Deo uno and vero.
as Zanchy observes. And the Papists have equaled, if not exceeded, the
Heathens in the number of their Gods, and their superstitious Ceremonies; as
may appear by the practice of the common people in these particulars.

1. The Pagans had their several tutelar Gods for several places; for Delphos
worshipped Apollo, Crete Jupiter, Athens Minerva, and Ephesus Diana: And so in
Popery, England worshipped St. George, Scotland St. Andrew, Ireland St. Patrick,
Venice St. Mark, and Millain St. Ambrose. 2. In Paganism they had several Gods
for several Elements; as Jupiter for the Fire, Juno for the Air, and Neptune
for the Sea; And so in Popery, they have Agathus for the Fire, Theadulus for
Tempests, St. Barbara for Thunder, and St. Nicholas for the Sea. 3. In
Paganism, they had several Gods to pray to for their Cattle, and their Fruit;
as Pan for the one, Ceres for the other, and Bacchus for their Wine: and so in
Popery, they have Vrbanas for their Wine, Jodocus for their Fruit, Wandelinus
for their Sheep, Eulogius for their Horses, and St. Anthony for their Pigs. 4.
In Paganism several Prosessions had several Gods to pray to; as Scholars
Apollo, Soldiers Mars, Smiths Vulcan, and Hunters Diana: So in Popery,
Scholars have St. Gregory, Soldiers St. George, Smiths St. Loy, and Shoomakers
St. Crispin. 5. In Paganism they had several Gods to pray to in several
Diseases; as Apollo for the Plague, Hercules for the Falling Sickness, and
Lucina for Women in Childbirth; and so in Popery, St. Roch for the Plague,
Petronella for the Ague, Apollonia for the Toothache, Anastacis for the
Headache. Lastly, To these both Pagans and Papists build Churches, erect
Altars, ordain Priests, appoint Festivals, set up Statutes, and burn Candles,
as Musculus observes; they did not learn this from our Apostle, Comm. in Psalm.
16.
the sole Object of whose religious Worship was the God of his Fathers, that
is, the God whom his Fathers worshipped.
There can be nothing more opprobriously objected in Religion than Novelty;
there are a People who have made Laws of their own, said Haman of the Jews,
Esth. 3.8.
and the Areo pagites of St. Paul, let us hear what new Doctrine this is; Acts
17.19.
for Innovation diminishes the venerable Authority of Religion: and therefore
it is the Politicians Rule, not to remove an ill custom when well settled: the
very Names of our Fathers and Predecessors sway much; for the Woman of Samaria,
you know, alleged the example of her Fathers against Gods Commands; Our
Fathers, says she, Joh. 4.20.
worshipped in this Mountain; but our Savior tells her, Salvation is of the
Jews. And the Gentiles excepted against Christianity, because they would not
condemn the ways of their Fathers; but keep to, and preserve those Rites which
descended to them from age to age; and the Heretics themselves, to gain credit
to their Tenants, were used to say, so I have received, so I have been taught
by the Fathers.

And the Romanists do not object any thing more maliciously, and falsely, to the
ignorant amongst us, then that we had our Religion only from Luther and Calvin,
(which they themselves cannot but know in their Consciences to be otherwise)
and that we swerve from the Judgment of the Primitive Fathers, and exclude our
Predecessors from all hope of Salvation. But notwithstanding that they brag the
Fathers are all theirs, like the Madman that challenged all the Ships that came
into the Harbor for his own; yet it is evident to any one, that is but meanly
conversant in reading their Authors; that they esteem the Fathers but as
Counters, which at play are sometimes placed for Pounds, and sometimes for
Pence; for where they seem to favor them, they commend and admire them; and
where they are clear against them, they decry and despise them. Otherwise if
the Fathers are theirs, and if they would have us believe they are their
principal Witnesses, why do they cut out their Tongues with their false
glosses, and expurgations of what they do not like.

2. The Examples of our Progenitors, or Predecessors, are no infallible rules
for us to follow; for we must not with the Pharisees transgress the Commands of
God by the Tradition of our Fathers. Mat. 15.3.


We must not with the Jews offer Sacrifice to the Queen of Heaven, Jer. 44.17
because our Fathers did so, and it was well with them. Jer. 9.14.
Why did the Land perish, and was burnt up like a Wilderness? But because the
people walked after Baalim, which their Fathers taught them. Therefore the
Prophet says, Ps. 49.19.
walk not in the ways of your Fathers; and they follow the Generation of their
Fathers, which shall not see the light.

3. We do not make the case of our Fore fathers, that lived in Popery, so
desperate as they represent it; for we do not question, but many of them held
firm the Foundation, though much Hay and Stubble was built upon it: for though
they might be forced by terror, or induced by sleight, to partake of the common
errors of the Church of Rome; yet they might be free from its Heresy, and hold
the Faith implicitly in preparatione animi, that is, be ready to embrace it,
when God should reveal it to them.

4. God might illuminate whom he pleased by his Spirit in those times of
darkness, when the means of Knowledge was wanting, (which is not now in this
Sunshine of the Gospel, to be expected) as he enlightened the world by an
expanded Light before he created the Sun, which is since the ordinary way of
giving Light; and as he fed the Israelites with Manna in the Wilderness, which
he withdrew as soon as they came into the Land of Promise. For when ordinary
means are afforded, extraordinary must neither be expected, nor relied upon: So
that you see there is a vast difference between the case of our Forefathers,
and the case of the Papist now, who wilfully shut their eyes against the Light
offered to them. When the ordinary means failed, God was able to save, and did
save in the midst of that Blindness, those that belonged to the Election of his
Grace: But it cannot be therefore safe for us to neglect so great Salvation as
is now offered to us, upon pretense of our Forefathers being otherwise
principled.

If my Predecessors, says St. Cyprian, have not taught, Cypriant Ep. 63. p.
156. Edit. Oxon. Si quis de Antecessoribus nostris, vel ignoranter, vel
simpliciter, hoc non observaverit, etc.
or held, either through simplicity, or ignorance, that which our Lord has
taught them, by his example, or Authority, the Mercy of God might pardon them;
but we cannot rely upon the like Mercy, who have so clear a proposal of those
Truths, which were concealed from them. It is indeed good manners, and charity,
to think, hope, and speak well of our Fathers; but it is both Wisdom and
Divinity to look well to our selves.

I wish the Dissenters from our Church would seriously apply this to
themselves; if they did, they must find their case much worse than their
Predecessors, because they at once tread out of their ways, and walk not in
ours. I am sure this disorderly tumultuous way of serving God, which the
Separatists use, was never practiced by any considerable party in the primitive
times. And tho I will not deny but several National Churches might differ from
one another in their Forms of Worship; yet I never read nor heard of any who
had not a Form by which they did worship, until our modern Presbyterians. This
one instance (I fancy) That they cannot pretend the custom of their Fathers,
for what they do, (unless they will own none for such that lived above sixty
years agon) might be sufficient to make them at the same instant to leave off,
and forsake their folly. And I am persuaded that there are not any considerable
persons amongst them, but if they did seriously reflect, and calmly consider,
how great a sin it is to make a schism in, and separate from that Church, with
which they own they agree in Doctrine, and is established by Law, for they know
not what reason, but because they will. I say, if they did think on this, and
sadly reflect, that whatever the Church of England either has already, or may
hereafter suffer through Popery, is wholly due to themselves, for having
murdered the best of Kings, and forced his Royal Issue to seek for safety under
great necessities in Popish Countries, and thereby exposed them to the dangers
and temptations of the Romish Clergy, who never fail to improve all
opportunities for the advantage of the Church, or rather Court of Rome: I say,
if they did think on this, they would now at least, being so very obnoxious,
for their own preservation, close with us in our Communion, and not separate
from that manner of Worship which we give to the God of our Fathers, with the
Apostle here in the Text, which was the object, and the second thing I was to
speak of, and leads me to the manner of his Worship, which is the third
particular, in these words, after that way which they call Heresy.

Whence we may first observe, that it is no new thing for Religion, and the
Professors thereof, to be traduced: for Christ was scoft at as a Carpenters
Son; and Christianity is called Heresy, and Christians Gallileans; and this
proceeds from the innate Malice and Ignorance that every Man has in him since
the Fall; which, as the Spider extracts Poison out of the sweetest Flowers,
makes the worst interpretations of the best things and actions; 2 Samuel 6.14,
15, 16.
so that if David dance zealously before the Ark; he shall not want a Michol to
laugh at him: and if Ezekiah destroy Idolatry, some Rabshekah will not stick to
say, Is not this the God whose Altars Ezekiah broke down. If Mary Magdalen pour
a little Oil on the Head and Feet of our Savior, some Judas will be ready to
say, what needs this waste? Constantine, Joh. 21.4.
for his bounty to the Church shall be called Pupillus, one that needs a
Guardian; and Theodosius for his Piety Imbellis, a Coward: But as the Moon goes
on silently in her course, tho Dogs do bark at her, so let us go on in our
Religious Worship, without regarding the Calumniations of our Adversaries.

2. Observe, That if we be morally certain, that what we profess is true, and
according to Gods Word, it matters not that the Papists call us Heretics, and
the Separatists call us Papists; Truth will justify it self. St. Paul you see
is not offended that they call his Religion Heresy.

And this brings me to the fourth thing in the Text, namely, the Rule, in these
words, believing all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets. God,
who requires man to worship him, has prescribed a Rule for his Direction: and
least this Rule might be forgotten or corrupted in tract of time by a bare oral
Tradition of it from age to age, he committed it to Writing; for though the
Word spoken be more efficacious, yet the Word written is more durable:
therefore it was that Moses was commanded to write the moral Law in two Tables;
and that the Spirit in the Revelation says write; and here St. Paul makes the
Rule of his Faith, all that is written in the Law and the Prophets.

It would not be proper now to dispute whether it be necessary to Salvation,
for a man to believe all that is written in the Old and New Testaments; and
therefore I shall only (for resolving this Doubt, and many other Objections,
that may follow thereupon) offer these few particulars.

1. That every distinct Sentence of the holy Scriptures does command and
require our Belief as much as the whole, or any part of them. 2. That though a
man may be saved without knowing all that is contained in the Scriptures; yet
if he refuse to give credit to any part of them (when it is revealed to him as
such) he cannot be saved. 3. That every man is not only obliged under pain of
Damnation, to believe all that is Scripture, when revealed to him; but he is
also bound to believe what is not revealed to him in preparation of mind. 4.
That we may and ought to infer from St. Paul's words in the Text, that the
Scriptures are a sufficient Rule of Faith, and that there is enough contained
in them, without any other additions, both for our Direction and Practice.
Yet I deny not, but that an undoubted Tradition, if we were so well assured of
the Truth of it, by a general consent of all Ages, as we are of the Truth of
the Scriptures, has the same Authority with Scripture; for until the means of
Salvation was fully perfected, and the Scriptures committed to Writing,
Tradition was the Rule: For St. Paul bids Timothy to take heed to all that he
had received, either by Word or Writing. And though we do not, with the
Romanists, allow Tradition to supplant the Scriptures, by giving it equal
Authority with them; yet we allow much to an Apostolical Tradition: because it
may be necessary, though not absolutely so, to the clearing and better
understanding of some intricate and mysterious passages in Scripture. And this
leads me to the fifth particular in my Text, to wit, the principal ground of
his Confession, in these words, and have hope toward God, which they
themselves also allow, that there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of
the just and unjust.

From which we may first observe, That Prudence and Wisdom are consistent with
true Religion; for you see St. Paul says, which they themselves also allow;
that is, the Pharisees, who did believe a Resurrection; that by this means he
might gain their favorable Opinion; and so divide them and the Sadduces, who
did deny a Resurrection. For God never gave a man Religion with design to
deprive him of the use of his Reason, and to make him a mere Natural: He that
charges his Disciples to be as innocent as Doves, bids them be as wise as
Serpents, Mat. 16.10.17.
and bids them to beware of men that will bring them into their Councils; which
shows, that we must not, with the Donatists of old, and the Quakers now, court
the Lash and the Prison, and seek for occasions of Trouble: He only is the
resolute Champion for Christ, that will neither for fear of suffering, weakly
betray his Cause, nor out of an ignorant Zeal, run into needless dangers.

2. We may observe from hence that the Hope of the Resurrection of the dead is
a most powerful Argument to persuade men to believe, and embrace, and practice
the Christian Religion. For when a man seriously considers that he is not only
to give an account here of what he has done, and that this life does not set a
period to his sufferings, or rejoycings; but that he shall rise again and
undergo a new and impartial trial, and be for ever determined to live in
eternal bliss or misery. This consideration (I say) as it will make every
rational (not to mention pious) man to live holily; so it will be a great allay
to his temporal sufferings, to consider that he shall have joy in the morning
of his Resurrection, for the heaviness he endured in the night of this life:
This was the ground of St. Paul's free and public confession of his Faith: And
thus I come to speak of the last particular in the Text, namely the effects, in
these words, and herein do I exercise my self, to have a Conscience void of
offense toward God, and toward man.

Whence we may observe, that the end of all Religious Knowledge is practice: for
Christianity is an active life, it is not to make a wry Face, and to put on a
serious look, and to talk piously, and to breath nothing but Scripture, that
denominates a man a true Believer; but it is an exercising of ones self so, as
to keep a clear Conscience toward God and Man. And therefore it is that St.
Paul elsewhere exhorts to press forwards, and so to run as to win, and not to
beat the Air. And our Savior bids bring forth works meet for repentance. Mat.
3.8.
And that we may do this, we must live unblameably toward God, our Neighbors,
and our selves. If we be defective in the last two, we must also be faulty in
the first; because though there are some offenses more directly and immediately
committed against God, than other; yet all are against him; For as much as they
are transgressions of his Laws: And therefore we must make it our chief
business; First to give him his due, which is honoring and invocating his
name, acknowledge all we have to proceed from his free Grace; and make him as
far as we are able suitable returns of Praise and Thanksgiving: And as we must
behave our selves thus toward God, so we must deal uprightly with our
Neighbors, we must carry Honey in our mouths, that is, not injure them with
false reports, nor provoke them with bitter language, and we must carry Charity
in our hands, that is, relieve them to our power, when their necessities
require it, not wrong them by Violence or Fraud, not exact upon their
necessities; and we must carry a good example in all our actions. And lastly,
as to our selves, we must take heed that we abuse not those parts and
indowments which God, gave us to be instrumental to his service, by any kind of
excess, riot, or intemperance; we must keep our senses well governed in great
equality. The Tongue under the rule of discretion, and the Heart in a firm
peace; free from all sensual distracting thoughts; this is the true end of
believing: Otherwise our assenting to a divine Truth, is no more than such a
faith as the Devils have, who believe and tremble, and are never the nearer
happiness: but our believing must include doing, and must carry along with it a
conscience or knowledge void of offense both toward God and toward Man. And
thus I have spoken what I designed at this time on this Subject, and shall
conclude all with one word of application. You have heard St. Paul's Confession
of Faith: I beseech you examine your selves, try whether you be of his Religion
or not; if you be, I entreat you practice it.

2. If you have a clear Conscience, you need not regard the false reports of
others; for though it be a misfortune to be undeservedly ill spoken of, yet it
is a comfort that it is undeservedly. The Bird in the Breast makes sweeter
Music than the Praises of a thousand Flatterers. I am grieved (says a Father)
that they speak ill of me, and asperse me falsely; because they injure
themselves, and not me, by their uncharitableness; for they cannot rob me of
the pleasure which a clear Conscience continually administers to me.

Lastly, That all of us may have this clear Conscience, let us be sure, with
St. Paul, to walk by the Rule, the Word of God; Psalm. 119.105.
that will be a Lanthorn to thy feet, and a Light to thy paths: and therefore
do not imagine, that the carrying of your Bible to Church, and turning over the
leaves, and reading it carelessly, is all that is required of you; but be sure
you practice what you read, and compare your actions with that Rule, and make
them conformable to it: this will make you not only Professors of St. Paul's
Faith, but also partakers of his Happiness, where we shall see the Face of the
living God clearly, and at the full, where the Beauties shall have no Veils to
hide them from our eyes, our Beings shall have no end, our Knowledge shall not
be subject to error, nor our Loves to displeasure. O! what an excess of
Happiness will it be, to enjoy all, and to desire nothing, to be a King without
an Enemy, to be rich without Covetousness, and to be ever living without fear
of Death; all which God of his infinite Mercy vouchsafe unto us all, through
the merits of Jesus Christ; to whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be
all Honor and Glory now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

