PRACTICAL MEDITATIONS UPON THE Four Last Things: VIZ. I. Death, II. Judgment,
III. Hell, IV. Heaven.


By R. SHERLOCK, D. D.

DEUTERONOMY. XXXII. 29. O that they were wise, that they understood this; that they
would consider their latter End.

LONDON, Printed by J.H. for L. Meredith at the Star, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

PRACTICAL MEDITATIONS UPON THE Four Last Things, etc.
The First Meditation.
THE clean Beast which was only commanded to be offered in Sacrifice unto God
under the Law, was such as chewed the Cud, Lev. 11.3
and divided the Hoof, mystically representing the qualifications of the clean
and pure Christian, Romans 12.1 1 Pet. 2.4, 5.
who is himself that spiritual Sacrifice God requires under the Gospel.

By chewing the Cud, holy and divine Meditation is intimated: by dividing the
Hoof, may be mystically meant the last end of man; which is a dividing asunder
the Soul from the Body by Death, and a separation of the holy from the wicked
by Judgment; which shall assign to either their everlasting habitations either
in Heaven or in Hell.

Of these Four Last Things S. Bernard says, that First, Death is of all things
to flesh and blood most formidable.

Secondly, Judgment, than the which there is nothing more terrible and dreadful.

Thirdly, Hell, the Torments whereof are insupportable.

Fourthly, Heaven, the Joys whereof are beyond Apprehension most Blissful and
Ravishing.

And these Subjects of holy Meditation would prove the most prevalent to turn
all persons professing Christianity, from all the errors of their ways, whether
in Opinion or Conversation, would they but seriously consider the shortness and
uncertainty of this present life: the strict account must be given of all our
Thoughts, Words and Actions, even to every idle Word, especially spoken to the
detriment of any: That in all these we shall have the Devil and his Angels
vehemently to accuse us, and our own Consciences to testify against us: A most
severe Judge to pass sentence upon us: from whose impartial doom, the endless
Torments of Hell shall receive the wilfully erroneous, and impenitent sinner;
but eternal Joys, and never fading Felicities shall crown the Orthodox and Holy.

Psalm. 6.17.
The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the people that forget God.

Wisd. 3.5.
But the Souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no
torment touch them.

Ath. cr. Mat. 25. ult.
They that have done good, shall go into everlasting life: and they that have
done evil, into everlasting fire.

Psalm. 4.4.
This Faith is professed by many, but by few believed with the heart: for he
that cordially believes these principles of his Religion, will stand in awe,
and sin not: he will not dare in defiance of this Faith, knowingly and
wittingly to transgress the Laws of the great Majesty of Heaven: and it is such
a Faith attended by Fear, and this Fear by Care and Caution, that must preserve
the Soul from the Torments, and entitle her to the Joys of the other World.

Aristotle says, That he who believes not, can neither Hope nor Fear: and
consequently, he who does truly believe these Essentials of his Religion,
cannot but both hope for the Happiness, and fear the Misery of the World to
come.

It Is recorded of a Friar, that he complained to his Abbot, that he was weary
of that idle, lazy life; and therefore he desired leave to depart to some other
place: To whom the Abbot returned answer, Thy laziness is a manifest sign, that
thou did never truly believe, and seriously consider of the Pains of Hell,
and the Joys of Heaven; for the deep sense of these would preserve thee from
^ll laziness in thy Cell. Pra. Spir. cap. 142.

O that they were wise, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter End.

It is the greatest and most comprehensive of all the parts of true wisdom, so
to consider as rightly to prepare for our latter end: for to end well is the
sum of all our hopes, and of all the happiness we can hope for.

It is a great vanity to desire a long life, without the thought of leading a
holy life. It Is a great vanity to be so wholly intent upon this present life,
as not to provide for the life to come. It Is a great vanity to be in love with
what suddenly fades away, and not to hasten in our desires and endeavors to
that joy which shall never end. T. K. l. 1. c. 1.

Have mercy upon me, Psalm. 9.13.
O God, and consider the trouble I suffer of them that hate me, my Spirit is
troubled for the daily incursions of my ghostly enemies: Thou that liftest me
up from the Gates of Death: Such is this frail mortal life, all the ways
whereof are vanity and iniquity, even Gates leading to Death eternal: From the
which I humbly beg to be raised up, and exalted by thy right hand.

That I may show all thy praises within the ports of the daughter of Sion: I
will rejoice in thy Salvation: to be thus lifted up and saved, is a joy
unspeakable and glorious.

Remember me, Psalm. 106.4.
O Lord, according to the favor thou bear unto thy people, and visit me
with thy Salvation.

That I may see the felicity of thy chosen,

MEDITAT. II. Of the Shortness and Frailty of this present Life.
MAN that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble. Job 14.1.


He comes forth like a Flower, and is cut down: he flees as a shadow, whilst
every day we live is one day nearer to the end of life.

For what is your life? Jam. 4.14.
it is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

The time of my life past is already swallowed up by death, which still dogs me
at the heels to devour the short remainder of my flitting days.

Not to consider this shortness and frailty of humane life, is to make my life
yet more short and frail. So Drex. vita brevis omnibus -- Life is short unto
all, but shortest unto those, who forget what is past, are negligent in what is
present, and fear not what is to come.

Lord, make me to know mine end, and the number of my days, that I may be
certified how long I have to live: that the length of my days is of the
shortest measure: for behold thou haste made my days as a span -- Verily every
man living is altogether vanity: The most high and mighty, the most honorable
and wealthy are not exempt from this character: for Honors, Riches, Friends,
all the delights of the Sons of men, with all the Pomp and Pleasure, and power
of the world, depending upon the shortness and frailty of humane Life; Nihil
est magnum re, quod parvum tempore: nec longis dilatatur gaudiis, quicquid
arcto fine concluditur. Hucher. Ep. Paran.
renders every man in all that he is, in all that he has, and in all that he
hopes for, in this world, a vanity of vanities, an universal vanity.

The divine a Kempis gives us both the reason and the use of this doctrine:
Quia per peccatum -- Since by Sin we have lost our innocence, we ought with
patience to expect the mercy of God, until this iniquity do pass away, and
mortality be swallowed up of life. T. K. l. 1. c. 22.

S. Augustine 's Meditation on this Subject.
THE time of my Pilgrimage here upon earth is tedious, wearisome -- for this is
a miserable life, a frail life, an uncertain life, a bitter life, a laborious
life, a sinful life: it is the mistress of error and sinfulness, and the
handmaid to death and hell --

This life is rather to be called death than life, as being through the whole
course thereof, a passing from Life to Death: for whilst we pass from Infancy
to Childhood, from thence to Manhood, and so to Old Age, every such change in
Life is but a passage to death, or rather so many stages of Death; for each
condition of life is the death of its foregoing state and condition.

There is no condition in this life certain and settled; now we are glad, and
anon sad; now we are well, and anon sick; now we are at ease, and anon in pain;
now we laugh, and anon weep; now in hunger and thirst, anon in fullness and
excess: in honor and dishonor, in wealth and poverty, in heats and colds, in
evil report and good report, in fear and terror, and much amazement: and all
this and much more than can be expressed, is too often attended by a sudden,
unexpected death; and which is yet more miserable, though there be nothing more
certain than death, yet vain foolish man knows not, considers not his end.

Eccl. 9.12.
So the Preacher: For man also knows not his time, as the fishes that are
taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the
sons of men snared in an evil time when it falls suddenly upon them.

Aristotle being asked, what is man? answered, Imbecillitatis exemplum;
Temporis. spolium; fortunae lusus; inconstantiae imago; invidiae and
calamitatis trutina; reliquum vero. pituita and bilis.

Quid homo (inquit Gran.) cujus conceptio, culpa, nasci poena, vivere miseria,
and mori, tormentum?

Silenus being asked by Midas: Quid homini optimum? answered: Primo, non nasci:
sccundo, quam ocyssime mori.

O senseless mortals! especially being called Christians, and yet to be of so
little Faith, as to dote upon a life so frail, short and uncertain, so
changeable and calamitous, in defiance of what we daily profess to believe,
Life Everlasting.

Blessed are they, and they are but a few, who in hopes and desires to enjoy
the unchangeable blessings of the life to come, do slight and despise the
fallacious flattering enjoyments of this world, lest being deceived by the
charms and fawnings thereof, the Deceiver and the Deceived perish together.

It Is a general complaint, that the world is deceitful, and unsatisfying in all
her most alluring enjoyments; and yet so mightily the flesh prevails against
the spirit, that most men love, (and I am a great fool among the rest) yea
doatingly love to be thus deceived: too passionately desiring to enjoy still
this mortal life how frail soever, and attended with a numerous train of
miseries.

But forget not, O remember and forget not, that thou art immortal (O my soul)
and that death is but the change of a troublesome for a quiet life, of a frail
for a fixed and permanent Being; of an uncertain for a certain abode, and of a
temporary for life everlasting. It Is but the falling in pieces of an earthly
Tabernacle, and when it is dissolved, 2 Cor. 5.1.
thou have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens.

It Is a famed saying of Benedict: Malus mortem, bonus vitam formidat: In the
death of the righteous is his hopes of happiness, but in the continuance of
this life does the wicked trust.

Thou would not fear the end of this life, did thou rightly hope for the
beginning of a better: It Is for want of treasures laid up in Heaven, the fruits
of true holiness, that thou art afraid to die, and 'twill be too late to labor
for them, when death approaches.

The Prayer.
O Almighty God, who alone can order the unruly wills and affections of
sinful men, grant unto thy people (and to me with them) to love the thing which
thou command, and desire that which thou do promise; that so among the
sundry and manifold changes of the world, our hearts may surely there be fixed
where true joys are to be found, through Jesus Christ.

MEDITAT. III. Of the frequent Remembrance of Death.
1. THIS present Life is the School of Death, wherein we are taught the several
lessons of living to die well, or so to die, that we may live Eternally.

Climacus scal. grad. 6. records a story of a Brother, who had lived
negligently for many years, and was at last surprised with such a desperate
disease, that he was for so long a time deprived of his Senses, that he was
supposed to be absolutely dead: but recovering again, he immediately secluded
himself from all society, and continued for Twelve years, which was the
remainder of his time, in that solitary separate condition, lamenting
continually the negligences and sins of his bypast life, and the sad condition
of all such persons who die in their sins unrepented.

And when the time of his death indeed approached, many of his fraternity
flocked to him, desiring to hear some more than ordinary instructions, and
directions from him for the good of their Souls: but all that he would say was
this, as the sum of Christian wisdom: If you desire so to live that ye may die
happily, then meditate continually upon death: for it is scarce possible for
that man to sin, who with due regard remembers Death, the wages of Sin.

It Is said by the said Climacus, That the meditation of death is as necessary
to preserve the health of the Soul in the life of grace, as is daily bread to
preserve the body in the life of nature.

2. The forgetfulness of Death is the seminary of all the Sins of the sons of
men: hence the neglect of all the duties we owe to God and Man: hence the abuse
of all the blessings of God, whether relating to this or the other world: hence
all luxury, and all the sinful pleasures of the flesh: hence all covetousness,
and carnal cares for the things of this life: hence all forgetfulness of the
great account we must make of all the works done in the body, together with the
banishment from our minds of all fears of Hell, and hopes of Heaven: It Is
therefore good advice the wise Syracides gives us; Ecclus. 28.6.
Remember thy end, and let enmity cease: Remember corruption and death, and
abide in the Commandments.

I should not surely dare to sin against my God, would I but seriously consider
in every act I do, and in every moment I breath, I am hastening to my last
breath, and that then I must give account as of every moment of my time, so of
every work, both good and evil, at what time soever performed. And 'twas surely
thus S. Paul died daily. 1 Cor. 15.31.


3. To die the death of the righteous is the desire even of the wicked; Numb.
23.10.
but his last end shall be very unlike the others.

Vt tibi mors foelix contingat, vivere disce:
Vt foelix possis vivere, disce mori.
The only way to die well, is to live well; and he that will live well, must
live by dying principles: saying with holy David, My Soul is continually in my
hand: Psalm. 119.109.
and for ought I know it may expire at my next breathing, since many thousands
in this very moment do breath their last.

And it is only this moment I can call mine: for what time of my life is past,
cannot return again to be enjoyed, and what is to come is not in mine, Psalm.
31.17. Acts 17.28.
but in the Lord's power: My time is in thy hand. In him we live and move, and
have our being.

Quam foelix and prudens -- He is both a wise, and a happy man, whose
endeavors are, so to be qualified in his life, as he desires to be found in
his death. T.K. In order hereunto, it is the wholesome advice of a Father, Cum
mane fuerit -- when it is morning, think that perhaps thou may not see the
evening; and when evening comes, remember that it is uncertain whether thou
shall see morning.

Those Indian wisemen called Brachmans, had their Sepulchers before their
doors: that both upon their going out, and coming in, they might remember their
approaching death, as a curb to restrain them from all extravagant lustings
after the pleasures, riches and honors of this mortal life.

It Is recorded of John the famous Patriarch of Alexandria, that whilst he was
in perfect health he had his monument framed, but not finished: and that he
gave order upon every Festival after the public offices of the Church were
ended, one of the Priests should say unto him aloud; Holy Father, your Monument
should be finished, Mat. 24.43.
because it is not known at what hour the thief comes.

I cannot better advise both my self and my Reader, than that in every thing we
go about we would every man of us ask himself this question: Would I now do
this if I were ready to die? It Is the Wiseman's advice, whatsoever thou take
in hand, Remember the end, Eccl. 7. ult.
and thou shall never do amiss.

When an Emperor of the East was newly proclaimed, before he spoke to any
person in the style of Majesty, a Mason comes to him, and showing him several
kinds of Marble, demands of which of those kinds of stone he would have his
Sepulcher made: intimating unto him, that although he was made an Emperor, he
was not to forget he was a mortal; and therefore it concerned him, with such
justice and mercy to govern his Earthly Kingdom, that he might not forfeit the
loss of the Kingdom of Heaven.

From the forgetfulness of my death, and the uncertainty of my life, from every
evil work whereunto such forgetfulness may betray me, and from a sudden, and an
unprepared death, good Lord deliver me.

4. The Lord clothed our first Parents with the skins of Beasts, to put them
in mind of that mortality and corruption of the flesh they had contracted by
their disobedience to his commands: the which as we their sinful offspring do
daily bear about us, so ought we also to have the same in a continual
remembrance for the keeping under the unruly lusts of the flesh, that we
finally pass not from a spiritual to death eternal.

And thus, every truly pious man thus remembers daily the unavoidable death of
his corruptible body, so as to keep his Soul unspotted of the world, and alive
from the death of sin, continually mortifying all his evil and corrupt
affections, and daily proceeding in all virtue and godliness of living.

And thus in the sense of the holy Apostle of our Lord, To die daily, is not
only daily to remember death, but daily to die unto sin, and live unto
righteousness unto the hopes of Eternal happiness: slighting all the false and
flattering felicities of this fawning world, as being not only empty and
unsatisfying, but also mortal and dying.

A holy confidence to die well, and in hopes to enjoy Life Eternal after Death,
is begotten in the heart, (says the spiritual A Kempis, A Kempis de Imit.
Christ. l. 1. c. 23.
) 1. By a perpetual contempt of the world. 2. By a thorough self-denial. 3. By
a fervent desire and endeavor for proficiency in Grace. 4. By the love of
discipline, or strict corporeal Austerities. 5. By the unwearied labor of true
Repentance. 6. By a willing and ready obedience to all God's commands. 7. By
suffering contentedly; yea, even joyfully all adversities for the love of
Christ.

And thus prepare for thy change to come, looking not (as becomes an Immortal
Soul) at the things which are seen, 2 Cor. 4.28.
but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.

The Prayer.
O God the protector of all that trust in thee, without whom nothing is strong,
nothing is holy: Increase and multiply upon us thy mercy; that thou being our
leader and guide, we may so pass through things temporal, that we finally lose
not the things eternal: Grant this, O heavenly Father, for thy Son Jesus
Christ. Amen.

MEDITAT. IV. Of the Horror of Death.
1. UNder the Law, when a Fowl was to be offered for a burnt Sacrifice unto the
Lord, The head was to be wrung off; Levit. 1.16.
the crop with the feathers to be cast into the place of ashes: Intimating
mystically that the way to mortify the swellings of pride and luxury, and make
all the feathers of secular pomp and vanity to flag, is to turn our eyes unto
the ashes of the dead, and see the horrid state of such as lie in the Grave,
even of the most high, powerful and pompous that ever lived upon earth.

"S. Augustine being with his Mother Monica invited to Rome by Pontianus the
Prefect, to view the stately Edifices, and ancient Monuments of that eminent
City, amongst other rareties, he saw the great Caesar's Sepulcher, and therein
his carcass of a livid, ghastly color; his face fallen away to such a meagre
leanness, as scarce of skin and bone consisting; his Lips being rotted away,
his Teeth were seen black and corrupted; his Nose so consumed, that only the
wide hollows of his Nostrils appeared; his Belly burst, and swarming with Worms
and Serpents; his Eyes quite sunk into his head, and in the two holes thereof
two loathsome Toads were feeding -- Then turning toward his Mother, he said:
What now, dear Mother, is become of the great Caesar, whose pomp, and power,
and policy; whose riches, honor and dignity; whose many victories, conquests
and triumphs rendered him the most admired Hero the world afforded? Where now
is all his glory? Where the Conquering Armies he commanded? The Cities,
Nations, Countries he subdued? The numerous train of Nobility, Gentry,
Soldiery that attended him? The vast riches and boundless authority he
acquired? --

Whereunto the pious Matron answered, O my Son! no sooner did his Spirit fail,
and his breath expire, but all his splendid enjoyments, all his flattering
worldly felicities forsook him: His riches, his friends, his attendants, all
his conquests and triumphs, all the honor which he got through manifold
travels, pains and perils, have all now left him alone in this ghastly silent
Sepulcher, accompanied only with Worms, Stench and Corruption. --

Such is the end of all flesh: All flesh is grass, Isa. 40.6.
and all the goodliness thereof as a flower of the field. The flower is more
gay and gaudy than the grass for a little space, but when the verdure of both
decays, they have the same withered complexion, they rot and corrupt both
alike; and commonly the more gaudy flower is more ugly and stinking than the
grass: It Is even so with the rich, and the poor, the honorable and the base in
this world, they differ only in their outward fashion and appearance: but when
death does seize them they are equally obnoxious to the same solitude, poverty,
and nakedness, to the same stench, corruption, and rottenness.

It Is as true of the greatest Prince, as of the meanest Peasant: When a man is
dead, Eccl. 10.11.
he shall inherit creeping things, Beasts and Worms. All the difference in the
Grave betwixt the rich and the poor, is this; That the dust of the rich,
through the luxury, lasciviousness, and intemperance of their life, is more
corrupt and loathsome after their death, than is the dust of the poor, whose
food and nourishment was more course and sparing.

Why then, my Immortal Soul, art thou so fond of thy corruptible companion, the
Body? Remember, its beginning is uncleanness, and its end rottenness? It Is thy
servant for the present, but if thou too much cocker and pamper it, 'twill
rebel, subdue, and lead thee captive to a worse death, than that whereunto it
self is liable, even the death of the nether Hell; Mar. 9.44.
Where the Worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

2. Death is the wages of sin: And I have sinned, vile wretch that I am, I have
sinned, and what shall I do, or what shall I say unto thee, O thou preserver of
man? All that I can say is the same still; Psalm. 38.18.
I have sinned, and as long as I have a day to live I will say it: I will
confess my wickedness, and be sorry for my sins.

Mercy, good Lord, mercy I humbly beg: Job 7.20, 21.
O why do thou not pardon my Transgression, and take away mine iniquity?

Are not my days few, cease then, and let me alone, that I may bewail my sins,
and take comfort a little, in the hopes of the pardon of them, through faith in
the blood of my dear Redeemer, Job 10.20, 21.
before I go to the place from whence I shall not return, to the land of
darkness, and of the shadow of death.

3. I know that to flesh and blood death is of all terribles the most terrible,
Job 18.14. but my blessed Redeemer has pulled out the sting, and quelled the
terrors of death, 1 Cor. 15.55, Heb. 2.14.
56, 57. He has also destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the
Devil. So that now when death approaches, through Faith and a good Conscience
I shall have hope, with all patience and contentment, to drink off that Cup,
how bitter and painful soever, saying with my blessed Lord and Master upon his
approaching death, Mat. 26.42.
Father, not my will, but thine be done.

The Prayer.
ASsist me mercifully, O Lord, to subject my rebellious flesh to the guidance
of the Spirit, and my spirit to the Laws of my Redeemer, that when my body
shall be the inheritance of Worms and creeping things, my Soul may possess an
inheritance uncorruptible, and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in the
Heavens, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

MEDITAT. V. Of Preparation unto Death.
I.
AS there is nothing more certain than death: Psalm. 89.47.
For what man is there that lives and shall not see death? So there is nothing
more uncertain than the time of death; Mat. 24.36.
for of that day and hour knows noman.

It Is therefore unknown, Luke 12.40.
that it might be always suspected and awaited: The Son of man comes in an hour
when you think not: That his coming may be hourly thought upon; Latet dies
ultimus, Aug.
ut observentur omnes dies: The day of our death is hidden from us, that all
our days should be no other but a preparation thereunto, the certainty of the
one engaging us unto sincerity in the other Very hominis Christiani vita, nihil
aliud quam continua ad mortem praeparatio esse debet.
.

Every danger foreseen is best prevented: And thus death the greatest of
dangers may be rendered the least dangerous by a prudent fear, and careful
provision for the same: Qui pavet, cavet; qui negligit, incidit: Bern. Prove.
14.16.
which may best be englished in the language of the Holy Ghost; The wise man
fears, and departs from evil; but the fool rages, and is confident Timeat
semper in vita mortem qui mortis metum evadere velit.
.

II.
The great end of this mortal life, is to prepare for death; or rather for a
safe passage through death to life Immortal: For upon the well or ill spending
of the few minutes of this present life depends either a blessed, or a
miserable Eternity.

It was the advice of a wise man to his friend, to have engraven in capital
Letters, in some such place of his house, as might be most frequent in his
view, to be often considered: Momentum unde pendet Eternitas.

III.
There is no consideration our blessed Lord has so frequently inculcated by
commands, counsels, exhortations, admonitions, parables, similitudes, arguments
and reasons, as this of the Christian watch, i. e. to prepare, to provide, to
be ready, to wait for the coming of the Lord, or for the approach of Death;
Luke 12.38.
whether he shall come in the first, or in the second, or in the third watch:
whether in the time of youth, or manhood, or old age: Mark 13.34, 35, 36, 37.
at all times, and in all ages he commands all men to be upon their watch.

This watch implies many particulars, which are so many preparatives, unto
death.

1. To watch, is to have our eyes open, or our minds enlightened by the holy
true Christian Faith.

2. That the affections of our hearts, and the actions of our lives be framed
according to what we rightly profess to believe.

3 To have our eyes not only opened, but uplifted toward Heaven above, and not
still poring upon the Earth below.

4. In our watch we must carefully observe all the orders and commands given us
by Christ the Captain of our Salvation.

5. That we shake off all drowziness and sluggishness, being active and
vigorous in the execution of all such commands; and in all the respective
duties we owe to God and Man.

6. That when the Lord comes, and knocks at the door, by the batteries of
death, we be both willing and ready to open unto him: And in order hereunto,

7. That our hearts be prepared to receive the Lord, being so swept and
cleansed, that nothing be found in any corner thereof, which may offend him,
who is the searcher of all hearts.

8. We must stand upon our watch with our loins girded, or all irrational lusts
restrained; that we may be expedite and ready to execute whatever our duty to
God or Man requires: Thus S. Jerome stood upon his watch, professing that
whether he did eat or drink, rest or labor, sleep or wake, he always heard the
voice of the last Trumpet sounding in his ears, Awake and come to Judgment.

9. Lastly, In this watch we must persevere, not to be taken off by any wiles
of Satan, concerns of the world, or allurements of the flesh; but to stand
fixed and immovable in our respective stations of Christian duty, until the
great Captain and Lord of life and death shall remove us hence.

And may I thus, blessed Lord, continually wait for thy coming, with my loins
girt, in the restriction of all the unruly lusts of my heart, and of all the
irrational imaginations of my head also: and my Lamp of the holy Christian
Faith burning continually; being fed with the oil or unction of the holy Spirit
of God, and shining in and through all the whole course of my life, by all such
good works as may glorify thee our Father which art in Heaven. This is that
sacred light (even faith which works by love) which will infallibly guide me
through all the mazes of this mortal life, and convey me safely through the
gloomy shades of death, into the Region of light, and life everlasting. Amen.

IV.
In this life our condition is changeable from better to worse, and from worse
to better: But in death all hopes of bettering our condition are buried with
the liveless corpse. 2 Cor. 6.2.
Now is the acceptable time, now is the day of Salvation. It Is in the day of
this life I am commanded to work out my Salvation with fear and trembling. Phil
2.12.
When the night of death comes no man can then work: Ecclus 9.10.
There is neither work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
where thou go. And it is wisely therefore advised in the following words;
Whatever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might: Be vigorous, be
active, Col. 1.10.
be zealous, be fruitful in every good work.

The Soul that is laden with the fruits of well-doing, shall cheerfully in the
approach of death commit her self unto God, 1 Pet. 4. ult.
as to a faithful Creator.

Those good deeds, which through the merits of Christ will render us secure in
the hour of death are,

1. Devout and humble, frequent and fervent prayers unto God, and praises of
him, wherein we do most immediately both commit and commend our Souls unto God,
and gain his grace and favor, especially when accompanied with,

2. Fastings often: Luke 2.37.
By these we offer our bodies in sacrifice unto God: as by Prayer our Souls.
Romans 12.1.


3. Charitable Almsdeeds, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Heb.
13.15, 16.


Such preparation for death is advised by the wise Syracides, Ecclus. 14.12.
Remember that death will not be long in coming: and that the covenant of the
grave is not showed unto thee. Verse 13. Do good to thy friend before thou die:
put not off to thy last Will and Testament: but according to thy ability
stretch out thy hand, and give unto the poor.

To make the poor our friends, or rather our Acts of charity toward them,
against the day of death, is commanded by our Lord, Luke 16.9. Make your selves
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, in the pious and charitable
distribution of your worldly goods; that when you fail, your bodies fail to be
the habitation of your Souls; they may receive you into everlasting
habitations: Which is yet more fully and plainly commanded by our Lord, Luke
12.33, 34, 35, 36. Thus the wise Virgins were provided, for the coming of the
Bridegroom, with oil in their Lamps: their light of Faith was kept flaming by
charity and good works, by which means they were admitted into the
Bridal-chamber of Celestial Paradise: from whence the foolish Virgins were
excluded, who had Lamps, but no Oil; Faith without Charity; or else good works
without sincere intentions, and holy affections in the performance of them,
Mat. 25.3, 4. --

It Is not doubted, but every act of Charity is transient, and every good work
of what nature soever, takes end with the work done: but the Charity, the
Piety, the Wisdom, the Righteousness of every religious work is not of a dying
stamp: For righteousness is Immortal, Wisd. 1.17.

As therefore the good works of holy and good men pass away and vanish, so the
holiness and charity of their actions pass into Heaven, and stand there upon
record to plead through the merits of Christ for their admission into those
Regions of bliss.

He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor, Psalm. 112.9.
his righteousness remains for ever; his horn shall be exalted with honor.

Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord; they rest from their labors, Rev.
14.13.
and their works follow them.

Lord, I pray thee, that thy grace may always prevent and follow me; and make me
continually to be given to all good works; the never failing fruits of a true
Christian Faith; and by these inseparably conjoined to make my calling and
election sure, scaled in the blood of my dear Redeemer. Amen.

V.
1. There are three general messengers of Death: 1. Chance: 2. Sickness: 3. Old
age. Chance renders the life of man doubtful and uncertain: Sickness makes it
grievous and weariso me: Old Age makes it tedious, and Death inevitable.

Some persons are stifled in their Mothers womb, and die before they see the
light of this life.

Some die in their infancy, some in their youth, some in their man's estate,
and some there be, but these are of all other the fewest in number, who die in
their Old age: And yet the most of men do not only desire, but fondly conceit
they shall live to be old, and yet never think themselves old enough to die;
which makes so many millions of persons die unpreparedly: And so pass from a
temporal to death eternal: For death is then most generally the nearest, when
it is conceited to be furthest off. Bern.
Mors enim propior esse solet, cum longius abesse putetur.

2. It Is the thought of a longer, and still of a longer life, that is the great
impediment of Repentance, and amendment of life: whereby the Devil hurries men
by throngs to be his woeful companions in his Region of blackness of darkness
for ever. And the great Reason is, because Repentance delayed till Sickness, or
Old Age come, is not only uncertain and unsafe, but very seldom or never truly
and sincerely performed. It Is a dreadful saying of S. Hierome; That scarce one
of ten thousand, who have continued in any sinful course of life, without the
conscientious practice of a true and timely Repentance, do ever so perfectly
repent, as to obtain the remission of their sins in the hour of death.

For the prevention of so great and general a mischief, and perdition of
ungodly men; the All-wise and good Providence of Heaven has ordained, that in
all ages and conditions of men this life shall take end: that so none how young
and lusty soever, with his bones full of marrow, should yet dare to live
unprepared for death, presuming still upon further time for Repentance and
Amendment of life.

Tu in senectutem sana defers consilia, and inde vitam vis inchoare quo pauci
perduxerunt: stultitia magna est tunc vivere incipere, cum desinendum est.

Blessed Lord, suffer me not thus to deceive my self, through the sly
insinuations of Satan, and my own sensual inclinations and desires, but make me
so mindful of my end, that I may pass the remainder of my days in the constant
practice of Repentance, and Godly fear, that living in thy fear, I may die in
thy favor, and in a well grounded hope to live with thee for ever. Amen.

VI.
1. Every change in my frail constitution, every little pain and ache in my
corruptible flesh, all distempers and diseases are as so many memorials of my
mortality; but the older I grow, Heb. 8. ult.
the nearer still is the approach of my dissolution by the hand of death; for
that which decays and waxes old is ready to vanish away.

2. Happy is the man, who on his bed of death can say with the Apostle, 2 Timothy
4.7.
I have fought a good sight, against all the assaults of the Devil, the World
and the Flesh, which war against the Soul: I have finished my course: as the
course of my life; so the course of godliness in all its respective duties
enjoined me. I have kept the Faith, untainted, by any Atheistical imaginations,
heretical opinions, or sinful practices: and I have been faithful in the
discharge of those offices, and relations, wherein my great Lord and Master
has entrusted and enstated me.

If my heart condemn me not in any of these respects, from henceforth there is
laid up a Crown of righteousness, which the righteous Judge shall give me at
that day; and not to me only, but to all them also that love his appearance.

The Prayer.
LOok graciously upon me, O Lord, I beseech thee, in the time of my approaching
dissolution: and the more the outward man decays, strengthen me so much the
more continually by thy Grace and Holy Spirit in the inner man: give me
unfeigned repentance for all the errors of my life past, and a steadfast Faith
in thy Son Jesus, that my sins may be done away by thy mercy, and my pardon
sealed in Heaven, before I go hence and be no more seen.

II.
IN the midst of life we be in death: of whom may we seek for succor but of
thee, O Lord, who for our sins art justly displeased?

Yet, O Lord God most holy, O Lord most mighty, O holy and most merciful
Savior, deliver us not into the bitter pains of eternal Death.

Thou know Lord the secrets of our hearts: shut not up thy merciful ears to
our Prayers, but spare us. O Lord most holy, O God most mighty, O holy and most
merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not at our last
hour for any pains of Death to fall from thee.

III.
IN my last hour, O Lord, I humbly beg thy protection from the busy
suggestions and direful insultings of my grand enemies, the Devil and his
Angels: Oh let not then my Faith fail, or my Hope wither, or my Charity wax
cold with the waining flesh: but when all my joints shall tremble by the
batteries of death, mine eyes be darkened, and my tongue falter, then, O then
let my heart be enlarged toward my God, waiting upon thee, longing for thee,
and incessantly praying, show me thy mercy, O Lord, and grant me thy Salvation.

The XXXIX. Psalm.
Verses,
1. I Said, I will take heed to my ways: that I offend not in my tongue The
meditation of death makes every wise man careful of all his ways, and more
especially to avoid the offenses of the tongue.
.

2. I will keep my mouth as 'twere with a bridle: while the ungodly is in my
sight The tongue is an unruly evil, and must be tamed as a wild horse with a
bridle, especially when provoked by captious, contentious and quarrelsome
persons.
.

3. I held my tongue, and spoke nothing: I kept silence, yea even from good
words, but it was pain and grief unto me Reproaches are for the most part best
answered with a discreet silence; so was our Lord, as a Lamb, dumb before the
Shearers.
.

4. My heart was hot within, and while I was thus musing, the fire kindled To
abstain from good words is sometimes necessary for the avoiding of an evil
construction: but such silence is grievous to the pious Soul, which burns with
the fire of divine love, and zeal to God's glory. The zeal of thine house has
even eaten me up.
: and at the last I spoke with my tongue Though it be often inconvenient to
speak before wicked Men, yet it is always necessary to speak unto God by Prayer.
.

5. Lord, let me know mine end, and the number of my days: that I may be
certified how long I have to live It Is a blessing we ought always to pray for,
to be feelingly sensible of the shortness of our life.
.

6. Behold thou have made my days as 'twere a span long; and mine age is
nothing in respect of thee: and verily every man living is altogether vanity
The life of man if compared with God's everlasting Being, is rather to be
called a death than a life, a vanity, not a verity of being.
.

7. For man walks in a vain shadow, he disquieteth himself in vain: he
heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them The hearts of men are
darkened with the shadows of happiness, whilst they vainly care for worldly
wealth, which is as transitory and uncertain as the life it self.
.

8. And now, Lord, what is my hope? truly my hope is even in thee It Is not in
riches, nor in all the world affords, but in God alone that all hope of true
happiness is attainable.
.

9. Deliver me from all mine offenses: and make me not a rebuke to the foolish
Our sins deprive us of all true well-grounded hopes in God: and make us liable
to the scorn, even of foolish men.
.

10. I became dumb, and opened not my mouth: for it was thy doing We must with
a patient silence suffer the reproaches of others, because occasioned by our
offenses, and because sent from God for our amendment.
.

11. Take thy plague away from me: I am even consumed by the means of thy heavy
hand And confess withal, that we deserve to be consumed by the just judgments
of God.
.

12. When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to
consume away, as 'twere a moth fretting a garment: every man therefore is but
vanity Whose lightest chastisements do easily deface the beauty, and decay the
strength of the corruptible body.
.

13. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and with thine ear consider my calling: hold not
thy peace at my tears Therefore the devout Soul is poured forth in Prayers,
with tears of godly sorrow for her offenses, from whence all the miseries of
this life do flow.
.

14. For I am a stranger with thee: and a sojourner as all my fathers were The
earth is a strange land to the immortal Soul, whose native home is Heaven,
where she was framed by the hands of the Almighty after his own Image.
.

15. O spare me a little that I may recover my strength, before I go hence and
be no more seen Which Image being defaced by her sins, she humbly begs with
tears, Time and Space by Repentance, Faith and new Obedience, to recover her
native strength and beauty, before she leave her tabernacle of flesh.
.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Prayer.
SInce my days are but as a span, short and uncertain, I humbly beseech thee, O
Lord, to wean my heart from the disquietude of worldly cares: and that I may be
fruitful in all the good works of obedience and charity, to repair the breaches
of thy blessed Image which mine offenses have made, before my departure hence:
that so recovering the spiritual health and strength of my Soul, I may die in
thy Grace and Favor, through Jesus Christ.

The XC. Psalm.
Verses,

1. LOrd, thou have been our Refuge from one generation to another Holy men
have in all ages of the world applied themselves unto the Lord for succor,
support and protection in all conditions.
.

2. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world
were made: thou art God from everlasting and world without end Who being
eternal is also immutable in his mercy, goodness, power and providence over all.
.

3. Thou turnest man to destruction: again thou say, Come again ye children
of men Dispensing both health and sickness, prosperity and adversity, life and
death to the sons of men, according to his all-just, allmerciful, all-wise good
pleasure.
.

4. For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday: seeing that is past
as a watch in the night The longest course of man's life in respect of God's
eternal praevision, is but as a day that is already past, or as one of the
night-watches, which is both swift and short, and also dark and gloomy through
frequent, cross and adverse occurrents.
.

5. As soon as thou scatterest them, they are even asleep: and fade away
suddenly as the grass As sleep is the Image of death, so the life of man in
this world is but the image or shadow of life, for as a shadow it flees the
pursuer and fades as the grass.
.

6. In the morning it is green, and grows up: in the evening it is cut down,
dried up and withered Which the same day beholds both growing and cut down,
flourishing and withered.
.

7. For we consume away in thy displeasure: and are afraid at thy wrathful
indignation This frailty of humane life is the punishment of sin, which incurs
most justly God's indignation and wrath.
.

8. Thou have set our mis-deeds before thee: and our secret sins in the light
of thy countenance Whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun,
both seeing and recording the most secret of our sinful ways.
.

9. For when thou art angry, all our days are gone: we bring our years to an
end, as it were a tale that is told It Is through God's just anger for our sins,
that our days are shortened, and our years are spent in vanity and trouble.
.

10. The days of our age are threescore years and ten: and though men be so
strong that they come to fourscore years, yet is their strength then but labor
and sorrow: so soon passes it away and we are gone The miseries of man's life
are not so great through the shortness thereof, as that his sorrows, and
troubles are increased with his days.
.

11. But who regards the power of thy wrath? for even thereafter as a man
fears, so is thy displeasure God's displeasure for our sins is either more or
less, according as we do less or more stand in awe thereof.
.

12. So teach us to number our days: that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom
True wisdom is attained by the serious contemplation of the frailty of life and
certainty of death.
.

13. Turn thee again, O Lord, at the last: and be gracious unto thy servants
Intermixing with our meditations devout Prayers for the propitious grace and
favor of God.
.

14. O satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon: so shall we rejoice and be
glad all the days of our life Which alone can satisfy the desires of the
immortal Soul, and thoroughly rejoice the same.
.

15. Comfort us again now after the time thou have plagued us: and for the
years wherein we have suffered adversity We may reasonably allege our
sufferings, though for our sins, as motives to implore the consolations of
God's Spirit.
.

16. Show thy servants thy work: and their children thy glory God's proper work
is mercy, and it is his glory to be gracious, for the which the righteous do
pray both for themselves and their Children.
.

17. And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper thou the
work of our hands upon us, prosper thou our handy work God's glorious Majesty
appears by the gracious influences of his holy Spirit: whereby we work the
works of God, to his glory and our own eternal happiness.
.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Prayer.
ALmighty God, the Fountain of all Wisdom, grant me so wisely to number and
compare the short and sorrowful days of this mortal Life, with that joyful and
never ending day of a blessed eternity; that despising the vanities of the one,
I may zealously aspire to the happiness of the other. O satisfy the panting
desires of my Soul, with the sense of thy mercy in the pardon of my sins: and
let the glory of thy grace appear, in prospering me to perform all those good
works of Faith and Obedience, which conduce to my eternal Salvation, through
Jesus Christ.

THE Second general Meditation UPON JUDGMENT. And first the Particular Judgment.
IT is appointed unto man once to die, Heb. 9.27.
and after that the Judgment: No sooner shall this house of flesh, wherein the
immortal Soul does now inhabit, be shattered in pieces by the hand of death,
but in the same moment the departing Soul shall be conveyed by the Angels of
God before his Judgment Seat: and this is called The particular Judgment, that
shall pass upon every person in particular immediately upon his death: Eccl.
12.7.
when the dust shall return to the earth as it was, then shall the Spirit
return unto God that gave it:

That grand enemy of man, the Devil, awaits thy Soul's departure hence, to dog
thee to the great Tribunal of Heaven. Ille enim tunc saeviens capit quos nunc
blandiens decipit. Greg.
In this life he fawns to seduce, but in the other he will roar to devour, as a
Lion over his prey: to this end he will vehemently accuse thee, aggravating all
thy miscarriages through his suggestions committed, and claiming thee as one of
the subjects of his kingdom of darkness: saying to the great Judge of all, as
several Fathers observe:

"This person (thou Judge of the world) though he be thine by Creation, Eusebius.
Emiss. Hom. Aug. orat. cont. Judaos, Page
yet he is mine by Depravation: He is Thine by nature, but mine by sin, for he
has obeyed my suggestions, and disobeyed thy Laws: and therefore though he
belong to thee by right, yet he is fallen to me by default: he is thine in
respect of his workmanship, but mine by the rebellion of his will, and disorder
of his affections: having yielded himself to follow my temptations, and to
forsake the paths of thy Commandments.

But it is not the Devil alone that shall thus accuse thee when arraigned at the
Bar of divine Judgment: but (as S. Chrysostom says) the Heavens and the Earth,
and the Sea, the Sun and the Moon and the Stars, both Nights and Days, and all
the Creatures thou have abused, shall bear witness against thee: but above all,

Thine own Conscience shall be as a thousand witnesses; for being then freed
from this clog and damp of the corruptible flesh, all thy imaginations and
desires, all thy words and works spoken and done in the body, shall appear to
thy Conscience in their native, genuine and proper colors, without any
ignorance or oblivion, misperswasion or misprision, which now blinds the minds
of many thousands to their eternal ruin on that day.

O who shall then be able to answer thee one of a thousand (thou most worthy
Judge eternal) if thou should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, Job 9.2.
Ps. 130.3.
and thy great mercy intervene not to mitigate the rigor of thy Justice?

But in thee have I put my trust: Ps. 38.15,
Thou shall answer for me, O Lord my God. I have no other Advocate to plead my
cause, but my righteous Judge himself from whom in my daily prayers I have
required that they, when I stand to be judged before the Tribunal of Heaven.

Eccl. 23.2, 3.
"Who will set scourges over my thoughts, and the discipline of wisdom over my
heart, that they spare me not for mine ignorances, and pass not by my sins?
Lest mine ignorances increase, and my sins abound to my destruction: And I fall
before mine adversaries (in the day of my trial) and mine enemies (the spirits
and powers of darkness) rejoice over me, whose hope is far from thy mercy.

Meditat. II.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, Psalm. 119.120.
and I am afraid of thy Judgments: when I consider the severity of many of thy
temporal judgments, which are now intended to drive sinners to Repentance, that
thou might spare them hereafter, I cannot but foresee the unconceivable
rigor of thy eternal judgments, which intend punishment only, without any
thought of future mercy to spare and to forgive, as in this life.

And I vile sinner have great cause to fear, as a strict examination which all
must undergo, so severe a sentence to pass upon me, having not so
conscienciously as I ought obeyed the sacred dictates of the saving grace of
God, teaching us, Tit. 2, 11, 12, 13.
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world.

With what face then shall I look for the blessed hope, or hope for blessedness
upon the appearance of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ?

I have a greater cause to fear, than to hope; to wave, than to await his
coming.

But how shall I avoid, or whither shall I flee from the face of my Judge?
whither but from an offended God, to a merciful Redeemer? from the Throne of
thy Justice, to thy Mercy-seat? To meet thee now with Repentance in my heart,
and the fruits thereof brought forth in the actions of my life; and with such
spiritual wings cemented with the blood of my Redeemer, I may hope to flee from
the wrath to come.

O God who art justly displeased for our sins, Mat. 3.7, 8.
and pacified by our true and sincere Repentance; spare, O spare all those who
confess their sins unto thee: that they whose consciences by sin are accused,
by thy merciful pardon may be absolved through Christ our Lord.

Meditat. III.
Before Judgment examine thy self: Eccl. 18.20.
and in the day of visitation thou shall find mercy.

And I, upon the examination of my self do find my heart foul and polluted, and
my life stained with manifold offenses: but that I may escape the judgment of
God, I judge my self to be a miserable sinner, I judge my self to have incurred
the Lord's just indignation, to have deserved the dismal sentence of
condemnation to pass upon me. For I have sinned, and I have done wickedly, and
I have committed iniquity, and have rebelled against the Lord by departing from
his most holy Laws and Judgments.

Many will be my accusers when I come to my great Trial upon life or death
eternal: and many and great accusations have they to lay against me: the Devil
and his Angels, whose suggestions unto evil I have too often followed; many
men, and many women too who have been conscious of my sins, and of whose sins I
have been many ways guilty: All the good Creatures of God I have abused, and
his mercies in them: all those evil deeds I have committed, and the many good
offices I have wittingly omitted, all which stand upon record in the Lord's
black book of remembrance: and mine own Conscience shall bear witness to all
these undeniable Evidences.

These are the Books that shall be opened against me: and I have not what to
answer for my self: Psalm. 26.1.
But my trust is in the tender mercies of the Lord, therefore I shall not fall,
and be cast in my trial. Holy Jesus, who wast condemned being innocent, acquit
me though greatly nocent through Faith in thy Blood.

Judge me, O Lord, Ps. 35.24,
according to thy righteousness, not after mine; for it is little, and good for
little: but it is thy righteousness, Holy Jesus, both active and passive, I must
plead for my acquittance when judged by thee: then, O then let not mine enemies
triumph over me.

Let them not say in their hearts, there, But in the hour of death and in the
day of Judgment,

Good Lord deliver me.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE General Judgment.
WHen the Son of man shall come in his Glory, Mat. 25.31,
and all his holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his
Glory.

And before him all nations shall be gathered --

This is called The day of the Lord, 1 These. 5.2.
by way of Eminence, as being of all days the greatest.

I.
And that first in respect of the great appearance which shall be upon this
day, both of the Judge and the persons to be judged.

1. Great and glorious, terrible and amazing shall be the appearance of the
Judge himself, with all his numerous attendants.

His personal appearance shall be in Majesty and great glory; not in respect of
his Divine nature, for that appears not to the eyes of flesh; but in respect of
his Humane nature assumed.

That nature which appeared here upon earth, poor, mean, contemptible: wherein
he was despised and scorned, whipped and scourged, beaten and buffetted,
bespattered with ignominious spittings and vile reproaches: racked, disjoynted,
distorted, deformed, nailed and pierced, crucified and died: shall upon this
day appear clothed with Majesty and crowned with glory: Every eye shall see
him, even they also who pierced him; and the marks in his nailed hands, in his
nailed feet, and in his gored side shall appear as so many shining Stars for
their glittering splendour.

2. A great day in respect of the numerous attendants upon this great Judge; of
whom Dan. 7.9. -- when the ancient of days did sit -- thousand thousands
ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; the
judgment was set, and the books were opened.

When this day of the Lord comes, the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and
the Moon into blood; and all the glittering Stars shall fall from their Orbs:
but then the Sun of righteousness shall shine, attended by all the triumphing
Saints and Angels of Heaven, who shall appear as so many Stars in the Firmament
above, dazzling the eyes, and astonishing the hearts of all persons to be
judged; and this renders,

3. This day a great day in respect of the appearance that shall then be; even
of all the Men that ever lived, or shall live upon the face of the earth: and
of all the Angels also, who are more numerous than men in the judgment of the
Schoolman; who says, T. Aq. p. 1. q. 50. Art. 3.
that there be as many, if not more, of spiritual than of corporal Beings.

4. A great day in respect of the multitudinous Trials, even of all the works
that ever have been done, from the Creation to the dissolution of all things
under the Sun.

And not our works only; but,

5. Of all our words, even of every idle word an account must be given: By thy
words thou shall be justified, Mat. 12.36, 37.
and by thy words thou shall be condemned.

6. Not our words and works only, but even the inward thoughts, intentions, and
desires of our hearts shall be exposed to open view and censure: the Lord will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of all hearts. 1 Cor. 4.5.


The most seared Conscience of the wicked, and the most subtle secret
Conscience of the Hypocrite, shall by the all-piercing light of the divine
Majesty be displayed, and appear as manifest and open, as if all the counsels
thereof had been written with a beam of the Sun: Ps 90.8.
For thou, O Lord, have set our misdeeds before thee, and our secret sins in
the light of thy countenance.

It Is recorded of Agathon, a person famous amongst the Egyptian Fathers for
strictness and holiness of life, that he was notwithstanding exceedingly afraid
upon his approaching death: And being demanded the reason of his fear by such
as knew the innocence of his life: He answered, That the judgments of God do
vastly differ from the judgments of Men: Every way of man is right in his own
eyes, but the Lord weighs the spirits, Prove. 16.2. Woe, woe to the most holy
and innocent life amongst Men, if the mercy of God do not interpose in the day
of Judgment.

For alas, who is so holy, who so pure and innocent, as to stand with any
confidence in that all-discerning light of the Sun of Righteousness? Eccl.
23.19.
Whose eyes are a thousand times brighter than the Sun, beholding all the ways
of men, and considering their most secret parts.

I have been guilty (most merciful Father) I have been guilty of manifold
miscarriages, which I have now forgotten, nor can I through the strictest
examination of my self, recall to my memory many of mine offenses. Job 14.16, 17.
But although I cannot, yet thou numbrest my steps: do thou not watch over my
sin? -- my transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up mine
iniquities. So surely are all my transgressions kept in store against the day
of my Trial: whilst I sensual and secure, think all is well enough with me, and
that my sins are forgotten: Ps. 19.12.
O cleanse thou me from all my secret faults: and as they are hid from my
memory, Ps. 51.9.
so hide thou thy face from them; blot them out of thy Book of remembrance,
that they appear not to my confusion on that great and last day.

II.
1. The Lord has made all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day
of evil, Prove. 16.4. The great day of Judgment is called (...), the day of
evil: As for which day the Lord has reserved the full execution of his severe
justice upon all the evils of the world.

In the Creation of all things, the power of God was most especially
manifested: in the government of the world does his wisdom most appear: In the
Redemption of mankind his mercy is most transparent: And in the day of Judgment
shall his justice most eminently show forth and exercise its strict and
severest measures.

2. Sad and dismal is the sentence that upon this great day shall pass upon all
such, whose Faith has not according to ability and opportunity been fruitful
in the good works of Charity: Mat. 25.41, 42.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire -- For I was an hungered and ye
gave me no meat --

And if these shall be eternally damned, who have not given of their own goods
for the relief of others: what shall become of the Oppressor, the Extortioner,
the Cheater, the Thief, and of every one who either by force or fraud,
publicly or secretly, has either taken, or detained what of right belongs
unto others? Surely if the one shall go, the other shall be driven, hurried
with a vengeance into everlasting fire. Ver. ult.


3. Great, unconceivably great shall be the perplexity and anguish of the
impenitent sinner in this great day: beholding (as Anselm meditates) on the one
side his sins accusing him, and on the other the strict and impartial justice
of Heaven, ready to pass sentence upon him: seeing below him the mouth of Hell
gaping to devour him; and above him an angry Judge condemning him to that place
of Horror: feeling within an accusing Conscience tormenting him, and without
the whole world in consuming flames: 1 Pet. 4.18.
And if the righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
sinner appear? or where shall he hide himself that he may not appear? For any
wicked one to lie hidden on that day is impossible, and to appear is dreadful
and intolerable.

S. Chrysostom says, that the very sight of an angry Judge shall be then more
unsupportable than a thousand Hells.

4. This is that dismal day foretold by our Lord himself, wherein they shall
say, Blessed are the barren, Luke 23.29,
and the womb that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck.

Then shall they begin to say to the mountains,

And hide us from the face of him that siteth upon the throne, Rev. 6.16.
and from the wrath of the Lamb.

For the great day of his wrath is come:

Woe is me that I have sinned: woe, woe, is me, that I have offended this great
and terrible Judge of all the world: but as is his Majesty, so is his Mercy
great and wonderful.

Have mercy upon me, O God, on that great day, have mercy upon me: and deliver
me now in this world from the society, from the temptations, from the guilt of
the wicked; Ps. 141.4.
Let me not be occupied in any ungodly works with the men that work wickedness,
that I be not reckoned and ranked amongst them in the world to come.

III.
The day of Judgment is not only of all days the most dreadful, but the most
joyful also.

The righteous, and the holy, and the just shall appear in glorified bodies,
encircled with the shining rays of excessive light; but the wicked in bodies,
or carcasses rather both hideous and loathsome.

To the impenitent and wicked of the world, it is a day of the greatest terror;
but to the holy and humble of heart and life, a day of Jubilee and greatest
joy: a day of shame and confusion to the one, of glory and consolation to the
other.

How great then shall be the glory of the holy Christian; and how great the
shame of infidelity and Atheism! how great the joy of the true Believer, whose
Faith has been fruitful in all good words; and how great the sorrow of the
Heretic, Hypocrite, the profane and dissolute! for then, and not fully till
then shall God render to every man according to his works. Romans 2.6.7,


To them who by patient continuing in well doing, do seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality: eternal life.

But to them who are contentious,

Tribulation,

But glory,

For there is no respect of persons with God.

What heart can worthily think of these things, without trembling and great
astonishment, if not purified and sincerely devoted to the service of God?

Teach me, O Lord, thy way, Ps. 86.11.
and I will walk in thy truth: O knit my heart unto thee that I may fear thy
name: fear to offend thee the great and righteous Judge of the world, in the
least particular of thought or desire, of word or of deed.

Lord, who never failest to help and govern them whom thou do bring up in thy
steadfast fear and love: keep us, we beseech thee under the protection of thy
good providence, and make us to have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy
name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

IV.
When the Son of man comes, Luke 18.8.
shall he find faith upon the earth? All we who are called Christians, profess
to believe both the certain coming of Christ to Judgment, and the uncertainty
of the time: That we must all stand before his dreadful Tribunal and receive
every man according to his works: but this is generally a dead Faith, it
quickens not the affections, it excites not to such holy conscientious actions,
as the firm and cordial Belief of all this does imply and command: and so will
prove as dangerous to the Souls of such Believers as if they had no faith at
all.

With most of men the Judgments of God, and all the amazing concerns of
Eternity, are no more but words which they hear: they have but very narrow,
very shallow and dark conceptions of them: they understand not their great
astonishing importance; and are not therefore deeply affected therewith to
become wise unto Salvation.

O raise up thy stupid Soul, I do here summon there whosoever thou art that
regardest these Meditations, and thou art hereby summoned particularly as by
name to make thy appearance at this general Assizes to be held at the great and
last day; and there to give an account of every passage throughout thy whole
life: which shall be as strictly and thoroughly sifted and examined, as if there
were none but thy self to be tried, as if no cause but thine alone were to be
heard.

Eja Charissime -- Consider my dear Christian brother, out of what great danger
thou may now deliver thy self, and from what great fear thou may be freed,
if now thou do always stand in awe and sin not; if now thou be always
suspectful of death, and solicitous of the Judgment to come. T. K. l. 1. c. 23.

Prepare then, prepare thy self now; now that thou have time and leisure
prepare thy self for that great day; for upon thy Trial then depends either thy
everlasting well-being, 1 Cor. 11.31. Jam. 4.8, 9, 10. Act. 10.4. Luk 2.37. 2
Cor. 11.27.
or miserable undoing for ever. Now then cast up thy accounts carefully;
examine, try, and judge thy self; confess thy manifold amisses: Humble thy self
greatly under the mighty hand of God: Appease the wrath of the great Judge of
the world by Prayers and Tears, Eccl. 7.17.
and all the sacred offices and acts of true Repentance, by Alms and Offerings
and Fastings often: and in a word, 1 Pet. 2.5.
by all the kinds of those spiritual sacrifices that are acceptable unto God
through Jesus Christ.

Stir up, we beseech thee, O Lord, the wills of thy fatithful people: quicken
our dead and cold Faith with the sacred fire of holy Charity, the very bond of
perfection and all virtue, that we plenteously bringing forth the fruits of
good works, may of thee be plenteously rewarded at the last day, through Jesus
--

V.
And there was a cry at midnight, Mat. 25.6.
Behold the bridegroom comes: Woe unto me then (says a devout Father) if I be
found sleeping in my bed at midnight, Ambr. in Luc.
when the great Judge of all the world shall appear: it concerns me much rather
to resolve with holy David: Psalm. 119.62.
at midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee, because of thy righteous
Indgments.

Happy are those servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find upon their
watch, Mar. 13.33, 34.
awaiting his coming with their loins girt, their lusts restrained, and their
Lamps burning: The light of the holy and true Faith flaming by divine Love, and
shining through all the actions of their life: Mat. 5.26.
that others seeing their good works may glorify God the Father of Heaven.

I will stand upon my watch to guard the innocence of my Soul: Mat. 26.41.
I will watch and also pray, that I fall not into the snare of the Devil when
tempted by him: and that day come upon me unawares.

There be two sorts of sins especially, against which my blessed Redeemer has
commanded me to watch, that the day of the Lord surprise me not: First,
Surfeiting and Drunkenness, Luke 21.34.
or the pleasures of the flesh. Secondly, The cares of the world, or Ambition
and Covetousness: against these grand enemies, which continually war against my
Soul, it concerns me continually also to watch and pray.

Blessed Lord, let not, I humbly beseech thee, any importunate cravings of this
corruptible flesh seduce me, nor the flattering false felicities of worldly
wealth and dignity deceive me; but grant that I being free from all pollutions
both from the one, and the other, may await thy coming in all holy but humble
confidence, to be ranked not amongst the cursed goats on thy left hand, but
amongst thy blessed Sheep on the right hand, and hear that joyful sentence
saying, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning of the world: Grant this O heavenly Father. --

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The XXVI. PSALM. PARAPHRASED.
BE thou my judge, O Lord: for I have walked innocently: not according to the
Innocence of thy Saints in Heaven, but according to that of frail Man upon
Earth. Neither do I herein presume to justify my self, but my trust has been
also in the Lord: it is not my innocence, but the Lord's mercy I rely upon, and
therefore shall I not fall in the day of Judgment.

Examine me, O Lord, and prove me: Try out my reins and my heart; as the silver
is tried when the dross is purged out, and this even in the furnace of
affliction if it so seems good unto thee: that my reins and my heart may be
cleansed from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit; and yet even so I dare
not undergo thy strict and severe examination of me, but with reflections upon
thine immense Goodness.

For thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes: It Is my constant meditation,
and I will walk in thy truth: inwardly delighting and outwardly performing the
commands thereof: and that I may do this,

I have not dwelt with vain persons, neither will I have fellowship with the
deceitful: I have not so delighted in the society, as to be tainted by the evil
examples of such as through their deceivable lusts keep not the Covenant they
have made with their God: nor is it enough to avoid the society, but

I have hated the congregation of the wicked: and will not sit among the
ungodly, so as to continue and be delighted with the errors of their ways.

I will wash my hands in innocence, with the tears of true Repentance I will
wash the sinful works of my hands, and keep them clean and innocent for the
future: and so, not in my sins unrepented, will I go to thine Altar to offer up
Vows and Prayers with the precious body and blood of my Savior.

That I may show the voice of thanksgiving: and tell of all thy wondrous works:
joining with the Ministers of thy Temple in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual
songs, wherein thy great works both of Mercy and Judgment are celebrated.

To this end, Lord, I have loved, the habitation of thy house, the place where
thou inhabitest more especially than any other houses: and it is my delight to
come to this house, because it is the place where thine honor dwells: where
the honor of thy Name is continually celebrated: for in his Temple does every
man speak of his Honor.

And since it is the joy of my heart to join with thy people in the praise of
thy Name, O shut not up my soul with the sinners: though in this world I cannot
altogether escape their temptation and trouble, yet rank me not amongst them,
in the world to come: nor my life with the bloodthirsty: let me not perish
with the cruel, uncharitable and covetous of the world.

In whose hands is wickedness: and their right hand is full of gifts: even
their righteous actions are for bribes, and sinister ends transacted: and such
are all they who make a gain of godliness.

But as for me, I will walk innocently: that is the desire and resolution of my
Soul: O deliver me, through the precious blood of my Redeemer, which was shed
for my deliverance; defend me from all my ghostly enemies that would destroy
mine innocence: and be merciful unto me: let thy mercy both pardon my bypast
transgressions, and support me through all the perils of this mortal life.

My foot stands right fixed in my affections to cleave unto thee, I will
praise the Lord in the congregations: in the assemblies of the Lord's people,
in the house where his Honor dwells: and so shall I hope to be hereafter
admitted into the blissfull company of Angels and Saints to praise the Lord for
ever: saying, Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.



The XLIII. Psalm. PARAPHRASED.
Verse, 1.

GIve sentence with me, O God: when I stand before thee to be judged according
to my works done in the body, whether good or evil, O then defend my cause
against the ungodly people: Plead for me against all the accusations of men,
women, devils, in whose company, or by whose temptations I have done any evil:
O deliver me from the deceitful and wicked man, that I be not ranked amongst
such upon the left hand of unrighteousness and infelicity.

For thou art the God of my strength: why have thou put me from thee leaving me
to mine own weak, frail and sinful self? And this is the reason, why I go so
heavily, in the ways of thy service and of mine own salvation: whilst the enemy
oppresses me; being destitute of thy help, the grand enemy of God and Man
over-powers me with his temptations and assaults: But that I may manfully
resist and overcome,

O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me out of all the
errors of this sinful life; that being separated from the allurements and
society of the ungodly, they may bring me to thy holy hill, where thy Temple is
situate, and to thy dwelling, the place where thine honor dwells.

And that I may go to the Altar of God both Sacramental, and Mystical: even the
God of my joy and gladness, who makes glad my heart by the consolations of his
Holy Spirit, when I approach his Altar: and upon the Harp, which is an
instrument of a Triangular figure, and represents the heart of man: wherewithal
I will give thanks unto thee, O holy and ever blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, one God over all, blessed for ever, and my God, even the God of my
joy and worship, my Glory and my Crown? O then

Why art thou so heavy, O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me?
It Is thy unquiet passions, and unruly lusts, which disturb thy reason, and
withdraw thee thus disquieted from a sincere dependence upon thy God: but
return, return unto thy rest, O my Soul.

O put thy trust in God: I will yet give him thanks: who is to be praised in
both the seasons of sadness and joy: for in both,

He is the help of my countenance, the lightsome gladness of my heart, and my
God, both of my Being and Well-being, even the God of all that I am, and all
that I have, and all that I hope to be; which is to enjoy the beatifical vision
of his divine Majesty: for ever to sing, Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.



THE Third General Meditation UPON THE PAINS of HELL.
MAny are the opinions, and disputes, and too curious also the disquisitions,
touching the place, and nature, matter, manner, and duration of the pains of
Hell: But it would be more Christian prudence strictly to search and find out
those crooked, deceitful and polluted paths which lead to that dismal place of
torments, that we may decline and avoid them.

It Is surely better by much not to feel by woeful experience the miseries of the
damned, than exactly to know, and accurately to discourse of them. And may this
be ever my study, blessed Lord, my continual care, and fear, and constant
endeavor not in the least particular to sin against thee: for thy wrath and
indignation which rests upon sinners, is a fierce wrath, and a terrible, it is
not in the power of frail man to sustain the fury of it.

MEDITAT. I. Of the Pain of Loss.
AS there are two general parts of every sin in this life committed: 1. An
aversion from the Creator: 2. A conversion to the Creature. So there are two
general kinds of punishment for Sin in the Life to come: 1. The Punishment of
Loss: 2. The Pain of Sense.

The first, and it is esteemed by many holy Fathers the greatest of
Hell Torments, is that which is called by Divines, The Pain of Loss, whereunto
the wicked of the world are sentenced in these several expressions: Mat. 22.13.
and 25.30.41. Luke 13.27. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 28.
Take him away -- Cast him out -- I know you not -- depart from me ye cursed --

"The Pains of Sense in Hell, are intolerable (says Chrysostom.) yet for a man to
suffer a thousand Hells is less irksome, than to be banished from Heaven, to be
driven from the presence of God, to be exiled out of the Regions of Light and
Joy, to be rejected of the Lord, and to hear from him, I know you not -- Depart
from me --

The Loss of Heaven must needs be the greatest of Evils, because it is the Loss
of the greatest and most perfect good, and of all that is truly good.

To lose the good things we do now enjoy in the world, may be recompensed with
advantage by the gain of Heaven; but to lose Heaven it self, to forfeit the
right and title we once had happily obtained to be inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven, is a Loss irreparable; Id. Sermon. Aug. Enchir. ad Laurent. c. 112.
"Nothing can compensate, nothing can equal, nothing to be compared to this
Loss, it is Hell enough it self if there were no other.

In this life the most wise and holy understand not thoroughly the fullness of
Heavenly joys, and so cannot be sensible of the Torment of their Loss: but in
the next life our eyes shall be opened, and the veil upon our hearts removed,
and then shall the ungodly see, to their unspeakable grief and anguish of
spirit the vast difference betwixt the never fading pleasures of the right hand
of God, and the empty transitory pleasures of sin; betwixt that fullness of joy
in the presence of God, and the deplorable sorrow of its loss and absence.

It is very probable, that this Torment of Hell is meant by the Worm that dies
not: For nothing can more corrode, and eat so deeply even into the inmost
recesses of damned Souls, as to see and consider for what poor beggarly,
trifling things of the Earth here below they have lost those blissful Joys and
ravishing Felicities of Heaven above, when they shall remember how momentany
were their sinful pleasures, but never to be ended their pains: Then shall they
curse their Parents that begat, and the womb that bare them, and the paps they
sucked; so terrible shall be the Torment of this never dying, ever-gnawing
Worm, that they shall curse themselves that they do still live, yea and curse
God himself, who is blessed for ever.

I have called but ye have refused, Prove. 1.24. Ezekiel. 33.11. Mat. 11.28. Joh.
6.37, 44, 56.
says the Lord: called saying, Turn ye, turn ye unto me with all your heart --
Come unto me all ye that are weary -- But we vain men slight and neglect, nay
too many contemn such gracious invitations: they are not affected or delighted
with the presence of God, or if they come to his house, and approach his
presence there, it is not either with that internal Devotion, and external
Reverence, it is not with such pure hearts and clean hands, as becomes the
presence of so great and glorious, so holy and pure a Majesty: and is it not
then most just and equal, that all such irreligious, irreverent and profane
persons be banished the blissful presence of God for ever?

And so has the Lord threatened, Isai. 65.12. -- Because when I called ye did
not answer; when I spoke ye did not hear, but did evil -- Therefore thus says
the Lord, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; my servants shall
drink, but ye shall be thirsty; my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be
ashamed: Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for
sorrow of heart, and shall houl for vexation of spirit.

Whatever therefore be the guise of the multitude, to walk every one after the
lusts of their own hearts, and to follow their own imaginations in the contempt
of the Lord's admonitions and commands, Psalm. 5.7.
yet as for me whilst I have life and liberty I will come into thy house, even
upon the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy
holy Temple --

My heart has talked of thee and of this gracious command of thine. Psalm. 27.9,
Seek ye my face -- Thy face, Lord, will I seek: under the cloud of my sins and
the thick cloud of my transgressions, nor cast away thy servant in displeasure:
but vouchsafe that my approaches to thy divine Majesty may be so frequent and
fervent, and with such Humility, Reverence and Devotion performed, that my
person and my services may in this life be accepted before thee, that I hear
not at the last day that dismal doom of the wicked, Depart from me, ye cursed
--

MEDITAT. II. Of the Darkness of Hell.
TO be banished the presence of God, who is the Fountain of Light is to be
involved in the terrors of Darkness: Mat. 22.13. Ca. 25.30. Job 10.21, 22.
and therefore after, Take him away, it follows, cast him into outer darkness:
And so is the place of Hell described: A land of darkness and of the shadow of
death, a land of darkness as darkness it self, and of the shadow of death,
without any order, and where light is as darkness. And this must needs be so,
because Hell is farthest remote from Heaven the Region of Light, being seated
(as it is generally believed) in the center of the earth, where neither Sun,
Moon nor Stars display the least ray or glimmering of their Light, and where
not the least beam of the divine Mercy shall ever appear.

There is Fire indeed in Hell, but such a Fire as burns without shining, a Fire
without light, not unlike whereunto is the Fire of blind Zeal, Jam. 3.6.
the tongue whereof sets on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire of
Hell.

All the light which the sulphurous Fire of Hell affords, serves only to
discover the ghastly sight of infernal Fiends, reviling, scourging, tormenting
the damned without mercy, without intermission: and there perhaps may the
wicked see some of their friends, and acquaintance, and of their companions in
their sins involved with them in the same punishment, which are sights so
dreadful as shall augment their Torments.

Here is darkness then, and no darkness: such darkness, as shall hide from the
eyes whatever is pleasant and desirable: and yet no darkness to hide from the
dismal sight whatever is vexatious, and adds the greater anguish to the aching
heart.

This dismal darkness of Hell is called The outward darkness, respecting the
inward darkness of humane Souls, and those manifold deeds of darkness which
issue from the one, and run headlong to the other.

If then thou have followed the lusts of thine own darkened heart, and obeyed
the suggestions of Satan the Prince of darkness, if thou have loved and acted
the works of darkness (of sinfulness and error) more than the sacred acts and
influences of Grace and Truth, it is most just that thy portion be with
blackness of darkness for ever. Joh. 3.19.


Vouchsafe, blessed Lord of light and life, vouchsafe to display the sacred
beams of thy Celestial light into my darkened Soul, dispel and dissipate thence
all the black stain and guilt of sin contracted by my daily backslidings from
thee, all those clouds of ignorance and error, which darken my understanding,
all those noisome lusts of the world and of the flesh which incessantly infest,
and infect my Soul, that I pass not from these inward to that outward darkness
where is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.

MEDITAT. III. Of the Fire of Hell.
OF all the Torments invented and practiced by the malice of men or devils,
that by Fire is the most fierce and frightful: how does it amaze the minds of
men, when they see it flaming in their houses, and consuming their habitations
and estates? and yet the Fire of Hell is far more dreadful and tormenting, as
differing from our ordinary fire especially in three respects.

1. Our fire feeds only upon gross and corporeal substances, but Hell fire
feeds upon spirits and damned souls; and it is therefore as much more fierce and
piercing than our fire, as a spirit is more quick and active, than a gross
heavy body.

Be not deceived (O my Soul) with any fond conceits of vain men, that this fire
is only metaphorical, or fantastical, allegorical or poetical, because it is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, who are spirits, and not liable to
visible flames: But the word of God which cannot lie, and many undeniable
reasons by the learned deduced thence, Mat. 3.12. cap. 13.42. cap. 25.41. Mark
9.43, 47.
do confirm it to be a real, yea a material fire, but more spiritual and
refined, and so more eating, piercing and tormenting than the fire which burns
upon our hearths.

2. Our fire does always burn and torment after the same manner; but Hellfire
being the instrument of divine Justice, does more or less rage and afflict,
according as the persons condemned thereunto have been more or less guilty.

And it is observable, that the sinful Souls doomed to these flames are
represented by our Lord unto those Tares that are bound in bundles to be burnt,
Matthew. 13.30. denoting all kind of sinners to be punished with them that are of
their own rank and quality: e.g. The proud with the proud: The drunkard with
his good fellow: The adulterer with the unclean; and so in all others,
according to the enormities of their lives, shall be their susterings after
death.

And although in this life it is some mitigation of sorrow to have companions
therein of the same quality; yet in Hell it is far otherwise; for there the more
sinners with their sins, the more fuel is added to that dismal fire: So that
when I consider, all the sins that have been committed against the Majesty of
Heaven since the beginning of the world to the end thereof, are as so many
faggots to feed the fire of Hell; I cannot but tremble at the greatness of its
force and fury; and carefully avoid the society of sinners in this life, that I
suffer not with them to the increase of our mutual torments in the other world.

3. Our fire may be quenched, Mat. 3.12. Isa. 66. ult. Isa. 30. ult.
nay 'twill quench it self when its fuel is wasted: but the fire of Hell is
unquenchable: because First, The breath of the everlasting God, like a stream
of Brimstone does enkindle it. Secondly, The fuel that feeds this fire shall
never be consumed, viz. Immaterial, Immortal Beings, of whom being tormented in
these flames it is affirmed, Rev. 9.6.
that they shall seek death, and shall not find it, they shall desire to die,
but death shall fly from them. Miserable wretches! whilst they had time and
leisure to seek life, they neglected it; nay, it is too common, Ut cujus vita
mortua fuit in culpa, illic mors vivat in poena. Greg.
that when life in Christ is offered unto many in the blessed food of their
Souls, they slight and contemn it, and therefore it is most just (as the Father
observes) that they whose life in this world was no other than a death in sin,
their death hereafter should be a life in punishment for sin everlastingly.

But as to the unquenchable fire of Hell, Remember (O my Soul) that there is
now a fire within thee, the which if it be not quenched in this life, will bring
thee to fire unquenchable in the other world: and this is the rank and fulsom
fire of Concupiscence. Thy carnal lusts, and thy worldly lusts being now
followed and fulfilled, are the fuel that feeds that dismal fire of the
Infernal Lake: and the worm also that never dies, is bred of the same
corruption, even in the dunghill lusts of the heart, actuated by the hot
suggestions of Satan.

And as the fire of Concupiscence does now more or less rage in thy heart, so
as to follow the sway thereof; so shall the fire of Hell be, more or less
raging hereafter, if these lusts do not die within thee, before the death of
nature seize thee.

Take then the advice of the Wise Syracides: Eccl. 7.17.
Humble thy self greatly, for the vengeance of the wicked is fire and worms.
And of S. Col. 3.5.
Paul: Mortify therefore your members that are upon earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which
is Idolatry -- For which things sake, the wrath of God comes upon the children
of disobedience.

Blessed Jesus, by the merits and mysteries of thy Circumcision I humbly beg
the true Circumcision of the Spirit: and by the virtue of thy Crucifixion
strengthen me to crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts, lest any of
those exorbitant fires being not opportunely quenched, involve me in those
flames of Hell which are unquenchable.

MEDITAT. IV. Of the extent of Hell-Pains.
Greg. mor.
WHen I consider righteous Job on the Dunghill, the holy Baptist hungring in the
Wilderness, S. James beheaded, S. Peter crucified, the Torments and Deaths of
innumerable Martyrs, the manifold Afflictions of the holy and elect people of
God; I cannot but consider, and know assuredly that very great and many shall
be the Torments of the wicked in the world to come: since God suffers those
whom he dearly loves to be so much afflicted in this life.

The Pains of Hell in the extent of them do herein differ from all present
bodily pains: that these are partial only in some particular parts, joints, and
members of the body, whilst other parts are free from pain: But in Hell the
whole man in all the Senses internal and external, in all the parts of his body
and powers of his soul, yea the most spiritual faculties shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone, rage and despite, grief and anguish, misery and
malediction. For the pains of Hell are a concourse of all kinds of pain, of all
at the same time, and of all of them for ever.

The Taste shall be punished with bitterness, the Appetite with hunger, and the
Tongue with thirst, the Sight with horror, the Hearing with astonishment, the
Smell with stench, the Heart with anguish, the Imagination with fear, the
Reason with madness, the Judgment with confusion, and in the very Bowels fire
unquenchable.

And this is most just, that as the wicked have employed all the powers and
parts both of Soul and Body, as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin; so should
their punishment be in all their Senses, Members, Faculties -- that as each
has transgrest by sinful Pleasure, and inordinate Delight, so each should have
its peculiar afflicting Torment.

There is no sin unrepented in this life, but shall have its proper peculiar
torment in Hell: There the proud shall be filled with confusion: The slothful
shall be pricked forward with burning goads: The covetous shall be pinched with
penury: The glutton and the drunkard shall be pined with a perpetual hunger and
thirst: The envious shall howl like mad dogs for rage and grief: The luxurious
and lovers of Pleasures more than lovers of God, shall wallow in burning pitch,
and stinking brimstone: And in a word, in whatsoever thing a man has in this
life offended, in the same shall he be tormented, if not by a true and timely
Repentance prevented. And this the miserable Dives felt, when he wanted a drop
of cold water to cool his Tongue in Hell, who whilst upon earth had fared
sumptuously every day.

It Is undoubtedly true, that all persons condemned to the flames of the nether
Hell are not equally tormented therein: for though the fire of Hell be one and
the same, yet it torments not all after the same manner, nor in the same degree
of torture: but every man shall therein more or less feel the smart of its
fury, as by the nature, quality and frequency of his sin, he has less or more
deserved the same: Genesis 18.25.
for shall not the Judge of all the world do right?

The more high, peremptory and presumptuous, as also the less obstinate and
impenient sinner shall both suffer under the torment of the same fire, but not
in the same degree of pain and suslering: As under the same heat of the Sun
upon Earth all creatures are not alike scorched, but some are more, some less
sensible of its darting beams, according to their several constitutions: So in
the fire of Hell, the degree of its burning shall not be alike in all, because
what here the diversity of bodies, there the diversity of sins shall effect: So
that though all be tormented with the like flames, yet not every one in the
like manner and degree of torment. Gregor. But alas the lowest degree of
suffering in that place of horror is punishment enough, if seriously
considered, to afright the sinner from all the errors of his ways.

There be many who now think this or that to be severe commands, Love your
Enemies -- Deny thy Self, Fast, and Watch, and Pray -- Take up thy Cross -- but
surely 'twill be much more hard and bitter to hear, Tho a Kemp.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire --

There was an Hermit called Olympius, who had a Cell near the River Jordan,
where he was constantly plagued both with excessive heat, and the bitings of
innumerable Flies: who being demanded why he would continue there to endure
such perpetual vexations: Answered, I suffer patiently the bitings of these
Flies, that I may escape the dismal bitings of that Worm that dies not: And
this great heat I endure, that I may escape the flames of Hell, which are
intolerable and everlasting, and these Heats but for a moment. Prat. Spir. c.
141.

O let not then the severest commands of the Gospel, nor the difficulties and
labors of Repentance startle and afright thee: let not the breach or neglect
thereof, seem a light and a small thing unto thee; but Remember that to endure
the pains of Hell but one hour, is more exceeding painful and asslicting, than
a thousand years of the most strict and severe austerities in Fasting, and
Sackcloth and Ashes.

Remember the Worm that dies not: The Fire that is not quenched: The
inseparable society of tormenting Devils: The horrid howlings of damned Souls:
The everlasting banishment from the presence of God, and from the Regions of
light: The insufferable stench, horror, and stifling fumes: The Eternal hunger
and thirst, lamentation and woe; and surely if these remembrances will not move
thee to embrace the strictest commands of thy blessed Redeemer, thy heart is
hard indeed, and harder than the nether Millstone. 'Twas otherwise with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 119.120.
my flesh trembles for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy judgments.

But I humbly beg I may be here, even here in this life punished for my sins,
but spare, O spare me in the life to come, and from those intolerable pains of
the nether Hell, good Lord deliver me, through Jesus Christ.

MEDITAT. V. Of the Bonds and Chains of Hell.
RIghteous art thou, O Lord, Psalm. 119.137.
and upright are thy Judgments: It Is a justice becoming the just judge of the
World, that the Licentious and Profane, who in this life would not be bound up
nor restrained from following and fulfilling their exorbitant lusts, but have
walked in the counsel of the ungodly, and stood in the way of sinners; that
they who bound up their hands from doing the works of God's Commandments, and
bound up their feet from walking in the paths of his most holy Laws; that they
whose sins are bound upon theirs Souls, and not loosed by true Repentance
through Faith in the Blood of Christ: it is just, I say, that such should incurr
this sad and dismal Sentence, Mat. 22.1.
Bind him hand and foot.

By the feet in holy Writ is frequently meant our affections whereby our Souls
do move, as our bodies do by our feet: And by our hands our actions are meant:
so that by the binding of both in Hell is intimated, that it shall not there be
possible, either to act, or so much as affect what is good, and conducible to
our redemption thence.

To be bound to one place, though in Silken Cords, or Chains of Gold, though
'twere on a Bed of Roses, or the sweetest Perfumes, to be so tied as not to be
able to stir hand or foot, is a very great punishment to the free, active and
stirring soul of Man: How much more then a sorer punishment is it, to be bound
in fiery Chains, eating through the flesh into the very Bowels, nay through all
the most hidden and deepest recesses of the Soul, and be forced to lie down in
a Bed of Flames, and therein not to be able to stir either hand or foot, not to
move or change from side to side for the least ease or mitigation of Torment?

For the binding of the feet implies there is no escaping, no flying from the
place of Torment; and the binding of the hands, that there is no fence against
the tormenting Fiends; that there is no way to be gone, no work to be done to
mitigate in the least their insupportable sufferings: It Is therefore one great
reason of God's forbearance with finners in this life to bring them to
Repentance, because there is no possibility by Repentance to abate the sorrows
of impenitent sinners in the life to come.

He must have a heart of Stone, or rather of Flint the hardest of Stones, who
in remembrance of his sins is not greatly terrified and humbled in the very
thought and apprehension of these fiery tormenting Chains of Hell. And such a
hardness of heart is contracted by a long continued custom in any sinful
course: And every sin unrepented is justly punished. 1. By being insensible of
sin; and 2. without the fear or remembrance of future Judgments, which makes
that vast difference betwixt the wise man and the fool: The wise man fears
and departs from evil, but the fool rages and is confident, Prove. 14.16.

Blessed Jesus, whose innocent tender hands were rudely seized and bound with
Cords of injustice and violence, vouchsafe to loose all the Bonds and Chains of
my Sins, wherewith both my hands and feet, affections and actions are
infettered and infested; and grant that the wounds they have made in my Soul
being washed with my Tears, may be healed by the Sovereign Balsam which from
thy Wounds and Stripes and Bonds does flow: Ps. 25.14.
Pluck my feet out of the Net of every temptation to sinfulness and error, Ps.
119.48.
and let my hands be continually lift up unto thy Commandments to do them, that
I be not liable to be bound by any of the Spirits of vengeance in the fiery
Chains of the nether Hell, where is weeping and wailing --

MEDITAT. VI. Of the Laments of Hell.
THere shall be weeping, Mat. 25.30.
and wailing, and gnashing of teeth: They shall deservedly weep in Hell, whose
eyes upon earth have been full of Adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14.
Lasciviousness and greediness of the Creature: whose eyes have been set upon
their covetousness, Prove. 13.30.
and their eyelids lifted up with scorn and contempt of others: who have been
guilty of any of these, or of any other sinful pollutions, and have not wept
and bewailed the same with the tears of Repentance.

Woe unto you that laugh now in your sinful pleasures, Luke 6.25.
for ye shall mourn and weep either here or hereafter: And it is sad and sottish
to put off this necessity of weeping to the other world, where the Tears of
sorrow and sad Repentance shall avail nothing.

And this is all the water that Hell affords, Luke 16.24.
not a drop to cool the tongue tormented in those scorching Flames, only those
driesly Tears, which the violence of her Torments do extort, which being salt
and brinish, and spent in vain, shall the more increase the bitterness and
augment the miseries of the condemned sinner.

Weeping in this life, as it is a sign, so it is some ease to the inward sorrow
of the Soul, which outwardly evaporates it self by Tears: But it is not thus
with the weepings in Hell; there no Tears, no Sighs, not the saddest
Lamentations can mitigate in the least the sorrows of the Soul; because there
is nothing but what does torment, without any intermixture of ease, or allay:
which is manifest from the conjunction of weeping and gnashing of Teeth, to
intimate there is not such a Lamentation as gives ease to the Soul, but rather
embitters the same even to rage and madness, and dire execrations of it self,
and of all its instruments and companions in her sins, accompanied with
blasphemous revilings of the justice of God.

O that now my head were waters, Jer. 9.1.
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, by weeping here, to prevent the weeping in
Hell hereafter, now to bewail my sins, that I sorrow not when it is too late,
where weeping and wailing shall not assuage but augment my sorrows.

Lament, O sinner, and gnash thy teeth through a holy indignation, to be so
foolish and mad, as for a little sinful pleasure, or dirty delight, to run the
hazard of being obnoxious to never-ending pains and sorrows.

Blessed are they that mourn, Mat. 5.4.
both for their own sins, and for the sins of others through the fear of Hell,
and desire of Heaven; for they shall be comforted, their scars prevented, their
desires obtained.

A broken and a contrite heart, Ps. 51.17.
O God, thou will not despise: A heart broken with godly sorrow for sin, and
venting it self in Tears with Prayers, Humiliations and Confessions mixed with
Faith in the Blood of my dear Redeemer. Thus Lord, thus I humbly beg to be
delivered from thy wrath, and from the deplorable wailings of a sad eternity.
Amen.

MEDITAT. VII. Of the Perpetuity of Hell Torments.
THE Perpetuity of Hell Torments is in the thought thereof a Torment
unspeakable: for in every instant of the Sufferings of the Damned, they suffer
all the Torments of those infinite thousands of years to come, the continuance
whereof is not measured by Time, but by the bottomless Abyss of Eternity, and
the immutability of Divine Justice: and what is time to eternity? Behold as a
drop of water is to the sea, Eccl. 18.10.
and a gravel-stone in comparison of the sand: so are a thousand years to the
days of eternity.

In this life fear has torment: but torment has no fear, but hope rather of
release, and delivery, but in Hell the Damned both fear what they suffer, and
also suffer what they fear, even the everlasting duration of their sufferings:
Rev. 20.10.
They that are cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone shall be tormented day
and night for ever, and ever.

The Damned in Hell (says holy Bernard) shall die unto life, and yet shall for
ever live unto death: For therefore shall they live for ever, that they may be
the food of death eternal.

Are not they then without understanding that work wickedness? Psalm. 14.4.
who being endued with Reason, and capable of Counsel, who knowing the
shortness of this life, and the uncertainty of the same, and withal believing
the everlasting duration of the life to come, do nevertheless bend all their
thoughts and endeavors upon what concerns this present temporary Being, even
to the great hazard of being obnoxious to the Pains and Torments of a sad
Eternity: such madness in the hearts of men can never be thoroughly bewailed
even with Tears of Blood.

Woe to them who now do laugh at what shall be hereafter most sadly bewailed:
and woe to them who shall feel by sad experience what they now either believe
not, or but slightly regard it.

Who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Matt. 3.7.
That there is a wrath to come every Christian believes, and it is a fierce
wrath and a terrible, Romans 2.8, 9.
even indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man
that does evil, and has not repented him of the evil, and of the iniquity he
has done.

Of the coming of this wrath also frequent warning is given, both by the works
and by the word of God, and by the Ministers of his Church: but who takes
warning given? who regards the power of this wrath? very few regard it; though
the less it be regarded, the more fierce it will be, for even thereafter as a
man fears, Ps. 90.11.
so is thy displeasure.

Fear thou the Lord, Prove. 3.7.
O my Soul, fear the Lord, and depart from evil.

Thou, Psalm. 76.7.
O Lord, thou alone art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight, when thou
art angry?

The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, Pro. 14.27.
to depart from the gates of death.

Fear not them that can kill the body, Mat. 10.28.
but are not able to kill the soul: but fear him who is able to destroy both
soul and body in hell.

Let us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly
fear. Heb. 12.28.


For our God is a consuming fire.

The LXXXVI. Psalm. PARAPHRASED.
Verse 1.
BOw down thine ear to him who now bows down his heart, and hear me, O Lord,
confessing, for I am poor, extremely wanting of the graces of thy Spirit, which
should make me rich toward God: I have little or no treasures laid up in
Heaven, and therefore I am in misery, liable to the eternal miseries of Hell:
But,

Preserve thou my soul from that dismal place of Torments, for I am holy, my
God, whom I worship and serve, and humbly beseech thee to save thy servant who
puts his trust in thee, for the riches of grace and salvation, wherein

Be merciful unto me, O Lord, for I will call daily upon thee, that it may
please thee in great mercy to deliver me from that misery, whereunto my
poorness in grace, but abounding sins, make me obnoxious.

Comfort the soul of thy servant that the sorrows of death overwhelm me not:
For unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul, being hereunto encouraged by thy
grace and goodness.

For thou, even the inexhaustible Fountain of goodness, and gracious,
propitiously inclined to hear the supplications of thy people, and of great
mercy against the greatness of iniquity, unto all them that call upon thee,
even to all that call upon thee faithfully, depending upon thee alone for help,
and safety.

Give ear, not slightly hearing the sound of my words, but ponder the voice of
my humble desires: the intense desires of my humbled soul, I humbly desire to
be considered.

In the time of my trouble, I will call upon thee for protection and
deliverance, whereof I will never despair: for thou hear me, if my Prayer be
pure and humble: and therefore will I call upon thee as long as I live.

Among the Gods that be either falsely so called, there is none like unto thee,
O Lord, either for Power or Wisdom: there is none that can do as thou do: thy
Works do far exceed the Power of any created Beings to do the like: and
therefore in fullness of time,

All nations whom thou have made, shall come and worship thee, O Lord, the
Maker of all Men, and of all Things, and being admitted Members of thy holy
Catholic Church shall glorify thy Name, both with heart and voice, and by the
good Works of their Obedience to the Gospel of Christ.

For thou art great, do wondrous things, not to be apprehended but admired,
and it is therefore in all the parts of the World confessed, that thou art God
alone, all others being either falsely or feignedly called Gods: And that I may
accordingly worship thee aright,

Teach me thy way, O Lord, walk in thy truth: and this Way and this Truth is my
blessed Redeemer, who by his Doctrine and Example, Doings and Sufferings, Life
and Death, is the way that leads to Life Eternal: O knit my heart unto thee, by
the indissoluble bonds of a true Faith, firm Hope, fervent Charity: that I may
fear thy Name, so as that I neither dare to sin against thee, nor too much
presume upon thy mercy.

I will thank thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart, as being hereunto excited
by the fear and love of thy Name: and I will praise thy Name for evermore: And
there is very great reason I should do so;

For great is thy mercy toward me, but in my deliverance from manifold evils,
and especially from the greatest of evils: for thou have delivered my soul from
the nethermost hell, in the broad way that leads thereunto I have a long time
walked, and it is of thy great mercy, that I have not long since been hurled
headlong to that dismal place of Torments: And still I have great cause to
complain,

O God, proud Lucifer and his infernal Fiends, and the congregation of naughty
men have sought after my soul: the wicked of the world conspire with the Devil
and his Angels by their sinful suggestions to subvert the innocence of my Soul,
to have her portion with them in the neithermost Hell.

But thou, especially to all them who choose rather to suffer than to do what is
offensive to thy Majesty, and mercy, in pardoning the offenses of the truly
penitent, long-suffering, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to Repentance, plenteous in goodness, abounding in thy blessings,
and truth both in performing thy promises of mercy to the penitent, and in
rendering to every man according to his works.

O turn thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me, a miserable sinner: and that
I may no more offend thee, give thy strength unto thy servant, even ghostly
strength and fortitude, manfully to resist the Devil, and all his numerous
troops of sensual and worldly lusts; in all whose assaults vouchsafe to help
the son of thine handmaid, that I may overcome all their temptations unto evil,
and carefully keep my vow and promise made when I was first admitted to be a
Son of thy handmaid the Church.

Show some token upon me for good, that they who hate me, my ghostly enemies,
may see it and be ashamed, when they shall behold all their conspiracies and
assaults against my Soul defeated by the assistance of thy divine Grace:
because thou, Lord, have helped me and comforted me: thy help to overcome when
I am tempted unto sin, is a great comfort to my Soul, for I have hereupon a
good ground of hope, that thou will deliver my Soul from the nethermost Hell:
and that being raised up from the gates of Death, I may show all thy praises
within the ports of the Daughter of Sion, Saying, Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.



The LXXXVIII. Psalm. PARAPHRASED.
Verse 1.
O Lord God of my salvation, my Corporal and Spiritual, Temporal and Eternal
Salvation is from thee, and therefore I have cried day and night at all times
and seasons, and in all conditions prosperous and adverse before thee, as unto
whom alone the inmost intimate desires of my soul are naked and open: O let my
prayer enter into thy presence, be received and accepted by thee: incline thine
ear unto my calling, so graciously hear as to grant my humble requests.

My soul is full of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto hell, which opens
wide her mouth to swallow down such polluted Souls.

I am counted as one of them that go down to the Pit, and I have been even as a
man that has no strength, which is derived from the Lord of life, to escape
the snares and terrors of death.

Free among the dead, which puts an end to all the miseries of this sinful
life: like unto them that are wounded by the fiery darts of the Devil, and lie
in the grave of corrupt conversation, which leads to the grave of death the
wages of sin; and whosoever thus lie there, are out of remembrance, both
forgotten by the righteous, and also are cut away from thy hand, repulsed from
amongst those blessed Sheep, which shall be ranked on thy right hand in the day
of Judgment.

Thou have laid me in the lowest Pit: a place of darkness, even blackness of
darkness for ever: and in the deep Abyss of inextricable Torments.

Thine indignation lies hard upon me, and thou have vexed me with all thy
storms; those tempests of affliction and trouble which disturb my peace are
sent from thee to scowre the rust of corruption off my Soul.

Thou have put away mine acquaintance far from me, and made me to be abhorred
of them:

I am so fast in prison, I am so enfetter'd in the bonds and chains of my sins,
that without the help of a divine hand I cannot be loosed from them.

My sight fails for very trouble, Lord, I have called upon thee, as being my
only refuge in danger, support in trouble, and succor in all distress, I have
stretched forth my hands unto thee, by my practice according to my prayer.

Do thou show wonders among the dead? or shall the dead rise up and praise
thee? They must have part in the first Resurrection (which is from the
corruption of sin) who worthily show forth thy praise.

Shall thy loving kindness be showed in the grave, both in the state of the
first, and of the second Death, there is a deep silence of thy Goodness and of
thy Truth.

Shall thy wondrous works be known in the dark, Thy righteous and admired deeds
are not once mentioned either in the grave of Death, or in the Pit of Hell: in
both estates there is an utter forgetfulness of all thy Goodness and Truth. But
that I may be delivered from such a sad condition,

Unto thee have I cried, Before I be surprised by Death, let my prayer for thy
prevented and assisting Grace be not rejected.

Lord, why abhorrest thou my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me, as being
still displeased with me, and deaf to my petitions?

I am in misery, Death as the wages of sin dogs me at the heels: even from my
youth up thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind: The terrors of my
Conscience for sin, have been always accompanied with a troubled and contrite
spirit, which thou have promised not to despise.

Thy wrathful displeasure goes over me: and the fear of thee has undone me:
the fear of thy wrath in the day of Judgment, and of the never-dying Torments
of Hell, has ruined all my worldly consolations.

They came round about me daily like water overflowing all the powers and
passions of my Soul, and compassed me together on every side, leaving no
visible means of evasion and peace.

My lovers and my friends, have thou put away from me, they are alienated and
estranged in time of my trouble: and hid mine acquaintance out of my sight,
they will not now see me who formerly frequented my company.

And therefore being thus desolate, and deeply endeangered, unto thee as my
only hope and refuge, O Lord God of my Salvation, I have cried day and night
continually, for Deliverance and Salvation, that my soul may continually bless
thee and say, Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.



THE Fourth general Meditation OF HEAVEN.
1. THE Land of Canaan was promised to Abraham the Father of the Faithful in
these words of command: Genesis 13.14.
Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art, Northward and
Southward, Eastward and Westward -- For all the Land which thou see, to thee
will I give it,

The Celestial Canaan is herein promised unto thee, if a true Son of the
Faithful Abraham: Lift up then thine eyes, O my Soul, and Contemplate the
ravishing Felicities of this Land of Promise. This is thy Native Country, where
thou wast at first Framed by the hands of the Almighty, after His own Image;
Why then do thou not pant, and breath, and sigh, and long to be at Home? Why
art thou so well pleased with a strange Land, and delightest rather to be a
Pilgrim in the Valley of Tears, than a Free Denizon in the Land of Peace? a
Foreigner in the city of Babylon than a Citizen in the heavenly Jerusalem?
Away, away from Lebanon, O my Soul, thy beloved calls thee away from the Dens
of Lions, Can. 4.8. Psalm. 55.6.
and the mountains of the Leopards. O that I had wings like a Dove, for then
would I flee away and be at rest.

3. We read that the Lord brought Moses to the top of mount Pisgah, and showed
him the promised land, where having the wilderness behind him, and the happiest
of all lands before him, he represents the devout and heavenly minded Soul, who
considering the manifold troubles in the wilderness of this world, and the joys
and felicities of the world to come, is highly ravished in the contemplation
and desire of the one, to the extreme contempt of the other.

Did I but seriously consider the ways of my present peace and contentment, I
could not but observe, that the Commandments of God have so much intrinsic
sweetness and felicity in them, as to excite the most simple and stubborn Soul
to obey them: and yet so excessive are the ardors of divine Goodness and Love,
as to engage our obedience by the promises of Celestial Joys. Unto this
immarcescible Crown of Glory we are Created by God the Father, Redeemed by God
the Son, and Sanctified by God the Holy Ghost in the sacred Waters of Baptism,
wherein we are adopted, not only sons, but heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven.

What blindness then does so much possess the minds of the greatest part of the
sons of men, that all their desires and endeavors should be so wholly taken up
with the vain, frail, empty and dying things of the Earth, to the slight and
neglect of those never fading joys of Heaven?

The first and largest step we take toward Heaven, is from the state of Sin
into the state of Grace; the other, viz. from Grace to Glory is a more easy
and ready passage; there being nothing betwixt the one and the other, but a
frail mortal life, which taking end, the Soul that is enriched with the
ornaments of divine Grace is immediately clothed with the Robes of Glory: and
therefore both the one and the other is styled by our Lord Life Eternal, John
17.3. This is Life Eternal, that we might know thee --

3. The happiness of Heaven is the end of all Holiness upon Earth; and that
must needs be the greatest good, which is the end of all that is good, for the
end is more noble than the means. It Is the last good we hope for, and so the
most perfect, as being the perfection and accomplishment of all the good we can
imagine or desire; nay, it is a blessedness beyond our frail imaginations to
comprehend: as it is written, eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him Quod Deus praeparavit diligentibus se, fide non capitur, spe non
attingitur, charitate non comprehenditur, desideria and vota transgreditur:
acquiri potest, aestimari non potest. Aug. in 1 Cor. 2.9.
.

4. Raise up thy affections (O my Soul) as to be ravished with the love of
Heaven, so to lament with tears of sorrow and shame thy sloth and negligence,
thy coldness and indevotion, thy sinful security and earthly mindedness, and
what obstructs thy way, and slackens thy pace toward this place of joy
unspeakable and glorious.

O how slight and trivial, how inconsiderable are all the most strict and rigid
labors of Repentance and Mortification, of the most profound Piety, and ample
Charity, in respect of those Celestial joys whereunto they lead thee!

And if it shall once please God through the merits of Christ to receive thee
into Heaven, thou will then think all thy prayers and tears, Age quod vgis,
fideriter labora in vinea tua: ego (inquit Dominus) ero merces iva: scribe,
lege, canta, geme, tace, ora, sustine viriliter contraria: digna est his
omnibus vita aeterna, and majoribus praeliis. T.K.
sighs and groans, fastings and watchings, all thy labors of love both to God
and Man, very well spent, that they have wafted thee over the troublesome waves
of this worlds vast Sea, into the Haven of Eternal peace and felicity.

Vouchsafe me, O Lord, a good end of my life, a happy passport out of this
world, and lead me in the straight and even path that leads to thy Kingdom;
where that I may at last arrive, it shall neither be my care nor fear, what,
and how great things I suffer and undergo in my passage thither.

MEDITAT. II. Of the place we call Heaven, and first, its Greatness.
THat Empyreal Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. Deuteronomy. 10.14. 2 Chr. 6.18.
which is the seat of God and of all his holy Angels and Saints for ever, is
called also the Third Heaven, and the Highest Heaven, and the Heaven of
Heavens; and it is of all the places of the Universe the most spacious, large
and ample: for it contains all the Heavens and the Earth also, even the whole
Creation within its verge and compass.

Do but consider the vastness of the Sun, and of the Moon, with the multitude
and magnitude of all the Lights of Heaven, most of which are greater, and some
of them far bigger than the whole body of the Earth: Consider also that besides
the vast number of Stars, there are empty spaces in the firmament for as many,
nay for many more than as many yet: and then admire with astonishment the vast
extent and amplitude of the Heaven of Heavens, which contains all these, and
all that is above, and all that is below all these, within its circuit and
circumference.

Secondly, Its brightness and Beauty.
The brightness of the Sun, the Moon and the Stars do but imperfectly represent
the Beauty and Brightness of Heaven, as it is described, Rev. 21.23.
Rev. 21.23. And the City had no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon to shine in
it, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof;
which exceeds as much the light of the Sun, as the Suns light transcends that
of a glimmering Taper.

The Air of this Country of Heaven is continually pure and clear, bright and
splendid; it is not capable of any Clouds, Mists, or Vapors, not liable to any
Rains, Storms and Tempests, not hick infectious Air offends the Inhabitants of
this happy Land; whilst the wretched Miscreants of the nether Hell are involved
in blackness of darkness, stifled with the suffocating fumes of sulphurous
fire, without the least hope of any purer Air wherein to breath for ever.

Thirdly, Its Tranquillity.
All in this City of God is peaceable and quiet, tranquil and secure, and free
even from the fear of the least disturbance; Psalm. 90.10.
no evil comes nigh this dwelling.

It Is promised by our Lord, John 16.22. Your joy no man takes from you: It Is
alone the joy of Heaven, which cannot be taken away: not by the world which is
overcome, and trampled under foot: not by the flesh, for that is so
spiritualized, and refined, as no more to rebel against the dictates of the
spirit: not by sin, for here enters nothing that is unclean: not by death, for
immortality reigns here: not by any pain or sickness, for these are but the
Messengers and Forerunners of Death: not by chance or fortune, for Heaven knows
no such heathen Deity: not by Envy, Hatred Malice, Strife, -- for all the
Inhabitants of Heaven are combined in the sacred Bonds of everlasting Charity.
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain, for the
former things are passed away, Rev. 21.4.

What the Lord promises to his Church Militant is fulfilled in his Church
Triumphant, Ps. 147.13,
The Lord has made fast the bars of thy gates: they are inexpugnable by any,
by the utmost force and fury of all the Spirits and Powers of Darkness.

The Lord makes peace in thy borders: fallen like lightning from Heaven, Luke
10.18.
there is no room here for that Author of all division, nor yet for any of his
instruments, Ps. 68.30.
The people that delight in war: It Is the inheritance of Peacemakers, Mat. 5.9.
and of the peaceable minded, and of such only as live in Peace upon Earth.

And O that it might please the God of Peace to allay that rancour, to depress
that tumor, to assuage that itch of contention which now so much disturbs the
peace of his Church upon Earth, and obstructs the way to this heavenly
Jerusalem, the City of Peace: Heb. 12.14.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord.

O God the Athour of peace and lover of concord, in knowledge of whom stands
our Eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom; defend us thy humble
servants in all the assaults of our Enemies, that would disturb our peace: that
we surely trusting in thy defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries,
through the might of Jesus Christ --

MEDITAT. III. Of the good things of Heaven.
1. HONOR.
Honor in Heaven is not that which swells with vainglory, and is puffed up with
the infectious breath of Flattery, and the praise of men, Joh. 5.44.
but the honor that comes from God only.

Honor is the reward of virtue, and he who is the donor of virtue and
obedience has promised to honor the obedient and virtuous, saying, If any man
serve me, Joh. 12.26.
him will my Father honor: What, and how great this honor is we read, Rev.
3.31. Rev. 3.31.
To him that overcomes will I give to sit with me in my Throne: even as I have
overcome, and am set down with my Father in his Throne: There cannot be surely
an higher Honor than this, to be exalted by the right hand of the most High,
and placed in the same Throne with the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: O what
Hymns of divine Praise, what applauses and exultations, what shouts of joy
shall sound through the whole Court of Heaven, when thus it shall be done to
the man whom the King delights to honor. Esth. 6.11.


2. POWER.
2. Honor without Power is but a titular, empty, airy happiness: And the
Saints shall have all power of what they will, as God has of what he wills:
For as God can do what he will by himself, so can they do what they will by
him: For as they will nothing but what the Lord wills; so the Lord wills
nothing but what they will have; it is not possible, but that they have Power to
do whatever they will; so Aug. Manual. c. 35. The Power of the Saints in Heaven
is promised by the Lord of all power, saying of the faithful and wise servant,
Matt. 24.45, 46.
he will make him ruler of all his goods: implying a power given to his Saints,
not only over all that is called good upon earth, but also over all the joys of
Heaven, which are an aggregation of all that is good. It Is promised to him that
overcomes, that he shall inherit all things; for being the Sons of God, they
are also heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, partakers of all power with
him both in Heaven and Earth. Closs. ord. in loc. Rev. 21.7.
He that overcomes shall inherit all things: wherein are implicitly promised,

3. RICHES.
3. The Riches of Heaven, are not such corruptible things as Silver and Gold,
gorgeous Attire, delicious Fare, large Demesnes, fair Habitations -- but
without any such frail deceitful pelf there shall be abundance of peace, Ps
72.7. 2 Cor. 4.17. 2 Cor. 15.28.
a fullness of perfection and felicity, an exceeding and eternal weight of
glory: and in a word; in Heaven God shall be all in all: He who is the Fountain
and Wellspring of all good gifts and graces upon Earth, will be himself the
Reward and Crown thereof in Heaven; than the which there can be nothing more
high and honorable, nothing more great and powerful, nothing more rich, full,
eminent, perfect, joyous, and all that can be desired conducing to true
happiness.

Happy then, and thrice happy are they who now in this life covet chiefly,
covet only to have the Lord for their portion, saying, not from the teeth only,
but from the bottom of their hearts, Psalm. 16.6,
The Lord himself is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou shall
maintain my lot. And surely he must needs be most exorbitantly covetous, that
will not be content with such a heritage: and to possess the Lord himself, who
possesses all things, is the Riches of Heaven.

4. PLEASURE.
Pleasure consists in the union of the Soul with an object of Delight: and in
Heaven the Soul shall be united with the most beautiful, and blissful object,
viz. The Lord of glory, The light of the World, The God of all Consolation. We
read 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit, which is the
height of pleasure, and perfection of Delight to be so intimately joined to the
Lord as to become one spirit with him: such do deliciously taste and fully see
how gracious the Lord is. Psalm. 34.8.


There is no earthly pleasure like the taste and sense of the Lord's grace and
favor to us: It Is yet a greater pleasure to enjoy the Lord as the only object
of Love and Delight: It Is yet more sweet and pleasurable to acquiesce and be
fully satisfied in the enjoyment of the divine Majesty. But the fullness of joy
is not only to enjoy, but to know that we shall ever enjoy the beatifical
vision, and have the fruition of the supreme beauty, and divine goodness for
ever and ever.

Now then, Psalm. 37.4.
O my Soul, Delight thou in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts desire:
In the satisfaction and peace of thy desires does thy happiness consist, and
this is alone in the Lord obtainable: Ps. 89.16,
Blessed are the people, O Lord, that can rejoice in thee; they shall walk in
the light of thy countenance:

But the soul that will rejoice in God must be stamped after his Image, and be
like unto him, pure as he is pure, holy as he is holy, merciful as he is
merciful.

Ephesians. 5.1, 2.
Be ye followers of God as dear children, and walk in love: and so thou may
hope to enjoy the Lord as the supreme object of love and delight in Heaven.

How infinite is the goodness, and how exceeding the bounty of the Lord to his
good and faithful servants, to admit them into the same joy, which himself
enjoys! for so shall it be said to each of them, Well done good and faithful
servant -- enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Matt. 25.25.

The joy and felicity of God does consist in the contemplation, and fruition of
his own perfections, and felicities: and such is the happiness of the Saints in
Heaven to contemplate, and enjoy the divine Majesty, in the fullness of his joy
and pleasure for evermore.

Beloved, now we are the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall
be: but we know when he shall appear we shall be like him: for we shall see him
as he is, 1 John 3.2. To see God as he is in himself clearly, fully, and with
fullness of satisfaction, is the happiness both of God himself, and of all his
Saints in him.

O Lord, who have prepared for them that love thee such good things as pass
man's understanding; Pour into our hearts such love toward thee, that we
loving thee in and above all things, may obtain thy promises which exceed all
that we can desire, through Jesus Christ.

MEDITAT. III. Of the Company of Heaven.
1. Of God's presence there.
1. GOD who is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is the chief and principal
Inhabitant of the Heaven of Heavens: God indeed is every where in respect of
his Essence, Presence, Power, but in Heaven in respect of his Glory, and the
supereminent brightness of his Majesty, which is in Heaven most conspicuous,
full, and ravishing: nor could Heaven be called so, it were not Heaven, if not
enlightened, and enhappied by God's superlative presence there: Tho. a Kemp.
And where ever, O Lord, thou art present, either in grace or glory, there is
Heaven: and Death and Hell is every where, where thou art absent.

2. But what does it avail the company of Heaven that God is there especially
present, since God dwells with the light which no man can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6.17.
whom no man has seen or can see? The very Angels of Heaven cover their faces
with their wings in the presence of God, that the excessive brightness of his
Majesty and great Glory overwhelm them not. Isa. 6.2.
It Is true, but however so much of this eminent glory shall appear, and so
fully the splendid Rays thereof be displayed in Heaven, as shall ravish all the
blessed beholders thereof with a joy unspeakable and glorious.

They shall be satisfied with the plenteousness of thy house, 1 Pet. 1.7. Ps.
36.8,
( viz. of Celestial glory) and thou shall give them drink of thy pleasures as
out of a river: so full and overflowing shall be their satisfaction and
contentment.

For with thee is the Well of Life, and in thy light shall we see light, even
the ravishing Light of Glory in the Light of God's countenance: in whose
presence is fullness of joy.

2. The Angels of Heaven.
Next to the blissful presence of God, the society in Heaven is Angels and
Archangels, Cherubims and Seraphims, Thrones and Dominions, Principalities and
Powers, and all the several Orders of celestial Spirits. Col. 1.16.


The very sight of one blessed Angel upon Earth, would be more joyous and
ravishing than to behold the greatest beauty, and most splendid excellency that
is liable to the eyes of flesh: yea all the pomp and glory of the World is not
comparable to such a sight: how much more joyful and glorious will it be, not
only to behold, but to enjoy the society of those innumerable ministering
spirits of whom we read, Dan. 7.10.
Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him? Isa. 6.3, etc. Rev. 21.10.


These rest not day and night, crying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath:
Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy glory: To make one in this
Hymnidical Quire, and to be received into one of these Mansions of Glory from
whence the Apostate Angels fell, is such an astonishing joy as cannot by the
tongue of men and Angels be expressed.

3. The Saints in Heaven.
To these Angelical spirits are joined in society as Members of the same Church
Triumphant in Heaven, The glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly
fellowship of the Prophets, the noble army of Martyrs, the innumerable train of
holy Confessors, Priests, and people of each Sex, and of every condition, of
whose numberless number we read, Rev. 7.9. Rev. 7.9, 10.
And I beheld and lo a great multitude which no man can number of all nations,
and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the
Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands -- and cried with a
loud voice, Salvation to our God --

These are they, which come out of great tribulation,

Therefore are they before the Throne of God,

They shall hunger no more,

The Lamb in the midst of the Throne shall feed them,

Blessed Souls in whom the King of Glory places his Throne, and reigns in
them for ever: Blessed are those mouths which shall taste and be satisfied with
the Waters of life everlasting, and blessed are those tears which shall be
wiped away with the right hand of God himself, and everlasting joy succeed in
the stead thereof.

Into this glorious Communion of Saints in Heaven, there daily are, and daily
shall be for ever received all such true servants of God, and stout Soldiers of
Jesus Christ, who under his banner have overcome the Devil and all his works,
the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, all the sinful lusts of the flesh:
who have warred a good warfare over these their ghostly enemies, and kept the
Faith whereinto they were baptized, without any tincture of Heresy, or Schism,
observing God's holy Will and Commandments, and walked in the same all the days
of their life.

All of these returning from their wearisome Pilgrimage through the wilderness
of this world, to their native home of Heaven, shall be received into, and
rejoice in their proper and peculiar mansions of peace: each differing indeed
in the degrees of glory, according to their difference in the degrees of grace,
but all shall enjoy their full proportion of happiness, and with common joy
shall sing together perpetual Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne,
Rev. 5.13.
and to the Lamb for ever.

And it is wonderful amongst the joys of Heaven, and adds exceedingly to the
greatness thereof. That as the number of Saints is great, and their joys many:
so are the joys of each particular Saint, even as many, and blissful, as the
joys of all: And this because each one shall rejoice as much in the felicity of
others, as if 'twere his own peculiar happiness.

Happy and for ever happy were I, if with a flood of Tears and incessant
Prayers, if with the devour surrender of all that I am, and all that I have to
the love and service of God, I might be admitted into this celestial Society:
To come unto Sion, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.
and unto the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable company of Angels, To the general assembly and Church of the
firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to
the Spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant --

All this I believe as a Christian, but my Hope to be admitted into this
blessed Society is too weakly grounded: whilst my Charity both toward God and
his Saints is too cold and benumbed.

I do profess to love God, and do desire that my heart may be every day more
and more inflamed with the sacred fire of divine charity: but doubtless I must
have withal a due regard and veneration for his Saints; for as God is praised
in his Saints, so is he dishonored in their dis-respect, He that touches them
touches the apple of his eye.

Qui derogat alicui sanctorum -- Who detracts from any of the Saints of God,
Ps. 150.1. Zech. 2.8.
detracts from Christ himself, who is the Saint of all Saints, and detracts
also from all the Saints in Heaven; for all are united in the sacred bonds of
Charity, all think the same thing, all do will alike, and all do love both
themselves and all in one. T.K. 2, 3. c. 58.

If the zeal of some persons toward the Saints in Heaven exceed its due bounds
and limits, I must not therefore throw off that devout respect which is due
unto them; remembering that it is the end of my Faith, the sum of my Hope to be
by holy Charity joined with them in the same mystical body of Christ our common
Lord, and Redeemer, and with them to love, and to praise the Lord: yea to
praise and love him for ever, Ps. 84.4.
which is the happiness of the Saints in Heaven: for, blessed are they that
dwell in thy house, they will always be praising thee.

And further, the greatness of the joys of Heaven may be in some degree
esteemed by the greatness of their purchase: It is not doubted but the blood of
the Son of God is of so great value, that the least drop thereof was of
sufficient dignity to redeem ten thousand worlds; and yet our blessed Redeemer,
who only knows how to value all things according to their worth, gave every
drop of his precious blood, accompanied with unspeakable torments, pangs and
sufferings, to purchase this Celestial inheritance: hence all truly Religious
have Heaven their desire, and the Earth their patience, being of the same mind
with S. Paul, Cupio dissolvi -- I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ
--

But I am unworthy, too much unworthy, sinful dust and ashes, to be admitted
into the blissful presence of my dear Redeemer: But I will not despair since he
has, 1. purchased this happiness for me Heb. 9.12, 15, 24.
; since 2. he has promised to receive me thereinto Joh. 14.3.
; and 3. he has prayed also for my actual possession thereof, saying, Father,
I will, that they whom thou have given me, Joh. 17.24.
may be with me, where I am, that they may behold the glory which thou have
given me.

O Sweetest Savior, who to save and redeem man vouchsafedst to be made man,
and to appear in the likeness of sinful flesh; O when? when will that happy
hour come, wherein I shall be admitted to behold thy blessed Face, Ps. 17.16.
which the Angels in Heaven behold with joy and wonder? When I shall awake up
after thy likeness, I shall be satisfied with it, Joh. 17.5.
satisfied to the greatest height and fullness of content, when I shall behold
that glory thou had with the Father before the world was: even so come Lord,
Jesus, come quickly.

MEDITAT. IV. Of the perpetuity of Heavenly Joys.
THE most full enjoyment of all the good things this world affords, is not to
be called, or accounted Happiness, because they are not only vain and empty of
true satisfaction, but also not permanent and lasting: To every purpose under
the Sun tending toward satisfaction and happiness, Eccl. 8.6.
there is a time and Judgment, a Time limited for its prosecution and
enjoyment, and Judgment also shall pass upon the actions relating thereunto: it
must needs follow, therefore the misery of man is great upon him.

But the good things of Heaven are durable, permanent and lasting, hereunto
shall no Time succeed, no Judgment follow.

It Is a maxim in Divinity, That there is no succession in the joys of Heaven,
because what is Eternal admits not of what is first, and what is last, but is
both, and all in the same moment, which renders those joys transcendently full
and ravishing, since in each moment is enjoyed the joys of perpetuity; not
increasing by degrees, or protracted by delays, nor yet augmented by several
spaces of Time, but wholly and altogether, and in the same moment is enjoyed
and received the same glory in its height and fullness, and this never to be
diminished, or decayed, forfeited or lost.

Eus.
The Glory of them that die in Grace, is Immortal, their Happiness Immutable;
their Crown immarcescible; their Life everlasting; and their Reign with God,
and the Lamb for ever and ever. No day does pass with these blessed Souls,
without its fullness of joy and content: This joy shall be ever new, and yet
ever the same: This glory shall never wither or decay, but flourish for
perpetual eternities.

And this must needs be so; because celestial joy consists as in the blissful
vision of God, so in an assimilation to him: for just men made perfect, are
immutable in their perfection and felicity by beholding him who is
unchangeable: so the Apostle, We all as in a Glass, 2 Cor. 3.18.
beholding the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to
Glory even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

The Moon and the Stars receive their light from the Sun, and become like unto
him, by being opposite, and in a sort beholding the Sun's bright face: So the
pure Souls in Heaven by seeing God who is the Light of lights, are from him
enlightened and made like unto him. So says the beloved Apostle: Beloved, 1 John 3.2.
now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but
we know when He shall appear, we shall be made like him, for we shall see him
as he is: 1 Cor. 13.12.
And that is not as now, in a glass darkly, but face to face i. e. as fully as
our measure will contain, our proportion bear, and our degree in Grace require.

Gran. medit.
"The joys of Heaven (says Gran.)shall continue as many millions of Years as
there are Stars in the Firmament, and many more: They shall last as many
hundred millions of years as there have been drops of Rain fallen from Heaven
since the beginning of the world, and more, much more. In a word, they shall
endure as long as there is a God in Heaven, and this God the same which was,
which is, and which is to come, from everlasting to everlasting.

Shall not then my heart be fixed where such lasting joys are to be found? And
thither my heart must first be sent by way of Harbinger, before my person can
atrive there: I must now have my Conversation in Heaven, before I can have my
Consummation there: I must now be Heavenly minded, or else never hope to be
admitted into the joys of Heaven.

But O the heavy burden of my sins! These do depress and weigh down the mind,
and make her affections grovel in the dust: and yet even these shall not hinder
thy ascent into Heaven, if thou tread them under thy feet: For every sin, and
vanity trodden down, subdued and mortified is one step, Genesis 28.12. De vitiis
nostris senlam facimus, dum vitia calcamus. Luke 15.7. Heb. 12.1, 2.
one Scale or Round of that Celestial Ladder, which being set upon the Earth
reaches up unto Heaven: which the Angels of Heaven rejoice to behold.

And may the right hand of God assist me, to lay aside every weight, and the
sin that does so easily beset me, and to run with patience the race that is set
before me.

Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that
was set before him endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set down
at the right hand of the Throne of God.

Blessed Lord, who have made me after thine own Image to attain the perfection
and felicity of my Being in the beatifical vision and fruition of thy Majesty
in Heaven, vouchsafe here to guide me with thy Counsel, and after that to
receive me with glory, through the Merits and Mediation of thy blessed Son and
my dearest Savior Jesus Christ --

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The XXIV. Psalm. PARAPHRASED.
Verse 1.

THe Earth is the Lords and all that therein is, the compass of the world, and
they that dwell therein: The Heavens are the Lord's chief Dewlling Place, the
Earth and all the Nations thereof he has given to his Son Jesus as he is
Redeemer of the World: so Psalm. 2.8. Desire of me, and I shall give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for thy
possession.

For he has founded it upon the seas, As God has so wisely ordered the Earth,
and the Water, that the one may refresh, not overflow the other: so he has
founded his Church upon a Rock above the Floods of secular Cares and Turmoils,
and all the rising waves of this World's vast Sea, which is signified by the
Situation of his Temple on a Hill: And,

Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, (or stand) in his holy place? Who
is he that shall be qualified to appear and stand in the presence of God, and
to join with his people in that solemn worship which in his holy Temple is
exhibited unto him? Such a one is also qualified to ascend and raise up his
Soul to those mountains of joy in the celestial Sion. And such a one is

He that has clean hands: And a pure heart, to all outward, an inward holiness
is required, which consists in the purity of the heart, viz. to be pure from
all sordid and vile affections, to be sincere and without hypocrisy in all
Religious performances: that has not lift up his mind to vanity: who follows
not those pomps and vanities of this wicked world which he once so solemnly
renounced: nor sworn to deceive his neighbor, that will not say, much less
swear an untruth, nor yet break his word, especially when confirmed with an
oath. Such is the holiness, and innocence that entitles a people to the
presence of God in his Temple upon Earth, and in his House in Heaven, 1. the
holiness of the heart, 2. of the hands, 3. of the tongue; or Holiness in
thought, word, and deed.

He shall receive the blessing from the Lord: and righteousness or mercy in the
pardon of his sins, or the reward of righteousness, i.e. Salvation not of or
from himself, or from any but from the God of his Salvation.

This is the generation of them that seek him: viz. in grace here, in glory
hereafter, which is the double blessing of them that seek thy face, O Jacob:
All that be true Israelites indeed, thus make their holy and humble addresses
to the God of Jacob for his grace and favor.

Lift up your heads, or, lift up your gates, O ye Heads or Princes of the
Heavenly Jerusalem: and be ye lift up ye overlasting doors which open the
passages to life everlasting: and the King of glory shall come in: he who has
vanquished and gloriously triumphed over the gates of everlasting death, over
all the spirits and powers of darkness, is ascended to open the gates of the
Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers.

Who is the King of glory? it is the Lord strong and mighty: who although he
submitted himself to be betrayed, apprehended, arraigned and condemned to
death; yet is he even the Lord mighty in battle, who naked and unarmed, has
vanquished by his sufferings: and by his death overcome death, and him who has
the power of death the Devil: for which victory he rides in Triumph upon the
clouds of Heaven: and therefore,

Lift up your Heads, O ye gates of the celestial Paradise, which have been shut
against the sons of Men from the fall of the first Adam: and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors: Raise up your selves ye immortal souls, open and be enlarged
in your desires and affections unto him who has opened unto you the
everlasting doors of glory: and the King of glory shall come in: He who is
ascended, will also descend into you, if pure and Heavenly minded, and thither
enwrap and raise you whither himself is gone before: if yet for your further
satisfaction you desire to know

Who is the King of glory: by whose Triumphant ascent into Heaven we believe
and hope thither to ascend also? It is even the Lord of Hosts, he who has the
command of all the powers of Heaven, Earth, and Hell, who has the command
especially of all the powers and operations, virtues and graces of the Holy
Spirit of God, and dispenses them accordingly unto all that love and fear his
name: He is the King of glory: he is glorious indeed above all, and God over
all blessed for ever: and therefore to him, as is most meet, be all glory
ascribed.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The LXXXIV. Psalm PARAPHRASED.
1. O How amiable are thy dwellings, especially in the high and holy place,
thou Lord of Hosts, even of the numerous troops of Angels and Archangels, and
of all the powers of Heaven!

My soul has a desire, which is more than ordinary, a longing even to a
separation from it self, to enter into the Courts of the Lord, to view those
several Mansions of glory, and the blissful condition wherein all the Courtiers
of the King of Heaven do praise him for ever: my heart and my flesh when
subdued to the spirit rejoice in the living God; there is no joy like the joy of
his presence who gives life, and a heart to pant and breath after the joys of
life eternal.

The sparrow has found her a house, And O that my Soul could mount as does the
Sparrow upon her wings with inflamed affections after the pleasures of thy
house, and that my flesh might be instrumental to my Soul in bringing forth the
fruits of the Spirit, to be sacrificed upon the Altar of Praise and
Thanksgiving unto thee, O Lord of hosts my King and my God, whom alone I desire
to adore, worship and obey.

Blessed are they here in hope, who dwell in thy house of Prayer upon Earth, of
Praise in Heaven, in both they will always be praising thee: It Is our principal
errand to the house of God upon earth, and shall be our only employment in his
house of Heaven always to praise the Lord.

But we of thy house and family here below, like the young birds near thine
Altar are unfledged, and empent in the nest of this corruptible body which
weighs down the Soul, so that amount to Heavenward we cannot without the
Divine assistance; therefore,

Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy ways,
cordially resolving and uprightly walking in the ways of thy service, and of
their own salvation.

Who going through the vale of misery, use it for a Well, even the deep
fountain of a broken heart, from whence the Pools are filled with water, the
eyes flow with tears of that Godly sorrow which works Repentance unto
Salvation not to be repented.

They will go from strength to strength, Patience, to Patience Godliness, to
Godliness Brotherly-kindness, and to Brotherly-kindness Charity, 2 Pet. 1.5.
unto the God of Gods appears every one of them in Sion, each person thus
qualified shall appear in the presence of the supreme Majesty of Heaven: which
being the felicity whereunto I am created, and earnestly long for, I therefore
humbly beg,

O Lord God of hosts, thou art the Donor of all those powerful Graces which
mount up our Souls to Heaven; and the Lord of all those hosts of Heaven amongst
whom my Soul longs to be enrolled: Hearken, O God of Jacob: assist me in all
my wrestlings with my ghostly enemies, that I may prevail and obtain thy
blessing, which is to be called Israel: Seeing God the felicity of Heaven.

Behold, against all the crafts, and assaults of the Devil, the World and the
Flesh: Look upon the face of thine anointed our blessed Redeemer sitting on thy
right hand, and interceding for us: and may the sacred beams of his celestial
light shine in our hearts, and appear in the holiness and righteousness of our
lives: that going from strength to strength we may appear before the Lord in
Sion.

For one day in thy Courts amongst the Quires of Heaven, is better than a
thousand of the flitting transitory days of this mortal life.

I had rather be a doorkeeper, in the house of my God, the place where his
Honor dwells who is the God of my Worship and Joy, than to dwell in the
tents of ungodliness, be conversant amongst the Ungodly of this World, in the
most splendid Condition with all the Delights of the Sons of Men: for it is not
all the Pomp and Glory, all the Pleasures and Treasures of this Life can give
any solid Satisfaction to the vast Desires of my immortal Soul.

For the Lord is a light and defense, He will give grace and worship, Grace to
serve him truly here, and Worship or Glory to crown our services hereafter: and
no good thing will he withhold from them that lead a godly life: who truly love
and fear God, and wait for his promises in the obedience of his precepts, shall
enjoy all that is truly good, or conducible to their Eternal happiness in
Heaven: And therefore,

O Lord God of Hosts, not roving in his hopes and desires after the exterior,
empty, transitory Consolations of the Creature, but among the sundry and
manifold Changes of the World has his heart surely fixed there, where true
joys are to be found, which is alone in the Presence of the God of Heaven:
where all do rejoice together and sing for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

AS an Earnest of this Everlasting Joy and Felicity, Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require: even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple. Amen.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
OF the Four last things in general. 1 Of the shortness and frailty of this
present Life. 5 S. Augustine 's Meditation on this subject. 6 Of the frequent
remembrance of Death. 9 Of the Horror of Death. 15 Of the uncertainty of Death,
and preparation for it. 19 The 39 Psalm illustrated with notes. 29 The 90 Psalm
illustrated with notes. 33
The II. general Head.
OF Judgment. Of particular Judgment. 38 Of the general Judgment. 44 The 26
Psalm paraphrased. 55 The 43 Psalm paraphrased. 58
The III. general Head.
OF the pains of Hell. 61 Of the pain of Loss. 62 Of the darkness of Hell. 65
Of the fire of Hell. 67 Of the extent of Hell-pains. 71 Of the bonds and chains
of Hell. 75 Of the Laments of Hell. 78 Of the perpetuity of Hell Torments. 80
The 86 Psalm paraphrased. 83 The 88 Psalm paraphrased. 88
The IV. general Head.
OF Heaven. 93 Of the place called Heaven, 1. Its greatness, 97 2. Its
brightness and splendour, 98 3. Its tranquillity and peace, ibid. Of the good
things of Heaven, 1. Honor, 100 2. Power, 101 3. Riches, 102 4. Pleasure, 103
Of the Company of Heaven, 1. God's presence there, 105 2. Of the Angels of
Heaven, 106 3. Of the Saints in Heaven. 107 Of the perpetuity of heavenly Joys.
112 The 24 Psalm paraphrased. 116 The 84 Psalm paraphrased. 120
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Luke Meredith, at the Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
Books written by Jer. Tailor, D. D. and late Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.
DVctor Dubitantium: or, The Rule of Conscience, in Five Books in Folio.

The Great Exemplar; or, The Life and Death of the Holy Jesus, in Folio, with
Figures suitable to every Story, ingrav'd in Copper: whereunto are added the
Lives and Martyrdoms of the Apostle. By W. Cave, D. D.

(...); or, A Collection of Polemical Discourses addressed against the Enemies
of the Church of England, both Papists and Phanaticks, in large Folio, the
Third Edition.

The Rules and Exercises of Holy Living and Dying The Fifteenth Edition, newly
Printed, in Octavo.

A Collection of Sermons, Folio.

The Golden Grove; A Choice Manual, containing what is to be believed,
practiced, and desired or prayed for: the Prayers being fitted to the several
Days of the Week; also Festival Hymns according to the manner of the Ancient
Church.

The Psalter of David, with Titles and Collects according to the Matter of each
Psalm; whereunto are added Devotions for the Help and Assistance of all
Christian People in all Occasions and Necessities. The Tenth Edition: in
Twelves.

A Collection of Offices, or Forms of Prayers in Cases Ordinary and
Extraordinary; taken out of the Scriptures and the ancient Liturgies of several
Churches, especially the Greek: Together with a large Preface in Vindication of
the Liturgy of the Church of England. The Second Edition, in Twelves.

Books written by the Reverend Dr. Patrick, Lord Bishop of Ely.
THE Christian's Sacrifice: A Treatise, showing the Necessity, End, and Manner
of receiving the Holy Communion; together with suitable Prayers and Meditations
for every Month in the Year; and the principal Festivals in Memory of our
Blessed Savior. In Four Parts. The Third Edition corrected.

The Devout Christian instructed how to pray and give Thanks to God: Or, A Book
of Devotions for Families, and particular Persons, in most of the Concerns of
Humane Life. The Eighth Edition, in Twelves.

An Advice to a Friend. The Fourth Edition, in Twelves.

The whole Book of Psalms Paraphrased, in Octavo. Newly printed in one Volume.

The Proverbs of Solomon Paraphrased, with Arguments to each Chapter, which
supply the place of Commenting.

A Paraphrase upon the Book of Ecclesiastes and the Song of Solomon, with
Arguments to each other Chapter, and Annotations thereupon: in Octavo.

The Truth of Christian Religion, in Six Books: written in Latin by Hugo
Grotius, and now Translated into English, with the Addition of a Seventh Book
against the present Roman Church, in Octavo.

The End of the Catalogue.

