THE PRACTICAL CHRISTIAN, Divided into FOUR PARTS.

I. The Practice of Self-examination, and a Form of Confession fitted
thereunto; the Lord's Prayer and Penitential Psalms paraphrased; with
Meditations, and Prayers to be made partakers of Christ's Merits. II.
Directions, Meditations and Prayers, in order to the worthy Receiving of the
Holy Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. III. Meditations with Psalms
for the Hours of Prayer, the ordinary Actions of Day and Night, with other
Religious Considerations and Concerns. IV. Meditations with Psalms -- upon the
Four (...) things; 1. Death, 2. Judgment, 3. Hell, 4. Hea^^^
The Third and Fourth Parts make the Second Volume, formerly called the Second
Part.

By R. SHERLOCK D. D. Rector of Winwick.

Omne tempus in quo de Deo non cogitas, hoc te computa perdidisse. LONDON,
Printed by E. Flesher for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty, at
the Angel in Amen-corner, MDCLXXVII.

To the Parishioners of Winwick in Lancashire.
Good People,
THE Cure of your Souls being by (...) Divine Providence incumbent upon Me,
very unfit to undergo so great a Cha^ especially considering the Liberty which
(...) men do now assume in the way of Religion In the discharge of my Duty,
though (...) not say I have been so prudent and di^^gent as the high and holy
nature of my Fun^^^^ requires; yet you know I have not omitte^ frequently to
put you in mind [which is on principal part of my Office] of the who^ Will of
God, in the careful observanc^ whereof the Health of your Souls consists

The Contents of God's revealed Will, being delivered and disporsed through the
whole Body of Holy Scriptures, are collected and summed up into general Heads
by the Church of Christ in her Catechism: the which, though by a strange
Fanatic humou^ it be slighted, and even derided, yet contains all things both
of Faith and Fact necessary to Salvation, being rightly, clearly and fully
understood.

Did you therefore rightly understand, and seriously consider, wherein your
Soul's Health and Edification chiefly consists, you ^ould be better pleased
with the frequency ^f Catechizing, and be more versed in those ^ssentials of
Religion, then in the hearing (...) many Sermons, which are of less concern^^^
have not spared my Pains in Preaching, ^or my Purse in the maintenance of
others ^ assist me herein. But by long experience it is evident, that Sermons
[what through ^he Variety, several Modes and Methods on ^he one hand, and what
through the great abuse thereof on the other,] have not that ^nfluence upon the
minds of men as becomes ^ound Doctrine, but have too much sway with men of
itching ears, who heap to themselves Teachers after their own ^usts; who, upon
Pretense of going on to ^erfection, go off the Foundation, wax ^ain in their
imaginations, and their foo^^sh hearts are darkened, whilst they conceit
themselves enlightened.

And therefore for your more ready, easy, and constant instruction, I have
committed to writing, and made public, the Summary of Christian Doctrine in
the Church-Catechism paraphrased.

And because Doctrine without Practice is but a Body of Religion without a Soul
to quicken it; I have here added a Summary of Christian Practice, in the
ensuing Rules of Self-examination, which will equally discover unto you your
Sins and Miscarriages past, and serve for a Guide to direct you in the future
ordering of all the Actions of your lives in the ways of Godliness.

In both which Summaries I have endeavored to be both brief and plain,
delivering only what I conceive generally necessary to Salvation, and
expressing the same in the most easy way to be understood: as knowing that
multitude of words, various, acute, and quaint affected expressions, especially
in the Essentials of Religion, though they may more please, do not so much
profit, nay, they do really rather distract then instruct the minds of most.
For it is not the rattling of the Leaves, but the Fruits of the Tree of
knowledge that feed the Soul to life eternal.

The Prayers prescribed upon any the ensuing considerations are not by way of
one long continued Oration without intermission; but divided into several
shorter Prayers: and this because,

1. The heat of holy Zeal is hereby better maintained, and kept flaming in the
Soul, whilst the ending of one Prayer and beginning another adds new fervor to
the Soul's Devotion.

2. Long Prayers do tire the spirits, clog the memory, distract the mind, and
damp that celestial fervor which is the life of all holy and acceptable
Prayers.

3. Such are all those Prayers which are truly the Prayers of God's Holy
Spirit, and stand upon record in Holy Writ: they are all divided and cut short
into so many distinct Verses, as into so many several shorter Prayers.

4. Thus Christ has commanded us to pray, Matt. 6.7, 8, 9. And according to
this pattern the Prayers of Christ's Church, even for the length thereof, are
generally framed.

My primary intention in the ensuing Discourse was chiefly, to direct you for
the worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ,
whereunto a through Self-examination is absolutely necessary.

And being desired to enlarge my Meditations upon that Blessed Sacrament, I
have therefore now divided the former Edition into Two Parts: the First, of
Self-examination; and the Second, of the Holy Communion.

Wherein I must necessarily tell you, that since the Danger of unworthy
Receiving is equivalent with the Benefit of the worthy; it therefore concerns
every one of you, that has any sense and sincere care of his Soul's health, as
strictly to examine himself before he eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup,
as he believes he shall be examined before the great Tribunal of Heaven; and
accordingly to purge and purify his Soul by Confession, Contrition, and all the
sacred Acts and Offices of true Repentance; the practice whereof is in the
following Leaves delivered.

Of the other Two Parts of the Practical Christian, mentioned in the general
Title Page, you will have a farther account in the Preface thereunto.

I shall not farther enlarge this Epistle, more then to pray, that God may be
pleased to assist you by his Divine grace carefully to observe such useful
Instructions as be herein given you: not vainly jangling, and talking of
Religion; but, according to the Covenant you have made with your God, to keep
his holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in the same all the days of your
life; remembering who it is that has said it, If thou will enter into life, keep
the Commandments, Matt. 19.17. And that you may observe the one as the way to
the other, is and shall be the constant Prayer of

Your respective Pastor, Ric. Sherlock.

A TABLE of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. Of the great necessity of Self-examination. CHAP. II. The Rule of
Self-examination by the Vow in Baptism. CHAP. III. The Rule of Self-examination
by the Creed; or, by the Second part of the Vow in Baptism, To believe all the
Articles of the Christian Faith. CHAP. IV. The Rule of Self-examination by the
Decalogue; or, by the Third part of the Vow in Baptism, To keep God's Holy Will
and Commandments, etc. CHAP. V. The Examination of Religious actions. CHAP. VI.
The Examination of Repentance. CHAP. VII. Considerations with Directions in the
Confession of Sin. CHAP. VIII. A Form of Confession of Sin fitted to the Rules
of Self-examination, whereunto every one may add or substract, as he finds
himself guilty or not guilty. CHAP. IX. An ancient Form of Confession extant
Biblioth. Patrum. CHAP. X. The Lord's Prayer paraphrased. CHAP. XI. The Seven
Penitential Psalms paraphrased. CHAP. XII. Meditations and Prayers to be
partakers of the Merits of what our Blessed Redeemer has done and suffered for
us.
Page 195. l. 26. for Christ's number, read this number. p. 200. l. 27. for
his, read this.

THE PRACTICAL Christian. PART I.
CHAP. I. Of the great necessity of SELF-EXAMINATION.
1. WHosoever believes as a Christian his Soul to be immortal, being either
entitled to everlasting Joy through Faith and Obedience to the Gospel of
Christ, or liable to eternal Woe through Disobedience and Misbelief Joh. 5.28,
29.
, must be very stupid and sottish, if he do not frequently examine himself
Psalm. 4.4. 2 Cor. 13.5. Gal. 6.4.
, whether he may reasonably conclude ^he is in the state of Grace and
Salvation; or of Sin, and of Death the wages whereof Romans 6.23.
.

2. That every man should know himself, is such a fundamental principle of
true wisdom, that wise men of old affirmed [Nosce teipsum] to be a command
immediately derived to the sons of men by a voice from Hea ven, as being
absolutely necessary to the right guidance of all the actions of humane life
upon earth.

3. The reasonable Soul, were it not debauched by the sensual appetite, and
distracted by the hurry of exorbitant desires, could not but often remember her
self, examine and call to mind the Author and End of her Being, the
immortality and dignity of her nature, what is her errand into this world, and
how she shall subsist in the world to come, what is her chiefest Good, and
wherein her perfection and felicity consists: which cannot be to eat, and
drink, and sleep, purchase lands, build houses, satisfy the lusts of the flesh,
swell with pride of life --. She would consider that she is stamped after the
Image of God, and her Happiness consists in the knowledge, love and enjoyment
of the Divine Majesty, and in the imitation and representation (according to
her model) of the Perfections of the Godhead.

But, alas! vain man being in honor, has no understanding, considers not the
honor of his being after the Image of his Maker; but receives his Divine
immortal Soul in vain, whilst he follows the sway of his sensual irrational
appetite, and is compared to the beasts that perish Psalm. 49.12.
.

4. And well it were for all such inconsiderate and imprudent persons, if their
Souls were as perishing and mortal as those which animate the beasts of the
field. But ^o their eternal sorrow it is far otherwise: for there is an account
to be given by every man of his immortal Soul, and of the Image of God stamped
thereupon: viz. how this blessed Image has been either defaced, or kept
undefiled; how it has been obscured, or how shined; how deformed, or how
beautified through all the actions of each man's life. For God will bring every
work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it
be evil Eccles. 12.14. Romans 2.16. and 14.10 2 Cor. 5.10.
.

5. Upon every man's Examination, both in his particular, and in the general
Judgment, depends his everlasting well-being, or undoing for ever: each man's
condition then shall be unchangeable, whether it be of glory, or misery. They
that have done good shall go into everlasting life, and they that have done
evil into everlasting fire Matthew. 25.46.
.

6. Since this great Trial then shall be upon life and death eternal, 'twil
be wisely done to try beforehand. Such is the advice of the wise Siracides;
Before judgment examine thy self, and in the day of visitation thou shall find
mercy Ecclus. 18.20.
.

To examine, accuse, judge and condemn thy self in this life, may, through the
merits of Christ, acquit thee in the life to come. So says the Apostle; If we
would judge our selves, we should not be judged 1 Cor. 11.31.
.

7. Now then (sinful man) delay not to pass judgment upon thy self: remember
that the Great Judge himself has said it, I will reprove thee, and set before
thee the things that thou have done Psalm. 50.21.
. Be wise then, and prevent this sad and dismal reproof, by setting in order
before thy self all the Sins of thy life. And to this Trial of thy self these
following particulars do necessarily concur.

(1.) A Tribunal must be erected; and this is not to be without thee, but
within thee, even in thine own heart 1 John 3.20, 21.
.

(2.) The Judge to sit upon this Seat of judicature must be thy Reason guided
by the Law of the most High; wherein beware of a misunderstanding and wresting
of the letter of the Law, to pass any unjust and partial sentence upon thy
self, for that may undo thee for ever 2 Pet. 3.16.
.

(3.) The Witnesses to be produced against thee are, the Conscience bearing
witness, and the thoughts the mean while accusing or excusing one another: and
thus shall it be also in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by
Christ Jesus Romans 2.15, 16.
.

(4.) The Executioners that stand ready to seize the Criminal are, Fear and
terror, and an horrible dread overwhelming the Soul Phil. 2.12. Psalm. 55.5.
. These do ever attend

(5.) Self-condemnation, which is an unfeigned and sad acknowledgment to have
incurred the dismal Sentence of condemnation to death eternal. To prevent
which,

(6.) Execution must be done, and the blood of the guilty Soul must be shed.

It Is not to be believed or hoped, that a black diseased Soul should recover
its health, and beauty after the Image of God, except she bleed plentifully;
bleed in the tears of Compunction and godly sorrow; bleed in the Confession of
her Sins, with an abhorrence of them, for the filthiness, guilt and danger
contracted by them, so as for the future to renounce and abjure them for ever.

8. Thus to examine, judge and condemn thy self, is the same Christian duty
which is called Repentance, without the practice whereof our Lord positively
affirms that we are all undone for ever, saying, Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish Luke 13.3, 5.
. And he says the same words again, at the same time, and in the same Text
recorded; 1. to enforce the great necessity of Repentance, against all carnal,
careless, self-conceited and seduced persons: 2. to manifest his great
goodness, who would not have any to perish, but that all should come to
Repentance 2 Pet. 3.9.
.

9. Sinners we are all, less or more Jam: 3 2.
: but God in great mercy has ordained and commanded Repentance as the great
antidote against the poison of Sin, and preservative from death Matthew. 3 7, 8.
. And that Repentance which is thus salutary consists of 2 general parts: 1.
to confess with sorrow our sins past; 2. for ever to abjure and forsake them.
And to such a true Penitent only is mercy promised Prove. 28.13. Joh. 8.11. 1 John 1.9.
.

10. To both these general heads of true Repentance, a full knowledge and deep
sense of all heinous sins, even punctually and particularly, is absolutely
necessary. For no man can confess his Sins who knows them not; nor forsake
them, who is not feelingly sensible of the guilt and danger contracted by them
Psalm. 51.3. Isa. 59.12.
.

Self-examination is therefore commanded as a previous duty necessarily
conducing to a true Conversion Psalm. 4.4. Lam. 3.40.
, or (which is the same) to a true Repentance, both in respect of all its
integral parts, and also of the fruits meet for Repentance, which are no other
but the Good works of a new Obedience Col. 1.10.
.

11. The just man falls seven times Prove. 24.16.
: and upon consideration of his seven times daily failings, he has seven times
daily confessions Psalm. 119.164.
, to the praise of God ^es. 7.19.
; with frequent laments in the night also Psalm. 6.6 and 77.6.
. At least twice aday, morning and evening, he takes a view of his miscarriages
the bypast day and night, confessing and bewailing his frequent backslidings,
and in all holy humility imploring with tears of godly sorrow the pardon of his
daily offenses, with firm resolution of more care and caution, more zeal of
innocence and purity both in heart and life, for the time to come.

12. It Is a great imprudence, even madness, in the hearts of men, to put off
from day to day this Self-examination, or reckoning with our selves. Since it is
difficult to account strictly for the misdemeanors of one day, how much more
hard then to set straight and even the accounts of a long sinful life? whereas
he who daily accounts with himself and his offended God for his daily
transgressions, shall have but one day's sins to account for upon his dying day
Luke 12.42, 43.
.

13. We read of Moses, that his leprous hand was made whole and recovered its
native whiteness by thrusting it into his bosom Exodus 4.7.
. And thus is the Soul cleansed from the leprosy of Sin, by thrusting the hand,
which is the instrument of action, into the bosom of thine own Conscience, to
enter, and strictly to search into the inner man; to ransack all the corners of
the deceitful heart; to examine what affections lurk there, and what
excursions they have thence made into any extravagant and sinful actions; that
they may be thence ejected and abandoned.

This is the way both to keep the heart pure, and the hands clean: hence comes
both the knowledge of thy self, and the fear of God: hence comes Sense of sin,
holy Compunction, godly Sorrow, Humiliation, and true Repentance in all its
branches and worthy fruits. Hence the Soul becomes inflamed with the ardent
heats of holy Devotion, and fervent Prayers for pardon and peace, mercy and
grace, Sanctification and Redemption. Hence arise in the heart holy Resolves of
new Obedience, with holy breathings after God and his Salvation. Therefore is
this Duty of Self-examination called the Magazine or Storehouse of all
Christian Virtue.

14. And because to receive worthily the Communion of the body and blood of
Christ is the chiefest of all Christian performances, and requires the practice
of all Christian Virtues; therefore after an especial manner is
Self-examination commanded as a necessary Preparative to that Sacramental
Feast; which from the doctrine of S. Paul we are taught in the Principles of
our Religion, where in the last Question of the Catechism it is demanded, What
is required of them that come to the Lord's Supper? and it is answered, To
examine themselves, whether they truly repent them of their former sins --.

CHAP. II. The Rule of Self-examination by the Vow in Baptism.
1. SInce Self-examination is a Duty of so great, so high, so general
concernment as has appeared; it will be necessary that it be sincerely and
thoroughly performed, not slightly, partially and deceitfully; not by any false
rules and erring opinions, but by such a Rule as will not deceive us, when we
shall come to our great Examination and Trial at the Last day.

2. There be too many who do flatter and deceive themselves by a bare and naked
Faith in Christ, by virtue whereof they conceit themselves to be justified, and
of the number of God's elect, and assured of Salvation. But these are
groundless presumptions, except thy Faith do purify thy heart Act. 15.9.
from all inordinate affections; and cleanse thy hands from all sinful actions
2 Cor. 7.1. Jam. 4.8.
; and be also fruitful in all good works Jam. 2.26.
.

3. The Rule according to which we shall be tried, when we shall all stand
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, is not that of Faith alone, under that
notion whereby it is too frequently misunderstood; but that of an universal
Obedience to the Gospel of Christ 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
, whereof Christian Charity is the Compendium and completion Matt. 25.35, 36,
etc.
.

4. The sum of Evangelicall Obedience is expressed in that Vow which every true
Christian has made when he was baptized or Christened. And by this, as S.
Gregory observes Greg. Hom. 19.
, every man may try the truth of his Faith in Christ. For as no man can be said
to be faithful, who keeps not his promise: so neither can any Christian be
said to have any true Faith toward God, if he performs not the promise he has
made unto him; especially considering that hereupon righteousness and
everlasting happiness does depend. For,

5. This Baptismall Vow is the condition upon which we are admitted into the
Covenant of Grace, and made members of Christ, children of God, and heirs of
the Kingdom of Heaven. And therefore they who perform not this condition, but
slight, neglect, or negligently observe the same, do uncovenant themselves, and
return again to their natural state of Sin and Misery; viz. become children of
wrath, enemies of God, and heirs of eternal damnation Heb. 10.23, 26, 27, 28,
29.
.

6. The holy Christian Religion we all profess, is no other but God's Will and
Testament, wherein a goodly inheritance is promised and bequeathed; but not to
be obtained, as S. Augustine observes Aug. Ser. de Tem. 167.
, except, as in all other Testaments, we observe the will of the Testatour: nor
is there any thing more clearly expressed in the revealed will of God, then this,
That the benefits of the Covenant of Grace belong only to them who keep the
condition therein required Deuteronomy. 7.9, 10. Psalm. 25.10 and 89 28, 29, 30, 31,
32. and 103.17, 18 and 132.11, 12. Jer. 11.3, 4, 5. Heb. 2.2, 3.
.

7. Every wilful sin is a breach of this Covenant, and contracts therewith the
sin of perjury, and incurs the forfeiture of all the precious benefits of the
members of Christ, children of God, and heirs of Heaven; so that no man can
reasonably conclude himself within the Covenant of Grace, until the leaven of
wickedness, which is a breach of its Condition, be strictly searched out and
expurged 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
.

According therefore to this Covenant, which we have every one, rightly
Christened, made with God, it concerns every man to examine himself, who has
any care of his Soul.

8. This Condition consists of three general Heads, called in Holy Writ by the
three names of, 1. Repentance, 2. Faith, 3. Obedience, containing thereunder
the whole Duty of a Christian man.

9. Repentance consists not only in confession, with sorrow for sin past; but
in performance for the future of that grand Evangelical duty whereby we forsake
sin, renounce all fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness Ephesians. 5.11.
, deny ungodliness and worldly lusts Tit. 2.12.
: the which, with several more expressions of the same nature, are the very
same in sense with the first part of our Baptismal Vow, viz. to forsake the
Devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and all
the sinful lusts of the flesh, which is frequently remembered to be one of the
two main ends of all that Christ has done and suffered for us Luke 10.17, 18,
19. Col. 1.13. Tit. 2.12. Heb. 2.14, 15.
.

10. This being therefore the preparation of the Gospel of peace Ephesians. 6.15.
Matt. 3.2.
, and the foundation of Religion Heb. 6.1.
, is the first general rule of Self-examination.

By the First part,
To forsake the Devil and all his works;
AND it highly concerns us surely to do this, since they are the children of
the Devil who do his works Joh. 8.44.
.

The Devil's first and general work was Apostasy: he abode not in the truth;
he kept not his first estate Jude 6.
. Here then in the first place consider seriously and impartially, how
frequently, nay daily, if not hourly, thou have yielded to the suggestions of
Satan, and become like unto him, by swerving from thy first profession of the
holy Christian Faith, and Vow of Obedience to God's Commands, when admitted
into covenant with God in Baptism.

The more particular works of the Devil are,

1. Pride, whereby he fell from being an Angel of Light, to be a Spirit of
Darkness Isa. 14.14, 15.
.

2. Lying; for he is a Liar, and the father of it Joh. 8.44.
.

3. Malice, Hatred, Envy, with all the degrees of Murder both in will and
deed: he was a Murderer from the beginning ibid.
.

4. Slander, Backbiting and accusing of the brethren Rev. 12.10.
; from whence he takes the name of Devil.

5. Tempting unto sin: that is the incessant work of the Devil, who continually
goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour 1 Pet. 5.8.
.

Examine then whether, according to thy promise made unto God, thou have
manfully fought under the banner of Christ against the crafts and assaults of
the Devil, tempting thee to any of these sins, or to any other miscarriage
either in judgment or practice; and have not rather suffered thy self, oftener
then thou can possibly imagine, to be taken in the snares of the Devil, and
led captive by him at his will 2 Timothy 2.26.
.

The Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World;
These are in other words the pride of life, and the lusts of the eyes, which
are positively affirmed to be inconsistent with the love of God 1 ^oh. 2.16.
.

Upon this Head examine

1. Has not thine heart been puffed up with the wind of vainglory, which vents
it self by boasting and bragging of vain things of the world which profit not
Ps. 12.2.
, by over costly and garish apparel Isa. 3.16, etc.
, high vaunting, imperious language, strutting gate, affected gestures,
supercilious and scornful looks Ecclus 19.29, 30.
, affecting and receiving the honor which is from man, more then the honor
which comes from God only Joh. 5.44.
?

2. Have you not esteemed your self more then others your equals, if not
superiors Phil. 2.3.
; either in respect of your worldly wealth and estate, place of credit and
superiority Ps 49.6.
, greatness of wit, readiness of elocution, boldness to outvie, cunning to
overreach your neighbor, or in any other of those worldly qualifications and
endowments, which usually swell the vain minds of worldly men with
conceitedness of their own worth, and makes them love the praise of men more
then the praise of God Joh. 12.43.
?

3. Have no idle and lewd company, nor yet the ill example of others, allured
you to follow any of those sinful customs of the world, which have some outward
show of pomp and seeming bravery, but are really vain and empty of all true
worth Psa. 144.11. Prove. 1.10, etc.
? Have you not delighted your self in such lying vanities, and loved even to be
couzened both of your time and treasure in pursuance of them Ps. 4.2.
?

4. Have you not loved and served Mammon more then God Matt. 6.24.
, by preferring the sordid service of your worldly ends and interests, before
the sacred service of God, and the interests of your Soul's health and
happiness?

And all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh.
1. Has not the corrupt seed of carnal Lust taken root in your heart, and
brought forth in your life any of those sinful fruits of the flesh, which are
reckoned by S. Paul to be these, Adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, strifes,
seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revelling, etc Gal. 5.19,
20, 21.
?

2. If upon the strict examination of your heart and life, you find your self
guilty in any of these respects, then remember what follows, that they who do
such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God Gal. 5.21.
: and such surely are not within the Covenant of Grace, neither have they any
title to the promises thereof, whilst they continue in any of the forementioned
sins unrepented; for the promise only appertains to him that overcomes Rev.
2.7, 11.
, namely, the Devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked
world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh.

The more particular breaches of this first part of your Covenant with God will
appear upon examination of your self by those particular Commands of God which
they do respectively transgress.

CHAP. III. The Rule of Self-examination by the CREED; or, by the Second part
of the Vow in Baptism, To believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.
HE that believes (viz. all the fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith)
shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned Mark 16.16. John
12.48.
.

Here then examine,

1. If you have learned being young, what are these Articles or Points of
Christian Faith whereinto you were Baptized or Christened: and if you can now
give a ready account of your Faith; and this both in the very words of your
Creed, and also in the full sense and true meaning of each Article thereof
James 2.18. 1 ^et. 3.15.
.

2. Do you steadfastly believe the infallible truth of each Article, though
perhaps you understand it not in its full extent? Are you zealously affected
with them all, resolved to die in this Faith, and, if occasion be, to die for
it, ^ Tim. 6.2. ^ Tim. 4.7.
resisting even unto blood whatever may oppose or infringe the same; earnestly
contending for that faith which was once given to [or by] the Saints, the holy
Apostles of our Lord Jude 3.
?

3. Do thou not only believe with the heart, but also frequently confess
this faith with the mouth? for as with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, so with the mouth confession is made unto Salvation Romans 10.10.
,

4. Have neither the senseless neglect of some, nor the profane scoffs of
others, made thee also neglect, or be ashamed to confess thy Faith in public?
And if so, thy Faith is not sincere: for he that truly believes in God, will
not be ashamed Romans 10.11.
openly to profess it; remembering that there is a dismal shame and confusion of
face threatened to him that is ashamed of Christ and his words Mark 8.38.
, which are summed up in the Creed.

5. Have thou lived in the practice of this Faith, framing both the affections
of thy heart and the actions of thy life according to what each Article does
imply and implicitly command? For thus the just man lives by his Faith Hab.
2.4. Romans 1.17.
.

6. Have you not been mistaken in the nature of a true Christian Faith, making
it to be a presumption upon the Promises of the Gospel abstract from obedience
to the Precepts thereof? And has not thy Faith been rather notional in the
Brain, then practical in the heart and life? been more in talk and dispute,
and verbal profession, then in love and good works Gal. 5.6. Jam. 2.17
, and holy conversation? For the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power 1
Cor. 4.20.
of holy actions.

CHAP. IV. The Rule of Self-examination by the DECALOGVE; or, by the Third part
of the Vow in Baptism, To keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in
the same all the days of thy life.
TO obey God's Commands is properly to serve him Eccles. 12 13.
; which is frequently affirmed to be the plain road-way to Heaven Matt. 19.17.
Rev. 14.12.
.

And 'twere a high presumption, Aug. de Sanct.
as S. Augustine observes, to hope to obtain what God has promised, except we
carefully observe what he has commanded.

These Commandments are the same which God spoke in the 20. Chap. of Exodus
Matt. 19.18, 19. Mark 10.19.
, the rule of Righteousness being the same under the Law and under the Gospel;
only in the one it is more plainly and fully understood then in the other.

Here then a more large and particular Examination of thy self is required;
viz. by all the Duties commanded and Sins forbidden in the Precepts of the
Moral Law.

The First Commandment. Thou shall have none other Gods but me.


Examination by the First Commandment.
THe Duties enjoined in this Commandment are,

I. To believe in God.
Since Faith in God is the ground of all religious worship, examine,

First, Heb. 11.6.
Whether truly and without all doubting, or harboring any secret Atheistical
thoughts, you do believe the being of God and his providence over all.

Secondly, Joh. 4.24. 1 Timothy 1.17. Ecclus. 16.11, 12. Psalm. 77.13, 14. Deuteronomy.
28.58.
That you believe of him what he truly is, a pure, spiritual, invisible
Essence, a God most wise, most holy, eternal and infinite, infinitely merciful
and infinitely just, infinitely great and glorious, omnipotent and immortal,
without beginning of days or end of time; Genesis 21.33. Ps. 90.2. Matt. 5.48.
and in a word, that his excellency, perfection and felicity in himself is
beyond all that the wit of man can conceive.

Thirdly, Job 11.7. Is. 40.28.
That you believe in him as the great Creator of the world, Redeemer of all
men, and Sanctifier of his Church and people, Matt. 28.19. 1 John 5.7.
three Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, one God over all, blessed for ever.

And because the Faith of most i^ but notional and verbal only, daily decaying
as the world draws nearer to an end, Luke 18.8.
examine the sincerity of your Faith by these essential properties thereof.

1. Acts 15.9.
If it purify your hearts from all unworthy thoughts of God, and vile
affections that separate from him.

2. If it increase divine Love in your heart: which was Mary Magdalen's Faith.
Luke 7.47.


3. If it make you devout and intense in your Prayers: which was the woman of
Canaan's Faith. Matt. 15.28.


4. If thereby you cleave unto God, and make him your choice above all the
pleasures and treasures of the world: Heb. 11.24, 25, 26.
which was Moses's Faith.

5. If it make you strong to resist even unto blood: Heb. 11.33, 34.
which was the Faith of all Martyrs.

6. If it bring forth the fruits of good works: which was Cornelius's Faith,
Acts 10.2. Jam. 2.26.
and is the life of Faith.

II. To trust in him.
1. Examine, first, whether both in prosperity and adversity your mind has so
been staid in the Lord, Ps. 62.1. 2 Thessalonians. 3.3.
as not to be puffed up by the one, or dejected by the other.

2. Have you not betrayed your trust in the care and providence of God, 1 Pet.
5.7.
so as either to distract your mind with carking cares for worldly concerns, or
yet to use any unlawful means to acquire or preserve health, wealth, credit,
liberty, or life it self?

3. Have you not leaned to your own understanding, Prove. 3.5. 1 Timothy 6.17. Jer.
17.5, 7.
trusted to your own wit, policy, strength, riches, nor yet in the favor and
power of any mortal man, to the weakening of your dependence on God alone?

III. To hope in him.
1. Whether to enjoy God, and those joys which are in his presence attainable
Psalm. 16.11.
, be the great and main object of your hope Ps. 71.5. Jer. 17.7.
, as being created after his image, and to attain the perfection of your being
in the beatifical enjoyment of his Sacred Majesty Psalm. 73.24, 25, 26.
.

2. Has your hope to enjoy God been accompanied with a conformity to the
nature of God, being holy as he is holy, merciful as he is merciful 1 Pet.
1.15, 16. Luke 6.36.
? For you hope in vain to see God in Heaven and enjoy him, except you be
God-like Matt. 5.8, 9.
.

3. Have you so hoped to enjoy the promises of God, as to obey his precepts,
and be fruitful in all good works? Hope in the Lord, and be doing good Psalm.
37.3.
: your hope is otherwise but a sinful presumption, or the hope of the hypocrite
that perishes Job 8.13.
.

4. Has not your hope in the mercies of God through the merits of Christ
emboldned you to go on in any known sin unrepented of, and banished grace out
of thy heart?

IV. To fear God.
1. Has thy fear of God's Judgments equally balanced thy hope in his Mercies,
revering his justice, and the direful threats and examples thereof in his Holy
Word, so as not to dare to sin against him? Fear the Lord, and depart from evil
Psalm. 4.5. Prove. 3.7. Phil 2.12.
.

2. Have you not more feared to sin in the sight of men, then in the presence
of God; more feared to displease man, then to incur the displeasure of the
Almighty; more feared to lose thy credit amongst thy neighbors and companions,
then to hazard the loss of God's favor; nor yet more feared the penalty of
humane Laws, then the threatenings of the Divine Prove. 29.25. Isa. 51.12. Luke
12.4, 5.
?

3. Has thy Fear of God been rather filial, viz. a fear to offend so gracious
a Father, then servile, for fear of punishment? But because we are commanded to
work out our Salvation with fear and trembling Phil. 2.12.
; examine, whether the filial fear of God prevail in your heart, and gather
strength over the servile fear, till at last it be quite cast out by perfect
love 1 John 4.18.
; which is the next Duty in this Commandment enjoined.

V. To love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all, etc.
This Divine Love includes all these graces, Matt. 22.37, 38 1 Cor. 13.1, 2,
etc.
and all the particulars of the duties we owe unto God. And because every man
pretends to love God, how falsely and deceitfully soever he think or say it,
therefore this Divine affection is to be strictly examined by these following
Rules.

And, 1. as thy Hope, so thy Love of God is not sincere, except thou be in some
good measure conformed to his nature, pure as he is pure, just, good, gracious
-- as God is so. Ephesians. 5.1, 2.
Be ye followers of God as dear children, and walk in love.

2. If the will of God be the rule of thy will, and moderatour of all thy
affections, Ps. 97.10. Matt. 5.44. Luke 14.26.
loving what he loves, hating what he hates, even to the love of thine enemies,
and hatred of thy friends, if in competition with the love of God.

3. If the chief end of all your actions be to please God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.4. Matt.
18.8. Matt. 10.37.
more then to please your self, or to pleasure any person, how great and high,
how near or dear soever.

4. Ps. 122.1. Isa. 2.3. Ps. 27.4. Ps. 42.1, 2. Ps. 71.20, etc. Matt. 5.16. 1
Pet. 2.12.
If it be the joy of your heart to come into the House of the Lord; to converse
with him in holy prayers, public and private; to contemplate his perfections
and felicities, so as to be inflamed with longing desires and affectionate
breathings after him; to glorify him both with heart and voice, both with your
lips and in your life.

5. If you be quick, ready, active, Joh. 14.15.
regular and constant in your Obedience to all his Commandments.

6. If you long to have a more full enjoyment of God in the world to come; Ps.
63.1, 2. 2 Cor. 4.18. and 5.1, 2, 3.
and do not rather prefer a troublesome temporary abode in this life, before
the pleasures of God's right hand in the other.

By these Rules you may examine your self, whether you love God in deed and in
truth, and not in conceit and verbally only.

VI. To call upon God, and give him Thanks.
In the habitual practice of the former Graces of the Spirit consists the
worship of God in Spirit: Joh 4.23, 24.
and they are all put in practice chiefly by holy Prayers unto God and Praises
of him, which is therefore the principal part of God's outward worship. And,
Psalm 50.23.


1. Here examine how frequently you have slighted and omitted to call upon God,
being hereunto obliged, Ps. 134.2^ Matt. 6.6. Ps. 55.17. Eccl 11.6.
both publicly in the congregation, and privately in your closet, morning and
evening at least, signified by the morning and evening sacrifice.

2. How often has any slight occasion and pretense made you neglect this
indispensable duty of Prayer, especially the public prayers of the Church? and
have you not been secretly glad when any such occasion has happened?

3. Being come into the House of God, have you not neglected to join in the
prayers and service of God there celebrated, and through ignorance and dullness,
or a sinful shame, omitted to lift up your voice in the congregation, Ephesians.
5.19. Ps. 106.48.
to praise the Lord in hymns and psalms and spiritual songs, and audibly to say
Amen to the prayers of the Church? For it is not the Minister's duty only to
pray and preach in the Church; but in the Temple of the Lord does every man
speak of his honor. Psalm. 29.9.


4. Eccles. 5.2.
Have you not been too rash with your mouth to utter any thing before God, that
is either unfit, impertinent or unlawful to be asked; but have first weighed
all your words in the balance of the Sanctuary, Hos. 14.2. Matt. 6.9.
and have framed all your prayers according to the pattern which our Lord has
given us, both by his own prayer and the prayers of his Church?

5. Have you prayed for others, viz. all Superiors and relations of every 1 Timothy 2.1.
kind, and not only for such as are your friends, Matt. 5.44.
but for your very enemies also?

6. Have you first endeavored to purify your heart from all hypocrisy, Jam.
4.8.
and to cleanse your hands from all your actual sins by true repentance, before
you make your approaches to the most Holy God by prayer?

7. Do you practice as you pray, in the careful use of those means which God
has appointed, James 1.6, 7, 8.
to obtain your petitions?

8. Do you daily praise God for his great glories in himself, and give him
thanks for his manifold graces, Ephesians. 5.20.
both general to all men, special to his Church and people, and particular to
your self ^xpressed? And do you show forth the praises of God, Matt. 5.16.
not only with your lips, but in the good works of your life, that others may
be thereby excited to glorify God also?

The Second Commandment. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor
the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or
in the water under the earth: Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship
them, etc.


Examination by the Second Commandment.
1. Deuteronomy. 4.15, etc.
HAve you not in your fantasy misrepresented the most pure and spiritual God,
under any bodily shape or visible being whatsoever?

2. Have you not served the creature more then the Creator, making a God of
the World by Ambition, Romans 1.25. Col. 3.5. Phil. 3.19.
and Cavetousness which is Idolatry, or a God of your Belly by Luxury, and the
too much indulging of carnal delights?

3. Ezekiel. 14.4. Ps. 81.9.12, 2 Cor. 10.5. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Heb. 13.^.
Have you not set up your idols in your own heart, idolized your own
imaginations, by believing and worshipping God otherwise then himself has
prescribed, either immediately in his Holy Word, or mediately by the Ministry
of his holy and true Church?

4. Have you worshipped God as with all internal devotion of Soul, so also with
all external, humble and low prostration of Body? Ps. 95.6. 1 Cor. 6.20.
For in being forbidden to fall down to serve Idols, or any false gods, you are
thereby bidden to fall down in serving the Lord.

5. If you abhor Idols, Romans 2.22.
examine if you have not been guilty of Sacrilege, which is to rob God in Tiths
and Offerings, Mal. 3.8.
or of whatsoever is devoted to his Service. Both of which sins are equally
condemned by this Law: for as by Idolatry God is robbed in his service, so by
Sacrilege, in the support and maintenance of his service.

The Third Commandment. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain, etc.


Examination by the Third Commandment.
HAve you not profaned the Name of God, either,

1. In your Thoughts, by entertaining any misbecoming apprehensions of God's
Majesty, and such as are vain and mean, and far below the Name of God, Ps. 99 3.
which is great, wonderful and holy? Or,

2. Jam 2.7.
In your Words, by any scurrilous and irreverent discourses of God, or
impertinent and unseemly addresses unto him? Or,

3. In your Actions, by the ungodliness and injustice of your conversation, 2 Samuel 12 14. Romans 2.23, 24.
giving occasion to others to blaspheme his Name?

4. Have you taken no Lev. 19.12. Matt. 5.34. Jam. 5.12.
false and unlawful Oaths, nor yet been guilty of too ordinary, customary
swearing in discourse, Ps. 109.17. Jam. 3.10.
or cursing by the dreadful Name of God, which is only to be mentioned for
adoration and blessing?

5. Ezekiel. 17.18, 19. Zach. 8.17.
Have you carefully observed those lawful Oaths you have taken in order to
subjection to higher powers, nor yet have taken any that have been contrary
thereunto?

6. Have you to the utmost of your power observed all just promises made unto
others, Psalm. 15.4.
though to your prejudice in your outward affairs?

And because the Name of God is to be honored in all things that have his Name
enstamped thereupon; Lev. 21.6. Deuteronomy. 28.58. ^er. 34.15, 16.
you may therefore upon this Commandment examine as to the duties you owe,
first, to the Word, secondly, to the Sacraments, thirdly, to the House of God.

As to the Word of God.
1. Have you a far more venerable esteem for the Word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
then for the word of man, though spoken in the Pulpit, wisely distinguishing
betwixt the divine inspiration of the one, and the humane invention of the
other?

2. Do you believe unfeignedly all that God has spoken in his Holy Word, Psalm.
19.7, etc.
whether by doctrine or example, promises or threatenings? and have the promises
of God's Word allured you to obey its precepts, and the threats (confirmed by
examples) deterred you from doing what is therein prohibited? Ps. 90.11.


3. Have you not placed your Religion in the bare reading of Holy Scriptures,
and hearing of Sermons, without due consideration of the weight and true
meaning of what you have heard or read, Mar. 4.24.
and without the careful practice thereof in your life? Jam. 2.22.


4. 2 Pet. 1.20. 2 Pet. 3.16. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. Tit. 3.9.
Have you not made your own private interpretation of Scriptures, nor wrested
any Text to another sense then the Holy Spirit of God intended therein, either
to please your own fancy, or maintain some private opinion, or to minister to
contention and dispute?

5. Have you not used the Word of God in ordinary and common talk, either to
excite to merriment and laughter, or to show your own wit, and secretly boast
of your reading and readiness therein?

As to the Sacraments which Christ has ordained in his Church.
1. In general; Have you a very high and holy esteem for those blessed means of
Grace and mysteries of Salvation, Joh. 3.5. and 6.53.
believing unfeignedly the great necessity and efficacy both of Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, and not upon any pretexts or pretenses neglecting the devout and
reverend use of either, as occasion and opportunity has been offered?

2. Have you not profaned the consecrated Elements of either Sacrament, Act.
10.14, 15.
by esteeming and using them as common things?

3. As to Baptism in particular, your grand duty is, to examine your self
frequently by that solemn Vow you made when Christened, confessing and
bewailing your manifold transgressions thereof, and daily renewing your
Covenant with God; resolving and promising daily to forsake the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh, and devoting your self to the sacred service of God by a
true and lively Faith, and Obedience to his Commandments. The breach of which
Vow unto God is a greater offense then that of ordinary Swearing: because in
the one God is but called upon as a witness; but in the other he is a party
concerned.

Concerning the Sacrament of the holy Body and Blood of Christ, examine,
1. How often you have neglected to come, Is. 55.1, 2, 3.
being invited, to that blessed Feast. And here consider the causes of this
sin: which are, 1. ignorance of your Duty, Isa. 5.13.
joined with a slothful and careless neglect to take pains for instruction, or
apply your self to your Pastor for direction; 2. 1 Cor. 11.28, 29. Isa. 55.7.
the terror of unworthy receiving considered, but the duty to receive not
remembered; 3. impenitence, and continuance in sin, preferred before the Sacred
Religious actions of a due preparation, and devout participation of that Bread
of life.

2. Notwithstanding which impediments, examine, have you not presumed to come
to that Sacred Feast, being ignorant of the nature, of the ends, and benefits
thereof, and so received the same unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.27, 29.
not discerning the Lord's body? Or having knowledge,

3. Have you accordingly prepared your self aright, to come unto that celestial
banquet; and that, 1. by a through examination of your self, 1 Samuel 7.6. Jam.
4.8, 9, 10. Act. 3.19.
to find out your sins and failings, 2. by a full confession of them to God,
and in some cases to Man, and that, 3. with all contrition and godly sorrow for
sin, and, 4. with a full purpose of amendment; Heb. 10.16, 17.
renewing your covenant with God, contracted in the foregoing Sacrament of
Baptism, and now to be sealed in the Sacrament of Christ's Blood?

4. Have you with all reverence and humility, 1 Cor. 6.20.
both of Soul and body, approached to that Sacrament? and have you received the
same, 1. To. 5.1, 2.
with a lively Faith in the mercies of God, through the merits of Christ; 2.
with all Devotion and thankfulness of heart, in the grateful acknowledgment of
God's infinite love, Joh. 3.16. 1 ^im. 1.15. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Joh. 6.51. Matt.
5.23, 24, 25. Isa. 12.3.
in giving his Son to be both the price of your Redemption, and the food of
your Soul; 3. with an entire and unfeigned Charity toward all men; 4. being
inwardly affected with a spiritual joy in the Lord?

5. After the participation of those divine Mysteries, examine, 1. whether you
feel your former sinful motions, sensual and worldly lusts dying and decaying
in your heart: 2. whether you have any sense of God's mercy refreshing your
Soul as to the pardon of your sins past; Romans 14.17.
and, 3. of Grace quickening and strengthening you to serve God more sincerely
and industriously for the time to come. If not, you may justly suspect your
self guilty, either of an undue preparation, or some sinful defect in the
participation thereof.

And because the Name of God is called not only upon his Word and Sacraments,
but also upon the Place where those are administered; examine whether you have
made your approaches to that House which is called by his Name, 1 Cor. 3.17.
Ps. 93.5. Matt. 21.13. Psalm. 5.7.132.7. Ps. 11.4. Hab 2.20
(viz.) the Temple of the Lord, the house of God, etc. and demeaned your self
therein with that lowly Reverence and Humility, both inward and outward, as
becomes the place that is separate to his service, and sanctified by his
special presence therein. If otherwise, remember with horror, if any one
defile or profane the Temple of the Lord, 1 Cor. 3.17.
him shall God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy.

It Is here objected, that the immediate following words [which Temple ye are]
do imply this Text to relate to holy Persons, not to any holy Houses of God.
But it is answered, That this makes not void that duty of holiness which
becomes the House of God, but rather confirms the same: for these words [which
Temple ye are] are an illation or consequence flowing from this which the
Apostle takes for an undeniable principle, [The Temple of God is holy.] And the
plain and full meaning of the whole Verse is in other words briefly this. The
material Temple or House of God is a figure of the mystical Temple or People of
God. As therefore the material Temple is an holy place, being sanctified to the
holy Service of the most Holy God; and whosoever profanes the same by
irreverent and undecent carriage there, him will God destroy: so the People of
God, being his mystical Temple, must keep themselves undefiled and pure both in
heart and life, that God destroy them not.

The Fourth Commandment. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day, etc.


Examination by the Fourth Commandment.
1. HAve you wisely distinguished betwixt times sacred and profane, Ecclus.
33.7, 8, 9.
by esteeming of such days as are devoted to the service of God, in a select
and separate respect, from such as are common or ordinary days allowed for the
service of man?

2. Have you not omitted the Christian Duties required to the Sanctification of
the Lord's day, and of every day holy to the Lord; viz. 1. the public Prayers
with Thanksgivings, Ephesians. 5.19. Isa. 56.7.
the Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs in the Lord's House; 2. the offices
of Charity, Matt. 12.12. Mar. 3.4.
Alms-deeds, Visiting the sick?

3. Have you not profaned any days devoted to God's public Worship, Isa. 56.2.
Ex. 20.10.
by doing such servile works that might be omitted, or by going unnecessary
journeys, Isa. 58.13.
or by spending the same in idleness or vain sports, luxury and wantonness?

4. Have you observed not only the Festival days, Joel 1.14. Matt. 6.16. 1
Cor. 7.5. Lev. 16.29, 30.
but also those days of Fasting and Humiliation which have been observed in
all ages of the Church of Christ, by the devout people of God, and are enjoined
by lawful Superiors, in order to the obedience we owe to the Commands of God?

5. Have you kept the true Christian spiritual Sabbath, which is to rest from
the service of sin, and to be wholly devoted to the service of God here; Heb. 4
9, 10, 11.
so that you may reasonably hope to keep an eternal Sabbath of peace and joy
with God and all the Chore of Heaven hereafter?

The Fifth Commandment. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc.


Examination by the Fifth Commandment.
THE Christian Duties enjoined in this Commandment are as many as there are
Relations of Superiority and Inferiority amongst men.

1. As to your natural Parents: Have you not been stubborn and irreverent in
your carriage toward them? Deuteronomy. 21.18. Prove. 20.20. and 23.22. Prove. 30.17.
Pro. 1.8. and 4.1. and 13.1. Ephesians. 5.1. Ecclus. 3.12, 13. Mar. 7.11, 12.
Have you not secretly despised them in your heart, nor openly published their
infirmities? Have you not slighted their wholesome admonitions, nor disobeyed
their lawful commands? Have you not neglected to comfort and relieve them, to
the best of your power and skill, in their sickness, wants, weakness, and old
age? and have you not secretly coveted their estates, though by their death?

2. If you be a Father or a Mother of Children, examine, 1. have you taken care
to see they were rightly and in due time Baptized? 2. Ephesians. 6.4.
that they be taught, as soon as they are able to learn, what a solemn Vow was
made in their name when Baptized, with the Principles of Religion implied
therein, and depending thereupon? 3. to correct them for their offenses, Heb.
12.9, 10, 11.
that they contract not a custom in sin? 4. to give them good example? 5. to
pray for them in private, and openly to give them your blessing? 6. Ecclus.
3.9. 1 Timothy 5.8.
to provide for them according to your ability; and not to spend in needless
riot, or otherwise, what ought to have been reserved for their maintenance?

3. As to your civil Father, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Jud. 8. Pet. 2.10, 11. Romans 13.6.
Tit. 3.1. Romans 13.1, 2. Pro. 24.21. Eccles. 10.20.
who is the King as Supreme; have you not been censorious and malapert, in
judging and traducing him or his government? Have you not grudged to pay him
toll or tribute; refused to obey his lawful commands; had no hand in rising up
against him, nor contributed thereunto, by sowing sedition and faction,
spreading infamous reports --?

4. As to your spiritual Fathers, 1 Timothy 3.1, 13. Luke 10.16.
the Bishops and Pastors of Christ's Church; have you not despised their
Calling, but honored them according to their respective degrees and stations
in the Church of Christ? 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.17. Ecclus. 7.29.
Have you not slighted and disobeyed those commands and admonitions which God
by them has given you? Have you not denied or diminished their dues, or paid
them grudgingly? Joh. 10.4, 5. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
Have you not forsaken your lawful Pastor, to follow after factious Preachers,
or such who more tickle your itching ears; which is the issue of a corrupt
heart, Prove. 29.1. Isa. 29.21.
and the high rode to error and falsehood? Have you not been angry when told of
your faults, or put in mind of the errors of your ways, and refused to return
and amend thereupon?

5. Have you been respective and lowly in your demeanor to all your
Superiors, whether in age or office, learning and judgment, temporal estate
and preferment, Romans 12.10. 2 Timothy 2.20. 1 Pet. 2.17.
giving to each the honor due to their respective conditions; and this though
you have no dependence upon them, nor hopes to receive any benefits from them?

6. Have you been meek, gentle, courteous and affable unto all men, as becomes
the Spirit of a true Christian; not high and haughty, Tit. 3.3.
churlish and distasteful in your carriage toward any; slighting,
undervaluing, scorning your equals, if not your betters, in some respects?
However, the truly humble good Christian esteems others better then himself.
Phil. 2.3.


7. If you have any persons under your command, as a Master of a Family, Ephesians.
6.9.
have you not been over-harsh and rigorous toward any of your Servants, 1 Samuel
12.3.
nor defrauded them of their wages? and have you preserved them to your power
from the wrongs of others? and have you taken care, what in you lies, for the
good of their Souls; viz. that they be Catechized in the principles of
Religion, Genesis 18.19. Jos. 24.15.
and duly frequent the public Worship of God, both in Church and family?

8. If you be a Servant, examine, Ephesians. 6.5. Tit. 2.9, 10.
have you been obedient to your Master in all his lawful commands? just and
true in the managing his business, so that he has suffered no loss, either by
your carelessness, or dishonesty? and has your carriage toward him been
submissive and meek, not answering again, when provoked by hard language?

9. In a word, have you obeyed that admonition of S. Paul, which is the more
full meaning of this 5. Commandment, Romans 13.7, 8.
Render therefore to all men their due; tribute to whom tribute is due, custom
to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor. Owe no man any thing,
but to love one another; for he that loves another has fulfilled the Law.

The Sixth Commandment. Thou shall do no murder.


Examination by the Sixth Commandment.
THere are several degrees of Murder in this Law prohibited; and though you
have not been guilty thereof by bloodshed, yet examine,

1. Have you not been guilty of immoderate Anger, Matt. 5.21, 22.
been peevish, and disquieted at trifles, at slight miscarriages of others, and
inconsiderable accidents about you?

2. Has not your anger swelled into wrath and fury, Pro. 27.3, 4. Ephesians. 4.31.
Jam 1.19. Matt. 5.22. 1 Pet. 3.9. Matt. 5.40.
nor been drawn out into hatred and malice, nor broken out into bitter and
opprobrious language, rendering evil for evil, and railing for railing, brawling
and quarrelling for any offense; going to law upon petty and small occasions of
trespass?

3. Ps. 37.1. Rom 13.13.
Have you not envied the good parts and endowments, or the wealth and
preferments, or the flourishing estate of others, in any respect, though they
may be wicked and unworthy?

4. Lev. 19.18. Matt. 5.38.
Have ye harbored no secret grudge in your heart toward any person, nor
entertained any secret thoughts and desires of revenge?

5. Prove. 24.17. Romans 12.15.
Have you not secretly rejoiced at the losses, crosses, disgraces or death of
any?

6. Have you no way impaired the health either of the Souls or bodies of
others; either by hurting, maiming, Exodus 21.22, etc.
wounding any person in body, or tempting them to sin, Matt. 18.6 Gal. 5.26.
to the ruin of their Souls, or provoking their spirits, or neglecting to
perform the Christian duties of Charity, both corporal and spiritual, unto them?

7. Has your demeanor been with all meekness and humility, Matt. 11.29. Ephesians.
4.32.
being loving, kind, tenderhearted, pitiful, peaceful, and easy to be
entreated, with the several qualifications of true Christian charity, 1 Cor.
13.1, etc.
without which no true Christianity?

8. Have you not impaired your own health, by surfeiting, drunkenness,
uncleanness, or giving way to any unruly lusts, passions, and desires, even
against your reason and judgment? Prove. 21.16.


The Seventh Commandment. Thou shall not commit adultery.


Examination by the Seventh Commandment.
THe Christian Virtues in this Law commanded are Chastity and Temperance, the
one being not to be preserved without the other: and of both these there are
several degrees; the transgression of each of which is to be here examined. And,

First, Concerning Chastity; because the uncleanness of the heart is as vile
before God as any act of that kind before man, examine, Matt. 5.28.


1. Have you not pleased your fancy with loose and wanton imaginations; nor
suffered unchaste thoughts so long to dwell in your heart, till by the corrupt
bent of its concupiscence they have grown into unruly lusts? and have you
endeavored to subdue those lusts, Col. 3.5.
and not suffered them to break out either, 1. Ephesians. 4.29.
into any filthy communication, scurrilous and obscene speeches? 2. into any
sinful solicitations and temptations of others to commit uncleanness with you,
Matt 5.29, 30.
by the wantonness of the eyes, hands, tongue?

2. Have you not gazed upon any person, Matt. 5.8.
till your eyes have betrayed your heart secretly to lust, and sinfully to
enjoy them?

And as to the acts of corporal uncleanness, they are of such a loathsome
nature, Ephesians. 5.3.
as not fit to be once named amongst Christians; your own Conscience will be
your best guide for your examination in such particulars: wherein consider and
seriously weigh the aggravating circumstances of Time, Place, Person; the
unruliness of your lust, against all the laws of God and Nature, right Reason,
and holy Religion: consider the inconsistency of every such deed of darkness
with the purity of your profession, 1 Cor. 6.15, etc. Ephesians. 5.5.
and your relation of being a member of Christ, a child of God, and an heir of
Heaven.

Upon the consideration of this, let this Memento of that one Father have a
deep impression upon your Soul; That in every lust of uncleanness, as the
unlawful flame thereof goes up into Heaven, so the filthy stench thereof goes
down into Hell. And as another Father observes, I am persuaded that the
greatest number of the Souls tormented in Hell have been less or more guilty of
this Sin.

Secondly, And because unlawful lusts are nourished and maintained by
Intemperance, Jer. 5.7, 8.
and that chiefly,

1. In Eating and Drinking, either more, or more often then is conducible to
the two ends of feeding; first, to maintain life, secondly, to preserve health;
examine, how frequently you have crossed these ends of God and Nature, either, 1.
by too much curiosity and daintiness to please an exotic palate, Prove. 23.3.
Deuteronomy. 31.20. and 32.15. Ecclus. 9.12. Luke 21.34. Ecclus. 37.29, 30, 31. Luke
16.19, etc. Prove. 23.29.
and humor a rebellious appetite; or, 2. to maintain and strengthen the lusts
of the flesh; or, 3. to please and humor others. And herein by drinking to
excess consider, first, the sinful expense of your Time; secondly, of your
Talent and estate; thirdly, of the health and good temper of your Body;
fourthly, of the soundness and quickness of all the faculties of your Mind;
fifthly, of what might and ought to have relieved the poor; sixthly, Isa.
56.12. Wisd. 2.6, etc.
of contracting the guilt of the excess of your companions, at least by your
compliance with them, if not tempting of them to drink: the which, though it be
looked upon as a matter of jest and merriment, yet 't will end in sadness and
woe. H^b. 2.15, 16.
And though perhaps, through the strength of your brain, and good constitution
of body, you may come off from your excess without any visible distemper; yet
that frees you not from the sad woe to such denounced. Isa. 5.22. Luke 6.25.
And it is woeful enough, that this beastly sin of eating and drinking to riot
and excess is inconsistent, as the former, 1 Cor. 6.10. Gal. 5.21.
with your Christian profession, and hopes of Heaven.

2. And since an account must be given of your precious Time, examine whether
your intemperance in diet has not often engaged you to spend your time either
in immoderate sleep or slothfulness, These. 5.^, 7. ^sa. 56.10, ^2. Ezekiel. 16.^9.
whereby the sinful lusts of the flesh are fomented; which was the sin of
Sodom: and it is the only business of the slothful man to tempt the Devil, who
tempts man unto all other sins.

3. Intemperance and excess in Apparel is not only a sign of pride and
vainglory, but a symptom and allurement to unlawful lusts. Examine if your
attire be such as is, 1. agreeable to your rank and condition, neither
affectedly sordid, nor too curiously fine and costly: Luke 7.25.
2. answerable to the ends of clothing; viz. first, to cover your nakedness,
secondly, to preserve, by moderate warmth, the health of the body: in either of
which respects to affect gorgeous apparel, Luke 16.19. Phil. 3.19. Genesis 3.21.
or to be proud of the same, is to glory in your shame; to cover which shame,
the use of garments was first instituted. Again, have you not envied others for
the bravery of their apparel, but rather pitied their folly; remembering that
the true ornament of a Christian is the hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4.
even the ornaments of a meek and quiet spirit?

4. Recreations are not only useful, but necessary to recruit the vigor both
of the Soul and body, Eccl. 2.10.11. and 3.12, 13. 2 Samuel 11.2, 3.
when overtoil'd with labor; but are too often the foments of unlawful lusts:
and therefore as to these, examine, 1. that your recreations be in themselves
lawful, neither dishonorable to God, nor scandalous and injurious to man: Ephesians.
5.11.
2. that they be not unseasonable, Eccl. 3.1.
to the hindrance of any duty to God or man: 3. that you be not immoderate in
their use, by making that your employment, which should only fit you for
employments more useful: 4. Eccl. 8.5.
that your recreations be not what they are vulgarly called, pastimes; it being
strangely imprudent to spend that precious time in toys and vanities, Eccl.
2.1, 2, 3. Phil. 2.12.
which is lent only to work out the eternal Salvation of your Soul.

The Eighth Commandment. Thou shall not steal.


Examination by the Eighth Commandment.
A Man may steal, and play the thief, 1. to himself, 2. to others.

1. As to the first, consider, if you have not ruined, decayed or diminished
the estate God has given you, either, Prove. 24.30, 31.
1. by your own careless and imprudent management thereof; or, 2. by the
carelessness and profuseness of others, whom you entrusted, but not discreetly
regarded; Prove. 6.6. and 13.4. and 19.15. Prove. 18.9. Eccles 6.1, 2.
or, 3. by your sloth and negligence in your calling; or, 4. by your prodigal
and profuse mispending; or yet on the contrary, 5. by pinching and too much
sparing, and denying thy self the full and lawful enjoyment of thy riches: the
which with several others are the causes of poverty, Prove. 24.34.
and kinds of self-robbery.

2. As to injustice toward others, examine your self, 1. 1 Kin. 21.1, etc. Is.
3.14, 15.
by the public sins of oppression, or grinding the face of the poor: 2. of
making hard bargains with the necessitous; of every forcible way either to get,
1 Samuel 12.3, 4.
or to keep what not of right, or more then of right belongs to you: 3. by the
private sins, 1. of pilfering and filching, which is properly called stealing;
2. of cogging and lying to cousen and deceive; 3. Luke 19.13, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4,
6. Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8, 9. Ps. 37.21. Hos. 12.7.
of cunning to defraud and circumvent, in buying and selling, lending and
borrowing, lending to the loss of the borrower, borrowing and not paying again;
by false weights and measures, by counterfeit coin, naughty money, and the like
unjust dealings.

Have you not robbed God in tithes and offerings? Mal. 3.8. Eccles. 7.29.3^,
31. Romans 13.6. Luke 10.7. ^e^ 20.13. ^^m. 13.7, 8.
nor his Priests in their accustomed dues? nor the King's Majesty in his
Tribute, customs, honor and obedience due to him? nor the labourer of his
hire, or servants of their wages? nor yet deprived any person of what either by
law or custom belongs unto him? All which with many more particulars are
transgressions of that golden rule of righteousness and charity, Whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, Matt. 7.12.
even so do unto them.

Have you not been uncharitable to the poor and indigent, Deuteronomy. 15.7, etc. Ps.
41.1. and 112.9. 2 Cor. 9.9. Pro. 29.7. Is. 58.7. Eccl 5.11. Luke 2.11. Pro.
3.27. 2 Cor. 8.12, 13, 14.
either by not giving, or not lending to supply their wants? or by railing,
reviling, and using opprobrious language toward them? Want of charity is no
other then downright robbery: for the poor man's livelihood is the rich man's
superfluity, and that is the poor man's due: it being as equal justice for the
rich to relieve the poor, as it is for the poor not to steal from the rich.

This sin is also a transgression of the former law: Ecclus. 34.21.
for the bread of the needy is their life, and he that defraudeth him thereof
is a manslayer.

The Ninth Commandment. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.


Examination by the Ninth Commandment.
NOt only of all false and evil speaking, Matt. 12.36, 37.
but of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account in the
day of Judgment. And therefore to make up your accounts against that great day
of trial, 'twill be necessary to commune with your heart, 12.34.
out of the abundance whereof the mouth speaks,

1. Whether you have been guilty of any officious lies, by speaking falsely
either in the cause of God, Job 13. Col. 3.9
or of man. The first being unlawful, the second is highly sinful, though my
neighbor may be benefited thereby. Ps. 12.2 Ecclus. 2.24, 25. and 23.


2. Have you told no scurrilous lies, vainglorious bragging lies, to please
and humor your own and your companions sensual inclinations?

3. Psalm. 24 4. Pro. 12 17. and 13.5.
Have you told no false stories to allure others to be of your mind and
judgment, though you be in an error? And it is very evident that you are both
deceived your self, and desire to deceive others, when you tell a lie to
maintain your opinion: for Truth stands in need of no lie to support it.

4. Prove. 18.8. and 24.28. Ecclus. 19.^, 8. and ^1.25. Ephesians. 4.25.
Have you told no infamous lies and scandalous stories, to detract and blemish
the good name of any? If such stories should be true, it is uncharitable; but
when falsities, abominable to report and spread them.

5. Matt. 7.3, ^.
Have you not talked of the moat in your brother's eye to his disgrace, being
blind as to the beam in your own? And have you not judged rashly, censured
uncharitably of other men's actions, viz. not in the better, but worser sense?

6. ^rov. 26.^4, 25, 26.
Have you not flattered with your lips, professing more love and respect to any
then has been truly in your heart toward them?

7. Exodus 23.1.
Have you neither publicly nor privately testified what is false, to the
diminution either of the reputation or estate of any man?

8. Have you used no opprobrious language, as, thou fool, knave? Matt. 5.22. 1
Pet. 3.9.
-- nor answered railing for railing? --

The sin of evil speaking is much aggravated from the quality of the persons
evil spoken of. As, 1. for Children to speak evil and reproachfully either of
or to their Parents: Pro. 20.20.
2. Jer. 18.18. Exodus 22.28. Jud. 8.
for a people to speak evil of their Pastors: 3. for Subjects to speak evil of
their King and his Ministers of State. Which is the humor of false Prophets
and Heretics; it being the practice of Orthodox Pastors, Tit. 3.1, 2.
to put their people in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to
obey Magistrates, to speak evil of no man, etc.

The Tenth Commandment. Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shall
not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is his.


Examination by the Tenth Commandment.
1. Has no lust inflamed your breast toward the Wife or Maid of another,
Matt. 5.28. 1 Thessalonians. 4.5. 2 Samuel 11.2.
or to covet whatsoever of his you vainly conceive serviceable to your sinful
pleasures? So lusted David after the wife of Vriah.

2. Hab. 2.9. Luke 12.15.
Have you not coveted the house, lands, preferments, offices, or whatsoever is
enjoyed by another, in order to your worldly profit? 1 King. 21.1, etc.
So coveted Ahab the vineyard of Naboth.

3. Have you not secretly wished the loss or ruin of your neighbor's health,
peace, credit, liberty, life, Job 31.29, 30. 1 John 2.11. and 3.15.
or any thing that is his, in order either to your pleasure or profit?

4. Number. 11.28, 29.
Have you not envied the flourishing estate of any, either in respect of their
wealth, esteem, honor, preferment, -- and this whether in reference to your
self, or to your friend?

5. Phil. 4.11. 1 Timothy 6.8. Matt. 6.19, 20. Heb. 13.5.
Have you been content with your present state and condition in this world, how
mean soever; not roving after the exterior consolations of the creature
abroad, the only way to lose contentment in your self at home?

6. Prove. 13.4. Ephesians. 4.28. 2 ^hess. 3.8.
Have you been diligent and industrious in the duties of your calling, (without
all carking solicitude,) both for the support of your self and yours, and for
the relief of others?

7. Have none of those great Diana's whom all the world worshippeth, viz. the
lusts of the flesh, 1 John 2.15, 16.
or voluptuousness, the lusts of the eyes, or covetousness, the pride of life,
or ambition, taken up more room in your heart then the love of God, and the
joys of the world to come?

My soul cleaves to the dust: Psalm. 119.25.
quicken me, O Lord, according to thy word.

CHAP. V. The Examination of Religious actions.
SUch is the infelicity of our humane condition upon earth, that we frequently
trespass against the Majesty of Heaven, not only by doing what God has by his
holy Laws forbidden, but also by the irregular performance of those holy acts
of Religion which he has commanded. Genesis 4.4, 5.


And herein a more strict scrutiny is required, a more narrow search into all
the secret recesses and corners, windings and turnings of the corrupt heart:
because the sins of such actions as be outwardly holy do commonly lie more
closely hidden from our apprehension and view, then those which have no
appearance of holiness in them. Where,

1. Examine your intention in every good work, what is your chief end and aim
therein. Matt. 6.22, 23.
For the light of the body is the eye: it is the intention, the internal eye of
the Soul, which renders every work, either of light or of darkness, sinful or
holy.

Consider then, whether in Almsgiving, Fasting, Praying, Preaching, or any
other Religious duty, you intend either, 1. the glory of God, rather then your
own glory and esteem; the praise of God more then the praise of men: or, 2. the
good of your Soul, and the interest of Heaven, rather then any worldly ends or
interests. 3. Whether you perform such or such an holy action out of a true
love to God, and obedience to his commands; or rather to please your self, in
following your own imaginations, inclinations and humors: 4. whether to
satisfy your own conscience, rather then to prevent the discourses or censures
of others; 5. to benefit others, rather then to please your own fancy. And
lastly, whether you have an eye to the recompense of reward in the other world,
without reflection upon any secular advantage in this life.

It Is too common with men, to mistake their own wills for the Will of God,
their own Fancies for Divine Illumination, the love of themselves for the Love
of God, and the revelations of flesh and blood for the Dictates of God's holy
Spirit.

The mind of man (says S. Gregory) does often belly it self, and conceits, both
in a good work to love what truly it loves not, and also in an evil work to
hate what thoroughly it hates not: nor can such secret collusions of the
deceitful heart of man be thoroughly sifted and found out, until the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed in that great day of a general examination and
trial. 1 Cor. 4.5.


2. As the end of every Religious action is to be examined, whereby the equity
or iniquity, sincerity or hypocrisy is discerned; so the care and caution,
fervor and devotion of the heart in its performance, is to be considered: Jer.
48.10.
for Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently. When the heathen
Priests offered Sacrifices to their false gods, in the midst of their
idolatrous Ceremonies an Herald cried unto them, Age quod agis, Be intent upon
what you are about. And it is surely unreasonable to imagine, that the
all-seeing spiritual God, or the God of the spirits of all flesh, should be
pleased with any worship, or act of Religion, where the heart is not wholly
intent thereupon, and devoted thereunto.

3. After any holy action performed in public, examine your own thoughts,
whether they reflect not upon your own dextrous wit, wisdom, elocution, zeal,
or holiness, for any of which you may expect to be praised and extolled by men.
And though your heart be so upright, as not to seek and hunt after popular
applause; yet if you be affected and delighted with the praise of men, it is not
without some tincture of vainglory.

4. Have you not been so secure, and conceited of your Religious performances,
as to lay your self the more open to after-temptations? For the more fervent
and frequent you be in holy actions, the more earnest and forcible will be your
temptations. And these also shall the more easily prevail against you, the more
secure you think your self of the Divine grace and favor upon such or such
Religious Duties conscienciously performed.

CHAP. VI. The Examination of Repentance.
HAving by all these particulars examined your self to find out your sins, it
will be necessary to try your Repentance also; that the great Antidote against
the poison of sin be not defective nor counterfeit. And the first particular
herein to be examined, is the duty of Examination it self.

1. Psalm. 26.2.
Have you daily considered your daily offenses, duly weighed them, and emptied
them out of your heart by a full and particular Confession of them in the
presence of God?

2. Have you so deeply considered your sins in the stain and danger thereof, as
to beget in your heart true compunction, 2 Cor. 7.10.
and that godly sorrow for sin which works repentance unto Salvation not to
be repented of?

3. Luke 11.24. Joh. 5.14. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
Has not your Repentance been too often an hypocritical mocking of God, by
returning again to your sins repented; breaking your promises of amendment in
time of sickness, danger, and the like?

4. Matt. 3.8. Hos. 14.1, 2. Dan. 4.27.
Have you brought forth fruits meet for Repentance? Such are, 1. more frequent
and hearty Devotions for your sins of ungodliness; 2. Almsgivings for your sins
of unrighteousness; 3. Joel 2.12. Matt. 3.10. and 7.16, 17.
Fasting for your sins of Intemperance. If the tree of Repentance bring not
forth such fruits, it is neither lively, nor likely to be accepted.

CHAP. VII. Considerations with Directions in the Confession of Sin.
1. HAving discovered the black stains and pollutions of Sin your Soul has
contracted, in the strict Examination of your heart and life by the foregoing
particulars, with what other your own judgment and conscience may suggest unto
you: your next work must be, to empty them all out of your Soul, to cast them
out with an abhorrence; which is to be done by a particular and punctual
Confession of them all unto Almighty God in prayer. Number. 5.6, 7.


Without such a sincere and through Confession of Sin, Lev. 16.21. and 26.40.
Prove. 28.13. 1 John 1.9.
the Pardon thereof is not promised; and therefore not likely to be obtained by
a bare and naked Faith in Christ, who very probably will not pardon and forgive
men their trespasses, but upon his terms prescribed.

2. It Is not to be imagined, that God therefore commands the Confession of
Sins, as if he were ignorant or unmindfull of any of our evil doings; Psalm.
90.8.
for he has set even our most secret sins in the light of his countenance. But
hereby, first, in all humility we acknowledge our undeservings of the least of
God's mercies: which, secondly, Jos. 7.19. Quando homo detegit, Deus tegit; cum
homo celat, Deus nudat; cum homo agnoscit, Deus ignoscit. Aug. in Psalm.
does magnify the glory of his grace, and the greatness of his glory: thirdly,
we discover our soars to our Physician, and our wants of mercy to the Father of
mercies, our great needs of pardon to the fountain of goodness: fourthly, we
declare our great obligations for pardon granted and mercy obtained: fifthly,
our hearts are excited, and our affections inflamed with the greater love of
our dear Lord, who died to merit so great a mercy: sixthly, the Confession of
sin does imprint in our hearts the deeper sense, with an abhorrence of them:
and lastly, being cordially done, it is an evident sign that we have abjured and
forsaken them.

3. But the outward confession of the mouth, without the inward compunction of
the heart, is but the shell of Repentance without the kernel, a carcass
without a Soul to quicken it. King David, 1 King. 15.5. Isal. 6.6.
for his only Sin in the matter of Vriah, every night washed his bed, and (in
the daytime also) he watered his couch with his tears. Mary Magdalen also with
her penitent tears washed the blessed feet of our Lord: Luke 7.38.
and such must be a flood of tears, and not a few drops only. S. Peter, for
one single sin, Luke 22.62.
wept bitterly: and it is recorded of him, that he never heard the cock crow
through the course of his life, but by a shower of tears he declared the sorrow
of his heart for his offense. And some of the Fathers have styled Repentance
the Baptism of tears, Clem. Alex. apud Eusebius.
as not to be exactly performed with dry eyes, in an outward verbal Confession
of Sin.

It Is confessed, that for sins of daily infirmity, small peccadillo's, and
frequent failings through ignorance, inadvertency, -- the daily confession of
sins, -- saying devoutly, (as S. Augustine) Forgive us our trespasses as we --,
will be sufficient, Quam magne deliquimus, tam granditer defleamus --
Poenitentia crimine minor non sit. Cypr. Sermon. de Laps.
through the merits of Christ, to obtain pardon of them: But such sins as be of
an higher and deeper stain, sins of wilfulness and presumption, of perverseness
and obstinacy of mind, and even lesser, when multiplied and continued, require
a deeper sense and sorrow. For it is most just and equitable, that true and
sincere Repentance be commensurate to the hainousness of the Crimes repented.

4. Psalm. 51.17. 1 Pet. 2.5.
That your Confession may flow from a broken heart, which will render the same
a Sacrifice acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ, these following
Considerations and farther Directions may be useful.

Remember how deeply you stand obliged to keep God's holy will and
Commandments, and to walk in the same all the days of your life. This was
promised in your name when you were Christened; and if you have any sense or
conscience of the Religion you profess, you have frequently renewed this your
Baptismall Vow. And surely, to live in obedience to God's Commandments you are
deeply obliged, 1. in general, in that he is the great Lord of all the world,
to whom all things in Heaven and Earth do bow and obey: 2. more particularly,
he is the God of thy life, health, strength, wealth, from whom thou have
received thy whole self, Body, Soul, Spirit, with all thou do enjoy in this
life, or can hope or desire to make thee happy, either in this world, or in
the world to come.

5. That to offend a God so great, so good, so glorious, so gracious, and
frequently to transgress his most holy Laws, contracts a guilt of such infinite
weight and demerit, as will undoubtedly, without an infinite mercy, sink thy
Soul to the bottom of Hell.

6. Consider for what foolish, petty, trifling things you have offended God:
perhaps for a little filthy lucre, or some dirty delight, or to please a
rebellious appetite, or to satisfy a mischievous, vindictive, malicious humor,
or for the venomous breath of popular applause, or the aicry thing of a fansied
esteem and the praise of men, -- wherein the service of every such unprofitable
and brutish lust is preferred before the service you owe to the great Majesty
of Heaven, which consists in obedience to his Commandments.

7. Remember and ponder with your self, as the folly, so the filthiness of your
Sins, how odious they render you both before God and Man.

First, as for God; he is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity Hab. 1.13.
. The Sinner with his Sins are equally hateful unto him Job 4.8, 9. Prove. 13.5.
. So that your Sins do not only, 1. rob you of his grace and favor, and, 2.
render all your Prayers and all your other acts of Religion abomination unto
him Isa. 1.12, 13, 14.
; but also, 3. move him to raze your name out of the Book of life Exodus 32.33.
, and, 4. to deliver you up to have your portion with the Devil and his Angels
in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone Rev. 20.15. Psalm. 11.6.
.

Secondly, as for Man; even wicked men themselves will abhor and revile you for
your Sins; but much, very much more hateful do they render you to all good
men, Prove. 29.27. Psalm. 97.10.
who truly love God, and hate all that is evil. And questionless, you would be
ashamed to look any men in the face, whether good or bad men, did they but know
all that by you which you know by your self, and which God knows better then
your self.

8. Call to mind some of the most aggravating Circumstances: how such or such a
Sin was committed against the light of your mind, wittingly and knowingly;
against the checks of your Conscience, stubbornly and wilfully; against the
admonitions of God's Holy Word, and the dictates of his Holy Spirit,
presumptuously and contumaciously; against your Covenant with God in Baptism,
and frequently renewed in your Prayers, profanely and perjuriously; against
your profession as a Christian to make conscience of your ways, scandalously
and offensively.

And this guilt of Scandal is much aggravated, if you be a Master of a family,
a Pastor of people, a Parent of children, a Magistrate, Minister, -- In every
of which respects your Sin is doubled, by the encouragement of others to the
like offense by your example.

9. In calling your Sins to remembrance, 'twill be necessary also to call to
mind several other Circumstances of many Sins; as the Time when, the Place
where, the Persons with whom, the Manner how such or such a Sin was committed:
viz. how bold, how impudent, how shameless, how peremptory, how furious and
unbridled you were in the prosecution of such or such exorbitant desires, such
unruly lusts, such irrational passions. Whether also 'twas the first or second
time only you transgressed in the like kind; or whether you have not rather
been more frequently guilty, and so through custom and continuance your heart
is hardened, and your Repentance for the same but hypocritical and feigned, if
any at all.

10. The most of these Considerations are of so high concernment, that if you
will truly turn unto the Lord from all the errors of your ways, your mind must
dwell upon them, especially upon such as do most sting your Conscience, and
affect your heart, 1 Samuel 7.6. 2 Cor. 7.10. Jam. 4.9, 10.
till the pride thereof be humbled, and its stubbornness subdued, and your Soul
melt into holy compunction, and your eyes run over with the tears of godly
sorrow.

11. And because your Soul cannot be truly humbled within you, except your Body
be humbled also, and God requires both Soul and Body in every act of his
service; 1 Cor. 6.20.
'twill be requisite therefore that you prostrate your self upon the earth in
the confession of your Sins. 2 Samuel 12.16.
So holy David lay upon the earth, when he fasted and prayed for the remission
of his sins. When the people of God made confession of their sins publicly in
the Temple, they did it grovelling on the ground, with their faces in the dust:
and to this day the Jews do the same in their Synagogues, falling flat upon
the earth when they confess their sins, and the sins of their forefathers.

Wherein that which should yet have a greater influence upon too stubborn
hearts and stifned joints, is, the example of our dearest Savior; who, when he
prayed, Matt. 26.38, 39. Lak. 22.44.
groaning under the burden of our sins, fell upon his face, and prayed, and
swet drops of blood, and prayed more earnestly saying the same words: 1 Pet.
2.21.
herein leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps; not so much to
mind variety of expressions and multitude of words in our prayers and
confessions, as to be thoroughly humbled both in body and Soul under the mighty
hand of God, 1 Pet. 5.6.
that he may vouchsafe to raise us up out of the mire and clay of all our
sinful pollutions.

12. This humiliation of your selves both in Body and Soul for your Sins cannot
be perfectly, sincerely and thoroughly transacted, except your Prayers be joined
with Fasting. That great day of expiation, commanded by God for the putting
away of Sin, was a Fasting-day: and for this corporal mortification, Lev.
16.29, 30. Isa. 58 3, 5. Joel. 2.12. Matt. 17.21. Luke 2.37.
as well as for the spiritual compunction, 'twas called a day wherein to
afflict the Soul.

The many admonitions and examples of Fasting, both in the Old and New
Testament, and its frequent conjunction with Prayer, may sufficiently convince
us of the necessity of this Duty, when we implore the pardon of our Sins; as
also of other acts of Mortification for the taming and subduing of the flesh, 1
Cor. 9.27. Gal. 5.17.
which has so shamefully rebelled against the spirit, as in the through
Confession of Sins is acknowledged.

13. That you may be both humbled for your Sins, and yet not despair of mercy
and forgiveness, meditate upon the bitter Sorrows and Sufferings of our Blessed
Redeemer.

Behold him with the eye of Faith and devout Meditation expanded on the Cross,
as on a Tormenting-rack: see him naked, and racked, and wounded, and bleeding
for thy Sins: no part of his Body untormented, no power of his Soul
unsacrific'd, no drop of his Blood unshed for thine offenses. His tender Skin
and delicate Flesh was torn, and rent, and razed, by cruel lashes with forked
whips; his Head crowned with thorns, the curse of the earth; his Sinews cracked,
his Veins burst, his Joints disparted, and all his Bones started aside: whilst
in the midst of these torments he offered up his Soul a Sacrifice for thy Sins.

And it is this precious Blood thus shed and applied to thy heart, if any thing,
will mollify its hardness, and melt thee into tears of Compunction for thy
Sins, the cause of thy Savior's Sufferings; into tears of Compassion with thy
Redeemer in his Passion for thee; into tears of Devotion, in the dedication of
thy whole self unto the service of his Majesty, who gave himself wholly to
redeem and save thee.

And because Meditations upon this subject are of all others most effectual to
excite Compunction, and Devotion in the heart, and to obtain mercy; I have
therefore annexed some short Meditations on the several Mysteries of our
Redemption, and our Savior's Passion, wherein every one may enlarge himself,
as his Devotion shall suggest.

14. In the Confession of your Sins, as in every of your set solemn constant
Prayers unto God, 'twill be very imprudent, and too presumptuous, to trust to
your own extempore expressions, and boldly say only what at present comes into
your mind: for this is to be as one of them that tempt the Lord. Ecclus. 18.23.
Eccles. 5.1, 2.
And by such rash inconsiderate addresses you offer to the Allwise God the
sacrifice of fools.

There Is no Malefactor that petitions his Judge for the pardon of his crime,
but will pen his Petition, and study to do it in such words as are pertinent,
and not superfluous, that he offend not by any tedious prolix or unnecessary
expressions. And we cannot surely be less considerate and careful, when we
petition the Great Judge of the world for the pardon of our Sins, which would
otherwise sink our Souls to eternal honor.

For the right performance therefore of a Duty of so high concernment, Dan.
9.4, etc. Hos. 14.2, 3. Baruc. 1.15, etc. Luke 15.18, 21.
we have many Forms of Confession upon record in the Book of God, and other
books of practical Devotion both ancient and modern. But because such
generals reach not punctually to the particulars of Self-examination proposed,
I have hereunto added, for the greater ease of the Reader, a Form of
Confession, whereunto every man may add or diminish, as his Conscience tells
him he is guilty or not guilty, also as he finds himself more or less guilty:
remembering to enlarge upon every general head of Confession, the enumeration of
all such particular Sins as relate thereunto.

And because there be few devout orthodox good Christians but are affected with
what is ancient and primitive, more then with the modes of new and modern
Devotion; I have therefore added one Form of Confession out of the Bibliotheca
Patrum, for its antiquity, and the general extent thereof.

15. After the Confession of your Sins, the most effectual Prayers you can use
for the Pardon of them are, next to the Lord's Prayer, the Penitential
Psalms; the praying whereof with understanding and devotion, is truly and
indeed to pray by the Holy Spirit of God: Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
for such are undeniably the dictates of God's Holy Spirit. I have therefore
added the said Psalms, with the Lord's Prayer, paraphrased, that in the devout
use thereof you may pray by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15.
and pray with understanding also.

CHAP. VIII. A Form of Confession of Sin fitted to the Rules of
Self-examination, whereunto every one may add or substract, as he finds
himself guilty or not guilty.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. BUT I
am unworthy, O Lord, to take thy Holy Name in my mouth, ashamed to lift up mine
eyes to Heaven; for I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, in that I
have daily broken my Vow and Promise made unto the God of Heaven. Sins against
the Baptismal Vow in general. To renounce the Devil and all his works;
I am unworthy to be called thy Son, having obeyed the suggestions and done the
works of the Devil; and I do therefore justly deserve, as a child of the Devil,
to have my portion with him and his Angels: for, with those Apostate spirits, I
have not kept to my first estate of Regeneration in Baptism, but have
transgressed all the particulars of that Covenant which I made with my God
therein.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have suffered my foolish heart
to be deceived with the Pomps and Vanities of this transitory life; The Pomps
and Vanities of this wicked World;
and have been more enamored with the empty, gaudy, flattering felicities of
this present World, then with those never-fading joys and unspeakable glories
of the World to come.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. The Pride of life has ensnared me
more to affect the praise of men then the praise of God; and the Lust of the
eyes has bewitched me, to prefer the love and service of Mammon before the
love and fear and service of my Maker.

God be merciful to me a sinner. I have more readily obeyed the sinful lusts
of the flesh, And all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh.
then the godly motions of the Spirit: and carnal Concupiscence has reigned in
my heart, and prevailed in the actions of my life, against the dictates both of
right Reason and holy Religion.

Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, and according to the
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses, through Jesus Christ, Amen. I
have not been so careful as I ought, To believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith.
rightly and fully to understand all the Articles of the holy Christian Faith,
whereinto I was Baptized, and made Christian: and my Faith in those
Fundamentals of the Religion I profess has been weak and wavering, clouded by
ignorance, depraved by error, and distracted by many various Opinions, and
doubts of the Truth.

God be merciful to me a sinner. I have not framed the affections of my heart,
and the actions of my life, according to what each Article of my Christian
Faith does imply, and implicitly command: but I have profaned, nay even denied,
that Faith by the sinful works of my hands, which I have professed with my
mouth.

God be merciful to me a miserable sinner. I have too often neglected, and been
sometimes ashamed to make confession of my Faith, when called hereunto by the
Minister in the Congregation: and most justly therefore may my Blessed Savior
be ashamed of me at the last great Day. But he is merciful, and I a miserable
sinner.

God be merciful to my sin, for it is great. I have not studied fully to know
what the Will of my God is, To keep God's holy Will and Commandments.
and to understand aright those Divine Commandments I am obliged to observe:
neither have I obeyed thy Will and kept thy Commandments, according to the
knowledge I have had thereof.

To thee, O Lord God, belongs mercy and forgiveness, but to me shame and
confusion of face; for I have rebelled against thee, and have not walked in
those Laws which thou have appointed for us. Sins against the First Table of
the Law.
I Have not so steadfastly and unfeignedly believed in thee my God, Sins against
the First Commandment.
as not many times to entertain wild and roving thoughts of Infidelity and
Atheism.

I have lived too much and too long without God in the world, Against Faith in
God.
spending my time either in doing nothing, or nothing to purpose, or doing what
I ought not; as if there were no God to call me to an account for the expense
of my time, and for all my actions in time.

The whole course of my life has been a trade of rebellion to my Creator, of
ingratitude to my Redeemer, of obstinacy to my Sanctifier, of contradiction to
a sincere Faith in the Trin-une God, Blessed Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; being
little better then one of those Atheists, who profess to know God, but in their
works deny him, being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.

Remember not, Lord, the sins of my youth, nor of my riper age; but according
to the multitude of thy mercies think upon me, O God, for thy goodness. I have
not fully relied upon the all-wise and good providence of God, Trust in God.
and cast all my care upon him; but I have often distracted my mind with
carking cares and fears for the things of this life, and have used unlawful and
indirect means to obtain and advance my worldly ends and interests.

I have leaned to my own understanding, trusted to my policy and cunning, made
flesh my arm, and riches my confidence, been puffed up by prosperity, cast down
by adverse occurrents; for want of a sure trust and holy confidence in my God.

God be merciful to me a miserable sinner. I have not made my Creator the
chief object of my hope and desires; Hope in God.
but being made in honor, after the Image of God, I have made my self like the
beasts that perish, roving in my desires and vain hopes of consolation in the
Creature.

I have foolishly hoped to avoid thy threatened Judgments, and yet have not
avoided the Sins against which they are denounced: and I have as vainly hoped
to attain thy promised Mercies, having not obeyed thy Precepts in order
thereunto.

O turn thy face away from my sins, and blot out all mine offenses. I have not
stood in awe of thy dreadful Majesty, Fear of God.
so as not to sin, and provoke thee to anger: I have more feared to commit sin
before men, then in the presence of the Allseeing God; more feared the penalty
of humane laws, then the threatenings of the Divine; more feared to lose a
little empty credit and esteem amongst men, then to incur the displeasure of
the Almighty: and the little fear I have had of God has been more servile then
filial, more afraid of the punishment then of the sin.

Enter not into judgment with thyservants, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
flesh living be justified. The Love of God in my heart is weak and defective,
Love of God.
and no better then dissimulation and hypocrifie; since I have not hated what
is evil, nor delighted my self in the Lord, and in the ways of his service:
since I have not obeyed his Laws, nor studied to please him, more then to
please my self and pleasure others: since I have not longed after a more full
enjoyment of God's Sacred Majesty in Heaven above, but my Soul cleaves to the
dust and rubbish of worldly vanities.

Withdraw not thou thy mercy from me, O Lord, though my heart has been
withdrawn from thee; but let thy loving mercy and truth always preserve me. I
have too often neglected and omitted that indispensable duty of holy Prayers,
both public and private, Prayers unto God.
in the Church and in the Closet; taking any light occasion, sometimes to omit,
sometimes to curtail my Devotions, and too often glad of such an occasion.

I have been too rash with my mouth to utter Prayers before God that have been
impertinent, irregular, and unfit to be offered up to the infinite wisdom and
purity of Heaven.

In the use of those holy Prayers which have been weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary I have been both indevout and irreverent, weary of their length,
displeased at their return; cold, dull, heavy and without advertency in the
effusion of them.

And that which renders the best and most zealous prayers ineffectual, I have
presumed to pray in my sins, with an impure heart and unclean hands; so that
wherein I might have most confidence, I find nothing but imperfections,
weaknesses and defects.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have not so seriously
considered and entertained so deep a sense of thy great glories in thy self,
Praises of God.
and manifold graces to us sinful mortals, as duly to praise thee, both with
heart and voice, both in the congregation and in the closet: neither has the
light of holy Truth so shined in the actions of my life, that others seeing my
good works, may glorify thee also.

God be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. O thou who art an Eternal, Sins
against the Second Commandment.
Incomprehensible, Spiritual, Pure, Invisible Essence, how have I
misapprehended thy greatness? My imaginations and conceptions of thee have been
vain and mean, and far below the excellency, purity and perfection of thy
Divine Nature.

And as my thoughts have been rude and unworthy of thee; Irreligious Worship.
so has my Worship also been far misbeseeming so great, so holy, so pure a
Majesty.

I have not worshipped thee either with that humble, low prostration of Body, or
yet with that sincere intense devotion of Soul, as was meet I should: I have
drawn near to thee with my lips, when often my heart has been far from thee.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have made a God of the World by
Pride, and Covetousness, Idolatry.
which is Idolatry; and a God of my Belly, by Luxury and Wantonness, wherein,
and in many more respects, I have served the Creature more then the Creator,
God over all, blessed for ever.

I have too much idolized my own Imaginations, both by believing and
worshipping God otherwise then himself, in his Holy Word, and by the Ministry
of his Holy and true Church, has commanded.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have too often sacrilegiously
robbed my God in Tithes and offerings, usurping and withholding what has been
consecrated to holy use, diminishing and defrauding in the dues of the Church.

Remember not, Lord, our iniquities, nor the iniquities of our forefathers;
but spare us, good Lord, spare thy people whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood. That Name of Heaven, Sins against the Third Commandment.
which is great, wonderful and holy, I have too slightly regarded, and too
often used to promote vanities, and maintain lies.

I have not only my self too often profaned, Rash Swearing and Cursing.
but, without regret in my self, or reproof of others, have heard thy holy Name
blasphemed by rash Oaths and irreligious Execrations; cursing the creatures, my
neighbors, nay my self, by that ever-blessed Name, which is only to be
mentioned for adoration and blessing.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have taken many solemn Oaths
Perjury.
in public, without a right understanding of the respective contents thereof,
and the obligation of my Conscience thereunto: and what I have understood, I
have not conscienciously kept and observed; being guilty of Perjury, both in
general Oaths, and in many particular.

I have seen the reverend Name and Oath of God imposed upon the Consciences of
men out of Tyranny, as a covert of oppression and injustice; and I also, partly
for fear, partly for favor and affection to unjust defigns, have wickedly
taken the same Oaths and Engagements: and though because of such unlawful Oaths
the Land sadly mourned; yet have not I been humbled for the sins and Perjuries
of this sinful Nation.

Those holy and just Promises I have made, both to God and man, Breach of
Promise.
I have not justly performed; but have preferred, sometimes my sinful pleasure,
sometimes my sordid gain and worldly advantage, before the obligations of my
Conscience both by oath and promise.

I have not given occasion to others to sanctify thy Name, by my discreet,
Scandal.
sober, edifying speech and demeanor; but have rather caused the same to be
profaned, by my idle, light, foolish, sinful words and works.

For thy Name's sake, Blessed Jesus, thy sweet and saving Name of JESUS, be
merciful unto my sin, for it is great. I have too slightly and negligently both
read and heard the Sacred Word of God; Against the Word of God;
through carelessness not understanding, and through precipitancy and
self-interest misunderstanding and wresting the contents thereof: and what I
have rightly understood, I have not conscienciously put in practice.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have too much slighted, and the
Sacraments,
and too often profaned, those Holy Sacraments Christ has ordained in his
Church, as the blessed means of Grace and Salvation.

I have not seriously enough weighed, Of Baptism,
and carefully observed, the Covenant I made with my God in Baptism; nor yet
informed those committed to my charge, of their obligation to perform the same.

I have not been so reverent and devout at the administration of that Holy
Sacrament of Baptism, as becomes so great a Mystery of Godliness, and the holy
offices of its Celebration.

God be merciful unto me, and heal my Soul, for I have sinned against thee.
When I have been invited to that Holy Communion of the Body and Blood of
Christ, Of the Lord's Supper.
I have often slighted such invitations; choosing rather to continue in my
ignorance and neglect of so great a duty, then to take pains to be informed,
and to practice the Religious acts and offices of due preparation thereunto.

I have pretended scruples of Conscience about harmless Ceremonies, to neglect
the Service of God it self: and remembered the danger of unworthy receiving, to
keep me back; but forgot the duty that is incumbent on me, to eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Cup.

Many excuses and pretenses I have fansied to my self, and made to others, to
detain me from that Sacrament; when the true cause has been, want of Devotion
in my heart, and of a full purpose to leave my Sins, and to turn unto the Lord
sincerely from all the errors of my ways.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I am much afraid that I have
received that Blessed Sacrament unworthily, by not discerning the Lord's Body,
being ignorant of the nature, ends and benefits thereof, and of what is
required of them that come thereunto; and by not observing strictly, in my
Preparation and Participation, what I have known thereof.

As to Preparation; I have not so duly and truly examined my heart and life,
confessed and bewailed my Sins, humbly implored pardon, fully resolved
amendment, carefully renewed my Vow and Covenant in Baptism, -- as becomes a
devout Communicant.

Thine infinite mercy, O God, in giving us thine only Son, to be both the
price of our Redemption, and the food of our Souls, has not sunk so deep into
my heart, as to be inflamed with Divine love and affection, with a spiritual
joy in the Lord, and a through devoting of my self to thy service, and to
praise thee therefore both with heart and voice, and through all the actions of
my whole life.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have not performed my promises,
nor put into practice my resolutions I undertook upon my approach to thine
Altar; but have again returned to my old sins, as the dog to his vomit.

I have sinned, woe unto me that I have sinned, O Father, against Heaven, and
before thee, and am not worthy to be called thy son. Thy Holy Temple have I
profaned by my often irreverent approaches thereunto, and my careless, The
profanation of what is holy.
slovenly and indevout demeanor therein; as if there were no difference
betwixt the House of God and the houses of men, betwixt a Church and a Barn.

I have too much undervalued the Ministers of thy Holy Word and Sacraments,
slighted and contemned holy persons, profaned many holy actions and holy
things, which have thy mark enstamped on them, and have been dedicated to the
service of thy great Name.

And though thus, and more ways then thus, in more respects then I can possibly
conceive or remember, I have profaned thy Holy Name; yet is thy Name called
upon me, and I do daily call upon thy Name: I do therefore humbly beg,

For thy Name's sake, O Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. Many of
those Days and hours, Sins against the Fourth Commandment.
times and seasons, dedicated to thy Divine Worship, public and private, have
I profaned and unhallowed; making no difference, either by my words or works,
betwixt Days separate to the sacred Service of God, and such as are left in
common for the service of our selves.

I have too often absented my self from thy solemn public Worship, without
sufficient cause, and have too carelessly, irreverently and indevoutly demeaned
my self therein.

I have misspent much of the time assigned for holy Exercises, in following my
own private business, satisfying my sensful lusts, pursuing the pleasures and
interests of this present world; spending upon such days in luxury, riot and
excess, what might better have been laid out in Alms and Charitable uses.

The whole course of my life, which thou grantedst me to be spent in thy
service here, that I might advance my hopes of Heaven hereafter, I have
foolishly thrown away upon my lusts and vanities; continually grieving thy good
Spirit, quenching those sacred flames he has enkindled in my breast, never
ceasing from the works of sin, but daily laboring to destroy my hopes to keep
a perpetual Sabbath in Heaven.

O God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my eyes to Heaven; for mine
iniquities are increased over mine head, and my trespass is gone up unto the
Heavens. Sins against the Second Table of the Law.
O Most just and dear God, Sins against the Fifth Commandment.
I humbly confess my self, not only to have broken the bonds of that love,
fear and service I owe unto thee, but I have also transgrest my duty in all my
Relations unto others.

I have been disobedient to my Parents, Against Parents.
stubborn and disrespective in my carriage toward them: I have sometimes
secretly despised them in my heart, and openly reviled them; I have slighted
their admonitions, thinking my self too good to own them, too wise to obey
their commands: I have not, to the best of my power, comforted and relieved
them in their wants and weaknesses, sorrows and sicknesses; and I have too
often wished for their death, that I might enjoy their estate, and follow the
sway of my own corrupt humor and inclinations.

God be merciful to me a sinner. I have not been careful, Against Children.
either my self to instruct my Children, or to see they were by others
instructed in the Principles of holy and true Religion: I have been more
careful for their temporal then spiritual estate, for the health of their
Bodies then for the Salvation of their Souls; not wisely admonishing,
discreetly correcting, and seasonably reproving them, and by my good example
teaching them the ways of Truth and Holiness.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. Against the King --
I have been too disobedient to my Prince, too censorious and malapert in
traducing his Person and Conversation, his Government, and the Governors under
his Majesty: I have murmured to pay him Toll and Tribute, and refused to obey
many of his Laws and lawful Commands.

I had too deep a hand in the Rebellion against the late King of blessed
memory, by my many personal sins provoking the wrath of God, by entertaining
false opinions, by believing and spreading lies and infamous stories --

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have not made conscience to obey
the Laws and Orders of thy Church, Against the Church,
whether universal or particular, not acknowledging or not submitting to the
authority of either, and am justly to be therefore rankt amongst Publicans and
Sinners.

My Ghostly Fathers, and the Ministers thereof.
in the several Orders of Bishop, Priest and Deacon, I have disbelieved,
disrespected, disobeyed; despised them in their Persons, in their Callings, in
their Admonitions for my Soul's health: And I have also detained, diminished,
defrauded, and grudingly paid the Dues of the Church.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. Amongst the Ministers of the
Gospel, I have had respect of persons, being better pleased with a stranger
then with my own lawful Pastor; better pleased with the Factious and
Schismatical, then with the Orthodox and Regular Clergy; better pleased with
Preachers that tickle the itching ear, then with such as feed the Soul with
sound and wholesome Doctrine.

I have hated him that reproves in the gate: I have hardened my heart, and
refused, when admonished, to return from the Errors of my ways.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. Toward all my Superiors I have
been too haughty and disrespectful, Against all men in their relations and
conditions.
both in my carriage toward them, and speeches of them: I have not honored
the aged, and admonished the younger and less experienced: Toward all men my
deportment has been too churlish and ungentle; not so meek and lowly, not so
courteous and affable, as becomes the spirit of a true Christian.

I have been proud and vainglorious, stubborn and disobedient; slighting,
contemning, deriding others, giving rash judgment: but have been impatient my
self of scorn, or of a just reproof; not enduring to be slighted, and yet
extremely deserving it.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have not ordered aright the
members of my Family, [or my Servant, Sins of Masters of Fandlies.
or Servants;] been too remiss in my care for their instruction, and for their
daily attendance upon the public Worship of God: preferring their attendance
upon me, and their service in my worldly concerns, before the great concernment
and interest of their own Souls Salvation in the service of thy Sacred Majesty.

I have detained or curtailed their wages, murmuring to give them their due;
provoked their spirits, exacted too hard duty from them, and too superciliously
lorded it over them.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have oftentimes disobeyed, And
of Servants.
and murmured to obey my Master's commands: I have not been so lowly and
submissive in my demeanor toward him, so just and honest in the management of
his affairs, as becomes a good and faithful Servant.

Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness; and according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses, through Jesus Christ -- I have
been hainously and frequently guilty of immoderate Anger, Sins against the
Sixth Commandment. Immoderate Anger in the heart: in word and deed.
been peevish and disquieted at trifles, at slight miscarriages of others, and
inconsiderable accidents about me.

My Anger has often swelled into wrath and fury, broken out into bitter
railing and cursing, opprobrious speeches, (to such and such,) mindful of
wrongs, forgetful of benefits: going to law (with such and such) more out of
malice then matter; more out of pride, or covetousness, or for revenge, then
for righteousness sake.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have envied the persons and
flourishing estates of others, Envy.
(of such or such,) their parts or endowments, of such for their wealth and
preferments, of such for their credit and esteem: I have desired and pursued
mine own worldly ends and interests, though in the loss, ruin and death of
others.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have many ways, The inferior
degrees of Murder, as to the Bodies of others;
and in many respects, impaired the health of others, the bodily health of such
and such, by fighting, maiming, wounding, and by not relieving the wants and
necessities of the poor and indigent; by not assisting and helping, to the best
of my power, the sick and the soar, the wounded and distressed, and such as are
in captivity and bondage.

I have also too much contributed to the ruin of other men's Souls, as to the
Souls of others:
both by silence, consenting, and not reproving; by not instructing,
admonishing, and exhorting others, as opportunity has been offered, and my duty
required; and by my lewd example and wanton behavior, encouraging, nay
tempting and alluring others to run with me to the same excess of Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, uncharitable Censures: -- and I have been pleased and delighted to
hear of the disgrace, loss and death of others.

I have been extremely wanting in all those several kinds of Christian Charity,
as to both.
both corporal and spiritual, whereby the good estate of my neighbors is
preserved, both in respect of their Souls and Bodies: I have not been so kind,
so loving, so courteous, so pitiful, so tenderhearted, so compassionate, so
gentle and easy to be entreated, as becomes a true disciple of Christ my
Savior.

Deliver me from bloud-guiltiness, O my God; even from all these, and from all
the several kinds and degrees of bloud-guiltiness, good Lord, deliver me; and
my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness. But how should I rightly love my
neighbor as my self, Toward our selves.
since I have not loved my self aright, but have gone the way to destroy my
self, by my intemperance in meats and drinks, and by my incontinence and
wantonness, by my impatience and overmuch solicitude of mind for temporal
things; and in a word, for want of prudence and sober guidance of my unruly
passions and desires?

I am gone astray like a sheep that is lost: O seek thy servant, for I do not
forget thy Commandments. I have not possessed my vessel in holiness and honor,
Sins against the Seventh Commandment. Wanton imaginations.
as the Temple of God should be.

I have entertained many loose and wanton Imaginations, the which I have not
forthwith cast out of my heart, but have suffered them to dwell there, till
they have grown into unruly, unlawful Lusts: Unclean lusts.
I have not endeavored to subdue those lusts, but have suffered them to break
out into filthy Communication, obscene talk, Filthy talk.
sinful solicitations of others, by the wantonness of my eyes, hands, unseemly
gestures, rude Actions; Actions.
more particularly, [such and such with such and such persons, at such and such
a time, in such and such a place, after such a shameless manner and behavior.]

I am unclean, unclean, unclean: O wash me in the fountain of thy inexhaustible
mercy through faith in the blood of Christ; wash me thoroughly from my
wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. I have not mortified my body, Neglect
of fasting.
for the subduing of carnal lusts, by Fasting and Abstinence; making no
conscience of several Days and times devoted thereunto.

I have fomented my lusts, Intemperance in Meats and drinks.
by giving too much way and sway to my rebellious appetite, even to Drunkenness
and Gluttony, [at such a time, with such company, -- ] wherein I have been too
forward my self to drink to excess, and to tempt others to the like excess.

Even the whole course of my life has been a trade of Intemperance in meats and
drinks: and though I have reapt the bitter fruits of such improvidence, by
having my heart thereby estranged from thee my God, by the slight and negligent
performance of holy duties, by wasting my time, my talent, giving ill example,
impairing the health both of my Soul and body; yet have I still continued to be
daily guilty of such Intemperance and folly.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have been too loose, In Apparel.
costly, garish and flaunting in my Attire, to entice and allure the eyes of
lovers, to gain an empty respect from others; making garments, given to cover
my nakedness, and the shame of my nature, to be the instruments of pride and
wantonness.

God be merciful unto me a miserable sinner. I have been both immoderate and
unseasonable in the use of Recreations, In Recreations.
misspending too much of that precious time in toys and vanities, which was
lent me only to work out the eternal Salvation of my Soul.

My sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up; yea, they
are more in number then the hairs of my head, and my heart does fail me when I
think thereupon. O let it be thy pleasure to deliver me; make haste to help me,
O Lord. I have been an improvident and unjust Steward of thy temporal
blessings, Sins against the Eighth Commandment. Improvidence. Prodigality
Injustice.
prodigally and sinfully wasting my estate, by drinking, gaming, feasting,
sloth and negligence in the duties of my Calling --

I have been guilty of defrauding and overreaching [such and such] in buying
and selling, in purloyning, in oppressing, in borrowing and not paying again,
in lending upon usury and for unjust gain -- By many undue means I have
interverted to my own use, and detained what of right belonged to others;
neither have I made restitution, or given satisfaction for [such and such]
wrongs and unjust dealings.

I have not been so charitable to the poor, Incharitableness.
so pitiful to the afflicted, so compassionate to the sick, nor so openhanded
to relieve the wanting and necessitous, as my ability and opportunity, and
their sad condition have required.

When [such and such persons, at such or such a time,] have called to me for
relief, I have turned the deaf ear, and given them harsh language in stead of
an Alms.

I have been unlike thee, my God, in all respects; for I have been uncharitable
and unjust.

O deal not with me after my sins, neither reward me after mine iniquities: but
according to the multitude of thy mercies think upon me, O God for thy
goodness, through Christ my Savior. I have not been so studious and diligent
to understand and speak the truth at all times as I might have been: Sins
against the Ninth Commandment.
neither have I had that Christian courage always to speak what I have known to
be truth, Denying of the Truth.
or to run any hazard to defend the same, as becomes a true soldier of Jesus
Christ.

I have not set a watch over my mouth, Lies.
and guarded the door of my lips: but I have suffered my unruly licencious
tongue to be the instrument of manifold Lies of all kinds and conditions;
officious lies, bragging, boasting lies, scurrilous lies, flattering lies;
professing more love to [such and such] then has been in my heart toward them.

I have offended by detracting, Censures.
defaming, censuring and condemning others, being my self far more worthy to be
condemned by others. I have talked of the moat in my brother's eye, to his
disgrace; but have been blind, and would not see mine own sins and infinite
misdemeanors.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, as I have entered into
judgment with others: O deal not with me after my sins, neither reward me after
mine iniquities, but according to the multitude of thy mercies think upon me, O
God, for thy goodness. I have sinfully coveted to enjoy the wife, or the maid,
Sins against the Tenth Commandment.
or the servant [of such and such;] coveted [such a man's] lands and
possessions, [such a man's] offices, preferments, credit, honor, [such a
man's] conveniences and seeming contentments in the world: maligning, envying
other men's wealth, fair house, great estate; but too too much dissatisfied with
my own estate and condition, though far beyond my desert.

God be merciful to me a miserable sinner. Having both food and raiment and all
things necessary for my support in this life, Covetousness.
I have not been therewith content, but have been over-disquieted and
solicitous in my mind for more, more wealth, more land, more and higher
preferments, though founded and settled not in the loss only, but even in the
death of others.

I have not accounted Godliness the chiefest gain, Earthly-mindedness.
nor delighted my self in the Lord, and in the ways of his service, nor set my
affections on things above; but have roved in my wild desires after the
exterior enjoyments of the creature, which being empty and unsatisfying, have
deprived me of true peace and contentment of mind.

Father, I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am not worthy to be
called thy son: but reject me not from amongst the number of thy servants;
though I be both an unprofitable and disobedient one. And to my sins, The sins
of Repentance for sin.
I have been guilty of many sinful defects in my Repentance for my sins.

I have but too slightly, not strictly and thoroughly, examined my heart and my
life, to find out my sins, which lurk in the dark, to hurry my soul to
blackness of darkness for ever: those sins which I have known and found my self
guilty of, I have not bewailed with that godly sorrow as the greatness and
grievousness thereof require.

With my lips have I often confessed my sins, when my heart has not been truly
humbled within me under the deep sense of their pollution, stain and danger, so
as to loath and abhor my sins and my self too in dust and ashes.

I have too often made a mock of the Almighty in the Confession of my sins, by
returning back to the sins confessed, as the dog to his vomit.

Thus have I sinned, and I have done wickedly, and I have committed iniquity,
and I have rebelled against thee, by departing from all thy most holy Laws and
Judgments.

To thee, O Lord God, belongs mercy and forgiveness, but to me shame and
confusion of face; for I have rebelled against thee: God be merciful -- I have
been guilty of many secular and sensual ends in the performance of holy
actions; The Sins of Religious actions.
minding more my own advantage, and the pleasing my own fancy, then the
advancement of thy service; loving more the praise of men, then the praise of
God.

I have entertained many vain, wandering, worldly, and sometimes wicked,
imaginations in the times of thy Service; have been dull, inconsiderate and
indevout in my Prayers; very much defective in Fasting, and too vainglorious
in the little good I have done to others.

I have secretly applauded my own fancy, wit, wisdom, elocution, and dextrous
management of Religious discourses: even the best and most holy of all my
Religious performances are not without their manifold sinful defects and
deformities.

Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from these, and from all
my secret faults. My secret sins are innumerable; Secret Sins.
sins secret through ignorance, through forgetfulness, through negligence, and
a negligent Self-examination, through wilful misperswasion; sins which a
watchful and diligent spirit might have prevented, but I would not: sins secret
to the world, committed before thee only, and under the witness of mine own
Conscience. I am confounded with the multitude of them, and the horror of
their remembrance: the remembrance of them is grievous unto me, the burden of
them is intolerable. Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, most merciful
Father, for thy Son my Lord Jesus Christ's sake: forgive me all that is past;
and grant that ever hereafter I may serve thee in newness of life, to the
honor and glory of thy name, and the eternal Salvation of my Soul, through
Jesus Christ --

Grant, merciful Lord, I beseech thee, not to me only, but to all thy faithful
people, pardon and peace; that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and
serve thee with a quiet mind through Jesus Christ -- CHAP. IX. An ancient Form
of Confession extant Biblioth. Patrum tom. 8. p. 409.
I Confess unto thee, O Lord, the Father of Heaven and earth, and to thee, O
sweet and benign Jesu, with the Holy and Blessed Spirit, before all thy holy
Angels and Saints, before thy Altar, and thy Priest standing there;

I was conceived and born in Sin: and since my Baptism, (wherein I was washed
from Sin original,) I have been conversant in actual Sins all the days of my
life, until this very hour.

I confess I have sinned in Pride and Vainglory, in the vanity of my Apparel,
in the lifting up of mine eyes, and the swelling of my heart: and Pride has
stained all my actions.

I have been in Envy, Hatred, Malice, and immoderate Anger; in Ignorance and
Negligence, in Slothfulness and Sullenness; in the greedy Covetousness both of
worldly wealth, and of the praise of men.

I have sinned in the Greediness of the belly, even to Gluttony and
Drunkenness, and Sodomiticall Luxury; in wanton kisses, unchaste embraces, in
Fornication and Adultery, and every kind of shameful Uncleanness.

I have sinned in Theft and Couzenage, in Rapine and Sacrilege, in Lying and
idle tales, in Swearing and forswearing; in the loss, sickness, disgrace and
death of others, which I have too often desired, and wherewith I have been too
well pleased.

I have sinned in the defects of Faith, Hope, and Charity; in the unworthy
participation of the Body and Blood of Christ; in the neglect of Hospitality
and Almsgiving, frequently denying to relieve, and often exasperating the poor
by opprobrious language. I have transgrest the precepts of thy Gospel,
injoyning me to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, visit the sick, --

I have been unjust in detaining the Dues of thy Church, and in the
dispensation of Ecclesiastical goods; in the contracts of Usury, bargaining
and sale, overreaching, lying, withholding what has been more or less
righteous and just.

I have not attended upon thy public and solemn Worship upon Sundays and
Holidays devoted thereunto: I have not behaved my self upon such days soberly,
righteously and godly: I have approached and come into thy House without that
reverence and godly fear which becomes that Sacred place; and there I have
demeaned my self unseemly, sitting, standing, leaning, lolling, and staring
about, when the respective parts of thy Sacred Service required more humble and
devout gestures and behavior. I have entertained vain, idle, wandering
thoughts, and intermingled unprofitable, wanton, worldly talk in the time of
thy solemn Worship.

I have unhallowed many holy things, many holy actions, by using the same as
common and unclean and with unclean hands, and an impure conscience.

I have not joined with a right understanding and devotion in Psalms and Hymns
and spiritual Songs, public Prayers, and other the sacred acts of Religious
Worship: too often speaking with my lips cursorily and customarily, whilst my
heart has been roving by evil imaginations and false suspicions; judging
rashly of what is sacred and holy, when transcending my shallow capacity.

I have sinned by perverse reasonings against the Truth, because either above
my understanding, or not agreeable with my will; by consenting, and not
reproving the sinful; by not instructing the ignorant, not reducing the
erroneous, not admonishing, not exhorting such as have gone astray, to
entertain more sound and sober counsels.

I have not reverenced my Superiors, I have both defamed and disobeyed my
Governors Ecclesiastical and Civil; neither have I repayed to my friends and
benefactours such grateful acknowledgments and due obsequiousness as becomes.

I have entertained in my heart many loose and unchaste thoughts and filthy
lusts; and have looked upon the carnal copulation and intermixture of beasts
with an unclean delectation of mind.

I have been guilty of much superfluous and opprobrious language, of lying and
slandering, of falsehoods and flatteries, of railing and reviling, of
scurrilous and vain jangling, of profane and irreligious speaking, and
customary swearing, of taking unlawful oaths, of much filthy communication,
and of all the evils of an untamed tongue, the instrument of a corrupt heart.

I have even renounced the Covenant of my God, by not renouncing the Devil and
all his works: I have too often yielded to his suggestions to disobey the will
of God, and to transgress his Commandments, in the breach of my Duty both
toward God and Man.

And thus I have sinned both in my thoughts and desires, in my words and
actions, by seeing, hearing, tasting, touching, smelling; even all my Senses
have been as so many windows to let in Sin to my Soul, and Death by Sin.

And not only thus, but in all kinds of Vice, whereunto humane frailty is
liable, or in whatever any dissolute and debauched person does or can offend,
have I offended the Great Lord of Heaven and earth. And I acknowledge my self
above all the men in the world to be the greatest of Sinners.

Have mercy upon me, Almighty and most merciful Father: for thy Son, my Lord
Jesus Christ, his sake, pardon and deliver me from all mine offenses, confirm
and strengthen me in all goodness, and bring me to everlasting life, through
Jesus Christ. --

Psalm 6. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger -- Psalm. 32. Blessed is he whose
unrighteousness is forgiven -- Psalm. 38. Put me not to rebuke, O Lord -- Psalm.
51. Have mercy upon me, O God -- Psalm. 102. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my
crying -- Psalm. 130. Out of the deeps have I called unto -- Psalm. 143. Hear my
prayer, O Lord, and consider -- Our Father, which art in Heaven, Hallowed be
thy Name; -- (...) the world to come, through Jesus Christ --

III. O merciful Lord, to whom chiefly it appertains to forgive sins, and by
whom alone the Souls of true Penitents are absolved from all their offenses,
wash me, O wash my unclean Soul in the fountain of thine inexhaustible mercy,
through faith in the blood of my dear Redeemer Jesus Christ --

IV. Look down from Heaven, O Lord, with the eye of pity and compassion upon
thy humble servant, confessing his wickedness, and being sorry for his sins,
imploring withal thy pardon, and trusting alone in thy mercics, through the
Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ --

V. Be propitious, O Lord, we humbly beseech thee, be propitious to the prayers
and supplications of thy humble servants; and grant that the remission of our
sins being obtained, we may evermore rejoice in thy heavenly benediction,
through Jesus Christ --

CHAP. X. The Lord's Prayer paraphrased.
Praefat. ad Orat. Domin. ex Lit. Mozarab. Ad te pervenire cupimus, Domine, per
Christum, qui apud te factus est Advocatus noster; and Orationem quam ipso
Domino instruente didicimus, ad te introire permittas; proclamantes e terris,

PATER NOSTER, QVIES IN COELIS --


OUR Father,] 1. The Preface.
as we have a Being with all things, by Creation and Providence; 2. as we are
reasonable creatures, with Men and Angels, by Representation and Likeness; 3.
as we are Christians, by Adoption and Grace.

Which art in Heaven,] by thy Majesty and great Glory; in earth, by thy Mercy
and good Providence; and in all things both in Heaven and earth, by thy
essential Presence.

Thou, O Lord, art more ready to hear then we are to pray, and art wont to give
more then we desire or deserve, as being our Father; and though daily provoked
by our sins, yet still our Father: and thou art able to do exceeding
abundantly, above all that we can ask or think, as being in Heaven. And to
Heaven vouchsafe to raise up our immortal Souls: Let them not cleave to the
dust of worldly vanities, since we have a Father in Heaven.

Hallowed be thy Name.] Name, which is great, wonderful and holy: but more
especially, may thy ever-blessed Name be magnified by me and by all people who
have thy Name called upon us; in all our thoughts, words and deeds, manifesting
that reverence and godly fear, that divine love and filial obedience we owe
unto thee, Our Father which art in Heaven.

Thy Kingdom come.] rule and reign in all the affections of our hearts, and
over all the actions of our lives; swaying thy Scepter of Righteousness by thy
Holy Word and Spirit, to the destruction of the Kingdom of Sin and Satan: And
may we all live in obedience of thy most holy Laws, and continue such loyal and
faithful subjects of thy Kingdom of Grace in this life, that we may become
Saints in thy Kingdom of Glory in the life to come.

Thy will will be done in earth as it is in heaven.] May all we, thy will, and
as cheerfully submit to thy good pleasure, as do thy blessed Angels and Saints
in their blissful mansions of Heaven above.

Give us this day our daily bread.] bread of Heaven and earthly bread. And
grant that what we do enjoy upon earth, may be rightly ours, not to any other
belonging; and neither acquired by injustice, nor uncharitably detained by us:
and our daily bread, according to our daily necessities administered to us, who
daily wait upon thee, O Lord, who give unto all their me^t in due season.

And that our daily abuse of thy gifts may not rob us of them, [Forgive us our
trespasses:] even all our transgressions of thy most holy Laws pardon, good
Lord, whose nature and property it is always to have mercy and to forgive. But
this we presume not to ask but upon thine own terms:

As we forgive those that trespass against us.] The trespasses of others, and
our sufferings from them, are but few and trifling, in respect of our sins and
trespasses against thee; for they be many and heinous: but as sin has abounded
in us, so does grace and mercy abound also with thee; but we are men of hard,
corrupt, uncircumcised hearts. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, and forgive us, both
our sins against thee, and our uncharitableness unto our neighbors: soften our
hard hearts, to be kindly affectioned one toward another; forbearing and
forgiving one another, as we hope and humbly beg to be forgiven by thee through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Lead us not into temptation:] and enable us by thy Divine grace to overcome
all the affaults of our ghostly enemies, and to continue thy faithful servants
and soldiers to our lives ends.

Deliver us from evil.] evil of sin, by thy grace; and from the evil of
punishment, by thy mercy: and from the author of all evils, the Devil: From
the temporal evils and miseries of this life, and from the evils of a sad
eternity in the life to come; from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation,

Good Lord deliver us.

Liberati a malo, confirmati semper in bono, tibi servire mereamur, Deo ac
Domino nostro. Pone Domine, sine peccatis nostris, da gaudium trd^ul^stis,
praebe redemptionem captivis fanitatem infirmis, re^^tiemque defunctis; concede
pa^em and securitatem in omnibus drebus ^^stris, france audaciam omnium
in^micorum ^^strorum, and exaudi. Deus, orationes omnium servorum cuorum
fidelium Christianorum in h^^ die and in omni tempore, per Dominum nostrum
Jesum -- Lit. Mozarab.

For thine is the Kingdom,] Conclusion.
Thou rulest and reignest over all: and thy Dominion is absolute and
independent, the power whereof cannot be broken, nor its glory eclipsed, like
the frail and fading Kingdoms of this world: But thine is [the Power and the
Glory, for ever and ever.] Thy Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, such as
shall not pass away; and thy Kingdom such as cannot be destroyed, but shall
stand fast in power, and eminent in glory, for ever.

O give us hearts yielding a willing obedience to the Laws of thy Kingdom, full
of reverence and awful fear of thy Power, studious to advance thy Glory upon
earth; that we may in the end arrive at thy Kingdom in Heaven, where thou
live and reignest, Blessed Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, One God, world
without end. Amen.

CHAP. XI. The Seven Penitential Psalms paraphrased.
THE Psalms of David being by all Christians, of what persuasion soever,
acknowledged to be the immediate dictates of God's Holy Spirit; it must
necessarily be acknowledged also, that he who understandingly and devoutly
prays in the very words of the Psalms, prays by the Holy and true Spirit of
God. The truth whereof, which by many blind Zelots is too much slighted and
neglected, we have both confirmed, and the practice commanded, Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
Be ye filled with the Spirit, Speaking to your selves (or among your selves,
which is done by answering each other) in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs; i. e. such as are the dictates of the Holy Spirit; compared with Col.
3.16.

Thus prayed our Lord upon the Cross in the very words of the Psalmist, Psalm.
22.1. and 31.5. And so has ever prayed the Church of Christ, Psalmus totius
Ecclesiae vox -- Aug. Prolog in Ps. Chrysostom. de Poen. Hom. 6. Ambr. de Virg. l. 5.
in all the Ages thereof. Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs are, and ever
were, the constant, regular, standing parts of God's Worship, both under the
Law and under the Gospel: And he must needs be a desperate Fanatic, who will
not acknowledge the words of God's own Spirit to be more wise, pithy,
pertinent, and effectually prevailing with God in our Prayers, then any words
of man's devising, how seemingly-zealous and taking soever. It Is a strange, but
not a true Spirit of holy Prayer, then, those persons pretend unto, who slight
the devout use of the Psalms, which are the treasury of all sound Devotion, and
trust to their own extempore or studied expressions in Prayer, preferring the
dictates of their own Spirit before those of the Spirit of God himself.

The Penitential Psalms are so called, because commended by the Church of
Christ, and by the constant practice of orthodox devout Christians, to the
Religious use of all true Penitents in their Prayers; to be used upon all days
of Humiliation and Fasting, and in the time of sickness or any disness. So
prayed S. Aug. upon his Deathbed; he wept and bewailed his sins in the devout
use of the Penitential Psalms. And those are also the most effectual Prayers we
can use in the practice of Repentance, by way of preparation to the holy
Communion.

Psalm VI.
Verse. 1. O Lord,] the Judge of all men, [rebuke me not in thine indignation:]
which I have deservedly incurred: [neither chasten me] for mine offenses [in
thy hot displeasure.] flaming to consume me.

2. Have mercy upon me, O Lord,] whose nature and property is ever to have
mercy and to forgive, [for I am weak:] both through original corruption, and
manifold actual transgressions: [O Lord, heal me,] pour the wine and oil of thy
grace and mercy into the wounds of my sinful soul, [for my bones are vexed.]
that interior strength which supports my Soul is troubled and sore shaken by
many falls and failings.

3. My soul also] being conscious of her guilt and distempered condition [is
sore troubled:] being terrified at the apprehension of thy strict Justice and
her own deserts: [but thou, O Lord,] who desire not the death of a sinner,
[how long?] will thou delay to hear, help and heal my Soul?

4. Return, O Lord;] from the rigor of Justice to the sweetness of Mercy;
[deliver my soul,] from the bands and fetters of her sins, and from under the
power of Satan, [and save me,] from thy wrath and from everlasting damnation,
good Lord, deliver me, [for thy mercie's sake.] wherein is my only trust
through the merits of my Savior.

5. For in death] whether spiritual in sin, or corporal for sin, [there is no
remembrance of thee:] either by confessing our sins unto thee, or imploring
mercy from thee: [and who will give thee thanks in the pit?] None sure do
praise thy Name in the grave of death, which is the dewlling place of silence
and oblivion; much less in the pit of hell, where thy great Name is not
praised, but blasphemed rather.

6. I am weary of my groanings:] having long labored under the heavy burden
of my sins: [every night wash I my bed,] both in the night, when I should
sleep, and in the day, Or, in the night, and obscurity of my sins, I wash with
the tears of compunction the bed of my Conscience. Tho. Aquin.
when I go to rest, [I water my couch with my tears.] Even all the places of my
ease, rest and refreshment are bedewed with tears of compunction and godly
sorrow.

7. Mine eye] wherein my exterior beauty chiefly consists [is consumed with
grief,] the inward sorrow of my Soul thereby emptying it self, [and worn away
because of all mine enemies.] because my ghostly enemies daily prevail against
me, by my consent to their suggestions and temptations unto wickedness. But
being resolved to avoid all occasions of such temptations, therefore

8. Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity:] For the future, I must leave
the society of all such as do not only work wickedness, but also tempt others
to sin with them: [for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping.] He has
put my tears into his bottle, and it concerns me therefore to separate my self
from the company and counsel of the ungodly. O how audible and effectual is the
voice of weeping! for therefore

9. The Lord has heard my petition:] graciously accepted and answered my
desires, in the pardon of mine offenses: and [the Lord will receive my prayer.]
when I thus humble my self under his mighty hand. And then

9. All my enemies shall be confounded] they shall be frustrated in their
designs and enterprises against my Soul, [and soar vexed:] when all their
contrivances fail them: [they shall be turned back,] from their farther
assaults of my innocence, [and put to shame suddenly.] Even before their
intentions be put in execution, their plots shall be blasted, when the Lord
vouchsafes to hear the voice of my weeping.

And O that I could so weep and bewail my sins, that the Lord may hear in
Heaven, and be merciful unto me, and heal my Soul, to glorify his Name.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost:
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be. Amen.
Psalm XXXII.
Verse 1. BLessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven,] as to the guilt
contracted, [and whose sin is covered.] that it appear not to his punishment.
Or, whose original pollution is washed away in the Laver of Baptism, and his
actual transgressions covered with the robes of Christ's merits.

2. Blessed is the man] He is blessed in Hope, though not in Fruition, [to whom
the Lord imputes not his iniquity;] to his eternal separation from the
presence of God. But of such an one it is required that he be sincere in his
Repentance, [and in whose spirit there is no guile.] no hypocrisy or deceit in
his Repentance: but he turns unto the Lord with all his heart, and this too
from all the errors of his ways.

3. Whilst I kept silence,] covering, and not confessing, my sins: or Whilst I
filently considered with my self the multitude and hainousness of my
transgressions, [my bones consumed away] the strength and support of my Soul
failed me [through my daily complaining.] not as I ought to complain in the
confession of my sins, for therein I have kept silence; but through the secret
murmurs of my troubled conscience, and fear of the just judgments of God.

4. Day and night thy hand is heavy upon me:] My daily practice and continuance
in my sins makes every day more heavy the hand of Divine justice: for the fear
whereof [my moisture is like the drought in summer.] The sap of grace and
vigor of the Spirit languisheth, and the verdure of my Devotion is dried up,
even as the fruits of the earth are parched by the Sun's hot beams in the
height of Summer. And now being sensible of this my sad condition,

5. I will acknowledge my sin unto thee;] both my sins of Omission, [and mine
iniquity] my sins of Commission, [have I not hid.] but laid them all open
before thee; purging my Conscience from the venom of them by Confession. And
this I firmly resolved with my self to do.

6. I said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord:] accusing my self, that thou,
O Lord, may excuse me; condemning my self, that thou may acquit me;
discovering my nakedness and shame, that thou may cover me with the robes of
thy mercy, through the merits of my Savior: [and so thou forgavest the
wickedness of my sin.] being confessed, bewailed and forsaken.

7. For this] thy great mercy in pardoning offenses sincerely repented [shall
every one that is godly pray unto thee] that he may be cleansed from his sins:
for there is no man so godly that sins not, but therefore godly, because
thou art gracious, both in forgiving the wickedness of his sins, and
strengthening him with grace to abjure them. And he that is thus godly, will not
neglect those blessed opportunitles of Prayer [in the time when thou may be
found:] ready and propense to hear and forgive, and that is the time of this
present life, wherein there are [great water-flouds,] of temptations and
troubles, [but they shall not come nigh him.] The Prayer of the godly is a
strong Bulwark: and thus he prays in the time of trouble.

8. Thou art my biding-place;] Under the sacred wings of thy merciful
protection is my refuge in the midst of the greatest tribulation; [thou shall
preserve me from trouble:] like Noah and his family in the Ark, when the rest
of the world perished by water: [thou shall compass me about with songs of
deliverance.] Being on all sides delivered and preserved from the floods of
many waters, I will sing praises unto thy great Name for the same.

The answer of God to a true Peititent.

9. I will inform thee and teach thee] outwardly by my Word, and inwardly by my
Spirit, [the way] of true wisdom, which is both to know God and know thy self,
[wherein thou shall go:] what good is to be done, and what evil to be left
undone: [and I will guide thee with mine eye.] have a constant eye upon thee
for thy guidance in the way of life. And he that is thus guided himself will
say unto others,

10. Be ye not like to the horse,] that is, untamed, headstrong and stubborn,
[or to the mule,] that is, foolish and slothful, [which have no understanding:]
or reason to bridle their sensual appetites: [whose mouths must be held with
bit and bridle, lest they fall upon thee.] Be not so brutish as not to keep the
ways of God's Laws, except he whip and spur thee with affliction and trouble:
this is like a horse that will not obey his rider, without a bridle in his
jaws, and a spur in his sides.

11. Great plagues remain for the ungodly:] often in this life, to drive them
to repentance, but assuredly in the life to come, if they repent not: [but
whosoever puts his trust in the Lord,] and will be doing good, his holy
confidence in God being not only notionary in the brain and fancy, but
practical in the heart and life, [mercy embraces him on every side.] The
Lord's mercy shall surround him for his protection, and support him for his
perseverance in the way to Heaven, where he shall both see and enjoy Divine
mercy on every side: 1. above him, in the beatifical Vision of God's Majesty;
2. below him, in the torments he has escaped; 3. and mercy round about him, in
the blissful society of Angels and Saints: great cause of joy surely.

12. Be glad, O ye righteous,] through the testimony of a good Conscience, [and
rejoice in the Lord:] not in your own merits, for by grace we are saved: [and
be joyfull] not ye that prosper in the world, but [all ye that are true of
heart.] sincere and upright before God, whose wills and affections are
conformable to the Divine will, both in desire and deed: such may rejoice
heartily in this life, in the assured hope of celestial happiness in the life
to come. And therefore Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


Psalm XXXVIII.
Verse 1. PVT me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thine anger;] to take revenge of the
ingratitude and perjury of mine offenses against thee; [neither chasten me in
thy heavy displeasure.] Let not my correction for my faults be in rigor of
justice, but tempered with mercy, as a father chasteneth his son whom he loves.

2. For thine arrows stick fast in me:] The sharp sentences of thy holy Word
against sinners pierce my heart with fear and terror: [and thy hand presses
me soar.] Thy vindicative power, which thou exercisest against offenders,
weighs down and oppresses myspirits.

3. There is no health in my flesh,] thence is the spring and foment of my
sinful corruption, and therefore justly punished, [because of thine anger:] the
sad effects whereof afflict me: [neither is there any rest in my bones, by
reason of my sin.] The sinful sickness of my Soul renders me so disquieted and
disturbed, as be those who are so afflicted with bodily pain and sickness, that
they find no ease or intermission of their anguish.

4. For mine iniquities] by my frequent reiteration of them [are gone over my
head:] their number is greater then the hairs of my head, and so prevalent
withal, that they have brought under both head and heart; both my Judgment and
Affections are ensnared thereby: [and are as a heavy burthen] which sinks the
body to the earth, so is the weight of sin upon the Soul, [too heavy for me to
bear] the weight of punishment due thereunto.

5. My wounds stink,] My sins through long continuance in them fester in my
Soul, [and are corrupt through my foolishness.] in consenting and delighting my
self to wallow, with the sow, in the mire of sinful pollutions.

6. I am brought into so great trouble and misery,] Both the powers and parts
of my Soul and body are so distempered and disturbed, [that I go mourning all
the day long.] The sense of my sins and just fears of punishment make the day
of my present life sad and heavy.

7. For my loins are filled with a soar disease:] there, there my carnal lusts
engendered, the fulfilling whereof has made my Soul like a loathsome leper, or
some such ulcerous creature: [and there is no soundness in my flesh.] which
always lusts against the spirit, to the great distemper of both.

8. I am feeble,] in body, through carnal incentives, [and soar broken:] in
spirit, by their prevalency over me: [I have roared for the very disquietness
of my heart.] My conscience gainsaying such exorbitances, but not prevailing,
makes me now cry aloud through its disquietude unto the searcher of all hearts.

9. Lord, thou know all my desire:] my earnest longings after thee for ease
and help: [and my groaning] under the heavy weight of my sins and of thy
displeasure [is not hid from thee.] although I should be silent, and not
express the same by prayers and tears.

10. My heart pants,] through the disquietude of its unruly passions, the
peace of my Conscience being also lost, [and my strength has failed me:] the
wonted vigor of my Devotion is decayed, whence fear and solicitude do issue:
[and the light of mine eyes is gone from me.] My understanding, which is the
eye of the Soul, is darkened through the sway of its passions; and the Sun of
righteousness is gone down upon my Soul, because of the deeds of darkness I
have committed.

11. My lovers and my neighbours] who are obliged by the ties of friendship and
continued conversation [did stand looking upon my trouble:] ^^t moving to
perform their wonted friendly offices to me: [and my kinsmen] they of mine own
flesh and blood, either out of scorn or abhorrence of my troubled estate,
[(...) a^ far off.] as if I were a stranger to them: and not only my friends,
but mine enemies,

12. They that se^k after my soul] the Devil and his Angels, and wicked men
their instruments, [laid s^^res for me:] by their cunning temptations of me
unto sin, to destroy me: [and they that went about to do me evil] endeavored
by all means to do me all the mischief was in their power, have to this end
[talked of wickedness,] framed lies, raised false reports, consulted and
contrived pernicious designs against me, [and imagined deceit all the day
long.] or continually framed all their imaginations to deceive and ruin me.

13. As for me, I was like a deaf man that hears not;] With such patience I
sustained all this, as if I had heard nothing of their consultations, nor known
any thing of their designs against me; [and as one that is dumb, who does not
open his mouth.] either to rail against mine enemies, or to murmur at the
sadness of my condition.

14. I became even as a man that hears not,] taking no notice of what was
said or done against me, [and in whose mouth are no reproofs.] I opened not my
mouth to reprove, much less to revile my adversaries. So my dear Savior has
taught me by his example, who suffered himself with all sweetness of patience;
he was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb dumb before the shearers,
so opened he not his mouth.

15. For in thee, O Lord, have I put my trust:] As knowing that vain is the
help of man; but thou, O Lord, art both able and willing to succor all such as
unjustly suffer, and depend upon thee for right: [thou shall answer for me, O
Lord my God.] Hear my prayers, and answer my desires; plead my cause against
mine adversaries, and disappoint me not of my hope, which hangs upon thee the
God of my Salvation.

16. I have required,] requested of thee in my prayers, [that mine enemies
should not triumph over me:] insult in my overthrow: [for when my foot slipped,]
at my slips and failings, either into sin or other danger, [they rejoiced
greatly against me.] My falls, which are grief to the godly, were great cause
of joy to my ghostly adversaries: how much more greatly then would they rejoice
and triumph in my utter overthrow?

17. And I truly am set in the plague:] being born to suffering, because born
in sin; being prone to fall, if not by thee supported: [and my heaviness is
ever in my sight.] being conscious of my sins, the cause of all my sorrows. But
that the plague thereof may be healed,

18. I will confess my wickedness;] and this not only outwardly with my lips,
but inwardly from my heart; [I will be sorry for my sins.] And great reason
sure, for they are the cause of all my sorrows and sufferings both in Soul and
body.

19. But mine enemies] the Devil and his angels [live and are mighty:] they are
lively, active, strong and vigorous, whilst I am weak and feeble: [and they
that hate me without a cause are many in number.] they are multiplied and make
head against me without cause given them by me. And not only they whom I have
not wronged or provoked, but even

20. They that reward evil for good are against me:] And such undoubtedly who
repay evil for good, do it by the instinct of Satan, and out of mere hatred to
goodness it self: and therefore they hate me [because I follow the thing that
good is.] hating my person because of the integrity of my actions. But

21. Forsake me not] In time of temptation and trouble leave me not destitute
of thy assistence, [O Lord my God:] in whom are all my hopes of salvation: [be
not thou far from me.] by taking away thy grace from me. But if in thy great
wisdom it be withdrawn a little, for my trial, yet not too far, nor too long,
but rather

22. Haste thee to help me,] against all the assaults of the Devil, the World
and the Flesh, whom to vanquish and overcome is from thee, and by thy assisting
presence, [O Lord God of my salvation.] the author, the promiser, the donour
of eternal Salvation. Let others trust in their riches, power --; yet shall my
Soul for ever trust in thee for saving happiness, in whom and from whom alone
is peace and joy, and to whom be all glory. Glory be to the Father --
As it was in the beginning --


Psalm LI.
Verse 1. HAve mercy upon me, O God,] the Father of mercies, [after thy great
goodness:] were not thy goodness infinitely great I could not hope for thy
mercy: [and after the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses.] Mine
offenses are multitudinous and heinous, and require a multitude of mercies to
cover them.

2. Wash me throughly] who am throughout foul and polluted in all the parts and
powers both of Soul and body [from my wickedness;] it is mine own indeed, from
mine own wicked will proceeding; [and cleanse me from my sin.] both from my
wickedness against God, and from my sin against man; from my wickedness past,
and from sin to come; that both the guilt of sin and my corrupt inclination
thereunto may be cleansed.

3. For I acknowledge my faults:] I desire neither to hide nor excuse them, but
with a penitent heart I own and confess them, that thou may forget and
forgive them: [and my sin is ever before me.] my conscience constantly accusing
and condemning my great folly and ingratitude in sinning against thee. And it is

4. Against thee only have I sinned,] who alone art both my Judge and the
Witness of my sins. Thou alone searchest the hearts, and know the greatness
and grievousness of my sins; and thou alone have supreme power both to punish
and to pardon. [and done this evil in thy sight.] What I was ashamed to do
before men, I have without either fear or shame done before thee, to whose
all-seeing eye nothing is hid. Have mercy upon me, O God.

5. That thou may be justified in thy saying;] be found just in all thy
words, and in this particularly, Hos. 13.9. Thou have destroyed thy self, O
Israel; but in me is thy help; [and clear when thou judge.] free from the
least injustice in pardoning the penitent, and condemning the obstinate.

6. Behold, I was shapen in wickedness:] contracting, together with my very
being in nature, original corruption from my parents loins: [and in sin has my
mother conceived me.] Hence my flesh becomes so frail and rebellious against
the spirit.

7. But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts: the internal purity of
the heart and affections are thy delight: [and shall make me to understand
wisdom secretly.] By the secret influences of thy Holy Spirit, make me to
understand and practice that wisdom which is from above.

8. Thou shall purge me with hyssop:] My foul and corrupt Conscience has need
of a purge, the ingredients whereof must be the bitter sorrows and sufferings
of my dearest Savior, intermixed with the salt tears of bitter sorrow of Soul
for my sins: [thou shall wash me,] in the inexhaustible fountain of thy mercy,
through Faith in the blood of Christ, [and I shall be whiter then snow.]
through the spiritual candor of my justified Soul.

9. Thou shall make me hear (or be inwardly sensible) of joy and gladness:] in
the remission of my sins, and hopes of eternal happiness, then the which no
greater joy can touch the immortal Soul: [that the bones which thou have broken
may rejoice.] in the light of thy countenance shining into my broken heart, and
there diffusing the glimmering rays of a blessed hope.

10. Turn thy face away] not from me through indignation, but [from my sins;]
by the remission of them; [and put out all my misdeeds.] out of thy book of
remembrance, that they appear not in judgment against me to my condemnation at
the last great Day.

11. Make me a clean heart, O God,] cleansed from all filthiness both of flesh
and spirit; [and renew a right spirit] rectified from all the crooked paths of
vanity and iniquity, raised up to heaven-wards, and cleaving steadfastly to
thee, my God: and let this be [within me.] Purify my will and affections,
whence all my extravagancies issued.

12. Cast me not away from thy presence:] in whose presence is both the light
and health of the Soul: and though I am unworthy to appear in thy presence, but
deserve rather to be as a castaway, given up to a reprobate sense; yet [take
not thy holy Spirit from me.] though I have often quenched his sacred fires by
my extravagant lusts, yet leave me not; forsake me not utterly. But,

13. Give me the comfort of thy help again.] or, Restore unto me the joy of thy
Salvation, which by my sins I have forfeited and lost: [and stablish me with
thy free spirit.] Free me by thy holy Spirit of liberty from the law of sin and
of death.

14. Then shall I teach] both by word and example [thy waies] of mercy and
truth [unto the wicked;] who follow the ways of their own hearts; [and sinners
shall be converted unto thee.] by the example of my sincere conversion and
seasonable admonitions.

15. Deliver me from bloud-guiltiness, O God,] from all the kinds and degrees
of bloud-guiltiness; such are immoderate anger, hatred, malice, envy, and from
all mortal or soul-killing sins; [thou that art the God of my health:] the
health both of my body and Soul, both temporal and eternal Salvation is from
thee: and therefore [my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.] extolling thy
truth in making good thy promised mercies to the truly penitent.

16. O Lord, open my lips;] which my sins have closed up; [and my mouth shall
show forth thy praise.] which becomes not the lips of sinners: but thou art a
God forgiving offenses, and even out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have
perfected praise.

17. For thou, O Lord, desire no sacrifice,] of slain beasts, for the
expiation of sin, [else would I give it thee:] were it thy pleasure to accept
the same: but [thou delightest not in burnt-offerings.] It Is not the outward
carnal offerings (though commanded by thee) that thou respectest as the
principal means to pacify thy displeasure, but the inward devotion and
compunction of the person offering.

18. The sacrifices of God] those he chiefly respects and accepts [are a
troubled spirit:] wounded and groaning under the sad sense of his sins: [a
broken and contrite heart] the fallow-ground whereof is broken up by a strict
Self-examination, contrite by Compunction, weeded by Confession, watered with
the tears of godly Sorrow; such a Sacrifice [O God, thou will not despise.] but
accept through his merits, who with a torn body and broken heart offered up
himself a sacrifice for the sins of the world.

19. O be favorable and gracious unto Sion:] Let thy blessing plentifully
descend upon our holy Mother, the Church, both universal, and this particular
Church whereof I am a Member: [build thou the walls of Jerusalem.] Repair the
breaches both in true doctrine and discipline, which through licenciousness in
opinion and conversation are greatly decayed: that the Souls of the righteous
may enjoy the vision of peace.

20. Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness,] with
those sacred acts and offices of true Repentance, whereby through Faith in the
blood of Christ the sinner is justified, [with burnt-offerings] not of beasts
without spot or defect, but of holy innocent persons, enfir'd with godly zeal
and devotion to thy Service, [and whole burnt-offerings:] even the whole man,
devoted to a whole entire obedience, through the whole course of life: [then
shall they offer young bullocks upon thine altar.] themselves shall they offer
upon the Altar of a pure heart, a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God
through Jesus Christ -- Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


Psalm CII.
Verse 1. HEar my prayer, O Lord;] as to the saving effects thereof; [and let
my crying come unto thee.] be accepted by thee, since my loud voice manifests
the inward zeal and devotion of my heart.

2. Hide not thy face from me] under the thick cloud of my transgressions [in
the time of my trouble;] when burdened with the weight of sin, or violence of
temptation; [incl^ne thine ears to me: when I call,] being penitent and humbled
under thy mighty hand, [O hear me, and that right soon.] there being danger in
delay.

3. For my days are consumed away like smoke:] spent in airy, light, vain,
unprofitable and black sinful works: [and my bones] the strength and support of
my Soul [are burnt up as it were a firebrand.] scorched and withered through
the exorbitant heat of carnal concupiscence, which renders me liable to the
fire of thy wrath.

4. My heart is smitten down, and withered like grass:] As when the grass is
mowed down, and withered by the Sun's hot beams; so my Soul, being smitten down
by the violence of temptation, is dried up and withered in her devotion: [so
that I forget to eat my bread.] neglecting the sweet refreshments of thy Holy
Word and Sacraments, where the Soul is nourished with the bread of life.

5. For the voice of my groaning,] under the heavy burden of my sins, [my
bones will scarce cleave to my flesh.] being macerated by the strict rigor of
penitential severities.

6. I am become like a pelican in the wilderness;] flying even the sight and
society of men, through shame and confusion of face; [and like an owl that is
in the desert.] that takes up her lodging in ruinous houses, and not inhabited.

7. I have watched, in the serious consideration of my sinful and sad
condition, [and am even as it were a sparrow] flying the company of sinners
[that sits alone upon the house top.] solitary, serious, and studious how to
escape the snares of sin below, and mount up my Soul to Heaven above.

8. Mine enemies revile me all the day long:] Such as hate to be reformed, and
are enemies to a serious and settled course of Religion, continually deride and
revile me: [and they that are mad upon me] with rage and fury [are sworn
together against me.] have conspired my ruin.

9. For I have eaten ashes as it were bread;] My meat was as unpleasant to me
as if I had eaten ashes; [and mingled my drink with weeping.] All my wonted
corporal refreshments were sowred with spiritual sorrow for my sins. Or,
August. in loc.
I have exercised the penitential rigours of ashes and weeping: sackcloth and
ashes being the armor and clothing of penitents.

10. And that because of thine indignation and wrath:] That Is the chief
ingredient in my sorrow, that I have deservedly incurred thy wrath: [for thou
have lift me up, and cast me down.] Thou seem, as it were, to raise me up,
that I may fall with the greater weight and violence: or, Thou have raised me
to great honor to be stamped after thine own image, but, for want of
understanding, I have fallen down as low as the beasts that perish.

11. My days are gone like a shadow:] they are not only vain, empty and
unprofitable, but also darksom and gloomy, because I have declined from the Sun
of righteousness: [and I am withered like grass,] for want of the celestial dew
of Divine grace.

12. But thou, O Lord, shall endure for ever;] Whilst all other things pass
away, thou changest not, being immutable, as in mercy to raise up, so in
justice to cast down; [and thy remembrance throughout all generations.] Thy
gracious promises both of the life that now is, and of that which is to come,
are in all ages remembered to thy praise and glory.

13. Thou shall arise,] to redeem, deliver, and defend, [and have mercy upon
Sion:] thy Church militant here upon earth: [for it is time that thou have
mercy upon her,] the time of this life is the seasonable time of mercy, because
it is a time of misery, [yea the time is come.] even the fullness of time is
completed of our Redemption and Salvation.

14. And why? thy servants think upon her stones;] both Angels and Saints
resent with much regret the dispersed members of thy Church; [and it pitieth
them to see her in the dust.] they pity her distractions and confusions, and
have great desires to succor and relieve her.

15. The heathen shall fear thy name, O Lord;] which now they blaspheme, but
being converted from their Idolatries, and from all the errors of their ways,
they shall with us adore the blessed and saving Name of Jesus; [and all the
Kings of the earth thy majesty.] being converted unto thee, they shall in all
humility confess the greatness of thy Majesty far to transcend their greatest
power and glory.

16. When the Lord shall build up Sion,] repair the breaches of his Church, and
settle it upon the foundation of Prophets and Apostles, [and when his glory
shall appear,] the glory of his great grace shall manifest it self in the
edification and support of his Church, upon the pillars of Truth and Peace,

17. When he turns him to the prayer of the poor destitute,] For his ears are
ever open to the prayers of the humble and poor in spirit, and such as be
destitute of all exterior consolations, [and despises not their desire;] when
flowing from a true Faith, and enfir'd with Charity and Devotion.

18. This shall be written for those that come after:] That the succeeding
people of God under the Gospel may have upon record the wondrous works of God
under the Law: [and the people that shall be born] regenerate and born anew of
water and of the Holy Ghost [shall praise the Lord.] for the grace of
Redemption and great mercy attained.

19. For he has looked down from his Sanctuary:] God the Son, from the bosom
of his Father above, looked down with the eye of his mercy upon us miserable
sinners here below: [out of heaven did the Lord behold the earth:] when the
King of Heaven descended upon earth, when the dayspring on high came down to
visit us, when the Word was made flesh for the building up of Sion.

20. That he might hear the mourning of such as are in captivity,] groaning
under the bonds and chains of their sins; [and deliver] out of the gulf of sin
and clutches of Satan [the children appointed unto death;] as the due wages of
sin;

21. That they may declare the name of the Lord in Sion,] being delivered from
the sad condition of being the children of the Devil in the vast womb of this
wicked world, to be the children of God in the sacred womb of their Mother, the
Church, they might therein and therefore extol the great Name of God; [and his
worship at Jerusalem;] promote and advance the holy Worship of God in his
Church, and unanimously join therein together, to the glory of his Name;

22. When the people are gathered together,] When the people of God, dispersed
through the world, shall be nevertheless joined together in the unity of the
true Faith, enlivened by divine Charity; [and the kingdoms also to serve the
Lord.] when both the Kings, and the people of their dominion, assemble
together, and join with one heart and one mouth in the public Worship of God;
then shall the Name of the Lord be magnified in Sion.

23. He brought down my strength in my journey:] In the mean time whilst I walk
in the way of Repentance, my strength is decayed: [and he has shortened my
days.] of health and outward prosperity, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom.

24. But I said,] addressing my self unto God by Prayer, [O my God,] the God of
my life, of my health, of my joy, my God and my all, [take me not away in the
midst of mine age:] before the natural course of my life expire: [as for thy
years, they endure throughout all generations.] being from everlasting to
everlasting, in respect of whose duration the years of my life are nothing; and
therefore I humbly beg, they may not be shortened through the violence of thy
afflicting hand.

25. Thou, Lord,] who art without beginning, [in the beginning] of time [hast
laid the foundations of the earth:] which is the center of this visible World:
[and the heavens are the works of thy hands.] both the Heavens and the earth,
and all things visible and invisible, are of thy Creation.

26. They shall perish,] as having their beginning in time, [but thou shall
endure.] as being from all eternity, and through all the changes of created
beings remaining in thy self unchangeable.

27. They all shall wax old as does a garment:] which is worse for the wearing:
[and as avesture shall thou change them,] from their present state and
condition, [and they shall be changed.] in their qualities and operations. [But
thou art the same;] in thy self immutable; [and thy years shall not fail.] or
rather, being not liable at all to any term of years, but without either
beginning or end of Time.

28. The children of thy servants] if they follow the steps of their godly
Fathers, in the sacred service of God, [shall continue:] in the land of the
living, being translated from the life of Grace to the life of Glory: [and
their seed] of good works, the issue of their true faith, [shall stand fast in
thy sight.] being treasured up in Heaven, where no moth or rust corrupts.

Glory be to the Father --
As it was in the beginning --
Psalm CXXX.
Verse 1. OVT of the depths] both of my sins and sufferings, and out of the
depth of my heart, wounded with godly sorrow for my sins, [have I called] as
Jonas out of the whale's belly, so do I lift up my voice in prayer, to be
delivered from the power of the Devil, [unto thee, O Lord:] with whom alone is
power to help and save me: [Lord, hear my voice.] in my prayers which I make
before thee.

2. O let thine ears] which are not corporeal, but wholly spiritual, and
therefore more quick andintense to [consider well the voice of my complaint.]
be intent to release me of my sins, under the weight whereof my Soul complains.

3. If thou, Lord,] to whom no secrets are hid, [wilt be extreme to mark what
is done amiss,] so as to take notice of all our faults and failings, and punish
us accordingly, [O Lord, who may abide it?] There is none so exactly righteous
and holy, as to abide the strict scrutiny of thy vindicative justice; since
every sin, from which none is free, is, in respect of the person offended,
infinite.

4. For there is mercy with thee;] to forgive the sins of the penitent, and to
raise up them that are fallen; [therefore shall thou be feared.] or, worshipped
with reverence and godly fear, thy mercy engaging and sweetly working upon our
hearts to fear thy Name.

5. I look for the Lord,] even for his saving mercy, [my soul does wait for
him:] to heal her soars, and satisfy her longing desires with the oil and wine
of mercy and consolation: [in his word is my trust.] for therein he has
promised to pardon the penitent, to heal the brokenhearted --. And I doubt not
but he will be as good as his word: and therefore,

6. My soul flees unto the Lord] upon the spiritual wings of ardent desires,
strong hopes, fervent prayers -- [before the morning-watch;] very early in the
morning of the day; or, in the morning of my life, the time of my youth; [I
say, before the morningwatch.] or, more carnestly then such who are appointed
watchmen for the night do wait for the morning to be discharged from their
watch, and have liberty to repose themselves.

7. O Israel,] Ye that are of the number of God's people, members of his
Church, if you be wise, trust not in your selves, nor in others, but [trust in
the Lord:] who never fails to help them that put their trust in him, and be
doing good: [for with the Lord there is mercy;] There is, there was, and ever
will be mercy with him to justify sinners that truly repent and believe in
him; for his mercy endures for ever; [and with him there is plenteous
redemption.] His precious blood, whereby we are redeemed, is plentifully
sufficient to satisfy for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins
of the whole world.

8. And he shall redeem Israel] No doubt but he will, more especially above all
others, redeem his own inheritance [from all his sins.] Be they never so many,
mortal and venial, if truly repented, through Faith in the blood of Christ they
shall be pardoned. And therefore we have great reason to give Glory to the
Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


Psalm CXLIII.
Verse 1. HEar my prayer, O Lord,] for the obtaining of what is good, [and
consider my desire:] for the avoiding of what is evil: [hearken unto me] in
both respects [for thy truth,] of thy promises made to hear the prayers of the
humble, [and for thy righteousness sake.] in performing all such promises to
those who trust not in their own, but in thy righteousness, condemning
themselves, that they may be absolved by thee.

2. And enter not into judgment] without any intermixture of mercy [with thy
servant, O Lord:] I dare not say thy son, but confess, with the Prodigal, that
I have sinned against Heaven -- but reject me not from among the number of thy
servants: [for in thy sight] who art a God of purer eyes then to behold
iniquity [shall no man living] in this frail mortal flesh [be justified.] by
his own merits, but by the mercy of God through the merits of Christ.

3. For the enemy] the Devil [hath persecuted my soul;] and does incessantly
undermine its innocence by his temptations and snares; [he has smitten my life
down to the ground:] so that my Soul grovels in the dust of earthly desires:
[he has laid me in the darkness,] involved in the night of secular lusts, [as
the men that have been long dead.] in their trespasses and sins, having no
sense or feeling of their desperate condition.

4. Therefore is my spirit vexed within me;] My Conscience within me being
defiled and my Soul, which would aspire to Heavenward, depressed with the
weight of her sins and the corruption of her flesh, is a great corrosive and
vexation of my spirit; [and my heart within me is desolate.] destitute of all
consolation.

5. Yet do I remember the time past;] wherein thy people have been exercised
and tried, both by adversity and prosperity, both by temptations and
deliverances; and for my consolation, and strengthening my hopes of deliverance,
[I muse upon all thy works:] wherein I observe, as thy great power and wisdom,
so thy mercy allaying the rigor of thy justice: yea, I en^^ise my self in the
works of thy hands.] wherein I find thy mercy to be over thy works; and that I,
though an unprofitable work of thy hands, may obtain mercy also.

6. I stretch forth my hands unto thee:] both praying with my lips, and working
with my hands, to obtain may petitions: and [my soul] pours forth her self in
the expansion of my hands, which being in her self dry and barren of
consolation [gaspeth unto thee] the fountain of living waters, and wellspring
of Divine graces, even [as a thirsty land] gapeth to be filled and satisfied
with rain from Heaven.

7. Hear me, O Lord,] watering my thirsty Soul with the celestial dew of thy
Divine grace, [and that soon;] delay not to satisfy the thirst of my soul,
which is great; [for my spirit waxes faint:] has lost its wonted fersour of
devotion, being oppressed with the burden of her sins, and destitute of the
sweet refreshments and influences of thy Holy Spirit: [hide not thy face from
me,] as one turns away his face from his enemy, or one with whom he is justly
offended, [lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.] If thou look
not in mercy upon me, I shall be in the same condition with them that are
involved in the pit both of sin and of death.

8. O let me hear] be made sensible of [thy loving kindness betimes in the
morning;] early and betimes in this life; and after the night of this life is
ended, in the morning of that day which never shall have end; [for in thee is
my trust:] not in my self, nor in any help of man, for it is but vain; and so
will prove my trust in thee also, except I obey thy will and walk in thy ways:
the which that I may do, I humbly beg [shew thou me the way] of thy laws, and
the paths of thy Commandments, [wherein I should walk;] as leading to my native
home of Heaven, where my immortal Soul was first framed by the hands of the
Almighty; [for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.] which being made after
thine Image, aspires to become perfect in the beatifical vision and fruition of
thy sacred Majesty. In which way being soar let and hindered, it implores thy
assistence, saying,

9. Deliver me from mine enemies, O God:] both visible and invisible, ghostly
and bodily adversaries: [for I flee unto thee] when assaulted by them [to hide
me.] under the covert of thy protection, from all the storms of temptations
which daily arise in the tumultuous sea of this life.

10. Teach me] who am naturally blind and careless of my duty [to do the thing
that pleases thee;] not only to know, but to do thy will; not to follow mine
own pleasure, but what is pleasing and acceptable unto thee; [for thou art my
God:] who have created and redeemed me: and that I may be thoroughly sanctified
[let thy loving Spirit] the Spirit of love and verity [lead me forth] in the
straight direct way that leads [into the land of righteousness.] That Is the
promised Land, the celestial Canaan, where alone is perfect, everlasting
righteousness, in the blissful presence of the God of righteousness.

11. Quicken me, O Lord,] who am dull and dead-hearted, and faint in the way
toward the land of the living, [for thy name's sake:] which I invoke and
adore: [and for thy righteousness sake] not for mine, which is little, and good
for little, [bring my soul out of trouble.] delivering me from whatever
disturbs the peace of my Soul, and hinders her progress in the way to Heaven.

12. And of thy goodness slay mine enemies,] Mortify in me all unruly lusts
and passions that rebel against Reason and Religion, [and destroy all them
that vex my soul:] by exciting and fomenting the flesh against the spirit, the
sensual against her rational faculties; that the whole may be obedient unto
thee: [for I am thy servant.] Created, Redeemed, not to serve my own lusts and
exorbitant passions, but to be Sanctified or devoted wholly to serve thee, in
holiness and righteousness before thee all the days of my life. And so shall my
Soul praise thee with joyful lips, and say, Glory be to the Father --
As it was in the beginning --


I. O most just and merciful God, who being by Sin offended, art by true
Repentance appeased, be propitious to the Prayers of thy faithful people; and
in great mercy turn away from us those scourges of thy wrath which our sins
have justly deserved, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

II. Remember not, Lord, our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers,
neither take thou vengeance of our sins; but spare us, good Lord, spare thy
people, whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, and be not angry with
us for ever.

III. O God, whose nature and property it is, ever to have mercy and to
forgive, receive our humble Petitions; and though we be tied and bound with the
chain of our sins, yet let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose us; for the
honor of Jesus Christ our Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

CHAP. XII. Meditations and Prayers to be partakers of the Merits of what our
Blessed Redeemer has done and suffered for us.
O Most Holy and ever-Blessed Jesus, The Incarnation of the Son of God.
who vouchsafedst, for the redemption of mankind, to be made Man, by the
blessed merits of thy mysterious Incarnation grant me to become one Spirit with
thee, who becamest one flesh with me.

Thou, Blessed Lord, Nativity.
were miraculously born of a pure immaculate Virgin, by the power of the Holy
Ghost overshadowing her: grant me, by the same power of the most High, to
possess a pure virgin Soul, in a pure and chaste body, and to be fruitful in all
good works.

Holy Jesus, Circumcision.
who vouchsafedst to be circumcised the eighth day, and made obedient to the
Law for man, grant unto me, I humbly beg, the true circumcision of the Spirit,
that my heart and all my members may be mortified from all carnal and worldly
lusts, and whatever hinders my regular obedience to thy most holy Laws.

By the merits and mysteries of thy Baptism in the river Jordan, Baptism.
wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sins, whereby I
have unhallowed those sacred and saving waters of my Baptism, and perjuriously
broken my Vow and Promise made therein.

Holy Jesus, Fasting.
who did fast forty days and forty nights, forgive me the manifold acts of
Gluttony and Drunkenness, Riot and Excess, whereof I have been guilty: and by
the virtue and power of thy miraculous Fast, grant me the mastery over my
rebellious appetite, to live soberly, that I may also live righteously and
godly in this present world.

Holy Jesus, Temptation.
who being fasting wast tempted of the Devil, and overcamest him, grant me, by
the influences of thy Blessed Spirit, so devoutly to intend the holy duties of
Fasting and Prayer, that by the power of thy victory over the Devil, I may have
strength and power to triumph over the Devil, the world and the flesh, and to
continue thy faithful servant and soldier to my life's end.

Holy Jesus, Doctrine and Example.
who being inaugurated in thy Prophetical office by Baptism, and confirmed by
the vanquishment of the Devil, wentest about preaching the Gospel, doing good,
healing all manner of sickness and all manner of diseases amongst the people,
being by thy doctrine and example the Way and the Truth that leads unto Life;
grant me to believe aright all thy Revelations, to obey all thy Commands, to
walk in thy steps, and so to follow thee the Light of the world, that I walk
not in darkness, but may have the light of life.

Holy Jesus, He is conspired against, and betrayed.
who did condescend to have thy precious life conspired against by the Jews,
and to be betrayed and sold by one of thine own Disciples for a vile price,
deliver me from the conspiracies of all mine enemies, ghostly and bodily; and
specially from the treachery and corruption of mine own deceitful heart, and
from the rebellion of my flesh, which for vile things and of no value daily
betray my Soul into the hands and under the power and bondage of Sin and Satan,
the great enemies of my life in Grace and Glory.

Holy Jesus, His Agony in the Garden.
who did begin thy last and bitter passion in a Garden, where thy innocent
Soul was sorrowful even unto death, sanctify, I beseech thee, all my natural
infirmities and passions, comfort me in all my troubles and disquietudes of
mind, and make me sensible with godly sorrow of that heavy wrath and curse for
Sin, which thou sufferedst, and I deserved.

Holy Jesus, Bloody swear.
who did prostrate thy self upon the cold earth, sweating drops of blood
under the pressure of our sins, and out of a sad apprehension of thy ensuing
sufferings, offering up strong ^^ies with tears unto him that is able to save;
O that my heart might inwardly bleed tears of compassion and of compunction,
and vent it self by such fervent and effectual prayers, with tears of
devotion, as to be heard in Heaven, and healed of all my sinful infirmities.

Holy Jesus, Submission to the will of God.
who with all sweetness of patience and submission did give up thy self
wholly to the will of thy Heavenly Father, endue me with the same spirit of
lowliness and meckness, patience and contentedness in all conditions,
submitting to the good will of my God, both in prosperity and adversity, health
and sickness, life and death.

Holy Jesus, Apprehension.
who did yield thy self to be apprehended, when thou might escape, and to
be bound as a Malefactor, being clearer then an Angel of light; O let not my
Soul be feised by any infernal Fiends to eternal horror in the other world:
But out of the sangs and clutches of all the spirits and powers of darkness,
good Lord, deliver me: from the bonds and chains of my sins, and from that
dismal sentence, [Take him, and bind him hand and foot, and cast him into
utter darkness,] good Lord, deliver me.

Holy Jesus, who being felsed by rude hands, Arraignment and Condemnation.
wast led as an innocent Lamb to the slaughter, hooted at, rated, reviled,
reproached, falsely accused, and unjustly condemned by unjust Judges here upon
earth, being thy self the most just Judge of Heaven and earth; O be not a
severe and angry Judge when I shall stand before thy Tribunal, but vouchsafe to
be then my Mediator, and answer for me, who am not able to answer thee one of
a thousand, if thou should be strict to mark what I have done amiss: But in
thee have I put my trust; thou shall answer for me, O Lord my God.

From all the accusations of the Devil and his Angels, from the accusations of
all men and of all women, with whom I have been guilty, or who have been
conscious of my many sinful pollutions, and from the accusations of my own
Conscience in the day of Judgment, good Lord, deliver me.

Blessed be that infinite mercy and humility of thine, Holy Jesus, He is
spitted upon.
whereby thou sufferedst thy face, faiter then the children of men, to be
polluted by filthy ignominious spittings. O turn thy face away from my sins,
whereby I have polluted my Soul, and profaned thy holy Name, which is called
upon me. Turn not thy face away from me, but turn thy face away from my sins,
who for my sins did not turn thy face from shame and spitting.

Holy Jesus, Buffeted.
who did expose thy blessed cheeks to the rude cuffs and buffets of hard
injurious fists, grant that though I may feel, yet not be felled and overthrown
by the buffets of Satan.

Holy Jesus, Forsaken of his friends and followers.
who wast content to be forsaken of all thy friends and dearest Disciples, and
to be left alone in the hands of cruel men, who like ravening wolves thirsted
after a draught of thy dearest blood; O leave me not destitute of thy assisting
presence, when assaulted by my ghostly Adversaries; though I have deserved to
be for ever desolate and forsaken, for my manifold treacherous backslidings
from thee.

Blessed be that infinite goodness and meekness of thine, Denied by Peter.
who looking back upon S. Peter, when he denied and forswore thee, did by
that gracious chiding look call him back, both to himself and to thee, by tree
Repentance. O look thus upon all backsliders from thee, for their correction
and sincere conversion; and look upon me also, and be merciful unto me, as thou
usest to do unto those that love thy name.

And now behold, (O my Soul,) Scourged.
with the eye of devout meditation, such a portion of thy Savior's sufferings
as is the wonder and astonishment both of Heaven and earth. See with what
profound humility and patience the great Lord of all the world condescends to
be whipped by a merciless crew of soldiers: see with what a sweet silence this
innocent Lamb yields to have his fleece torn off, his body stripped naked, and
strictly bound to a whipping-post: see him all alone, naked and helpless, where
there was no eye to pity him, no heart to have compassion on him; whilst those
merciless Caitiffs with their sharp and forked whips rip up and tear his
delicate skin and tender flesh, so that his blessed back and breasts, by the
violence of their cruel lathes, doubled and redoubled, are all gore blood,
which from the ghastly wounds streamed down his innocent sides.

Now when I think hereupon I pour out my heart by my self, even to weeping and
wonder: wondering, that the eternal Son of God, the glory of Angels and beauty
of men, should suffer such a cruel and shameful punishment; and weep, that my
sins should both deserve and cause such sufferings; and weeping wonder, that
the Son of God should suffer what I deserved.

But since thou disdainedst not, O merciful Lord, to be wounded for my
transgressions, and bruised for mine iniquities; O let thy chastisement procure
my peace with offended Heaven, and grant that by thy stripes my soul may be
healed.

Holy Jesus, Crowned with thorns.
whose venerable head was crowned with Thorns, the curse of the earth, and
those thorns beaten into thy Temples with a Reed and with much rage; pardon,
Lord, all those sins which by the instrumental mediation of all the senses of
my head I have committed: break not the bruised reed, my broken heart, with the
sad pressure of thy heavy wrath: let thy thorns, the fruits of the curse which
we contracted and thou sustainedst, deliver me from the curse due for my sins,
and stop the jaws of death, that the pit shut not her mouth upon me.

Thou art the King of glory, Renouncing the Pomps and Vanities of this world.
O Christ; yet wast content with a Cross for thy Throne, with a wreath of
Thorns for thy Crown, with a Reed for thy Regal Scepter, with Gall and Vinegar
for thy Cates, and for thy Robes of Majesty only a little Linen to cover thy
nakedness. O that I were so wise as, from thy example, to despise all the
gilded glories, empty consolations, nicknam'd pleasures and profits of this
present life: choosing, with Moses, rather to suffer affliction with the people
of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, having an eye to the
recompense of reward.

Blessed Jesus, Bearing his Cross.
who with an invincible patience wentest forth bearing thy Cross, till it sunk
thy tender virginal body to the earth; O let me not sink under thy Cross, nor
shrink from it, but cheerfully take up my Cross, whatever it be, and carefully
undergo all the sacred acts and offices of true Repentance, which is the Cross
of Sinners, and follow thee my immortal Savior, who did suffer for us,
leaving us an example, that we should follow thy steps.

Holy Jesus, Crucified.
who wast lifted up upon the Cross to draw all men unto thee, and did hang on
a cursed Tree, to abolish the Curse contracted by eating the fruit of the
forbidden Tree, and wast numbered with the transgressors, crucified amongst
thieves; O draw my hard and stony heart unto thee: deliver me from the curse,
by my sins contracted; and rank me not among the cursed Goats on thy left hand,
but amongst thy blessed Sheep on thy right hand, in the great Day of Judgment.

O most Holy crucified Jesus, All the parts of his body tormented.
all the parts and members of whose Body were expanded on the Cross, as on a
tormenting rack; thy blessed Arms and Legs were with such violence diftended,
that the Joints were disparted, the Veins burst, the Sinews cracked, the Skin
rent, the Flesh torn, and all the Bones started aside: And in this height of
distension thy innocent Hands and Feet were nailed for the sinful works of our
hands, nailed where the nerves, those conveyances of sense, are the thickest,
to the unspeakable torment of thine innocent body.

The sorrows and sufferings of thy Soul were far greater, The sufferings of his
Soul.
being like melting wax, molten in the fiery furnace of God's wrath for the
sins of the world; till the fullness of thy sufferings being accomplished, thou
commendedst thy spirit into the hands of God.

All this Sorrow and Suffering, Grief and Torment of thine, I believe verily,
was for me and for my sins; there being nothing in thee, the spotless Son of a
spotless Virgin, to grieve, or sorrow, or suffer for.

O sweetest Savior, save and deliver me from all my sins, whether of knowledge
or ignorance, of wilfulness or negligence, of omission or commission; of
thought, desire, word or deed, confessed or not confessed before thee: wash
them all away in thy precious blood shed for me; nail them to thy Cross, which
were the cause of thy Crucifixion; hide them in thy wounds, who wast wounded
for my transgressions: and write those wounds of thine in my heart, not with
ink, but with the blood which was shed form; that in and by those characters
of blood I may read and learn to die unto sin, and live only unto thee, who
diedst for me; cleaving steadfastly unto thee, whose whole self wast so fast
nailed to the Cross for me.

By thy Cross and Passion, both in Soul and Body, cleanse me from all
filthiness both of flesh and spirit; crucify this corruptible flesh of mine,
with all the inordinate affections and unruly lusts thereof: that being
conformed to thy Death, I may be partaker of thy Resurrection; that suffering
with thee here, I may reign with thee hereafter, where thou live --

THE SECOND PART OF THE PRACTICAL Christian: Being Considerations, Meditations
and Prayers in order to the worthy Receiving the HOLY COMMUNION of the Body and
Blood of CHRIST.

The Second Edition revised and augmented.

Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

Luke 12.43. LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, 1677.

A TABLE of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. Of the two general Christian Duties required in order to the Holy
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. CHAP. II. Meditations and Prayers
preparatory to the Holy Communion the Week before. CHAP. III. Meditations and
Prayers for the Friday, especially before the Communion. CHAP. IV. Saint
Augustine 's Recommendation of the Passion of Christ unto God the Father. CHAP.
V. Saint Ambrose 's Commem^ration of our Savior's Passion. CHAP. VI. Saint
Gregory 's Prayers upon the Passion of Christ. CHAP. VII. The Form of Prayer
used by our Lord upon the Cross, viz. the XXII. Psalm paraphrased. CHAP. VIII.
Meditations and Prayers preparatory to the Blessed Sacrament, on
Saturday-night, or Sunday-morning before. CHAP. IX. Meditations upon your going
to Church; with some short Directions for your demeanor in the House and in
the Service of God. CHAP. X. Meditations and Prayers at the Blessed Sacrament.
CHAP. XI. Psalms of praise and thanksgiving after the Holy Communion.
THE PRACTICAL Christian. PART II.
CHAP. I. Of the two general Christian Duties required in order to the Holy
Communion of the Body and Blood of CHRIST.
1. THE Blessed Eucharist, or Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, is of all the
Mysteries of godliness the most comprehensive, and applicatory to the Soul's
eternal Happiness. It Is amongst all Christian Duties of highest dignity, and
greatest concern. It Is both the Food and the Medicine, the Life and the Health,
the Strength and Defense, the Peace, Joy and Delight of the truly Religious
Soul. It Is the most effectual means of the nearest Union and Communion with
Christ in this life attainable. It Is expressly so called, the Communion of the
Body of Christ, and the Communion of the Blood of Christ 1 Cor. 10.16.
: which Doctrine we are taught as one of the Principles of our Religion; The
Body and Blood of Christ is verily and indeed taken and received of the
faithful in the Lord's Supper Church Catech.
.

2. In the right and reverent Administration, with the devout and worthy
Participation of this Sacramental Body of Christ we are incorporated into his
holy Mystical Body. So says our Lord himself; He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him Joh. 6.56.
. And such is also the Doctrine of the Church of Christ: If with a true
penitent heart and lively faith we receive the Holy Sacrament, we spiritually
eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood; we dwell in Christ, and Christ in
us; we be one with Christ, and Christ with us; we obtain remission of our Sins,
and all other the Benfits of his Passion Comm. office.
.

3. Hence then it follows, that whoever owns the name of a Christian and
understands aright what it is to be truly so, and not in vain so called, must
acknowledge these two general Duties to be incumbent upon him: 1. Not to
neglect any opportunity of Receiving this Blessed Sacrament; 2. To use all
possible means with his utmost endeavors to receive the same worthily.

I. As to the First, whosoever slights or neglects to come, being invited, to the
Holy Communion, either,

1. He rightly understands not the Holy Religion he professes: or,

2. His Religion is no other but a bare Profession; something that perhaps
employs his Tongue, and strikes upon his Ears, to hear and talk about it; but
never entered the deep of his Heart, truly to believe and practice it Matt. 15.8.
.

There be too many such persons, (God wot) that talk much of Religion, yea,
many that talk loudly of Communion with Christ, and are seemingly zealous in
the external performance of several Christian Duties, especially in the
frequency of long and loud Prayers: but if the many wild extravagancies of such
performances did not lay them open, yet their general neglect of this
Sacrament, which is the life and quintessence of all Christian offices, and the
infallible witness of true Christianity, discovers the hypocrisy of such
seeming Zelots; that, with the old Pharisees, they draw nigh unto God with
their mouth, and honor him with their lips; but their heart is not whole with
him, neither are they steadfast in his covenant Isa. 29.13. Psalm. 78.36, 37.
. Which is farther evident in that,

3. Such persons make no conscience of Sin, which is the transgression of the
Law of Christ. He commands saying, Take, eat -- Drink ye all of this -- Do
this in remembrance of me -- Show forth the Lord's death till he come -- Come
unto me all ye that are weary -- Ho, every one that thirsts, come -- Matt.
26.27, 28. Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. Matt. 11.28. Isa. 55.1.
. Not to come to that Blessed Sacrament, being invited, is to disobey all
these, and several more positive commands of God: which being also frequently
read, heard, preached, and pressed upon the consciences of men by their
conscientious Ministers, and yet still slighted and disobeyed, will undoubtedly
incur (if not prevented by a timely true Repentance and Amendment) that sad and
dismal sentence at the last Day, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire Matt. 25.41.
.

4. Disobedience to these commands of our Lord in the neglect of this Blessed
Sacrament, does declare every such person so neglecting, whatever his excuses
may be, 1. in general, that he is more in love with his Sins then with his
Savior, with the errors of his ways then with the Truth that is in Jesus Ephesians.
4.21.
: or, 2. more particularly, that he prefers either his sloth and negligence, or
his enmity and maliciousness, or his temporal concerns and covetousness, or,
in a word, some secular or sensual lust, before the purification of his Soul in
the Blood of Christ, and its nourishment to life eternal.

5. He disobeys the commands, slights the orders, contemns the discipline of
Christ's Church, makes no conscience of conforming to the practice of, and of
holding communion with, all sound and orthodox Members of Christ: but rather
implies, nay, openly declares, that he is none of Christ's number, but separate
and divided from Christ's mystical Body, which is the Church Col. 1.24.
; and, consequently, not quickened with his Spirit: for these two are
inseparable; one Body, the Church; and one Spirit Ephesians. 4.4.
, viz. of truth and holiness, which quickens this one Body, and this alone.

The guilt of any which particulars is so inconsistent with the state of true
Christianity, that there is no person who reads and seriously considers them,
can reasonably call himself a Member of Christ, or acceptably call upon God as
such, and yet still continue his neglect of this Blessed Sacrament.

6. And this amongst others is one of the greatest causes of so great a decay
of Piety, of so much dullness and deadness of heart in all Religious
performances, of so much averseness from the public Worship of God in his
House of prayer, and of so much irreverence and profaneness therein. It Is the
cause of so many spiritual diseases in the Souls of men, of so much weakness
against Temptations, of so much wavering in opinion, of so many Errors,
Schisms, Factions -- even because the Souls of all such are not fed, nourished,
strengthened and refreshed, quickened and confirmed with the precious Body and
Blood of Christ: the which, being rightly and reverently received, illuminates
the Understanding, purifies the Will, cleanses the Heart, rectifies the
Affections, and renders the whole Man apt and active to every good work of the
Lord.

II. The Second general Duty in order to this Holy Sacrament is, To use all
possible means and endeavors to receive the same worthily.

There will need no other Reasons to enforce this Duty then the terror of
those known words of the Apostle, He that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself. And this Unworthiness consists in not
discerning the Lord's Body, as it immediately follows 1 Cor. 11.29.
.

Here then every man that has any care of his Soul will desire to know what it
is, not to discern the Lord's Body, which makes a man liable to Damnation, by
being an unworthy Communicant at the Lord's Table.

To understand this fully and clearly, we must use the light of a distinction.
For there is a threefold Body of Christ abstracted from that of his personal
subsistence as Man of a reasonable Soul and humane Flesh subsisting: viz. 1.
Mystical, 2. Doctrinal, 3. Sacramental. And not to discern the Lord's Body in
any of these three meanings thereof, makes unworthie Receivers.

1. The Mystical Body of Christ is his Church Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Col. 1.24.
. And he discerns not this Body of Christ, who rightly believes not the Holy
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.

It Is one of the names whereby this Holy Sacrament is called, The Holy
Communion; excluding thence as unworthy all that are not within the Pale and
Communion of Christ's Church, both Unbelievers and Misbelievers, Heretics and
Schismatics; all disobedient, factious, contentious spirits, with all sorts of
Separatists from the Church of Christ, whether in Faith or Charity, Doctrine or
Worship. For all worthy Communicants, being many, are one Body in Christ, and
every one Members one of another Romans 12.5. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.
.

2. The Doctrinal Body of Christ is the Doctrine of Christianity, or the Body
of Faith, wherein all found orthodox Christians do agree, and are united as
Members of the foresaid Mystical Body of Christ, the Church: which is therefore
called the common Faith Tit. 1.4.
: and it is that Faith which was once given to, or rather by, the Saints Jude v.
3.
, the holy Apostles of our Lord.

He discerns not this Body of the Lord, who understands not the Principles of
his Religion, which are summed up in the Vow or Covenant which every person
rightly Christened has made with God in his Baptism: the positive parts whereof
(besides the negative) are, 1. the Apostles Creed, 2. the Ten Commandments;
with what is implied therein, and depends thereupon, viz. 3. the Lord's Prayer,
and, 4. the Doctrine of the Sacraments. Not to know these general Heads of
Religion, which be plainly and fully delivered in the Church-Catechism; or,
having learned them by heart when Children, not frequently to remember and
consider them when come to age, so as to understand and hold them fast as the
Essentials of Christianity; is the second general kind of Unworthiness of the
Lord's Supper, from whence all ignorant and careless, foolish and sottish
persons are excluded Jer. 24.7. Heb. 8.11.
, with all such as hold not fast the first Principles of the Oracles of God
Heb. 5.12.
.

3. The Sacramental Body of Christ is, the consecrated Elements of Bread and
Wine in the Sacrament. This is expressly affirmed by our Lord, saying, This is
my Body, This is my Blood. Who then dare say, (as the Fathers frequently
observe,) This is not his Body, but a Figure of his Body only?

He discerns not this Body of our Lord, 1. who sees not with the eye of Faith
Christ really present under the Species of Bread and Wine, though he conceive
not the manner thereof: who does not with all grateful acknowledgment and
divine love, and with the greatest humility and devotion, adore the infinite
wisdom, power, mercy, goodness and condescension of this Presence of our Lord;
not curiously questioning, much less pragmatically defining the way and manner
of his Presence, as being deeply mysterious and inconceivable.

Those old Verses expressing the Faith of the wifest of our first Reformers may
satisfy every modest, humble and sober-minded good Christian in his great
Mystery of godliness.

It was the Lord that spoke it,
He took the Bread and brake it,
And what the Word did make it,
So I believe and take it.
2. He discerns not this Sacramental Body of the Lord, who knows not in some
measure the nature, ends, uses and benefits of this Sacrament, with what is
required of them that come thereunto: All which being plainly, fully, and yet
very briefly, taught in our Church-Catechism, to be therefore ignorant of these
things, which every Child is bound to learn and say, is another Species of an
unworthy Communicant.

3. He discerns not this Sacramental Body of the Lord, who prepares not himself
to receive the same with all reverence and godly fear Heb. 12.28.
; with hands washed in innocence Psalm. 26.6.
; and into a pure and clean heart Isa. 1.16. Psalm. 24.4.
; into a Soul cleansed from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit 2 Cor. 7.1.
, and perfumed (as was our Lord's crucified Body) with the sweet odours of
Humility and Compunction, of Love and Devotion, of Obedience and Charity.

And hereunto all the parts and kinds of true Repentance do necessarily concur:
for there can be no cleanness of hands, no purity of heart, if the naturally
stiff and proud heart be not first humbled, and its stifness broken with godly
sorrow for sin, and its filthiness washed off with the devout tears of true
Penitence through Faith in the blood of Christ.

And he that receives Christ's Holy Body and Blood into his Soul, not first
emptied of all his Sins by holy Faith and all the sacred offices of true
Repentance, does with Judas betray his Master into the hands of his enemies,
even those very enemies which crucified him: for those were our Sins. And
therefore it is said of such unworthy Receivers, that they are guilty of the
Body and Blood of Christ.

To avoid such a horrid Sin, 1 Cor. 11.27. and Damnation following the same, v.
29. betwixt both Verses it is commanded v. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat --

Self-examination, as it is in the former Leaves prescribed to be practiced, is
the first and the greatest Duty, and requires the most of spiritual labor,
care and industry, of all that is required to the worthy Receiving of the Holy
Communion. And this because it is not only necessary in it self; but
necessarily, conducing to the sincere performance of all the other Religious
Duties commanded: Our Repentance in all its parts, our Humiliation and godly
Sorrow for sin, our holy Purposes and Resolves of amendment, our Faith, our
Hope, our Charity must be examined, that they be sincere, and without
hypocrisy. And therefore it is that this Duty is commanded by the Apostle, as
if it were alone sufficient, when sincerely performed, to make us acceptable
Guests at the Lord's Table; saying, Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat --

And indeed this so great, so necessary a Duty, is as greatly extolled, and
withal pretended unto, by most men, especially such as talk much of their
Religion, but practice little. It Is generally the pretense and the plea of such
who cry up Self-examination, to cry down the Sacerdotal power and function, to
withdraw themselves from under the guidance and examination of their respective
Pastors, whose Instructions being not received, or observed, but so far forth
as to every man seems good in his own eyes, is the great reason why this
grand Duty is so generally neglected, or negligently performed. The which is
manifest,

1. From the numerous company of those who make no conscience of coming to the
Holy Communion when invited. It Is not possible that men, otherwise prudent as
to their worldly concerns, should yet be so sottish, so retchless, so stupidly
careless of their eternal health and happiness, did they ever seriously examine
and consider the state and condition of their Souls. But whilst they know not
themselves in their spiritual wants, weakness and wickedness, how can they have
any desire, much less a delight, to come to the fountain of mercy, truth and
holiness Wisdom 2 21, 22. Matt. 5.6.
? It Is the reason,

2. Why many persons, having received the Sacrament, but feeling no virtue, no
efficacy, no power of grace, no consolation flowing from these celestral
Mysteries of Salvation, have therefore afterward slighted and neglected the
same. For whilst their ignorances and errors, whether in opinion or practice,
for want of due Examination, appeared not unto them; that Sun of Righteousness
shined not into their hearts, who appears not but through the windows and the
openings of broken hearts and displayed consciences Wised. 5.6.
. And besides, such is the corrupt nature of all finfulness and vice, that if
the leaven thereof be not narrowly searched out, and abandoned, it will sour
the Bread of life, and make it without any taste of sweetness to the Soul 1 Cor.
5.7, 8.
. It Is the reason,

3. Why many persons have by the receiving of that Blessed Sacrament been more
hardened in their sins, and in the errors of their ways. For errors in
judgment, and offenses in conversation, which are the soars and diseases of the
Soul, being not searched to the bottom, and salved by Repentance and the
acknowledgement of the Truth 2 Timothy 2.25.
, do change the spiritual food and nourishment of the Soul into the poison
thereof, whereby what was ordained unto life, is found unto death Romans 7.10.
.

CHAP. II. Meditations and Prayers preparatory to the Holy Communion the Week
before.
THE truly sincere good Christian, whose Faith is not in Fancy, or Opinion, or
Presumption, or consisting in word and tongue alone, but in deed and in truth,
who desires truly to serve God, and to honor and obey him with his whole
heart, and through his whole life; every such qualified Christian will, as soon
as he has notice given by his Pastor of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to
be administered, seriously apply himself to the great work of fitting, preparing
and ordering his Soul for the joyful and devout entertainment of his Blessed
Redeemer thereinto.

In order to such a Blessed work, 'twill be very useful and advantageous, the
whole Week foregoing, to add to your daily Prayers and Meditations these (or
the like) following Collects, with the Psalms ensuing.

I. Almighty God, our heavenly Father, who of thy tender mercy did give thine
only Son Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the Cross for our Redemption, and
have commanded us to continue a perpetual memory of that his precious Death
until his comiong again; Hear me, O merciful Father, I most humbly beseech
thee, and grant that I may with that right Understanding^ true Faith, sincere
Repentance, deep Humility, and fervent Charity, receive the Sacrament of my
dear Savior's Death, accoridng to his institution and command; that I may be
made partaker of all the benefits of his Passion, to the justification,
sanctification, and eternal Salvation of my Soul, through the same Jesus Christ
--

II. I will not presume to approach thine Altar, O Lord, trusting in mine own
Righteousness, but in thy manifold and great Mercies. I am not worthy to gather
up the crumbs that fall from thy Table; for I am an unclean creature, to whom
the Childrens bread belongs not, having too often returned to my old Sins, as
the dog to his vomit. But whither, Blessed Lord, whither should a defiled Soul
go to be cleansed, but unto that Fountain which is opened in the house of
Israel for sin and for uncleanness? In this inexhaustible Fountain of Divine
grace my sinful Soul longs to be washed, and through the effusion of the
precious Blood of my Redeemer to be purified; and my whole self for the future
to be sincerely devoted to serve thee in holiness and righteousness before thee
all the days of my life. Amen.

III. Assist me, Blessed Lord, in the Trial and impartial Examination of my
heart, and of all the actions of my life; in the full Confession of all my
Sins, with the tears of true Penitence and godly Sorrow for them; in my Prayers
for mercy and pardon of them, and for grace to be sanctified against them. O
hear in Heaven, and be merciful unto me; forgive me my Sins, and heal my Soul,
through the merits and mediation of my dearest Savior Jesus Christ -- Amen.

A short preparatory Meditation to the Sacrament out of S. Ambrose.

O with what great contrition of heart, with what a flood of tears, with what
reverence, fear and trembling, with what purity of mind, and chastity of body,
is that Divine celestial. Mystery to be celebrated, where thy Flesh, O Lord, is
truly received, and thy Blood is truly drunk; where things most high and low,
Divine and humane, are mysteriously intermingled; where the Angels of Heaven
are invisibly present, beholding and assisting in the celebration; and where
thou, O Lord, art inconceivably present, both as the Priest and the Sacrifice!
O who can worthily either administer or receive such grand, tremend, celestial
Mysteries, except Thou, the Omnipotent God, make him worthy of thy Grace? Even
so come, Lord Jesus.

The XXIII. Psalm paraphrased.
Verse 1. THE Lord] who has created, redeemed and sanctified me, [is my
Shepherd;] to feed, guide, and defend me from the ravening of my ghostly foes:
[therefore I can lack nothing] that is needful or convenient either for Soul
or body.

2. He shall feed me in a green pasture;] My Soul does he feed with the verdant
refreshing Indoctrinations of his Holy Word; [and lead me forth beside the
waters of comfort.] Such are the influences of the Holy Ghost the Comforter;
and such are the Sacraments of his Church, which as waters do quench the fire
of Concupiscence, wash off the pollution of Sin, cleanse the heart from all
vain and impure thoughts and desires, satisfy the spiritual thirst of the Soul,
and feed the same to life eternal: and these be Comforts both great and
glorious.

3. He shall convert my soul,] from the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked
World, and from the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, [and bring me forth into the
paths of righteousness,] to keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and to walk
in the same all the days of my life: and this he will do [for his Name's
sake.] that his Name, which is great, wonderful and holy, may be glorified in
me, and by me.

4. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,] be
conversant amidst continual Temptations, and Tribulations, which are the
miseries of mortality, and the shadows of death in this valley of tears, [I
will fear none evil:] neither the evil of Sin, nor Death the wages of Sin:
[for thou art with me;] dwelling in my heart by Faith in this mortal life, that
after the shadow of death is vanished, I may dwell with thee by Vision in life
immortal; Aug. [thy rod and thy staff comfort me.] thy rod, to correct me; thy
staff, to support me: thy rod, to punish me when I do evil; thy staff, to
sustain me in my sufferings for my Sins. Both are great comforts to the devout
Soul, as being signs of Adoption and Grace, purchased by the mystical Rod and
Staff of my Savior's Sufferings on the wood of his Cross. This was the rod of
the Lord's indignation for our Sins, and the rod wherewithal our Lord beat the
Devil out of his strong holds: this was the staff also or stay of fallen Man:
the merits whereof I humbly beg to be applied to my Soul in the Sacrament of
his Passion. For,

5. Thou shall prepare a table before me] The Table of the Lord is spread before
all true Believers, where is prepared the Bread of Heaven, the food of Angels,
the Body and Blood of Christ, for the strengthening and refreshing of my Soul,
[against them that trouble me:] and these are chiefly homebred Enemies, even
all those sinful Lusts of the flesh which war against the Soul. But that I may
be prepared for the conflict with them, [thou have anointed my head with oil,]
The Unction of the Holy one, are the Graces of the Holy Spirit, which from
Christ the Head do flow down upon his Members in the devout use of his
Sacraments. [and my cup shall be full.] That Cup of blessing which is the
Communion of the Blood of Christ, is full of grace and heavenly benediction.
And this in all humility I call my cup, because I am invited, nay commanded, to
take and drink thereof. And if I receive it worthily, I may then rejoicing say,
The Lord himself is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: and as it
follows,

6. Thy loving kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life:]
'Twas thy loving kindness and mercy preventing me whereby I was called unto the
state of Grace and Salvation: and I believe and humbly pray that thy Grace may
also follow me to continue in the same to my life's end. [and I will dwell in
the house of the Lord for ever.] This is the end and the perfection of all the
Lord's Blessings upon me: He is therefore my Shepherd, and does feed and guide
me, protect and defend me, correct and support me, and with his precious Body
and Blood does nourish me in his house of prayer here below, that I may
hereafter dwell in his house of praise above, and with his holy Angels and
Saints for ever sing, Glory be to God the Father --
As it was in the beginning --


Other Psalms seasonable for Meditation, and relating to this Divine subject in
several Verses, are the XLII. XLIII. LXXXI. LXXXIV. Psalms; the which I have
not paraphrased or explained, that this Volume might not swell into too great a
bulk.

CHAP. III. Meditations and Prayers for the Friday; especially before the
Communion.
1. AMongst all the days of the Week, Friday is the most seasonable and fittest
for the performance of those Religious Duties, the which, though never out of
season, are yet then most practical, when commanded as necessary Preparatives
for the worthy receiving of the Sacrament; viz. the grand Duty of
Self-examination, of Confession of sins, with Contrition, Humiliation, and
Fasting; as also for Meditations and Prayers upon the Passion of our Lord,
since it was upon this day of the week he was crucified and died for our Sins.

2. It Is upon this account, that our Church enjoins this day to be observed
through the whole year as a day of Fasting and Abstinence; and it was ever
observed as such, since our Lord died upon the Friday, through all the Ages of
the Church, until these last and worst of days, wherein the evil spirit of
contradiction against the Religious practices of Christ's Church does so rage,
as, amongst many others, to cry down all Times and Days devoted to the Service
of God, except what they call the Sabbath Day: the which under the Gospel is
neither properly so called, nor rightly observed by such as truly understand
not the IV. Commandment, but misinterpret the sound meaning of the Spirit by
the killing Letter of the Law.

3. All orthodox and understanding good Christians, in stead of a Jewish
Sabbath, observe as festival and holy the Christian Sunday, because the Sun of
Righteousness arose upon that day from death to life, and has brought life and
immortality to light through the Gospel: in which respect it is frequently in
Holy Scripture called the Lord's day.

4. And there is the like reason for the observance of Friday, as fasting in
commemoration of Christ's Passion, as there is for Sunday, as festival in
commemoration of his Resurrection. Nor is this obscurely, but plainly enough
commanded by our Lord himself; But the days will come when the Bridegroom shall
be taken away from them: and then shall they fast in those days Luke 5.35.
. These words are both, 1. a positive command to all the Disciples of Christ,
they shall fast; and also, 2. the days whereon they shall fast are prescribed,
in those days whereon the Bridegroom was taken away from them, which are the
Fridays of the year, whereon our Lord, the Bridegroom and Head of his Church,
was taken off by a bitter death upon the Cross. It is therefore but meet and
just, that all true Members of this Head should fast, and pray, and be humbled
for their Sins on that day especially, whereon the Son of God so sadly suffered
and sorrowed for the Sins of the world.

Friday Meditations.
I. Part of LXIX. Psalm paraphrased.
Verse 13. LORD, I make my prayer unto thee in an acceptable time.] Now is the
acceptable time, now is the day of Salvation* even the day whereon for us men,
and for our Salvation, the Blessed Son of God was crucified unto death.

14. Hear me, O God, in the multitude of thy mercies:] against the multitude of
my Sins, which require a multitude of mercies to pardon them: [even in the
truth of thy Salvation.] which on this day was so dearly purchased with the
precious Blood of the Son of God, as a Lamb without spot.

15. Take me out of the mire,] of all my sinful pollutions, and of all
exorbitant lusts, both secular and sensual, [that I sink not:] under the weight
and pressure of them: [O let m^ be delivered from them that hate me,] meaning
chiefly the Devil and his angels, and all the enemies of my Soul, [and out of
the deep waters.] the rising waves of my unruly Passions, and the waters of
Trouble and Affliction which issue thence.

16. Let not the water-floud] of iniquity, which overflows the face of the
earth, [drown me,] with the rest of evill-doers, [neither let the deep swallow
me up:] the deep abyss of Death, the wages of Sin: and let not the pit shut her
mouth upon me.] so as that I arise not out of the gulf of Sin and Death, to
the life of Grace and Glory.

17. Hear me, O Lord, for thy lo^^^ kindness is comfortable:] It Is the (...) and
fountain, life and soul of (...) consolation, at all times, and in (...)
conditions, both prosperous and adverse: [turn thee unto me] not for any worth
that is in me to attract thy loving kindness, but [according to the multitude
of thy mercies.] which are ever manifested to all them who truly turn unto thee.

18. Hide not thy face from thy servant;] as angry and displeased for the
alienations of my heart from thee, and negligence in thy service; [for I am in
trouble:] troubled for my Sins and frequent backslidings; and the sacrifice of
God is a troubled spirit; a broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not
despise: [O haste thee, and hear me.] For if thou make as though thou hear
not, I shall be like them that go down into the pit.

19. Draw nigh unto my Soal, and save it:] who for the Salvation of my Soul
did this day humble thy self unto death, even the cursed death of the Cross:
by the Merits and efficacy of which Cross and Passion [O deliver me,] from all
mine offenses, [because of mine enemies.] that they triumph not in my confusion.

II. Meditations out of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. LIII.
Verse 4. SVrely he has born our griefs, and carried our serrows: yet we did
esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed.

6. All we like sheep have gone astray: and God has laid upon him the iniquity
of us all.

In the Sufferings of thy Savior, O my Soul, thou may see as in a glass
thine own Deformities and Sins.

The Great Lord over all, Blessed for ever, to be reproached, reviled, scorned,
contemned, and numbered amongst the transgressors, discovers thy false and
uncharitable Judging, Censuring, Condemning, Evil-speaking, Lying and
Slandering, Railing, and Reviling of others.

The blessed Face of Jesus besmeared with Spittle, does remember thee of all
thy unclean Lusts, and of all the filthy Communication that has proceeded out
of thy mouth.

His blessed Mouth embittered with Gall and Vinegar does mind thee of thy
Effeminacy and Luxury, Drunkenness and Gluttony: and his Whipping, of thy
Stubbornness, and Disobedience to the Laws of Heaven.

The King of Glory to wear a Crown of Thorns, and for his Robes of Majesty
only a little Linen to cover his nakedness, declares the iniquity of thy Pride
and Vainglory, the folly of Gay clothing, and all thy vain and foolish
affectation of the Pomps and Vanities of this sinful World.

That Crown of Thorns beaten into his Temples with a Reed, and much rage,
discovers the offensive nature of immoderate Cares of the world, with the sharp
and piercing Vexations issuing thence, which eat up the Consolation of the
heart, and all true sincere Devotion of the spirit --

O sweetest Jesu, let all my Sins be done away through thy Sufferings, which
did both represent, and satisfy for them. Let thy Wounds be a Salve for my
Sin-wounded Soul; and by thy Stripes let her be healed of all her Distempers.
Let thy Bonds discharge that Bond of malediction and woe wherein my Sins have
enwrapt my Soul: and let my Obligation to punishment be cancelled by thy Cross.
Let thy Pains deliver me from the Pains of Hell; and thy Labors procure my
Rest with the Saints in Heaven. Let thy Sorrows purchase the Joys, and thy
Griefs the Pleasures of thy right hand. Let thy Captivity be my Redemption, thy
Humiliation my Exaltation, thy Cross my Crown, and thy Death my Life for ever.

God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world Gal. 6.14.
.

III. Meditations out of the Prophet Jeremy.
IS it nothing to you, Lam. 1.12.
all ye that pass by? behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day
of his fierce anger.

Ob that mine head were waters, Jer. 9.1.
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the
Sufferings of my Savior.

Shall I not weep for him who both wept and bled for me, yea, wept out every
drop of his most precious Blood, to deliver me from weeping and wailing and
gnashing of teeth for ever?

In the natural Body, if one Member suffer, all suffer with it: and it is thus
in the Body mystical also. If I be a lively Member of Christ, his Afflictions
will afflict and pierce my heart; his Passion will excite both compassion and
compunction in my Soul, so as to bewail not my Savior only, but my self and
my Sins also: to bewail my self, and the hardness of my heart, that I cannot
even with a flood of tears bewail my Savior in his Sufferings, nor yet
sufficiently lament and abhor my Sins, the causes thereof.

Upon the Passion of our Lord the veil of the Temple was rent in twain from the
top to the bottom. That Temple mystically represents the Heart of man, which
signifies by its triangular form, that it is framed to be a Temple consecrated
to the thrice-blessed Trinity. But, woe and alas! my Heart is harder then the
stones of that material Temple, and receives not any deep impressions of that
honor and happiness whereunto it was created. Yet if any thing will mollify
its stifness, it must be the precious Blood of my dear Redeemer, which was for
this very end shed upon the Cross. There he bled, whilst he had one drop to
shed; and there together with his precious Blood he poured forth his righteous
Soul with strong cryings and tears, to melt the stony hearts of the sons of men
into tears of Penitence and Devotion, of divine Love and Obedience.

The gaping Wounds of my dear Lord are as so many Mouths opened to show forth
the bowels of his Compassion: and through the hollow of his pierced Side may
the devout Soul behold with the eye of faith his broken Heart flaming with the
love of Man, and dying for love.

O senseless ungrateful Soul, who art not wounded with the Wounds of thy
Savior; who art not thoroughly pierced with the dart of his Love, who was
pierced to the heart for the love of thee; whose mouth is not continually
opened in the praise of him, all whose Wounds were as so many mouths praising
the Lord for thy Redemption!

I am surely bound, deeply engaged to love, to honor, to obey, and wholly to
live unto him, who died for me; even to give up my self, my whole self, all
that I am, and all that I have, to his service, who gave up his whole self,
every member of his Body, every power of his Soul, every drop of his Blood, a
Sacrifice for my Sins.

And the very God of peace sanctify me wholly to his service: And I pray God my
whole spirit, and Soul and body, may be preserved blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

CHAP. IV. Saint Augustine 's Recommendation of the Passion of Christ unto God
the Father.
BEhold, Holy Father, thy Blessed Son suffering for me great and grievous
things. Regard, most glorious King, who it was that suffered, and remember in
mercy for whom he suffered. Is not this He, (my Lord,) even that Innocent one,
whom, to redeem a Servant, thou offeredst up being a Son? Is not this He, even
that Author and Giver of Life, who was led as an innocent Lamb to the
slaughter, and became obedient unto thee even unto death, and feared not to
undergo the most bitter of all deaths? Is not this He, whom thou (the dispenser
of all Salvation) did beget from all eternity, but in fullness of time would
have him partaker of my infirmity? This is truly thy Deity, who has put on my
mortality, who was lifted up on the Cross, and in my flesh suffered that sad
punishment of a cursed death. Look back (O Lord my God,) with the eyes of thy
Majesty upon this unspeakable work of mercy. Behold thy sweet Son in all the
parts of his Body extended and rackt. See his innocent Hands flowing with his
precious blood; and pardon in great mercy the iniquities which my wicked hands
have committed. Consider his naked Side pierced with a cruel spear; and renew
me in the sacred Font, which I believe to have issued thence. Behold those
immaculate Feet, which never stood in the way of sinners, but always walked in
the Law of the Lord, cruelly bored and transfixed with nails: remove far from
me the way of iniquity, and make me to choose the way of truth, to hate and
decline the ways of the ungodly, and to walk in the paths of thy Commandments.
O hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

I beseech thee, O King of Saints, by him who is the chief of Saints, my
Blessed Redeemer, make me to run the way of thy Commandments; that I may be
united unto him, who abhorred not to be clothed with my flesh. Behold, most
merciful Creator, the Humanity of thy beloved Son, and have mercy upon the
infirmity of thy frail creature. His naked Breast is white and wan, his pierced
Side red and bloody, his distorted Bowels wither, his splendid Eyes do
languish, his majestic Countenance is pale, his procerous Arms are stiff and
cold, his marble Thighs hang down, whilst his precious Blood like water bedews
his Feet.

Behold the punishment of God made Man, and relax the misery of created man:
consider the sufferings of the Redeemer, and forgive the sins of the redeemed.
This is He, my Lord, whom thou have stricken for the sins of thy people;
although he be thy beloved Son, in whom thou art well pleased. This is He, who
knew no sin, neither was any guile found in his mouth; and yet he was numbered
amongst the Transgressors, and bore the sins of many.

CHAP. V. Saint Ambrose 's Commemoration of our Savior's Passion.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, the Creator and Redeemer of
all mankind, we give thee thanks, unworthy though they be, yet desire they may
be devout and acceptable to thee, who for us miserable sinners came down from
Heaven, and tookest flesh of the blessed Virgin Mary: of her thou vouchsafedst
to be born; to be wrapped in swadling-cloaths, and laid in a manger; to suck the
breasts; to be circumcised in thy tender flesh; to be manifested to the Wise
men, and adored by them; to be presented in the Temple; to be carried into
Egypt; to return into thy country; to be subject to thy parents; to be
baptized by John; to be afflicted with a forty days fast; and thrice to be
tempted of the Devil; to be wearied with journeys, and macerated by hunger and
thirst and watchings, to be tired with preaching; to weep for compassion; to be
rejected of the Jews, and frequently abused by them.

Thy Passion approaching, thou vouchsafedst to be heavy and exceeding
sorrowful; to pray, not only with bended knees, but thrice to fall upon thy
face, to be in a bitter Agony, and to sweat drops of blood; to be betrayed by
Judas with a deceitful kiss; to be apprehended by the Jews, and bound as a
thief; to be left desolate and alone, for all thy Disciples forsook thee and
fled.

To be led to Annas the High Priest first, and there to be buffeted; to be sent
by him bound to Caiaphas, and there to be many ways derided; to be brought
before the council of the Jews, and there to be falsely accused and condemned;
to have thy face polluted with spittings, to be provoked by manifold
repro^ches, to be scorned, and blasphemed, and again smitten on the face and
buffeted; to be delivered bound unto Pilate, and before him vehemently accused
unto death, and by him to be sent unto Herod, and there to be calumniated, and
set at naught by him and his men of war; to be arrayed in white, and sent back
unto Pilate; by his command to be bound to a pillar, and cruelly scourged unto
blood; to be by him condemned, and delivered up to the soldiers to be
crucified: by whom thou wast mocked with a purple garment, and pierced with a
Crown of thorns, derided with a Reed in stead of a Regal scepter, and with
bowing of knees named in contempt, The King of the Jews; again the third time
bespattered with spittle, and buffeted, and beaten with a Reed on thy head;
laden with the weight of thy Cross, and led away to the place of thy Passion;
there again stripped naked of thy garments, and proffered to drink Gall mingled
with Myrrh.

At last thou wast extended on the Cross, thy hands and feet transfixed with
nails, crucified amongst thieves, numbered amongst transgressors, blasphemed
both by them that stood by and by them that passed by; and in the extremity of
thy sufferings criedst out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Thy head
bowed down, thou did give up the ghost; and thy Side was pierced by a
Soldier, whence issued both water and blood. Taken down from the Cross, and
buried by Joseph, the third day thou did rise again, and appear to thy
disciples. The fortieth day thou ascendedst into Heaven; and sitting on the
right hand of God the Father, thou did send down the promise of the Holy
Ghost upon thy blessed Apostles and Disciples; and shall come again to
Judgment, to render to all men according to their works done in the body,
whether they be good, or whether they be evil.

O Blessed Lord Jesus, by all these thy most sacred Sufferings, by thy bitter
death and most precious blood shed for us, and by all things foretold of thee
and fulfilled by thee, vouchsafe in great mercy to deliver me, a sordid sinner,
with all my friends and enemies, parents, brothers, sisters, all that are poor
and desolate, tempted and afflicted, bound and imprisoned, with all Christian
people. From all our tribulations and distresses, from the snares of the Devil,
from the bonds and chains of our Sins, and from all evils both of Soul and
body, good Lord, deliver, save and defend us.

All our imaginations and actions vouchsafe so to dispose and order, that they
may be acceptable unto thee: fill us with thy grace, and with holy peace, and
with all virtue; and grant us herein to persevere even unto death; that making
a good end of this present life, thou may bring us to eternal life in thy
celestial Kingdom, where thou live and reignest --

CHAP. VI. Saint Gregory 's Prayers upon the Passion of Christ.
I. I Adore thee, Holy Lord Jesus, hanging upon the Cross, and bearing on thy
venerable head a Crown of Thorns: and I humbly beg, by thy Cross, to be
delivered from the destroying Angel.

II. I Adore thee, Holy Lord Jesus Christ, expanded on the Cross, with five
great wounds in thy nailed hands and feet, and pierced side: and I humbly beg,
that thy dire and ghastly wounds may be a healing remedy to my sin-sick Soul.

III. I Adore thee, Holy Lord Jesus, panting under the sad weight of the sins
of the world: and I humbly beg, by that unconceivable bitterness of sorrow thy
innocent Soul suffered in that moment when it left the body, have mercy upon my
Soul in the memert of her departure hence.

IV. I Adore thee, Holy Lord Jesus, laid in the Sepulcher, and anointed with
Myrrh and Aloes: and I humbly beg that thy death may be the life of my Soul.

V. O Save, Holy Jesus, the good Shepherd, who laid down his life for his
Sheep, save and preserve the righteous, call home the wicked, justify the
penitent, have mercy upon all true believers, and upon me a miserable sinner.
Amen.

CHAP. VII. The Form of Prayer used by our Lord upon the Cross, viz. the XXII.
Psalm paraphrased.
Verse 1. MY God, my God,] So prayed my dear Redeemer hanging upon the Cross;
the gemination of his words expressing both the great Devotion and also the
bitter Anguish of his Soul; [look upon me;] imploring divine commiseration and
assistence in the sufferings of his humane nature. [why have thou forsaken me?]
That Is the height of sorrow and suffering, to be therein forsaken: as if the
personal union of his divine and humane nature were dissolved. [and art so far
from my health,] not affording the least mitigation of my tormenting pains, or
consolation therein, [and from the words of my complaint? or, the voice of my
roaring? for with strong crying and tears I offer up my prayers and
supplications Heb. 5.7.
.

2. O my God,] I will never cease to call thee so, though now thine indignation
for the sins of the world lies heavy upon me, so that though [I cry in the
daytime,] in the which I suffer the torments of crucifixion, [yet thou hear
not:] so as to deliver me from them: [and in the night-season also] when I was
in a bitter agony, sweating drops of blood under the pressure of the Sins of
men, and thy wrath for them, in both seasons and sad sufferings [I take no
rest.] no ease of my Soul's sorrows, no cessation of my bodily torments.

3. And thou continuest holy,] just and faithful in all thy promises of mercy
to the miserable: or, [thou dwell in thy holy one,] in this holy and
innocent body of mine, though nailed to the cross. So we read, God was in
Christ reconciling the world 2 Cor. 5.19.
. [O thou worship of Israel.] who have so often delivered thy people, and been
made both the subject matter of their prayers and praises, and only object of
their divine adoration and worship.

4. Our fathers] after the flesh, the Patriarchs and Prophets of old, [hoped in
thee:] and when they did so, when sincerely and without hypocrisy [they
trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them.] as from the Egyptian bondage and
Babylonian captivity, and from all their enemies on every side: figuring
thereby the great deliverance and redemption of mankind by my present
Sufferings for their Sins.

5. They called upon thee,] as the only anchour of their hope amidst the
raging waves of worldly tribulations, [and were helped:] either supported in
their distresses, or delivered from them: [they put their trust in thee, and
were not confounded.] or frustrated in their expectation of a sure and
seasonable succor and defense.

6. But as for me,] who now call upon thee in distress, [I am a worm,] framed
of the dunghill nature of Adam by the supernatural operation of the Holy Ghost
upon my Virgin Mother, without any carnal lust or copulation; as the worm has
its being out of the dung of the earth, without any mutual coition, by the
sole heat of the Sun; [and no man:] not made man after the same manner with
others: and as a worm that is trodden on and despised, so am I [a very scorn of
men,] who have spitten on me, reviled, reproached, derided, whipped, buffeted,
and in all respects used me as [the outcast of the people.] who have judged me
more unfit to live then Barabbas, a thief, a rebel, and a murderer.

7. All they that see me, laugh me to scorn; they shoot out their lips, and
shake their heads,] So we read, And they that passed by reviled him, wagging
their heads, saying, He saved others, himself he cannot save Matt. 27.39, 42.
: [saying,] in derision,

8. He trusted in God, that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, if he
will have him.] So says the sad story of our Savior's suffering Matt. 27.43.
. Thus have they rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my good will. But
though I be thus evil entreated by sinful men, yet thou, Lord,

9. Thou art he that took me out of my mother's womb:] 'Twas by thee alone,
(for none but a supernatural Divine power could effect it,) that I was both
made man, and born of a woman: [thou wast my hope when I hanged yet upon my
mother's breasts.] my refuge, my support in my infancy as Man; who art my
Father from all eternity as God.

10. I have been left unto thee ever since I was born:] my Humane nature being
united unto the Person of the Son of God from the first moment of my
conception: [thou art my God even from my mother's womb.] when I was conceived
without any other father but thy power sanctifying the Virginwomb of my mother;
and have ever since lived, and am now ready to die, in obedience to thy most
holy will.

11. O go not from me,] by withdrawing thy Divine assistence, [for trouble is
hard at hand:] the inveterate malice of my persecuting enemies and my
tormenting pains bespeak my near-approaching death: [and there is none to help
me.] in that bitter agony, besides thee, O Lord: for vain is the help of man;
and the nearest of my friends and followers have also now forsaken me and fled:
in whose room

12. Many oxen are come about me:] people who have cast off the yoke of
Obedience to God's most holy Laws, being luxuriant in their opinions, and
licencious in their conversation: by such I was apprehended, hurried away,
hooted at and reviled, falsely accused, and cried down by their loud clamours
against me: [fat bulls of Basan] the Highpriests, rich and fat men of the
world, swollen with their pomp and wealth, armed with power like unto horned
bulls, [close me in on every side.] By their counsels and conspiracies, votes
and suffrages, they have so enfettered me, that there was no way left to escape
their rage and malice.

13. They gape upon me with their mouths;] some falsely accusing, some
ironically deriding, some maliciously reproaching, some unjustly censuring and
condemning me; and all crying out, Crucify him, crucify him; [as it were a
ramping and a roaring lion.] greedily and fiercely yelling over his prey: so
eagerly do they thirst after the blood of my Soul, and that now is in their
power; for

14. I am poured out like water;] so is my Blood poured out of all my veins,
flowing from my nailed Hands and Feet, pierced Side, and from my Head crowned
with thorns, which eat into my temples. And may this precious blood, like
water, wash off the pollutions of my Soul, soften the hardness, moisten the
dryness, and make fertile the barren ground of my Heart, to be capable of the
great benefits my dear Redeemer purchased with his Blood. [all my bones are out
of joint:] through the violent distension of my Members on the Cross: and yet
far greater are the sufferings of my Soul, for [my heart also in the midst of
my body is even like melting wax.] even molten in the fiery furnace of God's
wrath for the Sins of the world, whose indignation like fire consumes and eats
up all consolation within me.

15. My strength is dried up like a potsheard,] That radical humor which
supplies the strength of the body is exhausted through the effusion of my
Blood, and dislocation of my bodily Members, [and my tongue cleaves to my
gums:] through the drought, pain and weakness of my tortured Body: [and thou
shall bring me into the dust of death.] By my Death and Burial in the dust of
the earth my Sufferings will be completed. And this cannot be avoided,

16. For many dogs] persons who bark and devour, not out of conscience or love
of the Truth, but out of custom and malice: such [are come about me:] they
encompass me, to rend and tear in pieces both my good name, liberty, and life
it self: [the council of the wicked lays siege against me.] So we read, The
chief priests and elders took counsel against Jesus; to put him to death Matt.
27.1.
: and this both shameful and painful; for

17. They pierced my hands and my feet;] Through the palms of my Hands and the
plants of my Feet, places fullest of nerves, and most capable of sense, have
they nailed me to the Cross; but first with the greatest violence, and to the
utmost extent, my Arms and Legs were expanded, so that [I may tell all my
bones:] for they start through my flesh, through the violent distension
thereof; and this to the great astonishment of all that behold my torments: for
[they stand staring and looking upon me.] The tormenting punishment renders me
so misshapen, distorted, and deformed, as makes all the spectatours gaze and
wonder. But it is more with bodily then spiritual eyes: They see not, neither
do they understand me aright, though I thus suffer for their sins.

18. They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.] So did
the Soldiers with the garment of our Lord's natural Body; and so do Heretics
and Schismatics with his mystical Body the Church.

19. But be not thou far from me, O Lord:] so as to leave me altogether
destitute of consolation in my present distresses; nor yet to leave me buried
in the grave to see corruption with other men, and not to rise again till (...)
general Resurrection: [thou art (...) succor;] It Is thy promise of succor I
rely upon; [haste thee to help me.] finishing my Sufferings by Death, and the
Redemption of the world by my Resurrection from death to life.

20. Deliver my soul from the sword.] from that death which by the sword and
violence of wicked men is inflicted: [ and my darling, or dear and only one,]
Such was the Soul of Christ, dear, because innocent and free from Sin; and the
only one, that is, absolutely so: such is the Church of Christ, dear unto him,
without spot; and only one, as united in its Members. [from the power of the
dog.] from such who without reason bark and devour: (August.) or, from the
power of Hell, which greedily devours like a dog all that descend into it.
(Lyra.)

21. Save me from the lion's mouth;] out of the jaws of the Devil, which are
open ever to swallow up all departing Souls into death eternal. But by thy
assistence I shall overcome the tyrant, and swallow up Death in victory. [thou
have heard me also] answered my prayers by thy deliverance of me [from amongst
the horns of the unicorns.] such as lifted up the horn of pride and fierceness
against me, and extolled themselves (August.) as if there were none like them.

And thus far (says Cassiodore) our Lord expostulates his Sufferings by way of
Prayer: The fruit of his Passion follows; which is in general the Glory of
God's name. 22. I will declare thy name] thy might and thy Majesty, thy
greatness and thy goodness, in my Passion and Resurrection especially
manifested [unto my brethren:] to my Apostle and Disciples, and they to others.
F^^ the word was first spoken by the Lord and was confirmed to us by them the^
heard him Heb. 2.2, 3.
. [in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee.] publicly and in the
Temple of the Lord, where every man speaks of his honor.

23. O praise the Lord, ye that fear him:] Ye that have any respect to the
worship of the Lord, lift up you voice in the congregation, and both with
Priest and people praise the Lord: [magnify him, all ye of the seed of Jacob,
and fear him, all ye of the seed of Israel.] even all whom he has chosen to be
his people, whether Jews or Gentiles. So they are distinguished, Ye men of
Israel, and ye that fear the Lord, i. e. from amongst the Gentiles Act. 13.16.
. To both, even to all you it appertains to praise the Lord, for the Redemption
of the world by his Son Jesus Christ; who although he was despicable in the
eyes of men, yet is far otherwise in the eyes of the Lord: for

24. He has not despised nor abhorred the low estate of the poor;] Though born
in a poor condition; lived a poor life; more poor yet in his death, being
stripped naked of all, even to a little linen to cover his nakedness; destitute
of what the poorest enjoy, a buriall-place, for he was buried in a stranger's
sepul chre: yet not despised, but highly exalted, having a Name given above
every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow -- Nor has He ever
despised his brethren, the Members of his body, who conform to his poverty, by
being poor in spirit, humble and meek -- [he has not hid his face from him:]
either through neglect or scorn, as too usually men do to the poor: [but when
he called unto him, he heard him.] as not presuming in himself, but depending
upon God.

25. My praise is of thee, or in thee, For God the Son is praised in the
Father, and the Father in the Son, [in the great congregation:] both of the
Church militant here below, and triumphant above. And that thy praise may be
perfected in and by me, [my vows will I perform] The vows of our Blessed Lord
were, to offer up his Soul a Sacrifice for Sin, and to give his holy Body and
Blood to be the food of devout Souls in the Blessed Eucharist: and this to be
publicly performed, even [in the sight of them that fear him.] And only for
such is that Blessed Feast prepared: not for the proud, stubborn, and
disobedient; but for

26. The poor] The humble and penitent Souls, and such as have abjured the
Pomps and Vanities of this wicked world; such [shall eat and be satisfied:]
because they hungered and thirsted after righteousness: [they that seek after
the Lord] in all humility and devotion [shall praise him;] because he is found
of them that seek him, and shows himself to such as distrust him not; [your
heart shall live for ever.] The life of your heart is the joy thereof, which is
both begot and maintained unto perpetuity by the Bread of life. He that eats
this bread shall live for ever Jeh. 6.51.
.

27. All the ends of the world] The inhabitants of the utmost corners of the
earth [shall remember themselves,] in the remembrance and adoration of their
Creator and Redeemer, [and be turned unto the Lord:] from the service of the
creature to the worship of God, over all Blessed for ever. Such, so great and
unspeakable, is the efficacy of our Savior's Passion, as that thereby the
sacred beams of Grace and Truth are displayed over all the world: insomuch that
[all the kindreds of the nations] of what tribe, family, nation, sect or
condition soever, [shall worship before him.] fall down before his footstool,
and adore him as the great Redeemer of the world, and Prince of the holy
Catholic Church.

28. For the Kingdom is the Lord's:] Or, Dominion over all the people of the
earth is given to the Lord Christ who has a Name written on his vesture and on
his thigh, King of kings, and Lord of lords Rev. 19.16.
: [and he is the Governor among the people.] even all true Christian people,
among whom and over whom he sways his Scepter of righteousness by his Holy Word
and by his Holy Spirit.

29. All such as be fat upon earth] spiritually fat, or grown in Grace and
Holiness; temporally fat, abounding in wealth and power, the Princes and
Potentates of the earth, says the Chaldee Paraphr. [have eaten and
worshipped.] adoring the Lord for that he feeds them with his Divine Gifts and
Graces.

30. All they who go down into the dust] whose bodies are buried in the grave
[shall kneel before him:] prostrate themselves unto him, who vouchsafed to give
himself, both Soul and Body, a Ransom for their Sins: for being all dead in
Sin, [no man has quickened his own soul.] That was and is effected only by
the meritorious Death of the Lord of Life. And such as are quickened, even

31. My seed] whose Life in grace is the fruit and issue of my Death: of which
seed it is said, When thou shall make his Soul an offering for Sin, he shall
see his seed Isa. 53.10.
, even the fruits of his Passion, devout Believers, who [shall serve him:] or,
keep his holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of their
life: [they shall be counted unto the Lord for a generation.] being regenerated
by Water and the Holy Ghost in Baptism; whereby they are made Members of
Christ, Children of God, and Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven.

32. They shall come,] being admitted into the glorious Communion of his
blessed Saints, [and the Heavens] both above and below, both the Church
Triumphant and Militant, [shall declare his righteousness] His Mercies
promised, and performed in the Redemption of the world, shall be proclaimed to
all succeeding generations, [to a people that shall be born,] new born in and
through all the Ages of the Church, [whom the Lord has made.] his own peculiar
people, whose mouths are filled with his praise for ever, saying, Glory be to
God the Father --
As it was in the beginning --


In the Greek Liturgy the people pray in the words of the Thief upon the Cross,

Lord, remember us in thy Kingdom. The Priest answers,

God be mindful of every one of us in his Kingdom both now and always for ever
and ever. Amen. In the Mozarabick Liturgy.
I. By the wood of a Tree was Adam banished out of Paradise; and from the Tree
of wood, the Cross, the Thief that was crucified with our Lord ascended into
Paradise. The one by eating the forbidden Fruit transgrest the Law of his
Maker: the other confessed Christ in his Crucifixion to be the Lord of Heaven,
saying, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom.

II. Grant unto us, O Lord, the Repentance of the Thief upon the Cross; and
grant that we may with the like Faith call upon thee our Lord of great and much
mercy, saying, Lord, remember us in thy Kingdom.

III. Lord, thou have made us in the image of thine ineffable Glory, which we
have much defaced by the black marks of our many Falls: have mercy upon the
work of thine hands, sanctify us of thy great goodness, and restore us to our
much-desired Country, the celestial Paradise. Lord, remember us in thy Kingdom.

CHAP. VIII. Meditations and Prayers preparatory to the Blessed Sacrament on
Saturday-night or Sundaymorning before.
I.
THOU art now invited, O my Soul, to such a Banquet as Heaven and Earth affords
not the like. It Is the precious Body and Blood of thy dear Redeemer, which he
first gave to be the price of thy Redemption, and now gives again to be thy
food and nourishment.

Teach me, O Lord, by thy Holy Spirit, Out of St. Ambrose.
to understand and believe, and ever to conceive and speak of those great and
wonderful Mysteries (and this day to receive the same) with that Faith and
Esteem, Humility and Contrition, holy Desires and Resolutions, Reverence and
Devotion, as may please thee, and conduce to my Soul's Salvation.

Empty my heart of all vain, idle, wandering Thoughts, and of all filthy and
unfruitful Lusts. Take from me this Heart of stone, and give me an heart of
flesh, a soft and melting heart, to fear thee, love thee, honor thee, delight
in thee, and so to follow thee, that I may be for ever happy in the enjoyment
of thee.

II.
O Holy crucified Jesus, Out of St. Aug. Man. ca. 11.
I humbly beg, by that sacred effusion of thy most precious Blead, give unto
thy Servant the effusion of Tears, with compunction of spirit, when I approach
thine Altar, to partake of that celestial Sacrament, worthy of all Reverence,
and the most inflamed Devotion, which thou, O Lord God, did institute, and
command to be received, in commemoration of thine infinite Love in dying for
us, and for the reparations of our manifold infirmities and daily failings.

Grant me, Blessed Lord, Out of T. Aquin.
not only to receive that Sacrament in the outward Elements, but in the virtue
and power thereof; not Bread and Wine alone, but the Body and Blood of my
Jesus, to the Remission of all my Sins, and to all other the Benefits of his
Death and Passion for me.

III.
The whole need not a Physician, Out of T. Aquin.
but they that are sick: And such am I, a diseased sin-sick Soul; and as sick I
now go to my Physician; as a Sinner, to the Redeemer of fallen Man; as
miserable, to the Father of Mercy; as unclean, to the fountain of Purity; as
poor and needy, to the Lord of all Bounty; as blind and ignorant, to the
Brightness and splendor of Spirits; as infirm and weak, to the Strength of
Israel. And oh that it may please thee to enlighten my Darkness, to heal all my
Infirmities, to enrich my Poverty, to strengthen my Weakness, to wash away all
my Uncleanness, and by the Communion of thy precious Body and Blood to cleanse
me from all Filthiness both of flesh and spirit, that I may perfect holiness in
the fear of the Lord.

IV.
Thou did offer up thy self, Out of Tho. a Kempis.
Blessed Jesus, even thy whole self, upon the Altar of the Cross, a Sacrifice
for my Sins; no Member of thy Body not tormented, no Power of thy Soul not
sacrificed, no Drop of thy Blood not shed for me a miserable Sinner. It Is
therefore most just and meet, and my bounden Duty, that I should offer up my
self, my whole self, to thee and to thy service: for I am not mine own, being
bought with a price; and such a price as transcends the value of all that the
whole Heavens and Earth afford beside.

Whatever I offer unto thee, O Lord, though it be all that I do enjoy in the
world, with my Prayers for all, it will not be accepted without the offering of
my self: for it is not mine, but me, not all that is without me, but all that is
within me thou requirest, as the price of thy self to be enjoyed.

Receive me, O Lord, in the devout Participation of thy most holy Body and
Blood, whereunto I am now invited.

Guard me, O Lord, with the pious custody and strong defense of thy holy Angels
invisibly present, and assistent in the transaction of those tremend Mysteries
of Godliness and Salvation; that the enemies of all that is holy and good may
be thence driven back with shame and confusion.

In all the holy Actions of that sacred celestial Service make me sensible of
the sweetness of thy presence with me: that I may taste and see how gracious
the Lord is Psalm. 34.8.
, be satisfied with the plenteousness of thy house, and drink of thy pleasures
as out of a river. For with thee is the Well of life, and in thy light shall we
see light Psalm. 36.8, 9.
.

O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me, and bring me to thy
holy hill, and to thy dwelling: and that I may go unto the Altar of God, even
the God of my joy and gladness: and upon the harp (with my heart) will I give
thanks unto thee, O God my God Psalm. 43.3, 4.
.

The CXI. Psalm.
Verse 1. I Will give thanks unto thee, O Lord; with my whole heart God must be
worshipped not with the lips alone, nor alone in the closet; but both with
heart and voice, both secretly and in the Congregation.
; secretly among the faithful, and in the congregation not in the Conventicles
of Heretics and Schismatics, but in the Congregation of the faithful.
.

2. The works of the Lord are great; sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein whose delight it is to study and meditate upon the greatness of God
apparent in his works.
.

3. His work is worthy to be praised and had in honor: and his righteousness
endures for ever wherein to the honor of God his righteousness is as himself
unchangeable and everlasting.
.

4. The merciful and gracious Lord has so done his mavelous works, that they
ought to be had in remembrance Though the Lord be mavelous in all his works,
yet of his grace and mercy he has therein observed such an excellent order,
that we might remember and recount them to his praise and glory.
.

5. He has given meat to them that fear him: he shall ever be mindful of his
covenant In remembrance of the Covenant of grace he has made with his people,
he feeds them with celestial meat, even the Sacrament of his Holy Body and
Blood.
.

6. He has showed his people the power of his works: that he may give them the
heritage of the heathen by the power and virtue whereof, we, who were heathens,
are entitled to the heritage of Heaven.
.

7. The works of his hands are verity and judgment: all his Commandments are
true Christ is Truth to them who worthily receive him, but Judgment to the
unworthy.
.

8. They stand fast for ever and ever: and are done in truth and equity And
this being true and equitable, shall never fail of its due accomplishment.
.

9. He has sent Redemption to his people, he has commanded his Covenant for
ever: Holy and reverend is his Name God's holy and reverend Name is to be for
ever magnified, for the Redemption of his people in the Blood of his Son, which
is sealed and applied in the Blessed Eucharist, to stand as an everlasting
Covenant betwixt God and man.
.

10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom The first part of this
Covenant is the beginning of Wisdom, viz. to fear the Lord, and to depart from
evil, or to renounce the Devil and all his works, the Pomps --
: a good understanding have all they that do thereafter: the praise of it
endures for ever They are truly wise who frame both their hearts and lives by
this rule of Divine fear, the praise whereof is everlasting.
.

Glory be to the Father, and --
As it was in the beginning --
The Prayers.
I. THou art worthy, O Lord, to be praised and had in honor for all thy
mavelous works; but most to be admired for thy grace and mercy in the
Redemption of thy people by the Blood of thine own dear Son, whom thou have
also given to be meat unto them that fear thee. Be ever mindful, O Lord, of
this thy Covenant of grace; and grant that I may ever receive the Blessed
Sacrament, which is the Seal thereof, in verity, and not unto judgment; nor to
my condemnation, but unto the attainment of the heritage of Heaven through
Jesus Christ --

II. Vouchsafe, O Lord, to pierce my heart with such an awful fear of thy
Name, which is holy and reverend, that I may not dare to offend thee, by
transgressing the least of thy Commandments, but carefully, conscienciously and
constantly do thereafter; that I may be admitted into the blissful Society of
those happy Souls, the praise of whose innocence and holiness endures for
ever, through Jesus Christ --

Praefatio ad Orationem Dominicam ex Liturgia S. Basilii ante Communionem
Corporis -- That we may worthily receive the Body and Blood of our Lord, to the
confirming and strengthening of our Souls, let us worthily say that Prayer which
the onely-begotten Son of God has taught us, crying unto heaven with a pure
heart,

Our Father, which art in Heaven, --

You may, if you desire to enlarge your Prayers upon this divine subject, add
Psalm. CXVI. verse 10. to the end, and CXXVIII. and CXLVII. verse 12. to the
end. CHAP. IX. Meditations upon your going to Church, with some short
Directions for your demeanor in the House and in the Service of God.
UPON your going to Church three things will be necessary for you to consider:
1. the condition of the Place whither you are going; 2. the great End of your
going thither; and, 3. how there you are to demean your self. All this you
would consider, if you were going to the Palace of an earthly Prince, who is
but a mortal man, like your self: and you surely have much more reason to
consider these particulars now that you are going unto the Courts of the Lord's
House.

First then, as to the House whither you are going, it is indeed, as to its
Fabric, but like other houses, made of wood and stone: [even as the Lord's Day
is but like other days as to the air and light of Heaven:] But the relative
Holiness of this House, and its eminency above other houses, will appear by the
Names whereby it is called both in the Book and by the People of God.

Under the Law it was called the Tabernacle of the congregation, i. e. the
place of God's meeting with his people; the Temple of the Lord, where he
presents himself to the view of his people sitting betwixt the Cherubims as on
his Throne of state. It Is also called the Sanctuary of the Lord; the House of
God; the Habitation of his Holiness; and the place where his Honor dwells.
All which Names do explain each other, and need no interpretation.

Under the Gospel it is called (...), the Church of God; (...), the Lord's
House; (...), the King's Palace; and Oratorium, the house of Prayer. Any of
which Names (much more all of them together considered) will oblige any man who
has any sense of Religion, to obey that command of God himself, which is not
merely ceremonial and typical, but moral and perpetual, Ye shall keep my
Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary: I am the Lord Lev. 19.30.
.

Secondly, as to the great End of your going to Church, it is, to present your
self before the Lord, and there to adore the great Majesty of Heaven, from whom
you have your life and breath and all things.

It is not to serve your self, by hearing this or the other fine-gifted Minister
tickling your itching ears, by his taking discourses agreeable to your fancy:
but to serve the Lord is your errand to his House, viz. there to join with the
Minister and the Congregation in public Prayers and Praises of God, in Psalms
and Hymns and spiritual Songs, in Confessions, Thanksgivings and Benedictions,
as wherein chiefly the service of God consists.

Behold, now praise the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord; ye that by night
stand in the house of the Lord, even in the Courts of the house of our God.
Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary, and praise the Lord Psalm. 134.1, 2.
.

As for me, I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy name --
Psalm. 138.2.
.

Thirdly, as to your Carriage and Demeanor in the House of God, you are
commanded, Keep thy foot when thou go unto the house of God Eccles. 5.1.
: enjoining thee, 1. to beware of all light, unseemly, indecent and irreverent
carriage, and to show Humility and Devotion in all the Gestures of thy Outward
man: bowing down thy self, and kneeling before the Lord thy Maker Psalm. 95.6.
; before him who made both thy Body and Soul, and joined them together, that
they might be joined in his Service. So worshipped the people of God; the whole
congregation bowed themselves with their faces to the ground 2 Chronicles. 7.3.
. And so all good people resolve to do: We will go into his tabernacle, and
fall low on our knees before his footstool Psalm. 132.7.
.

2. The foot of the Inward man must also, and chiefly, be kept upright in the
House of God. Thy Affections are the feet or motions of thy Soul: these must be
kept free from all secular Cares, pure from all sensual Lusts, clean from all
wanton, wicked Inclinations, yea from all Thoughts of any worldly concerns. For
ye cannot serve God and Mammon Matt. 6.24.
.

In the High-priest's forehead was engraven in a plate of gold, Holiness to the
Lord Exodus 28.36.
: and every ordinary Priest was commanded to wash before he entered into the
Sanctuary Exodus 30.19, 20.
: intimating that exact Purity and Holiness which is required of all, both
Priests and people, when we approach the presence of the Lord in his holy
Temple. So says the holy man of God, Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord, for
ever Psalm. 93.5.
: and he resolves accordingly; I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will I
go to thine Altar Psalm. 26.6.
.

Be not slothful and negligent, averse and careless, backward and tardy in
coming to the Church: for many and mischievous are the Consequents of coming
late. For, 1. you rob your self of the opportunity of your private Prayers for
a Blessing upon the public. 2. You lose the benefit of the public Confession
and Absolution, which are of high esteem and value to all who are wisely
Religious. And, 3. to deprive your self wittingly and willingly of any part of
God's public Worship, is both a sin and a loss of so great an account, as
cannot easily be expressed, or will be ordinarily believed.

Against such sinful sloth and neglect, endeavor to have imprinted in your
heart the love of God's House, and of his Service there performed. Say with the
man after God's own heart,

Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine
honor dwells Psalm. 26.8.
.

I was glad when they said unto me, We will go unto the house of the Lord
Psalm. 122.1.
.

Our feet stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem Verse 2.
.

1. When you come to the Church-door,

Consider, that you are now upon entrance into the Presence Chamber of the
Great King of the world, whose Throne of glory is in Heaven above, but his
Throne of grace in his Temple here below. Say then within your self,

Surely the Lord is in this place --

How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the House of God: this is
the Gate of heaven Genesis ^ 16, 17.
.

O how amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of hosts!

My soul has a desire and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord: my
heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God.

Yea the sparrow has found her an house, and the swallow a nest, where she may
lay her young, even thine Altars, O Lord of hosts, my King and my God.

Blessed are they who dwell in thy House: they will be always praising thee
Psalm. 84.1, 2, 3, 4.
.

And most happy were I, could I both esteem it, and make it my greatest joy,
and constant labor of love, to praise the Lord in his Temple.

2. When you are entered, and View the Baptisterion or Font,

Give hearty thanks unto God for your Christendom; that by holy Baptism he has
called you to the state of Grace and Salvation through Jesus Christ: and humbly
beseech God to give you his grace to continue in the same to your life's end,
by the religious observance of that Vow which was so solemnly taken in your
name, the which you must now perform, that you forfeit not the great
privileges, rewards and honors, of being a Member of Christ, a Child of God,
and an Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. When you view the Pulpit,

Remember how many good Lessons you have received thence; the which not being
carefully practiced will rise up in judgment against you in the great Day of
your Trial. Resolve therefore for the future to be a Doer of the Word, and not
a Hearer only, deceiving your own self.

4. When you look up toward the Altar, say,

What reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto
me?

I will receive the Cup of salvation, [offer the sacrifice of Thanksgiving for
my Redemption,] and call upon the name of the Lord.

I will pay my vows unto the Lord in the sight of all his people, in the courts
of the Lord's house; even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise the Lord
Psalm. 116.12, 13, 14, 18, 19.
. Glory be to the Father --
As it was in the beginning --


5. When you come to your Seat, kneeling down, pray,

I. Prayer. Let thy merciful ears, O Lord, be open to the prayers of thy humble
servants: and grant that what we ask faithfully we may obtain effectually
through Jesus Christ --

II. Prayer. O God, forasmuch as without thee we are not able to please thee,
grant that thy Holy Spirit may in all things direct and rule our hearts: and
more especially be assistent to us in all the holy actions of this day through
Jesus Christ --

III. Prayer. And since by reason of our Sins we are unworthy to offer up any
Sacrifice to so pure a Majesty, grant, merciful Lord, both to me, and to all
thy faithful people, pardon and peace: that being cleansed from all our Sins,
we may serve thee with a quiet mind through Jesus Christ --

Directions relating to some parts of the public Worship.
AS soon as the Minister begins with the public Worship, all your private
Meditations and Prayers must be waved, and your mind applied to attend
diligently, and to join devoutly in every part and passage of Divine Service;
considering that this is the great End of your coming to Church, and your
business there is to serve the Lord with your Christian brethren in public.

1. Therefore when the Minister exhorts you, out of the Word of God, to confess
and acknowledge your sins and wickedness, harden not your heart, but with all
possible humility both of Body and Soul say after the Minister in the
Confession of sin: and to this, and to every Prayer, or other act of Divine
Worship, where it is prescribed, neglect not to say Amen: for that is as it were
the seal to confirm to your Soul the Benefits thereof. And the Hebrews have a
saying, that Whosoever says Amen with all his might, opens the doors of
Paradise.

2. After the Confession, when the Minister comes to the words of Absolution,
bow down your head, and say softly in your heart, Lord, let this pardon
pronounced by thy Minister fall upon my Soul, and seal thereunto the
forgiveness of all my sins.

3. The Psalms and Hymns are to be answered verse for verse with the Minister;
that so all may join and bear a part in the Service of God: for in his Temple
does every man speak of his honor Psalm. 29.9.
And (...), although you cannot read, yet your heart may join with them that
do read: and your mouth also may show forth the praise of God, by saying after
every Psalm, Glory be to the Father, and to -- or else, if it fall in course,
As it was in the beginning, is now -- Adding always Amen, to express how
affectionately you desire the glory of God.

4. Be not silent, nor ashamed publicly and audibly to make confession of the
holy Christian Faith, when you are thereunto called by the Minister. For this
is a Duty you owe both to God and Man: it is an act of God's Worship, and a
declaration that you hold the same Faith with all true Christians. And
therefore it is required of you, not only with the heart to believe unto
righteousness, but that with the mouth also Confession be made unto salvation
Romans 10.10.


And when the Confession of Faith is publicly pronounced, do not you sit or
loll, as if it concerned you not, but stand up with the rest of the
Congregation, to signify and declare, that you will stand to this Faith, and
earnestly contend for it, as being the same which was once given to, or by, the
Saints, the holy Apostles.

5. Be not so cold and careless in giving honor to God, as not to bow at the
name of Jesus: for it is a Duty positively commanded, and universally practiced
by the Church and people of God in all Ages. And therefore give no ear to those
deceivable Criticisms, corrupt Glosses, and false Inferences, which are too
frequently, but profanely, urged to make void the commandment of God, in the
omission of this Religious practice. If you hear any such allegations out of
the Pulpit, detest them the rather, that any act of Religious worship should be
spoken against in the place where whatever tends to the honor of God should be
magnified and advanced.

6. That you may not be tired with the length of the Divine Service, consider,
1. the great variety of its several parts, as consisting of Prayers and
Praises, Confessions, Thanksgivings, Invitations, Lessons, Admonitions -- all
of which are with most admirable prudence and Religious wisdom so ordered, and
contrived to follow each other, that so the ending of one, and beginning of
another, may renew and re-enquicken your Devotion cheerfully to join in all.

Remember, 2. whose service it is you are a-doing, and continue therein from
the beginning to the end: that you may reap the benefit of the whole Office,
both of the Absolution in the beginning, and of the Blessing in the end, and of
the Amen's throughout.

CHAP. X. Meditations and Prayers at the Blessed Sacrament.
When you go up to communicate.

COme unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you
Matt. 11.28.
.

Thus calls my Savior upon Sinners: whereunto my heart answers, I come,
Blessed Jesus; in all humility, and deeply sensible of my Sins, I now come unto
thee, to be eased of the burden of them, and to be refreshed with the sense of
thy Mercy, and the truth of thy Salvation.

My heart has talked of thee, [and of thy gracious command,] Seek ye my face:
Thy face, Lord, do I now seek.

O hide not thou thy face from me Psalm. 27.8, 9.
, under the clouds of my Sins; neither let the thick clouds of my
transgressions hinder the light of thy countenance from shining upon thy
servant.

When you kneel down before the Altar.

Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive blessing, and honor, and power; for thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created Rev.
4.11.
.

Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing Rev. 5.12. Out of S.
Chrysostom. Liturgy.
.

But I am unworthy his praise should come within my polluted lips; and much
more unworthy, his precious Body and Blood should be received into my Soul and
unclean mouth.

But since he disdained not to be born in a Stable, and to be laid in a Manger
amongst Beasts Luke 2.7.
; since he vouchsafed to enter into the house of a Leper Matt. 26.6.
, and of a Publican Luke 5.29.
, and to admit the kisses of an unclean Sinner (such as I am) washing his
delicate Feet with her penitent Tears Luke 7.38.
; O vouchsafe, most benign Jesus, to receive me also: reject me not, though a
Sinner, yet thy Servant; though unclean, yet penitent, and now humbling my self
under thy most mighty hand. That it may please thee to remit, to release, to
pardon all my Sins, whether of knowledge or ignorance, whether by thought, word
or deed, committed: that with a pure and clean Soul I may receive thy most
precious Body and Blood.

Prayers out of several other Liturgies, that the devout Reader may have the
more choice, and fix upon the use of such as he feels most enquickening his
Devotion.
Out of S. James's Liturgy.
I. O Lord God, the Bread of Heaven, and Life of the World; I have sinned
against Heaven and before thee, and am not worthy to partake of thy most holy
Mysteries: yet vouchsafe, merciful Lord, to make me worthy by thy grace; that
I may not receive thy Holy Body and Blood to my condemnation, but unto the
remission of my Sins and everlasting life. Amen.

II. I beseech thee, O Lord, Out of the R. B.
that I may so worthily receive those sacred Mysteries of Salvation, as to have
Christ dwelling in my heart, and that it may become the Temple of the Holy
Ghost.

III. In the spirit of Humility and with a contrite heart receive me, O Lord:
and may the Sacrifice which this day I offer up unto thee be accepted, and
please thee, O Lord my God.

IV. Let not the Participation of thy Body, Lord Jesus, which I, too much
unworthy, presume to receive, be unto me for judgment, but effectual through
thy great mercy for the safeguard both of my Mind and Body, and for the healing
of my sin-sick Soul, who live and reignest with the Father --

Out of the Greek Ritual.
I. May what we now offer up unto thee, O Lord, be accepted, for the mercy of
the universal World, for all them for whom Christ offered up himself a
Sacrifice upon the Altar of the Cross, for the glory of thy Name, and for the
coming of the Holy Ghost, that he may please to visit and enlighten my heart.
Amen.

II. As the Offering of righteous Abel, as the Sacrifice of Noah, of Abraham,
of Isaac, -- so let this our Sacrifice be acceptable unto thee, O Lord; and may
the same be so worthily offered by us, and mercifully received by thee, as when
'twas performed by thy holy Apostles. Amen.

III. O God, the King of all, give me, I beseech thee, true Compunction, the
Redemption of my Sins, and the Amendment of my life, who am deeply immersed in
bodily Affections, estranged from thee, and without hopes but in thy great
goodness and saving mercies, Omnipotent Jesus, Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Out of the Mozarabick Liturgy.
I. May the Sacrifice we now offer up unto thy Divine Majesty be effectual for
the Pardon of all our offenses, for the Establishment of the Holy, Catholic
and Apostolic Faith, and for all who religiously profess the same, through
Jesus Christ --

II. Bearing in mind continually the Holy Catholic Church, we pray that the
Lord may be pleased to be propitious hereunto; and by the increase of Faith,
Hope and Charity, to enlarge its limits. We likewise remember all them that are
fallen, all that be in captivity, the infirm and sick, the stranger, the
fatherless and widow, that the Lord would in mercy look upon them, restore,
redeem, heal, comfort and relieve them all, through Jesus Christ --

III. O Holy Trinity, the Storehouse of blessings, vouchsafe to bless, confirm
and strengthen us (all here present before thee:) deliver us from the day of
condemnation, and let us not be confounded when we shall appear before thee,
and in the presence of thy holy Angels; but make us joyful in thy
Resurrection, Blessed Jesus. Keep the Soul of thy Servant the King; and let
Grace and Peace, Charity and Humility flourish in his days, through Jesus
Christ --

IV. Grant, O Lord our God, that we may receive the Body and Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to obtain the Remission of all our Sins, and to be replenished
with thy Holy Spirit, who live and reignest, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one
God over all Blessed for ever.

Out of the Aethiopick Liturgy.
I. Holy, Holy, Holy, thrice Blessed ineffable Lord, grant me to receive the
Blessed Body of my Redeemer not unto judgment, but to all fruitfulness in Good
works, according unto thy will: and that such fruits may remain to thy glory.
Quicken us in thee to do thy will. In faith we call thee Father, and pray, Thy
Kingdom come, Hallowed be thy Name in us and by us; for thou art most
powerful, praiseworthy, and glorious. To thee be glory for ever. Amen.

II. O God, the Governor of Souls, the Guide of the holy, and the Crown of the
just; open mine Eyes now to see thee, mine Ears always to hear thee, and mine
Heart to receive thee. O give me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within
me. And after of thy great grace thou have satiated my Soul with thy Blessed
Body and Blood, give me to understand both thy Greatness and thy Goodness, and
grant that thy holy will may ever be done in my Soul: for thine is the Kingdom,
O Lord. Glory and Blessing be to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for ever.
Amen.

III. Grant me, Blessed Lord, Out of the English Lit.
so to eat the Flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his Blood, that
my sinful Body may be made clean by his most Holy Body, and my Soul washed in
his most precious Blood; that I may evermore dwell in him, and he in me. Amen.

(...) which is the great benefit of the Communion of Saints.

After you have received the consecrated Bread.
The Bread which I have now taken is the Bread which came down from Heaven, and
gives life unto the world.

Oh that I may now feel its efficacy, enquickening and inflaming my Soul with
the heavenly ardours of divine love, having all my Affections set upon things
above, and not upon things below. May this Bread be to my Soul the staff of
strength, whereby I may vanquish all the assaults of the Devil, the World, and
the Flesh, and continue my Lord's faithful Servant and Soldier to my life's
end. Amen.

After the Cup received.
O that this precious Blood of my dear Redeemer may be now both the
Purification and Nourishment of my Soul, the seal of my Pardon and Peace with
God, and the pledge of mine Inheritance in Heaven.

After both.
Grant, Holy Jesus, that as I have now received in faith thy precious Body and
Blood, veiled under the Species of Bread and Wine, I may hereafter behold thy
blessed Face reveiled in Heaven, to eat and drink with thy holy Angels and
Saints in their mansions of bliss; where they are satisfied with the fullness
of the most ravishing delights in the Beatificall vision of the thrice-blessed
Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; of whom, and through whom, and in whom
are all things, and to whom be all glory for ever. Amen.

Out of the Greek Ritual.
We give thee thanks, good Lord, the Benefactour of our Souls, that thou have
this day made us worthy of thy celestial and immortal Mysteries. Vouchsafe, O
Lord, to confirm us in thy fear, to preserve our life, to secure our paths, and
to guide our feet in the way of peace. Amen.

The Song of Simeon.
1. Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy Word.

2. For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation,

3. Which thou have prepared before the face of all people,

4. To be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy people
Israel.

Glory be to the Father --
As it was in the beginning --
Meditations whilst others are communicated.

The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord
God of his fathers; though he be not cleansed according to the purification of
the Sanctuary 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19.
.

Blessed are they who dwell in the House of the Lord, and are fed though it be
but with the crumbs that fall from his Table.

The XXXIV. Psalm is in the Apostolical Constitutions, and in S. Chrysostom 's
Liturgy, appointed to be at this time devoutly prayed.
Verse 1. I Will always give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in
my mouth.

2. My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall hear thereof,
and be glad.

3. O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his Name together.

4. I sought the Lord, and he heard me: yea he delivered me out of all my fear.

5. They had an eye unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not
ashamed.

6. Lo, the poor cries, and the Lord hears him: yea and saves him out of
all his troubles.

7. The Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them.

8. O taste and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts
in him.

9. O fear the Lord, ye that be his Saints: for they that fear him do lack
nothing.

10. The lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they who seek the Lord shall
want no manner of thing that is good.

11. Come, ye children, and hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the
Lord.

12. What man is he that lusts to live, and would fain see good days?

13. Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile:

14. Eschew evil, and do good: seek peace and ensue it.

15. The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous: and his ears are open unto
their prayers.

16. The countenance of the Lord is against them that do evil; to root out the
remembrance of them from off the earth.

17. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them; and delivers them out of
all their troubles.

18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that are of a contrite heart: and will save
such as be of an humble spirit.

19. Great are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out
of all.

20. He keeps all his bones: so that not one of them is broken.

21. But misfortune shall slay the ungodly: and they that hate the righteous
shall be desolate.

22. The Lord delivers the souls of his servants: and all they that put their
trust in him shall not be destitute.

Glory be to the Father --
As it was in the beginning --
The Prayer.
May the praise of the Lord be ever in my mouth: and let us all magnify his
Name together, who do now taste and see how gracious the Lord is: for he has
heard our prayers, enlightened our minds, delivered us from all our fears, and
from all those troubles whereunto our Sins had made us liable.

And oh that the sweet taste of our gracious Lord in this Blessed Sacrament of
his Body and Blood may have its proper influence upon all the Affections of our
hearts and Actions of our lives; that we may henceforth and for ever eschew
evil, and do good; being fruitful in all the good works of Righteousness and
true Holiness, from whence ensue eternal Peace and Happiness through Jesus
Christ --

I have sworn, [vowed in my Baptism, and now again renewed the same Vow,] and
am steadfastly purposed, to keep thy righteous judgments Psalm. 119.106.
.

I am thine: [even now solemnly devoted thine, steadfastly resolved thine:] O
save me, for I have sought thy Commandments Verse. 94.
.

O hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not Psalm. 17.5.
.

O hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that I may daily perform my vows Psalm.
61.8.
.

CHAP. XI. Psalms of Praise and Thanksgiving after the Holy Communion.
The CIII. Psalm.
Verse 1. PRaise the Lord, O my Soul; and all that is within me, praise his
holy Name.

2. Praise the Lord, O my Soul; and forget not all his benefits:

3. Who forgiveth all thy sins, and heals all thy infirmities:

4. Who saves thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and
loving kindness:

5. Who satisfies thy mouth with good things, making thee young and lusty as
the eagle.

6. The Lord executes righteousness and judgment for all them that are
oppressed with wrong.

7. He showed his ways unto Moses, his works unto the children of Israel.

8. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, long-suffering and of great
goodness.

9. He will not always be chiding: neither keeps he his anger for ever.

10. He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
wickedness.

11. But look how high the heaven is in comparison of the earth: so great is
his mercy also toward them that fear him.

12. Look how wide also the East is from the West: so far has he set our sins
from us.

13. Yea, like as a father pitieth his own children; even so is the Lord
merciful unto them that fear him.

14. For he knows whereof we are made: he remembers that we are but dust.

15. The days of man are but as grass: for he flourishes as a flower of the
field.

16. For as soon as the wind goes over it, it is gone; and the place thereof
shall know it no more.

17. But the merciful loving kindness of the Lord endures for ever and ever
upon them that fear him; and his righteousness upon childrens children:

18. Even upon such as keep his covenant, and think upon his commandments to
do them.

19. The Lord has prepared his seat in heaven: and his Kingdom rules over all.

20. O praise the Lord, ye Angels of his, ye that excel in strength: ye that
fulfill his commandment, and hearken unto the voice of his words.

21. O praise the Lord, all ye his hosts: ye servants of his that do his
pleasure.

22. O praise the Lord, all ye works of his, in all places of his dominion.
Praise thou the Lord, O my Soul.

Glory be to the Father, etc. I. It Is not within the power of all the Faculties
of my Soul, worthily to praise the Lord, for that he has now satisfied my
mouth with the good things of Heaven; he has forgiven me all my sins, and
healed the diseases of my Soul; he has renewed my strength as an Eagle, to
mount my Soul unto Heaven upon the sacred wings of holy Faith, firm Hope,
fervent Charity, and by the virtue of that celestial Food I have now received.

II. How great is the goodness, and how great is the mercy of the Lord, who
has not dealt with me after my Sins, nor rewarded me according to my
wickedness! But as a father pitieth his own children, so merciful is the Lord,
and has compassion upon the work of his own hands, and whom he has framed
after his own Image, frail and sinful though we be.

III. But since through the weakness and frailties of my mortal nature I cannot
praise the Lord as becomes his eminent grace and greatness: may my defects
herein be supplied with the Hallelujahs of Angels and Archangels, and all the
company of Heaven. And it is the exultation and joy of my heart, that these
celestial Spirits cease not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God
of hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory: Glory be to God on high. Amen.

Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, who only does wondrous
things.

And blessed be the name of his majesty for ever: and all the earth shall be
filled with his majesty. Amen, Amen Psalm. 72.18, 19.
.

The following Hymn of Ananias, Azarias and Misael, is in some Liturgies
prescribed to be used after the Blessed Eucharist.
Tres pueri jussu Regis missi sunt in fornacem, non timentes flammam ignis; at
dicentes, Benedictus es, Domine: Hallelujah.

Verse 1. O ALL ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and
magnify him for ever By this rhetorical invocation upon all creatures we stir
up our own minds, in, by, and for them all to praise the Lord.
.

2. O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever The Angels are called Morning-stars, for the light of their Understanding,
which most eminently shines in their praises of the Lord, begun in the very
morning of the Creation, and continued to all eternity. Job 38 7. Rev. 4.8.
.

3. O ye Heavens, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever The
heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his -- Psalm. 19.1.
.

4. O ye Waters that be above the firmament, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and
magnify him for ever All creatures, even the most irrational, do praise the
Lord, 1. By Excitement: in that the con^^deration of their vast number, and
distinct nature, their beauty and variety, their use and excellency, their
instincts and operations -- do excite all Angels and all men to revere the
Power, to admire the Wisdom, to adore the Greatness, to love the Goodness, and
to be ravished with the Perfections of the Lord, which do so eminently appear
in all the works of his hands, Romans 1.19, 20. 2. By Obedience: in that all
created Beings do regularly obey the law imposed upon each, both according
unto, and sometimes against their natural inclinations; as in the example of
these Three Children in the fiery furnace not consumed, which is at large
declared Wisdom 16.17, 18, -- 3. By the Benefit and Comfort we receive from
them: which is therefore particularly to be considered upon the mention of
every Creature, that in and for each we may with the more alacrity and devotion
praise the Lord.
.

5. O all ye Powers of the Lord, bless ye the Lord praise him, and magnify him
for ever.

6. O ye Sun and Moon, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

7. O ye Stars of heaven, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

8. O ye Showrs and Dew, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

9. O ye Winds of God, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

10. O ye Fire and Heat, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

11. O ye Winter and Summer, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

12. O ye Dews and Frosts, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

13. O ye Frost and Cold, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

14. O ye Ice and Snow, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

15. O ye Nights and Days, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

16. O ye Light and Darkness, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him
for ever.

17. O ye Lightnings and Clouds, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him
for ever.

18. O let the Earth bless the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

19. O ye Mountains and all Hills, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify
him for ever.

20. O all ye Green things upon the earth, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and
magnify him for ever.

21. O ye Wells, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

22. O ye Seas and Floods, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

23. O ye Whales, and all that move in the waters, bless ye the Lord, praise
him, and magnify him for ever.

24. O all ye Fowls of the air, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him
for ever.

25. O all ye Beasts and Cattle, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify
him for ever.

26. O ye Children of men, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever After all the works of the Lord, Man is excited to praise him, who made
all things for the use of Man, and Man for his praise in the use and
consideration of them.
.

27. O let Israel bless the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever But the
Church and people of God are most specially bound to praise God in his works,
as to whom alone they are sanctified in their use, both natural and divine.
.

28. O ye Priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him
for ever.

29. O ye Servants of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him
for ever It is the constant and common work both of the Priests and people of
God in his Church militant,
.

30. O ye Spirits and Souls of the righteous, bless ye the Lord, praise him,
and magnify him for ever and of his Saints in his Church triumphant, to praise
the Lord. Psalm. 84.4.
.

31. O ye Holy and Humble men of heart, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and
magnify him for ever The humble are encouraged to praise the Lord, because he
has respect to the lowly; but as for the proud, he beholds them afar off.
Psalm. 138.6.
.

32. O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify
him for ever They who have received any signal Deliverances, are engaged to be
the more frequent and servent in praising the Lord, for their Redemption both
general and particular.
.

Glory be to the Father -- The Prayer.
O God, who did miraculously assuage the fury of the fiery Furnace, that it
touched not to harm thy Three Servants when cast thereinto, vouchsafe to allay
all exorbitant heats of Concupiscence in my heart: Let not any vicious fires
inflame my Affections; but quench them all through Faith in the Blood of my
dear Redeemer, and by the sweet influences of thy Holy Spirit, the Breath of
Heaven: and so shall my Soul bless thee, and praise thee, and magnify thy Holy
Name for ever. Amen.

Blessed be the Holy and undivided Trinity now and for evermore. Amen. The End.

