DISCOVERIES. OR An EXPLORATION AND EXPLICATION OF Some Aenigmatical Verities,
hitherto not handled by any Author. viz. In the written Word of God. In the
Commentaries of the Fathers. In the Cabal of the Stoics.
Many choice Inferences, and unheard of (yet considerable) Nicities, never
before Proposed. ALSO, A Seraphick Rhapsodie on the Passion of Jesus Christ our
sole Redeemer.

By S. SHEPPARD.

London; Printed by B. Alsop, near the Upper Pump in Grubstreet. 1652.

To the truly Judicious and eminently learned, JOHN SELDOM, Esquire.
SIR,
WEre not your humanity my Rock, I could not but be thought audacious, (if not
insolent) to make you (learned Sir) Patron to this piece; you, whose works have
carried your name and honor as far as learning has spread her wings; you,
whose smallest pieces, are worth whole volumes of other writers, so that the
ancients have no cause to glory in their Livie, or their Seneca, since the best
of those they so much boast of, are blended in your person, and you are master
of all their perfections: but Sir, I know you will not think your self
disparaged, that I (how mean or unfortunate soever am so bold thus to salute
you, since you know (as well as I) the greatest Monarchs ever yet in power,
have deigned to accept (if I may speak modestly) and refund far unworthier
subjects then these. You know Sir, that Mercury the God of wisdom, has his
house, his exaltation, and his triumph in one and the same sign; nevertheless,
he has greater force and efficacy in his unfortunate one. These Essays (for
the most part) found production in the infamous Goal of Newgate, where (for my
loyalty to the late King) I suffered a severe restraint almost fourteen
months. These Delineations (I am confident) as dull as they are, will seem to
some but as so many night-pieces; they will cry out, that like (the Cuttle
fish, I hide my self too much in my own ink: But to you (most learned Sir) if
I may seem but the least guided by caelestiall adjuvements, and worthy of your
pardon, I have my wish, and shall esteem my self ever obliged, as becomes him
that affectionately honors you, and is,

Sir, The devoted servant of your worth S. SHEPPARD.

To the Peruser.
SOme of my friends (whom I unfeignedly honor for their learning, etc.) have
of late been pleased to tax my studies (referring to somewhat I lately
divulged) as incompatible with my profession, etc. but did they know how meanly
I prize those pieces of frippery, they would suspend their censures; and be
confident, that their Severitia (in that kind) cannot exceed mine* he that
thinks worse of those Rimes then my self, I scorn him; for he cannot: he that
thinks better is a fool. We know that the greatest Kings and Statesmen
sometimes purposely desert their stations, yet not forget who they are, nor
what power they manage. But to let my friends know I can be serious, and
(sitting in Porticu Zenonis) seem as sullen as the sowrest of them, I present
this to public view wherein I have endeavored to stive as much good matter as
I could in a little room (perhaps) to affront partiallity, and opinion (the
Goddess of the world) and beard the Zanzummims of Gyant-wits of the time.
These Issays, and delineations I dedicate only to the judicious: for the
Rabble of misguided Censors, I say --

Hence ye big-buzzing little bodied Gnats;
Ye tatling echoes, huge tongued Pigmy brats:
I mean to sleep; wake not my slumbring brain,
With your malignant weak detracting vein.
S. SHEPPARD.

An Alphabetical Table, Directing to the most material Observations throughout
this Work.
A
Chap. 1. ANgels, that they are not unacquainted with things done here in this
Elementary world. Sect. 2. All shall be saved, the manner how; an old error
newly revived. All of old saved by the same faith, the same allegorically
illustrated. Sect. 3. Apio the Grammarian.
chap. 2, etc. Chap. 3. Adam and Eve lost Paradise by luxurious desires. Chap.
4. An apology for dancing and kissing. Sect. 3. Ambrose his reason why Eliah
fled from the face of Jezabel, yet boldly met Ahab, 1 Kin. 10. Alexander the
Great his continency.
Chap. 5. Anthonies strictness. Ambrose his reason why Joseph left his coat
with his Mistress. Sect. 3. Abraham not so long lived as his son Isaac, the
reason way.
Chap. 6. Sect. 2. Apolinarius his error. Sect. 3. All not capable of a
resurrection, according to the Jewish Rabbis; the names of those they except
against.
Chap. 7. Sect. 2. An account given how the resurrection of our bodies may be
perfected by natural reason. Sect. 3. Angels, that they are always conversant
with us here below, that they join with us in the first Petition of the Lords
Prayer. Sect. 5 Angels, whether Ministerial in Christ's resurrection or not.
Sect. 6. Angels, whether God will not use their aid at the last day in raising
our bodies.

B
chap, 1. etc. Chap. 2. sect. 6. BOdy of man subject to six thousand several
diseases.
Chap. 3. Ba^^^ bemoaning of a valiant (but drunken) Commander. Chap. 4. Sect.
3. Beautiful objects, how dangerous. Chap. 5. Brayding the hair, and painting
the face, how lawful. Sect. 3. Baal-peor, the Idol of the Midianites, why
worshipped by women.
Chap. 6. Bodies assumed or counterfeit receive their full perfection at their
creation. Chap. 7. Blasphemy belched by Overton and his adherents.
C
Chap. 1. sect. 3. CYnocephalia that revived Homer. Canibals, or the craws of
Ravens, though digesting our flesh, not able to hinder the connection of our
bodies. Sect. 4. Conceits of the Jewish Rabbis, concerning Gods three Keys.
Chap. 2. Chrysostomes place in heaven for the ancient heathen Sages. Causabon
upon Baronius. Sect. 5, Covenants between God and Christ, before the creation
of the world.
Chap. 3. Cyrus his defeating the Amazons. Carowse, the naturalizing of the
word amongst us. Chrysostomes observation upon Luke, 13. 45.
Chap. 4. Capitol of Rome besieged, a rare example. Chap. 5. Conjectures why
our Savior opened so many eyes, and unlocked so many ears, Sect. 2. Couzenage
practiced by Jacob.
Chap. 7. Sect. 2. Christ's resurrection powerful in reference to us. Sect. 4.
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, how equitably punished. Sect. 6. Curious enquiries
concerning the resurrection of our bodies.

D
Chap. 1, etc, Chap. 2. Sect. 3. Distinction in the Joy of the Angels.
Chap. 3. Devils lodged in every grape, according to the Alchoran. Chap. 4.
Doves engender at their mouths. Sect. 4. Defense of some Authors.
Chap. 5. Sect. 2. Dambo the Hermit. Sect. 3. Dalilah, Sampsons missresse
dreadful in her very name. Dionisius the elder of Sicilie, his colloquie with
his son.
Chap. 6. Damnable heresy, broached by Manicheus, and Marion. Chap, 7.
Dullness and stupidity in the wisest of the Heathen in reference to true saving
knowledge. Sect. 2. Disciples of Christ, how unlikely it was that they should
steal away the body of their dead master. Sect. 4. Destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah by fire and brimstone, the great contradiction of nature therein.

E
Chap. 1. Sect. 3. Ezekiahs description of the manner of Gods actuating a
general resurrection.
Chap. 2. Sect. 2. Equality and continuance where alone to be expected. Sect.
5. Eternal life promised on Gods part ere the world was, an expesition upon
Titus, 1. 2, and Proverbs, 8. 13.
Chap. 4. Sect. 2. Ease, how dangerous.
Chap. 5. Easier to keep out then to cast out lust. Chap. 6. Sect. 2. Eye, and
Touch, the fidelity of those two senses.
Chap. 7. Sect. 2. Emblemes and Types of the resurrection in the book of
Nature. Sect. 6. Excrements, whether at our resurrection our hair and nails
that have been cut from us, shall not rise with us.

F
Chap, 1. sect. 3. FAlacious dealing of the Jewish Rabbis, perverting the
words of David, Psalm. 3. 4.
Chap, 2. Fullness of the Angels joy. Sect. 4. Folly proceeding of wisdom the
most foul.
Chap. 3. Feasting of some the famishing of others. Feasts the Physicians best
friends.
Chap. 4. Fixing of the eye, how obnoxious. Chap. 5. etc. Chap. 6. Fashion of
Christ not fantastical but real. Chap. 7. Sect. 3. Familiarity of the Angels
with Maxkind. Sect. 6. Females whether they shall not be changed at the
resurrection; and whether there shall be any distinction of Sexes.

G
Chap. 1. Gods special revelation to the Angels. Chap. 2. Gods mercy not to be
limited to Christians only. Sect. 4. Gods permission of Solomen to wade
through the deep sea of vanity, the reason why.
Chap. 3. Gluttony, bow rise in these times, Chap, 4. Gazing too greedily, how
dangerous, instanced in Eve. Chap. 5. Gaudie attire the Bawd to lust. Chap. 6.
Sect, God and man made one compound by Apollinarius.
Chap. 7. Sect. 3. Gods works mistaken by the heathen for their Gods. Sect. 4.
Gods retalliating vengeance.

H
Chap. 1. Sect. 2. HEaven not shut up till the time of Christ's incarnation, as
Sergius and others affirm. Sect. ibid. Hosanna sung to our Savior as he rode
to the Temple, the interpretation thereof. Sect. 3. How the resurrection of our
bodies shall be wrought, according to the Jewish Rabbis. Sect. 4. The wiser
sort of Heathen, their opinion concerning the same.
Chap. 2. Heraclitus with Socrates, ranked by Justin Martyr in heaven, the
authors opinion concerning the souls of deceased Pagans. Chap. 3. Hillarion his
rare abstinence. Chap. 4. How an idle person may be said to be the Devils
tempter. Chap. 5. Sect. 3. Heathens why they painted their lascivious God and
Goddess naked.
Chap. 6. How Nicodemus might be said to resort to an Savior by night, etc.
Chap, 7. Heathen by Philosophy and the scale of the creature ascended very
high. Sect. 4, Herodias death. Hatto Bishop of Ments Gods wonderful judgment
toward him. Sect. 6. Holy land why (in all probability) Joseph and the
Patriarchs were so solicitous to have their bones buried there.

I
Chap, 1, etc. Chap, 2. Sect, 3. JOy, how different from mirth, a definition of
either.
Chap. 3, Italian Proverb concerning gluttony. Chap. 4. Sect. 2. Idleness
elaborately delineated.
Chap. 5. Sect. 3. Jacob lived but 147 years, why.
Chap. 6. Sect. 2. Ietelligence of the senses penetrating to the intellect.
Chap. 7. Sect. 2. Instances proving by natural reason the possibility of a
resurrection.

K
Chap, 1. etc. Chap. 2. KNowledge of Christ might be revealed to the wiser sort
of heathen, even at their latest gasp. Sect. 2. Knowing men are only capable
of true joy.
Chap. 3. etc, Chap. 4. Sect. 4. King David's adultery, the occasion thereof.
Chap. 6. etc. Chap. 7. etc.
L
LEaven, that a little bone in every man's back shall partake of the nature of
that in order to a resurrection, etc. Chap. 2. Sect. 2. Letari et gaudere,
their real difference.
Chap. 3. etc. Chap. 4. Sect, 2. Lust the exuberance of idleness. Labor,
loves strongest Antidote.
Chap. 5, Licurgus his law concerning women. Sect. 3. Lust a soaker of men's
estates, and how.
Chap. 6. Legerdemain practiced by Christ, according to the blasphemy of
Marion. Chap. 7. etc.
M
Chap. 1. Sect. 2. MInerals juice of herbs extract their operative faculty.
Chap. 2, Sect. 2. Mirtha passion most trivial.
Chap. 3. Macarius his incomparable abstinence. Museus his mad opinion.
Chap. 4. etc. Chap. 5. etc. Chap. 6. etc. Chap. 7. Sect. 2. Martyrs bones
annually rising in Egypt on Easter day.

N
Chap. 1. Sect. 2. No alterations, transmigrations, or dispersiont of our
bodies can force us out of Gods Granarie.
Chap. 2. Sect. 4. None ever made so perfect a discovery of mundane vanities as
Solomon.
Chap. 3. No Drunkard to your English Drunkard. Chap. 4. etc. Chap. 5. New
fashions how noxious. Chap. 6. Sect. 3. Noah's flood, those that perished
therein not capable of a resurrection, according to the Jewish Rabbis.
Chap. 7. etc.
O
Chap. 1, etc. Chap. 2. Sect. 6. Our Jouls subject to more diseases then our
bodies.
Chap. 3. etc. Chap. 4. Orthodox warrant for dancing and kissing. Chap, 5.
Sect. 3. Origens observations in his 20 Homily upon Numbers.
Chap. 6. Our Saviors a true substantial body. Chap. 7. Sect, 2. Objects their
moving faculty. Sect. 6. Our Resurrection, whether we shall rise all of one Age.

P
Chap. 1. etc. Chap. 2. PHilosophy alone sufficient to save the wiser sort of
Heathen, according to some of the Fathers. Chap. 3. Procopius his opinion why
Sampson was inhibited the use of wine. Chap. 4. etc. Chap. 5. etc. Chap. 6.
Plants their admirable intelligence. Chap. 7. Plato, Plotinus, etc. their
conclusion of the soul to be immortal. Sect. 2. Pascasin his holy Well.

Q
Chap. 1. etc. Chap. 2. etc, Chap. 3. QVeen Thomiris. Quarrelling the
inseparable companion of Drunkenness.
Chap. 4. etc, Chap. 5. etc. Chap. 6. Sect. 3. Questions of strange consequence
by the Jewish Rabbis.
Chap. 7. etc.
R
Chap, 1. etc. Chap, 2. etc. Chap. 3. Rare examples of temperance, and
moderation, instanced in diverse holy men. Chap. 4. Sect. 3. Reason why the
Israelites were enjoined to wear embroidered fringes on their garments.
Chap. 5 etc. Chap. 6. Sect. 3. Resurrection of the Children of wicked parents,
forbidden by the Rabbis, their reason why.
Chap. 7. Sect. 6. Resurrection of our bodies, whether it shall be in April
early in the morning, or at midnight.

S
Chap. 1. etc. Chap. 2. Sect. 2. Sacrilege in any to rob the Heathen of Gods
mercy. Stoics, their admirable Paradox.
Chap. 3. Socrates, his saying. Chap. 4. Sect. 2. St. Hieroms saying concerning
idleness.
Chap. 5. St. Anthonies over nice Decorum. Chap. 6. etc. Chap. 7. Some of the
heathen, their excellent notions. Sect. 6. Suarez his opinion.

T
Chap. 1. etc. Chap, 2. sect. 2. THe joy of the Angels either essential or
accid^ental.
Chap. 3. The calamitous condition of these times. The story of a Monk tempted
by the Dviel.
Chap. 4. Sect. 2. The golden saying of St. Anthony. Theodorets quere in his
questions, etc. Sect. 3. The reason why Alexander having conquered Darius,
would not be drawn to look upon his daughters.
Chap. 5. etc. Chap. 6. Sect. 2. The proportion of our bodies probably proving
the reasonableness of our souls.

V
Chap. 1. etc. Chap. 2. etc. Chap. 3. VItellius board. Chap. 4. Sect. 4. Vain
verses, and Ribauld talk.
Chap. 5. Vainness of Women in their Attire. Chap. 6. Vigor cannot be in
assumed or counterfeit bodies.
The end of the Table,
DISCOVERIES.
CHAP. I.
That the Angels know, both what has been, and what is done here on Earth.

SOme of latter times tells us of a wonderful Glass, wherein the saints and
angels behold whatsoever is done, nay whatsoever is thought in the Church
below. I know not how we may be sure that that Glass is of Gods making; and if
it be not, it must needs be a false one: but if they mean by that glass, a
special Revelation, making known to those blessed spirits whatsoever may
redound to the honor of the Trinity by their knowledge, we may safely take
them at their words; for though God conceal the works of his goodness, mercy,
truth, and holiness already past, I make no question, but his glorious
Redemption, admirable Dispensation, and all other occurrent favors, meeting
^^gether in one center for the good of those appointed to Salvation, have been,
and are always revealed to the whole Court of Heaven.

SECT. II.
Whether by the light of Reason only, Salvation may be purchased.

There has not wanted those, who have peremptorily affirmed (an opinion in
these our days too much prevaent) That all, of all nations and people shall be
saved, and conducted in this manner to heaven, The Jews by Moses, the
Christians by Christ, the heathen by Mahomet. As I affirm not that the light of
natural reason is enough to save a man; so on the other side I dare not aver,
that none at all were saved till the 15 year of Tiberius; and that heaven was
quite shut up till after Christ's passion, were an assertion befitting the mouth
of Sergius the Maniche, that vouched it against St. Augustine. I conclude that
all that died of old, were saved by a prioristical knowledge of Christ, and
that it is at the entrance of the heavenly Jerusalem, as it was at Christ
entrance into Jerusalem below, you shall read that those that went before as
well as those that came after, cried, Hosanna to the son of David, i. e. save
we pray thee, oh Messiah incarnate.

SECT. III.
The strange opinions of the Jewish Rabbis, concerning the resurrection; no
difficulty therein in respect of God.

Ask the Jewish Rabbis how the Read more of this Cha. 6.. 3.
resurrection of our bodies shall be wrought, and they will tell you of a
certain little bone, in spina dorsi, in every man's back, that shall never be
subject to any putrefaction, and they will find you text for it too, in 3. 4.
Psalm. where it is said, he keeps all their bones, so that one of them, unum ex
ijs (as they make the Prophet speak) shall never be broken, and this bone, say
they, at the last day shall be mollified and softened by a dew from heaven, and
it shall swell, as having the nature of Leven, and it shall diffuse its virtue
to the collecting of all the dust that belongs to its own body, and so fit and
prepare it for a resurrection. I shall not be so audacious as to pass a
definitive sentence, or positively to determine how this (to humane reason)
incredible resurgation, is effected; I had rather make Ezekiel my Oracle who
gives the manner how thus, he shall breath upon the slain, and they shall live.
Authors of unquestionable repute and daily experience, informs us, that the
juice of herbs and minerals extract, are of sufficient force to restore sick
persons, Apio the Gramarian (Pliny na hist) by the power of Cinocephalia
revived Homer; how facile then may we conclude it, for the supreme Architector
and Gubernator of the earth, by his word alone, to actuate an universal
resurrection; and that though the bodies of all mankind were crumbled into
dust, and that dust scattered before the wind; or were they distilled into
water, attenuated into air, or though they were eaten by Canibals, and those
Canibals devoured by fishes, and those fishes by men again; I say, though they
had all these dispersions, and alterations, and transmigrations, yet were they
still in the storehouse of a powerful God, to whom the whole world is but as
one repository, or larger cabinet, and all the elements but several drawers in
that great frame, and those lesser creatures, the craws of Ravens, bellies of
fishes, and intrails of beasts, but as smaller boxes included in the greater,
so that wheresoever we shall be laid God will know where to find us; though our
bodies may be hid to sense, yet they are not lost to him: he that called us at
first out of nothing, can by the same mighty voice raise us again from nothing.

SECT. IIII.
Yet of the same.

The Jewish Rabbis tell us of three keys that God keeps always in his own
hands, the Key of the Womb, whereby he lets us into this life; the Key of the
Clouds, by which he nourishes, and refreshes us with rain; and the Key of the
Resurrection, by which he loses us from the prisons of death, and gives us
entrance into a new life. I willingly grant the Key of the Resurrection, to be
in Gods power only; for Christ is that key Clavis Resurrection is (as
Tertullian calls him) he shall open and bring us out of our graves, as the
Prophet Ezekiel speaks, The wiser sort of heathens believed a resurrection, and
a restitution of our bodies, but then they thought the stars and the Planets
(by whose decay and continuance they measured the stability and perpetuity of
all sublunary things) to be the only causes of it; and so they ran giddily
into Platos circulation of years.

CAAP. II.
That we cannot conscienciously censure the ancient Heathen Sages as damned.

NOt only St. Chrysostom, but many other of the fathers, have set open a door
for Socrates, Aristotle, etc. to enter into heaven by Philosophy alone, and
Causabon in his animadversions upon Baronius says, that those places in the
fathers, which seem to look that way, are candida interpretatione mollienda, to
find a favorable interpretation with us, since it were not pious in us to
improve an uncharitable opinion of them, for their (perhaps) over charitable
opinion of the heathen.

As I dare not therefore (with Justin Martyr) rank Socrates, and Heraclitus in
heaven, and as I cannot think Aristotle by writing his books de Coelo, has
himself gained a place there; so neither dare I pass the sentence of eternal
damnation upon them, it were sacrilege in any man to rob them of Gods mercy,
which is over all his works; and who is he that shall presume to set bounds to
the overflowing Ocean of his compassion, to say unto it, thus far shall thou go
and no further; for might not God, for ought we know, reveal unto them this
saving knowledge of Christ, in articulo mortis, at the last gasp, and when
their own spirit was parting from them, breath his holy spirit into them: those
places of Scripture, wherein mention is made of our Saviors spoiling of hell,
and leading captivity captive, may (perhaps) be understood of his powerful and
merciful delivering, of some of the souls of virtuous Pagans, as of
Philosophers, Lawgivers, Governors, Kings, and other private persons,
renowned for their wisdom, prudence, fortitude, temperance, bounty, chastity,
mercy, and generally for their civil carriage, and moral conversation, such as
were Hermes, Zoroastes (however calumniated) Socrates, Homer, Plato, Aristotle,
Plotinus, Pythagoras, Phocillides, Theognes, Epictetus, Cicero, Hercules,
Theseus, Cyrus, Solon, Lycurgus, etc.

Sect. II.
That a wise man only is capable of mirth.

The Stoics) among many other excellent contemplations) in the discourse of
joy, came the nearest unto divine truth, when they put a main and real
difference, between Letari and Gaudere, mirth and joy the former is a light and
toyish passion, skipping in wanton manner up into the face, the latrer a
continual exultation of the soul in the enjoyment of some excellency; mirth is
a sudden or short fit raised by some pleasant or ridiculous accident, joy is a
settled content, and constant delight, by the presence of possessed good; mirth
is ever in the sensual appetite, joy is only in the soul and will: from which
inference they drew that admirable Paradox (scoft at by other Philosophers)
That a wise man only rejoices truly, though a fool be always more merry. For
which St. Augustine found warrant in Scripture, non est gaudium impijs, the
wicked can never cordially rejoice, and he ads the reason, quia effunduntur,
etc. because they are ever restless ever wandering from themselves; for it is
impossible to find those effects of true joy, satiety, equality, and
continuance any where else, but in the object of perfect goodness; which
because no place can afford but heaven, there must this joy be, and no where
else.

Sect. III.
How the Angels may be said to rejoice, and the manner of their exultation in
Heaven.

The joy of the Angels (whom our Savior positively affirms to be capable of
rejoicing) is either essential or accidental, either in habit or in act; their
essential joy is most perfect, eternal without change, without cause of
increase or addition, for they behold the presence of God in righteousness, and
are satisfied. Psalm. 16. 12, and again satisfied by reflex and meditation, on
the state of their own happiness, and yet satisfied again and again, in
ebriatie sunt ab ubertate donius ejus (says the Psalmist) and torrente
voluptatis sue potavit eos, but their accidental joy that is continually
increased by the mavelous effects which God daily works here in the Church
below, their knowledge does kindle their joy anew, not by adding more fuel,
but increasing more flame; the habit of joy in the Angels is the same,
incessant, immutable, etc, but the act is increased according as it shall
please the most high to impart the measure and present the object, and that
(doubtless) he does most freely to all the Angels.

SECT. IIII.
The vanity of all things terestial; Solomon, a true and competent judge of
mundane pleasures, and none else.

In the rule of contrarieties, as the folly that) comes from wisdom is most
foul, so the wisdom sprung from folly should be the greatest. It was the
wisdom of folly which occasioned Solamons Ecclesiastes, it was written by the
Preacher, and who could more thoroughly make experience of the diverse kinds of
pleasures and multiplicities of vanities, then a rich commanding Monarch;
Solomon sailed about the whole world of vanities, others had discovered only
some few nooks and bays; God suffered him to run through them a time, till
being recalled he might more fully instill this instruction of wisdom, Vanity
of vanities, all is vanity.

SECT. V.
That the world was already in Gods decree myriads of years before its
creaation.

Titus, 1. 2. the Apostle speaks of eternal life which God promised before the
world began: some men may perhaps wonder how that could be, when men were not
to whom eternal life was to be given? the answer (therefore) must be that this
promise or covenant which God made with his son, and with us in him from
eternity, is here meant; all the promises of the new Testament are but copies
of this original covenant made before the world began, and this is the ground
of that spoken, Proverbs, 8. 13. before the mountains were brought forth he
rejoiced in the habitable parts of the world, and his delight was in the sons
of men,

SECT. VI.
How many diseases are incident to the body of man, a parallel of the
infirmities of the body with those of the soul.

The body of man is but a weak sconce, Of the body of man.
a slight earthwork not above six foot high, thrown upin an instant, and will
in a short time (if let alone) moulder away of it self, and yet a wonder it is
to see what a number of enemies beleager it on all sides, how many diseases and
infirmities it is subject too. If we look into the muster roles, I mean the
Physicians books, we shall find them upon Tally no less then 6000, so many
diseases is the body subject to: and the soul is incident to as many if not
more. Now perhaps we are swelled with a Tympany of pride, anon inflamed with a
Fever of lost, by and by besotted with a Dropsy of drunkenness, after that
with a Lethargy of sloth, and then again we pine with a Consumption of envy and
malice; Almighty God therefore, has left us his word the holy Scriptures, and
appointed us the writings, sentences, and axioms of the holy Councels,
fathers, confessors, and martyrs, like an Apothecaries shop (as St. Basil
speaks) whence in every chapter, in every tract, and in every line, as on so
many shelves, and in so many boxes, there are store of preservatives and
remedies.

CHAP. III.
The Luxuriousness of the present Age: History of Cyrus: Museus his mad
opinion: Procopius his reason why Sampson was enjoined not to drink wine:
Remarkable story of a Monk: Rules against Riot.

IF there were ever a time when it was requisite to inveigh against gluttony
and drunkenness, certainly it is now; for the older the world grows the more
does singrow upon it, it improves it self daily: where shall we now (especially
in this our Borean clime) hear of a Macarius that has not taken his fill of
meat or sleep 20 years? or of such holy men as St. Hierom speaks of, that can
be content to live with barley bread and muddle water for a long time, when
they might daily have fed on dainties? or of an Hillarion, such an one as the
Ecclesiastiacal history tells us of, that would threaten his body with a Domabo
te etc. when he found him beginning to be provender pricked? such rare examples
of abstinence and sobriety the primitive time afforded store of.

Now rather on the contrary, we never think we have provisions store enough,
unless our Kitchins may vie with Noah's Ark for varicty, and and our
Table-cloaths with St. Peter's sheet Vitellius board, that was furnished at one
Feast with 2000. Fish, and twice as many Fowl, may be surpassed by some of our
(Westminster) bills of fare, if not for variety, yet expense and costlinesse;
and if at any time exceedings in this kind might be permitted, least of all at
this time, the time of war, when widows weep over the dead bodles of their
murrhered husbands, and orphans crying for bread are fed with stones: but these
Swine consider not that penury, scarcity and want are ever the companions of
war; if that lead up the Van, famine ever follows in the Rear; and indeed what
other can be expected, when the plough-share is turned into a sword, and the
pruning hook into a battel-axe, but empty barns, and lean bellies?

When Cyrus the Persian Monarch entered with his Army the Country of the
Amazons, and Thomiris their Queen with a great Army drew up toward him to give
him battle, he caused throughout his Gampe tables to be spread, well furnished
with store of meats, and feigns a sudden flight (hearing of the enemis
approach) leaving all his provisions behind him; the Amazons upon this drew up
to the place, and finding the enemies gone, presently fell to eating and
rioting with what they found, till being full fed, and night coming on, slept
as securely and soundly as they had eat before; Cyrus in the dead of night drew
forth his men from a neighboring wood, where they were hid before, fell upon
the Amazons in this security, and utterly defeated the whole army. How easily
we are taken with the pleasure of our palate and how dangerous they have
proved, we may see in our first parents Adam and Eve, the first motive that
drew the woman to disobedience to Gods command, was, that the tree was good for
sood; her appetite betrayed her soul, and engaged all her posterity to
perpetual guilt. Afterward in the holy seed, we find an Isaac apt to mis-place
a blessing for a piece of Venison, and his son selling his Birthright for a
mesle of broth. Seneca has told us upon experience, that Multos morbos multa
fecerunt sercola, multiplicity of Dishes cause multiplicity of Diseases.And a
greater Philosopher then he could set down, that Sicknesses and Infirmities are
the natural issues of great entertainments; and it is too well known, that
Feasts have ever been accounted the Physicians best Friends. More die of eating
then fighting: the belly kills more the bullet.

To this purpose, it is wittily said in the Italian Proverb, that the Glutton
diggeth his grave with his own teeth, is guilty of his own death, and cuts his
throat with his knife; our food is our Kitchin-physick given us by God to take
every day a competency to keep us alive; let us use it then as Physic,
moderately, left our Physic prove our bane, and we be poisoned by our
preservative. Rioting and Drunkenness was once reputed the national sin of
Germany only, but if we hold on as we have of late years continued, they are
like to lose their Charter, we out go them in their profession: the word
Carowse we speak now as naturally as they, and it passes for as good English as
ever it was Dutch; it has made a deluge, and overflowed our whole Land, and
yet I cannot see why men should so universally fall in love with it, and so
eagerly pursue it, unless they were possessed with the mad opinion Musaeus the
Poet was once, who thought, the only fit reward of Virtue to be perpetual
Drunkenness.

Procopius makes the question why Sampsen had so strict a charge laid on him
not to drink wine nor strong drink, nor any thing that came of the Vine, and he
gives this reason for it; Because (says he) the Holy Ghost knew the natural
tempter of Sampson to be so fierce and violent, that if he should at any time
inflame it with wine, it might do much mischief to his own people and friends
as well as his foes: And so St. Chrysostom observes in his 26 Sermon, that the
unruly servant that beat and wounded his fellows, Luke 13. 45. is said to have
eat and drank, and to be drunken; and from thence the Father notes, that
Drunkenness is the mother of Quarrels, such Frays usually ending in bloodshed.

To this purpose, I have read a story; A Monk whom the Devil had often tried,
and could never fasten any thing The Story of a Monk tampted by the Devil.
upon him, at last told him, if he would yield but to one vice (and he should
take his choice of three) that he would never assail him more; upon this he
yielded, and of the three that were proposed, viz. Murder, Adultery, and
Drunkenness, as thinking to choose ex malis minimum, the lesser evil of the
three, he was content for once to over drink himself: but when he was drunk, he
presently lusted after his neighbors wife, and her husband coming in, in rage
that he was discovered, ran to him and stabbed him, and so in the highest
degree became guilty of all.

Socrates passing by a house where he knew a frequent Reveller had lived, and
finding it empty, burst out into these words, I ever thought (said he) that
this house, always accustomed to so much drinking would at length spew out its
owner.

Saint Basil in a Homily of his bemoans a valiant soldier and a brave comander
in those days, that he saw overcome with drink: Miserum oculis spectaculum
(says he) qui terribilis hostibus fuerit, etc. it is a miserable sight, a
lamentable case to see such a man when drunk made a laughing stock by boys and
children in the street, who when he is fresh would strike terror into his
stoutest foe.

It is a vile and pernicious sin in any (I speak it with shame and sorrow
having my self been too guilty of ebriety) but more inexcusable in a soldier,
but most of all in a Commander, for how can he have any command upon others,
that has none over himself, if a Governor be too good a fellow every one will
look to be Tiberius Mero.

Mahomet in his Alchoran to fright his Turks from drinking of wine, ts them,
tells them that in every grape there is lodged a Devil. St. Augustine in his
confessions tells us a passage of his mother Monicha, that being by her maid
servant once upbrayded and twitted to her face for bibbing of wine, which she
did rather out of curiosity then pleasure, upon that taunt or reprehension of
her fervant, took up a resolution never to drink drop of wine more, which she
kept to her dying day.

CHAP. IIII.
Of dancing and kissing the lawfulness thereof.

THough I am as much against the abuse of this as any man, yet no man I think
that has read the Scripture, can conclude either of these, kissing or dancing,
simply and absolutely in themselves unlawful.

For, for the one St. Paul often woos his friends to salute one another with a
holy kiss, and it was frequently used all along in the primitive times, as St.
Augustine tells us, in reconciliationis charitas laetitia and catholicae
veritatis signum, as a testimony of reconcilement of our charity and love, of
our joy at a meeting after long absence, and of our unity in religion.

And for dancing, if we use it moderately for exercise, etc. there is no fault
nor danger in it, though I know it is accounted by some of our straight laced
brethren in its best intention, no better then the Devils procession, as they
call it, but unbyassed persons know, that many holy men and women practiced it
in scripture without reproof, Solomon allows us a time for it, there is a time
to dance, says he, Eccle. 3. nay King David says, we may praise God in a
dance, 149. Psalm.

Sect. II.
Of idleness the danger thereof: St. Anthonies Axiom: and Theodorets
exposition on Genesis 1.

Idleness is the high road to lust, it is pulvinar libidinis (as St. Hierome
Of Idleness.
calls it) the pillow whereon the unclean spirit delights to rest him, and
wantonness never thrives so kindly, nor takes root so deeply as in a field
that lies fallow. King David rising from his afternoons nap, walking idly on
his Tarras immediately fell into Adultery with Vriahs wise, lust having never
so great an advantage over us, as when it finds us sitting still, or doing
nothing; Cupid may more easily hit us then, then when we are in motion.

Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis Arcus. Take away Idleness, and never doubt
But Cupids bow breaks, all his lamps go out.
Labor is Loves strongest antidote so that it is ridiculous for a slothful
lazy man to say, if he commit fully, that he was enticed and tempted by the
Devils suggestion, or the allurements of the flesh, he is rather the Devils
tempter then the Devil his, and does A sloth full man the Devils Tempter.
as much as in him lies tempt a Temptation to seize upon him. Idleness (says
the wise son of Sirach) teaches much evil. And therefore S. Anthony was wont
to say. He had never so much need of good men's prayers for A remarkable saying
of St. Anthonies.
him, as when he was going about nothing. And Theodoret raising a Quere in his
questions upon Genesis, why God should sanctify and hallow the seventh day
only, and not any other of the six working days, amongst other reasons he
gives this for one; It was (says he) to intimate unto us, that the seventh
Theodorets opinion why God sanctified the seventh day.
day being a day wherein we are to sit still, and not labor, was a day whereon
we were more subject and liable to temptation then on other days, and so that
day in more danger of profanation then any working day, and so had more need
of a more special benediction then the rest, from him that is Lord of all days.

SECT, III.
The Eye, the grand Incendiary to Lust; Eliah 's flight; Alexanders continence;
Zeleucus his Law explained; Numbers 15. 39. explicated.

The eye if it be fixed long on a beautiful object, like a burning glass
collects the rays of it so strongly, that it sets the soul on fire with the
flames of Lust. St. Ambrose in his Tract De fuga saeculi, observes, that The
Prophet Eliah feared not to meet and speak face to face with cruel Ahab, 1 Kin.
18. 2. but fled from the face of Jezabel. And the Father says there, It was
for fear lest by the sight of such a tempting woman his eye might convey some
loose thoughti into his heart.

And to prevent this treachery of the eye, Alexander the Great (as Plutarch
relates) when he had conquered Persia, would not by any persuasions be drawn to
look upon the beautiful daughters of Darius, lest after his conquest over so
many men, he should be brought into the slavery of a woman by his own lust. If
the eye be full of adultery, the heart will not be long empty: Mors intrat per
fenestras, this way, by the windows of the eye sin entered into the world, and
by sin, death. Eve first saw the forbidden fruit that it was beautiful,
pleasant, and good for food, and then her desire was tempted to eat of it; When
David saw Vriah's wife, he was but one step from the enjoying her.

And upon this ground was it that Zelencus made his Law, That Adulterers should
lose both their eyes, that having lost their Zeleucus his Law.
sight, they might for the future the better keep their chastity; or rather to
show, that since the eye of any of the bodies members is the first incendiary
to lust, and the chiefest Pander to uncleanness, that that should be first in
the punishment, that was both first and chiefest in the fault.

Almighty God therefore took a care of the Israelites that they should have
embroydered Fringes on their garments to fix their wandering eyes on, that they
might not gaze and stare about, in Numb. 15. the reason is set down in these
express words, v. 39. That you seek not after your own eyes, after which you go
a whoring.

SECT. IIII.
Obscean talk obnoxious; that it is possible for an Author to write
lasciviously, yet live temperately.

The mischief of wanton talk we have a good (Emblem of in Venus birds the
Doves, which some Naturalists say engender at their mouths; it is a sign the
pot is hot within if there come such steams from it, the tongue speaks not but
from the abundance of the heart; let the Poet plead in desence of his loose
verses, of his ribald talk, or his reading or singing lascivious songs, and
vainly think his life nevertheless may be thought modest, he will find but few
to believe him, he shall never persuade the world but that they must needs be
ulcered Lungs from whence comes such putrid Spittle: Yet I dare not conclude it
impossible (for in so doing I should sin against the clear and destinate light
of knowledge, and my own experience) that a Poet may write lasciviously (and
that at the height) and yet his thoughts remain spotless, and his actions
proclaim him truly chaste; so exactly can man play the Pretens, and so facilcly
practice a disguise.

CHAP. V.
Pride in whom, and how far tolerable; the plainness of the Spartan women, etc.

IF Lot will avoid the sin of Sodom he must not depart from the City only, but
the Region round about it too, the over curious dresling and adorning the body,
when we rake our brains and wrack our wits, and grow old in the search of a new
fashion, the pleating the hair, and painting the face, as it were laying an
ambush in our locks to catch our lovers, are but as so many baits for lust to
nibble at, in women scarce tolerable, in men monstrous, or although we grant
this in either sex, but a sin of the lesser size, yet a raisin stone or a hair
may choke as well as a bone, and a young thief may creep in at a window and
open the door for sturdier rogues to rob the house, it is dangerous anchoring
near a Rocky shore, and no safe riding by the brink of a downfall. Joseph
therefore fled from his mistress, and left his garment behind him; but why did
he leave his garment in her hand, and did not rather, being in all likelihood
stronger then a weak and wanton woman, extort and force it from her? Oh (says
St. Ambrose) if he had come so near as to have strove with her or touched her,
he might perhaps have gained his coat, but he had been in danger to have lost
his innocence: it is storied of S. Anthony that he the better to preserve his
chastity, would never endure so much as to see himself naked: in Sparta there
was no uncleanness or adultery committed, and the reason is given by the
Historian, that in Lyourgus his time women were limited to a plain and homely
attire, etc. Seneca observes, that lust is easier kept out, then cast out; gay
attire is at best but the bawd to Venus, and therefore the way to be sure not
to come into the house is to resolve never to set foot over the threshold.

SECT. II.
Yet of the same; the story of Dambo the devout Hermit.

I have read that once when the Capitol was besieged, the Roman women for a
shift took their own hair, and made strings for the men's crossebows; I would
the lovely females of our time would put their hair to no worse employment, by
curling and brayding it, so that us fit for nothing but to make strings for
Cupids bow.

It is recorded in the Tripartite history of one Dambo an Hermit, who being
sent for by Athanasius to Alexandria, coming from the wilderness where he had
long lived, and entering into the City, he espied a woman pass by him in a very
spruce and wanton dress; the good man fell presently a weeping, and being
asked the reason, he said, he wept for two things; first for the danger that
woman's soul was in; secondly for himself, what a vile wretch he had ever been,
that never used so much care and diligence to please his God, as that woman did
daily to please her wanton lovers.

SECT. III.
The modesty of the Scriptures: Of the Idol Baal-peor: Why the Heathen painted
their lascivious God and Godnesse naked.

The Schoolmen or Cafuists do assign six specicies or principal kinds of
unlawful executing our lusts, as by Fornication, Adultery, Incest, Sodomy
Self-defiling, etc. Almighty God knew well enough of how combustible a matter
our flesh was composed and how ready and apt we were to be set on fire with
obscean words, and therefore throughout the whole body of Scripture, where
occasion is to speak of our unclean parts, the holy Ghost ever as it were casts
a veil over them, and shadows them by some figurative expression, as in one
place they, are called our flesh, in another our feet, in another our shame, in
another place our wickedness, and that, piantiphrasin, because they should not
be naked.

Nay, the very Hebrew language which is called not only the holy, but lingua
pudica the modest tongue, in the Hebrew I say there is no proper word to
signify any such thing insomuch that Origin in his 20 Homily upon Numbers,
speaking of the Idol Baalopeor, ^n Idol of the Midianites that was chiefly
adored by the women, he says, that when he had searched into the Hebrew for the
original of that name he could find none, save only that it signified a kind
of filthy lustful act, and no more was to be found in the Rabbis of the sense
of that word; I suppose they forbear to say more of it, to set down plainly
what it signified, more out of modesty then ignorance, not that they could not,
but because they would not for shame, least they should at once instruct their
Readers and infect them; and for this very cause it is that the sin of Sodomie
has no name, but is by the Schoolmen called Mutum peccatum; the sin not to be
spoken of.

The Heathens always painted their lascivious God and Goddess naked, not so
much to show forth the provocations of lust; but that letchery will leave
lustful people naked. And this was typified of old in Dalilah, Sampsons
mistress, that carried poverty in her very name, for so (I am told) by
interpretation does the word signific in the Original tongue.

And as lust soaks out ones estate, so it impairs the honor and the credit and
repute of a man, however some brag and boast of it, and some great ones that I
know in the world (as if they had the Monopoly of lust to themselves as of
other things) style it Maguatum ladere, the Grandees recreation. But Dionysius
the elder of Sicily gave his son a good caveat to this purpose, when he had
reproved him for being too much addicted to women, asking him whether he had
seen him his father do so before him? No (said the son) but you father were not
the son of a Prince as I am. True (quoth Dionysius) I was not indeed the son of
a Prince, and I fear if you follow on these lewd courses, your son will not be
the son of a Prince neither: meaning his people would not suffer him ever to
enjoy the Crown.

Add to this the rottenness that it brings to the bones, the ulcers that it
breeds in the flesh, the untimely disloving of the Lust how destructive to Life.
whole frame of nature, forcing the soul out of doors before its time, We read
that our father Abraham, Genesis 25. lived 175 years, and that his Grandchild
Jacob lived but 147 years, and no more, Genesis 48. but Isaac lived 180 years,
longer then either of the other; and the reason is conjectured at by one of the
Fathers to be, because Isaac was but the husband of one wife, but the other two
had many wives; because one was more chaste and abstemious in the use of women
then the rest.

CAAP. VI.
Of Manicheus and Marion, who allow our Savior only a fantastical seeming
Body.

THose Scepticks in Theology, Manicheus and Marion, those two exquisite
Traitors, who far out-stript Judas, he sold but his Masters life, but these
begin where he left, and rob him of his body. Belike they thought the Virgin
was purposely overshadowed to bring forth a shadow; or else that themselves
might appear to be saved, they would have Christ to be a mere apparition. If so
be that he was nothing but a dream, it was a fit season for Nicodemus to come
to him by night, the Jews were still in a slumber, the Pharisees disputed with
him in their sleep, and we our selves have not shaken of the same nap since. I
confess the eye may be often gulled with her object, yet it cannot pass for
current, that he that made the eye would delude it, and walk in the Visor of a
body 30 years; the Prophets, Kings, and Patriarchs might have spared their
longing, who beheld his Idea, and so enjoyed their wish in conceiving it. It is
no bold conjecture, to think that so many eyes were opened to assure the touch
of the opener, and as many ears unlocked, that more then faith might come by
hearing: the knowledge of him also came this way, for the word being made flesh
was known by his voice, and he that spoke as never man spoke, could he be
thought an Echo? if his words cannot witness a mouth, his food and taste may;
from the Dug to the Vinegar he conversed with man, eating and drinking to the
imputation of Gluttony: nor was he only outwardly sociable as the Angels were,
hunger and thirst set an edge to his appetite, his natural heat conquered this
nourishment and confessed it by his growth: Bodies assumed or counterfeit have
their perfection in the cradle, and as they need no supply, so they thrive not
by meat: If Christ were an empty shape, it will sound as impossible for Simeon
to embrace air, as for air to support that massy burden; our Savior from
Simeons arm-full waxed tall enough to bear his own Cross.

Thomas the Proverb of Unbelief, desired no more warrant then the trial of a
Touch, a sense so corporeal, that plants themselves shrinking from a light
finger, seem in this kind as apprehensive as man: no sense pleads more for the
solidity of Christ's Body then the sense of Feeling.

SECT. II.
The most material objection against the reality of Christ's body answered of
the two senses seeing, and feeling. Apollinarius error.

The example of Jacobs couzenage, whose hands gainsaid his voice, might afford
some pretense of staggering, but when all are knit in a mutual testimony, as
well of themselves as the truth, he that denies it, is less ingenious then the
confessing Devils. The Manithees and Marionits less ingenious then the Devils.


St. Paul could questionless have verified his humanity by more essential
properties then his figure, Phil. 2. 8. found in fashion like a man, but none
so obvious and familiar as the common objects of those two trusty senses, the
eye, and the touch, whose easy intelligence, though it pitch first on the
outward surface, it rests not there, but ushers our view to the whole draught
and inward Table of man, the beauteous variety of useful Organs, the regular
property of limbs, commended by a straight and comely posture, promise at first
sight, a soul answerable to her province, and a master not unlike so fair a
lodging, such a house were too good for a meaner guest then a reasonable soul,
and too bad for a better, Apollinarius matching the flesh and the Godhead in
one compound gives not our Savior the fashion of a man but of a body, and by
over advancing the happy estate of the flesh, makes us all loosers in the soul.

SECT. III.
Who shall be saved, and who not (as being not capable of a resurrection)
according to the Jewish Rabbis; St. Cyrils exposition.

Some have had the confidence (and that of late years) to question, whether at
the day of doom all mankind universally shall be capable of a resurrection or
not? the Jewish Rabbis say that they shall not; one of them says, that those
that perished at Noah's flood, shall not be partakers of the resurrection,
another will not allow the children of unbeleeving parents any share in the
resurrection, least (forsooth) their Parents might receive any comfort by it; a
third thinks the resurrection belonged to Israel, and not to Gentiles at all a
fourth excepts against them four too, viz. Bilha, Jacobs concubine that lay
with Reuben Doeg that caused Saul to slay Abimelech and the Priests, Geheza and
Achitophel; but St. Paul is peremptory against all such vain exceptions, in the
3 Chap. ad Cor. he says expressly. as in Adam all died, so in Christ shall
all be made alive, all the wicked as well as the just. all shall rise from
their graves, but not all to glory, the wicked shall not stand All shall rise
the wicked as well as the Godly
in judgment (says David) or else they shall appear in judgment (says St.
Cyril) but not stand in it, i. e. they shall be cast and overthrown in it.

CHAP. VII.
How far the ancient Heathen might go by Philosophy only.

THe wiser Heathen by Philosophy and the scale of the creatures, ascended so
high as to the knowledge of one supreme Deity, this the course of nature taught
them; for indeed the whole world is nothing else but a commentary or paraphrase
of the Deity, howbeit many of the Heathen instead of knowing God by his works,
mistook many of his works for their Gods.

But though some of them might discover by the works of the creation a supreme
Deity, yet they could not discern any saving power by that perspective, or if
they did is was but obscurely, as wrapped up and involved in the notion of a
common providence, as believing one supreme God, and that God to be just, and
so a rewarder of those that did well; but of the son of God to be incarnate,
and to die in satisfaction for their errors and transgressions, of this for
ought we know they had not the least knowledge at all.

However for the resurrection of bodies, Plato, Plotinus, Virgil, etc.
positively conclude, that the soul is immortal, and capable of eternal blifle
or everlasting torture; and therefore Overton and his adherents, who so
strenuously and blasphemously attempt to prove the soul dies with the body
(Overton having divulged a book to that purpose) may be reputed worse then
Heathen. That the bodies Overtons book of the mortality of the soul.
of all mankind may arise, I thus prove by natural reason.

SECT. II.
The general resurrection of bodies at the last day, proved possible by natural
reason.

What else does the night in her black mantle with all those stars as so many
torches attending her, but proclaim the last days funeral which the next
morning revives again, I may instance in Quick silver, which though you moulder
into drops no bigger then Attoms, it naturally unites its parts together again,
and resumes its old form. I might instance the silkworm or Phoenix, which is
ipsi sibi proles suus, etc.

I could speak likewise out of Josephus of Pascasin his Holy well, that fills of
it self every Easter day; and of the annual rising of certain Martyrs bones in
Egypt: but I should be too prolix. Take therefore a brief of all from St.
Augustine: Tota mundi administratio futura Resurrectionis testimonium est; The
whole course of nature is nothing else but a testimony and manifestation of the
Resurrection.

That Christ is risen from the dead is an Article of our Belief. Fundatissimi
fidiae, etc. a well grounded principle in our Christianity, that now after so
many years growth needs no prop to support it; nor can we confirm it by the
creation of any new Arguments, but only by the resurrection and reviving of
the old. Let it be given out that his Disciples came by night, and stole him
away while they slept, none but a besotted Jew, given over to believe lies, can
The Jews contradict themselves
credit it; for if the Watchmen were asleep how could they tell that his
Disciples stole him (...)? if they were nor asleep, why would they suffer his
Disciples to steal him.

And besides, who can believe that his Disciples, a poor disconsolate and
forsaken company, Doves under the tallons of the Jewish Vultures and Roman
Eagles, should adventure upon a guarded Sepulcher, to brave a band of armed
Soldiers? Can you think, that they who before he was crucified stole for fear
themselves away, would now adventure to steal him away? that they that could
not watch with him before one hour at prayer, should now watch whole nights to
steal his body from the Grave? And if they had stolen him, what did they
expect, but a body as dead and livelesse as their own hopes? Thus when such
strange impossibilities are brought to back it, a lie does confute it self, and
blinded malice helps to establish and confirm the truth; nor by such
forgeries as these is our Belief any whitshaken, but rather ratified and
confirmed.

But (and this is the main Objection of our present Sadduces) an exemplary
cause is not enough, this demonstrates neither a power nor a will in Christ to
do it; a pattern cannot raise me: I may have the Map or the Copy of the
Universe, yet by that Map, by that Copy not be able to make another: I may see
the picture of Christr Resurrection upon a wall, but that will no more raise me
then it will make me valiant to read of Hannibal, Caesar, Alexander. Objects
have a moving and attracting power in them, but no forcing casualty; the
heavens are a fair sight, but they cannot make a blind man see; no more can a
bare pattern raise a dead man from the Grave.

I Answer.

That besides this, there is a proper efficacy in Christ, an Influence
distilling from him the head to us the members, a dew on our souls, and a dew
on our bodies, such a dew as will make a withered soul and a dead body revive
again.

Our Savior who raised himself from his Monument, shall be the cause of our
Resurrection; he is the root, we are the branches, if the root live, the
branches will spring forth; and it is no absurd conclusion, he is risen, and
therefore we shall rise; Christ's resurrection and ours are links of the same
chain, pull one and all will follow: if there passed such a power from his
clothes, why not such a power from his resurrection? Now Christ, who had
depositum carnis nostrum (as Tertullian says) by raising up himself, has
given us a pledge and an assurance that he will us raise also, so that he may
raise in us a belief and an assurance of it, he has given us many types and
emblemes of it in the book of Nature; it is writ in every field we walk in:
Consider the Lillies, and al flowers, how they die and grow fresh again;
corruption is the chiefest cause of their continuance: the earth also receives
not the seed, but to restore it again.

Sect. III.
That the Angels are always conversant with us here below, etc.

St. Paul, though he gave a sufficient reason for the covering of women in the
Church, because of the Angels and their reverence; for they are every where,
they pitch round about us: Yet if our eyes were opened (like Gods servant) or
closed up either That the Angels are always conversant with us.
in a holy dream (like Jacob) we should behold them ascending and descending;
descending from the Presence Chamber of the great King, and ascending up with
our requests; again descending to comfort our desires, to illuminate our
understandings. Inter sunt Cantantibus adjunt Orantibus in sunt Meditantibus
(says St. Bernard) When we sing, they make up the Quire with us; when we offer
up our Orisons, they hover about us, etc. and which is more, they join in the
first Petition of the Lords Prayer with us.

Sect. IIII.
The equality of Gods Justice observable; many instances out of Scripture and
other Authors.

It is usual with Jehovah to suit and proportion the punishment according to
the offense of the sinner, that many times, the judgment is but as it were an
anagram of the sin, so that you may easily read the offense in the punishment.
God does retalliate to sinners, pay them (as we say) in their own coin. The
Egyptians they drown all the males of the children of Israel, and they
themselves, their master Pharaoh, and all his host perish in the red sea.
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, opened their mouths against Moses and Aron, the
Lords anointed King and Priest, and the earth presently opened her mouth and
swallowed them up, Sodom burned with unnatural lust, and they were burned up
with fire; that a shower of brimstone should descend from above, and a shower
of fire from that which is naturally water, that hell it seif should come down
from heaven, is a prodigy only exceeded by the sin that caused it.

Adombezek that had taken the 70 Kings and barbarously cut of their great toes,
had his own toes cut off soon after, and it wrung from him this expression, As
I have done so has God requited me, Judge, 1. 7.

Because Moab burned up the bones of the King of Edom, therefore God burnt up
Moab. And the Jews that bought Christ of Judas for thirty pence, at the sacking
of Jerusalem by the Roman Emperor Titus, 30 of them were sold for a penny.

Herodias that by her lascivious dancing procured Herod to cut of St. John
Baptists head, had her own head cut off by the breaking of the ice, as she
passed over a river. Nicephorus Eccles, Hist. lib. 1. chap. 20.

Hatto that merciless Bishop of Ments, who set fire on his barn, where many
poor people were congregated to get relief for their hunger, and burned them up
like Vermin, was himself followed with troops and armies of mice and rats, who
found him out though immured in a strong Castle, seated in the midst of a
river, and falling on him devoured him to the bones; Munster relates he story
at large in the third book of his Cosmotgraphy.

SECT. V.
Concerning Christ's resurrection, two Queres.

For Christ's resurrection whether when he rose his humane soul, came and united
it self to the body by its own motive faculty, or else assisted by the power of
the Deity.

Whether his body penetrated the Tombstone, or whether the Angels, that removed
it were ministerial in it, and furtherers of his Resurrection?

SECT. VI.
Enquiries in referrence to our own Resurrection, etc.

For our own Resurrection, Whether we shall not rise all of one age, about 32,
which we have good ground to think; because it is said in Ephesians. 5. Till we
come to the measure of the Age of Christ?

Whether in our Resurrection, our hair and our nails that have been cut,
whether those excrementious parts shall not rise with us?

Then for the time of the Resurrection, Whether it shall be in April, as
Athanasius thinks, in his sixth Homily? and for the time of the day, Whether it
shall be early in the morning, which we have cause to think, because Christ
rose at that time? or in the middle of the night (as St. Hierome thinks)
because Christ ('it is said) shall come as a Thief in the night: and as St.
Ambrose collects from those words, viz. In that night two shall be lying in one
bed, etc.

Then for the place where we shall be raised, whether in the valley of Megiddo
where Iehosaphat fell, as the Rabbis think; or at least in some part of the
Holy Land; the reason (perhaps) why Joseph and the Patriarchs were so
solicitous to have their bones carried from Egypt, and other places to be
buried there,

Then whether we shall rise naked or clothed, which we may justly dispute,
because the seed that springs up is covered with a husk?

Whether God will not use the help of the Angels in raising us? whether they
shall gather our bones and dust together (as Suarez thinks) and we have some
ground to believe, because it is said in the Parable of the Sower, The Angels
are the Reapers, and they shall separate the wicked from the just.

Lastly, when we rise, whether there shall be any distinction of Sexes, Male or
Female amongst us. Scotus thinks there shall not; and perhaps that Text may
intimate as much, where it is said, There is no Marrying, nor giving in
Marriage; but we shall be like the Angels of God.

A SERAPHICK RHAPSODY ON The Incarnation, the Progression, And the PASSION OF
Jesus Christ.

By SAMUEL SHEPPARD.

LONDON: Printed by B. Alsop, MDCLII.

A SERAPHICK RHAPSODIE On the Passion of Christ.
CHrist coming to write our acquittance with his blood, knew well that
humility would suit best with the head, when the body was sick with pride, He
bowed the Heavens and came down, i, e, the honor of his Godhead was not put
off by clothing it with rags of flesh; from his birth to his burial reaches
the humiliation of his manhood, never ceasing till his head was thrown under
earth his footstool. Thus his passion began in the stable, where he was no
sooner born, but the Creed immediately tells us he suffered; the blood of his
circumcision was but so many warning drops of this great shower in his passion;
and whereas others were born to live, his only errand was to die: to this end
he villified himself, being brought up in poverty, ranked with the meanest, no
companion but for Publicans and Sinners, never taken notice of by the chiefer
sort. The Jews grossly expected the Messiah in worldly pomp, as if God would be
known by his clothes, such is the Sorcery of bewitching Mammon, that a gaudy
train would have gone further with them then a miracle: but does any come to
Petition in State, or to beg in robes? humility was the right garb of Christ's
intendment; for none can vault or mount himself without shrinking his joints,
none can raise another unless he stoop to do him courtesy; the surest
building has the lowest foundation, and Christ our Cornerstone, our strong
Tower whereby we ascend into heaven, must be first deep laid in the bowels of
the earth.

In the eye of man Christ humbled himself, but the object of his obedience was
God, whether active in fulfilling the law, or passive in bearing the punishment
for the law: this latter obedience neither contradicts his equality with the
father, nor his willingness in suffering for his brethren, because an equal
may be sent by his equal, performing the task undertaken by his own consent:
the Heathen superstitiously thought it ominous when the Ox was not half a
Priest, not religiously bowing his neck to the stroke; Christ then could be no
gracious sacrifice unless his blood was sent out as willingly as it was
cruelly drawn, Obedience is better then sacrifice, but sacrifice with obedience
is far better; both which were gently united by our Savior, who voted his
death, presented his person, and quietly admitted violence, as much without the
assailers compulsion as his own command, witness his injoyning the peace to
his followers, the Host of Angels shall have no watchword (for they were the
taller soldiers) because he will not be rescued from surprising miseries;
Peter shall not persuade, nor the Jews work him out of his peremptory
resolution: De cruce non vult descendere, qui potuit de morte resurgere (says
St. Augustine,) he will not keep himself alive that can rise being dead: others
as they are not born when they will, so neither can they die when they will;
Voluntary expense of life is but a glorious murder, and so the example of
Christ's death might bring us thither from whence the benefit redeems us: but
our Savior having life in his own dominion, had power to lay it down, and
power to take it up again, no man took it from him, he laid it down of himself
John, 10 18. so that Pilate's arrogance herein was much out, who had no
authority to condemn, but from the person condemned: wherefore that perplexed
and passionate Pilate reluctance but an ambush to the Devil.
reluctance of his appetite, was but an bush to the Devil, and to Christ's
obedience a Trophey; for as the one would not scarce have ventured without
imitation, so the other could not have conquered without opposition. The fire
of virtue having not matter to scedon, will die of idleness; passion augments
the liberty of the will, whose active courage runs best with fetters, and most
declares her magnanimity in a stiff contradiction. Christ therefore whose Ely
took our infirmities, was freely troubled, both for the greater proof of his
manhood, and greater victory, nay valor was here the cause of fear, and all
these unwilling motions proceed of very willingness, neither can affections
being natural powers be made unlawful by workings but over-masterings, and
these inferior orbs of the soul may enjoy their proper course, so they turn
with the swinge of there prime mover, not spurning at the wills, decrees: Isaac
may ask his father where is the Lamb (for innocence cannot die without a word,)
and our Savior may well begin his prayer with an If, but the conclusion is
absolute, the cup shall not pass from him, and I likewise will pass to it.

The soul her self (though impenetrable) must not escape, which being the
original womb of Disobedience in us, first returns his paenal Obedience in
Christ the very Qualm and seizure of his Agony was heavier then unto Death,
whose pangs were known before they were felt, known and augmented by that
accurate apprehension, which in the heat of his fit made the soul work more
upon the body, then the body wrought afterward upon the soul. For how sharp
was the conflict! O how was the soul preserved when the body was forced to rain
blood! when every Pore gasped as if the soul meant to follow, and he to die as
often as it had places to expire at! Indeed well it might; for this single
Death was conceived as a multitude of Deaths, a Death for those that died
before and after. Behold a ghastly sight; for he that never committed one sin,
to be charged with so many heaps of sin, whose load could not choose but be the
heavier, because Innoccency lay under and came so near to Guilt as to be
punished; the Cup of sower Grapes mixed with those thoughts, burst out into
billows of Sweat, so that Floods ran over him, Psalm. 69. Oh what bleeding was
within, when it streamed so without* never was such a Sweat because never such
a Cause; no such heat but that of Hell. Sin being the Fuel of both: by whose
vehemence each Pore became an Eye, and each Member wept, that by the tears of
his whole body, the whole body of his Church might be cleansed; and yet his
sufferance swells to the largest extent of Obedience, exercised in sundry
torments by all persons upon his parts; Friend and Foe, Jew and Gentile, King,
Priest and People, all join against him, in the Front of which conspiracy comes
Judas, a Wolf trained up in the school of a Lamb, with a Kiss; Was ever such a
salutation between God and the Devil? with a kiss does this courteous
blood-sucker kill his Masters Traitor, Do thou so kiss the Son lest he be
angry? Well; take thy leave Judas, never shall thou come so near again; this
hanging about Christ's neck, shall cost thine own a worser hanging, whilst
Heaven and Earth, for betraying him that came from both, shall with vengeance
thrust thee from them, and leave thy Carcass to thy new Master the Prince of
the Air.

It could not choose but make his Enemies bold to see his Disciple so cruel, who
now prepare to kill the true Passover, though not for their own, but our
eating; the seed of Abraham came out with Bills and Staves to take him, who
came down from Heaven to take the seed of Abraham; and violently attach him
with their hands, whom they could not apphehend with their hearts: They take
him, but as Sampson was taken by the Philistines, to the loss and ruin of
themselves; both felt the God of Israel when they held him in bondage; both
smarted under their prisoner: By tying his hands which might have loosed
theirs, they tied themselves in a double knot; but that hindered not his
proceeding, who through Adams captivity through a rash freedom, regained us
liberty with a deliberate captivity: Thus with bonds of liberty he traveled to
Caiphas, a man that went for a High Priest, but first, Murder must call in
Annas, his reverend Father-in-Law, that so the generation of Vipers might be
more allied in blood. After Annas, Caiphas with good manners may be avillain; a
zealous counterfeit, who having with deep conjuration wrung out the truth,
accuses God himself of Blasphemy: The watch word being given, the servants
are diligent in reviling him that never spoke amiss, they blind his eyes, and
challenge a Prophecy, that so they might prove him a Seer, by making him not
to see; they pluck off his hair, Esaias 5. 6. that no hair of us might perish,
threshing his cheeks with buffets, wherein our offenses have a hand: Yet to all
these reproaches he sets his face at a flint, Esa. 5. 6. as flint indeed, from
whence those smiters smore fire for their own Damnation. The night being spent
with those hellish Pastimes, they benight the Day with Actions of Darkness;
their fury hurries him to Pilate, where the Scribes ommitting Blasphemy as an
idle brangling before a secular Judge object him a Traitor against the God
Caesar; this killing Plea they keep till last, and make it the first Argument
of his guilt, that They brought him, as if their infallible Chair could neither
err nor slander, whereas affectors of credit are most commonly Liars; these
holy Murderers though by no means they will enter the Judgment Hall, because
of the Passover, nor be defiled with a place of blood; yet with a clear
Conscience they prosecute that deed which defiles the place. Pilate espying
their malice, makes a friend of a bad office, shifts him over to Herod. This
King was more like a Courtier then himself, a most Herod his Character.
curious piece of Vanity, who after some discourse of stately impertinency,
would fain have God recreate his Highness with a Miracle: Behold a Miracle of
Patience, Our Savior returns him and his scoffs not so much as a word; Silence
is the best reply to a A speaking silence.
Babbler, which both secretly darts at the Conscience of the Adversary, and
retains the station of Meekness. Our Savior was often dumb as a Lamb, his
dumbness now has made him white as a Lamb: for Herod mocking him with a white
Robe, as a Candidate or suitor only for a Kingdom, unwillingly deciphers his
integrity in its true colors; thus attired, he is tosled back again like a
Tennis-ball to Pilate, where death is little, unless an odious comparison with
Barrabas kill him double; this of the two is the Goat, which to the utter
pollution of the Dismissers is set at liberty, Genesis 16. and the destroyer of
the living is thought more worthy of life then he that raised their dead.
Pilate being weary of being just against the stream, delivers him to the place
of crucifying to be scourged by soldiers, a punishment ordained by the Romans
for small offenses, as the Axe for capital: But Christ, who suffered for our
slips as well as for our crimes, endured not only the Cross, but scourging, a
punishment most suitable to the nature of sin, whereof any Act, though never so
little, makes as many breaches in the Law is the lash imprints in the body.
When the whip had launced our Saviors flesh, their own humor (bad Commands
are still over-done) proceeds to scorn him in state, and inviting the multitude
to their pettulant fury; they repeat what was done last night with advantage,
with thorns they crown his head, not remembering the Parable of Jotham, that
fire might come out of the Bramble. All Crowns are thornie, and the Heathenish
Sacrifices used to be crowned; but when this Sacifice of Jew and Gentile is
crowned with thorns, when his head is tied in the thickets, is not this the
Oblation that was slain for Isaac and all the flock of the Faithful? Next in
ridiculous honor they invest him in a Purple garment: Why should their spite
be at such charges? the white Robe now clapped on his bleeding Members, would
soon take the dye of a better Purple. But to make him a complete mock-Emperour,
with bended knees they gave him a Reed for a Scepter. Innocent King, herein thy
obedience is most remarkable; for whereas other members were merely passive,
here the hand was made an instrument of its own shame; the Ree^ dashed against
thy head, shows thy sufferings to be the doings of thy own Scepter. In this
variety of torments, I find no women save only one, whom the Devil to preserve
his old slight of tempting had set on Peter: Eve, the cause of all, had done
enough already, and such hands were to weak for the Jews hate, which required
the utmost vigor of bloody soldiers: but out Savior having tired them also,
Pilate, who thought it mercy to use him thus cruelly, presents him in his
woeful formalities to move compassion, Behold the man; alas, alas the King, is
this a Competitioner for a Caesar? they like hounds having fastened upon the
prey, and coming again to full gaze, yell out with full cries, Crucify him,
Crucify him: Since then Justice is turned to a cry, Esaias 3. I appeal to you,
behold the man, a man so torn in all his parts, that no part can be known by it
self, but by the property of its torture; Behold his head tented with thorns,
his cheeks macerated with buffets, his face chequered with blood and spittle,
his hand behold with a Reed, his back plowed over with stripes: O that ye would
behold what words has stounded his ears, what swords have passed through his
soul; shall yet the spear rip up his side? shall yet the nail pierce his feet?
shall this man be crucified? Behold him again, and then behold your selves, how
many Jews are in each of you, since each of you have procured al these
outrages; hear the cry of your selves, Crucify him, Crucify him; well, if he
must die, if the same Judge having thrice pronounced him innocent, must in the
same breath condemn Christ and himself, his willingness is as ready as the
necessity is urgent; let him become obedient unto Death, Phillip. 2. 8.

But could the Creatot die, and be brought himself so near that nothing out of
which he breathed all things? No Death being only a Divorce of the natural
parts could not separate the Godhead, the man only died, the person was but in
a sound, the commerce and influence of the whole Divinity, like the Spirits in
a falling Disease, did not vanish, but retire; that astonishing voice, My God,
my God, why have thou for saken me? infers no more: For how should God and Man
be accorded by him who suffered a disunion of God and Man in himself? all this
was but a sharp pull of his former Agony, where an Augel did then cheer him,
but now he is forsaken of all enduring the height of Anguish in the end of
Life, that we might receive the greater comfort in the point of Death: And
hereby he gives his enemy the fiercest blow at last, while he stretches
himself, and roars over the prey, as it became the Lion of the Tribe of Juda.
But what had Death to do to punish, when Baptism had nothing to wash (...) his
seeming
contradiction is the main thing of our Salvation. For if Death be the wages of
sin, and sin be not in Christ, it remains that our sins put him to death, which
he discharges as a Surety, not as a Debtor. Adams Disobedience in the easiest
Command, is recompensed by Christ's Obedience in the hardest Injunction; for
Obedience consisting in the renowning our selves, is most eminent in Death.

There is a Death in Death which makes it more then Death, the Jews malice and
our Saviors obedience are well met to entertain it, both which emulate each
other; So habituate and obdurate themselves, that they forgetting their Splcen,
may now believe they do justice; and Christ, were he any besides himself, might
think he died deservedly: Could any Tyranny have startled his Obedience, the
Cross had done it, whose gripes are employed to be infinite, while their Eury
is here matched as an even measure with the Patience of God. Behold ye that
pass by; Was ever sorrow like this sarrow? Jer. 1. 21. A sorrow that might be
felt by looking on, felt by that which had no feeling: The Earth was moved at
his constancy, it fell a shaking when his hands were Why the Earth shook at our
Saviors Passion.
fastened, it reeled and staggered when it missed his feet whose touch
supported it: One timely wound at the heart had been a friendly murder: But
when all the extreme parts are beset with distinct killings, yet none so kind
as to dispatch him, when the nail only tortures, not destroying the part, but
deading the sense making Death live, the Cross it self must needs be the only
Pulpit to express Anguish. But why all these stations? Tardiora sunt remedia
quem mala; It is easier to spill then to gather, to mar then to mend.

In man's creation and fall, God and Devils were quick at work: but when it
comes to redemption, how many premises? how many ages of expectance? what
growth? what preparation? what lingering execution must join to finish the
Sacrifice? for should our Savior have made have in his task, it would have
filled us with wonder rather then thanks, and would have relished more of power
then love: but great must his love be when he dwells on his pain, when he
delights in sorrow, and huggs it instead of them he loves.

Whilst his body was thus afflicted, the Jews took care that his soul should
not be idle, who provided a punishment mixed with as much shame as smart; for
although the Cross had never been made infamous by the communion of Slaves yet
how shameful it was, might be read in his own countenance, the seat of shame:
he enjoyed not here the privilege of others, Death the face was covered with
nothing but shame, and to its greater confusion, it beheld the bodies
nakedness; the first object of shame, not in secret as our first Parents did,
but before a cloud of insulting scorners, such as durst mock him when he was
clad in purple: it is true our Savior had no cause of shame in himself yet
Innocence may be dipped in a blush as well as guilt, not for any conscions ground
in its own bosom, but a timorous suspicion of sinister thoughts in others;
which made the Sun remember its duty in cloaking him from shame, who clothed
it with light, and seasonably denying his beams in a time unseasonable, The
Statists of the Synagogue well knew what they asked when they they asked for a
crucifying; in death they stroke at his life, in the death of the Cross they
aimed at his name, they that hated his Doctrine more then his person, slew him
but to come at his memory, in murdering which they might ever raise a
continual slaughter, not only on him, but on all those that should follow so
vile a master: this wooden engine was a stumbling block to the Jew and Gentile,
to whom it seemed incredible, that the author of life should die so base a
death again that such a death should be the spring of life, it appeared a
greater riddle then that the honey should be hived in a carcass: but we know
how the disgrace of this Altar made our sacrifice the more acceptable, Judge.
14. and know the stench of the place gave it a sweeter savor, and how all our
glory is founded on this dishonor; why then should it be strange that Christ
died the death of a slave, since he died for the slaves of sin. Had not a thief
therefore the first handsel of Redemption? happy life, who quitted his
reckoning for death to come, while here at once he was twice crucified in
himself and Christ. It was necessary that Christ should hang naked on the Tree,
to free us from the Trees malediction which first showed us to be naked; nor
ought his death to be private as his birth, but exposed to public view that so
paying ransom for the world he might take a whole nation to witness. But is
their fury yet sated, and their rancour glutted? no, Christ's bones should be
broken did not a Prophecy keep them whole; but lo the flints and the bones of
the earth are broken for them, his garments should be tortured, did not mystery
dispose of the soldiers Avarice; but lo the vail of the Temple is rent for it,
and the Holy of Holies is taught to suffer with the more Holy.

The death of the Cross was attended not only with the worst of shames but
the greatest of pains; our Saviors life went from him like water out of a
little mouthed vessel, where a speedy mortal wound had been a meritorious
courtesy: to be betrayed by his own servant, to have that face defiled with
spittle which Angels could not look on, and yet cannot look off from, to be
tossed about like a Tennis ball, from Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to Pilate,
from Pilate to Herod, and from Herod back to Pilate; to be accused of blasphemy
against God whose will he came to fulfill; of treason against Caesar whom he
was so careful that he should have his due, that rather then not pay tribute a
fish should bring it in his mouth; then for the Prince of Peace to have
Barabas, a mover of sedition, preferred before him, nay a murderer, the
destroyer of life thought to be more worthy of life then he that so often
raised their dead; to be mocked with innocence clad in a white garment the
mystical robe of purity; to have the knee bowed to him in scorn to whose name
every knee should bow in devotion; to be delivered over to the soldiers to
buffet and play with, who being men of blood their very sport is cruelty; and
then to have those hands barbarously nailed through that had made the whole
world, and had been instruments in so many pious and charitable deeds; those
feet that trod the way of Gods commands to a thread to suffer as if they had
been swift to shed blood, etc.

What now remains, but having surveyed this bitter Passion, I turn it to a
definition of our Salvation? the Prophet has done it for me, Esaias 53. 5. He
was wounded for our Transgressions; He was bruised for our Iniquities; The
chastisement of Peace was upon him and by his stripes are we healed. The Lord
is my Shield, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 28. 8. For like a Shield he has
warded off the blow from us.

What sin is there for which the Lord Jesus has not suffered? He sweat Blood
for the Idlers, was Mocked for the Scorners, Blasphemed for the Swearer, Spit
on for the Malicious, Falsely accused for the Liar, Buffetted for the Violent
man, Tosled up and down for the Troublesome, did Penance in white for the
Adulterer, he was Scourged for the Stealer, Crowned with Thorns for the
Ambitious, Burned in the Feet for the Stragler, in the Hand for the corrupt
Receiver, Gall and Vinegar to drink for the Riotous: for all he died; for the
Secrecy of all he died Openly with shame on the Cross.

LEt the Blood therefore from which Pilate washed his hands, wash us all over,
and grant (good Lord) that we may safely pass through this Red Sea of thy
Passion, wherein though the spiritual Pharaoh and his Host, though the
Israelites themselves be drowned; yet let it open a way for us Gentiles, into
that Kingdom which thou have promised.

Quod faxit Deus.
AMEN.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 26. line 17. for piantiphrasin, read per Antiphrasin, Page 38. line 17.
for adjunt read ad sunt.


