Sold by Thomas Dring at ye George in fleetstreete near Cliffords Inn. 1651



POEMS AND TRANSLATIONS. Amorous, Lusory, Moral, Divine: By EDWARD SHERBURNE
Esquire;

LONDON, Printed by W. Hunt, for Thomas Dring, at the Sign of the George, near
Cliffords-Inn in Fleetstreet. 1651.

NOBILISSIMO AMICISSIMO CANDIDISSIMOQUE PECTORI HOMAE STANLEIO ARMIGERO; OYSAGT
PRAESTANTISSmo QUO NULLUS MIHI CARIOR MEORUM ^EM PLURIS FACIUNT NOVEM SORORE:
QUAM CUNCTOS ALIOS;

HAEC QVALIACVNQVE, NON TAM MATERIE VARIA, QUAM MACULIS VARIEGATA POEMATA,
^MAXIMAE INTIMAEQVE, HEV MINIMVM AMICITIAE PIGNUS!) DICATA, DEDICATA VOLUI
EDWARDVS SHERBVRNE.

EROTICA.
SALMACIS
BY Signeur GIROLAMO PRETI, Out of Italian.
WHere clear Pactolus glides through Phrygian Lands
Tween Banks of Emeralds, on golden Sands,
And in his Course does Lydi^'s Confines trace
With humid feet, and with a slippery pace,
The Bedridden Earth, to ease her self (oppressed
With her own weight, and crampt with her long Rest)
Her vaster Limbs first stretches to a Plain,
Then to a Mountain lifts her head again;
A Mountain; such for height, as if 'midst those
Which to scale Heaven by the bold Giants chose
(Pelion, Olympus, Ossa,) placed it were,
Would like a Cedar amongst low shrubs appear.
So far above the Clouds his head does rise
That his green Locks no Summer dripping spies
With Rain, his face no Winter does behold
Masked with a snowy Muffler against the cold.
The proud Usurper seems as if he meart,
^corning his low and baser Element,
To make the Airy Region his own,
And plant for Juno an Imperial Throne.
Or like some new Briareus he stands
Armed with more large-spred Oaks than he with hands,
And menaces the Stars; his Sides and Back,
Woods which never shade, fields which never verdure lack,
With a green Mantle cloth, whose fringed Base
A hundred Brooks with Streams of Silver Lace.
At foot of this tall Rock, a Cave disclosed
It self; a Cave, shady and dark; supposed
The sole design of Nature, as the Effect,
Where She both Workman played, and Architect.
Over whose gaping Mouth, her hand had hewn
Out of the living Rock a Lip of Stone
Cut like a bending Arch; whence for more grace
(As 'twere the native Porter of the Place)
Green Ivy wreathed in many a subtle knot
Hung dangling: Fore the entry of the Grot
With streams of liquid Pearl, (the humid Son
Of some large Torrent) a small Brook does run,
Which on the Pibbles as it purling plays,
Does so harmonious a murmur raise,
Tuned to so just a Pitch, as dares defy
The Birds sweet Noats, and with the Lute may vie.
In The amidst of this vast Cave, (which seems to prop
With it is arched back the whole Mountain) towered the top
Opens a spacious Vent; through which, it is flight,
The damp Air takes, Entrance, the Suns warm light.
The rude Walls Ivy, creeping round about,
With a green Suit of Tapp'stry hangs throughout.
The Goddess which in Heavens third Orb does shine
Did to these shades her amorous thefts confine.
Here her delights secured; whose Passions prove
Her more the Servant, than the Queen of Love,
Here Mars to war often taught she in Loves field
With other weapons than with Spear and Shield;
Whilst 'bout his Sinewy Neck her Arms she wound,
And his rough Limbs in those soft Fetters bound.
Here once three naked Goddesses ('it is said)
With censuring Eyes the Phrygian Swain survayd;
Whose judgment in that memorable strife
Gained him the beauteous Hellen for his Wife,
And gave to lovely Ven^s uncontrolled
The Prize of Beauty, and the fruit of Gold.
And here at last the winged Son of Jove
And M^ija, sported with the Queen of Love;
Who, in these shades (if Fame have Truth revealed)
And her soft Bosom, long time lay concealed.
Mean while great Jove, wondering at his neglect,
(Who of some Message did return expect)
Thus with himself discoursed 'bout his long stay:
Sure he lies lurking for some hop'd-for Prey,
Or his light Wings, (doubtless he had else returned:)
He in the Sea has wet, or fire has burned.
True Jove; he lurking lay, but in the shade
Of Venus Arms; whilst on her Lips he preyd.
His Pinions he had singed; but with Loves sorch,
Which not so much his Plumes as heart did scorch;
Drenched too he had, and wet his lighter Wing,
Not in the Seas salt Waves, but Loves sweet spring.
And now seven times the Sun with quickening Ray
Had lighted in the East the Lamp of day;
As often the humid Night had wrapped the Skies
In her black Mantle, wrought with Stars like Eyes:
And yet no Day goes by, no Night ever passes,
But sees these Lovers linked in close Embraces.
But from those Arms (where long a Prisoner held)
The loyt'ring God now to return compelled,
Unwillingly their dear Embrace declind:
Yet left a growing Pledge of Love behind.
Nine times already had the Moon (constrained
By Course) her Orbinto a Crescent wain'd;
As often, (her horns spread to a round) had run
With Light that seemed to emulate the Sun;
When a sweet Boy (so geniall Stars disposed)
Fair Cytheraea's pregnant Womb disclosed.
In their warm Laps new born the Graces laid him,
And with their softer Arms a Cradle made him.
Beauty first suckled him at her white Breast
And her Idaea in his Looks impressed.
About him did like little Anticks play,
Laughter, and mirth, and smiled his Cries a^ay.
No noise, but light breathed from his Lips of Roses,
^^ch as the Sky no Thunder heard discloses,
Nor like to other Childrens, seemed his Eyes
Two springs of Tears, but like two Suns to rise:
Whence all presaged that they in time should prove
No less the Food than the sweet fire of Love.
His Beauty with his years did still increase;
Whilst his fair Mother, longing to impress
The Image of her self in his loved face,
Did every day add some Celestial Grace.
Now grown a Youth, behold him, with the Darts
Of his bright Eyes, subduing Female Hearts:
The living Picture of his Parents; where
Their mixed Beauties seem to have equal share.
From Father both and Mother Name he took,
From Father both and Mother his sweet Look.
All the feigned Beauties of the World, seemed met
In him as in their living Counterfeit.
Where Nature (like Apelles) the best Graces
(To add to his,) culled from a Thousand Faces,
Upon his Ivory Front you might behold
His curled Tresses flow like Waves of Gold,
And as enamoured on his Lovely Face,
That with their soft and twining Arms embrace.
Then like loose Wantons 'bout his Neck to twist,
Glad that they might by its warm snow be kissed.
View his fair Front, and thou wilt say that displays
A clear Horizon decked with Morning Rays;
And as we see beneath the dawning Gleams
Of The Morn, the Sun shoot forth his brighter Beams;
So here might you perceive alike to rise
In's Front the Morn, the Sun in his bright Eyes.
His melting Lips, Speeches Vermilion Gate,
Soft Seat of smiles, blushes so sweet dilate,
As seem at once to ravish the pleased sight,
And to a Kiss the longing touch invite;
Through which a fragrant Zephyrus transpires,
That Fans and kindles both Loves flagrant Fires.
Nor can one tell (no grace in either missing)
Which best becomes them, speaking, smiling, kissing.
Look on his tender Cheek, and the^e thou wilt spy
The Rose as in a Throne of Majesty,
'Midd'st a white Guard of Lillies, proudly grow;
Or blushing Pinks set in a Bank of Snow:
His Habit, and his Looks did both express
A kind of sweet becoming carelessness.
Whom all so much more Beautiful esteem
By how much he less beautiful would seem.
Whilst thus he manifests in every Part,
What Art there is in Beauty void of Art.
One Day by Chance 'twixt him and Cupid grew
This aemulous Contest; which of them Two
(Since he in Beauty so surpast the other)
The God of Love should be! he, or his Brother?
When Venus Arbitress of the Debate
On a Sublime Tribunal throned in State,
(Fixing upon the Lovely youth her Eyes)
Thus spoke: My Deer, this Doom 'twixt you denies
All further strife; a Bow Cupid and thou
Shall bear; he at his side, thou in thy Brow.
The same your Weapons; Love's inflaming Brand
Thou in thy Looks shall bear, he in his hand:
Both too shall shoot at and wound humane Hearts,
Thou with thine Eyes (sweet Boy) he with his Darts.
This lovely Youth, with divine graces crowned,
As yet three Lustres scarce had seen go round,
When in his Mind a Resolution grew
Of bidding Phrygia, and the Cave adue.
Desire of knowledge, and the Love of Fame,
For Travel his aspiring thoughts inflame.
How often he wished his Fathers Wings? that so
He might each clime the Sun enlightens know:
And view what ever the Earths vast Bosom holds,
Or in its watery Arms the Sea infolds.
The Lycia^ Realms he viewed; and there survay'd
The Hill, within whose dark, and dreadful shade
The triple-shap'd Chim^ra once did dwell
That animated Aetna, living Hell,
Which from three sooty Jaws, used to expire
A sulph'ry Deluge, and belch Floods of fire.
To Caria next his Course he bends; where he
Through that well-peopled Land does wondering see
The numerous Villages like shrubs to rise,
The Cities tower like Cedars to the Skies;
Whose fertile Borders with its winding waves
Towered the cold North the famed Meander laves;
Which (like a Traveller on some strange Coast,
Having his first Path, his Directress, lost,
With devious steps, now in, now out does wind,
Flies what he seeks, and meets what he declined,
Lost in the Error of ambiguous ways)
Its self imprisons in a watery Maze.
At length he to that fatal Place arrived
Where envious Love his sad Revenge contrived.
So pleasant and delightful was the Place,
That Heavens great Eye in its Diurnall Race
Yet never beheld another like unto't,
Of all 'twixt Ganges head, and Calpe's foot.
There to a round which a fair Prospect lends,
Its flowery surface a large Plain extends;
A hundred little Brooks its Bosom trace,
And with their streams of Quicksilver enchace;
Which with sweet vernall Dews supplied, still yield
Life to the Flowers, and Verdure to the Field;
That may, with odorous Jewels thus aray'd,
A heaven of flowers, or ^ield of stars be said.
And what more Pleasure adds; this pleasant Ground,
Tall Trees, as with a leavy wall surround,
And 'bout it seem like a green work to run
As if to sconce it against the scorching Sun.
And as sometimes the Airs soft breath we find,
Crisps the smooth Sea; so here a gentle wind,
(Whose softer wing the Flowers does lightly brush)
Curles into trembling waves the fields green Plush.
In The amidst of this fair Plain, the tumid Earth,
(As if impregnate with a fruitful Birth)
Swells gently up into an easy Hill:
Where crowned with sweets the spring sits smiling still.
And, as from thence she sheds her balmy showers,
The ground with grass enamels, that with flowe^s.
Whose pregnant Womb a Crystal issue teems;
Which as it glides along with purling streams,
(That settle in a verdant Vale;) does make
Of a small Rivolet, an ample Lake;
In which no Weeds their muddy dwelling have
To stain the native cleerness of the Wave*
But as the Sun pure Crystal by its light
Transpierces; so the penetrating sight
May through the Water here, the bottom spy,
Checkerd with Pibbles of a various dye:
And see how the Mute People of the Flood,
With Ebon Backs, and Silver Bellies scudd.
The Flowers which on its fertile Borders grow,
As if in Love with their own Beauties show:
Bending their fragrant Tops, and slender Stems
Narcissus-like, to gaze on the clear Streams.
Where limbed in Water Colors to the Life
They see themselves; and raise a pleasing strife
In the deluded Sense at the first View
To judge which Flowers are Counterfeit, which true.
On the left hand of this transparent Flood,
Fringing the Plains green Verge, there stands a Wood
Where Lovers Myrtles, and the Poets Bays,
Their spreading Tops to Native Arbors raise:
From whose tall Crowns like a black Veil the shade
Falling, the Lakes clear Bosom does invade.
So thick the Trees are they exclude Heavens sight,
And make a leavy Skreen against the Suns Light.
Whose close-weav'd Branches a new Heaven present
And to the Sight form a green Firmament:
In which like fixed Stars one might epsy
Gold-colour'd Apples glitter to the Eye.
Which though no Motion Circular they run,
Want not yet that of Trepidation.
No vulgar birds there make their mean Abodes,
But winged Heroes, Musicks Demi Gods,
Whose Plumes like Gems, with various Colors shine,
Their Beaks of Orient Hew, their Notes Divine:
Whilst this sweet Place seems a retired Cell,
Where Love and Flora with the Muses dwell.
Within these dark, yet pleasant Coverts bred,
Close by the Lake, a Nymph inhabited:
A Nymph; her Breast more snowy, Looks more fair,
Her Eyes more Diamonds, and more Gold her Hair,
Than ever Nymp^ could boast that has been seen
To haunt the VVoods, or press the flowery Green.
The Chase she loved not, nor with Hound or Spear
Would charge the Tusked Bore, or savage Bear.
Nor at a Mark or Quarry Bow would bend:
Nor in a Race with other Nymphs contend.
To her the Naiades would often say,
Fair Salmacis, fair Cynthia's Laws obey:
Her sports pursue; and in thy hand a Spear,
Or at thy side a painted Quiver bea^.
But she who other Pleasures had in Chase,
As the proud Mistress of so proud a Place,
Disdains to set a Foot beyond the Bounds
Of those loved shades, or tread on meaner grounds.
There with its liquid streams the neighboring Lake
A Lukewarm Bath for her fair Limbs did make.
The Neighboring Lake; which often it self discovers,
Swelled by the Tears of her forsaken Lovers.
In whose unflattering Mirror, every Morn,
She Counsel takes how best her self t'adorn.
There she sometimes her looser Curles unwinds,
Now up again in Golden Fillets binds,
Which makes (which way soever them she wears)
For amorous hearts a thousand catching Snares.
A Robe, like that of Day, now wears she, white,
Now one of Azure, starr'd like that of Night.
Now curious Sandals on her feet does slip,
In Gems, and Gold less rich, than Workmanship.
Now in a careless Dress she goes; her Hair
Spread 'bout her shoulders, and her Ankles bare.
And gathering Flowers, not all alike does pick,
But such alone does in her Bosom stick,
Whose leaves, or Milk, or Scarlet, does invest,
To suit in Color with her Lip and Breast.
And if a Flower she pull, strait from its Root
Another rises up to kiss her Foot;
Thus whether more she take or give none knows,
Whilst her Hand gathers what her Foot bestows.
By chance she then was gathering Flowers, when she
The Son of Venus spied, and Mercury:
On whose bright Looks her wanton Eyes she bent,
With which her longing Thoughts moved with Consent,
Whilst both her Sight, and Thoughts by seeing bred,
With pleasure on so sweet an Object fed.
But she sucks in Loves poison with desire,
Which through her Eyes glides like a stream of fire
Into her Breast; where, with Aetnaean Waves
Firing her Heart, the scalding Torrent raves.
And now she forward goes like a bold Lover,
Her flames to him that caused them, to discover.
But coming near, she saw in's eyes there played
A wantonness with Modesty allayd:
Which though the Gazers Heart it set on Fire,
Quenched yet the heat of a too bold Desire:
Whence though Love spurred her on, fear held her back,
And though her heart did fly, her pace did slack.
Yet she observed to lighten in his Look
I know not what Majestic Grace, which struck
Her Eye not with more Terror than Delight,
And less did dazzle than it did invite.
Whence fired with hope, yet freezing with despair,
She nearer fearfully approached; and there
Sent him by the light waftage of the VVind,
A sigh, an Ah Me, Nuncios of her Mind.
And now her Passion gaining vent, affords
Her Tongue the liberty and use of words.
But lame, and broken; yet that serve t'imply,
'Twas this she meant, Be kind, or else I dye.
"Sweet Stranger! if a Soul lodge in thy Breast
"Fair as thy outside, hear a Nymphs Request:
"That begs thou wilt take thy Inn up in this shade.
"(And Gods their dwellings in the woods have made.)
"Here on this Bank may thou repose thy Head,
"Or on my Bosom make thy softer Bed:
"The Air here still is sweet, still cool; if by
"My sighs inflamed it be not, or thy Eye.
"That Eye which quick as lightning Flames does dart;
"And sooner then I saw it, scorched my Heart.
"O more than happy were thou, Salmacis!
"If he (but dream not of so great a Bliss)
"Should prove so kind to lay thee by his side,
"Not as his Mistress only, but his Bride.
"But if that Joy another do possess,
"O let me, as her Rival ne'rtheless
"(Since here is none that may the Theft reveal)
"From thy sweet Lips a kiss in private steal.
"But should some Goddess nourish in thy Breast
"A nobler fire; deny not a request
"To one that dies; if more I cannot move,
"A kiss for pity grant, if not for Love.
"Or if too much that seem; pray let me have
"What Sisters yet may from their Brothers crave.
Here ceast to speak; and with that forward pressed
To have joynd Lip to Lip, and Breast to Breast.
But the shy youth coyly repulst her still,
As cold in Love, as deaf unto her will,
Dying with Blushes of a deeper stain,
The native Crimson of his Cheeks, in Grain.
(For a bold Suter, of a cold denier
When he the heart cannot, the face will fire)
At last with a coy look, thus moved, he spoke.
"Fair Nymph be gone, or I the place forsake.
"You but deceive your self to think my Mind
"Will to such wanton Follies be inclined,
At which (with his desires glad to comply,
Yet loath to lose the pleasure of her Eye)
She sadly creeps behind a bushy Skreen,
There closely skulks to see, and not be seen.
And now the Planet worshipped in the East,
Rid on the Back of the Nemaean Beast;
And from the inflamed Meridian that bends
Like to a Bow, his Beams like Arrows sends.
When this fair Traveller, with heat oppressed,
And the days Toyls, here laid him down to rest
Where the soft Grass, and the thick Trees, displaid
A flowery Couch, and a cool Arbor made.
About him round the grassy spires (in hope
To gain a kiss) their verdant heads perk'd up.
The Lilly, the fields Candidate, there stands
A Suter for the favor of his hands:
And here the blush-dy'd Amaranthus seeks,
And finds it self outrivald in his Cheeks:
Whilst the enamoured Trees to embrace him, bend
Their shady Crowns, and leavy Arms extend.
Mean time from his fair Front he rains a shower
Of shining Pearl-drops, whilst his bright Eyes power
On the Nymphs Heart (that melts through hot desire
TO enjoy what she beholds) a Flood of fire.
This Place at length he leaves, roused by the Call
Of the near waters sweetly murmuring fall.
Where, on the Bank his Sandals off he slips,
And in the Crystal streams his Ankles dips.
Whilst the clear Lake, as his pure feet he laves,
Feels Love's warm Fires mix with its colder Waves.
And now, not his fair feet content alone
To kiss, desires, (an amorous VVanton grown)
(That she might nearer to her wish aspire)
Her Bottom deeper, or her Waters higher.
Which (to their power) to rise when moved seem,
As if they longed to bath each curious Limb.
The Youth with pleasure on the Flood does gaze,
And in that watery glass his Face survaies,
Admiring, with a Look steadfastly set,
His real Beauty in his Counterfeit.
And sure he with himself in Love had fell,
Had he not heard of fond Narcissus tell,
Who from cold streams attracting fatal fire,
Did, to enjoy what he possessed, expire.
Then stooping, he with hands together closed,
Hollowing their joined Palms, a cup composed
Of living Alablaster; which when filled
With the sweet Liquor the clear Spring distilled,
He gently lifts it to his head, then sips,
Both bath and Beverage to his Looks and Lips.
Mean time with ravished thoughts the Nymph does view
The sportive Lad, and whilst he drinks, drinks too,
But in a different Manner: from the Lake
He his, her draught, she from his Eyes does take.
His slacks his Thirst, hers more inflames desire,
He sucks in Water, but she drinks in Fire.
And now, invited by the heat, and took
With the alluring Temper of the Brook,
Himself disroabing, the rich spoil he throws
Away, and his pure Limbs all naked shows.
And like a new Sun with a darkening Cloud
Invested, casting off the envious shroud,
He round about his beauteous Light displaies,
And makes the Earth a Heaven with his bright Rays.
The Nymph at this freezes at once and burns,
And fire with Love and Ice with wonder turns.
At length cries out; Ah me! what see I here?
What Deity leaving his heavenly Sphere
Is come to sport him in these shades? sure by
His wounding Look, and his inflaming Eye
It should be Love; but no light Wings appear
On his fair shoulders; strange he none should wear!
No; those he lent my heart; which from my Breast
Its flight has took, and now in his does rest.
Ah me thou living Aetna! clothed in snow,
Yet breathing flames, how lovely do thou show?
Cruel, yet cunning Archer! that my Heart
Thou sure might hit, to allure me with the Dart.
But now from the green Bank on which he stood,
Fetching his Rise, he leaps into the Flood.
Whose fall, (as him the breaking Waters take)
With a white foame all silvers o'r the Lake.
Where, as he swims, and his fair Arms now bends,
Now their contracted Nerves again extends,
He the Nymphs Heart (that peeps behind an Oak)
Wounds from that Ivory Bow at every stroke.
Into another Form he then converts
The Motion of his Arms, and like to Darts,
Now this, now that, through the clear Waves does shoot,
His Hand in Motion answered by his Foot.
For as he this Contracts, he that extends,
And when this forward, that he backward sends.
Whilst through the streams his purer Limbs, like snow
Or Lillies through transparent Crystal show.
His flowing Hair, floating like that rich Fleece
Which the first Ship from Colchos brought to Greece.
The Nymph at this stands as of sense quite void,
Or as no Sense but Seeing she enjoyed.
At last from her full Breast (of its close fire
The sparks) these broken Accents did expire.
"O why (as Arethusa, or the Joy
"Of Galatea) cannot I (sweet Boy)
"Melt to a flood for thee? then (my fair Sun!)
"Thou might (to bath thee) to my Bosom run.
More would sh' have said: but her full Passion stopped
Her Door of Speech, and her Eyes Floodgates op't.
Struck with Despair so dead, she scarce appears
To breath, or live, but by her sighs and tears;
Yet though her silent Tongue no Words impart,
Her speaking Thoughts discoursed thus with her heart.
"Fond Salmacis! why slag thy hopes? thy Mind
"What fears deject? on; nor be ever declined;
"But boldly thy fair Enemy assail.
"See! thy desired Prey's within the Pale:
" And Love (perhaps in pity of thy Pain,)
"Offers what was denied thee by disdain.
"Be resolute; and him whose conquering Eyes
"Made thee his Captive late, now make thy Prize.
"Fear not; for pardon justly hope he may
"Who plunders him that does deny to pay.
Thus she, rekindling her half-quench'd desires,
Her Cheeks with Blushes, heart with boldness fires.
Then forward moves a little; and anon
Full speed, unto the Lake does madly run.
But in the midst of her Careere, repents,
And stops; suspended 'twixt two cross Intents
Like to a wavering Balance; on, afraid,
Back, loath to go, and yet to either swayed.
Now she advances; then again retreats:
Her fears now conquers, then her hopes defeats.
Struck with Loves powerful Thyrsus, at the last
(True Manad-like) her lighter Robes off cast,
She hurries to the Lake, then in she skips;
And in her wanton Arms the unwilling clips.
He, who Loves Fires never felt in his cold Breast,
With fear at such a strange surprise possessed,
For help began to cry; when she at this,
Ah, peace, says; and his Mouth stopped with a kiss.
Yet strugg'ling he her Wishes did deny,
And from her shunned Embraces strove to fly.
But whilst he labors to get loose, to his Breast
She faster cleaves; and his Lips harder pressed.
So when Joves Bird a Snake has trussed, his Wings
The more that plies, the more that 'bout 'em clings,
And leaves it doubtful to the Gazers view,
To tell which more is Prisoner of the two.
Fearful to lose yet her new-gotten prize,
The Nymph to heaven (sighing) erects her Eyes.
"And shall my Love (says she) triumph in vain,
"Nor other Trophy than a bare kiss gain?
"O Jove! if what Fame sings of thee be true,
"If ever thou did a Bulls fierce shape indue,
"And on thy Back from the Phaenician shore,
"Through Seas thy Amorous Theft in Triumph bore,
"Assist my Vows; and grant that I may prove
"As happy in this Conquest of my Love:
"No force let our Embraces ever disjoyn;
"Breast unto Breast unite; our souls entwine;
"Tie heart to heart; and let the knitting charms
"Sweet kisses be; the Fetters, our soft Arms.
"Or if thou have decreed that we must part
"Let that Divorce divide life from my Heart.
Jove heard her Prayers; and suddenly as strange,
Made of them both a mutual Interchange;
And by an undiscerned conjunction,
Two late divided Bodies, knit in One:
Her Body straight a Manly Vigor felt,
And his did to a Female softness melt.
Yet thus united, they with difference
Retained their proper Reason, Speech, and Sense.
He liv^d and she appart; yet each in either;
Both one might well be said, yet that One, neither.
This Story by a Rivers side (as they
Sat and discoursed the tedious hours away)
Amyntas to the coy Iole told:
Then adds; O thou more fair, in Love more cold
Than he, Heaven yet may make thee mine in spite,
That can such Differents, Ice and fire, unite.
This with a Sigh the Shepherd spoke; whilst she
With a coy smile mocked his simplicity.
But now the setting Sun poasting away,
Put both an End to their Discourse and Day.
FINIS.
The Metamorphosis of LYRIAN and SYLVIA,
by St Amant. Out of French.
UNder that pleasant Clime, where Nature placed
Those Islands, with the name of Happy graced,
There lived a young, and gentle Shepherd late,
And had he never loved, too fortunate;
His Name was Lyrian, she whose looks enthralled
His amorous heart, was the fair Sylvia called.
The Natives there, amongst whom still lives his Name,
(Nor shall the Waste of time impair it is Fame)
Report, he bare for sweetness of his Song,
The Prize from all Apollo's learned Throng.
Yet nor his Voice, nor Worth that did exceed,
And even in Envy Admiration breed,
Could e'^ move her that o'r his heart did reign,
To pleasing Joys to turn his amorous pain.
The Cheerful fields, and Solitary Groves,
(Once loyal Secretaries to his Loves)
Are still the Witnesses, and still shall be,
Of his chaste thoughts, and firm fidelity.
For they alone were conscious of his Grief,
They only gave his Wonded Soul Relief,
When with the Weight of his sad Woes oppressed,
They pitying, heard him ease in Plaints, his Breast.
Ye Gods! how often resolved he, yet declined,
(Although he felt his heart with flames calcined)
Before those Eyes h' adored so, to display
His Griefs! Such Modesty his Soul did sway.
And though h' had learned, and knew to suffer much,
Yet were his Manners and Discretion such,
Silence should first in death have quenched his flame,
Ever he would have rudely voic'd it unto ^ame.
Nor had it yet to any (had not Stone
And stocks discovered it) been ever known.
Which, (for on them he used his Plaints to incise)
By chance presented it to Sylvia's Eyes.
This seen, in her does Scorn and Anger move;
O heavens! is it possible that such a Love
She should despise; and him who had professed
Himself her Captive, as her Foe detest?
Or that Love's Magic Characters his hand
Had engraved, should in her Eye for Ciphers stand?
Or she should read them yet with so much spite,
Never more to see them, less to ^aze them quite?
Ah it is too true! nor's that sufficient,
Unless her Tongue to her hard heart consent,
And against her faithful Love, with cruel Breath
Pronounce the rigid sentence of his Death.
What said he not his Passion to excuse?
What flourishes used not his willing Muse,
To prove, his Love (of which the noble ground
Was her Perfections) could no Crime be found!
If neither Reasons self, nor Justice, ought
(Those for which Heaven is loved) as Crimes be thought
That the Worlds Sovereign Planet which the Earth
And Mortals Fates does govern from their Birth,
By firm Decrees enrolled in the Skies
Had destined him a Servant to her Eyes.
And could his Will be lead another way,
Yet being forced he could not disobey.
So that his Soul in this her Captived state
Did only yield to her impulsive Fate;
Not that (said he) he murmured at his Chains,
But pleased, sat down and blessed his rigorous Pains;
Not but his Yoke so willingly he bare
That Liberty a greater Bondage were;
Not but in spite of his malicious fate,
(In crossing all his Joys so obstinate)
He should unforced, even to the Grave affect
That Beauty which his Love did so neglect.
Yet these his Reasons, so well urged, so fair,
With her that will hear none, no Reasons are.
They more incense her: yet for fear she might
Be softened, she betook her self to flight.
Such were the winning Graces of his Tongue,
Proving his Love did not her Beauty wrong.
How often since that, by all fair means he tried
(Whilst he the Gods with Sacrifices plied)
To bring the humorous Nymph unto his Bent,
And make her too obdurate Heart relent!
His Passions, Sighs, and Tears were ready still,
As the officious Agents of his Will,
To work her to a sense of his hard State;
But 'lass! his hopes grew still more desperate,
Nay even his voice, of so divine a strain,
So moving! moved in her naught but disdain.
Six years he lived perplexed in this distress,
Without the least Appearance of success;
When he by chance (as she a Stag pursued)
Encountered her: who ever the Queen has viewed
Of Wood-Nymphs, (Cynthia) a hunting go
After the Bore, armed with her shafts and Bow,
May then imagine the diviner Grace,
The Looks, the Habit, Stature, and the Pace
Of beauteous Sylvia, as she tripping came
Into the VVoods, pursuing of her Game.
Soon as poor Lyrian, half dead with Love,
Had spied her in that solitary Grove
For whom his wounded heart so long had bled,
He with these words pursues her as she fled.
Art thou resolved then (Sylvia) against my Cries
Thine Ears to close, and against my Verse thine Eyes?
That Verse which Fame unto thy Life does give;
And must I d^^, 'cause I have made thee live
Eternally? Seven years expired be
Since I Have been tortured by thy Cruelty;
And do thou think that little strength supplies
My heart, for everlasting Torments will suffice?
Shall I for ever only see thee stray
Amongst these wild VVoods, more senseless yet than they?
Alas! how weak I Am grown with Grief! I feel
My feeble Legs beneath their Burden reel;
O stay! I faint, nor longer can pursue,
Stay, and since Sense thou lack'st, want Motion too.
Stay, if for nothing else, to see me dye.
At least vouchsafe stern Nymph to tell me why
Thou came into this Dark and Gloomy Place?
Where Heaven with all its Eyes can never trace
Or find thee out. VVas't thy Intent, the Light
Of thy fair Stars thus to obscure in Night?
Or seek'st thou these cool shades, the Ice and Snow
That Is 'bout thy Heart to keep unmelted so?
In vain Coy Nymph thou Light and Heat do shun,
Who ever knew cold or shade attend the Sun?
Ah Cruel Nymph! the Rage do thou not fear
Of those wild Beasts that in these VVoods appear?
No, no, thou art secure* and may out-vy
Both them and all the World for Cruelty.
Oh thou that gloriest in a heart of stone!
VVilt thou not stay? yet see (as if my Moan
They pitied) each rough Bramble 'bout thy foot
Does cling, and seems to arrest thee at my Suit?
Ye Gods! what Wonders do you here disclose?
The Bramble has more sweetness than the Rose.
But whether fly these idle Words? in vain
Poor, miserable Wretch, thou do complain,
After so many Ills, (of which I bear
The sadder Marks yet in my heart;) Now hear
Ye Gods at last! and by a welcome Death
A period put unto my wretche^ Breath.
Ah me! I saint; my spirits quite decay;
And yet I cannot move her heart to stay.
Ye hellish Deeps! black Gulp^s where Horror lies,
Open, and place your selves before her Eyes.
Had I Hippomenes bright Fruit, which stayed
The swifter speed of the Schenaeian Maid,
They would not profit me; the Worlds round Ball
Could not my cruel Fugitive Recall.
She is all Rock, and I who am all fire,
Pursue her Night and Day with vain desire.
O Nature! is it not a Prodigy
To find a Rock than fire more light to be?
But I mistake: for if a Rock she were
She Would answer me again as these do here.
Thus tired with running, and o'rcome with VVoe,
To see his Mistress should outstrip him so,
Poor Lyrian yields himself as sorrows Prize,
His Constancy and amorous Fervor dies,
Bloody despair entering his captived Soul,
Does like a Tyrant all his Powers control.
Then in the height of VVoe to his Relief
He calls the Gods, yet in the midst of Grief
All fair Respect does still to Sylvia give,
To show that even in Death his Love should live.
He who for Daphne like Regret did prove,
And the horned God (who breathless, thought his Love
The fair-hair'd Syrinx in his Arms he clasped,
And slender Reeds for her loved Body grasped)
So far, (remembering their like amorous Fate)
His unjust sufferings commiserate,
That both straight swore in Passion, and disdain,
To punish the proud Author of his Pain:
Their powerful Threats alike effect pursues;
See I that proud Beanty a Trees shape endues.
Each of her Hairs does sprout into a Bough,
And she that was a Nymph, an Elm is now.
Whilst thus transformed, her feet (to Roots spread) stuck
Fast in the ground, she was at last o'rtook
By panting Lyrian; happy yet, to see
Her he so prized within his Power to be;
Ye Gods then says he! who by this sad Test
Have before mine Eyes Natures great Power expressed,
Grant that to this fair Trunk which Love never knew
My heart may yet a Love eternal show.
This having said, unto the yet warm Bole
He clings, (whilst a new Form invests his Soul)
VVinding in thousand twines about it, whence
He Is called of Love the perfect Symbol since.
In brief, this faithful Lover now is found
An Ivy Stock; which creeping from the ground
About the loved stem, still climbing is,
As if he sought her Mouth to steal a Kis^:
Each leafe's a heart; whose color does imply
His wish obtained, Loves Perpetuity;
Which still his strict Embraces evidence.
For all of him is lost but only sense,
And that you ^d swear remains; and say (to see
The Elm in his Embraces hugged) that he
VVilling to keep what he had gained at last,
For fear she should escape, holds her so fast.
FINIS.
Forsaken LYDIA.
Out of the Italian of Cavalier Marino.
IN Thunder now the hollow Cannon roared,
To call the farre-fam'd Warriors aboard,
Who that great feud (enkindled 'twixt the French
And German) with their blood attempt to quench.
Now in the open Sea they proudly ride,
And the soft Crystal with rude Oars divide;
Perfidious Armillus at once tore
His Heart from Lydia, Anchor from the shore.
^T was Night, and Aged Proteus had driven home
His numerous Heard, fleec't with the Seas white foam;
The Winds were laid to rest, the fishes slept,
The wearied world a general silence kept,
No noise, save from the Surges hollow caves,
Or liquid silver of the justling waves,
Whilst the bright Lanthorns shot such trembling light,
As dazzled all the twinkling eyes of Night.
The fair Inamorata (who from far
Had spied the Ship which her hearts treasure bare,
Put off from Land; and now quite disembay'd,
Her Cables coiled, and her Anchors weighed,
Whilst gentle gales her swelling sails did court
To turn in scorn her Poop upon the Port)
With frantic speed from the detested Town
To the deserted shore comes hurrying down.
As the Idaean Shepherd stood amazed,
Whilst on the sacred Ravisher he gazed,
Who snatched the beauteous Trojan youth away,
And wafted through the yielding Clouds his prey;
Or as that Artist whose bold hand durst shape
Wings to his shoulders (desperately to escape
A loathed servitude) through untrac'd skies
Creets King pursued with fierce, yet wondering Eyes:
The flying Navy Lyd^a so beheld,
Her Eyes with Tears, her Heart with Passion swelled;
In sighs to these she gave continual vent,
And those in brinish streams profusely spent:
But tears and sighs alas bestows in vain,
Borne by the sportive Wind to the deaf Main;
The Main, who grief inexorably mocks,
As she her self is scorned by steady Rocks*
O what a black Eclipse did straight disguise
In Clouds the Sunshine of her lovely Eyes!
She tore her Cheeks, Hair, Garments, and impressed
Marks of his falsehood on her guiltless breast.
She calls on her disloyal Lovers Name,
And sends such sad loud Accents to reclame
The Fugitive, as if at every cry
Her weary soul forth with her voice would fly.
Whither, ah Cruel! There, full grief represt
Her Tongue, and taught her Eyes to weep the rest;
Whither, ah Cruel, from the hollow side
Of the next Rock the Vocal Nymph replied.
In Tears and Sighs the Water and the Air
Contend which in her sorrows most shall share;
And the sad Sea hoarse with incessant groans
Wakens her faint grief, and supplies her mones.
Oh stop kind Zephyre bu^ one minutes space,
(She cries) the swelling Sails impetuous race,
That my expiring groans may reach the ear
Of him who flies from her he will not hear.
Perhaps, though whilst alive I cannot please,
My dying Cries his Anger may appease,
And my last Fall, Trophey of his Disdain,
May yield delight, and his lost Love regain*
Receive my heart in this extreme farewell,
Thou in whom Cruelty and Beauty dwell,
With Thee it fied; but what alas for me
Is it to lose my Heart who have lost Thee?
Thou art my better self; Thou of my heart,
The soul, more than the soul that moves it, art:
And if thou sentence me to suffer death
(My Life) to Thee let me resign my breath.
Alas I do not ask to live content,
That were a blessing me Fate never meant;
All that my wishes a^me at, is, that I
(And that is but a poor wish) Content may dye;
And if my heart, by Thee already slain,
Some relics yet of a loathed life retain,
Oh let them by thy pity find release,
And in thy Arms breath forth their last in Peace.
No greater happiness than Death I crave,
So in thy dearest sight I death may have;
And if thy hand, armed with relentlesse Pride,
Shall the small thread of my poor Life divide,
What Pleasure than that Sorrow would be higher?
When I in Paradise at least expire;
And so at once the different Arrows prove,
Of Death from thy hand, from thy Eyes of Love.
Ah! if so pleased thou art with Wars alarmes;
If that be it that calls thee from my Arms;
If thou aspi^'st by some adventurous toiles
To raise proud Trophyes decked with glorious spoils,
Why fondly do thou seek for these elsewhere?
Why leav'^t thou me a prisoner to despair?
Turn; nor thy willing Captive thus forsake,
And thou shall all my Victories partake.
Though I to thy dear Eyes a Captive be,
Thousands of Lovers are no less to me.
Unhappy! who contend and sue for sight
Of that which thou unkindly thus do slight;
Is It not a high attempt that can comprize
Within one Act so many Victories;
To triumph over Triumphs, and subdue
At once the Victor and the Vanquished too?
But if to stay with me thou do refuse,
And the rude Company of Soldiers choose,
Yet give me leave to go along with Thee,
And in the Army thy Attendant be.
Love, though a child and blind, the Wars has known*
Can handle Arms, and buckle Armor on;
And thou shall see, my courage will disdain
(Save of thy Death) all fear to entertain,
I will securely 'midst the armed Troops run,
Venus has been Mars 'his Companion;
And though the heart in thy obdurate Breast
Be with an Adamantine Corslet dressed,
Yet I in stead (to guard thee from all harm)
With my own hands will thy fair body arm,
And the Reward Love did from me detain
In peace, in War shall by this service gain.
And if it fortune that thou undergo
Some dangerous hurt by the prevailing Foe,
I sadly by thy side will sit to keep
Thee company, and as thou groan'st will weep.
My Sorrow with thy Anguish shall comply,
I will thy Blood, and thou my Tears shall dry:
Thus by an equal sympathy of pure
Affections we each others wounds will cure.
Perhaps when he this sweet effect of Love
Shall see, the happy President may move
The stubborn Enemy more mild to grow,
And to so soft a yoke his stiff neck bow,
Who by himself gladly betrayed to thine,
Shall willingly his own Command resign.
So by a way of Conquest strangely new,
Thou shall at once Love, Arms, and Souls subdue.
Ah most unhappy! he to these sad cries
Inexorable his deaf ear denies;
And far more cruel than the rough Seas are,
Laughs at my sighs, and slights my juster Prayer.
See, whilst 'thou spreadst thy sails to catch the Wind,
What a sad Object thou have left behind.
Of War alas why do thou go in quest?
Thou leave a fiercer War within my Breast.
Thou fly'st thy Country and more happy state*
To seek in some strange Land a stranger Fate*
And under foreign Climes and unknown Stars*
TO encounter hazards of destructive Wars;
Eager to thrust thy self (lavish of breath)
Upon Disasters, Dangers, Blood and Death,
Changing (ah too unwary, too unwise)
Thy certain Joys for an uncertain Prize.
Can it be true thou more thy self should please
With busy troubles than delightful ease,
And like the enraged Deeps rough toiles above
The calmer pleasures and sweet sports of Love?
Can thou from a soft bosom fly (ah lost
To gentleness*) to be on rude Waves tossed?
And rather choose in Seas a restless Grave,
Than in these Arms a quiet Port to have?
With furrowing Keel thou plow'st the foming Main,
And (O o^durate) hearst not me complain;
Too swift thou fly'st for Loves slow wings t'oretake,
Love, whom perfidiously thou did forsake;
And all the way thou swell'st with Pride, to know
The sufferings for thy sake I undergo,
Whilst the mild East to flatter thy Desires
With his soft Breath thy flagging Sail inspires.
Go faithless Youth, faithless and foolish too,
Thy Fate, or folly rather, still pursue;
Go, and now thou art from my Fetters free,
Never take care who sighs or dies for Thee.
Oh! if the Heavens are just, if ever they
With Eyes impartial humane wrongs survey,
Heaven, heaven my tears implore, to Heaven I cry,
Avenge my sufferings, and his Treachery.
Be Seas and Skies thy foes! no gentle gale
Blow on thy ^hrowds! destruction sill thy Sail!
No Star to thee (lost in despair and Night)
When thou invok'st, disclose its friendly Light.
To Scythian Pirates, (such as shall despise
Thy fruitless tears) may thou become a Prize,
By whose inhumane usage may thou be
Spoiled of the Liberty thou took'st from me.
Then thou the difference shall understand
Betwixt the shafts shot from a Thracian hand,
And Lovers eye; the odds betwixt a rude
Insulting Foe, and Loves soft servitude:
The Breast his golden Darts not pierced, shall feel
The sharp Impression of more cruel steel,
And thou enslaved, which are the stronger prove
The fetters of Barbarians, or of Love.
Ye Seas and Skies, which of my amorous care
The kindly faithful Secretaries are,
To you my crying Sorrows I address,
To you the witnesses of my distress;
Shores by the loss of my fair Sun forlorn,
Winds who my sole delight away have born,
Rocks the Spectators of my hapless Fate,
And Night that hearst me mourn disconsolate.
Nor without reason is it (alas) that I
To Stars and Sands bewail my misery;
For with my State they some proportion bear,
And numberless as are my woes appear.
Heaven in this Quire of beauteous Lights does seem
To represent what I have loss in him;
The Sea to whom his flight I chiefly owe,
His heart in Rocks, my tears in Waves does show.
And since to these Eternal Fires whose Light
Makes Sleep's dark Mansion so ^erenely bright
I turn; what one amongst them shall I find
To pity me above the rest inclined?
She who in Naxos when forsook did meet
A better Spouse than him she chose in Cr^et,
Though all the rest severely are intent
To work me harm, should be more mildly bent.
Oh Thou who guid'st the Pompous train of Night,
With the addition of thy glorious Light,
Whose radiant hair a Crown adorns, whence streams
The dazzling luster of seven blazing Gems:
If that Extremity thou not forget,
If thy own sorrows thou remember yet,
Stop at my sighs a while, and make the Crew
Of thy bright fellows stay and hearken too.
Thou know the like occasions of our Fate,
Both circumvented by unkind Deceit;
A cruel I, a Love ungrateful Thou
Did follow, both to equal sufferings bow,
In this to thine a near resemblance bears.
The Cause that dooms me to eternal Tears;
I now am left as thou were heretofore
Alone upon the solitary Shore.
But how the ever our misfortunes share
The same Effects, their Causes different are;
I my poor self no other have deceived;
Thy Brother was through thee of Life bereaved.
Sleep thy Betrayer was, but Love was mine,
Thou by thy short Eclipse did brighter shine,
And in the Skies a Crown of Stars obtain,
But I on Earth (forsaken) still remain.
Fool, to whose care do thou thy grief impart?
What do thou talk, or know thou where thou art?
She midst a dancing Bevy of fair Lights
Trips it away, and thy misfortune slights:
Yet happy may she go, and her clear beams,
Whilst I lament, drench in the Brinish streams;
Perhaps the Sea to my afflicted state,
Will prove then her less incompassionate.
But how on Seas for help should I rely,
Where nothing we but Waves and Rocks can spy?
Yet so small hopes of succor has my grief,
That of those Rocks and Waves I beg Relief.
Down from these Rocks, of Life my troubled Breast,
By a sad Precipice may be releast,
And my impu^er soul in these Waves may
Quench her Loose Flames, and wash her stains away.
Ah Lydia, Lydia, whither do thou send
Thy lost Complaint? Why words so fruitless spend
To angry Waves? to Winds where horror roars?
To Rocks that have no ears? to senseless shores?
Thou giv'st thy grief this Liberty in vain,
If Liberty from grief thou can not gain;
And fond presumption will thy hopes abuse,
Unless thou grief and life together lose.
Dye then: so shall my Ghost (as with despair
Laden it flies) raise in the troubled Air
Tempests more loud than Thunder, Storms more black
Than Hell or Horror, in curled Waves to wrack
His Ship and him: so (and it is just) shall I
And my proud Foe, at least together die:
On him who first these bitter Sorrows bred,
Seas shall avenge the Seas of Tears I shed.
This said, she made a stop; and with rash have
(By violent despair assisted) cast
Her self down headlong in the raging Sea,
Where she believed it deepest; Now to be
Sadly by her enriched; whilst from her fair
Vermilion lips, bright eyes, Phaebeian hair,
Coral a purer tincture does endue,
Crystal new light, Pearls a more Orient hue.
Such was the hapless fate of Lydia,
Who in those Waves from which the King of Day
Each morn ascends the blushing East, in those
From which the Queen of Love and Beauty rose,
A second Queen of Love and Beauty perished,
Who in her Looks a thousand Graces cherished;
And by a sad Fate (not unpittied yet)
A second Sun eternally did set.
Sweet Beauty, the sad wrack of ruthlesse Seas,
And ill placed Love, whom cruel Destinies
Have food for Monsters made, and sport for Waves,
With whom so many Graces had their graves,
If vain be not my hopes, If no dead fire
These Lines devoted to thy Name inspire,
Though buried in the Seas salt Waves thouly,
Yet in Oblivions Waves thou shall not die.
FINIS.
THE Rape of Hellen, Out of the Greek OF COLUTHUS* By EDWARD SHERBURNE Esquire;

LONDON, Printed by W. Hunt, for Tho. Dring, at the Sign of the George, near
Cliffords-Inn in Fleetstreet. 1651.

Upon the Title.
THe Rape, etc.] Not to be taken in the Common acception of the Word: (for
Paris was more courtly than to offer, and Hellen more kind-hearted than to
suffer, such a violence;) but rather for a transporting of her (with her
consent) from her own Country to Troy: which Virgil seems to insinuate in the
first of his Aeneis, where he speaks to Achates to bring him from the Fleet,
amongst other Presents for Dido, a rich Veil; once, Ornatus Argivae Helenae,
quos illa Mycenis
Pergama eum peteret, inconcessosque Hymenaeos
Extulerat, etc,
Greek Hellens dress, which she from Sparta brought,
When Troy, and lawless Marriages she sought.


Where the Word peteret is to be applied as well to Hymenaeos as Pergama, and
implies that the quitting of her Country, and going along with Paris, was an
Act she desired as well as consented to, as Donatus (in 6 Aeneid.) has rightly
observed* and thus much the ensuing Poem makes good.

But the Occasion of this her Rape is diversely reported: Herodotus writes that
Paris did it in a mere bravery of Knight Erranty, following the Examples of
the Cretans, Phaenicia^s, and the Argonauticks, in the Rapes of Europa, Io, and
Medea. Dictys Cr^tensis and others report that being sent Embassodor unto the
Grecian Princes to negotiate for the Release of his Ant Hesione, or (according
to Plutark in vita Homeri) (...). to learn Greek fashions; and being kindly
entertained at Sparta in the Court of Menelaus, he in his absence solicited
his Queen, and having won her Consent, carried both her and her two Kinswomen
Clymene and Aethr^ away with him to Troy.

(...),
(...).
But she in neat-built Ships (as falsely Fame
Gives out) n^'r sailed, nor ever at Ilium came.
Says Stesichorus in his Recantation, after he had been struck blind for
slandering Hellen, (with a Matter of Truth) as Plato in Phaedro and Pausan. in
Lacon. make mention. Euripides likewise in her Tragedy (though elsewhere he be
of another Opinion,) makes her not to be rapt by Paris, but conveyed into
Egypt by Mercury, and there kept in safe Custody by Proteus: and that a Cloud
in her Likeness was only transported by Paris to Troy: which Menelaus after the
end of the Trojan Wars brought away with him, but being driven (in his Return)
upon the Coast of Egypt, lost there his Cloudy Hellen, and recovered the true
one by the means of Theonoe Proteus his Daughter.

But this is ove^born by the general stream of all Poetical Relations, which
say, (and our Author here goes along with the Tide) that Hellen was assigned to
Paris, as (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Euripid. Iphig. in Aul. The gift of Venus, when she near
The Fountain clear,
With Pallas, and the Wife of Jove,
For Beauty strove.


Upon which score he is said to have undertaken a Voyage to Sparta, and from
thence to have brought her away with him to Troy. Which occasioned those fatal
and lasting Wars, so celebrated by Homer in his Iliads, to which this ensuing
Poem, seems as it were a Prologue or Preludium.

There be those yet who think her not worth the Honor of so famous a
Contention; and Hoelzlin (in Prolegom: ad Apollon:) says in plain terms, that
Homer might be ashamed to make that the Argument of his Work, not will believe
that any man could be such a Wittall, as to seek by force to regain one to his
Bed, that had so notoriously wronged it. (Though this Example wants not seconds
if we may credit Parthenius in Eroticis) But hear we another Doctors opinion:
with which we conclude: Olim mirabar, quod tanti ad Pergama Belli
Europae, atque Asiae causa puell^ fuit.
Nunc, Pari, tu sapiens, and tu, Menelae fuisti:
Tu, quia ponebas; tu, quia lentus eras,
Digna quidem facies, pro qua vel obiret Achilles
Vel Priamus, belli Causa probandafuit.
Propert. l. 2. eleg. 3. I wondered once, that Troy's War, which engaged
Half the whole World, should for a Wife be waged,
But now methinks both Princes I approve,
This 'cause he sought, that 'cause he kept his Love.
Worthy Achilles, worthy Priams Life,
Was such a Beauty: 'Twas a just brave strife.


The Rape of HELLEN, out of the Greek of Coluthus.
YE Trojan Nymphs! Xanthus fair Progeny!
Who on your Fathers Sands often laying by
Your sacred Armelets, and Heads reedy Tires,
Ascend to dance on I Would in mixed Quires;
Quit your rough flood; and tell the Phrygian Swains
Just verdict: how the Hills he left, the Main's
New Toyls to undergo: his Mind what pressed
With fatal Ships both Sea, and Land t'infest;
Whence did that unexpected strife arise,
Which made a Shepherd judge 'twixt Deities:
What was his bold Award; how to his Ear
Arrived the fair Greek's Name; for you were there:
And Paris throned in Ida's shades did see,
And Venus glorying in her Victory.
When tall Thessalian Mountains the Delights
Witnessed of Peleus Hymenaeall Rites,
Ganymed Nectar at the sacred Feast
By Jove's Command filled out to every Guest;
For all descended from caelestiall Race,
That day, with equal forwardness, to grace
Fair Thetis (Amphitrite's Sister) strove.
From Seas came Neptune, from the Heavens came Jove*
And Phoebus from the Helicon^an spring,
Did the sweet Consort of the Muses bring.
Next whom, the Sister to the Thunderer
Majestic Juno came: nor did the Fair
Harmonia's Mother Venus stay behind;
Suada went too, who for the Bride entwined
The Wedding Garland, and Love's Quiver bare.
Pallas from Nuptials though averse, was there;
Aside her heavy Helmet having laid.
Apollo's sister, the Latonian Maid,
(Though wholly to the savage Chase applied)
Her Presence at this Meeting not denied.
Stern Mars, not such as when his Spear he shakes,
But as when he to lovely Venus makes
His amorous Address, (his Shield, and Lance
Thrown by) there smiling mixed in a soft dance.
But thence unhonour'd Erys was debarred;
Nor Chyron her, nor Peleus, did regard.
But Bacchus shaking with his golden Hair
His dangling Grapes, let us Zephyre's sportive Air
Play with his curled Tresses: like some young
Heyfer, (which by a furious Gad-fly stung
Quitting the Fields, in shady Forests straies)
Whilst madded Erys roams: seeking always,
How to disturb the quiet of the Feast.
Often from her rocky Cell (with rage possessed)
She slings; now stands, then sits: still up and down
Groaping on the Earth, yet could not find a stone:
For Lightning she would have struck: or by some spell
The bold Titanean Brethren raised from Hell
With hostile-Flames to storm Jove's starry Fort;
Though thus enraged, she yet does Vulcan court,
Whom Fire, and Malleable steel obeys:
She thought the sound of clatt'ring shields to raise,
That so the Gods affrighted with the Noise
Might have run forth, and left their Festive Joys.
But fearing Mars, She does at last incline
To put in Act a far more quaint Design:
She calls to mind Hesperia's golden Fruit;
Whence a fair Apple of dire Wars the Root,
Pulling, the Cause of signal strifes she found:
Then midst the Feast, Dissentions fatal ground
Casts, and disturbs the Goddesses fair Quire.
Juno, of Joves Bed proud, does first admire
The shining Fruit, then challenged as her due:
But Venus (all surpassing) claims it too
As Love's Propriety: which by Jove seen,
He calls, then thus to Hermes, does begin.
Know thou not Paris, one of Priam's Sons?
Who, where through Phrygian Grounds smooth Xa^thus runs,
Grazes his horned Herds, on Ida's Hill,
To him this Apple bear: say it is our Will,
As Arbiter of Beauty, he declare
Which of these Goddesses excells in rare
Conjunction of arched Eyebrows, lovely grace,
And well-proportion'd roundness of the Face;
And she that seems the fairest in his Eyes,
To have the Apple, as her Beauties prize.
This charge on Mercury, Saturnius lays,
Who humbly his great Sires Commands obeys;
And with officious care The Immortals guides:
Whilst each her self in her own Beauty prides,
But as they went: Loves subtle Queen, her heads
^ich Tire unloosing, with gold Fillets breads
Her curious Hair; then thus, with Eyes intent
On her winged Sons, her troubled thoughts does vent.
The strife is near; deer Sons your Mother aid!
This day must crown my Beauty, or degrade.
And much I fear to whom this Clown will give
The golden fruit: Juno, all men believe
To be the Graces reverend Nurse: to Her
The gift of Scepters they assign, in War
A powerful Goddess is Minerva deemed:
But We alone are of no Power esteemed.
Nor Empires We, nor Martial Arms bestow:
Yet why without a cause thus fear We? though
Minervas spear We have not, We yet better
Are with our Caestus armed, sweet Loves soft Fetter,
Our Caestus: that our Bow is, that our sting,
Which smart to Women, but not death does bring.
Thus rosie-finger'd Venus on the Way
To her attending Cupids spoke, whilst they,
With dutious Words, their drooping Mother cheer.
And now they reached the Top of Ida; where
The youthful Paris near Ana^^us head,
His Father's sheep in Flocks divided fed:
Here of his roving Bulls he count does keep,
And there he reckons o'r his well-fed sheep.
Low as his Knee, a Mountain Goats rough hide
Hung from his shoulders slagging by his side:
In's hand a Neatheards Goad: such to the Eye
(As slowly to his Pipes soft Melody
He moves) appeared the gentle Phrygian Swain:
Tuning on's Reed, a sweet, though rural strain.
In The solitary stalls often would he set
Himself with Songs delighting; and forget
The care both of his Herds and Flocks; the Praise
Of Pan and Hermes subject of his Lays,
With Shepherds most in use:) whose sweeter Note
No Dogs rude Howl, no Bulls loud-bellowing Throat
Disturbs; but Echo only, that affords
An artless sound in unarticulate Words.
His Oxen cloyed with the rank Grass, were laid,
Stretching their fat sides in the cooler shade;
Under the Umbrella of a spreading Tree
Whilst he himself sat singing: but when he
Spied Hermes with the Goddesses; afraid,
Upstarting, from their sight he would have made:
And, (his sweet Pipe among the Bushes flung)
Abruptly closed his scarce commenced Song.
To whom, amazed, thus Heavens winged Nuncius spoke:
Cast away fear; a while thy Flocks forsake,
Thou must in Judgment sit; and freely tell
Which of these Powers in Beauty does excel,
And to the fairest this fair fruit present.
Thus he: when Paris, with Eyes mildly bent
In amorous Glances, of their Beauties took
Exact survey: which had the gracefull'st Look,
The brightest Eyes, whose Neck the whitest skin,
Not leaving ought from Head, to Heel, unseen.
To whom Minerva first her self addressed,
Then, taking by the hand, these Words expressed.
Come hither Paris I leave Jove's Wife behind:
Nor Venus President of Nuptials, mind.
Pallas of Valor the Directress praise:
Entrusted with large Rule and Power, Fame says,
Thou govern'st Troy: Me chief for Form confess,
I Will make thee too its Guardian in distress.
Comply, and against Bellona's dreadful Harms
Secured, I Will teach thee the bold deeds of Arms.
Thus Pallas courted him: she scarce had done
When with fair Words, and Looks, Juno begun.
If me the Prize of Beauty thou wilt assign,
The Empire of all Asia shall be thine;
Slight Wars, what good from thence to Princes springs?
Both valiant men and Cowards stoop to Kings.
Nor do Minerva's Followers often rise high,
But Servants rather to Bell^na die:
This glorious Proffer stately Juno made.
But Venus (her large Veil unloos'd) displayed
Her whiter Bosom; nor at all was shy;
But did the honied Chain of Loves unty:
And, (whilst to view she her fai^ Breasts disclosed)
Thus spoke; her Looks into sweet smiles disposed.
Our Beauty, Wars forgot, our Beauty prize,
And Empires and the Asian Lands despise.
We know not Wars, nor use of Shields can tell;
In Beauty, Women rather should excel;
For Valor, I Will to thee a Wife commend,
Stead of a Throne fair Hellens Bed ascend.
A Spouse, thee Troy and Sparta shall behold:
Scarce had she ended, when the fruit of Gold
To Venus, as her Beauties noble Prize,
The Swain presented; whence dire Wars did rise.
Who in her hand as she the Apple weighed,
Did Juno, and Minerva thus upbraid.
Yield me the Victory, yield me fair Friends!
Beauty I loved, and Beauty me attends^
Juno they say thou gav'st the Graces Life,
Yet they have all forsook thee in this strife,
Though thou to Mars and Vulcan Mother art,
Nor Mars nor Vulcan did their Aid impart;
Though this in Flames, that glory in his Spear,
Yet neither one nor other helped thee here.
How thou braggd'st too, who from no Mothers womb
But Jove's cleft Skull, the Birth of Steel, did come?
In Armor how thy Limbs are dressed? how Love
Thou shunn'st, and do the Toyls of Mars approve?
Alike to Peace and Wedlock opposite.
Minerva! know, that such for glorious Fight
Are much unfit, whom by their Limbs, none well
Whether they Men, or Women be, can tell.
Sad Pallas thus, proud of her Victory,
She flouts, and her, and Juno both puts by,
Whilst she the fatal Prize of Beauty won.
Inflamed with Love, hot in pursuit of one
To him unknown; with inauspicious Fate,
Men skilled in Architecture, Paris strait
To a dark Wood conducts; where, in a Trice,
Tall Oaks are felled by Phereclus Advice,
Of Ills the Author, who before to please
His fond King Ships had built; whilst for the Seas
Paris does Ida change; and on the shore
With frequent Prayers, and Sacrifice, implore
His kind Assistant, Queen of Marriage vows;
Then the broad Back of Hellespo^tus ploughs.
But sad presaging Omens did appear:
Seas rising to the Skies, did either Bear
Surround with a dark Ring of Clouds: whilst through
The troubled Air a showring Tempest flew.
With strokes of active Oars the Ocean swelled:
And now, the Trojan Shores forsook, he held
His Course for Greece, and born with winged have,
Ismarus Mouth, and tall Pangaeus past.
Then Love^slain Phyllis rising Monument,
And of the Walk which often she came and went,
The Ninefold Round he saw; there she to mourn
Did use, while her Demophoons safe Return,
She from Athenian Lands expected: then
Coasting by Thessalies broad Shores, in Kenn
The fair Achaian Cities next appeared.
Men^breeding Phthia, and Mycene, reared
High, and wide built; when the rich Meadows past
Watered by Eryman^bus, He at last
Spies Sparta, loved Atrides City, placed
Near clear Eurotas, with rare Beauties graced:
Not far from whence, under a shady Wood,
H' admiring saw how sweet Therapnae stood.
For now but a short Cut he had to sail,
Nor long was heard the dash of Oars: They hale
The Ship to shore, and with strong Haulsers tied;
When Paris with clear water purified,
Upon his Tiptoes lightly treads* for fear
His lovely feet he with the Dust should smear,
Or going hastily* his Hair which flows
Beneath his Hat, the Winds should discompose.
By this, the stately Buildings, drawing nigher
He views, the Neighboring Temples that aspire,
And Cities splendor: where with wondering Eyes
The Statue of their Pallas he espies,
All of pure Gold; from which, his roving sight
Next Hyacinthus Image does invite;
The Boy with whom Apollo used to play:
Whom lest Latona should have rapt away
(Displeased with Jove) the Amyclaeans feared.
Phoebus from envious Zephyre, who appeared
His Rival, could not yet secure the Boy:
But Earth to appease the sad Kings Tears, his Joy,
A Flower produced; a Flower, that does proclaim
Of the once lovely Youth, the still-lov'd Name.
Now near Atrides Court, before the Gates,
Bright in caelestiall Graces Paris waits.
Not Seme^e a Youth so lovely bare:
(Your Pardon Bacchus! though Joves Son you are)
Such Beauty did his Looks irradiate.
But Hellen the Court doors unbolting strait,
When before the Hall the Trojan she had seen
And thoroughly marked, kindly invites him in,
And seats him in a Silver Chair; her Eyes
Whilst on his Looks she feeds, not satisfies.
First she supposed he Venus Son might be,
Yet when his quiver'd Shafts she did not see
She knew he was not Love; but by the shine
Of his bright Looks thought him the God of Wine.
At length her VVonder in these Words did break.
Whence art my Guest? thy Stock, thy County speak;
For Majesty is printed in thy Face:
And yet thou seem not of the Argive Race.
Of sandy Pylos sure thou can not be,
I know Antilochus, but know not thee.
Nor art of Phthia which stout Men does breed,
I know all Aeacus renowned Seed;
The glorious Peleus, and his warlike Son,
Courteous Patroclus, and stout ^elamon:
Thus Hellen curious to be satisfied,
Questions her Guest; who fairly thus replied.
If thou of Troy in Phrygia's utmost bound,
By Neptune, and Apollo walled round,
And of a King from Saturn sprung, who there
Now fortunately rules, did ever hear,
His Son am I; and all within his sway,
To me, as chief next him* subjection pay.
From Dardanus am I descended, he
From Jove; where Gods, immortal though they be
Do often serve Mortals: who beguirt our Town
Round with a Wall, a Wall that never shall down.
I am great Queen! the Judge of Goddesses,
Whom though displeased, I censured, and of these
The lovely Venus Beauty did prefer:
For which, in noble Recompense, by her
Promised a Wife, her Sister, Hellen named.
For whom these Troubles I through Seas sustained,
Since Venus bids, heart let us solemnize
Our Nuptial Rites; Me nor my Bed despise;
On what is known, insist we need not long
Thy Spouse from an unwarlike Race is sprung:
Thou all the Grecian Dames do far outvy,
Beauteous thy Looks are, theirs, their Sex belie.
At this she fixed on Earth her lovely Eyes*
And doubtful, paws'd a while, at length replies.
Your Walls my Guest! by hands Caelestiall raised,
And Pastures, where his Herds Apollo grazed,
I long to see: To Troy bear me away.
I Will follow thee, and Venus will obey;
Nor, there, will Menelaus anger heed;
Thus Paris, and the beauteous Nymph agreed.
Now Night the ease of Cares, the Day quite spent,
Sleep brought, suspended by the Morns Ascent,
Of Dreams the two Gates opening: this of Horn,
In which the Gods unerring Truths are born.
The Other of Ivory: whence couzening Lies,
And vain Delusions of false Dreams arise.
When from Atrides Hospitable Court
Paris through plough'd Seas Hellen does transport,
And in the gift of Venus proudly joy;
Bearing with speed the Freight of War to Troy.
Hermione, soon as the Morn appears,
To Winds her torn Veyl casting, big with Tears,
Her loss bewails; and from her Chamber flying,
With grief distraught, thus to her Maids spoke, crying.
Whither without me is my Mother fied?
Who lay with me last Night in the same Bed?
And with her own hand locked the Chamber door?
Thus spoke she weeping: All the Maids deplore
With her their Mistress absence; yet assay
With these kind Words her Passion to allay.
Why do thou weep sweet Child! thy Mother's gone,
But will return soon as she hears thy Moan.
See how thy Tears have blubbered thy fair Cheeks!
Much weeping the divinest Beauty breaks.
She amongst the Virgins is but gone to play,
And coming back perhaps has missed her way:
And in some flowery Meadow doubtful stands;
Or in Eurotas bathed, sports on his Sands.
The weeping Child replies; the Hill, Brook, Walk,
And Fields she knows; do not so idly talk:
The Stars do sleep, yet on cold Rocks she lies;
The Stars awake, and yet she does not rise.
O my dear Mother! where do thou abide?
Upon what Mountains barren Top reside?
Has some wild Beast alas! thee wandering slain;
(Yet from Joves Royal Blood wild Beasts refrain)
Or fallen from some steep Precipice, art laid
An unregarded Corse in some dark shade?
And yet in every Grove, at every Tree,
Search have I made, but cannot meet with Thee.
The Woods we blame not then; nor do profound
Furota's gentle streams conceal thee drowned:
For in deep Floods the Naiades do use,
Nor ever by them their Lives do Women lose.
Thus poor Hermione complaining wept,
Then towered her shoulder her head leaning, slept.
(Sleep is Deaths Twin, and as the younger Brother,
In every thing does imitate the other;
Hence it is that Women often when they weep,
O'recharg'd with their own sorrows, fall asleep)
When in a Dream, her Mother (as she thought)
Seeing, she cries, vexed, yet with fear distraught:
From me disconsolate last night you fled,
And left me sleeping in my Fathers Bed.
What Hill, what Mountain have I left untrac'd?
To Venus pleasing Ties make thou such haste?
To whom fair Tyndaris this Answer made:
Daughter! though grieved, me yet forbear to upbraid:
That treacherous Stranger, who the other Day
Came hither, carried me by force away.
Thus she: at which out strait Hermione flies.
But finding not her Mother, louder cries;
VVing'd Issue of the Inhabitants of Air,
Ye Birds! to Menalaus strait declare,
One late arriving at the Spartan Port,
Ha^h robbed him of the Glory of his Court.
Thus to regardless Winds did she complain,
Seeking her absent Mother, but in vain.
Mean-time, through Thracian Towns, and Helles strait
Paris arrived safe with his beauteous Freight,
When from the Castle, viewing on the shore
A new guest Land, her hair Cassandra tore.
But Troy with open Gates her welcome shows
To the returning Author of her VVoes.
FINIS.
Upon COLUTHUS.
Ye Trojan-Nymphs! Xanthus fair Progeny^] NOt unlike that of Callimachus in
Hymno ad Delium (...) --

These Nymphs were frequently invoked by the Poets, and by others (anciently)
adored; sometimes by the Jews: For upon that passage Deutero. 32. (they have
sacrificed to Schedim, which our English Translation with the Septuagint
renders Devils) I find that the Rabbis understand by Schedim, Spirit^ haunting
Rivers, or Water-Nymphs. Of these there were diverse, as the (...) of all Waters
in general, the (...) of standing Lakes or Pooles, the (...) of Fountains,
the (...) of Rivers, and the (...) of Marshes; held yet to be Mortal by the
Poets, in regard they believed that all moisture (of which they were thought to
consist as composed of a mean nature between Men and Heroes according to
Platonic Philosophy) should be one day consumed by fire, in the last general
Conflagration.

Xanthus was the most celebrated River of Troas, descending from Mount Ida.

(...). Hom. Il. (...). Xanthus by Gods, by Men Scamander called. The first
Name being given it, for that it is Water turned the Fleeces of such Sheep as
drunk thereof yellow; as Aristotle (in tertio Animal.) has recorded; taking the
last from Scamander, who therein drowned himself. There is another River
likewise of the same name in Lycia, of which Homer (Iliad. 16.) and Callimachus
(hymno in Del) make mention and a third in Baeo^^a so called, of which
Pl^^arch. (in quaestion. graecan. quaest. 41.)

Your sacred Armelets] What our Author means by (...) I cannot undertake to
determine; yet, if not something of Ornament, as Armelets or the like, according
to our Version (which seems not unsuitably to answer to (...)) perhaps the
works of their hands, such as were Venus her Silver Mirror, Philostrat. (...)
rich Pantaphles and Bracelets, which Philostratus affirms to have been made
and offered by the Nymphs.

Or (which may perhaps be thought more genuine) some Musical Instruments,
Cymbals or the like.

-- Who the Hills forsook, the Mains
New Toils to undergo.]
(...) (though elsewhere a simple Periphrasis) is here meant in opposition to
the proper acception of (...) below, at verse 15.

(...). When tall Thessalian Mountains the delights
Witnessed of Peleus Hymenaeall Rites.]
The Poets fabled that Peleus, the son of Aeacus, and pupil of Chiron,
married Thetis the daughter of Nereus in the Mountain Pelion, and that all the
Gods did him the honor to grace his Nuptials with their Presence; The ground
of which Fiction the Scholiast of Aristophanes, (in Nubibus) has after this
manner discovered: So indulgent was Chiron to his Pupil Peleus, that he
studied by all possible means to advance the Honor of his Name. He therefore
endeavored, and at last concluded a Match betwixt him and Philomela the
Daughter of Actor the Myrmidon, a Lady of incomparable Beauty, but gave it out
that she was Thetis, whom by Joves consent, Peleus was shortly to marry, and
that all the Gods would descend to his Wedding in showers of Rain: Whereupon,
having made choice of a Time which by his conjecture (as he was notably well
verst that way) was like to prove very showry, he appoints the Consummation of
the intended Nuptials; and the season proving as he expected, the Rumor was
verily believed by the ignorant vulgar, and increast in succeeding Times by the
Fictions of the Poets. From whence we may likewise collect this further Moral:
Thetis (by Mythologists) is taken for the Water, married by Jupiter, i.e. fire
or the Calor Naturalis, to Peleus or Earth, whence is produced Mankind ((...)
Aristoph.) All the Gods come to the Wedding, because every Part of the Body is
attributed to some particular Deity (as the Head to Jupiter, Eyes to Minerva,
Arms to Juno. etc.) except Eris or Contention; because the Work it self
subsists by Harmony and Agreement, Fulgent.

Ganymed Nectar at the sacred Feast,
By Jove's Command filled out to every Guest.]
This with some of the following Verses, seems to be abstracted out of that of
Euripides (in Choro Iphig* in Aul.)

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...);
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
Which we thus Parahhraze:

What was the Pleasure of that day,
When Hymen on his Harp did play,
And Lybian Pipe for Dances meet!
When the Muses too with nimble Feet
The ground in golden Sandals pressed,
At happy Peleus Nuptial Feast,
Graced by the Gods! and sweetly sung
(Whilst Pelion with their Voices rung)
The Praises of the Queen of the Seas
Fair Thetis, and Aeacides!
Mean-time the Phrygian Ganymed,
The furtive Pleasure of Joves Bed,
From golden Ewrs brisk Nectar still
Fast as 'twas quafft did freely fill.
For all descended of Celestial Race,
That day, with equal forwardness to gra^e
Fair Thetis, Amphitrites Sister, strive.]
Though this Fable has been already sufficiently explained by us; yet (for
variety sake) take this further Explication of it out of Dictys Cretensis (de
Bello Trojano c. 6.) Ea tempestate (speaking of the Nuptials of Peleus and
Thetis) multi undique Reges aviti, domum Chironis, filiam ipsas Epulas laudibus
veluti deam celebraverant, Parentem ejus Chirona, appellantes Nerea, ipsamque
Nereidam: Et ut quisque eorum Regum qui Convivio interfuerant, Choro modulisque
Carminum praevaluerat, ita Apollinem, Liberum que; ex foeminis, Plurimas, Musas
cognominaverunt; unde ad id tempus Convivium illud Deorum appellatur. Where, we
see Thetis is made the Daughter of Chiron, and not of Nereus, and so
consequently not the Sister to Amphitrite: And of this opinion likewise is
Tzetzes, Chiliad.

(...)
(...)
(...).
Achilles was Peleus and Thetis Son,
Not sea-born Thetis, but another's, One
That Daughter to the learned Chiron was.
But no marvel if these Fables, which for the most part contradict Truth, do
sometimes cross one another: which to go about to reconcile, were to twist
ropes of ^and.

Phoebus from the Heliconian Spring.] Contradicted ^et with what follows (at
Ver.) by Catullus in Nup^is Pelei.

Inde Pater Divum sancta cum conjuge natisque
Advenit coelo, te solum (Phoebe) relinquens,
Vnigenamque simul cultricem montibus Hydri.
Pelea nam tecum pariter soror aspernata est,
Nec Thetidis Tedas voluit celebrare jugales.
The Muses sweet-voyc'd Quire did bring.] So we render -- (...), Dissenting
from Vulcanius (in Del. Callimach.) who makes (...) hereto bear the same sense
as (...), and this place agreeable to that of Callimachus, -- (...).

Harmonia's mother Venus.] Harmonia was the Daughter of Venus by Mars: so
Hesiod. in Theogonia.

-- (...)
-- (...)
(...) --
Fair Cytherea, Terror, Fear,
To Mars did with Harmonia bear.
Of which the Scholiast renders this reason (...), etc. In regard that the
breaches and ruins which were made in Cities by the assaults of Mars, are
repaire^ again by a peaceable Commerce, and amicable Association* Or (according
to others) in that Music not only delight^ the Mind, but inflames the Heart
with courage and resolution: and therefore there is hardly any People that use
not some kind of Music or other to provoke them to Battle.

Suada went too, who for the Bride entwined
The Marriage Garland, and Love's Quiver bare.
Suada, by the Greeks called (...), was the Goddess^ of Persuasion, whom
Theseus (as Pausanias in Attic^ witnesses) first caused to be honored with
divine Rites amongst the Athenians. She is here said to compose the Wedding
garland for Thetis. Juno likewise (in 4. Apollonii) confesses that at this
Wedding she played the Torch-bearer; for so courteous did the ancient Poets use
to make their Deities at the Marriages of Eminent Personages, of which Statius
(in Epithalam. Stell. and Violantill.) affords us not an unelegant Example.

Ipsa manu nuptam, genetrix Aeneia ducit
Lumine demissam, and dulci probitate rubentem,
Ipsa toros, and sacra parat, coetuque Latino
(Dissimulata deam) crinem, vultusque, genasque
Temperat, atque nova gestit minor ire Marita.
Venus her self leads by the hand the Bride,
With eyes down cast, and cheeks in Blushes died,
The Bed, the Rites prepares, and amongst the rest,
(Her Deity and dazzling Looks suppressed)
Strives to go less than the fair Bride --
Then speaking of the Bride-goom.

-- Tibi Phoebus and Evan
Et de Maenalia volucer Tegeaticus umbra
Serta ferunt, nec blandus Amor nec gratia cessat,
Amplexum niveos optatae conjugis artus
Floribus innumeris and olenti spargere Nimbo.
Sol, Bacchus, and the nimble Mercury
From shady Maenalus bring wreaths for thee;
Nor ceases Cupid, nor the chiefest Grace,
(Whilst of thy dearest spouse thou do embrace
The snowy Limbs) to strew thee o'r with flowers,
And rain upon thy Head sweet Balmy showers.
Nor unaptly, in my Opinion, does our Author here make the Goddess Suada to
bear Cupids Quiver, since nothing in Love is more forcive then persuasive
Courtship.

But thence unhonour'd Eris was debarred.] The reason we have already given: We
shall only add, that Eris or Contention was the daughter of Night, so Hesiod
(in Theogonia) tells us.

(...) --
-- (...).
Pernicious Night
Contention brought to Light.
The Poets fabled that there were two Erises, one the Goddess of noble
Contentions, in which those that strove, (the vanquished as well as Victor) came
off with great glory: The other the Goddess of base, and pernicious
Contentions, which rendered those that were engaged therein still more infamous.
See Eras^. Chil. 2. Centur. 6. Adag. 24.

-- Like some young
Heifer which by some furious Gad-fly stung,
Quitti^g the fields in shady forests straid)
Whilst madded Eris roams, etc.]
Suiting with that Simile in 1 Apollonii, where Hercules is described running
madly in quest of his lost Hylas.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
As when a Bull stung by some Gadfly runs,
Loathing the green and plashy Meads, and shuns
Herdsmen and Herds; now restless flings about,
Now chafing stands, and his large neck thrusts out,
Bellowing as if by some fierce Oestrum stung;
So raves the Hero --
Where the Oestrum (though generally by the Latin Poets, our Author here,
Aeschilus in these verses;

(...)
(...);
and the greek Glossaries it be usually taken for one and the same thing)
seems yet to be distinguished by Apollonius from the (...). So is it by
Sostratus (in 4. Animalium) cited by his Scholiast, where he writes, ((...).)
That the (...) or Tabanus is bred in the woods, the Oestrum in Rivers.
Aristotle speaks always distinctly of them; though in the Metaphor they
agree, taken for any high passion or fury. Suidas; (...) Festus; Oestrum furor
Graeco vocabulo: Most frequently applied to Love, Aristaenetus (lib. 2. c. 17.)
of a woman possessed with that passion. (...)* And our Author at Verse ()

Musaeus,
-- (...).
Nonnus,
-- (...).
Whence Lightning she would have struck.]
The common opinion was, that fire was naturally inherent in the flint.

Semper inest silici, sed raro cernitur ignis;
Intus enim latitat, sed solos prodit adictus.
Nec lignis ut vivat eget, nec ut occidat undis.
Fire always lurks in Fli^^; not always seen,
Unless by strokes forced out: nor wood to feed
It Is flame, nor water does to quench it, need.
Sophocles in Philoctet. (...)
(...) --


Excellently expressed by Virgil, l. 6.

-- Pars semina quaerit
Abstrusa in venis Silicis. --
In the same sense Arnobius (llb. 2.) says, Matrem Deam quae in saxo inani and
informi colebatur, habitasse in cilicis fragmentis in venis ejus abstrusam.
Isidorus Pelusiota, l. 2. Epistol. 100. (...). i.e. That fire which is the
fountain of all Arts, not only from Iron, Brass, and stone, but from Water
also, and Wood does naturally break forth: explain therefore this wonder to me:
Is it inherent in the Wood? how chance then it does not consume it? Is it not
inherent in the Wood? how has it from thence its birth?

The bola Titanian brethren called from Hell.] The Titans were the issue of the
earth, which she is said to have produced against Saturns, (as the Giants
afterward against Jupiter) to revenge the injury the Gods had offered her;
whence Servius (in 6. Aeneid) conceives their name to be derived, (...), (i.e.
ab ultione.) These were struck down to hell by the conquering Gods, and
overwhelmed with perpetual night, all but Sol, who for his fidelity merited so
eminent a place in Heaven.

But this place seems to savor of the Adage (...), (i.e. Titanas invocas) which
is usually taken up, ubi quis suis diffisus viribus alienum implorat Auxilium.
Erasm. chiliad 2. centur. 4. Adag. 47.

As Love's propriety.] The Scholiast upon that of Aristophanes, ((...), hit
with an apple by a wench) says, that the apple is the Symbol of Love, and
dedicated to Venus, so called by Arabius Scholasticus in an Epigram upon
Atalanta, (...), hence it is that Philostratus brings in the Cupids gathering
Apples: and that Apples were used for presents amongst Lovers Catullus testifies

Vt missum sponsae furtivo munere malum
Procurrit castae virginis in gremio. ad Ortalum.
See the story of Acontius and Cydippe, and that elegant description of the
marriage of Theophilus the Greek Emperor with Theodora, by Cantacuzenus, and by
Theodosius Melittus. Hither refer we that which Theocritus calls (...), Virgil,
Malo petere, Allurements of love, Chariclea in Lucian sends to Dinias (...),
Garlands half withered, and some Apples here and there bitten. Aristaenetus,
(...). i.e. but Pamphilus biting a piece of Apple, cast it directly into bosom.
She with a kiss receives it, and puts it up closely between her breasts, and her
stomacher. Philo allegorizeth the Apple of which Eve tasted and gave to Adam,
much to this effect.

Know thou not Paris.] Lucian (in dialog* (...). Which our Author has
verbatim expressed in Jupiters speech, and therefore will not need our further
version.

For rare conjunction of arched eyebrows.] An eminent part of beauty:
Aristaenetus, (...).

Petron. Supercilia usque ad malorum scripturam, and rursus confinis Lumine
pene permixtam; Anacreon describing his Mistress to the Painter,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Her fair arched eyebrows see
You so cunningly dispose,
That they may not part, nor close;
But by a divorce so slight
Be disjoynd, may cheat the sight.
-- When thus with eyes intent
On her wingdsons, her troubled thoughts does vent,
The strife is near: dear Sons, your mother aid,
This day my heavenly form must be survaid, etc.]
Consonant to the description our Author here makes, is that in Silius
Italicus, upon the same subject.

Cum sic suspirans roseo Venus ore, decoros
Alloquitur natos. Testis certissima vestrae
Ecce dies pietatis adest; quis credere salvis
Hoc ausit vobis? de forma atque ore (quid ultra
Jam superest rerum!) certat Venus. --
When sighing Rose-lipd Venus thus bespake
Her beauteous Sons. The day is come to make
Full trial of your loves: who would have thought
This, you being safe? for beauty (is there ought
Left her beside!) Venus must contest.
The gifts of Scepters.] By the Scepter and Spear she implies commands Military
and Civil: yet either includes both: Hasta (says Festus) olim summum armorum
Imperium significabat. Justin. l. 34. per ea adhuc tempora Reges Hastas pro
Diademate habebant quas Graeci (...) dixere. Nam and ab origin rerum pro diis
immortalibus veteres Hastas coluere, ob cujus religionis memoriam, adhuc deorum
simulachris Hastae adduntur. In those days Spears were born by Kings instead
of Diadems, which the Greeks called Scepters: for the ancients at first
worshipped a Spear for a God; in the memorial of which, the Statues of the Gods
were pourtraid with Spears.

In this sense Euripides uses (...); so la Cerda interprets puram hastam in
Virgil. The Spear afterward was changed (as the times altered) into a staff;
by the giving or taking away of which, the authority was conferred, or resumed
(as before to Soldiers by the Spear.) Continued to this age. I may observe by
the way, That Kings of old had birds carved on their Scepters: Aristophanes in
Avibus.

(...).
A Bird upon their Scepters pearch'd.
And presently after, (...)
(...) --
Like to some Priam in the Play,
Bea^ing in state a Poppinjay.
-- Loves Queen her head's
Rich tire unloosing with gold Fillets bread's
Her curious hairs.]


Which seems to be taken from that hint Callimachus gives in Palladis Lavacro,
where (speaking of Pallas) he writes, (...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
On I Would when she for beauty did contest,
Her looks Minerva by no mirror dressed,
Nor Simois streams, though clear as any glass.
Nor Juno: Venus only in smooth brass
Her face beheld, and often her Tresses trickt.


We yet better are with our Caestus armed.] Claudian,

Bellumque solus consiceret decor. Anacrion, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Beauty arms alone does yield:
That Is the woman's Spear and Shield.
Fire and sword both vanquished are,
When they meet a Foe that is fair.


And questionless this Caestus of Venus could not but be most strangely
powerful, that was made up of such bewitching Materials: For as Homer tells us,
-- (...).
(...);
(...).
All provocating pleasures there were wrought,
Desire, Love, Female Blandishments, that can
Captive the mind, even of the wisest man.


-- The praise
Of Pan and Hermes, subject of his Lays,
With Shepherds most in use.]
Horace lib. 4. Ode 12. Dicunt in tenero gramine pinguium
Custodes ovium, Carmina sistula,
Delectantque Deum, cui Picus, and nigri
Colles Arcadiae placent.
On the soft grass laid along,
Shepherds with their pipe and song,
Please the God, whose joy Flocks be,
And black Hills of Arcadie.
Nor less than Pan, was Mercury honored by them; for Antiquity likewise
conceited*

(...).
Hermes to be the guardian of all sheep.
Homer in Him. Mercur. Anaurus.] Though here (as by Callimachus, Moschus,
The^critus, Euripides, and others) taken for the proper name of a River; yet
(...) is the common name of all Torrents, (...). says Eustathius. But though
the Etymology hold, the Disparity does not; for by Lucretius it is applied to a
River.

Quique nec humentes Nebulas, nec rore madentem
Era, nec tenues ventos suspirat Anaurus.
The brightest eyes.]
(...);
which Meander improperly translates caesiorum oculorum fulgorem. For (...)
being equally attributed to the three, I conceive rather signifies the
brightness, than that color which is peculiarly ascribed to Minerva. The
Scholiast of Challimachus and Apollonius, confirm this opinion, who render
(...), and (...). And Hesychius (...).

In's hand a Neat-heards Goad.] Some nice-eard Critic may perhaps think a
Shepherds Crook would have sounded better in this place; but we go along with
our Author; nor without authority; for the (...) (which as the Scholiast of
Apollonius says, (...)) though by the later Latins rendered Pedum, (ab usu
consistendi, Scalig. l. 1. Poet.) was by the ancient Romans termed Agolum, as
Festus notes; which he describes to be Pastorale Bacculum quo Pecudes aguntur,
which warrants our interpretation, and expresses (^otidem verbis) -- (...)

Cast away fear.] Agreeing verbatim with that of Ovid (in Epistol. Parid.)

-- Pone metum nuncius ales ait,
Arbiter es formae, certamina siste Dearum,
Vincere quae forma digna sit unaduas.
Which needs no other interpretation then what our Author has here given.

But Venus her large veil unloos'd, displaid
Her whiter bosom, nor at all was shy.]
Let Ausonius here moralize. Tegat oport^t, auditor doctrina^ suam, qui volet
ad dicendum sollicitare trepidantem, nec emerita adversum Tirunclos arma
concutiat veterana calliditas. Sensit hoc Venus, de pulchritudinis forma, diu
ambiguo ampliata judicio: pudenter enim, ut apud Patrem, velata certaverat,
neque deterrebat aemulas, ornatus aequalis: at postquam in pastoris examen
deducta est lis Dearum; Qualis emerserat Mari, aut cum Mart convenerat, and
consternavit Arbitrum, and contendentium Certamen oppressit. Auson. Epist. 11.
ad Paulum.

Juno, they say, thou ga^'st the Graces life.] Our Author here makes Juno the
mother of the Graces: Hesiod (in Theogon.) Jupiter and Eurynome their Parents:
Antimachus will have them the daughters of Sol and Egle: (Pausan. in Boeotic.)
Servius (in 6. Aeneid.) of Bacchus and Venus: These were in number three; their
names Aglaia, Euphrosyne, Thalia. Yet both their names and number I find
controverted: the Lacedaemonians acknowledging only two, by the name of Auxo,
and Hegemon, (Paus. Boeot.) Homer but one, whom he makes the wife of Vulcan)
quod gratiosa sint Mechanica opera, says Phornutus:) yet he names Pasiphae
likewise for one of the Graces, whom Juno promises to Somnus for his Bride: but
see the common received Fable (and that moralized) in Seneca, in 1. de
beneficiis.

Though thou to Mars and Vulcan Mother art
Nor one nor other did their aid impart.]
I know not how Mars may be excused: but Vulca^ had little reason to help so
unnatural a mother as Juno, who is said to have thrown him to earth from
heaven* when newly born, for his deformity: (the Physical* sense of which,
Lucretius in 5. de rerum natura tells us, is no other then that Fulmen detulit
in terras mortalibus ignem
Primitus; inde omnis Flammarum diditur ardor.)


Nor would she ever acknowledge him for hers, until such time as having made a
chair of gold with such inward springs, that whoever sat therein was caught
as in a Trap: he sent the same for a present to Juno, who sitting down therein
was taken fast in the private snares, and denied by Vulcan to be set at
liberty, until such time as she would discover unto him who were his parents,
whereupon Juno declaring the truth of the business, she was set free, and he
admitted into the number and society of the Gods. See Pausan* in Attic. and
Servius in 5. Eclog. Virgil.

Who from no Mother's womb.] Chall imachus de Pallade (in Lavacro) -- (...)
(...) --
No Mother brought her forth,
But Joves head gave her birth.


Aeschilus Eumenid.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
One may a Father without Mother prove,
Witness the daughter of Olimpique Jove.
She from the wombs dark Mansions came not forth,
But Plant-like sprung: no Goddess gave her birth.
Which Coluthus seems to have imitated, and from thence to borrow the Metaphor
of (...) and (...), as Nonnus from him, (...).

By Phereclu's advice.] Phereclus was the son of Harmonides. -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) -- Homer. Iliad. (...).
For curious handicrafts exceeding famed;
Minerva's favorite: who for Paris framed
A Fleet of ships of equal bulk and trim:
Of ills the originals to Troy and him.


For he was slain afterward in the Trojan wars by Meriones, as Homer in the
same place witnesses.

-- On the shore
With frequent prayers and Sacrifice.]
The Libations which were usually made before any voyage, by pouring Wine, or
throwing the Intrails of Beasts into the sea, are enough known from Virgil,
Ovid l. 11. and others.

The broad back of Hellespontus.] (...), frequent with Homer, Oppian, etc.
Virgil, dorsum Maris: Suidas expounds it, (...). Arnobius (speaking of our
Savior) calcabat Ponti Terga.

Ismarus mouth, and tall Pangaeus.] Ismarus is a mountain of Thrace, and a
Maritime City of the same Region, in the province of Ciconia, mentioned by
Homer in Odiss. (...). expugned and plundered by Ulysses in his return from
Troy, as he himself confesses: (...)
(...).
From Troy cross winds me to Ciconia bare
To Ismarus, where we the City sacked.
Here a River, perhaps descending from the mountain, and therefore so called.

Pangaeus according to Pliny, is a mountain of Thrace.

Phillis rising Monument.] The reason of this Epithet Heinsius gives (in
Crepund. Silian. l. 15.) where he writes: Sepulchra sua in gratiam viatorum,
Nautarumque in Mari errantium, in altum educebant antiqui: unde elegantissime
(...) Naviganti (...) dixit Coluthus (citing this verse.) In which sense
likewise Apollonius in 1. (speaking of Mount Athos discovering it self to the
Argonauticks as they sailed along) says, -- (...)
(...) --


Where (...) means no more than (in the sea-mans Phrase) (...), as a little
before Apollonius in the same book speaks.

(...)
(...) --
Which Hoelzlin not improperly renders, Marina oriebatur Sciathus,
oriebanturque procul
Piresiae --


Since to the sailer at sea, making for any shore, objects from thence discover
themselves, as it were rising by degrees.

The Nine-fold round.] Hyginus in l. de Poetarum fabulis, c. 59. (speaking of
Phyllis expecting Demophoon at the appointed day of his return) -- Illa eo die
dicitur novies ad littus accurrisse, quod ex ea Graece Enneados appellatur.

Men breeding Phthia.] So after at verse () and Seneca in Troad, Viros tellus
dare militares
Aptior Phthie --


A Province and City of Thessalie (the birthplace of Achilles.)

(...)
(...) -- Appollon. 1.
Built by Minerva, who near Pelions Crown
With ax the large Materials cut down.
Which Peleus (as Teucer of Cyprus, and Telamon of Salamis) when banished by
his father Aeacus (as his brothers likewise were) for the casual murder of
Phocus, made himself Lord of.

Mycene.] A City in the Argive Territories, whose founder Perseus is said to
be; so called, for that the pummel of his sword hilt (which in the Greek is
(...), by which word likewise they denoted a Mush-room, or Toad-stool) fell off
there* (Paus* in Corinth.) I have heard likewise (says ^he) that* Perseus
being very thirsty, and pulling up a Mushroem by chance, there suddenly gushed
out of the place a clear spring of running waters; with which having quenched
his thirst, to his no little pleasure, he from that accident called the City he
built there, Mycene: though there be others that will have Mycenus the son of
Sparto, or Mycene the Daughter of Inachus, to give name to it; which opinions
Pausanias yet rejects.

Erymanthus] Pausan. Arcad. (...). i. e. Erymanthus has his Fountain in the
hill Lampea, sacred to Pan; some part perhaps of the Mountain Erymanthus,
(whence the river takes its name.) Which ((...).) gliding through Arcadia, and
on the right hand leaving the Mountain Pholoe, on the left the Thelpusian
Plains, falls at length into Alphaeus.

Sparta.] The chief city of the Laconians, where Menela^* reigned, built by
Lacedaemon, and so called from Spa^^ (the daughter of Eurotas) his wife:
Pausan. Lacon.

Eurotas.] The most celebrated River of Laconia, which derive^ its name from
Eurotas, one of the Laconian Kings; wh^ (...). having by a Channel carried away
the water in to the sea, which before made the fields Fenne, calle^ the Current
now flowing like a River within its banks, after his own name, Pausan. Lacon*

Therapnae.] A Town in Laconia where Hellen was born, (and buried, with
Menelaus, as Pausanias writes) so called (...), from Therapne the Daughter of
Lelex. Lacon.

Beneath his hat.] The Scholiast of Aristophanes, (...). In Peloponnesus they
call a Hat Cunea, from the wearing of which Mercury is named Cunes. But
Eustathius expressly avers, that the Greeks in Homers time, went bare headed:
Festus may reconcile this difference, who says, The ancients gave hats to
Castor and Pollux, because they were Lacedaemonians, quib^s pileatis pugnare in
more positum: quo indomitum animum adversus Barbaros Reges and Tyrannos,
significationem libertatis, ostentarent, Pier. Hierogl. lib. 40. So that I
conceive here is meant rather such kind of Helmets as by Vegetius are
described: Pilei, quos Pannonicos vocant, ex pellibus.

Phoebus from envious Zephyre (who appeared
His Rival) could not yet secure the boy.]
The story is thus related by Apollo to Mercury in Lucian (dialog. (Mercurij
and Apollo.) (...). i. e. He learnt (to wit Hyacinthus) to play at Hurlebats,
and I played with him. But the most pernicious of all the Winds, Zephyrus, loved
him too, and had done so for a long time; but being slighted, and not brooking
to be disdained; he, whilst we (as our custom was) played together, and I tossed
the Hurlebat on high, blowing from the top of Taygetus, drove it directly
against the Boys head with such violence, that the blood strait sprung from
the wound, and the Boy immediately dyed.

-- But the Earth
A Flower produced that does proclaim
Of the once lovely youth the still loved name.]
In the same Dialogue Apollo thus goes on, (...). i. e. But of the blood that
was shed, I caused the earth to produce a flower, the fairest (Mercury) and
most fragrant of all others, which carries certain letters in its leaves, that
do (as it were) deplore his death. Of which, see Ovid. l. Metam. 10. and 13.
Moschus in Epituph. Bion. Pliny l. 21. c. 11. and 26. Dioscorides takes it to
be the Vaccinium of the Latins, retaining some similitude of name: and so
interpreted by Servius on this verse of Virgil,

Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur.
-- Her Eyes
Whilst on his looks she feeds, not satisfies.]
In imitation of Musaeus, (...). A sign of Love, as Heliodorus observes, l. 2.
so Dido in Virgil.

Expleri mentem nequit, ardescitque tuendo.
Catul in Ariadne -- Cui languida nondum
Lumina sunt nati cara saturat^ figura


Sandy Pylos.] Paus. (in Messeniacis) (...). The Pylian fields are for the most
part sandy, and afford little pasturage for cattle. Homer testifies as much,
who speaking of Nestor, styles him always the King of sandy Pylos. Eustathius
upon Homer reckons up three several Towns of the same name; the first in
Messenia, where Nestor reigned; the second in Arcadia, where Nestor was born;
the third in Elis, near to the Olenian Promontory. This of Messenia is now
called Navarinum, where yet stands a strong Castle (subject, as is all
Peloponnesus, to the Turk) upon a rising ground, stretching into the sea,
whereinto it has a large Prospect, and a fair Haven, as the Author of the
Turkish History tells me.

Antilochus.] -- (...) -- The Son of great-soul'd Nestor. Homer Il. (...). of
whom Pindar. Pythic. 6. Philostratus, l. 2. Ieon. 7. and Horac. l. 3. od. 10.

Aeacus renowned seed.] Aeacus was the son of Jupiter and Aegina; whose sons
were Phocus, Peleus, Teucer, and Telamon.

Patroclus.] (...). -- (Homer passim in Illad. (...) and (...).) Menaetius
valiant son, and the beloved associate of Achilles; by birth an Opuntian: who
having at play casually slain Clysomnius the son of Amphidamus, a youth of
equal years with himself, being banished his Country, and coming to Phthia,
was kindly entertainted by Peleus, and brought up by him as a companion for his
son Achilles: which besides Homer in Iliad. (...). Ovid in these verses
testifies,

Caede puer facta Patroclus Opunta reliquit,
Thessalicamque adijt Hospes Achilles humum.
Stout Telamon.] Not here to be taken for one of Phthia, though happily our
Author (at first sight) may seem to infer as much; for (as I have before noted)
-- (...),
(...).
Apollo^. l. 1. -- Telamon in Salamis did reign,
But Peleus apart in Phthia dwelt.


By Neptune and Apollo walled round.] Yet Neptune in Homer (Iliad. (...).)
affirms that he only walled it.

(...),
(...).
I only Troy with a fair wall did round,
That it impregnable might still be found.
Being hired to that end for a year by Laomedon, as Apollo was to keep his
Oxen: as Homer in the same place tells us, and our Author likewise at verse ()
following, plainly intimates. But Pindar (Olymp. 8.) reports that part of it
was walled by Aeacus,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
Whom Phoebus and dread Neptune called
To help them when they Ilium walled,
Foreknowing in wars wastfull fire,
It once should fatal fumes expire.
The Godlings having no other way to save their credits, and keep touch with
destiny, t^ an by admitting a mortal to the work, which else in spite of fate,
must needs have been impregnable.

From Dardanus am I descended.] It is not perhaps commonly taken notice of,
that this Dardanus was a famous Magician. Apuleius in Apolog. Ego ille sim vel
Charinondas, vel Damigeron, vel is Moses, vel Jannes, vel Apollonius, vel ipse
Daidanus, vel quicunque post Zoroastrem, vel Hostanem, inter Magos celebratus
est.

On earth she fixed her lovely Eyes.] Musaeus, (...).
And (with little difference) Virgil, Diva solo fixos oculos aversa tenebat.

A sign of bashfulness, or deliberation. Vide Barthij Adversaria. Of Dreams the
two Gates opening.]

The Ancients (as both Philostratus and the Anonymus Author of Hieroglyphical
Collections reports) painted sleep like a man heavy with slumber, his under
garment white, his upper black, thereby expressing Day and Night; holding in
his hand a Horn, sometimes really such, sometimes of Ivory in the likeness of
one, through which they feigned that he conveyed dreams: true, when the same was
of Horn; false, when of Ivory. To which Virgil in 6. Aeneid. and our Author
here allude, (as before them Homer in 19. Odyss.) The reason of which Fiction*
take from Macrobius (in Somn. Scip.) as more pertinent in my opinion, than that
Exposition which Servius gives, where he writes much to this effect. There is a
veil drawn between our Intellect and Truth, yet this the soul (when freed from
the distempers of the body by sleep) oft-times perceives, but darkly, and as it
were through a cloudy medium, signified by the horn, of color black, yet of a
diaphanous nature: but when there is such a veil drawn over it, that the eyes
of the mind can no way penetrate it, it is said to be of Ivory, whose nature
is such, that though wrought to never so extreme a thinness, it cannot possibly
be made pellucid. Having given you this serious Mythologie of the Fable, it
will not be amiss to conclude with this lighter allusion of Manno's.

Sogno, a la sua donna
Sognasti d'esser Mia:
Mafu sogno mentito:
Perch' egl' era uscito
Fuor d' Avorio del tuo bianco seno.
Se vuoi ch'a pieno
Egli verace sca.
Il geloso Marito
Lascia schernito,
Esi fara ritorno
Per la Porta del Corno.
Once unto my amorous flame,
Dear, thou dreamd'st thou did consent;
But that dream of truth fell short,
'Cause it from the Ivory Port
Of thy white bosom came.
But if thou would what that meant
Now a real truth should prove,
(Dearest Love)
Thy old bedfellow forsake,
And a new and better take;
And thou wilt find it will then return
By the other Gate of Horn.
-- From Atrides hospitable Court
Paris through plowd S^as Hellen does transport,
And in the gift of Venus proudly joy.]
Briefly, but fully to this purpose, Statius in 2. Achill.

Hospitis Atridae --
-- Spolia^ Thalam^s, Helenaque superb^s
Navigat. --
Whither without me is my Mother fled.] Hermione in Ovids Epistle, Ipsa ego non
long^s etiam tunc scissa capello^*
Clamabam, Sine Me, me sine Matter abis?
My self with short hair, torn, cried whither? Oh
Without me Mother! whither do thou go?


She with the Virgins is but gone to play.] Of these Customary meetings of
Virgins to dance in some Garden or Meadow, Theocrit. Idyl. 18. Moschus. Id. 2.
Apollon. 1. Musaeus.

From Joves Royal blood wild Beasts refrain.] Upon this ground (perhaps) is
built that opinion of the Ancients (commonly received among the vulgar,) that
the Lion will not touch the person of a King to hurt him* for, (...)
(...). --
Challimach. in Hymno ad Jove^. Kings are from Jove: nor from Jove springs
Ought that more sacred is than Kings.


Sleep is deaths Twin.] Homer in 14. and 16. Iliad. whence Seneca in Hercule
furente borrowed this expression,

Frater durae languide mortis. For they both had the same parents, Erebus and
Night, according to Hesiod in Theogonia: Pausanias (in Eliacorum 1.) reports
that he saw at Elis, the picture of a woman holding in her left arm a white, in
her right a black child, the one expressing death, the other sleep; the woman
her self representing night, the nurse of both. The reason of which feigned
Twinship, Athenagoras thus gives: (...). i. e. For this cause I suppose some
call sleep, the brother of death, not as deriving their genealogy from the
same parents, but from the same accidents which happen to those that sleep and
dye; as their insensibleness of external occurrences, and their own being.

Hence it is etc.] By reason of the near similitude of the two affections:
Heliodor. l. 2.

LUDICRA.
THE SYRACUSIANS, OR ADONIS FESTIVAL. Theocrit. Idyl. 15.
Gorgo, Eunoa, Praxinoe, two strangers, an old Woman. Gorgo. PRay, is Praxinoe
within?

Eunoa. What, Dear
Gorgo! how great a stranger? yes, she is here.

Prax. In The name of wonder, what is the news with thee?
Reach her a Stool and Cushion.

See Casaubon. Lect. Theoc. c. 16.
Gorgo. Not for me.

Prax. Nay sit.

Gorgo. Well fare a stout heart yet: I thought
I scarce should er'e a live to thee have got
Through such a throng of men, and Coaches: All
The streets are set with Guards, and every stall
Crowded with gallants; and thou know beside
From hence to our house is no little stride.

Prax. My Goodman Dotard (thank him) at th 'worlds end
Has found this hole for Me; lest any friend
Should ever come at Me: Mischief on his Care
That Is only bent to cross me.

Gorgo. Dear, beware
To talk thus before the child: See how his eye
Is set upon thee!

Prax. I, it is my good boy;
We speak not of thy Father.

Gorgo. Now by'r Lady
The Child does understand -- Dad's a fine Daddy.

Prax. Well, this fine Dad, (for we in private may
Say what we please) being spoke to the other day,
Ceruse and Merc'ry at the shops to buy,
Brings me home salt: this Dunce twelve Cubits high.

Gorgo. Just so my Diocleides does; that Grave
Of money! Yesterday, a Crown he gave
For a few Dag-locks coarser than Dogs hair;
Five Sheepskins too he bought: most precious ware!
But let that pass: come, make thee ready strait;
And let us to Court, to see them celebrate
Adonis Feast: the Queen intends (they say)
To make a gallant show on it.

Prax. Great ones may
Do great things: tell them this that nothing see.

Gorgo. Faith, dress thee straight, and go along with me:
With loyterers it is always holiday.

Prax. Fetch me some water hither, Eunoa:
Do You hear, Joan Cleanly! high you, make more haste;
Quick; The Cat loves a Cushion: see how fast
She comes with it! -- pour forth: not so much (Drone^)
Ye idle slut, why have thou wet my gown?
Hold! -- We Are 'een washed after a sort, as please
The Fates: -- lock the great chest, and bring the keys.

Gorgo. That gown does thee exceeding well become.
See Causab. Lect. Theoc. c. 16.
How much might the stuff cost thee from the Loom?

Prax. I pray thee do not ask Me: 'bove one Pound
Or two, the weaving: * but the yarn I found.

Gorgo. Troth it does mighty well.

Prax. And well y' have sed.
Reach me my Kirtle, wench; and help me spread
My scarf. -- Child, you must stay at home: there is sprites
Where we are going, and a horse that bites.
Nay, cry (and the woo't) as long as thou can scream,
I care not: do thou think I Will see thee lame?
Come, -- To Eunoa.
take the boy, and play with him: do you hear!
Call the Dog in, and make the door fast. -- Dear
What a huge crowd's here! how shall we get by?
They swarm like Ants. O noble Ptolomy!
Many a good deed since thy Fathers days
We ow thee thanks for. Free are now the ways
From Thieves and Murderers: no Rogues flock together
To act their cheats now, like birds of a Feather.
But which way now? there is the Horse-guard before us.
Pray friend be fair conditioned; don't ride over us.
O, he curvets; it is a fierce horse that Bay;
He Will throw his Rider, let us get out o'th way:
Run Eunoe: -- I Am glad yet I have made
The boy keep home.

Gorgo. Come, courage; ben't afraid:
They Are past us now.

Prax. And so's my fright: good Lord!
A Horse and Snake are two things I Have abhorred
Even from a child: -- but haste, or else another
Shole will or'etake us.

Gorgo. Come you from Court, Mother?

Old Woman. Yes, my good Daughter.

Gorgo. Pray, may one get in?

Old Woman. The Greeks did Troy by their endeavors win:
Endeavor will do all things.

Gorgo. S'lid the old Crone
Speaks Oracles. To woman what is unknown?
How Jove wood Juno they can tell. But see,
Before the Gate what store of company?

Prax. A world! Gorgo, thy hand: Eutychides,
Lend Eunoa thine, least she be lost in the press.
Let Us all crowd in together: Eunoe,
Be sure you keep your hold. Gorgo, Ah me!
My scarfe's rent quite in two: good Sir, for love
Of Heaven, help save my scarf there.

Stranger. It Is above
My power to do it: yet I Will do my best.

Prax. They thrust like Swine: how vildely are we pressed!

Stranger. Come, come, we are well now: take a good heart.

Prax. May it be ever so with thee, that art
So kind to us: an honest civil man:
But O, they crowd as bad as e're again.
Help, help alas! thrust Eunoa for thy life.
So, now we are in, as the man said to's wife.

Gorgo. Come, look upon these Hangings first; so fair,
As if the handy work of Gods they were.

Prax. Bless me! what Artist made them of so fine
A Woof? what Painter could so well design?
They seem to move: sure they are alive, not wrought:
Lord! Lord! the wit of man surpasses thought.
But see how lovely on a silver bed
(His tender cheeks with a soft down over spread)
Adonis lies! how admirably fair!
With whom the powers of Hell enamored are.

2d. Stranger. Peace, foolish tatling women; hold your prate:
Your wide mouthed Dorick here is out of date.

Gergo. Gup: who art thou? what is our talk to thee?
Correct your maids, not us of Sicilie:
Yet (would you knew't) we are from Corinth sprung,
As was Bellerophon: our Mother Tongue
Peloponnesian is: nor is it scorn
That they speak Dorick, who are Dorick born.

Prax. More Lords then one, Sir, we disclaim: See Heins. Lect. The. c. 21.
so short!
Ye need not faith: here is those care little for it.

Gorgo. Whist! whist Pr^xi^^e! The Hymn let us hear*
This is the maid that did from Sperchis bear
The Prize. I know she will sing anon, she ^mms
Unto her self such sweet Praludiums.

The Hymn.
THou who in Golgos, and Idalia take
Delight, with lofty Erix; who See Hein. Lect. Theoc. cap. 21.
gold make
Thy joy: sweet Venus! see the soft pac't hours
Thy dear Adonis from The Infernal powers
Have brought again at the years end to thee!
Though slowest of the Deities they be,
Yet they come wished for, and with something fraug^^
Always to ^ll. Thou whom Dione brought
To light, fair Cypris! Berenice's said,
Mortal, by thee to be Immortal made,
And fed with sweet Ambrosia: wherefore now,
Her daughter (to make good her grateful vow
To thee) her Daughter who for form may be
A second Heli^) fair Arsinoe,
To thy Adonis choicest gifts assigns;
O thou, that gloriest in thy ^^^erous shrines!
The several fruits which laden Top-boughs yield
Beside him lie: here flowers of every field
In Silver Baskets: there Gold Boxes stand
Full of Assyrian unguents: On this hand,
All sorts of rare Confections; and with those,
What e're of Oil or Honey we compose.
All Fo^ls, all beasts for food: green Arbours dressed
With soft Dil branches, where Loves make their nest:
And like young Nightingales that have but now
New tried their wings, flutter from bough to bough.
O the golds splendour! the pure Ivories too!
The Eagle with Joves Cup Bearer that flew!
And Purple Carpets then sleep softer! may
The wondering Samian, and Milesian say.
Here on a rich Bed does Adonis lie;
And lovely Venus on another by.
Soft are his kisses, and his lips still red;
Venus, now joy in his regained Bed.
For we to morrow, e're the dew's exhaled,
With hairs unbound, loose garments, breasts unveild,
Him to the foaming waves that wash the shore,
Shall bear from hence, and with sad songs deplore.
The way from Hell (Adonis) unto thee
Is ever open, though to none else free
Of all the glorious Heroes (as they tell)
This never to Atrides, Ajax never befell.
Not Hector, chief of Hecub's numerous Race,
Patroclus, Pyrrhus, those of elder days,
The Lapithites, Deucalions issue; nor
The Sons of Pelops, (Princes famed in War)
Nor Argive Kings could er'e to this attain.
Be now appeased: and the next year again
Bring gladness with thee: still propitious prove,
And as thou came, return to us in love.
Gorgo. O deer! what a rare woman's this? what choice
Of knowledge has she? and how sweet a voice?
But go: -- My husband's fasting still, and then
He eats his own Gall: Fear a hungry man.
Farewell Adonis for this time; and when
The year's done, come, and make us glad again.

THE SUNRISE.
THou youthful Goddess of the Morn!
Whose Blush they in the East adore;
Daughter of Phoebus! who before
Thy all-enlightning Sire art born!
Haste! and restore the day to me,
That my Loves beauteous Object I may see.
Too much of time the night devours,
The Cocks shrill voice calls thee again;
Then quickly mount thy golden Wain
Drawn by the softly-sliding hours:
And make apparent to all eyes
With what Enamel thou do paint the skies.
Leave thy old husband, let him lie
Snorting upon his downy bed;
And to content thy Lover, spread
Thy Flames new lighted, through the sky;
Hark how thy presence he conjures,
As leading to the Woods his Hounds, he lures.
Moisten the fallow grounds before
Thou come, with a sweet dewie rain;
That thirsty Ceres having taken
Her Mornings draught, that day no more
May call for drink; and we may see
Spangled with pearlie drops each bush and tree.
Ah! now I see the sweetest dawn!
Thrice welcome to my longing fight!
Heil divine beauty! Heavenly light!
I see thee through yon Cloud of Lawn
Appear; and as thy star does glide,
Blanching with rays the East on every side.
Dull silence, and the drowsy King
Of sad and Meloncholie Dreams,
Now fly before thy cheerful Beams,
The darkest shadows vanquishing:
The Owl, that all the night did keep
A houting, now is fled and gone to sleep.
But all those little Birds, whose noats
Sweetly the listening ear enthrall,
To the clear waters murmuring fall,
Accord their disagreeing throats,
The luster of that greater Star
Praising, to which thou art but Harbinger.
'Bove our Horizon see him scale
The first point of his brighter Round!
O how the swarthie Aethiop's bound
With reverence to his light to veil,
And love the color of his look,
Which from a heat so mild, so pure he took.
A God perceivable is he
By humane sense, Natures bright eye,
Without whom all her works would die,
Or in their births imperfect be:
He Grace and Beauty gives alone,
To all the Works of her Creation.
With holy Reverence inspired,
When first the day renews it is light,
The Earth, at so Divine a sight,
Seems as if all on Altar fired,
Reeking with Perfumes to the skies,
Which she presents, her Native Sacrifice.
The humble Shepherd to his Rays,
Having his Rustic Homage paid,
And to some cool retired shade
Driven his bleating Flocks to Graze;
Sits down, delighted with the sight
Of that great Lamp, so mild, so fair, so bright.
The Eagle in her Airy sitting
Spreading her wings, with fixed eye
Gazes on his, t'whose Deity
She yields all Adoration fitting:
As to the only quickening fire,
And Object that her eye does most desire.
The Salmon (which at Spring forsakes
T^^tis sa^t Waves) to look on him;
Upon the waters top does swim:
And to express the joy he takes,
As sportingly along he sails,
Mocks the poor Fisher with his silver Scales.
The Be through flowrie Gardens goes
Buzzing to drink the mornings tears;
And from the early Lilly bears
A kiss, commended to the Rose;
And like a wary Messenger,
Whispers some Amor^^s story in her ^ar.
At which, she rowsing from her sleep,
Her chaster Flames seems to declare
To him again, (whilst Dew her fair
And blushing leaves in tears does steep)
The sorrow which her heart does waste,
That she is so far from her dear Lover placed.
And further seems, as if this plaint
In her mute Dialect she made:
"Alas! I shall with sorrow fade,
"And pine away in this restraint,
"Unless my too too rigorous Fate,
"My Constant faithful Love commiserate.
"Love having gained the victory
"Over my soul, there acts his harms,
"Nor Thorns so many bear my Arms,
"As in my heart now prickles be:
"The only Comfort I can give
"My self, is this; I have not long to live.
"But if some courteous Virgin shall,
"Pitying my Fate, pull my sweet flower,
"E're by a sad and fatal hour
"My Honors fade away and fall;
"I nothing more shall then desire,
"But gladly without murmuring expire.
Peace sweetest Queen of Flowers! now see
Sylvia, Queen of my Love, appear:
Who for thy Comfort brings with her
What will thy wishes satisfy;
For her white hand intends to grace thee,
And in her sweeter Breast, sweet flower to place thee.
FINIS.
The Night: OR, The fair Mourner.
THis fair, and animated Night
In Sables dressed* whose Curls of Light
Are with a shade of Cypress veiled;
Not from the Stygian Deeps exhaled,
But from Heaven's bright Balcone came;
Not dropping Dew, but shedding Flame,
The blushing East her smiles display,
Her beauteous Front the Dawn of Day;
The Stars do sparkle in her Eyes,
And in her Looks the Sun does rise.
No mask of Clouds and Storms she wears,
But still serene and calm appears:
No dismal Birds, no hideous Fiends,
Nor charming Hag on her attends;
The Graces are her Maids of Honor,
And thousand Cupids wait upon her.
Dear Flames! still burning, though you are
Suppressed: Lights, though obscured, still fair!
What Heart does not adore you? who,
But sighs, or languishes for you?
Heaven wishes, by your shade outvy'd,
It Is milky Path in Ink were died:
The Sun within an Ebon Case,
Longs to shut up his golden^ Face:
The Moon too with thy sad Dress took,
Would fain put on a mourning Look.
Sweet Night! and if thou art Night, of Peace
The gentle Mother! Cares Release!
My Heart, now long oppressed, relieve;
And in thy softer Bosom give
My weary Limbs a short Repose;
It Is but a small Request, Heaven knows:
Nor think it shame to condescend,
For Night is styled the Lovers Friend.
But Muse, thou art too loud I fear,
The Night loves silence, Muse forbear.
I SOSPIRI.
Sighs.
SIghs! light, warm Spirits! in which, Air,
And Fire, possess an equal share:
The Souls soft Breath! Loves gentle Gales!
Which from Griefs Golfe (when all else fails)
Can by a speedy Course, and short,
Conduct the Heart to it is sweet Port:
Ye flattering Zephyrs! by whose Power,
Raised on the Wings of thought, each How'r
From the Abyss of Miseries
To her Loved Heaven the freed Soul flies.
True lively sparks of that close Fire,
Which Hearts conceal, and Eyes inspire:
Chaste Lamps that burn at Beauties shrine,
Whose purer Flames let none confine:
Nature a warmth unto my Heart,
Does not so kind as yours impart;
And if by Breath preserved alive,
By your Breath only I survive.
Loves faithful Witnesses! the Brief,
But true Expresses of our Grief!
Ambassadors of mute Desires!
Dumb Rhetoric which our Thoughts attires!
Grief, when it overloads the Breast,
Is in no other language dressed;
For you the suffering Lovers Flame,
Sweet, tounglesse Orators, proclaim.
A numerous Descant upon Sorrow!
Which sweetness does from sadness borrow,
When Love two differing Hearts accords,
And Joy, in well-tuned Grief, affords.
The Music of whose sweet Concent,
In a harmonious Languishment,
Does softly fall, and gently rise,
'Till in a broken Cloze, it dies.
Nature, and all that call her Mother,
In Sighs discourse to one another:
Theirs, Nightingals, and Doves, in Tones
Different express; this sings, that groans:
The Thrush, his, whistles to his Hen;
The Sparrow chirps out his again;
Snakes breath their amorous sighs in Hisses,
This Dialect no Creature misses.
The Virgin Lilly, bashful Rose,
In Odours their soft sighs disclose;
Theirs, sportive Winds in whispers! re^th;
Earth hers in Vapors does bequeath
To her caelestiall Lover; He,
Touched with an equal Sympathy,
To fann the Flame with which she burns,
In gentle Gales his sighs returns.
Ye glowing Sparks of a chaste Fire!
Now to those radiant Lights aspire,
The fairer Nests of my fair Love,
And the bright Spheres where you should move.
The Surprise.
There Is no dallying with Love
Though he be a Child and blind;
Then let none the danger prove
Who would to himself be kind:
Smile he does when thou do play,
But his smiles to death betray.
Lately with the Boy I sported;
Love I did not, yet Love feigned;
Had not Mistress, yet I courted;
Sigh I did, yet was not pained;
Till at last this Love in Jest,
'Prov'd in Earnest my Un^est.
When I saw my fair One first,
In a feigned fire I burned;
But true flames my poor Heart pierced,
When her Eyes on mine she turned:
So a real VVound I took
For my counterfeited Look.
Slighted Love his skill to show,
Struck me with a Mortal Dart;
Then I learnt that against his Bow,
Vain are the weak Helps of Art:
And thus captived, found that true
Does dissembled Love pursue.
'Cause his Fetters I disclam'd,
Now the Tyrant faster bound Me;
With more scorching Brands inflamed,
'Cause in Love so cold he found me:
And my sighs more scalding made,
'Cause with Winds before they played.
None who loves not then make show,
Love's as ill deceived as Fate;
Fly the Boy, he will cogg and woo;
Mock him, and he wounds thee strait.
Ah! who dally boast in vain;
False Love wants not real Pain.
Chloris Eyes and Breasts.
Chloris! on thine Eyes I gazed;
When amazed
At their brightness,
On thy Breasts I cast my Look;
No less took
With their whitenes:
Both I justly did admire,
These all Snow, and those all Fire.
Whilst these Wonders I survay'd,
Thus I said
In suspense;
Nature could have done no less
To express
Her Providence,
Than that two such fair Worlds, might
Have two Suns to give them Light.
Love's Arithmetic.
BY a gentle River laid,
Thirsis to his Phillis said;
Equal to these sandy Grains,
Is the Number of my Pains:
And the Drops within their Bounds
Speak the sum of all my Wounds.
Phillis, whom like Passion burns,
Thirsis Answer thus returns:
Many as the Earth has leaves,
Are the Griefs my heart receives;
And the Stars, which Heaven inspires,
Reckon my consuming Fires.
Then the Shepherd, in the Pride
Of his happy Love, replied:
With the Choristers of Air
Shall our numerous Joys compare;
And our mutual Pleasures vy
With the Cupids in thine Eye.
Thus the willing Shepherdess
Did her ready Love express:
In Delights our Pains shall cease,
And our War be cured by Peace;
We will count our Griefs with Blisses,
Thousand Torments, Thousand Kisses.
Caelia weeping. A Dialogue.
Lover. SAy gentle God of Love, in Caelia's Breast,
Can Joy and Grief together rest?

Love. No; for those differing Passions are,
Nor in one Heart at once can share.

Lover. Why grieves hers then at once, and joys,
Whilst it another Heart destroys?

Love. Mistaken Man! that Grief she shows,
Is but what martyred Hearts disclose
Which in her Breast tormented lie,
And Life can neither hope, nor die.

Lover. And yet a shower of Pearly Rain
Does her soft Cheeks fair Roses stain.

Love. Alas! those Tears you hers surmise,
Are the sad Tribute of poor Lovers Eyes.

Chorus. Lover and Love. What real then in Women can be known!
When nor their Joys, nor Sorrows are their own?

The Vow.
BY my Life I vow,
That my Life, art Thou;
By my Heart, and by my Eyes:
But thy Faith denies
To my juster Oath to incline,
For thou say I swear by thine.
By this Sigh I swear,
By this falling Tear,
By the undeserved Pains
My grieved Soul sustains.
Now thou may believe my Moan,
These are too too much my own.
Ice and Fire.
NAked Love, did to thine Eye,
Chloris, once to warm him, fly;
But it is subtle Flame, and Light,
Scorched his Wings, and spoiled his sight.
Forced from thence he went to rest
In the soft Couch of thy Breast:
But there met a Frost so great,
As his Torch extinguished strait.
When poor Cupid, thus, (constrained
His cold Bed to leave) complained;
'Lass! what lodging's here for Me,
If all Ice and Fire She be.
Novo Inamoramento.
ANd yet anew entangled, see
Him, who escaped the snare so late!
A Truce, no League thou made with Me
False Love! which now is out of date:
Fool, to believe the Fire quite out, alas!
Which only laid asleep in Embers was.
The Sickness not at first past cure,
By this Relapse despises Art:
Now, treacherous Boy, thou have me sure,
Playing the VVanton with my Heart,
As foolish Children that a Bird have got,
Slacken the Thread, but not unty the knot.
Caelia's Eyes. A Dialogue.
Lover. LOve! tell me; may we Caelia's Eyes esteem
Or Eyes, or Stars? for Stars they seem.

Love. Fond, stupid Man! know Stars they are,
Nor can Heaven boast more bright or fair.

Lover. Are they or erring Lights, or fixed? say.

Love. Fixed; yet lead many a Heart a stray.

The Resemblance.
MArble (coy Caelia!) against my Prayers thou art,
And at thy Frown to Marble I convert.
Love thought it fit, and Nature, thus
To manifest their several Powers in us.
Love made me Marble, Nature thee;
To express Constancy and Cruelty.
Now both of us shall Monuments remain;
I of firm Faith, thou of Disdain.
Love once, Love ever.
SHall I hopeless then pursue
A fair shadow that still flies me?
Shall I still adore, and woo
A proud Heart that does despise me?
I a constant Love may so,
But alas! a fruitless show.
Shall I by the erring Light
Of two crosser Stars still sail?
That do shine, but shine in spite,
Not to guide, but make me fail?
I a wandering Course may steer,
But the Harbor never come near.
Whilst these Thoughts my Soul possess,
Reason, Passion would o'rsway;
Bidding me my Flames suppress,
Or divert some other way:
But what Reason would pursue,
That my Heart runs counter to.
So a Pilot bent to make
Search for some unfound out Land,
Does with him the Magnet take,
Sailing to the unknown Strand;
But that (steer which way he will)
To the loved North points still.
The Pendants.
THose Aspes of Gold with Gems that shine,
And in Enammel'd Curles do twine,
Why Chloris in each Ear
Do thou for Pendants wear?
-- I now the hidden meaning guess:
Those Mystic signs express
The stings thine Eyes do dart
Killing as Snakes into my Heart:
And show that to my Prayers
Thine Ears are deaf as theirs.
The sweet Meat.
Thou gav'st me late to eat
A sweet without, but within, bitter Meat:
As if thou would have said, Here, taste in this
What Caelia is.
But if there ought to be
A likeness (dearest!) 'twixt thy gift and thee,
Why first what is sweet in thee should I not taste,
The bitter last?
Violets in Thaumantia's Bosom.
Twice happy Violets! that first had Birth
In the warm Spring, when no frosts nip the Earth;
Thrice happy now; since you transplanted are
Unto the sweeter Bosom of my Fair.
And yet poor Flowers! I pity your hard Fate,
You have but changed, not bettered your Estate:
What boots it you to have escaped cold Winters breath,
To find, like me, by Flames a sudden death?
The Dream.
FAir shadow! faithless as my Sun!
Of peace she robs my Mind,
And to my Sense, which rest does shun,
Thou art no less unkind.
She my Address disdainful ^lies,
And thou like her art fleet;
The real Beauty she denies,
And tho^ the Counterfeit.
To cross my innocent desires,
And make my Griefs extreme,
A Cruel Mistress thus conspires
With a delusive Dream.
An old Shepherd to a young Nymph.
SCorn me not Fair because you see
My Hairs are white; what if they be?
Think not 'cause in your Cheeks appear
Fresh springs of Roses all the year,
And mine, like Winter, wan and old,
My Love like Winter should be cold:
See in the Garland which you wear
How the sweet blushing Roses there
With pale-hu'd Lillies do combine?
Be taught by them; so let us join.
Beauty increased by Pity.
It Is true; thy Beauty, (which before
Did dazzle each bold gazers Eye,
And forced even Rebell-Hearts to adore,
Or from its conquering splendor fly)
Now shines with new increase of Light,
Like Cynthia at her full, more bright.
Yet though thou glory in the Increase
Of so much Beauty dearest Fair!
They err who think this great Access,
(Of which all Eyes the Admirers are)
Or Art, or Nature's gift should be:
Learn then the hidden Cause from Me.
Pity in thee, in me desire
First bred; (before, I durst but aim
At fair Respect) now that close fire
Thy Love has fanned into a flame:
Which mounting to its proper Place,
Shines like a Glory 'bout thy Face.
Weeping and Kissing.
A Kiss I begged; but smiling, She
Denied it Me:
When strait, her Cheeks with tears o'rflown,
(Now kinder grown)
What smiling she would not let me have.
She weeping gave.
Then you whom scornful Beauties aw,
Hope yet Relief,
For Love, (who Tears from Smiles) can draw
Pleasure from Grief.
The Dilemma.
AS poor Strephon (whom hard Fate
Slave to Chloris Eyes decreed)
By his cruel fair one sat,
Whilst his fat Flocks grazed along:
To the Music of his Reed,
This was the sad Shepherds Song.
From those tempting Lips if I
May not steal a Kiss (my Dear!)
I shall longing pine and dye:
And a Kiss if I obtain,
My Heartfears (thine Eyes so near)
By their lightning 'twill be slain.
Thus I know not what to try:
This I know yet, that I dye.
Change defended.
LEave Chloris, leave, prithee no more
With want of Love, or Lightness charge Me:
'Cause thy Looks captived me before,
May not another now enlarge me?
He, whose misguided Zeal has long
Paid Homage to some Stars pale light,
Better enform'd, may without wrong
Leave that, to adore the Queen of Night.
Then if my Heart, which long served thee,
Will to Car^ntha now incline;
Why termed inconstant should it be,
For bowing before a richer shrine?
Censure that Lover's such, whose will
Inferior Objects can entice;
Who changes for the better still,
Makes that a Virtue, you call Vice.
The Microcosme.
MAn of himself's a little World, but joined
With Woman, Woman for that end designed,
(Hear cruel fair One whilst I this rehearse!)
He makes up then a complete Universe.
Man like this sublunary World is, born
The sport of two cross Planets, Love, and Scorn:
Woman the other World resembles well,
In whose Looks Heaven is, in whose Breast is Hell.
The Defeat.
Against Celinda's Marble Breast
All his Arrows having spent,
And in vain each Arrow sent,
Impotent, unarmed Love,
In a shady Myrtle Grove
Laid him down to rest.
'Soon as laid, asleep he fell:
And a Snake, in (as he slept)
To his empty Quiver crept.
When fair Chloris, whose soft Heart
Love had wounded, (and its smart
Lovers best can tell)
This Advantage having spied;
Of his Quiver, and his Bow
Thought to rob her sleeping Foe:
Softly going then about
To have seized upon them; out
Strait the Snake did glide.
With whose Hisses frighted, she,
(Nimbly starting back again)
Thus did to her self complain:
Never cruel Archer! never
(Full, or empty) does thy Quiver
Want a sting for Me.
Amore secreto.
Content thy self fond Heart! nor more
Let thy close Flames be seen:
If thou with covert Zeal adore
Thy Saint enshrined within,
Thou have thy Feast, as well as they
That unto Love keep open Holy Day.
In his Religion, all are free
To serve him as they may.
In public some, and some there be
Their vows in private pay.
Love that does to all Humors bend,
Admits of several Ways unto one End.
Yet will thou not repining cease!
Still do thou murmurs vent?
^tubborn, Rebellious Zealot, peace!
Nor sign of Discontent
So much as in one sigh afford;
For to the Wife in Love, each sigh^s a Word.
A Maid in Love with a Youth blind of one Eye.
THough a Sable Cloud benight
One of thy fair Twins of Light,
Yet the other brighter seems,
As 't had robbed its Brother's Beams;
Or both Lights to one were run,
Of two Stars, now made one Sun.
Cunning Archer! who knows yet
But thou wink'st my Heart to hit!
Cloze the other too, and All
Thee the God of Love will call.
The broken Faith.
LAtely by clear Thames his side,
Fair Lycoris I espied
With the Pen of her white hand
These words printing on the Sand:
None Lycoris does approve
But Mirtillo for her Love.
Ah false Nymph! those Words were fit
In Sand only to be writ:
For the quickly rising Streams
Of Oblivion, and the Thames,
In a little Moments stay
From the Shore washed clean away
What thy hand had there impressed,
And Mirtillo from thy Breast.
Complaint on the Death of Sylvia, to the River.
Clear Brook! which by thy self art chased,
And from thy self do fly as fast,
Stay here a little; and in Brief
Hear the sad Story of my Grief:
Then, hasting to the Sea, declare
Her Waves not half so bitter are.
Tell her how Sylvia (she who late
Was the sole Regent of my Fate)
Has yielded up her sweetest Breath,
In the best Time of Life, to Death:
Who proud of such a Victory,
At once triumphs o'r Love, and Me.
But more (Alas!) I cannot speak;
Sighs so my sadder Accents break.
Farewell kind Flood! now take thy Way,
And like my Thoughts, still restless, stray:
If we retarded have thy Course,
Hold! with these Tears thy speed enforce.
A Shepherd inviting a Nymph to his Cottage.
DEer! on yond' Mountain stands my humble Cot,
Against Sun and Wind by spreading Oaks secured;
And with a Fence of Quickset round immured,
That of a Cabban, make 't a shady Grot.
My Garden's there: o'r which, the Spring has spread
A flowery Robe; where thou may gather Posies
Of Gilliflowers, Pinks, Jelsomines, and Roses,
Sweets for thy Bosom, Garlands for thy Head.
Down from that Rocks side runs a purling Brook
In whose unsullied Face,
(Though thine needs no new Grace,)
Thou may, as thou think best, compose thy Look,
And there thine own fair Object made,
Try which (judged by the River) may by said
The greater Fire.
That which my Breast feels, or thy Eyes inspire.
To Ligurinus. Horat. Carm. l. 4. Od. 10. Paraphrastice.
CRuel, and fair! when this soft down,
(Thy Youths bloom,) shall to bristles grow;
And these fair Curls thy shoulders crown,
Shall shed, or covered be with snow:
When those bright Roses that adorn
Thy Cheeks shall wither quite away,
And in thy Glass (now made Time's scorn)
Thou shall thy changed Face survey.
Then, ah then (sighing) thou't deplore
Thy Ill-spent Youth; and wish, in vain,
Why had I not those thoughts before?
Or come not my first Looks again?
The Penitent Murderer. Theocrit. Idyl. 31. (...).
When Venus saw Adonis dead,
His Tresses soyl'd, his Color fled,
She strait her winged Loves commands
To bring the cruel Boar in Bands.
They, the Woods nimbly ranging, found
The pensive Beast, and brought him bound:
This drags along the captived foe,
That pricks him forward with his Bow.
With trembling steps the Boar drew nigh,
For he feared angry Venus Eye.
-- TO whom thus she spoke: O thou the Worst,
Of all wild Beasts, and most accursed!
Was It thou with wounding Turks did tear
This whiter Thygh? thou kill my Dear?
To whom the Boar replied, I swear
By thy self Venus, by thy Dear,
By these my Bonds, these Hunters, I
Meant to thy Love no Injury:
But gazing on him, as some fair
Statue, unapt the flames to bear
Desire had kindled in my Breast,
To kiss his naked Thigh I pressed;
And kissing, killed him: wherefore these,
These murdering Tusks, doom as you please.
(For why alas! Teeth do I bear
That useless and enamored are?)
Or if a punishment too small
You yet think that, take Lips and All.
But Venus, pitying the Beast,
Commands that strait he be released;
Who to the Woods never went again,
But lived as one of Venus Train:
And coming one Day near a Fire,
Quenched there the flames of his Desire.
The Shepherd. Theocrit. Idyl. 21.
FAir Eunica I sweetly would have kissed,
But was with scorn, and this reproach dismissed.
Hence! what? a Shepherd, and yet hope from Me
For such a Grace? We kiss no Clowns, says she.
My Lips I would not with a kiss so vile
As thine, so much as in a Dream defile.
Lord! how thou look? how like a Lubber sport'st?
What fine discourse thou have? how sweetly court'st?
How soft thy Beard is? and how neat thy Hair?
Thy Lips like sick men's blush, and thy hands are
White as an Ethiops: fogh! thou stink'st, out, quick,
Carrion! be gone; lest thy smell make me sick.
Then in her Breast thrice spitting, me a skew
(Mumbling t'her self) from Head to foot does view.
Such Pride in her self-flatter'd Beauty takes,
Whilst in Derision Mouths at Me she makes.
This scorn my blood inflamed, and red I grew
With anger, like a Rose new bathed in Dew.
She went her way, and left me vexed, to see
I should by such a Huswife slighted be.
Say Shepherds! am I not a handsome Lad?
Or has some God transformed, and lately made
M'another Man? for once I Would a good face:
And that (as Ivy Trees) my Beard did grace;
My Locks like Smallage 'bout my Temples twined;
And my white Front 'bove my black Eyebrows shined.
My Eyes more lovely than Minerva's were,
Than Curds my Lips more soft, and sweeter far
My Words than Honey: play too, would you knew't,
I sweetly can; on Pipe, Shalm, Reed, and Flute.
There Is not a Country Lass but likes, as passes,
And loves me too: all but your City Lasses;
Who, 'cause a Shepherd, me without regard
(Forsooth!) pass by, alas! they never heard
How Bacchus on the Plains did Oxen tend,
And Venus to a Shepherds Love did bend,
And his fat Flocks on Phrygian Mountains kept,
Or loved in Woods, and for Adonis wept.
What was Endymion but a Shepherd? whom
The Moon affected, and from Heaven would come
To lie whole Nights on Latmus with the Boy.
A Shepherd (Rhea) too was once thy Joy:
And oh, how many scapes Jove did thou make
From Juno's Bed for a young Shepheard's sake?
But Eunica alone does Swains despise,
And 'bove those Goddesses her self does prize.
Venus no more thou with thy Love may keep
In Town, or Hill; alone thou now must sleep,
The Pastoral Wooing. Daphnis, and Shepheardess. Theocrit. Idyl. 28.
Daphnis. PAris the Swain, away coy Helen bare:
And I, a Swain, am kissed by one more fair.

Shepheardess. Brag not rude Hind; Kisses are empty things.

Daphnis. From empty Kisses yet sweet pleasure springs.

Shepheardess. I Will wash my mouth, wipe off thy Kisses stain.

Daphnis. Wip'st thou thy Lips? then let us kiss again.

Shepheardess. Go kiss your Cows; you fit to kiss a Maid!

Daphnis. Be not so proud: your youth will quickly fade.

Shepheardess. Grapes though they are dry, yet still are Grapes we see,
And Roses although withered, Roses be.

Daphnis. Let Us sit and talk beneath this Myrtles shade.

Shepheardess. No; your smooth Tongue me once before betrayed.

Daphnis. Beneath these Elms then sit and hear me play.

Shepheardess. Play to your self; I not your Music weigh.

Daphnis. Take heed lest thou the Wrath of Venus find!

Shepheardess. Venus her worst; be but Diana kind.

Daphnis. Oh say not so: lest her excited Rage
Thee in unextricable Snares engage.

Shepheardess. Do what she can, find we Diana's Grace.
Hold off your hands, or else I Will scratch your Face.

Daphnis. Love, which no Maid ever did, thou must not fly.

Shepheardess. By Pa^ I will: why do thou press so nigh?

Daphnis. I fear he will make thee stoop to thy first Love.

Shepheardess. Though wooed by many, none I did approve.

Daphnis. Amongst those many, here, behold! I sue.

Shepheardess. Why, my kind Friend, what would thou have me do?
The married Life with troubles is repleat.

Daphnis. No Cares, Joys only Marriage does beget.

Shepheardess. They say, Wives of their Husbands live in fear.

Daphnis. Of whom do Women? rather domineer.

Shepheardess. But thought of Childbed Pains makes me afraid.

Daphnis. Diana, whom thou serv'st, will be thy Aid.

Shepheardess. But bearing Children will my Beauty wrong.

Daphnis. In Children thou will see thy self still young.

Shepheardess. What Dowry will thou give if I consent?

Daphnis. My Flocks, my Groves, my Fields, be thou content.

Shepheardess. Swear, that, when married, thou will never forsake me.

Daphnis. By Pan I will not, so thou please to take me.

Shepheardess. Thou Wilt give me Beds, and House, and Sheep to breed?

Daphnis. Both House, and Beds, and the fair Flocks I feed.

Shepheardess. What shall I to my aged Father say?

Daphnis. He, when he hears my Name, will soon give way.

Shepheardess. How art thou called? for Names do often please.

Daphnis. Daphnis my Name, my Father's Lycides,
My Mother's Nomaea.

Shepheardess. Of an honest Line
Thou come, nor we of no more mean than thine.

Daphnis. Yet not so great to make your Pride aspire,
For, as I take it, Menalcas is your Sire.

Shepheardess, Show me your Stalls, and Groves.

Daphnis. Come let thine Eyes
VVitness how high my Cypress Trees do rise.

Shepheardess. Feed Goats whilst I survay the Shepheard's Bounds.

Daphnis. Graze Bullocks whilst I show the Nymph my Grounds.

Shepheardess. What do? why thrust'st thy hand into my Breast?

Daphnis. Thus thy soft, swelling Bosom should be pressed.

Shepheardess. Help Pan! I faint; Swain, take thy hand away.

Daphnis. Fear not sweet Nymph; nor tremble with dismay.

Shepheardess. 'Twill spoil my Coat should I in the dirt be thrown.

Daphnis. No; see! on this soft hide I Will lay thee down.

Shepheardess. Ah Me! why have thou loos^d my Virgin Zone?

Daphnis. To Venus this be an Oblation.

Shepheardess. Hark! see! some body comes; I hear a Noise.

Daphnis. The Cypress Trees are whispering of our Joys.

Shepheardess. Thou Have torn my Clothes, and me quite naked laid.

Daphnis. I Will give thee better.

Shepheardess. Words no deeds ever paid.

Daphnis. Would I could send my soul into thee now!

Shepheardess. Oh Phoebe, pardon! I have broke my Vow.

Daphnis. A Calf to Love, a Bull to Venus burn.

Shepheardess. A Maid I came, a Woman shall return.

Daphnis. And be a Mother-Nurse to pretty Boys.

Shepheardess. Thus intertalk'd they midst the active Joys
Of closs Embraces; when at length they rose,
And being up, to feed her Flock she goes
With blushing Face, but with a lightsome Heart,
Whilst to his Herds he no less pleased does part.

On the Picture of Icarus in Wax. Marino.
What once did unto thee impart
The means of Death; by happy Art
Now thee restores to life again:
Yet still remember to refrain
Ambitious Flights; nor soar too nigh
The Sun of an inflaming Eye;
For so thou may, scorcht by those Beams,
In Ashes dye, as once in Streams.
On a Marble Statue of Nero, which falling killed a Child. Marino.
THis Statue, bloody Nero does present;
To Tyrants a sad Document.
Though Marble, on his Basis yet so fast
He stood not, but he fell at last.
And seems as when he lived, as cruel still,
He could not fall, but he must kill.
On Paula. Mart. l. 9. Epig. 5.
FAin she would have Priscus; and who blame her can?
But he will not have her: and who will blame the Man?
On an Ill Husband and Wife. Mart. l. 8. Epigr. 34.
SInce both of you so like in Manners be,
Thou the worst Husband, and the worst Wife she,
I wonder, you no better should agree.
On Candidus, a rich Miser. Mart. l. 3. Epig. 26.
Alone thou do enjoy a fair Estate,
Alone rare Myrrhme Vessels, golded Plate;
Alone rich Wines do drink; and have for None
A Heart, nor Wit but for thy self alone.
None shares with thee, it is denied by no man:
But Candidus, thou have a Wife that is Common.
On Bassus a Pitiful Poet. Mart. l. 5. Epigr. 53.
Why writ'st thou of Thyestes, Colchis hate,
Andromache, or Niobes sad Fate?
Deucalion (Bassus!) better far would fit,
Or Phaeton, believe me, with thy Wit.
On a Boy kill^d by the fall of an Icesicle. Mart. l. 4. Epig. 18.
VVHer streams from Vipsan Pipes Port Capen powers,
And the Stones moystned are with constant showers,
A drop congealed to a sharp Icesicle
On a Child's Throat that stood beneath it, fell,
And when the Wretches Fate dissolved it had,
Melted away in the warm VVound it made.
What may not cruel Fate? or where will not
Death find us out, if Water Throats can cut?
On Nestor a whisperer. Mart. l. 3. Epig. 28.
THou wonder'st Marius Ears should smell so Ill:
They may thank thee; thou whisper'st in 'em still.
On Martinia, an old, old, leacherous -- Mart. l. 3. Epigr. 32.
What? can thou not with an old Woman bed
Thou criest? -- yes: but thou art not old but dead.
We could with Hecuba, or Niobe
Make shift, but then (Martinia!) it must be
Before the one
Into a Bitch be turned, the other to Stone.
On Philomuse, a needy Newesmonger. Mart. l. 9. Epig. 35.
TO gain a Supper, thy shift (Philomuse!)
Is to vent lies, instead of Truths, for News:
Thou know what Pacor^s intends to do,
Can count the German Troops and Sarmats too.
The Dacian General's Mandates do profess
To know, and Victories before the Express.
How often it rains in Egypt, thou as well,
And Number of the Lybian Fleet, can tell.
Whom Victor in the next Quinquatrian Games
Caesar will crown, thy knowing Tongue proclames:
Come, leave these shifts: thou this Night (Philomuse)
Shall sup with Me; but, not a word of News.
On Aulus a Poet-Hater. Mart. l. 8. Epig. 63.
AUlus Loves Thestius, him Alexis fires;
Perhaps he too, our Hyaci^^h desires;
Go now, and doubt if Poets he approves,
When the Delights of Poets Aulus Loves!
On Lentinus, being troubled with an Ague. Mart. l. 12. Epig. 17.
LEntinus! thou do naught but fume, and fret,
To think thy Ague will not leave thee yet.
Why? it goes with thee; bathes as thou do do,
Eats Mushromes, Oysters, Sweet-breads, wild Boar too,
Often drunk by thee with Falern Wine is made,
Nor Caecub drinks unless with snow allayed:
Tumbles in Roses daubed with unctuous sweets,
Sleeps upon Down between pure Cambrick sheets,
And when thus well it fares with thee, would thou
Have it to go unto poor Damma now?
To Priscus. Mart. l. 8. Epigr. 11.
Why a rich Wife (Priscus) I will not wed,
Ask'st thou? -- I would not have my Wife, my Head:
Husbands should have superiority;
So Man and Wife can only equal be.
On Phoebus that wore leather Caps. Mart l. Epig.
Whilst thou a Kidskin Cap putt'st on
To hide the Baldness of thy Crown,
On jested wittily, who sed,
Phoebus, that thou had shod thy Head.
On Horace a poor fellow. Mart. l. 4. Epigr. 2.
HOrace alone, amongst all the Company,
In a black Gown the Plays did lately see.
Whilst both the Commons, and the Knights of Rome,
Senate, and Caesar all in white did come.
When strait it snow'd apace; so he the sight
Beheld as well as all the rest, in white.
On a Swallow torn in Pieces by her Fellows. Mart. l. 5. Epig. 67.
WHen for their winter Homes the Swallows made,
One against the Custom in her old Nest staid.
The rest at Spring returned, the Crime perceive,
And the offending Bird of Life bereave.
Late yet she suffered, she deserved before,
But then when she in Pieces Itys tore.
To Apollo pursuing Daphne. Auson.
THrow by thy Bow, nor let thy Shafts appear,
She flies not thee, but does thy weapons fear,
De Erotio Puella. Mart. l. 5. Epigr. 38.
SHe, (who than down of aged Swans more fair,
More soft was than Galaesian Lambkins are;
More beauteous than those Shells Lucrinus shows,
Or Stones which Erythraean Waves disclose;
Smooth as the Elephants new polished Tooth,
VVhiter than Lillies in their Virgin Growth,
Or Snow new fallen; the color of whose Tresses
Outvy'd the German Curles, or Baetick Fleeces;
Whose Breath the Pestan Rosaries excelled,
The honey in Hymaettian Hives distilled,
Or cha^ed Ambers scent: with whom conferred
The Phaenix was but thought a common Bird)
She, she, in this new Tomb yet warm, does lie,
Whom the stern hand of cruel Destiny
In her sixth year, ever quite expired, snatched hence,
And with her all my best Joys: yet against all sense
Paetus persuades me not to grieve for her;
Fie, says he, (whilst his hair he seems to tear)
Art not ashamed to mourn thus for a Slave?
I have a Wife laid newly in the Grave,
Fair, rich, and noble, yet I live you see.
O what than Paetus can more hardy be?
No sorrow sure a heart like his can kill,
^'hath gained By the Death of Wife.
ten thousand Pounds, yet he lives still.
On Mancinus a Prating Braggart. Mart. l. 4. Epig. 61.
THou made thy Brags that late to thee a Friend
A hundred Crowns did for a Present send:
^ut four days since (when with the Wits we met)
Thou said Pompilla too (or I forget)
^ave thee a rich Suite worth a thousand more,
Altered purposely.
Scarlet of Tire with gold embroidered o'r:)
And swor'st that Madam Bassa sent thee late
Two Em'rald Rings, the Lady Caelia, Plate.
And yesterday, when at the Play we were,
At coming forth, thou told'st me in my Ear,
There fell to thee that Morning, the best part
Of Fourscore Pounds per Annum next thy Heart.
What wrong have I thy poor Friend done thee, that
Thou thus should torture me? Leave, leave this Chat
For pitties sake; or if thou wilt not forbear,
Tell me then something that I Would gladly hear.
On Picens. Mart. l. 8. Epig. 62.
PIcens the Backside of his Book does fill
With tedious Epigrams; yet takes it ill
Phoebus should show himself his Back Friend still.
On Caius, one of large Promises, but small Performances. Mart. l. 10. Epig. 16.
IF not to give, but say so, giving be,
Caius! for giving we will vie with thee.
What ever the Spaniard in Gallician Feilds
Digs up, what the gold Stream of Tagus yields,
What the tanned Indian dives for in the deep,
Or in its Nest the Arabion Bird does keep,
The wealth which Tyrian Caldrons boil; receive
Bll this, and more; but so as thou do give.
To Posthumus, an Ill Liver. Mart. l. 5. Epigr. 58.
STill, still thou cry'st to morrow I Will live well:
But when will this to morrow come? can tell?
How far is it hence? or where is it to be found?
Or upon Parthian, or Armenian Ground?
Priams, or Nostors years by this't has got;
I wonder for how much it might be bought?
Thou Wilt live to morrow? -- it is too late to day:
He Is wise who yesterday, I lived, can say.
To Thelesinus. Mart. l. 3. Epigr. 40.
THou think the have shown thy self a mighty friend,
'Cause at my Suit thou fifty Pounds did lend:
But if thou, rich, for lending, may be said
So great a Friend: what I, who Poor, repaid?
On Cinna a bold Suter. Mart. l. 3. Epigr. 60.
THou say it is nothing that thou ask'st me; Why,
If thou ask'st nothing, nothing I deny,
The happy life. To Julius Martialis. Mart. l. 10. Epig. 47.
THose things which make life truly blessed,
Sweetest Martial hear expressed:
Wealth left, and not from Labor growing;
A grateful soil, a Hearth still glowing;
No Strife, small Business, Peace of Mind,
Quick Wit, a Body well inclined,
Wise Innocence, Friends of one Heart,
Cheap Food, a Table without Art;
Nights which nor Cares, nor Surfets know,
No dull, yet a chaste Bedfellow;
Sleeps which the tedious Hours contract;
Be what thou may be, nor exact
Ought more; nor thy last Hour of breath
Fear, nor with wishes hasten Death.
Epitaphium Glaucae. Mart. l. 6. Epig. 28.
HEre Meliors Freed-man, known so well,
Who by all Rome lamented, fell,
His dearest Patrons short-lived Joy,
Glaucias, beneath this Stone does lie,
Near the Flaminian Way interred:
Chaste, modest, whom quick Wit preferred
And happy Form, who to twelve past,
Scarce one year added; that, his Last.
If Passenger thou weep'st for such a Loss,
May thou never mourn for any other Cross.
To Sextus. Mart. l. 2. Epig. 3.
YOu say y'ow nothing; and it is true you say;
For he ows only, who has means to pay.
To Maximus. Mart. l. 7. Epig. 72.
THE Esquiliae a House of thine does show
Mount Aventine, and the Patrician Row.
Hence Cybells Fane, thence Vesta's thou do view;
From this the Old Jupiter, from that the New;
Where shall I meet thee? in what Quarter, tell?
He that does every where, does no where dwell.
To Stella. Mart. l. 7. Epigr. 35.
When my poor Villa could not storms sustain,
Nor watery Jove, but swam in Floods of Rain,
Thou sent'st me Tyles, wherewith to make a Fence
Against the rude Tempests sudden violence.
We thank thee Stella: but cold Winter's near,
The Villa's coverd, not the Villager.
On Parthenopaeus. Mart. l. 11. Epig. 87.
THy Doctor, that he may assuage the Pain
Of thy sore Throat, which a sharp Cough does strain,
Prescribes thee Honey, sweetmeats, luscious Pies,
Or what ever else stills fretfull Childrens cries:
Yet leave thou not thy coughing: now we see
It Is no sore Throat, but sweet Tooth troubles thee.
On Philaenus. Mart. l. 11. Epigr. 102.
IF how Philaenus may be styled
A Father, who never got a Child
Thou'd'st know; Davus can tell thee it,
Who is a Poet and never writ
The Choice of his Mistress. Mart. l. Epigr.
I would not have a VVench with such a Waste
As might be well with a Thumb-Ring embraced;
Whose bony Hips, which out on both sides stick,
Might serve for Graters, and whose lean Knees prick;
One, which a saw does in her Backbone bear,
And in her Rump below carries a Spear.
Nor would I have her yet of Bulk so gross
That weighed should break the Scales at the market-cross;
A mere unfathomed lump of Grease; no, that
Like they that will; it is Flesh I love, not Fat.
To Sextus. Mart. l. 2. Epig. 55.
SExtus thou will'st that I should show
Thee Honor, where I love would ow;
And I obey since it is thy will,
By Me thou shall be honored still:
But Sextus if thou wilt honored be,
Thou shall not then be loved by Me.
On Baucis, an old drunken Crone. Antholog. Graec.
BAucis the Bane of Pots, what time she lay
Sick of a Fever, thus to Jove did pray;
If I escape this Fit, I vow to take
These hundred Suns no drink but from the Lake:
Wanting her wonted Cups, (now past all doubt
Of Danger) she one day this shift found out,
She takes a Sive, and through the bottom pries;
So she at once a hundred Suns espies.
On Captain Ansa, a bragging Runaway. Casimire.
Whilst timorous Ansa lead his Martial Band
Against the Invaders of his Native Land,
Thus he bespake his Men before the Fight:
Courage my Mates, let us dine, for we to Night
Shall Sup (says he) in Heaven: this having said,
'Soon as the threatening Ensigns were displaid,
And the loud Drums and Trumpets had proclaimed
Defiance 'twixt the Hoasts; he, (who never shamed
At Loss of Honor) fairly ran away,
When being asked, how chance he would not stay
And go along with them to sup in Heaven?
Pardon me Friends (said he) I fast this Even.
To Fuscus. Mart. l. 1. Epig. 55.
IF Fuscus thou have room for one Friend more,
(For well I know thou every where have store)
Let me complete the List; nor be thought ever
The worse 'cause New; such once thy old friends were:
But try if he you for your New Friend take,
May happily an old Companion make.
On Marcus Anton: Primus his Picture. Mart. l. 10. Epig. 32.
THis Picture, which with Violets you see
And Roses decked, askst thou whose it may be?
Such was Antonius in his Prime of Years,
Who here still young, though he grow old, appears.
Ah! could but Art have drawn his Mind in this,
Not all the World could show a fairer Piece.
Horat.
See thou not, how Socrates Head,
(For all it is Height) stands covered
With a white Perriwigg of Snow?
Whilst the laboring Woods below
Are hardly able to sustain
The Weight of Winters feathered Rain;
And the arrested Rivers stand
Imprisoned in an Icy Band?
Dispell the Cold; and to the Fire
Add fuel, large as it is Desire;
And from the Sabine Casque let fly
(As free as Liberality)
The Grapes rich blood, kept since the Sun
His Annual Course four times has run.
Leave to the Gods the rest, who have
Allayed the Winds, did fiercely rave
In Battle on the Billowy main,
Where they did blustering tug for Reign.
So that no slender Cypress now,
It Is Spirelike Crown does tottering, bow:
Nor aged Ashtrees, with the shock
Of Blasts impetuous, do rock.
Seek not too morrow's Fate to know;
But what day Fortune shall bestow,
Put to a discreet Usurie.
Nor (gentle youth!) so rigid be
With froward scorn to dispprove
The sweeter Blandishments of Love.
Nor mirthfull Revels shun, whilst yet
Hoary Austerity is set
Far from thy greener years; the Field
Or Cirque should now thy Pastime yield:
Now nightly at the Hour select,
And pointed Place, Loves Dialect,
Soft whispers, should repeated be;
And that kind Laughters Treachery,
By which some Virgin closely laid
In dark Confinement, is betrayed:
And now from some soft Arm, or Wrist,
A silken Braid, or silver Twist,
Or Ring from Finger, should be gained,
By that too nicely not retained.
Ad Puellam edentulam. Mart. l. 2. Epig. 41.
SMile if thou art wise; smile still, fair Maid!
Once the Pelignian Poet said;
But not to all Maids spoke he this,
Or spoke he to all Maids I wisse,
Yet not to thee; for thou art None.
Thy bare Gums show three Teeth alone,
Scaled o'r with black and yellow Rust:
If then thy Glass or Me thou wilt trust,
Thou laughter should no less abhor,
Than rough Winds crisped Spanius, or
The neat-drest Priscus the rude Touch
Of boisterous hands, and fear as much
As Caelia does the Sun; or more
Than painted Bassa does a shower.
Looks thou should wear more grave, and sad,
Than Hectors Wife, or Mother had:
Never at Comedies appear;
All festive Jollities forbear;
And what ever else does laughter cause,
And the closed Lips asunder draws.
Thou Childlesse Mothers should alone,
Or Brothers hapless Fates, bemoan:
Or follow still some mournful Hearse,
And with sad Tragedies converse.
Then rather do as I advise,
Weep (Galla) still, weep, if thou art wise.
Epitaph on an old drunken Crone. Ex Antipatr. Sidon.
THis Tomb Maronis holds, o'r which, does stand
A Bowl, carved out of Flint, by Mentor's hand:
The tippling Crone while living, death of friends
Never touched, nor Husbands, nor dear Childrens Ends.
This only troubles her, now dead; to think,
The Monumentall Bowl should have no drink.
On Bibinus, a notorious Drunkard. Scaliger.
THe Sot Loserus is drunk twice a day;
Bibinus only once; now of these, say,
Which may a man the greatest Drunkard call?
Bibinus still; for he is drunk once for All.
On poor Codrus, who though blind, was yet in Love. Mart. l. 3. Epig. 15.
NOne in all Rome, like Codrus trusts I find;
How, and so poor! he loves, and yet is blind.
FINIS.
ETHICA.
Ausonii Ludus septum Sapientum.
The Prologue.
THe seven Wisemen, (that Name Times past applied
To them, nor has Posterity denied)
Themselves this Day unto your view present.
Why do thou blush Gown'd Roman? discontent
That such grave Men should on the Stage be brought!
Is It shame to us! 'twas none to Athens thought:
Whose Councell-Chamber was their Theater.
True; here for Business several Places are
Assigned, the Cirque for Meetings, Courts to take
Enrollments, Forums in which Pleas to make:
But in old Athens, and all Greece, was known
No other Place for Business, but this viz. the Theater.
One,
Which later Luxury in Rome did raise.
The Aedile heretofore did build for Plays
A Scaffold-stage, No work of Carved stone;
So Galbus and Murena did, it is known:
But after, when great Men not sparing Cost,
Thought it the highest Glory they could boast,
To build for Plays a Scene more eminent,
The Theater grew to this vast Extent;
Which Pompey, Balbus, Caesar, did enlarge;
Vying, which should exceed for State and Charge.
But to what End all this? We came not here
To tell you who first built the Theater
Or Forum, or who raised this Gallery;
But as the Prologue to a Comedy,
In which act Heaven-lov'd Sages; who in Verse
Their own Judicious Sentences rehearse,
Known to the Learned, and perhaps to you:
But if your Mem'ries shall not well renew
Things spoke so long since; the Comedian shall,
Who better than I knows them, tell you all.
Enter Comedian. A Thenian Solon, Fame sings, wrote at Delphis
(...); whose sense, Know thy self, is.
But this for Spartan Chilons many take.
Whether this Chilons be, some question make,
(...): Is It hard?
We Will english't; The End of a long Life regard.
But this (say some) to Craesus Solon sung.
From Lesbian Pittacus this Motto sprung,
(...); that is Know-Time: But He
By (...) here means Opportunity.
(...), Bias, did proceed
From thee; that is, Most Men are Ill. Take heed
You not mistake him; for by Ill Men here
He means the Ignorant: the next you hear
Is Periander's (...);
That is, Thought's All in All; a Thought-full Man!
But Lyndian Cleobulus does protest
(...); Mean in All is best.
Thales, (...) cries.
Upon a Surety present Damage lies.
But this, before those who gain by it, to tell,
May 'chance displease: Now Solon comes, farewell.
Exit. Enter Solon. Lo! on the Roman Stage is Solon come,
Clad in his Grecian Ornaments: To whom
Fame gave the Prize of Wisdom from the rest;
But Fame is not of Censure the strict Test.
Nor first nor last I take my self to be,
^or there is no Order in Equality.
Well did the Delphick Prophet sport with him
Who asked, which first of the Wise Men might seem,
^ying; if on a Globe their Names he writ,
^one first, or lowest he should find in it.
^^om amidst of that learned Round come I; that so,
^Vhat once I spoke to Craesus, All here now
^ight take as spoken to themselves; It Is this:
(...); which is
(...) English, Mark of a long life the End;
^ill then your Censure of All Men suspend:
^or Miserable These, nor happy Those
^steem; for None are such till their last Close.
^he Ground of this we will in few Words display.
^Craesus, the Tyrant King of Lydia,
^^ppy, and rich even to Excess! (who walled
^he Temples of his Gods with pure Gold) called
^e from my Country to him: We obey
^is Royal Summons, went to Lydia,
^illing his Subjects by our means might find
their King improved, and bettered in his Mind.
He asks Me whom I thought the happiest Man?
I said Telana the Athenian,
Who his life nobly for his Country gave;
He pishes at it, will another have.
I told him then Aglaus who the Bounds
Never past in all his life of his own grounds;
Smiling, he says, what think you then of Me?
Esteemed the happyest in the whole World? We
Replied, his End could only make that known.
He takes this Ill: I, willing to be gone,
Kiss his hand, and so leave him: For some Ends
Meantime, against Persia he a War intends;
And all Things ready, does in Person go.
How speeds? he is vanquished, Prisoner to his foe,
And ready now to yield his latest Breath,
(For by the Victor he was doomed to death)
Upon the Funeral Pile rounded with Flames
And smoke, he thus with a loud voice exclames.
O Solon! Solon! now I plainly see
Thou Art a true Prophet! thrice thus naming Me.
Moved with which words, Cyrus, (the Conqueror)
Commands the Fire be quenched; which, by a shower
Of Rain then falling, happily was laid.
Thence to the King by a choice Guard convay'd,
And questioned who that Solon was? and why
He called so on his Name? He, for Reply,
In Order all declares: Pity at this
The Heart of Cyrus moves; and Craesus is
Received to grace, who in a Princely Port
Lived after, honored in the Persian Court.
Both Kings approved, and praised Me; but what I
Said then to one, let each Man here apply
As spoke t'himself; 'twas for that end I came.
Farewell: your liking let your hands proclaim.
Exit Solon. Enter Chilon. MY Hips with sitting, Eyes with seeing ache,
Expecting when Solon an End would make.
How little, and how long you Atticks prate!
Scarce in three hundred Lines one word of Weight,
Or a grave Sentence! how he looked on me
At going off? -- Now Spartan Chilon see!
Who with Laconian Brevity commends
To you the Knowledge of your selves, kind Friends!
(...), carved in Delphos Fane.
It Is a hard Work, but recompensed with Gain.
Try your own strength; examine what it is you
Have done already, what you ought to do.
All Duties of our Life, as Modesty,
Honor, and Constancy, included be
In this; and Glory the Idol of these days.
I Have said: Farewell: I stay not for your Praise.
Exit* Enter Cleobulus. I Cleobulus, though my Native Seat
Be a small Isle, am Author of a great
And glorious Sentence; (...);
A Mean is best; You Sirs that sit upon
The fourteen middle Benches next unto
The Orchestra, best may judge if this be true.
Your Nodd shows your Assent: We thank you; but
We shall proceed in Order: Was it not
Your Afer, (though a Man he of late Time is)
That said once in this Place, Ut ne quid Nimis?
And hither does our (...) aim.
The Dorick and the Latin mean the same.
In speaking, being silent, or in sleep,
In good Turns, or in bad, a mean still keep.
In study, Labor, or what else so ever.
I Have said: and that a Mean I keep, end here.
Exit* Enter Thales. I Am Thales, who maintain (as Pindar sings)
Water to be the original of Things,
(...) me Ver^^^ because ^erfect in Original, ^^^ted.
And on the Stage (as those before) am come
TO assert the Truth of my own Axiom.
Perhaps by some 't may be offensive thought:
But not by those by sad experience taught.
(...), say we,
Be Surety, and be sure a loser be.
A thousand Instances I could produce
To prove Repentance is the only use
That can be made of it, but that We here
Examples by their Names to cite, forbear.
Make your own Application, and conceive
The Damage, Men by this sole Act receive.
Nor this our good Intention take amiss.
You that like, clap, you that dislike it, hiss.
Exit. Enter Bias. I Am Priaenean Bias, who once taught
(...), That most men are naught.
I wish to had been unspoke; for Truth gains Hate.
But by bad Men, I meant Illitterate,
And those who barbarously all Laws confound,
Religion, Justice; for within this Round
I see none but are good: believe all those
Whom I proclaim for bad amongst your Foes:
Yet there is none so partially applied
To favor Vice but with the good will side:
Whether he truly be such, or would fain
Of a good man the Reputation gain:
The hated name of an ill Man, there is none
But flies: if you are all good, your praise: I Am gone.
Exit. Enter Pittacus. I Am Pittacus, who once this Maxim penned,
(...), That Is Time apprehend.
But by Time we meant Time in Season, as,
In tempore veni is your Roman Phrase.
And your own Comic Poet Terence, he,
Chief of all things makes opportunity,
Where Dromo comes unto Antiphila
I'th'nick of Time: consider what I say,
And mark how many Inconvenience
Sustain, for want of this sole Providence!
But now it is more than Time we should be gone;
Farewell: and give your Approbation.
Exit. Enter Periander. NOw on the Stage see Periander move!
He who once said, and what he said will prove
(...). Thought is all in all.
Since him a perfect Agent we may call
Who first considers what he undergoes;
For we should still forecast* as Terence shows,
The Event of Business, whether good, or bad,
Ever w'undertake it: where may best be had
Convenience for Planting, where to build,
When to wage War, and where to pitch a Field:
Nor unconsiderately take in hand
Or great or small Things; for that makes a stand
In the free Progress of all new designs;
In which, there is nothing Policy injoyns
Like Consultation; hence it is that they
Who use it not, Chance does, not Counsel, sway.
But I retire; whilst you with better Fate
Employ your Thoughts how to uphold your State.
The Sentences of those seven Sages, comprehended in as many Septenaries.
Bias Prieneus*
What Is Man's chief good? a Mind that right does know.
What Is his chief Ill? Man, his own greatest Foe.
Who Is rich? he who is contented. Who poor? He
Who Covets. A Wives best Dowr? Chastity.
What Woman's chaste? whom Fame dares not belie.
Who's the Wise man? who can, but does no Ill.
The Fool? He who cannot, yet has the Will.
Pittacus Mitylenaeus.
NOne knows to speak, who knows not to refrain.
Before many bad, one good Man's Praise retain.
He Is mad who envies others happiness.
So's he who joys in other Men's distress.
The Laws thou do impose, thy self obey.
When Times are prosperous store of Friends provide:
When they are bad, but in a few confide.
Cleobulus Lindius.
THe more thou can, 'less wish to do. The spite
Of Fortune often does on the guiltless light.
None long is happy in Impiety.
In others much, naught in thy self pass by.
The good Man's Friend is still the bad Man's Foe.
Our Father's merits want of their due Fame.
And often our Childrens Portion is but shame.
Beriander Corinthius.
DEcent and Profitable never dissent.
The happier Man still the more Provident.
It Is ill to wish, it is worse to fear Death, we
Should make a Virtue of Necessity.
He who is feared by many, many fears.
When Fortune's kind, dread thy advanced height:
And scorn to sink yet when she shows her spite.
Solon Atheniensis.
LIfe then is happy, when it is consummate.
Wed with thy like; Disparity breeds hate,
Confer not Honors casually. A friend
Convince in private, publicly commend.
It Is more to be, than be made Noble far.
If Fates decrees are sure, in vain We fly them;
If they are not, in vain We fear to try them.
Chilo Lacedaemonius.
Feared by Inferious, nor by betters scorned
Let me not live. Often of thy Death be warned,
And Health: Misfortunes, by thy own, defeat,
Or friends Advice. The good thou do, forget,
But that which thou receiv'st, remember still.
Age that resembles Youth does grateful come.
Youth that resembles Age is burdensome.
Thales Milesius.
ABout to sin, thy self, though none else, fear.
Life dies: the glory of a good Death, never.
What thou intend'st to do, forbear to tell.
To fear what thou can not o'rcome's a Hell.
A just Reproof does good though from a Foe:
But a false Praise does harm, though from a Friend.
Nilnimium satis est bids us here end.
Amphion, or a City well ordered.
Casimer.
Foreign Customs from your Land,
Thebans by fair Laws command:
And your good old Rites make known
Unto your own.
Piety your Temples grace;
Justice in your Courts have Place:
Truth, Peace, Love, in every Street
Each other meet.
Banish Vice, Walls guard not Crimes.
Vengeance o'r tall Bulwarks climbs:
O'reach Sin, A Nemesis
Still waking is,
Truth resembling craft, Profane
Thirst of Empire, and of Gain,
Luxury: and idle ^ase,
Banish all these.
Private Parsimony fill
The Public Purse: Arms only Steel
Know, and no more: Valor fights cold
In plundered Gold.
War, or Peace do you approve,
With united Forces move:
Courts which many Collumes rear
Their falls less fear.
Safer Course those Pilots run
Who observe more Stars than One.
Ships with double Anchors tied
Securer ride.
Strength united firm does stand
Knit in an eternal Band:
But proud Subjects private hate
Ruins a State.
This as good Amphion sings
To his Harps well-tuned strings,
It Is swift Streams clear Dirce stopped,
Cytheron hopt,
Stones did leap about the Plains,
Rocks did skip to hear his Strains,
And the Groves the Hills did crown
Came dancing down.
When he ceased, the Rocks and VVood
Like a Wall about him stood;
VVherce fair Thebes, which seven Gates close
Of Brass, arose.
Virtue improved by suffering.
It Is but the Body that blind Fortunes spite
Can chain to Earth; the nobler Soul does slight
Her servill Bonds, and takes to Heaven her flight.
So through dark clouds Heaven lightens (whilst the shade
^s as a foyl to its bright splendor made)
And Stars with greater Luster Night invade.
So sparkle Flints when struck; so Metals find
Hardness from hammering, and the closer bind:
So Flames increase the more suppressed by VVind.
And as the Grindstone to unpolis'd Steel
Gives Edge, and Luster: so my Mind, I feel
VVhetted, and glazed by Fortunes turning Wheel.
To Mr Stanley, on his unimitable Poems.
THe Stagirite, who Poesy defines
An Imitation, had he read thy Lines,
And thy rich Fancy known, he would have then
Recalled the learned Error of his Pen,
And have confessed, in his convicted State,
Naught those could equal, this would imitate;
Which from no foreign Supplement does spring,
Nor any Stand, but its own Height, take VVing.
And but that We should seem so to misprise
The Influence of Chariessa's Eyes,
We should not think Love did these Flames inspire,
Rather, that thou taught'st Love this noble Fire:
And, by a generous Way thy hopes to improve,
Shew'dst her before thou did, how thou could love;
And the old, common Method did invert,
First made her Mistress of thy Brain, then Heart,
Some Phant'sies growth may from their Subjects take,
Thine does not Subjects find, but subjects make;
Whose numerous strains we vainly strive to praise
'Less We could ours, high as thy Phant'sie, raise.
Large Praise we might give some, with small Expense
Of Wit, cry Excellent! how praise Excellence?
The Painters Fate is ours, his hand may grace,
Or take a bad, scarce hit a beauteous Face.
Nor can our Art a sitting value sit
Upon thy noble Courtesy of Wit,
Which to so many Toungs does lend that store
Of pleasing sweetness which they lacked before.
The Iberian, Roman, and the fluent Greek;
The nimble French, and the smooth Thuscan, seek
For several Graces from thy Pen alone,
Which that affoords to all these Toungs, in One.
Whose foreign Wealth transferred, improved by thine,
Does with a fair Increase of Luster shine
Like Gems new set upon some richer Foil,
Or Roses planted in a better Soil.
If 'bove all Laurels then thy Merits rise,
What can this Sprig (which while it is offered, dies)
Add to the Wreath that does adorn thy Brows?
No Bays will suit with that but thy own Bowghs.
On his Translation of Oronta.
FLames rescued fair Oronta from the Power
Of an insulting Thracian Conqueror.
The Fame of which brave Action, Preti's Rhyme
Freed from the greater Tyranny of Time:
Yet in that Freedom she less glories, then
In being thus made Captive by thy Pen.
To Mr James Shirley, on his Way of Grammar explained in English Verse.
Grammar, which taught the Poet first to write,
Is by the Poet now taught to delight;
And Poesy, which once unto the School
Owed it is Instructions, now, to that is a Rule.
Thy grateful Pen, to Science does impart
Civility, and requites Art, with Art.
Yet not like some, who think they hardly should
Be thought to understand, if understood,
Do thou the Minds of weaker Tiro's vex,
Or, as perplexed with the Art, the Art perplex;
But what e're seemed therein obscure, make clear,
Brief, what prolix, smooth what did rough appear;
That so the Art to Learners now is seen
As in a Flat, which Hill, and Wood did skreen.
How should they err their Journey's end in view,
Their Way so pleasing, and their Guide so true!
Rest then secure of Fame; nor think thy Worth
Can by a private Hand be well set forth.
Attempts, which to the Public Profit raise,
Expect, nor merit less than Public Praise.
In Idem, ad Eundem.
SHirleie, Angliacum cui olim celeberime vatum!
Drama Labor Nomenque fuit; tibi nune novus ecquis
Surgit Honos? qualisve alto subit Infulanexu
Tempora? -- Nunc video: Magnos accinctus in usus,
Carmine facundo tractas Pracepta severae
Grammatices, Latiaeque canis Primordia linguae;
Ut melius teneros blanda dulcedine captos
Afficeres animos, and dura Elementa colenti,
Atque rudi nimium, Eloquio, placitura Juventae
Efficeres: Labor, en multum meriturus honestae
Landis! non aliter (tua sed mage mellea Lingua)
Tentavit Nestor juv^^^lia fingere Corda,
Heroum teneras tam grato Carmine Mentes
Thessalici haud rexit Moderator semifer Antri,
Grammatica exultet; vibretque Heliconia Ser^a,
Land nova florens: dulci nunc munere fand^
Provocet and Musas: Decus hoc Shirleie dedisti.
FINIS.
SACRA.
To the Eternal WISDOM; Upon the Distraction of the Times.
O Thou Eternal Mind! whose Wisdom sees,
And rules our Changes by unchanged Decrees,
As with Delight on thy grave Works We look,
Say; art thou too with our light Follies took?
For when thy bounteous Hand, in liberal Showers
Each where diffused, thy various Blessings powers;
We catch at them with strife as vain to sight,
As Children, when for Nuts they scrambling, fight.
This snatching at a Scepter breaks it; He,
That broken does e're he can graspe it, see.
The poor World seeming like a Ball, that lights
Betwixt the hands of Powerful Opposites:
Which while they cantonize in their bold Pride,
They but an Immateriall Point divide.
O whilst for VVealthy Spoils these fight, let Me,
Though poor, enjoy a happy Peace with Thee.
Draw Me, and I will follow Thee.
THrough devious Paths without thee, Lord! I run,
And soon, without Thee, will my Race be done.
Happy was Magdalen, who like a Bride,
Her self to Thee by her fair Tresses tied.
So she thy Presence never did decline,
Thou her dear Captive were, and she was Thine,
Behold another Magdalen in Me!
Then stay with Me, or draw me after Thee.
If a Man should give all the substance of his House for Love, he would value
it as nothing, Cant. 8.
LOve I Would of Heaven have bought; when He, (this who
Would think?) both Purchase was, and Seller too.
I offered Gold; but Gold he did not prize.
I offered Gems; but Gems he did despise.
I offered All; All he refused yet: why,
If All will not take, take what is left, said I.
At this he smiled, and said; in vain divine
Love's Price thou beat'st; give nothing and she is thine.
And they laid him in a Manger.
HAppy Cribb! that were alone
To my God, Bed, Cradle, Throne,
Whilst thy glorious vileness, I
View with divine Phant'sies Eye;
Sordid filth seems all the Cost,
State, and Splendor, Crowns do boast.
See! Heaven's sacred Majesty
Humbled beneath Poverty.
Swadled up in homely Rags,
On a Bed of Straw and Flags.
He whose Hands the Heavens displayed,
And the Worlds Foundations laid,
From the World's almost exiled,
Of all Ornaments despoyl'd.
Perfumes bath him not, new born,
Persian Mantles hot adorn:
Nor do the rich Roofs look bright
With the Jaspers Orient Light.
Where O Royal Infant! be
The Ensigns of thy Majesty?
Thy Sires equallizing State,
And thy Scepter that rules Fate?
Where Is thy Angell-guarded Throne,
Whence thy Laws thou did make known?
Laws which Heaven, Earth, Hell obay'd;
These, ah these, aside he laid;
Would the Emblem be, of Pride
By Humility outvy'd.
On the Innocents slain by Herod.
GO blessed Innocents! and freely power
Your Souls forth in a Purple shower.
And for that little Earth each shall lay down
Purchase a Heavenly Crown.
Nor of Original Pollution fear
The Stains should to your bloods adhere;
For yours now shed, e're long shall in a Flood
Be washed of better Blood.
Christo Smarrito.
SIghing, her sad Heart fraught with Fears,
Whilst from her Eyes gush streams of Tears,
Seeking again how to retrive
Her little wandering Fugitive,
Each where with weary Steps does rove,
The Virgin Mother of lost Love.
Like a sad Turtle, up and down
She mourning runs through all the Town:
With searching Eyes she pries about
In every Creek; within, without.
Sticks at each Place, looks over and ore;
Searches, where she had searched before:
Old Joseph following with sad Face,
A heavy Heart, and halting Pace.
Thrice had the Day been born in the East,
As often been buried in the West,
Since the Dear Comfort of her Eyes
She miss't; yet still her Search she plyes.
Each where she seeks with anxious Care
To find him out, yet knows not where.
When the third Morn she saw arose,
And yet no Beam of Hope disclose;
Looking to Heaven, in these sad Words
She vent to her full Grief affords.
O my dear God! Son of my Womb!
My Joy, my Love, my Life, for whom
These Tears I shed, on thee I call,
But oh! thou answer'st not at all.
For thee I search, but cannot find thee:
Say (Dear!) what new Embraces bind thee?
What Heart, enamored on thy Eyes,
Enjoyes what Heaven to Me denies?
Daughters of Sion! you which stray
With nimble feet upon the Way,
I beg of you, (if you can tell,)
To show we where my Love does dwell:
Whose Beauty with Celestial Rays,
The Light of Paradise displayes.
Perhaps to you he is unknown;
Ah! if you wish to hear him shown,
I Will tell y'him: Snow her whiteness, seeks,
Vermilion, Blushes, from his Cheeks:
His Eye a light more chaste discloses
Then amorous Doves, his Lips then Roses.
Amber, and Gold shine in his Hair
(If Gold, or Amber may compare
With that,) a Beauty so Divine,
No Tongue, Pen, Fant'sie can design.
Why break'st thou not (my Soul) this Chain
Of Flesh? why lett'st thou that restrain
Thy nimble Flight into his Arms,
Whose only Look with gladness charms?
But (alas!) in vain I speak to thee
Poor Soul! already fled from Me;
To seek out him in whose loved Breast,
Thy Life, as mine in thee, does rest.
Blessed Virgin! who in Tears half drowned,
Griev'st that thy Son cannot be found.
The time will come when Men shall hear thee
Complain that he is too too near thee.
When in the amidst of hostile Bands
With pierced Feet, and nailed Hands
Advanced upon a cursed Tree
His naked Body thou shall see
As void of Coverture, as Friends,
But what kind Heaven in pity lends,
Thy Soul will then abhor the Light,
And think no Grief worse than his Sight.
But lo, as thus she searched, and wept,
By chance she to the Temple stepped,
Where her dear Son with joyful Eyes
Set amongst the Rabbis she espies.
And as the Light of some kind Star
To a distressed Mariner,
So his dear sight to her appears,
Tossed in this Tempest of her Fears.
But O what tongue can now impart
The joy of her revived Heart?
The Welcome, spoke in mutual Blisses
Of sweet Embraces, sweeter Kisses!
Muse, since too high forthy weak Wing
^is, contemplate what thou can not sing.
Christus Mathaeum and discipulos alloquitur.
LEave, leave converted Publican! lay down
That sinful Trash; which in thy happier Race
To gain a Heavenly Crown
Clogs thy free Pace.
O what for this pale dirt will not Man do!
Nay even now, amongst you
(For this) there is One I see,
Seeks to sell Me.
But Times will come hereafter, when for Gold,
I shall by more (alas) than One, be sold.
Conscience.
Internal Cerberus! whose griping fangs
That gnaw the Soul are the Minds secret Pangs:
Thou greedy Vulture! that do gorging Tire
On Hearts corrupted by impure desire.
Subtle, and buzzing Hornet! that do ring
A Peal of Horror, ever thou giv'st the sting.
The Souls rough File that smoothness does impart!
The Hammer that does break a stony Heart!
The Worm that never dies! the Thorn within,
That pricks, and pains: the whip, and scourge of sin!
The voice of God in Man! which, without rest
Does softly cry within a troubled Breast;
To all Temptations is that Soul left free,
That makes not to it self a Curb of Me.
And she washed his Feet with her Tears, and wiped them with the Hairs of her
Head.
THe proud Egyptian Queen, her Roman Guest,
(TO express her Love in Hight of State, and Pleasure)
With Pearl dissolved in Gold, did feast,
Both Food, and Treasure.
And now (dear Lord!) thy Lover, on the fair
And silver Tables of thy Feet, behold!
Pearl in her Tears, and in her Hair,
Offers thee Gold.
Good Friday.
THis Day eternal Love, for me
Fast nailed unto a cursed Tree;
Rending his fleshly Veyl, did through his side
A way to Paradise provide.
This Day Life died; and dying, overthrew
Death, Sin, and Satan too;
O happy day!
May sinners say:
But Day can it be said to be,
Wherein We see
The bright Sun of celestial Light
O'rshadow'd with so black a Night?
Mary Magdalen weeping under the Cross.
I Thirst, my dear, and dying Savior cries:
These Hills are dry: O drink then from my Eyes.
On the Receiving of the blessed Sacrament.
THen Nourishment our Natural Food imparts,
When that into our Flesh, and Blood converts:
But at this heavenly Banquet, I
Then find of strength a spiritual supply,
When (as by Faith the sacred Food I eat)
My Soul converts into the Meat.
The Message.
DEar Savior! that my Love I might make known
To thee, I sent more Messengers than one.
My heart went first, but came not back; My Will
I sent thee next, and that staid with thee still.
Then, that the better thou might know my Mind,
I sent my Int'lect; that too stays behind.
Now my Soul's sent: Lord! if that stay with thee,
O what a happy Carcass shall I be!
The Fountain.
STranger, who ever thou art, that stoop'st to taste
These sweeter streams, let me arrest thy haste;
Nor of their fall
The Murmurs, (though the Lyre
Less sweet be) stand to admire:
But as you shall
See from this Marble Tun
The liquid Crystal run;
And mark withal,
How fixed the one abides,
How fast the other glides;
Instructed thus the Difference learn to see,
'Twixt Mortal Life, and Immortality.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 32. l. 5. read Yet I in Steel. p. 36. l. 9. for guid'st read guild'st.


