A SURVEY of the County JUDICATURES, Commonly called the County Court, Hundred
Court, and Court Baron. Wherein the nature and use of them, and the way and
order of keeping them is opened; for the great ease and profit of all such as
have occasion to keep, or use them.

By WILLIAM SHEPPARD Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by R. DANIEL, and are to be sold by Nathaniel Ekins, at the
sign of the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

To the Reader, and all his dear Countrymen.
My dear Countrymen,
WHiles I think of my day far spent, and my night almost come, when my Body
must fall asleep, and my Soul must to God my great Master, that gave it me, to
give an account of my Time which I have had, and Talents wherewith I have been
trusted: I am pressed to make use of the little time is left me to do what
service I may for you. And calling to mind the excellent invention of our
Common Law, ( Coo. 2. part of his institutes, fol. 311.
observed by an eminent Judge of the Nation) that men should not be troubled
for suits of small value in the great and remote Courts of the Nation, but that
they might be heard and determined in the Country with small charge, and little
or no travel, or loss of time, it ordained County Iudicatures, the County
Courts, Hundred Courts, and Court Barons; where all Actions of Debt, of the
Case, Detinue, Covenant, Trespass, and other personal Actions under forty
shillings, (which would be now more then twice so much) were to have been heard
and ended. And (as this Judge has it) it was then accounted against the
dignity and institution of those high Courts, to hold plea of small or trifling
causes. Ne dignitas Curiarum illarum vilesceret, and ne materiam superaret
opus. And looking upon our present State, that (as it is generally conceived) a
third part of the many thousand actions now depending in Westminster Hall, are
such trifling actions, that might be ended in the Country Iudicatures, were
these Courts duly regulated. So that the Law that was instituted for the quiet
and defense of man, is now by corruption abused to his vexation, charge, and
offense. I cannot but say woe and alas, that we are so miserably fallen and
degenerated. And taking notice further that there is at this time upon the
spirit of our present Authority, a deep sense of this and some other evils and
pressures upon this Nation; with a resolution, as far, and as fast as it can,
to cure them, if we our selves do not obstruct it. These, and some other such
like considerations as these, have put me on the resolution to send this rude
draught amongst you: that thereby I may perhaps provoke those that are
concerned, and have power in it to endeavor the regulation and reducement of
this County Judicature again to its pure and primitive institution. And that
they that are employed in the keeping of these Courts, may the better know how
to keep them; and they for whom they are kept, the better know what to require
of, and expect from them that keep them; I have adventured to send this little
piece more amongst you. And now if I can but have your good will and good word
for all this, it shall suffice to

Your dear Countryman W. S.

CHAP. I. Of the County Court.
THe County Court is a What the County Court is.
Court, not of Record, incident to the Sheriffs office, for the hearing and
determining of petty matters between party and party within the County; wherein
the Sheriff is only a Register or Recorder and the Freeholders of the County
are Judges. The style of this Court is GLOUC. The first Court of E. C. Esquire
Sheriff of the County aforesaid held at Gloucester the first day of May, 1655.
And the next Court, The second Court, etc.

Sect. I. Of the nature of this Court.
THe office of the Sheriff The Sheriffs office.
has this Court incident and belonging to it; and not to be severed nor
granted away from it. Nay the Lord Protector by his Letters pattents cannot
grant away the office of the Clark of the County Court, nor the fees etc.
thereto belonging; and if whilst the office or place of the Sheriff remains
void, the Lord Protector (by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal) shall
grant away the said office of the Clark of the County, (or Shire Clark of the
County) or shall appoint any to occupy or use the same, yet when the Lord
Protector shall afterward make one Sheriff, he shall avoid that grant: for
that the County Court, and the entering of all the proceedings therein are
incident to the office of the Sheriff; and the Sheriff is to appoint such
Clarks under him Sheriffs Clark.
in his County Court, for whom he will answer at his peril.

Sect. II. Of the time of keeping this Court.
THese County Courts must The County Court to be kept monthly.
be holden and kept from month to month: and must be no longer deferred, but
one month from Court to Court, and so these Courts are to be kept every
month, upon a day certain, and no otherwise: and the months to be reckoned by
eight and twenty days and not by the Calendar; and so within the twelve Shires
of Wales, their Sheriffs must keep their Counties monthly.

The necessity of keeping this The reason of the keeping this Court monthly.
Court every month and upon a day certain, is by reason of the Lord Protectors
writs of Exigents which must be read there.

Sect. III. Of the place of keeping this Court.
AS to the place wherein these Courts are to be kept these things are to be
known.

First, The Sheriff of Northumberland Sheriff of Northum.
(by the statute made Anno 2. Ed. 6. Chapter 25.) is to keep the County Court
of that Shire in the Town or Castle of Alnewick, and in none other place.

Secondly, The Sheriff of Sussex Sheriff of Sussex.
(by the statute made Anno 19. Hen. 7. chap. 24.) is to keep and hold the Shire
Court for that Shire, one time at Chichester, and the other time at the Borough
of Jews, and so to be kept by turn for ever: and every Shire Court holden
there to the contrary, and all things done therein shall be void.

Thirdly, The Sheriff of the Sheriff of Chester.
County of Chester, is to keep his Shire Court in the Shirehall of the said
County.

Fourthly, The Sheriffs Shire Sheriffs of Wales.
Courts in Wales of the County of Brecknock, shall be holden at Brecknock; of
Radnor, at new Radnor and Prestene; of Montgomery at Montgomery, and
Maghenleth; of Denby, at Wrixham; and of Monmouth at Monmouth, and Newport; by
turn, one after another.

Fifthly, For the County of Glouc. it may be kept in the city of Glouc. This
Court may be kept in other Counties, in any place of the County wheresoever the
Sheriff and Freeholders please.

Sect. IIII. Of the Judges of this Court.
AS to the Judges of these Courts; these things are to be known.

First, In this Court, (which is of the nature of a Court Baron) not the
Sheriff nor the Steward, but as to all actions and proceedings by a Iusticies
or other writ, as also in other Suits which are there by plaint without writ,
the Freeholders Freeholders or suitors to be Judges.
of the County or Suitors are Judges there; But as to Outlawries the Coroners
only are Judges. and the Sheriff, Steward, and Bailiffs are ministers: and
therefore the Sheriff can do no act there without the assent of the Suitors,
and if he do, an Action of the Case lies against Action of the Case against
the Sheriff. False Judgment.
him, not a writ of false Judgment as it does against the Suitors, if they
give a false Judgment: and thereupon they are to be amerced, whether the Suit
be upon a Iusticies or not.

Secondly, There must be two Freeholders at the least, or else the Court cannot
be held.

Thirdly, In some special writ, (now out of use) the Sheriff is Judge there.

Fourthly, If the Freeholders do not appear, they may be Affering.
amearced, the amearcement affeared, extreated and levied, but it must be done
by two Freeholders at the least, and may not be done by the Sheriffs without
Freeholders.

Sect. V. Of the Power and Proceedings of this Court in General.
THe power in General of this Court is either ex officio, and of it self, or
by commission called a Iusticies, and in Justicies.
both cases the Freeholders, not the Sheriffs, are Judges of this Court: and
they may by their own authority hold plea of, hear and determine all lesser
actions; as actions of debt, trespass, covenant, detinue, account, and the
like; and in cases of Replevin, where the debt or damage is not forty
shillings, or upwards, and no freehold is in question, and by a Iusticies they
may hold plea of, hear and determine, all actions of what value soever; and
notwithstanding the freehold it self being in question. And this not only
between persons and parties living within the County where the defendant lives,
but also between persons living elsewhere out of the County; for any cause or
contract ensuing within the County, or any transitory things.

In all which cases their proceeding is much after the example of the higher
Courts; by entering of Plaints by the plaintiff himself, or his Attorney,
putting in of pledges, filing declarations. And if the Defendant appear not by
process of summons, attachment, and distress, upon attachment infinite, till
he do appear; which when he does, he is to plead, and so to the trial of the
cause: which is commonly by wager of law, but by consent of the parties it may
be by Jeury: as it may be also where the use of the Court is so. And if
judgment be given against the defendant, the execution is by distress, a
warrant is sent from the Judges to the Bailiff to seize the defendants goods,
put them in pound, or sell them, and bring the money in Court for the
Plaintiff, as the custom and course of the Court is. And if the Court give
judgment, or do any thing contrary to Law, the party grieved thereby must have
his remedy by a writ of false judgment. And Executors and Administrators may
sue and be sued here, as in other Courts.

But we shall open these things more particularly in the things that follow.

Sect. VI. Of a Iusticies.
A Iusticies is a writ in the nature of a commission, directed to the Sheriff
for the dispatch of justice in his County Court, in some especial cases,
wherein of his own authority he cannot deal. And as to this part these things
are to be known.

First, That albeit the writ does lie in diverse cases, yet at this day it is
very rarely used in any case, but in an action of debt, or some such like
action, of, or above forty shillings; in which case, the Sheriff has not power
in this Court without this commission.

Secondly, That albeit the writ be directed to the Sheriff, yet are the Suitors
the Judges, and their proceedings alike in this as in other actions. And yet in
this it is a County record; and so it is not in the proceedings of all the rest.

Thirdly, The Sheriff upon this writ may not make a precept to a Bailiff of a
Franchise to have his cognizance of the cause; nor may any other but the
Sheriff and the high Sheriff (as it is held) himself hold plea upon this writ.

Fourthly, A suit here upon Remove.
this writ is removeable, as another suit is, that is without it.

Fifthly, The Sheriff is not bound to make any return of this writ.

Sect. VII. Of an Attorney and Pledges.
ANy man may make a general Attornees
Attorney to sue for, or against him in all pleas in this Court. And for
pledges pledges.
which are such as do undertake for the Plaint, that they should prosecute the
suit, and stand to the judgment of the Court, there ought to be such in this,
as in other Courts, of sufficient men of the county: but this it seems is out
of use, and not necessary at this day.

Sect. VIII. Of a Plaint.
THe Plaint is the first entry of the persons to and cause of the action in the
Court, upon which all the rest of the proceedings are grounded, and is thus: A.
B. complains of C. D. in a plea of debt of ten shillings, and so as the case
is. And as to this, these things are to be known.

First. No Plaint ought to be entered (except in case of Replevins) out of
Court, but in full County, and sitting of the Court. And yet the course is
otherwise, and (as it seems) good enough.

Secondly. The Sheriff or his County Clark, or any other, by either of their
commandments, or in their names, may not enter any plaint in any man's name,
unless the Plaintiff be present in Court, in person, or else by his Attorney
or deputy, and yet this it seems is good enough, though otherwise entered, but
for this cause, it may be removed, if it be set forth Remove.
and moved in another Court.

Thirdly, Nor may any man enter a plaint in the name of a dead man, of purpose
to get money of the Defendant.

Fourthly, Nor may any of the Officers of the Court enter or cause to be
entered, any more plaints then the plaintiff has cause, and desires against
the defendant.

Fifthly, There must be but one plaint for one contract, trespass, or cause.

Sixthly, The plaint that is for trespass, may not be vi and armis: for then a
prohibition Prohibition.
may be had to stay the suit, but leaving out these words, it may be brought
there for a trespass,

Seventhly, No plaint can be heard in this Court for charters touching
Inheritance or Freehold.

Eighthly, No plaint or suit can be entered here for debt, or damages to forty
shillings or upwards, etc. unless it be upon a Justicies. But under forty
shillings it may be for any action of debt, either upon an account made by the
parties, or upon an especiallity, or for wages after a hire, or upon a lending,
or upon an arbitrament, or the like: and for a detinue, and for actions of the
case upon a delivery, or upon a warranty, or upon a Misfesans, or upon a
Nonfesans, Nusans, or the like.

Ninthly, And upon a Replevin Replevin.
for damage fesant, amearcement, rent, or the like: and upon all actions of
trespass; for breaking of a house, taking away goods, or the like. And if the
debt or damage be forty shillings, or upwards, the defendant may demurre to the
Demurrer.
jurisdiction of the Court, or have a prohibition. And yet Prohibition.
it is a question whether these Courts may not hold plea so much now, as forty
shillings was then, which is about six pound, but it is not safe to adventure.
And it is held clear, That if the declaration be laid for, or above forty
shillings, albeit the Jury find the damage under forty shillings, this will not
help.

Tenthly, If the debt be above forty shillings, as for example, twenty pound,
the Plaintiff cannot divide this into twenty several actions to make this
Court hold plea of it. for in this case the defendant may wage his law with
good conscience, or have a Prohibition.

Eleventhly, But if the debt be above forty shillings, and the plaintiff will
acknowledge in his plaint the receipt of so much as to bring it within forty
shillings, in this case perhaps the plaint may be good. This plaint must be
continued from Court to Court, or else may be dismissed, and the Plaintiff will
be forced to begin again.

Twelfthly, If the Sheriff or any of his officers shall procure others to enter
plaints or suits in this Court against other men, they may be punished for it
by a special Act of Parliament.

Sect. IX. Of the Process of the Court.
THe Process of the Court Process.
is the precepts that issue out in the actions, and these are either original,
which are such as issue out before judgment; or judicial, such as issue out
after judgment. Those which we call original, are the summons, and the
attachment, and distress; both which (upon the matter are all one.) The venire
facias, the Alias and Plures, and distringas or distress.

The summons is a warrant Summons
to an officer, to warn the defendant in the action to appear to it. And is
after this form.

The Bailiff of the hundred of S. is commanded to summon C. D. that he be here
at the next Court, to answer A. B. in a plea of debt, (or in a plea of
trespass, or in a plea of detinue, as the case is,) or more largely after this
form.

R. S. Esquire, Sheriff of Glove.
the County aforesaid, to the Bailiff of the Hundred of W. greeting. Forasmuch
as A. B. at my County Court held for the County aforesaid, complains against C.
D. in a plea of debt of thirty shillings, (or in a plea of trespass, as the
cause is,) and has found pledges to prosecute, etc. These are therefore to
require that you summon the said C. D. that he be here at the next Court; to
answer the said A. B. in the foresaid Plea: and that you have there this
warrant, and show how you have executed it. Dated the eighth day of August,
1655.

Attachment is the second degree Attachment.
of Process, and issues out where the defendant comes not in upon the
Summons; and this is to take the defendants goods, and keep them, to the end he
may appear; and is made Briefly after this form. It is commanded the Baylife
of the hundred of S. That he attach C. D. by all his goods and chattels to the
end that he may be at the next Court to answer A. B. in a plea of debt, etc. or
more largely as before in the other.

And in this case, the Sheriff may choose to take away the goods, or leave
them with the defendant, (which he will,) and if the defendant appear not, by
this at the day of the return of the Attachment he shall forfeit them, but the
property thereof by the taking is not out of him, till he has made default, so
that if he appear or be essoyned, the goods are not to be forfeit.

The distress is the third degree Distress.
of Process, or a third Process; and it is a warrant to the Bailiff to destrayne
the defendant by his goods and chattels, to the end that he may be at the next
Court to answer A. B. (as the cause is) or largely as before. And the alias and
pluries does not differ from these but has these words added. It is commanded
the Bailiff, etc. as an alias (or as a pluries) the venire facias is a precept
to summon a Jury to appear to try the case; and it is after this form. It is
commanded the Bailiff, etc. or

To the Bailiff of the hundred of S.
These are to require you the said Bailiff, to cause to come, twelve good and
lawful men of your Bayliwicke that they be here at the next Court to try an
issue joined between A. B. Plaintiff, and C. D. defendant, touching a plea of
debt (or as the case is) and if the full Jury do not appear, then as many as
make default and be not essoyned Amercement.
shall be amerced.

And a December Tales awarded to summon ten more, and the same day given to the
first Jury after this form. It is commanded, etc. That he cause to come ten
such good and Lawful men of his Bayliwicke, etc. as in the last. At which day
as many as make default and be not essoyned shall be amerced and then an Octo
tales. And affer that if needs be a Sex tales. Till a full Jury appear.

The judicial Process in this Court, is only the Levari facias which is a
precept to the Bailiff Execution.
to levy the debt or damage recovered, and the costs of suits, of the goods
and chattels of the defendant, and is after this form.

It is commanded to the Bailiff of S. That he cause to be levied of the goods
and cattels of C. D. twenty shillings which A. B. has recovered against him in
this Court in a plea of debt, for a plea of trespass as the case is) and for
his costs and expense in the suit twelve pence. And that he have the same money
at the next Court, or thus largely.

R. S. Esquire. Sheriff of the Glouc.
said County whereas A. B. at my County Court held for the said County has
recovered against C. D. twenty shillings in a plaint of debt and twelve pence
for his costs of suit, whereof the said C. D. is in the same Court convict by
the judgment of the Court.

These are therefore to command you according to the custom of the said Court,
the said twenty shillings adjudged by the said Court and the said twelve pence
for costs that you cause to be levied, and that you have the same money at the
next Court to answer the same to the said A. B. and that you have there also
this precept, etc. And this precept is given where the defendant is condemned
by default, verdict, or otherwise, to levy the debt or damages of the goods of
the defendant, which being taken are to be prised and sold to satisfy the
Plaintiff: but the goods in this case may not be delivered over to the
Plaintiff himself;

And as to all these Process Officers.
and the execution thereof these things are to be known.

First, that the Bailiffs or other officers of the Court upon these Process or
precepts must take care duly to execute them; and to make return what they do
upon them.

Secondly, they may upon these Process, take any man's goods or cattle in any
place in the County upon his own or another man's ground.

Thirdly, they may enter into any house or close, if the door be open, to do
execution of the goods of the party the goods being there.

Fourthly, if any default be in the Bailiff, or other officer, in Amercement.
the execution of his precept, or making return of it when it is executed, or
the like, he may be amerced for it by the Court. And in some cases the party
grieved by it may have his action of the case against him.

Fifthly, the goods they seize Attachment.
or take must be reasonable and not excessive.

Sixthly, after Process by Attachments or distresses, once Or distresses.
granted the Sheriff ex officio may grant new Process of the same nature. And
so after judgment entered he may grant out execution of course, if the Court do
not stay it. But otherwise these officers are not to do any thing without the
Benchers, except in case of necessity, as granting of Replevins; Replevins.
this is done of course.

Sect. X. Of the proceedings from the time of the defendants being summoned, or
attached, to the end of the Suit.
THe proceedings in these cases is much after the fashion of the proceedings in
the higher Courts, as in these particulars that follow.

First, when the defendant is to come in, sometimes he may Essoyne.
be excused by an Essoyne; for the defendant when he cannot appear at the time
appointed by the Court; for reasonable cause, he shall have a further day, and
his default shall be saved, and as to this essoyne these things are to be known.

1. That the ordinary causes for which this is allowed are.

1. That either the defendant is in the service of the Lord Protector, or is
beyond the sea, or is sick, or the water is so high that he cannot come, or the
like.

2. He that casts an essoyne ought to come at the beginning of the Court,
when Proclamation is made.

3. If one be essoyned one Court the other may be essoyned the next Court.

4. No essoyne is to be allowed by either party without cause showed, which
may be without oath.

5. No essoyne is to be allowed in these cases following.

1. Where the party himself is seen in Court. 2. Where the party has an
attorney in the same plea present in Court. 3. Where the party made default at
the last Court before. 4. Where the party does come in by distress.
Secondly, where the defendant Declaration.
does appear the Plaintiff must see his Declaration be filed, or the Plaintiff
may be nonsuit otherwise, unless the Court give further day to him: also he
must see to it that it be made perfect or the defendant Demurrer.
may demurre to it, and put the Plaintiff to make a new Declaration, and yet
before the defendant have answered the Amendment.
Plaintiff may by order of the Court have any thing amended that is amiss in
the Declaration.

Thirdly, the defendant when Imparlance.
he appears and the Declaration is filed, shall of course have an Imparlance
for one Court, (that is) upon his desire he shall have further day given him to
answer till the next Court, and this by order of the Court, or agreement of the
parties may be again continued to another Court.

Fourthly, continuances must Continuances.
be made of cases in this Court from Court to Court, as they are in the Courts
at Westminster from term to term, to keep the suits in being.

Fifthly, the defendant after a perfect Declaration put in; must Pleading.
give his answer or plead to it, and for this, these things are to be known.

1. He must plead in the time appointed by the rules of the Court, otherwise
judgment will be given against him for his default, by nihil dicit 1. because
he says nothing.

2. His plea must be legal, full and perfect; or else it will be to the
advantage of the Plaintiff, for a bad or insufficient plea is in Law as no plea.

Sixthly, the ordinary pleas here to action of debt are as in the Courts at
Westminster: (as the case is;) as for example if the suit be on a deed. It is
not his deed; that it was made by threatening or imprisonment. That he tendered
the money at the day, and is still ready to pay it. A release or acquitance by
deed, and such like.

Or if it be on a Contract without a deed, payment, or obligation made for the
debt, an arbitrament, etc.

That he does not owe the money, and such like. And if the suit be against an
executor, or administrator, the ordinary plea is, that he was never executor,
or that he has fully administered, or the like. Or if the suit be grounded on a
deed, or on a Contract without a deed, that he was within age when he did make
the deed or Contract, or if it be against a woman; that she was covert (1.) had
a husband when she made the deed or Contract or such like.

If the suit be grounded on an arbitrament, that there was no arbitrament
Legally made, or that he has performed the award.

If it be on a Replevin for trespass by damage fesant; that the beasts came in
by the default of the enclosure of the Plaintiff; or that he has title of
common there, or the like.

And if it be on a distress for rent; That there is no rent behind, or the
like.

If it be on an action of detinue the ordinary pleas are. That he does not
deteine the thing sued for, a release, or a gift to him by the Plaintiff of
the thing sued for, or that he did tender the thing sued for before the action
brought, or that he is ready to deliver the thing, and has brought it in
Court; or that the Plaintiff did deliver it to him as a pledge for twenty
shillings, which he has not paid; or that the thing sued for was delivered to
him by the Plaintiff and another, and not by the Plaintiff alone. And such like.

Or if it be an Action of the Action of the case upon an assumpsit.
Case upon an assumpsit, the ordinary pleas are, that he did not so assume, or
that he is not guilty, a concord performed, or the like.

Or if it be in an other Action of the Case, the ordinary plea is, not guilty:
and if it be on a warranty, that he did not warrant, etc.

And if it be in an Action of Action of trespass.
trespass, the ordinary plea is not guilty; also in this case an arbitrament,
or concord with execution, tender of amends, before the action brought, may be
pleaded.

And in all these actions, special pleas may also be pleaded (as the case is.)

But if the defendant plead Frehold or foreign plea.
his freeheld, or foreign plea not triable there; the Court can no further
proceed, and if it does, the other party may have a writ of false judgment,
to avoid the judgment when it is False judgment.
given.

But in all these cases, the defendant may if he will, refuse to plead any such
plea, and confess the action; or let judgment go by, Non sum informatus,
defaults, by the saying of his attorney that he is not informed.

But upon these pleas, the Trial. Issue.
Plaintiff in most cases, may take issue, and put it to a Jury, which is
thereupon warned: whereby the Court of any of these Courts, Trialls are by
Juries, to By Jury.
appear to try it. And these appearing, the parties are to have their
Challenges, as in other Challenge.
Courts. Or by consent of parties, it seems it may be tried by Jury in any case.

And upon some of these pleas, pleaded by the defendant, Wager of Law.
where wager of Law does lie, as upon an action of debt brought upon a contract
by word without writing, or detinue, he may offer to wage his Law, and may have
it for the trial, and cannot be put upon another way of trial. And this is
the proper and ordinary way of trial, appointed by Law in all actions in this
Court. And where this is admitted, the Court does appoint the defendant to do
it at the next Court; and set down with how many hands, or other men witnesses,
he shall wage his Law, which is taken by the Judges of the Court, who do
examine the defendant and his witnesses, on oath: and the Plaintiff also, if
they think fit.

Or the defendant (if he will) By witnesses.
may deny the debt, where it is with out a deed, and put it on the Plaintiffs
proof, and then he must prove it by witnesses at the next Court, if it be so
ordered; and if he do then make default herein, he is to be nonsuit. So if the
Plaintiff in person be in Court, (where the Jury Non suit.
is ready to appear, or give their verdict) and renounce his suit or withdraw
his action, and says he will follow it no more; or when the parties have
demurred in judgment, and have a day given over, and at the day the Plaintiff
do not appear, but make default, in these cases Nonsuit.
the Plaintiff shall be nonsuit; and judgment shall be given against him for
costs of suit. Which shall be levied in the same manner as money recovered
against a defendant is levied.

And in all these cases, if the Judges where it is to be judged by them alone,
or the Judge and Jury (where there is a Jury) shall find for the Plaintiff,
they must give judgment for the debt, or damage and costs of suit, as the
Judgment.
case is; and if they find for the avowant in a Replevin, they Costs.
must give damage and costs of suit: or otherwise, if it go against the
Plaintiff, or he be nonsuit for not proceeding, judgment must go against him,
for such costs of suit for vexation: So that as the Court shall adjudge, if the
defendant be condemned by default or verdict, a levarie is to go forth to levy
the debt or damage, and costs of suit; and so if costs be recovered against the
Plaintiff, and hereupon execution shall be done accordingly by a Levari facias,
or warrant appointed to leavie the money. And upon this, the Sheriffs officers,
or servants appointed, are to levy so much of the goods of the Plaintiff or
defendant, the which they are to take, prise, and sell, and therewith pay the
party that does recover his money, and the costs of suit, and give back the
overplus. But neither can the under officers, nor the Sheriff, nor the Court,
deliver over, or cause to be delivered over the goods distrayned, to the party
that is to have the money.

Sect. XI. Of a suit by Replevin, and the proceedings therein, from the
beginning to the end of it.
A Replevin is where one What a Replevin is.
man distraineth another goods or cattle: then the party that is distrained,
upon giving security to the Sheriff, or his depulie, that he will pursue the
action, and return the beasts again, if the taking shall be adjudged Lawful;
may have this by writ to the Sheriff, or the Sheriff may do it ex officio: or
if it be within a franchise, the Sheriff may send his warrant to the Bailiff of
the franchise; and hereby he shall have the goods or cattels restored again. As
touching this, these things are to be known.

First, that he that brings this writ must have either a general Special
property.
or a special property in the thing; as of goods pledged, or the like; and
this must be in him at the time of the taking, or otherwise he cannot have, or
not maintain the Replevin for them.

Secondly, if diverse men's cattle be taken they may not join in a Replevin, but
must have several Replevins.

Thirdly, this is grantable in hundred Courts and Courts Barons also.

Fourthly, the Sheriff is bound to have four deputies in the County, to make
these Replevins; and the Sheriff upon complaint of goods or cattels taken and
wrongfully withheld, may send his warrant by word or writing (if it be out of a
liberty) to whom he pleases to deliver them; and if it be in a franchise, he
must first send to the Bailiff of the franchise, to do it, which if he will not
do, the Sheriff himself at the last may do it.

Fifthly, this the Sheriff does and may do, either ex officio by virtue of his
office, and of his own authority; or by a writ sent to him out of another Court
to give him command so to do.

Sixthly, the party that sueth it out (be it with or without a writ) must first
before he can have it, or the distresses be delivered, enter his plaint in the
Court, of the which to the end that deliverance may be made presently by a
Replevin, before a Court day he may enter at any time out of Court for the
taking of the things; and give a band of forty pound at the least to prosecute
the suit, and make return of the goods, if return be awarded by the Court; and
if the Sheriff do otherwise, the party grieved may have an action of the case
against Action of the case.
him, and recover his damage by it.

Seventhly, if the things distrayned, be put by him that did distrayn them, in
a place where the Sheriff cannot come at them to make a Replevin, as a Castle,
or the like; he may take the power of the County, and after demand, beat down
the Castle to take them, and the owner of the goods shall recover double for
his loss, what ever it be. And if the goods be put in a Castle, or driven into
another County, or other place where he cannot deliver them upon the Replevin,
or Retorno Habendo; he may grant a precept in the nature of a Withernam, to
whom he will, to take Withernam.
the parties own goods. Or if the Sheriff command the Bailiff of the franchise
to make deliverance, and he return that he cannot come at them; the Sheriff at
the next County Court may enquire of it by inquest of office; and if he find it
true, he may of his own authority grant a precept in the nature of a Withernam
to the Bailiff to take the parties own goods. The which goods the Sheriff or
Bailiff may either keep, or deliver to the Plaintiff to keep, at his choice.
But the defendant is to pay for the keeping of them, before he have them again.

And if the Sheriff coming to make a Replevin, and the party that has the
distress, claim propriety in the goods for himself, or for himself and
another, of his Master; the Sheriff cannot proceed till this question be
decided by a Proprietate Probanda. Proprietate probanda.


Which is a writ lying where the Sheriff is coming to make a Replevin by writ,
or without, before or after Gager de deliverance; and the party that has the
goods, and distrayneth them, claymeth them for himself, or his Master for whom
he destrayned, as their own; then the Sheriff can proceed no further in the
Replevin, until the Playntiff have sued out this writ, which if the writ were
had out of the upper Bench, or common pleas, may be had thence; else out of the
Chancery; and thereby the Sheriff may try the property, and if he have no
property that pretended it, then the Sheriff may go on in the Replevin.

If he had, he must surcease; for in all cases of Replevin, the Plaintiff ought
to have the general or special property of the goods, at the time of the
taking. For a Replevin lies upon either property. It is therefore a good plea
in a Replevin, that the property is to the Plaintiff and a stranger: but this
finding of the Sheriff by this writ, is but an inquest of office; and therefore
if it be thereby found against the Plaintiff, yet may he have a writ of
Replevin to the Sheriff; and if he retain the claim of property, etc. yet
shall it proceed in the Court of common pleas, where the property shall be put
in issue and finally tried.

But a man cannot claim property by his Bailiff or servant; because if it be
found against him, he shall be fined that so does; which the Lord cannot be,
unless he claim himself.

Eighthly, this suit, after it is once brought into the Court, and the
defendant, which is the party that took the distress, does appear, is to be
determined in this Court. But according to the plea ministered by that party, it
becomes real or personal.

For where there is property claymed, it is personal. But if the defendant
justify the taking, as in his freehold, or for services, or rent behind, or
the defendant avow for damage fesant, and the Playntiff justify by reason of
common of pasture, then it is real. And then there can be no further
proceeding there except it be upon a justicies, but the case must be removed by
a writ of recordare, which must be read and allowed in the Court; That the
Plaintiff in the Replevin may have notice of the Court wherein it is removed;
and of the day, that he do then appear, and declare there against the taker, or
else he will have a returno habendo.

And then is the defendant to make his Avowrie, and set forth by what right, or
for what cause, he took the cattels.

Tenthly, for an Avowrie is Avowrie.
where one does estrayne another for rent, or other cause, and the party
estrayned sueth a Replevin, against the taker, then he must justify and avow
in his plea, the lawful taking of them: and show why he took them, whether in
his own right, or a servant, or Bailiff to another. And upon this, the
Plaintiff does usually join issue; and so they go to trial commonly by a Jury.

Eleventhly, if after the Replevin brought, the Plaintiff (whose goods be
taken) do make default, or be non suited, before declaration, or the like; or
judgment be given against him; he that distrayned the beasts shall have them
delivered to him again by the writ of Returno habendo. Returno habendo.


And this writ must have this clause inferted in it. That the Sheriff shall not
deliver the goods without writ, wherein mention shall be made of the judgment.

And hereupon the Plaintiff if he will may have a judicial writ to the
Sheriff, to deliver the beasts to him.

Twelfthly, where a plaint is Second deliverance.
removed out of the County Court, or Court Baron by Pone or Recordare, into the
common Bench, (...) after the Plaintiff in the Replevin is nonsuited before any
Avowrie made; notwithstanding this nonsuit, the party that distrayned, may have
again the same distress, and no other by this writ; which is only to revive
the first suit, and the defendant cannot have a recaption in this case, for a
double distress: And this is called second deliverance; after which had, and
trial thereupon, or that the Plaintiff be again nonsuited before declaration:
Return Irreprevisable, shall be awarded Return irreprevisable.
to the avowant; and then he may make his attorney to the intent to ground a
writ to enquire of damages: or he may hold the beasts as a distress, till he
be satisfied, and if any returno habendo go forth before this writ, this is a
supersedeas to it; and the Sheriff may not meddle upon it.

1. If after one return awarded, a return shall be another time awarded, there
shall be no more Replevins granted. And if upon this default the second time,
or otherwise the defendant be adjudged to have a new return, the distress
shall remain Return irreplegiable.
Irreplegiable.

Where one has sued a Replevin, Gager de deliverance.
and yet has not the goods delivered, and the other avoweth; now he may show
this in pleading that the defendant is still possessed of the goods, and pray
that he may put in pledges for the deliverance; which when they come to issue,
or demurrer shall be granted him, or after avowrie, if the defendant do not
claim propriety in them: and then a writ shall go to the Sheriff to deliver
them; but where the avowant does clay me propriety in them, this is not
grantable.

It is a writ lying where a man is distrayned for any services: Recaption.
and having that suit, he is distrayned again for the same cause though the
distress be for service due, after the first distress, yet it lies not till
the first suit be determined.

Sect. XII. Of costs of suits recoverable in this Court.
AS to the costs of suits recoverable in this Court. These things are to be
known.

First, in all suits whether judgment be given for Plaintiff or defendant,
such reasonable costs of suit are to be given as the Court shall set down.

Secondly, where the Plaintiff does not proceed, or the cause does go against
him upon the trial, the Court must give the defendant reasonable costs for the
unjust vexation.

Thirdly, such remedy and execution shall be made for recovering of these
costs, as the Plaintiff has for recovering of the costs he does recover in
that Court, against the defendant.

Sect. XIII. Of Amercements in this Court, and the streats thereof.
ANd to this, these things are to be known.

1. The Court may amerce any man, for any contempt or disturbance of the Court,
made in the presence of the Court; for in what case a man may be fined in a
Leet, he may be amerced here, and this it seems need not be affered, as all
others, but Afferement.
it is safe to do it.

And when any officer does commit any default, or neglect in the execution of
his office; and when the Plaintiff is nonsuit; Quia non est prosecutus.
Because he has not prosecuted, either at the first or after, when the Jury is
ready to give verdict; or the Court give judgment, or pro falso clamore. And
when judgment is given against the defendant he may be amerced. And when any
Bencher Iuror, Plaintiff or defendant does make default, he may be amerced: so
also every man for his default of appearance after summons may be amerced. But
all these amercements upon officers for their miscarriage must be Afferement.
affered by the Benchers; the rest by them or some others otherwise they may
not be extreated, and they may be levied by Estreates.
distress, and putting in pound; not by sale without a special custom in it;
and being levied shall go to the use of the Sheriff. And the Sheriff must see
that he leavie none of these amercements, until they be first allowed by two
Justices of the Peace.

Sect. XIV. Of removing of suits out of this Court.
SUits may be removed out of this into a higher Court. And this is to be done
either by a recordare, or by a pone. And Recordare.
therefore the recordare is said to be a writ out of the upper Bench, or common
pleas, directed to the Sheriff, commanding him to send a plaint that is before
him without writ in his County Court into that Court, from whence the recordare
is sent, to the end that the case may be there determined. And this the Sheriff
must certify under his seal, and the seal of four of the Suitors of the same
Court; and he is to summon the other party to be in that Court whether the
plaint is to be sent by a day; and a pone does Pone.
nothing differ from this, but that that is to remove such suits as are there
before the Sheriff by writ and not by plaint, and as to this these things are
to be known. 1. That if these be sued out by the Plaintiff in the County Court,
it may be had without showing any cause at all, if it be had by the defendants
suit, he must show cause.

As first being to remove a plea in a replevin by plaint, to show that the
defendant avoweth for damage fesant, and the Plaintiff does justify for common
of pasture, which is a plea touching freehold, and therefore should not be
without writ. Or that he before whom the writ depends is a favorer of him that
is of the other side.

Secondly, if any officer of the Court proceed after the removeall, he may be
punished for it in the Court from whence the writ to remove it came, for the
suit in Law is now at an end in the inferior Court.

Thirdly, and after it is once sent away, it can never be sent back again, but
must be tried in the Court into which it is sent.

Fourthly, a suit is sometimes removed out of this Court into False judgment.
a higher Court by a writ of false judgment.

And this writ is defined to be where an erroneous judgment is given in any
inferior Court, that is not a Court of record; as County, Hundred, or Court
Baron, then the party grieved by the judgment may have this writ, and remove
the whole Process of the suit into the common pleas; and there it shall be
examined, and if it be found, the judgment shall be reversed, and the Suitors
or Judges Jurors amerced.
of the Court that gave the judgment, amerced.

Sect. XV. Of the Power and duty of the officers of the Court.
AS touching the power and duty of the officers and those that act under this
Court, these things are to be known.

First, the Sheriff may, if he will, appoint special Bailiffs that is, others
besides the common Bailiffs to execute the process of the Court.

Secondly, some say a warrant from the Court by word may be good in these
cases, but it is not safe to trust to such a warrant, but to have it in writing.

Thirdly, the officers that have any precept to execute, must do it with all
care, and when done or not done, give an account and make a return of it,
especially if they take goods in execution; otherwise it is dangerous; for
perhaps by the not return, the Act of the officer may become unlawful.

Fourthly, in taking of goods they must be reasonable.

Fifthly, they may enter into a close, or into any house of any other man's (the
door being open) to take the goods of any man there upon any precept.

Sixthly, they may take the goods of any man in any place within the County, in
another man's house or ground as well as in his own.

Seventhly, they are to take upon execution so much of the goods as will
satisfy the execution, and bring them into the next Court where they must be
prised.

Eighthly, they are not to proceed in any case after it is removed into another
Court.

Ninthly, if the Sheriff or any of his officers shall procure others to
commence suits against any person, and shall cause them to resort to this
Court. The party attached upon any such suit may replieve his distress so
taken, and remove the suit before Remove.
the Justices, etc. Before whom if the Sheriff be convicted of such
procurement, he shall be amerced grievously to the Lord Protector, and shall
answer to Amercement.
the party grieved treble damages.

Tenthly, the Sheriff (his Shire Clerk, or deputies) shall Estreates.
make no estreats to leavy the said Sheriffs amercements (or Shire amercements
until two Justices of the peace (one of the Quorum) have had the oversight of
their Books, and that the estreats be indented between the Justices of the
Peace and the Sheriff.

Eleventhly, the Officers, that leavie these estreats, ought to be sworn before
the Justices that they will leavie no more then is upon the estreats.

Sect. XVI. Of the Fees of this Court.
THe Fees of this Court are The Fees.
such as time out of mind have been used to be paid and received i^ the Court.
And these happily are in some places more, in some places less. But in some of
these Courts where they are reasonable, they are as follows.

A Table of all such Fees as are due and payable in the County Court.
Fees due to the Court. For every judgment iiijd For every Attachment fugitive
ijs For a judgment on a justicies is Fees due to the Steward. For entering of
an Action and warrant for the summons iiijd For an ordinary Attachment vjd For
an ordinary distringas vjd For filing of a Declaration iiijd For filing a
Declaration on a Replevin xijd For an aparance iiijd For every plea iiijd For
every rule or order of Court iiijd For a venirefacias ijs For a warrant for
witnesses for every name vjd For every witness sworn ijd for every judgment
iiijd for every levari facias or execution xijd for a copy of the Declaration
iiijd for allowance of a justicies ijs vjd for every warrant upon it ijs vid
for every Attachment fugitive if it be against one only ijs If more then one
at one man's suit, then for the first defendant ijs And for all the rest of the
defendants xijd a piece. for allowance of a recordare, etc. ijs vjd for
retorning of it ijs for a retraxit before judgment iiijd for search for any
old Action iiijd Fees due to the Attorneys. For a retayning fee by the
Plaintiff xijd for drawing of a Declaration xiiijd for appearing for the
defendant xijd The ordinary fee upon a Iusticies iijs 4d The fee upon a
replevin iijs 4d Fees due to the Bailiff. For every ordinary summons vjd for
executing an ordinary Attachment vjd for executing an ordinary distringas vjd
for summons upon a justicies ijs vjd for an Attachment upon a justicies ijs vjd
for executing of a distringas upon a justicies ij^ vjd for every judgment
iiijd for executing of an Attachment fugitive ijs for doing execution upon the
levari facias, xijd for the warrant, and jd in the shilling for all the money
that is recovered and levied. for summoning a Jury to to try a cause ijs vjd To
every witness sworn for his charges xijd To a Jury that give a verdict, or are
sworn in a cause for their attendance. iiijs.
Sect. XVII. Certain Rules necessary for a County Court.
ANd now having showed what the Law is as touching these Courts, if the
Justices of the Peace, Lawyers, and others of the most sufficient Freeholders
of the County, shall out of their zeal for the good of their Country meet
together and agree upon a Course for the better regulating of this Court, and
usually sit in Court to see the Laws therein observed, they shall do a good
work that may bring much ease to their Countries. And herein we do (under
correction) conceive it may much help hereunto to set down and observe some
such like rules as these.

First; that such a number of the most sufficient Freeholders do appear every
Court, or be content to pay such an Amercement.

Secondly, that they set down what number of attorneys; and who shall practice
in the Court.

Thirdly, that these attorneys, and all the officers that do practice, shall
agree to, and observe the rules for practice set down, and take no advantage by
error; nor remove of suits or otherwise without consent of the Court for any
thing done according to these rules: and that they be content with the Fees set
down.

Fourthly, that they agree upon a Method of short Declarations, pleading the
General issues. Amendment of Declarations mistaken before answer, and entering
continuances afterward, when omitted by the Clerk of the Court and the like,
to make the suits there depending short and cheap. These things will help much.
And thus we have done with the County Court, and now come to the Hundred Court.

CHAP. II. Of the Hundred Court.
THe Hundred Court is not a Court of Record, but derived out of the County
Court and is of the same nature within the Hundred, as the other is within the
Shire; in this Court also the Freeholders falled free Suitors are the Judges;
and the Steward their Clark. And the style of this Court is thus. The Hundred
of W. in the Margent and then.

The Court of A. B. Knight of his Hundred of W. in the County of C. Held the
first day of May one thousand six hundred fifty five before W. S. Steward there.

Sect. I. Of the nature of this Court. the time and place for the keeping of it.
THis Hundred Court is no Court of Record, but a kind of Court Barron, and of
the same nature with the County Court; out of which it was first derived, and
set up, for the ease of the people; and therefore the Course and rules of
proceeding in, and all the matters relating to this Court, are much like to
those in, and relating to that Court. And for that these things are to be known.

First, that this Court may be kept in any place within the Hundred, and it
must be kept in some place within the Hundred.

Secondly, it may be, and is usually kept once every three weeks, upon a day of
the week certain; which may (being begun) be adjurned to be ended on another
day of the week. And perhaps this day may be changed, or if the Court be kept
on another day it may be good enough. But the safe way is to keep it as time
out of mind it has been kept and not to alter it.

Sect. II. Of the Judges of the Court.
THe Judges of this Court are the Freeholders, called Free-suitors, which we
conceive to be all the Freeholders of Land within, and dwelling within the
Hundred. But in some Hundreds some certain Freeholders of the Hundred only are
the Judges; and the service seems to be appropriate to their Land only: But we
conceive that this does not exempt the rest of the Freeholders of the Hundred,
but that they may be charged. But it is safest to keep the Court by those that
are bound to the service by their Land, or to have two of them present and if
any of these Free-suitors make default they may be amerced, as in the County
Court. And the amercement affeared and extreated, as there; but that in this
case there is nothing to be done with, or by the Justices of the Peace.

Attorneys and Pledges.
Attorneys may be made and used in this Court as in the Attorneys.
County Court, and for Pledges, this usually is the Course, that Pledges.
where the Plaintiff does live out of the Hundred, he is to find pledges of
some sufficient men within the Hundred for him; otherwise the defendant is not
bound to answer. But what remedy to have against the pledges, If judgment go
against the Plaintiff, we cannot tell you, except an Action of the case lie, or
some custom have been there time out of mind to charge them some other way.

Sect. III. Of the power and proceedings in this Court in General to the end
of the suit.
THe power and proceeding of this Court in General is much like to the power
and proceedings of the County Court, save only in the case of a Iusticies: for
no Iusticies does lie to the Judges of this Court. And that this is for the
hundred only, and that is for the whole County. And that in most of these
Courts there is no distress used to bring the party to appear but a summons and
attachment only. And as to amercements Amercements and Estreats.
and estreats thereof the rules of the one are all agreeable to the other, save
only that the Justices of the Peace have nothing to do with the estreats of
these amercements. And these amercements go to the Lord of the Leet, not to the
Steward.

For costs of suit both Courts agree in all things. And for removing of suits
the Courts are much alike: Save only that to remove a suit of this Court there
is another writ called an Accedas ad Curiam; which is a Accedas ad curiam.
writ out of the upper Bench, or common pleas, directed to the Sheriff
commanding him to go to such a Court of some Lord or franchise; as County
Court, or court Barron, where a Plaint is sued for taking of Beasts, as a
distress or some false judgment is supposed to be given in any suit; which
has been in such a Court, which is not a Court of record, and that he do there
make record of the same suit in the presence of the Suitors of the same Court,
and four Knights of the County; and certify it into the Lord Protectors Court,
at the day limited in the writ; and this cannot be had without showing of some
cause; and the causes to remove these suits are when a Freehold is in question
there, or some foreign plea is pleaded not triable there. Or the like.

And for Officers power and duty in these Courts it is altogether the same with
the Officers of the County Court; save only that which does concern the entering
of suits in other men's names, and without their privity.

And also save only in what does refer to their relation to the Justices of
the Peace of the County, as to their estreats. See for these things Chap. 1.
Sect. 12. 13. 14. 15. and for the Fees of this Court the same is to be said as
in the former Court; their Fees differ, and are by Law what they have been time
out of mind. But some of these Courts wherein the fees are reasonable are as
follows.

The Stevvards fees. For entering every Action 2d Every order entered 2d Entering
Declaration 2d If large then more. Entering every plea or answer 2d Every
Essoyne 2d Every Process 4d Every continuance 2d Every nonsuit and detraxit 4d
Entering the Judgment 2d Satisfaction acknowledged 2d Every wager of Law and
entry 2d Warrants for witnesses and summoning Iuries 4d for removing and
certifying a cause 6s 8d The Baylifs fees. for Summons and entrance 7d for
executing every Process 4d Upon Judgment for every shilling 1d for warning of
the Jury 1s for warning of witnesses on a warrant 4d for every oath 2d The
Attorneys fees. for every cause at hearing 1s for the Declaration 4d for every
Court the cause depends after he is retained 4d Other Officers fees. for the
execution of every Process 4d
CHAP. III. Of a Court Barron.
THe Court Barron is no What a Court Barron is.
Court of record, but a Court that every Lord of a Manor, (which anciently
were Barrons) has within his Manor, as inseparably incident to his Manor;
which Court is said to be double; the one, called the coppyholders Court, for
the trial of the titles of their land, for the taking and passing of Estates,
Surrenders, Admittances and graunts, and herein the Lord or his Steward is
Judge. And the other is called the Freeholders Court, which is only for the
trial of Actions wherein the Freeholders are Judges. The style of this Court
is after this manner. The manner of Dale in the margent.

The Court Barron of I. S. Knight of his Manor aforesaid held the first day of
May 1655. before W. S. Steward there.

Sect. I. Of the beginning and use of this Court.
THis Court was first instituted for the ease of the Tenants The nature of it.
of the Manor, and ending of suits there under forty shillings. That it might
be done at home, as it were at their own doors. And it is much of the nature of
the two former Courts.

Sect. II. Of the time and place for the keeping of this Court and the Judges
therein.
THe Judges here are the Freeholders, that is, such Tenants as have ancient
estates of Inheritance in any Lands held of the Manor; And of these there must
be two at the least. And therefore when once the Manor is gone, this Court is
gone also; or if the Manor continue, and there be but one Freeholder, the
Court is gone; nor will new Freeholders (as it seems) made with in the time of
memory serve; and therefore coppyholders or leaseholders. That by the
Inheritance of the Lands, nor of any that buy of the Lord a part of his
demesnes, these will not be Judges of the Court.

The place of keeping of these Courts must be somewhere within the Manor. And
it may not be kept without the Manor, if it be, all that is done at the Court
is void; and Coram non judice.

And yet perhaps where a man has two or three Manors together; and time out
of mind the Court has been kept in one Manor for all the rest of the Manors,
there happily it may be good for all. And the time of keeping of this court is
once every three weeks and not oftener, but more seldom as the Lord of the
Manor shall please.

Sect. III. Of the Power and proceedings in this Court.
THe power of this Court, where it does continue, is much as the power of the
hundred Court: and the Process, it holds plea: under forty shillings also
much like unto it.

And as for costs of the suit, the power of the Officers, amercements, trial,
and removal of suits, the course in this Court is much like to the course of
the Hundred Courts; save only that here no Trials are by Jury, but all by wager
of Law and proof of witnesses.

For all this therefore see Chapt. 1. Sect. 12. 13. 14. 15. etc. And for the
fees of this Court the same is to be said as in the former Court; their fees
differ, and are by Law what they have been time out of mind: but some of these
Courts wherein the fees are reasonable are as the fees are in the Hundred Court.

The TABLE.
ACcedas ad curiam chap. 2. sect. 3. Affering chap. 1. sect. 4. 13. Amercements
chap. 1. sect. 13. chap. 2. chap. 3. chap. 1. sect. 9. 15. Amendment chap. 1.
sect. 10. Attachment chap. 1. sect. 9. chap. 2. chap. 3. Attorney chap. 1.
sect. 7. chap. 2. chap. 3. Avowrie chap. 1. sect. 11. Challenge chap. 1. sect.
10. Confession chap. 1. sect. 10. Continuances chap. 1. sect. 10. Costs chap.
1. sect. 10. 12. Court. The County Court. chap. 1. The Hundred Court chap. 2.
The Court Barron chap. 3. Declaration chap. 1. sect. 10. Demurrer chap. 1.
sect. 8. 10. Distress chap. 1. sect. 9. Estreats chap. 1. sect. 13. Essoyne
chap. 1. sect. 10. Execution chap. 1. sect. 9. chap. 2. chap. 3. False
Judgment chap. 1. sect. 10. 4. Fees chap. 1. sect. 16. chap. 2. chap. 3. Gager
de deliverance chap. 1. sect. 11. Imparlance chap. 1. sect. 10. Issue chap. 1.
sect. 10. Judgment chap. 1. sect. 10. Iusticies chap. 1. sect. 6. 4. Levari
facias chap. 1. sect. 9. Nonsuit chap. 1. sect. 10. chap. 2. 3. Officers chap.
1. sect. 9. 13. chap. 2. chap. 3. Playnt chap. 1. sect. 8. chap. 2. chap. 3.
Pleading chap. 1. sect. 10. Pledges chap. 1. sect. 7. chap. 2. Process chap. 1.
sect. 9. chap. 2. chap. 3. Prohibition chap. 1. sect. 8. Proprietate probanda
chap. 1. sect. 11. Recaption chap. 1. 11. Remove of a cause chap. 1. sect. 6.
8. 16. Replevin chap. 1. sect. 11. 9. Recordare chap. 1. sect. 15. Return
habendo chap. 1. sect. 11. Return Irreprevisable chap. 1. sect. 11. Second
Deliverance chap. 1. sect. 11. Summons chap. 1. sect. 9. chap. 2. Trial chap.
1. sect. 10. chap. 2. 3. Wager of Law chap. 1. sect. 10. chap. 2. chap. 3.
Withernam chap. 1. sect. 11.
FINIS.

