A DISCOURSE Concerning the Object of Religious Worship. OR, A SCRIPTURE PROOF
OF THE UNLAWFULNESS of giving any Religious Worship to any other Being Besides
the One Supreme God. PART I.

LONDON: Printed for Abel Swalle, at the Unicorn, at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXV.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Object of Religious Worship.
The INTRODVCTION.
OF all the Disputes between us and the Church of Rome, there is none of
greater concernment, than that about the Object of Religious Worship.

We affirm, as the Scripture has taught us, 4. Mat. 10.
that we must worship the Lord our God and serve him only; the Church of Rome
teaches, that there is a degree of Religious Worship, which we may give to some
excellent Creatures, to Angels and Saints and Images, and the Host, and to the
Relics of Saints and Martyrs. If they are in the right, we may be thought
very rude and uncivil at least, in denying to pay that Worship, which is due to
such excellent Creatures, and very injurious to our selves in it, by losing the
benefit of their Prayers and Patronage. If we be in the right, the Church of
Rome is guilty of giving that worship to Creatures which is due to God alone,
which is acknowledged on all hands to be the greatest of sins; and therefore
this is a dispute which can never be compremised, though we were never so
desirous of an union and reconciliation with the Church of Rome; for the
Incommunicable glory of God, and the salvation of our Souls, are too dear
things to be given away in complement to any Church.

And should it appear in the next world (for I believe it will never appear to
be so in this) that we were mistaken, that we were over-nice and curious in
refusing to worship Saints and Angels, yet ours is a much more innocent and
pardonable mistake, than that which the Church of Rome is guilty of, if they
should prove to be mistaken. We are only wanting in some Religious Courtship,
which we might innocently have given to Saints and Angels, but which we were
not bound to give, (as the Church of Rome will not say, that we are) by any
express Divine Law; and therefore it is no sin against God not to do it; and
when this neglect is not owing to any designed contempt and dis-regard of those
excellent Spirits, but to a great reverence for God, and jealousy for his
incommunicable glory, if it were a fault, we need not doubt but that God would
pardon it, and that all good spirits, who have such a profound veneration for
God, will easily excuse the neglect of some Ceremonies to themselves upon so
great a reason.

But if the Church of Rome be mistaken, and gives that worship to Creatures,
which is due only to the Supreme God, they have nothing to pretend in excuse of
it; neither any positive Law of God, which expressly forbids all
Creature-worship (as I doubt not to prove, to the satisfaction of all impartial
Readers) nor the principles of Natural Reason; which, whatever Apologies it may
make for the worship of Saints and Angels, can never prove the necessity of it;
and it highly concerns the Church of Rome, and all of her Communion to
consider, whether if their distinctions and little appearances of reason cannot
justify their worship of Creatures, they will be able to excuse them from the
guilt of so great a sin.

But not to insist on these things now; I shall divide this discourse into
three parts.

1. I shall prove from the plain evidence of Scripture, That God alone is to be
worshipped.

2. I shall examine what that worship is, which is proper and peculiar to the
Supreme God.

3. I shall consider those distinctions, whereby the Church of Rome justifies
her worship of Saints and Angels, and Images, etc.

SECTION I.
That GOD alone must be Worshipped.
TO make good the first point, Sect. 1.
that we must worship no other Being, but only God, I shall principally confine
my self to Scripture evidence, which is the most certain authority to determine
this matter. For though I confess, it seems to me a self evident and
fundamental principle in natural Religion, that we must worship none but that
Supreme Being, who made, and who governs the world, yet I find men reason very
differently about these matters.

The Heathen Philosophers, who generally acknowledged one Supreme and Sovereign
Deity, did not think it incongruous, nor any affront or diminution to the
Supreme God, to ascribe an inferior kind of Divinity, nor to pay an inferior
degree of Religious Worship, to those excellent Spirits, which are so much
above us, and have so great a share in the government of this lower world, no
more than it is an affront to a Sovereign Monarch, to honor and reverence his
great Ministers of State, or peculiar Favorites. And the Church of Rome, as
she has corrupted Christianity with the Worship of Angels, and Saints departed,
so she defends her self with the same Arguments and Reasons, which were long
since alleged by Celsus and Porphyrie, and other Heathen Philosophers, in
defense of their Pagan Idolatry.

And it must be confessed, that these Arguments are very popular, and have
something so agreeable in them, to the natural notions of Civil Honor and
respect, which admits of great variety of degrees, that I do not wonder that
such vast numbers of men, both wise and unwise, have been imposed on by them.

For there is certainly a proportionable reverence and respect due even to
created excellencies, and every degree of power challenges and commands a just
regard, and we are bound to be very thankful not only to God, who is the first
cause, and the supreme giver of all good things, but to our immediate
Benefactors also. And therefore if there be a sort of middle Beings, as the
Heathens believed, and as the Church of Rome asserts, between us and the
Supreme God, who take particular care of us, and either by their power and
interest in the government of the world, or by their Intercessions with the
Supreme God, can and do bestow a great many Blessings on us, it seems as
natural and necessary to fear and reverence, to honor and worship them, and to
give them thanks for their care and patronage of us, as it is to court a
powerful Favorite, who by his interest and authority can obtain any request we
make to our Prince; and the first seems to be no greater injury to God, than
the second is to a Prince. 2 Col. 18.
Thus St. Paul observes, that there is a show of humility in worshipping
Angels; that men dare not immediately approach so glorious a Majesty as God is,
but make their addresses by those excellent spirits which attend the Throne of
God, and are the Ministers of his Providence.

But then every one who believes that there is one Supreme God, who made all
other Beings, though never so perfect and excellent, must acknowledge, that as
there is nothing common to God and Creatures, so there must be a peculiar
Worship due to God, which no Creatures can challenge any share in. It is no
affront to a Prince to pay some inferior degrees of civil honor and respect
to his Ministers and Favorites, because as the difference between a Prince and
his Subjects is not founded in nature, but in civil order; so there are
different degrees of civil respect proportioned to the different ranks and
degrees of men in the Commonwealth. There is a degree of preheminency which is
sacred and peculiar to the Person of the Prince, and no Prince will suffer his
greatest Favorite to usurp the Prerogative honors which belong to the Crown;
but while they are contented with such respects as are due to their rank and
station, this is no injury to the Prince; for all civil honor is not peculiar
to the Prince, but only a supereminent degree of it, and therefore inferior
degrees of honor may be given to other persons.

But though there are different degrees of civil honor proper to different
ranks and degrees of men, who all partake in the same nature, and are
distinguished only by their different places in the Commonwealth; yet in this
sense there are no different degrees of Religious Worship. All Religious
Worship is peculiar to the Divine Nature, which is but one, and common only to
three Divine Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one God blessed for ever,
Amen. Civil honor and Religious Worship differ in the whole kind and species
of actions, and have as different objects as God and Creatures; and we may as
well argue from those different degrees of civil honor among men, to prove
that there is an inferior degree of civil honor due to Beasts, as that there
is an inferior degree of Religious Worship due to some men. For all degrees of
Religious Worship are as peculiar and appropriate to God, as civil respects are
to men, and as the highest degree of civil honor is to a Sovereign Prince.

However should we grant, that some excellent Creatures might be capable of
some inferior degrees of Religious Worship; yet as the Prince is the fountain
of civil honor, which no Subject must presume to usurp, without a grant from
his Prince, so no Creature, how excellent soever, has any natural and inherent
right to any degree of Religious Worship and therefore we must not presume to
worship any Creature without Gods command, nor to pay any other degree of
Worship to them, but what God has prescribed and instituted; and the only way
to know this, is to examine the Scriptures, which is the only external
revelation we have of the will of God.

Let us then inquire, what the sense of Scripture is in this controversy; and
I shall distinctly examine the testimonies both of the Old and New Testament,
concerning the object of Religious Worship.

SECT. II.
The Testimonies of the Mosaical Law considered.
1. TO begin with the Old Testament; Sect. 2.
and nothing is more plain in all the Scripture, than that the Laws of Moses
confine Religious Worship to that one Supreme God, the Lord Jehovah, who
Created the Heavens and the Earth. For,

1. The Israelites were expressly commanded to Worship the Lord Jehovah, and to
Worship no other Being; as our Savior himself assures us, who I suppose will
be allowed for a very good Expositor of the Laws of Moses. It is written, 4
Matthew. 10. 6 Deutr. 13. 10 Deutr. 20.
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. In the
Hebrew Text, from whence our Savior cites this Law, it is only said, Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, without that addition, of him only.
And yet both the Septuagint and the vulgar Latin, read the words as our
Savior does, him only shall thou serve; and the authority of our Savior is
sufficient to justify this Interpretation; and withal, gives us a general
rule, which puts an end to this controversy; that as often as we are commanded
in Scripture to worship God, we are commanded also to worship none besides him.

For indeed the first Commandment is very express in this matter, and all other
Laws which concern the object of Worship, must in all reason be expounded by
that. Thou shall have none other Gods before me. 20 Exodus 3.
The Septuagint renders it (...) besides me; so does the Chaldee, Syriack, and
Arabic to the same sense. And it is universally concluded by all Expositors
that I have seen, that the true interpretation of this Commandment is, that we
must Worship no other God, but the Lord Jehovah. To pay Religious Worship to
any Being, does in the Scripture notion, make that Being our God, which is the
only reason, why they are commanded not to have any other Gods. For there is
but one true God, and therefore in a strict sense, they can have no other Gods,
because there are no other Gods to be had; but whatever Beings they worship,
they make that their God by worshipping it; and so the Heathens had a great
many Gods, but the Jews are commanded to have but one God, that is, to worship
none else besides him.

In other places God expressly forbids them to worship any strange Gods, or the
Gods of the people, or those Nations that were round about them. And least we
should suspect, 6 Deutr. 14.
that they were forbid to worship the Gods of the people, only because those
Heathen Idolaters worshipped Devils and wicked Spirits, the Prophet Jeremiah
gives us a general notion, who are to be reputed false Gods, and not to be
worshipped. Thus shall ye say unto them, 70 Jere. 11.
the Gods that have not made the Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish
from the Earth, and from under these Heavens. So that whatever Being is
worshipped, whether it be a good or a bad Spirit, which did not make the
Heavens and the Earth, is a false God to such Worshippers: and I suppose the
Church of Rome will not say, that Saints or Angels, or the Virgin Mary (as much
as they magnify her) made the Heavens and the Earth. And then according to
this rule they ought not to be worshipped.

But to put this past doubt, that the true meaning of these Laws is to forbid
the worship of any other Being besides the Supreme God, I shall observe two or
three things in our Saviors answer to the Devils temptation, which will give
great light and strength to it.

1. That our Savior absolutely rejects the worship of any other Being together
with the Supreme God. The thing our Savior condemns, is not the renouncing the
worship of God for the worship of Creatures, (for the Devil never tempted him
to this) but the worship of any other Being besides God, though we still
continue to worship the Supreme God. It is written, thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Which is a plain demonstration, that
men may believe and worship the Supreme God, and yet be Idolaters, if they
worship any thing else besides him. The Devil did not desire our Savior to
renounce the worship of the Supreme God, but was contented, that he should
worship God still, so he would but worship him also. And therefore it is no
reason to excuse the Church of Rome from Idolatry, because they worship the
Supreme God, as well as Saints and Angels; this they may do, and be Idolaters
still; for Idolatry does not consist merely in renouncing the worship of the
Supreme God, but in worshipping any thing else, though we continue to worship
him. When the Jews worshipped their Baalims and false gods, they did not wholly
renounce the worship of the God of Israel; and the Heathens themselves,
especially the wisest men amongst them, did acknowledge one Supreme God, though
they worshipped a great many inferior Deities with him.

2. Our Savior in his answer to the Devils temptation, does not urge his being
a wicked and Apostate Spirit, an enemy and a rebel against God, but gives such
a reason why he could not worship him, as equally excludes all Creatures,
whether good or bad Spirits, from any right to Divine Worship. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Him and none else,
whether they be good or bad Spirits, for our Savior does not confine his
answer to either, and therefore includes them both.

When we charge the Church of Rome with too plain an imitation of the Pagan
Idolatry in that worship they paid to their inf^riour Demons, which was
nothing more, than what the Church of Rome now gives to Saints and Angels; they
think it a sufficient answer, that the Heathens worshipped Devils and Apostate
Spirits, but they worship only the Friends and Favorites of God, blessed
Saints and Angels.

Now I shall not at present examine the truth of this pretense, but shall refer
my Reader to a more Learned person for satisfaction in this matter; but if it
were true, Stilling fleet^s Defense of the discourse of Idolatry.
yet it is nothing to the purpose, if our Saviors answer to the Devil be good.

For let us suppose, that the Pope of Rome, who calls himself Christ's Vicar,
had at this time been in Christ's stead to have answered the Devils
temptations, and let us be so charitable for once as to suppose that (saving
always his indirect power over the Kingdoms of this world in or line ad
spiritualia) he would not worship the Devil to gain all the Kingdoms of the
World and the Glory of them. Consider then, how the Pope of Rome could answer
this Temptation; All this I will give thee, if thou will fall down and worship
me: could he answer as our Savior does? It is written, thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. How easily might the Devil reply,
Is this indeed your infallible Opinion, and the judgment and practice of your
Church to serve God only? do you not also serve and worship St. Paul and St.
Peter, and the Virgin Mary, besides a great many other obscure and doubtful
Saints? This is down right Heresy to confine all Religious Worship to God;
Here now is matter of fact against the Pope, that he does worship other Beings
besides God, and if he will show any reason for his not worshipping the Devil,
he must quite alter our Saviors answer, and not plead for himself, that he is
bound to worship God and him only, but that he is bound to worship only God
and good Spirits; and therefore the Devil being a wicked and Apostate Spirit,
it is not lawful to worship him. So that if our Savior gave a sufficient
answer to the Devils temptation, it must be equally unlawful to worship good
and bad Spirits; there may be some peculiar aggravations in having communion
with Devils, but the Idolatry of worshipping good and bad Spirits is the same.

3. Our Saviors answer to the Devil, appropriates all kinds and degrees of
Religious Worship to God alone. The Devil was not then so good a School-man, as
nicely to distinguish and dispute the degrees of Religious Worship with our
Savior, but would have been contented with any degree of Religious Worship. He
did not pretend to be the Supreme God, nor to have the disposal of all the
Kingdoms of the world in his own right; but acknowledges, 4 Luke 6.
that it was delivered to him, and now by virtue of that grant, he gives it to
whom he will. Now it is impossible in the nature of the thing to worship any
Being as Supreme, whom at the same time, we acknowledge not to be Supreme. And
therefore the Devil asks no more of our Savior, than that he would fall down
and worship him; which is such an inferior degree of Worship, as Papists every
day pay to Images and Saints; and yet this our Savior refuses to do, and that
for this reason, that we must worship God only, which must signify, that we
must not give the least degree of Divine Worship to any Creatures; or else it
is not a satisfactory answer to the Devils Temptation, who did not require any
certain and determinate degree of Worship, but left him at liberty to use what
distinctions he pleased, and to pay what degree of Worship he saw fit; whether
absolute or relative, supreme or subordinate, terminative or transient, so he
would but fall down and worship him any way, or in any degree, he left him to
be his own Schoolman and Cas^ist; but of this more presently.

11. As the Laws of Moses in general, appropriate all Religious Worship to God,
command us to worship God, and him only, so the whole Jewish Rellgion was
fitted only for the worship of the Lord Jehovah.

I suppose our Adversaries will not deny, that the Tabernacle and Temple at
Jerusalem was peculiarly consecrated to the honor and worship of the Lord
Jehovah: this was the house where he dwelt, where he plac^^ his Name, and the
Symbols of his presence. It was a great profanation of that holy place, to have
the worship of any strange Gods set up in it; and yet this was the only place
of Worship appointed by the Law of Moses* they had but one Temple to worship
in, and this one Temple consecrated to the peculiar worship of one God; which
is a plain demonstration, that they were not allowed to worship any other God,
because they had no place to worship him in.

And this I think is a plain proof, that all that worship which was confined to
their Temple, or related to it, was peculiar to the Lord Jehovah, because that
was his house, and then all the Jewish worship was so, which was either to be
performed at the Temple, or had a relation and dependence on the Temple worship.

Sacrifice was the principal part of the Jewish worship, and this we know was
confined to the Temple. Moses expressly commands Israel, Take heed to thy self,
that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou see. 12
Deuteronomy. 13, 14.
But in the place which the Lord shall choose in one of thy Tribes, there shall
thou offer thy burnt offerings, and there shult thou do all that I command
thee. The Prophets indeed, especially before the building of the Temple, did
erect Altars at other places for occasional Sacrifices, for as God reserved a
liberty to himself to dispense with his own Law in extraordinary cases, so it
was presumed, that what was done by Prophets, was done by a Divine command; but
there was to be no ordinary or standing Altar for Sacrifice, but at the
Tabernacle or Temple; this we may see in that dispute which had like to have
happened between the Children of Israel and the Tribes of Reuben and Gad, and the
half Tribe of Manasseh, about the Altar of Testimony, which these two Tribes
and a half built on the other side of Jordan. 22 Joshua.
It was agreed on all hands, that had it been intended for an Altar for
Sacrifice, it had been Rebellion against the Lord to have built any Altar
beside the Altar of the Lord, v. 16. 19. 22, 23.
though they had offered no Sacrifice but to the Lord Jehovah. The same is
evident from Gods dislike of their offering Sacrifices in their high places,
though they sacrificed only to the God of Israel. So that all Sacrifices were
to be offered at the Temple on the Altar of God, and therefore were offered
only to that God, whose Temple and Altar it was. And indeed this is expressly
provided for in the Law. 22 Exodus 2^.
He that sacrifices to any God, but to the Lord only, shall be utterly
destroyed.

And as their Sacrifices were appropriated to the Temple, so in some sense were
their Prayers, which were offered up in virtue of their Sacrifice. And
therefore this is a peculiar name for the Temple, that it was the House of
Prayer. 56 Isai. 7. 2^. Matthew. 13. 1 King 8.
Here God was more immediately present to hear those Prayers which were offered
to him, according to Solomon's Prayer at the Dedication of the Temple. It is
true, the devout Jews did pray to God where ever they were, though at a great
distance from the Temple, whether in the land of Canaan, or out of it, but then
there are two things, which show that relation their Prayers had to the Temple
Worship. 1. That their stated hours of Prayer were the hours of Sacrifice,
which plainly signified, that they offered up their Prayers in conjunction with
those Sacrifices, which were at that time offered in the Temple; and therefore
that they prayed only to that God to whom they sacrificed; for we must
consider, that the constant morning and evening Sacrifices, were not particular
Sacrifices, but were offered for the whole Congregation of Israel; and
therefore every man had a share in them. Hence the time of offering the
Sacrifice, is called the hour of Prayer. Thus Peter and John went up together
into the Temple, at the hour of Prayer, being the ninth hour; 3 Acts 1.
that is the time of the Evening Sacrifice. Hence are such expressions as that
of the Psalmist, Let my Prayer be set before thee as Incense, and the lifting
up of my hands, as the Evening Sacrifice. Nay, it is most probable, that when
Jerusalem and the Temple were destroyed, and the people carried captive into
Babylon, and the daily Sacrifice ceast, yet the devout people observed the hour
of Sacrifice for their Prayers. Thus Daniel prayed three times a day, which
most likely were Evening and Morning, and Noon. 6 Dan. 10. 55 Psalm. 17.
Where Evening and Morning no doubt signify the time of the Evening and
Morning Sacrifice; and we are told, that the Angel Gabriel came to Daniel while
he was praying, 9. Dan. 21.
and touched him about the time of the Evening oblation. But 2ly besides this,
when they offered up their Prayers to God in other parts of the Nation, or in
other Countries, they prayed toward Jerusalem, and the Temple of God, as we
now lift up our eyes to Heaven, where God dwells. Thus Solomon in his Prayer of
Dedication, does not only beg of God to hear those Prayers, which were made to
him in that house, but those also which were made toward it, as the words must
signify in several places. In general he prays, 1 Kings 8. 30.
Hearken thou to the Prayer of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, when they
shall pray toward this place; (...) may signify both in and toward this
place, and here includes both, as appears from the following instances, which
refer both to Prayers made in the Temple, and to those Prayers which were made
toward the Temple by persons who were at a distance. Thus in what ever part of
the Nation they wanted rain, which might be at a great distance from Jerusalem,
they were to pray toward this place. v. 35.
The same was to be done in case of Famine and Pestilence, etc. or if they were
besieged in any of their Cities, when they could not go to the Temple to pray.
v. 37.
Nay, What Prayer or supplication soever shall be made by any man, or by all
thy people Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own heart, v.
39.
and spread forth his hands toward this house, then hear thou in Heaven thy
dwelling place and forgive. Thus when they went out to battle, they were to
pray toward the City of Jerusalem, v. 44.
and toward the Temple. And when they were carried captive into their enemies
land, they were to pray to God toward the land which God had given them,
toward the Holy City, and toward the Temple. And accordingly it was the
constant practice of Daniel, v. 48.
when he was in Babylon, to pray three times a day to God, with his windows
open in his chamber toward Jerusalem. 6. Dan. 10.


So that though the Temple were not the only place where they might lawfully
pray to God; yet all their Prayers were to be directed to the Temple, and
receive their virtue and acceptance from their relation to the Temple and the
Temple-Worship. This was a standing rule for the whole Jewish Nation, that
whenever they prayed, they offered up their prayers in the Temple or toward
it; and this is generally observed by them to this day: For the reason why they
generally now turn themselves toward the East when they pray, is not out of
any respect to the rising of the Sun, but because they live in Western
Countries; Bu^torsii Synag. Jud. p. 222
and so by turning to the East, they look toward Jerusalem, and the place
where the Temple stood. And this is as plain evidence, that all their Prayers
as well as Sacrifices, were to be offered only to that God who dwelt in the
Temple. And therefore as they are commanded to pray to God, 65. Psalm. 2. 23
Joshua 7^
and this is made the peculiar attribute of God, that he hears prayers, and
therefore unto him shall all flesh come; so they are expressly commanded not to
make mention of the name of the Heathen gods; that is, not to pray to them; the
prayers of the Heathens consisting of a frequent repetition of the names of
their gods, as we see in the priests of Baal, who cried from morning till
evening, 1 Kings 18. 26.
saying, O Baal hear us.

Thus the Jews were commanded to bring all their Vows, first Fruits, Tithes,
and Offerings, to the Temple, which is a plain sign to whom they were offered.
The Seventh-day Sabbath was a sign that they worshipped that God who created the
world in six days, and rested on the seventh, and delivered them from their
Egyptian Bondage, and gave them rest in that good Land, both which reasons are
assigned by Moses, and therefore God commands them by the Prophet Ezekiel, 20
Ezekiel. 20.
Hallow my sabbaths, and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may
know that I am the Lord your God.

They had but three solemn Festivals every year, and they were all in
remembrance of the great Works of God, and all the Males were to go up to
Jerusalem to keep these Feasts; and therefore all these were the Feasts of the
Lord Jehovah.

And as they were to pray only to God, so they were only to swear by his
Name, which is another part of Religious Worship; 10 Deuteronomy 21. 19 Isai. 18.
and therefore to swear by the Lord of Hosts is called the Language of Canaan.

So that all the parts of the Jewish Worship were appropriated to the Lord
Jehovah, he was the only object of their dread and fear, and religious
Adorations. And when we consider that God had chosen them to be a peculiar
people to himself, that the Land was a Holy Land, Gods peculiar Inheritance,
which he gave by promise to their Fathers, and the Temple was his House where
he dwelt among them, it cannot be expected that any other Gods might be
worshipped by such a people, in such a Land, and in such a house, as God had
appropriated to himself.

3. It is very considerable, that we have no approved example under the Law, of
any worship paid to Saints or Angels, or any other Being, but God alone. We
have too many sad examples of the Idolatry of the Jews both in worshipping the
Molten Calf which Aaron made, and Jeroboams Calves, and Baalim's, and other
Heathen gods; but had it been allowed by their Law to have paid any inferior
degree of Religious Worship to Saints and Angels (which is now asserted by the
Church of Rome, to be a matter of such great benefit and advantage to mankind)
it is very strange, that we should not have one example of it throughout the
Scripture, nor any authentic Records among the Jewish Writers: All the Psalms
of David are directed to God alone, and yet we cannot think but such a devout
man would have bestowed some Hymns upon his Patron and tutelar Saints, had he
worshipped any such, as well as the Papists do now.

This the Church of Rome sees and acknowledges, and thinks she answers too,
when she gives us the reason why it could not be so under the Law; because
those Old Testament-Saints were not then admitted into Heaven, to the immediate
vision and fruition of God; Heaven-gates were not opened till the Resurrection
and Ascension of our Savior, and therefore those blessed Spirits were not in a
condition to be our Intercessors and Mediators, till they were received into
Heaven; but now Saints and Martyrs ascend directly into Heaven, and reign with
Christ in Glory, and it seems share with him in his peculiar Worship and Glory
too.

Now 1* Whether this be so or not, the Scriptures assign no such reason for it;
and therefore it is likely there might be other reasons, and I think I have
made it very plain that there was. We are not enquiring for what reasons the
Jewish Church did not worship Saint and Angels, but whether they did worship
them or not; and it appears that they never did; so that we have neither
precept nor example for this, during all the time of the Jewish Church* Which
is all we intend to prove by this argument.

2. But yet it is evident, that this is not a good reason why the Jews did not
worship Angels under the Law. For certainly Angels were as much in Heaven then,
as they are now, whatever Saints were. They are represented in the Old
Testament, as the constant Attendants and Retinue of God, and the great
Ministers of his Providence, and therefore they were as capable of Divine
Worship in the time of the Law, as they are now, nay, I think, a little more.
For the Law it self was given by the Ministry of Angels, and their appearances
were more frequent and familiar, and the world seemed to be more under the
Government of Angels then, than it is now, since Christ is made the Head of the
Church, and exalted above all principalities and powers.

And therefore sometimes the Advocates of the Church of Rome, make some little
offers to prove the worship of Angels in those days: to this purpose they
allege that form of Benediction, which Jacob used in blessing the Sons of
Joseph: 4^ Genesis 16.
The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the Lads.

But 1. This is not a direct prayer to the Angel, but only his committing of
them to the care and patronage of that Angel, with a prayer to God for that
purpose: And if he by experience had found that God had appointed his Angel to
defend and protect him, it was but reasonable to pray to God, that the same
Angel might protect his posterity.

2. But yet according to the sense of the Ancient Fathers, this was no created
Angel and Spirit, but the Son and Word of God, the Angel of the presence, who
is so often in Scripture styled Jehovah, a name which can belong to no created
Spirit. And it is no hard matter to make it highly probable, that this is that
Angel who redeemed Jacob out of all his troubles. But it is strange if Angels
were worshipped under the Old Testament, we should have no clearer and plainer
evidence of it, than such a single Text, which was never expounded either by
any Jewish or Christian Writers to this sense, till of late days; and here the
Priests of the Church of Rome are to be put in mind of their Oath to expound
Scripture according to the unanimous consent of the Ancient Fathers.

SECT. III.
The Testimonies of the Gospel considered; whether Christ and his Apostles have
made any alteration in the object of our Worship.
LEt us now proceed in the second place, Sect. 3.
to consider the writings of the New Testament, and examine what they teach us
concerning the object of our Worship. And that Christ and his Apostles have
made no change in the object of our worship, will appear from these
considerations.

1. That they could not do it. Had they ever attempted to set up the worship of
any other Beings besides the One Supreme God, the Lord Jehovah, the Jews were
expressly commanded by their Law not to believe them, nor hearken to them,
whatever signs and wonders and miracles they had wrought. 13 Deuteronomy. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5.
If there arise among you a Prophet or a dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a
sign or wonder, and the sign or wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee
saying, let us go after other Gods (which thou have not known) and let us serve
them; Thou shall not hearken unto the words of the Prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams; for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord
your God with all your heart, and with all your Soul. Ye shall walk after the
Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his Commandments, and obey his voice, and
you shall serve him, and cleave unto him. And that Prophet or dreamer of dreams
shall be put to death, etc. in which Law there are some things very material to
be observed in this present dispute.

1. When they are forbidden to hearken to any Prophet, who seduces them to the
worship of any other Gods, this must be extended to all those instances of
Idolatrous worship, which are forbid by the Law of Moses, whatever is opposed
to the worship of one Supreme and Sovereign Being, the Lord Jehovah. And
therefore whether these Prophets seduced them from the worship of the Lord
Jehovah, to the worship of other Gods; or persuaded them to worship other Gods
besides the Lord Jehovah, whether they were any of those Gods which were at
that time worshipped by other Nations, or any other Gods, whom the ignorance and
superstition of the people should create in after ages, whether good or bad
Spirits, the case is the same; whoever persuaded them to worship any other
Being with or besides the Supreme God, was to be rejected by them; for this is
the sense of the Mosaical Laws concerning the worship of one Supreme God, as I
have already proved, and the serving other Gods in this place, is opposed to
the worship of one God, and therefore must include whatever according to the
Law of Moses is contrary to the worship of one Supreme Being.

2. This Law makes the worship of one God eternal and unchangeable. There is no
way of altering any Divine Laws, but by a new revelation of Gods will, and
there is no way to give Authority to such a revelation, but by Miracles or
Prophecy; but in this case Miracles and Prophecy it self can give no
authority, because God himself has expressly forbid us to hearken to any
Prophet, whatever signs or wonders are wrought by him, who teaches the worship
of any other Being besides the one Supreme God. So that the Law of Moses having
expressly forbid the worship of any other Being besides God, and as expressly
forbid us to hearken to any Prophet, though a worker of Miracles, who teaches
any other worship, it is impossible, that this Law should ever be altered,
because we are beforehand warned by God himself, not to give credit to any
Prophet, whatever he be, or whatever he do, who attempts any alteration of it.
And therefore had Christ or his Apostles taught the worship of Saints and
Angels, it had been a just reason for the unbelief of the Jews, notwithstanding
all the Miracles that were wrought by them; and it is well the Jews never had
any just occasion to make this objection against our Savior; for if they had,
I know not how it would have been answered. I say a just occasion, for the Jews
did urge this very Law against him before Pilate. We have a Law, and by our Law
he ought to die, 19. John 7.
because he made himself the Son of God. In which they refer to that discourse
of our Savior, 10. John 29, 30. where he affirms that God is his Father, and
plainly tells them, I and my Father are one, for which saying they attempt to
stone him for Blasphemy, and that being a man, he made himself a God. v. 33.
But though he did indeed (as the Jews rightly inferred) make himself a God by
this saying, yet he did not preach any new God to them, but affirmed himself to
be one with his Father, that same Supreme God, the Lord Jehovah, whom they were
commanded to worship by their Law; he made no alteration in the object of their
worship, but only did more clearly and distinctly reveal the Father to them, as
manifesting himself in and by his only begotten Son. And therefore he did not
offend against this Law, by seducing them to the worship of any other Gods
besides the Lord Jehovah; which if he had done, their accusation had been just,
and all the Miracles which he did, could not have secured him from the guilt
and punishment of an Impostor.

Which shows us, what force there is in that Argument, which the Church of Rome
urges from those Miracles: which have been wrought at the Tombs of Martyrs, to
prove the Religious invocation of them; if such Miracles were ever wrought, it
was in testimony to the truth of Christianity, for which they suffered, not to
betray men to a superstitious and idolatrous worship of them; ten thousand
Miracles should never convince me of the lawfulness of praying to Saints
departed, while I have such a plain and express Law against believing all
Miracles upon any such account.

Nor can it reasonably be said, that this Law was given only to the Jews, and
therefore obliges none but them; for we must remember, that Christ was
originally sent to the Jews, to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; and
therefore by this Law, he was bound not to teach the worship of any other
Beings, under the penalty of death; and they were bound not to own and receive
him if he did; and therefore it was impossible for the true Messiah to
introduce the worship of any Being, besides the one Supreme God; and if Christ
could not teach any such Doctrine, I know not how the worship of Saints and
Angels should ever come to be a Doctrine of Christianity. For what Christ
himself cannot do, none of his Followers may, who had no other Commission but
to teach those things which they had learnt from him; and he could not give
commission to preach such, Doctrines, as he himself had no authority to preach.

So that though this Law was not originally given to the Gentiles, but only to
the Jews; yet it equally obliges the Christian Church, whether Jews or
Gentiles, because Christ himself, who was the Author of our Religion was
obliged by it. The worship of one Supreme God, and of none else, is as
fundamental to Christianity, as it is to Judaism; for Christianity is now, or
ought to be, the Religion of the Jews, as well as Gentiles; and yet the Jews
are expressly forbid by this Law ever to own any Religion, which allows the
worship of any Being besides God: and therefore the worship of one God and none
else, must be fundamental in Christianity, if the people of the Jews are, or
ever were bound to embrace the Faith of Christ.

SECT. IV.
2. ANd therefore I observe in the next place, that Christ and his Apostles
have made no alteration at all in the object of our worship. Christ urges, that
Old Testament Law in answer to the Devils Temptation; It is written, 4 Matthew.
10.
thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve. Which it
seems, is as standing a Law after the appearance of Christ, as it was before.
He gives no other direction to his Disciples, but to pray to their Heavenly
Father, and in that form of prayer which he gave them, he teaches them to
address their prayer neither to Saints nor Angels, but to God only. Our Father
which art in heaven.

When St. Paul charges the Heathens with Idolatry, he does it upon this
account, that they joined the worship of Creatures, with the worship of the
Supreme God. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, 1
Romans 21.
neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was darkened. Where the Apostle acknowledges, that they did know
God, that they did own that Supreme and Sovereign Being who made the world; and
does suppose, that they did worship him also. For he does not charge them with
renouncing the worship of that God who made the world; but that they did not
glorify him as God; which only taxes the manner of their worship. And wherein
that was faulty he declares in the following verses. As that they made mean and
vile representations of him, that they changed the glory of the uncorruptible
God, v. 23.
into an Image made like to corruptible man, and to birds and four footed
beasts, and creeping things. And thus changed the truth of God into a lie. But
this was not the only fault, but they also gave his incommunicable worship to
Creatures, and worshipped and served the Creature more than the Creator, v. 25.
who is blessed for ever, Amen. Which words do plainly suppose, that they did
worship the Creator of all things, but besides the Creator, (for so (...) may
signify) they worshipped the Creature also; which proves that the worship of
the Supreme God will not excuse those from Idolatry, who worship any thing else
besides him. For the opposition lies between the Creator, and the Creature, be
it a good or a bad Creature, it matters not as to Religious Worship, which must
be given to neither. Or if we render the words, as our Translators do, more
than the Creator, (for (...) is often used comparatively) yet so it supposes,
that they did worship the Creator, and when they are said to worship the
Creature more, that cannot signify a higher degree of worship, but more
frequent addresses; and thus the Church of Rome worships the Virgin Mary, more
than the Creator; for they say ten prayers (if they be prayers) to the Virgin
Mary for one to God; ten Ave Mary's for one Pater noster.

The same Apostle determines this matter in as plain words as can be: 1 Cor. 8.
5, 6.
For though there be, that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth, as
there be Gods many, and Lords many; but to us there is but one God the Father,
of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all things, and we by him. Where in opposition to the Pagan Idolatry, who
worshipped a great many Gods, not as Supreme Independent Deities (for they
acknowledged but one Supreme God, who made all the other Gods) but either as
sharers in the Government of the World, or Mediators and Intercessors for them
with the Supreme God, the Apostle plainly asserts, That to us Christians there
is but one God the Maker of all Things, and one Lord Jesus Christ our great
Mediator and Advocate with God the Father; that is, that we must worship none
else. And that none of the distinctions, which are used by the Church of Rome
to justify that Worship, which they pay to Saints and Angels, can have any
place here, is evident from this consideration: For either these distinctions
were known, or they were not known, when the Apostle wrote this, and in both
cases his silence is an argument against them. If they were known, he rejects
them, and determines against them; for he affirms absolutely without the salvo
of any distinctions, that we have but one God, and one Mediator; that is, that
we must worship no more. If they were not known (as it is likely they were not,
because the Apostle takes no notice of them) it is a plain argument, that these
distinctions are of no use, unless they will say, that St. Paul, who was guided
by an Infallible Spirit, was ignorant of some very useful and material notions
about the object of Worship. If the Apostle did not know these distinctions, it
is evident they are of a late date, and therefore can have no authority against
an Apostolical determination: If he did not know them, he could have no regard
to them, and therefore made no allowance for such exceptions.

Nay, the same Apostle does not only give us such general rules, as necessarily
exclude the worship of Saints and Angels, but does expressly condemn it, and
warns the Christians against it. He foretells of the Apostasy of the latter
days, 1 Timothy 4. 1.
wherein some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and
the doctrine of Devils, (...), The doctrine of Demons, the doctrine of
worshipping Demons, or some new inferior Deity, Saints, or Angels, or
whatever they are, as Mediators and Intercessors between God and men. This is
the true notion of the doctrine of Demons amongst the Heathens, See Mr. Joseph
Medes Apostasy of the latter times.
and the Apostle tells us, the time shall come, when some Christians (for it is
evident he speaks here of the Apostasy of Christians) shall fall into the same
Idolatry; which is an exact prophecy of what we now see done in the Church of
Rome, who have the same notion of their Saints and Angels, and pay the same
worship to them, which the Heathens formerly did to their Demons or inferior
Gods.

3. And as a further confirmation of this, I observe, that the Gospel of our
Savior forbids Idolatry, without giving us any new notion of Idolatry; and
therefore it has made no alteration at all in this Doctrine, of the worship of
one God, which Moses so expressly commanded the Jews to observe. For the Gospel
was preached to the Jews as well as to the Gentiles; nay, the Jews had the first
and most undoubted right to it, as being the posterity of Abraham, to whom the
promise of the Messiah was made; and therefore as the Law was at first given
them by Moses, so it did still oblige them in all such cases, wherein the
Gospel did not in express terms make a change and alteration of the Law; and
therefore since there was no such alteration made, and yet the Law against
Idolatry renewed and confirmed by the authority of the Gospel, what could the
Jews understand else by Idolatry, but what was accounted Idolatry by the Law of
Moses; that is, the worship of any other Being besides the Supreme God, the
Lord Jehovah. And since it is evident, that there are not two Gospels, one for
the Jews, and another for the Gentiles, all Christians, whether Jews or
Gentiles, must be under the obligation of the same Law, to worship only one God.

The notion of Idolatry must alter as the object of Religious Worship does. If
we must worship one God, and none besides him, then it is Idolatry to worship
any other Being but the Supreme God; for Idolatry consists in giving Religious
Worship to such Beings, as we ought not to worship; and by the Law of Moses
they were to worship none but God; and therefore the worship of any other Being
was Idolatry. But if the object of our worship be enlarged, and the Gospel has
made it lawful to worship Saints and Angels, then we must seek out some other
notion of Idolatry, that it consists in worshipping wicked Spirits, or in
giving Supreme and Sovereign worship to inferior Deities, which the Church of
Rome thinks impossible in the nature of the thing, for any man to do, who knows
them to be inferior Spirits. But if Idolatry be the same under the New
Testament, that it was under the Old, the object of our worship must be the
same too; and we have reason to believe, that it is the same, when we are
commanded to keep our selves from Idols, and to fly from Idolatry, but are no
where in the New Testament expressly told, what this Idolatry is; which
supposes, that we must learn what it is, from some antecedent Laws, and there
were no such Laws in being but the Laws of Moses.

The only thing that can be said in this case, is, that the Apostle refers them
not to any written Law, but to the natural notions of Idolatry: but with what
reason this is said, will soon appear, if we consider to whom the Apostle
writes; and they were both Jewish and Heathen Converts. As for the Heathens,
they had corrupted all their natural notions of Idolatry, and had no sense at
all of this sin till they were converted to Christianity; and therefore they
were not likely to understand the true notion of Idolatry without being taught
it; and it is not probable the Apostles would leave them to guess what Idolatry
is. As for the Jews, God would not from the beginning trust to their natural
notions, but gave them express Laws about Idolatry, which though they are the
same Laws which natural reason dictates to us, as most agreeable to the nature
and worship of God, yet since the experience of the world, which was overrun
by Idolatrous worship, did sufficiently prove, that all men do not use their
reason aright in these matters, God would not trust to the use of their reason
in the weighty concernments of his own worship and glory, but gives them an
express positive Law about it; and Christ and his Apostles having done nothing
to repeal this Law, they leave them under the authority of it; and when they
warn them against Idols and Idolatry, without giving them any new Laws about
it, must in all reason be presumed to refer them to those Laws, which they
already had.

SECT. V.
4. AS a farther proof of this, I observe, that Christ and his Apostles did not
abrogate, but only complete and perfect the Mosaical Laws. Our Savior with
great zeal and earnestness disowns any such intention or design. 5. Mat. 17.
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, I am not come to
destroy but to fulfill. (...) to fill it up, by fulfilling the types and
prophesies of it, by exchanging a ceremonial for a real righteousness, or by
perfecting its moral precepts with new instances and degrees of virtue. And
therefore he adds, For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one
jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.
And St. Paul, who was looked on by the believing Jews as a great enemy to the
Law of Moses, does renounce all such pretenses. 21. Acts 21, 22.
Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid; yea, 3. Romans 31.
we establish the Law.

Indeed had Christ or his Apostles attempted to have given any new Laws
contrary to the Laws of Moses, it had justified the Jews in their unbelief, for
God by his Prophet Isaiah, had given them this express rule to examine all new
Doctrines by; 8. Isai. 20.
To the law and the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them; and that Christ himself is not excepted from
this rule, appears in this, that this is joined with the prophecy of the
Messiah, both before and after; as you may see in 8 Isai. 13, 14. and 9 Chap.
6, 7. and therefore Christ and his Apostles always make their appeals to the
writings of the Old Testament, and St. Paul in all his disputes with the Jews
urges them with no other authority but the Scriptures; and tho the Miracles
which were wrought by the Apostles did move the Jews to hearken to them, and
greatly dispose them to believe their Doctrine, yet it was the authority of the
Scriptures whereon their Faith was founded. As St. Peter tells those to whom he
wrote, that though they preached nothing to them concerning the coming of
Christ, but what they were eyewitnesses of; and though God had given testimony
to him by a voice from Heaven, which they heard, when they were with him in the
holy Mount, yet he adds, We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto
ye do well, 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17, 18, 19.
that ye take heed, as to a light, that shines in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts. That is the Scriptures of the Old
Testament; and therefore the Jews of Berea are greatly commended for their
diligence in searching the Scriptures, and examining St. Paul's Doctrine by
them; 17. Acts 10, 11.
and this is assigned as the reason why many of them believed.

To apply this then to our present purpose, I observe,

1. That if Christ did not make any new Laws in contradiction to the Law of
Moses, then he could make no alteration in the object of Religious Worship. He
could not introduce the worship of Saints and Angels without contradicting that
Law, which commands us to worship no other Being but the one Supreme God, For
the worship of Saints and Angels together with the Supreme God, is a direct
contradiction to that Law, which commands us to worship God alone; though we
should suppose, that in the nature of the thing, the worship of Saints and
Angels were consistent with the worship of the Supreme God, yet it is not
consistent with that Law, which commands us to worship none but God. So that
let this be a natural or positive Law, or whatever men please to call it, it is
a very plain and express Law, and Christ never did contradict any express Law
of God.

It is true, that Typical and Ceremonial Worship, which God commanded the Jews
to observe, is now out of date under the Gospel, and does no longer oblige
Christians; but the reason of that is, because it has received its
accomplishment and perfection in Christ. Christ has perfected the Jewish
Sacrifices, and put an end to them, by offering a more perfect and meritorious
sacrifice, even the sacrifice of himself. The Circumcision, Washings,
Purifications of the Law, are perfected by the Laws of internal purity. The
external Ceremonies of the Law cease, but they are perfected by an Evangelical
righteousness. But this I say, that Christ never repealed any Mosaical Law, but
by fulfilling and perfecting it. He came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill.
Now methinks I need not prove, that the worship of Saints and Angels is not a
fulfilling, but a destroying that Law, which commands us to worship none but
God. And it is not enough to say, that these are positive Laws given to the
Jews, (though that be said without any reason) for let them show me any
positive Law relating to the Worship of God, which Christ has wholly abrogated
without fulfilling it.

2. Yet as a farther proof, that Christ has made no alteration in the object of
our worship, that he has not introduced the worship of Saints or Angels, or
Images, into the Christian Church, which was so expressly forbid by the Jewish
Law, I observe that according to our Saviors own rule, that he came not to
destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill; these Laws of worshipping one
God, and none besides him, were not liable to any change and alteration,
because there was nothing to be perfected or fulfilled in them. He made no
change or alteration but by way of perfecting and fulfilling; and therefore
those Laws which had nothing to be fulfilled, must remain as they were without
any change.

To perfect or fulfill a Law, must either signify to accomplish what was
prefigured by it, and thus Christ fulfilled all the types and prophesies of the
Law, which related to his Person, or his undertaking, as the Jewish Priesthood,
and Sacrifices, etc. or to prescribe that real righteousness which was
signified and represented by the outward ceremony, and so Christ fulfilled the
Laws of Circumcision, Washings, Purifications, Sabbaths, etc. by commanding the
Circumcision of the heart, and the purity of mind and spirit: or by supplying
what was defective; and thus he fulfilled the moral Law by new instances of
virtue, by requiring something more perfect of us, than what the letter of the
Mosaical Law enjoined. These are all the ways that I know of, and all that we
have any instances of in Scripture of fulfilling Laws.

Now I suppose, no man will say, that the first Commandment, which forbids the
worship of any other Gods besides the Lord Jehovah, is a Typical Law, for pray
what is it a Type of? nor can any pretend that the first Commandment is a
Ceremonial Law, for it prescribes no rite of worship at all, but only
determines the object of worship.

As for the third way of fulfilling Laws, by perfecting them with some new
instances and degrees of virtue, it can have no place here, for this Law is as
perfect as it can be. For it is a Negative Law, Thou shall have none other God.
Now that which is forbid without any reserve or limitation, is perfectly and
absolutely forbid. There are no degrees of nothing, though there are several
degrees of perfection in things which have a being; and therefore though there
are degrees in affirmative Laws, for some Laws may require greater seize
than other; and one man may do better than another, and yet both do that which
is good; yet there are no degrees in not doing a thing, and no Law can do more
than forbid that, which the Lawgiver will not have done.

And besides, this way of fulfilling Laws, does not abrogate any command, but
adds to it; it may restrain those liberties which were formerly indulged, but
it does not forbid any thing which was formerly our duty to do; for when God
requires greater degrees of virtue from us, he does not forbid the less. And
therefore in this way, Christ might forbid more than was forbid by the Law of
Moses, but we cannot suppose that he gave liberty to do that which the Law
forbids, which is not to perfect, but to abrogate a Law.

But to put an end to this dispute; if Christ have perfected these Laws by
indulging the worship of Saints and Angels under the Gospel, which was so
expressly forbidden by the Law, then it seems the worship of Saints and Angels
is a more perfect state of Religion, than the worship of the one Supreme God
alone.

If this be true, then though the Heathens might mistake in the object of their
Worship, yet the manner of their worship was more perfect and excellent, than
what God himself prescribed the Jews. For they worshipped a great many inferior
Deities, as well as the Supreme God; and if this be the most perfect and
excellent worship, it is wonderful to me, that God should forbid it in the
worship of himself; that he should prescribe a more imperfect worship to his
own people, than the Heathens paid to their Gods.

For to say that God forbade the worship of any Being besides himself, because
this liberty had been abused by the Heathens to Idolatry, is no reason at all.
For though we should suppose that the Heathens worshipped evil spirits for Gods,
this had been easily prevented, had God told them what Saints and Angels they
should have made their addresses to; and this had been a more likely way to
cure them of Idolatry, than to have forbad the worship of all inferior
Deities; for when they had such numerous Deities of their own, to have made
their application to, they would have been more easily weaned from the Gods of
other Countries.

And we have reason to believe, so it would have been, had God been pleased
with this way of Worship, for he would not reject any part of Religious
Worship, merely because it had been abused by Idolaters. The Heathens
sacrificed to Idols, and yet he commands the Jews to offer Sacrifices to
himself, and so no doubt he would have commanded the worship of Saints and
Angels, had he been as well pleased with this, as he was with Sacrifices; had
it been a more perfect state of Religion than to worship God only, and without
any Image.

When God chose the people of Israel, and separated them from the rest of the
world, to his own peculiar worship and service, we cannot suppose that he did
intend to forbid any acts of worship, which were a real honor to the Divine
Nature, much less to forbid the most excellent and perfect acts of worship; for
he who is so jealous of his glory, will no more part with it himself, then he
will give it to another; and therefore excepting the Typical nature of that
dispensation, the whole intention of the Mosaical Law was to correct those
abuses, which the rest of the world was guilty of in their Religious Worship,
which either respected the object or the acts of worship; that they worshipped
that for God, which was not God; or that they thought to honor God by such
acts, as were so far from being an honor, that they were a reproach to the
Divine Nature. And whatever is forbid in the worship of God, unless there be
some Mystical and Typical reasons for it, must be reduced to one of those
causes. This account God himself gives, why he forbids the worship of any Being
besides himself, or the worship of graven Images. I am the Lord, 42. Isai. 8.
that is my Name, and my glory will I not give to another, nor my praise to
graven Images. Whatever is his true glory, he reserves to himself, and
therefore never did forbid any act of worship which was truly so; but he will
not give his glory to another, and for that reason forbids the worship of
graven Images, or any thing besides himself; and if this was not his glory
then, much less the most perfect and excellent part of worship, I know not how
it should come to be his glory now, unless the Divine Nature changes and alters
too.

So that Gods having forbid by the Law of Moses the worship of any other Being
besides himself, is a very strong presumption, that the worship of Saints and
Angels, (whatever fine excuses and Apologies may be made for it, yet at least)
is not a more perfect state of Religion, than to worship God alone. For though
God may not always think fit to command the highest degrees of perfection, yet
there never can be any reason to forbid it. But let us now consider the nature
and reason of the thing, whether it be a more perfect state of Religion to
worship God alone, or to worship Saints and Angels, etc. together with the
Supreme God. Now the perfection of any acts of Religion must either respect God
or our selves, that they signify some greater perfections in God, or more
perfect seize in us, and a nearer union and conjunction with the Deity.
Let us then briefly examine the worship of Saints and Angels, both with respect
to God and our selves, and see whether we can discover any greater perfection
in this way of worship, than in the worship of the Supreme Being alone, without
any Rival or partner in worship; and if it appears, that it is neither for the
glory of God, nor for the happiness and perfection of those, who worship, we
may certainly conclude, that our Savior has made no alteration in the object
of our worship, for he made no alteration for the worse but for the better; he
fulfils and perfects Laws, which, I suppose, does not signify making them less
perfect than they were before.

SECT. VI.
1. THen let us consider, whether the worship of Saints and Angels be more for
the glory of God, than to pay all Religious Worship to God alone. Now if
Religious Worship be for the glory of God, then all Religious Worship is more
for Gods glory than a part of it; unless men will venture to say, that a part
is as great as the whole. And yet whoever worships Saints and Angels, though he
be neve so devout a worshipper of God also, yet he gives part of Religious
Worship to Creatures, and therefore God cannot have the whole, unless they can
divide their worship between God and Creatures, and yet give the whole to God.

If it be objected, that those who worship Saints and Angels, do not give that
worship to them, which is peculiar and appropriate to the Supreme God, and
therefore they reserve that worship which is due to God, wholly to himself,
though they pay an inferior degree of Religious Worship to Saints and Angels.
I answer, what that worship is, which is peculiar to the Supreme God, I shall
consider more hereafter; but for the present, supposing that they give only an
inferior degree of worship to Creatures, is this Religious Worship, or is it
not? if it be, is a degree of Worship a part of Worship? if it be, then God has
not the whole, and therefore is not so much honored, as if he had the whole;
as to show this in a plain instance.

Those who pray to Saints and Angels, though they do not pray to them, as to
the Supreme God, but as to Mediators and Intercessors for them with the Supreme
God, yet they place an inferior degree of hope and trust and affiance in them,
or else it is nonsense to pray to them at all; so that though God may be the
Supreme Object of their relyance and hope, yet he is not the only Object; he
has part, and the greatest part, but not the whole, for they divide their hope
and trust between God and Creatures; and if it be a greater glory to God to
trust wholly in him, than to trust in him in part, then it is a greater glory
to God to pray to him only, than to pray also to Saints and Angels.

Nay it is more than probable, that those who pray to Saints and Angels, as
trusting in their merits and intercession for them, do not make God, but these
Saints and Angels, to whom they pray, the Supreme Object of their hope. This it
may be will be thought an extravagant charge against men who profess to
believe, that God is the Supreme Lord of the world, and the sole giver of all
good things; but this is no argument to me, but that notwithstanding this
belief, they may trust more in Saints and Angels, than in God, and consequently
give the Supreme Worship to them. For men do not always trust most in those who
have the greatest power, but in those by whose interest and intercession, they
hope to obtain their desires of the Sovereign power. Thus I am sure it is in
the Courts of earthly Princes; though men know, that the King only has power to
grant what they desire, yet they place more confidence in a powerful Favorite
than in their Prince, and when they have obtained their requests, pay more
solemn acknowledgments to their Patron; for let the power be where it will, our
hope and trust is placed there where our expectations are. And when men's
expectations are not from the Prince, who has the power, but from the
Favorite, whose interest directs the influences of this power to them, which
otherwise would never have reached them, such Favorites have more numerous
dependants, more frequent addresses, more formal courtships, than the Prince
himself. And when men model the heavenly Court according to the pattern of
earthly Courts, and expect the conveyance of the Divine Blessings to them as
much from the intercession of Saints and Angels, as they do to obtain their
desires of their Prince, by the mediation of some powerful Favorite, no
wonder, if they love, and honor, and fear, reverence and adore, trust and
depend on Saints and Angels, as much or more than they do on the Supreme God.
For there is not a more natural notion, than to honor those for our Gods, from
whose hands we receive all good things, whether we receive it from their own
inherent power or not, Deus nobis haec otia fecit,

Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus, illius aram
Saepe tener nostris ab ovilibus imbuet agnus.
Men may acknowledge God to be the Supreme Being, and ascribe incommunicable
perfections to him, and yet may pray more frequently, more devoutly, more
ardently, with greater trust and affiance to Saints and Angels, than to God, as
it is apparent many Devotoes of the Virgin Mary do; and this is to give Supreme
and Sovereign Worship to them, without acknowledging them to be Supreme Beings.

Indeed it is morally impossible, but our Religious Worship, trust and
affiance, must be at least equally shared between the Supreme God and our
Mediator, whatever he be, as men do not less trust in the interest of their
Patron, than in the power of their Prince; for it is not mere power but favor,
which is the immediate object of our trust; and therefore God appointed his
only begotten Son to be our Mediator, as for other great and wise reasons, so
to prevent Idolatry by giving us a God incarnate, who is a proper object of
Religious adoration, to be our Mediator, that seeing men will worship their
Mediator, they may have a God for their Mediator to worship. The sum is this:
If it be more for the glory of God to have all Religious Worship appropriated
to himself, than to have only a part of it, and it may be the least share and
part too, then the worship of Saints and Angels cannot be for Gods glory.

But besides this, the worship of Saints and Angels, together with God, does
mightily obscure and lessen the Divine perfections, and therefore it cannot be
for his glory. It represents him indeed like a great Temporal Monarch, but it
does not represents him like a God.

That which we ignorantly think a piece of state and greatness in earthly
Monarchs, to administer the great affairs of their Kingdoms, to receive
Petitions and Addresses, to bestow Favors, to administer Justice by other
hands, to have some great Ministers and Favorites to interpose between them
and their Subjects, is nothing else, but want of power to do otherwise. He
would be a much greater Prince, more beloved and reverenced, who could do all
this himself; but no Prince can be present in all parts of his Kingdom, nor
know every particular Subject, much less their particular cases, and
conditions, deserts and merits; and therefore is forced to divide this care
into many hands, and in so doing shares his power and honor with his Subjects.
But whoever imagines any such thing of God, denies his omnipresence, his
omnipotence, his omniscience, and his particular care and providence over his
Creatures. God indeed does not always govern the world by an immediate power,
but makes use both of the Ministry of Angels and Men; but he governs all things
by his immediate direction, or at least by his immediate inspection. He
overlooks every thing himself, while all Creatures either obey his commands, or
submit to his power. If this be the true notion of Gods governing the world,
that he has the concernments of the whole Creation under his eye, and keeps the
disposal of all things in his own hands, so that nothing can be done, but
either by his order or permission; then the most perfect and glorious Angels,
the greatest Ministers of the Divine Providence, can challenge no share in
Religious Worship, cannot be the objects of our trust or hope, because they are
only Ministers of the Divine Will, can do nothing from themselves, as civil
Ministers of State, and Officers of great trust can in Temporal Kingdoms, but
are always under the eye, and always move at the command of God. In such a
state of things all the peculiar rights of Sovereign Power and Dominion God
reserves wholly to himself, as any wife Prince would, among which the receiving
the Prayers and Petitions of his Creatures is none of the least; to hear
Prayers is made the peculiar attribute of God in Scripture, Thou art a God that
hear, prayers, therefore unto thee shall all flesh come. And reason tells
us, that it is the most eminent part of Sovereignty and Majesty; and the reason
why Temporal Princes do not reserve this wholly to themselves, is because they
cannot do it; but God can, and he challenges it to himself, and will not allow
any Creature to do it; and there is no temptation to pray to any Creature, when
we know, that they cannot help us, that they must receive their orders and
commands from God, and not act by their own will and inclinations.

Thus Princes have their Eavourites, to whom they express a very partial
fondness and respect, to whom they will deny nothing that they ask, nor hardly
show any grace or favor to their Subjects without them; and this forces
Subjects to address themselves to their Prince by them; but it is a reproach to
the Divine Goodness and universal Providence, to conceive any such thing of
God; which yet is the foundation of the worship of Patron Saints and Angels, as
persons so dear to God, that he cannot deny their requests, and will not grant
our Petitions without them, or at least, that it is the most certain and
effectual way to obtain what we desire, to offer up our Prayers and Petitions
to God by their hands.

No doubt but all good men on earth, much more Blessed Saints and Angels in
Heaven, as being more perfect and excellent Creatures, are very dear to God;
but yet God is not fond and partial in his kindness, as earthly Princes are,
but has an equal regard to all his Creatures, and delights in doing good to
them, and needs not to be importuned by any powerful Favorites to hear their
cries and prayers; he will as soon attend to the Prayers of an humble penitent
sinner, as of the most glorious Saint, and is more ready to grant than they are
to ask.

A Mediator of Redemption is very consistent with all the perfections of the
Divine Nature, and does mightily recommend both the goodness and wisdom of God
to the world. When Manking had transgressed the Laws of their Creation, they
forfeited their natural right and interest in the care and goodness of their
Maker; The Divine Justice, and the wisdom of God in the government of the
world, required an atonement and expiation for sin; and it was an amazing
demonstration of the Divine goodness to sinners, that he found one himself,
that he gave his Son to be a propitiation for our sins. When men by sin had
forfeited their original innocence and happiness together, they could expect
nothing from God, but by way of Covenant and promise; and every Covenant
between contending parties, must be transacted in the hands of a Medaitor, and
none so fit to be our Mediator, as he who is our ransom too.

And a Mediator must be invested with power and authority to see the terms of
this Covenant performed, and this is his Mediatory Intercession. He intercedes
not merely as a powerful Favorite, but as the Author and Surety of the
Covenant, not merely by entreaties and prayers, but in virtue of his blood,
which sealed the Covenant, and made atonement and expiation for sin.

Thus Christ is our Mediator of redemption, who has redeemed us by his blood;
and we must offer up all our Prayers to God in his name and powerful
intercession, because we can expect no blessings from God, but by virtue of
that Covenant, which he purchased and sealed with his Blood.

But now a Mediator of pure intercession, without regard to any atonement made
for sin, or any Covenant of redemption (such as Saints and Angels and the
blessed Virgin are made by the Church of Rome) is a mighty reproach to the
Divine Nature and perfections. It clothes God with the passions and infirmities
of earthly Princes; represents him as extremely fond of some of his Creatures,
and very regardless of others; as if his kindness to some favorite Saint, were
a more powerful motive to him to do good, than his own love to goodness; as if
he knew not when, nor to whom, to show mercy without their direction or
counsel, or would not do it without their importunity; as if some of his
Creatures had as much the ascendant over him, as some favorites have over
their Princes, who can with a words speaking have any thing of them, and extort
favors from them, even against their wills and inclinations. No man can think
there is any need of such Intercessors and Mediators with God, who believes him
to be infinitely wise, and to be infinitely good; to know when it is fit to
hear and to answer, and to be always ready to do, what his own wisdom judges
fit to be done. There can be no place for such intercessions and entreaties, to
an infinitely perfect Being; for they always suppose some great weakness or
defect in him who wants them, for even a wise and a good man wants no Mediators
to persuade him to do that good, which is fit to be done. The Objection against
this is very obvious, and the Answer, I think, is as easy. The Objection is
this: If God be so good, that he needs not such Prayers and Intercessions to
move him to do good, Why do we pray for our selves? Why do we pray for one
another? Why do we desire the Prayers of good men here on earth? Why is it a
greater reproach to the Divine Perfections to beg the Prayers of St. Paul, or
St. Peter, now they are in Heaven, than to have begged their Prayers, while
they had been on Earth?

To this I Answer: When we pray for our selves, I suppose, we do not pray as
Mediators, but as Supplicants, and nothing can be more reasonable, than that
those, who want mercy, or any other blessing should ask for it. It is certainly
no reproach to the Divine goodness, that God makes Prayer the condition of our
receiving, which is a very easy condition, and very necessary to maintain a
constant sense and reverence of God, and a constant dependence on him. And when
we pray for one another on earth, we are as mere supplicants, as when we pray
for our selves, and to pray as supplicants is a very different thing from
praying as Advocates, as Mediators, as Patrons. The virtue of the first
consists only in the power and efficacy of Prayer; the second in the favor and
interest of the person. This the Church of Rome her self owns, when she allows
no Mediators and Advocates, but Saints in Heaven, which is a sign, she makes a
vast difference between the prayers of Saints on earth, and Saints in Heaven.

There are great and wise reasons, why God should command and encourage our
mutual prayers for each other while we are on earth; for this is the noblest
exercise of universal love and charity, which is a necessary qualification to
render our prayers acceptable to God; this preserves the unity of the body of
Christ, which requires a sympathy and fellow-feeling of each others sufferings,
this is the foundation of public worship when we meet together to pray with,
and for each other to our common Father; and it gives a great reputation to
virtue and Religion in this world, when God hears the prayers of good men for
the wicked, and removes or diverts those judgments which they were afraid of;
this becomes the wisdom of God, and is no blemish to his goodness, to dispense
his mercies and favors in such a manner as may best serve the great ends of
Religion in this world.

God does not command us to pray for our selves or others, because he wants our
importunities and solicitations to do good, but because it serves the public
ends of Religion and Government, and is that natural homage and worship, which
Creatures owe to their great Creator and Benefactor, and Sovereign Lord. But to
imagine, that God needs Advocates and Mediators to solicit our cause for us in
the Court of Heaven, where none of these ends can be served by it, this is a
plain impeachment of his wisdom and goodness, as if he wanted great
importunities to do good, and were more moved by a partial kindness and respect
to some powerful favorites, than by the care of his Creatures, or his love to
goodness.

Erom hence it evidently appears, how inconsequent that reasoning is, from our
begging the prayers of good men on earth, to prove the lawfulness of our
praying to the Saints in Heaven to pray and interceed for us; the first makes
them our fellow supplicants, the second makes them our Mediators and
Intercessors; and how little the Church of Rome gains by that distinction,
between a Mediator of Redemption, and Mediators of pure Intercession* for
though they pray to Saints and Angels only as Mediators of Intercession, yet
this is a real reproach to the nature and government of God; a Mediator of
Redemption is very consistent with the Divine glory and perfections, a Mediator
of pure intercession is not. And the sum of all is this, That it is so far from
advancing the Divine glory to worship Saints and Angels together with God, that
it is a real reproach and dishonor to him; and therefore this can be no Law
nor Institution of our Savior, who came not to abrogate the Divine Laws, but
to fulfill and perfect them. Some think there is no danger of dishonouring God
by that honor they give to Saints and Angels, because they honor them as Gods
Friends and Favorites, as those whom God has honored and advanced to great
glory; and therefore whatever honor they do to them, rebounds back again on
God, and this may be true, while we give no honor to Saints and Angels, but
what is consistent with the Divine glory; but when the very nature of that
honor and worship we pay to them, is a diminution of Gods glory, and a
reproach to his infinite perfections, as I have made it appear, the worship of
Saints and Angels is, surely it cannot be for Gods glory to advance his
Creatures by lessening himself.

SECT. VII.
2. LEt us now consider, whether the worship of Saints and Angels together with
God, be a more perfect state of Religion than the worship of God alone, with
respect to our selves; whether it puts us into a more perfect and excellent
state. It does indeed mightily gratify the superstition of mankind to have a
multitude of Advocates and Mediators to address to, but there are three
considerations which may satisfy any man, how far this is from a perfect state
of Religion.

1. That it argues very mean and low conceits of God, for did men believe God
to be so wise, so good, and so powerful, as really he is, they would be
contented with one infinite God, instead of ten thousand meaner Advocates. The
worship of Saints and Angels* as I have already proved, is a great reproach to
the Divine perfections, and therefore such worshippers must have very imperfect
and childish apprehensions of the Supreme Being, which is a plain proof what an
imperfect state of Religion this is; for the perfection of Religion is always
proportioned to that knowledge we have of God, who is the object of it.

2. This worship of Saints and Angels is a very servile state, it subjects us
to our fellow creatures, who are by nature but our equals, however are not our
Gods. It is a state of liberty, freedom and honor, to be subject to God, who
is our natural Lord and Sovereign, but to fall down to our fellow Creatures,
and to worship them with Divine honors, with all humility of address, and
sacred and awful regards, is to debase our selves as much below the dignity of
our natures, as we advance them above it. The excellency and perfection of
reasonable Creatures principally consists in their Religion, and that is the
most perfect Religion, which does most advance, adorn, and perfect our Natures;
but it is an argument of an abject mind, to be contented to worship the most
excellent Creatures, which is a greater dishonor than to own the vilest Slave
for our Prince. Mean objects of worship do more debase the Soul, than any other
the wilest submissions; and the more our dependancies are, and the meaner they
are, the more imperfect our State and Religion is.

3. The greatest perfection of Religion, consists in the nearest and most
immediate approach to God; which I think, these men cannot pretend to, who fly
to the patronage and intercession of Saints and Angels, to obtain their
Petitions of him. Though we should allow it lawful to pray to Saints and Angels
to mediate for us with God, yet we cannot but own it a more perfect state to do
as the Saints and Angels themselves do, go to God without any other Advocate
but Christ himself. It is a great happiness to have a friend at Court, to
commend us to our Prince, when we have no interest of our own, but it is a
greater privilege to go immediately to our Prince when we please, without any
Favorite to introduce us. This is the perfect state of the Gospel, that we
have received The adoption of sins, 4 Gal. 5, 6.
and because we are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into our
hearts, crying Abba Father. That is, this Holy Spirit which dwells in us,
teaches us to call God Father, and to pray to him with the humble assurance and
confidence of Children. This is the effect of Christ intertercession for us, 4
Hebr. 16.
That we may now come boldly unto the throne of Grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in a time of need. The throne of Grace certainly
is not the shrine of any Saints, but the immediate throne and presence of God,
whether we may immediately direct our Prayers through the merits and
intercession of Christ. Upon the same account the whole body of Christians are
called a Spiritual house, that is, the Temple of God, where he is peculiarly
present to hear those Prayers which are made to him, An holy priesthood, 1 Pet.
2 5, 9.
to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. And a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people: This
is a privilege above what the Jews enjoyed, they had a Priesthood to minister
in holy things, and to offer their Sacrifices for them, but the whole Nation
was not a Priesthood, nor had such immediate access to God; but now every
Christian has as near an access to God as the Priests themselves under the Law
had; can offer up his Prayers and Spiritual Sacrifices immediately to God; and
that very acceptably too, through Jesus Christ our great High Priest and
Mediator; and if our Prayers be acceptable to God by Jesus Chrrist, we need no
other Mediators or Advocates. This is the only direction our Savior gave his
Disciples a little before his death, to ask in his name, with this promise, If
ye ask any thing in my name, 14 Joh. 13, 15. 16 Joh. 24.
I will do it. Hither to have you asked nothing in my name, ask and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full. And to give them the greater assurance of
acceptance, he acquaints them with Gods great and tender affection for them,
such as a Father has for his Children. At that day ye shall ask in my name; 26,
27.
and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you, for the Father
himself loves you because ye have loved me, and have believed, that I came out
from God; a reason which equally extends to all those who shall believe in
Christ, to the end of the world. And can we now imagine, that when our Savior
has purchased for us this liberty of access to God, he should send us round
about by the shrines and Altars of numerous and unknown Saints to the Throne of
Grace. When he will not assert the necessity of his own Prayers for us, while
we pray in his name, because our heavenly Father has such a tender affection
for all the Disciples of Christ, can we think it necessary to pray to St. Paul
and St. Peter, and the Virgin Mary to pray for us. This is none of our Saviors
institution, nor can it be, because Christ by his death and sufferings and
intercessions brings us nearer to God, 10 Hebr. 19, 20, 21, 22.
as the Apostle to the Hebrews speaks, Having therefore Brethren boldness to
enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he
has consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh, and having
an high Priest over the house of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in
full assurance of Faith. But the worship of Saints and Angels removes us at a
great distance from God, as not daring to approach his presence without the
mediation of some Favorite Saint. And though the Church of Rome does sometimes
pray directly to God only, in the Name and Mediation of Christ, as the Pagans
themselves sometimes did to their Supreme Deity, yet it seems this is what they
dare not trust to, and therefore join the Meditation of Saints with their
Prayers to God, and never pray to God without it.

SECT. VIII.
5. THat the Gospel of our Savior has made no alteration in the object of our
worship, appears from that Analogy which there is, and ought to be, between
the Jewish and Christian Worship. The Jewish and Christian Church are but one
Church, and their worship the same worship, only with this difference, that the
Jewish worship was in Type and Figure, and Ceremony, the Christian worship in
Truth and Substance. And therefore if this legal and Evangelical worship be the
same it must have the some object, for the object is the most essential part of
worship.

So that if it appear, not only from the express letter of the Law of Moses,
but from all the Types and Figures of the Law, that God only was to be worshipped
by the Jewish Church; if Christ was to fulfill all these Types and Figures in
his own person, and in the Evangelical worship, then it is certain, that the
object of our worship must be the same still; for if the Type was confined in
its nature and signification to the worship of One God, then the whole
Christian worship, which was signified and praesigured by these Types, must be
peculiar and appropriate to the same One Supreme God.

As for instance. I have already proved at large, that the Jews were to worship
but One God, because they had but one Temple to worship in, and all their
worship had some relation or other to this one Temple, and therefore all their
worship was appropriated to that One God, whose Temple it was; now we know Gods
dweling in the Temple at Jerusalem, was only a Type and Figure of Gods dwelling
in Humane Nature, upon which account Christ calls his body the Temple; and St.
John tells us, 2 John 19. 21. 1 John 14.
That the word was made flesh and dwelt among us, (...) tabernacled among us;
as God formerly dwelt in the Jewish Tabernacle or Temple, and St. Paul adds, 2
Coloss. 3.
That the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ bodily, (...) really,
substantially, as an accomplishment of Gods dwelling by Types and Figures, and
shadows in the Jewish Temple.

Now if all the Jewish worship was confined to the Temple, or had a necessary
relation to it, as I have already proved, and this Temple was but a figure of
the Incarnation of Christ, who should dwell among us in humane nature, then all
the Christian worship must be offered up to God through Jesus Christ, as all
the Jewish worship was offered to God at the Temple; for Christ is the only
Temple (in a strict and proper sense) of the Christian Church, and therefore he
alone can render all our services acceptable to God. So that God, who is the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the only object of our worship, and Christ
considered as God Incarnate, as God dwelling in humane nature, is the only
Temple where all our worship must be offered to God, that is, we shall find
acceptance with God only in his name and mediation: we must worship no other
Being but only the Supreme God, and that only through Jesus Christ.

Thus under the Law the Priests were to intercede for the people, but not
without Sacrifice; their Intercession was founded in making atonement and
expiation for sin; which plainly signified, that under the Gospel we can have
no other Mediator, but only him, who expiates our sins, and intercedes in the
merits of his Sacrifice; who is our Priest and our Sacrifice, and therefore our
Mediator; 1 John 2. 1, 2.
as St. John observes. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. The Law
knew no such thing as a Mediator of pure intercession, a Mediator, who is no
Priest, and offers no Sacrifice for us, and therefore the Gospel allows of no
such Mediators neither, who mediate only by their Prayers, without a
Sacrifice, such Mediators as the Church of Rome makes of Saints and Angels and
the Virgin Mary; but we have only one Mediator, a Mediator of redemption, who
has purchased us with his Blood, of whom the Priests under the Law were Types
and Figures.

Thus under the Law, none but the High Priest was to enter into the Holy of
Holies, with the blood of the Sacrifice; now the Holy of Holies was a Type of
Heaven, and therefore this plainly signified, that under the Gospel, 1. Heb. 12.
there should be but one High Priest and Mediator, to offer up our Prayers and
Supplications in Heaven, He and He only, who enters into Heaven with his own
Blood, as the High Priest went into the Holy of Holies with the blood of the
Sacrifice. There may be a great many Priests and Advocates on Earth to
interceed for us, as there were under the Law, great numbers of Priests, the
Sons of Aaron, to attend the Service and Ministry of the Temple, but we have,
and can have, but one Priest and Mediator in Heaven.

Whoever acknowledges that the Priesthood and Ministry of the Law was Typical
of the Evangelical Priesthood and Worship, cannot avoid the force of this
Argument, and whoever will not acknowledge this, must reject most of St. Paul's
Epistles, especially the Epistle to the Hebrews, which proceeds wholely upon
this way of reasoning: Now this manifestly justifies the worship of the Church
of England, as true Christian worship, for we worship One God through one
Mediator, who offered himself a Sacrifice for us, when he was on Earth, and
interceeds for us as our High Priest in Heaven, which answers to the One
Temple, and the One High Priest under the Law: But though the Church of Rome
does what we do, worship the Supreme God through Jesus Christ, yet she spoils
the Analogy between the Type and the Antitype, the legal and Evangelical
worship, by doing more; when she sends us to the Shrines and Altars of so many
several Saints, surely this cannot answer to that one Temple at Jerusalem,
where God alone was to be worshipped, there are as many Temples and Mercy-seats
now, as there are Shrines and Altars of Saints and Angels, by whose
Intercession we may obtain our requests of God. When she advances Saints and
Angels to the Office of Mediators and Interceslsors in Heaven, this contradicts
the Type of One High Priest, who alone might enter into the Holy of Holies,
which was a type of Heaven; for there is some difference between having one
Mediator in Heaven, (and there can be no more under the Gospel to answer to the
Typical High Priest under the Law) and having a hundred Mediators in Heaven
together with our Typical High Priest. To have a Mediator of pure Intercession
in Heaven, who never offered any Sacrifice for us, cannot answer to the High
Priest under the Law, who could not enter into the Holy of Holies without the
blood of the Sacrifice. The High Priests entering but once a year into the Holy
of Holies, which was typical of Christ's entering once into Heaven to intercede
for us, cannot be reconciled with a new succession of Mediators, as ofter as
the Pope of Rome pleases to cannonize them. So that either the Law was not
typical of the state of the Gospel, or the Worship of Saints and Angels, which
is so contrary to all the types and figures of the Law, cannot be true
Christian Worship.

Sixthly, I shall add but one thing more, that Christ and his Apostles have
made no alteration in the object of worship, appears from hence, that de facto
there is no such Law in the Gospel for the worship of any other Being besides
the One Supreme God. There is a great deal against it, as I have already shown;
but if there had been nothing against it, it had been argument enough against
any such alteration, that there is no express positive Law for it. The force of
which argument does not consist merely in the silence of the Gospel, that there
is nothing said for it, (which the most Learned Advocates of the Church of Rome
readily grant, and give their reasons, such as they are, why this was not done,
why we are not directed to pray to Saints and Angels, and Images, etc.) but the
argument lies in this, that there can be no alteration made in the object of
worship without an express Law; and therefore there is no alteration made,
because there is no such Law in the Gospel.

The Jews were expressly commanded to worship no other Being, but the Lord
Jehovah, as I have already proved, which Law appropriates all the acts of
Religious Worship to one God; and therefore all those, who were under the
obligation of this Law (as to be sure all natural Jews were) could not without
the guilt of Idolatry give any Religious Worship to any other Being, till this
Law were expressly repealed, and express leave given to worship some other
Divine Beings besides the Supreme God; so that at least our Savior himself,
while he was on Earth, and subject to the Law, and his Apostles, and all
believing Jews, were obliged by this Law to worship none but God, unless we can
show where Christ by his Legislative Authority, or his Apostles by Commission
from him, have expressly repealed this Law; nay, indeed* unless we can show,
that Christ himself repealed this Law, and taught the worship of Saints and
Angels, the Apostles themselves could have no authority to do it, 28. Mat. 20.
for their Commission was only to teach what Christ had commanded them, which
though it does not extend to matters of order and discipline, and the external
circumstances of worship, yet it does to all the essentials of Faith and
Worship, and I think the right object of Worship is the most essential thing in
Religious Worship.

From hence it appears, that at least all the Jewish Christians in the Apostles
days, and all succeeding Ages to this day, cannot Worship Saints and Angels
without Idolatry, because the Law* which was given to them, and never yet
repealed, commands them to worship none but God; and if Gentile Converts were
received into the Jewish Christian Church (and Christ has but one Church of
Jews and Gentiles) they must also be obliged by all those Laws, which were
then, and are still obligatory to all believing Jews, and therefore Gentile as
well as Jewish Christians, are still bound to worship none but God.

Now I think I need not prove, that an express Law can be repealed only by an
express Law. That Law which commands us to worship God, and him only, must
continue in full force, till God do as expressly declare, that he allows us to
pay some degree of Religious Worship to other Beings besides himself: When a
Lawgiver has declared his will and pleasure by a Law, it is not fit that
Subjects should be allowed to guess* at his mind, and dispute away an express
Law by some surmizes and consequences, how probable soever they may appear; for
at this rate a Law signifies nothing, if we may guess at the will of our
Lawgiver, without and against an express Law. And yet none of the Advocates of
the Church of Rome (though they are not usually guilty of too much modesty)
ever had the confidence to pretend an express Law for the worship of Saints and
Angels, and Images, etc. and though they sometimes allege Scripture to prove
this by, yet they do not pretend that they are direct proofs, but only attempt
to prove some other Doctrines from Scripture, from which they think they may
prove by some probable consequences that which the Scripture nowhere plainly
teaches, nay the contrary to which is expressly taught in Scripture. And if this
may be allowed, I know no Law of God so plain and express, but a witty man may
find ways to escape the obligation of it. This is a consideration of great
moment, and therefore I shall discourse more particularly of it.

The Law of Moses expressly commands us to worship God, and him only; Our
Savior Christ owns and confirms the authority of this Law in the Gospel; the
Church of Rome notwithstanding this Law, gives Religious Worship to Creatures;
the question then is; how she avoids the force of this Law, since it is no
where expressly repealed, and she does not pretend that it is. Now the Patrons
of Creature-worship think to justify themselves from the breach of this Law,
these three ways. 1. By consequences drawn, as they pretend, from other
Scripture-Doctrines. 2. By distinctions. And 3. By authority. Let us then
examine, whether all this have any force against an express Law, which was
never expressly repepealed.

1. By consequences drawn, as they pretend, from other Scripture-Doctrines; and
I shall discourse this with a particular reference to the Invocation of Saints.
For when they would prove the lawfulness of praying to Saints, they allege no
direct proof of this from Scripture; But because they must make a show of
saying something from Scripture, when they are to deal with such Heretics as
will be satisfied with no less authority, they endeavor to prove something
else from Scripture, from whence they think by an easy consequence, they can
prove the lawfulness of praying to Saints.

Thus they very easily prove, that we may and ought to pray for one another,
and to desire each others prayers while we are on Earth; and from hence they
presently conclude, that we may as lawfully pray to Saints in Heaven to pray
for us, as beg and desire their prayers, while they are on Earth.

And to confirm this, they endeavor to prove, that some extraordinary Saints,
whose merits are very great, do directly ascend up into Heaven into the
immediate presence of God, and a participation of his Glory; and hence they
conclude, that they have authority and power to help us and to intercede for
us, and that they are so far advanced above us in this mortal state, that they
deserve some kind of Religious Honor and Worship from us, as being Dii per
participationem, Gods by participation, that is, by partaking in the Divine
Nature and Glory by their advancement to Heaven.

And if after all this they can prove, that the Saints in Heaven do pray and
intercede for us on Earth, they think the demonstration is complete and
perfect, that therefore Bonum atque utile esse suppliciter Sanctos invocare,
and ab beneficia impetranda ^ Deo per silium ejus Jesum Christum Domini
nostrum, qui solus noster Redemptor and Salvator est, ad eorum orationes opem
auxilium* confugere. Can^. Trin. 16. 25. de Invocat.
It is good and profitable (as the Council of Trent words it) humbly to invoke
the Saints after the manner of Supplicants, and to fly to their prayers and
help and aid to obtain blessings of God by his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who
is our only (not Intercessor and Advocate, but) Redeemer and Savior.

Now how they prove all this, is not my business at present to enquire; but my
inquiry is, whether such arguments as these be sufficient to oppose against the
authority of an express Law; and if they be, truly I think it a very vain
thing, either for God or men to make any Laws. For,

1. I desire to know, what these Gentlemen would prove by such kind of
arguments as these. Suppose we should grant them, that the Saints are received
into Heaven before the Resurrection, and are actually possessed of all that Glory
and Happiness, which they say they are* suppose we should grant them, that by
some means unknown to us, Saints and Angels are acquainted with all that we do
and suffer in this world, hear all our vocal or mental prayers, which we offer
to God or to themselves, and that they do actually pray and intercede for us,
what follows from hence? That therefore we may pray to Saints? not I hope if
there be an express Law against it, These arguments at most can only prove,
that in the nature of the thing it might be fitting and reasonable to pray to
Saints if God thought fit to allow it, not that we must pray to Saints, though
God has forbid it. For those are powerful reasons indeed, which can justify
Saint-worship against the express Law and declared Will of God. Could they
first prove one of these three things: Either 1. that there is no such Law
against the worship of any other Being besides God. Or 2. that this is not the
sense of this Law, that they must not pray to Saints or Angels, that the Law,
which forbids us to worship any Being but God, does not forbid the worship of
Saints* Or 3. that though there was such a Law, and this were the sense of it,
and this Law were never formally repealed by God, yet it disappears of it self,
and obliges no longer since the discovery of such reasons as these for the
worship of Saints and Angels. I say, could they prove any thing of this in the
first place, then there would be as much reason for the worship of Saints, as
there is strength and validity in their Arguments; but no Reason can take place
against an express Law, till it be as expressly repealed. For,

2. If an express Law may be disobeyed, as often as men fancy they see reason
to do, what the Law forbids, this overthrows the whole authority of making
Laws, and makes every Subject a Judge, whether the Laws of a Sovereign Prince
shall be obeyed or not. At this rate he has the greatest authority, who has the
best reason; and since every man believes his own reason to be best, every man
is the Sovereign Lord of his own actions. It is to be presumed, that no Prince
makes a Law, but what he apprehends some reason for, and to oppose any man's
private reason against a Law, is to set up a private man's reason against the
public reason of government: and yet it is much worse to oppose our reason
against a Divine Law, which is to oppose the reason of Creatures against the
reason of God, unless we will say, that God makes Laws without reason, and
those who can believe that, may as easily imagine, that God will expect, that
those Laws which he makes without reason, should be obeyed without reason also,
and then to be sure all their reasons cannot repeal a Law, nor justify them in
the breach of it. It becomes every Creature to believe the will of God to be
the highest reason, and therefore when God has declared his will by an express
Law; while this Law continues in force, (as it must do, till it be as expressly
repealed) it is an impudent thing to urge our reasons against the obligations
of it. So that since God has expressly forbid us to worship any Being besides
himself, unless we can prove, that God has repealed this Law, it will never
justify the worship of Saints and Angels, though we could by the plainest and
easiest arguments prove to the conviction of all Mankind, that Saints and
Angels are very fit objects of our Religious Worship, and that it is no
diminution to the glory of God to pay some degree of Religious worship to them.

3. Especially, when the matter of the Law is such, that whatever reasons may
be pretended on one side or the other, it must still be acknowledged to be
wholly at the will and pleasure of the Lawgiver, which side he will choose. As
for instance, suppose there were no natural and necessary reason against the
worship of Saints and Angels, yet there is no natural and necessary reason for
it neither, and therefore God may either allow or forbid it, as he himself
pleases, without assigning any reason why he does either. And when it appears
that God might forbid it if he pleases, and that he has actually forbid it by
an express Law, it is time to leave off reasoning about it: natural reason can
give us no assurance of any thing, which it cannot prove to be necessary,
whatever in the nature and reason of things may be, or may not be, can never be
proved either to be, or not to be, by mere reason; for it is a contradiction to
say, that there is no necessary reason why such a thing should be, and yet that
I can prove by reason, that it must be, which supposes, that there is a
necessary reason, why it should be; for I cannot prove, that it must be, unless
I can prove, that it must necessarily be; that is, that there is a necessary
reason, why it should be.

To apply this then to our present Case. The Law expressly forbids us to worship
any other Being besides the Supreme God, the Church of Rome prays to Saints and
Angels and Images, which is an essential part of Divine Worship; and without
ever attempting to prove this Law to be repealed, she justifies her worship by
such reasons and consequences, as I have now cited from their most celebrated
Doctors, and some of which are the principles, whereon the Council of Trent
founds their praying to Saints and Angels. I ask then, whether these arguments,
whereby they endeavor to justify the worship of Saints and Angels, prove that
we must worship them, that such worship is their natural right, and our duty.
No, this the Church of Rome will not own; the most the Council of Trent says,
is, that it is bonum and utile, good and profitable to do it; but, say I, if
they do not prove it to be necessary, they prove nothing; for if Saints and
Angels have not a natural right to our worship, though we should suppose them
to be very fit objects of some degrees of worship, yet it is at Gods choice,
whether he will allow it or not, and they can challenge no worship, and we must
give none, if God forbids it; and therefore since God has forbid the worship of
any Being, but himself (and therefore of the most excellent Saints and Angels)
by an express Law; and it nowhere appears, where or when, or in what manner
this Law was repealed, a hundred such arguments as these cannot prove it lawful
to worship Saints and Angels against an express Law not to do it. Though we
should grant that God, if he pleased, might allow us to worship Saints and
Angels, as the Church of Rome does, without any deminution of his own Glory,
which is the most that all their arguments can pretend to prove, yet it does
not hence follow, that we may worship them, when God by an express Law has
declared, that he will not allow it. No arguments nor consequences can prove,
that God allows us to do that, which by an express Law he has forbid us to do.
No reason can prove that to be Gods will, which he has publicly declared in
his Law to be against his will.

4. That no reason or arguments can absolve us from our obedience to an express
Law, till it be as expressly repealed, appears from this, that our obligation to
obedience does not depend merely upon the reason of the Law, but upon the
authority of the Lawgiver, and therefore though the reason of the Law should
cease, yet while it is enforced by the same authority, it obliges still. Thus I
am sure, it is in humane Laws, and it is very fitting it should be so; mere
reason cannot make a Law, for then every thing which is reasonable, would be a
necessary duty; that which is reasonable may be fit matter for a Law, but it is
the authority of the Lawgiver which makes the Law, and the same authority
which at first made it a Law, continues it to be a Law while the authority
lasts, though the particular reason for which it was enacted into a Law, may
cease.

So that though the Church of Rome could prove, that there is no reason now
against the worship of Saints and Angels, that all those reasons for which God
forbad the Jews to worship any one but himself, were now ceased; yet till the
Law be repealed too, it is utterly unlawful to worship any Being besides the
Supreme God, and yet this is the most that all their reasonings come to, that
there is not the same reason for this Law under the State of the Gospel, that
there was under the Jewish Economy.

They suppose, that God forbad the Jews to worship any one but himself, because
they were in great danger of falling into Pagan Idolatries, and worshipping the
Gods of the Egyptians, and other Neighbour-Nations, and that this was the case
also of the Christian Church at the first planting of the Gospel; but now there
is no danger of worshipping false Gods, we may very securely worship the
Friends and Favorites of God.

They suppose, that all the ancient Patriarchs who lived before the
Resurrection of Christ, were not received into Heaven, and therefore not being
in a state of Bliss and Glory themselves, were not yet capable of Divine
Honors, could neither know our Prayers, nor intercede for us. But now at last
some eminent Saints and Martyrs ascend directly into Heaven, and are the beati,
advanced to such a state of Happiness and Glory, that they are fit objects of
Religious Worship, and are so powerful in the Court of Heaven, that God denies
them nothing which they ask; and so tender and compassionate to us, that they
readily undertake our Cause, and intercede for us, and therefore it is very
good and profitable now to invoke their aid and assistance by solemn and devout
Prayers.

Now though the learned men among them are put to miserable shifts to prove
the least part of all this, yet let us for argument-sake, suppose all this to
be true, that things are mightily changed since the making of this Law, and
that there is not the same reason now to confine all Religious Worship to God
alone, that there was in the time of Moses, what follows from hence, that
therefore we may now worship Saints and Angels, notwithstanding this Law which
forbids it? by no means, unless they can prove that the Law is repealed too, as
well as the reason ceased: Here is the authority of the Lawgiver still, though
we should suppose, that we had lost the reason of the Law; till the Law is as
expressly repealed as it was given, it is Gods Will still, and that is reason
enough to bind the Law upon us, though other reasons fail. The reason (if we
speak of such reasons as these, which the Church of Rome assigns, for it is a
different case, if we speak of eternal and necessary reason, which is nothing
else but the eternal and immutable nature and will of God, which is an eternal
Law) did not make the Law, and the change of the reason cannot repeal it. And
since we see, that God has not repealed this Law, we rather ought to conclude,
that we are mistaken in the reasons, for which God made this Law, or that there
are other reasons, which we know not of, for which he continues it: we may
indeed reasonably suppose, that God will repeal a Law, when the reason, for
which it was given, ceases, though earthly Princes may not always do so; but
still the Law binds till it be repealed; and it is more reasonable to conclude,
that the reason of the Law continues, while we see God does not repeal it, than
first to persuade our selves, that the reason of the Law is changed, and thence
infer the repeal and abrogation of the Law, when we see no such thing done.

5. That these arguments which the Roman Doctors urge, to justify their
worship of Saints and Angels, are of no force to repeal that Law, which forbids
the worship of any other Being besides the Supreme God, appears from this, that
they had no force in them to prevent the making of this Law, and therefore much
less can they repeal it now it is made: The reasons which they use, had the
same force then, which they have now, and if notwithstanding all these reasons,
God thought fit to forbid the worship of all Created Beings, it is ridiculous
to imagine, that these reasons should supersede the obligation of that Law,
which is made in contradiction to all such reasonings: as to show this brie^ly.

They prove, that we may pray to Saints and Angels to pray for us, because we
may desire good men on earth to pray for us. Now suppose we could not assign
the difference between praying to Saints in Heaven, and desiring the prayers of
Saints on earth, yet I would desire to know, whether good men did not pray for
one another, and desire each others prayers, before and after God gave this Law
on Mount Sinai, which forbids the Religious worship and invocation of any other
Being but himself: if good men did in all ages pray for one another, and desire
one another prayers, and God allowed and approved of this, then it seems God
did not think this a good reason for praying to Saints and Angels in Heaven,
because good men might beg each others prayers on earth, for if he had, he
would not have made that Law, which forbids such a Religious Invocation of any
Creature. And if notwithstanding this reason, which had as much force then, as
it has now, God made and promulged this Law, this reason can never repeal it,
nor dissolve the obligation of it.

Thus if the Saints and Angels being in Heaven be a good reason why they should
be worshipped, this was as good a reason at the giving of the Law, as it is
now; for tho we should suppose with the Church of Rome, that Saints departed
were not in Heaven then, yet certainly the Angels were, and if their being in
Heaven made them fit objects of our worship, why did God so expressly forbid it;
and if he forbad it then, when there was as much reason to allow the worship of
those heavenly Inhabitants, as there is now, this argument cannot prove, but
that God forbids it still.

The same may be said of the Intercession of Saints and Angels. The Papists
suppose, that the Saints and Angels pray and intercede for us in Heaven, and
obtain for, and convey many blessings to us, and therefore it is good and
profitable to pray to them, and to fly to their patronage; now though indeed
they date the Intercession of Saints, (as they do their admission into heaven)
from the Resurrection of our Savior, yet there is as much evidence for the
aids and intercessions of Angels before and under the Law, as there is now;
nay, I think somewhat more; for the government of the world was much more under
the administration of Angels, in the time of the Law, then it is now; and yet
notwithstanding this, God did by an express Law forbid the worship of any Being
but himself, and therefore of these Angelical powers, who are somewhat
superior to Saints in Heaven; and if this were no good reason against making
this Law, it can be no good reason to prove the abrogation of it.

2. The next way they take to evade the obligation of this Law of worshipping
God only, is by distinctions. As to name the chief of them.

They tell us, that this Law is only opposed to the worship of false Gods, such
Gods as the Heathens worshipped, not to the worship of Saints and Angels, who
are the Friends and Favorites of God.

And then they distinguish about the nature of worship; they confess there is a
worship which is peculiar to God, Supreme and Sovereign worship, which is
peculiar to the Supreme Being, and this, for what reason I know not, they call
Latria; but then there is an inferior degree of worship, which they call
Dulia, which may be given to excellent Creatures, to Saints and Angels, who
reign with Christ in Heaven.

They farther distinguish between absolute and relative worship. Absolute
worship is, when we worship a Being for its self, and thus God only is to be
worshipped; but relative worship is, when we worship one Being out of respect
to another, and thus we may worship Saints and Angels upon account of their
relation to God.

Now I shall have occasion to examine these distinctions more particularly
hereafter, my business at present is to examine, how far these distinctions can
justify the worship of Saints and Angels against an express Law, which
commands us to worship God only. And I have three things to say on this
argument. 1. That the letter of the Law will admit of no such distinctions as
these. 2. That the Scripture no where allows of any such distinctions, And 3.
That no distinctions can justify our acting against the letter of a Law, which
have not the same authority which the Law has.

1. The letter of the Law will admit of no such distinctious as these. The Law
is, 20 Exodus
Thou shall have none other Gods before me. The explication of this Law is,
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, 10 Deuteronomy. 20.
him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou cleave and swear by his name. Or
as our Savior expounds it, 4 Matthew 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Now these words do plainly exclude the worship of all other Beings besides the
Supreme God: They exclude indeed the worship of all the Heathen Gods, which
were at that time worshipped in the world, but they are not confined to the
worship of the Heathen Gods, nor merely to the worship of those Gods who were
at that time worshipped, but should any new Gods start up in after Ages, whether
among Jews or Christians, the words extend to all that are, and all that ever
shall be worshipped. Thou shall have none other Gods before Me, Signifies, that
we must worship no other Being but the Supreme God, for to have a God, is to
give religious worship to some Being; as appears from that exposition, which
both Moses and our Savior Christ gives of it. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve. For it is impossible to have any God
besides the Supreme God, in any other sense than as we worship some other
Being, besides the Supreme God, with Divine honors; and whatever Being we so
worship, become our God, and therefore this Law forbids the worship of any
Being, which is not God, be it Saint or Angel, or the Virgin Mary; how
excellent and perfect Creatures soever they be, they are not our God, and
therefore must not be worshipped. If we must worship and serve God only, as
our Savior expressly tells us, that we must worship no Creature whatever it be,
the worship of Saints and Angels is as expressly forbid by this Law, as the
worship of the Heathen Gods, for that Law which commands us to worship God
only, excludes the worship of all Creatures, whatever they be.

But may not the meaning of this Law be only this: That we must not give
Supreme and Sovereign worship to any other Being, but the Supreme God, but we
may give an inferior degree of worship to some excellent Spirits, who under
God have the care of us. And is not this plainly signified in the very letter
of the Law, when it says, Thou shall have none other Gods before me. For no
other worship makes any Being a God, but that which is Supreme and Sovereign,
peculiar and appropriate to the One Supreme God; and therefore not to have any
other Being for our God, is not to give Supreme and Sovereign worship to it.
Now what that worship is, which is peculiar and appropriate to the Supreme God,
I shall discourse particularly in the second part; our present inquiry is,
whether this Law makes any such distinction. The Laws says, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: Here is no distinction
between Supreme and Subordinate worship; whatever is an Act of worship must be
given to God only. But the Law says, Thou shall have no other gods before me,
and therefore it must signify Supreme and Sovereign worship, for no other
degree of worship makes a God. Did the Heathens then worship no inferior gods?
did those who worship ped so many several Gods, look upon them all as supreme
and absolute? or were they so senseless as to give supreme and sovereign
worship to inferior Deities? or does not this Law forbid the worship of those
Gods, whom the Heathens worshipped as inferior Demons, but only the worship
of those Gods, whom they accounted supreme and sovereign? If this Law forbids
the worship of all Heathen Gods, and it is certain, that they worshipped a
great many Gods, whom they did not account supreme, then there can be no place
for this distinction here, for such an inferior worship as makes an inferior
God, is as well forbid, as Supreme and Sovereign worship.

The Law says, Thou shall have none other Gods before me: or besides me; which
as I observed before, does not exclude the worship of the Supreme God, but
forbids the worship of any other Being together with him. The meaning is not,
Thou shall not renounce my worship, for the worship of any other Gods, but thou
shall worship me, and no other God besides me: now I would only ask this
question, Whether a Jew who worshipped the God of Israel, who declared himself
to be the Supreme God, could give Supreme worship to any other God? This is
contrary to the sense of all mankind, to worship him as supreme, whom they do
not believe to be supreme. And therefore when God forbad them to join the
worship of any other Gods with the worship of himself, he must forbid all kinds
and degrees of worship, even the most inferior worship, which the Heathens
paid to their inferior Deities.

If you say, that God did indeed forbid all kinds and degrees of worship to be
paid to the Heathen Gods, which were impure and wicked Spirits, but still it is
lawful to pay an inferior worship to Saints and Angels, who are the friends of
God. I answer, the law makes no distinction between the worship of good and bad
Spirits, and therefore as far as this Law is concerned, we must either deny
this inferior worship to all, or grant it to all. If this Law does not forbid
giving inferior degrees of worship to other Beings, then it does not forbid
the inferior worship of Heathen Gods; that may be faulty upon other accounts,
but is no breach of this Law, and then the Heathens were not guilty of Idolatry
in worshipping their inferior Demons with an inferior worship. If this Law
does forbid even this inferior degree of worship, then it forbids the worship
of good Spirits too, though with an inferior worship, which transforms true
Saints and Angels into false and fictitious Deities.

But I have another argument to prove, that this Law can have no respect to the
different degrees of worship. The Roman Doctors themselves grant, that the
difference between supreme and subordinate or inferior worship, does not
consist in the outward Act, that all or most of the external Acts of worship
may belong to both kinds, they except indeed Sacrifice, but contrary to the
sense of all men; for the Heathens offered Sacrifice to their inferior
Deities, as well as to the supreme; and there is no imaginable reason to be
assigned, why Sacrifice, as well as Prayer, may not be an act of inferior, as
well as of supreme worship. The difference then between supreme and inferior
worship, is only in the intention and devotion of the worshippers, and no man
can by the external act know whether this be supreme or inferior worship. Now
from hence I thus argue: if the worship forbidden by this Law be such, as can
be known by the external act, then this Law can have no regard to the degrees
of worship, for the degrees of worship are not in the external acts, but in the
mind of the worshipper, which cannot be known by external acts. Now that the
Law did forbid the external acts of worship, without any regard to the
intention of the worshipper, appears in this, that this Idolatrous worship was
to be punished with death, 13 Deuter. 6, 7. etc.
and therefore it must be such external Idolatry as falls under the cognizance
of humane Judicatures. Had there been any regard to the degrees of worship, no
man could have been convicted of Idolatry by the external act, and could not
have been liable to punishment, unless he had confessed his intention of giving
supreme worship to a false God, and so this Law of putting such Idolaters to
death had signified nothing, because it had been impossible for them to convict
any man of Idolatry, but by his own confession; but when the external act which
is visible to all men, is sufficient to convict any man of Idolatry, it is next
to a demonstration, that the Law had no respect to the degrees, but to the acts
of worship.

And that our Savior in that Law, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve, had no regard to the different degrees of worship, I
have already proved at large, for allowing that distinction, he had not given a
good answer to the Devils temptation.

Thus as for their distinction between absolute and relative worship, that
though we must not worship any Creature, the most excellent Saints and Angels,
for themselves, yet we may worship them upon account of that relation they have
to God; that is, we may worship them for Gods sake, though not for their own; I
find no intimation of any such distinction in the Law. We are there commanded
to have no other Gods, to worship God and him only, which excludes Saints and
Angels from being the object of our worship, as well as Devils.

2. But possibly it may be said, that though the Law takes no notice of such
distinctions, yet the Scripture in the explication of this Law may make
allowances for it. Now in answer to this, I only desire to know, where the
Scripture has made any such distinction between worshipping good and evil
Spirits, the enemies and Rivals, or the Friends of God, between supreme and
subordinate, absolute or relative worship; I can find no such distinctions in
Scripture, and I have a material reason to believe no such can be found, viz.
because there was no occasion for them. The Scripture nowhere allows us to
give any kind of worship to any Creature, and therefore there was no need to
distinguish between the kinds and degrees of worship.

The most material thing that can be said in this cause is this: that when the
Scripture mentions this Law of worshipping One God, it opposes it to the
worship of the false Gods of the Heathens; 6 Deuteronomy. 13, 14. 13 Deuteronomy. 7.
from whence some may conclude, that God forbade the worship only of these
false Gods. But we must consider, that the Law is conceived in such general
terms, as to exclude the worship of all Beings besides the Supreme God; but it
could not be thought, that God should at that time immediately apply this Law
against the worship of any other Beings, but those which were at that time
worshipped in the world. If God gives a Law, which forbids the worship of all
Beings besides himself; and particularly applies this Law to prohibit the
worship of all those Gods which were then worshipped in the world, will any one
in their wits hence conclude, that if the folly and superstition of men should
set up a new race and generation of Gods in after ages, that the worship of
these new Gods is not as well forbidden by this general Law, as the worship of
those gods which were worshipped at that time when this Law was given? if this
were true, possibly Pagan Rome it self was not guilty of Idolatry; for most, if
not all of their Gods might be of a later date than the giving the Law.

3. Now since no such distinctions as these appear in Scripture, it is
impossible they should justify the worship of Saints and Angels, which is so
expressly forbidden by the Law, if we will acknowledge them to be distinct
Beings from the Supreme God; for if they are not the Supreme God, we must not
worship them, for we must worship none but God. No distinctions can justify us
in this case, but such as God himself makes; for otherwise it were easy to
distinguish away any Law of God. Humane Laws will admit of no distinctions, but
such as they make themselves; for a distinction does either confine and
streighten, or enlarge the Law, and he who has power to distinguish upon a Law,
has so far power to make it. If the Law says, that we shall worship no other
Being besides God, and we have power; if we have but wit enough, to invent some
new distinctions, between the worship of good and bad spirits, between Supreme
and Subordinate, absolute and relative worship, this makes a new Law of it; for
it is one thing to say, thou shall worship God only, and quite contrary to say,
thou shall worship God only and good Spirits, God with a Supreme and absolute,
good Spirits with a subordinate and relative worship. This I think is
sufficient to show, that we must admit of no distinctions upon a Divine Law,
but what the Scripture it self owns, and therefore since those distinctions,
with which the Church of Rome justifies her worship of Saints and Angels, are
no where to be found in Scripture, they have no authority against an express
Law.

3. The next course the Papists take to justify their Creature-worship, in
contradiction to that Law, which expressly commands us to worship none but God,
is an appeal to such authorities, as they think sufficient to decide this
matter.

Now I shall not say much to this, for I believe all Mankind will acknowledge,
that no Authority less than Divine, can repeal a Divine Law; and therefore
unless God himself, or such persons as act by a Divine Authority, have repealed
this Law, no other Authority can do it. That Christ and his Apostles have not
repealed this Law, I have already proved, that the whole Church in after Ages
had any Authority to repeal this Law, I desire them to prove.

For the authority of the Church, as to the essentials of Faith and Worship, is
not the authority of Lawgivers, but of Witnesses. The Church never pretended
in former Ages to make or to repeal any Divine Laws, but to declare and
testify what the belief and practice of the Primitive and Apostolic Churches
was; and it is unreasonable to think, that they should have any such Authority;
for then Christ and his Apostles preached the Gospel to little purpose, if it
were in the power of the Church to make a new Gospel of it when they pleased.

But indeed could it appear, that the Apostles did teach the Christians of that
Age, and the Church in those Ages, which immediately succeeded the Apostles,
did practice the worship of Saints and Angels, we should have reason to
suspect, that we, and not they, are mistaken in the sense of that Law, which
commands us to worship none but God.

But then none can be admitted as competent witnesses of this matter, but those
who did immediately succeed the Apostles, or conversed with Apostolical men and
Churches. And thanks be to God, there is no appearance of Creature worship in
those Ages, we dare appeal to the testimony of Fathers and Councils for above
three hundred years; and those who come after, come a little too late to be
witnesses of what was done in the Apostolic Churches; especially, when all the
intermediate Ages knew nothing of it.

I shall not fill up this discourse with particular Citations, which learned
men know where to find; since the Roman Doctors can find nothing in the
Writings of the first Fathers to justify the worship of Saints and Angels, and
the Protestant Writers find a great deal in those Ages against it.

Indeed at the latter end of the fourth Century, some of the Fathers used some
Rhetorical Apostrophes to the Saints and Martyrs in their Orations, which the
Church of Rome interprets to be Prayers to them; See Bishops Ushers Answer to
the Jesuits Challenge.
but though other Learned men have vindicated those passages so far, as to show
the vast difference between them, and solemn and formal Invocations, which is
not my business at this time, yet there are several things very well worth our
observation toward the true stating of this matter. As,

1. That these Fathers came too late to be witnesses of the Apostolical
practice, which they could know no otherwise, than we might know it, if there
had been any such thing, viz. by the testimony and practice of the Church, from
the Apostles till that time: This was no where pretended by them, that the
Invocation of Saints had been the practice of the Catholic Church in all ages,
and they could have no proof of this, unless they had better Records of former
times, than we have at this day, and such as contradicted all the Records which
we now have of the Apostolic and Primitive Churches, and I believe few men
will be so hardy, as to assert this; and methinks there should be as few, who
are so credulous as to believe it, and I am sure, there is no man living who is
able to prove it.

2. Nay, the particular sayings of these Fathers, by which the Romanists prove
the Invocation of Saints, do not prove, that it was the Judgment and practice
of the Church of that age. They no where say, that it was, and it does not
appear to be so by any other Records. Let them show me any Council before, or
in those times, when these Fathers lived, that is in the fourth Century, which
decreed the worship of Saints and Angels. Let them produce any public offices
of Religion in those days, which allows this worship; and if no such thing
appears, those men must be very well prepared to believe this, who will without
any other evidence judge of the practice of the Church, only from some
extravagant flights of Poets and Orators: and if even in those days, the
worship of Saints was not received into the public offices of the Church,
methinks we may as well live without it still, and they must either grant, that
these Fathers, whose authority they allege, meant no such thing by these
Rhetorical flourishes, as they extract out of them, or else that they
introduced a new and unknown worship into the Christian Church; and then let
them prove, that some few Fathers of the fourth Century, without the public
authority of the Church, had authority enough of their own to change the object
of worship, contrary as the Church in former Ages, believed, to an express
Divine Law, which commands us to worship none but God.

3. Nay, I further observe, that these Fathers, whose authority is urged for
the invocation of Saints by the Church of Rome, do nowhere dogmatically and
positively assert the lawfulness of Praying to Saints and Angels, and many
Fathers of the same Age do positively deny the lawfulness of it, which is a
plain argument, that it was not the judgment and practice of the Church of
that Age, and a good reasonable presumptition, that these Fathers never
intended any such thing in what they said, how liable soever their words may be
to be expounded to such a sense.

Gregory Nazianzen, indeed in his Book against Julian the Apostate, speaks to
the Soul of Constantius, in this manner: Hear O thou Soul of great Constantius
(if thou have any sense of these things,) etc. But will you call this a Prayer
to Constantius? does this Father any where assert in plain terms that it is
lawful to pray to Saints departed? a hundred such sayings as these, which are
no Prayers to Saints, cannot prove the lawfulness of praying to Saints against
the constant Doctrine of the Fathers of that Age. Thus in his Funeral Oration
for his Sister Gorgonia, he bespeaks her to this purpose, that if she knew what
he was now a doing, Greg. Naz. Orat. 2. in Gorg.
and if holy Souls did receive this favor from God to know such matters as
these, that then she would kindly accept that Oration which he made in her
praise, instead of other Funeral Obsequies. Is this a Prayer to Gorgonia to
intercede for him with God? by no means! He only desires if she heard what he
said of her (which he was not sure she did) that she would take it kindly.
Whereas in that very Age the Fathers asserted, that we must pray only to God,
and therefore they define Prayer by its relation to God; Basil, Orat. in Julit.
Martyr. Greg. Naz. Orat. 1. de Oratione. Chrysostom. in Genes. Homil. 30. Aug. De
Civit Dei, l. 22. cap. 10.
That Prayer is a request of some good things, made by devout Souls to God,
that it is a conference with God, that it is a request offered with
supplication to God. Which is a very imperfect definition of Prayer, were it
lawful to pray to any other Being besides God.

St. Austin tells us, that when the names of the Martyrs were rehearsed in
their public Liturgies, it was not to invoke them, or pray to them, but only
for an honorable remembrance; nay, he expressly tells us, that the worship of
dead men, must be no part of our Religion, for if they were pious men, they do
not desire this kind of honor, but would have us worship God: honorandi ergo
sunt propter imitationem, Id. de vera religione, Cap. 55
non adorandi propter religionem, they are to be honored for our imitation,
not to be adored as an act of Religion.

The Council of Laodicea condemned the Worship of Angels; and so does
Theodoret, Oecumenius, and others of that Age. It is notoriously known, that
the Arrians were condemned as guilty of Idolatry for worshipping Christ, whom
they would not own to be the true God, though they owned him to be far exalted
above all Saints and Angels, and to be as like to God, as it is possible for
any Creature to be: and those who upon these Principles, condemned the worship
of the most perfect and excellent Creature, could never allow the worship of
Saints and Angels.

So that though the worship of Saints and Angels, did begin about this time to
creep into the Church, yet it was opposed by these pious and learned Fathers,
and condemned in the first and smallest appearances of it; which shows, that
this was no Catholic Doctrine and Practice in that Age, much less that it had
been so from the Apostles; and I think, after this time there was no authority
in the Church to alter the object of worship, nor to justify such an
Innovation as the worship of Saints and Angels, in opposition to the express
Law of God.

The sum of this Argument is this: Since there is an express Law against the
worship of any other Being besides the supreme God, the Lord Jehovah, which
never was expressly repealed, whatever plausible reasons may be urged for the
worship of Saints and Angels, they cannot justify us in acting contrary to an
express Law of God.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 53. Line 23. for repepealed, read repealed, p. 54. margin, for domini, r.
dominum, p. 59. l. 30. for last r. least,

A Catalogue of Books sold by Abel Swalle, at the Unicorn, at the West End of
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1685.
A Companion to the Temple: or, a Help to Devotion, in the use of the Common
Prayer. Divided in the four Parts. Part 1. Of Morning and Evening Prayer. Part.
2. Of the Litany, with the Occasional Prayers and Thanksgivings. Part. 3. Of
the Communion Office, with the Offices of Baptism, Cateohism and Comfirmation.
Part. 4. Of the Occasional Offices, viz. Matrimony, Visitation of the Sick*
etc. The whole being carefully corrected, and now put into one Volume. By Tho.
Comber, D. D. Folio.

Forty Sermons, whereof twenty one are now first published; the greatest part
of them Preached before the King, and on Solemn Occasions. By Rich. Allestry,
D. D. With an account of the Authors Life, in Folio.

The Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley, consisting of those which were formerly
Printed, and those designed for the Press, and now Published out of the Authors
Original Papers. The eighth Edition, in Folio.

The Second Part of the Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley; being what was written in
his younger years, and now Reprinted together. The fifth Edition.

The Case of Resistance of the Supreme Powers, Stated and Resolved, according
to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures. By William Sherlock, D. D. in Octavo.

A Vindication of the Rights of Ecclestastical Authority; being an Answer to
the First Part of the Protestant Reconciler. By William Sherlock, D. D. and
Master of the Temple, in Octavo.

Pet. Dan. Huetii de Interpretatione Libri 2. duo: quarum Prior est, de Optimo
Genere Interpretandi: Alter d^ Claris Interpret* etc. in Octavo.

The Case of Compelling Men to the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
considered. And Authority vindicated in it, by the Rules of the Gospel, and
from the Common and Popular Objections against it. By the Author of the Charge
of Scandal, omitted in the late Collection.

L. Coely Lac^ant^i Firmiani Opera que extant, ad fidem MS* S. recognita and
Commentariis* illustrata, a Tho. Spark, A. M. Oxonii e Theatr. Sheldoniano.

A Sermon Preached before the King at White Hall, November. 23. 1684. By Gilb.
Ironside, D. D. Warden of Wadham- College in Oxon, etc.


