A Practical DISCOURSE OF Religious Assemblies.

By WILL. SHERLOCK, D. D. Rector of St. George Botolph-lane, London.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard* M. DC. LXXXI.

The Preface. To his Beloved Parishioners, the Inhabitants of St. George
Botolph-lane, and St. Botolph-Billingsgate, Grace, Peace, and Truth, be
multiplied.
My Friends and Brethren,
I Hope we are all sensible of that great Account we must shortly give to God
of all our Actions, which obliges us, as we love our Souls, to take care, both
to know our Duty, and to practice it; neither to suffer our selves to be
biased by Interest, Prejudice, and Partiality in our Inquiries after Truth,
which is the common cause of many dangerous Mistakes in Religion; nor to be
overborn by any impetuous Lusts and Passions, to the neglect or violation of it.

That Relation I stand in to you, makes me concerned, as I love my own Soul, to
take care of yours; and tho there are many Men fitted with greater Abilities
for the discharge of so weighty an Office; yet I thank God, I cannot charge my
self with any wilful neglect, either in informing my self, or instructing you.
I am as careful as I can not to mistake my self, and resolvedly honest not to
conceal any part of your Duty from you, tho in this Age plain and free dealing
meets with no great encouragement.

The greatest hindrance I have in the exercise of my Ministry among you is,
That many of you, who are as much bound to attend my Instructions, as I am to
instruct you, and must as certainly give an account of your neglect, as I must
of mine, do yet either wholly, or in part, withdraw your selves from your
Parish Church, and make it in that way impossible for me to discharge this Duty
to you.

And therefore that I might not be wholly wanting in my Duty to you, I have
sent this little Book to wait on you at your Houses, and to invite you to our
Communion, to convince you of the evil of such a Neglect, and to remove those
Mistakes and Prejudices which have kept you at a distance.

And since some of you, who do not forsake my Ministry, are yet guilty of other
Neglects, which are of very dangerous consequence, especially the neglect of
the Holy Supper of our Lord, I have here admonished you of your Duty, and
offered the most prevailing Considerations, I could think of, to persuade you
to it.

And now I hope you cannot take it ill, if I endeavored to make this
Discourse, which was designed for your Instruction, as generally useful as
might be, and took a larger scope than I hope had been necessary, had it been
calculated only for your private use; since I would not have you, nor the World
think, that I charge you with all those Faults and Miscarriages which I there
reprove; but there are too many, who are called Christians, guilty of them all,
and possibly this Book may fall into the hands of some such Men; and if it
does, I pray God they may find the benefit of such plain, but seasonable
Instructions.

But whatever other Men do, I think, I may in reason and justice expect from
you, that you will vouchsafe to read and consider this Discourse. I have
contrived it to be as plain and easy as I could; but yet I fear some things may
not be fitted to every Capacity; for as there are different degrees of Knowledge
among Men, so I did not scrupulously confine my self to the lowest, being, as
St. Paul speaks, A Debtor to all Men, to the Wise, and to the Unwise; And
therefore if any of you find any thing above your reach, do not presently fling
the Book away, for you will find those things, which are of most general
concernment, fitted to very ordinary Understandings.

If you meet with any thing, which you may think sharp or severe, God is my
Witness, that I have no design to anger any Man in it, and therefore have
carefully avoided all unnecessary Severities; but there are some severe Truths,
which yet must in many cases be spoken, if we would do any good: And those
Patients who will not endure the severity of a Cure, must perish under more
gentle Remedies.

I only beg this requital of my pains and care of you, That if you have any
Objections against what is offered, if you meet with any thing you do not
understand, you would consult me in it; if you are offended at any thing, let
me know it first, before you publish it to others: and if you have nothing to
oppose, have a care of resisting the Evidence of Truth, but comply with your
Duty, and rejoice that you are delivered from any Mistakes. I beseech God give
you a good understanding in all Things, and Hearts obedient to the Truth, and
preserve you blameless until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Which is the hearty prayer of Your faithful Friend and Servant in the Gospel
of Christ, W. Sherlock.

THE CONTENTS.
The Introduction.
OF Religion in general, Page 1 What Religious Worship is, Page 3 Of Public
Worship, and the danger of forsaking public Assemblies, Page 4 The difference
between Schisms in the Church, and from the Church, Page 7 The difference
between Schism and Heresy, Page 9 What is a public Assembly for Religious
Worship, Page 15 A Scheme of the Design of the following Treatise, Page 17 The
seasonableness of this Discourse, Page 18 Some Objections against it answered,
Page 20
Part I.
Chapter 1.
Section 1.
COncerning Speculative Atheists, Page 28 The Inclinations of Humane Nature to
Religious Worship, Page 29 What natural Inclinations are not owing to
education, Page 30 Inclination to Religious Worship natural, and yet Idolatry
and Polytheism not the Voice of Nature, Page 32 How natural Inclinations to
Religion, prove the natural Notions of God imprinted on Men's minds, Page 35 To
scoff at Religion, is contray to good Manners, an affront to humane Nature, to
the Wisdom and Authority of Government, and to the wisdom of Philosophers, Page
40 To scoff at Religion, exposes such Scoffers to contempt, Page 42 To deride
Religion, is contrary to Men's Interest, as being injurious to public
Societies, Page 45 To affront God, more dangerous than mere Atheism, Page 46
Tho Religion were a mistake, yet it is no ridiculous thing, Page 48 Atheists
should not wholly forsake Religious Assemblies, Page 50 Non intermeddle in the
Disputes of Religion, Page 52
Section 2.
Concerning the Practical Atheist, Page 53 Irreligion as great an affront to
God as Atheism, Page 54 Not to worship is great injustice, Page 56 Irreligion
the most sordid Ingratitude, Page 65 Our Baptismal Vow an Obligation to
Religious Worship, Page 73
Section 3.
The danger of Irreligion, both with respect to this World and the next, Page
82 The folly of Irreligion, Page 91 A serious Exhortation to take care of our
Souls, Page 98 Every part of Religious Worship fitted to the Wants and
Necessities of our Souls, Page 99 The care of our Souls our greatest
concernment, Page 104

CHAP. II.
COncerning Public Worship, Page 110 Public Worship to be preferred before
private, tho it were not expressly commanded by God, Page 111 Public Worship a
greater honor to God than private Devotions, Page 116 External Worship must be
public, Page 118 God is a public Benefactor, and therefore public Worship is
due to him, Page 120 Public Worship instituted by God under the Law, Page 122
And by Christ under the Gospel, the true Notion of a Church requires it, Page
125 This proved from the nature of Christian Communion and Sacraments, Page 126
The same proved from the Institution of the Gospel Ministry, and the power of
the Keys, Page 130 And from the public profession of Christianity, Page 133
And from the Duty of Princes, to encourage and propagate Religion, Page 134
CHAP. III.
Section 1.
COncerning those who plead Conscience for Separation, and set up distinct
Communions of their own, Page 138 Some Inquiries, with reference to their
honesty and sincerity in this Matter, Page 139 1. Whether they separate upon
true Principles of Conscience; the difference between private Opinion and
Conscience, and the use of this Distinction, ibid 2. Whether they consider the
great Evil of Schism, Page 151 3. Whether they believe our Communion to be
unlawful, Page 156 4. How they came to think our Communion unlawful, Page 156
5. Whether they ever impartially examined the Reasons of their Separation, Page
170 6. How they behave themselves toward their Governors, Page 184

Section 2.
Some general Considerations, in order to remove those Prejudices which some
have entertained against the Worship of the Church of England, Page 188 1. From
the Nature of God, Page 190 2. From the Nature of Christian Religion, Page 193
3. From the Example of our Savior, Page 207 4. From the practice of the
Apostles, and the first and best Churches, Page 208

Section 3.
An answer to some popular Cavils, Page 215 Concerning Will Worship, Page 216
Concerning Superstition, Page 222 The Church of England charged with Idolatry,
Page 235 And with Popery, Page 236


PART. II.
CHAP. I. COncerning Parochial Communion, CHAP. II. Concerning irreverence in
Worship, 267 CHAP. III. Concerning the neglect of the public. Prayers of the
Church, 281 CHAP. IV. Concerning the public administration of Baptism, 289
CHAP. V. Concerning the public instruction of Youth, 296 CHAP. VI. Concerning
the great neglect of the Lord's Supper.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 26, read Apollos. P. 9. l. 13. r. and that none. P. 18. l. 15. r.
that they either. P. 50. l. 14. f. we, r. be. P. 105. l. 18. r. you will. P. 124.
l. 26. r. who. P. 164. l. 9. r. fell. P. 185. l. 2. r. them. P. 208. l. 6. r.
so. P. 212. l. 11. f. if, r. that. P. 219. l. 24. r. now though. P. 224. l. 12,
13. r. difficult. P. 230. l. 5. r. had. P. 331. l. 18. f. rule, r. rite. P.
346. l. 28. f. truth, r. faith.

A Practical Discourse OF Religious Assemblies.
The INTRODUCTION.
1. Containing a short Account of the nature of Christian Assemblies for
Public Worship. 2. A Scheme of the Design of this following Treatise. 3. The
seasonableness of such a Discourse.

1. RELIGION is the greatest Concernment of Mankind, both with respect to this
life and the next; and the Worship of God is the most excellent part of
Religion, as having GOD, the most excellent Being, for its immediate Object:
This is the Work and constant Employment of Angels, and blessed Spirits in
Heaven, who see the Face of God, dwell in his Presence, admire his essential
Glory, and infinite Perfections, and sing Eternal Hallelujah's to Him. When we
come to Heaven, we shall have no unruly Passions and Appetites to govern; and
tho our Souls shall be transformed into a pure Flame of Divine Love, yet there
will be no place for the laborious exercise of Charity, in pitying and
relieving one another; where all the Inhabitants shall be perfectly happy in
the enjoyment of the most perfect Good.

Indeed in this World Temperance and Charity are no Christian Virtues, but as
they are acts of Worship; that is, as they flow from a great sense of God, and
veneration for him: for God is the sole Object of Religion; and to be sober,
and to be charitable upon some meaner Considerations, without any respect to
God, as the last end of all, is to serve our selves or our Friends, or to
follow the inclinations of our nature, but is not properly the Service of God.

Whatsoever we do out of a just sense of God, is in some respects an act of
Worship; for it is to honor the Deity, which may as effectually be done by
actions, as by words; verbal praises are of no value with God, are mere
lip-labor and formal complements, when they are alone, and produce no
answerable effects in our lives. This is what the Apostle calls, a form of
Godliness, without the power of it. Religion is nothing else but such a vital
sense of God, as excites in us devout affections, and discovers it self in a
divine and heavenly Conversation.

But yet that which we more strictly call Worship, is the most visible and
solemn expression of our Honor for God, when we lift up our hearts, and our
eyes and hands to God in Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings; and when it is
sincere and hearty, has a powerful influence upon the government of our Lives:
For what sincere Worshipper can be so void of all fear of God, as to break his
Laws, and contemn his Authority, and despise his Judgments? and therefore that
vain and hypocritical semblance of Religion, wherewith some bad Men deceive
themselves, and flatter God, is called the form of Godliness without the power,
it being only an external imitation of Religious Worship, without that powerful
sense of God, which governs the Lives of truly devout and pious Men.

And as the Worship of God is the most excellent part of Religion, which has
the most universal and most powerful influence upon our Lives: So public
Worship is the most excellent Worship, as you shall hear more hereafter. Indeed
the right and power of holding Public Assemblies for Worship, is the
fundamental right of the Church, whereon all Church Authority depends, as has
been well observed and proved by a Mr. Thorndyke's right of Christian
Assemblies.
Learned Man of our Church. The Power of the Keys signifies no more, than
Authority to take in, and to shut out of the Church; the first is done by
Baptism, the second by Church Censures, the highest of which is
Excommunication, which debarreth Men from all parts of Christian Communion.

And therefore the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, makes forsaking
Christian Assemblies, either to be an Apostasy from Christianity, as it was in
those days, or at least a fair step toward it: he exhorts those to whom he
writ, to hold fast the profession of their Heb. 10. v. 23.
Faith without wavering; that is, to continue firm and steadfast in the
profession of Christianity, and in order to this, gives them this Caution, Not
forsaking the assembling of themselves together, as the manner of some is, but
exhorting one another, and so much the more as you see the day approaching.
Which at least supposes, that to forsake the Assemblies of Christians, does
greatly dispose Men to a final Apostasy, as appears from the following verses,
wherein he urges the great danger of Apostasy, which had been nothing to his
purpose, had not separation at least been the beginning of it: But if we sin
wilfully after that we Verse. 26, 27, 28, 29.
have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for
Sin, but a certain fearful looking for of Vengeance, and fiery Indignation,
which shall devour the Adversary. He that despised Moses' s Law, died without
mercy under two or three Witnesses; of how much sorer punishment shall he be
thought worthy, that trampleth under foot the Son of God, and has counted the
Blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has
done despite unto the Spirit of Grace?

The truth is, whoever carefully examines the state of the
Apostolical-Churches, according to that account we find of them in the Writings
of the Apostles, (and I may add of the succeeding Ages) from the report of the
most Primitive and Apostolical Fathers, will find, that none but Apostates from
Christianity (by Apostates, not meaning those who wholly renounced the Name and
Profession, but those who renounced the Truth of Christian Doctrine) actually
separated from the Communion of the Church.

There were Schisms and Divisions in the Church of Corinth, which S. Paul 1
Cor. 1. 12.
reproves them for; but we do not find that they actually separated into
distinct Communions, but contended amongst themselves about the preference of
several Apostles, which of them was greatest; Every one of you says, I am of
Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas (or Peter) and I of Christ. And this
seems to be the Case in the second Schism of Corinth, in the time of Clemens
Romanus, who writ a Letter to them in the name of the Church of Rome,
persuading them to Peace, Unity, and Order.

But besides these Schisms in the Church, (which S. Paul makes a great sign of
carnality; For are ye not carnal? 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4.
for whereas there is among you Envying, and Strife, and Divisions, are ye not
carnal, and walk as Men? For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am
of Apollos, are ye not carnal?

There were also Schisms from the Church; as we learn from St. Paul's Epistle
to Timothy; For of this sort are 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7, 8.
they who creep into Houses, (who kept Secret and Clandestine Meetings) and
lead captive silly Women, laden with Sins, led away with diverse Lusts; ever
learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth. Now as Iannes
and Iambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the Truth: that is, they
opposed themselves against the Apostles of Christ, who were the only Teachers
of the true Religion; and were that to the Christian Church, which Moses was to
the Jews. Which plainly signifies that they set themselves up against the
Apostles, and gathered Churches in opposition to them.

Of such Separatists St. John speaks* whom he calls Antichrists; they went out
1 John 2. 18, 19.
from us, because they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would
no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that it might be made
manifest, that they were not all of us. Where the Apostle expressly affirms,
that they went out from them, that is, forsook the Christian Assemblies: by
which he proves, that they were not of them, i. e. that they did not belong to
the same Body and Society, but had entertained such Doctrines, as were
destructive to the Christian Faith, for otherwise they would not have separated
from the Christian Church.

Now this necessarily supposes, that Christian Communion is so indispensible a
Duty, that no Man can causlesly separate from the Christian Church, without at
least bringing his Christianity into question; that nothing can reasonably
tempt Men to a Separation, but their renouncing some great Article of the
Christian Faith, nor can any thing justify a Separation, but such Corruptions,
as destroy the Faith once delivered to the Saints; for otherwise there had bin
no force in the Apostle's Argument to prove that they were corrupt in the Faith
from their Separation; They went out from us, because they were not of us: for
if they had been of us, no doubt they would have continued with us. So that tho
we should grant, that Schism (as Dr. Owen earnestly contends) signifies no more
than Divisions and Contentions among the Members of the same Church, without
the breach of Church Communion, and therefore Separatists are not properly
Schismatics. I know not what he gains by this, when Separation in the Apostles
days was looked upon as a much greater evil than Schism, and yet none but
Heretics, or Apostates from the Truth of Christian Doctrine, were in those
days guilty of it; and if the Apostle's Argument holds good, a sinful and
causless Separation can never be owned without some degree of Apostasy.

It is to no great purpose to dispute the signification of words, when the
difference between things is plain and notorious. But yet there seems to be a
manifest difference in Scripture between Schism and Heresy: the first being
commonly applied to signify those Divisions which were among Christians in the
same Communion; the second, if not always, yet chiefly applied to signify
Separation from the Church: for (...) properly signifies a Sect, or Party, and
(...) a Sectarian. Thus Christianity it self, when the Christians united into a
distinct Church-Society, was called Heresy, or a new Sect, and Acts 24. 14. and
28. 22. and 24. 5. and 5. 17. and 15. 5.
the Sect of the Nazarens. Thus we read of the Sect of the Sadduces, and the
Sect of the Pharisees, where the word (...) or Heresy is always used.

Now tho these different Sects among the Jews did not separate into distinct
Assemblies for Worship, but all worshipped at the Temple, (as even the
Christian Jews did, while the Temple stood, as appears from what happened to
St. Paul at Jerusalem, the last time he Acts 21. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
went thither) yet they were distinguished by different Opinions, Rites and
Usages, and Schools; and, which is usually the effect of such Distinctions, by
different Interests and Affections. And, in allusion to those Jewish Sects,
these Differences amongst Christians, which did not break forth into open
Separation, but occasioned great sidings and Parties, and Heats and
Animosities, were indifferently called Schisms, or Heresies. 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19.
Gal. 5. 20.
Thus St. Paul joins Hatred, Variance, Wrath, Seditions, Heresy.

But then there were another sort of Heresies, which always ended in
Separation; for such Men were always either cast out of the Church, or
separated themselves. Such are those which St. Peter calls Damnable Heresies,
whom 2 Pet. 2. 1.
he compares with the fallen Angels, and the old World, which was destroyed
with a Deluge of Water; and Sodom and Gomorrah, whom he calls presumptuous, v.
4, 5, 6.
self-willed, and that are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities; that is, who
did wilfully and obstinately oppose the Apostles of Christ, who were invested
with his Authority, answerable to the Sin of those in the Jewish Church, who v.
10.
set themselves up against Moses and Aaron, and reproached the Rulers of Exodus
22. 28.
the People; and it is expressly called, -- doing presumptuously, not to hearken
to Acts 23. 4, 5.
the Priest, that stands to minister before Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
the Lord. And therefore these Men are said, to have forsaken the right way,
and 2 Pet. 2. 15.
are gone astray. And whoever compares this Chapter with St. Iude's Epistle,
will find that St. Peter and S. Jude speak of the same Men, for their
Characters do exactly agree; and of them S. Jude tells us, these be they who
separate themselves Jude, v. 19.
sensual, having not the Spirit. And thus in the first Ages of Christianity, no
Men ever separated from the Communion of the Church, but such gross Heretics,
the several Sects of Gnostics, of whom Irenaeus and Epiphanius give us a large
and particular account; and for this reason the name Heresy, which properly
signifies a Sect or Separation, came to be applied to corrupt and Heretical
Doctrines, which in those days were the only cause of Separations.

And we may find some remains of this ancient and original use of these words
in after-ages; for though Schism commonly was used in Church-Writers to signify
Separation from Church Communion, and Heresy to signify false Doctrine; yet
separation from the Christian Church, though it were only ocasioned upon a
Dispute about Discipline, without any other error in matters of Faith, was
called Heresy; Thus St. Cyprian I remember calls the Schism of Novatianus
[Haereticam Pravitatem] Heretical Impiety; and in answer to that question of
Antonianus, Quam Haeresin ( Novatianus) introduxisset, What Heresy Novatianus
was the Author of? he alleges nothing but the breach of the Peace and Unity of
the Church, and says, That we ought not curiously Scias nos primo in loco, nec
curiosos esse debere, quid ille doceat, cum foris doceat, quisquis ille est,
and qualiscunque est, Christianus non est, qui in Christi Ecclesia non est.
Cypr. ad Anton. Epist. 52.
to enquire, what he teaches, who is out of the Church; for whatever he be, he
is no Christian, who is not in the Church of Christ. And thus Felicissimus and
his adherents are called Haeretica Factio, an Heretical Cyp. Ep. 39.
Faction; though the Schism was occasioned only by a Dispute of Discipline,
concerning the restoring the Lapsed to the Peace and Communion of the Church.
So that in St. Cyprian's time Separation from the Church, without any other
Error in the Fundamentals of Faith, was called Heresy.

And though Heresy did most frequently signify corrupt Doctrine, yet a mere
error in Doctrine was not thought a complete formal Heresy, without such
Wilfulness and Obstinacy as ended in Separation. And therefore St. Austin
describes Heretics to be Qui ergo in Ecclesia Christi morbidum aliquid
pravumque sapiunt, si correpti ut sanum rectumque sapiant, resistunt
contumaciter, suaque pestifera and mortifera dogmata emendare nolunt, sed
defensare persistunt; Haeretici fiunt, and for as exeuntes, habentur in
exercentibus inimicis, etc. Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 51.
those, who hold some false and corrupt Doctrines, and when they are reproved,
in order to reduce them to truth and sobricty of Judgment, do obstinately
resist, and refuse to correct their poisonous and damnable Opinions, but
persist in defending them. Thus they become Heretics, and going out of the
Church, become its enemies, etc. And this I take to be the meaning of this
Father in that famed Saying, Errare possum, Hereticus esse nolo; though he
might err, yet he would not be an Heretic; that is, that he would not so
obstinately persist in the defense of any private Opinion in opposition to the
received Doctrine of the Christian Church, as to break the Communion of the
Church upon that account.

Now if this were the Case, that besides those Divisions among Christians in
the same Communion, which are called Schisms by St. Paul, there were formal
Separations from the Church, of a much more heinous nature, which none in those
days were guilty of, but those who renounced the purity of the Christian
Doctrine; if such Separations were always condemned in the Primitive Church, as
Heresy and Apostasy from Christianity, though such Separatists were not guilty
of any fundamental See the Inquiry into the original of Evangelical Churches,
chap. 11. page 231.
Error in Doctrines of Faith, I see not what Dr. Owen gains, by proving that
Separation is no Schism, when it appears to be a much greater evil.

And indeed if the Doctor will allow Schism to be a great evil, when it
signifies no more than Contentions and Quarrels in a Church, any one would
reasonably think that Separation from a Church should be a much greater Evil:
for Contentions and Quarrels are then come to their height and perfection,
when they make Friends, Brethren, and Confederates part company; and it seems
strange that less Quarrels should be a greater Evil than greater Quarrels,
unless he thinks it is with Schism, as under the Law it was in the case of
Leprosy, that when the whole Body was overspread with it, the Leper was
pronounced clean.

But the most material Inquiry here is, What is a Public Assembly for
Religious Worship? for our Dissenters meet as publicly now, as the Church of
England, and therefore cannot be charged with forsaking Christian Assemblies;
and in times of Persecution the Primitive Christians met very privately in
small numbers, or in the night, or very early in the morning, to avoid the
discovery of their Persecutors, and yet such private and clandestine Meetings
were not really Conventicles, but public Church Assemblies. Which is a plain
Proof, that it is not numbers, nor meeting openly and publicly which makes a
Church-Assembly, but holding such Assemblies by the Public Authority of the
Church, and in union with it: As in the State, when a great many People meet
together without Public Authority, it is a Riot, not a Legal Assembly.

Public Places of Worship, allowed by the Public Authority of the Church, is
one thing which makes the Assemblies of Christians public: For the Dr. Cave's
Primit. Christianity, par. 1 chapter 7. p. 171.
Primitive Christians allowed no separate Assemblies, no Congregations but what
met in the public Church; and therefore we find an express Canon in the
Council of Gangra, That if any shall Council. Gang. Can. 6.
take upon him out of the Church privately to preach at home, and making light
of the Church, shall do those things, which belong only to the Church, without
the presence of the Priest, and the leave and allowance of the Bishops, let him
be Accursed.

So that Public Worship is that Worship which is performed in Public
Churches, or, in case of necessity, in other places, by the allowance and
appointment of the Public Authority of Church and State, and Separate
Meetings, which have no such allowance and authority, must be Schismatical
Conventicles, unless they can prove the lawfulness and necessity of such a
Separation; for indeed nothing can make a Separation lawful, but what makes it
necessary.

II. This following Treatise consists of two Parts: the first concerns those,
who wholly, or for the most part absent themselves from the Public Assemblies
of Christians; and these are of three sorts: 1. Those who forsake Religious
Assemblies out of profaneness, for want of a due sense of any Religion, or in
contempt of it. 2. Those who forsake Religious Assemblies for want of a due
sense of the necessity and advantage of Public Worship; who do not go to
Church, because they think they can worship God as well at home in their
Closets or Families. 3. Those who plead Conscience for their Separation, and
set up distinct Communions of their own.

The second Part is designed to correct some great Miscarriages in Public
Worship, which some, who profess to live in Communion with the Church of
England, are too notoriously guilty of. Such as these:

1. The forsaking the Communion of their Parish Churches without just cause for
it. 2. Irreverence in Worship. 3. The neglect of a due attendance on the
public Prayers of the Church. 4. The neglect of the Public Administration of
Baptism. 5. That they neglect or refuse to submit their Children and Servants
to Public Instructions. 6. That either never receive the Lord's Supper, or
very rarely.
III. The very naming these things, must needs convince all Men, who have any
sense of Religion, how seasonable this Discourse is; for there was never any
Age wherein there was more need of it. And since Religion has so great an
influence upon the government of Men's Lives, the neglect or miscarriage of
Public Worship does not only tend to corrupt Men's Manners, but has a very ill
aspect upon Public Affairs.

I confess it is a very ill time for any Man, who prefers his own Ease and
Quiet, before the Service of God and of Religion, to put forth to Sea in such a
Storm and Hurricane; when the passions of men are in such a ferment, that they
are hardly capable of cool thoughts, and impatient of the gentlest Reproof and
Opposition; the most charitable Designs are misconstrued, and nicknamed; and
whoever endeavors to convince Men of their Mistakes, how careful soever he be
to avoid all just occasion of offense, is either a Railer, or a Persecutor.

But these things, I thank God, do not much affect me, and shall never affright
me from any part of my Duty; I value a good Name as much as other Men, but am
contented to be reproached for the sake of my Lord and Master, who was Himself
reproached and vilified by Scribes and Pharisees.

But that which, I suppose, will be thought most unseasonable at this time, is
what concerns the Dissenters from our present Establishment; for this is now
upon all occasions urged, and thought a sufficient Answer to all such
Discourses.

But can it be thought unseasonable to persuade Men not to forsake Christian
Assemblies, when it is grown so general a practice, that many have lost all
sense of the evil of it? Is it not a fit season for the applications of the
Physician, when the Patient is dangerously sick of a mortal distemper?

Thanks be to our good God, we still enjoy the Opportunities of Public
Worship, and therefore have opportunity also of persuading and exhorting Men to
return to the Communion of the Church: How effectual indeed such Exhortations
may be at such a time we cannot tell; success in these matters does not so much
depend upon the fittest season, as upon the Grace of God, and the good temper
of the Ground where the Seed falls, as our Savior tells us in the Parable of
the Sower, Matthew. 13. However, in case of necessity, a thing must be done when
and as it may; and I think there never was greater necessity for this
Exhortation than in our days.

But that which I perceive makes some Men think it so unseasonable at this time
to persuade Men to return to the Communion of the Church of England, is,
because they are either in great hope to pull down the Church of England, or at
least to open the Door a little wider, to let those in, who are now excluded by
some scruples of Conscience, about some indifferent Rites and Ceremonies used
in our Worship.

As for the first of these, I wish with all my Soul, that such seasonable
Exhortations as these may prove very unseasonable for their Designs, that it
may bring Men to their Wits, and make them consider what they are a doing, when
they go about to pull down the best Church in the World. It may be very
unseasonable indeed for them, but it would be a very unseasonable and
despicable piece of Folly and Modesty for all those who favor Sion, to stand
still and say nothing, while they accomplish their Designs, and bring their
wicked Devices to pass.

As for the second sort, who only desire to see the Church Doors a little
wider, to receive more honest and devout Men into our Communion, I cannot
imagine why they should conceive such Exhortations unseasonable at this time:
for, are they afraid that such Discourses should so far satisfy all Men in our
Communion, that there should be no need of any alteration? Truly I have no
great hopes to see such blessed effects of the wisest and most convincing
Discourses; and if such a thing ever should be, certainly no good men would be
troubled at it, since the great End they designed, viz. To see all Men return
to the Communion of the Church, would be as effectually obtained; and it is
much more desirable to see Men rectify their own Mistakes, than to alter
wholesome Constitutions, wherein there is always great danger, and very seldom
any great success, witness the miserable Confusions of the last Age.

Or do they think it impossible to vindicate the Church of England from unjust
Imputations, to wipe off that dirt, which is cast upon her by her inveterate
Enemies, to discover the evil and danger of Schism and Separation, without
obstinately adhering to every Punctilio, and opposing all reasonable
Condescentions to the weakness or ignorance of others? I am sure there is no
consequence in this, and it is a great Argument that they censure and revile
Men before they know them.

We know how to distinguish between the lawfulness and necessity of things,
between some less material Circumstances of Worship, and the Peace and
Communion of the Christian Church. Possibly the most zealous and most learned
Defenders of the Church, are most ready to any Reasonable Compliances,
whenever Authority shall see fit. We have a late Instance of it in an
excellent Person, than whom possibly Dr. Stillingfl. Unreasonableness of
Separation.
no Man ever writ better for the Church, nor ever hinted more reasonable and
equal Proposals in the behalf of Dissenters.

The truth is, it is as absolutely necessary to dispose Men's minds to Peace and
Union by good Arguments, and pious and earnest Exhortations, as it is for
Public Authority to relax the Terms of Communion, to give ease to some
doubting and scrupulous Consciences; for while Men have such superstitious
Conceits, that God is either pleased or displeased with doing or not doing some
indifferent things in themselves considered; with wearing or not wearing a
Surplice, or using or not using the Cross in Baptism: when Men think that God
will be angry with them for doing that, which he has no where forbid; and that
we must do nothing in the external Ministries of Religion, but what he has
expressly commanded, (and then I confess I do not see how we can perform any one
Duty of external Worship with a safe Conscience, how we can pray either with or
without a Form, since neither of them is commanded in Scripture, as the
external circumstances of no one Duty are that I know of) I say, while Men have
such wild unpracticable Notions in their Heads, which when they are pursued to
their last Issue, overthrow all manner of external Order and Government in the
Church, and end in all the Confusions of Quakerism, it is a vain thing to talk
of Comprehensions and Concessions.

And while Men have no sense at all of the evil of Schism and Separation, but
think it as innocent a thing to set up Church against Church, as to go from one
Parish Church to another; it is evident that they will never desire to return
to the Union of the Church, who have no sense what a necessary duty Christian
Communion is, and what a damning Sin Schism is: and therefore whoever does
sincerely and cordially desire to see all sober Christians united in the same
Communion, must earnestly exhort, persuade, and convince, as well as yield and
comply.

The common Danger we are all in from the growing Power, and secret
Conspiracies of the Popish Faction, makes all Men acknowledge the necessity,
and call aloud for Union. Our Dissenters, who never did, nor are ever likely to
unite in any thing, but their Cries against Popery, and their Designs of
pulling down the Church of England, think this a convenient opportunity to
accomplish their Ends, and have been very busy to libel Church and Churchmen,
to say nothing now of the State: this has put many worthy Sons of the Church
(who are impatient to hear their Mother reviled and slandered) upon the
defensive part, to vindicate the Reformation of our Church from their rude
Calumnies, and yet to express their readiness to comply and unite upon such
Terms, when ever Public Authority shall see fit, as would not utterly destroy
our Constitution. The first they have done beyond the possibility of a sober
Reply; and how fruitless their Charity is in attempting the second, the
Dissenters themselves will convince all men, who cannot patiently hear of any
other terms of Concord, but the extirpation of the corrupt and Antichristian
Church of England. I am not ambitious to thrust my self into this Scuffle, and
therefore do not appear as a Disputant, but make a close and serious
Application to the Consciences of Men, which I hope, when the heat of
Disputation is a little over, may prove a more powerful conviction to all
well-meaning Men, than the best and most unanswerable Reasons have hitherto
done.

PART. I.
Concerning those who wholly forsake Religious Assemblies.

CHAP. I.
Containing an Address and Exhortation to those, who have no sense at all of
Religion, or that Obligation which lies on them to worship God, and take care
of their Souls.

SECT. I.
Some Proposals made to the Speculative Atheist. 1. That they would once more
consider, what strong and almost invincible Inclinations, there are in Humane
Nature to the Worship of God. 2. That they would not publicly affront
Religion. 3. That they would not wholly forsake Religious Assemblies. 4. That
they would not intermeddle in the Disputes and Controversies of Religion.

FIrst, I shall begin with those who withdraw themselves from Christian
Assemblies out of profaneness, for want of any due sense of Religion, or that
Obligation which lies on them to worship God, and to take care of their own
Souls: And there are two sorts of these Men, first the Speculative; secondly,
the Practical Atheist.

First, The Speculative Atheist, who denies the being of God, and therefore
must of necessity despise his Worship; for that which is not, cannot be the
Object of our Love or Fear, or Religious Adorations. Those indeed who do not
believe that there is a God, may in prudence conceal their Atheism, and comply
with the custom of their Country, in performing all the External Acts of
Worship; but yet few Atheists have so much Wit, or good breeding, as not to
affront the universal Belief and Practice of Mankind.

Now I shall not at present dispute the Case with these Men, nor attempt to
convince them of their great Folly and Madness in not worshipping God, by
proving that there is a God who ought to be worshipped. This requires a larger
Discourse than my present Design will allow, and has been already done more
than once, with all the advantages of Reason and Learning, by much better Pens;
and therefore I shall only make three or four very fair and reasonable
Proposals to them.

First, That they would once more seriously consider, what strong and almost
invincible Inclinations there are in Humane Nature to the Worship of God. I do
not argue now from Natural Notions and Anticipations, or those common Maxims
and Principles of Reason, which are found in all Mankind, because the Atheist
tells us, That these are only the Principles of our Education, and we should
never have had such Conceits and Fancies in our Heads, if we had not been
taught them; though it is a hard thing to give an account, how these Principles
should first come to be entertained in the World; who taught them the first
Man; and how he came so readily to believe them, and so carefully to propagate
them to Posterity; and it seems strange, how Mankind should so universally
assent to such Principles, as the Being of God and a Providence, etc. if at
least they are not extremely agreeable to the Make and Frame of our Minds,
though we should suppose them not to be Natural Notions.

But, I say, to let pass this now, I shall only desire these Men to consult a
little with the Inclinations of Nature; which are not the Effects of Reason and
Discourse, but Natural Impressions, the necessary Efforts, Impetus, and
Tendencies of Nature, as a Stone naturally falls downward, and the Fire as
naturally ascends. Now it is impossible that any Education should put new
Inclinations or new Passions into our Minds; Education may direct our Natural
Inclinations and Passions to Unnatural Objects; but it can no more make new
Inclinations and Passions, than it can make a new Soul. Now among all the
Inclinations of Humane Nature, there is none more strong and invincible than
the Inclination to Religion, to worship something or other as a God. Though the
Heathens were greatly mistaken in their Notion of a God, and some worshipped
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Earth, and Seas, and Rivers, and the meanest and
most contemptible Creatures, for Gods; yet they all agreed in this universal
Inclination to Religious Worship; which is a plain Argument, that this
Universal Consent in Religion was more owing to the impulses and tendencies of
a Reasonable Nature, than to the clear and distinct Principles of Natural
Reason; for Reason always joins the Act and the Object together; but Natural
Inclinations are a blind and confused Principle of Action, which thrusts
forward to such an Act, without a clear perception of its Object, just as the
Appetite of Hunger, which does not direct to any particular sort of Food, but
only to eating: for these Natural Inclinations are of the same use with our
Natural Passions, which are not designed to direct us what to do, (that is the
Work of Reason and wise Consideration) but to excite us more vigorously to
action, by a natural kind of Thirst and Appetite; and therefore as Men act very
foolishly, who suffer themselves to be hurried away by their Passions, without
expecting the Directions and Government of Reason; so do those Men, who follow
their Natural Inclinations, without directing them to their proper Object.

And this gives a plain Account, how the Inclination to Religious Worship may
be natural, and yet the universal Practice of the Heathen World for so many
Ages, in worshipping those things for God, which are no Gods, and in
worshipping a great many false Gods instead of one True God, be no Argument,
that what we call Idolatry and Polytheism is the Voice of Nature.

It is sufficiently known, that when we prove against the Atheist, that there
is a God, and that he ought to be worshipped, from the general consent of
Mankind in worshipping some God or other, which is no less than the Voice of
Nature; they presently reply, that this Argument will prove Idolatry and
Polytheism also to be natural, since Mankind were not more universally agreed
in worshipping a God, than they were in worshipping many false Gods.

Now though this be false; for the World was never without some Worshippers of
the one True God, the Maker and Governor of the World, and in the most
prevailing Times of Paganism, the whole Nation of the Jews, a great, potent and
flourishing People, were the Worshippers of the Lord Jehovah; and though we
should suppose it to be otherwise, there are several very good Answers returned
to this Objection by Learned Men; yet I confess none seems to me more clear
than this I have now hinted, the difference between Natural Inclinations and
Natural Reason. Natural Inclinations work more necessarily, and to this we owe
the universal Consent in Religious Worship; but in a State of Nature, Mankind
were to receive their Directions concerning the Object and Nature of Religious
Worship from Natural Reason, which will discover the True God to them, if they
make a wise use of it; but they may choose whether they will or no, and if they
do not exercise their Reason to find out the True God, (as it is plain the
Heathens did not, for which St. Paul tells us they are inexcusable, Romans 1.) no
wonder if they fall into Idolatry and Polytheism, and the most ridiculous
Superstitions. Which shows, how the consent of Mankind, which is owing to
Natural Inclinations, proves the Worship of God to be the Voice of Nature, when
the consent of the Heathen World, in the Worship of a great many false Gods,
can prove no more, but that they neglected the Directions of Natural Reason, or
were imposed on by Wicked Spirits: And this makes it very evident, that when
Men so vastly differ in the Object of their Worship, but so universally agree
in paying Divine Honors to some Being or other, this cannot be the Effect of
mere Custom, or Education, or Natural Reason, (for then they would agree as
well in the Object and Nature, as in the Act of Worship) but of a natural
Inclination to Religion, not governed and conducted by right Reason.

And I shall observe further, that Natural Inclinations and Passions being only
(according to the Original Design and Contrivance of our Wise-Maker)
subservient to right Reason, and to be governed by it, natural Inclinations
being a necessary Spring of Motion and Action, when mere dry Reason in this
imperfect State, would not give us sufficient quickness and vigor in pursuing
its Commands. Hence, I say, these Natural Inclinations to Religion, which are
so visible in all Mankind, do plainly prove, that there are Natural Notions of
God and of Religion imprinted upon Men's Minds; for there would be no need of
such Natural Inclinations, were there no Natural Knowledge to direct and govern
them, no more than there would be of our Natural Passions, of Hope, and Fear,
and Desire, and Love, were there no Natural Objects proportioned to such
Passions: And therefore such Natural Inclinations plainly prove, that those
Notions Mankind always had of the Being of God, are not the Effects of mere
Education, but of Nature: for if one be Natural, both must be so; Natural
Inclinations, which are in themselves no better than a blind Impetus, must have
some Natural Knowledge to guide them.

For what the Atheist says, That we owe the Knowledge and Belief of a God, only
to the Instruction of our Parents and Tutors when we are Children; and that
this Belief taking so early a possession of our Minds, grows up into such
strong Prejudices, that we mistake it for the Dictate of Nature; and that our
Inclinations to Religion are wholly owing to this Belief, is as ridiculous as
to say, That our Natural Passions of Hope, and Fear, and Desire, are not
implanted in our Natures, but are only owing to the Impressions of External
Objects. And then we may as well say, that as long as there is Light, and
External Objects to be seen, a Man will see without Eyes, and by the same
Reason, may hear without Ears; for what our Senses are in the Body, that
Inclinations and Passions are in the Mind, necessary to make us capable of
External Impressions, and to give us a quick perception of them; no Belief or
Opinion whatsoever can put any new Inclination into our Minds, to that which we
have no natural inclination to. It is possible to excite some Inclinations
which lay dormant in us, and which we had no sense of before; but to put new
Inclinations into us, is to create new Powers and Faculties in our Souls.

And therefore since this Inclination to Religion is so strong and so
universal, it is evident, that it cannot result from any Notions and Opinions
imprinted on our Minds from without, nor does at all depend on them: for some
Men can baffle their Reasons, and think they are able to confute all the
Arguments for the Being of a God, when they cannot silence and conquer their
Inclinations to believe that there is a God, and that they ought to worship
him; this the Atheist feels, and endeavors to laugh away as a mere childish
Superstition; whereas were this Inclination owing to Opinion and Prejudice, it
is impossible it should be more strong and more lasting, than such a Belief is.

The sum of all is this, That if our Modern Atheists, who pretend such an
intimate knowledge and familiar acquaintance with Nature, would be persuaded
seriously to consider the Powers of Nature, and be better acquainted with the
Frame and Constitution of their own Natures; if they would consider what is the
natural Language and Interpretation of those strong Impressions of Religion,
which they feel in their own Minds, it might, by the Blessing of God, open
their Eyes to see and adore that God, who made them, and cure their Souls of
that most fatal and mortal Disease, which makes them Beasts here, and Devils
hereafter.

Secondly, Another Proposal I would make to these Men is, That they would not
publicly affront Religion, that they would not so impudently attempt to laugh
God and Religion out of the World; that they would not make sport with those
Things which other Men account Sacred; that they would not profane the Holy
Scriptures, by turning them into Ridicule, or obscene and impious Burlesque.
This possibly will be thought a very odd Proposal to these Men, who think it
the only way to justify their Atheism, by making Religion look ridiculously;
but yet had I to deal with reasonable Men, though they were Atheists, I would
not despair of convincing them of the reasonableness of this Proposal.

For first, this is nothing but what the Laws of Civility and good Manners
require from them. No wellbred Man will choose to put a public Affront upon his
Friends and Neighbors, though he sees them daily guilty of great Follies and
Indiscretions. The Laws of Conversation require us to treat all Men with just
respects, though their Understandings be of different makes and sizes, and
their Fortune and way of Life very different from our own; much less then can a
modest Man endure the thoughts of affronting Mankind, or laughing at any thing
which is received or established by an Universal Consent. Though the Belief of
God were as very a Dream and Fancy as the Tales of Faries, yet there is a
certain Reverence due to Humane Nature, at least from Men; and since all
Mankind, in all Ages of the World (excepting some few wise and cautious
Atheists) have believed that there is a God, and have honored him with public
Worship, it is an affront to Humane Nature to laugh at the Being of God, though
we do not believe it.

Nay this is not only an Affront to Humane Nature, but to Public Government:
In all Nations one Religion or other is established by a Law, so that these Men
do not only laugh at the Dreams and Dotages of single Men, but at the united
Counsels, and most mature Resolves of all the World; which is an Argument of
great Boldness, but of very little Wit or Manners. A modest Man would be apt to
suspect his own judgment of Things, when he found himself opposed by the
general Consent of all Men, and the Wisdom of all the World; but if this did
not make him of the Common Opinion, yet at least he would not rudely contradict
it.

But not only the Wisdom, but the Authority of Government is affronted by these
Men, when they laugh at such public Constitutions, at Religion considered as
established by Law. So much do such Men recede from the Mr. Hobbs.
Principles of their great Master, who though he had no great opinion of
Religion in it self, yet thought it something considerable, when it became the
Law of the Nation. But neither the Wisdom nor Authority of Laws can command
respect from some Men, without a vigorous execution of them, and that would
soon teach them better Manners, than ever they will learn in the School of
Atheism.

Nay, to laugh at the Being of God, and at Religion, is not only to affront the
general sense of Mankind, and the Wisdom and Authority of all Governments, but
the Wisdom of the sagest Philosophers, and the most inquisitive Men of all
Ages. Among all the Ancient Philosophers, no Man expressly denied the Being of
God, or that Worship which was due to him; Epicurus indeed denied his
Providence, which was only a more civil way of turning him out of the World,
though he pretended to worship him upon account of his infinite, but idle and
unactive Perfections. Socrates died a Martyr for Religion, and Plato and
Aristotle did both acknowledge a supreme Being; and the later Philosophers,
though they differed about the Nature of God, yet did not question but there
was one: so that the Being of a God is not the mistake merely of a few ignorant
unphilosophical Heads, but has in all Ages had such Learned Patrons, as at
least do not deserve to be laughed at by Men of the least modesty and good
breeding.

Secondly, I would desire these Men to consider, how little they consult their
own Reputation in laughing at Religion; it is a very silly thing for some few
Men, (though they were in the right) to think to out-laugh all the World; the
loudest laughter will always be on that side, right or wrong, where there are
the greatest numbers; though indeed all Men have such a veneration for God and
Religion, that such Abuses and Affronts of Religion do not so much provoke Men
to laughter, as to a holy jealousy and indignation. No Man can endure with
patience to hear that exposed to contempt, which he admires and adores. Such
Atheistical Scoffers are looked on as the common Enemies of Mankind; all Men,
but such like themselves, abhor and scorn them, fly their Company, hate their
very Names, as Traitors to the Majesty of Heaven, and the great Pests of Humane
Conversation, and the reproach and shame of Humane Nature. And can any wise
Man, (let his Opinions be what they will) who designs to live happily in this
World, (as methinks those above all others should desire, who expect nothing
hereafter) think this the best way to happiness, to forfeit the Love and
Friendship of all Men who love and worship God, or make any show of Religion;
which are so much the greatest numbers, that he does in a manner banish himself
from Humane Conversation, or render it very unpleasant and uneasy.

I know there are some, who expect to gain the Reputation of great Wits, and
very cunning Men, by unsetling Foundations, and breaking a merry Jest upon
Religion; but they should consider, that the generality of Men, who will be
Judges of these Matters, whether they will or no, look upon the Being of God as
so plain and evident a Truth, that that Man infallibly forfeits the reputation
of his Understanding, who sets up for Atheism. Atheists may make a Scene and
Theater for themselves, and admire and applaud one another, but all the rest of
the World despise them: for indeed it is no argument of any great depth and
subtilty, to raise Objections, and start Difficulties, which a Man of very mean
parts may do, but it is a greater trial of Judgment to answer them, which the
Atheist, it seems, cannot do; when Men are so over-subtil, that they cannot
understand these plain and obvious Demonstrations, which convince all Mankind,
and are understood by every Plowman, such subtilty is never admired, but
despised.

And as for Wit, it is so very undecent to jest with grave and serious Matters,
that though it have never so much Salt, it is nauseous and offensive to sober
Minds; no Man admires his Wit, who abuses his Prince, his Father, or his
Friend: Profane Wit is the easiest of all, as consisting in such bold
Allusions as any Man may make, who has neither Modesty nor Grace; and those
Men, who have no way to show their Wit, but by abusing their Maker, have
nothing to boast of, but the very scum and putrefaction of Wit.

Thirdly, These Men should consider what mischief they may do to public
Societies, by laughing at Religion, and exposing it to contempt; for Religion
is the firmest Bond of Humane Societies; and if once Men should cast off the
Fear of God, nothing but external Fear and Power could restrain and govern
them. Atheism is a Secret, which he, who has it, ought in prudence and interest
to keep to himself; for an Atheist can never mend his condition, but may
greatly injure himself by propagating Atheism. All the Ends he can serve by
Atheism, he enjoys in greatest perfection, while no Man understands the Secret
but himself: for the only end he can propose in it, is to be delivered from the
Fears of Invisible Powers, to have no restraints laid upon his sensual
Enjoyments, but what Caution and Interest suggest, that he may satisfy his
Lusts by any means, so long as he can secure himself from present danger. Now
when he is an Atheist alone, he has great advantage of the rest of Mankind,
because they are restrained by a sense of Religion, and the Fear of God, which
is as unequal a Match, as to fight with a Man, whose hands are tied, when your
own are free. But now if he should, by his Wit and Learning, proselite a whole
Nation to Atheism, Hell would break loose upon Earth, and he might soon find
himself exposed to all those Violences and Injuries which he now securely
practices. When there is nothing to restrain Men from doing any wickedness they
have a mind to, but only the Fear of Humane Power, this World will quickly
prove a very miserable State, and Scene of Confusion and Disorder, of Rapes and
Adulteries, of Violence and Rapine, of Blood and Murders, especially if the
great Leviathan, who is entrusted with the Sovereign Power, understands his own
Liberty, as well as his Atheistical Subjects do theirs: So that no wise Man can
think it his Interest to promote Atheism, and therefore it cannot be his
Interest to deride Religion, and expose it to contempt.

Fourthly, Another Reason why they should at least be modest Atheists, is for
fear that they should find a God, when they come into the other World; for they
are not so absolutely certain that there is no God, as to be perfectly secure
that there is none; though they think they can answer all the Arguments,
whereby Men prove there is a God, (which is the utmost they pretend to) though
they know how to make a World without God, and can laugh at the silly Cheats
which have been put upon Mankind by some cunning Statesmen, who invented the
Belief of a God, and the Fears of Religion, to make their Government more easy
and secure; yet after all, they dare not undertake to demonstrate that there is
no God, and that it is impossible there should be one; and till they can do
this, they can never be perfectly secure that there is none.

And therefore lest they should find that there is a God, when they come into
the other World, they should offer as few Affronts to him as may be here; to
deny his Being, when he has furnished us with so many ways of knowing him, is a
sufficient Affront, without any other additional Aggravations: but if it were
nothing but mere incurable ignorance, which made Men Atheists, the Fault is
much less, than when they express so much scorn and contempt of the very Name
of God and Religion; for this looks like a professed enmity to the Deity, that
they are not only ignorant of him for want of sufficient Evidence, but that
they hate and despise the least Thoughts and Imagination of such a Being as Men
call God. And therefore were it possible to separate the disbelief of a God
from a hatred and contempt of him (as certainly it might be, were Men Atheists
merely for want of Evidence) it would concern such Men, though they enjoyed the
other Liberties, which Atheism allows, yet to be very modest and civil even to
the fanciful Idea and Imagination of a God.

For, fifthly, whether Religion be true or false, it is no ridiculous thing,
and therefore it argues great folly for any Man to laugh at it. If there be no
God, all Religion indeed is a Mistake; but it is no ridiculous Mistake, when
there is such Evidence for it, as convinces the generality of Mankind, even the
wisest and most inquisitive Men: and what we call Religion, is so grave and
serious a Thing, and of such high importance and concernment to us, that if it
be not true, all Mankind have reason to wish it were true.

What more lovely and desirable Being could there possibly be, than is*
represented by the Notion of a God: an infinitely Wise and Powerful, Holy and
Just Being, who made and who takes care of all his Creatures, who governs the
World with the kindness and tenderness of a Parent, and takes care, not only of
the Great and Public Affairs of Kingdoms and Empires, but of every particular
Creature, how mean and contemptible soever it appears; and if there be no God,
what Man, who loves himself, could forbear wishing that there were One on whom
he might securely trust and depend in all Events?

And what is more worthy of a Reasonable Creature, than to adore and worship so
perfect and glorious a Being, to pay our thankful Acknowledgments to our great
Maker, and constant Benefactor, which is one great part of Religion, which is
nothing else, but to love, reverence, and obey, the most Lovely, Excellent,
Powerful, Wise, and Holy Lord and Judge of the World?

And what can be more noble than the end of Religion, which is not merely to
live happily a few Years in this World, but to be happy for ever? a Thing so
agreeable to those vehement Desires of Immortality, which are imprinted on our
Natures, and does so raise our Minds above the mean and beggarly Enjoyments of
Sense, that it makes a truly-religious Man almost as much differ from earthly
Men, and sottish Atheists, as a Man differs from a Beast.

Here certainly is nothing that is contemptible, nothing but what deserves to
be admired; and though the Atheist may think, that we are mistaken in all this,
yet we cannot say, that we have made a foolish choice. This may suffice for the
second Proposal, to persuade them not to put public Affronts upon God and
Religion.

Thirdly; If what I have already said, could persuade these Men to treat the
Name of God and Religion, with some external Modesty and Respect, my next
Proposal to them should be, Not to forsake the Public Assemblies for Religious
Worship; and indeed they cannot do this, unless they will set up for Atheism,
and openly profess it; or at least bring themselves under a great suspicion of
it.

Now I cannot imagine what they have reasonably to object against this; to be
sure they can have no Scruple of Conscience; for those who believe there is no
God, cannot believe themselves accountable to any but themselves in these
Matters, while they conceal their own Sentiments and Opinions of Things; and
though this be not the Worship of God, whose Being they deny, yet it is a piece
of Civility and Respect to Men, to common and received Opinions, and to public
Laws and Constitutions.

And the Advantages of this may be very great; for who knows how God may work
upon their Minds at such a Time! how they may be affected with observing the
great and public Expressions of Devotion in Christian Assemblies, and begin to
think, that this must be something more than a Dream and Fancy? Who knows how
God may direct the Preacher, and put such words into his Mouth, as may pierce
their Souls, and dispel those Mists and Fogs which clouded their
Understandings, and enable them to discover the Truth, and Certainty, and
Excellency of Religion. To be sure this is never likely to be done by their
turning their Backs upon Public Instructions, which is very often the Cause,
but is a very unlikely Cure of Atheism.

But, lastly, I think at least such Men should be so modest, as not to
intermeddle in the Disputes and Controversies of Religion. It is a fulsome and
nauseous Thing, to see the Atheists and Infidels of our Days, to turn great
Reformers of Religion, to set up a mighty Cry for Liberty of Conscience: for
whatever Reformation of Religion may be needful at this Time, whatever Liberty
of Conscience may be fit to be granted, yet what have these Men to do to meddle
with it? those who think Religion a mere Fable, and God to be an Utopian
Prince, and Conscience a Man of Clouts, set up for a Scarecrow to fright such
silly Creatures from their Beloved Enjoyments, and Hell and Heaven to be forged
in the same Mint with the Poets Styx, and Acheron, and Elysian Fields? We are
like to see Blessed Times, if such Men as these had but the Reforming of
Religion.

SECT. II.
Concerning the Practical Atheists, who profess to believe that there is a God,
but live as if there were none; very seldom think of him, and neglect to
worship him: Several Considerations to convince* them of the Evil and
Sinfulness of Irreligion.

SEcondly; Another sort of Men, who desert Religious Assemblies for want of a
due sense of Religion, are the Practical Atheists, Men who though they profess
to believe that there is a God, yet live as if there were none, very seldom
think of him, and take no care to please him, and make him their Friend; and
though they believe their Souls shall survive their Bodies, and be either very
happy, or very miserable hereafter, yet are so wretchedly careless, so
brutishly unconcerned for Times to come, as to make no Provision for a future
State; to use no diligence to escape the Eternal Miseries, or to obtain the
Eternal Rewards of the next Life.

And I have but two ways of dealing with these Men, to Convince, and to
Persuade; to convince them of the Evil, the Danger, the folly of Irreligion, of
forsaking the Public Assemblies of Christians; and to persuade them to take
care of their Souls, and to prepare for an Eternal State.

Now the natural Method of proceeding is, first to Convince, and then to
Persuade: And therefore for the conviction of these Men, I shall represent to
them, the Evil, Danger, and Folly of this.

First; The Evil and Sinfulness of it. Now supposing that there is a God, as
these Men profess to believe, every Man must acknowledge it to be a most heinous
and provoking Sin to neglect or contemn his Worship.

1. For Irreligion is as great, if not a greater affront to God, and contempt
of him, than Atheism it self. An Atheist denies that there is a God, an
Irreligious Man contemns and slights God, whose Being he owns; the one denies
the Being of God, the other reproaches his Nature. The Atheist denies that
there is such a Being, whom we call God; the Irreligious Man owns that there is
such a Being, but will not own him for a God; that is, will not worship him as
God; for Religious Worship is nothing else but a public acknowledgment of God,
of the Excellencies and Perfections of his Nature, of his Power and Providence
in making and governing the World, and taking Care of all his Creatures; and to
refuse to worship God, or to live in an habitual neglect of it, makes a mere
Titular and Mock-God of him, and argues a very mean and contemptuous Opinion of
the Deity, as including a denial of the Essential Perfections of his Nature, or
of his Providence and Government.

The Pagan Superstitions and Idolatries were a great reproach to God, both as
they gave that Worship, which is due only to God, to Creatures, and too often
to Evil Spirits; and as they worshipped God by such ridiculous, or barbarous
and inhumane Rites and Ceremonies, as made a dishonorable representation of
the Divine Nature; but yet even their Idolatrous Worship was some
acknowledgment of God's Power and Providence, which is more than these Men do,
who refuse to worship him at all.

Secondly; To deny or neglect the Worship of God, is the highest injustice; it
is to deny God what is his natural Right, what is due from us, and what alone
we are able to give, and what he requires of us.

If we consider God as the most Excellent and perfect Being, who has all
possible Perfections in himself, and from himself, and so he has a right to the
most Excellent Worship: for all Perfections by a natural right, challenge a
proportionable esteem and reverence, and the most absolute and sovereign
Perfections, a Sovereign Worship. We cannot see nor hear of an excellent Man,
but it excites in us a great Esteem, Love, or Reverence, according to the
nature of the Thing wherein he excels; and prompts us to say what we know in
his Commendations. And it is accounted injustice among Men, to deny each other
their just Praises; And how much greater Injustice is it, to deny God his
Essential Glory, that incommunicable Worship, which naturally belongs to such
incommunicable Perfections? Indeed it is almost impossible not to admire that
which is Great, nor to love that which is Good, nor to fear and reverence that
which is powerful; for our Passions are naturally determined to their proper
Objects, and not to discover those Perfections which are notorious and visible,
is a reproach to our Understandings; and not to love, or fear, and admire them
according to their Natures, is accounted dullness and stupidity, and a vicious
defect in our Will and Passions; which is a plain Argument, that all
Perfections have a natural right to some proportionable Respects; and therefore
the Infinite Perfections of God naturally challenge the highest veneration,
since there is such a natural Relation between natural Perfections, and the
natural Passions of our Minds.

If we consider God as the first Cause of all Things, so God has a natural
right to the Praise and Glory of all his Works; and therefore all the Works of
God are said to praise him: The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handywork. Whatever Wisdom, Power, or Goodness is seen
in the frame of this vast and beautiful World, whatever Perfections are
bestowed on any Creatures, must be ascribed to the great Maker of all Things.
It is impossible to see any curious piece of Painting, without admiring and
praising the skill of the Painter; and that Man is very unjust, as well as very
senseless, who can look upon this World, so wonderful for its unknown Extent,
exquisite Contrivance, Beauty, Uniformity, infinite Numbers, variety and
perfections of its Inhabitants, and not adore and worship that God who made all
this. The Order, Beauty, and Glory of Material Beings, are visible
Demostrations of the Infinite Perfections of their Invisible Cause; and the
most proper and natural Work of reasonable Creatures, is to discover the
Perfections of God, and of his Works, and to worship him with the humblest and
devoutest Adorations; and if it be unjust to defraud Men of the Glory of their
wise, and great, and good Actions, it is much greater injustice to God, who is
the sole and independent Cause of all Things: and yet not to worship God, is to
defraud him of his Glory. And if we consider more particularly, that we our
selves are God's Creatures, who owe our Being to him, that in him we live,
move, and have our being; this makes it a natural Debt, to praise and adore the
God who made us; as the Psalmist speaks, To worship and fall Psalm. 95. 6.
down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. Know ye, that the Lord he is Psalm.
100. 3, 4.
God; it is he that has made us, and not we our selves; we are his People, and
the Sheep of his Pasture: Enter into his Gates with thanksgiving, and into his
Courts with praise, be thankful unto him, and bless his Name. For since God
made us, he has a natural Right and Interest in us, and may challenge our
Homage and Obedience, as a just Debt entailed upon our Natures. Thus God
argues, A Son honors his Father, Mal. 1. 6.
and a Servant his Master: If then I be a Father, where is my Honor? and if I
be a Master, where is my Fear? That is, there is at least as much natural
Justice in paying all Homage and Worship to God our Heavenly Father and
Sovereign Lord, as it is accounted among Men, for Children to honor their
Parents, and Servants their Masters; and therefore let any Man, who will but
allow God the same right in his Creatures, which he himself challenges in his
Children and Servants, judge how unseemly and unnatural it is, to refuse to
love, and honor, and worship the great Author of our Being: Who planteth a
Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof? Can any thing be more
reasonable, than that God should be worshipped and adored by those Creatures,
whom his own Hands have made and fashioned?

So that upon all Accounts, God has a natural Right to our Homage and Worship,
and nothing can excuse us from paying this Debt, unless it appear that we are
under some natural Incapacity to do it: But indeed this is a Debt which we are
all able to pay; for God has made us reasonable Creatures, endowed us with
Wisdom and Knowledge, to discover the Perfections of his Nature, and Works, and
to understand our Obligations to him; and with such a Principle of Will and
Choice, as can act freely, and with such inward passions of Love and Joy, Fear
and Reverence, Hope and Affiance, as may easily be wrought up to the highest
strain of Devotion. He has given us Eyes to contemplate this beautiful Frame of
Things, and Tongues to speak his Praises, and publish all his mighty Works; so
that Mankind seems to be made on purpose for the Worship of God, to be a
curious and diligent Observer of God's Works, and to speak of his Glory; which
lays a new Obligation on us, and gives God a natural Title to our Worship. This
was the Reason why he made us, this was the Design of our Natures, and the End
of our Creation.

We live now in such a busy World, where we find so many things to do, to
provide Food and Raiment, and all things necessary to this Mortal State; or, it
may be, to serve the Ends of Ambition and Lust, that we can find very little
time to worship God; and therefore are apt to think that this is the least
thing we have to do: But we should consider, that this is not the Original Work
and Employment of Mankind, but the punishment of our Sin, and Apostasy from
God: For let us suppose, that Mankind had preserved their Innocence, and
continued in Paradise, where they had no need of Clothes, and fed on the Fruit
of the Garden, which grew of it self, without plowing or sowing, and was fit
for Food, without any Arts of Cookery; when there was no other bodily
Employment, but to look to the Garden, which neither required much labor, nor
took up much time, but was like those innocent Diversions, we now use to
recreate and unbend our Minds with; now, I say, in such a state as this, which
was the Original State of Mankind, how could Men spend their time, but in the
Contemplation of God's Works, and in the study of Divine Wisdom and Philosophy,
and in adoring the great Maker of all Things? unless we can imagine, that God
gave Man such an active and busy Mind to dissolve in sloth, which is so uneasy
a state, that Paradise it self could be no happiness upon these terms; or that
God designed him for an Atheistical Philosopher to admire the Works of Nature,
without adoring the Wise Creator. Indeed it is not conceivable, that so vast
and comprehensive a Mind, such active and boundless Passions, as God has
endowed Mankind withal, should be wholly designed for no higher Employment,
than to qualify a Man to be a Plowman or a Mechanic, or to speak the greatest
thing at once, to be a Prince or a Minister of State; such a Mind as comes so
near Infinity, as that of Man, was certainly designed for nothing less, than
the Knowledge, Love, and Admiration of an Infinite Being.

And if we must learn the End for which Creatures are made, by the End which
they are capable to serve, it is evident Man was made for the Worship of God,
because he is fitted with such Endowments and Perfections of Mind, as qualify
him to be a Worshipper. And if God be the greatest and most perfect Being, then
the Knowledge and Worship of God, is the noblest Employment of Humane Nature,
and consequently the last and highest End for which Man was made.

Nay, we may consider further, that Man is not only capable of worshipping God,
but no other Creature in this visible World is; he, and he only, is capable of
this Work; whence again we may conclude, that God made Man for his peculiar
Service and Glory, unless we can imagine, that God would make a World, and
place no Creature in it, whose proper Business it should be to know and worship
his Wise Maker, and Bountiful Lord. Man is the Priest of Nature, who offers up
the Praises and Thanksgivings of the whole Creation to God.

Thus you see that Religious Worship is a natural Debt which we owe to God; and
that God does expect and exact the Payment of it from us. We may certainly
conclude from hence, that he expects we should live according to the most
perfect Constitution of our Natures. This is the natural Rule of our Actions,
to serve the Ends for which we were made; for God did not make such and such
Natures for nothing, either to be unimployed, or employed to other, or to less
and meaner purposes than they were designed for.

And besides this, we have frequent and express Commands to worship God in that
Revelation he has made to us of his Will. The Scripture is so full of
Precepts, Exhortations, and Reproofs about this Matter, that I need not spend
time to prove so acknowledged a Truth. But from the whole of what I have now
discoursed, we may safely conclude the great Evil of Irreligion, as being the
highest injustice to our Maker and Sovereign Lord.

Thirdly; The great Evil of Irreligion, of denying or neglecting the Worship of
God, appears in this, That it is the most sordid Ingratitude. Now, Ingratitude
is Injustice too; but it is Injustice to a Benefactor; that is, it consists in
violating all those Obligations which Goodness and Kindness has laid upon us;
as Injustice, properly so called, consists in breaking the Rules of Natural or
Civil Right. For Mankind generally accounts the Obligation to return a
kindness, as strong and necessary as to pay a Debt; and nothing is more
infamous among Men, than an ungrateful Person; for as Goodness is a greater
Perfection than strict Justice, so Ingratitude must needs be a more hateful
Vice than bare Injustice* because it is opposite to the greatest Good. As
Goodness is the greatest Glory and Perfection of Humane Nature, so Ingratitude
must needs be the greatest Infamy and Reproach, because it is at the greatest
distance from Goodness. Now among Men, Injustice and Ingratitude may be
separated: Men may be unjust, but not ungrateful, and they may be ungrateful,
and not unjust, according to the strict Notion of Injustice: for Men may wrong
and injure those who never did them any kindness, and that is Injustice without
Ingratitude; and they may neglect to make decent Acknowledgments, and Returns
of Kindness, without injuring their Friends, in any of their Natural or Civil
Rights, and that is Ingratitude without Injustice: But now it is impossible to
be unjust to God, without being ungrateful too, because he is not only our
Natural Lord, but our great Benefactor; and those very things which give him a
natural Right to our Worship and Obedience, do not only lay on us the
Obligations of Justice, but of Gratitude to worship him. He made us, and this
gives him a natural Right to our Worship, because he is our Natural Lord; we
are entirely his, and owe our selves, and all we have, and all we can do, to
him; and this makes it very unjust to deny or neglect his Worship: But then we
must consider, that if we love our Selves and our Being, and those Advantages
of Happiness, which Being makes us capable of, then much more we are obliged in
gratitude to praise and adore that God who gave us our Being; for though
possibly some will not allow it proper to say, that God was good to us before
we had a Being, yet he was very good in making us; and therefore it is high
ingratitude, as well as injustice, in Creatures not to praise and glorify their
Maker.

Thus that Divine and Heaven-born Mind, and those noble and excellent Faculties
of Soul which God has bestowed on us, as they may make us capable of knowing
and worshipping God, so make Religious Worship a natural piece of Justice; and
if we value the excellency of our Natures, and think it any advantage to be
made so noble an Order of Beings, Gratitude as well as Justice, obliges us to
employ all the Faculties of our Souls, for that high and noble End for which
they were made; that is, to know, and love, and admire, and worship God, the
greatest and the best Being, and the most perfect Object of our Minds.

It is Ingratitude, as well as Injustice to our Maker, to debase our Natures,
to make them stoop to low, mean, and vile Things: to inherit the Curse of the
Serpent, to crawl upon their Bellies, and lick up the Dust of the Earth, when
they were made to aspire toward Heaven, to unite themselves to God the
Fountain of Life and Being, and to live in the Love and Contemplation of him.
The like may be said with reference to that good Providence of God, which
maintains and upholds us in Being, and provides all Necessaries for us, and
defends us from all unseen Mischiefs; both Justice and Gratitude require us to
praise and adore so great and constant a Benefactor.

These are all Expressions, both of the Natural Justice and Bounty of our Wise
Maker, and therefore lay a mixed Obligation on us of Justice and Gratitude. God
was under no Antecedent Obligation, but his own Will and Goodness to make a
World; but if he did resolve to make one, he was under the Obligations of his
own Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness, to make every Creature perfect in its
kind, and fitted to attain the end of its Nature, and to make some Creatures
for great and noble Ends; and consequently to bestow very noble and excellent
Natures on them; and therefore there being a mixture of Justice and Goodness in
God's making and governing the World, no wonder that it lays a mixed Obligation
on us too of Justice and Gratitude.

But there is another manifestation of God's Goodness in the Redemption of the
World by our Lord Jesus Christ, which is a Work of such pure and unmixt Grace
and Goodness, that it is all Goodness, and nothing but Goodness. Innocent
Creatures may challenge a natural Right in the Care, and Protection, and Bounty
of their Maker; but a Traitor, a Rebel against the Majesty of Heaven, an
Apostate Wretch, who has abused the Bounty and Goodness of his Creator, can
challenge no right to those common Blessings which God bestows upon his
Creatures; so that he should cause the Sun to shine, and the Rain to fall on
them; and therefore since Sin entered into the World, even those External and
Temporal good Things which Sinners enjoy, are wholly owing to the Goodness and
Mercy of God, and accordingly our Obligations to Gratitude and Thankfulness are
so much the stronger; and our Ingratitude, in neglecting the Worship of God,
the more heinous and provoking.

But much less can such Sinners reasonably expect from God, and much less
challenge it as a right, that he should redeem them from that state of Misery
into which they had brought themselves, by such an amazing, stupendous, and
incomprehensible expression of his Love, as the Incarnation, and Death, and
Sufferings of his own Eternal, only begotten, and well-beloved Son: Here is
such a height, and depth, and length, and breadth of the Love of God, as
passes all Understanding; this is Grace, free Grace, the Riches of Grace, the
abundant Riches of Grace: And therefore this brings us under such Obligations
of Love and Gratitude, as infinitely excel all the Obligations of Natural
Justice. Now we are not our own, but are bought with a price, and therefore
must glorify God, both with our Bodies and Spirits, which are God's: We are now
redeemed, not with corruptible Things, as Silver and Gold, but with the
precious Blood of Christ, as a Lamb without blemish, and without spot; who gave
himself for us to redeem us from all Iniquity, and to purify to himself a
peculiar People zealous of good Works.

As the whole Economy of Man's Salvation by Christ, is the effect of mere
Grace and Love, so Gratitude is the only true Principle of Gospel-Obedience: to
serve God out of a prevailing sense of his Goodness, to feel that constraining
Love and Power of Christ's Love engaging us to live to him, who died for us.

For those Men greatly mistake the Nature and Obligations of Gratitude, who
think that Gratitude leaves them at liberty to do, or not to do it, as they
please; whereas the Obligations of Gratitude, especially in our present Case,
are infinitely more strong and forcible, than those of Justice, and the
punishment of Ingratitude proportionably great: For how shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation, if we refuse to hear him, who spoke from Heaven to
us? if we have trodden under-foot the Son of God, and counted the Blood of the
Covenant, wherewith we were sanctified, an unholy Thing, and have done despite
unto the Spirit of Grace.

Since then we are now under such powerful Obligations, as the Love and Grace
of God declared to us in the Gospel of his Son, to love, serve, and worship
him; we should consider how unkind and ungrateful it is, especially in those
who call themselves Christians, to slight or neglect the Worship of their God
and Savior; certainly such Men cannot expect to be saved by Christ, after all
he has done and suffered for them, when they will not thank him for it, when
they will not go to God in his Name. As nothing is more infamous among Men, so
nothing does more provoke God than such rude Affronts of his Goodness to sin
against the Grace of the Gospel; and those surprising Discoveries and
Manifestations of the Divine Goodness, argue so brutish, so diabolical a temper
of mind, such a perfect contrariety and contradiction to the Nature of God,
that such Men must naturally sink into the lowest Hell; for those who have no
sense of the Gospel Grace, who cannot be conquered nor affected with all the
Charms of so powerful a Love, are as incurable as Apostate Spirits.

Fourthly; Another Aggravation of the Guilt of this Sin is, That those who are
baptized and professed Christians, (and I suppose I write to none else) are
under the Obligation of their Baptismal Vow to worship God; and therefore to
neglect his Worship is Perjury, and breach of Covenant; it is an Apostasy from
Christianity, though they still retain the Name of Christians.

And do thou know what this is, thou profane Wretch, who think it lost
time to serve God, who can not spare so much time from worldly Cares, or from
thy Sports and Pleasure, as to attend the Worship of God in the Assemblies of
Christians? Wast thou ever Baptized? and do thou know what the signification
of Baptism is, That thou art taken into Covenant with God, and have obliged thy
self to serve and worship him; that thou art incorporated into the Christian
Church, and therefore obliged to live in the Communion of the Church, that is,
to frequent Christian Assemblies, and to join in all the Parts and Offices of
Religious Worship? and art not thou afraid to deal falsely and treacherously
with thy God? For Vengeance is mine, says God, I will repay it: It is a
dreadful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God. To have our Portion
with Hypocrites and Unbelievers, signifies, in the New Testament, the greatest
miseries of the next World. Now as Unbelievers signifies such Infidels as
obstinately refuse to believe the Gospel, when it is fairly proposed to them:
So Hypocrites does not only signify (as some Men mistake the word) those who
counterfeit Religion, who make a fine external show and appearance of Piety and
Devotion, when they are rotten at the Heart; but it signifies those also, who
live contrary to their Profession, who are, suppose, nominal and titular
Christians, who have been baptized in the Name of Christ, and own his Religion
as the Religion of their Country, but live lewd and profligate lives, make no
Conscience of worshipping God, nor ever think of saving their Souls: These are
the Men, who are proposed as the Patterns and Examples of the severity of God's
Judgments, to deter any Man from imitating their wickedness, lest they be
punished with Hypocrites and Unbelievers.

Those who are baptized into the Christian Church, into the Faith and Worship
of Christ, do not only forfeit all the Blessings of the Covenant, by renouncing
or contradicting their Baptismal Vow, in an habitual course of a wicked and
licentious Life, but become obnoxious to all the Threatenings of the Gospel in
their utmost severity; which is a much worse state than the poor Heathens are
in, who never heard of Christ; for they shall not be judged by the Gospel,
which was never preached to them; and therefore shall not be condemned by the
Gospel neither; as St. Paul tells us, That as many as have sinned without Law,
shall also perish without Law; and as many as sinned in the Law, shall be
judged by the Law. And by the same Reason we may add, As many as have sinned in
the Gospel, shall be judged by the Gospel. Now to perish without the Law,
signifies a much easier punishment than to be judged by the Law; and to be
judged by the Gospel, signifies a great deal more than that; for as God has
increased his Grace to Mankind, so he has always annexed severer Punishments
to the abuse of it: Thus our Savior tells us, It shall be easier for Sodom and
Gomorah, in the day of Judgment, than for Capernaum. Sodom and Gomorah were as
vile infamous Places as were in the World, and God destroyed them by very
memorable Judgments, by raining Fire and Brimstone on them from Heaven; but yet
they never enjoyed those means of Grace which Capernaum did, where our Savior
himself preached in Person, and confirmed the Truth of his Doctrine by many
mighty Works, and therefore they should escape better at the last Judgment,
than Capernaum; and Capernaum, I doubt, will escape much better than the
Infidels and Atheists, and profane despisers of Religion in our days, because
they labored under old and inveterate Prejudices, which could not easily be
removed, but required time and patience, and the exercise of free and impartial
Reason to wear them off. But now, when the Gospel has prevailed in the World
for so many Ages; when Men are educated in the Christian Religion, and have all
the Prejudices of their first and early Instructions on the right side; when it
is so difficult a thing to cast off their reverence for God, and to silence and
stupify their clamorous Consciences: for Men to use so much Art and Industry to
turn Atheists or Infidels, or profane Scoffers at Religion, will admit of no
excuse, but is the highest Affront to God, and will receive the sorest
Punishment, and a Sentence as amazing and astonishing as the Sin is.

Thus I have represented the evil and heinous Nature of this Sin; and if these
Men do believe that there is a God, as they profess to do, would they give
themselves time seriously to consider these things, I cannot imagine but it
must have some good effect upon them. For can any Man, who believes a God, if
he ever consider such Matters, endure the least thought of putting such a scorn
and contempt upon God, as the neglect of Religious Worship does naturally
signify? He knows what a sharp resentment he himself has of a slight or
neglect; how ill he takes it if Men industriously avoid his Company, if they do
but talk and seem to mind something else, when he is telling a Story; if his
Friends neglect to visit him, and turn their heads another way, when they pass
by his Door; and he knows how sensible Superiors especially are of such
neglects from their Inferiors. For a Prince to be slighted by his Subjects, or
a Father by his Children, or a Master by his Servants, is thought so
unsufferable a rudeness, as cannot be too severely punished: And therefore
considering that infinite distance which is between God and Creatures, he may
easily conclude how ill God takes the neglect of his Worship, which is the
greatest slight that can be put upon him, and argues very mean and contemptible
Thoughts of him, if such Men did think of him at all.

And when he considers also how many Obligations he lies under to worship God,
he cannot but blush to be guilty of so great injustice, not to praise and
magnify him, who deserves to be praised, and to be had in reverence by all
those who are about him. He thinks it great injustice to detract from the
Praises of worthy and deserving Men, or to conceal them; what is it then not to
ascribe to God the Glory and Perfection of his Nature and Works, which are
proclaimed by all the World? Not to adore and worship our Maker, who made us
for this end, that we might see and speak of his Glory. Did God give me Eyes
(may such a Man say) to see the Glory of this World, and an Understanding to
search out the first Cause, to whom the Praise of all is due, that when I have
found him, I should take no notice of him, neither confess his Power, nor
admire his Wisdom, nor praise his Goodness? Did he give me a Tongue to talk of
every Trifle, and never to be silent but where it ought to be most vocal, in
the Praises of my Maker? How ill should I take it, could I make any Being that
could understand or speak, should it refuse to acknowledge from whence it was,
and to whom it owes its Being?

Consider, my Soul, how thou should resent the neglect of a Son, of a
Client, of a redeemed Captive, or of any one whom thou have obliged, and by thy
Bounty raised from a low to a splendid Fortune, who owes his Being, his
Fortune, his Liberty, and all the Comforts and Blessings of Life to thee. And
is it nothing then to neglect the Worship of that God, who is the Universal
Parent, Lord, and Benefactor of the World; who has redeemed thee with the Blood
of his Son, and designed a more glorious Happiness for thee, if thy unjust and
ungrateful neglects of him, do not render thee incapable of his Favor?

But how unpardonable is it, for a Man to be false to his Oaths and Covenants?
Such Persons are not thought fit for Humane Conversation, who break the most
Sacred Ties, and therefore can never be trusted; but yet no Man ever broke his
Word, much less an Oath or Covenant, but when he expected to make some
advantage of it: And shall I break the Covenant of my God? a Covenant to which
I owe all my hopes of Happiness, all the Good I now enjoy, and all that I
expect? If I forfeit my Interest in this Covenant, I must be miserable, and
perish like a Fool; and since I cannot forfeit my Interest without breaking my
Covenant, I must perish like an Apostate, a Runnagate, a Traitor, or like one
who deserves to suffer the worst things, but deserves no Pity; and is it so
grievous a thing to worship God, that I should choose rather to be unjust, to be
ungrateful, to be perfidious to God, to forfeit his Love and Favor* and to
incur his hottest Displeasure, than acknowledge that I owe all to him that I
have, and that I expect all from him?

SECT. III.
Concerning the Danger of Irreligion, both with respect to this World and the
next, and the folly of it; with a serious Exhortation to these Men to take care
of their Souls.

SEcondly; I shall now consider the Danger of Irreligion, in neglecting or
contemning the Worship of God: For those who will not be wrought on by a sense
of Justice or Gratitude, may yet be governed by the more brutish Principle of
Fear. Now the Danger of this, respects both this World and the next.

1. The Danger of Irreligion, with respect to this World. Now, whoever believes
there is a God, who governs all Humane Affairs, in whom we live, move, and have
our Being, who disposes of our several Fortunes and Conditions of Life, must
needs apprehend himself in great danger of being miserable here, while he
neglects to adore and reverence the sovereign and unaccountable Lord of the
World.

We find throughout the Scripture, that the Promise even of Temporal Blessings
and Deliverance, is made only to those, who beg it of God by their servent and
importunate Prayers. This is the course all good Men in all Ages have taken,
and found the blessed success Psalm. 50. 15.
of it; Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. For thou, Lord, art good, and and 86. 5, 6, 7.
ready to forgive; and plenteous in Mercy unto all them that call upon thee.
Give ear, O Lord, unto my Prayer, and attend unto the Voice of my
Supplications. In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee, for thou will
answer me. He shall Psalm. 91. 15.
call upon me, and I will answer him; I will be with him in trouble, I will
deliver him, and honor him. The Lord is nigh Psalm 145. 18, 19, 20.
unto all them that call upon him; to all that call upon him in Truth. He will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry, and will
save them. The Lord preserves all them that love him; but the wicked will he
destroy: Where, those who love God, are those who pray unto him; and therefore
the wicked, whom God will destroy, are those who do not pray to him, who
neglect or despise his Worship: whence it is the Psalmist describes God, that
he is One that hears Prayers; O thou that hear Prayer, Psalm. 65. 2.
unto thee shall all flesh come.

For indeed it is not reasonable to expect that God should bestow those
Blessings and Deliverances on us, which we do not think worth asking, or will
not own him to have the disposal of; those who will not pray for those good
Things they want, will not bless God for giving them; and no wise Man thinks it
prudent to place his Favors, where they shall meet with no return; which is
like burying good Seed in a barren Soil, that deceives the expectation of the
Husbandman.

God indeed being the Maker of the World, takes care of all his Creatures; but
then he expects that reasonable Creatures should beg the protection, and
provisions of his Providence, because this is an excellent Instrument of
Government, as it keeps Mankind under a constant sense of his Power and
Providence, and in a constant dependence on him.

Those who expect all good Things from God, dare not provoke him to anger by
the breach of his Laws; Men are naturally ashamed of approaching the Presence
of God, when they are conscious to themselves of any great Crime, but sneak and
hide themselves, as Children do, when they have displeased their Parents, and
dare not ask any kindness, till they have first obtained their Pardon; which
makes it highly reasonable and necessary for God to discountenance Irreligion,
by casting off the care of such Men who refuse to worship him.

It is true, very many Irreligious Men do thrive in this World, and arrive to
great Estates, and to great Honors; for God does not make such an exact
difference between good and bad Men in this Life, as he will do in the World to
come, and can serve the Ends of his Providence in the prosperity of bad Men.

But yet there is a vast difference between God's permitting the prosperity of
bad Men, and that constant Providence which watches over good Men. Bad Men may
advance themselves by Injustice, Oppression, and Perjury, but they are not
advanced by the Blessing, but by the Permission of God, for God never blesses
any wicked Arts; and therefore such Men's Prosperity is very uncertain, and as
tottering as the Thrones of Usurpers: for though they have a good Title with
respect to Men, yet they are but Usurpers with respect to God, and therefore
are tumbled down again at his pleasure; but the only sure way of thriving in
the World, is by God's Blessing; these are the only lasting and durable Riches
and Honors, which are free from such Vexations and Troubles, Fears and
Disappointments, which attend on unjust Possessions; as the Wise Man tells us,
The Blessing of the Lord, it Prove. 10. 22.
makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it.

The sum is this; It is possible for Irreligious Men to enjoy great prosperity
without God's Blessing, and those who like this way may take it; but it is a
very uncertain, and a very slippery way, it often ends in Poverty and Contempt,
or leads to the Gallows; or Men lose their standing, when they are almost got
up to the top of the Precipice, and they tumble down faster than ever they got
up: But those who desire God should take care of them, must pray to him, and
worship him; for as St. James told those he writ to, Ye have not, because ye
Jam. 4. 2.
ask not. Some bad Men are for awhile prosperous, but a hundred for one are
miserable; and no Man can be secure from Misery, but in the Protection of God.

Secondly; There is a much greater Danger than this in Irreligion, and that is,
The loss of our Souls, the loss of Eternal Happiness, and the miseries of an
Eternal Death; now it is Godliness 1 Timothy 4. 8.
which has the promise of this Life, and of that which is to come, and the
Grace of God which brings Salvation; that is, the Gospel of Christ, which
contains the Promises of eternal Life, has appeared unto all Men, teaching us,
that denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should Tit. 2. 11, 12.
live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present World. These are the
Conditions of Eternal Life, without performing which, we shall never see God;
but the intemperate, unrighteous, ungodly Men, shall be condemned to the
punishment of Devils, to outward darkness, where there is weeping and wailing,
and gnashing of teeth for evermore.

For Godliness, which consists in such a constant sense of God, as expresses it
self in all Acts of Homage, Worship, and Obedience, is the only vital Principle
of Religion; though Men have a great many very good Qualities, and sociable
Virtues; though they are modest and temperate, just in their Dealings, pitiful
to the Poor, of a liberal and generous Spirit in promoting good Designs; very
affable, courteous, and obliging in their Conversations; yet if they have no
sense of God, as these Men have not, who neglect his Worship, all this is no
part of Religion, but owing to natural Temper, and good Breeding, or humane
Policy, or such other Causes as may make Men good Neighbors and Citizens, but
cannot make them good Christians. They may reap some Temporal Rewards of these
Virtues, but they cannot carry them to Heaven, for indeed such Men are not
qualified for the Work, and the happiness of Heaven, which is to know, and
love, and admire, and praise the great Maker and Redeemer of the World; which
no Man can do, who has not a quick and prevailing sense of his Excellencies
and Perfections. And how intolerable would it be, for such Men to keep an
Eternal Sabbath in Heaven, to worship God, and sing his Praises day and Night,
for ever and ever; who think it lost time, and a dry, insipid, wearisom thing,
to worship God here on Earth? but they need not fear that Penance, for they
shall never be troubled with it: None shall be received into Heaven, but those,
who by the constant Exercises of Devotion on Earth, have spiritualized their
Minds, and made Religion, in some measure, their Happiness, as well as their
Work and Duty.

And because there are a sort of inconsiderate Men, who think to grow very
religious, and to repent of all their Sins before they die, and thereby prevent
the danger of Eternal Damnation, I would desire them to consider;

Thirdly; That the great Danger of Irreligion, of an habitual neglect of God's
Worship, is, That it lets loose the Reins to all manner of Wickedness, and
naturally tends to harden Men in Sin, and very often ends in downright
Atheism. Men, who have cast off all sense and reverence for God, have no other
restraint from the greatest Villainies, but what the Laws of the Land, their own
natural Tempers, their Education and Converse, and suchlike Considerations,
lay upon them; which can keep very few Men, who have cast off the Fear and
Reverence of God, within any tolerable bounds; and thus Men run into the
wildest Excesses, and wound their Consciences, and stain their Reputations,
till they grow hopeless, desperate, and impudent Sinners.

Men, who are very bad, and yet will not neglect their Prayers, nor absent
themselves wholly from Christian Assemblies, do what they can, find great
checks of Conscience, and have a great many sober Intervals; they cannot say
their Prayers, and confess their Sins to God, and beg his Pardon and Mercy, but
their Consciences will reproach them, and put them at least upon some imperfect
resolutions of amendment; and when they attend the preaching of the Word, they
often are so startled and scared, and labor under such strong Convictions,
that they are not able to resist any longer, and the good Spirit of God does
not wholly forsake those Men who attend the Public Ministries of Grace, but
sometimes works such miraculous Cures, as are the triumphs of a Sovereign
Grace; and therefore the Case of these Men can never be so desperate and
hopeless as theirs is, who take care to think of him as little as possibly they
can, and withdraw themselves from Public Instructions, that they may sin on
without disturbance till they drop into Hell.

Thirdly; Let us now consider the folly of Irreligion; and there is the more
reason to do this, because the Irreligious and Profane, the Practical as well
as the Speculative Atheist, is very apt to boast of his Wit and Understanding,
and to think himself much above the ordinary level of Mankind. But the Spirit
of God calls them Fools, The Fool has said in his Heart, There is no God;
which is not meant of the Speculative, but of the Practical Atheist, who though
he professes to believe that there is a God, yet lives as if there were none.
And if Religion be the only true Wisdom, Irreligion must be the greatest
folly; and yet so we are taught in Scripture, that the fear of the Lord, that
is, the Worship of God, which is the most natural expression of our reverence
of him, that is Wisdom; The Fear of the Lord Job 28. 28. Psalm. 111. 10.
is the beginning of Wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do his
Commandments. The Fear of the Lord is Prove. 9. 10.
the beginning of Wisdom, and the Knowledge of the Holy is Understanding.

Now what I have already discoursed of the Evil and Danger, proves also the
Folly of Irreligion; for what can be more foolish, than that which contradicts
the best Reason of our Minds, and our natural Obligations to worship God,
founded on the highest Wisdom? What can be more foolish, than to undermine our
own Interest, to lay Trains of Misery for our selves, and to forfeit our
present and future Happiness? That is cursed, contemptible Wit, which will
droll away a Man's Life and his Soul together.

But besides all this, the Folly of Irreligion will appear, if we consider
these two Things.

1. That it transforms a Man into a Beast; and then, though such a Man may have
all the wild conceits of Apes and Monkeys, and the craft and subtilty of a Fox,
yet he has not the Understanding and Wisdom of a Man. He may have an inferior
sort of Wit, and may be reckoned the top and perfection of the mere Animal and
Sensitive Life, but is fallen vastly below the Seize of Men; for it is
not Reason, but Religion, which is the Glory and Perfection of Humane Nature,
as every one must acknowledge, who believes that there is a God; for God is the
noblest Object of our Minds, and to adore and worship him, is to act according
to the most excellent capacity of our Natures.

I doubt not at all, but brute Creatures have an inferior degree of Reason,
fitted to the low Seize of their Natures, and that they commonly reason
more wisely and truly in their own Concerns, than Irreligious Men do in theirs;
but they cannot know God, nor worship him; they cannot see nor adore his
infinite Perfections, their Reason is confined to a narrow compass, to those
things which concern the preservation of their own Being, and the enjoyments of
their Natures; and such a kind of Being is an Irreligious Man, whose Reason
indeed is capable of higher and nobler flights, but is pinnioned down, and
confined to present and sensible Objects, and serves only to corrupt and
deprave a more excellent Nature into a brutish State.

Now if that be the true Wisdom and Glory, the specifical Difference of a Man,
which distinguishes him from all inferior Creatures, then Religon, as the
Scripture tells us, must be his Wisdom; and whatever Wit Irreligious Men may
pretend to, being so much below the Seize, nay, being no better than the
Corruption of Humane Nature, it may set them a degree above the Wit of a Beast,
but is no better than folly in a Man.

2. There is not a more certain demonstration of folly, than for Men to act
foolishly, especially in Matters of vast Concernment; and this consideration
impeaches the Irreligious Man of the most despicable Folly; as to give you some
Instances of this:

Some neglect to worship God out of a careless trifling humor; they never
consider what God is, how much they owe to him, how entirely they are at his
disposal, what the danger and punishment of Irreligion is; and if it be folly
not to use the wisest Thoughts, and best Consideration we have, in matters of
the greatest moment, then Irreligion is Folly.

Others neglect the Worship of God, because it disturbs them in the secure
enjoyment of their Lusts, and puts a great many black and melancholy Thoughts
into their Heads: which is just as wise, as to shut our Eyes, and run down a
Precipice, because it makes us melancholy to open our Eyes and see our Danger;
whereas a wise Man would rather choose to open his Eyes, that he might see how
to avoid it.

Others take offense at Religion, because they see a great many Hypocrites
zealous pretenders to Religion, and they had as good never mind Religion as be
Hypocrites: but is this a good Reason not to mind Religion, because Hypocrites
pretend to Religion, when indeed they have none? Cannot they be sincerely
Religious, though Hypocrites be not? Are there not a great many Religious Men,
who are no Hypocrites? And is not that a better Reason to be Religious without
Hypocrisy, than to be of no Religion, to declare to all the World that we are
not Hypocrites?

Others are scandalized at the great variety of Religions, which are as
contrary to each other, as Light to Darkness; and conclude, that it is to no
purpose to trouble their heads about any form of Religion, for they may be
mistaken after all, and they had as good be of no Religion, as not of the
right. But if these Men did but wisely consider of what infinite concernment
true Religion is, they would conclude quite otherwise, that seeing there is so
much dispute which is the true Religion, they would use the greater diligence
and honesty to find it out, and hope that God would pardon those Mistakes,
which are merely the Errors of their Understanding, when they offer up to him a
pious and devout Soul; that an honest Man, who is not biased by Interest, and
does not choose a false Religion upon a Design, will be accepted for his
Sincerity and Devotion, by that God who is a merciful and compassionate Father,
and very ready to pardon all invincible Mistakes, when they are not made
invincible by our own Fault: But to cast off all Religion, because there is
some difficulty in finding the right, is just as if a Traveller, when he meets
with a great many cross Ways, should resolve to go no farther, for fear he
should mistake the right Road, though he is sure that he shall never get home
if he go no farther.

Others are so tired with their Secular Affairs, and hard Labor all the week,
that truly they must make Sunday a Holy Day, not for Devotion, but for Rest and
Pastime, as a Holy Day commonly now signifies; and therefore they cannot go to
Church, which will tire them more than all their weeks Work did; that is to say,
They feel the Wants and Necessities of their Bodies, and must take care of
them, but their Souls must shift for themselves; they cannot bear hunger and
cold, and nakedness; but never consider, Who can dwell with devouring Fire? who
can dwell with everlasting Burnings? But more of this presently.

Such kind of foolish Reasonings as these, make Men neglect the Worship of God;
and should any Man act or reason so weakly in his Worldly Affairs, he would be
begged for a Fool if he were worth the keeping.

Thus I have endeavored to convince these Men of the Evil, Danger, and Folly
of Irreligion; I now proceed to the second Thing proposed, to persuade them to
take care of their Souls.

2. Let me therefore earnestly exhort all Men to take care of their Souls; for
this is the true Reason why they neglect the Worship of God, Because they are
sottishly unconcerned what will become of their Souls after Death, whether they
shall be happy or miserable in the World to come. For all Men, who make it the
great Business of their Lives to get Heaven, who are impatiently desirous to
see God, and to enjoy him, who are afraid of nothing so much, as of being
banished from his Presence: I say, these Men are serious and hearty in their
Religion, They seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness. For tho
Religious Worship be a Natural Debt, which we owe to God as we are his
Creatures, yet God in great wisdom and goodness has so ordered all the parts of
Worship, that we may at the same time, and in the same Act, worship and glorify
God, and serve and supply the Wants and Necessities of our own Souls. The
Worship of Innocent Creatures, consisted principally in praising that great,
wise, and bountiful Maker and Governor of the World; but the Religion of
Sinners is fitted to a lapsed state, to heal and recover our Souls, restore us
to the perfection and happiness of our Natures, and to entitle us to new and
glorious Rewards.

Since we are Sinners, God has made it one part of Religious Worship, and
given us great encouragement, to confess our Sins, and to ask pardon and
forgiveness for them: And can any Man, who loves his Soul, and considers, that
the Wages of Sin is Death, be careless in suing out his Pardon. Must thou die
eternally, Sinner, unless thou obtainest thy Pardon from God, and will thou not
fall down upon thy Knees, and lie prostrate in the Dust before him? Do thou
think it sufficient to reserve this Work for thy last Breath, when thou art so
hasty to procure a Pardon from thy Prince, when thou have only forfeited a
perishing Estate, or a mortal Life? Me thinks I should see thee run with all
speed to Church, for fear thou should come too late to offer up thy
Confessions and Prayers with the Congregation, by the Mouth of God's Minister,
who is appointed to pray for thee, and to receive that reviving Absolution
which is promised to all humble Penitents, confessing and praying Sinners. And
since our own unworthiness our manifold and great Sins, might justly discourage
us from approaching the Presence of so Holy a God; God has in infinite Mercy
provided a great High Priest for us, to offer up our Prayers to God, and to
intercede for us; and has commanded us to come to him in his Name; and shall we
forfeit our Interest in our Savior's Intercession, by neglecting to beg pardon
in his Name? For the Work of our great High Priest, is to offer up our Prayers
to God, incensed and perfumed with his own Merits: But this supposes, that we
must offer up our Prayers to God in his Name; and therefore those who do not
pray to God in Christ's Name, have no part nor interest in his Intercession: He
is an Advocate for none but those who Worship God in his Name. And since our
Natures are greatly corrupted, and we are very weak and unable to serve God in
an acceptable manner, in our own strength, God has made it a part of his
Worship to beg the supplies of his Grace, and has promised to give his Holy
Spirit to them who ask him; and when we find, by daily experience, how liable
we are to the Assaults of Temptations, and how easily we are conquered by them,
and know how impossible it is ever to get to Heaven, unless we be renewed and
sanctified by the Holy Ghost; Can any Man, who loves his Soul, exposes himself
naked and unarmed to a tempting World and Devil, without so much as begging the
Auxiliary Forces, and Divine Aids of the Holy Spirit, which we may have for
asking, but shall never have without. You are glad of any help and assistance
to promote your secular Interest. When a City is besieged by powerful and
numerous Enemies, they send Ambassadors to their Allies and Confederates, and
will never want help for want of asking it; and shall we be so foolish as to
become the triumph and the scorn, and a prey to our Spiritual Enemies, for want
of crying to God to save us?

For the same Reason, our blessed Lord has appointed and instituted the Holy
Feast of his Sacramental Body and Blood, as a conveyance of new Life and Grace
to us; and have those Men any care of their Souls, as well as any honor for
their Crucified Lord, who deny themselves so inestimable a privilege of
feasting on the Symbols of Christ's Body and Blood? which seals to all worthy
Communicants the pardon of their Sins, and more firmly unites them to Christ
their Head, and to each other, and intitles them to the powerful influence of
that Divine Spirit, which dwells in, actuates, and governs the whole Church and
Body of Christ.

Thus we are very ignorant, and very unmindful of our Duty, and God in great
goodness has appointed a whole Order of Men, whose Business it is to instruct
us, to teach us what we do not know, and to mind us of those Things which we
are apt to forget, and has made it our Duty, and a part of his Worship, to
attend their Instructions. And though I hope, in such an Age, and such a Church
as this, there are a great many Christians so knowing, that they need not be
taught their Duty; yet it is sad to consider how many very ignorant Professors
there are, that want to be instructed in the first Rudiments of Christian
Knowledge; and warm, zealous, and frequent Exhortations, are of great use to the
most knowing Christians.

And though a great many, who have little other Religion, are forward enough to
hear Sermons, yet it grieves me to think how many there are who will live, die,
and perish for ever in their Ignorance, because they refuse Instruction; who
can never be persuaded to attend, either Sermons, or Catechizing, or so much as
reading the Scripture; and yet these very Men could be contented to hear a
large discourse of News, or Trade, or Merchandise; or how they might order
their Affairs to better advantage, and are glad to be told of any Mistake or
Error which might have been prejudicial to them in their secular Affairs. And I
need not tell you the Reason of this Difference, they are in very good earnest
to get this World, but are very indifferent and unconcerned about the next. So
that all the parts of Religious Worship, as they are expressions of our
Reverence and Devotion for God, so they immediately tend to the happiness of
our Souls; the Virtue of them is seen, in transforming us into a Divine Nature,
in obtaining the Pardon of our Sins, and the Supplies of God's Grace, in making
us Holy here, and eternally Happy hereafter; and therefore if we love our
Souls, let us constantly exercise our selves in all the Parts and Offices of
Religious Worship.

And methinks, it should be no such hard Matter to persuade Men to love and
take care of their Souls; for can any Man have a greater Concernment in the
World than this? For to love our Souls, signifies no more than to love our
Selves, and to take care of our own happiness; for the Soul is the Man, the
Body is only the Organ and Instrument of the Soul, an earthly Tabernacle,
wherein it dwells in this state of its Pilgrimage, but it is our Soul only that
is capable of Joy and Pleasure, or Grief and Sorrow; and therefore as the Soul
is either happy or miserable, so is the Man, and all Men desire to be happy;
this they seek with unwearied endeavors; this makes all that busle and stir
that is in the World, that all Men are a catching after happiness, and
scrambling for it: Why then you say, What is the Dispute and Difficulty, since
all Men do love their Souls, that is, desire to be happy? and it is only the
Soul that relishes Happiness, or is the Subject wherein Happiness dwells.

This is true, and yet very few Men love their Souls: for we must consider,
that the Soul of Man is capable of a twofold happiness; one as it lives in
this gross Body of Flesh and Blood; another as it lives without it in a
separate state, or receives it again refined and purged, made a Heavenly and
Spiritual Body.

Now as the Soul dwells in these Earthly Bodies, it is apt to be mightily
pleased with sensual Enjoyments, and such Objects as are represented to us by
our Senses; and this is the Happiness which most Men are fond of in this World,
which tempts them to all those sensual Lusts which St. John comprises under the
Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of Life; but now this
is not the greatest happiness of the Soul, because dwelling in this Body is not
its most perfect State; it is to dwell but a little while in this Body, and
then can enjoy these bodily Pleasures no longer, and therefore that is called
the happiness of the Soul, which is agreeable to its most perfect state of
Life, and commensurate to an eternal duration.

So that the Controversy in short is this, Whether we will prefer an imperfect,
unsatisfactory, momentary Happiness, or such a Happiness, which is the biggest
our Souls are capable of, and will last to Eternity; and it is strange there
should be any difficulty in this choice.

For can an Immortal Being, who is to live Eternal Ages, be satisfied with such
perishing Joys as wax old, and expire in half an Age? It would be thought very
strange, that an Immortal Creature should grow weary of Life, and be contented
to fall into nothing after threescore or fourscore Years; and yet this is a
much more reasonable desire, than to choose such a happiness as will last but
sixty or eighty Years, when we must live for ever; and therefore the Atheist is
much a wiser Man than an irreligious and profane Worldling.

Every one contemns the folly of such a Prodigal, who spends a fair Estate in a
very short time, and wastes away the rest of his Life in Poverty and Beggary;
and yet three or four Years pleasure bears some proportion to threescore or
fourscore Years; but threescore or fourscore Years have no proportion at all to
Eternity.

Were there no other punishment of such Folly, but to live for ever in a sense
of our Want, to find no suitable Objects to entertain our Minds, but to languish
perpetually with pining and unsatisfied Desires; yet this were like the pain of
perpetual Hunger and Thirst, somewhat worse than the delays of Hope, even the
torment of Despair.

And yet it is much worse still than this; for such Men, when they come into
the other World, will be convinced what Happiness it is they have lost, when
they shall see them come from the East and from the West, from the North and
from the South, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
God, and themselves shut out; when they shall see victorious Saints, who have
triumphed over all the Follies and Vanities, all the Smiles, Flatteries, and
Terrors of this World, clothed with Bodies of pure Light, and rewarded with
immarcessible Crowns of Glory, singing Eternal Halelujahs to their God and
Savior; and when all the toys and pleasures of this World are gone and past,
and nothing is present but the happiness of the next, it will infinitely more
afflict them to think they have missed of Heaven, than it would do now to lose
their Estates and Honors, and let slip any opportunity they had to make
themselves the Universal Monarchs of the World.

And yet it is much worse than this too, for such Men will not only miss of
Heaven, but sink into Hell, a place of endless* Torments, where there is no
ease, and no hope. So well might our Savior ask that Question, What shall it
profit a Man to gain the whole World, and to lose his own Soul? Or what shall a
Man give in exchange for his Soul? And can any thing in the World deserve more
of our care and industry, than to obtain eternal Happiness, and to avoid
eternal Misery? And yet this cannot be done, without a sincere and devout
performance of all the Acts of Religious Worship. Those Persons do not deserve
to be God's Friends and Favorites who do not worship him, and those are not
capable of the Joys of Heaven, who cannot relish the Pleasures of Religion, and
the Worship of God.

CHAP. II.
Concerning those who forsake Christian-Assemblies, for want of a due sense of
the Nature and Necessity of Public Worship. Several proofs of the Necessity of
Public Worship; from the Nature of Religious Worship; from the Nature of the
Mosaic Worship; from the Institution of a Christian Church, and the Nature of
Christian Worship and Discipline.

OThers there are, who either wholly, or in a great measure, forsake our
Communion, for want of a due sense of the Nature and Necessity of Public
Worship; They acknowledge it is their Duty to Worship God, but they think they
can worship God as well at Home as at Church; that it is not the Place which
makes their Prayers more or less effectual; but God hears us, wherever we
pray, and is always pleased, even with the single and private Devotions of good
Men; and the World is now so well stored with good Books, that they can spend
their time in reading at Home to as good purpose, as if they went to Church to
hear a Sermon. And I need not observe how many there are, who Act according to
these Principles, i. e. who seldom or never come to Church, though how they
spend their Time at home I know not; but have great reason to suspect, that
with too many, a warm Bed in the morning, and a bottle of Wine in the
Afternoon, serves instead even of their private Devotions.

Now before I proceed to show what a great and dangerous mistake this is, I
shall briefly expostulate the Case with these Men, supposing it to be as they
say, That we may serve God very acceptably at Home, without attending the
public Assemblies of Christians. Supposing the Case to be equal in it self
considered, yet I beseech you, Why should you prefer your own Private before
the Public Devotions of the Church? Cannot you serve God, at least as well at
Church as you do at Home? And Public Worship having bin the universal Practice
of the World in all Ages, and under all Religions, does it become a modest Man
to affront so general a Custom, which if it be not expressly commanded by God,
yet at least has no hurt in it? And since the generality of Mankind have not
only consented in such a Practice, but have believed it to be their Duty; to
pay their joined and public Acknowledgments to their Universal Lord and
Father; and are apt to suspect these Men of Atheism and Irreligion, who deny or
neglect it: What Reason can be sufficient to persuade any Religious Man to
oppose so universal a Belief, and to incur the public censures of Insidelity
and Irreligion?

Especially since the public Exercise of Religion is enjoined by Humane Laws;
and to neglect it, is an affront to the public Wisdom and Authority of a
Nation; which, though other things were equal, makes public Assemblies a Duty,
and private Devotion when we ought and may attend on public Assemblies, to be
a Sin.

And indeed we cannot imagine, that God should take it well of any Man, how
devout soever he be in private, who will rather affront the Universal Practice,
founded upon as Universal a Consent of Mankind, will rather be thought an
Atheist or an Insidel, will rather trample upon all Humame Authority, than join
with his Fellow Creatures, and Subjects, and Neighbors, in the public Acts of
his Worship.

Put the case any of you were the Father of a very numerous offspring, and
that without any express Command from you, most of your Children should agree
by a common consent to visit you together once a week to ask your Blessing, and
pay their thankful Acknowledgments for your great care of them in their
Education, and in that liberal Provision you have made for them; but one or two
of your Children should choose to come alone to you in private, when no body
sees them, and obstinately refuse to come with the rest of their Brethren,
though they were censured by them with undutifulness and ingratitude for such a
Neglect. I am apt to think, there is none of you would accept of such private
Acknowledgments, from those who refused the more public and solemn Addresses:
and we have as little reason to expect acceptance from God, when we refuse to
worship him in the Congregation of his Saints, how devout soever we are alone.

Nay, though we should grant, that private Devotions were as acceptable to God
as Public, supposing they were performed with equal Zeal and Fervency of Mind,
yet upon this account Public Worship has much the advantage; good Company in
all Cases is apt to give us greater briskness and vigor of Mind: the very
presence of devout Souls, who breath forth their ardent Desires to God, is
enough to fire our cold and chill Spirits, and good Men receive warmth and
quickness from each other, and grow into greater ardours and transports:
Hypocrites have no other sense of Devotion, but what they receive from good
Company; but good Men themselves, who have a true and constant sense of God,
many times experience a great difference in this respect, between their private
Retirements, and the more public and solemn Acts of Worship.

Thus you see, that tho we could produce no express proof of the necessity of
public Worship; yet there are sufficient reasons to prevail with every wise
and good Man, not to withdraw himself from the Communion of Religious
Assemblies; and therefore indeed we shall never find, that a truly wise and
good Man does. Private Devotion may be a pretense to justify the neglect of
public Worship; but I dare appeal to these Men's own Consciences, that it is
never the true Cause; for Men who do heartily desire to worship God, will choose
to worship him in the best and most solemn manner, that is, in the public
Assemblies of Christians. But yet to take away this very pretense from them, I
come now to consider our Obligations to public Worship.

1. And first I shall argue from the Nature of Religious Worship, and the
fundamental Reasons of it. Now Worship signifies all that part of Religion,
which immediately respects God, as it is distinguished from Sobriety and
Righteousness, and is commonly known by the name of Godliness; as the Apostle
divides the several Duties of Religion into three parts, living soberly,
righteously, and godlily in this present World. Tit. 2. 12.
And the proper Notion of worshipping God, is to honor him; all the several
Acts of Worship honor God, as they signify our great sense and devout
acknowledgment of his Being, Power, and Providence, of the Excellencies and
Perfections of his Nature, our dependence on him, submission to him, trust and
affiance in him; such as are great and venerable apprehensions of God, Prayers,
Praises, Thanksgivings, and the like.

Now every Man must acknowledge, that Honor is always the greater, the more
public it is. That he who has great and admiring Thoughts of God, and
publishes this to the World in the most solemn manner, honors God a great deal
more, than he who keeps these Thoughts to himself, and praises God so
privately, that no Man knows it but himself. The Prophet David resolves to make
his Praises of God as public as he could; I will declare thy Name unto my
Brethren; in the midst of Psalm 22. 22.
the Congregation will I praise thee. And exhorts others, to exalt him in the
Congregation of the People, and praise him in Psalm. 107. 32. Psalm. 111. 1.
the Assemblies of the Elders. Praise ye the Lord, I will praise the Lord with
my whole Heart, in the Assembly of the Upright, and in the Congregation.

And besides this, we may consider, that there are two parts of Worship; the
Worship of the Mind, which consists in honoring God with devout and pious
Affections, in bowing our Souls before him; and the external and visible
expressions and significations of this Honor, which is external and visible
Worship, such as praying and praising God with an audible Voice, falling down
on the ground, kneeling, uncovering the Head, and those other outward
Expressions of Devotion, which signify the humble and devout Affections of the
mind; now tho these external signs of Honor may and ought to be used in
Private and Closet Devotions, so it be with due caution, not to make them
public, which is a piece of Pharisaical Hypocrisy; yet the proper use of them
is in public Acts of Worship, to testify our concurrence and agreement with
other devout Persons in the same Acts of Worship; for God knows our Thoughts
and Affections, and therefore needs not to be acquainted with our Desires, by
clothing them with words; he hears the most silent breathings of our Souls,
and therefore needs not that we should speak to him in an audible Voice; he
sees the bending of our Souls, and the most humble submission and prostration
of our Minds, and needs not be informed of this, by bending or bowing our
Bodies to him; but Men cannot see this but by external signs, nor join in the
same Petitions and Praises, without words so audibly pronounced, that all
present may hear them; and therefore those Scriptures which require these
external Signs of Worship, suppose that this Worship must be public too, that
we must meet together, to offer up our united Prayers and Thanksgivings to God.
And accordingly we find, that all the Psalms of David were penned for public
Worship, for the use of the Temple, and delivered to the Master of Music, to
be sung as public Hymns of Prayer or Thanksgiving.

And if we enquire into the fundamental Reasons of Worship, we shall find our
Obligations much more strong to public than to private Worship, tho that be
our Duty also, especially when we want such public Opportunities.

The natural Reason of worshipping God, is, that he is the most excellent and
perfect Being, the great and universal Parent and Benefactor, and the Sovereign
Lord and Judge of the World; for it becomes us to acknowledge and adore him who
is our Maker, in whom we live, move, and have our being; who feeds and clothes
us, who defends us from Evil, who encompasseth us with his loving kindness and
tender mercies; and therefore these are the Subjects of most of those Forms of
Worship, Prayer and Thanksgiving, which we find recorded in Scripture,
especially in the Writings of the Old Testament.

Now all this is a more cogent Reason for public than for private Worship; for
though we are bound to acknowledge those particular Favors and Blessings which
God has bestowed on us, which is the foundation of private Worship; yet God is
not so much to be considered a private, as a public Benefactor, as an
universal Parent, and sovereign Lord, and therefore must be worshipped as a
public Benefactor, that is, with public Worship; for there is no visible
Worship of God, as the Supreme Lord of the World, unless it be public. And
since all Mankind are God's Creatures, and the Subjects of his Care and
Providence, and are every one of them bound to worship the same God, natural
Reason will inform us, that we ought all to join in the same acts of Worship,
which gives a greater awe and solemnity to it: for we cannot think that Man was
made a sociable Creature for every thing else, but only for Acts of Worship,
which is his highest End and greatest Perfection; and therefore if Men unite
themselves into Societies, for Civil Order and Government, it is as highly
reasonable that they should unite for Religious Worship, unless we think that
Bodies Politic, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, are not bound to worship God, as
every particular Person is; tho it be an old Maxim of Government, That Religion
is the surest Bond and Cement of Civil Societies. Especially when we consider,
that the greatest Blessings we are to praise God for, are such as are bestowed
on us in common with others, or all Mankind, such as the influences of Heaven,
and the fruitfulness of the Earth; the blessing of Peace and Plenty,
deliverance from Enemies, the advantages of good Government, and all other
National Mercies, and above all, the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus
Christ; so that God is defrauded of his Glory, if our Acknowledgments be not as
public as his Blessings are: For private Praises are not just Returns, nor due
Acknowledgment of public Mercies. And therefore when the Psalmist celebrates
the public Mercies of God, he invites all Israel to join in his Praises.
Praise ye the Lord; sing unto the Lord Psalm. 149. 1, 2.
a new Song, and his praise in the Congregation of Saints. Let Israel rejoice
in him that made him; let the Children of Zion be joyful in their King. And all
this is confirmed by the universal practice of Mankind, who tho they differed
in the Objects and Nature of their Worship, yet all agreed in making their
Worship public and solemn; and such an universal Consent, is no less than the
Voice of Nature.

Secondly; Let us now consider what that Worship is which God himself
instituted and ordained; and I shall at present instance in the Jewish Worship,
which was typical also of the Christian. Now it is so evident, that every part
of the Jewish Worship, which God commanded by Moses, was of a public Nature,
and to be performed in a public manner, that I need not insist on the proof of
it.

Their several sorts of Sacrifices were to be offered at the Tabernacle or
Temple, by the Priests who were public Persons; even those particular
Sacrifices which were offered for particular Men, either Expiatory or
Eucharistical, to make atonement for their Sins, or to be an oblation of Praise
for particular Mercies, were yet offered at the Temple; and besides this, they
had Sacrifices for the whole Congregation, as on the great day of Expiation,
which was not for any particular Man, but for the whole Body of the People, and
therefore considered them all as united in the same Religion and Worship.

God appointed also a public Place of Worship, viz. the Tabernacle or Temple
at Jerusalem; and a public place for Worship can be of no use, if there were
no obligation to public Worship.

God also instituted public Times of Worship, the Seventh day Sabbath, their
New Moons and Annual Festivals, when all their Males were to appear three times
a Year before the Lord: And such Times as these are described by calling
Assemblies, and solemn Meetings; Isa. 1. 13.
because then they met together for public Worship; for indeed it seems to be
a contradiction to appoint public and solemn Times for private Worship. If Men
are bound only to worship God in private, there is no need of public Days of
Rest dedicated to God's Worship, for every Man may take his own Time for it, as
he finds most convenient and useful; but fixed and stated Times of Worship, do
necessarily suppose public Worship, and evidently prove, that Solemn and
Public Days for Worship are not sanctified merely by private Acts of Worship.
And therefore we may consider further, that God entered into Covenant with the
Children of Israel, not as particular Persons, but as the Seed of Abraham, as a
People and Nation whom he had chose for himself, to be his peculiar
Inheritance; and therefore every part of his Covenant (and the institution of
Religious Worship, is none of the least parts of it) concerns them as a Nation:
So that this was a National Covenant, and a National Religion and Worship; and
I need add no more, to prove that, according to God's Institution, it was a
public Worship; for God was the King of Israel, and therefore required as
public Homage from them, as other Princes expect from their Subjects; as
public, I say, tho he can Challenge more divine Regards than earthly Princes,
because he was their God as well as their King. And therefore the Children of
Israel themselves are frequently called the Congregation of Israel, and the
whole Congregation, as consisting of such Persons as used to meet together for
public Worship, how had a right to Worship at the Tabernacle of the
Congregation.

Let us then thirdly consider the Religion of our Savior, and what Obligations
that lays on us to all the Acts of Public Worship.

Now I need not tell you, that Christ has instituted a Church, which is so
often in the Writings of the Apostles called a Church, and the Church of
Christ. Now (...) properly signifies a Meeting and Assembly, which is called
together, and so acquaints us what the Nature of a Christian Church is, that it
is a Society of Men united and combined together in the Faith and Worship of
Christ; For the Church of Christ is purely a Religious Society. Our Savior had
no Temporal Kingdom, as the Jews expected; his Kingdom was not of this World,
and therefore his Church is nothing else but a Society of Men for the Worship
of God through Christ; which is a plain demonstration, that every Member of the
Christian Church is bound to join in all the Offices of public Worship; for
there can be no Christian Church, if there be no public Worship, because the
Christian Church is a Religious Society, that is, a Society instituted for
Religious Worship; nor can he be a Member of the Christian Church, who wholly
neglects or despises public Worship; for he can at best be only a nominal
Member of an Assembly, who neglects to assemble with them, especially when it
is essential to our Membership to frequent such Assemblies.

Now we may safely conclude, that Christ would never have instituted a Church,
or Religious Assembly for public Worship, had not public Worship been much
more acceptable to God than our private Devotions; had it been so indifferent,
as some Men presume, whether we worship God singly, or in a Body and Society;
whether at Home in our Closet, or in the public Congregation.

And we may observe farther, That this Church is called the Body of Christ, and
the Apostle tells us, that there is but one body, and one Spirit, even as
Ephesians. 4. 4.
you are called in one hope of your Calling: Now to be one Body, as all good
Christians are, if Christ have but one Body, signifies a very near and intimate
union between all the Members of the Body; this is agreed by all, but then the
Question is, wherein this Unity consists? Some place the Unity of Christians in
one Faith, in believing all the Articles of the Christian Faith, or in having a
mutual Kindness and Charity, and it must be acknowledged, that these are
absolutely necessary to unite Christians to make them the one Body of Christ.
But yet this is not all, for there may be great Dissensions and Schisms, where
there is but one Faith; as it was of old in those fearful Schisms of the
Novatians and Donatists, who differed not in Matters of Faith, but Discipline;
and as our own sad Experience convinces us at this Day; and Men may exercise a
Christian Charity and Forbearance to each other, without being Members of the
same Body; and therefore we must consider, that this one Body is one Church;
and the Unity of a Church, or Religious Assembly, must of necessity consist in
one Communion; and therefore he who separates himself from Christian Communion,
who forsakes the Public Assemblies for Religious Worship, destroys the Unity
of the Church: which is a sufficient Argument, that public Worship, when we
can enjoy the Opportunities of it, is essential to the Notion and Being of a
Christian Church.

And therefore we find, that this was the constant practice of Christians, from
the very first Foundations of a Christian Church. Thus we read of those new
Converts, That they continued Acts 2. 42.
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread,
and in Prayers. And they continuing Verse. 46.
daily with one accord in the Temple, and in breaking Bread from House to
House, did eat their Meat with gladness and singleness of Heart.

Here you see the Example of the first Christians, they continued in the
fellowship of the Apostles, in the communion of Doctrine, Sacraments, and
Prayers, which is the true description of the Unity of the Christian Church;
and therefore the Christian Church is called, a Communion or Fellowship. That 1 John 1. 3.
which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that you may have
fellowship with us, ((...), that you may become Christians, and enter into our
Society) and truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. And therefore the Sacrament of Baptism is our admission into the
Christian Church; that is, gives a right to all the Privileges of Christian
Communion, for we are baptized into one 1 Cor. 12. 13.
Body; and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is expressly called the Communion;
it is that common Table which all Christians have a right to; The Cup 1 Cor.
10. 26. 27.
of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ?
the Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we
being many, are one Bread, and one Body; for we are all partakers of that one
Bread. It is essential to the nature of the Lord's Supper, that it is a common
Feast of which all Christians partake; for it signifies not only our Union to
Christ, but our Union to one another in the same Body; for which Reason the
Reformed Churches universally condemn the private Masses of the Church of Rome,
where the Priest receives by himself; and truly, private Devotions, when they
thrust out public Worship, are much of the same nature.

So that the very Institution of a Church, the Example of the Primitive
Christians, and those Sacraments of our Religion, which our Savior has
instituted as the Badges of Christianity, and the Conveyances of Spiritual Life
and Grace, may convince us how necessary Christian Communion and Public
Worship is, if we will be the Disciples of Christ, and we are expressly
commanded by the Writer to the Hebrews, Not to forsake the assembling of our
selves together.

But we may consider farther, that Christ has instituted an Evangelical
Priesthood, the public Ministers of Religion, whom he has commanded to
instruct his Church, to feed his Flock, to pray for his People, and to bless in
his Name, to whom he has committed the Power of the Keys, to let in, or to shut
out of the Church. Now what use could there be for public Ministers, unless
public Worship were a great and necessary Duty? If it were so indifferent a
thing, whether Christians frequent the Religious Assemblies, and continue in
their Doctrine and Fellowship, breaking Bread and Prayers, it does not seem
worth the while to have invested Men with such Power and Authority, which is of
so little use, especially since Christianity is so much known, and so far
spread in the World; whereas our Savior promises to be with his Apostles unto
the end of the World; which could not be meant of the Persons of the Apostles,
for they are long since dead; but of their Successors, who retain their Office
and Power, as far as is necessary to the present state of the Church.

And the force of this Argument from the Apostolical Office will be better
understood, if we consider wherein the Power of the Keys consists, which Christ
committed to St. Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, or what is the true
ancient Discipline of the Christian Church. Now the Power of the Church, which
is truly Spiritual, consists only in letting into the Church or shutting out.
The admission into the Church, is by administering Baptism, which they are made
the external Judges of, who are fit to be received into the Church by Baptism,
and who not; shutting out of the Church, is by exercising Censures upon
Offenders, which consists only in this, in removing such Men from Christian
Communion, either in part or wholly, for a time or for ever, according to the
severity of the ancient Discipline. Some were not permitted to come into the
Christian Assemblies, but lay at the door lamenting their wickedness, and
begging their Prayers. Others were admitted to public Instructions, but not to
the Communion of Prayers; or at least if they were admitted to the Prayers of
the Catechumens, those who were publicly instructed and catechized, but not
yet baptized, were not allowed to be present at the Prayers of the Faithful.
Others were admitted to Prayers, but not to the Supper of the Lord. Now all
this supposes, that Christian Communion is not only a necessary Duty, but a
great Privilege, since they had no other way of punishing Offenders, but by
denying them the liberty of Worship in their Assemblies; but what would those
Men value Church Censures, who make so slight of public Worship, as daily to
excommunicate themselves? Certainly these Men are greatly mistaken, or else the
very Office and Authority of an Apostle, is a very inconsiderable thing, and
that dreadful Sentence of Excommunication, which was so formidable in the
Ancient Church, is a very innocent and harmless thing, since Men may as well
worship God alone as in Christian Assemblies; and that they might do, when
excommunicated or shut out of Christian Assemblies.

And I observe farther, That our Savior requires of us, the public profession
of his Name and Worship, which necessarily includes public Worship; Whosoever
therefore shall confess Mat. 10. 32, 33.
me before Men, him will I confess before my Father which is in Heaven; but
whosoever shall deny me before Men, him will I deny before my Father which is
in Heaven. To confess Christ, is to own him for our Lord and Savior, not only
in words (tho too many such there are, whom our Savior will not own, will not
confess before his Father which is in Heaven) but by paying him such public
Homage and Worship, as is a visible demonstration, that we do own him for our
Lord. For thus to confess Christ, signifies, With the mouth Romans 14. 10, 13
Confession is made unto Salvation; for whosoever shall call upon the Name of
the Lord, shall be saved.

The Christian Church was to be a Visible Society, like a City that is set on a
Hill, or like a Candle placed in a Candlestick, Mat. 5. 14, 15.
to give light to all that are in the House: But the Church can never be
visibly distinguished from the rest of the World, without the public and
visible exercise of Religion; and therefore our Savior exhorts his Disciples,
Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven; which must refer to all parts of
Religion, and therefore includes Acts of Worship, as well as Acts of Mercy and
Charity.

To conclude this Argument, It is the acknowledged Duty of a Christian Prince,
to take care to encourage and propagate true Religion in his Dominions; which
can never be done without encouraging public Worship, correcting public
Abuses, and punishing the neglect or profanation of it: for if Men's Religion be
confined to their Closets, no Man can possibly tell what Religion they are of;
they may be Pagans, Mahometans, Papists, or Infidels, and no Man the wiser, if
they can but keep their own counsel: And therefore if it be the Duty of
Magistrates to encourage and reform Religion, and yet nothing can fall within
his cognizance, or under his care, but what is public, it is easy to conclude,
That public Worship, which is the Care of public Magistrates, is the Duty
also of private Christians.

Possibly some may think, that I have taken a great deal of needless pains in
proving so plain a Thing; and truly I should think so too, were I not sensible
by my own experience, how many professed Christians there are, who have very
little apprehension of the necessity of public Worship; and therefore
sometimes come to Church to comply with the fashion of the Place; and sometime
stay at Home, to comply with their own careless Humors.

If any such read these Papers, I would desire and beg of them, seriously to
consider this Matter, and not to abuse themselves by some childish and
sophistical Reasonings, into a Neglect so dishonorable to God, and so
destructive to their Souls.

Suppose you did really (as some I fear only pretend) spend your time in
private Prayer, and Reading and Meditation, yet can you reasonably expect that
God should accept, should hear and answer your private Prayers, when they
signify a Neglect, if not a Contempt of public Worship? which is so much more
pleasing to him, as it is more honorable to be praised by a multitude of
devout Souls in the Face of the Sun, than in a secret Corner, where no Body
sees nor hears us. Can you think your single Prayers will as much prevail with
God, as when the fervent and ardent Desires of a Christian Assembly are offered
up to God by a public Minister of Religion, whom our Savior has appointed to
pray for us, and to bless in his Name? Can you any where expect such plentiful
effusions of the Divine Grace and Spirit, as in the Congregation of the Saints,
while we attend on Divine Institutions, which are never without a Blessing
annexed unto them, when there are Subjects capable of receiving it? There is
time enough for our private Devotions, without neglecting or affronting public
Worship. And when we remember that Christ has promised to be present in
Christian Assemblies; Wherever two or three are gathered together in his
Name; and that God prefers the Gates of Sion, the place of public Worship,
before all the Dwellings of Jacob, it should make us long and thirst after the
Courts of God, and be glad when they say, Let us go up into the House of the
Lord.

CHAP. III.
Concerning those who plead Conscience for their Separation, and set up
distinct Communions of their own.

SECT. I.
Containing several Directions to such Men, whereby to try their Honesty and
Sincerity in this Matter.

THe third sort of Men, who forsake our Religious Assemblies, are those who
pretend Conscience for their Separation, and set up distinct Communions of
their own; who separate for fear of Sin; and think themselves bound, as they
honor God, and love their own Souls, to avoid our Communion. Now these Men
deserve our most tender regard; for if they be in good earnest, it is very
great pity that those who are so desirous to please God, and to save their
Souls, should fall into such dangerous Mistakes. But yet I do not intend to
dispute the terms of our Communion with them at this time; there are so many
excellent Books writ in defense of the Church of England, that there is no want
of Instruction for those, who are honest and inquisitive; and therefore at
present I shall take another Method, which I hope may prove more effectual,
than disputing commonly does. And I shall reduce what I have to say, under
these three Heads.

First, To put them upon some Inquiries, with reference to their honesty, and
sincerity in this Matter. Secondly, To offer some general Considerations for
their Satisfaction. Thirdly, To remove some popular Pleas and Objections.
First, To put them upon some Inquiries, with reference to their honesty and
sincerity in this Matter. For those who plead Conscience for disobeying their
Governors in Church or State, offer such an insufferable affront to God, if
they be Hypocrites, and carry on other Designs under a pretense of Conscience,
that woe be to that Man, that whited painted Sepulcher, how glorious a
Profession soever he makes, who is thus rotten at the Heart. And in order to
discover your honesty and sincerity, I shall desire every Man, as he fears God,
and loves his Soul, and hopes for Mercy at the terrible appearance of our Lord
Jesus Christ, when he shall come again to judge the Quick and the Dead, to give
a sincere Answer to these following Questions.

First; Whether he do indeed separate from the Communion of our Parish Churches
upon true Principles of Conscience? To pretend to Conscience for any Thing, is
to pretend the Authority of God; for God alone is the Supreme Lord and
Governor of our Consciences in all Cases, where he interposes his Authority;
and to pretend the Authority of God for disobeying our Governors, and dividing
the Church, when we have no such Authority, is like counterfeiting the King's
Broad Seal to justify Treasons and Rebellions.

Few Men make any difference between their private Judgments, Opinions of
Things, and their Conscience; that is, between their own Authority, and the
Authority of God; whatever fancy comes into their Heads, is called their
Conscience, and then they think they are bound to prefer their own private and
groundless Conceits, before all the visible Authority of Church and State. And
if this Principle be once admitted, it is impossible there should be any
lasting Peace and Unity in Church or State. No Man must act against his
Conscience, that is, he must not do any thing which he knows God has expressly
forbid, nor neglect doing any thing which he knows God has commanded. A Divine
Law is the Rule of Conscience, and all the Powers of the World cannot deliver
us from the Obligation of it; in such Cases we must rather choose to obey God
than Men, whatever we suffer by it in this World; but an erroneous, doubting,
scrupulous Conscience, is improperly called Conscience, it being nothing else
but our mistaken Opinion of Things, and the wavering uncertainty of our Minds,
which cannot determine on which side the Truth lies.

But you will object, That this seems to be a fruitless nicety, which signifies
nothing in practice; for whether you will call it Conscience, or private
Opinion, the case is the same; for we must not do any thing which we believe or
fear to be evil, and contrary to a Divine Law; as St. Paul tells us, That he
that doubts, is damned if he eat; Romans 14. 23.
for whatever is not of Faith, is Sin. But notwithstanding this, this
distinction between Men's Consciences, and private Opinions, between their
Judgments directed and governed by the Laws of God, or by other arbitrary and
uncertain Measures, is of very great use to direct our practice.

For first, this should make us religiously careful not to pretend Conscience,
that is, a Divine Authority, where we can produce no Divine Law commanding or
forbidding those things, which we pretend to do, or not to do, under the
Obligations of Conscience. The pretense of Conscience is, that we dare not
displease God, and therefore choose rather to displease Men: but to pretend a
Divine Command and Authority when we have none, is like prophesying falsely in
the Name of God, and entitling the Divine Majesty to all our Dreams and
Fancies; it is to make new Laws which God never made, and to set up a new
Church, and new Religion in his Name. And if we consider what dreadful Woes and
Curses are denounced against those who prophesy falsely in the Name of God, it
should make us all tremble to pretend a Divine Command, without Divine
Authority. This we may see in the Prophet Jeremiah, Then the Lord Jer. 14. 14.
said unto me, The Prophets prophesy lies in my Name, and I sent them not,
neither have I commanded them, neither spoke unto them; they prophesy to you a
false Vision and Divination, and a thing of naught, and the deceit of their
Heart. I have heard what the Prophets said, that Jer. 23. 25, 26.
prophesy lies in my Name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed. How long
shall this be in the Heart of the Prophets that prophesy Lies? Yea, they are
Prophets Verse. 30, 31.
of the deceit of their own Hearts. Therefore behold, I am against the
Prophets, says the Lord, that steal my words every one from his Neighbor.
Behold, I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that use their Tongues, and
say, He says. Behold, I am against them that prophesy false Dreams, says the
Lord, and do tell them, and cause my People to err by their Lies, and by their
lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them; therefore they shall not
profit this People at all, says the Lord. Now tho we understand prophesying
here of foretelling future Events in God's Name, without any Revelation or
Authority from him; yet to pretend that God has commanded or forbidden any
thing which he has not, is not a less Crime, than to prophesy Dreams, and the
deceit of our Hearts: for the mischiefs which these false Prophesies did,
consisted in that ill influence they had upon Men's Lives, that they hindered
their Repentance, and encouraged them in their licentious or idolatrous
practices; and therefore to preach up new Laws in God's Name, is as great an
Evil as it is to prophesy falsely in his Name; and therefore no Man must
pretend Conscience any further, than the express Commands and Prohibitions of
the Scripture. To say that any thing is unlawful to be done which God has not
forbid, or that it is unlawful to do any things in Matters of Worship which God
has not commanded, is to prophesy falsely in God's Name, when they can show no
such Law extant in the whole Bible.

You pretend Conscience, it may be against hearing a form of Prayer, or
receiving the Sacrament kneeling, or being present when the Minister uses a
Surplice in Divine Administrations. Consider now, whether you do not falsely
pretend a Divine Authority, when you have none; show me, where God has forbid
the use of a form of Prayer, or a Surplice, or kneeling at the Lord's Supper,
or the Cross in Baptism: If you think it sufficient that these are not
commanded, show me but that Law, That nothing must be done in the Worship of
God but what he has commanded; and if you can do neither, as I am sure you
cannot, then consider what an impious thing it is, to say, Thus says the Lord,
when he has not said it? to make new Laws, and bind them upon your own
Consciences, and impose them upon other Men, by your own private Authority,
which is a much heavier imposition, than the observation of some few innocent
and indifferent Rites and Ceremonies.

Those who understand their Christian Liberty, in the use of indifferent
Things, and therefore comply with all wholesome Constitutions of the Church, in
obedience to their Civil and Ecclesiastical Governors, do not usurp upon God's
Authority, but obey Divine Laws as Divine, and Humane Laws as Humane; but to
pretend Conscience for disobeying our Governors in indifferent things, is to
teach for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, to make that a Divine Law which
God never made so, viz. That we must do nothing in Religion which God has not
commanded, tho it be commanded by our lawful Superiors.

Secondly; I observe further, That the mere pretense of Conscience, is not a
sufficient justification of any Action, unless we can produce a Divine Law, as
the Rule of our Consciences. It is not Conscience, when we mean no more by it,
than our private Judgment and Opinions of Things, but the Law of God which is
the Rule of our Actions. There never have been worse Actions done, than have
been done out of a pretense of Conscience; and he must be a very uncharitable
Man, who believes that there never was a conscientious Pagan, Papist, or
Mohammedan; and if to act according to our Consciences, that is, our Belief and
Persuasion, be sufficient to acquit us at God's Tribunal, this must necessarily
make all Religions indifferent; for then an honest Pagan, Papist, or Turk, who
lives according to his own Persuasion, is as acceptable to God, as the most
hearty and sincere Protestant; then the Jews were very godly and devout Men,
when in Zeal for their Law they crucified Christ, and persecuted his Apostles,
as believing that they did God good Service; and therefore we must not content
our selves, if we act according to our Belief; but we must be careful to
believe a right, for if we follow the guidance of a blind and ignorant
Conscience, we shall wander and go astray to the infinite danger of our Souls;
as our Savior tells us, That if the Blind lead the Blind, they shall both fall
into the Ditch. These blind Men are such as have blind Consciences, that is,
are ignorant of their Duty; but yet may very sincerely follow their own
Consciences, and very safely too, if Conscience, right or wrong, were a secure
Guide.

Thirdly; I observe further, That we ought not to doubt and scruple any thing
which is not forbid by a Divine Law. The Law of God is the Rule of our
Consciences; and therefore to the Law, and to the Testimony, and if our
Consciences do not speak according to them, it is, because there is no Light in
them. Some Men look upon it as a sign of great tenderness of Conscience to be
doubtful and scrupulous, and value themselves more by their Scruples, than
other Men do by the most clear and distinct Knowledge, and therefore are afraid
of being delivered from their Scruples, and use great Art and Industry to
ensnare and entangle themselves; but I confess, I shall never envy any Man this
Attainment, no more than I do a purblind Eye, which sees very imperfectly, and
therefore gropes for its way with great caution and fear.

Now all Men agree, that when we have any unnecessary Doubts and Scruples, tho
we must not act with such a scrupulous Conscience, yet we ought to lay our
Scruples aside: But then the great Question is, How we should do it? unless Men
can have Scruples, and lay them aside* again when they please; but this seems
to be a plain and easy way to satisfy our Consciences, that since the Law of
God is their Rule, we must never scruple the lawfulness of any thing, which is
not either expressly forbid by God, or by such evident and necessary
consequence, as every honest Man may discern without using any great skill and
subtilty. While Men do not judge of things by the Law of God, but by arbitrary
Rules of their own inventing, or by Fancy and Humor, Prejudice or Interest,
they may like or dislike just what they please, and call it Conscience when
they have done; but the observing this one Rule, would soon cure all
Fanaticism, and restore the Church to Peace and Unity.

To make the Scripture a perfect Rule, not only of Faith and Manners, and all
the essential parts of Worship, (which we readily grant and prove against the
Church of Rome) but also of all external Circumstances, Rites and Ceremonies,
when we find no such thing said in Scripture, nor any such entire and perfect
Form of Discipline and Worship prescribed in it, is the true cause of all our
Divisions, and fills peoples heads with endless and infinite Scruples; but to
make the Commands and Prohibitions of Scripture, the Rule of our Consciences,
and the certain measure and standard of what is lawful and unlawful, so as
neither to condemn nor scruple what is not forbid in Scripture, would
infallibly heal our Breaches, and restore us to Peace with our selves, and with
one another.

Fourthly; I observe further, That neither a mistaken nor a scrupulous
Conscience, can justify our Disobedience to the Commands of our Superiors. We
may indeed oppose the Authority of God, against any humane Power; a Conscience
informed and governed by the Divine Laws will not, cannot, ought not to stoop
to the greatest Prince, who commands any thing contrary to God's Law, because
the Power and Authority of God is most sacred and venerable, absolute and
supreme; but an erroneous, mistaken, doubting, scrupulous Conscience; in a
word, a Conscience which is not governed by the Laws of God, is not armed with
his Authority neither, and therefore cannot justify our Disobedience to
Princes; for it is only the Opinion of a private Man, and therefore cannot
justify Disobedience to public Authority.

Which shows us how necessary it is to inform our Consciences aright, and to
keep close to our Rule, not to neglect any thing which God has commanded, nor
to do any thing which he has forbid; and where God has not determined us by his
Authority, in those things which he has neither commanded nor forbid, to submit
our selves to our lawful Superiors; for nothing but the Authority of God will
justify our Disobedience to Humane Authority, and where we cannot pretend God's
Authority, as we cannot in those things, which are left undetermined, it is a
sin to disobey our Rulers, though they be but Men.

I shall not determine that Question now, Whether a Man, who is under some
Doubts and Scruples, ought not to obey his Governors, notwithstanding those
Scruples, because he that doubts, is only supposed not to be satisfied about
the evil of the thing commanded, but in the mean time he is certain that it is
his Duty to obey his Superiors; and therefore not being sure that he shall sin
in obeying (because he is not sure that what they command is sinful) and being
sure, that he shall sin in disobeying them, (if their Commands be lawful) and
being withal under a necessity of doing one or the other, whether he ought not in
prudence to take the sure side, that is, to wave his Scruples, and obey his
Prince?

I shall at present only observe this one thing, without drawing any peremptory
conclusion from it; That Obedience to our Superiors is a plain and express Law,
and so the proper Rule of Conscience; and therefore if what our Prince commands
us, be not forbid by as plain and express a Law as that is which commands our
Obedience, we seem to oppose our private and uncertain Opinions, against the
express Authority of God, and choose rather to follow our Consciences, where
they are not evidently directed by a Divine Law, than where they are. No Humane
Authority must be set up against the Authority of God, but a Divine Authority,
that is, a Divine Law, is a more certain Rule than private Opinions.

The sum of all is this, That no Man acts out of true Principles of Conscience,
but he who keeps his Eye fixed upon his Rule; who directs and governs his
Conscience by the Law of God; other Men live by their private Humors and
Fancies, are turned aside by every Novel and groundless Conceit: And tho they
may be pleased to call this Conscience, yet it will not excuse them from the
guilt of Schism, if they divide the Church, and rend themselves from the Body
of Christ: Conscience will never justify us, but when we obey and observe our
Rule.

Secondly; Another Question I would propose to these Men, is, Whether they ever
seriously consider the heinous nature of Schism? Now there is great reason to
ask this Question, if we observe with what little consideration most Men engage
themselves in it, how wantonly they forsake the Communion of the Church, as if
it were perfectly indifferent whether they come to Church, or go to a
Conventicle; as if it were no more, than to leave their own Parish Church and
go to another, where there is a Preacher whom they like better.

It is plain, that such Men as these never understood what Christian Unity is,
nor ever considered what the danger of Schism is; that is, that they have not
acted honestly and sincerely in a Matter of such vast importance.

The Christian Church is represented in Scripture as one Body, united to
Christ, who is the Head of his Church, and the Savior of the Body; This St.
Paul makes a powerful Argument to Unity, endeavoring to keep the unity Ephesians.
4. 3, 4.
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace; there is one Body, and one Spirit, even as
you are called in one hope of your Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.
What does this Bond of Peace signify, but the external Communion of the
Christian Church, when Christians live together as Members of the same Body,
and united to each other as the Members of the natural Body are, by Nerves and
Sinews? For Christians are called one Body, with respect to their external
Communion, which is represented in the Lord's Supper, by their eating of one
Bread; as St. Paul argues, The 1 Cor. 10. 16. 17.
Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we
being many, are one Bread, and one Body; for we are all partakers of that one
Bread. So that we become one Body by external and visible Communion, by being
united into one Religious Society for the Worship of God, and our mutual
edification. But speaking the Truth in love, may grow up to him in all things,
which is the Head, even Christ; From whom the whole Body fitly joined together,
by that which every Joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the
Ephesians. 4. 15, 16
measure of every part, makes increase of the Body to the edifying of it self
in love. The Christian Church is a House, and Building, and Temple of God; but
this House and Building is not raised with loose and incoherent Stones, but all
the Building fitly framed together, Ephesians. 2. 21.
grows into a Holy Temple in the Lord. All those Expressions, whereby the
Scripture describes the Unity of the Christian Church, signify one Communion,
as our Savior prays for his Disciples, that they all may be One; and for all
those who in after Ages should believe on him; That they all may be One, as
thou Father art in me, and I in Joh. 17. 20, 21.
thee, that they also may be one in us; that the World may believe that thou
have sent me. From whence it appears, that our Savior speaks of an external
and visible Union, which may be seen and taken notice of in the World. How
frequent are the Exhortations to Christian Love and Unity? Fulfill ye my Phil.
2. 2.
Joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same Love, being of one accord, and of
one mind. This was that new Commandment which Christ gave to his Disciples, as
the badg of their Discipleship, A new Commandment I give unto Joh. 13. 34, 35.
you, that you love one another, even as I have loved you; hereby shall all Men
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another. And wherein this
mutual Love expressed it self, we learn from the first Pattern of the Christian
Church. And they continued steadfast Acts 2. 42.
in the Apostle's Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and of
Prayers; that is, in all the Parts and Offices of Christian Communion: this is
essential to Christian Love, to continue in the Communion and Fellowship of the
same Body, that there may be no Schism in the Body, but all firmly united by
the common Bonds of Love and Peace: and therefore in St. John's Time, those
Heretics who separated themselves into distinct Conventicles, are said to go
out from among them; They went out from us, 1 John 2. 13.
because they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt
have continued with us, (that is, in our Fellowship and Communion) but they
went out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us. Now if
this Argument be good, it necessarily infers that indispensable Obligation
which lies upon all Christians, who will be owned for Members of that one Body
of Christ, to live in Communion with each other.

The Unity of Mind and Spirit, of Love and Affection, and the Unity of the same
Faith, is necessary to Christian Union; but this Union is made external and
visible by Christian Communion; and our daily experience tells us, how
impossible it is for Men to love like Brethren, like Members of the same Body,
who are not of the same Body, but divide themselves into distinct and separate
Churches, under different Laws, Government, and Discipline.

Now if Christian Love and Union be so necessary a Duty of Christianity,
consider what the Evil of Schism is, which rends the seamless Coat of Christ,
and divides his Church into so many little Parties and Factions.

Christ has but one Body, and those who separate from the Body of Christ, are
no longer of his Body; and the Ancient Christians did believe Schism to
separate Men from Christ, and to put them out of a state of Salvation: It was
an acknowledged Principle among them, That there was no Salvation out of the
Church, and that Schismatics were out of the Church.

I dare not judge any Man's final State, as not knowing what merciful allowances
a merciful and compassionate Lord may make, for the Errors and Mistakes,
Frowardness and Peevishness of his Disciples; but yet I wish that all Persons
concerned, would seriously consider, that St. Paul makes all other Seize
whatsoever of no value without Charity; that this is that Divine Principle
which unites us to God, and to one another; that he makes Schism a Work of the
Flesh, and when he reproves the Corinthians for that Schism which was among
them, though it was not broke out into actual separation, yet he calls them
Carnal; For are ye not carnal? for whereas there 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4.
is among you envyings, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk
as Men? So far is Separation from being an Argument of more perfect and
excellent Christians, that it is a Work of the Flesh, and the Symptom of a
Carnal Mind.

But I do not intend to discourse this fully; but it is a certain Argument,
that that Man does understand nothing of Christian Religion, who makes light of
Schism, without so much as considering what guilt he involves himself in;
nothing could be a more effectual Cure of Schism, than a serious consideration
of the evil and danger of it. That pain we feel in tearing one Member from
another, and that mischief the whole Body suffers by it, which becomes maimed
and imperfect by the want of the least and most inconsiderable Member, makes us
careful to preserve our natural Bodies from any Rent or Schism; and were we
living Members of the Mystical Body of Christ, had we that natural love,
sympathy, and fellow-feeling for each other, as the Members of the natural Body
have, we should find Schism and Separation as painful to us, as it is to part
with one of our Members, and be as sensible of the want of Christian Communion,
and the discharge of these mutual Offices of Charity, in exhorting,
admonishing, reproving, comforting, praying for, and with each other, (which
cannot be performed in a state of Separation) as we are of the want of the
service of any Member which we have lost: It is a certain sign, that Member
does not belong to the Body, which feels not the pain of such Convulsions and
Schisms.

Thirdly; Another Question I would ask these Men, is, Whether they do in their
Consciences believe, that Communion with our Parish Churches is unlawful? And
there is some reason to ask this; for it is easily observed, that there are a
great many, who are Christians at large, and as occasion serves, can either go
to Church, or to a Conventicle. Now if they make Conscience of any thing, we
may conclude, that when they come to Church, they do not think it a sin so to
do; or that there is any thing so unlawful in our Worship, as is sufficient to
justify a Separation: for if they may lawfully communicate with us once, they
may do so always by the same Reason, from whence it follows, that there can be
no necessity of Separation, and then Separation must be a sin.

Some indeed say, That it is a sufficient reason to separate, even from a True
Church, and a lawful Communion, to join in fellowship with a purer Church, and
to enjoy purer Ordinances. But I would desire such Men to consider;

First; That this Notion of a purer Church, and purer Ordinances, varies with
every Man's fancy, as having no Foundation in Scripture, Reason, or Antiquity,
when you distinguish a purer Church from a pure Church. I would desire to know,
what greater degree of purity they find in a Presbyterian or Independent
Conventicle, than in our Parochial Churches. If this Purity consists in
Doctrine, Government, or Worship; that Doctrine and Government which is most
Ancient, and most Apostolical, is purer than some novel and upstart Opinions,
Church Forms and Models; and that Worship which retains all the Institutions of
Christ, and administers them with the greatest order and decency, and most to
Christian Edification, is as pure a Worship as that which is slovenly and
unbecoming the gravity and solemnity of Divine Worship: That Church wherein
Christians may enjoy all the means and conveyances of Grace, without any
corrupt Mixtures to spoil their Virtue and Efficacy, is a pure Church, such a
Church wherein a Christian may communicate, without doing any injury to his
Soul, is a pure Church, and has all the degrees of purity, which is necessary
to External Communion.

If by a purer Communion, they mean only the Communion of better Men, and of
greater Saints, they ought to consider, that it is impossible to exclude
Hypocrites out of any Church, unless they pretend to a Gift of discerning
Spirits; nor is it fit they should be excluded, while they are not openly
scandalous; for to shut such Men out of the Church, deprives them of the Means
of Grace, and all hopes of proving better Men.

And I hope Christian Communion is not confined to any single Congregation, but
every good Christian, who lives in the Communion of the Church, enjoys the
Communion of Saints in all the World, is a Member of the same Body, which
consists of all the true Disciples of Christ.

Nay, I would desire them to consider, that the Glory of the Christian
Communion is this, That our Fellowship 1 John 1. 3.
is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, with the glorious and
triumphant Church in Heaven, as well as with the Church Militant on Earth. But
ye are come unto Mount Sion, and Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.
unto the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
company of Angels; to the general Assembly, and Church of the First Born, which
are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just
Men made perfect; and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the
blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things than the Blood of Abel. This
is the Church Fellowship which those enjoy, who live in Communion with the
Universal Church, and which Schismatics have no right to; and those who think
to meet with better Company at a Conventicle, let them take it.

But must not the Christian Church consist of all ranks and degrees of
Christians, as our natural Body does of several sorts of Members of different
honor and worth? and is it fitting for strong and well-grown Christians to
separate from the weak and imperfect, as if the eye should separate from the
Body, as despising the Communion of the Foot; and yet if St. Paul says true,
that Schism is a work of the Flesh, and the sign of carnal Men, we have no
reason to look for the best Christians in Schismatical Churches.

But secondly, it was never till of late days thought lawful to separate from a
lawful Communion; tho as the state of the Church in this World is, it were
subject to some defects; and therefore the Brownists, who separated from the
Church of England pretended, that her Worship and Government was Unlawful,
Idolatrous, and Antichristian; and the old Nonconformists, who though they
could not conform as Ministers, yet very religiously conformed as Laymen, both
in Prayers and Sacraments, condemned this Schism, and proved, that Communion
with the Church of England was lawful, and therefore Separation was sinful; and
I dare challenge any Man to show me, from the first beginnings of Christianity,
that ever it was thought lawful to separate from a Church, where we might
communicate without sin.

And thirdly, let these Men consider, that this Notion of separating from a
lawful Communion, for a purer Communion, lays the foundation of eternal
Schisms; for there being no certain rule for the degrees of this Purity, every
Man according to his own fancy may refine for ever.

Fourthly; If they do indeed think the Communion of the Church of England to be
unlawful and sinful, I would desire them to enquire, how they came at first to
think so? for this is a very material Enquiry, if Men desire to know their
honesty and sincerity in this Matter: for if Men are at first by their own
fault ensnared in an Error, and drawn into Schism, how firmly soever afterward
they believe their Separation to be lawful and necessary, it will not excuse
them.

It is impossible to know all the several ways whereby Men come at first to be
engaged in Schism; but I shall take notice of some few which seem to be most
common: Such are these, 1. Education. 2. Lightness and giddiness of Mind. 3.
Some distaste at Public Affairs. 4. Some quarrel with the Ministers of
Religion. 5. Interest, or the Persuasion of Friends.

1. Education; when Men have been nursed up in Schism from their infancy, and
have been taught to despise the Common Prayer before they could read, and to
call the Church Antichrist, and the Ministers of it Baal's Priests, as soon as
they could speak.

Now it must be acknowledged, that this is the most pitiable case, and the
fairest Excuse and Apology that can be made for any Man; for we all know, what
the power of Education is, and how hard it is to deliver our minds from the
first Impressions of Childhood and Youth; but yet this will not excuse a Man,
when he has attained to Years of discretion, and has opportunities of being
better informed, for if it would, Pagans, Mahometans, and Papists, who labor
under the same prejudices of Education, have the same excuse: We must offer up
to God a reasonable Service, and that requires the exercise of our Reason in
the choice of our Religion, as well as in the discharge of Religious Duties.
Nay, Papists, Mahometans, and Pagans, have a better excuse upon this account,
than our Dissenters, because their Prejudices may reasonably be thought more
invincible, as will appear, if we briefly consider three or four things.

First, That theirs is the Religion of their Country, which they have been in
quiet possession of for many Ages; and thus that reverence they pay to the
wisdom and memory of their Ancestors, adds to the prejudices of their
Education; whereas every one knows that this present Schism, and the pretenses
whereon it is founded, are but late Innovations, a Novelty which is not yet
grey-headed: And tho Antiquity in it self considered, is no Argument for an
ancient Error, nor Novelty, any reasonable exception against Truth, if there
are any new Discoveries to be made in this last Age of the World; yet we all
know, when we speak only of the Power of Prejudice, that it is a harder thing
to persuade Men to part with such Doctrines, Customs, Usages, Religions which
they have received from their Ancestors for many Generations, than to part with
some novel Invention, whose very Novelty will not admit of any strong and
lasting Prejudice. Thus we know, the Antiquity of the Pagan Religion, which
pleaded the Prescription of unknown Ages, made it extremely difficult to
persuade Men to renounce their Country Gods, and to embrace Christianity; and
that Objection of Novelty, tho it were false, was yet a great hinderance to the
reception of the Gospel, which I alleadg to show, that a long and immemorial
Prescription, is a more powerful Prejudice than some few Years Education; and
therefore if the Prejudices of Education be thought sufficient to justify our
Dissenters, it is a much better Justification of Pagans and Papists in foreign
Countries.

For, 2ly, it may cause a reasonable suspicion in honest Dissenters, sufficient
to put them upon a new search and enquiry, when they remember that the King and
the Church of England fall together; that those, who altered the Government of
the Church pulled down Monarchy, and transformed themselves into as many
different shapes and forms in the State, as they set up new Models of
Discipline and Government in the Church; which is an Argument, that they were
not the most infallible Men, nor acted by the best Principles that ever were.

The Church of England, as established by Law, has had possession in this
Nation ever since the Reformation; and a few Years interruption, in a time of
Rebellion and great Confusion, is not sufficient to dispossess it; and
therefore all Men ought to have laid aside their Prejudices, and to have
returned to the Communion of the Church, as well as to their Loyalty to their
Prince, unless they could show some better Reasons against it, than the
Prejudices of Education, which can be no just excuse at this day; for he is a
very unreasonable Man who shall desire any more than twenty Years, to wear off
the Prejudices of twenty Years Education.

Especially when we consider thirdly, That no other Religion, or form of Church
Government, ever had a legal possession of this Nation, during this Anarchy and
Interregnum of Church and State. Neither Presbytery, Independency, nor
Anabaptism, were settled by Law, but they shuffled as well as they could, and
used their utmost skill to establish themselves by the numbers and power of
their several Parties, and sometimes one praviled, and sometimes another; and
instead of one National Church, we had twenty National Schisms, but no Church.

Which 4thly plainly shows, That the Prejudices of Education can be no good
Plea in this Case; for it is impossible the Prejudices of Education should be
strong and invincible, where there is no one fixed Church, nor one face of
Religion in a Nation, but several Churches quarrelling and contending with each
other.

Those who are brought up in a Country where the People never heard but of one
Religion, as it is in Spain, or at least never heard of any other, but under
such dismal frightful Characters, as may raise their indignation and their
hatred of such Monsters, it is no wonder, I say, if such Men's Prejudices be
very strong, and almost invincible: but when Men see Religion in so many
shapes, and converse with Men of different Persuasions, and see that they are
not Monsters, but Men like themselves; this rather inclines them to uncertainty
and Skepticism in Religion, to be sure it is not apt to possess them with any
fixed and unalterable Prejudices for or against any Religion. And therefore we
find in this state of things, how Men make their advances from one Church to
another, till at last they come to Quakerism, the end and center of all
Confusion, as being at the greatest distance from all good Order. Now when Men
are in such a wandering state, like Travelers who have no certain Abode, but
pass out of one Country into another, visit all, and stay no where, (which is
the deplorable Case of many thousand poor injudicious People) it is ridiculous
to plead Prejudice in their Justification.

2. Others engage themselves in Schism, out of lightness and giddiness of Mind:
They have no fixed and stable Principles, and can never like one thing long
together; or they run into Conventicles, out of a wanton curiosity, and are
taken with any thing, or with nothing, as it happens; and thus by degrees
contract Prejudices against that Church, whose Communion they forsook without
any reason, and then believe it to be unlawful without any. The Zeal of their
Preachers, and those hard words they give the Church and Churchmen, makes them
believe there is some cause for it, tho they know not what; and they learn by
roat some popular Objections and Cavils, and when they are once engaged, lay
aside all thoughts of further consideration, or a timely retreat. When Men
first begin to separate, and then learn some Doubts and Scruples, and in time
improve those Doubts into lasting Principles of Schism; it is no Argument of
any great honesty: for an honest Man must first have very undeniable proof,
that Communion is unlawful, before he can entertain the least thought of a
Separation; and did Men take this course, the Schism would soon be at an end.

3. Others take distaste at the public Administrations of Civil Government,
and hence take occasion to quarrel with the Church. This seems strange, that
whatever is done amiss in the State, should be made an Argument against the
Church, when the Church in a Christian Kingdom is subordinate to the State, and
has no power to correct the Miscarriages of Civil Government, as Civil
Governors have to correct and reform the Abuses and Exorbitances of
Ecclesiastical Power. But some Persons observing that close Union which is
between Church and State, think it a vain thing to attempt the Crown, till they
have first pulled down a Legal Church. But tho these Men may talk very much
against Church-Impositions, and seem as much concerned for Liberty of
Conscience, as they are for the Liberty of the Subject, it is plain, Religion
is the least thing in their thoughts; they love Schism only for the sake of
Rebellion, and look upon Schismatical Conventicles, as admirable Nurseries for
the Camp, tho I am willing to hope they may be mistaken in it.

That this was the plain state of the Case in our late Troubles, we have been
lately told in print, by one who is no great Friend to the Church of England,
(tho I wonder so grave and wise a Man, should thus openly betray the Secrets of
his Party) tells us, That when the War was begun by Churchmen, who had no
design at first to pull down the Church, the Auxiliaries of the Baxter's search
for the English Schismat. p. 12.
Parliament (the Scots) would not help them but on the terms of the Covenant;
and so Church-Alterations came on, and the Parliament thought it was better
have no Bishops, than such as did prevail against them. This is fair warning,
and let the Church and Churchmen have a care how they oppose Rebellion any more.

4. Every Miscarriage of the Bishops or Clergy, or every thing that is thought
a Miscarriage, tho it be none, is presently made an Occasion of Separation; as
if so be the Constitution of any Church were ever the worse, because some of
the Ministers of it neglect their Duty, abuse their Power, or do some things
which do not please every Man's Humor. As if the Miscarriages of some of the
Ministers of Religion, which will sometimes happen under the best Government in
the World, would justify Men in pulling down an Apostolical Church, modelled
according to the Pattern of Primitive Government and Practice. And yet nothing
is more common than to see Men forsake the Church and run to Conventicles, if
their Minister do not in every thing comply with their Desires; if he be so
ill-bred as to reprove them for their Sins, or so stiff as not to make the Laws
and Constitutions of the Church yield and bend to their Humors. I suppose no
Man will think, that such Persons separate out of tenderness of Conscience, who
date their Separation from some little pet, quarrel, or peevish fit.

Nor fifthly, are those very conscientious Men, who separate from the Church
out of Interest; and the persuasions and importunities of some dissenting
Friends, who forsake the Church for the sake of a good Trade, or a rich Wife,
or in hope of some great temporal Advantage, unless it be a sign of a tender
Conscience to make Gain Godliness; not to serve Christ but our own Bellies. I
do but just mention these things, which tho I am sure are great Truths, and
necessary for all Men to consider, who would try their honesty and sincerity in
this Matter of Separation; yet, I fear, the very naming of them will be very
offensive to guilty Persons, who when they feel their Consciences smart, are
very apt to revenge themselves upon their kind and faithful Monitors.

Fifthly; I would desire those Persons, who plead Conscience for their
Separation from the Church of England, to consider whether ever they
impartially and thoroughly examined the Reasons of their Separation. We must be
fully satisfied, that it is unlawful to communicate in such a Church, before
Separation from it can be lawful; for it is as great a sin to separate from a
pure Church, as it is to hold Communion with a corrupt Church; and a truly
honest Man is equally careful to avoid every sin, and is as much afraid of the
sin of Separation, as the sin of a corrupt and idolatrous Worship. Now when we
consider how few there are that do this, and how much fewer there are that are
capable of doing it; it is too plain an Argument, that most Men separate from
the Church, without knowing any just cause and reason for it; as to explain
this Matter a little more at large.

First; How few are those who do examine the Reasons of their Separation? Not
but that there are a great many who furnish themselves with some popular Talk
against the Bishops, and Forms of Prayer, and Ceremonies, etc. but to examine
the reasons of Things, is very different from being able to make some slight
Objections which have been answered an hundred Times. For to examine things, is
impartially to weigh and consider both parts of the Question, to avoid no
difficulty, to consider what is said for and against Separation, and to hold
the balance so equal, that Interest and Affection do not turn the Scales
instead of Reason. Now there are two great Faults which Men are commonly guilty
of in this Matter.

First, That they do not carefully examine both parts of the Question; possibly
they read such Books as are writ against the Church of England, and so justify
a Separation, but do not with the same care read those Books, which prove the
sinfulness of Separation, and justify the Communion of the Church of England.
They have the Arguments for the Church of England only at second hand, from
those who pretend to answer them, but never look into the Books themselves: And
I do not wonder at this rate of examining, that Men continue Separatists after
all that can be said against it; for it is rare to find any one Argument
against Separation, or for Communion with our Church, fairly represented by
those who pretend to answer it; who commonly pick out such things as are least
material, or do not concern the main Controversy, and make a great noise and
flourish with seeming to say something, which is nothing to the purpose, but
silently pass over what they know they cannot answer.

Now whoever separates from the Church, without a thorough and impartial
examination of the Reasons of it, tho he should happen to be in the right, is
yet guilty of Schism; that is, tho his separation in it self considered be no
Schism, because there may be sufficient Reasons to justify such a Separation;
yet this being more than he can be presumed to know, he contracts the guilt of
Schism: for he separates without cause, who does not know the cause of his
Separation; and he cannot know whether there be a just cause for it, who
separates before he understands what is said on both sides; as we all reckon
that Man perjured, who swears nothing but what is true; but without knowing it
to be true.

Secondly, Another great Fault is, That Men's Minds are commonly biased by
some Interest and Affection, which weighs much more than any contrary Reasons
can do; by one means or other they fall in love with Schism and Separation, and
then set their wits on Work to defend it, and those must be mighty evident and
powerful demonstrations which can force Men to believe that which they have no
mind to believe.

If it be objected, That this is a Fault common to both sides: There are few
Men, which side soever they are of, but are greatly inclined to favor it, and
to help out a weak Argument, which is too light, with some grains of Allowance.
I Answer, Possibly with most Men it may be so; and in many cases it may be so
far from being a Fault, that it is both innocent and useful, and an Argument of
great Virtue and Goodness; but the Fault and the Danger is, when the Bias
stands the wrong way. As for Instance, a good Man is as strongly inclined to
believe that there is a God, and to wish and hope that there is one, as a bad
Man is to believe that there is no God, and to wish that there were none: Here
are Inclinations and Prejudices on both sides, and yet it is a virtue in a good
Man, and a great sin in a bad Man; because the one is a natural Bias and
Inclination, and a sign of Virtue; the other is against Nature, and the effect
of Vice.

Thus it is here, the Laws of the Gospel, which so strictly require Christian
Love and Unity as a most necessary Duty, and essential to the Christian
Profession, clap a Bias upon true Christians Minds, which strongly inclines
them to maintain and preserve the Peace and good Unity of the Christian Church,
where they can preserve it without an apparent injury to common Christianity;
and therefore this makes them put favorable and candid Constructions upon
every thing, and not make a breach without absolute necessity; and if they
should mistake here, it is an Error on the right side; but an inclination to
Separation is a false Bias, contrary to the Genius and Spirit of the Gospel,
which inclines Men to Peace and Union, and is usually the effect of some
vicious indisposition of Mind; and if Men's Reason and Judgment be perverted by
such an unchristian Inclination, it will aggravate their Guilt and Crime; and
therefore it greatly concerns all Men, who love their Souls, and would avoid
the Guilt of Schism, not to be in love with Separation, which will so blind
their Minds, that they shall never discover how sinful and causless it is, nor
ever be able to deliver themselves from it with all their reading and study;
and it is a mighty suspicion, that Men are in love with Separation, when they
are so industrious to hunt for Doubts and Scruples, and little cavilling
Objections, which all the lovers of Peace and Unity, at the first Proposal, see
the folly and weakness of, while such learned Rabbis are held fast in the
Cobwebs of their own spinning.

Secondly; As there are great numbers of Men who separate from the Church of
England, without an impartial Examination of the Reasons of their Separation:
so there are a great many who are not capable of such Inquiries; and yet they
separate also at all adventures as others do.

A great many such Men there are who live by their Labor, and have not time
for such Studies, or it may be, cannot read, or however were never used to the
Art of thinking and reasoning, and therefore may be easily mistaken in such
Matters, while they rely upon their own Judgments of things; that unless we
think it enough to justify such Men, that they have been taught to call the
Bishops Antichristian, and our Ministers Baal's Priests, and our Common Prayer
the Mass Book, and kneeling at the Sacrament Idolatry, and the Surplice a Rag
of the Whore of Babylon, and such kind of Rhetorical Figures (which signify
nothing but to make a noise and scare ignorant People). These Men must be
acknowledged to be guilty of Schism in separating from a Church, without
knowing any just reason for their Separation.

I can think but of two or three things that can be answered to this.

First, That tho they are ignorant themselves, yet they are directed by wise
and good Men, who understand the reason of these things.

Secondly, That this Objection does as well lie against those ignorant People
who live in Communion with the Church of England, as against those who
separate, for they both understand the Reasons of things alike.

And thirdly, That according to this rate of arguing, such Men are not capable
of choosing any Religion, but must take the Religion of their Country, as they
find it, whether it be Paganism, Popery, or Mahometism.

As for the first, That tho they are ignorant themselves, they follow the
direction of wise and good Men, who know the Reasons of these things; I would
ask them this Question, who made these wise and good Men their Guides? and how
do they know that they have any reason themselves for what they do? especially
since other as wise and good Men say, that they have none; and such Persons are
as unable to know who is in the right, as they are to discern the Controversy;
and yet they do in a manner determine the Controversy, by choosing Separatists
for their Guides, and rejecting those whom the Providence of God, and the Laws
of the Land have appointed to be their Guides. It is plain, such Men as these
want Guides to direct them, and yet in such Controversies as these, know no
more whom to choose for their Guides, than which side to take; and therefore it
is much the safest for them (because it will admit of the best excuse if they
should err) to follow the direction of those Guides whom the Providence of God
has provided them; for if they choose Guides of their own, and heap to
themselves Teachers, having itching Ears; and thereby miscarry, they must blame
themselves, but will have no Defense and Apology to make at the Tribunal of God.

As for the second, That this Objection equally lies against those ignorant
People in our Communion, as against those who separate, for they both
understand the reasons of things alike: The Answer is very plain, viz. there is
not such a particular knowledge of things required to live in Communion with a
Church, wherein we were baptized and educated, as there is to separate from it;
for Separation condemns the Communion of that Church from which we separate as
unlawful and sinful, it divides the Unity of the Church, which when it is
causeless, is a very great sin; and therefore before Men venture to separate,
they ought to be very well assured, that the Communion of such a Church is
sinful; which they cannot do without a particular knowledge of those things
which they condemn as sinful, and the reasons why they do so. To hold Communion
with the Church wherein we live, is always the surer side, when there are not
such notorious Corruption as the meanest Man, who is honest and sincere, may
understand; for Christian Communion is a great and necessary Duty, and is not
to be forsaken for every trifle; and when the justification of Separation is
spun out into such a thin and airy Controversy, as requires a very Metaphysical
Brain to understand it; honest plain Men, who are strangers to such Subtilties,
should leave learned Men to wrangle among themselves, and keep close to the
Communion of the Church, till they could produce some such Reasons against it,
as all honest Men may understand as well as themselves; but this will be better
understood by the Answer to the Objection; which is this.

Thirdly, That according to this rate of arguing, such Men are not capable of
choosing any Religion, but must take the Religion of their Country as they find
it, whether it be Paganism, Popery, or Mahometism; but this is a great Mistake,
for the difference between Paganism and Christianity, between Popery and
Reformed Christianity, is much more plain and discernible, and more easily
understood by the most illiterate People, than the Dispute about Ceremonies,
Church Government, and Discipline; and therefore those who are not capable of
judging in these Matters, may yet be able to choose the Christian Religion, and
to reject both Paganism and Popery.

The truth of Christianity does not depend upon some nice and curious
Speculations, but on the authority of Miracles, which is so sensible an
Argument, that the meanest People understand it, as well as the greatest
Philosophers; those Miracles which were wrought by Christ and his Apostles, the
knowledge of which is conveyed down to us in the Writings of the New Testament,
and which have been owned in all succeeding Ages of the Church till our days,
do as certainly prove the truth of that Religion, which Christ and his Apostles
taught, as if we had heard God speak in an audible Voice from Heaven to us; and
this is a sufficient reason to believe whatever he has revealed, though we
cannot perfectly understand all the difficulties of it.

And when we have once embraced Christianity, we have the Writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles to be the Rule of our Faith and Practice; and
therefore whatever is expressly forbid in those Writings, every Man, without any
great skill in Controversy, knows to be unlawful, as being contrary to the
revealed Will of God; and by this means the plainest Countryman may understand
the difference between Popery, and Reformed Christianity; the peculiar Doctrine
of the Roman Church being expressly contrary to the Doctrine and Institutions of
our Savior: for what can be more expressly contrary to the Gospel than
worshipping Images, praying to Saints and Angels, praying in an unknown Tongue,
the half Communion, where the Priest drinks the Wine by himself, and gives
nothing but a Wafer to the People? these things require indeed great subtilty
in the Church of Rome to defend them; but may be understood and confuted by the
plainest Man, who is no Master of Subtilties.

But the Case is quite different in the Dispute between the Church of England
and Dissenters; we desire no more from them, but to show us where any one
Doctrine or Practice of the Church of England, is expressly condemned in
Scripture, or by such a natural and easy Consequence, as every honest Man, tho
no Schoolman nor Philosopher, may understand it.

Where do they find that the Office of a Bishop is Antichristian, which has
been continued in the Church ever since the Times of the Apostles, and whose
Successors they were, if we will believe the Ancient Fathers? Where do they
read, that a form of Prayer is unlawful, when Christ himself gave a Form of
Prayer to his Disciples; and the Book of Psalms consists of an hundred and
fifty Forms of Prayer and Praises which were used in their Public Worship?
Where do they find that the Ceremonies of our Church are Idolatrous and
Superstitious, when they can produce no Text of Scripture where they are
forbid? unless they think, that because God has forbid worshipping Images in
the second Commandment, therefore he has forbid all external Circumstances of
Worship instituted for decency and Order; which is so subtle a Consequence, as
will make a very Metaphysical Head ache to discover it.

Now when there is no direct and positive proof, but Men argue wholly from some
uncertain and far-fetcht Consequences: How shall the common People, who
understood none of the artificial Laws of Reasoning, judge of such Arguments?

It is possible indeed to make some terrible impressions upon their Fancies by
great confidence, and an uncouth sound of words which they understand not; As,
that our Ceremonies are Symbolical, that they are new Sacraments, not mere
Circumstances, but parts of Worship. Now, how few are there of our Separatists,
who understand any thing of this talk? How long time will they take to teach a
Countryman, who is not Book-learn'd, what a Symbolical Ceremony is? or to
understand how our Ceremonies are transformed into Sacraments? And yet, whoever
separates upon such Accounts as these, without being able to understand the
true meaning of those terrible Objections, is most certainly a Schismatic.

And yet there is a great deal more than this to be known, before Men can
justify their Separations; for suppose they should discover some Faults in our
Constitution, they must further inquire, Whether these be only some tolerable
Defects and Imperfections, or whether they be Sins? Whether they Pollute the
Communicants, and make Communion unlawful? Whether they be only active or
passive in it? Whether, supposing the wearing of a Surplice were superstitious,
all that are present at the Public Prayers, who disown such Superstition, are
yet guilty of it, and must separate to preserve their Innocence, and to declare
their abomination of such Superstitions? whether the Child, who is signed with
the sign of the Cross at Baptism, be ever the worse for it? or, whether the
Parents, who dislike such a Ceremony, sin in submitting their Children to it,
in Obedience to their Superiors? or whether the Fault be theirs who enjoin it?
These are Matters beyond the reach of every ordinary capacity to determine; and
therefore tho Separation were in it self lawful, very few Men can separate
lawfully.

6. I shall add but one thing more, with reference to the trial of these Men's
honesty, Whether they separate upon true Principles of Conscience, and that is,
by considering how they behave themselves toward their Governors?

The Conscience of any honest Man, especially when it dissents from Public
Constitutions, is a very modest and peaceable Principle; such Men think it very
well if they have leave to dissent, and quietly withdraw, tho they have not
leave to vilify the established Religion, nor undermine public Constitutions;
and tho they cannot obtain thus much favor, but are persecuted for a good
Conscience, yet they suffer patiently, after the Example of their great Master,
who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, threatened not,
but committed himself to him, who judges righteously.

But a Schismatic, whose Conscience serves an Interest, must miss of his end,
if he suffers patiently; such are indeed as little in love with Sufferings as
other Men, but yet they love to have some pretense or other to make a great
noise and clamor about their Sufferings; as it is observed of the Schismatical
Donatists, that there were several Laws made against that by Caeterum etsi vix
ulla harum legum executio esset, Donatistae tamen invidiose, odioseque
clamabant, sese injuste vexati, and causam tuam non jure agi, sed vi opprimi;
delibatio Hist. Afric. apud Optatum.
Theodosius the Emperor; and tho none of those Laws were scarce ever executed,
yet they set up a mighty cry, aggravated every little matter to cast an odium
upon the Government, complained that they were injuriously handled, that their
Cause was never fairly heard and determined by its intrinsic Merits, but
oppressed with Force and Power. And how parallel this Story is to the case of
some in these days, I need not tell you.

I am sure there are a sort of Men who separate from our Church, and for that
reason are reckoned among the Godly Party, who take as little care to govern
their Tongues or Pens (tho St. James makes this the Character of a perfect Man)
as any Schsmaticks in the World ever did; who neither express any regard to
Princes, nor to Truth and Honesty, if they can but serve their Cause by casting
dirt upon the Government, or blasting the Reputation of virtuous and peaceable
Men, who will not run headlong into the same Excesses with themselves. I will
not enlarge upon this Argument, lest telling plain Matter of Fact, should be
called Bitterness and Railing; for some Men, out of a pretense of Conscience,
are guilty of such vile and lewd Practices, as they are not willing to hear of
again, and think themselves slandered if they do: All that I shall say of it is
only this, That a tender Conscience never teaches Men to revile and reproach
their Governors; but this has been the Practice and Character of the most
infamous Heretics and Schismatics ever since the beginnings of Christianity.
St. Jude gives a great many hard words to some Men in his days, which I am not
willing to apply to any in ours, who despise Dominions, and speak evil of
Dignities. Yet Michael the Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he
disputed about the Body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing
Accusation, but said, the Lord rebuke thee. But these speak evil of those
things which they know not -- Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of
Cain, and ran greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward, and perished in
the gainsaying of Core; these are spots in your Feasts of Charity, when they
feast with you, feeding themselves without fear; Clouds are they without Water,
carried about of Winds; Trees whose Fruit withers, without Fruit, twice dead,
plucked up by the Roots; raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame;
wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

I shall conclude with that admirable Rule of St. Austin, in answer to
Parmenianus the Donatist.

Whoever corrects what he can Quisquis vel quod potest arguendo corrigit, vel
quod corrigere non potest, salvo pacis vinculo, excludit, vel quod salvo pacis
vinculo excludere non potest, aequitate improbat, firmitate supportat, hic est
pacificus. St. Aug contra Epist. Parmen. l. 2.
by Reason and Discourse, and shuts out or lays aside what is not capable of
amendment, as far as this may consist with the preservation of Christian Peace
and Unity, and modestly disallows, and yet upholds what cannot be parted with,
without breaking the Peace of the Church, this is the true Peacemaker.

SECT. II.
Containing some general Considerations, in order to remove those Prejudices,
which some have entertained, against the Worship of the Church of England.

I Shall now lay down some general Principles, which may contribute toward the
satisfaction of Men's Minds, to remove their Prejudices against the Worship of
our Church.

The things commonly objected, to drive away our People, from the Communion of
our Parish Churches, are the Government of the Church by Bishops, the
unlawfulness of Forms of Prayer, the Surplice, the Cross in Baptism, and
Kneeling at the Sacrament, and such like; which concern the use of some
indifferent and uncommanded things in Religious Worship. For we have always
challenged our Adversaries, to produce any one express Law of Christ, which is
contradicted and broken, by the Constitution of our Church, or the
Administration of our Religious Offices; they could never produce any yet, and
I am sure never can. And if Men will abuse and scare themselves, with some
fancyful Applications of Scripture, and remote and illogical Consequences,
there is no help that I know of; since it is an endless work to answer all such
cavils. For Men, who can make Objections without any just Reason, may at the
same rate return answers too, without end: Therefore, the best and shortest way
I can think of, is, to lay down some such general Considerations, as may
satisfy all honest and teachable Minds, that tho it is possible to raise
Objections against any thing, yet those Objections must prove fallacious, which
contradict other great and apparent Truths. And I shall reduce what I have to
say, to these four general Heads.

First, The Consideration of the Nature of God. Secondly, The Nature and Design
of the Christian Religion. Thirdly, The Example of Christ. Fourthly, The
Example of the Apostolic and Primitive Churches in the first ages of
Christianity.
First, Let us consider the Nature of God; for God is the Object of our
Worship: And that is the best Worship, which is most suitable to his Nature:
Thus our Savior teaches us to argue, God is a Spirit, and they that Joh. 4. 24.
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. And thus the wise Man
argues, God is in Heaven, and thou upon Eccles. 5. 2.
Earth, therefore let thy Words be few.

Now, to apply this briefly to our present Case; can any Man, who considers
what God is, imagine, that he will be displeased with his Creatures, for
offering up their Prayers and Thanks-givings to him in a pious and sober Form
of Words? Can God be pleased with the volubility of the Tongue, or quickness of
Fancy, or variety of Invention, more than with devout Affections, than with a
Soul enflamed with Divine Love, and possessed with a Reverence of the Divine
Majesty, and offering up it self to him in few, grave and considerate Words?
Will a Father reject the Petitions of his Child, if as often as his Wants
require, he uses the same Words, when he asks the same thing? Does a Prince
like a long extemporary Harangue, when his Subjects come to beg a Boon of him,
or a short and well composed Petition? The wise Man, I am sure, tells us, that
few and becoming Words, are more agreeable to the Majesty of God, and more
expressive of that distance which is between him and us: and therefore, are
more agreeable to the nature of public Worship, which is only an external
signification of the Reverence and Devotion of the Mind.

Prayer is a necessary part of natural Religion, and was a Duty incumbent on
Mankind, before God made any other revelation of his Will, than by Natural
Reason; and therefore, the Reason of Mankind is a very proper Judge, in what
manner we must pray to God, unless there were an express positive Law made
about it. Revelation may suggest new matter for our Prayers, and direct us to
pray to God in the powerful and prevailing Name of the Holy Jesus: But Words,
and Postures, and other external Circumstances of Prayer, which are not
expressly determined by Revelation, may be determined by humane Prudence; for
there could be no other rule for these Matters, before God revealed his Will,
and if God have not altered this Rule, by a plain positive Law, it must be our
Rule still, for we have no better. And therefore, we cannot imagine, that God
who is our Supreme Lawgiver, and discovers his Will to us, partly by the Light
of Reason, and partly by Revelation, should be angry with his Creatures, for
following the best Reason they have; nay, for governing themselves by the
public Reason and Authority of Church and State.

Whoever only considers the Nature of God, and the reason of things, must
certainly judge it fitter to meditate before hand, and to take Words with us,
when we approach the Presence of so great a Majesty, than to venture saying any
thing which comes next: and neither the Nature of God, nor the Reason of Man,
condemns any external Ceremonies for Decency and Order, and an useful
Signification, but have taught all Mankind to use them in all Ages of the
World, and under all Forms of Religion. Whatever Religious Rites are a
Dishonor and Reproach to the Divine Nature, or unbecoming the Seriousness and
Solemnity of Worship, natural Reason condemns as Idolatrous or Superstitious;
but whatever is no Dishonor to God, and may be useful to Men, is so far from
being condemned, that it is little less than the Law and Voice of Nature.

At least thus much we may certainly conclude, that there can be no intrinsic
evil in these things, which are neither repugnant to the Nature of God, nor the
Reason of Man; much less can it be Idolatry or Superstition, to use a Form of
Prayer, and some significant Ceremonies in Religious Worship; for Idolatry and
Superstition are not made so by positive Laws and Institutions: but to worship
a false God, or to pay such a false Worship to the true God, as is a reproach
to his Nature, is Idolatry; and Superstition consists in false Notions,
repugnant to the Nature of Worship, and Men may be guilty of Superstition, in
using or not using very lawful and indifferent things, when by an abused Fancy,
and ill instructed Conscience, they imprint either a religious or sinful
Character upon them; either think they shall please God, or fear they shall
displease him, by doing things in their own Nature indifferent, and neither
good nor bad, but according as they are used.

And this is no small advance, toward satisfying Men's Minds, in the lawfulness
of those Religious Ceremonies, which tho indifferent in their own Nature, yet
are enjoined by the Public Authority of Church and State, for the Order,
Decency, and Solemnity of Worship. For that which does not contradict the Light
of Nature, which has no repugnancy to the Nature of God, nor is forbid by any
plain positive Law, is the matter of Christian Liberty, and falls under the
Government and Direction of our Superiors; as will more evidently appear, if we
consider,

Secondly, The Nature and Design of the Christian Religion, which I shall
discourse of, only as it concerns the present Debate; and if it shall appear
that Liturgies and Ceremonies do no more contradict the Nature of Christianity,
than they do the Nature of God, let us all seriously consider, how we shall
answer Disobedience to our Governors, and Separation from the Church upon such
accounts as these, to our great Lord and Master, when he comes to judge the
World: And here I shall do these two things;

1. Show you, what that Worship is, our Savior instituted, and how far it is
from condemning the use of sober Liturgies, or decent Ceremonies.

2. What there is in the Christian Religion which countenances both.

1. What the Worship is our Savior Instituted. Christ came into the World to
reform Religion, and there are four things he seemed principally to design. 1.
To Spiritualize our Worship. 2. To strip it of all Types and Shadows. 3. To
deliver Religion from the Encumbrances of Superstitious Observances. 4. To put
a difference between the Substance, Circumstances, and Appendages of Religion,
between what is Natural and Moral, and the Instrumental and External parts of
Worship.

1. Our Savior's great design was to Spiritualize our Worship. The Jewish
Worship consisted in so many external Rites and Usages, in Washings,
Purifications, Sacrifices, Oblations, and the like; that the generality of them
placed the Worship of God, in the Homage of the external Man. If they did but
worship God at the right place, and with such Sacrifices and Ceremonies as he
had appointed, they took little care of inward Devotion. But now, our Savior
teaches the Woman of Samaria, to worship God in Spirit and Truth, for the
Father seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him,
must worship him in Spirit and in Truth: Which our Savior does not oppose to
external and bodily Worship, which is the only visible Worship God can have in
this World; but either to a typical Worship, of which more presently, or to
such external Worship, as is separated from the Devotion of the Mind, when Men
draw nigh to him with their Lips, but their Hearts are far from him. So that,
if we can offer up a devout Soul to God, in a Form of Prayer, if the external
Ceremonies of Religion do not hinder the Devotion of the Mind and Spirit, so
far we do not contradict or oppose the nature of Christian Worship: and if Men
do sink down into an external Form of Religion, and never raise up their Hearts
to God, the Fault is not owing either to Liturgies or Ceremonies, but to a
carnal and earthly Mind. Extemporary and conceived Prayer, has indeed usurped
the Name of Spiritual Prayer, but for what Reason I know not; for I suppose,
few Men will pretend to pray by Inspiration; and tho extemporary Prayer may
more heat the Fancy, there may be more serious Devotion and Piety in using a
Form; when we have nothing to do, but to offer up our Souls to God, without
setting our Inventions upon the Rack, what to say. An extemporary Prayer is as
much a Form, and does as much confine and stint the Spirit in all, but the
Speaker, as a Book-Prayer does: and that is a very sorry Devotion at best,
which owes its Heates and Passions, not to an inward Sense of God, but to a
musical Voice, earnestness in the Speaker, surprising Invention, or popular
Rhetoric.

2. Our Savior's design was to strip Religion of Types and Shadows: He did not
indeed do this, while he was upon the Earth, because the Jewish Economy was
not ended, all things were not fulfilled, which were necessary to put an end to
that State, till Christ died; nor did his Apostles do it immediately, at least
not in all places, but yielded to Jewish Prejudices, and indulged Jewish
Converts in their Observation of Circumcision, and other Mosaical Rites: Tho
St. Paul, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, would not suffer the Gentile
Churches to be brought under that Bondage, which occasioned a great many
Disputes with the Jews, as you may see in the Epistles to the Romans and
Galatians. But the abrogation of Mosaical and Typical Ceremonies, does not
infer a prohibition of all significant Ceremonies in the Christian Worship;
because the Reason and Nature of them were very different: The Mosaical
Ceremonies were Types of Christ, who was to come in the Flesh; and therefore,
to retain them in their proper Nature and Use, was to deny, that Christ was
come in the Flesh: for when the Antitype appears, there is no longer any use of
a Type. But now, a few innocent Ceremonies, which are neither burdensome for
their number, to encumber Religion, and clog and shackle our Devotions, nor
signify any thing contrary to the Nature and Design of Christianity, but add to
the external Decency and Solemnity of Worship, and may withal suggest pious and
devout Thoughts to us, are far enough from a Typical Nature, and therefore,
cannot be presumed to be shut out of the Christian Church, together with the
Law of Moses. For we may observe, that the Apostles themselves, in compliance
with the weakness of the believing Jews, did use a great many Mosaical Rites,
only stripping them of their Typical Nature. St. Paul was a zealous opposer of
Circumcision, and yet did not scruple to circumcise Timothy, not in token of
God's Covenant with Abraham; but to prevent Scandal. And those Christians, who
lived at Jerusalem, worshipped in the Temple, kept their Religious Festivals,
and Acts 21. 21, 22
observed their Law: but no Christian could do this, according to the Original
Institution of those Laws, for that had been to renounce Christianity: but they
observed them in compliance with the custom of their Nation, and to avoid
giving offense to believing Jews. And if the Apostles might lawfully observe
those Jewish Customs, when they were freed from their Typical signification; it
cannot be a Fault to use some such innocent Ceremonies, and Circumstances in
Worship, as are no way prejudicial to the Nature of Christianity. If the belief
of Christianity, made the Observation of those Jewish Ceremonies Innocent,
which in their own Nature, and Original Institution, are inconsistent with
Christianity; as signifying that Christ was not yet come: How much more
innocent is it to worship God in a white Garment; to kneel at the Sacrament,
and bend our Knee to our Lord, at whose Table we eat, and to sign our Children
with the Sign of the Cross, in honor of our crucified Lord, and as a visible
Profession of a suffering Religion.

3. Our Savior rejects all Superstitious Observances, which were not any part
of Religious Worship, and yet were thought to have an extraordinary Sacredness
and Religion in them; such as he calls the Traditions of their Elders, and
charges them with teaching for Doctrines, the Commandments of Men, such as
washing Cups, Platters, and Hands before Dinner; thus touch not, taste not,
handle not, are by St. Paul, called Col. 2. 21.
the Doctrines and Commandments of Men; which refer to their abstaining from
certain sorts of Meats, and the like.

So that these Doctrines and Commandments of Men, which Christ flings out of
his Religion, were not any Ceremonies or Circumstances of Worship, but some
Customs they take up with a great Opinion of their Religion, and Merit: As the
Papists have great numbers of them, such as Pilgrimages, and Penances, etc. And
St. Paul tells us with respect to such Customs as these, That the Kingdom of
God is not Meat Romans 14. 17.
and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost: that is,
that Christian Religion does not consist in such sorry things, as eating or not
eating such and such Meats, but Christ expects from us true and sincere Piety,
as the only thing that can recommend us to God. Such Superstitious Customs as
these, are very different from the Circumstances and Ceremonies of Religious
Worship, unless we think it the same thing, to hope to merit Heaven by going a
Pilgrimage, by professing Poverty, Celibacy, and blind Obedience, by abstaining
from Flesh in Lent, and such kind of vain Superstitions; as it is to wear a
Surplice in the time of Divine Worship, or to receive the Lord's Supper upon
our Knees, as an external Expression of Devotion, not as meritorious
Superstitions.

The Ceremonies of our Church have been often declaimed against, under the
Notion of the Doctrines and Traditions of Men; but it is plain, that neither
our Savior, nor St. Paul, meant any thing like them; for they do not speak of
any Circumstances or Appendages of Religious Worship, but of such arbitrary
Superstitions, as they turned into formal Acts of Religion.

The fourth does not much concern our present Argument, the difference Christ
put between the Substantial, and the Instrumental parts of Worship, any
otherwise than to mind us, that we must not look upon any Ceremonies as parts
of Worship, but a decent manner of performing it: That our acceptance with God
depends upon nothing, that is merely external, but on the Devotion of the Heart
and Soul, expressed in such becoming Words and Behavior, as may make it
visible and exemplary to others; and this is exactly the Doctrine of our
Church, and if any Men think, that such external Expressions of Honor will
please God, without the Worship of the Mind and Spirit; they must answer for
themselves, for she owns no such Principles, but takes care to instruct her
Children better.

And methinks, this should be no small satisfaction to Men's Minds, that the
established Worship of our Church, has nothing contrary to the nature and
design of Christianity; from whence it follows, that Men may be very good
Christians, while they live in Communion with our Church; and then I doubt,
they cannot be very good Christians when they forsake it: for nothing but an
apparent and manifest danger of sin, can justify such a Separation.

2. But let us now further consider, how the Worship of our Church is justified
by the Principles of Christianity. We do not pretend that there is an express
command to pray always by a Form, or to institute and appoint significant
Ceremonies, in the Worship of God; but there is enough in the Gospel of our
Savior to justify such Practices: as briefly, to point to some few things;

1. Our Savior himself taught his Disciples to pray by a Form, Our Father
which art in Heaven, etc. And if you will allow that it was lawful for them to
pray in these words, though you should suppose, that they were not always bound
to use it, it plainly proves, that the Christian Religion does not forbid
praying by a Form; for if it be lawful to pray by a Form, even of Divine
Institution, then a Form as a Form cannot be unlawful.

2. Our Savior has no where prescribed the particular Circumstances of
Religious Worship, and yet no Religious Action can be performed without some
Circumstances or other; he has commanded us to pray to God in his Name, to
commemorate his Death and Passion in his last Supper, and has commanded his
Apostles to baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost: But how often we must pray, and celebrate this Heavenly Feast,
in what Place, in what Posture, in what Time, he has not told us. He has
prescribed the Form of words in Baptism, but not any one Circumstance; and yet
it is certain, there must be some Circumstances for every Action, for the more
decent performance, and greater solemnity of such mysterious Rites; and
therefore we may well conclude, that our Savior left all such to the order and
direction of his Apostles and their Successors in all Ages, as may tend most to
the preservation of good Order, and the edification of the Church. For we must
consider the difference between the Law and the Gospel. Under the Law the
Church Gal. 4. 1, 2.
was in an Infant State, like an Heir under Age, which is under Tutors and
Governors, and therefore every part of that Typical Temple-Worship, was exactly
framed according to the Pattern in the Mount.

But the Christian Church is arrived to a full Age, and set at liberty by
Christ from the Yoke of Bondage, and Gal. 5. 1.
therefore is not under servile restraints, but has the Government of its own
Actions, according to the general Rules and Prescriptions of the Gospel. Not
that every particular Christian is at liberty to worship God as he pleases,
which could bring nothing but confusion and disorder into the Church, but is to
be under the Government and Direction of his Spiritual Guides and Pastors,
while they keep within the General Rules of the Gospel: But the Christian
Church enjoys that Liberty which the Jewish Church had not, that they can
institute and appoint, change and alter the external Circumstances of Worship,
as the Necessities of the Church, and the Edification of Christians require.

So mu^^ are those Men mistaken, who argue from Moses to Christ, that Christ is
as faithful at least as Moses was; and therefore since Moses gave them an exact
platform of Worship, Heb. 3. 5.
from which they must not vary in the least punctilio; therefore they conclude,
that Christ has done so too, tho they cannot show where he has done it; that
he has prescribed such an exact Form of Government, Discipline, and Worship in
the Church, as perpetually obliges all Christians; whereas we must observe,
that there was no Christian Church formed in our Savior's Days; but he
communicated with his Disciples in the Jewish Church while he lived, and gave
them Authority and Power to form Churches after his Resurrection. But we must
observe the difference the Apostle makes between Moses and Christ, that one was
faithful as a Servant, the other as a Son. Now a Servant must exactly follow
his Rules and Orders; but a Son Governs his own House with greater freedom: and
Moses being a Servant, signifies also the servile State of that People whom he
governed, that they were in Bondage under the Rudiments of this World, and had
their task exactly set them; but Christ, who is the Son and Heir, and Lord of
all, has made us Sons and Freemen too; and therefore does not give such
particular Laws about every little Circumstance, but expects from us a more
manly and generous Obedience.

And indeed there was great reason why the Jewish Worship should be exactly
prescribed by God, because it was typical of Christ and the state of the
Gospel; it was a visible Prophesy of things to come, and therefore could be
drawn by no other hand, but that which was guided by an Omniscient Eye; whence
the Apostle observes, that Moses was faithful as a Servant, for a Testimony of
those things which were to be spoken after. But in other Matters the Jews
themselves were not under such confinement; their Synagogue-Worship, where they
performed the Duties of Natural Religion, was ordered by their own prudence and
directions: They ordered the baptizing of Proselytes, without any command or
direction in their Law for it; which our Savior made the Sacrament of our
Admission into his Church; and that Bread and Wine, which by the same Authority
was added to the Paschal Supper, was consecrated by our Savior as a Festival
Commemoration of his broken Body, and his Blood shed for us; and therefore we
have little reason to doubt, whether the Christian Church has the same liberty
which the Jewish Synagogue had, to appoint such Circumstances and Ceremonies as
are most suitable to the several parts of Religious Worship.

3. The Apostles, who were authorized by our Savior to make Disciples, and to
gather them into Church Communion, give general Rules for Order and Decency,
and enjoin Obedience to our Spiritual Guides; Let all things be done decently
and in order; 1 Cor. 14. 40, 26.
and let all things be done to edifying; which is even the Rule of the
Apostolical Power, which God has given us for edification, and not for
destruction. Now general Rules leave Men at liberty 2 Cor. 10. 8.
as to particular Instances, because a general Rule may be complied with
different ways, which are supposed to be in his choice who receives such a Rule.

Thus we are commanded to obey our Spiritual Guides: Obey them who Heb. 13. 17.
have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls,
as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with
grief: Which when there is no fixed and settled Rule of Government, supposes that
many things are left to the prudence and discretion of the Governors; the
natural Inference from which is, that tho there be no express command for a
Form of Prayers, or significant Ceremonies; yet when they are ordered and
established by the united Wisdom and Authority of Church and State, it is the
Duty of every Christian, willingly and cheerfully, to comply with them, while
they agree with the general Rules of Gospel Worship.

3. Let us now consider the Example of our Savior while he conversed on the
Earth, which is a most admirable Pattern for all Christians to follow.

Now I observe, that though our Savior lived in a very degenerate Age of the
Jewish Church, when their Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, by those Characters
which he himself gives of them, appear to be very vile Persons; yet he lived in
the Communion of the Jewish Church; tho he were the great Reformer of Religion,
yet the time of the Jewish Church not being yet expired, he formed no new
Churches, but observed their Public Assemblies of Worship, preached in their
Temple, and in their Synagogues, and observed all their Religious Festivals as
punctually as any of themselves: which Consideration ought to give some check
to those Men, who forsake the Communion of the Church, under pretense that
there are bad Men in it.

Thus our Savior conformed to all those laudable and innocent Customs of the
Jewish Church, which were of humane Institution, and were not founded on the
Authority of a Divine Law. He celebrated the Feast of Dedication, which was
appointed by Judas John 10. 22.
Macchabeus and his Brethren, and the Children of Israel, to be observed
annually for eight days, in remembrance of the cleansing of the Temple from the
profanation of Antiochus, 1 Macab. 4. 59.
and the regaining their liberty of public Worship. This Feast, though it were
of Humane Institution, our Savior no where reproves, but graces and
countenances the Solemnity with his own Presence. Thus he conformed to the
Synagogue-Worship, which was all of humane Order and Appointment, as you heard
before.

Thus he who so severely reproved the superstitious abuse even of Divine
Institutions, who despised their Sacrifices, and Oblations, and all their
external and solemn Hypocrisies, their broad Phylacteries, and their frequent
and religious Purifications, when they placed their Religion in the bare doing
those things, without attending to the end for which they were commanded; does
both practice and allow those humane Institutions, which served a good end in
Religion; which is a plain Argument that our Savior did not think it such a
profanation of Religion, to appoint any Circumstances of Religious Worship,
not commanded by God; as that all external Things must be measured by their End
and Use. Those are innocent and laudable Customs which serve a good End, either
help the Devotion of the Worshipper, or make the Worship more grave and solemn,
provided it be not in forbidden Instances.

4. The practice of the Apostles, and the first and best Churches, are a great
vindication of the Constitution and Worship of the Church of England: Where we
have not a plain and express Rule, Examples, which are great and good Ones,
have the authority and face of a Rule; and he must be a very unreasonable Man,
who will desire any better Examples, than of the best and purest Churches.

Some are offended at the Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters, and the
Inferior Clergy, which they say is expressly forbidden by Christ; The Kings of
the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise Authority upon
them, are called Benefactors. But Luke 22. 25.
ye shall not be so, but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the
younger, and he that is chief, as he that does serve. In which words it is
plain our Savior forbids such kind of Authority over one another, as the
Gentile Princes exercise over their Subjects; but that it should forbid all
kind of Superiority among the Ministers of the Gospel, is contrary to the
Example even of the Apostolic Age. The Apostles indeed were all equal, had no
superiority of Order or Power over one another; and our Savior in this Place
speaks only to the Apostles not to exercise Superiority over each other, for
there was a strife among them, which of them should be greatest: But by our
Savior's own Institution, the Office of an Apostle was superior to the Seventy
Disciples, whom he sent out to preach the Gospel. And after the Resurrection of
Christ, the Apostles were supreme Governors of the Church; and if we believe
the first Records we have of the Christian Church, Bishops were the Apostles
Successors in their Power in the Church, and in their superiority over
Presbyters and Deacons: and so the Government of the Church continued in the
hands of Bishops till the Reformation, when the necessity of Affairs, and the
aversion some Men had against Popish Tyrannical Bishops, persuaded some
Reformers to lay aside the Order, which has been made the most specious
Argument against the Reformation; and to say no more, If Episcopacy be
Antichristianism, the whole Church was Antichristian for above fifteen hundred
Years together, from the very Times of the Apostles themselves. But if it be an
Apostolical Order, I know not what Authority any Man had to alter it; and for
my own part, think that Communion safest which is most agreeable to the Pattern
of the Apostolic Churches.

Others except against Forms of Prayer. Now not to take notice that Forms of
Prayer were of old in use in the Jewish Church, and that our Savior himself
gave a Form of Prayer to his Disciples, we must grant, that we have no certain
Evidence what the practice of the Church in the Apostles Days was in this
respect. I am much of S. Chrysostoms Opinion, That there were in that Age of
Miracles, extraordinary and miraculous Gifts of Prayer, as there was of
Healing, and Prophesying, and working Miracles: Not that every Christian had
these Gifts, any more than the Gift of Miracles, but there were some Persons
who had the Gift of inspired Prayer for the public benefit of the Church,
which made it needless in that Age to have Forms of Prayer for Public Worship;
and when I see that Age of Miracles return again, I will gladly renounce
Liturgy to join in inspired Prayers.

But as Miracles ceased, so did the miraculous Gift of Prayer; and then, as the
same Father observes, the Church worshipped God in allowed Forms; to be sure so
it was in his days, and a great while before him; and if we cannot trace it to
its first Original, for want of early Records in those Matters; yet I think he
must be a very scrupulous Man, who would refuse to communicate with the Church
in Constantine's Days, who composed Forms of Prayer for his Soldiers, which it
is not probable he would have done, had not the Church at that time used Forms
of Prayers.

And so it continued till the Reformation, and the Reformation made no
alteration in it; for the Lutheran and Bohemian Churches, the Church of Geneva,
France, and Holland, have their Lyturgies and Forms of Prayer, and so has the
Church of England since the first Reformation of it; and if not only allowed,
but advised by Mr. Calvin himself, till some Jesuits in Masquerade first set
up that way of conceived and extemporary Prayers, on purpose to break good
Order in our Church, as we well are assured by very Foxes and Firebrands.
credible Testimony.

Others scruple significant Ceremonies; and yet in the very Apostles Days we
find such in use, which are now disused, as the Holy Kiss, and the Love-Feast,
which was an addition to the Lord's Supper, much more obnoxious to censure than
the Cross in Baptism, and yet was retained for several Ages in the Church. In
Tertullian's and St. Cyprian's Times, we find a great many symbolical and
significant Ceremonies in use among them.

They frequently crossed themselves to show that they were Christians upon all
Occasions; the baptized Person was clothed in white, and thence Whitsunday
received its Name, because that was a solemn Time for Baptism, when those who
were baptized were clothed with white Garments.

It were easy to give you abundance of such Instances, which are so obvious to
any one, who is acquainted with Ecclesiastical Writers, that it is superfluous
to mention them.

In St. Austin's Time, Ceremonies were grown so numerous, that he very much
complains, not of the significancy and symbolicalness, but of the burden of
them; but never disturbed the Peace of the Church himself, Ep. ad Ianuar.
but advises others to conform to the Rites and Usages of any Church where
they came, though different from the Customs of their own.

As far as I have observed, there never was any Schism occasioned in the
Christian Church about significant Ceremonies, till of late among us, and it
would a little startle a modest Man to separate from the Church of England for
such Reasons, as must have made him a Schismatic from all ancient and modern
Churches, in all Ages to this day.

These things carefully and impartially considered, must needs tend to compose
Men's Minds, and reduce those who are gone astray, into the Communion and Unity
of the Church: For my part, I should rather venture erring with all the
Churches of Christ from the Apostles to this present Age, than break the Hedges
of the Church and Christian Communion, to follow some upstart new Lights, tho
it were possible they might lead me right.

SECT. III.
Containing an answer to some popular Cavils, or a Vindication of the Church of
England, from the Charge of Will Worship, Superstition, Idolatry, Popery.

LEt us now consider some popular Cavils and Exceptions, which too often
prevail with some honest, but less thinking Men to forsake our Communion.

And I shall only mention those which concern the Rites and Ceremonies of our
Church; and all that I shall at present do here, shall be to answer some hard
Words, and ill Names, which are given to our Worship; and show how ignorantly
and injuriously they are applied to the Church of England. Such are these,
Will Worship, Superstition, Idolatry, Popery.

These are hard Words, which very few People understand, and therein the great
force of the Objection lies; as will appear from a particular examination of
them.

First, Will Worship. Now, when Men charge the Church of England with
Will Worship, they generally understand such a Worship, as is not commanded by
God, but is originally owing to the Will and Invention of Men. Now this I
absolutely deny, that there is any such thing as Will Worship, in the Church of
England.

The Worship of the Church of England, consists in public Prayers and Praises,
in reading the Scriptures, and expounding them to the People, and instructing
them in the great Articles of Faith, and Rules of Life, in singing Psalms, and
administering the Supper of our Lord, and such like Exercises of Devotion: All
which are expressly commanded in Scripture, and therefore cannot be Will Worship
in this Sense; for they are not the Inventions of Men, but the Institutions of
Christ. It is true, there are some Circumstances and Ceremonies of Religious
Worship, used and enjoined in the Church of England, which are not commanded by
God; but these are no parts of Worship, and therefore not Will Worship. We do
not think wearing a Surplice to be an act of Worship, nor expect to please God
by any external Dress or Habit; but we think it a decent Garb for those to use,
who minister in holy things. We do not think kneeling at the Sacrament to be an
Act, but a Posture of Worship, as it is of Prayer; and therefore not kneel to
the Bread and Wine, but receive them kneeling, as expressing that Reverence and
Devotion of Mind, which becomes such a mysterious Worship, and as a Posture
suitable to those Prayers, which in the Act of receiving we put up to Heaven.
The Cross in Baptism is not designed as any act of Worship to God, but as a
visible Profession of our Faith in a crucified Savior; it is not a dedicating
and covenanting Sign, which respects God, but at most an engaging Sign, which
respects the Church; and therefore is not an Act of Worship, much less
Will Worship.

To institute any new Kind or Species of Worship, is certainly unlawful; as to
make any new object of Worship, whether it be a visible representation, such as
a Picture and Image; or invisible Beings, as Angels, and deisied Men, a
numerous company of whom are worshipped in the Church of Rome or any new Acts
of Worship, such as frequent Washings, Purgations, Sacrifices, Pilgrimages,
etc. But the Circumstances and Ceremonies of Religious Actions, which are no
where determined by God, may and must be determined, either by our own
Prudence, or by the Prudence of our Governors, without the least suspicion of
Will Worship; because they neither are, nor are designed for Acts of Worship.

But we must observe further, that this Word Will Worship is found but once in
all the Scripture, and some very wise and learned Men question, whether in that
place Will Worship be condemned by the Apostle, as an ill thing; the Words are
these; Which Col. 2. 23.
things have indeed a show of Wisdom in Will Worship and Humility, and
neglecting the Body, not in any honor of satisfying the Flesh: For they
observe, that Will Worship is joined with two other very good things, Humility,
and neglecting the Body: (...), which signifies external Severities and
Mortifications, to keep down the Body and bring it into Subjection, not to
pamper it with high Nourishment, nor to make Provision for the Flesh to fulfill
the Lusts thereof: which seems to be the meaning of what follows, not in honor
in satisfying the Flesh: for Honor, as St. Hierom observes, signifies taking
Care of, and making Provision for it.

So that we may as well say, that Humility and bodily Severities, Strictness
and Austerity of Life, in suppressing all the Motions of Lust, and the least
inclinations to sensual Pleasures, are forbidden or censured by the Apostle, as
that Will Worship is; for there is as much appearance of his condemning one as
the other.

And besides this, the Apostle says, that these things have a show of Wisdom in
Will Worship, etc. (...); now we expound this to signify only a false
appearance of Wisdom, yet that supposes, that Will Worship, and Humility, and
bodily Severities are in themselves good things, and parts of Religious Wisdom,
when other things which are not good, gain a Reputation of Wisdom, by being
like them; for that which makes these things to have a show of Wisdom, is, that
they are mistaken for Will Worship, Humility, and neglecting the Body.

And therefore, according to this way of expounding the Words, by Will Worship
we must understand voluntary Worship, which answers to Free-Will-Offerings
under the Law, which were not commanded by God, but yet were very acceptable to
him; when Men do something more than God has expressly commanded, and deny
themselves those Liberties and Enjoyments, which God allows, in order to some
Spiritual End, to refine and purge their Souls, that they may arrive at more
perfect seize in Goodness.

And there is so much to countenance this Interpretation, that all the
Superstitions in the World do deceive and abuse Men, and pass for excellent
seize in Religion, under the show and appearance of voluntary Worship,
and Free-Will-Offerings, of doing something more than God has enjoined them,
whereby they think they so highly merit of God, as to obtain the pardon of
their Sins, and become his peculiar Favorites. Thus the Pharisees thought to
do, by observing the Traditions of their Fathers, by their frequent Washings,
Purifications, Fastings, and Tything even Mint and Cummin: Thus the Papists do
by their Fasts, Pilgrimages, and Penances; but the mistake is, that this is but
a false appearance of Wisdom, because tho at first it looks like the noble
generous Worship of Free-Will-Offerings, yet it is not so.

For tho under the Law, Free Will Offerings were not commanded (which had
destroyed the Nature of a Free Will Offering) yet there are directions given
what such Persons shall offer to God, in case they do offer at all; and in
particular that there shall be no blemish Lev. 22. 17.
in it: which signifies, that this voluntary Worship must be confined to such
Instances, as we know are acceptable to God; and therefore, when Men spend
their Zeal in some voluntary Superstitions, which cannot please God, such
things have only a show, a false appearance of Wisdom, in voluntary Worship,
because tho their Worship be voluntary, and so far commendable; yet they do not
make a wise choice of the Acts of Worship, do not worship God in an acceptable
manner.

And this is the very case the Apostle mentions; for the things which he says,
have a show of Wisdom, are either the worshipping Angels, ver. 18. which has a
show of Humility, that such mean and guilty Creatures dare not immediately
approach to God without the Intercession of Angels, who are the great
Ministers, Friends, and Favorites of God; or those Ordinances and Rudiments of
the World, touch not, taste not, handle not; 20, 21. which he calls, the
Doctrines and Commandments of Men, ver. 22. by which he means, either the
Jewish Laws of abstaining from certain Meats forbid by the Law of Moses, or the
Pythagorean abstinence from the use of Women, or from eating any living
Creature; or, as it is most probable, both of them. These are those things,
which have a show of Wisdom in Will Worship, and neglecting the Body, but
indeed are not true Wisdom, nor an acceptable Worship of God: a great many such
things, we may find in the Church of Rome, such as their praying to Saints and
Angels, and the Virgin Mary, their Fastings, Penances, and Pilgrimages, etc.
which are made substantial parts of Religion; but Circumstances, and Ceremonies
of Worship, were never reckoned among them till now, by any ancient or modern
Expositors.

Now tho Will Worship were in this place condemned by the Apostle, and these
things condemned as parts of Will Worship; yet the Church of England is not
concerned in it, as having nothing in her Worship like these things; and we
must not apply the Name of Will Worship any farther than the Apostle has
applied it, or to such things as are analogous to what he condems for
Will Worship; but yet it does not appear, that this voluntary Worship is
condemned by the Apostle, or has the least ill Character affixed to it.

2. The second Accusation is Superstition, a Name which is at all adventures
given to every thing, which Men dislike in Religion, and being a Name of
Reproach serves instead of all other Arguments, especially when they have no
other at hand: Thus, to pray by a Form, to wear a Surplice, to kneel at the
Lord's Supper, are all superstitious Ceremonies, and so they may for any thing
They know, who most frequently use this Word, without understanding what it
means; and no Man need be at any greater trouble to vindicate the Church of
England from the charge of Superstition, than to explain the Nature of it,
which will soon convince them of their mistake in applying it.

Now (...), which by Tully is rendered Superstitio, is by St. Austin called
demonum cultus, the Worship of Demons, that is, of Angels or dead Men; and in
this Sense, St. Paul at Athens, when he observed the Inscription of Acts 17. 22.
their Altar to an unknown God, says that they were (...), that is, more
Superstitious than others, i. e. that they worshipped more Gods or Demons than
other Heathen Nations, and possibly with more Devotion and Religious
Observances.

But then, (...) signifies a great dread and fear of their Demons and Gods; and
therefore is made equivalent to (...), a dread or fear of God. And, as a
Learned Man observes, Dr. Ham. of Superst.
this was originally owing to the belief of a divine Providence, and
consequently of Rewards and Punishments in this World, and the next: for which
reason Epicurus, tho he did not deny the Being of a God, yet he removed him out
of the World, and would not allow him to be Maker of the World, nor to
intermeddle in humane Affairs; and those who believed a divine Providence, he
rejected under the Notion of (...), Superstitious fearers of the Deity. Hence
he represents the design of his Philosophy to be to deliver Men from
Superstition, that they might live without fear of any invisible Powers, or
infernal Judges, of whom their Poets especially, told such frightful and
tragical Stories; and therefore, in other places Superstition is made by him
equivalent to the fear of Death, or the fear of punishment after Death. And in
this Sense Superstition is nothing else but a Nickname for Religion, or such a
fear of God as is the beginning of Wisdom; but this was so troublesome and
irksome to the Atheistical Philosopher, that he endeavored to deliver himself
and Mankind from the belief of a Divine Providence, or future Account: as in
our Age, for the fame reason, too many deny the Being of God, and endeavor to
laugh and droll themselves into Atheism, that they may live secure from the
fear of Punishment. But tho every bad Man desires to do this, yet few can
attain to it, the belief of a God sticks close to their Minds; and it is equally
different for them to deny his Being, as to despise his Power: and therefore,
they live in a perpetual dread of God, as an observer of their Actions, and a
severe Judge, and can form no other Notion of him, but as of a powerful,
domineering, imperious Tyrant.

And therefore, Maximus Tyrius makes this the difference between a Religious
and Superstitious Man: that a Religious Man goes to God (...), without any
servile Fear and Horror. which we now commonly oppose to a Filial fear, which
is mixed with Love and Reverence; as a Son Loves and Honors his Father, which
is the true Spirit of Religion; but a Superstitious Man is horribly afraid of
God, as a powerful Tyrant. Hence Plutarch observes, that an Atheist does not
believe that there is a God, and a Superstitious Man wishes there were none.

And hence it comes to pass, that as Superstition makes Men fear God, so it
teaches them to flatter him; for it is the natural temper of Fear to fawn and
crouch, and by the basest and most servile Submissions, to court the Favor of
an imperious Lord; and it is as natural for those, who are Proud, Severe, and
Imperious to love to be flattered: and therefore those Men, who look on God
only as Almighty Power, which is soon provoked, and cannot be resisted, hope to
appease so angry a Being, by some servile and flattering Submissions. Whence it
is Maximus Tyrius represents a truly pious Man as God's Friend, and a
Superstitious Man as his Flatterer; (...).

Now the true Reason of this Difference between the Religious and the
Superstitious Man is this; that a truly Religious Man is one, who conforms
himself to the Divine Nature, and admires the Wisdom of God's Laws, and the
Beauty and Perfection of Virtue; and therefore, instead of this servile fear of
God, he loves him as the most excellent Being, and securely hopes in him, as
the most kind Father and bountiful Benefactor, and delights to pay him such
Homage and Worship, as is suitable to his Nature and Perfections. But a
Superstitious Man is one, who is in love with some Vice or other, which he
fears God will punish him for, but cannot and will not part with it; and
therefore fears God, and flatters him, and invents such Arts to appease an
offended and angry Deity, as a Slave would do to pacify his Lord.

And here is the true Original of all that, which we call Superstitious
Worship; which is nothing else, but such a Worship, as Superstitious Men pay to
God, to appease his Anger, and to flatter him into a good Opinion of them: For
Superstition is properly seated in the Mind, as Religion is; and that is a
Superstitious Worship, which serves the Ends of Superstition; as that is true
Religious Worship, which expresses the sincere Devotion of the Mind, and is
fitted to the Nature and Ends of true Religion.

This was the Original of those numerous Sacrifices, which were offered by the
Heathens, at least they were abused to this Purpose by Superstitious Minds, to
appease their angry Gods by the Blood of the Sacrifice, instead of their own:
especially those barbarous Sacrifices of Men, and Children, which it is
impossible, should ever have any other Original than Superstition: For Men must
be in a horrible dread and fear of God, and entertain very frightful
Apprehensions of him, before they can either persuade themselves to offer, or
believe, that God will accept of such Sacrifices.

To the same Original is owing their worship of Demons and Inferior Deities, as
Intercessors for them to the more powerful God; for Men who are afraid,
endeavor to make all the Friends they can to a powerful Adversary; and it not
only makes a show of Humility, as the Apostle speaks, that Men dare not go
directly to God, but employ his great Ministers to speak for them; but it
signifies also a great dread of him: for had Men right apprehensions of the
Nature of God, and were conscious to themselves of a sincere Love and Reverence
of him, and a desire to please and to be like him, they would be no more afraid
to pray to him, than a Child is to ask his Father for what he wants.

Thus Superstitious Men, who have a mind to appease God, and to keep their
sins, endeavor to court and flatter him with an arbitrary and external
Worship, either with a pompous show; such as was their carrying the Images of
their Gods in Procession, which was so magnificent a sight, that many
Christians were tempted to be present at it, which was condemned and censured
by the Ancient Fathers; or with public Feasts and Sports, their Solennes Ludi,
instituted in honor of their Gods, in which so many ancient Christians
suffered Martyrdom; or frequent Washings and Purifications, or external
Severities to their Bodies, as Whippings, and cutting themselves till the Blood
gushed out, as the Priests of Baal did; or by prostituting their Wives and
Daughters, and defiling themselves in honor of their Wanton Deities: Or by
abstaining from certain Meats, and being initiated into the Mysteries of their
Religion by severe and troublesome Methods: In these and suchlike things
consisted that superstitious Worship, which the Heathens paid to their Gods, in
such external Rites as were expensive, costly, or troublesome, which they
thought apt and proper to atone for their sins, and flatter their angry Gods
into a good liking of them, while they continued in sin. Their Worship did not
consist in any real and substantial acts of Piety and Devotion, were not
designed, and had no tendency in them to make them more like to God, or to do
any real Honor to his Nature and Perfections, but were an external piece of
Pageantry, like the crouchings and fawnings of Slaves to their Imperious Lords.

And thus a superstitious Mind may turn even Divine Institutions into a
superstitious Worship, as the Hypocritical Jews did, who had no respect to the
nature and signification of those external Rites of Worship which God
appointed, but doted upon the Letter of the Law, and thought to please God with
the external performance of them. They gloried in the Circumcision of the
Flesh, but made no regard to the Circumcision of the Mind and Spirit; they
thought it enough that they descended from Abraham by Carnal Generation, but
took no care to imitate the Faith of their Father Abraham: They boasted of the
Temple of the Lord, which was the visible Symbol of God's Presence with them,
and residence among them, tho they made it a Den of Thieves. They punctually
observed their New Moons, and Sabbaths, and Solemn Assemblies, tho they defiled
themselves with all manner of wickedness, insomuch that God abhorred his own
Worship, as much as the Pagan Superstitions; and tho he instituted it himself,
yet denies that he required it from them. When you come to appear before me;
Who has Isa. 1. 11.
required this at your hands, to tread my Courts?

And thus professed Christians may, and do turn the Institutions of our Savior
into the grossest Superstitions; when they think it sufficient to carry them to
Heaven that they are baptized, and call themselves Christians, and say their
Prayers, and hear Sermons, and receive the Sacrament, without attending to the
end of all this, which is, to transform them into a Divine Nature, to purify
their Minds from all earthliness and sensuality, and thereby fit them for the
happiness of a Spiritual World.

The sum of all is this, That Superstition is not properly in any Act of
Worship, but in the Mind; Divine Institutions may be abused to Superstitious
Purposes, and Humane Institutions, which are mere Matters of Decency and Order,
may be used without Superstition. The Superstition of Heathens, Jews, and
Christians, differ in their Acts, but agree in their Principle, too great a
Fear and Flattery of God.

But yet from what I have discoursed, we may collect some plain Rules, to judge
what is Superstitious, and what not; and when we may be charged with
Superstition, and when not: For,

1. Then Men are certainly Superstitious, when they think they shall please or
displease God, merely by doing or not doing some indifferent things, which he
has neither commanded, nor forbid. To think to please God, and to make him our
Friend by any Arbitrary Rites and Usages in Religion, is to think, that God may
be flattered by external and insignificant Complements, which is the true
Spirit of Superstition; and to think that God will be displeased with us for
doing some indifferent Things, which he has no where forbid, argues a
superstitious dread and horror of him, so that we dare not use that liberty
which he has no where restrained; touch not, taste not, handle not; that is, to
forbid doing those things which God has allowed, or at least not forbid, is
more certainly an Act of Superstition, than to do those things which God has
not commanded; for Men may do what God has not commanded, without any
superstitious Conceit about it; but they cannot forbid doing what God has not
forbid, without placing Religion in not doing it, and to make any thing an Act
of Religion, and to think to please God with it, which is no Act of Religion,
is certainly superstitious.

2. Then Men are guilty of Superstition in the external Acts of Religion,
whether they be instituted by God or not, when they think to please God by the
bare external performance of them: for whatever is external in Religion, cannot
be acceptable to God for it self: In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails
any thing, nor uncircumcision but a new Creature, and Faith which works by
Love, and Obedience to the Commandments of God: And to hope to please God with
any thing else, is to hope to flatter him, and to compound with him for the
breach of his Laws, and the want of an inward vital Principle of Religion, by
external Hypocrisies and Superstitions.

But on the other hand we may be sure;

1. That no Man can be guilty of Superstition, who hopes to please God, and
obtain his Favor, only by an Universal Righteousness, and Holiness of Heart
and Life. Such a Man is truly Religious, who endeavors to conform his Mind to
the Divine Nature and Image, and to frame his Conversation by the eternal Laws
of Goodness; he neither fears nor flatters the Deity, as the Superstitious Man
does, but is the Son and the Friend of God, and the external Expressions and
Exercises of his Religion are fitted to the great ends of an Universal Holiness.

2. That cannot be the matter of Superstition, which is not made or judged an
acceptable part of Divine Worship: for Superstition can be only in such things,
wherein we hope to please God; and this effectually justifies the Church of
England from the charge of Superstition, with respect to the External Rites of
Worship, which she declares to be no parts nor acts of Worship, but such
Circumstances and Ceremonies, as make the external performance of the Acts of
Worship decent and solemn, and are useful to Edification; to help Men to
worship God better, not to please God by such external Rites.

The third Accusation of the Worship of the Church of England is Idolatry, a
terrible, and yet a ridiculous Charge. But Idolatry is an odious Name, and that
is enough; if there be those who are bold enough to say it, they will be sure
to find some of their Proselytes ignorant enough to believe it: It is but
calling the Common Prayer Book and Ceremonies Idols, and then they are plainly
forbid in the Second Commandment.

But is there indeed no difference between* worshipping God in a sober and
pious form of words, and worshipping a Graven Image? No difference between
wearing a Surplice, and falling down to a Stock or Stone? No difference between
signing Children with the sign of the Cross, and dedicating them to an Idol, or
false God? Whither does a blind Zeal transport these Men! I am sure this is
much more like Blasphemy, than any thing in our Worship is like Idolatry; but
such an Argument as this does not deserve to be answered, nor such Men deserve
to be reasoned with; those who can abuse themselves and others with such
formidable Nothings, stand more in need of Physic than a sober Confutation.

4. Another Accusation of the Worship of the Church of England is, That it is
Popery: And so indeed it is as much* Popery as it is Superstition and Idolatry:
And thus our Religious Princes, and Godly Bishops, are well rewarded for
reforming Religion, with infinite pains and labor, and to their utmost peril.
It cost many Martyrs their Lives, and would have made the Crown to shake, had
it not been secure by an Omnipotent Hand, and All-seeing Providence; and all
this it seems for nothing, for we are not got out of Babylon yet. That Command
still lies against the Church of England, as our Ancestors believed it did
against the Church of Rome, Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says
the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you.

It is somewhat strange that God should suffer our Reformers, who were so
sincere and honest, who spared no pains, and feared no danger to purge the
House of God, to retain so much of the old Leaven, as makes it unsafe for all
good Christians to partake in such Worship.

And it is strange that the Papists should be such mortal Enemies to the Church
of England, which is so near a Kin to Rome, and look so kindly upon our new
Thorough-Reformers.

But I would desire these Men to tell me what Point of Popery is still retained
in the Doctrine, Government, or Discipline of our Church? O, say they, that is
quickly done, The very Office of Bishops is a Relic of Popery: And if this be
so, then the whole Christian Church, from the very first institution of it, has
been popishly affected; for if we will allow the Apostles to have had an
Episcopal Power and Authority, we find no Christian Church without Bishops,
till the Reformation, that is, for 1500 Years, and I confess I never thought
Popery could have pleaded such Antiquity, and early prescription.

That Supreme and Sovereign Power, which the Bishop of Rome challenges over all
other Bishops, and Secular Princes, nay that uncontrollable Authority he
challenges over the Laws of God, and Institutions of our Savior, to change and
alter them by his infallible Decrees, when he pleases; his absolute Power to
forgive Sins, and to dispose of Heaven and Hell, is no doubt, the Perfection of
that Apostasy, which was foretold should happen in the latter days; and if our
Bishops challenge any such Power to themselves, I will own them to be
Antichristian and Popish: But we may see, what admirable Reformers those are
like to make, who know not how to distinguish between an Apostolical Office,
and Antichristian Usurpations.

But the Common Prayer Book is Popish: I beseech you wherein; as it is a Form
of Prayer? Then our Saviour*taught Men Popery, for he taught his Disciples to
pray by a Form; and the whole Book of Psalms must be rank Popery, which
consists only of Forms of Prayer, and Thanksgiving, composed for the use of the
Temple.

But is there any Remains of Popish Worship in our Liturgy? are there any
Prayers to Saints or Angels, or the Virgin Mary? Are our Prayers concealed from
us in an unknown Tongue? Do we not understand what we say, what Petitions we
put up to God? Do you find the Sacrifice of the Mass, or any Relics of it in
our Liturgy? Thanks be to God, for our Reforming Bishops and Martyrs, who
purged our Worship from all these Abominations.

But the Common Prayer Book is taken out of the Mass Book, and therefore it is
but Popery still. This I will in part grant, but deny the Consequence; for
every thing in the Mass Book was not Popery, unless you will say, that the
Creed, Ten Commandments, and Lord's Prayer are parts of Popery.

The plain case is this, You must consider the Church of Rome, as a true Church
corrupted, and degenerated from its Primitive Institutions; for we must
acknowledge, that the Church of Rome, was not inferior in all Gifts and Graces
to the most eminent Churches in the World, in the Apostles days, and several
Ages after. And therefore no wonder, if in its greatest degeneracy, it retained
some small Remains of its ancient Piety and Devotion, which was buried in the
midst of Rubbish, and Idolatrous Superstitions.

Consider then, what the proper work of a Reformer must be? to pull up Root and
Branch; to pull up the Wheat with the Tares? This would be not to reform a
corrupt Church, but to make a new one: This would be to cut off the sound, with
the rotten Members; and is like pulling down a well constituted Government, to
correct Abuses. I pray God preserve us from such Reformers as these.

In a Word, if these Men, who accuse the Church of England of Popery, can show
any thing practiced among us, which is peculiar to Popery, which cannot be
justified by the Precepts and Examples of Scripture, and the first and purest
Churches, I will heartily join with them in calling for a Reformation. In the
mean time I would desire them to consider, that they do Popery too much
Reputation, by giving up the Church of England to it, and make the name of
Popery a less formidable thing, when it is thus indifferently applied to a
corrupt, and to a reformed Church. I wish with all my Soul they were half so
free from Popish Principles, and Practices in matters of Civil Government, as
the Church of England is from a Popish Worship.

PART. II.
Concerning those Disorders and Miscarriages, which some men are guilty of in
Church Communion.

CHAP. I.
Concerning those, who ordinarily forsake the Communion of their Parish
Churches.

HAving discoursed thus largely of those, who wholly separate themselves from
Christian Communion, who either communicate with no Church, or forsake the
Communion of the Church of England; I now proceed to correct those
Miscarriages, which some, who profess themselves of our Communion, are too
notoriously guilty of.

And I shall first begin with those, who ordinarily forsake the Communion of
their Parish Churches. This has been an old and inveterate evil, of long use
and practice, especially in this great and populous City, and it may be thought
a daring and fruitless attempt to oppose it; however I have this satisfaction,
that no man can reasonably suspect, that I serve any other interest by this,
but the interest of Peace and Order, and the better edification of the
Christian Church; which must reasonably engage all men the more impartially to
consider what I shall now offer, which shall be comprised under these two
General Heads.

First, Our Obligations to Parochial Communion: 2. An Answer to some Objections
against it.

First, Our Obligations to Parochial Communion: which will appear in these
particulars;

1. That Parochial Communion is in it self an excellent Institution for the
more regular Instruction and Government of the Christian Church. We do not
indeed pretend, that the division of an Episcopal Church into several Parishes
with their distinct Pastors set over them, is in a strict sense of Divine
Institution: for Christ and his Apostles did not by an express Law determine
the Bounds and Extent of Bishoprics, much less of Parochial Communions; nor
indeed was it possible to do it in those days, when the greatest number of
people were either Jews or Heathens. Nor was there any need of this, it being
at last an acknowledged Principle among Dissenters themselves, and those of the
greatest note; That the directive Light of Nature Dr. Owen's Enquiry into the
Original of Churches, p. 14.
is sufficient to guide us in such things as these; the times and seasons of
Church Assemblies, the order and decency wherein all things are to be
transacted in them, the bounding of them, as to the number of their members,
and places of habitation, so as to answer the ends of their institution. And
therefore if this Parochial Communion be of great use to the edification of
Christians, it not only justifies the Wisdom of the Church in the first
Institution of it, but severely condemns those, who break and violate so useful
an Institution.

The whole Christian Church is but one Body and Society of Christians united to
Christ, who is the Head of this Body; and therefore, were it possible, should
all worship their common Father and Savior together: but since the number of
Christians, and their great distance from each other, will not admit this, they
are divided into less Societies, for the more convenient Administration of holy
Offices, and the exercise of Christian Discipline and Government.

How can any thing in a Christian Nation be more useful for all the ends of
Church Society, than the distribution of Christians into Parochial Communions?

To enjoy the liberty of public Assemblies near our own dwellings, without
being forced to seek for it at a distance, would have been thought a great
privilege in former Ages; like the Heavenly Manna falling round about the
Tents of the true Israelites.

To have a fixed Pastor, who is particularly entrusted with the care of your
Souls, to whom you may at all times freely resort, and disclose your spiritual
wants, whose neighborhood and conversation may contract a particular
friendship and familiarity, and beget a mutual confidence and endearment, is
quite a different thing from some public and general exhortations; and the
reason why men do not more value the benefit and advantage of a Parochial
Guide, is because generally they make so little use of him.

This is the truest emblem of Catholic Unity, when we hold personal Communion
with those Christians who are our neighbors, and so in the nearest disposition
for it: for our obligation to Christian Communion extends it self to all
Christian Societies, which live in the Communion of the Church; and to pick up
a Church for constant and Ordinary Communion here and there from straggling
members, who live in remote and distant places, is to make a Schismatical
difference between Christians, as if all Christians were not of the same body,
nor fit for personal Communion: and though forsaking our Parish Churches for
other Churches in the same Communion be not so formal a Schism, yet it has some
tendency that way, it being a forsaking the Communion of our neighbor
Christians and Parochial Guide.

There is no other Rule, that I know of, for personal Communion, but
cohabitation, or dwelling together in the same neighborhood; for then we
communicate with the Catholic Church, when we communicate with that part of it
wherein we live: but when without just cause we ordinarily forsake the
Communion of Parochial Assemblies, we disturb the most convenient Order of
Church Communion, and make a Rent and Schism in the Church, as total Separation
makes a Schism from the Church.

Neighbor Christians have the most frequent occasions of conversing with each
other, and therefore many great ends of Christian Communion are best attained
among them: they may exhort and reprove one another, and provoke unto love and
good works; they may watch over one another souls, and when they observe each
others miscarriages (which they cannot avoid observing, when they live so near,
and converse so often together) they may apply such timely remedies, as may
help up those, who fall, or prevent the fall of those, who trip and stumble;
and when the case is beyond their private redress, may call in the help of
their Pastor, who by his wise Counsels and seasonable Exhortations and
Reproofs, and pious and ardent Prayers, may convince those who have sinned, and
restore them by Repentance, and obtain their Pardon, or strengthen and confirm
those who were assaulted by Temptations, and procure fresh supplies of Grace
for them.

We see indeed very little of this now, and the reason of it is very plain,
because few men consider, what are the Duties of Christian Communion, but are
too much unconcerned what becomes of their Brothers soul; they think every man
must look to himself, but do not feel that sympathy, compassion and care; which
one member has for another; that whether one member suffer, all the members
suffer with it, or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it; but
were men sensible of the necessity of this mutual care of each others souls, it
could never be better discharged than among neighbors, who live under each
others eye.

And were men faithful in this, it would be a more effectual way to preserve
the Church from the infection of putrid and corrupt members, than particular
Church-associations, and all the Tests they could use or invent of real
Saintship in admitting Churchmembers.

The great Exception against Parochial Communion, which has formerly been, and
is still managed by the Independents, is, that there are a great many bad men
in our Communion, that Discipline is not duly exercised among us, to remove
those from Christian Communion, who have forfeited their right to it by their
vicious lives. But though this is no just reason for Separation, and there is a
greater noise made about it, than there is any occasion for: since such
notorious sinners usually excommunicate themselves, and if they do now and then
hear a Sermon (which I suppose they would not deny to Turks, Heathens and
Infidels, as being the most likely Means for their Conversion) yet never
approach the Lord's Table, or are rejected, when known; yet I say, would every
Christian faithfully do his part (and without this it is impossible Discipline
should be duly administered in any Church State) Parochial Communion is the most
effectual Means to preserve the Church pure, it being almost impossible any man
should be guilty of any gross and scandalous vices, but some of his neighbors
must know it; which is more than can be said of any Congregation, whose members
live at a distance from each other, and rarely converse together, and when they
do, can easily put on greater reservedness and caution, and appear quite other
men, than their common conversation speaks them to be.

Love and Unity is a necessary duty of Christian Religion, it is the badge of
our discipleship, By this shall all men John 13. 35.
know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another: Now though we
must love all Christians, as members of the same body, yet neighbors have the
greatest reason by all possible arts and endearments, to secure their love to
each other; because they have the most frequent occasions of quarrels and
contentions, if they do not: it is a much harder thing to maintain love and
peace among men, who live together, and have different interests, which are
many times cross to each other; than among those who live at a distance, and
seldom see one another: and there cannot be a more firm and lasting cement of
Peace and Union, than Christian Communion is, when they worship God in the same
place, and put up their united Prayers and Thanksgivings to him, and eat at the
same Table, as members of the same body, and children of the same Father, and
heirs of the same promises. This is a powerful argument to the love of all
Christians, but it does more sensibly endear us to those, who are as it were of
the same household and family: and since there is greater need of this
endearment among neighbors, than strangers, Parochial Communion, which is made
up of Christian neighbors, who daily converse with each other, does better
answer the end of Christian Communion, than gathered Churches.

I add further, that in Parochial Communion every particular Christian in a
Nation, may be provided for, which cannot ordinarily be done in gathered
Churches; for every particular man belongs to one Parish or another, and is by
Law bound to communicate in it, and if he do not, may be discovered, and
corrected either by private admonitions, or public censures: but when men
forsake their Parochial Communion, it is impossible to give any account of
them; they may be of this Church, or of that, or of none at all. It is
impossible for the Governors of the Church, who are to take care of every
particular wandering Sheep, to give such an account of their charge in any other
Church State, as in Parochial Communions; and that is a sufficient argument to
prove that it is a very useful and necessary Constitution, and the more useful
and necessary it is, the greater fault is it in those, who without great reason
disturb good order, and though they know how to use this liberty wisely and
innocently themselves, yet give an ill example to those who will make a bad use
of it.

I shall add but one thing more, and that is with reference to the good
Government of your families: you cannot ordinarily have such inspection over
your Children and Servants, when you go to other Churches, as when you can
appoint them their Seats or Stations in your own, where you may have your eye
upon them, and observe their carriage and behavior; and your example in
forsaking your own Church, will be apt to teach them to do so too; and I have
reason to fear, that this has too often occasioned the debauchery of many,
otherwise hopeful, young men.

The Sum is this, that though the division of Churches into Parish-bounds under
the conduct of a Parochial Minister, be not founded on any express Law of God,
yet it is so highly useful to all the great ends of Church Communion that it
must needs be a very great fault lightly or wantonly to violate so wholesome an
Institution.

2. Because the great Plea, which is made by those who communicate with our
Church, for forsaking their Parish Churches, is the different abilities of
Preachers; and every one is desirous to hear those Preachers whom he likes
best, and thinks there is no hurt in it: I shall, as plainly as I can, and with
as little offense as may be, consider this matter.

1. And first I observe, that this is a great pretense of others, for
Separation from our Church, that they can profit more by Nonconforming than by
Conforming Preachers, and therefore forsake our Churches, and join themselves
to separate Congregations; and methinks wife and good men should not like a
principle, which so easily leads men into Separation, and ends in Schism. I
confess, there is a great deal of difference, between taking the best care we
can of our souls in the Communion of the Church, and involving our selves in
the guilt of Schism upon this pretense; but yet that is a suspicious argument
which tends toward Schism; which in its greatest innocence breaks good orders,
and wholesome Constitutions, and when it is fully pursued, may lead giddy and
unstable minds into Separation.

2. There is so much unaccountable fancy and humor to be seen in those
different judgments, men make of Preachers, that it were a very hard case, if
the Peace, Order and Government of the Church were to lie at the mercy of men's
different fancies. Some are taken with a grave and solid, others with a florid
and polite Preacher; some are pleased with a tone, others with earnestness and
vehemence of action and voice. How often do many men vary in their opinions of
Preachers, and change their Churches, as their fancy changes? Those Preachers
who are disliked by their own Parishioners, are very often admired by
strangers: Now what work would this make in all Civil Governments, were Fancy
suffered to overruled public Establishments? and we have as little reason to
expect that God will allow of such inroads of Fancy upon the Order and
Government of the Church.

The design of Church Communion, and of Preaching the Gospel, is not to please
and tickle a wanton Fancy, but to instruct us in the plain Duties of the
Gospel, and to furnish us with the Arguments and Motives to a holy life; and
thanks be to God, such discourses we may meet with in most Churches in this
Nation, especially in this great City, though it may be not always dressed to
every man's palate.

It is a sign men are full fed, when they cannot be contented with plain and
wholesome food, but complain, if they have not some delicious Sauces to create
and tempt an appetite: this I am sure is certain, that men, who govern
themselves by such Fancies, do not always make the wisest choice, nor the best
improvements.

3. Suppose your Parochial Ministers do not appear to be the best Preachers,
the profoundest Divines, nor the most moving Orators; consider whether this may
not in great measure be owing to your selves: whether your withdrawing your
selves from their instructions, may not make them more slight and careless in
their preparations. Preachers are men subject to humane infirmities, and in all
cases it is apt to dispirit men, to see all their pains and labor despised and
slighted, especially in this case, which makes them incapable of doing that
service to the souls of men, which their Office requires, and which they so
passionately desire. Men who are above the vanity of a great Auditory, are yet
desirous to preach to those, whom they are concerned to instruct, and are
grieved to see them turn their backs upon them. You might many times have
better Sermons, did you not discourage your Preachers by such neglects.

4. Consider farther, that you are particularly accountable for the improvement
of those means of Grace, which you did or might have enjoyed in the Communion
of your Parish Churches. God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Order and
Peace, and therefore requires us to keep our station; and when the Providence
of God, and the Laws of Church and State, have placed us under such a Ministry,
we are accountable for no more, than what we can enjoy with the preservation of
the Peace, and Order, and Government of the Church: and if our improvements be
proportionable to this, we shall not lose our reward.

But now suppose, by pursuing your wandering fancies, ye fall into any mistakes,
or are ignorant of any part of your duty, when ye might have been better
instructed, had ye diligently and constantly attended the Parochial Ministry,
what excuse can such men make for themselves? they are misled, but it was
occasioned by forsaking that Guide, whom the Divine Providence had provided for
them; they sin ignorantly, but they might have known better, had they not
withdrawn themselves from such instructions: certainly those men act more
safely, with reference to a future account, who make the best use they can of
such instructions, as the Providence of God provides for them; than those, who
leave their rank and order to choose better for themselves.

5. We may also reasonably expect the greater assistances of the Divine Spirit
in preserving good order, which will tend more to our spiritual increase and
growth, than the best external means of edification: the success does not
depend upon the gifts and abilities of the Preacher, but upon the influences of
Gods Grace: Who then is 1 Cor. 3. 9, 6, 7.
Paul, and who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord
gave to every man? I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase:
so then, neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God
that gives the increase. Some little imperfect hints may more enlighten our
minds, when the Divine Spirit is pleased to teach us, than the most exact and
elaborate discourse; and plain truths without any art or varnish, may be
conveyed with more warmth and vigor to our souls and consciences, and may
affect us more, than all the charms of humane eloquence. If men design only
pleasing their fancies, that they may do better by gratifying their curiosity;
but he, who has no other design in hearing, but to save his soul, ought
principally to take care, that he may enjoy the influences of the holy Spirit,
which alone can make the external Ministry of the Word effectual; and the best
way to do that, is to observe good order; for he is a Spirit of Love, and
Peace, and Unity, and Order, and therefore is more concerned to supply the
defects and imperfections of external Ministries, which we conscientiously
submit to, and diligently attend, to preserve good order in the Church.

6. The constant attendance on a meaner Ministry, is much more for our
edification, than an occasional hearing much better Sermons. It is too much the
humor of many men, who forsake their own Church, to be constant to none; and
by this means they may hear a great many excellent Sermons, and yet not be
thoroughly instructed in all parts of their duty: whereas every Minister, who
makes conscience of instructing his people committed to him, will take care at
one time or other to teach them all the great Articles of Faith, and Rules of
Life, which though it may not be so taking and popular, is yet more useful than
some general Discourses, and pressing and vehement Exhortations without a
particular explication of their duty. Which shows the advantage of attending a
constant Ministry, especially if men would acquaint themselves with their
Minister, whereby he might the better understand, how to apply himself to their
particular cases, to fit his Instructions to their capacities, and his
Counsels, Exhortations and Reproofs to their spiritual wants. This may suffice
to show our obligations to Parochial Communion.

2. The second thing proposed, was to answer some Objections against this; and
they are only some hard cases, which make Parochial Communion very nauseous and
unpleasant to honest minds, or very dangerous. As to name some of the hardest:

1. The case of a vicious and scandalous Minister, who like Eli's Sons, makes
the Sacrifices of God to be abhorred: I am in great hope, that the number of
these men is not great, though one were too much: and yet it is not to be
expected, that in so great a body of men, there should be none: Let the enemies
of God, and of Religion, triumph in this, and increase their numbers, while we
silently lament it.

But when this is the case, I think every good man should apply himself to his
Superiors, and endeavor to remove him; if this cannot be done, or is too long
delayed, he must learn to distinguish between the man and his Office; a bad
man, but yet a legal Minister; and though he be unworthy of so holy a
Profession, yet the efficacy of his Ministry does not depend upon his personal
qualifications, but on the Institution of Christ. The lewdness of Eli's Sons,
though it gave great offense and scandal to the Israelites, yet it did not make
them forsake the Altar of God: The Scribes and Pharisees in our Saviors days,
were a vile sort of people, but yet he does not command his Disciples to
withdraw from their Communion, but not to follow their examples. The Scribes
and Pharisees sit in Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever Matthew. 23. 2, 3
they bid you observe, that observe and do, but do not after their works, for
they say and do not. And upon these principles St. Austin disputes against the
Donatists, and will not allow the personal miscarriages of Ministers, to be a
just cause of Separation: and yet if in such cases, a serious Christian with
prudence and modesty, and with as little noise and scandal as may be,
preserving the Communion of the Church, should join in Communion with a
neighboring Minister, I should not see much reason to blame him: for it is no
Schism, while he continues in the Communion of the Church, and only forsakes
the Communion of his Parish Minister upon too just an offense.

2. The case of an ignorant Minister; and I hope this case is not very frequent
neither, at least not such gross ignorance, as shall make a man utterly
incapable of such a function: and yet it cannot be expected, that all the
Parishes in England should be supplied with Learned Preachers, when there are
so many Livings, that will hardly find bread for a Family.

But we must consider, that our Church has made excellent provision in this
case; has taken care, that the instruction of her Children, shall not wholly
depend upon the personal abilities of the Minister. Our Liturgy is the same,
whatever the Ministers abilities be, which contains a very excellent form of
Worship, and Administration of Sacraments; the Catechism, which he is bound to
teach the Children, contains the substance of Christian Religion in few and
plain words; and the Homilies which are appointed to be read, are very useful
and pious Sermons upon most of the material heads of Religion; that though the
Minister be no great Scholar, if he be but honest and diligent in observing the
Rules and Directions of the Church, his people cannot want sufficient
Instructions. And this one instance, shows the great necessity and advantage,
of public Liturgies and Homilies, which secures the decent performance of
Religious Worship, and the instruction of the people in sound and wholesome
doctrine, notwithstanding the personal defects and inabilities of the Minister;
what case such poor Parishes were in, when these provisions were cried down, as
Popish and Antichristian, I cannot guess.

3. The case of an erroneous and heretical Minister; who mixes poison with his
doctrine, and corrupts the plainness and simplicity of the Christian Religion;
and can any Christian, who is bound to take care of his soul, think it his duty
to expose himself to the perpetual danger and temptation of erroneous
doctrines? In answer to which, consider,

1. That people are very ill Judges of errors and heresy; the most ancient and
most useful doctrines of Christianity have sometimes been thought so; and when
we have so many men intent and zealous to seduce our people, it is an easy
matter to whisper the danger of being infected by a corrupt and heretical
doctrine. Some think every thing heresy, but Antinomianism; to persuade men to
a good life, to tell them, that there are certain conditions annexed to the
Gospel Covenant, without the performance of which, we shall not be saved: that
not an idle and notional, but an active and working faith justifies; that we
are saved by Christ, not as a Proxy, who has done all for us, but as a Priest
and Sacrifice and Mediator, who has expiated our sins by his death, and sealed
the Covenant of Grace in his blood, and now powerfully intercedes for us with
his Father, and sends his Spirit into the World to be a principle of a new life
in us: these and such like doctrines are by some men reproached with the name
of heresy: and upon their authority believed to be so by others: and yet if
men must withdraw their Communion for the sake of such heresies as these, they
must forsake the most useful Preachers and most Orthodox Churches: and
therefore,

2. The charge of heresy must be very plain and notorious, before it can
justify our breach of Communion. If men deny any plain Article of the
Christian Faith, it is dangerous to entrust the care of our souls with them,
for they are at best but Wolves in Sheeps clothing; but to suspect men of
heresy, when there is no evidence of it, is it self a very great fault; and
difference of judgment and opinion about some less matters in Religion, which
we are always like to differ about, while we see in part, and know only in
part, may exercise mutual forbearance, but will not excuse men from the guilt
of such causless Separations.

3. Where the presumptions are very strong, we must appeal to Church
Governors, to detect his errors and heresies, if he have any, and to secure
the flock from such apparent danger: Private Reformations usually prove more
fatal, than the mischiefs which they are designed to remedy: and what I said in
the case of an ignorant Minister, is very applicable to this, the public
Prayers and administration of Sacraments, and Catechism, cannot be corrupted by
the greatest Heretic, if he observe his Rule; and this secures the purity of
Worship, and wholesome instructions: and as for his Sermons, it only concerns
men to be wary what doctrines they receive from him, to take nothing upon
trust, but to search the Scriptures, whether such things be so. Such a course
as this, will maintain good order in the Church, without any danger to our
faith.

4. When the bounds of Parishes, and the number of people is too large for
Parochial Communion. This has often been made a pretense to justify separate
Meetings, because the number of people is much greater in many Parishes, than
can be contained in one Church. The complaint is too true, and worthy of the
care of public Authority to redress it; but this is no just reason for
Separation, though it be a reason for such persons, who are shut out of their
own Parish Churches, to go to others, where they can be received; for where
public Authority has not made sufficient provision for Parochial Communion,
men who love their souls, must provide for themselves in the Communion of the
Church.

CHAP. II.
Concerning Irreverence in Worship.

ANother great miscarriage, which many professed Christians are guilty of, is
an irreverent performance of Religious Worship; if that may be called Religious
Worship, which is not attended with all the solemn expressions of reverence and
devotion.

There are so many instances of this, that the very naming of them, will be
thought sharp and satirical. There are but few Christians, who put on that true
gravity and seriousness of looks and behaviors, as becomes the presence of
God, and the solemnity of Religious Worship. You shall see some gazing about
them with a roving and wandering eye, as if they came only to see, and to be
seen, to observe every new face, or new dress and garb, and therefore too often
set themselves out with that fantastic gaiety, which more becomes a Playhouse
than a Church. You shall see others talk, or whisper, or laugh, to the great
offense and scandal of all serious and devout minds. Others instead of
worshipping God, sleep away the Prayers or Sermon, or both, as if they were not
concerned in either: It is possible indeed for very devout men sometimes to be
surprised with sleep, but it is a great indecency, when ever it is so and
requires great care to prevent it, in our selves and others; and is a great
contempt of God and of his Worship, when it grows into a custom, and men as
naturally dispose themselves to a sleeping posture, as if it were the design of
their coming to Church. You shall see others sit all the time of Divine
Service, which would be thought a very great rudeness, when we put up a
Petition to an earthly Prince: this was unknown in the ancient Church, wherein
for some Ages, they did not so much as sit either while the Scriptures were
read or expounded: and Eusebius relates a famous* Story of Constantine the
first Christian Emperor, that when he made a Speech to him in his own Palace
concerning the Sepulcher of our Savior, he heard it standing, though it were
very long, and would not be persuaded to sit down, saying, That it was not fit
to consult our ease, De Vita Constable. l. 4. c. 33.
while we hear any discourses concerning God: and that it was more agreeable to
piety, to hear Religious discourses standing. And what would that Religious
Emperor have thought, to have seen Christians in public Assemblies pray
sitting? And indeed I have often thought, what should be the reason of that
universal practice of sitting, when we sing Psalms; for Psalms of praise and
thanksgiving are as much the worship of God as Prayer, and therefore equally
require a posture of Devotion. Thus uncovering the head, has at least among
Christians, been always accounted an act of Reverence, as pulling off the
Shoes was among the Eastern Nations, and therefore becomes the presence of so
great a Majesty.

But I shall not take notice of every particular instance of such miscarriages,
but endeavor to convince you of the great evil and undecency of such
irreverence in Worship, and that from these two considerations: 1. The nature
of Religious Worship, especially considered as public. 2. From the peculiar
presence of God, and holy Angels in Christian Assemblies.

1. From the nature of Religious Worship, especially considered as public: Now
Religious Worship consists in a great awe and reverence for the Divine Majesty:
when we are possessed with a great sense of that infinite distance, which is
between God and us, and our constant dependence on him, which makes us approach
his presence with great humility of mind, with a profound admiration of his
infinite perfections, with thankful acknowledgments of his many and great
blessings bestowed on us, and with souls devoted to his service and obedience;
hence Religion is so often called the fear of God, because Religion is founded
in a great awe and reverence for God.

So that where there is no true reverence of God, there is no true Worship of
him; and where ever the mind is thoroughly affected with this religious fear,
it will discover it self in our words, and looks, and actions. Our souls have
the government of our outward man, and our passions discover themselves in our
looks and behavior. It requires very great art, either to conceal those
passions, which we have, or to counterfeit those which we have not: for there
is such a sympathy between our souls and bodies, that they powerfully affect
each other; and our wise Maker so contrived our frame, that though the secret
motions of our minds cannot be seen, yet they discover themselves by those
external and visible impressions they make on our bodies, without which,
mankind could never know one another, nor have any pleasure or security in
mutual conversation. For no wise man cares to converse with those, who can so
artificially diguise themselves, that you can never know, what their inward
resentments are.

Which shows, that according to the frame of our natures, an inward reverence
for God, will show it self in external actions; and therefore that it ought to
do so; for as God has united the soul and body into one man, so he has united
their motions and actions too, without which, there can be no one perfect act
of Religion or Virtue: to worship God with the body without the soul is
hypocrisy; to worship God with the soul without the body is either impossible,
because our inward passions will discover themselves by some external signs,
when we have no design nor interest to conceal them, or is very lame and
imperfect and unbecoming this state of life: We must glorify God both with our
bodies and with our spirits, which are Gods; he made them both, and united them
for his service, and for the same reason, redeemed them both with the blood of
his Son.

But we shall better see the necessity of this, by considering the nature of
public Worship; for public Worship consists in public signs of honor; no
man has a Window into our souls, to discover the secret devotion of our hearts;
and therefore visible Worship must be expressed in visible actions, in the
external reverence of our words, and gestures, and behavior, that is, in such
actions, as express the great humility of our minds, that great sense we have
of the infinite Majesty of God, and our own meanness and worthlessness, and all
those passions and affections, which become Divine Worship: and therefore rude
and unmannerly approaches to God, such as would not become the Majesty of an
earthly Prince, whatever inward devotion we may pretend to, is not external and
visible Worship, because it is separated from all external and visible signs of
honor.

And therefore we may observe, that good men in all Ages have not contented
themselves merely to worship God with devout thoughts and passions, but with
such external acts of Religion, as either a Divine Institution, or the Custom
of their Country, and the practice of the Church had made external signs of
honor: Such as uncovering the head, or putting off their shoes, or bowing the
body, or kneeling, or prostration, or lifting up eyes and hands to Heaven,
where God dwells. For this we have the ancient Patriarchs, the Jewish Church,
Christ and his Apostles, and the whole Christian Church for many Ages, for our
example; and it will be hard to find any sort of people in the World, that
pretended to any Religion, but took great care of the ex^e^nal solemnities, and
decent circumstances of Worship: I know of no Age of the Christian Church till
very lately, wherein those men would have been allowed to be of any Religion,
or admitted to Christian Communion, who should have betrayed such slight
thoughts of God in a rude and slovenly Worship, as too many among our selves
are now guilty of; and indeed this has insensibly crept upon us ever since
those hot disputes about Ceremonies and the externals of Religion have troubled
the Church: for when men began to dispute down all good order and decent
administration of Religious Offices, they soon disputed away all external
Worship, and many who still pretend no great dislike to public Constitutions,
are so far infected with this disease, that they are not sufficiently careful
of the gravity and seriousness of their devotion; and some are so afraid of
Fanaticism, that they dare not look solemnly, nor lift up their eyes and hands
to Heaven, for fear of being thought Fanatics or hypocrites. Thus while some
men out of a groundless fear of Superstition, strip Religion of all useful and
decent Ceremonies; and others out of as wild a suspicion of Fanaticism, are
afraid to appear grave and serious in their Religion, the public solemnities
of Worship are either left to every man's fancy, or performed in so careless and
trifling a manner, that the Name of God is dishonored, and his Worship
profaned and scorned.

But my business at present, is with those of our own Communion, and possibly
it may do them some good to tell them, that they who appear so zealous against
Fanaticism, and are yet so trifling in their Worship, are much the worst
Fanatics of the two. For many of our Dissenters, though they reject the use of
our Ceremonies, and neglect that external decency of Worship, which has been in
use in all Ages of the Church, yet however they make a show of great
seriousness in their worship, and seem to be very sensibly affected with it,
and therefore this looks like Worship, though it want some external
solemnities, which may be thought needful; but when men stare and gaze about
them, laugh or whisper at their prayers, and betray great vanity and lightness
of mind (to say no worse) instead of an awful sense and reverence of God, this
is so far from making any show of Worship, how exact soever they may be in
their postures or responses, that it is downright profaneness. They are thus
far fanatical in their principles, that they must believe (if they consider any
thing) that God does not much regard the Worship of the outward man, for did
they believe he did, they would be more careful to pay it him; for the bare
doing any thing in Religious Worship, such as kneeling at Prayers, or standing
up at the Hymns and Creed, and the like, does not make it so much as an
external sign of Worship, unless it be performed with that gravity and
seriousness, which is essential to all Religious Worship; and if they believe,
that though God does expect the Worship of the body, he matters not the Worship
of the mind, nor how carelessly external Worship is performed, so it be done:
This is so wild a principle, that it out-does all the Fanatics that ever were
in the World. Those who were arrant hypocrites, and yet very punctual in the
externals of Religion (such as the Scribes and Pharisees were in our Saviors
days) were withal very solemn and demure in those external superstitions: and
those who reject external Ceremonies of Religion, yet pretend to great devotion
of mind, and rapturous ardours and transports of spirit; but these men are for
an external bodily Worship without so much as the least visible appearance of
external devotion; and (if there be no other remedy) I wish with all my heart,
that these men would make a Sect by themselves too, and not reproach the Church
of England by continuing in her Communion, which has brought a greater scandal
upon our Worship, than all the arguments and cavils of Dissenters: though the
better way would be, and that which I heartily beg of God, and do earnestly beg
all men, to correct this fault, and to wipe off that reproach of a cold formal
Worship, by expressing that grave, and serious, and ardent devotion, which so
much becomes all the true Worshippers of God, is so essential to Religious
Worship, and so interwoven with all the public Offices of our Religion, which
are admirably fitted to serve all the ends of a grave and serious Piety.

2. Let us consider now the peculiar presence of God and holy Angels in
Religious Assemblies: Did we see God in a visible glory (as he used to appear
to Moses at the door of the Tabernacle) every time we meet to worship him, I am
apt to think we should all express greater signs of Reverence and devotion: and
yet there is none of you, but will pretend to believe, that God is present in
your Assemblies, and that he takes a more particular notice of your carriage
and behavior, when ye meet to worship him, than he does at other times; that
is, that he expects now, that ye should take a more particular notice of his
presence, and behave your selves with a suitable reverence, as those who
believe, that God is present in a peculiar manner, though ye do not see him.

Under the Law God dwelt in the Tabernacle and Temple, which was his house; and
therefore when the Tabernacle was finished, God filled it with his presence and
glory: there was the Mercy-Seat covered with Cherubims, which was a figure of
Gods presence, and the attendance of Angels; and it was a constant opinion
among the Heathens, that their Gods dwelt in their Temples and Images
consecrated to their Worship; and though they were ridiculously foolish in
thinking to charm their Gods by some Magical Rites and Mysteries, and confine
them to certain places; yet the original of this, was only a traditional
belief, that God was always peculiarly present in all places of his Worship.

It is sufficiently evident, that the Primitive Christians did believe, that
Angels, who are Gods Retinue and Ministers, do attend Christian Assemblies, and
are witnesses of the decency and reverence of our Worship: and this is the most
plain and obvious sense of St. Paul's words, For this cause ought the woman to
have power over her head 1 Cor. 11. 10
because of the Angels, he was a discoursing the decency of men's praying
uncovered, and women covered, because the woman ought to be in subjection to
her husband; and therefore it was undecent to appear with her head uncovered;
and much more so in religious Assemblies, wherein we are to have a greater
regard to decency because of the Angels, that is, those Angels, who attend our
Worship, and carefully observe our behavior, though we do not see them: and as
St. Chrysostom says, If we reverence men, much more the Angels of God. From
whence we learn these two things, that the Angels attend our Worship, and that
for that reason, we ought to be very careful of all decency and gravity in our
Worship.

And certainly did men heartily believe, and seriously consider, that God and
his holy Angels look on, and take special notice of every action, and are
greatly offended with a light and trifling carriage, with any gestures or
actions, which unbecome so great a presence, it would compose them to greater
seriousness and devotion, and either make them afraid to come to Church, or
more reverent when they do.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the neglect of the public Prayers of the Church.

A Another great miscarriage, which some are guilty of, who do not forsake our
Communion is a great neglect of the public Prayers of the Church: A great many
come to Church, when the Service is half read, others when it is near a
conclusion, and think there is no great hurt in it neither, if they do not lose
the Sermon. At other times when there is only the Divine Service read, without
a Sermon, few persons think it worth their attendance, but the Worship of God
is exposed to contempt, and the Minister laugh't at for reading to bare Walls
and empty Seats.

These things, I grant, may happen sometimes, where there is no designed
neglect, the mistake of time may occasion some persons coming late, who want
certain notice, and on the Weekdayes necessary business may hinder others, who
are glad to take all the opportunities, they can get, of public Worship; but
where there are not such reasonable excuses, the fault is very great, though
few people are convinced of it; and therefore my business at present, shall be,
to endeavor to convince you of the evil of this neglect.

1. If you will acknowledge it your duty to worship God together in the
Assemblies of Christians, I need not multiply words to prove such a neglect of
public Prayers to be a great fault: for they are the principal part of the
Divine Worship: there we confess our sins to God, and beg his Pardon, and
receive a Ministerial Absolution from the mouth of his Minister; there we
praise him in divine Hymns and Anthems, and put up our joint Petitions and
Thanksgivings to him; and this is properly divine Worship, because it is our
address to God in Supplications, Prayers and Praises. To hear the Word of God
read or preached, is so far an act of Worship too, as it signifies an
acknowledgement of his authority over us, and our desire to be instructed by
him: but this is but a secondary act of Worship, which consists in hearing God
speak to us, either immediately in his inspired Word, or mediately by those men
whom he has authorized and qualified for the instruction of his Church: but the
Worship of God properly consists in our offering something to God, the
Sacrifices of Prayers and Thanksgivings which are highly pleasing to him, when
they are offered up by a devout soul in the name and merits of our great High
Priest and Mediator Jesus Christ.

So that those, who neglect the Prayers of the Church, neglect public Worship,
and those who slight the opportunities of public Prayers, when there is no
Sermon to invite their presence, plainly discover, that they prefer pleasing
their curiosity, with hearing some new discourse, before the more solemn acts
of Worship, which is a great sign, that they hear to very little purpose, when
the end of hearing is practice, and the most excellent part of practical
Religion is the immediate Worship of God.

2. Because some men think, they worship God sufficiently, if they come time
enough to Church to join in the Pulpit Prayer, I would desire them to consider,
that Church Communion principally consists in joining in the public Prayers of
the Church. These men would not be thought, nor do they intend to renounce the
Communion of our Church, and yet in effect do so, while they neglect its
public Worship; for Church Communion consists in meeting together for public
acts of Worship, and then we join in the public Worship of the Church, when we
worship God according to that Rule and Form prescribed by the public Authority
of the Church, wherein we live. The Prayer of the Minister before Sermon is not
so expressly provided for by our Rubric, though it be favored by a Canon made
for that purpose, and is now usefully introduced by long custom with the
connivance, if not the express allowance of our Governors, but the Liturgy is
the form of public Worship and administration of Sacraments, there the Church
offers up more especially her public Prayers and Praises, this is the great
bond of Church Communion, and to neglect or withdraw our selves from this
Worship, is in effect to forsake the Communion of the Church, as to the
principal part and exercise of it.

When you join in the Pulpit Prayer, though it be never so well composed, grave
and serious, pious and ardent, yet it looks more like the Worship of a
particular Congregation, than of the Church, for you join only with those, who
are present at such a prayer; but when we offer up our souls to God in that
public Form of Prayers prescribed by public Authority, we join with all the
Congregations of England, who at the same time offer up the same Prayers and
Praises in the same words, as if they were, but one Congregation, and had but
one heart and mouth; and those men, do not understand the reason and nature of
public Worship, who make light of this.

Why is the Worship of a Religious Assembly more acceptable to God, than the
private Devotions of good men, when they might as well stay at home, and about
the same hour (which in ancient times was observed for private as well as
public Devotion) offer up their private Prayers to God for themselves and one
another; for God can hear them all, where ever they are, and their prayers may
ascend up to Heaven together; and this one would think, should be as acceptable
and prevalent, as to pray to God in a great company: and yet we see, that our
Savior has instituted public Assemblies for Worship, has appointed his
Ministers to offer up the public prayers of the Congregation to God in his
name, has confined his more peculiar presence and favor to such Assemblies;
and one great reason of this is, that he is pleased with the unity and
uniformity of Worship; for he has expressly promised, that if two of you shall
agree on earth, as touching any thing they Matthew. 18. 19, 20.
shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father, which is in heaven: for
where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. This is the fundamental Charter of Christian Assemblies, and the reason
of it certainly is stronger, the more universal the consent and agreement is:
for if Christ will be present with two or three, who assemble in Christian love
and charity, and agree to put up the same Petitions to God, much more when so
many Christian Churches are confederated in the same Worship, and offer up the
same Prayers and Thanksgivings to God in the same words. How powerful will the
united Prayers of a whole National Church be to procure those blessings for us
which we want. For if unity and consent in Worship be so pleasing to God; the
greater this consent is, the more pleasing it must be:

Especially considering, that in this case, we have not only the consent and
agreement of private Christians in such acts of Worship, but are confederated
by the public authority of the Church, and therefore such public Worship has
the beauty and advantages of public Order and Government. If the Prayers of a
particular Minister of Religion be so prevalent, how much more those Prayers,
which have the stamp of Church Authority, which are the Desires and Petitions
of the whole Church, even when they are offered up by a single Minister; which
cannot so well be said of any Prayer of his own: and if we believe that God is
the God of Peace and Order in the Church, we cannot but think it very
acceptable to him, to observe good order in our Religious Worship.

Did men seriously consider these things, they would be soon sensible of the
great advantage of such public Forms of Prayer, and prefer the Prayers of the
Church, before any Prayers of a private composition, or any sudden extempore
effusions. For public Prayers, prescribed by public Authority, and offered up
by a public Minister, are always in the Communion of the Church, and
virtually contain the Desires and Petitions of the whole Church.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the public Administration of Baptism.

ANother great miscarriage of those, who live in the Communion of our Church,
concerns the administration of Baptism: Public Baptism is now very much grown
out of fashion; most people look upon it, as a very needless and troublesome
Ceremony, to carry their Children to the public Congregation, there to be
solemnly admitted by Baptism into the fellowship of Christ's Church. They think
it may be as well done in a private Chamber, as soon as the Child is born, with
little company, and with little noise.

As prevailing as this custom now is, it is of a very late date, even in this
Church. It seems to owe its original to the disputes about Ceremonies: for when
some men scrupled Godfathers and Godmothers, and the use of the Sign of the
Cross, to avoid this, they baptized their Children privately at home without
either, when they could meet with such a conscientious Conformist as could
dispense with his Rule. And when the Church of England was pulled down, and the
use of the Liturgy and Ceremonies forbid; those who still retained their
reverence and obedience to the Constitutions of the Church, and would not
partake in a prevailing Schism, were forced to retire into private too, and to
baptize their Children at home; and it is a hard thing to break a custom, upon
what occasion soever, it was at first begun. That, which necessity occasioned,
is continued by some, as a piece of State, by others to save charge and
trouble, which might be much better saved by public Baptism; by others, out of
softness and tenderness; a kind and indulgent Mother dares not expose a young
Infant to the cold Air, unless it be to send it to nurse.

I could never hear any thing pleaded for this practice, that deserved an
answer; that which makes this custom prevail, is, that men do not consider the
great decency and fitness, and the many advantages of public Baptism, which I
shall therefore now briefly represent.

By public Baptism I mean that, which is administered in the public
Congregation, and in the public place of Worship: and the fitness and
advantage of this will appear, if we consider some few things.

1. That Baptism is our solemn admission into the Christian Church, and
therefore ought to be administered in the public Congregation. Baptism makes us
members of the body of Christ, and unites us to the society of Christians, and
therefore is of a public nature, and therefore ought to be administered
publicly. For there is no other rule, I know of, whereby to determine the
manner and circumstances of any action, but to consider the nature of it: there
are some actions, which are more proper to be done in private, others, which
require some public solemnities: and it is as undecent to do a public action,
i. e. an action of a public nature, privately, as it is to do a private action
in public.

Now that is certainly of a public nature, which concerns a who'e society, and
such is the admission of Church Members, and therefore ought to be done in the
presence, as well as by the authority of the Church. The efficacy indeed of
Baptism depends upon the Institution of Christ, and therefore when it is
rightly administered, does not lose its virtue, for want of some due
circumstances; but it is a great fault in those, who wilfully and obstinately
refuse to give all Christian offices their due solemnity.

2. We may consider, that Baptism contains a public profession of our faith in
Christ: it is a public owning of his Religion: no adult person was ever
admitted to Baptism without a profession of his faith in Christ: in allusion to
which, as Learned Men think, St. Peter calls Baptism, not the putting away of
the filth of the flesh, but 1 Pet. 3. 21.
the answer of a good conscience toward God. The person to be baptized being
examined about his faith in Christ, and resolutions of obeying him:

Now the profession of our faith, the more public it is, the more agreeable is
it to the nature of Baptism, and the constitution of the Christian Church,
which is a visible Society professing the faith of Christ: and though indeed
Infants, who are baptized, are not capable of making such a public profession
of their faith, yet their Sponsors and Sureties are, who undertake for their
education in the Christian faith: and certainly the public Church is the most
proper place for such a public profession.

To baptize our Children privately, looks as if we were ashamed of the
Christian profession; and there is not a more effectual way to root out
Christianity, than to destroy all the public solemnities of Worship.

4. Public Baptism is very much for the edification of the Church: It minds
Christians of their Baptismal Vow, which I fear too many are apt to forget; it
puts good thoughts into them, when they see, what a grave and serious thing it
is to be a Christian; it sets their consciences on work, to review their past
lives, and to consider how they have kept their Baptismal Vow: it minds
Children and Servants of their duty, who are seldom at private Baptism, and
are many times more affected with such a sight, than with the best counsels. It
minds those, who have been Godfathers or Godmothers, what charge they have
undertaken, which they are to look upon as somewhat more than a complement to a
friend, or matter of ceremony; even a trust, and a trust of the highest nature,
an obligation to God, and to his Church, to take care of the Virtuous and
Religious Education of such Children. Which may convince all considering men,
of what great use it is, that Baptism should be administered with all the aweful
and public solemnities that may be; and not be huddled over in private, as a
thing, that must be done, though it matters not how.

5. For this we have the example of the Primitive Christians, who always
administered Baptism in public places, and in the presence of the Congregation.
At first indeed they baptized in Rivers or Ponds, as John the Baptist did in
Jordan, where our Savior himself was baptized, which made many in the
Primitive Church ambitious to be baptized there also, as Eusebius reports of
Constantine the Emperor, though he was disappointed in it: afterward they
built Fonts near the Church, then in the Church Porch, and at last in the
Church it self; and never allowed of private Baptisms, but in danger of death.

And to make the action more solemn, they had public times for Baptism, which
in most Churches were Easter and Whitsunday, when all their Catechumens, who
desired Baptism, and were judged fit to receive it, were admitted into the body
of Christians, and made members of Christ and of his Church.

And thus it continued in following Ages, and so it ought still to be according
to the Rubric of our Church (I mean as to the public administration of
Baptism, though it be not now confined to such certain times) which allows of
no private Baptisms, but in danger of death: So that this is a plain
transgression of the Rule, and therefore such a disorder, as no man should be
guilty of, who professes himself a member of our Church.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the public Instructions of Youth.

ANother great miscarriage is, that few men are so ready and careful, as they
ought to be, to submit their Children and Servants to public Instructions. Of
what mighty concernment the Religious and Virtuous Education of Youth is, I
need not tell you; for in a great measure their happiness in this World and in
the next depends on it: when Children are brought up in ignorance and folly, it
lays a foundation of Atheism and Debauchery in their riper years. Unless they
be t^ught to know and to fear God betimes, they are in great danger of laughing
at God and Religion, and making a mock of sin, as they grow in years and
wickedness. I doubt not but the Atheism and lewdness of this present Age, has
been as much owing to the miscarriages of Parents and Governors in the
Education of Children and Youth, as to any one cause besides. How many Children
have never been taught any other Catechism, than some flattering Complements,
modish Oaths, and obscene talk? How many have been instructed in profane and
impious Jests, and all the topics of irreligious Wit? and no wonder, there are
so many great Proficients who are wicked above their age, and can as pertly and
confidently laugh down God and Religion, as the gravest and most studied
Atheists.

Others are not so industrious to corrupt Youth, but yet take no care to
instruct them better, to possess their tender minds with the knowledge and love
of God, and true goodness; and then there is no great need to teach them to be
wicked. If the ground been't tilled and cultivated, you can expect no good
fruit, but weeds will grow of themselves. Others possibly do take care to
instruct their Children in the Principles of Religion, and to train them up to
the practice of Virtue; and I only wish there were greater numbers of these
men; we might then hope in time to see the World reformed, and Religion grow
into fashion and credit again; at least the next generation might see the
blessed effects of those seeds of Virtue and Piety, which are sown now.

But there is one great neglect of very mischievous consequence, easy to be
observed among us, and we can expect no great good, till it be reformed; and
that is the neglect of public Catechizing; which may be sometimes the neglect
of the Minister, but is oftener the neglect of the people, who cannot be
persuaded to submit their Children and Servants to public instructions, nor to
give any encouragement to it by their own presence and attendance.

That this is so, is too evident, and yet I cannot make any probable
conjecture, what should be the cause of this; For,

1. No man certainly can think it an indifferent thing, whether his Children be
thoroughly instructed in the principles of Christian knowledge: for knowledge
must be both the rule of practice, and the motive of obedience: the Laws of the
Gospel must be the rule of our life and practice, and no wonder men do amiss,
who know not, what they ought to do; the Articles of the Christian faith are
the motives and principles of obedience, to enable us to conquer the corrupt
inclinations of our nature, and the allurements and temptations of this World;
and no wonder men are conquered, who understand not the use of their spiritual
armor, who are ignorant of those things, without the belief and knowledge of
which, they cannot conquer: Such as the being, and nature, and providence of
God; the incarnation, death, and sufferings, resurrection and ascension of
Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God; the influences and assistances of the
Divine Spirit, the Judgment to come, and everlasting life after death.

Nor is it sufficient, to be able to say over these words, without some
competent understanding of the sense and meaning of them, the Articles of our
Creed do not work like Spells or Charms, by the Magical power or sound of
words, but as arguments and motives, that is, as they convey such a sense of
things to our minds, as govern our affections, and subdue them to the obedience
of Christ; and therefore no man can be the better for his faith, who does not
thoroughly understand, what he believes.

And though hearing Sermons may help somewhat toward the instruction of Youth,
yet this cannot be so effectual, as Catechizing; for the first principles of
knowledge ought to be taught by few and plain words, and instilled into them by
degrees, as they are able to bear it. There is milk for babes, and meat for
strong men: to understand the first principles of Christian knowledge, is
necessary to teach them to understand a Sermon, which commonly supposes some
competent knowledge in the principles of Christianity: and the true reason, why
so few men understand Sermons, or get any good by them, is, because they never
well understood their Catechism.

The want of this careful instruction of Youth, makes them so unstable and
uncertain in their Religion, when they come to be men. This makes so many
different Opinions and Sects of Religion, that they are turned aside with every
wind of doctrine, that they are taken with every new phrase, that they fall
into such monstrous errors, so destructive to the fundamentals of Christian
faith; for it is impossible a house should stand, which has no foundation: So
that all men must acknowledge, that it is very necessary, that Children and
Youth should be carefully instructed in the fundamental principles of Religion.

2. I cannot suppose neither, that any considering men should think, there is
no need of the assistance of the Ministers of Religion for the instruction of
Youth: this indeed is a duty, which every Parent, and Master of a Family is
concerned in, to instruct those, who are under their care in the knowledge and
fear of God; but if they think their Minister able to instruct themselves, they
cannot but think it reasonable to desire his assistance to instruct their
Children.

They call in the assistance of men expert and skilful in several Arts to teach
them those Arts, which they profess, though they have some skill themselves in
them; and there is nothing of such moment to them, and nothing it may be more
difficult, than to be thoroughly instructed in Religion. It requires great
skill, and such as every Learned Rabbi is not Master of, to fit the principles
of Christian knowledge to the capacity of Children and Youth.

The Articles of the Christian Faith contain the highest, and most Seraphical
Speculations, that ever were taught by any Philosophy, such as the Incarnation
of the Eternal Son of God, who was conceived in the womb of a pure Virgin, and
came into the world in our nature, and wrought miracles, and dyed as a
Sacrifice for sin, and rose again from the dead, and is now ascended up into
Heaven in our nature, and invested with great power and glory, having all power
given to him both in heaven and in earth, a name, which is above every name,
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11.
both of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth, and
that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God
the Father: That when these earthly bodies shall dye, and rot in the grave,
they shall be raised again at the last day incorruptible and glorious. These
are great, sublime, stupendous Mysteries, and it requires no small skill to
know, how to teach such great and mysterious Doctrines to Children and Youth,
that they may so by degrees, discover these Mysteries, as neither to blind nor
dazzle their eyes with their brightness and luster, nor yet to remain wholly
ignorant of them. The thorough knowledge of Christianity is not so easily
attained, as some men imagine, nor is every one, who knows something himself,
fit to be a Teacher of others. And therefore though I would earnestly exhort
you all, to use the best skill you have to instruct your Children and Servants,
yet this is no reason to withdraw them from public instructions: nor can any
man, who understands his Religion, think he discharges his duty to God and the
Church, merely by his private instruction of his family, when he neglects, or
refuses to bring them to public instructions.

3. For he must consider, that his Children and Servants, who are baptized, are
members of the Christian Church, and therefore ought to be subject to the
instructions and discipline of it, as far as their age and capacity will
permit. They do not only belong to his private care, but to the public care of
the Church, who is to provide for the instruction of her Children; and to deny
the Church liberty to instruct her Children, or not to interpose their own
authority to make them submit to it, is to withdraw their Children from the
Communion of the Church, after a solemn dedication of them to God.

No good man can with patience think of being guilty of so great a sin, which
is a kind of Sacrilege, as it respects God, a degree of Schism from the
Church, and very injurious to his Childrens souls.

Especially considering, that there is a more peculiar blessing attends the
public instructions of the Church, for the same reason, that God prefers
public before private Worship, and is more peculiarly present in Christian
Assemblies, than in the families of private Christians, and blesses the public
administrations of his Word before private counsels.

4. Which may further convince us, that the public Catechizing of Children and
Youth, is not needless, whatever good instructions they may have at home: for
besides what I have already observed, that God does more peculiarly bless
public Institutions; there are several advantages in it, which I shall briefly
represent.

1. This will make them more careful to improve in knowledge, when they know,
they must give an account of such improvements to the public Congregations:
there will be an emulation between Youth, who shall give the most manly and
reasonable account of their faith; and as they grow in years, they will be
ashamed to continue Children in understanding: we see the effects of this shame
and emulation in other matters, and when it may be improved to such admirable
advantage in this case, if there were nothing more to recommend it, it were a
sufficient reason to all good men, who desire the improvement and increase of
Christian knowledge in the World, to encourage and promote it.

2. By this means the Church may take notice of the improvement of Youth in
Christian knowledge, which is necessary to their regular admission to higher
acts of Communion. Those, who are baptized, when they are Children, ought not
regularly to be admitted to the Lords Supper, till they have been confirmed,
and to qualify them for Confirmation, it is necessary, they should in some
competent measure understand their Religion, and be able to give a reasonable
account of their faith: and though indeed the Minister and Bishop may be
satisfied in this by private examinations, yet this is no satisfaction to the
Congregation, with whom they are to communicate, any otherwise, than as they
rely upon the authority of their Minister; but such young men will be received
with a more universal applause, and sincere joy, to the Table of our Lord, who
have given such public testimony of their improvements in Christian knowledge.

3. Another advantage is, that this trains up Children and Youth in a just
respect and reverence for their spirial Guides. This may be thought an
inconsiderable thing, and only a word by the by for my own Profession; but let
it be for whom it will, Religion never did, nor ever is like to flourish, when
the Ministers of Religion are despised, when their counsel is slighted and
contemned. Their Office is to be the Guides of souls, and unless men look upon
them, as such, it renders their Office useless to the souls of men; and this is
all I mean by a respect and reverence to their spiritual Guides; to reverence
their counsels, reproofs and censures, and to apply to them in all cases which
concern their souls.

Now when men have been trained up in the knowledge of Religion by their
Spiritual Guides, and have found the benefit of their instructions, it makes
them naturally reverence their judgments, and advise with them in all
difficult cases: a thing much out of use now, and we see the sad effects of it
in the lives of too many.

4. By the public instructions of Youth, those may learn the first principles
of Religion, who are too old indeed to be Catechized, but yet very much want
it: it is almost incredible to think, how ignorant many men are of the very
first rudiments of Christianity, who are baptized in their Infancy indeed, but
were never catechized: all our Sermons are in a manner lost upon these men, who
can never be brought to understand Religion, unless you teach them, as you do
Children, which would be thought a great affront to their age, and long
profession: and therefore the best and modestest way of instructing these men,
is to instruct Children, when they are present, which may be of great use to
them, if they be sensible of their own ignorance, and do not disdain
instruction.

I shall add but one thing more, and so conclude this argument; that when I
speak of instructing Children, I would not have you think. that I only mean,
such young Children, as are just able to repeat the Catechism by heart, but are
not capable of giving any other answer, to what you ask, but what they find in
their Books; such Children as these, are scarce capable of any instruction, nor
can it much edify the Congregation to hear them repeat imperfectly the words
of the Catechism; but I principally mean such young men, who are capable of
learning, who can understand, what is said to them, and make a reasonable
answer, at least with a little help and instruction.

We live now in an Age, wherein it is thought a reproach for those to be
catechized, who are got out of their hanging-sleeves; as soon as they are old
enough to learn a Trade, they think themselves too old to learn their Religion:
But is Religion then so easy a thing, that every youth of sixteen or seventeen
is past his Catechism? Is it a greater reproach at such an Age to be instructed
in Religion, than it is to learn Arithmetic and Merchants accounts.

I readily grant, such young men ought not to be treated like Children, to be
made repeat only the words of the Catechism, as School-Boyes do their Lessons;
but there is a manly way of instruction, which will not unbecome their years,
but much contribute to their increase in Christian knowledge; could this point
be once gained, to persuade Parents and Masters to send such to be catechized,
as are capable of instructions, I should not doubt in a short time to see very
happy effects of this so much despised and neglected duty.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the great Neglect of the Lords Supper.

THe last miscarriage I shall at present take notice of, is the general neglect
of receiving the Lords Supper: for though thanks be to God, this practice is in
some measure restored among us, and we now with joy observe more frequent and
numerous Communions, than have been for many years last past, yet this holds no
proportion at all to those great numbers of professed Christians, who neglect
it wholly, or communicate very seldom.

Thus to turn our backs on the Lords Table, is a very great reproach to
Christianity, and infinitely dangerous to men's souls, because the Lords Supper
is the most excellent and the most beneficial part of Christian Worship; and
indeed one would think, that there needs nothing else to persuade any man to so
advantageous a duty, but true understanding the nature of it.

My present design will not admit of a large discourse, and therefore I shall
bring what I have to urge, into as narrow a compass as I can: and 1. Show you
the great evil and sinfulness of this neglect, and 2. Examine what are the true
causes or occasions, which tempt men to such a neglect.

1. The great evil and sinfulness of this neglect, and the most effectual way
to convince men of this, is by explaining those many obligations, which lie on
us, to a frequent celebration of this mysterious Feast.

1. And I shall first argue from the Command and Institution of our Savior,
which certainly is sufficient to make it a standing and necessary duty to all,
who profess themselves his disciples.

Now the Institution of this Feast runs in the form of a command. So St.
Matthew tells us, as they were eating Matthew. 26. 26, 27, 28.
( viz. the Feast of the Passover) Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake
it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, take, eat, this is my body: and he
took the cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, drink ye all of it,
for this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins. The same account St. Mark and St. Luke Mark 14. 22, 23, 24.
Luke 22. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25.
give of it, and almost in the same words; so does St. Paul, which he received
by revelation from Christ himself.

So that those men at least are guilty of a very great sin, who never celebrate
this heavenly Feast, if it will be acknowledged a sin to break a plain express
institution of our Savior; and very great numbers there are of such men in our
Church (if at least they may be said to be in the Church) who never received
the Lords Supper, who call Christ Lord, and Master, but do not the thing, which
he has commanded. And there are two very considerable aggravations of this sin.

1. That it is his last and dying command, which usually has great sacredness
and authority in it, though it be but the command, nay, but the desire of a
Friend: this command he gave his Disciples the same night, wherein he was
betrayed, when he was just about to offer his soul in sacrifice for sins, when
he was preparing to encounter with scorn and reproach, with rage and malice,
with the shame and exquisite pains of the Cross; and it is an ill requital of
the love of our dying Lord, that we will not obey his dying commands.

2. That our Savior by the Institution of this holy Feast, has delivered us
from all the numerous, troublesome, expensive Ceremonies and Institutions of
the Jewish Worship: he has put an end to Circumcision, Sacrifices, Legal
Washings and Purifications, and the like, and has only instituted Baptism as
the Sacrament of our admission into his Church, which cannot be thought
grievous and troublesome, when it is administered but once to a man for his
life; and the Lords Supper as a standing Rite of Worship; and to deny obedience
to one easy Command, when our Lord has delivered us from such a grievous and
unsupportable yoke, is a sign, that as much as men talk of Christian Liberty,
they little value that love, which purchas't it at so dear rate.

Others there are, who do not wholly withdraw themselves from the Lords Table,
but yet think there is no great reason to communicate often; so they do it some
times, though very seldom, they comply with our Saviors Institution, who has
commanded us indeed to eat the Sacramental Bread, and drink the Wine in
remembrance of him, but has not appointed, how often this shall be done.

In answer to this, I grant that our Savior has appointed no fixed and settled
times for the celebration of this holy Supper, but this seems to me a plain
argument, that he has instituted this Supper, as an ordinary part of Christian
Worship; if he had intended, that we should have received these mysteries only
on some set and solemn times, he would have told us so; but having appointed no
time for it, we must conclude, that this is part of that Worship, which he
expects from Christians in all their public Religious Assemblies, when ever
they meet together to worship God and their Savior.

And thus the Primitive Christians understood our Savior, for they never met
together for Religious Worship, but this holy Feast was part, and always
accounted the principal part of it. In the Apostles days this was done every
day, as is generally concluded from that short history we have of their daily
conversation, which was spent in the duties and exercises of Religion, that
they continued daily with one accord Acts 2. 46.
in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with
gladness and singleness of heart, praising God (the proper work of the
Eucharistical Feast) and having favor with all the people: and we have reason
to think it was so in the Apostles days, when it is evident, this custom of
receiving every day, continued some Ages after: So it was in St. Cyprian's
time, and so it was at Rome in St. Hierom's time: and the Apostolical Canons,
Apost. Can. 9. Council. Antioch. Can. 2.
and the Synod of Antioch denounce Excommunication against those Christians,
who come to Church to join in other Religious Offices, but go away without
receiving the Lords Supper: afterward, as men's zeal in Religion decayed, so
they abated in the frequen^ Celebration of this Feast; and from every day it
came to once or twice a Week, or every Lords day, till it grew so dis-used,
that the Church was forced to make provision by her public Canons, that every
Christian should at least receive the Supper of the Lord three times a year, on
the three great Feasts of the Church, Christmas, Easter and Whitsunday. But
the Institution of our Savior confining it to no time, seems to make it an
ordinary part of Christian Worship; especially when it was thus expounded by
the general practice of the Apostles and Primitive Christians, who were most
likely to understand our Saviors meaning, that I confess, I am so far from
thinking it an excuse for communicating seldom, that I want a fair Apology to
make for our selves for communicating so seldom as once a Month, unless the
degeneracy of the Age, the decay of Christian Piety, and that little sense men
have of the necessity and advantages of this duty, be thought a good Apology.

2. For we may consider farther, that as Christ has instituted this holy
Supper, so he has instituted it as an act of Religious Worship. It is a
Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving to God, and to our Savior. It is a
commemoration of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, a showing forth the
Lords death until he come; and therefore is a mysterious Rite of Worship, as
all Sacrifices were under the Law. But to explain this more particularly,
though briefly, I shall consider this holy Feast, both as it respects God, and
as it respects our Savior.

1. With respect to God: and so we may consider it as a Thanksgiving or as a
Prayer.

1. As a Thanksgiving to God for his great and unexpressible goodness in
sending his Son Jesus Christ into the World, and offering him up as an
expiation and atonement for our sins. Certainly it becomes us to admire and
adore that Infinite Goodness, which took pity on us in our low estate, and
provided a Ransom and Sacrifice and Redeemer for us; Who so loved the John 3.
16.
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life. And when so proper to do this, as
when we celebrate this holy Feast, when we commemorate the Death and Sufferings
of our Lord, which must needs affect our souls, if we be not wholly stupid,
with a very passionate sense of the love of God: and what more proper Sacrament
of Thanksgiving and Praise can we use, than to present him with the memorials
of his stupendous love, to let him see, that we retain a fresh sense and
remembrance of it, that we never suffer it to slip out of our minds, though it
is so many hundred years since Christ suffered, and perfected the work of our
Redemption. You cannot more effectually praise any man, than to show the
visible remains and monuments of his Bounty and Charity, as the Widows weeping
showed the coats and garments Acts 9. 39.
which Dorcas made, while she was with them. Thus when we offer up to God the
memorials of Christ's Death and Passion, it is a visible Sacrifice of Praise,
and speaks such kind of language as this; Behold Lord, here is the token of thy
love to us, thy own Son bleeding and dying for our sins, thy eternal Son, the
Son of thy love, in whom thy soul is well pleased, dying upon the Cross, a
shameful, accursed, lingering, tormenting death, scorned and reproached of men,
and forsaken of God, who delivered him up into the hands of his enemies, and
left him to struggle with the fears and weakness of humane nature, without
those divine and supernatural supports, which he now needed most, but least
enjoyed. We will never forget such love as this, we will perpetually celebrate
this holy Feast, and offer up the memorials of a crucified Jesus, as a
sacrifice of praise to his Father, and to our Father, to his God, and to our
God.

2. The Lords Supper may be considered as a Sacrament of Prayer; for so the
Sacrifices under the Law were always offered with Prayer, which were accepted
in virtue of the Sacrifice; and therefore though all men could not every day
attend the Temple Worship, especially those who lived at a great distance from
the Temple, yet the time of Morning and Evening Sacrifices were the usual hours
of prayer observed by pious and devout men, who sent up their prayers together
with the Sacrifice. Thus Ezra tells us, at the Evening Sacrifice, Ezra 9. 5.
I fell upon my knees, and spread out my hands unto the Lord my God: and to
this the Psalmist alludes, Let my Psalm. 141. 2.
Prayer be set before thee as incense, and the lifting up of my hands as the
Evening Sacrifice.

For since the fall of man we cannot expect, that God should hear our prayers
for our own sakes, we can make no atonement and expiation for our own sins, nor
offer him any just compensation for them; and therefore under the Law God
appointed Expiatory Sacrifices, to be offered by the Priests, who were Gods
Ministers; and now under the Gospel God has sent his own Son into the World to
be both our Priest, and our Sacrifice: the acceptance of our prayers, depends
upon the power of his Intercession, and the power of his Intercession upon the
merit of his blood: for with his own Heb. 9. 12.
blood he entered once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption
for us. We must now go to God in his Name, and plead the Merits of his blood,
if we expect a gracious answer to our Prayers.

Now for this end was the Lords Supper instituted, to be a Remembrance of
Christ, or of the Sacrifice of the Cross, to show forth the Lords death till he
come, which as it respects God, is to put him in remembrance of Christ's death,
and to plead the Virtue and Merit of it for our pardon and acceptance. It is a
visible prayer to God, to remember the sufferings of his Son, and to be
propitious to his Church, his body, and every member of it, which he has
purchased with his own blood. And therefore the ancient Church constantly at
this holy Supper offered up their prayers to God in virtue of the Sacrifice of
Christ there represented, for the whole Church, and all ranks and conditions of
men. For this reason the Lords Supper was called a Commemorative Sacrifice,
because we therein offer up to God the Remembrance of Christ's Sacrifice; and
therefore in the ancient Church, the Altar, or the place where they consecrated
the Elements, was the place also, where they offered up their prayers, to
signify that they offered their prayers only in virtue of the Sacrifice of
Christ, and that the very remembrance of this Sacrifice in the Lords Supper by
virtue of its Institution, did render their prayers prevalent and acceptable to
God; and therefore in the very first account we have of the exercise of
Christian Worship, we find breaking bread and prayers joined together. The
efficacy of our prayers depends on the merit of Acts 2. 46.
Christ's Sacrifice, and the way Christ has appointed to give our prayers an
interest in his Sacrifice, is to offer them in the holy Supper, with the
Sacramental remembrance of his Death and Passion.

2. If we consider the Lords Supper as it respects Christ himself, and is a
Remembrance of him, so it contains all that peculiar Worship, which the
Christian Church pays him as a thankful acknowledgement of his great love in
dying for them, as will appear, if we consider what it is to do this in
Remembrance of him. For,

1. This signifies to keep this Feast as a public and solemn Commemoration of
our Lord: we ought to remember our Savior, and think of him as often as we
can; but this holy Feast is a public celebration of his fame and memory: we
must not only think of our Savior, as we do of an absent Friend, who is very
dear to us, but we must remember him as some Nations do their public Patrons,
and Benefactors, with solemn and festival joys.

The Lords Supper is a Feast instituted in honor of our Savior, wherein the
whole Church must call to mind his noble acts, and show forth his praises, and
perpetuate the memory of them from one generation to another: We must call to
mind his great and astonishing love, and recount all his victories and triumphs
over Sin, and Death and Hell, and him who had the power of death, that is the
Devil. We must sing praises to the Lamb of God, Rev. 5. 12.
who was slain, and is worthy to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. This is the proper work of a
Religious Feast, to call to mind the works of God, and ascribe unto him the
glory due unto his Name.

This is the true reason of all Religious Festivals. The Seventh Day Sabbath
was originally instituted in honor of the great Maker of all things, who
finished the Creation of the World in six days, and rested on the seventh; and
was changed to the first day of the Week in remembrance of the work of our
Redemption, and the Resurrection of our Savior from the dead. The Feast of the
Passover was for a memorial of that deliverance the children of Israel had
from the destroying Angel, who smote all the firstborn of the Egyptians, but
spared their houses; which was but an obscure type of our greater deliverance
by Christ, of which the Lords Supper is instituted as a perpetual memorial. All
these holy Feasts were for a remembrance, that is, to call to mind the
wonderful works of God, to praise his great name, and by a contemplation of his
wisdom, goodness, and power in making and governing the world, to inflame our
souls with love, and joy, and wonder, till our thoughts and passions grow too
big and vehement to be suppressed in our own breasts, but break forth into
public songs of praise and thanksgiving.

And thus we must remember our Savior in this holy Feast, by making public,
thankful, and joyful acknowledgements of his great and mysterious love, and all
the mighty things he has done for the redemption of mankind. When our Savior
says, Do this in remembrance of me: he requires us to keep this Feast with the
public expressions of that love and honor which we bare to his memory; as a
testimony of our thankfulness to him for all that he has done and suffered for
us; as a profession of our faith and hope, and trust and affiance in a
Crucified Jesus; that we own him for our Lord and Savior, and are not ashamed
of his Cross, nor afraid of any sufferings for his sake.

2. The Lords Supper is the peculiar worship of Christ, considered as a God
incarnate: the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us; the eternal son of God,
the uncreated wisdom of the Father came down from Heaven, and clothed himself
with flesh and blood, and became man, as we are, that he might be capable to
dwell among us, without that terror and astonishment which his unvailed glory
carries with it, which is too bright and dazzling for mortal eyes to gaze on;
and that when he had lived here a poor despised afflicted life in the condition
of a Minister and a Servant, he might die as a Sacrifice for our sins: this is
represented to us by Bread and Wine, that he was Flesh and Blood as we are,
that bread of life which came down from Heaven to give life unto the world.

This is a great and stupendous Mystery, which the Angels themselves desire to
pry into, the lowest condescension of eternal love, but the highest advancement
of humane nature above the glory of Angels into a union with the Deity it self.

How should our Souls triumph in God-man, a Savior of our own race and stock;
and with a little variation sing the Song of the Blessed Virgin.

My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior,
for he has regarded the low estate of our nature; for behold from henceforth
all generations, even the Angels themselves, shall call us blessed; for he that
is mighty has done great things to us, has magnified us, has greatly exalted
us, and holy for ever blessed and glorified be his name.

How zealous should we be to advance his name and praise, who debased, who
humbled, who emptied himself, and made himself of no reputation for our sakes:
when he suffered so low a debasement by becoming man, and has so greatly
exalted us by it, does it not become us in this holy Feast to advance his name,
to sing his praise, to publish his con descending love, and with a greater
passion and wonder adore the Deity clothed with our nature? how should our
hearts leap within us, when we see such a visible representation of an humble
and incarnate Deity, when we see that mysterious bread and Wine, which
represents to any eye of Faith a God Incarnate, a God clothed with Flesh and
Blood, a God in the nature, and subject to all the sinless weaknesses and
infirmities of a man? Oh amazing and surprising sight! which does as much
puzzle our passions as our faith, and is as much too big for our love and joy
and wonder, as it is for our finite and narrow understandings: and yet oh how
pleasant it is to be lost in the contemplation of such love and condescension
as this! to find an object too big for our highest raptures and ecstasies of
devotion! where we launch out beyond the sphere of words and thoughts, and are
swallowed up in silence and wonder. This is one great design of the Lords
Supper, that we may celebrate the praise and glory of an Incarnate God.

3. The Lords Supper is the proper worship of a Crucified Savior, for here we
see his body broken, and his blood shed for our sins; it is a Feast upon the
Sacrifice of the Cross, wherein we visibly declare and profess our Faith in a
Crucified Savior, and return him our joyful praises, for his great love in
dying for us; here we offer up our selves, Souls and Bodies to him, as the
purchase of his blood; Souls fired with zeal and devotion, and transported with
a passionate admiration of his dying love; a love without any bounds or
measure, without precedent or example; a love stronger than fear, or shame, or
death, a love which had no cause but it self, which did not find, but make its
object, which pitied us when we did not pity our selves, which suffered such
hard, such unsufferable usage from the hands of sinners, to deliver them from
those punishments, which they had deserved from God: and can we do less than
love him, who has loved us first; than live to him, who has died for us, and
give up our selves to be governed by him, who gave himself a ransom for us?

Blessed Jesus! thou have conquered, thou have captivated us by thy astonishing
love, we are thine, we give up our selves to thee, take the entire possession
of us; we lay our selves and our dearest concernments at thy feet, use us as
thou please; we have no greater ambition than to serve thee, and to advance
thy name and glory, whether in life or death, riches or poverty, honor or
disgrace; we will follow thee whither soever thou leadest us, though it be to
the Cross, and through the valley of the shadow of death, and will rejoice that
we are accounted worthy to suffer shame for thy sake, and account the reproach
of our Lord greater riches than all the treasures of this world.

Nay in this holy Feast we do not only admire and praise his dying love, but
extol his power and conquest over death; that he was dead indeed, but is alive,
and has the Keys of hell and death. Our Lord is risen again, and become the
first fruits of them that sleep; and now in the death of our Savior we see the
eternal conquest of death and the grave; for by death he has destroyed him,
who had the power of death, that is the Devil, and delivered them, who through
fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage: O death where is thy
sting! O grave where is thy victory! thanks be to God, 1 Cor. 15.
who has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ: at this holy
Table we feast on the spoils of death, this is that bread which gives life to
the world, by putting an end to death, and becoming the principle and earnest
of Immortality: Glory be to this mighty conqueror, whom all the powers of
darkness could not detain prisoner; this is our crucified Lord, who died with
scorn and ignominy, but rose again with glory and power, we do not eat the
Sacrifices of the dead, but feed on a living Savior.

So that you see the Lords Supper contains in it self, or is admirably fitted
to all the parts of Christian worship, which is no more than expressing that in
words and actions which is represented by visible signs in this holy Feast; we
cannot beg of God the pardon of our sins, or any blessings which we want either
Temporal or Spiritual, but in the merit of that Sacrifice which is here
represented; the proper subject of Christian praises and thanksgivings is the
work of our redemption, and the worship of an Incarnate and Crucified Savior
must relate either to his great humility and condescension in becoming man, his
great love in dying for us, or the glory of his resurrection, and that power to
which he is now advanced at the right hand of God, all which is either
signified or represented in the Supper of our Lord; and therefore that question
how often we should communicate at the Lords Table is easily answered by
another, how often we are bound publicly to worship God, and our Savior
Christ; for the Lords Supper being instituted by our Savior as a sacred and
venerable rule for worship (for so I must beg leave to call it, for want of a
more proper name) and fitted to all parts of Christian worship, ought to be as
often repeated as we worship our Savior, and public worship is very lame and
imperfect without it.

For if it be urged, that it is sufficient to pray to God in Christ's name, and
to praise him for that wonderful manifestation of his goodness in all the parts
of the work of our redemption, without using those visible signs, I would fain
know to what purpose they were instituted by our Savior; if Christian worship
be complete and perfect without it, it is and ever was as needless an addition
as most Christians now think it to be, which, I think, derogates very much from
the wisdom of our Savior in its Institution.

We ought not to look upon the Supper of our Lord only as a particular act of
worship, but as an external and sensible rite of worship, which is fitted to
all parts of Christian worship, and by the institution of our Savior necessary
to give virtue and efficacy to them, as the oblation of Sacrifices under the
Law, did to those Prayers which were offered with them.

Now suppose that any men should have argued thus under the Law; that if men
prayed devoutly to God, though they offered no Sacrifice they should be
accepted by him; I doubt this would have been called despising Moses's law, and
such men must have died without mercy, though they had prayed never so
devoutly, and yet the Apostle tells us, that we ought to have greater regard to
the Laws and Institutions of Christ, than the Jews had to the Law of Moses.
Heb. 10. 28, 29.


The great danger then of neglecting the Lords Supper, is, that such a neglect
may render all our Worship unacceptable to God: a right to Christ's Sacrifice
upon the Cross, is by the Institution of our Savior conveyed in the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper; and therefore though we pray in Christ's Name, if we
neglect his Institution, whereby the virtue of his Sacrifice is conveyed to our
prayers, we must pray without any interest in his Sacrifice, and we may easily
guess of what worth such prayers are; just as much as our own good works
without an Expiatory Sacrifice to recommend them to God.

The serious consideration of this thoroughly convinces me, how highly useful,
(not to say necessary) it is to restore the Apostolical and Primitive practice,
to celebrate the Lords Supper as often as we meet for public Worship, if we
would have our Worship true Christian Worship according to our Saviors own
institution, as understood and practiced by the Apostles themselves.

3. Another obligation to a frequent receiving the Lords Supper is, that this
is the principal act of Communion with Christ. There is nothing more frequently
talked of, than our Union to Christ, and our Communion with him, which is the
great mystery of our Religion, and the great foundation of our hope. Now Union
to, and Communion with Christ, may either be considered as a constant state and
relation, and so it signifies being members of the body of Christ, by being
incorporated into his Church by a visible profession of our faith in him,
ratified and confirmed by Baptism, and by the communication of his Grace and
Spirit, which dwells in the sincere Disciples of Christ, as the bond of a
spiritual Union, and an abiding principle of sanctification and holiness; or it
may be considered as an Act, and so it is most properly applied to the Lords
Supper, which is the most visible external symbol of our Communion with Christ,
and instituted as a Sacrament of Union, for the conveyance of all divine and
spiritual blessings to us. And for the explication of this, I shall observe two
things In this holy Feast; 1. That it is our eating at the Table of our Lord,
and 2. That it is our feeding on the body of Christ.

1. In the Lords Supper we eat at the Table of our Lord: for this is a Feast of
Christ's own appointment, instituted by him on purpose to commemorate his death
and sacrifice upon the Cross; and so answers to the institution of God under
the Law, to feast upon Sacrifices: which was constantly observed in
Peace Offerings, of which, part was burnt upon Gods Altar, part belonged to the
Priest, and part was eaten by the Sacrificers, or those Persons who offered the
Sacrifice of Peaceofferings, who are therefore said to partake of the Altar:
behold Israel after 1 Cor. 10. 18.
the Flesh, are not they which eat of the Sacrifices, partakers of the Altar?
To partake of the Altar, signifies to partake with God, whose Altar it is, that
is, to have part with him: for part of the Sacrifice was burnt upon the Altar,
or given to the Priests, and that was Gods part or share, and the other part
was eaten by themselves.

Thus it was among the Heathens also, who used to feast on the Sacrifices which
they offered to their Gods: and sometimes invited their Christian neighbors to
these Feasts, who not sufficiently understanding the nature of such Religious
Feasts, many times went as to common friendly entertainments, and therefore are
corrected by the Apostle for it, as utterly inconsistent with their Christian
profession; for to eat of a Feast upon a Sacrifice, is to have communion with
that Being, whatever he is, to whom the Sacrifice is offered: Now the Gentiles
sacrificed to Devils, and therefore to eat of such Sacrifices, is to partake
with Devils, to be in confederacy and communion with them. But I say, that the
things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils and not to God,
and I would not that ye should have fellowship with Devils, (...), that you
should be Communicants with them: Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the
Cup of Devils, ye cannot be partakers of the V. 21.
Lords Table, and the Table of Devils: that is, it is as irreconcilable to eat
at the Table of Christ and of the Gentile Sacrifice, as it is impossible to
unite Christ and false Heathen Gods.

From whence we learn, that to eat of the Lords Table, that is, of the
Christian Feast of the Lords Supper, is to partake with Christ; or to have
Communion with him, as to eat of the Sacrifices under the Law, was to partake
of the Altar, or to eat of Pagan Sacrifices, was to partake with Devils. Now in
general, there were two things signified by these Religious Feasts.

1. A Covenant relation, that such persons who feasted at Gods Table were in
Covenant with him: for all solemn Covenants even between men in the Eastern
Country were made and ratified by Sacrifice; thus it was in the Covenant
between Jacob and Genesis 31. 46.
Laban, and Jacob said unto his brethren, gather stones; and they took stones
and made an heap, and they did eat there upon the heap. And what this eating
was, we may conclude from the nature of the action, which was confirming a
Covenant, and therefore this eating is eating a Sacrifice, as we are more
expressly told; then Jacob offered V. 54.
Sacrifice upon the Mount, and called his Brethren to eat bread, and they did
eat bread and tarried all night upon the Mount. And thus it is especially
between God and men: thus we know the Mosaical Covenant was confirmed by the
blood of the Sacrifice: as the first Testament is said to be dedicated by
blood, and the book and all the people, the Heb. 9. 18, 19, 21.
Tabernacle and all the Vessels of the Ministry, were sprinkled with blood:
nay, not only this general Covenant was confirmed by Sacrifice, but all good
men, when they offer Sacrifices to God, are understood to make renew, or
confirm their Covenant with him, whence is that expression in the Psalms,
Gather my Saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by
Psalm 50. 5.
Sacrifice.

Thus the death of Christ did ratify and confirm the Gospel Covenant between
God and men, and therefore the blood is called the blood of the Covenant, and
to feast on the memorials of his death and passion, is a signification that we
are in Covenant with God, and God with us, that we still own our Covenant, and
are resolved still to do so; it is to put God in mind of his Covenant with us,
and us of our Covenant with him; and if we have been guilty of any breach of
Covenant with God, by venturing upon the commission of any sin, when we have
with tears bewailed our sin, and renewed our repentance, here we must renew our
Covenant, and by approaching the Table of our Lord, declare, that though we are
sinners, yet we are not Apostates, that we still own our Covenant, and by the
Grace of God, which we now implore, and hope to receive, resolve to continue
steadfast in it, while we live.

And is not this an inestimable privilege, to be in Covenant with God, and to
have this Covenant as it were signed and sealed to us, as often as we please,
by a foederal Rite of God's own appointment? especially is it not a mighty
favor for such frail sinners, who are so exposed to temptations, and so often
conquered by them, to have liberty granted upon their sincere repentance to
return to Gods Table, and to renew their Covenant, and to be received again
into Covenant by God? Is it not a mighty affront to God, when he invites us to
his Table, as those who are in Covenant with him, to live in so great a neglect
of it? Is it not a kind of renouncing our Covenant, when we refuse to own it by
such public solemnities, as he himself has appointed for that purpose?

2. These Religious Feasts signify a state of Peace and Friendship with God;
and therefore those Sacrifices of which the Sacrificers were allowed to eat,
are called Peace Offerings in the Law of Moses. Under the Law it was not
permitted to them to eat of the Sin-offering, that Sacrifice which was offered
for the expiation of sin; but when they had offered a Sacrifice for sin, they
might then offer a Peace Offering, and feast before the Lord on the Sacrifice,
as a token of peace and reconciliation with God. And thus it is under the
Gospel, Christ offered himself once for all a Sacrifice or Offering for sin;
and has obtained eternal redemption for us, and therefore there is no more
expiatory Sacrifice to be offered for sins; but when through the frailty of
humane nature, and the powerful temptations of flesh and sense, of the World
and the Devil we have defiled and polluted our consciences with sin and guilt,
instead of those particular Sacrifices for sin, which the Jews were directed to
offer, we must offer up the Sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart to God,
that is, we must truly repent of our sins, and turn from them, and arm our
selves with powerful resolutions against them for the future, and then we may
approach the Table of God, and receive the pledges of his love, and the fresh
assurances of our pardon and acceptance through our Lord Jesus Christ.

We do not use to receive and entertain any at our Tables, but those who are
our Friends; or at least are not our enemies; others are intruders, and if they
be not turned out again, yet must make themselves welcome; and indeed a
Covenant made by Sacrifice always signifies a Covenant of Peace, and such to
be sure the Gospel Covenant is, of which the Lords Supper is the Seal and
Sacrament, a Covenant of peace and reconciliation between God and men. None
ought to come to this Table, but the Friends of God, as all holy men, and all
true humble penitents are, and such men shall be sure to receive a joyful
welcome, and all the peculiar marks of Gods favor; for such this holy Supper
it self is to all worthy receivers.

2. In the Supper of our Lord, we do not only eat at his Table, but we feed on
his body; not as if in a carnal sense we eat his natural flesh, and drink his
blood, as the Church of Rome teaches, contrary to the common sense and
experience of mankind, and without any colorable pretense from Scripture or
Primitive Antiquity, but we eat his flesh and drink his blood in such a
spiritual manner, as they are exhibited to us in the Sacrament of his own
Institution. As to explain this in as few words as may be.

The Lords Supper, I told you before in General, did answer to a Feast upon a
Sacrifice in the Jewish Law. And now I add, that it is a Feast upon the
Sacrifice of Christ, who dyed upon the Cross, and bore our sins in his own body
upon the Tree: and therefore it is called eating the flesh and drinking the
blood of Christ. For under the Law the Jews did in a literal sense eat the
flesh of the Sacrifice, for part of it was burnt upon the Altar, and part they
eat; and this eating of the Sacrifice, did give them a right and interest in
the virtue of the Sacrifice, and all the blessings purchased by it.

Now though Christ dyed upon the Cross for us, yet he could not in a literal
sense give us his natural flesh to eat; for he was to rise again from the dead,
with a glorious and incorruptible body, and ascend up in the same body to
Heaven, and there to continue united to this humane, but glorified body, till
he return again to judge the World. This Sacrament of his body and blood was to
be celebrated in all parts of the World, where a Christian Church should be
planted, and though he himself, who is over all, God blessed for ever more, is
present also in all places, and especially in all the Assemblies of his
Disciples, who meet to worship him; yet his body though glorious and perfect as
a body can be, yet is but matter still, and therefore confined to one place,
and cannot at the same time, be at Rome and Constantinople, nor in ten thousand
places at once, more remote than they: and this Sacrament is to be celebrated,
his flesh eat, and his blood drank, as long as the Church and the World lasts,
and it is contrary to the nature of a body to be so often eat, and yet continue
the same body; and at best were the thing possible, it would be no better than
an inhumane and barbarous Rite, to eat the flesh of a man, and of our Friend.

And therefore, since by the Institution of God, a Sacrifice for a Peace
offering was to be eat, and especially the Paschal Lamb, which was a Type of
Christ, and that eating did in a Legal sense unite the Sacrificer and the
Sacrifice, and convey its virtue and efficacy to him; I say hence Christ
instituted the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, i. e. Bread and Wine, to be eat
and drank, as the symbols and signs of his Body and Blood, and a Sacramental
conveyance of all the merit and purchase of his death to his sincere Disciples,
who feed on him: and therefore the Bread and Wine are called his Body and
Blood, because feeding on the Bread and Wine is ordained by him instead of his
Body and Blood, and that eating Bread and drinking Wine in obedience to his
Institution, and in remembrance of his Death and Passion, does to all intents
and purposes as much entitle us to the Merits, Atonement, Reconciliation, and
all the blessings of the New Covenant purchased by his death; as eating the
Flesh of the Sacrifice did the Jews to the virtue of that Sacrifice, whereof
they eat.

And since Faith in Christ is made necessary by the terms of the Gospel to an
interest in his Sacrifice, the symbols of Bread and Wine, serve as well or
better for this holy Feast, than his natural flesh and blood would do; for here
is room for the exercise of faith: we do not see the body of Christ broken, and
his blood shed, nothing appears to our bodily senses, but Bread and Wine; but
by an eye of faith we see him hang upon the Cross, and bleeding for our sins,
and thus we feed on his Sacrifice, eat his flesh and drink his blood. Bodily
eating cannot make us partakers of Christ, but as the Institution of our
Savior has united the virtues of his Sacrifice with the elements of Bread and
Wine in this holy Supper, which makes it as much his body to all the real
purposes of a feast upon a Sacrifice, as if it were his natural body and blood,
in as proper a sense as ever the Jews did eat the Paschal Lamb, which is all
the Church of England means by the real presence. So then we by faith eat the
body of Christ, and drink his blood, when together with our bodily feeding on
the Sacramental Bread and Wine, by faith we feed on the merits of his Sacrifice.

And this must needs convince us, how necessary it is to communicate at the
Lords Table, as well as to believe in Christ, if we would partake of the merits
of his Sacrifice; for this sacramental Bread and Wine is his body and blood,
that is, has the merits of his Sacrifice annexed to it by his own Institution;
and as under the Law, it was not enough to offer a Peace Offering, unless they
eat of it, so neither will the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross be of any
value to us, unless we feed on it in this holy Supper not only by Faith, but
also by a bodily eating of those Sacramental elements to which he himself has
annexed the merits of his Sacrifice. To feed on the Sacramental elements
without faith, is no more than to eat so much ordinary Bread, and to drink
common Wine, and to believe on Christ without feasting on his Sacrifice cannot
without uncovenanted Grace apply his merits to us: for it is evident, that
Truth in its own nature cannot give us an interest in the merits of Christ: for
how does my believing that Christ died for sinners convey the merit of his
death to me, nay, though I believe, that Christ in particular died for me, this
does not actually make his merits mine, but only in the performance of such
conditions, and in the use of such means as he has appointed for the
application of his merits to particular persons; and I see no reason why men
may not as well hope to be saved without holiness by Christ, as without eating
his flesh and drinking his blood in the Sacrament; for holiness will not save
us without the merits of Christ, and I know not how we should come by the
merits of Christ but only in such ways of dispensing, conveying, and applying
them, as he himself has appointed, and he has appointed no other ordinary way,
but this mysterious Supper.

Hence the Apostle tells the Corinthians, The Cup of blessing which we bless, 1
Cor. 10. 17.
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ, the bread which we break is it
not the Communion of the body of Christ? what does he mean by the communion of
the blood, and of the body of Christ, (...) and (...); the meaning is very
plain, that hereby we partake in the body and blood of Christ, that is, in the
efficacy of his death and passion, and if we could do this any other way, or
without it, it would be a useless Sacrament, as most Christians seem now to
think it is: and therefore I doubt not but our Savior in that mysterious
discourse in John 6. had respect to this holy Feast, though not then
instituted, when he tells them, Verily, verily, I say unto Joh. 6. 53, 54, 56,
57.
you, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life,
and I will raise him up at the last day, for my flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells
in me, and I in him.

The only objection I know against expounding this of eating the flesh of
Christ, and drinking his blood in the Lords Supper, is because the Feast was
not then instituted, and therefore neither the Jews nor his own Disciples could
possibly understand what he meant: now there are several very plain and easy
answers to this: as 1. our Savior said a great many things to the Jews in his
Sermons, which neither they nor his own Disciples could understand, when they
were spoke, though his Disciples understood them after he was risen, when the
Holy Ghost brought those things again to their remembrance, and the event had
expounded them, such we may reckon whatever concerned his death and
resurrection, and spiritual kingdom.

2. They might as well understand this discourse of eating his Flesh, and
drinking his Blood, as they could what he immediately before told them; I am
the living bread, which V. 51.
came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever:
and the bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of
the world. For they understood as little what it was to give his flesh for the
life of the world, and how this made his flesh to be that living bread, as what
it was to eat his flesh, and to drink his blood: for they both signify the
same thing, and these words last quoted do plainly prove, that he respects the
Eucharistical Feast, when he speaks of his eating his flesh, and drinking his
blod: for we must eat his flesh only as considered as the bread of life, which
came down from Heaven, and his flesh is bread considered as given for the life
of the world, and therefore to eat his flesh and drink his blood must signify
the Sacramental eating of it, as the memorials of his death and passion.

3. Suppose we should understand this eating the flesh, and drinking the blood
of the son of man, of feeding on Christ by faith, or believing, yet they could
understand this no better than the other, it is plain they did not, and I know
not how they should: for to call bare believing in Christ, eating his flesh and
drinking his blood, is so remote from all propriety of speaking, and so unknown
in all languages, that to this day those who understood nothing more by it but
believing in Christ, are able to give no tolerable account of the reason of the
expression. Now if this place in St. John be meant of the Lords Supper, as I do
not in the least doubt but it is, our Savior has made it as necessary to us,
as we think eternal life to be, for he has expressly told us, except ye eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.

We must not indeed expound these words to such a sense, as to make the
Sacrament necessary, even to Infants themselves, as St. Austin did, who
therefore administered the Eucharist as well as Baptism to Children, which was
plainly contrary to the nature of it; for it must be eaten with Faith, or else
it is not the body of Christ to the receivers, and God does not make any
ordinance necessary to those, who are under a natural incapacity; nay, a moral
impossibility will excuse this; when men are desirous to communicate in all our
Saviors institutions, but have no opportunity to do it; for God will dispense
his grace in extraordinary ways to all well disposed minds, when his providence
denies those which are ordinary; but those who wilfully neglect the ordinary
means of grace, have no reason to expect those which are extraordinary; how God
will deal with those who are guilty of such neglects, not out of a contempt of
his institutions, but out of ignorance of their necessity, or a superstitious
awe and reverence for them, I will not determine.

Having thus proved that we cannot in an ordinary way partake in the benefits
and blessings, which Christ has purchased by his death, but by a Sacramental
eating of the body, and drinking the blood of Christ, to make you still more
sensible of the infinite hazard and danger of this neglect, I shall briefly
consider what those blessings are which we partake of at the Lords Table, and
which we cannot expect any where else. And I shall name but these.

1. The pardon of our sins, for this was the purchase of Christ's death, he
died for our sins, and expiated them with his own blood: and therefore we may
observe, that we do not only eat the body of Christ in this holy Feast, but we
drink his blood, the blood of expiation, the blood of the Covenant, which
speaks better things than the blood of Abel: now this was never permitted the
Jews to eat any blood, much less the blood of the Covenant, which was sprinkled
about the Altar to make Atonement: nay we feed in this holy Supper on a
Sinoffering, nay that great expiatory Sacrifice, whose blood was carried into
the Holy of Holies, which the High Hebr. 13. 10 11, 12, 13.
Priest himself was not allowed to eat of; to which the Apostle alludes in the
Epistle to the Hebrews: We have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat,
which serve the Tabernacle: for the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is
brought into the Sanctuary by the High Priest for Sin, are burnt without the
Camp: i. e. no body was suffered to eat the flesh of the Sacrifice on the great
day of expiation, which was a general atonement for the sins of the whole
Congregation; not so much as the High Priest himself; but their bodies were
burnt to ashes. Now the death of Christ upon the Cross was peculiarly typified
by that great expiatory Sacrifice, whose blood was carried into the Holy of
Holies, as he had discoursed at large in the ninth Chapter, and plainly refers
to here, wherefore Jesus also, that he might Sanctify the people with his own
blood suffered without the gate: This is the Sacrifice we eat of, to which he
plainly refers in what he adds, by him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of
praise (or the Eucharistical Sacrifice, which is the Lords Supper) to God
continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to Heb. 13. 15.
his name: but to do good, and to communicate forget not, for with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased: which refers to those oblations for the relief
of the poor, and other religious uses, which were always made at the Lords
Table.

Now what is the meaning of this, that we are allowed to drink of the blood of
the Sacrifice, and eat the flesh of the great Sin-offering, and Propitiatory
Sacrifice which the High Priest himself under the Law was not allowed to touch?
I say, what is the meaning of it, but to exhibit and convey to us the full and
perfect remission of all our sins in the blood of Christ. So that we eat the
flesh of an expiatory Sacrifice, and drink the blood of atonement, and thereby
partake of that pardon and expiation which was made by Sacrifice, and if we
were sensible what the guilt of sin is, and what will be its punishment, we
should not fail frequently to come to this holy Table to renew the pardon of
our sins in the blood of Christ.

2. Another fruit of Christ's death, which we receive at the Table of our Lord,
is the assistances of his grace and Spirit; and the communications of a divine
life to us. Hence our Savior tells us, he that eats my flesh Joh. 6. 56.
and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him: which signifies such a
close and intimate union, whereby we receive the communications of his own life
and spirit from him: and therefore all Christians are said to be 1 Cor. 12. 13.
made to drink into one Spirit: which signifies the communications of the
divine Spirit at this Holy Table: the whole Gospel administration is called the
Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8.
as being accompanied with a divine power, much more this divine Feast, wherein
we become one with Christ, eat his flesh and drink his blood, as members of his
body, Ephesians. 5. 30.
of his flesh, and of his bones, as St. Paul speaks; and it is impossible the
Spirit of Christ should be separated from such an uniting ordinance, as makes
us members of his body.

3. By eating the flesh and drinking the blood of Christ in this holy Feast, we
have a pledge and earnest of immortality. So our Savior expressly tells us,
Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life, and Joh. 6.
54, 57, 58.
I will raise him up at the last day. As the living Father has sent me, and I
live by the Father, so he that eats me, even he shall live by me. This is
that bread, which came down from heaven: not as your Fathers did eat Manna, and
are dead, he that eats of this bread shall live for ever. Where our Savior
gives the reason, why those who eat him shall live for ever, because he himself
shall live for ever: though he must die, he was to rise again into an immortal
life and an eternal Kingdom, as the reward of his death and sufferings, and
therefore this holy Feast is a certain earnest of immortality to those who feed
on him: and we need not indeed doubt this, since it conveys the holy Spirit to
us, as St. Paul tells the Romans. But if the Romans 8. 11.
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit,
that dwells in you.

But possibly some may object, that all this which is attributed to the Holy
Supper, we receive at our Baptism, the pardon of our sins, the gift of the
Spirit, and the promise and earnest of immortality: for so we are Baptized for
the remission of sins, and we are baptized as well as 1 Cor. 12. 13.
made to drink into one Spirit: and those who are baptized into Christ have put
on Christ; and we are buried with Christ by baptism into death, that like as
Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also should
walk in newness of life, for if we have been planted together in the likeness
of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of Romans 6. 3, 4, 5.
his resurrection.

Now all this I grant to be true, and therefore Baptism (not the Lords Supper)
is our regeneration, or new birth, we are raised into a new life, are renewed
and sanctified at our Baptism, and have the Holy Spirit bestowed on us, as the
author and principle of a new life, but the continuance of this grace, and the
daily assistances of the Holy Spirit, especially when we have grieved him, and
made him withdraw from us by our sins, depends upon our diligent attendance at
the Table of our Lord. It is not enough that a man is born into the world,
unless he have constant food to preserve his life: and thus it is with the new
creature; and therefore the Supper of our Lord is Bread and Wine, the stay and
support of life, to signify to us, that these supplies of grace which we
receive at this Feast are as necessary to our Spiritual life, as our daily food
is to the support of a bodily life: and therefore our Savior calls himself the
bread of life which came down from Heaven, of which the Manna was a type and
figure; now we know Manna was their constant food, the only Bread they had,
which signified that this heavenly Manna is the daily support of our spiritual
life; and therefore we know the ancient Fathers by our daily bread, in the
Lords Prayer, did generally understand the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which
they called the (...), or the Bread of God. All which may convince us from the
very nature and reason of the institution, that frequent communione are as
necessary to our spiritual growth and increase in holiness, to repair the
decays of our graces, and to renew our strength and vigor in serving God, and
to procure the pardon of sin after a relapse, and to call back the holy Spirit,
when he is withdrawn from us, as bread is to keep our bodies in constant
repair; and did men love their souls as they do their bodies, they would no
more neglect the Supper of our Lord than their daily food.

4. The Lords Supper is the principal part of Christian communion, and
therefore as necessary as the communion of the Church is: to debar any persons
from the Lords Table is to shut them out of the communion of the faithful, and
they are never restored to full communion till they are restored to the
communion of this holy Feast: while discipline was preserved in its glory and
vigor in the ancient Church, no Christian durst turn his back upon the Table
of our Lord, as nine parts in ten now often do: indeed they could not well
communicate as faithful Christian people without receiving the Lords Supper.
The Catechumens and Penitents were admitted to public instructions, and to
such prayers as were proper for them; but they were dismissed when that was
done, and not admitted to be present at the worship of the faithful, who were
in full peace and communion with the Church, the principal part of which was
the Holy Supper. Indeed St. Paul attributes the union of Christians in one body
to Christ, to this holy Feast. He calls the Cup the communion of the blood of
Christ, and the bread the communion of the body of Christ, and assigns this as
one reason of it; for we being many are one bread 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.
and one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread. From whence it is
plain, that we are united to each other by partaking of the same bread; for we
are one bread, as well as one body, which places Christian unity in a joint
participation of this Holy Feast. This also unites us to Christ, makes us his
body, because we all feed on his body: the Church is his body, as being fed and
nourished with his body: which both shows us, how necessary the peace and unity
of the Church is to give us an interest in the Sacrifice of Christ; for the
virtue of his Sacrifice is contained in the holy Supper, and this must be
celebrated in the communion of the Church; and withal how essential this holy
Supper is to Christian communion, as uniting us all to Christ in one body.

For shame then let not those men cry out against Schism and Schismatics, who
separate themselves from the body of Christ in that part of Christian
communion, which is most essential to Christianity: it is a much less evil not
to hear a Sermon together, nay, sometimes not to pray together, than to join in
all other parts of worship; but to break company at the Lords Table, where if
ever they ought to appear as one body, and one bread, to set up Altar against
Altar is somewhat worse, is a greater and more incurable Schism, than to absent
our selves from the Lords Table: but for my part I cannot excuse those men from
being Schismatics, who live in an habitual neglect of so necessary a part of
Christian communion, and could the ancient discipline of the Church be revived,
such men should know that Christian communion in any religious offices, is a
privilege which they do not deserve, and which they should not have.

Having thus explained our obligations to frequent Communion in the holy Supper
of our Lord, which I judge so plain and evident, that no honest impartial
Inquirer can resist the evidence of them, and of such great weight and moment,
that no sober Christian can withstand their conviction: I shall now briefly
consider the second thing proposed, What are the most common occasions of, or
excuses for such a neglect; and though it were easy to think of a great many,
I shall but mention two very briefly, as being I think the most universal and
the foundation of all the rest.

1. The first is of that nature, that it is great pity it should have so ill an
effect, and that is a mighty reverence and esteem for this holy Feast. Either
they can never think themselves worthy to approach the Table of our Lord, or
that they can never be sufficiently prepared for it.

As for the first, it looks like pride and folly, to think that we must be
worthy of the divine favors: they must all be acknowledged to be above our
deserts: How came mankind to be worthy, that the Son of God should dye for
them, and had God advised with such modest sinners, they might have
complemented away the death of Christ, as now they do the benefits and
advantages of it in his holy Supper? How great a Saint soever thou art, thou
can never merit such favors and privileges as these, for then there had
been no need of Christ to merit for thee; and how great a sinner soever thou
art, by complying with the Grace of God, thou may quickly make thy self a
worthy Communicant. Repent of thy sins, and heartily resolve, by Gods Grace to
reform thy life, and come to this holy Table with assurance to receive those
supplies of Grace, which may enable thee to do it.

And as for that great preparation which is necessary to fit our selves for so
solemn an act of Religion, I must say, it is in this, as in other acts of
Religious Worship, the greater the better: but if we consider what I said
before, that the Institution of our Savior plainly proves, that he designed it
for an ordinary part of Christian Worship, we cannot suppose that it requires
much greater preparation of mind, than other acts of Religion.

This holy Supper is a sacred mysterious Rite of Prayer and Thanksgiving, which
gives virtue and efficacy to our prayers, and makes them acceptable and
prevalent with God: Are you then, when you come to Church, fit to pray to God
and to praise him? if not, you must neglect your prayers, as well as the
Sacrament: if you are, then you are fit to approach the Lords Table to give
virtue and prevalency to your prayers.

This holy Supper conveys to us the virtue and efficacy of Christ's Sacrifice
upon the Cross, the pardon of our sins, and the assistances of the divine Grace
and Spirit. Now if you be truly penitent, you are qualified to receive the
pardon of your sins, and therefore to approach this holy Table, where it is
dispensed: if you earnestly desire the divine Grace, you are prepared for the
reception of it. Come but with a sense of your wants, and with such desires as
a hungry man has of meat, and here you shall be filled and satisfied; and
without such preparations as these, we can neither pray to God to forgive our
sins, nor to bestow his Grace on us. Yet I confess, I cannot see, how any man,
who is fit to pray to God, should be unfit to approach his Table.

2. Others think, that there is much greater danger in approaching the Table of
the Lord unworthily, than in an unworthy performance of other parts of
Religious Worship; but for what reason, they think so, I could never learn. The
prayer of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, and his sacrifice is no
more: It is as unpardonable an affront to God, to pray for the pardon of our
sins in Christ's name without true sorrow and contrition, and serious
resolutions of amendment, as it is for an impenitent sinner to receive the
Sacrament; to praise God without a due sense of his Mercy and Goodness, differs
not at all from feasting at the Table of our Lord, without any sense of his
dying love.

I would not be thought to give encouragement by this discourse, to wicked men
to approach this holy Table; such men ought to be carefully turned away from
such sacred Mysteries, when they are discovered; but the whole design is to
show, that those men, who have such clear innocent consciences, that they dare
pray to God, need not be afraid of receiving the Sacrament, and those who have
not, I would desire them to consider, what a case they are in: they defile
every holy duty they meddle with, and are in perpetual danger of Gods wrath and
displeasure; they cannot ask his pardon, but they provoke him the more, for the
interpretation of such men's prayers, is only to beg a longer liberty and
indulgence in sin; and therefore this is no more an encouragement to neglect
the Lords Supper, than it is to continue in a state of sin and damnation.

But you will say, does not the Apostle tell us, that a man must examine
himself, and so eat of that bread, and drink of that cup, for he that eats,
and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not
discerning the Lords body? Very right; but not to dispute the particular
meaning of that place, is not this true also of him, that hears or prays
unworthily? Does the Apostle say, that there is any greater degree of
worthiness required to receive the Lords Supper, than there is to pray to God?
He who is fit to pray to God, is fit to eat and drink at the Lords Table; and
he who is not fit for either, I am sure is not fit to dye. Our right to
immortality is conveyed to us in this heavenly Feast, as you have already seen,
and it is equally strange to me, that men should content themselves in such a
condition, as makes them unfit to receive the pardon of their sins, the
assistances of Gods Grace, or immortal life; or if they be not in this
deplorable condition, that they should neglect that holy Feast, which is the
only ordinary instituted means of conveying all these blessings to them.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed by Richard Chiswel.
LOrd Bacon's Remains, octavo. Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the
Church of England, octavo. Dr. Edw. Bagshaw's Discourses upon Select Texts
against the Papist and Socinian, octavo. Mr. Rushworth's Historical
Collections: The Second Volume, folio. -- His large and exact Account of the
Trial of the Earl of Strafford, folio. Remarques relating to the state of the
Church of the 3 first Centuries, wherein are interspersed Animadversions on a
Book called, A View of Antiquity: By I. H. Written by A. S. Speculum
Baxterianum, or Baxter against Baxter, quarto. The Countrey-Mans Physician,
octavo. Dr. Burlace's History of the Irish Rebellion, folio. An Apology for a
Treatise of Humane Reason, Written by Ma. Clifford Esquire twelves. The Laws of
this Realm concerning Jesuits, etc. explained by diverse Judgments and
Resolutions of the Judges; with other Observations thereupon, by William Cawley
Esquire folio. Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England. In
two Vol. folio. Bishop Sanderson's Sermons: with his Life, folio. Fowlis his
History of Romish Conspiracies, Treasons and Usurpations, folio. Markham's
Perfect Horseman, octavo. The History of the Powder Treason, with a Vindication
thereof, against the Author of the Catholic Apology, and others: to which is
added a Parallel betwixt that and the present Plot, quarto. Dr. Parker's
demonstration of the divine authority of the Law of Nature, and Christian
Religion, quarto. A Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of
Separation, octavo. Dr. Outram's Sermons on several occasions, octavo, now in
the Press.
FINIS.

