A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the Reverend Benj. Calamy D. D. And late
Minister of St. LAWRENCE JEWRY, London, Jan. 7th. 1686.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Master of the Temple, And Chaplain in Ordinary to
his Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for John Amery at the Peacock, and William Rogers at the Sun;
both against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1686.

Imprimatur.

Jan. 11. 1685/6;. C. Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris Domestics.

To his much Esteemed Friends the Churchwardens and Parishoners of St.
LAURENCE Jewry, and St. MARY MAGDALANE Milkstreet.
Gentlemen,
THough I had no intention to make this Sermon Public, yet I could not with
any Modesty deny your Request, when you had paid so great a regard to the
Counsel given you in it. I heartily Congratulate your happy agreement in the
Choice of so excellent a Person to succeed the not-to-be-forgotten Dr. CALAMY,
who, I doubt not, will deserve all that Honor and Kindness, which it is so
natural to you, to show to your Ministers. I here present you with the Sermon,
as it was Preached, excepting some few things at the beginning, which were left
out in speaking, to shorten it, as much as I could, without injuring the Sense.
I am sensible the Character falls very short of what our deceased Friend
deserved, but it is every Word true, and I thought, had been as inoffensive too
as it is true; and so I believe it will appear to wise and considering men, and
others may judge as they please. If it will contribute any thing to make both
Ministers and People more faithful in the discharge of their several Duties, I
have what I aimed at, both in Preaching and Printing it, especially if you
please to accept of it as a Testimony of the sincere Respects of

GENTLEMEN, Your very Humble Servant, WILL. SHERLOCK.

24 Matthew. 45, 46. Who then is a Faithful and Wise servant, whom his Lord has
made Ruler over his Household, to give them meat in due season?

Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so doing.


IN this and the foregoing Chapter, our Savior acquaints his Disciples with
the Signs and Prognostics of his coming; which plainly have a double aspect,
both upon his coming to destroy Jerusalem, and upon his coming to judge the
World: But the application he makes of it, is of universal use; Watch
therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord does come. v. 42. which is
excellent advice, in what sense soever we understand the coming of our Lord;
for the coming of our Lord signifies his coming to take account of us, and
whether we apply this to the Hour of our Death, or to the last Day of Judgment,
still it concerns us to watch; that is, to be always diligent and careful in
doing our Duty, and discharging that Trust which is committed to us, that
whenever our Lord comes, we may give up our Accounts with joy.

The Words, I have now read to you, concern the Apostles of Christ, and their
Successors, the Bishops and Pastors of the whurch, who are as much obliged to
this watchfulness, as any other sort of persons, because as they have a greater
Trust, so they have a greater Account to give. This we learn from 12 Luke 42,
43, v. where our Savior having given that general advice to all his Disciples,
to watch for the coming of their Lord, St. Peter particularly enquires, how far
he, and the rest of the Apostles were concerned in it: Lord, speak thou this
parable unto us, or even to all. v. 41. To which our Savior answers, Who then
is that faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord shall make Ruler of his
Household, to give them their portion of meat in due season? Blessed is that
servant, whom his Lord, when he comes shall find so doing. Wherein our Savior
does particularly apply that general Advice to his Apostles and their
Successors, his Servants, Stewards, and Ministers of the Gospel: and indeed
those particular expressions which are here used do sufficiently acquaint us,
to whom this Advice belongs.

We need not question, who is here meant by the Lord, which is the peculiar
Title of Christ in the New Testament, and it is as evident, what this Household
is, which is the Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 16.
The House and Temple of the living God, 2 Cor. 6. 16.
The Household of Faith, The Household of God. And Christ is said to be Faithful
as a Son, or Lord, 6 Gal. 10.
over his own House, whose House are we, if we hold fast the confidence, 3 Heb.
5, 6.
and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end, in distinction from Moses,
who was Faithful as a Servant.

The Rulers of the Household, or the Stewards in St. Luke, are the Apostles,
Bishops, Presbyters, who are the Governors of the Church, 20 Acts 28.
(...) the Overseers, the Ministers of Christ, the Stewards of the Mysteries of
God. 1 Cor. 4. 1.
The Meat, which they are to give in season, is the Word of Life, which with
respect to the different degrees and perfection of Knowledge is compared to
Milk, 1 Cor. 3. 2.
and to strong Meat: and therefore they are commanded to feed the Flock, 5.
Heb. 12
to preach the Word, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
to be instant in season, out of season, to reprove, 2 Timothy 4. 2.
rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine.

This is sufficient to show you, that my Text does principally concern the
Bishops and Ministers of the Church, who are in an eminent manner the Servants
of Christ in the Instruction and Government of his Church, which is his House;
and in speaking to these words, I shall observe this following method.

I. Consider the Duty of Gospel-Bishops and Pastors, which is to Feed, and to
Govern the Household of Christ.

II. The Qualifications of Gospel Ministers, which are Faithfulness and
Prudence, a Faithful and Wise servant.

III. The great rewards of such men, Blessed is that servant.

I. The Duty of Gospel Ministers whether Bishops or others, and that consists
of two parts. 1. To Feed. 2. To Govern the Household or Church of Christ. They
are appointed Rulers of his Household, to give them meat in due season.

I. To Feed the Flock of Christ. 20. Acts 28.
This command Christ gave to Peter, and repeated it three times; 21. John 15,
16, 17.
Simon, son of Jonas, love thou me more then these? then feed my lambs, feed
my sheep. Now to Feed, signifies to instruct men in the Knowledge of Christ,
for Knowledge is the proper food and nourishment of the Soul, by which it grows
in Spiritual Wisdom, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
and all Virtue and Goodness; and is as necessary to our Spiritual Life, as
natural food is to the Life of our Bodies. 17. John 3.
This is life eternal, says our Savior, to know Thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent.

For this reason our Savior appointed Stewards and Dispensers of the Mysteries
of his Kingdom, whose whole business it should be to study the Divine Will
themselves, and to instruct others. For this is a knowledge which must be
taught; Nature may instruct us in the Being of a God, and the differences
between good and evil, and the plain Rules of Morality; but the Mysteries of
the Kingdom, the whole economy of man's Salvation by Jesus Christ, is to be
known only by Revelation. Christ came down from Heaven to reveal this to us,
and he instructed his Apostles, and his Apostles by their preaching and
Writings instructed the Church, and have left us a standing Rule of Faith and
Manners; but yet it is necessary, that there should be some men peculiarly
devoted to the Service of Religion, the study of the Scriptures, and the Work
of the Ministry, to instruct and teach those who have neither leisure nor
opportunities for enquiry, nor capacity to learn without a Guide, which is the
case of the generality of Christians; especially since Religion has been
clogged with such infinite Disputes, and there has been so much art used to
make the plainest truths difficult, obscure, and uncertain, to corrupt the
Christian Faith, and to make it comply with men's sensual Lusts, or secular
Interests. A Guide and Instructor is absolutely necessary, when there are so
many Turnings and Labyrinths, wherein men may lose themselves, and their way to
Heaven.

But though there were no Disputes in Religion, no difficulty in understanding
it, though all men were agreed about the way to Heaven, though the meanest
Christian understood the Mysteries of Christianity, as well as the greatest
Divine, yet there would be constant need of a Spiritual Guide, while men are
apt to be unmindful of their Duty, and careless in the practice of it. The work
of an Evangelical Pastor is not merely to instruct the Ignorant, but to exhort,
to reprove, to admonish, to watch over the Lives and Manners of Christians, to
make seasonable Applications to their Consciences, to administer Comfort to
afflicted Spirits, to excite and quicken the slothful, and to encourage the
fearful and timorous, and to assist and direct men in their Spiritual Warfare,
how to obtain a glorious victory over the World and the Flesh. This is to feed
the Flock of Christ, and to give them Meat in due season, to instruct them in
those things of which they are ignorant, and to put them in mind of those
things which they already know, that their Faith may be turned into a principle
of life and action, and this heavenly Food may be digested into Blood and
Spirits, to the edifying of the Body of Christ in all Christian Graces and
Virtues.

2. Another part of the Ministerial Office consists in Acts of Discipline and
Government; Christ has made these Ministers and Servants, Rulers over his
household. No Society can be preserved, without Order and Government, 5 Ephesians. 23.
which is as absolutely necessary in the Church, 10 John. 14.
as in the State. Christ is the Head of the Church, the Husband, the Shepherd,
the Lord, which are all names of Authority and Power; and the Church is his
Body, his Spouse, his Flock, his Household, and Family, which are names of
Subjection, and denote a regular and orderly Society; but Christ has now left
this World, and does not visibly appear among us, to direct and govern the
Affairs of his Church; he is ascended into Heaven, where he sits at the right
hand of God, and exercises an invisible Power and Providence for the defense
and preservation of his Church on Earth: He governs us by his Laws, and by his
Spirit, and by his Ministers: for when he ascended on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts to men. And he gave some, Apostles: 4 Ephesians. 8, 11, 12,
13.
and some, Prophets: and some, Evangelists: and some, Pastors and Teachers. For
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ.

When our Savior was risen from the dead, 28 Mat. 18, 19, 20.
he tells his Disciples, All power is given unto me both in Heaven and in
Earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, even unto
the end of the World. This is their Commission to preach the Gospel, and to
govern his Church; which was not merely a Personal Commission to the Apostles,
but extends to all their Successors, as appears from Christ's promise to be
with them in the discharge of his Ministerial Authority to the end of the
World. Thus St. John acquaints us, that Christ after his Resurrection appeared
to his Apostles, when they were met together, and said unto them, Peace be unto
you, 20 Joh. 21, 22, 23.
as my Father has sent me, so send I you. And as he had said this, he breathed
on them, and said unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose soever sins ye
remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are
retained. This invested them with Authority, but then the actual communication
of Power, which, especially at that time, was necessary to the discharge of
their Office, was reserved for the descent of the Holy Ghost; and therefore our
Savior commanded them, Not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the
promise of the Father, that is, the gift of the Holy Ghost. For says he, Ye
shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, 1 Act. 4. 8, 9.
and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the Earth.

And accordingly we find, that during the time of the Apostles, the Supreme
Authority of the Church was in their hands, which they committed to their
Successors, and has ever since been exercised by Christian Bishops and
Presbyters, with regard to their different Order and Power. But what is this
Power which Christ has given to his Ministers? They have no Rods, nor Axes, as
secular Princes have, to compel men to the Faith of Christ, and to force their
obedience. No, this is contrary to the Genius and Spirit of Christianity. If
men will be Infidels, if they will be wicked, we cannot help it: 2 Cor. 10. 3,
4, 5.
For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh: For the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, such as earthly Princes use, but mighty
through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, Casting down imaginations,
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

Our Savior in my Text acquaints us what this Power and Authority is; he makes
them Rulers over his Household, to give them meat in due season. This is the
Authority Christ has given to his Ministers, to instruct, to exhort, to
advise, to admonish, to reprove, and that with sharpness too, when there is
occasion for it, according to the power which the Lord has given to
edification, 2 Cor. 13. 10.
and not to destruction; as St. Paul speaks.

But what Authority is this? May not every Christian do the same? Is it not the
duty of us all, as we are able, to instruct, exhort, reprove one another? Yes,
it is; and I would to God it were more generally practiced: but yet every
private Christian cannot do this with the Authority of a Bishop, or a
Gospel-Minister: The Instructions and Exhortations of private Christians, are
acts of Friendship and Charity; and the obligation to it, is that mutual
concernment and sympathy which the Members of the same Body ought to have for
each other: In Gospel Ministers it is an act of Authority, like the Censures of
a Father, a Magistrate, or a Judge.

We do not pretend indeed, as St. Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 1. 24.
to have dominion over your Faith, to exercise a kind of Sovereign Authority,
to oblige you to believe any thing merely because we say it; but yet our
Authority is such, that if in the exercise of our Office we explain the
Articles of Faith and Rules of Life to you, it lays an indispensible Obligation
upon you, carefully to examine what we say, and not to reject it, without plain
and manifest evidence, that what we teach you is not agreeable to the Will of
God revealed in the Scriptures. For when we come in the Name and Authority of
Christ, that man who rejects our Message, without being sure that we exceed our
Commission, rejects the Authority by which we act; and he that despises,
despises not man, but God. It is our Work and our Commission to instruct you,
and it is your Duty to be instructed; and whoever shall wantonly reject any
Doctrines which do not suit with his humor and interest, or oppose some
popular mistakes and prejudices against the Instructions of his Guide, or turn
away his ear from instruction, and heap to himself Teachers, having itching
ears, such a man must give a severe account of this neglect and contempt to the
great Bishop and Shepherd of Souls. While we are careful to discharge our
Office in pursuance of that Trust our Great Master has committed to us, what
our Savior tells his Apostles is true of the meanest of us all; 10 Luke 16.
He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you, despises me: and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

The like may be said of the Exhortations, and Counsels, and Directions, and
Reproofs, of our Spiritual Guides, they carry great Authority with them; they
are not like the private Admonitions of our Friends, who exhort and reprove out
of kindness, and their particular concernment for us: To reject such Counsels
as these, does mightily aggravate our sin and our condemnation, as every thing
does, which makes our sin more wilful and obstinate; but to reject the Counsels
and Reproofs of our Guide, is a new act of disobedience to that Authority which
Christ has set in his Church. Whether you will hear, or whether you will obey,
we must exhort, reprove, advise; and woe be to us, if we do not, and woe be to
those who will not hear, who will not obey. Our great Master looks upon this as
a contempt of his own Authority, and this is all the Authority we have. We
cannot force you to obey our Counsels or Reproofs, but ours and your Master
will severely punish you, if you do not.

In a word, the Instructions, Reproofs, and Censures of Christ's Ministers,
carry such Authority with them, that they can receive into, or shut out of the
Communion of the Church, which is the only visible state of Salvation.
Remission of sins, and eternal Life, is ordinarily to be had only in the
visible Communion of the Church, and therefore the Power of Receiving into the
Church by Baptism, and of Casting out of the Church by Excommunication, which
is the only Authority Christ has given to these Rulers of his Household, to
Receive in and cast out of his Family, is called a Power of Remitting or
Retaining sins, because the forgiveness of Sins is to be had only in the
Communion of the Church, and no man belongs to the invisible Church, who does
not live in Communion with the visible Church, when it may he had.

The Authority of Christ's Ministers is to feed those, who are of his Household,
to give them their meat in due season, and to judge who shall belong to this
Household, who shall be received in, or cast out of Christ's Family: This is the
highest Act of Church Authority on Earth, and the only Sanction of all our
instructions, counsels, and reproofs; and therefore this Authority is not
entrusted with every Gospel-Minister, but is committed to the chief Governors
of the Church, the Bishops who succeed into the ordinary apostolical Power.

II. Let us now consider the due Qualifications which are required in
Gospel Ministers, and they are two: Faithfulness and Prudence, Who is that
Faithful and Wise Servant?

First, Faithfulness: Now Faithfulness in a Servant consists in being true to
his Trust; and when this is applied to Preaching the Gospel, it signifies, that
he is extremely careful to publish the whole Mind and Will of God; which as it
concerns us in this Age, includes these following Rules:

1. To be careful to acquaint our selves with the Will of God, that we may be
Scribes which are instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, 13. Mat. 52.
who are like unto a man that is an householder, which brings forth out of his
treasure things new and old. The Priests lips must preserve Knowledge, but we
must first have it, before we can teach it others; and since none of us now
pretend to immediate Inspirations, this is a work of difficulty and labor, and
requires as much faithfulness in our Studies, as in the Pulpit. It is no
argument of Faithfulness, whatever it may be of Diligence, to run like Ahimaaz
without Tidings, 2 Samuel 18. 22.
to vent some crude and indigested thoughts for the Oracles of God.

2. Faithfulness requires us to preach nothing for the Will of God, but what we
are sure to be so; to deliver no Message, but what we have received in
Commission; not to indulge our own private conjectures and fancies, nor think
to mend and sublimate Religion by Philosophical Speculations, but to content
our selves with the simplicity of the Gospel, to Preach Christ Jesus, and him
Crucified. Nothing has done greater mischief to Religion, than when the very
Teachers of it have been ambitious to be Wise above what is Written. All the
Articles of the Christian Faith, as distinguished from the Principles of Natural
Religion, can be known only by Revelation; and therefore there is no reasoning
about them any farther, than to know what is revealed, and what is not
revealed, is so uncertain, and so useless, that it is not worth the knowing.
Since we preach in the Name, and by the Authority of Christ, we ought not to
instruct our People in any thing but what we have his Authority for, for this
is to exceed our Commission. Other nice Speculations may entertain us in
private Conversation; but when we preach in the Name of Christ, let us only
preach his Gospel, and teach them to observe and do whatsoever he has
commanded us.

3. Faithfulness requires, that we preach the whole Will of God; that we
instruct men in all the Articles of the Christian Faith, especially where there
is any apparent and present danger of a mistake; and that we teach them every
part of their Duty to God and men, especially such Duties as they are most
unwilling to learn, and most averse to practice. This is an essential part of
Faithfulness, and requires no small courage too.

There are no times so bad, no hearers so captious, but they will very well
bear some general commendations of Religion, or some common Topics about
Virtue or Vice; which are of great use too, especially in such a skeptical and
unbelieving Age, as this. But a faithful discharge of our Ministry requires
somewhat more; a particular application to the Consciences of men, according to
their wants and necessities, not so much to consult what will please them, as
what will do them good. It mightily concerns a Gospel-Minister, as far as he
can, to maintain a fair reputation in the World, but a good name is nothing
worth, when we can do no good by it, when we cannot get or maintain a good name
without neglecting our Duty, or betraying the Souls of men. I had a thousand
times rather, that men should reproach and revile me for instructing them in
such Duties, as they cannot with patience hear of, than that they should
commend me for my silence.

It is hard to live in any Age, wherein there are not some popular Errors, or
some popular Vices to be corrected; and it is a very dangerous thing to meddle
with any thing that is popular. But what is danger to that man, who is in a
greater danger by the neglect of his Duty? Shall any man call himself a
Minister of the Gospel, and a Servant of Jesus Christ, and in such an Age, as
we now live in, be ashamed or afraid to cenfure or consute the Errors of Popery
or Fanaticism, or to reprove Schism and Faction, because they are very popular
Vices. Let a man so account of us, 1 Cor. 4, 1, 2, 3.
as the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. Moreover, it
is required in stewards that a man be found faithful. But with me it is a very
small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment: as St. Paul
speaks. When we leave our several Flocks, it will be infinite satisfaction to
us, to be able to say, as St. Paul did to the Asian Bishops; 20. Acts 26, 27.
I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men. For I
have not shunned to declare to you all the counsel of God.

Secondly, Prudence is as necessary in a Gospel-Minister, as Faithfulness is:
By Prudence I do not mean Cunning and Subtilty, artificial Insinuations and
Addresses, which are more like the Arts of Seducers, than of Gospel Ministers,
16 Romans 18.
Who by good words, and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.
Prudence will not allow us in the neglect of any part of our Duty, whatever the
event be; but we must renounce the hidden things of dishonesty, 2 Cor. 4. 2.
not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in
the sight of God.

Wisdom and Prudence, as it is consistent with Faithfulness and Honesty in the
discharge of our Trust, can signify no more but this; To Instruct, Exhort,
Persuade, and perform all the parts and offices of a Gospel-Minister, in such a
manner, as may render our instructions and persuasions most effectual; to take
the most convenient seasons, when men are most apt to be wrought on; to teach
them such things as are of most present use to them; to use such Arguments as
are most likely to prevail; to avoid all unnecessary provocations, when the
Duty it self, which we are to teach them is not the matter of the provocation;
for if men will be provoked with hearing of their Duty, there is no help for
that. Prudence never dispences with any part of our Duty, but directs to the
best way of doing it: a Faithful Servant does what he is commanded, and a Wise
Servant does it in the most effectual manner.

III. The last part of my Text concerns the great Rewards of such Faithful and
Wise Servants; Blessed is that servant. What this Reward is, we are not here
particularly told. All good men, we know, shall be very blessed and happy in
the other World, and we may reasonably presume, that Christ, who is the great
Judge of the World, has reserved some peculiar marks of honor for his
immediate Servants: This he plainly intimates to us, in that distinction he
makes between the reward of a Prophet, and of a righteous man: He that
receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, 10. Mat. 41.
shall receive a prophets reward: and he that receives a righteous man in the
name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward.

Our reward in Heaven will bare some proportion to the nature of our Work, and
to that Service we do for God in this World. Now we cannot do any more
acceptable service, than to serve God in the Gospel of his Son: to use our
utmost endeavors to propagate Religion in the World, and to make other men
wise, and good, and happy. Our Savior himself came into the World on this very
design, and was advanced to the right Hand of Glory and Power, as a reward of
it; 2 Cor. 6. 1.
and those who are workers together with him, as St. Paul speaks, will receive
some proportionable Reward also.

The faithful discharge of this Duty is a work of infinite care and difficulty,
that it made an Apostle himself cry out, Who is sufficient for these things. 2
Cor. 2. 16.
It requires the exercise of great care, and great prudence, and great
patience; it is abundantly enough to employ our whole time and thoughts either
in studying the Will of God, or in attending the public Ministries of
Religion, or in private Addresses and Applications to men who want our Advice
and Counsel; we must contentedly bear all the Affronts and Insolences of bad
men, the Frowardness and Peevishness of many professed Christians, the
Gain-sayings and Contradictions of sinners. We must go on and persevere in our
Work, though our Persons and our Ministry be despised: when we are reviled, 1
Cor. 4. 12, 13.
we must bless: when persecuted, we must suffer: when defamed, we must entreat:
yea though we are made as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all
things. This is not very pleasing to flesh and blood, but the harder the work
is, the greater will our reward be, if we be found faithful and wise Servants.

Nay, there is no Work does so ennoble the Mind as this, and qualify us for an
excellent Reward. No man can faithfully discharge this Work, but it must purge
and refine his Mind, and set him vastly above this World, and the little
Concernments of it: It gives us a more clear distinct comprehensive knowledge
of God and divine things, which is an Angelical perfection of the Mind and
Understanding; and he must be a strange man, who can be so constantly employed
in the Contemplation of God, and the things which relate to another and a
better life, and not find his Soul ravished with those unseen and unspeakable
Glories; who is so constantly employed in taking care of other men's Souls, and
takes no care of his own; who is so frequent in his Devotions, as the very
nature of our Work exacts from us, and not live a most divine and heavenly
life: There are indeed some, who in the most Divine Employment are no great
Examples of such a Divine Conversation; but I fear they will not be found in
the number of these faithful and wise Servants. Whoever heartily applies
himself to the care of Souls, will in the first place take care of his own; and
the faithful discharge of this Duty, will raise us so much above the ordinary
Level and Seize of Christians, as will prepare us for a greater Reward,
and advance us to a more perfect state of Glory.

Nay, that immediate Relation we stand in to Christ, who is the Sovereign Lord
and Judge of the World, if we approve our selves faithful and wise Servants,
will secure us of a more excellent Reward. The Church on Earth and the Church
in Heaven, is but one Church, one Household and Family; and those whom he has
made Rulers of his Household here, to whom he has committed the greatest places
of Trust and Dignity, need not fear being degraded in the other World, if they
adorn their Office, and faithfully discharge their Trust here: And therefore
our Savior tells his Apostles, Verily I say unto you, 19 Mat. 28.
that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall
sit in the Throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging
the twelve Tribes of Israel: that is, that their Reward and Glory in the other
World, should answer to that place of Trust, and Power, and Dignity, which they
had in the Church on Earth; and this Promise is no more peculiar to the
Apostles, than their Office was.

In a word, if we consider what the state of the other World is, and who is
King there, that it is the blessed Jesus, our Great High Priest, King of Salem,
or the new Jerusalem, and Priest of the most High God, how mean and
contemptible soever our Office is thought here, we need not doubt but the Scene
will be mightily changed, when we come into that Kingdom where the King is a
High Priest.

Let this then, beloved Brethren of the Clergy, be a mighty Encouragement to us
to be very diligent and faithful in the discharge of this great Trust; whatever
Difficulties we meet with, whatever Scorns, Reproaches, or Sufferings, it is
but expecting a while, and our Lord will come, and his Reward is with him: and
blessed, for ever blessed, is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall
find so doing.

Yea blessed, for ever blessed, as my Text gives us reason to hope, is this our
dear Brother, whose Remains lie here before us, who, when his Lord came, was
found thus doing. We may lament the loss of so kind a Relation, so true a
Friend, so faithful a Pastor, and Fellow Laborer, according to the several
interests we had in him; but he, blessed Soul, has fought a good Fight, and
finished his Course, and kept the Faith, and is now gone to receive a Crown of
Righteousness, a Crown of Immortality and Glory. He is now gone to that great
Bishop and Shepherd of Souls, whose Flock he has so carefully and diligently
fed, and whose wandering and straggling Sheep he has reduced into the Fold. To
that kind Shepherd who laid down his life for his Sheep, and therefore will not
fail to reward those who have spent their lives, and were ready to have
sacrificed them too, for the service of Souls.

When we speak of so great a man, it is below his Character to mention such
things as would be thought considerable Seize in meaner persons; though
indeed a truly great man does nothing meanly. A great Mind gives a peculiar
grace and decency to common Actions, as it was easy to observe in his very
Mirth and freest Humors, that he never gave the Reins out of his hands, but
governed himself by the strictest Rules of Prudence and Religion.

But I shall confine my self to the subject of my Text, and consider him only
as a faithful and wise Steward, and therefore have very little to add; for I
doubt not, but you who knew him, especially you who have enjoyed the benefit of
his Ministry, and have lived under his Care and Conduct, have already applied
what I have discoursed on this Argument, to your deceased Pastor; and would I
have chosen any particular man to have drawn the Character by, of a wise and
faithful Steward, there are not many men I should sooner have thought on, than
Dr. Calamy to have been the Pattern.

That he did take care to give you Meat in due season, I need not tell you,
because you all know it. If Preaching in season and out of season, if public
Instructions and private Applications, where they were needful or desired, be
to feed the Flock of Christ, and to give Meat to his Household and Family, this
he did, and that very faithfully and wisely too.

In the first place, he took care to inform himself, and to furnish his own
Mind with all useful knowledge; and his constant Preaching, though without any
vain affectation of Learning, which serves only to amuse, not to instruct, did
sufficiently discover both his natural and acquired Abilities. He had a clear
and distinct apprehension of things, an easy and manly Rhetoric, strong Sense
conveyed to the mind in familiar words, good Reasons inspired with a decent
Passion, which did not only teach, but move and transport the Hearers, and at
the same time gave both light and heat: for indeed he was a good man, which is
necessary to make a good Preacher; he had an inward vital sense of Religion,
and that animated his discourses with the same Divine Passions which he felt in
himself.

He did not entertain his Hearers with School-Subtilties, or a coniectural
Divinity, with such thin and airy Speculations, as can neither be seen, nor
felt, nor understood, but his chief care was to explain the great Articles of
Faith, and Rules of Life, what we must believe, and how we must live, that we
may be eternally happy. And he did; as a faithful Servant ought to do, as he
declared a little before his death, that he never preached any thing, but what
he himself firmly believed to be true.

I need not tell you what a troublesome World we have lived in for some years
past, such Critical times as would try the Principles and Spirits of men; when
a prevailing Faction threatened both Church and State, and the fears of Popery
were thought a sufficient Justification of the most illegal and irreligious
methods to keep it out; when it was scandalous to speak a word either for the
King or the Church, when cunning men were silent, and those who affected
Popularity swam with the Stream; then this great and good man durst reprove
Schism and Faction, durst teach men to conform to the Church, and to obey and
honor the King; durst vindicate the despised Church of England, and the hated
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, though the one was thought to favor Popery, and
the other to introduce Slavery; but he was above the powerful Charms of Names,
and liked Truth never the worse, because it was miscalled. His public Sermons
preached in those days, and printed by public Authority, are lasting Proofs of
this, and yet he was no Papist neither, but durst reprove the errors of
Popery, when some others, who made the greatest noise and outcry about it,
grew wise and cautious. This was like a truly honest and faithful Servant, to
oppose the growing Distempers of the Age, without any regard either to unjust
Censures, or apparent Danger. And yet he did not needlessly provoke any man; he
gave no hard words, but thought it severe enough to confute men's errors without
upbraiding or reproaching their persons. His Conversation was courteous and
affable to all men, soft and easy, as his Principles were stubborn; he could
yield any thing but the Truth, and bear with any thing but the Vices of men. He
would indeed have been the Wonder of his Age, had he not lived in such an Age,
as; thanks be to God, can show many such Wonders, and yet in such an Age as
this he made an Illustrious Figure; though he had his Equals, he had not many
Superiors.

Thus he lived, and thus this good man died, for thus he was found doing when
his Lord came. The first symptoms of his Distemper seized him just before his
last Sermon at White Hall, but gave him so much respite as to take his leave of
the World in an excellent Discourse of Immortality, which he speaks of with
such a sensible gust and relish, as if his Soul had been then upon the wing,
and had some fore-tast of those joys it was just a going to possess. And indeed
he encountered the apprehensions of Death, like one who believed and hoped for
Immortality; he was neither over-fond of living, nor afraid to die. He received
the Supper of our Lord, professed his Communion with the Church of England, in
which he had lived, and in which he now died, and having recommended his Soul
to God, he quietly expected how he would dispose of him.

But I must not forget to tell you, that he died like a true and faithful
Pastor, with a tender care and affection for his Flock. When he imposed this
unwelcome Office upon me, he told me, he did not desire any Praises of himself,
but that I would give some good advice to his People, who, said he, are indeed
a very kind and loving People. And this was not the first nor the only time I
have heard him own not only your kind reception of him at first, but the
repeated and renewed expressions of your affection, which did signally manifest
it self in his late Sickness, and now accompanies him to the Grave. A
Character, which to your honor I speak it, you have now made good for several
successions, and which, I hope, you will never forfeit.

But what that good counsel is, he would have me give you, he told me not; and
therefore I can only guess at his intentions in this. Were he now present to
speak to you, I believe he could not give you better counsel than he has
already done: and therefore my advice to you is,

1. To remember those Counsels and Exhortations, which you have heard from your
deceased Pastor. Though the Sower be removed, yet let that immortal Seed, that
Word of Life which he has sown, live and fructify in your hearts, and bring
forth the blessed Fruits of Righteousness. He has showed you the plain way to
Heaven, have a care you do not forget it, have a care you do not wander out of
it. He has recommended the Communion of the Church of England to you. He has
taught you to be Loyal to your Prince, and to be true to your Religion; take
care then, that neither your Religion destroy your Loyalty, nor your Loyalty
corrupt your Religion: remember that beloved person, whose memory is dear and
sacred to you, was neither a Rebel, a Papist, nor a Fanatic.

2. Since you have lost your Guide, a faithful and a prudent Guide, and the
choice of a Successor is in your selves, be very careful, as the concernment
of your Souls requires you should be, of your Choice. Consider what an Age we
live in, which requires an experienced and skilful Pilot to steer a secure and
steady course. Have a care of dividing into Factions and Parties; let not mere
private Interests or Friendships govern you; if it be possible, admit of no
Competitions, much less of Pulpit-Combats, which do oftener occasion lasting and
fatal Divisions, than end in a wise Choice. Remember what a succession you have
had of Great and Good Men in this Place, and let it be your ambition still to
equal and outdo it, if you can.

And now I shall conclude with one word to you my Brethren of the Clergy. We
have lost a faithful and diligent Labourer in Gods Vineyard, in a time when we
could ill have spared him; let us then, who still survive, double our
diligence, and express a greater Zeal and Concernment in the defense of
Religion, and in the care of Souls. Let us remember that we are all mortal, and
how little time we have to work in, we know not; but let us so improve the
remainder of our days, that when our Lord comes, he may own us for faithful and
wise Servants, and bestow on us a Crown of Righteousness and Immortality. Which
God of his infinite mercy grant, through our Lord Jesus Christ; To whom, with
the Father and the Holy Spirit, be Honor, and Glory, and Power, now and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
A Sermon Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, by W. Sherlock D. D.
Price 6 d. A Vindication of that Sermon from a Popish Remonstrance, 4o. Price 6
d. Both sold by John Amery at the Peacock in Fleetstreet.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation. Price 6 d. Doctrines and Practices of
the Church of Rome truly Represented, in Answer to a Papist Misrepresented and
Represented. Both printed for W. Rogers.


