THE GRATEFUL SERVANT.

A Comedy.

As it was Presented with good Applause in the private House in Drury Lane.

By Her Majesty's Servants.

Written by James Shirley, Gent.



LONDON, Printed for William Leake, at the Crown in Fleetstreet, between the
two Temple Gates.

To the Right Honorable, FRANCIS EARL of RUTLAND, etc.
My most honored LORD,
WHen the Age declineth from her primitive virtue, and the Silken wits of the
Time, (that I may borrow from our acknowledged Master, learned JOHNSON)
disgracing Nature, and harmonious Poesy, are transported with many illiterate
and prodigious births, it is not safe to appear without protection. Among all
the names of Honor, this Comedy owes most gratitude to your Lordship, whose
clear testimony to me was above a Theater, and I applaud the dexterity of my
Fate, that has so well prepared a Dedication, whither my only ambition would
direct it. I am not pale, to think it is now exposed to your deliberate
censure; for it is my security, that I have studied your Lordships Candor, and
know you imitate the Divine nature which is merciful above offense. Go on
great Lord, and be the volume of our English honor, in whom while others,
invited by their birth, and quickened with ambitious emulation, read and study
their principles, let me be made happy enough to admire, and devote my self,

Your Lordships most humble creature: James Shirley.

Persons.
DUke of Savoy, Lover of Leonora; and in her supposed loss, of Cleona.
Lodwick, his Brother, wild and lascivious. Foscari, a noble Count, and Lover of
Cleona. Grimundo, a Lord, and once Governor to Lodwick. Noble men of Savoy.
Soranzo. Giotto. Fabrichio.
Piero, Companion of Lodwick. Jacomo, a foolish ambitious Steward to Cleona.
Valentio, a religious man. Abbot. Gent. Servants. Satyrs.
Leonora, the Princess of Millan, but disguised as a Page to Foscari, and
called Dulcino. Astella, a virtuous Lady, Wife to Lodwick, but neglected.
Belinda, Wife to Grimundo. Cleona, Foscari's Mistress. Ladies. Nymphs.
The Scene SAVOY.

THE GRATEFUL SERVANT.
ACTVS 1.
SCAENA 1.
Enter Soranzo, Giotto. Giotto. THe Duke is moved.

Sor. The news displeased him much.

Giot. And yet I see no reason why he should engage so great affection to the
Daughter
Of Millan; he nere saw her.

Sor. Fame does paint
Great beauties, and her picture (by which Princes
Court one another) may beget a flame
In him to raise this passion.

Giot. Trust a pencill.
I like not that State-woing: see his Brother Enter Lodwicke.
Has left him. Pray my Lord how is it with
His Highness?

Lodw. Somewhat calmer, Love I think
Will kill neither of us: although I be
No Stoic, yet I thank my Stars I have
A power o'r my affection, if he will not
Tame his, let it melt him into Sonnets,
He will prove the more loving Prince to you.
Get in again, and make wise speeches to him,
There is Aristotle's Ghost still with him,
My Philosophical Governor that was:
He wants but you two, and a pair of Spectacles,
To see what folly it is to love a woman
With that wicked resolution to marry her.
Though he be my elder Brother, and a Duke,
I ha more wit: when there is a death of women
I may turn fool, and place one of their Sex
Nearer my heart: farewell, commend me to
My Brother, and the Councel-Table.
Exit
Sor. Still the same wild Prince, there needs no character
Where he is, to express him.

Giot. He said truth;
I doubt there is no room for one, whom he:
Should place in's heart, and honor.

Sor. His own Lady
All pity her misfortune, both were too
Unripe for Hymen, 'twas the old Dukes act,
And in such marriages hearts seldom meet
When they grow older.

Giot. Wherefore would the Duke
Marry his young son first?

Sor. The walk of Princes,
To make provision betimes for them:
They can bequath small legacy, knowing the heir
Carries both state and fortune for himself,
His fate's before him, here comes Grimundo!

Enter Grimundo. Grim. The Duke is recollected, where is the Prince*

Sor. Gone.
I would he were returned once to himself.

Giot. He has too soon forgot your precepts.

Sor. Your example might still be a Lecture,

Grim. I did not deceive the old Dukes trust
While I had power to manage him,
He Is now past my tuition, but to the Duke --
Is it not strange my Lord, that the young Lady
Of Millan, should be forced to marry now, with
Her Uncle?

Giot. They Are unequal.

Sor. It Is unlawful,

Grim. It Is a trifle, reasons of State they urge
Against us, least their Dukedom by this match,
Be subject unto Savoy, for the scruple
Of Religion, they are in hope that
A Dispensation may be procured
To quit exceptions, and by this means
They shall preserve their Principality,
In The name and blood, so reports Fabrichio
Whom the Duke employed for treaty: how now?

Enter Gentleman. Gent. The Duke calls for you my Lords.

Ciot. We attend, Ha? he is coming forth.

Enter Duke and Fabrichio. Sor. His looks are cheerful.

Duke. Fubrichio?

Fabr. My Lord.

Duke. We will to Tennis.

Fabr. What your Grace please. --

Duke. Grimundo?
Because you take no pleasure in such pastimes,
Your contemplation may busy it self with that book.

Grim. Book my Lord, it is

Duke. Leonora's picture, a fair Table Book,
You may without offense to your young wife
Look on a picture.
Millan and we are parted, our breast wears
Again his natural temper, allow me pray
The excuse of common frailty, to be moved
At strangeness of this news.

Giot. Your Highness said, You would to Tennis.

Duke. And it is time enough,
We have the day before us: some Prince Grimundo
In such a case as this would have been angry,
Angry indeed, thrown of cold language, and
Called it a high, and loud affront, whose stirring
Imagination would have weakened Death,
And by a miserable war, have taught
Repentance, to a pair of flourishing States,
Such things there have been?

Sor. But your grace is wise --

Duke. Nay, do not flatter now, I do not Court
Your praise so much, I speak but what our stories
Mention, if they abuse not soft posterity:
I was not come to tell you, what my thoughts,
With a strong murmr prompt me too.

Grim. We hope --

Duke. Ye fear, and do not know me yet, my actions
Shall clear your jealousy, l'me reconciled
At home, and while I cherisht a peace here,
Abroad I must continue it, there are
More Ladies in the world?

Fabr. Most true my Lord.

Duke. And as attractive great, and glorious women,
Are there not, ha?

Sor. Plenty my Lord in the world.

Duke. l'the world, within the confines of our Dukedom
In Savoy, are there not?

Grim. In Savoy too.
Many choice beauties, but your birth my Lord --

Duke. Was but an honor purchased by another,
It might have been thy chance.

Grim. My Father was -- No Duke.

Duke. 'Twas not thy fault, nor is it my virtue,
That I was born when the fresh Sun was rising,
So came with greater shadow into life,
Than thou or he.

Grim But royal Sir be pleased --

Duke. No more, wear not ignorant, you may
Take away this distinction, and allege
In your grave wisdoms, specious arguments,
For your alliance with some foreign Prince,
But we have weighed their promising circumstance,
And find it only a device, that may
Serve time, and some dark ends, a mere state trick,
To disguise hatred, and is empty of
Those benefits, it seems to bring along:
Give me a Lady born in my obedience,
Whose disposition, will not engage
A search into the nature of her Climate,
Or make a scrutiny into the Stars:
Whose language is mine own, and will not need
A smooth Interpreter, whose virtue is
Above all titles, though her birth or fortune,
Be a degree beneath us, such a Wife
Were worth a thousand far fetched Brides, that have
More state, and less Devotion.

Fabr. If your Highness --

Duke. Come you shall know our purpose, in the last
We obay'd your directions, not without
Our free and firm allowance of the Lady
Whom we will forget, it will become our duties,
Follow us now, we have not been unthrifty
In our affections, and I must tell you
Here we are fixed to marry.

Grim. We are subjects,
And shall solicit Heaven, you may find one
Worthy your great acceptance.

Duke. We are confident,
And to put off the cloud we walk in, know
We are resolved to place all love and honor
Upon Cleona. Nor is it a new affection, we but cherish
Some seeds, which heretofore her virtue had
Scattered upon our heart.

Grim. We cannot be
Ambitious of a Lady, in your own
Dominion, to whom we shall more willingly
Prostrate our duties.

Soran. She Is a Lady of
A flowing sweetness, and the living virtue
Of many noble Ancestors.

Giot. In whom
Their fortunes meet, as their Prophetic souls
Had taught them thrifty providence, for this
Great honor you intend her.

Duke. We are pleased,
And thank your general vote:
You then shall straight prepare our visit, bear our
Princely respects, and say we shall take pleasure
To be her Guests to day: nay lose no time,
We shall the sooner quit the memory
Of Leonoraes Image.

Enter Lodwick. Soran. The Prince your brother Sir?

Duke. Withdraw, but be not at too much distance.

Lodwick. You Are welcome.

Lodw. I shall know that by my success, I want
A thousand Crowns, a thousand Crowns.

Duke. For what?

Lod. Why will these foolish questions ne'e be left,
Is It not sufficient I would borrow em,
But you must still capitulate with me?
I would put em to that use they were ordained for;
You might have well have ask't me, when I meant
To pay you again.

Duke. That to some other men
Might ha been necessary.

Lodw. And you wo'not
Do that, I have another easy suit to you.

Duke. What is it?

Lodw. A thing of nothing; I would entreat you
To part with this same transitory honor,
This trifle called a Dukedom, and retire
Like a good Christian Brother, into some
Religious house, it would be a great ease to you,
And comfort to your friends, especially
To me, that would not trouble you with the noise
Of money thus, and I could help it.

Duke. It Is a kind and honest motion, out of Charity,
Mere Charity, so I must needs accept it -- Why?
I Will only marry, and get a boy, or two,
To govern this poor trifle, for I Am bound
In duty, to provide for my succession.

Lodw. What do you make of me, cannot I serve?

Duke. You that propound a benefit for my soul,
Wo'not neglect your own I know: we will both
Turn Friars together?

Lodw. And be lousy?

Duke. Any thing.

Lodw. I shall not have a thousand Crowns?

Duke. Thou shall.

Lodw. Then be a duke still; come, lets love, and be
Fine Princes: and thou had but two or three
Of my conditions, by this hand I would not
Care and thou were immortal, so I might
Live with thee, and enjoy this worlds felicity.

Duke. T'hast put me in tune, how shals be very merry
Now in the instant?

Lodw. Merry?

Duke. Yes.

Lodw. Merry indeed?

Duke. Yes.

Lodw. Follow me.
I Will bring you to a Lady.

Duke. To a Whore.

Lodw. That is a little the courser name.

Duke. And can you play the Pander for me?

Lodw. A toy, a toy.
What can a man do less for any brother?
Th'ordinary complement now a days, with great ones,
We prostitute our sisters with less scruple
Than eating flesh on vigils; it is out of fashion
To trust a servant with our private sins;
The greater tie of blood, the greater faith,
And therefore Parents have been held of late
The safest wheels on which the childrens lust
Has hurried into act, with supple greatness.
Nature does wear a virtuous charm, and will
Do more in soft compassion to the sin,
Than gold or swelling promises.

Duke. O Lodwick!
These things do carry horror, he is lost
I fear; no I ha thought of something else,
You shall with me to a Lady.

Lodw. With all my heart.

Duke. Unto my Mistress.

Lodw. Your Mistress, who is that?

Duke. The fair Cleona.

Lodw. She is honest.

Duke. Yes, were she otherwise, she were not worth my visit;
Not to lose circumstance, I love her.

Lodw. How?

Duke. Honestly.

Lodw. You do not mean to marry her?

Duke. It shall not be my fault if she refuse
To be a Duchess.

Lodw. A'my Conscience,
You are in earnest.

Duke. As I hope to thrive in desires, come
You shall bear me company, and witness
How I woe her.

Lodw. I commend
Your nimble resolution; then a Wise
Must be had somewhere, would y'ad mine, to cool
Your appetite, take your own course, I can
But pray for you; the thousand Crowns --

Duke. Upon condition, you will not refuse, to Accompany. --

Lodw. Your Caroach quickly -- stay --
Now I think better on it, my Wife lives with her,
They are companions, I had forgot that?

Duke. She Will take it kindly.

Lodw. It were enough to put her
Into conceit, I come in love to her;
My Constitution will not bear it.

Duke. What? Not see her?

Lodw. Yet a thousand Crowns -- God buy
Condemn me to my wife.
Exit.
Duke. Ye hear Gentlemen?

Grim. With grief my Lord, and wonder at your sufferance.

Duke. He is our Brother, we are confident
Though he be wild he loves us, 'twill become
Us to pray and leave him to a miracle,
But to our own affair.
Love and thy golden Arrow, we shall try,
How you will decide our second Destiny.
Exeunt.
Enter Foscari with a Letter. Fosc. A kiss, and then it is sealed; this she
would know
Better than the impression, which I made,
With the rude signet; it is the same she left
Upon my lip, when I departed from her,
And I have kept it warm still, with breath,
That in my prayers have mentioned her.

Enter Dulcino. Dulc. My Lord?

Fosc. Dulcino welcome: Thou Art soon returned.
How do thou like the City?

Dulc. It Is a heap of handsome building.

Fosc. And how the people?

Dulc. My conversation has not age enough
To speak of them, more than they promise well
In their aspect: but I have argument
Enough in you, my Lord, to fortify
Opinion, they are kind, and hospitable to Strangers.

Fosc. Thy indulgence to my wound,
Which owes a Cure unto thy pretty Surgery,
Has made thee too much Prisoner to my chamber,
But we shall walk abroad.

Dulc. It was my duty?
Since you received it in my cause; and could
My blood have wrought it sooner, it had been
Your balmy Fountain.

Fosc. Noble youth, I thank thee. Enter Servant.
How now, did speak with him?

Serve. I had the happiness, My Lord, to meet him
Waiting upon the Duke abroad: he bid me
Make haste with the remembrance of his Service:
He Will bring his own joys with him instantly,
To welcome your return.
^

Fosc. Did thou reqnest
His secrecy?

Ser. I did, he promised silence.

Fosc. So, I Will expect him, thou art sad Dulcino,
I prophecy thou shall have cause, to bless
The minute, that first brought us to acquaintance.

Dulc. Do not suspect my Lord, I am so wicked,
Not to do that already, you have saved
My life, and therefore have deserved that duty.

Fosc. Name it no more, I mean another way.

Dulc. It is not in your power, to make me Richer,
With any benefit, shall succeed it, though
I should live ever with you.

Fosc. I require,
Not so much gratitude.

Dulc. There is no way
Left for my hope, to do you any service,
Near my preserving, but by adding one
New favor, to a suit, which I would name.

Fosc. To me, I prithee speak, it must be something
I can deny thee.

Dulc. It Is an humble suit,
You license my departure.

Fosc. Whither?

Dulc. Any whither.

Fosc. Do you call this a way to do me service?

Dulc. It is the readiest I can study Sir;
To tarry were but to increase my debt,
And waste your favors; in my absence, I
May publish, how much virtue I have found
In Savoy, and make good unto your fame.
What I do owe you here, this shall survive you,
For I will speak the story with that truth,
And strength of passion, it shall do you honor,
And dwell upon your name sweeter than Myrrh,
When we are both dead?

Fosc. Thou have art, to move
In all things, but in this, change thy desire,
And I Will deny thee nothing; do not urge
Thy unkind departure, thou have met perhaps,
With some that have deceived thee with a promise,
Won with thy pretty looks and presence; but
Trust not a great man, most of them dissemble,
Pride, and Court-cunning has betrayed their faith,
To a secure Idolatry, their soul
Is lighter than a complement; take heed,
They Will flatter thy too young ambition,
Feed thee with names, and then like subtle Chimists
Having extracted, drawn thy spirit up,
Laugh, they have made thee miserable.

Dulc. Let
No jealousy my Lord, render me so
Unhappie, that preferments or the flatteries
Of any great man has seduced my will
To leave you.

Fosc. Still I suspect thy safety?
And thou may thus deceive me, it may be,
Some wanton Lady has beheld thy face,
And from her eyes shot Cupids into thine.
Trust not the innocence of thy soul too far,
For though their bosoms carry whiteness, think,
It is not snow, they dwell in a hot Climate,
The Court, where men are but deceitful shadows,
The women, walking flames; what if this Lady
Bestow a wealthy Carkanet upon thee,
Another give thee Wardrobes, a third promise
A Chain of Diamonds, to deck thy youth,
It Is to buy thy virtue from thee, and when
Thy outside thrives, upon their treacherous bounty
The outstarve at heart, and lust will leave thy body
Many unpitied Ruins, thou art young --

Dulc. There is no fear my Lord, that I shall take
Such wicked courses, and I hope you see not
Any propension in my youth, to sin
For pride, or wantonness.

Fosc. Indeed I do not,
But being my boy so young, and beautiful,
Thou art apt to be seduced.

Dulc. Believe me Sir,
I will not serve the greatest Prince on earth
When I leave you.

Fosc. Thou shall not serve me, I
Will make thee my companion.

Dulc. No Reward,
Though just, should buy the freedom I was born with,
Much less base ends, if I but meet again
That good man, who in Reverence to his habit,
The thieves let go before your happy valor
Came to my Rescue.

Fosc. He that was your Conduct
From Millan, for so -- if I remember
You named a Father, what could he advantage
Your fortune, were he present, more, than with
Religious Counsel?

Dulc. I did trust him Sir,
As being the (...)asurer, with that
Would make me welcome in Savoy, and
I know he will be faithful, when we meet.
For his sake let me beg you would discharge
A worthless Servant, that inquest of him --

Fosc. No more, to cut off all unwelcom motives,
I charge thee by thy Love, thy Gratitude,
Thy life preserved, which but to stay thee here,
I would not name again; urge no consent
From me, to thy departure, I have now
Use of thy faith, thou wo't not run away;
I have employment for thee, such a one
As shall not only pay my services,
But leave me in arrerage to thy love.
Receive this letter. Enter Grimundo.
Let me embrace thee with a spreading arm.

Grim. I have dispensed with my attendance on
The Duke, to bid you welcome Sir from death;
Fame so had couz'nd our belief, but thus
She has made you the more precious.

Fosc. Then I prospered,
If I may call it so, for I procured
That Rumor to be spread, excuse a minute,
I Will tell thee all my Counsels, I need not
Waste any instructions on thee Dulcino,
For the conveyance of this paper, let me
Commend it to thy care, it is to my Mistress,
Conceal my lodgings, and do this for him
Will study noble Recompense.

Dulc. You command me.
Exit.
Grim. What pretty youth is that? sure I have seen
That face before.

Fosc. Never; I brought him first
To Savoy, having rescued him from the
Bandetti, in my passage ore the Confines:
Is It not a sweet-fac'd thing? there are some Ladies
Might change their beauties with him.

Grim. And gain by it.

Fosc. Nay, to his shape he has as fine a Soul,
Which graceth that perfection.

Grim. You ha not
Been long acquainted with him?

Fosc. I have skill
In Phisnomy: believe my Character,
He Is full of excellent sweetness.

Grim. You express him
Passionately.

Fosc. His virtue will deserve
More praise, he suffers sit for love, in that
He is a Gentleman; for never could
Narrow and earthly minds be capable
Of Loves impression, or the injury --
He willingly forsook his friends and Country,
Because unkindly for unworthie ends,
They would have forced him marry against his heart,
He told me so himself, and it were sin
Not to believe him: but omitting these,
How fares the best of Ladies, my Cleona?

Grim. Your Cleona?

Fosc. Mine, she is in affection,
She is not married?

Grim. No.

Fosc. She is in health?

Grim. Yes.

Fosc. There is something in thy looks, I cannot
Read, be thy own gloss, and make me know
That doubtful Text, to whom has she given up
The hope of my felicity, her heart,
Since my too fatal absence?

Giot. Unto none,
Within the circle of my knowledge.

Fosc. Then
I am renewed again, may thy tongue never
Know sorrows accent.

Grim. Will you presently.
Visit her?

Fosc. I have sent a letter, to
Certify, I am still her loving servant.

Grim. No matter, we'll be there before the boy,
There is necessity, if you knew all:
Come lets away.

Fosc. Again thou do afflict
My Soul with jealousy, if she have still
The clear possession of her heart.

Grim. But you are
Dead Sir, remember that.

Fosc. I shall be living,
And soon enough present my self her fresh
And active Lover.

Grim. If the Duke be not
Before you.

Fosc. How?

Grim. The Duke, it is so resolved,
Your Rival, if you still affect Cleona,
Within this hour, he means his first solicit
And personal siege; loose not your self with wonder,
If you neglect this opportunity,
She having firm opinion of your death,
It will not be a miracle, if the Title
of Duchess be a strong temptation
To a weak woman.

Fosc. I must thank your love,
And counsel, but for this time disingage
Your further stay with me, the Duke may miss you,
Preserve his favor, and forget me in
Your conference, I would be still concealed;
Let me consider on my fate, again
I thank you, and dismiss you.

Grim. Quiet thoughts
Dwell in your breast, in all things I obey you;
You know you have my heart.

Nosc. She Is but a woman:
Yet how shall I be able to accuse her
With any justice, when she thinks me dead.
The Duke, I must do something, I am full
Of discord, and my thoughts are fighting in me.
From our own Army must arise one fear,
When Love it self is turned a Mutineer.

ACTUS. 2.
SCAENA. 2.
Enter Jacome, the Steward, and Servants. Jac. So, so, yet more perfume, y' are
sweet Servingmen, make every corner of the house smoke, bestir your selves,
every man know his Province, and be officious to please my Lady, according to
his talent; have you furnished out the banquet?


Serve. Most Methodicallie.


Jac. It Is well, here should have been a fresh suit of Arras, but no matter,
these bear the age well, let them hang.


Serve. And there were a Mask to entertain his Highness?


Jac. Hang Masks, let every conceit show his own face, my Lady would not
disguise her entertainment, and now I talk of disguising, where is the Butler?


Butl. Here Sir.


Jac. Where Sir? it is my Ladies pleasure that you be drunk to day, you will
deal her Wine abroad the more liberally among the Dukes servants, you are two
tall Fellows, make good the credit of the Butterie, and when you are drunk, I
will send others to relieve you: Go to your stations, if his Grace come hither
a Suitor to my Lady, as we have some cause to suspect, and after marry her, I
may be a great man, and ride upon a Reverend Moyle by patent, there is no end
of my preferment; I did once teach my Lady to dance, she must then teach me to
rise: for indeed it is just, that only those, who get their living by their
legs, should ride upon a Foot-cloth.


Serve. Here Is a young Gentleman desires to speak with my Lady.


Jac. More young Gentlemen? tell him I am busy.


Serve. With my Lady --


Jac. Busy with my Lady Sir?


Serve. Would speak with my Lady Sir?


Jacom. I ha not done with my Lady my self yet, he shall stay, it is for my
Ladies State, no time to interrupt my Lady; but now? I Will know his business,
and taste it for my Lady; if I like it, she shall hear more, but bid him come
to me, methinks I talk like a peremptory Statesman already, I shall quickly
learn to forget my self when I am in great office; I will oppress the Subject,
flatter the Prince, take bribes a both sides, do right to neitber, serve heaven
as far as my profit will give me leave, and tremble only at the summons of a
Parliament.

Enter Dulcino. Hum, a Page, a very Page, one that would wriggle and prefer
himself to be a Wag, it is so, have you any letter of commendations?


Dulc. I have a Letter Sir.

Jac. Let me see the complexion of the face, has it a handsome
Title Page, is it Stilo novo?

Dulc. I have command Sir, to deliver it
To none but to my Lady.

Jac. A forward Youth, I like him, he is not modest, I will assist his
preferment, to engage him to my faction, a special Courtpolicie, see my Lady.


Enter Cleona, Astella, Belinda. Cleona. Yet stay Belinda --

Bell. I beseech you Madam
Allow excuse to my abrupt departure.
There is a business of much consequence,
And which you will not mourn to see effected.
Besides the duty that I owe my Lord,
Compells me to it Madam.

Cleon. Well, but that
We are acquainted with your virtue, this
Would move suspicion you were not in
Charity with the Duke.

Bell. You are pleasant Madam.

Cleon. You are severe to bind yourself too strictly
From Court and entertainments, sure your Lord
Should chide you for it.

Astel. If it please you stay,
Your Ladyship and I Will converse together,
My unkind Fate has indisposed me,
To these State Ceremonies too.

Bell. You will oblige me by your pardon?

Cle. Use your pleasure.

Ast. Nay you shall give me leave a little further,
Here I am useless.
Exeunt Astella, Belinda.
Jac. May it please you Madam,
This pretty Gentleman has a suit to you,
And I in his behalf; he will be serviceable
And active in his place, a friend of mine.

Dulc. Your Steward Madam is too full of zeal
To do me a preferment, but I have
No other ambition, than to commend
This paper to your white hands.

Jac. Never doubt,
It Is done, be bold and call me fellow.

Cleon. Be
You circumspect I pray, that all things have
Their perfect shape and order to receive
The Duke: you know our pleasure, not to spare
Or cost or study to delight his highness.

Jac. I hope I have not been your Steward so long,
But I know how to put your Ladyship
To cost enough without study.
She reads.
Cleon. Shall I credit
So great a bliss? the date is fresh, Foscari
Whom I thought dead? give him five hundred Crowns*

Jac. We will divide em.

Cleon. Stay.

Jac. You need not bid,
I use to make em stay, and long enough
Ere they receive such bounties.

Cleon. Treasure is
Too cheap a payment for so rich a message.

Jac. This is the right Court largess.

Cleon. The day breaks glorious to my darkened thoughts,
He lives, he lives yet; cease ye amorous fears,
More to perplex me: prithee speak sweet Youth,
How fares my Lord? upon my Virgin heart
I Will build a flaming Altar, to offer up
A thankful sacrifice for his Return
To life, and me; speak and increase my comforts:
Is he in perfect health?

Dulc. Not perfect Madam, until you bless him with
The knowledge of your constancy.

Cleon. O get thee wings and fly then,
Tell him my love does burn like vestal fire,
Which with his memory, richer than all spices,
Dispersed odors round about my soul,
And did refresh it when 'twas dull and sad,
With thinking of his absence.

Jac. This is strange,
My Lady is in love with him.

Cleon. Yet stay,
Thou go too soon away, where is he, speak?

Dulc. He gave me no Commission for that Lady,
He will soon save that question by his presence.

Cle. Time h'as no feathers, he walks now on crutches,
Relate his gesture when he gave thee this,
What other words, did mirth smile on his brow,
I would not for the wealth of this great world,
He should suspect my faith, what said he prithee?

Dulc. He said, what a warm lover, whom desire
Makes eloquent could speak.

Jac. I have found it,
That boy comes from the Duke, that letter love,
'Twill be a match, and please your Ladyship --

Cleo. Forbear your Ceremonies, what needs all this
Preparation, if the Duke vouchsafe
His person for my guest, duty will teach me,
To entertain him without half this trouble;
I Will have no Riot for his Highness.

Jac. Hum?
How Is this?

Cleo. Be less officious, you forget --
Sweet Youth, go forward with thy story.

Jac. Hum?
This is a Fayrie, and the Devil sent him
To make my Lady mad, 'twere well to try
Whether he be flesh and blood, ha, I Will pinch him first.

Cleo. How now?
He pinches Dulcino.
Jac. My care shall see nothing be wanting, for
Your honor, and the Dukes.

Cleo. Your place I see,
Is better than your manners, go too, be
Less troublesome, his Highness brings intents
Of grace, not burden to us, know your duty.

Jac. So, I were best keep my self warm with my own office, while I may, the
tide is turned I see within two minutes, here was nothing but look to the
Gallerie, perfume the Chambers, what Music for the Duke, a Banquet for the
Duke, now, be less officious, We'll have no Riot for his Highness, it is this
Urchin h'as undone all our preferment.


Cle. The Suns loved flower, that shuts his yellow Curtain,
When he declineth, opens it again
At his fair rising, with my parting Lord,
I closed all my delights, till his approach,
It shall not spread it self.

Enter Gentleman. Gent. Madam the Duke?

Cleon. Already.

Enter Astella and Ladies. Ast. He is entered.

Cleon. Do not leave me,
I shall remember more.

Enter Duke, Fabrichio, Soranzo, Giotto. Duke. Excellent Cleona.

Cleo. The humble duty of a Subject to your Highness.

Duke. Rise high in our thoughts, and thus
Confirm we are welcome, to these eyes, our heart,
Shall pay a lower duty, than obedience
Has taught your knee.

Cleon. Your Grace much honors me,
Till this white hour, these walls were never proud,
T'inclose a guest, the genius of our house,
Is by so great a presence waked, and glories,
To entertain you.

Duke. Every accent falls
Like a fresh Jewel, to increase her value,
We can but thank Cleona.

Cleon. Royal Sir --

Duke. Let me revoke that hasty syllable,
But thank thee; yes, we can do more, and will,
We have a heart to do it, our much grieved Sister
I know you do not wear this sadness for
Our presence.

Ast. If I Have any skill in mine own eyes,
Since they beheld you, they have looked
More cheerfully, than they were wont.

Duke. And yet I see a tear is ready to break prison.

Ast. It is of joy to see you sir in health,
I hope the Prince is well?

Duke. He will be so
Astella, when he leaves to be unkind
To thee, but let us forget him.

Dulc. Fame has not
Injured him, in the character of his person.
And his shape promises a richer Soul,
I feel a new and fiery spirit dance,
Upon my heart strings.

Duke. We are come
My fair Cleona.

Cleo. With your Highness pardon,
That name was never so attended, it
Becomes your bounty, but not me to wear
That Title.

Duke. What?

Cleo. Of fair my Lord?

Duke. I said you were my fair Cleona --

Cleo. Sir?

Duke. I did apply,
I hope 't does not offend to call you so,
Y' are yet my Subject.

Cleo. When I leave that name, may heaven --

Duke. Be pleased to change it for a better.

Cleo. It cannot.

Duke. Do not sin, it is in our power
With your consent, to work that wonder Lady.

Cleo. I want my understanding.

Duke. I Will explain,

Cleo. Do not believe him Youth, by all the faith
Of Virgins, I Will not change my service, to
Thy Master for his Dukedom.

Dulc. Y' are too Noble.

Duke. What boy is that? Ha Giotto?

Dulc. Madam, the Duke observes us.

Duke. I ha seen him.
It is no common face.

Soran. My Lord we know not.

Duke. Where is Grimundo?

Giot. Not yet come my Lord.

Duke. Send for him strait, and bid him bring the picture
We gave into his keeping, yet forbear,
It is in vain.

Soran. My Lord, Cleona waits
Your farther Courtship.

Duke. VVhither am I carried?

Cleo. I hope, dread Sir, my house affords no object,
To interrupt your quiet.

Duke. None but heavenly,
Or could this Roof be capable of ill,
Your only presence Lady would convert it,
There is a virtuous magic in your eye.
For wheresoere it casts a beam, it does
Create a goodness, you have a handsome boy.

Dulc. The Duke is troubled?

Cleo. He Is a pretty Youth.

Dulc. I hope he wo'not take me from my Lady,
I Will say I am her servant.

Duke. Something binds
My speech, my heart is narrow of a sudden:
Giotto take some opportunity
To enquire that Youths condition, name, and Country,
And give us private knowledge, to cut off
* Circumstance Lady, I am not your fresh,
And unacquainted Lover, that does waste Soranzo whispers with Jacome.
The tedious Moons with preparation
To his amorous suit, I have been Cleona,
A long admirer of your Virtues, and
Do want the comfort of so sweet a partner,
In your young state.

Cleo. You mock your humble handmaid.

Soran. A stranger say?

Jac. He brought some welcome letter
To my Lady.

Sor. Not know his name, nor whence?

Jac. No my good Lord. So so, I like this well,
My Lady does apply her to the Duke,
There is some hopes again things may succeed;
This Lords discoursing with me, is an Omen
To my familiarity to greatness.

Duke. Grimundo not come yet? I am not well.

Cle. Good heaven defend, Angels protect your Highness.

Duke. Your holy prayers cannot but do me good.
Continue that devotion, Charity
Will teach you a consent to my departure.

Cleo. I am unhappie.

Duke. Make me not so Lady
By the least trouble of your self; I am
Acquainted with these passions, let me breath
A heart upon thy lip; farewell, again
Your pardon.
Exit.
Soran. It Is a very strange distemper,
And sudden: Noble Lady we must wait
Upon the Duke.
Exeunt.
Jac. My bud is nipt again,
Would all the banquet were in his belly for it.

Dulc. Let not my eyes betray me.

Jac. I Am sick too;
Let not your Ladyship repent your cost,
I Will have a care the sweetmeats be not lost.
Exit.
Cleo. Acquaint him with these passages of the Duke,
Tell him I long to see him, and at last,
To crown the story, say my heartshall know
No other love but his.

Dulc. I fly with this
Good news.
Exit. Dulc. Enter Jac.
Jac. Madam, here is Prince Lodwick.

Cleon. Attend him.

Jac. Most officiously.

Cleon. Stay, it can do no harm.

Ast. Even what you please.

Cleon. If he enquire for his Lady, answer
She is not very well, and keeps her Chamber.

Jac. I Will say she is dead if you please, it is my duty:
I Will never speak truth while I live that shall
Offend your Ladyship.

Cleon. You may hear all, Enter Lodwick and Piero.
And when you please appear.

Lodw. Sick; where is her Doctor?
I Will be acquainted with him. Noble Lady.

Cleon. Your Grace is here most welcome.

Lodw. I am bold?

Pier. I am happy that my duty to the Prince
Brought me to kiss your hand.

Cleon. Beside the honor done to me, your person
Will add much comfort to Astella, your
Weak Lady.

Lodw. She is sick; mend, let her mend, she will spend her time worse, yet she
knows my mind, and might do me the courtesy to die once; I Would take it more
kindly, than to be at charge of a Physician.


Cleon. You would not poison her?


Lodw. I think I must be driven to it; what shall a man do with a Woman that
wo'not be ruled. I ha'given cause enough to break any reasonable woman's heart
in Savoy, and yet you see how I am troubled with her: but leave her to the
Destinies. Where is my Brother all this while? I came to meet him; what, is it a
match already? when shall we dance and triumph in the Tiltyard, for honor of
the high and mighty Nuptials? where is he?


Cleon. My Lord, he is gone.


Lodw. How?


Cleon. Distempered.


Lodw. Not with Wine?


Cleon. Departed sick.


Lodw. She jeers him: By this lip I Will love thee, and thou wot abuse him; I knew
he would but shame himself, and therefore durst not come with him for my own
credit; I warrant he came fierce upon thee with some parcel of Poetry, which he
had conn'd by heart out of Tasso, Guarrini, or some other of the same melting
Tribe, and thought to have brought thy Maiden Town to his obedience, at the
first noise of his furious Artillery.


Cleon. My Lord, you understand me not, your Brother
Is not in health; some unkind pain within him
Compelled him to forsake us.

Lodw. Is it true
That he is sick? My Brother sick Piero.

Pier. I am very well here.

1. Lady. So am not I: pray sir appear more civil,
Or I shall leave you.

Lodw. True?

Cleon. It Is too true my Lord.

Lodw. No, no, Truth is a virtuous thing, and we cannot have too much on it.
Do You hear, if I may counsel you, be wise, and stay for me; you may be my Wife
within this month, and the Duchess too.


Cleon. Your Wife my Lord; why you are married,
What shall become of her?

Lodw. Is she not sick?

Cleon. But are you sure she'il die?

Lodw. What a ridiculous question do you make: If death wo'not take a fair
course with her, are there not reasons enough in State think you, to behead
her; or if that seem cruel, because I do not affect blood, but for very good
ends, I can be divorced from her, and leave her rich in the title of Lady
Dowager.


Cleon. Upon what offense can you pretend a divorce?

Lodw. Because she is not fruitful; is not that a sin?

Cleon. Would your Lordship have her fruitful, and you
Never lie with her?

Lodw. Have not I known a Lady, whose husband is an Eunuch upon Record, mother
to three or four children, and no free conscience but commends her?


Cleon. But these things wo'not be easily perfect, unless
You were Duke to enforce em.

Lodw. Is not my Brother in the way? sick already, and perhaps as fit for
heaven as another; I know he cannot live long, he is so well given, they never
thrive, and then do you think I Will keep such a religious Court; in this corner
lodge a Covy of Capouchins, who shall zealously pray for me without Stockins,
in that a nest of Carthusians, things which in fine turn to Otters, appear
flesh, but really are fish: No, no, give me a Court of flourishing pleasure,
where delight in all her shapes, and studied varieties every minute courts the
soul to act her chief felicity.


Cleon. Do you never think of hell?


Lodw. Faith I do, but it always makes me melancholy, and therefore as seldom
as I can my contemplation shall point thither; I am now in the spring of my
life, winter will come on fast enough; when I am old, I will be as methodical
an hypocrite, as any pair of Lawn Sleeves in Savoy.


Cleon. I dare not hear him longer: Madam, release me.


Enter Astella. Lodw. How now; whence come you? were you sick?

Ast. At heart my Lord, to think of your unkindnesse.

Lodw. At heart: I Will never believe without inspection. Am I unkind? go to,
there is not a friend in the whole world can wish you better: Would you were
canonized a Saint, it is more than I wish my self yet; I do not trouble thee
much on earth, and thou were in heaven I would not pray to thee, for fear of
disturbing thy Seraphical devotion.


Ast. What sin have I committed deserves
This distance?

Cleon. In Christian charity salute her.

Lodw. I would not have your Ladyship too ventrous,
The air is somewhat cold, and may endanger
A weak body.

Ast. If the suspicion that I am unchaste --

Lodw. Unchaste; By this hand I do not know an honest woman in the Dukedom.


Cleon. How, my Lord: what do ye think of me?


Lodw. I know not whether you be a woman or no, yet.


Cleon. Fie, my Lord.


Lodw. What would you have me do? I have not seen her this six months.


Ast. O rather, my Lord, conclude my sufferings,
Than thus with tortures lengthen out my death:
Oh kill me, and I beseech you; I will kiss
The instrument, which guided by your hand,
Shall give my grief a period, and pronounce Enter Grimundo.
With my last breath your free forgiveness.

Lodw. No, kill your self, more good will come on it: how now? nay then we are
like to have a precious time on it.


Cleon. The Duke, my Lord, enquired for you.


Grim. I met
His Highness in return, and he employed me
To bring back knowledge of his better health;
Which, he says, shall enable him but to
Express how much he honors fair Cleona.

Cleon. I am his studious servant, and rejoice
In this good news: Your Brother is recovered.

Lodw. I, I, I knew he would do well enough: Now sir?


Grim. I have some business with you, my Lord,
Were you at opportunity.

Lodw. Some moral exhortations; they are fruitless: I shall never eat Garlic
with Diogenes in a Tub, and speculate the Stars without a Shirt: Prithee enjoy
thy Religion, and live at last most Philosophical lousie.


Grim. My design is of another nature.


Cleon. May I obtain so great a favor Sir,
You Would be my guest in absence of the Duke;
I Am but ambitious to remember
His health in Greek Wine.

Lodw. So this Lady will be temperate, and use me but like a Stranger, without
pressing me to inconveniences of kissing her, and other superstitious Courtship
of a husband.


Cleon. I will engage she will not offend you.


Lodw. And yet it goes against my conscience to tarry so long in honest
company; but my comfort is, I do not use it. Come away Piero, you have had a
fine time on it.


Cleon. My Lord.


Grim. I follow Madam, yet have comfort,
Though reason and example urge our fears,
Heaven will not let you lose so many tears.
Exeunt.
Enter Foscari, and Dulcino. Fosc. Did she receive my Letter with such joy?

Dulc. I want expression, my Lord, to give you
The circumstance; with what a flowing love,
Or rather, with what glad devotion
She entertained it; at your very name,
For so I ghest, to which her covetous sight
Made the first haste; one might have seen her heart
Dance in her eyes, and as the wonder strove
To make her pale, warm love did fortify
Her cheeks with guilty blushes, she did read
And kiss the paper often.

Fosc. This was before the Duke came thither?

Dulc. Yes, my Lord.

Fosc. And did thou not
Observe her at his presence ^lack that fervor
Her former passion had begot of me?
Was she not courtly to him, Boy?

Dulc. So far
As her great birth and breeding might direct
A Lady to behave her self to him, that was her Prince.

Fosc. She kissed him, did she not?

Dulc. She kissed.

Fosc. He did salute her?

Dulc. Yes, my Lord.

Fosc. And did not see a flame hang on her lip,
A spirit busy to betray her love,
And in a sigh conveigh it to him? Oh
Thou can not read a woman. Did he not
Woo her to be his Duchess?

Dulc. Yes, my Lord.

Fosc. Thou should ha watched her cheek then; there a blush
Had been a guilt indeed, a feeble answer,
With half a smile, had been an argument
She had been lost, and the temptation
Above her strength; which had I known, I could
Have slept, and never been disturbed, although
I had met her in a dream.

Dulc. My Lord, you weave a causeless trouble to your self.


Fosc. Oh jealousy. I am ashamed --


Dulc. If ever any woman loved
With faith, Cleona honors you above
Mankind; *twere sin, but to suspect so chaste,
So furnished with all virtue, your Cleona.

Fosc. It were indeed; I am too blame Dulcino;
Yet when thou comst to be so ripe, for so
Much misery, as to love, thou wo't excuse me.

Dulc. My Lord, if I might not offend with my
Opinion, it were safest that you lose
No time, your presence would confirm a joy
To either, and prevent the Duke, whose strong
Solicits may in time endanger much
The quiet of your thoughts.

Fosc. O never, never, and I will reward
Her love beyond example: Thus Dulcino
Thou shall return.

Dulc. My Lord, I had much rather
Write on you to her.

Fosc. Tush, thou understandst not
What I have purposed, thou shall presently
Go back, and tell Cleona I am dead.

Dulc. How, dead?

Fosc. I boy, that I am dead: nay, mark the issue.

Dulc. But my Lord, she has your Letter
To check that.

Fosc. Thou shall frame something to take
That off, some fine invention may be made,
To say 'twas forged, we'll study that anon,
In the assurance of my death, which must
Be so delivered, as she shall believe thee,
She may affect the Duke.

Dulc. Ho sir, the Duke?

Fosc. I, I, the Duke: for that is the plot, I must advance.

Dulc. And will you thus reward so great a love to you?

Fosc. Best, best of all,
Shall I be so ungrateful to a Lady
Of such rare merit, when a Prince desires
To make her great? by my unworthie interest
Destroy her blessings, hinder such a fortune
From fair Cleona? Let her love the Duke;
In this I will express the height and glory
Of my best service.

Dulc. Are you sir in earnest?

Fosc. I love her, and can never see her more:
Posterity shall learn new piety
In love from me; it will become me look on
Cleona a far off, and only mention
Her name, as I do Angels in my prayer:
Thus she deserves I should converse with her;
Thus I most nobly love her.

Dulc. Does she languish
Expecting you, and shall I carry death
To comfort her? good heaven forbid this Sir.

Fosc. Heaven does engage me to it: she shall
Reign glorious in power, while I let fall my Beads
That she might prosper. Be not thou an enemy
To her and me, but do it, or never see more.
Exit.
Dulc. I Am lost in the springing of my hope, shall I
Obey him, to destroy my self? I must,
I dare not be my self; no need have they
Of other force, that make themselves away?
Exit.
ACTUS 3.
SCAENA 1.
Enter Jacomo. Iac. I smell a Match again: the Duke will fetch her about; here
was another Ambassador at dinner, and his Highness is again expected: in
confidence of my place that shall be, I will continue my state posture, use my
Tooth-pick with discretion, and cough distinctly: what can hinder my rising? I
am no Scholar, that exception is taken away; for most our Statesmen do hold
it a saucy thing, for any of their Servants to be wiser than themselves.


Enter Dulcino. Dulc. Worthy Sir --


Iac. My Lady shall be at leisure for you presently --
It may be you would speak with me first?

Dulc. I only entreat my Lady may have knowledge
That I wait here.

Iac. I will enrich my Ladies understanding; I Will say nothing else, but that you
are here, shall I? That Is enough if you have another Letter.


Dulc. What then?


Iac. I would wish you deliver it to her own hand: but under your favor, the
Contents of the last Chapter had like to undone us all, and Cupid had not bin
more merciful.


Dulc. Fear nothing, the news I bring will make you merry.


Iac. I Would laugh at that; howsoever you are heartily welcome, and ever shall
be: You do hear no harm of the Duke?


Dulc. No harm?


Iac. You shall hear more shortly: I say no more, but heaven bless my Lady and
his Highness together, for my part, though I speak a proud word -- I Will tell
my Lady that you attend her.


Dulc. I prithee do, and hasten the discharge
Of my sad Embassy, which when I have done,
And that it prospers in mine own misfortune,
I Will teach my breath to pray.

Enter Cleona, Fabrichio, Jacomo. Fabr. A glorious fate
Courts your acceptance, and I hope your wisdom
Will teach you how to meet it, you have received
His Highness bosom, now I Will take my leave.

Cleon. Will you not see the Prince again?

Fabr. I saw his highness walking with Grimundo
Toward the garden, and the Duke expects me --
Think of a Duchess Madam.

Cleon. I Am not worthy,
And needs must sink under the weight of such
A title; my humblest service to his grace,
I am his beads-woman.
Exit Fabrichio.
Iac. Madam here is the youth.

Cleon. Art thou returned already? why were you
So rude to make him wait?

Dull. Since I arrived
It Is but a pair of minutes.

Cleon. They are worth
As many days.

Iac. He shall be with your Ladyship
Next time before he come; when I but spy him
A mile off, I Will acquaint you in my duty
To your self, and my honor unto him.

Cleon. Withdraw.

Iac. Here is no couth, I do not like
My Ladies familiarity with a boy:
Methinks a man were fitter, and more able
To give her a refreshing: but this Lobby
Shall be my next remove.
Exit, and stays behind the hangings.
Dull. You will repent
This welcome Madam.

Cleon. What harsh sound is that?
Thy looks upon a sudden are become
Dismal, thy brow dull as Saturns issue;
Thy lips are hung with black, as if thy tongue
Were to pronounce some funeral.

Dull. It is,
But let your virtue place a guard about
Your ear; it is too weak a sense to trust
With a sad tale, that may disperse too soon
The killing sillables, and some one or other
Find out your heart.

Cleon. The Mandrake has no voice
Like this, the Raven and the night birds sing
More soft, nothing in nature, to which fear
Has made us superstitious, but speak gently
Compared with thee; discharge thy fatal burden,
I am prepared, or stay but answer me,
I will and save thy breath, and quickly know
The total of my sorrow; is Foscari
Dead since I saw thee last? or has some wound,
Or other dire misfortune sealed him for
The grave? that though he yet live, I may bid
My heart despair to see him.

Dulc. None of these,
Since last I saw you Madam.

Cleon. None of these?
Then I despise all sorrow boy, there is
Not left another mischief in my Fate;
Call home thy beauty, why do look so pale?
See I am armed, and can with valiant blood
Hear thee discourse of my terror now;
Methinks I can in the assurance of
His safety, hear of Battails, Tempest, death,
With all the horrid shapes that Poets fancy;
Tell me the tale of Troy or Rome on fire,
Rich in the trophies of the conquered world,
I will not shed so many tears to save
The Temples, as my joy does sacrifice
To hear my Lord is well.

Dull. Turn them to grief
Again, and here let me kneel, the accuser
Of him, that has deserved more punishment,
Than your wronged piety will inflict.

Cleon. Do kneel, and call thy self accuser?

Dulc. Yes.

Cleon. Of whom,
Thy Lord? take heed, for if I be thy judge
I shall condemn thee ere thou speak.

Dull. You may,
But I accuse my self, and of an injury
To you.

Cleon. To me?

Dulc. Too great to be forgiven.

Cleona. My love to him thou serv'st has found a pardon
Already for it; be it an offense
Against my life.

Dulc. For his sake you must punish,
Dear Madam, I have sinned against his ghost,
In my deceiving you.

Cleon. His Ghost?

Dull. And if
His soul had not forgotten how he loved you,
I must expect him to afright my dreams,
The truth is, my Lord is dead.

Cleon. How dead? when? where? did I
Not hear thee say, since I received this letter,
He was alive?

Dulc. No Madam.

Cleon. Be not impious.

Dull. I said that neither death, nor any black
Misfortune had befalne him, since I gave
The letter to you.

Cleon. Grant this truth, I am secured again.

Dull. Alas he was dead before,
I Am sure you could not choose but hear as much,
It was my wickedness arrived to mock
Your credulous heart with a devised letter:
I know you are in wonder what should move me
To this imposture; sure it was no malice,
For you nere injured me, and that does make
My crime the more deformed, all my aim was,
Being a stranger here, and wanting means
After my Lords death, by this cunning to
Procure some bounty from you to sustain
My life, until by some good fortune, I
Might get another Master, for I knew
There was no hope to benefit my self
By saying he was dead: good heaven forgive me,
And keep my eyes from weeping,

Cleon. Thou have undone me,
Like a most cruel boy.

Dull. Madam I hope
I shall repair the ruins of your eye,
When I declare the cause that leads me to
This strange confession; I have observed
The Duke does love you, love you in that way,
You can deserve him, and though I have sinned,
I am not stubborn in my fault to suffer you
In the belief of my deceitful story,
To wrong your fortune by neglect of him
Can bring your merit such addition
Of state and title.

Cleon. Do thou mock again?

Dull. Heaven knows I have no thought of such impiety,
If you will not believe that for your sake
I have betrayed my self, yet be so charitable,
To think it something of my duty to
The Duke, whose ends, while they are just and noble,
All loyal subjects ought to serve for him,
Whom I am not bound to honor, and I love him,
Else may I never know one day of comfort;
I durst not without guilt of treason to
His chaste desires deceive you any longer:
Collect your self dear Madam, in the grave
There dwells no music, in the Dukes embrace
You meet a perfect happiness.

Cleon. Begone,
And never see me more; who ever knew
Falsehood so ripe at thy years?
Exit.
Dull. Is not yet
My poor heart broke? has nature given it
So strong a temper that no wound will kill me?
What charm was in my gratitude to make me
Undo so many comforts with one breath?
Or was it for some sin I had to satisfy?
I have not only widowed Cleona,
But made my self a misery beneath
An Orphant; I nere came to have a friend,
I ha destroyed my hope, that little hope
I had to be so happy.

Jacomo comes forth. Jac. Is It e'ne so?

My friend what make you here? who sent for you? begone dee hear, begone I say
the word too; there is a Porters lodge else, where you may have due
chastisement, you will begone.


Dule. I Am sorry
I have offended Sir,
Exit. Dull.
Jaec. So am not I;

Let me see some body is dead, if I knew who, no matter it is one that my Lady
loved, and I am glad to hear it for mine own sake; now Venus speed the Dukes
plough, and turn me loose to a privy Councellor.


Enter Soranzo. Sor. Signior Jacomo, where is your Lady?


Jac. She is within my good Lord, wilt please you walk this way?


Sor. Prithee make haste, the Duke is coming.

Exeunt.
Jac. I smell him hitherto.

Enter Jacomo presently. So so, I will take this opportunity to present my
self to his Highness, that he may take particular notice of my bulk and
personage, he may chance speak to me, I have common places to answer any
ordinary question, and for other, he shall find by my impudence, I come not
short of a perfect Courtier. Here he comes, I will dissemble some
contemplation, and with my Hat on, give him cause to observe me the better.


Enter the Duke and Lords. Duk. What fellow's that?


Giot. A servant of Cleona's.

The Duke extends his hand, Jacomo kisses it.
Fabr. Signior?


Jac. Your Highness humble creature, you have blessed my lips, and I will wear
them threadbare with my prayers for your Graces immortal prosperity.


Enter Soranzo. Duk. Soranzo is returned: How fares Cleona?


Sor. My Lord, not well, I found her full of sadness, which is encreast, she
cannot, as becomes her duty, observe your Highness.


Jac. One word with your Grace in private; she is as well, as either you or I.


Duk. Say thou so?


Jac. There came indeed certain news before you, that a noble Gentleman, I know
not who, and therefore he shall be nameless, but some dear friend of hers is
dead, and that is all, and that has put her into a melancholy mood; with your
gracious pardon, if I were worthy to be one of your Counselors. --


Duk. What then?


Jac. I would advise you, as others do, to take your own course; your Grace
knows best what is to be done.


Duk. So sir: Did thou not see the pretty boy I told thee of?


Sor. No my good Lord.


Duk. We are resolved to comfort her; set forward*


Grim. You had simple grace.


Iacom. A touch or so, a beam with which his Highness
Does use to keep desert warm: good my Lord, Exeunt.
It is not come to that yet.

Enter Foscari and a Servant. Fosc. Go to the next religious house, and pray
Some hosie father come and speak with me:
But hasten thy Return. Exit Ser.
I must not entertain with the same thought
Cleona, and my love, lest my own passion
Betray the Resolution I ha made
To make my service famous to all ages.
A legend that may startle wanton blood,
And strike a chilness in the active veins
Of noblest lovers, when they hear, or read,
That to advance a Mistress, I have given her
From mine own heart, if any shall be so
Impious at my memory, to say
I could not do this act, and love her too,
Some power divine, that knew how much I loved her,
Some Angel that has care to right the dead,
Punish that crime for me, he is come. Enter Valentio, a religious man.
Welcome good father;
I sent to entreat your help, but first, pray tell me,
I have no perfect memory, what Saint
Gives title to your Order?

Ual. We do wear
The Scapular of St. Bennet Sir.

Fosc. Your Charity
Make you still worthy of that Reverend habit,
I have a great devotion, to be made
A brother of your sacred institution:
What persons of great birth it has received?

Ual. To fashion my Reply to your demand,
Is not to boast, though I proclaim the honors
Of our profession; four Emperors,
Forty six Kings, and one and fifty Queens,
Have changed their Royal Ermines for our sables,
These Cowls have clothed the heads of fourteen hundred,
And six Kings sons, of Dukes, great Marquises,
And Earls, two thousand and above four hundred
Have turned their Princely Coronets, into
An humble Coronet of hair left by
The Razor thus.

Fosc. This, it is not.
There is a Sun ten times more glorious,
Than that which rises in the East, attracts me
To feed upon his sweet beams, and become
A Bird of Paradise, a Religious man
To rise from earth, and no more to turn back,
But for a Burial.

Ual. Think what it is you do,
It is nothing to play the wanton with,
In the strong bended passion of an humor,
For a friends death, a Kings frown, or perhaps
Loss of a Mistress.

Fosc. O still bless the guide
Whatever, that shall lead this happy way.

Ual. My Lord, the truth is like your Coat of Arms,
Richest when plainest; I do fear the world
Has tired you, and you seek a Cell to rest in,
As Birds that wing it over the Sea, seek ships,
Till they get breath, and then they fly away.

Fosc. Do not mistake a piety, I am prepared,
And can endure your strict mortifications.
Good Father then prefer my humble suit,
To your Superior for the habit, and
Let me not long expect you, say I am,
Noble, but humblest in my thoughts.

Val. I go,
Mean time examine well this new desire,
Whether it be a wild flash, or a heavenly fire.
Exit.
Fosc. Now my good Boy.

Enter Dulcino. Dulc. Sir, your command is done,
And she believes?

Fosc. That I am dead Dulcino?

Dulc. That you are dead, and as she now scorned life
Death lends her cheeks his paleness, and her eyes
Tell down their drops of silver to the earth,
VVishing her tears might Rain upon your Grave,
To make the gentle earth produce some flower,
Should bear your names and memories.

Fosc. But thou see,
I live Dulcino.

Dulc. Sir, I should be blessed,
If I did see you sought the means to live,
And to live happily, O noble sir
Let me untread my steps, unsay my words,
And tell your love, you live.

Fosc. No my sweet boy,
She thinks not much amiss, I am a man
But of an hour or two; my will is made
And now I go, never more cheerfully,
To give eternal farewell to my friends.

Dulc. For heavens sake sir, what is this you mean to do?
There is a fear sits cold upon my heart,
And tells me --

Fosc. Let it not misinform thee boy;
I Will use no violence to my self, I am
Resolved a course, wherein I will not doubt,
But thou will bear me company? we'll enter
Into Religion.

Dulc. Into Religion?

Fosc. O'tis a heavenly life, go with me Boy,
We'll imitate the singing Angels there,
Learn how to keep a Quire in heaven, and scorn
Earths transitory glory; wo't Dulcino?

Dulc. Alas my Lord, I am too young.

Fosc. Too young
To serve heaven? Never, never; O take heed
Of such excuse.

Dulc. Alas, what shall I do?
And yet I Am weary of the world, but how
Can I do this? I am not yet discovered:
Sir, I shall still attend you.

Fosc. Thou art my comfort,
I have propounded it already, to
A Benedictine, by whose means we may
Obtain the habit; stay thou and expect him,
I must be absent for a little time,
To finish something, will conduce to my
Eternal quiet, if thou have any scruple,
He will direct thee, having both made even
With earth, we'll travail hand in hand to heaven.
Exit.
Dulc. Fortune has lent me a prospective glass,
By which I have a look beyond all joys,
To a new world of misery, what is my best
Let it be so, for I am hopeless now,
And it were well, if when those weeds I have,
That I might go disguised to my grave.
Exit.
Enter Lodwick and Grimundo. Lodw. This is strange.


Grim. You know I have given you many precepts of honesty?


Lodw. And you know how I have followed em.


Grim. To mine own heart, I have made tedious discourses of heaven to ye, and
the Moral Virtues, numbered up the duties of a good Prince, urged examples of
virtues for your imitation.


Lodw. To much purpose.


Grim. Seemed to sweat with agony and vexation, for your obstinate courses
reproved you, nay, sometimes made complaints of you to the Duke.


Lodw. And I ha'curst you for it, I remember.


Grim. Alas my Lord, I durst do no otherwise: was not the Duke your father an
honest man? and your brother now foolishlie takes after him, whose credulities,
when I had already cozened, I was bound to appear Stoical, to preserve the
opinion they had conceived of me.


Lodw. Possible.


Grim. It speaks discretion and abilities in Statesmen, to apply themselves to
their Princes disposition, vary a thousand shapes; if he be honest, we put on
a formal of gravitie; if he be vicious, we are Parasites. Indeed in a politic
Commonwealth, all things are but Representation, and my Lord, howsoever I have
appeared to you, I am at heart one of your own Sect, an Epicure; be but so
subtle to seem honest, as I do, and we will laugh at the foolish world in our
Cells, declaim against intemperate livers, and hug our own licentiousness,
while we surfeit our souls in the dark with Nectar and Ambrosia.


Lodw. Can this be earnest, you did talk of hell, and bug-bears?


Grim. I confess, and were you in public, I would urge many other empty
names to fright you, put on my holie-day countenance, and talk nothing but
Divinity, and golden sentences.


Lodw. You were a Christian, how came you to be converted?


Grim. I think I had a name given me, and that is all I retain; I could never
endure reallie their severe discipline: Marry for my preferment, and other
politic ends, I have, and can still dispense with fasting, prayer, and a
thousand fond austerities, though I do penance for em in private.


Lodw. Let me ask you one question, were you never drunk?


Grim. A thousand times in my study, that is one of my Recreations.


Lodw. How chance I could never see it in you? you know I would ha'been drunk
for company.


Grim. But I durst not trust so young a sinner; for I always held it a maxim,
to do wickedness with circumspection.


Lodw. Wickedness?


Grim. I speak in the phrase of the foolish world, that holds voluptuousness a
crime, which you and I, and everie'wise man knows to be the only happiness of
life, and the inheritance we are born to.


Lodw. But stay, how comes it to pass, that accounting me so young a sinner,
you now adventure to discover your self?


Grim. To you?


Lodw. To me.


Grim. Good my Lord conceive me, you were a young sinner, and in your Nonage,
does that infer that you have made no growth, that you are a Child still, dee
think that I ha not wit to distinguish a Principiant in vice, from a Graduate,
shall I be afraid to lay open my secret impieties to you, that are almost as
perfect as my self in Epicurism?


Lodw. Very well, proceed.


Grim. And yet my Lord, with your Princely license, you may learn too, and
indeed the first virtue that I would commend to your practice, should be that,
by which I have attained to this height, and opinion, and that is hypocrisy.


Lodw. Hypocrisy?


Grim. Yes, a delicate white Devil, do but fashion your self to seem holy, and
study to be worse in private, worse, you will find your self more active in your
sensuality, and it will be another titillation, to think what an Ass you make
a'the believing world, that will be ready to dote, nay, superstitiouslie adore
you, for abusing them.


Lodw. This is pretty wholesome doctrine, and hark you, ha you no wenches now
and then?


Grim. Wenches? would the Duke your brother had so many for his own sake, or
you either.


Lodw. Have in faith?


Grim. Why judge by your self, how dee think a Gentleman should subsist? I Will
not give a Chip to be an Emperor, and I may not curvet as often as my
constitution requires. Wenches, why I have as many -- yet now I think better
on it, I Will keep that to my self, store makes a good proverb.


Lodw. Nay, nay, be free and open to me, you have my oath not to betray.


Grim. Well, I Will not be nice to you, you little imagine (though I be married
that I am the greatest Whoremaster in the Dukedom.


Lodw. Not the greatest?


Grim. Have a strong faith, and save my proofs; but Caute si non Cast, my Nun
at home knows nothing, like a Mole in the earth, I work deep, but invisible; I
have my private houses, my Granaries, my Magasines Bullie, as many Concubines,
as would, collected, furnish the Great Turks Seraglio.


Lodw. How do you conceal em? I should nere keep half so many, but 'twould be
known.


Grim. You are then a Novice in the Art of Uenus, and will tell Tales out a'
the School, like your weak gallants of the first Chin, that will brag what
Ladies they have brought to their obedience, that think it a mighty honor, to
discourse how many Forts they have beleaguered; how many they have taken by
battery; how many by composition, and how many by stratagem: a fine
commendation for young whelps, is it not?


Lodw. A fault, a fault; who can deny it? But what are those you practice with?
A touch, come.


Grim. Not sale-ware, Mercenary stuff; but rich, fair, highfed, glorious,
Ladies of blood; whose eyes will make a soldier melt, and he were composed of
marble; whose very smile has a magnetic force to draw souls; whose voice will
charm a Satyr, and turn a man's prayer into ambition.


Lodw. I have heard you; and now I think fit to discover my self to you: You
are a Rascal.


Grim. Sir, I think I am one.


Lodw. Let not your Wisdom think, I can be so easily gulled.


Grim. How Sir?


Lodw. You think you have talked very methodicallie, and cunningly all this
while, and that I am, as they say, a credulous Coxcomb, and cannot perceive,
that by your politic jeers upon my pleasures, you labor to discredit, not
only my recreations, but my self to my own face: Do You hear? the time may come
you will not dare these things, and yet you shall see, I will not now so much
as seem angry: preserve your humor, 'twill appear fresh o'th'Stage, my
learned Gymnosophist; very well, excellent well.


Grim. Why does not your Lordship believe me then?


Lodw. Do thou think throughout the year, I will lose one minute of my
pastime, for this your toothlesse Satyr? I Will to a Wench presently.


Grim. I came to carry you to one.


Lodw. How, thou?


Grim. Do not deceive your self; come, you shall believe, and thank me: go with
me, and I will demonstrate.


Lodw. Whither?


Grim. I Will carry you to a Lady; be not afraid, she is honest; such a
charming brow, speaking eye, springing cheek, tempting lip, swelling bosom.


Lodw. Will you lead me to such a creature?


Grim. Yes.


Lodw. And shall I?


Grim. And think your self richer, than to be Lord of both the Indies; here is
my hand, cut it off, if I do not this feat for you when you please; and when
you are satisfied with her, I Will help you to forty more: but we are
interrupted.


Enter Giotto, Soranzo. Giot. There he is with Grimundo.


Sor. His late Governor, he is giving him good counsel.


Giot. Pray heaven he have the grace to follow it.


Grim. Consider Sir, what will be the end
Of all these wicked courses.

Lodw. Precious Tutor.

Grim. We must be circumspect.

Lodw. No more: I have a crotchet new sprung:
Where shall I meet thee?

Grim. I Will expect you in the Park -- be very secret.
My Lord, I can but grieve for you.
Exit.
Lodw. How have we all been cozened?
What, is my Brother here?

Sor. This hour, my Lord, he is now upon return.

Lodw. I Will see him, and then prepare me for this Lady.
I feel a boiling in my veins already;
This is the life of greatness, and of Court;
They Are fools that will be frighted from their sport.
Exeunt.
ACTUS 4.
SCAENA 1.
Enter Lodwick and Piero. Lodw. Do It and thou love me.


Pier. What do you mean, my Lord?


Lodw. Nay, we must have such a deal of circumstance; I say, do it.


Pier. What, that?


Lodw. That: is that such a piece of matter, does it appear so horrid in your
imagination, that you should look as if you were frighted now?


Pier. My Lord, it is --


Lodw. A thing your heat will prompt you to, but that you affect ceremony, and
love to be entreated.


Pier. With your Lady?


Lodw. Yet again: you have not been observed so dull in a business of this
supple nature.


Pier. But think on'c again; I pray you think a little better: I ha no great
ambition to ha my throat cut.


Lodw. By whom?


Pier. By you; you cannot choose but kill me for it when I have done. Your Lady?


Lodw. Is your mountanous promise come to this? Remember; if I do not turn
honest --


Pier. My Lord, do but consider -- well, I will do what I can, and there be no
remedy -- but


Lodw. Never fear it, for if thou can but corrupt her, I Will sue a Divorce
presently.


Pier. And bring me in for a witness?


Enter Astella. Lodw. She Is here; fear nothing, I Will be thy protection; it were
not amiss to cast away some kindness upon her: nay, I was coming to take my
leave.


Ast. I know you never meant it.


Lodw. Thus my best intents are rewarded still, the more sin upon your
conscience; you have a hard heart, but heaven forgive us all: Astella farewell;
Piero expect my return here -- pray entertain this Gentleman courteously in my
absence, you know not how kindly I may take it.


Ast. I would you would enjoin me any testimony,
So I may be in hope to win your love.

Lodw. It Is in the will of women to do much; do not despair; the proudest heart
is but flesh, think a that.


Ast. Of what?


Lodw. Of flesh; and so I leave you.

Exit.
Pier. Will It please you Madam walk into your Chamber?
I have something to impart will require more privacie.

Ast. If it be grief it is welcome.

Exeunt.
Enter Duke and Lords. Giot. Please your Highness,
A Stranger, but some Gentleman of quality,
Intending to leave Savoy, humbly prays
To kiss your hand.

Duk. A Gentleman: admit him.


Enter Foscari disguised, and kisses the Dukes hand. Fosc. You are a gracious
Prince, and this high favor
Deserves my Person and my Sword, when you
Vouchfafe so much addition to this honor,
To call them to your service.

Duk. You are Noble.


Fosc. It is not complement my Lord alone,
Made me thus bold; I have a private message,
Please you command their distance.

Duk. Wait without.


Fosc. Have you forgot this face?


Duk. Foscari's shadow.


Fosc. The substance, Sir, and once more at your feet.


Duk. Returned to life. Rise; meet cut arms: why in
This Cloud?

Fosc. Your pardon, Royal Sir; it will
Concern your Highness to permit me walk
In some Eclipse.

Duk. How?


Fosc. I said I had a message:
I come from Cleona.

Duk. From Cleona?


Fosc. And in her name I must
Propound a question; to which she prays
You would be just and noble in your answer.

Duk. Without disputing your Commission,
Upon mine honor --

Fosc. Princes cannot stain it: Do You love her;


Duk. Do I love her? Strange.


Fosc. Nay, she would have you pause, and think well ever
You give her resolution; for she bid me tell you,
She has been much afflicted since you left her, about your love.

Duk. About my love? I prithee be more particular.


Fosc. I shall: So soon as you were gone, being alone, and full
Of melancholy thoughts.

Duk. I left her so.


Fosc. Willing to ease her head upon her Couch,
Through silence, and some friendship of the dark,
She fell asleep, and in a short dream thought
Some Spirit told her softly in her ear,
You did but mock her with a smoo h pretense
Of love.

Duk. Ha?


Fosc. More; that you were fallen from honor,
Have taken impious flames into your bosom;
That you are a bird of prey, and while she has
No household Lar, to wait upon her threshold,
You would fly in, and seize upon her honor.

Duk. I hope she has no faith in dreams.


Fosc. She cannot tell; she has some fears, my Lord;
Great men have left examples of their vice:
If you but once more say you love Cleona,
And speak it unto me, and to the Angels,
Which in her prayers she has invoked to hear you,
She will be confident.

Duke. Though I need not
Give an account to any, but to heaven
And her fair self. Foscari thou shall tell her
With what alacrity I display my heart:
I love her with chaste and noble fire; my intents are
Fair as her brow: tell her I dare proclaim it
In my devotions, at that minute when
I know a millon of adoring Spirits
Hover about the Altar: I do love her --

Fosc. Enough: my Lord, be pleased to hear
What I have now to say; You have expressed
A brave and virtuous soul, but I must not
Carry this message to her; therefore take
Your own words back again -- for, I love Cleona
With chaste and noble fire; my intents are
Fair as her brow: I dare proclaim it Sir
In my devotions, at that minute when
I know a million of adoring Spirits
Hover about the Altar.

Duk. Do ye mock me?


Fosc. Pardon a truth, my Lord: I have apparrel'd
My own sense with your language.

Duk. Do you come
To affront us? you had better ha been sleeping
In your cold Urn, as fame late gave you out,
And mingled with the rude forgotten ashes,
Than live to move our anger.

Fosc. Spare your frowns: it is not breath
Can fright a noble truth; nor is there Magic
In The person of a King.

Duk. You threaten us.


Fosc. Heaven avert so black a thought;
Though in my honors cause I can be flame,
My blood is frost to treason; yet I must tell you,
I love Cleona too; and I may say
You reach not my affection: I admit
You value her above your Dukedom, health;
That you would sacrifice your blood to avert
Any mishap should threaten that dear head;
All this is but above your self: but I
Love her above her self; and while you can
But give your life, and all you have to do
Cleona service, I can give away
Her self, Cleona's self, in my love to her.
I see you are at loss; I Will reconcile
All, she is yours, this minute ends my claim;
Live, and enjoy her happily; may you be
Famous in that beauteous Empire; She,
Blessed in so great a Lord.

Duk. I must not be
Overcome in honor; nor would do so great
A wrong to enjoy the blessing; I knew not
You were engaged.

Fosc. E're you proceed, I must
Beseech you hear me out: I am but fresh
Returned from travail; in my absence, she
Heard I was slain; at my return, upon
The hearing of these honors you intend her,
And which I now believe from your own lip,
I found a means, and have wrought her already
Into a firm belief that I am dead:
(For I have but pretended I came from her)
If for my sake you leave her now, I can
Make good her faith and die; 't sha' not be said,
I lived and overthrew Cleona's fortune.

Duk. Stay miracle of honor, and of love.


Fosc. If you proceed, as it concerns your happiness,
I can secure all fear of me; I am
Resolved a course wherein I will be dead
To her, yet live to pray for her and you,
Although I never see you more: will you
My Royal Lord.

Duk. Did ever Lover plead
Against himself before?

Fosc. I love her still,
And in that study her advancement, Sir,
In you: I cannot give her.

Duk. Well, I will still love her, and solicit.


Fosc. And not open that I am living.


Duk. Not a syllable.


Fosc. I am confident, let me but kiss your hand
Again: my blessings dwell with you for ever.
Exit.
Duk. He was always noble; but this passion
Has out-gone History: it makes for me:
Hail to my courteous fate; Foscari thanks;
Like the aged Phoenix thy old love expires,
And from such death springs life to my desires.
Exit.
Enter Dulcino. Dulc. The Father is not come yet; nor my Lord
Returned; yet when they do, I have no way
To help my self; nor have I power to go
From hence: sure this is the Religious Man.

Enter Valentio. Val. Ha, it is the same.


Dulc. Father Valentio?


Val. Dear Leonora?


Dulc. Sir, the same.


Val. Oh let
My tears express my joys, what miracle
Gave you this liberty?

Dulc. I was rescued
By the happy valor of a Gentleman,
To whom in gratitude I pay this service:
He bid me here expect a holy man; and is it you?

Val. The circumstance confirms it.


Dulc. Are you the good man whom my Lord expects?
It Is some refreshing in the midst of sorrow
To meet again.

Val. And heaven has heard my prayer.


Dulc. But I am miserable still, unless
Your counsel do relieve me.

Val. Why my charge?


Dulc. This noble Gentleman, to whom I owe
My preservation, who appointed you
To meet him here, having resolved to enter
Into Religion, has been very urgent
For me to do so too; and overcome
With many importunities, I gave
Consent, not knowing what was best to do:
Some cure, or I am lost; you know I cannot
Mix with religious men.

Ual. Did you consent?


Dulc. I did, and he is now upon the point
Of his return.

Val. Y' are in a straight I must
Confess; no matter, hold your purpose, and
Leave all to me. He is returned.

Enter Foscari. Fosc. Good Father,
Now I am ready; have you disposed him for such a life?

Val. He is constant to attend you,
I have prepat'd him, and made way to the Abbot
For your reception.

Fosc. I am blessed, Dulcino,
Nay no distinction now, methinks we move
Upon the wings of Cherubims already;
It Is but a step to heaven; come my sweet Boy,
We climb by a short Ladder to our joy. Exeunt.

Enter Lodwick and Grimundo. Grim. This, my Lord, is her Garden, into which you
see
My Key has given us a private access.

Lodw. It Is full of curiosity.


Grim. You see that Grove.


Lodw. I do.


Grim. There is her house of pleasure: let your eye
Entertain some delight here, while I give her happy
Knowledge you are entered.
Exit.
Lodw. Do so; an honest knave, I see that: how
Happy shall I be in his conversation? I sha not
Need to keep any in fee to procure, and he be
So well furnished: if ever I come to be Duke, I will
Erect a magnificent College; endow it
With Revenue to maintain Wenches, and
With great Pensions invite the fairest Ladies
From all parts of Christendom into my Seraglio;
Then will I have this fellow gelded, and make him
My chief Eunuch ranger, or overseer of all
My precious tame Fowl.
Enter 3 like Satyrs, and lie down. How now? what is this, some Fury asleep?
I Will take another path; another? into what wilderness has this Fire-drake
brought me? I dare not cry out for fear of waking 'em: would Grimundo were
come back.


Enter one like Silvanus. Silv. Rise you drowsy Satyrs, rise;
What strong charm does bind your eyes?
See who comes into your Grove,
To embrace the Queen of Love;
Leap for joy, and frisk about,
Find your pretty Dryads out;
Hand in hand compose a ring,
Dance and circle your new King;
Him, Silvanus must obey, Satyrs rise and run in.
Hence, and cry a holiday.
Exit*
Lodw. Some Mask; a device to entertain me, ha? And yet I see not how they
should prepare so much ceremony, unless they had expected me. A curse upon
their ill faces; they shook me at first: how now?

Enter Satyrs pursuing Nymphs, they dance together. Exeunt Satyrs, 3 Nymphs
seem to entreat him to go with them. Have ye no tongues? yes I will venture my
self in your company, and you were my destinies; would there were no worse in
hell, must I walk like a bride too, fortune set on before then, and thou do
not guide into a hansome place, would thy eyes were out, and so thou may be
taken for the blind goddess indeed; forward to Venus Temple.

Exit.
Recorders. Enter again where the Nymphs suddenly leave him, a banquet brought
in. Lod. Vanished like Fayries? Ha, what musicks this? the motion of the
Spears, or am I in Elisium?

Enter Grimundo, bare, leading Belinda richly attired, and attended by Nymphs.
Here is Grimundo, ha? what glorious creatures this commits a rape upon my
senses on every side, but when I look on her, all other admirations are forgot,
and lessen in her glory.


Bell. My Lord you are welcome; most welcome.


Grim. I have kept my word Sir.


Lod. Thou have oblieg'd my soul.


Gri. Be high and frolic, she loves to see one
Domineer; when you are thoroughly acquainted you will
Give me thanks.

Lodw. Let us be private with at much speed as may be;
Away with those gossips, so, so. Exeunt all but Lodwick and Belinda.
I forgot to ask her name: Lady am come.

Bell. Wilt please you use that chair?


Lodw. You are not ignorant
Of the intents my blood has brought with me,
Grimundo I hope has told my coming Lady.
And you I Am confident will justify his promise
Of some pastime.

Bell. He Is a servant,
Whose bosom I dare trust the son of night,
And yet more secret than his mother, he
Has power to engage me, and I shall
Take pride in my obedience; first be pleased
To taste, what in my duty I prepared
For your first entertainment; these but serve
To quicken appetite.

Lodw. I like this well, Recorders.
I sha not use much Courtship, where is this music?

Bell. Does it offend your ear?


Lodw. It Is ravishing, whence does it breath?


Bell. If you command, we will change
A thousand airs, till you find one is sweet
And high enough to rock your wanton soul
Into Elisian slumbers.

Lodw. Spare them all,
I hear 'em in thy accents.

Bell. Orpheus
Calliopes famed son, upon whose Lute
Myriads of lovers ghosts do wait and hang
Upon the golden strings to have their own
Griefs softened with his noble touch, shall come
Again from hell with fresh and happier strains
To move your fancy.

Lodw. That were very strange,
She is Poetical, more than half a fury:
But we prate all this while, and lose the time
We should employ more preciously; I need
No more provocations, my veins are rich,
And swell with expectations: shall we to
This vaulting business?

Bell. I shall hope my Lord
You will be silent in mine honor, when
You have enjoyed me, and not boast my name
To your disgrace, nor mine.

Lodw. Your name, why Lady?
By my desires I know it not: I hope
You have received a better character,
Than to suspect my blabbing: I Will not trust
My Ghostly Father with my sins, much less
Your name.

Bell. O let me fly into your arms,
These words command my freedom; I shall love
You above my self, and to confirm how much
I dare repose upon your faith, I Will not
Be nice to tell you who I am.

Lod. Pray do.


Bell. I am a Princess.


Lod. How?


Bell. Believe me sit.


Lod. I Am glad a that, but of what Country Lady?


Bell. And my dominions are more spreading than
Your brothers.

Lod. Ha? that is excellent; if the Villain
Do prosper with my wife, I Will marry her.

Bell. I was not born to perch upon a Dukedom,
Or some such spot of earth, which the dull eyes
Examine by a magnifying glass,
And wonder at; the Roman Eagles never
Did spread their wings upon so many shores,
The silver Moon of Ottomon looks pale
Upon my great Empire; Kings of Spain,
That now may boast their ground, does stretch as wide
As day, are but poor Landlords of a Cell,
Compared to mine inheritance; the truth is,
I am the Devil.

Lod. How a Devil?


Bell. Yes.
Be not affrighted Sir, you see I bring
No horror to distract you: if this presence
Delight you not, I Will weary a thousand shapes
To please my Lord.

Lodw. Shapes quotha.


Bell. Do not tremble.


Lodw. A Devil? I see her cloven foot: I ha not
The heart to pray, Grimundo has undone me.

Bell. I did command my spirits to put on
Satyrs, and Nymphs to entertain you first,
Whiles other in the air maintained a quire
For your delight: why do you keep such distance
With one that loves you? Recollect your self,
You came for pleasure, what does fright my love?
See I am covetous to return delight,
And satisfy your lustful genius:
Come let us withdraw, and on the bed prepared
Beget a Race of smooth and wanton Devils --

Lod. Hold, come not near me; ha? now I compare
The circumstances, they induce me to
A sad belief, and I had breath enough
I would ask a question.

Bell. Any thing, and be
Resolved.

Lod. How came Grimundo and your Devilship
Acquainted?

Bell. He has been my Agent long,
And has deserved for his hypocrisy,
And private sins, no common place in hell,
He Is now my favorite, and we enjoy
Each other daily; but he never did
By any service more endear my love,
Than by this bringing you to my acquaintance,
Which I desired of him long since, with many
And fierce solicit, but he urged his fear,
You were not ripe enough in sin for his
Discovery.

Lod. I feel my self dissolve
In sweat.

Bell. My Lord, I must acknowledge, I
Have ever had you in my first regard
Of any mortal sinner, for you have
The same propention with me, though with
Less malice, spirits of the lower world
Have several offices assigned; some are
To advance pride, some avarice, some wrath;
I am for lust, a gay voluptuous Devil,
Come lets embrace, for that I love my Lord,
Do, and command a Regiment of hell,
They all are at your service.

Lod. O my soul!


Bell. Beside my Lord, it is another motive
To honor you, and by my chains which now
I have left behind, it makes me grow enamored;
Your wife that says her prayers at home, and weeps
Away her fight; O let me hug you for it,
Despise her vows still, spurn her tears again
Into her eyes, thou shall be Prince in hell,
And have a Crown of flames, brighter than that
Which Ariadne wears of fixed stars;
Come shall we dally now?

Lod. My bones within
Are dust already, and I wear my flesh
Like a loose upper garment.

Bell. You Are afraid,
Be not so pale at Liver, for I see
Your blood turns coward, how would you be frighted
To look upon me clothed with all my horror,
That shudder at me now? call up your spirit.

Lod. There are too many spirits here already,
Would thou were conjured, what shall I do?

Bell. What other than to bathe your soul in pleasure,
And never heard of Ravishings; we two
Will progress through the air in Venus Chariot,
And when her silver Doves grow faint and tire,
Cupid and Mercury shall lend us wings,
And we will visit new worlds when we are
Weary of this, we both will back the winds,
And hunt the Phoenix through the Arabian Deserts,
Her we will spoil of all her shining plumes,
To make a blazing Coronet for thy Temples,
Which from the earth beheld, shall draw up wonder,
And puzzle learned Astronomy to distinguish it
From some new Constellation, the Sea
Shall yield us pastime, when inveloped
With clouds blacker than night, we range about;
And when with storms we overthrow whole Navies,
We'll laugh to hear the Mariners exclaim
In many thousand shipwracks; what do I
Urge these particulars? let us be one soul,
Air, earth, and hell is yours.

Lod. I have a suit,
But dare not speak.

Bell. Take courage, and from me
Be confident to obtain.

Lod. I am not well,
The name of Dill came too quick upon me,
I was not well prepared for such a sound,
It turned my blood to Ice, and I ha not
Recovered so much warmth yet, to desire
The sport I came for; would you please but to
Dismiss for me a time, I would return
When I have heat and strength enough for such
A sprightful action.

Bell. I do find your cunning,
You pretend this excuse but to gain time,
In hope you may repent.

Lod. And please your Grace
Not I.

Bell. You will acquaint some Priest or other,
A tribe of all the world I most abhor,
And they will fool you with their Ghostly counsel,
Perplex you with some fond Divinity,
To make you lose the glories I have promised.

Lod. I could never abide such melancholy people.


Bell. In this I must betray, we spirits we have
No perfect knowledge of men's thoughts; I see
Your bloods infeebled, and although my love
Be infinite, and every minute I
Shall languish in your absence, yet your health
I must preserve, it is that feeds my hopes,
Hereafter I shall perfectly enjoy thee;
You will be faithful, and return.

Lod. Suspect not.


Bell. One kiss shall seal consent.


Lod. Her breath smells on brimstone.


Bell. For this time I Will dismiss you -- do not pray,
A spirit shall attend you.

Lod. Do not pray, when did I last? I know not, farewell horror,
He wants a wench that goes to the Devil for her.
Exeunt.
ACTUS. 5.
SCAENA. 1.
Enter Astella and Piero. Ast. Touch me not Villain, piety defend me,
Art thou a man, or have I all this while
Converst with some ill Angel in the shape
Of my Lords friend.

Pier. What needs all this stir,
I urge your benefit.

Astel. To undo my name,
Nay soul for ever with one act.

Pier. One act;
There be those Ladies that have acted it
A hundred times, yet think themselves as good
Christians as other women, and do carry
As much opinion too for virtue.

Astel. Heaven.


Pier. What harm can there be in it, can you neglect
Revenge so just, so easy, and delightful?

Ast. Thy breath does scatter an infection.


Pier. Scatter a toy, be wise, and lose no time,
You know not when such opportunitle
May tempt you to it again; for my own part
I can but do you a pleasure in it, your blood
Should need no other argument.

Ast. I Will sooner
Empty my veins, not to redeem thy soul,
Should sin betray mine honor to one loose
Embrace: hence Traitor, I do feel corruption
In The air already, it will kill me if
I stay: hereafter I Will not wonder how
My Lord became so wicked.

Pier. You will lead me
To some more private Room, I Will follow Madam.
Exeunt
Enter Iacomo. Iac. More private Room said he? I smell a business, I thought
this Gamester had been gone, is it e'ne so, have at your Borough Madam, he is a
shrewd Ferret I can tell you, and just in the nick here comes the Warrener.


Enter Lodwick. Lod. This Devil does not follow me, nor any of her Cubs I
hope, I Am glad I came off so well, I never was so hot to engender with the
Nightmare; could Grimundo find no other creature for my coupling but a
Succubus, methinks I smell the fiend still.


Iac. He talks on her already.


Lod. I am very jealous.


Iac. Not without a cause my Lord.


Lod. Ha? there she is again.


Iac. No my Lord, she is new gone into the withdrawing chamber.


Lod. Ha? who? who is gone?


Iac. A Gentlewoman that you were late in company with.


Lod. The Devil? look well about you then, a spirit
Of her constitution will set the house on fire
Instantly, and make a young hell on it, when
Came she? I shall be everlastinglie haunted
With goblings, art sure thou saw her?

Iac. Saw her, yes, and him too.


Lod. Grimundo?


Iac. No not Grimundo, but I saw another Gentleman
That has been held a notable spirit,
Familiar with her.

Lod. Spirit and familiar.


Iac. Piero my Lord.


Lod. Piero?


Iac. I wonot say what I think, but I think somewhat*
And I know what I say, if she be a Devil, as she
Can be little less, if she be as bad as I imagine,
Some bodies head will ache for it, for mine own
Part I did but see and hear, that is all, and
Yet I ha not told you half.

Lod. Let me collect, sure this fellow by the circumstance
Means Astella; thou talkest all this while of my Lady
Do not?

Iac. Yes my Lord, she is all the Ladies in the house;
For my Lady and Mistress was sent for
To the Abbey.

Lod. I had forgotten my self, this is new horror,
Is my Lady and Piero so familiar say, and
In private?

Iac. What I have said, I have said; and what they have
Done, they have done by this time.

Lod. Done? and I Will be active too.


Iac. Show what feats of activitie you please. Ex. Lod.
So so, now I am alone, which is, as
The learned say, Solus cum sola, I will entertain
Some honorable thoughts of my preferment. Enter Piere.
Hum, the Gamester is returned; what melancholy? then.
He has don't, I Will lay my head to a fools Cap on'c,
I was always so my self after my capring.
Did you not meet the Prince sir?

Pier. No, where is he?


Iac. He was here but now, and enquired how his Lady did, and I told him you
could tell the state of her body better than I. for --


Pier. I did but see her.


Iac. That Is not the right on it, it runs for I did but kiss her, for
I did but kiss her.

Pier. It was enough for me to kiss her hand.
I am suspected, I must turn this fools discourse
Another way, the present theme is dangerous:
What I hear say Iacomo, your Lady is like to rise?

Iac. My Lady does rise as early as other Ladies do that go to bed late.


Pier. And there will be a notable preferment for you.


Iac. It Is very likely my Lady understands her self.


Pier. There is a whisper abroad.


Iac. It Is a good hearing.


Pier. What if she be married in this absence?


Iac. Very likely; I say notthing, but I think I know my Ladies secrets for
the triumph, as pageants, or running at tilt, you may hear more shortly, there
may be Reasons of State to have things carried privatelie, they will break out
in Bells and Bonefires hereafter; what their Graces have intended for me I
conceal.


Pier: He is wound up already.


Iac. You are a Gentleman I shall take particular notice of.


Pier. But what if after all this imagination of a marriage, fortune should
forbid the banes?


Iac. How? fortune's a slut, and because she is a whore her self, would have no
Lady marry and live honest.


Enter Lodw. Lod. Piero, where is Piero?


Pier. Ha my Lord I ha don't.


Lod. Ha, what?


Pier. I ha pleased thy excellence, and you had made more haste, you might a
come to the fall a'th'Deer.


Lod. Thou Have not enjoyed her?


Pier. They talk of Jupiter, and a golden shower,
Give me a Mercury with wit and tongue,
He shall charm more Ladies on their backs,
Than the whole bundle of gods pshew.

Lod. Shoot not so much compass, be brief and answer me; have thou enjoyed her?


Pier. I have, shall I swear?


Lod. No, thou will be damned sufficiently without an oath; in the mean time I
do mean to reward your nimble diligence: draw.


Pier. What dee mean?


Iac. And you be so sharp-set I do mean to withdraw.

Exit.
Lod. I do mean to cut your throat, or perish in the attempt, you see your
destiny, my birth and spirit wo'not let me kill thee in the dark; draw, and be
circumspect.


Pier. Did not you engage me to it? have I done any thing but by your
directions? my Lord.


Lod. It Is all one, my mind is altered, I will see what complexion your heart
bears; if I hit upon the right vein, I may cure your disease a'th blood.


Pier. Hold, and there be no remedy, I will die better than I ha lived; you
shall see sir that I dare fight with you, and if I fall by your sword, my base
consent to act your will deserves it.


Lod. Ha?


Pier. I find your policy, and by this storm
You Would prove my Resolution, how boldly I
Dare stand to it when this great
Dishonor comes to question, prepare
To be displeased -- she is a miracle
Of Chastity, impenetrable like
A marble, she returned my sinful arrows,
And they have wounded me; forgive me Lady.

Lod. I prithee tell me true; now thou shall swear,
Have thou not don't.

Pier. Not by my hope of heaven
Which I had almost forfeited, had not she
Relieved me with her virtue; in this truth
I dare resign my breath.

Lodw. I dare believe thee:
What did I see in her to doubt her firmness?

Enter Jacomo and Astella. Iac. Here they are Madam, you do not mean to
Run upon their weapons.

Lodw. Piero thou shall wonder.


Ast. What means my Lord?


Lodw. You shall know that anon;
My Lady go with me.

Ast. VVhither you please,
You shall not need to force me sir, you may
Lead me with gossamere, or the least thread
The industrious Spider weaves.

Iac. Whimsies.


Pier. What fury thus transport him at some distance,
I Will follow him, he may intend some violence,
She is too good to suffer, I shall grow
In love with my conversion.
Exit.
Iac. Grow in love with a Cockscomb, his last words
Stick on my stomach still fortune forbid the banes
Quotha slid if fortune, should forbid the banes,
And my Lady be not converted into a Duchess
Where are all my offices?
Exit.
Recorders, Chairs prepared. Enter Soranzo, Giotto. Sor. Know you not who they
are my Lord this day
Receive the habit?

Gio. I can meet with no intelligence.


Sor. They are persons of some quality --


Gio. The Duke does mean to grace their Ceremony.


Sor. He was invited by the Abbot to their clothing.


Gio. Which must be in private too, here in his lodgings.


Sor. Well we shall not long expect 'em, his Grace enters.


Enter Duke, Grimundo. Gri. It helped much that he never saw my wife.


Duk. Do think 'twill take?


Gri. There Is some hope my Lord already,
And heaven may prosper it.

Duk. We cannot endear thee to thy merit.


Sor. How the Duke embraces him.


Enter Cleona attended. Duk. Cleona you are welcome, it is a blessed
Occasion that makes us meet so happily.

Cleon. It pleased my Lord Abbot to invite me hither.


Duk. I appeared too upon his friendly summons,
We'll thank him for this presence.

Sor. The Abbot enters.


Enter the Abbot, attended with Religious men, having bowed to the Duke, he
takes a Chair; being sat, Valentio goes out, and presently enters, leading
Foscari and Dulcino in St. Bennets habit, he presents them, they kneel at the
Abbots feet. Abb. Speak your desire.


Fosc. We kneel to be received into the number
Of those Religious men that dedicate
Themselves to heaven i'th'habit of St. Bennet,
And humbly pray that you would rectify
And teach our weak devotion the way
To imitate his life, by giving us
The precepts of your order.

Abbot. Let me tell you,
You must take heed the ground of your Resolve
Be perfect; yet look back into the spring
Of your desires, Religious men should be
Tapers, first lighted by a holy beam:
Meteors may shine like stars, but are not constant.

Fosc. We covet not the blaze, which a corrupt
And slimie matter may advance, our thoughts
Are flamed with charity.

Abb. Yet ere you embark,
Think on your hard adventure, there is more
To be examined beside your end,
And the Reward of such an undertaking;
You look on heaven afar off, like a land-skip,
Whether wild thoughts like your imperfect eye,
Without examination of those ways,
Oblique and narrow are transported, but
In The walk and trial of the difficulties
That interpose, you tire like inconsiderate
And weary Pilgrims.

Fosc. We desire to know
The Rules of our obedience.

Abb. They will startle
Your Resolutions; can your will, not used
To any Law beside it self, permit
The knowledge of severe and positive limits?
Submit to be controlled, employed sometime
In servile offices, against the greatness
Of your high birth and sufferance of nature?
Can you, forgetting all youthful desire,
And memory of the worlds betraying pleasures,
Check wanton heat, and consecrate your blood
To Chastity, and holy solitude?

Sor. I wonot be Religious Giotto.


Giot. Nor I, upon these terms, I pity em.


Abb. Can you quit all the glories of your state,
Resign your titles and large wealth, to live
Poor and neglected, change high food and surfets
For a continual fasting, your down-beds
For hard and humble lodging, your gilt Roofs
And Galleries for a melancholy Cell,
The pattern of agrave, where, stead of music
To charm you into slumbers, to be waked
With the sad chiming of the sacring Bell;
Your Robes, whose curiosity has tired
Invention, and the Silkworm to adorn you,
Your blaze of Jewels, that your pride have worn
To burn out Envies eyes, must be no more
Your ornament, but coarse, and rugged clothing
Harrow your skins; these, and many more
Unkind austerities will much offend
Your tender constitutions; yet consider.

Duk. He does insist much on their state and honor:
May we not know em yet?

Ual. One of them sir
Does owe this character.
Gives him a paper.
Duk. It is Foscari,
I find his noble purpose, he is perfect:
I honor thee young man, she must not see
This paper.
Gives another paper.
Val. This does speak the other Sir.


Duk. It Is at large -- ha -- Grimundo, I prithee read,
I dare not credit my own eyes: Leonora,
So it begins, Leonora.

Grim. Leonora, Daughter to the late Gonzaga, Duke
Of Millan, fearing she should be compelled to marry
Her Uncle, in the habit of a Page, and the conduct
Of Father Valentio, came to Savoy, to try the
Love and honor of his Excellence, who once
Solicit^d by his Ambassador --

Duk. No more, I am extasied;
If so much blessing may be met at once,
I Will do my heart that justice to proclaim
Thou had a deep impression; as a boy
I loved thee too, for it could be no other,
But with a Divine flame; fair Leonora,
Like to a perfect magnes, though enclosed
With an Ivorie box, through the white wall
Shot forth embracing virtue: now, oh now
Our Destinies are kind.

Fosc. This is a mystery, Dulcino?


Leon. No my Lord, I am discovered;
You see Leonora now, a Millan Lady,
If I may hope your pardon --

Duk. Love and honor
Thou do enrich my heart: Cleona read,
And entertain the happiness to which
Thy Fate predestined thee, whilst I obey
Mine here.
Cleona reads.
Cleon. How, my Lord Foscari?
If he be living, I must die before
This separation be confirmed; my joy
Does overcome my wonder; can you leave
The world, while I am in it?

Fosc. Dear'st Leonora!
Then willingly I dispense with my intention,
And if the Duke have found another Mistress,
It shall be my devotion to pray here,
And my Religion to honor thee.

Ab. Many blessings crown this union.


Fosc. Your pardon gracious Princess,
I did impose too much.

Leon. I studied
To be your grateful Servant, as your self
Unto the fair Cleona; we are all happy.

Enter Lodwick, Astella, and Piero. Lodw. They Are here; by your leave Brother,
my Lord Abbot,
Witness enough.

Duk. Why thus kneels Lodwick?


Lodw. To make confession Brother, and beg heavens,
And every good man's pardon, for the wrong
I ha done this excellent Lady, whom my soul
New marries, and may heaven -- ha, do not hold
A justice back: Grimundo is a traitor,
Take heed on him, and say your prayers; he is
The Devils grand Solicitor for souls.
He has not such another cunning engine in the
World to ruin virtue.

Grim. I, my Lord?


Lodw. You are no hypocrite: he does every night
Lie with a Succubus; he brought me to one,
Let him deny it; but heaven had pity on me.
Enter Belinda. Ha! there she is: do you not see her? Devil
I do defy thee: my Lord, stand by me:
I will be honest spite of him and thee,
And lie with my own Wife.

Giot. Sure the Prince is mad.


Duk. O rise most noble Lady, well deserving
A statue to record thy virtue.

Lodw. Ha?


Duk. This is Grimundo's Wife.


Lodw. It Is so, my Lord.


Bell. No Devil, but the servant of your virtue,
That shall rejoice if we have thrived in your conversion.

Ast. I hope it.


Lodw. Have I bin mocked into honesty?
Are not you a Fury? and you a sly and subtle Epicure?

Grim. I do abhor the thought of being so:
Pardon my seeming, Sir.

Ab. O go not back,
Prevent thus seasonable your real torment.

Lodw. I am fully wakened, be this kiss the Pledge
Of my new heart.

Pier. True love stream in your bosoms;
Lady forgive me too.

Ast. Most willingly.


Duk. Our joy is perfect: Lodwick salute
A Sifter in this Lady Leonora,
The object of our first love; take the story
As we return: Lord Abbot we must thank
You for contriving this; and you good Father.
Ambassadors shall be dispatched to Millan,
To acquaint 'em where, and how their absent Princess
Leonora has disposed her self; meanwhile,
Poets shall stretch invention, to express
Triumphs for thee, and Savoys happiness.
Exeunt Omnes.
FINIS.
Books Printed, or So(...) at the Sign of the Crown in Fleet(...) the two
Temple Gates.
YOrks Heraldry. Fol. A Bible, of a very fair large Roman Letter. 4. Orlando
Furioso. fol. (...)ilkinsons Office of Sheriffs. Mirror of Justice. 8. Parsons
Law. 8. (...)elamans use of the Horizontal quadrant (...)ilbeys second Set of
Music, 3, 4, 5, and 6, Parts. 4. Corderius in English. 8. (...). Fulks
Meteors, with Observations 8. Malthus Artificial Fireworks. (...)ye's Gunnery
and Fireworks. (...)to Major, with Annotations. By William Austin, Esquire.
(...)tell Heliconium, by Alex. Ross. 8. (...)osce teipsum, by Sir John Davis. 8.
(...)nimadversions on Lillies Grammar. 8. (...)he History of Vienna and Paris.
The History of Lazarido de Tormes. (...)ero and Licander, by George Chapman.
(...)ayer's Catechism. 8. (...)ercitatio Scholastica. (...)sing of the
Accidence. (...)rberts Travels, fol. (...)an become guilty, by John Francis
Senalt, and Englished by Henry, Earl of Monmouth. The Idiot, in four Books.
(...)e Life and Reign of Hen. 8. by the Lord Herbert. fol. (...)la Lucis, or
the house of Light. (...)e ^^^t-Royal of holy Scripture, or a new Concordance
of the chief heads of Scripture, by I. H. Tragoedy, written by the most learned
Hugo Gropius, called CHRISTUS PATIENS, and translated into English, by George
Sandys. (...)e Mount of Olives, or solitary devotions (...)e description and
use of the double orizontal Dyal. (...)e Rights of the people concerning
Imositions. (...)nce painted out to the life. The second (...)dition. (...)e
Garden of Eden, both parts. (...) exact Abridgement of the Records in (...)he
Tower of London, from the Reign (...)f K. Edward the second, to K. Richard
(...)he third, of all the Parliaments hol(...)en in each Kings Reign, and the
several Acts in every Parliament, by Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet. Le
Prince d'Amour, or the Prince of Love; With a collection of several ingenious
Poems and Songs, by the Wits of the Age. 8. The Solemn League and Covenant,
Arraigned and Condemned. The Result of False Principles, or Error convicted by
its own evidence, with Diott^phes his Dialogues, by the Author of the
Examination of Tyleaus before the Tryers; whereunto is added a learned
Disputation of Dr. Goads, sent by King James to the Synod at Dort. An Apology
for the Discipline of the ancient Church, intended especially for that of our
Mother the Church of England, in answer to the Admonito^y Letter, lately
published by William Nichoison, Archdeacon of Br^con, and now Lord Bishop of
Gloucester. A learned Expositon of the Apostles Creed, delivered in several
Sermons, by the Right Reverend Father in God, William Nicholson, Lord Bishop of
Gloucester. Dav^ds Harp strung and tuned, being a brief Analysis of David's
Psalms, with devout Prayers and Meditations to every Psalm, framed for the most
part out of the words of the Psalm, and fitted for several occasions. By
William Nich^^son, Lord Bishop of Gloucester. Mathematical Recreations. Callis
learned Readings on the Statute 21 of H. n. 8. Chap. 5. of Sewers. Sken, de
signisicatione verborum. 4. Flamma sine famo, or Poems without Fictions. 12.
PLAYS.
The Wedding. Philaster. The Hollander. The Merchant of Venice. The strange
Discovery. Maids Tragedy. King and no King. Othello, the Moor of Venice. The
Grateful Servant.

