THE True Christian's FAITH AND EXPERIENCE Briefly Declared, Concerning God,
Christ, the Spirit, the holy Scriptures, the Gospel and the Doctrines thereof.

Also, The Titular Christian's Faith and Profession Tried, Examined and Judged.

Written for the Confirmation and Consolation of the One, and for the
Information in order to the Restoration and Salvation of the Other.

Also, A Few Words to such who are newly turned in their Minds to the Light
within, and are Believers in it.

By William Shown.

He is not a Jew that is one outwardly, Romans 2.28. -- He that has the Bride,
is the Bridegroom, John 3.29. -- He that has the Son has Life; he that has
not the Son, has not Life, John 5.6. -- Darkness is past, the True Light now
shines, 1 John 2.8. The People that walked in Darkness have seen a great
Light, they that dwell in the Shadow of Death, upon them has the Light shined,
Isa. 9.2. -- Every one that does Evil, hates the Light, etc. John 3.20.21.
Printed in the Year 1675.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Faith and Experience of the True Christian briefly declared

1. Concerning God, page 33. 2. Concerning Christ, page 39. 3. Concerning the
Holy Spirit, page 45. 4. Concerning the Holy Scriptures, page 48. 5. Concerning
Repentance, page 52. 6. Concerning Mortification, Warfare, Self-denial and
Dying Daily, page 60. 7. Concerning Sanctification, Washing and Cleansing from
Sin and Corruption, page 65. 8. Concerning Justification, page 72. 9.
Concerning Baptism and the Lord's Supper, page 76. 10. Concerning the Universal
Love of God toward all Mankind, page 88. 11. Concerning Election and
Reprobation, page 92. 12. Concerning Temptation, page 105. 13. Concerning a
Holy Life, page 114. 14. Concerning the Motion or Moving of the Spirit of God,
and the Motion of the Spirit of the Old Serpent in the Hearts of Men, page 119.
15. Concerning Revelation, page 224. 16. Concerning the Gospel, or Gladtidings
of Life and Salvation, page 133. 17. Concerning Grace, and Living under it, and
Growing in it from one Degree unto another; and of the Possibility of Falling
Away from it, page 142. 18. Concerning Outward and Inward Miracles, page 150. 19.
Concerning the Doctrine and State of Perfection. page 161. 20. A Few Words to
such as are newly turned in their Minds to the Light, and are Believers in it.
page 173.
TO THE READER.
Friend,
THou may know, that in this Part of the World called Christendom, the Name
Christian is very Famous, and that there are few therein but desire to be
called by that Name; and a high and great Profession of Christianity abounds
amongst the diverse Sects therein, all covering the Name of Christian,
but the Christian-Life, the Christ-like Life, and the nature of Christianity
is much Wanting; and the Fruits and Effects of the holy Spirit of Christianity
are much wanting among them all, and the contrary much abounds, whereby an Evil
Savor is sent forth to the Nations round about, called, Heathens and Infidels:
For, there is scarce any Sort of Wickedness to be found upon the Face of the
whole Earth, which is not done and committed in this Part of the World, called
Christendom, whereby the Jews and Heathen, instead of being Converted, are
strengthened and confirmed in their Infidelity, Ignorance, Blindness and
Idolatry; For, where this Nominal or Titular Christian has prevailed (as among
the Americans) he has sent forth such a Stink and III Savor, by his
Abominable Inhumane Practices, that the Name of Christ is blasphemed, and the
Christian-Religion hated, by many that have heard the Fame and Report thereof.

Had the Life of Christ, and the Nature of Christianity been known and lived in
by all that profess the Name, Christendom had bin as a Fruitful Field, and as a
Pleasant Garden enclosed, and as a Vineyard walled about full of Trees of
Righteousness, and Plants of God's own Right Hand planting; and the Tree of
Life would have flourished among them in the midst thereof; and the Leaves of
the same would have healed the Nations round about; and it would have been as a
City set upon an Hill, which cannot be hid; and as a Lamp that burns, being
fed with Sweet Oil; and as a Glorious Light that shines; and many would have
fled unto it, as unto a City of Refuge, and have walked in the Light thereof,
and have seen and beheld their Good Works, and have Glorified their Father
which is in Heaven; and they would have lain down as a Flock of Harmless Lambs
together, solacing themselves in the Green Pastures of Life and Salvation, in
the low Valley, and a top of that holy Mountain, where no Destroyer is, nor
none can make afraid; Isa. 11.7, 8, 9.
Where the Lion eats Straw like the Ox, and where the Sucking Child-plays on
the Hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child puts his Hand on the Cockatrice's Den
without Hurt: And the Earth would have been full of the Knowledge of the Lord,
as the Waters cover the Sea: And this Song would have been in Christendom, as
in the Land of Judah, Isa. 26.1, 2.
We have a strong City; Salvation will God appoint for Walls and Bullworks: and
the Gates thereof would have been open to them, as a Righteous Nation, that
keeps the Truth, that they might have entered in, and dwelt safely; this would
have been the State of Christendom.

But, alas, alas! the quite Contrary appears: Instead of being as a Fruitful
Field, and as a Pleasant Garden ^^closed, and as a Vineyard planted and walled
about, bearing Fruit unto God, and flourishing with Trees and Plants of his own
Right Hand planting; its like a Desert, Howling Wilderness, full of Briars and
Thorns, and hurtful Weeds, whereby the Good Seed that was sown is choked, and
the Noble Plant degenerated from, and become the Plant of a strange Vine, which
brings forth the sower Grapes, which makes the Wine of Sodom, which fills the
Whore's Cup, whereby Nations are made drunk.

And instead of being like a Flock of Harmless Lambs, and lying down together
in Love and Unity, feeding in the Green Pastures of Life and Salvation, in the
low Valley, and a top of the holy Mountain, where no Destroyer is, they are
like unto a Herd of Swine, that is possessed, and runs violently into the Sea,
and that walloweth in the Mire; and like the Wolf, Bear, Lion,
Asp and Cockatrice, which the little Child has not Power over; but their
devouring and poisonous Nature remains, which makes them prey one upon another,
bite and devour one another, hate and murder one another, even under the
Profession and Name of Christ and Christianity: So instead of being as a City,
whose Walls are Salvation, and as the heavenly Jerusalem, they are like Sodom,
Gomorrah and Babylon: And instead of being like a Lamp that burns, being fed
with sweet Oil, and a Light that shines, they are like a Lamp that is gone out,
and a Candle under a Bed or Bushel, which gives no Light to others: Instead of
the Meekness, Love, Brotherly-kindnes, Gentleness, Patience, Long-suffering,
Forgiveness, Innocence, Goodness, Harmlesness, Righteousness and
Heavenly-mindedness of Jesus, which he and his Followers were and are endued
withal, the quite contrary abounds; and yet a Profession of Jesus in Words is
not wanting in these Nations called Christendom; so that Isaiah's Vision, Sight
or Prophecy is fulfilled therein, The show of their Countenance does witness
against them, Isa. 3.9, 12.
and they declare their Sin as Sodom, they hide it not: Woe unto their Soul; for
they have rewarded Evil unto themselves; Children are their Oppressors, and
Women rule over them: Oh my People! they which lead thee, cause thee to Err,
and destroy the Way of thy Paths, etc.

In this day also this Prophecy is fulfilled in Christendom, Seven Women shall
take hold of one Man, Isa. 4.1.
saying, We will eat our own Bread, and wear our own Apparel, only let us be
called by thy Name, to take away our Reproach:
These seven Women are (or may fitly be compared to) the perfect full Number of
all the Titular Christians of all the diverse Sects and Opinions in whole
Christendom, who profess the Name of Christ, and call Christ their Husband, but
play the Harlot with other Lovers, and eat their own Bread, which is the
forbidden Fruit (and the old gathered Manna) and wear their own Apparel, which
they have sowed together with their own Hands, and formed by their own
Inventions, to cover they Nakedness in Transgression: But the Lord God, whom
they have transgressed against, is come down to walk in his Garden; and he
finds it overgrown with Weeds, Thorns, Briars and Thistles; but neither the
Weeds, Trees nor Fig Tree Leaves of Profession, though sowed together, and made
like a Garment of Modefty and Righteousness,
can hide from his All-seeing Eye; the Word Adam, where art thou? is sounded
forth, and he and all his Works are found out, and the hidden things of Esau
are sought out, and the Earth can no longer cover her slain: But the Blood of
Righteous Abel cries, and the Souls under the Altar cry, How long Lord, how
long will it be ere thou avenge thy self on them that dwell on the Earth, and
yet profess thy Name and thy Son's Name, and say, Thus says the Lord, when
they have not heard thy Voice, nor seen thy Shape, nor known thy wondrous
Works in the Deep, nor regarded the Operation of thy Hand?

Because of these things the Cry of the Righteous has been unto the Lord in
all Ages, and is now in this Age, even because of the Hatred and Bloodiness of
Cain about Religion and Worship, and because of the Envy of Esau about the
Blessing; and because the great Whore, who sits upon the Waters, and rides upon
the Beast, and calls her self the Lamb's Wife, and holds forth her Golden Cup,
full of Abominations, with which the Nations (even those called Christendom)
are made drunk, has so far prevailed.

And because the Waters on which the Whore sits, which are Nations, Tongues
and People; and the Beast on whom she rides, takes her Golden Cup for the Cup
of Blessing, and for the Gold that is tried in the Fire, and the Wine of
Fornication, for the New Wine of the Kingdom.

And because this great Whore is taken for the Bride, the Lamb's Wife; the
Harlot for the Spouse of Christ; the Titular Christian for the True; finally,
because Light is called Darkness, and Darkness Light; Good Evil, and Evil Good.

I say, This made Jeremy wish his Head were Waters, and his Eyes a Fountain of
Tears, that he might weep day and night for the Slain of the Daughter of his
People, Jer. 9.1, 2. This made Christ to weep over Jerusalem, and Paul to wish
himself separate from Christ for his Brethrens sake. This made the Prophets,
Apostles and Ministers willing to spend and be spent, and to run to and fro,
that Knowledge might be increased, and People undeceived.
because of these things the Cry and Breathing of the Souls of the Righteous is
unto the Lord, that he would take away the Vail that is spread over the Hearts
of all People by Transgression, and open the Blind Eye, and unstop the Deaf
Ear, that his Glory may be seen, and his Voice heard, and the two great
Mysteries of Godliness and Iniquity revealed.

And that People may come to look upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn
over him, even him whom they have kissed with their Lips, but betrayed in their
Hearts, and so come to that Godly Sorrow which leads to Repentance, and a
Turning unto him, who redeemeth from all these things, and brings into Favor
with God again, and gives Right to eat of the Tree of Life, and to enter
through the Gate into the City, even the heavenly Jerusalem; which, that all
may partake of and inherit, is the Desire of the True Christian, who has
received the Gospel of Peace and Goodwill to all men; the which, that thou may
attain unto, take the Counsel of one who was a Child of Wrath as well as
others, and once lived in the Nature of Cain and Esau, and was one of them on
whom the Whore sat, and was deceived by her Golden Cup, and drank of the Wine
of her Fornication; and once took the Whore for the Lamb's Wife, the Harlot for
the true Woman, Babylon for Jerusalem, Antichrist for Christ, the Titular
Christian for the True: But now knows that the Son of God is come, and a good
Understanding given, whereby he knows him that is true, and is in him that is
true; and has received Wisdom to trace the Eagle in the Air, and the Serpent
on the Rock, and the Adulterous Woman, who eats (the Forbidden Fruit) and
wipeth her Mouth, and says, She has done none Evil; and is now acquainted
with the Wiles and Mysterious Workings of him, who is more subtle then all the
Beasts of the Field; and is come to the Rending of the Vail, and the taking off
the Covering, and to the falling of the Scales from his Eyes, and to the
Revelation of the two great Mysteries of Godliness and Iniquity; I say unto
thee, whosoever thou art, that read these words (and know not the same)
Turn thy Mind inward;
commune with thy own Heart, and be still; stand in Awe, and sin not; fear to
offend that holy Spirit which searches thy Heart, and love the Reproofs
thereof; for its the Way of Life; and wait low in the same, until that Eye be
opened in thee that can see God's Salvation, that he has appointed unto the
ends of the Earth; then will thou Rejoice therein.

And cease from Man,
whose Breath is in his own Nostrils, and speaks the studied Inventions of his
own corrupt Heart, and the Traditions of his Forefathers, and yet says, Thus
says the Lord, when he has not spoaken unto him, nor heard his Voice, nor
seen his Shape; but speaks the Conceivings and Divinations of his own Brain,
and the Uncertain Notions of his own Spirit; The The Root of all Division,
Erroneous Opinions and Sects.
listening and hearkening to this, and following of this in the particular and
in the general, is the universal Ground and Root from whence spring all the
Diversities of Sects and Erroncous Opinions upon the Face of the Earth; and
from this arises all the Willing and Running, Self-Righteousness,
Will Worship, Voluntary Humility, and Intrusion into Things which are not seen
in the Vision of God, but being vainly puffed up in a fleshly Mind: Now this
thou art to cease from in thy own particular; for thou were not created to
sollow thy own Thoughts, Conceivings and Imaginations,
nor the Motions of the Flesh, nor Enticements of the Serpent; But another
Guide is appointed for thee, which all that are ignorant of, go astray from
their Youth.

Now, this Guide is not far off, that thou need say, Who shall ascend, or
descend, or go beyond the Seas to setch it; but its nigh thee, in thy Mouth and
in thy Heart, tha^ thou may hear it, and obey it, and be guided by it.

And that thou may know its Voice, and Teaching, and Guidance from all other
Voices and Teachings, I will in a few words set before thee an Infallible Way,
and show thee Certain Marks and Tokens thereof; for its known by its Work and
Operation.

First, If thou art (as all are before the New Creation is known) without Form,
and Void, Darkness being over the Face of the Deep;
if thou art as the Waters, or one covered with Darkness; yet the Spirit of God
moves upon the Waters, and is ready to work in thee, and to form thee into a
Comeliness: and the true Light shines in thee, though thou art Darkness, in
order to show thee the Way out of it: And thou may know this holy Spirit,
that moves upon the Waters, and the Voice of it from thy own Spirit, Thoughts
and Imaginations, and from the Voice of the Serpent, An infallible Mark of the
Holy Spirit of God in the Hearts of Men, Jew and Gentile.
because it always moves against every Appearance of Evil, and calls out of
it; shows thee the very secret Thoughts and Intents of thy Heart, reproves
and judges every vain Thought and wicked Imagination; and when thou go
before it, and walk in the Paths of Darkness, Sin and Disobedience, thou
may hear it as a Voice behind thee, reproving thee, saying, This is the Way,
walk in it. And this holy Guide consents to no Evil thou do; but is given of
God to lead thee out of it, and to bring thee to him that saves from it; This
is the great Ordinance of God, Ae
and the Means of Salvation, that he has appointed; the which, if thou slight
and difregard, thou will remain without Form, Void, and Empty of the Heavenly
Treasures, and never be able to say in Truth as the Primitive Christians did,
and the True Christians now can (viz.) God, who commanded Light to shine out of
Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give us the Light of the Knowledge of
the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ; and so wilt continue ignorant of
the New Creation of God, and of the Experimental Work of Regeneration, profess
what thou will,
and live under what other Ordinances and Means thou will, and hear what other
Teachers thou will, and follow what other Guides thou will, if thou learnest
not of the Grace of God within, which has appeared to thee and all men, if
thou walk not in the Light which shines within, and art not guided by the
good Spirit of God, which was the Saints Guide in all Ages, thy Profession is
vain, and thy Religion a Lie, and thou deceivest thy own Soul; in Sin thou
live, and in Sin thou will dye, and where Christ is, thou can not come.
This is the Experience of him that has tried the Traditions of Men, the
Teachings and Inventions of Men, Books and studied Sermons, and Carnal
Ordinances, and has found them not able to lead one Step in the Narrow Way, or
give perfect Victory over one Sin; neither is all the Wisdom, Understanding,
Prudence and Knowledge among all the Children of men, that are Strangers to the
New Creation and Work of Regeneration, wrought by the Spirit of God within
themselves,
able to direct or bring any so much as to the Gate or Entrance of true Wisdom,
Life and Immortality; but rather hedgeth up the Way, and leads more and more
astray from it.

This is the Wisdom and Knowledge which the Righteous in former Ages testified
against, which is of this World Fleshly and Foolish, Earthly and Sensual and
whoever increases in it, encrea^eth in that which brings Sorrow (for as the
Fool, so dies this Wise Man And whosoever sets himself up (...) this Wisdom,
as a Teacher of the Ignorant, and as a Guide to the Blin^ though allowed by
the Universiti^ (or general Schools) he runs before he is sent, and does not
profit t^ People at all; but is as the Bli^ which leads the Blind, and they
b^ fall into the Ditch together, out which there is no Redemption, (...) by the
Knowledge of the Effect Working of the holy Spirit, and Son of God in thee, to
open thy Eye, that thou may see where thou art, and beget a Desire in thee,
and a Cry in thee for Deliverance, and minister Strength unto thee, and to pull
thy Feet out of the Mire and Clay, and to set them upon a Rock; and be as a
Light unto thee, to guide thee in thy Way, that thou stumblest not again; all
which I testify, he is ready and willing to do for thee, and all that love his
Appearance;
And those only love his Appearance, that love the Spirit of Truth in them, and
believe in it, and receive it, which reproves them of Sin, of Righteousness,
and of Judgment; and this is an Infallible Proof, that People love this Spirit,
believe in it, and receive it, A True Proof that People love the Spirit.
when they walk in it, and obey it, and bring forth the Fruits of it, and are
led by it out of Sin, and that Righteousness and Judgment, which it did reprove
them of, while they lived therein, and are led by it into that Holiness and
Everlasting Righteousness (through true Judgment) which is the White Raiment,
Fine Linen, and Clothing of the True Christian, who is come to know the same
holy Spirit of Truth, which once convinced, reproved and judged him for Sin and
Ungodliness, to make him free from it, and become his Comforter and Leader into
all Truth, according to the Promise of Christ Jesus, Joh. 16. the which to
possess and enjoy, The Sum of Christian-Religion.
is the End, Sum and Substance of the Christian-Religion, and the End of all
Hearing, Reading, Preaching and Believing: And that thou may know, whether
thou art a Possessor hereof, or whether thou only talkest of it, and professest
it, I in the Bowels of Love entreat and beseec^ thee seriously to weigh, read
and confider what follows, as the Faith and Experience of a True Christian,
which i^ written in True Love and Good-Wi^^ to all that have the Vail over
their Hearts, and the Scales before their Eyes, when they are reading the holy
Scriptures, and professing God, Christ and Christianity, and the Doctrines
thereof, which are but briefly hinted at or spoaken to in few words, in what
follows.

And whether thou art a bare Professor, or a real Possessor, thou may reap
Profit hereby; if the one, thou art in vited to inherit Substance; if the
other, thou art exhorted and Warned, to beware, lest thou lose thy Inheritance
again. So to the Light, Grace and holy Spirit of God in thee (...) thou
Professor, Profane or Believer^ I do commend thee, with it to read, and with
it to judge, and by it to be taught and g^^ded into a good Understanding, and
into the true Knowledge of the two great Mysteries of Godliness and Iniquity.

And that thou may truly understand and receive the one, and discover and
avoid the other, is the Desire of him who is a Lover of the Christian-Religion,
and of all that walk therein, and has Good Will to all men;

William Shown.

Reader,
THese Scriptures following, having a good Esteem in my Mind, as Sayings worthy
greatly to be noted, and weightily considered, I have committed them to the
Press; wishing thou may enjoy the End wherefore.

And this I will assure thee, If thou can understand, believe and receive
these Divine and Heavenly Sayings, Precepts, Exhortations, Promises and
Testimonies, in these and other Scriptures mentioned in this brief Declaration
of a True Christian's Faith, etc. thou will not stumble at, nor reject his
Testimony, etc. but embrace and have Unity therewith. But if thou understandest
not, nor believe the one, neither will thou the other; for the True Christian
bears Testimony to the holy Scriptures, and the Scriptures to him; and the
Titular Christian's Testimony is against them, and they are against him,
because he does not obey them, nor live the Life they call for.

Eccl. 12.1, 2. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the Evil
Days come not; nor the Years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
Pleasure in them; while the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not
darkened, nor the Clouds return after the Rain.

Dearly Beloved, Believe not every Spirit; but try the Spirits, whether they
are of God; for many False Prophets are gone out into this World, 1 John 4. 1,
etc.

Little Children, You are of God, and have overcome them; for, greater is he
that is in you then he that is in the World, Verse. 4.

Whosoever transgress^th, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not
God: He that continues in the Doctrine of Christ, has both the Father and the
Son, 2 John 9th verse.

If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into
your House, neither bid him God speed, Verse. 10.

To be Carnally-minded, is Death; but to be Spiritually-minded, is Life and
Peace; because the Carnal Mind is Enmity against God; for it is not subject to
the Law of God, neither indeed can be: So then, they that are in the Flesh
cannot please God. But ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be
that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now, if any man have not the Spirit of
God, he is none of his. And if Christ be in you, the Body is dead because of
Sin; but the Spirit is Life because of Righteousness. But if the Spirit of him
that raised up Jesus from the Dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from
the Dead shall also quicken your Mortal Bodies by his Spirit, that dwells in
you, Romans 8.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Unto the Pure all things are pure; but unto them that are Defiled and
Unbelieving, is nething pure; but even their Minds and Consciences are defiled:
They profess, that they know God, but by Works they deny him, and are
abominable; and to every good Work Reprobate, Tit. 1.15, 16.

If ye abide in me, and my Words abide in you, ask what you will, and it shall
be done unto you, John 15.7.

And you shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free. Whosoever
commits sin is the Servant of sin, John 8.32, 34.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my Saying, he shall never see
Death, Verse. 51.

Father, I will, That they also whom thou have given me be with me where I am,
that they may behold my Glory, which thou have given me; for thou lovedst me
before the Foundation of the World. That the Love wherewith thou have loved me,
may be in them, and I in them, John 17.24, 26.

The Disciple is not above his Master, but every one that is perfect shall be
as his Master, Luke 6.40.

But love ye your Enemies, and do good; and lend, hoping for nothing again; and
your Reward shall be great, and ye shall be the Children of the Highest; for he
is Kind to the Unthankful, and to the Evil: Be ye therefore Merciful, as your
Father also is Merciful, Luke 6.35, 36.

Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.

But the Anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you; And ye need
not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you of all
things; and is Truth, and is no Lie: And even as it has taught you, ye shall
abide in him, 1 John 2.27.

Read the 8th Chapter to the Romans, and the Lord give thee Understanding.

Romans 10.8. The Word is nigh thee, in thy Mouth and in thy Heart; that is the
Word of Faith which we preach. And hereby we do know that we know him, if we
keep his Commandments: He that says, he knows him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him: But whosoever keeps his
Word, in him verily is the Love of God perfected; hereby know we, that we are
in him. He that says, He abides in Him, ^ught himself also so to walk, even
as he walked, 1 John 2.3, 4, 5, 6. read to the end of the Chapter.

Little Children, Let no man deceive you: He that does Righteousness is
Righteous, even as he is Righteous: He that commits Sin is of the Devil; for
the Devil sins from the beginning: For this Purpose was the Son of God
manifest, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil. Whosoever is born of
God, does not commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is born of God. In this the Children of God are manifest, and the
Children of the Devil; Whosoever does not Righteousness is not of God, neither
he that loves not his Brother. We know, that we have passed from Death to Life,
because we love the Brethren. He that loves not his Brother, abides in Death,
1 John Chap. 3. Verse. 2. to the 10th and 14th.

No man has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwells in us,
and his Love is perfected in us. Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he
in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. And we have seen, and do
testify, That the Father sent the Son, to be the Savior of the World, 1 John
4.12. read to the end of the Chapter.

I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the Fire, that thou may be Rich;
and White Raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the Shame of thy
Nakedness do not appear; and anoint thy Eyes with Eye Salve, that thou may
see. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; be Zealous therefore, and Repent.
Behold, I stand at the Door, and knock; if any man hear my Voice, and open the
Door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me. To him that
overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame,
and am sat down with my Father in his Throne. He that has an Ear, let him
hear what the Spirit says to the Churches, Rev. 3.18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

To him that Overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give
him a White Stone, and in the Stone a New Name written, which no man knows
save he that receives it, Rev. 2.17.

He that believes has the Witness in himself.

He that overcomes, shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he
shall be my Son.

But the Fearful and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderer, and
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars shall have their Part
in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the Second Death,
Rev. 21.7, 8.

Thus I have here transcribed and set before thee these Scriptures before,
being very Divine and Heavenly Sayings, greatly worthy of thy reading over and
over again; and in that Light and Grace which shines and appears in thy Heart,
and is able to remove the Covering, and take away the Vail from off the same; I
desire thee to weigh and consider them, and measure and try thy self thereby.
Had I not the Remembrance still upon my Mind, how I often read those
Scriptures, and many the like, while my Understanding was clouded, and the Vail
over my Heart, and did not understand what I read, nor receive the Comfort of
them, nor witness the Truth thereof in my self; I say, were it not for this
Remembrance, and the Knowledge of the true Light, that now shines out of
Darkness, I should admire and wonder how the Titular Christian, who reads and
professes the holy plain Testimonies, Precepts Exhortations, and Glorious
Promises recorded in the Holy Scriptures (and lived in, and born witness to by
diverse true Christians now in this Age) should oppose and gainsay the fame,
and understand nothing thereof.

Though he professes them to be (...) he is so far from being ruled by (...)
Ru^^ that he hates and persecutes those that are, and that have received the
good things they testify of.

And were it not that the holy Scriptures had a great Esteem in the Affections
of the People of those Nations called Christendom, and that they did bear so
plain Evidence to the Truth of the Doctrines taught, and Heavenly Estates now
professed and enjoyed by the True Christian, he would be more hated, persecuted
and cried out against then he is: So for this Reason and diverse more, he has
great Cause to praise God, that the Scriptures have been preserved, and the
holy divine Sayings and Testimonies of the Righteous delivered down to this
Age, so clear, true and plain as they are; for he alone enjoyes the Benefit,
Privilege and Comfort of them, by the Virtue and Operation of the Light, Love
and Spirit of God, which they testify of, working in his Inward Man: And
except this be known, the Scriptures and all Heavenly things are as a sealed
Book to thee, let thy Natural Parts, Wisdom and Acquired Seize be never
so great: Therefore thy Duty is above all things, To hearken to and obey the
Voice of God, and regard the Inspiration of the Almighty, which gives
Understanding, that thou may learn his Heavenly Precepts, and understand his
Divine Mysteries, and enjoy his Glorious Promises, and be made wise unto
Salvation, and so inherit Everlasting Life, Peace and Glory, and know an
Entrance ministered into the Joy of the Lord.

And at least an Earnest of all these things thou art to know, revealed, felt
and enjoy within thy self, before thou go hence, and be no more among men.

Therefore put not the Day of the Lord afar off, nor say in thy Heart, The Lord
delays his Coming; for he waits to show himself gracious unto thee, and is
come nigh unto Judgment, and stands even at the Door, Read. Proverbs 8.
and appears at the Gate and Entrance of thy Hearth and his Appearance thou
may (...) infallibly know from all other Appearances because it judges every
Appearance of Evil^ and not only so, but if thou openest the Gate, and
entertainest him in thy Heart, h^ will furnish thee with Power and Strength
against it, and fill thy Temple with his Heavenly Treasures of Wisdom and
Glory: S^ shall thou not only read and hear of Goo^ Things, but understand,
possess and enjoy them; and be able to obey this Exhortatio^^ Abstain from
every Appearance of Evil.

And this Saying, once spoaken to Cain, the Firstborn, after Transgression,
universally concerns thee and all Mankind, and is sounded daily in their Ears,
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? But if thou do Evil, Sin lies
at thy Door, Genesis 4.3. And Tribulation and Anguish attends every Soul of Man
that does Evil (let him profess what he will) Romans 2.9.

Something by Way of Caution and Warning to the Titular Christian, to whose
Hand this following Treatise may come.
I Have some Sense upon my Mind, that thou will upon thy reading thereof, be
ready to censure and judge those Things thou understandest not, nor have had
any Experience of; and also, to deride and mock at the frequent Testimonies and
Exhortations to the Light within, Grace within, Spirit within, Power of God
within, Word of God within, Law within, etc. Consider what thou do, and
against what and whom thou openest thy Mouth, and dread the living God, whom in
Words only thou professest to be a Spirit, Infinite, Omnipresent and Almighty,
which Spirit searches thy Heart, and judges thy Ways, though thou at present
be Ignorant and Unbelieving concerning him, and his being so near thee; and
also consider within thy self, how that if thou know not Light shining
within, and a walking in it, thou art no Child of it, but Darkness abounds in
thee, and thou know not whither thou go, nor at what thou stumblest; if
Grace thou know not to rule and reign within thee, Sin rules, and Death,
the Wages thereof, is present with thee; if the Spirit of God thou know not
teaching and ruling in thy Heart, and sitting upon the Throne thereof, the
Spirit of Satan, Devil and Antichrist rules there and teaches there, and thou
art a poor Captive and Bondslave thereof, profess what thou will; and if the
Power of God thou know not working within thy self, and operating in thy
Heart, not only to shake, pull down, and remove that which can be shaken and
removed, but also to bring in that which cannot be shaken nor removed, (viz.)
Everlasting Righteousness; I say, if this thou know not, the Power of the
Enemy of God (and thy Soul) works in thee, and prevails over thee, by
working in thy Imaginations, Will and Affections, Mind and Members, that which
is Evil, either in self-Sinning or self Righteousness, which are both
Abomination to the Lord: So if thou know not the Word of God within thee, in
thy Mouth and in thy Heart (with the Virtues and Properties thereof, as a
Hammer, as a Fire, quick and powerful, sharper then a two-edged Sword) and
hear and obeyest the Voice thereof; I say, if this Word thou know not
within, thou art not made clean nor sanctified by it; but those Things stand in
thee, against which it is as a Hammer, Fire, Sword, sharp and powerful; and the
Word and Commands of the old Serpent, that Betrayer, sounds lo^d in thy Ears,
and pierces deep into thy Heart, and thou art carried away with the Wind
thereof, and enterest into his Temptations daily, and know not Power against
them; so thou can not say, as David once did, Psalm. 119.11.
I have hid thy Word in my Heart, that I might not sin against thee; neither
have thou received with Meekness the Ingrafted Word, which is able to save; but
art of those whom Christ spoak to, Ye have not his Word (speaking of his
Father) abiding in yo^. John 5.38.


And if thou know not the Law of the Spirit of Life within thee, written in
thy Inward Parts, thou art a Stranger to the New Covenant, Jer. 31.33.
and the Law of Sin and Death has Power over thee, and the Law that is in thy
Members leads thee Captive thereto, and the Carnal Mind which is Enmity against
God, and cannot be subject to his Law, reigns in thee, and though thou
professest the Law of God with thy Tongue, thou do not love it, nor delight
in it in thy Hearr, neither is it better in thy Esteem then Thousands of Gold
and Silver.

So, in short, If thou art not Partaker and Possessor of the Heavenly Treasures
in thy Earthen Vessel, thou art fraighted with Earthly Treasures and Vanities;
if thou know not thy Body the Temple of the Living God, and thy Heart his
Throne, then is it as a Cage for Unclean Birds, and as a Habitation for Wild
Beasts, and as a Nest for Venomous Creeping Things; and the Prince of Darkness
sits upon the Throne of thy Heart, and rules there, let thy Opinion and Talk of
Religion be what it will.

Now, be thou warned and advised, to watch against that Spirit in thy self,
which moves thee to slight, deride and mock at the Appearance and
Manifestation of the Light, Crace, Spirit, Power, Word and Law of God within.

And learn to cease also from those Teachers without, which have caused thee to
err, who hate the Light within, and despise the Shining of it, and give it
despicable Names; as, Ignis Fatuus (...) certain or Falce Fire; Natural Light;
and the Checks and Reproofs of it, but the Checks of a Natural Conscience; and
despise the Grace that appears to all men, and call it Common, and not Saving
Crace; and slight and reject the Power and Spirit of God within, which moves
and works against all Evil, and to all Good, not allowing it to be the
principal Rule and Guide of a Christian; and also endeavor to demolish and
race out the Word and Law of God within, under Pretense of directing thee to a
more sure Word and Law without, viz. the Holy Scriptures, which contain diverse
Words, Precepts and Commandments, etc. spoaken by holy men, to whom the Word of
the Lord came (which was before the Words were) and by this Word and Spirit
that came to them, and was in them, were they moved to speak them, and that is
greater then the Words; and till thou know a Measure of the same Word and
Spirit within thy self, thou can neither truly understand nor obey the Words,
and holy Precepts, and Exhortations that proceeded from it, that indeed being
the Original Cause, Root and Ground from whence all the Good Words and Good
Works that ever sprang up in the Heart of Mankind, proceeded: Such Teachers
have ran, ^ut God has not sent them, so People are not profitted, but spoiled
by them; they shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men; they neither enter
themselves, nor suffer those that would; and under the Name of Ministers of
Christ, are direct Ministers of Antichrist; from such turn thou away, and learn
of the Grace of God, which Teaches to deny Ungodliness, etc. and love the
Light, and bring thy Deeds to it, John 3.21.
and walk in it; so shall thou become a Child of it, and have Right to inherit
the precious Promises, and possess and enjoy the Glorious Privileges, which
thou have hitherto only professed, heard and read of in the holy Scriptures; so
will thou come to inherit Substance, and soon be wiser then thy former
Teachers; and of a Titular Christian thou will become a Christian indeed, an
Israelite indeed, a Jew inward indeed, whose Praise is of God, and not of Men.

W. S.

THE True Christian's FAITH AND EXPERIENCE DECLARED Concerning God, Christ, the
Spirit, etc.
First, Concerning God.
THE True Christian believes there is One God, who is a Spirit, pure in
Essence, God is infinite and incomprehensible in himself; and all the Words of
Men and Angels cannot define him, as he is, being in all, through all and above
all. And the various Names given him throughout the holy Scriptures, were
according to the Manifestation or Appearance and Operation of his Spirit in
their Hearts that wrote them, and according to the State it found them in, when
it appeared to them, hence he was called a Consuming Fire; Our God is a
Consuming Fire; and his Word as a Hammer and as a Fire, and a Jealous and Angry
God, who as a Devouring Fire goes through the Briars and Thorns, and consumes
them; and the Day of his Appearance among these Briars and Thorns, Thi^les and
Stubble, is compared to the burning of Fire in an Oven, in which the Wicked
cannot dwell. And others could call him by quite contrary Names, even according
to the Operation of his Spirit in them and by the same could say, that God is
Love; and his Word was as Milk, and sweeter then Honey or the Honeycomb, and
that the Light of his Countenance was better then the Increase of Corn, Wine
and Oil; and that he was a Shield and a Shadow of a Rock in a Weary Land, and
his Name as a strong Tower and safe-dwelling-Place, and as precious Ointment
poured forth; and his Face or Presence, Glory and Power, which is Terrible to
the Worker of Iniquity is pleasant and desirable by those that witness Sion's
Redemption by the Spirit of Judgment and Burning from Iniquity; these things
are known now, as in former Ages: The same Ark, whose Presence troubled and
plagued the Philistians, was the Glory of Israel; the same Hand and Power that
smites and destroys the Egyptian, saves and delivers the Israelite; the same
Spirit of Truth that reproves the World of Sin, is the Comforter of those that
are made free by it from Sin; the same Breath that breathed Life in the
beginning, before Sin entered, kind'eth the Fire that tormenteth the Wicked. He
that can understand, let him.
^mnipresent in Be^^g, incomprehensi^^e and Almighty in Power: And he
demonstrateth his Faith and Experience after this manner; He has received a
Manifestation of him in his own Heart, Mind and Spirit; and so is come to know
him pore, and Omni-present by his Work and Operation therein; he can say, that
God is pure of a Truth, because he finds his Appearance so pure and holy in
his Heart, that it will not allow nor suffer so much as a vain Thought to lodge
there, nor no unclean thing to be touched. And this True Christian is a true
witness of the Truth of those Scriptures ( Hab. 1.13. Jer. 17.10. and 15.19.)
which says, that God is of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity; and that He
searches the Heart and tries the Reins, and divides betwixt the Precious and
the Vile, betwixt Thought and Thought, Word and Word, Work and Work. And
further, He is a True Witness, that God is Almighty in Power, because he has
by his mighty Power broaken down those Strong Holds, formerly builded in his
Heart by the Enemy of his Soul; Cast down Imaginations, and every High Thing,
that exalted (...) self against the Knowledge of God; ^inging into Captivity
very Thought into the ^bedience of Christ. And he knows the ^rk Mountains, at
^^ich his Feet stumbled, removed, and the Rocks rended, and the Raging Waves
stilled, and that Tongue and Nature bridled, which no Man could tame: But
before this be witnessed, he has known him to sit as a Refiners Fire, Mal. 3.3.
and as Fullers Soap, and as a Spirit of Judgment and Burning; and so became a
living Witness of what he has seen, felt, heard and understood, by the mighty
Working of his Holy Spirit in his Mortal Body.

The Titular Christian he says, he believes in one God, who is pure,
omnipresent and Almighty (take his Word and there is no Difference) But how
does he demonstrate his Faith, that to him there is but one God? why, he has
heard a Relation of him, his Oneness his Purity and Almightiness in the Holy
Scriptures, and he has been educated and trained up in the Traditions of his
Forefathers, and so his Knowledge of God he professes is acquired therefrom;
he has read in some Book, or some Body has told him, that God is One, Pure,
Omnipresent and Almighty, and he grounds his Faith and Knowledge upon this
Tradition and History, and sorofesseth God and his Attributes in Words, but is
not a living Witness of the same within himself: And so, notwithstanding he
professes one God, he lives in the World which has many Gods, and worships
and falls down before them; every beloved Lust, obeyed, is a God. Let the
Titular Christian profess what he will, he that commits Sin is the Servant
of it, and therein is no Believer, Worshipper nor Knower of the True God, his
Purity nor Almightiness, because his Heart remains Corrupt and Rocky, and the
Mountains of Darkness and Ignorance remain unremoved, and the strong Holds of
Satan unbroaken down, his Thoughts and Imaginations unsubjected to the
Obedience of Christ, his Will Tongue and Nature unbridled, the Dross, Tin and
Rubbage remains, and is as a Grave to the pure Metal; this Titular Christian
contents himself to hear or read of God as a Refiner's Fire, and as Fuller's
Soap, and as a Spirit of Judgment and Burning, and of his cleansing and
purifying some in former Generations, but loves not, nor cares not to know him
so in himself; but rather despises and hates his pure Appearance in him)
whose first Work is to convince him of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment) which is
compared to a little Silver amongst much Dross, a little Seed amongst many
great ones, and to a little Leaven hid in three Measures of Meal; which Silver
cannot be parted, separated and enjoyed, but by the Appearance of God within, as
a Refiners Fire, to purge away the Dross, and take away the Tin also, which is
somewhat like the Silver, whereby indeed the Titular Christian is deceived;
neither can the little Seed grow up till the Rubbish be taken away, and the
Ground that is Cursed, removed, and the Heart made honest, which is the good
Ground, wherein the Seed of the Kingdom grows to Perfection; neither can the
little Leaven work through and leaven the three Measures of Meal, till that be
taken away which lets and hinders, viz. Unbelief and Hardness of Heart: Now
this Day of small Things, this Day of Jacob's Troubles, wherein he goes through
the Refiners Fire, this little Seed, this little Leaven is overlooked, despised
and flighted by the Titular Christian, who in his own Conceit is exalted and
puffed up above the pure Appearance of God in his Heart, which to know and obey
is the Gate of all true Wisdom and Knowledge; and is grown so tall, great and
Wise in his own Thoughts and Imaginations, that he cannot walk in the straight
Way, nor go in at the Door of the Sheepfold, but would climb up some other Way,
and so contents himself with a Traditional Historical Profession of God in
Words, and deny him in Works: And all the Knowledge and Experience he has of
God, his Purity, Oneness and Almightiness, is but as some Body has told him,
or as he has in an Unsanctified and Unprepared Heart, read in the Holy
Scriptures, which Knowledge avails nothing, except accompanied with a living
Expe^ience of the same Power, working after the same Manner as it did in others
in Times past, who have left their Testimonies thereof upon Record.

II. The True Christian's Faith and Experience concerning the Lord Jesus Christ.
THE True Christian believes in one Lord Jesus Christ, who came from the Bosom
of the Father, who is the Son of the true God, by whom he made the World; and
that this Lord Jesus Christ is his Savior, Redeemer, Sanctifier and Cleanser,
by his precious Blood, and is to him as a King, Priest and Prophet, etc. And he
demonstrateth his Faith in this Manner; in being Obedient to him as he is Lord,
in being saved by him from Sin, as he is Jesus, and by his learning of him, and
being taught by him, as he is Christ or the Anointing: So he can call him Lord
Jesus Christ in Truth and Righteousness, having truly learned his Name and
Nature, through Obedience to his Cross, and a Cleansing by his precious Blood;
and so he not only reads, hears and professes the Benefits and Privileges
which the primitive Christians partook of and enjoyed, by believing in and
receiving of Christ, but experimentally partaketh of, and possesses, and
enjoys the same; Romans 8 16.
And the Spirit of God bears Witness with his Spirit, that he is a Child of
God, and a Joint. Heir with Christ, Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh;
and that he has the Mind of Christ; and that Christ lives in him, and is
greater in him then he that is in the World: And as the old Adversary the Devil
is strong and powerful to tempt, and ready on the one Hand, and on the other,
to draw and allure into Evil; so he knows his Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
as near, and as ready, and more powerful to deliver, save and preserve him from
falling into Evil and Temptation; and he is not only enabled to resist the
Devil, but to make him flee also: Thus in Truth can the True Christian call
Christ the Captain of his Salvation, who being armed with his Power, fights as
he did, and follows him, and sits down in Heavenly Places with him,
triumphing over Sin, Death, Hell and the Grave: So the True Christian proves
himself so, by denying himself, and taking up his Cross daily, and following of
Christ; and that he believes in him, because he enjoys Everlasting Life, and
abides not in Death and Darkness, but has overcome the Wicked one; and that he
is his Lord, because he does the thing he says or commands; and that he
loves him, because he keeps his Commandments; and has received Power to
become the Son of God; and further, has a Name better then the Name of Sons
and Daughters.

The Titular Christian says, he believes in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
the true God, by whom he made the World, and that this Lord Jesus Christ is his
Savior, Redeemer and Sanctifier by his precious Blood, etc. and professes him
as King, Priest and Prophet and in all his Attributes and Offices. -- But how
does he demonstrate and show forth his Belief and Profession? How is he his
Lord? Does he do the Thing he says? How is he his Savior? Is he saved by him
from the committing of Sin, and redeemed from a vain Conversation? How does he
believe in him as Christ or the Anointing? Is he taught by him? How is he his
King, Priest and Prophet? Does he rule in his Heart as King? Are all his
Services, Sacrifices and Offerings offered up by and through his Hand, as
Priest? Does he hear him in all Things, as the Prophet whom God has raised
like unto Moses? No, the Titular Christian has no Knowledge of him after this
Manner, neither does he believe it is attainable on this side the Grave; nor
possible to obey him as Lord; nor to be saved by him from Sin, as Jesus; nor
taught by him, as Christ or the Anointing; nor that he can be washed, cleansed
and sanctified by his precious Blood from the Stains, Spots and Defilements of
the World, Flesh and the Devil, while he bears about this Body of Clay; he
contents himself with a corrupt, traditional Faith, which has sprung up in the
dark Night of Apostasy (which is certainly a very venomous pernicious Weed of
the Devil's Kingdom, which has poisoned and destroyed the Souls of many, and
is now grown to such Maturity, and clothed with such Beauty to the Eye of the
Titular Christian, that he calls it the Christian Faith, though thereby he is
taught to believe, that it is not possible to cease from Sin, nor to have his
Heart purified, nor to overcome the Devil, and gain Victory over the World; and
further, that notwithstanding he commits Sin daily, and lives in the Act of
it Term of Life in this World, he is hereby taught to believe, that Christ will
save him from the Guilt and Punishment of it in the World to come: It may be
said of this Titular Christian's Faith; as it was once said of Saul and David;
Looseness and A theism has slain its Thousands; but this its Ten Thousands.

So although he hears and reads what Christ did in, and for those that belived
in him, and of the powerful Virtue and Operation of that Ancient Christian
Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints, and born witness to by the Holy
Scriptures; yet he neither hopes, believes, nor expects to witness the same
wrought in him, and for him; they bear witness of some, in whom Christ wrought
In whom Christ works all, the Devil works nothing.
all their Works; and that through him they were able to do all Things: And
many glorious Things were spoaken of, and were enjoyed by the true Believers in
Christ, while upon Earth: But the Titular Christian puts off all till he is
dead, and pleads for the Continuation of the Devil and his Works, Term of Life,
and says, the Devil works strongly in him, and prevails over him, and causes
him to sin in his Holy Duties; and that he is so captivated by him, that he
cannot live one Day nor Hour without Sin; so notwithstanding his Profession of
Christ, he knows him not greater in him, then he that is in the World; so the
strong Man keeps House, and its furnished with his Goods, and though he cries
Lord, Lord, he is a Worker of Iniquity, and is bound in Chains of Darkness, and
his Feet stick fast in the Mire and in the Clay, even while he talks of Lord
and Savior, he is led Captive at the Devils Will; and is a Stranger to that
Power which is able to resist him, and make him flee, and to that Faith which
gives Victory: So he cannot in Truth call Christ the Captain of his Salvation,
nor approve himself one of his Soldiers, who is armed with the same Power, and
with it fights against the same Enemy, and gains the Victory, and follows
him, who rides on Conquering and to Conquer; so never comes to sit down with
him in his Father's Kingdom, triumphing over Sin, Death, Hell and the Grave,
but remains under the Power thereof, through the Fear of which he is all his
Life Time subject to Bondage, 2 Heb. 15.
let his Profession of Liberty and Redemption by Christ be what it will; his
fair Talk will avail him nothing, though he says he believes in Christ, and
loves him, yet if he keeps not his Commandments, he is a Liar, and deceives
himself, and has not Eternal Life abiding in him; Profession and Name of
Christ without Possession and Nature, is of no worth.

III. The true Christian's Faith and Experience concerning the Holy Spirit.
THE True Christian believes in the Holy Spirit, being one of the Three which
bears Record in Heaven, which Three are one; and he shows forth his Faith by
his Obedience thereto; he has received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby he can
call God Father (not as the Scribes, Pharisees and Hypocrites did) but in Truth
and Righteousness; and he witnesses a being led by the Spirit in the Way of
Holiness, and so cannot fulfill the Lust of the Flesh, but by the same does
mortify them, and gain Victory over them, and is sanctified and cleansed from
them, and is taught by the Spirit the true Knowledge of God, and how to worship
him aright in Spirit and Truth and so prays in the Spirit and with the
Understanding and sings in the Spirit, and praises God in the Spirit, and the
Law of the Spirit is in his Heart, and this Law of the Spirit of Life makes him
free from the Law of Sin and Death; and the Spirit of God which raised up Jesus
from the Dead, dwells in him, and quickneth his Mortal Body: And this True
Christian is the Spiritual Man which discerns all Things, but is not
discerned by another out of the same Spirit which searches all Things, yea,
the deep Things of God; and he is led by the Spirit from under the Law, and
through the Law, to him which was before the Law, and so is under Grace, and
brings forth the Fruits thereof, which is Love, Peace, Joy, Long-Suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance; against this Christian there
is no Law.

The Titular Christian he says, he believes in the Holy Spirit, etc. But how
does he demonstrate his Faith and Belief; he is ready to make a Mock of
receiving the Spirit, and being led by the Spirit and moved and taught by the
Spirit; this seems strange Doctrine to him, that he should know his Lusts
mortified by the Spirit, and that he should walk in the Spirit, and be
sanctified by the Spirit from all Sin and Uncleaness, and that he should attend
the Motion and Guidance of the Spirit, and in all his Conversation to do
nothing but what will stand justified by this Holy Spirit, and that he should
pray in the Spirit, and sing with the Spirit, and worship in the Spirit, etc.
These are new Doctrines to the Titular Christian, he knows not what to make of
them, except it be to brand them with despicable Names; And the Law of the
Spirit of Life, which should free him from the Law of Sin and Death, he is a
Stranger to; and wholly ignorant of the Indwelling of that Spirit which raised
Jesus from the Dead, to quicken his mortal Body; this he counts Fanatic
Doctrine, etc. And instead of being a spiritual Man which discerns all
Things, he is Carnal, and sees not far off; the Vail being over his Heart;
cannot see nor regard the Glory of God when it appears in the Inward Temple,
but opposes and slighteth the Appearance of that Holy Spirit which searches
his Heart and all Things; and so is not led by it from under the Law; which Law
was added because of Transgression; and this Titular Christian which lives in
the Nature and Act of Transgression, and that knows not the Cursed Ground
removed, which brings forth Briars and Thorns, from whence all Evil Thoughts,
Words and Works proceed, and is a Stranger to the Mortification of them by the
Spirit; he is under the Law, and liable to the Punishment thereof, and not
under Grace, let him profess what he will, if he brings not forth the Fruit of
the Spirit in his Life and Conversation, he clearly shows, he does not
believe in it, nor walk in it, neither has received it, nor come to any true
Knowledge of it, by its Work and Operation in his Heart; he only talks of it
with his Tongue, as some Book or Body has told him; this is the Property and
State of a Titular Christian.

IIII. The True Christian's Faith and Experience concerning the Holy Scriptures.
THE True Christian truly honors the Holy Scriptures in their Places, and
believes and receives their Testimony, and is a living Witness of the Truth
thereof, and he domonstrateth it as follows. By believing, receiving and
obeying him (viz. Christ Jesus) of whom they testify, whereby he receives
Power to order his Conversation according to them; and the True Christian
believes that they were spoaken and written by the Motion and inspiration of
the Spirit of God in Holy Men, Prophets and Apostles; and that it is his Duty
to Wait upon God, to receive the Spirit of Grace and Glory, and the Gifts
thereof, of whom they testify; that thereby be may be enabled to read them
with Understanding, and to receive the Comfort of them, and to be made wise
through Faith in Christ unto Salvation by them.

And this Christian knows rightwell, That all the University or Acad mi^al
Learning in the World is not able to give the true Knowledge of the Mind of the
Spirit in the holy Scriptures; they are as a sealed Book to all the Wit,
Reason, Comprehension and Acquired Parts of all Mankind in the Fall, Learned
and Unlearned: And until man comes to receive, regard and improve the
Manifestation of the Spirit, which is given to every man to profit withal, as
the Scriptures witness, he is wholly ignorant and a Stranger to the Key of true
Knowledge; and the Treasures of Life and Wisdom are hid from him, and secured
as with seven Seals; and the Cherubim^, with a Flaming Sword, that turns every
Way, and guards the Tree of Life, with the Fruits thereof, from the fallen Wisdom
of Man: And this the True Christian knows by Experience, having tried what the
Wisdom of this World in all its Perfection can do; and has seen it confounded
and brought to naught in himself, being discovered to be no part of the Key of
true everlasting Knowledge; but rather that which hides it, and makes the Vail
the thicker, and shuts the Door of the Kingdom the faster; and those that
abound in it, neither enter themselves, nor suffer those that would; and this
the Holy Scriptures testify.

The Titular Christian, he says, He honors the Scriptures, and believes
the Testimony of them, etc. But how does he demonstrate his Honor to them, and
Belief of them? Does he order his Conversation according to them? They exhort,
To abstain from every Appearance of Evil, and from every fleshly Lust, which
wars against the Soul; and to put on the whole Armor of God, and thereby
resist the Devil, and make him flee: The Titular Christian does not obey this
Exhortation, neither does he believe, that it is possible that any should obey
it on this side the Grave: So while he pretends to honor them, he gives them
the Lie; for, what is more ridiculous and unreasonablethen to profess a Belief
that the Spirit of God in Holy Men has left Holy Precepts and Exhortations
upon Record in the Scriptures, which are unpossible to be obeyed? Yet this is
the Language of the Titular Christian, who honors them with his Lips, and
cries them up with his Tongue, but in Works denies them: Sometimes he will give
them more Titles of Honor then to them is due, as, when he calls them, The
Word of God, The Touchstone and Tryer of all Spirits, The Everlasting Rule of
Faith and Practice; so in his Ignorance will advance them with Lip-Honour
beyond what they testify of themselves, and above what they are; for they are
not the Word of God, but proceeded from it, and bear witness thereof, which
Word is sharp and powerful, sharper then any Two edged Sword, dividing in the
inward Parts; and this Word is in the Mouth and in the Heart, to be heard
there, and obeyed there: And they call Christ the Word of God, which Word was
in the beginning, before the Scriptures were written: And all that understand
not the Voice of this Word, this inward and spiritual Speaking Word, are
wholely ignorant of the Words of God and Good Men, recorded in the holy
Scriptures; and is no true Honourer nor Believer of them, notwithstanding his
Verbal, Traditional, Notional Profession and high Titles he gives them; he only
therein shows his Blindness and Folly, in taking the History and Description or
Declaration of a thing for the thing it self: They are not the Everlasting
Rule, Touchstone and Tryer of Spirits, but declare and testify of him that
is, as Christ said to the Jews, speaking of the Scriptures, They are they that
testify of me, but you will not come to me, that you may have Life.

IIII. The True Christian's Faith and Experience concerning the Doctrine of
Repentance.
THE True Christian believes the Doctrines and Teachings of Christ and his
Apostels recorded in the Holy Scriptures, and that it is not only his Duty, but
his Practice to obey them, and live according to them: As first, the Doctrine
of Repentance from Dead Works, or a turning from Darkness to Light, and from
the Power of Satan to the Power of God; this is the Gate of the Kingdom, or the
first Step toward Christianity; this is the Door at which the True Christian
enters; if any miss this Way, they strive to enter in vain, without
Repenting, which is changing or turning from Evil to Good, from the Way of
Death to the Way of Life, from Darkness it self to Light it self, from the
Power and Service of Sin and Satan to the Power and Service of God and
Righteousness. This is the Nature and Effect of true Repentance, and without
this no Man has a true Title in Christ, nor Christianity, let his Profession
of it be never so high; for Death reigned over all Men from the Fall of Adam
till Moses, and all Men have therein come short of the Glory of God, and in
that fallen Nature are the Children of Wrath, dead in Sins and Trespasses? and
God has concluded all in Unbelief, Romans 11.32.
that he might have Mercy upon all.

And now the Call of God is to all Men every where to Repent, Acts 17.30.
and none but those that answer this Call, finds the Mercy; this Call of God is
more universally inward and immediate, then outward and mediate, the which if
People slight, disregard and neglect to obey, the outward Instruments and Means
avail not.

Now the true Christian gives Testimony that he believes and obeys the Doctrine
of Repentance, in manner following: First-Whereas his Mind and Heart was
running after, and captivated with the Sight of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh,
and the Pride of Life, that are in that World which lies in Wickedness; now his
Mind and Heart is not only stopped, but also turned from them, and weaned from
the Delight and Pleasure he had in them, and not only so, but by the Shining of
the Light in his Heart, is made to see the exceeding Sinfulness of them, and to
feel the Weight and Burden thereof, which while he was dead in Sins and
Trespasses, he could not feel, nor be sensible of; but now being quickened by
the Voice of God, which calls to Repentance, he cries out with Paul, O wretched
Man, who shall deliver me, etc? and this is the Cry which the Lord is ready to
hear, and to answer with the Manifestation of his Love and Power, and with the
Joy of his Salvation; and now is his Face Sion-ward, and his Travail toward
the Holy City is begun; and this True Christian right well knows that his
Repentance or turning from and out of the broad Way of Sin and Satan, and
setting his Foot into the strait and narrow Way, was not of himself, nor
effected in his own Will and Power, but by the Virtue of the free Gift of God,
and Operation of his Free Grace, and that he daily and momentarily needs the
Divine Assistance of the same, to lead, guide and assist him every Step of his
Journey, to the End of the same.

And now he is a living Witness of the Truth of Christ's Saying, when he said,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, John 5.25.
the Hour is coming, and now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear shall live: This is the first distinguishing Work of
the powerful Voice of God, and the true hearing of it; the World hears its
convincing Voice, but not regarding nor obeying it, are not made alive nor
converted by it; nothing is able, nor sufficient, nor appointed of God to give
Repentance unto Life, but the hearing of this Voice of the Son, he has
formerly, or in Times past heard many Voices, Lo here and lo there, and has
made many Repentances, and Turnings from one Way and Opinion to another; but
till he heard and obeyed the Voice of the Son of God, never knew that
Repentance which is never to be repented of.

And then 2dly, when this Christian has heard and obeyed this Voice, and is
turned out of the broad Way, and begins to walk in the straight and narrow Way,
and to have no Fellowship with the Unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather
reprove them, then he became a Wonder, a Byword and a Taunt, and his former
Companions, who thought it strange, that he run not with them into the same
Excess of Riot; but makes strait Steps to his Feet, and measured all his Goings
by the Line of Righteousness, Romans 2.4.
which the Goodness of God; that leads to Repentance, has brought him to;
now he appeared like an Owl in the Desert, and like a Pelican in the
Wilderness, and like a Sparrow upon the Housetop: Now his great Trials,
Temptations and Exercises begin both within and without; here he sees his
Enemies about him like Bees when they swarm, which till now he had no Sight nor
Sense of; the strong Man keeping the House, all his Goods were at Peace, and
the House being Dark, and his Eye Dim, did not perceive nor discover the
Enemies of his Soul that lodged therein, nor could not judge, nor discern the
Nature of the Goods with which his House was furnished, that old Deceiver
having Power to transform himself like unto an Angel of God, and to imitate the
Furniture of his Temple; but now he having heard the Voice of the Son of God,
and being quickened by his mighty Power, and the Eye of his Mind opened and
fastened upon the same, then the Devil rages, knowing he has but a short
Time, and that his Dispossession grows nigh, and the spoiling of his Goods are
at Hand, Except he could by any Means prevent it; but all his Endeavors were
and are in va^n against this true Repentant, who trusting in the Goodness of
the Lord, which at first led him to Repentance, and relying upon the Arm of his
Power, which had opened the Eye that was blind, and unstopped the Ear that was
deaf, and enlightened the Understanding that was darkened; he in the same is
made able to stand, and to resist him in all his Assaults, and to escape all
his Baits and Snares, and to quench all his fiery Darts, and to overcome him in
all his Temptations, and to go right on his Way, pressing forward toward the
Mark of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.14.
where all the Treasures of Wisdom, of Knowledge, and of Glory are hid, Col.
2.3.
and laid up for these that love his Appearance, and obey his low Calling,
which is to Repentance; and none other are in the Way to know what the
High-Calling of God in Christ Jesus is, let their Notions, Professions and
Confessions be never so high.

The Titular Christian he professes, he believes the Doctrine and Teachings
of Christ and his Apostles, and first this of Repentance; but how does he
demonstrate his Faith? Is his Mind turned from the Darkness and the Way of it,
to the Light and the Way of it, from the Power of Satan and the Works of it, to
the Power of God and the Works of it? Is he quickened and made alive by the
hearing of the Voice of the Son of God? Is he come forth of the Grave of Sin,
and Sea of Corruption? Does he feel the Weight and Burden of it? Is Sin become
exceeding sinful unto him? Is a Cry raised in his Soul unto the Lord for a full
Deliverance and Redemption from the Servitude of Sin and Satan? Has he a true
Sense and Sight of the Nature and Tendency of Sin? Is his Mind truly turned to
the Appearance of God in Christ within, which is to destroy and make an End of
Sin, and finish Transgression, and the Authors of it, and bring in Everlasting
Righteousness instead thereof? Does he bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance?
And does he show by them that he is turned from the Service of Sin and Satan,
into the Service of God and Righteousness? Is he turned out of the broad Way?
Does he walk in the straight and narrow, and make strait Steps to his Feet? and
are they pulled out of the Mire and Clay? and are they set upon the Rock? and
are all his Goings guided by the Line of Righteousness? and is he enabled by
the powerful Voice and Arm of the Son of God, to stand upright on his Feet in
the midst of all his Enemies, and by the same to travail on in the Way of
Holiness toward the Holy City and Heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the Saints
Solemnity? These Things accompany True Repentance; therefore let the Titular
Christian turn the Eye of his Mind Inward, and commune with his own Heart, and
be still, and consult with God's Witness therein, and examine and answer these
Things, and see and try whether he has not deceived himself with a false
Profession and a feigned Repentance, wherein he confesses daily, but does not
forsake, and so finds not Mercy, deceiving his own Soul by daily sinning, and
an Imaginary Repentance, being subject to call and account a changing and
turning from one Sort of the Devil's Service to another, from Self-Sinning and
Debauchery to Self-Righteousness, from one Opinion to another, and from one
Sort and Fashion of invented Worship to another, a Repentance; though in all
the old Man with his Deeds appears prevalent, and the Earthly Image is born,
and the Nature and Ground of Sin and Transgression remains unshaken by the
Voice and Power of the Son of God, which calls and leads all that hear and obey
it to true Repentance.

And till this Voice be heard, and this Power felt and witnessed to work and
operate in the inward Man, the Beast receives no deadly Wound, nor the Strength
of Sin is not abated, and the strong Holds of Imagination continues unbroaken
down; and so Repentance in this State is only talked of in vain by all the
Nominal Christians upon the Face of the Eatth, who experience not these Things
wrought and effected in them and for them, and are wholely ignorant of that
Repentance which is never to be repented of, and of that Joy that is in Heaven
over one Sinner that Repents, more then over ninety nine Just Perfons who
need no Repentance.

VI. The True Christian 's Faith and Experience concerning Mortification,
Warfare, Self-denial and a Dying daily.
THe True Christian, next unto Repentance, believes the Doctrine of
Mortification, Warfare, Self-denial and a Dying daily; and he shows forth his
Faith by his Works, having heard and obeyed the Call of God, and being thereby
turned or repented, he comes to receive the Spirit of Adoption, where by he can
call God Father, and so comes to receive Power against the World, the Flesh and
the Devil, which though he has turned his back upon them, and set his Face
Sion-wards, yet they will follow him, and pursue him, and attend him with
diverse Allurements and Temptations, in order to turn him back again; and thus
will continue, laying Baits and Snares, in Hopes to prevail, until a Death be
witnessed to the Carnal Mind, and Transgressing Nature, which is prone to
receive the Temptation; therefore the True Christian being come to a true Sight
and Sense of the Strength and Subtility of the Enemy, watches and wars in the
Spirit against him, and obeyes the Apostle's Exhortation, Mortify therefore
your Members, Col. 3.5. Romans 8.13.
which are upon the Earth, etc. And if ye through the Spirit mortify the Deeds
of the Body, ye shall live. So he witnesses a Dying or Mortifying daily of
that Nature and Mind which has had a Life in Sin, until it be mortified or
Killed, and till he comes to witness that Saying fulfilled, Death is Swallowed
up in Victory, the Strength of it being taken away; till which is effected he
remains in the Warfare, like a good Soldier, sollowing his Captain,
conquering and to conquer, until a perfect Victory be obtained: And that he may
not fail nor come short in this Warfare and Work of Mortification he keeps his
Eye always upon his Captain, and his Ears open to that Voice that at first
quickened him, and called him to Repentance, and his Mind stayed upon that Holy
Spirit of Grace that has wrought hitherto for him, which makes Self of no
Reputation, and which burieth self in all his Acquirements and Perfection in
the Death of the Cross, as not being fit nor worthy to be concerned in the Work
of Regeneration. And the True Christian well knows, that there is no
Possibility to be a Disciple and Follower of Christ further then the daily
Cross to Self is taken up; he meets with no greater Enemy in his Journey then
Self-Thoughts and Imaginatons, Self-willing and Running, Self-consultation and
Self-working, which This made Paul careful to keep his Body under, lest while
he preached to others, he himsolf became a Castaway.
if he watch not against, rule over and keep under by that Hand and Power that
has appeared for his Deliverance, and has wrought it in a measure, he again
may be entangled and enshared, and driven back into that Pit wherein is no
Water; therefore he stands in the Doctrine of Self-denial, till Self be denied,
and in the putting off the Old Man, with his Deeds, till they are wholly put
off; and when he has done all, to stand still, and abide with the same
powerful Hand, that has wrought all these things in him and for him; and to it
he attributes the Glory, and gives the Praise forever.

Now the Titular Christian professes the Doctrine of Mortification, and talks
of a Dying to Sin, and a Warring against it, and of Self-denial, and putting
off the Old Man, and taking up the Daily Cross, etc. But how does he answer his
Profession? What Course does he take to mortify Sin, while he believes not in
the Light, which shines in his Heart, that discovers it; nor in the
Manifestation of the Spirit given him to mortify and destroy Sin; nor in the
Power of God within, which gives Strength to War against it, and to overcome
Sin within; neither has he received the Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15.
whereby he is enabled to call God Father, but is unacquainted and ignorant of
him in that Relation; yet has learned by Tradition, as the impenitent and
unconverted Jews did, John 8.41.
to call God Father, whose Knowledge of him was taught by the Precepts of Men:
And though they accounted themselves Children of God by virtue of this
Traditional Knowledge, received from their Forefathers, Isa. 29.3. John 8.44,
etc,
Rabbis and Doctors of the Law; yet Christ Jesus, the Great Doctor, and
Righteous Judge, and True Teacher, told them, they were quite the Contrary,
even of their Father the Devil.

So the Titular Christian, while unbegotten to God, in his impenitent
unregenerate State, having read the holy Scriptures, and the Traditions of his
Fathers, furnishes himself with the Profession of the Doctrines of the Gospel
(as the Jews did of the Law) even while Sin reigns in his mortal Body, while
the Old Man with his Deeds are un put off, and while Self. Will, Self-Wisdom,
and Self in all its Properties is undenyed, and while he is a Stranger to the
Cross of Christ, and so takes it not up, and follows him; but wants Power to
mortify Sin, and to war against the World, Flesh and the Devil: So while he
talks of Mortification and Dying to Sin, Sin lives in him, and increases as his
Days increase; and instead of overcoming it, is overcome daily by it: And while
he professes Self-denial, nothing but Self is owned; Self wills and runs; Self
worships and offers the Offerings of Cain; Self seeks, and knocks and strives
to enter, but is not able: And ^^ll this Willing and Running, and Power of Self
is denied, judged and brought down, and made of no Reputation, by the Powerful
Working and Operation of the Spirit of God within, none can witness a being
dead to Sin, nor have Victory over it, nor be a Disciple of Christ Jesus, nor
follow him in the Work of Regeneration, let them profess what they will, except
this be known, their Profession is a Lie, and they deceive their own Souls:
This is the Word of Truth to all the Titular Christians upon the Face of the
Earth, of what Name or Sect soever.

VII. The True Christian's Faith and Experience concerning Sanctification,
Washing and Cleansing from Sin and Corruption.
THe True Christian owns and believes the Doctrine of Sanctification, Washing
and Cleansing from Sin and Corruption; and he manifests his Faith by the Virtue
and Operation of the Spirit of God working in him; having been led by the same
through the Work of Repentance, Mortification and Self-denial; he is now not
only turned from Sin, and come to the Mortifying of it, but also to the
Sanctifying, Washing and Cleansing from it; so he comes to witness a being
delivered from the dead Body, and the Dead to be buried out of his Sight;
and as he abides and dwells with this Sanctifying and Cleansing Power, he is
preserved from corrupting himself, or so much as touching the Dead again: This
is the Antitype, and Substance of all the diverse Washings, Purifications and
Sanctifications, used under the Law, where the Temple and all the Furniture
thereof were sanctified. 1 Cor. 6.19.
Now he knows himself to be the Temple of the Holy Ghost; and this Knowledge
keeps him from defiling of it, being bought with a Price, not with Gold nor
Silver, nor Corruptible Things, but with the Precious Blood of Christ, which
cleanses and keeps clean the True Christian, who trampleth it not again
under his Feet: And herein also he witnesses the Antitype and Substance
signified by the laying of the People's Sins upon a Scapegoat once a year, and
letting him go into the Wilderness, etc. so that the People were as free and
clean from Sins committed the year past, Levit. 16. from verse. 8. to 26.
as if they had committed none at all, their Sins confessed, and Sacrifices
being offered, and Atonement made:
These were the Shadows of Good Things to come, the Substance of which the True
Christian now enjoys; and is come to the One Everlasting Offering, Christ
Jesus, which perfects forever those that are sanctified; Heb. 10.14.
and both he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all of one:
Hebr. 2.11.
And he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. And the True Christian
abiding in this Sanctification, and Unity with the Lord, Sins no more; so needs
no farther Confession of Sin, nor further Sacrifice for it; being drawn near
unto the Lord with a true Heart, Heb. 10.22.
in full Assurance of Faith, having his Heart sprinkled from an Evil
Conscience, and his Body washed with pure Water: Here is no more a Remembrance
again of Sin once a Year; Yet there is a Possibility, after this Estate is
witnessed and enjoyed, Heb. 10.26.
that there may be a Falling-away, or a Wilful Sinning again, which the Apostle
knew well, and therefore warned People to beware of it, that they tread not the
Son of God under Foot, Heb. 10.29, 30.
nor count the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith they were sanctified, an Unholy
Thing; nor do Des^ight unto the Spirit of Grace. Therefore the True Christian,
after he is washed, cleansed and sanctified, watches against all that would
defile him again; and in the Spirit and Power, which has wrought his
Sanctification, abiding, he rules and reigns over Sin and Satan, and is no more
entangled with the Yoke of Bondage; but keeps in his Inheritance among them
that are sanctified, Acts 20.32. Ephesians. 5.27.
who are Members of that Glorious Church, which is without Spot or Wrinkle, or
any such thing, Holy, and without Blemish.

The Titular Christian, he also talks of and professes the Doctrine of
Sanctification, Washing and Cleansing from Sin and Corruption; But his Talk is
not true, and his Profession is feigned, because he is not a Witness of the
Work thereof in himself: He has read in the Holy Scriptures, That no Unclean
Thing can enter the Kingdom; and that without Holiness no man can see the Lord;
and that the Lord will be sanctified of all that draw near unto him: Therefore
he has devised a Profession of Sanctification, which may be only talke^ of,
but never possessed and wrought in him on this side the Crave: And to this End
he has made up a Faith of his own (and is wholly ignorant of that Faith which
was once delivered to the Saints (or holy People) by which their Hearts were
purified) And by Virtue of this Feigned Faith, persuades himself, that the
Sanctification and Holiness of Christ without him, shall be reckoned and
imputed unto him,
while he remains unsanctified, and unholy; and that the Cleanness, Innocence
and Spotlesness of Christ shall be accounted unto him, notwithstanding he
remains foul, guilty and full of Spots and Defilements; and that God looks upon
him not as he is in himself, but as he is in Christ Jesus, his Savior; when
indeed he is not in him, nor saved by him from that which defiles him; for, if
any man be in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.17.
he is a New Creature, old things are past away, and all things are become New:
By this the Titular Christian may try himself, if he be not really changed, the
old Creature and old Things past away, he is not in Christ; and God cannot, nor
does not look upon him where he is not;
therefore let him not further deceive himself; for God's Witness in his own
Conscience sees and judges him where he is, out of Christ, unsanctified, in
the old Nature and old things; and God, from whence it comes, is greater, and
sees and judges him also.

And this Titular Christian is so far from living and enjoying a sanctified
State, really, indeed, and in truth, as the True Christian did and does, that
he never comes to enjoy so much Clearness and Freedom from Sin, as the Jews
did, who lived but in the Types, Figures and Shadows of Good Things to come;
for they once a year, while they kept the Law, were quitted and eased of all
their Sins and Transgressions, and a full Atonement was made once a year for
all Sins past, etc. which is more then all the Nominal Christians upon the Face
of the Earth really enjoy, notwithstanding their Boast of living in Gospel
Times, and in the Days of the New Covenant, and of Salvation by Christ Jesus:
Their Boast is vain; the Gospel, which is the Power of God to Salvation
(working and operating in their Inward Man, to save not only from the Guilt,
but from the Act of Sin, and to cleanse from all Iniquity) they are wholely
ignorant of, and Strangers to; and the New Covenant, the Law in the Heart,
which makes free from the Law of Sin and Death, and the Spirit that sanctifies
from it, reigns not in their Mortal Bodies; but the contrary, viz. Sin, and the
Law of it, and by the Spirit of Truth are convinced of it, and by God's
Vicegerent, the Light in their Consciences, they stand arraigned, and convicted
before the Judgment Seat of God, let their Profession be never so high.

And the Titular Christian is not a living Witness of the One Everlasting
Offering, which perfecteth forever those that are sanctified; nor of the
Oneness and Unity which is between him that sanctifies, and those that are
sanctified; nor of the abiding with him that sanctifies, so as to sin no more;
neither is he drawn near unto God with a true Heart, sprinkled from an Evil
Conscience; nor is his Body washed with pure Water: he has no full Assurance
of Faith in these things; but rather concludes them unattainable on this side
the Grave, and so is held captive in the Chains of Sin and Satan, and entangled
with the Yoke of Bondage, and in this State inherits Misery and Darkness, and
is a Member of that Church which is full of Spots and Wrinkles, Sores and
Corruptions, Diseased from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot; of
this Church Christ is not the Head: Let the Titular Christian imagine what he
will, he must depart among the Goats, because he is a Worker of Iniquity.

VIII. The True Christian's Faith and Experience concerning Justification.
THE True Christian believes the Doctrine of Justification, and that it
immediately succeeds the Work of Sanctification; Being justified by Faith (even
that Faith which is the Gift of God) he witnesses Peace with God through the
Lord Jesus Christ; Romans 5.1.
Heb. 10.38. Heb. 12.23.
And the Just lives by Faith; And he is come to the Spirits of Just Men made
perfect, etc. even now in this Age, as the True Christian did in former Ages,
testified of in the holy Scriptures: Now to be Justified, is to be made Just,
by Virtue of that Faith which gives Victory over the Unjust, and by that Blood
which cleanses and saves from Wrath to come: And this Justification comes not
by the Works of the Law; Gal. 2.16.
For by that shall no Flesh be Justified, nor by self-Works, nor
self-Righteousness, but by the free Gift of God, which leads through the Law,
and fulfils it, and destroys self-Works, and self-Righteousness, and
establishes good Works, and brings in Everlasting Righteousness, which exceeds
the Righteousness of Scribes, Pharisees and Hypocrites; and herein the True
Christian stands Justified in the Sight of God, who works all his Works in
him and for him,
and to will and to do of his own good Pleasure: Phil. 2.13. Romans 8.33.
And none can lay any Thing to the Charge of this Elect, whom God justifies.

The Titular Christian, he professes the Doctrine of Justification by Faith in
Christ Jesus: But it is no more then a bare Profession, and his Faith is not the
Faith of God's Elect; neither is he led into Peace with God by it, nor receives
Power by it to gain Victory over the Unjust Nature and Spirit that lives in
him, but imagins an imputative Justification, and applies the Justness,
Righteousness and Holiness of Christ, wrought without him, above 1600 Years ago
unto himself, while he is Unjust, Unholy and Unrighteous: But this avails not
the Titular Christian at all; herein also he dec^ives himself, being not
experimentally acquainted with the Blood of Christ, which justifies, washes
and cleanses, and saves from Wrath to come, and from that which is the Cause
of it (viz. Sin) And so he knows not a leading through the Law (which was added
because of Transgression, and has Power over the Transgressor as long as he
lives) unto Christ, which was before the Law, and before there was any
Occasion for the Law, who alone is able to Justify the Righteous, and condemn
the Wicked, whose Ways are all Equal, Just and Righteous, never condemning the
Just, nor justifying the Wicked; and it may be truly said of this Titular
Christian, as Christ said to the Covetous Pharisees, who derided him,
Ye are they which JVSTIFIE YOUR SELVES before Men, but God knows your
Hearts; Luke 16.15.
for that which is highly esteemed amongst Men, is Abomination in the Sight of
God.

And now the same Spirit that then derided Christ, and set him at Naught, and
that then ruled in the Hearts of Scribes, Pharisees and Hypocrites, and
Impenitent hard-hearted Jews, in this Part of the World called Christendom,
is now turned Professor of him in Words, and teaches him in whom it rules to
talk of Salvation and Justification by him, though at the same Time that Spirit
lives and rules in his Heart (to which God looks, and which he knows) that
denies,
despises, betrayeth and crucifieth him, even while he pretends to worship
him, as the Jews did, who sm^te him on the Head, Mark 15.19.
and spit upon him, and mocked him, and at the same Time bowed their Knees and
worshipped him; and as Judas did, who said, Hail Master, and Kissed him, Mat.
26.49.
and at the same Time betrayed him; the Nominal or Titular Christian is guilty
of the same Thing, he living in that, and daily committing that which ever was
the Cause and Occasion of all his Sufferings (viz. Sin) Therefore is he many
Times convicted,
reproved, judged and condemned in his Heart by God's Spirit that searches it,
even while his Tongue talks of Justification: Now to this Spirit of God, which
searches his Heart, and tries his Reins, and the innermost Parts of the
Belly, is this Titular Christian counseled to take heed, and to hear its
Judgment concerning him, and with his whole Heart receive the same, and by it
judge all the Flatteries, vain Conceits, Notions, Imaginations and Dreams, by
which he has been led and deceived, through the Subtilty of that grand Enemy
the Devil and Satan, who will suffer his Servants, Children, and Slaves,
to turn Professors of Christianity, and be Christians in Name, and to talk of
the Gospel, while he keeps Possession of the Heart: Let the Titular Christian
confider these Things before it be too late.

IX. The True Christian's Faith and Experience concerning Baptism and the
Lord's Supper.
THE True Christian believes and lives under the two great Ordinances of
Christ, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord in the Mystery; and he can give an
experimental Account how he come to live in the Enjoyment of these Ordinances,
even how he passed through the Work of Regeneration, Mortification and self
Denial, Sanctification and Justification, before he come to be a true Subject
and Partaker of these Ordinances; he can tell how the Old Man with his Deeds
were put off, and the New Man put on; Gal. 3.27.
for he that is baptized into Christ, has put on Christ,
not only professed him, while the Old Man was alive; but baptized with the
same Baptism he was baptized with in a Measure, even with the Holy Ghost and
Fire, which is inward and spiritual, and washes, cleanses and purifieth
inwardly and Spiritually, which all the outside Washing; and Baptisms were but
a Type of; and by this Baptism the True Christian is not only washed and made
clean, but kept and preserved by the same clean and pure, prepared and made fit
to put on the Wedding Garment, and to sit at the Table of the Lord, and partake
of the Feast of Fat Things, and drink of the Wine that he has prepared, which
is the Blood of the New Testament, which is Drink indeed and he eats the Flesh
of the Son of Man, John 6.5^.
which is Meat indeed, and this is the Supper of the Lord; and he eats and
drinks worthily, discerning the Lord's Body, having heard his Voice, and opened
the Door at which he once stood knocking; and he is now come in unto him,
according to his faithful Promise, Rev. 3.20.
and suppeth with him, and he with him; here is the Fruit of the Vine drank new
in the Kingdom of God; Mark. 14.25. Luke 14.15.
and here is the blessed Man that eats Bread in the Kingdom of God, and
sits down therein, being clothed with his Wedding Garment of fine Linen,
and adorned as a Bride for her Husband, and enjoying the efficacious Virtue of
him, which is Everlasting Life and Salvation, hungring and thirsting no more
after the forbidden Fruit nor after the Wine of Sodom, because he has the same
Mind which was in Christ Jesus, who never hunger'd nor thirsted after those
Things,
though tempted, yet never transgressed, but overcame the Devil in all his
Temptations: This is the State and Glory of the True Christian; this Honor
have all the Saints, who come to be established in the Mind of Christ; and this
Honor they had in former Ages, born witness of and testified in the Holy
Scriptures, and is in Store, and laid up for all that love his Appearance, and
come unto God by him.

The Titular Christian he says, he owns Christ's Ordinances, and professes
himself a Subject of the Baptism of Christ, and a Guess at the Lord's Table;
but his Profession must be examined, tried and searched; for as in other
Things, so in this he must not be so because he professes it; this were to
judge according to Appearance, and so not Righteous Judgment; his Account that
he gives to prove that he is so, is as follows: First, as to Baptism, he has
received the Administration of it by Water after one Fashion or other; either
when he was a Child, he had Water sprinkled upon his Face by the Hand of a
sinful Priest, or plunged all over, it may be accompanied with other
Ceremonies, as Spittle, Cream, Salt, Oil, and the Sign of the Cross, etc. or
otherwise, when he grew up to Years of Discretion able to receive the
Traditions of his Fore Fathers, and to read the Holy Scriptures, therein he
finds that diverse were baptized in Water after they did believe in John's
Ministry who was the peculiar Minister of it (and was a burning and a shining
Light in his Day, and as the Voice of one crying in the Wilderness, Prepare the
Way of the Lord) and that Jesus himself was baptized therewith, and that many
others were baptized, not only by John, but also by the Disciples and Apostles
of Jesus: Now this Reader, it may be in the Tenderness and Simplicity of his
Spirit, the Vail being over his Heart when he reads, is ready to conclude,
Surely this is an Ordinance of Christ, this is Christ's Baptism: and if I will
be his Disciple, I must be a Subject of it; if I would be counted a Believer, I
must also be baptized with Water, or else I cannot be saved; and so this
Reader, his Eye being abroad, and being ignorant of that Head, in which the
Wise Man's Eye stands, and not discerning the Times and Seasons, and the diverse
Dispensations of God toward Mankind since the Fall,
nor perceiving the End of them, lays hold of the Shadow and Figure, instead
of the Substance, and gets Possession of the Shell instead of the Kernel, his
Body washed, though not with the pure Water of the Word, his Outside baptized
with outward Water, and then accounts himself a Subject and Partaker of
Christ's Ordinance. But herein the Titular Christian of all Sorts is deceived;
for notwithstanding his Teachers tell him, that he entered within the Pale of
the Church,
and was made a Member of Christ, when he was sprinkled with Water in his
Infancy; and the other, when of Understanding to imitate others, I say, herein
he deceives himself, and is deceived, because he still remains ignorant of the
One Baptism, which washes and cleanses the Inside, purifieth the Heart, and
sprinkles the Conscience from dead Works, of which all the Outside Sprinklings,
Washings and Baptisms that ever were appointed of God, or practiced of holy
Men, were but a Figure or Type: And the True Christian sticks not, nor remains
in any of them: but it is a great Mystery to tell the Titular Christian of being
baptized with this one Baptism, which is the Baptism of Christ, under the Term
of Holy Ghost and Fire, though he may read that Christ foretold, that even
those that were Partakers of John's Baptism, which was the greatest of outward
Baptisms, should be baptized with the Holy Ghost and Fire: And John said, I
indeed baptize with Water, Mat. 3.11, 12.
unto Repentance; but he that comes after me, is mightier then I, whose Shoes
I am not worthy to bear, he will baptize with the Holy Ghost and with Fire,
whose Fan is in his Hand, and will make clean his Floor, and gather his Wheat
into his Garner, and burn up the Chaff with Unquenchable Fire; This the True
Christian witnessed fulfilled in the Primitive Times; and now is Partaker of
the same, being baptized into Christ, Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.12.
has put him on, being baptized into his Death, is buried with him in Baptism;
and this Baptism being one, brings all that are Partakers of it, The Ground of
Unity.
of what Nation or Country soever, Bond or Free, into one Body, into Oneness of
Heart, and Mind, and Spirit, as Paul testified to the Corinthians: For by one
Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Grecians, 1
Cor. 12.13.
whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit;
this blessed Oneness and Unity, is the Fruit and Effect of the one true Baptism
of Christ Jesus.

These Things the Titular Christian can read of in the Holy Scriptures, which
the True Christians were Witnesses of: But till the Vail of the Covering be
rent and taken away from off his Heart, and he truly turned unto the Lord, and
becomes sensible of the Operation of his Spirit, as a Fanner, as a Purger, as a
Gatherer of the Wheat in the Garner, and as a Fire to burn up the Chaff, till
this he knows working in his own Heart,
he remains in Death and Darkness, and only talks of Heavenly Things, and lives
in the Earthly, and boasts of Christ's Ordinance of Baptism, but is a Stranger
to it, and sticks in the Outside and Shadow, and abides in the outward Court
which is trodden under Foot of the Gentiles, and cries up the Temple of the
Lord and his Ordinances, but dwells not therein, nor is not a living Witness or
Member thereof.

And concerning the Lord's Supper, the Titular Christian professes himself a
Guess prepared to sit at the Table, and to eat of the Dainties that he has
prepared; but the Master of the Feast has appeared, and taken notice of his
Guess, and has given an Eye also to his Children, to see beyond the outside
Appearance and Profession; and the Day of Trial and Manifestation is come, and
the Titular Christian must be examined, whether he sits at the Table of the
Lord, and eats of his Flesh, and drinks of his Blood; or on the contrary,
whether he only professes it,
and crowdeth himself in unprepared, without his Wedding Garment, and catches
at a Shadow, and feeds upon Husks, and is as one that dreameth he eats, but
when he awakes, is hungery; therefore how does he demonstrate that he is a
Partaker of this Supper? why, he has received by Tradition, or finds it
written in the holy Scriptures, That the same Night that Christ was betrayed,
he took Bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave to his Disciples, and
said, take, eat, this is my Body, which is given for you, do this in
Remembrance of me; and also the Cup, saying, This Cup is that Now Testament in
my Blood, which is shed for you, this do as often as ye drink in remembrance of
me, and Paul says, So often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, you show
forth the Lord's Death till he come: This was only to and amongst the Disciples
and weak Believers, and was in it self but a Representation and Figure of that
which is Meat indeed, and Drink indeed, which Paul principally aimed at, which
at Christ's second Appearance without Sin unto Salvation, his Saints and
Disciples were Partakers of: But the Titular Christian before he has approved
himself a Disciple of Jesus, and before he has followed him one Step in the
Work of Regeneration,
begins to imitate what he finds was practiced by Christ and his Disciples,
though not in the same Spirit, nor to the same End; one Sort gets Bread and
Wine, and consecrates it (as he says) by a sinful Hand and polluted Lips, and
then imagins it immediately Transubstantiated (or changed) into the Real Flesh
and Blood of Christ; this is a great and strong Delusion indeed, be being led
by such a gross implicit Faith, as to believe so palpable and witless a Lie
(contrary to his outward Senses, which are able to try outward Things for the
very Bread and Wine so consecrated, remains of the very same Quality, Nature
and Form as before, and as subject to Decay, Mould and Corrupt, and be eaten by
Vermin, as any other Bread and Wine of the same kind.

Another Sort, not quite so much besotted in this thing, blesses Bread and
Wine after his manner, and looks upon it as Bread and Wine after his Blessing
is bestowed upon it, eating and drinking of it, some after one Fashion, and
some after another, calling it, A Blessed Sacrament; one will eat it before
Dinner, another after Supper; one Standing, another Kneeling, another Sitting,
etc. and do not look upon it as Real Fesh and Blood, but a Representation,
Type, or Figure, or something which ought to be partaken of in Remembrance of
Christ till he comes. But in all these things the Titular Christian deceives
himself, and indeed has no Part in the one, nor in the other, in the true
Figure, nor in the Substance: And notwithstanding his outward Mouth eats and
drinks outward Bread and Wine, which comes from beneath, and is the Fruit of
the Earth, his Inward Man pines and hungers for want of partaking of that
Living Bread which comes down from Heaven; and is wholely a Stranger to that
Flesh which is Meat indeed, and to that Blood which is Drink indeed; and puts
the Coming of the Lord far off; and is wholely ignorant not only of him, but of
the Manner of his Coming also, and of the very Door of Conscience at which he
stands knocking, and so does not open unto him, but opens to a Stranger, and
entertaineth his Enemy, and gives Place and Obedience to that which occasioned
all his Sufferings (to wit, Sin) and the Author of it;
this is to sit at the Table of Devils, eating of the Forbidden Fruit; in this
State he has no Part in the Precious Promises, no Right nor Title in Christ
nor his Ordinances, much being to do before all things are prepared,
and made ready for the Last Supper: And before this Titular Christian is made
fit to fit at the Table with him, or stand upright in his Presence; and before
he knows him tomake his abode with him, and to sup with him, as he has
promised, and as the True Christian in former Ages and now in this Age
enjoys, who did and does witness Eternal Life abiding in him; Read John 6.53,
54, 55, 56, 57, 58.
For he that eats his Flesh and drinks his Blood, has Eternal Life, and
dwells in him, and he in him, etc.

This the Titular Christian cannot receive nor understand, no more then the
Jews did; this he stumbleth at, and goes backward, murmureth and takes
Offense, as some of old did, when Christ was speaking of the Bread which came
down from Heaven, which, who eat of should live forever, many of his own
Disciples said, This is a Hard Saying; who can hear it? and so murmured, and
went backward and walked no more with him:
These, though they heard his many Gracious Words, and saw his Mighty Works and
Miracles wrought before their Carnal Eyes and Ears, yet they saw not him, as he
was the Mighty Power of God, nor heard him, as Peter did, who said, when he
asked the Twelve, Will ye leave me also? Master, To whom shall we go? Thou have
the Words of Eternal Life; and we believe and know, thou ^rt Christ, the Son of
the Living God. This Knowledge, Christ said, was revealed unto him, not by
Flesh and Blood, but by his Heavenly Father.

Now the Titular Christian denies Revelation, the only Means of all true
Knowledge; and so in his Carnal Imaginations, and exalted Mind above the Cross
of Christ, glories in the Flesh, and prides himself with what Flesh and Blood
has taught him, and revealed unto him; and cries up Natural Bread, and Natural
Wine,
and a Natural Supper, which feeds the Natural Man, and remains a Stranger to
that Bread which comes down from Heaven, and to the Wine of the Kingdom, and
to the Supper of the Lord, and to his Table which is richly spread; and hates
and derides the True Christian, who possesses and enjoys these things. And
this is the Cause, that notwithstanding the Titular Christian eats never so
often of this Outward Bread, and drinks this Outward Cup (which he in his
Ignorance calls, The Supper of the Lord) he hungers and thirsts again,
even after the Forbidden Fruit, and after the Wine of Sodom and Egypt, and
drinks down Iniquity as the Ox drinks Water: And so, in the End,
notwithstanding his Notions and Profession of the Supper of the Lord, and
Eating at his Table, his Soul is hard bestead with Hunger, and pines for
Thirst, and labors for very Vanity, sows the Wind, and reaps the Whirlwind
of the Wrath of God. This is the State of all the Titular Christians upon the
Face of the Earth, of what Name or Sect soever.

X. The True Christian 's Faith and Experience concerning the Universal Love of
God toward all Mankind.
THe True Christian believes, that the Love of God is universal unto all
Mankind; and that his Grace, which brings Salvation, has and does appear
unto all men; and that he has given a manifestation of his Spirit to every man
to profit withal; and that he has and does give his Good Spirit and Gifts to
the Rebellious; and that God so loved the World that he has given his only
begotten Son, that None excluded from Salvation in Christ by any Decree.
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life; and
that he is the true Light, that lights every man coming into the World;
and that this Light is saving and sufficient to lead all Mankind, that love it
and walk in it, to him from whence it comes, where they may inherit Life and
Salvation; and God wills not the Death of him that dies, neither does he desire
the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he would turn and live; and his Call is
to all men every where to Repent; and there is a Possibility that all men may
hear his Voice, and Repent, and may partake of his Universal Love, and be saved
by his Grace, which has appeared, and profit by the Manifestation which he
has given, The Gifts, Graces and Spirit of God are given to all men, yea, to
the Rebellious, Sloathful and Disobedient, to lead them out of those things.
and be guided out of Rebellion by his Good Spirit, and to believe in him,
which saves from perishing, and gives Everlasting Life: These things are called
for and exhorted to throughout the Holy Scriptures; and there is a Possibility
to obey them; otherwise, all is in vain, the Call to all in vain, the
Appearance of Grace to all in vain, the Gift and Manifestation of the Spirit to
every one in vain, and the Shining of the Light in vain, if Men may not obey
it,
and walk in it. So Man's Destruction is of himself, and his Sores remain
uncured, and his Soul unredeemed; not because there is no Balm in Gilead, or
because the Arm of the Lord is shortened, or his Love abated; nor not because
he has decreed any man's Destruction from Eternity; but because men will not
make use of the Balm, nor be gathered by his Arm, that is stretched out all the
Day long, even to the Rebellious, to save them, nor receive that Love that
daily is tendered: Their Eye is blind, and their Souls poor, miserable and
naked; not because he has not Eye Salve, Fine Linen, and Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge to furnish them withal; but because men are taken up with other
things, and have no mind to purchase Gold tried in the Fire, nor White Raiment
to be clothed: The Forbidden Fruit seems more beautiful and lovely to desire,
the Enemy having drawn out his Mind to look after it, he turns his Back upon
the other; then his Eye is blinded, and his Ear stopped; then he cannot see the
Glory of God to surpass the Beauty and Glory of all things visible and in
visible, nor delight in the hearing of his Voice and obeying it; but his stolen
Water is sweet, and the Forbidden Fruit is pleasant to Man in this Blind, Deaf
and Dead Estate, wherein he walks in the Broad Way, and falls into every
Temptation, Bait and Snare of the Enemy, that old Serpent, who having drawn him
thus far, takes him captive at his Pleasure.
Thus entered Sin in the Beginning, and thus it increases, and thus the Enemy
^revaileth.

Now, no man in this Estate can open that Eye which was blinded through
Transgression, nor unstop that Ear, nor save and deliver himself out of the
Hand of his Enemy, which holds him in sore Captivity: Therefore, herein is the
Universal Love of God manifest, that he has laid Help upon one that is Mighty,
that is able to save to the uttermost; that he has appointed and prepared a
Seed that is able to bruise the Serpent's Head; and that he has sown this Good
and Powerful Seed in the Hearts of all men,
in the Bad Ground as well as in the Good; and that he has caused his Light to
shine in the Hearts of all, though in Darkness; and his Rain to Fall upon all,
Just and Unjust; and to call upon all men every where; and to follow Mankind
(who is run from him by Transgression, and hid himself among the Trees, and
covered himself with the Fig Tree Leaves) and to meet with him in the Cool of
the Day; and to Reason with him, Reprove, Correct and Chastise him, in order to
do him Good, if he will hearken to his Voice, and turn at his Correction is
Gracious to him that forsakes the Way; and he that hates Reproof shall dye,
Prove. 15.10.
Reproof; and be gathered by his Arm, which is stretched out to save him;
which, if he does, he shall not miss of Salvation: But if he stops his Ear,
hardens his Heart, and continues in Rebellion, and refuses to be reconciled,
his Destruction is of himself, and God will be just when he judges.

XI. The True Christian 's Faith and Experience concerning the Doctrine of
Election and Reprobation.
ELection and Reprobation stands in the two Seeds, called, The Seed of the
Woman, and The Seed of the Serpent; and all Mankind are Partakers of the one or
of the other, as either of these two Seeds grows up in them,
and as they grow, up in the one, or in the other; or join to the one, or to
the other; and are born of the one, which is Incorruptible; or of the other,
which is Corruptible: And this Seed, which is incorruptible, and has remained
pure throughout all Generations, is that in which all Nations are blessed, Acts
3.25.
as they come to be born of it:
And this is it unto which all the Promises of God are Yea and Amen, which was
not made unto Seeds, as of many, as Paul says, speaking of the Seed of
Abraham, Gal. 3.16, 29.
but of one Seed, which is Christ; and they that are Christ's, are Abraham 's
Seed, and Heirs by Promise. And the Election or Choice of God, stands in this
Seed, and all the Heavenly Blessings and Evangelical Promises come to be
enjoyed and inherited by Mankind through Faith in this Seed, through the
Growing up of this Seed in them, and through the knowing this Seed to remain in
them, and become the greatest of all Seeds, stopping the Growth of the Seed of
the Serpent, bruising his Head, and causing his whole Body to languish and dye:
And through the knowing this Seed become so Powerful in them, as to possess the
Gates of its Enemies;
with this Seed, and with all that are born of it, God's Election stands sure,
and his Covenant is kept with it forever; whom he loves here, he loves to the
End; and all that love this Seed, he will be their God, and they shall be his
People; and those are the Elect, which can never be deceived, nor the Gates of
Hell prevail against.

And the True Christian, who is born of this Incorruptible Seed, 2 Pet. 1.
obeyes Peter's Exhortation, Giving Diligence to make his Calling and Election
sure; adding to his Faith,
Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to
Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, Godliness; and to Godliness,
Brotherly-Kindness; and to Brotherly Kindness, Charity, etc. and as he does
these things, he shall never fall; but have an Entrance ministered abundantly
into the Everlasting Kingdom of his Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: And he lays
aside all Malice, and all Guile, Oh! that Christendom would obey this.
and Hypocrisies, and Envies, and all Evil-Speakings, and becomes as a Newborn
Babe, desiring the Sincere Milk of the Word, that he may grow more and more,
and increase with the Increase of God thereby, until he grows up in the
Promised Seed, in which his Calling and Election stands, unto the Unity of the
Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the
Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ, growing up in him in all
things, which is the Head,
even Christ. This is the Mark of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus; and
these are the Marks, Tokens and Signs, Fruits and Effects, which attend and
accompany all those that are born of this Incorruptible Seed, in which their
Election stands, in, through and by which their Calling and Election is made
sure. And the True Christian, who is thus elected, and born of this Seed, has
not only the Witness in himself, and the Spirit of God bearing witness and
sealing to his Spirit,
that he is a Child of it; but the Fruit of this Seed also shows it self forth,
and appears, that men may see and behold it, and glorify his Father which is
in Heaven.

Now, the Reprobation stands in the Seed of the Serpent, and all that are born
of it, are born of Flesh and Blood, and of the Will of Man, and not of the Will
of God, nor by Promise; and in whomsoever this Seed grows up,
Enmity increases in them against the Seed of the Woman, against the promised
Seed, and all the Children of i^; hence arose Cain's Envy, Ishmael's Mocking,
and Esau's Rage, and is continued in that Generation or Birth, down to this
Age: This is that Birth that is born after the Flesh, which always did, and
does to this Day persecute him that is born after the Spirit; this is he that
was grown a great Dragon in John's Day, which persecuted the Woman that brought
forth (the Seed) the Man Child, and that went to make War with the Remnant of
her Seed, which kept the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus:
And he is the same at this Day and his Wrath; Enmity and Work is the same in
the Hearts and Hands of all Mankind, in whom this Seed of the old Serpent has
taken Root, and grows up; Psalm. 37.28. Isa. 14.20.
this is the Seed of the Wicked that shall be cut off, and of Evil Doers that
shall never be renowned;
and all that are joined to it, and become Children of it, are Reprobate to
every good Word and Work, and go upon their Bellies, and Dust is their Meat,
and they dwell upon the Earth, where the Woe is, and where the Devil is come
down among them, and they walk upon that Ground that is Cursed, and inhabit the
dark Corners thereof, and they hate the Light, and are Reprobate from the
Prefence of God, and from the Glory of his Power, Children of Disobedience and
Wrath, in whom the old Serpent rules, and holds them in sore Captivity; and as
in this State of Reprobation they abide, they are Children of the Devil, and
his Lust they do, Marks ^f Reprobation.
his Servants and Slaves they are, and cannot cease from Sin, nor enjoy the
many glorious Promises made to the Seed of the Woman, nor know the Serpents
Head in them bruised by it, nor the great red Dragon chained, being Reprobate
from that Faith which gives Victory over him.

But out of this Estate of Reprobation and deep Pit of Misery, wherein a great
Part of Mankind is held, A Possibility that the Reprobate may become Elect.
the Testimony of the True Christian is, that God has appointed a Means of
Deliverance, Salvation and Redemption;
there is a Possibility of being born again of the other Seed, the
incorruptible Seed, wherein the Election stands; Children of Disobedience and
Wrath, may become Children of God, and partake of his Grace and Mercy, and
witness Redemption from the Earth, and the Cursed Ground with its cursed Fruit
burned up by the Spirit of Judgment and Burning; and the Seed of the Serpent
may be rooted out of the Heart of Man, though it has grown there long, and
filled it with its Fruit; and the good Seed of the Kingdom may spring and grow
there; and every Thorn Bryar, Thistle and Plant which hinders its Growth, may
be pulled up, which the Heavenly Father has not planted; and they that have
born the Earthly Image, may bear the Heavenly; and those that have yielded
their Members Servants to Unrighteousness, may yield them Servants to
Righteousness; and those that are foolish, may become Wise; those that are
disobedient and deceived, may become obedient and undeceived; those that serve
diverse Lusts and Pleasures, Tit. 3.3, 4.
and live in Malice and Envy, hateful, and hating one another, may come to
witness Victory over,
and Redemption from all these Things; and this True Christian's Testimony is
plentifully born witness to in the Holy Scriptures, as Paul wrote to Titus,
saying, We our selves were sometimes foolish, diso edient, deceived, serving
diverse Lusts and Pleasures, living in Malice and Envy, hateful, and hating one
another; these were all the Fruit and Effect of the Evil Seed; these were all
Fruits of the Ground that is Cursed; and in this Estate they were reprobate
concerning the Faith, and Children of Wrath as well as others: But says he,
After the Kindness and Love of God our Savior toward Man appeared, not by
Works of Righteousness which we have done; but according to his Mercy he saved
us, by the Washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he
shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ, our Savior, etc. So in the
Kindness, Love and free Mercy of God, by the washing of Regeneration (or New
Birth) they become transplanted out of the Old into the New, out of the Seed of
the Serpent into the Seed of the Woman, out of the Reprobate State into the
Chosen and Elected State; taken out of the Wild Olive, and planted or grafted
into the True Vine that brings forth Fruit which glads the Heart of God and
Man; and he is ready to do the same in this Age for all that love his
Appearance,
and hearken to his Voice, and obey it, and shut their Ears against the Voice
of the Serpent (which is possible to be done) they shall enjoy God's Salvation,
and partake of his Love and Kindness, which the Saints enjoyed in former Ages,
and do in this Age, and is freely tendered to all for their Everlasting Good.
For God has not (as some Titular Christians affirm) predestined or
fore-ordain'd the greatest Part of Mankind (or any Part) to Everlasting
Perdition, nor made any fixed Decree, that so many, and no more, shall be
saved, and all the rest damned, and that this Decree was established before
Mankind was brought forth, without having Respect to either Good or Evil that
they should do.

This is a Doctrine that is accursed, and contrary to the Gospel or glad-Tidings
of Peace and Reconciliation,
and Inconsistent with all the Dispensations of God's Love toward lost Man,
ever since he obeyed the Voice of the Serpent, and his Seed grew up in him, and
ever since the Devil got his Seat and Dominion in Man, all which have been in
order to break his Power, and to dispossess him, cast him forth, and spoil his
Goods, and to sweep and garnish the House, and furnish it again with Heavenly
Goods, as it was before the Devil and his Goods entered, and as it was before
the Evil Seed was sown in Man's Heart, and before he entered into Temptation,
or eat of the forbidden Fruit; this has been the End of the Lord in all his
Promises, Appearances and Dispensations, before the Law, and under the Law, and
in the Days of the Evangelical Prophets, who saw and prophesied of glorious
Things, which God would bring to pass for the Universal Good of Mankind; for
Isaiah saw that Day in which the Lord with his sore, great and strong Sword,
should punish Leviathan the piercing Serpent, even Leviathan that crooked
Serpent, and slay the Dragon that is in the Sea, In Scripture Phrase People are
compared to the Sea.
and he saw that the Abundance of the Sea should be converted, and the Forces
of the Gentiles should come unto him, Isa. 27.1.60.5.
whom God has appointed to be his Salvation to the Ends of the Earth; and he
spoke of a Time, wherein the Lord would gather all Nations and Tongues to come
and see his Glory, which he had given for a Light to the Gentiles, and for the
Glory of his People Israel, to finish Transgression, and make an End of Sin,
and bring in Everlasting Righteousness, to destroy the Devil and his Works, to
repair the Breach, and restore Paths to dwell in, even Paths of Holiness,
wherein the wayfaring man, though a Fool, cannot err;
this is the End or Substance of all the Dispensations of God; and many have
been and are living Witnesses of the same, and no Man is exempted by any Decree
of God from the Enjoyment of these Things.

And all those Babel Builders and blind Guides, which set up and minister this
kind of Doctrine, that God has pre-ordained how many Persons shall be saved,
and how many damned, if People were not as ignorant and as blind as themselves,
their Trade would quickly be spoiled, and come to an End, and no Body would
employ them; for if there be a fixed Decree from all Eternity how many shall be
saved, and how many damned, which neither the one nor the other by all the Good
and Evil they can do, are able to alter this determinate Counsel, then
altogether in vain is it for People to hire such Builders, who say before hand,
their Tower will never convey any to Heaven, who are not designed to go there
without it, or to maintain such unprofitable Talkers and vain Bablers, when
they can neither make them better nor worse, nor bring one Soul to Salvation
that is not determined and decreed already to be saved, nor direct one Soul how
he may escape Hell, that shall not escape it without their Directions; these
are unprofitable and vain Talkers indeed, and Messengers of miserable Tidings,
that preach this Doctrine of Devils in the World, the Fruit and Effect of which
runs many a poor Soul upon one of these desperate Rocks, disfolute Despair, or
implicit Imaginary Security.

Again, this Doctrine of God's absolutely decreeing the greater Part of Mankind
to Damnation, makes void Christ's coming a Light into the World, and his
Suffering, Dying and R^sing again, his sending his Apostles and Ministers out
into the World, to persuade Men to be reconciled to God, and to receive his
free Love and Grace that is tendered in Christ Jesus to all; The Doctrine of a
settled Decree concerning Election and Reprobation, as to Persons, lays wast
all the general Means of Salvation, and excludes God's Universal Love, and
makes him a Rospecter of Persons.
and if all stand under such a unrevokeable Decree, which all that the Sons of
Men can do or say is not able to alter, or to make them one Jot the better or
worse, as to the End, nor any Means contrarvwise take Effect to gain Heaven,
nor prevent going to Hell; I say, if these Things were so, then in vain are all
conditional Preachings, Woings, and Beseechings in an universal Way; in vain is
the Gospel preached in every Creature; in vain has and does the Grace of God,
which brings Salvation appear, unto all Men; in vain are all enlightened; in
vain is a Manifestation of the Spirit given to every Man to profit withal; in
vain are his good Gifts given to the Rebellious; and the Testimonies of God's
Universal Love to all Mankind, plentifully declared of in the Holy Scriptures,
are all in vain, and this Doctrine gives them all the Lie.

Much might be said to show the Grossness and Absurdness of this kind of
Doctrine; but intending Brevity and a Hint at Things, and hoping the Light of
the glorious Gospel, that now shines, and is broaken forth in the Hearts of
Thousands and Ten Thousands, will disperse this gross Darkness, and cause this
destructive pernicious Doctrine to vanish away, especially in this Nation of
England, before this Age is worn out; I say, for these two Reasons I forbear to
enlarge, with a Breathing to the Lord, that People may come to know the fallow
Ground plowed up, and the hard Clods broaken, and their Hearts made tender and
honest, that the good Seed of the Kingdom, wherein the Election stands, may
spring and grow up, and bear Fruit in them to Everlasting Life, and the Seed of
the Serpent rooted out, and he and all his Works destroyed; this is the
glorious Liberty which the whole Creation groans for, and some already enjoy
it, Praises to God forever, whose Love extends to all, whose Arm is stretched
out to help all, whose Scepter of Salvation is held forth to all, whose Desire
is, that all may come to the Knowledge of his Truth, and be saved: This is the
Testimony of God and of those Righteous Men that knew him in former Ages, who
were born of the Incorruptible Seed, and is the Testimony of the Righteous in
this Age,
and the contrary is the Testimony of the Enemy of God and Man, that old
Serpent and his Children, who are born of the Seed of it, and their Fruit is
the Offspring of the Adulterer and the Whore, whom God will judge: This is the
Word of Truth to all whom it may concern.

XII. The True Christian's Faith and Experience concerning Temptation.
JAMES says, Blessed is the Man that endures Temptation; for, when he is
tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them
that love him. Let no man say, when he is tempted, he is tempted of God; for
God cannot be tempted with Evil, neither tempts he any man: But every man is
tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed, James 1.12, 13, 14.

Now the True Christian is a Witness of this Saying of James, having found the
Blessedness that follows the enduring Temptation, and received the Earnest of
the Crown of Life: And he truly and experimentally knows, That God cannot be
tempted with Evil, because that Heavenly Light and Grace, and Manifestation of
the Holy Spirit, which he is Partaker of, and endued withal, and is of God,
cannot be tempted with Evil, nor be prevailed upon to consent or take Pleasure
in any Unrighteousness; and this good and perfect Gift of God, which cannot be
tempted with Evil, nor tempts no man, received, believed in, and entertained
in the Heart, is that which enabled the Righteous in all Ages to endure
Temptation, and does enable them in this Age:
And all those that know not, receive not, believe not in this Good and Perfect
Which is the Light and Grace, or Holy Spirit Within.
Gift of God, given and sent into the World (to Sinners as well as Saints) they
cannot, nor are not able to endure Temptation; but are led away of their Lusts,
and enticed, and fall into Temptation, for want of Faith in the Gift and Power
of God, which is as near them as the Temptation, and able and ready to deliver
them, if they would regard it and obey it.

Now, the Ground of all Temptations are within, the Lusts that lead away, are
within; the Light which discovers them, and the Grace which is sufficient, and
the Spirit which mortifies the Lusts,
must be also known within, where the Temptations rise and attend Mankind (
even the Righteous for a time) and diverse outward Objects also may present, in
order to draw out and alure the Mind to join with them, and to entertain them:
The Devil has Power to Tempt, but not to Force.
But neither the Temptations Within nor Without can prevail, until the Light is
disregarded, the Appearance of Grace slighted, and the Spirit of God despised,
and the Mind joined to the Tempter and Temptation.

Now, its no Sin to be tempted, but to enter into the Temptation. No man was
ever condemned because tempted, or because Evil Motions and Temptations did
arise in him, and present themselves, if he entered not into them, nor gave no
place to them, nor joined with them in his Mind, nor suffered his Members to
obey them; but kept in the Light, Grace and Spirit of God, by which he resisted
them, and the Author of them, and made him flee: This is the Blessed Man, that
endures Temptations.

So though Temptations are Evil and Sinful in themselves, and did at some times
attend the Righteous in all Ages, and do at this day; yet if they give no place
nor Consent to them,
nor obey them, but by the Light and Spirit of God judge them, and walk in the
Light which discovers them, and the Evil Tendency of them, and are preserved
from joining to them, they are no Sinners because tempted; as for instance (to
speak but to a low State) if any are troubled with unclean and vain Thoughts,
and tempted with Dark Unlawful Imaginations, which in themselves are Evil and
These will lodge in that Flesh in which dwells no good thing, till it and its
Habitation be Mortified, and removed, which is to be known, even while the
Earthen Vessel remains, that holds the Heavenly Treasure.
Sinful; yet if they by the Light and Spirit of God judge them, and give no
Place or Obedience to them, but wait to see the ground thereof removed, they do
that which is right in the Sight of the Lord, and are no Sinners: so if tempted
to use any Member of the Body, to speak or do any Evil; as, the Tongue, to lie,
flatter, or dissemble, or speak perverse things; or the Hand, to do Violence to
any man; or the Feet, to run to do Mischief;
if these Members are not yielded up to serve and obey these Temptations, those
so tempted are no Transgressors; but are Witnesses of that Prayer, and the
Effect of it, which Christ taught his Disciples, Lead us not, or, let us not be
led into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil.

Christ Jesus was attended with diverse great Temptations, and the Old Serpent
(that deceived the first Adam) was very bold with him, and carried him from Let
him that reads, understand.
Place to Place, from the Wilderness to the holy City, from thence to the
Pinnacle of the Temple, and then to an exceeding high Mountain, and showed him
all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them, with a Promise, He would
give them all to him, if he would fall down and worship him: But he standing in
the Power of his Father, gave no place to him, but rebuked him, and resisted
him in all his Temptations, and overcame him. Now its said, While the Time of
Temptation lasted he eat nothing, and when they were ended, Luke 4. Mat. 4.
he afterward hungered; and when the Devil departed, Angels ministered unto him:
this is the Glory of the Second Adam, that never fell, though tempted to fall,
eat no forbidden Fruit, though tempted to ea^; neither did he hunger in the
time of Temptation after it; nor gave no place to the Lies of the Old Serpent,
that allured and deceived the First Adam thereby, and subjected him under Hope
of enjoying a better Estate then that wherein God had placed him, and so fell
into the Depth of Misery, first by letting out a Desire after the Pleasantness
of the Forbidden Fruit, and Hungering after it in the Time of Temptation; and
then putting forth the Hand, and joining to it, obeyes and eats, and fulfils
the Lusts of the Serpent: And thus, and in this manner, Temptation prevails
over all the Sons of the First Adam, who bear the Earthly Image, and are not
born again of the promised Seed, that breaks the Head of the Serpent, and
redeems from under his Power, and brings to grow up in the Second Adam, who
could not be prevailed upon with his Lies and Subtilty.

And this Second Adam, Christ Jesus, is the Captain of the True Christian's
Salvation, who is gone before, leaving him an Ensample, to follow his Steps:
And he has endued him with Heavenly Power, and armed him with Spiritual
Armor, and furnished him with Strength so to do: So the True Christian is
compared to a good Soldier, that follows his Captain,
and fights with him, and does not desert him, and leave him to fight by
himself; but makes Good Use of the Power, Armor of Light, and Sword of the
Spirit, that is given him to war withal, and to overcome his Enemy withal; and
he keeps on his Breast Plate of Righteousness, and the Helmet of Salvation,
which are able to quench all the Fiery Darts of the Devil, and so follows his
Captain, not only Conquering, but also to Conquer; for when he has overcome
him not only in the Field, but has also pursued him to his The Devil's Strong
Holds are built in the Wills, Thoughts and Imaginations of Men.
Strong Holds, and beaten him out there, and pulled them down; and cast down
Imaginations, (and every high thing, that exalts it self against the Knowledge
of God) in which he built them) When this is effected by virtue of the Weapons
which are Mighty, and by the Power of him which enables the True Christian to
do all things, he still keeps on his Watchtower, which is the Light of Christ,
wherewith he is enlightened, that he may not be surprised with another Part of
his Forces; and as he keeps watching there, in vain are all his Stratagems,
Wiles and subtle Devices; in vain are all his Snares and Ambushments laid; in
vain are all his Temptations and Allurements, as the True Christian keeps in
that, and dwells in that in which the Devil has no Part nor Fellowship in,
(viz. the Light) whereby he is discovered, and all his Baits and Snares seen
and avoided.

It is in the Darkness, and over all that dwell in it, that he prevalls; his
Power stands there, and is exercised over all that walk in it; he need not go
about with Wiles and Devices to deceive such, who already dwell and are
Subjects in his Kingdom; nor he need not go about like a roaring Lion, seeking
to devour them, being already under his Dominion, and obedient Children, Vasals
and Slaves to him;
he need not use Subtilty to tempt such, but Power to command, and they obey.

But its against the Children of Light, that are turned from the Darkness, and
from under his Power, that he improves all his cunning Subtilty and Devices,
and its against them he rages, if by any Means he can beguile them, as he
beguiled Eve, 2 Cor. 11.3.
and corrupt their Minds from the Simplicity that is in Christ; even after they
are presented as a chaste Virgin to Christ, and are come to a dwelling Place in
Paradise, and to appear before God in Heaven; he will not cease to tempt and
accuse there, as he has done, he is still ready to do; he tempted and beguiled
Eve in Paradise: Genesis 3. Job. 1. Rev. 12.4
And on a Day when the Sons of God appeared before the Lord, Satan came also
among them, and accused Job: And John in his Day saw the great red Dragon
appear in Heaven,
waiting to devour the Man-Child (he that reads let him understand) This made
Paul fear the Serpent might beguile them he wrote to, 1 Cor. 11.3.
as he beguiled Eve, through his Subtilty tempt and allure them out of
Innocence, out of a Virgin, sinless and harmless Estate, after they were in it;
It Is possible to be tempted and allured out of Innocence, and to loose a good
Estate.
this he once did, and may do again, if he be not watched against, and resisted
in the Power of the second Adam, which enables to endure Temptation, and so to
receive the Blessing, and after Trial to enjoy the Crown of Life which the Lord
has promised to them that love him. Jam. 1.12.


XIII. The True Christian's Faith and Experience concerning a Holy Life.
THE True Christian believes, that it is his Duty to live a holy Life, and to
forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanity of the World (which
lies in Wickedness) and to keep God's holy Will and Commandments, Jer. 31.33.
and they are not grievous unto him; for he loves the Law of God in his Heart,
and sees it written there with his own Finger, enjoying that precious Promise,
I will write my Law in their Hearts, Isa. 51.7.
and put my Fear into their inward Parts; and he can say, as David once did, Oh
how I love thy Law, it is my Meditation all the Day! Psalm. 119.
how sweet are thy Words unto my Taste! yea, sweeter then the Honey to my Mouth;
thy Law is my Delight; the Law of thy Mouth is better to me then Thousands of
Gold and Silver: The True Christian being in this Estate, and persevering in
this Love of God and his Law, it becomes his Meat and Drink to do the Will of
his Heavenly Father: And so by walking in this Law, and meditating in it, and
by feeding on this Word, which is sweeter then Honey, he becomes so united with
it, and so natural a Subject and Child of it, that he comes to be able to say,
as some of old did, We can do nothing against the Truth; this is the true
forsaking the Devil and all his Works, etc. and the keeping God's Holy Will and
Commandments: And as the True Christian grows up in this, he does always that
which pleases him, like unto his elder Brother, the Captain of his Salvation,
who is gone before, being Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh, sitting in
Heavenly Places with him, beholding the Glory of their Heavenly Father, even
the same Glory which was before the World began, before the Devil and his Works
entered, before his Holy Will and Commandments were broaken, or before the
forbidden Fruit was eaten. Those that have their Eyes anointed with Eye Salve,
and are clothed with fine Linen, and have their Garments washed in the Blood
of the Lamb, and follow him whethersoever he goes, and have no Guile in their
Mouths, but stand before the Throne of God without Spot or Wrinckle, those are
they that are redeemed from the Earth, and have their Conversation in Heaven,
and enjoy those Things, and give the Glory to him who is God blessed forever.

The Titular Christian he says and professes, that it is his Duty to live a
holy Life, to forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of
the World, and to keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, but never comes to
witness that Estate; it is very grievous to him to make straight Steps to his
Feet; he enjoys not that precious Promise, the Law writ in his Heart, and the
Fear which keeps the Heart clean, in the inward Parts; neither is the Law of
God his Meditation all the Day, nor his Delight therein; neither are his Words
to him sweeter then Honey, or better then Thousands of Gold and Silver; he
cannot say that he does nothing against the Truth; nor that he does always
that which pleases God; nor that he follows Christ the Captain of Salvation,
neither is he a Member of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; nor sits in
Heavenly Places with him, beholding the Glory of God, etc. though he will
sometimes talk of these Things, as they are written in the Holy Scriptures; but
in his Heart he is a Stranger to them; and God's Holy Witness in his own
Conscience makes him confess that his Heart is desperately wicked, and that his
Thoughts and Meditations are defiled, and full of Sin, and that his best
Performances or Doings are accompanied with Sin and Corruption, and that in all
he does, he does something against the Truth:
And further, he is so far from living a Holy Life, and forsaking the Devil and
all his Works, and keeping God's Holy Will and Commandments, that he is
begotten into such a Belief and Persuasion, that it is not possible to do it,
while he breathes in the Air of this World, but must always be sinning, and
doing that which he ought not to do, and leaving undone that which he ought to
do; always confessing, always sinning, and never forsaking; so always
reaping the Wages of Sin, which is Death; and so always wanting the Mercy and
Forgiveness, which he that forsakes the DEVIL and all his WORKS, partaketh of.

So in short, this is one of the last Lessons the Devil can teach his Children,
viz. to Those that preach this Belief and Persuasion in the world aredirect
Ministers of Satan.
persuade them, and make them believe, that they cannot cease from Sin, but
must be Committers of it, and Servants to it, and that they cannot forsake him
and all his Works, nor keep God's Holy Will and Commandments so long as they
live in these Houses of Clay; such Titular Christians as these he has them in
Chains and Fetters strong enough, nothing less then the Mighty Arm and Power of
God is able to break them, and to release those poor Captives, and to redeem
them out of this deep Pit of Misery, wherein is no Water, wherein their Souls
or inward Man lies as among the Pots, soiled with the Smoke and Soot of the
Bottomless Pit. Oh God hasten, and bring Deliverance to these poor Bendslaves
of Sin and Satan, is the Cry of the Souls of the Righteous, who have the Mind
of their Heavenly Father, who desires not the Death of him that dies, but that
they should come to the Knowledge of his Truth, and be saved, and be Partakers
with them of the exceeding Riches and Glory that is laid up for all that love
his Appearance,
and is ready to be revealed to all that truly wait for it.

XIV. The True Christian 's Faith and Experience concerning the Motion or
Moving of the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of the Old Serpent in the Hearts of
Men.
THe True Christian is endued with a Heavenly Spirit of Discerning, by which he
sees to the Beginning, before Sin entered the World, and by it perceives, how
it entered, and how it has grown and increased, and filled the Earth with
Violence; and how that Old Serpent (which at first was fain to use great
Subtilty and Lies, and make great Promises, before he could prevail against
Eve) is now grown so Power full a Prince in his Kingdom of Darkness in the
Hearts of the Children of Men, in whom he rules, that he no sooner moves in
their Hearts,
but they follow him; no sooner commands, but they obey: he needs not use his
Subtilty and Cunning to betray, allure and persuade, nor make great Promises,
before he can win to his Obedience, many being grown such Natural Children of
him, and such born Slaves in his Kingdom, that now in these days his Commands
are sufficient to Thousands and Ten Thousands; and his very Motions to Evil
have gained such a Powerful Name in the World, even among the Titular
Christians, that they count them too Mighty to be withstood, too Powerful to
vanquish, too Strong to war with, overcome and conquer in all his Motions,
Commands and Temptations, while on this side the Grave; hereby People are
become Homebred Slaves, and have sold themselves for naught, having let in
that accursed Faith that has sprung up in the Apostasy from the True Faith,
that they can never resist all the Motions of the Devil, nor disobey all his
Commands,
nor be delivered from all his Temptations, till the Death of their Natural
Bodies, which is then too late; for, As the Tree falls, so it lies, etc.

Now, the Titular Christian will readily acknowledge and confess, that the
Motions of the Devil are strong, powerful and present with him and in him, and
that thereby he is stirred up to Evil: But he does not believe, that the Spirit
of God is so nigh him, and present with him, moving in him against the Motions
of the Evil One; nor that there is sufficient Power from God given to him, to
preserve him from obeying the Motions and Temptations of the World, Flesh and
the Devil, and to move him to that which is Good, and enable him to do it. Also
he has no Faith in this Gift of God, but rather counts it Delusion (and the
Property of a Phanatick) to profess the Knowledge of the Spirit of God moving
in them to speak and write good Words, and do good Works; this Professors and
Profane, Learned and Unlearned, make a Mock at, concluding this Operation of
the Spirit is not in use, nor to be known in these days, nor to be expected in
these latter Ages of the World; as if God had left the World of Mankind to be
guided wholely by the Motions of the Devil; as if there was no Law or Power in
the Mind able and sufficient to war against the Law and Power that is in the
Members, and overcome it: Thus to believe, is the Faith of Devils, and not the
Faith of God's Elect; For, the True Christian in this Age (as in former Ages)
is a living Witness of the Moving of the Spirit of God to every good Word and
Work, as the Holy Men and Christians in former Ages did, who speak as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost, and as they were led and guided by the Spirit, as is
testified in the Holy Scriptures, though made a Mock of in this Day: And this
Spirit of God accompanied the Righteous in all Ages, and always moved, led and
guided them into the Way of Peace; and as they obeyed it, and abode with it,
Acts 7.9.
they were preserved by it therein, though in the midst of their Enemies: This
preserved Joseph, when the Patriarchs, moved with Envy, sold him into Egypt,
and out of the Temptations he met with there; and the same Spirit of Envy that
moved the Patriarchs to sell Joseph, moved Cain to kill Abel, and moved Esau to
hate his Brother, and the Israelites to envy Moses and Aaron; and the Jews to
persecute the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles; And the Unbelieving Vagabond
Jews were moved by this Spirit of Envy, Acts 17.5.
to make a Tumult against Paul and Silas, and to assault the House of Jason,
and to draw him and the Brethren to the Rulers, with false Accusations; the
Spirit of Envy is the same at this Day, and his Motions are the same, and all
that obey them, are found in the same Work. And the Motions of the Holy Spirit
are also the same, and all that obey them bring forth the Fruits thereof, and
they are both manifested by their Fruits; the one moves to Good, the other to
Evil; the one to Love and Good Will, the other to Envy and Hatred;
the one to Patience and Long-suffering, the other to Anger, Rage and
Persecution: the one moves to Meekness, Gentleness and Lowly-mindedness; the
other to Hardness, Roughness, Exaltedness and High-mindedness: So by the Fruits
and Effects are the Motions of the Spirit of God known and distinguished from
the Motions of the Devil, the Prince in Darkness.

And whosoever do or shall profess to speak or write Words, or do Works, Many
whom the old Serpent could not move nor draw into Carnal Wickednesses, have
been captivated with Spiritual Wiskednesses in High Places; and have been
deceived so far as to call High Thoughts and Imaginations, Motions of the
Spirit of God; and these have been exalted above all that is called God, being
joined to the Son of Perdition, who usurps the Throne of God, and has been and
is worshipped as God.
or do Works, in and by the Motion of the Spirit of God, if they tend not to
Good, if they are not accompanied with the Fruits of the same, if they will not
endure the Trial of the Spirit of God in others, and abide by the Testimony
thereof; and also agree with the Testimonies of the Holy Men of old, left upon
Record in the holy Scriptures; For, the Spirit of the Prophets was subject to
the Prophets; and, The Christians were of One Mind: I say, (except this) their
Motion is to be judged by the Spirit of God, and them also that obey it, as a
Delusion of an Exalted Spirit, and as a High Imagination, which must be brought
down; and whoever glories therein, or boasts thereof, will fade and wither as a
Flower, and fall and corrupt as Untimely Fruit; the Mouth of the Lord has
spoaken it.

XV. The True Christian 's Faith and Experience concerning Revelation.
THE Cry in the World is even among many called Christians, No Revelation in
these days; Revelation is ceased; No Spiritual Vision to be known now; No
Sight of God now, as Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets, and Primitive Christians
had, etc.

Now, the Faith, Experience and Testimony of the True Christian is, that Where
there is no Vision, Prove. 29.18.
no Heavenly Sight, that is the Perishing State: Where there is No Revelation
known, there is No True Knowledge of God, as is witnessed by the Holy
Scriptures; Mat. 11.27.
None knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him.

Since the Vail came over Man's heart, there was never any other Way in any
Age, nor is not in this Age, to come to the true Knowledge of God but by
Revelation; by taking off the Vail and removing the Covering, which hides the
Face of God from Man; the outward Vailes before Moses's Face, and in the
outward Temple, were a Figure of this Vail, that is spread over the Hearts of
Men; and the rending the Vail of the Temple from top to bottom,
was a Figure of Revelation and Spiritual Sight into the Holiest of all, or the
taking away that which stood betwixt Man and the True Sight and Knowledge of
God: And there is not, nor never was (since the Cause of the Vail entered) any
Man upon the Face of the Earth, that came or comes to the Knowledge of God by
any other Means: Men have sought out many Inventions, and devised many Ways
and Means to gain the Knowledge of God, but all in vain; as his Invention,
Device and Knowledge increases, his Sorrow increases also; and all he can
arrive at, is Traditional Knowledge, a Historical Knowledge, a Strong Conceit
and Imagination concerning God, which is all nothingworth: When he comes to see
and know him by Sight and Revelation, he will say as Job once did, Job 42.5, 6.
I have heard of thee by the Hearing of the Ear, but now my Eye sees thee;
therefore I abhor my self, and Repent in Dust and Ashes.

And as there is no True Knowledge of God but by Revelation, 2 These. 2.3, 4.
so there is no perfect Knowledge of the Son of Perdition, or Man of Sin, but
by Revelation: Iniquity is a Mystery, as well as Godliness; and the Devil can
appear like unto an Angel of Light, and get into the Temple of God, and sit
there as God, and be worshipped as God also; and when he thus appears in the
Temple of God, clothed with the Sheep's Clothing,
and in the Form of an Angel of Light, with the Saints Words in his Mouth, many
are then beguiled with him, the Vail being over their Hearts, and the Scales
before their Eyes, that they see no further then his Appearance, his Show and
Outside; and hereby he deceives many in the Form of Religion, which could not
be deceived by him as a Devil, nor drawn into his Service in the gross Evils
that are in the World: This is the Mystery of Iniquity, which cannot be
discerned nor discovered while the Vail is over, till Revelation be known, and
the Prophecy of Isaiah witnessed; Isa. 25.7.
I will destroy in this Mountain the Face of the Covering, cast over all
People, and the Vail that is spread over all Nations: This is a Blessed Promise
to enjoy, and to witness fulfilled.

Now till it pleased God to reveal his Son in Paul, and to shine round about
him with a Light, surpassing the Natural Sun in his Strength, and to cause the
Scales to fall from his Eyes, he was deceived, and captivated with this Mystery
of Iniquity, and in his Religious Zeal and Ignorance thought he was serving
God, when he was serving the Devil: And in this Estate lie all the Titular
Christians at this day, who are persecuting the True Christians, and hating one
another, and destroying, biting and devouring one another about Religion,
Church and Worship; and this comes to pass for want of Revelation, for want of
true Knowledge: All the Contentions, Envyes, Quarrellings and Divisions among
all the Sects in Christendom,
arise, for want of being acquainted with Revelation. One says, Lo here is
Christ; another, there; one says, Christ is this; another, that, and are of
many Minds concerning him now, as they were in the Days of his Flesh, some
saying one Thing, and some another of him; But says Christ to Peter and the
rest, what say ye? Mat. 16.17.
Peter answered, thou art Christ, the Son of the living God, Christ says,
blessed art thou Peter; etc. for Flesh and Blood has not revealed this unto
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven: Revelation was the Cause of Peter's
surpassing the others in true Knowledge; many that eat and drank with him, and
had a Love for him, and heard his gracious Words, and saw his mighty Works that
he did, yet wanting this Revelation, had only a Knowledge of him after the
Flesh, Ignorance of Revelation, the Ground of Division and Contention.
contended and reasoned about him; but this Knowledge that was revealed to
Peter, they were Strangers to; this was the Ground of Contention then, and is
the same at this Day, throughout all Christendom.

But Peter himself did not abide in this Knowledge, which was revealed to him;
but for want of Watchfulness and through self-Confidence, Weakness and Fear
became veiled again, Mat. 26.70, 7^, 74.
and lost ^is Knowledge, Sight and Revelation, and in the Day of close Trial
denved that he knew him at all; then began he to Curse and to Swear, saying, I
know not the Man: this is a great Change in Peter, who in his Zeal and
Affection thought, if all forsook him, he should not, yea, though he should or
were to dye, with him, he would not deny him; likewise also said all the
Disciples.

This may learn all even those that have had Revelations, Heavenly Sights and
Visions to be watchful, and beware, lest Darkness overtake them again, the Vail
spread over again, these things are written for our Learning, and are set forth
as an Ensample, showing how far Self-Confidence, Zeal, and Affections, and a
Knowledge of Christ after the Flesh, can carry men; and how Heavenly Sights,
Vision and Revelations may be seen and partaken of, before a through
Conversion; The Wind blows where it lists, John 3.8.
and many hear the sound thereof, yet knows not whence it comes, nor whither
it goes, so is every man that is born of the Spirit. Now, its a farther thing
to grow up in it, and to increase with the Increase of God, unto the Stature
and Fullness of Christ; such are not only born, nor Children, but Men, such
cannot be tossed to and fro with Wind; and till this is attained unto, there is
much Danger.

I knew a Man (Twenty Four Years ago) who had Heavenly Sights, and Revelations,
and Raptures into the Third Heaven, and heard and saw Things unutterable,
ravished with Delight, overcome with a Joy and Consolation, while his Hand has
been in his outward Labor; and would with Peter and John, have built
Tabernacles there, and all before his Conversion, before he was endued with
Power from on High,
before the Work of Regeneration was wrought, and before he knew from whence it
came, or whither it went, being as the Lightening coming out of the East, and
shining into the West; and so knew not how nor where to wait to receive it
again, nor knew not a Stay to his Mind, nor a Bridle to his Tongue, nor
Strength to endure Temptations, nor Patience to have its perfect Work; neither
was he endued with Wisdom and Discerning, to discover the diverse Wiles and
Devices of that Old Serpent that betrayed in Paradise, being not humbled and
brought down to the true Foundation, though the Seed of the Kingdom was sown,
and received with much Joy; but springing up in great Haste, for want of Depth
of Earth, proved like Corn upon the Housetop or in Stony Ground, soon withered
again.

So, let none be lifted up above Measure, because of Revelations, Heavenly
Sights and Visions; let none rest in Zeal and Affections; let none deck
themselves with God's Jewels, and play the Harlot with them, nor lay up Manna
for to morrow; but wait upon him from whence the Daily Bread comes, and abide
low in the Root,
from whence all Heavenly Blessings, Gifts and Graces spring; so a growing up
in him, which was from Everlasting, before Evil sprung up, before the Vail was
spread over, when all was good, yea, very Good, will be witnessed. This is the
converted Estate, which those that are come unto it, not only stand themselves,
but are able to streng then their Brethren, who are begotten by the same
Father, and born of the same Mother: And this Counsel Christ gave unto Peter,
that Zealous Affectionate Disciple, after he had had Heavenly Sights and
Revelations, When thou art Converted, Strengthen thy Brethren. Let this be
minded by all to whom the Lord has appeared, and given Discoveries of himself,
lest they take up their Rest by the way, and like Peter and John at the Sight
of the Transfiguration of Christ, say, Master, it is Good for us to be here;
let us build Three Tabernacles, one for Thee, one for Moses, one for Elias:
This they spoak in Ignorance; while the Cloud over shadowed them, while they
saw his Payment shining exceeding white, as Snow; but did not see him not hear
him as the Beloved Son of God, nor understand the Vision; Mark 9
therefore the Voice out of the Cloud says to them, This is my Beloved Son,
hear him, etc. Heights may separate, as well as Depths; therefore what Christ
says to one, he says to all, Watch and Pray, l^st ye enter into Temptation.
In hearing and obeying the Beloved Son, there is Peace Blessings and Safety; but
in hearing and obeying the Serpent, Tribulation, Anguish and Sorrow, and great
Danger; which all that wait and watch in that True Light, The Light that shines
in the heart, is the safe Dwelling place of its Children.
where with they are enlightend, enjoy the one, and escape the other.

XVI. The True Christian's Faith and Experience concerning the Gospel or Glad
Tidings of Salvation.
THE True Christian believes the Gospel or Glad Tidings of Life, Liberty and
Salvation; and at the hearing the Joyful Sound thereof he is glad; and he
rejoices to see the Angel fly through the midst of Heaven, having the
Everlasting Gospel to preach again to them that dwell on the Earth, Rev. 14.6.
and to every Nation, Kindred, Tongue and People, saying with a loud Voice,
Fear God, and give Glory to him, for the Hour of his Judgments is come, and
worship him that made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and Fountains of Water. And the
True Christian has not only heard, but obeyed this Gospel; and he knows Life
and Immortality brought to Light through this Gospel; 2 Timothy 1.10.
and the Light of this Glorious Gospel shines in his Heart, and he has
repented or turned to the Light thereof, received and believed this Gospel,
Gal. 3.8.
which is the Power of God unto Salvation, which Gospel was preached unto
Abraham, and was and is now preached in every Creature under Heaven; Col. 1.23.
of this Gospel Paul was a Minister: And the True Christian is come to the
Mystery of the Fellowship of the Gospel, That which judges the Secrets of Men's
Hearts is the Gospel.
which stands not in Word, but Power, and is not of Man, nor by Man, but of
God; and this Gospel judges the Secrets of all Men; and he is come to the
Knowledge of the Mystery of the Gospel, and through it has received Life,
Liberty, and Salvation; and his Feet are shod with the Preparation of the
GOSPEL of Peace, and his Conversation is as becomes the Gospel; and he adorns
the Gospel of his Lord and Savior; and in this abiding he enjoyes the
Privileges of the Gospel, and inherits the precious Promises made of old, and
enjoyes that which was prophesied of by that Evangelical or Gospel Prophet
Isaiah, when he saw and spoak of the Universal Love of God to be enjoyed in the
Gospel Days, in making a Feast unto all People: In this Mountain shall the
Lord of Host make unto all People a Feast of fat Things, Isa. 25.6, 7, 8, 9.
a Feast of Wine on the Lees, of fat Thingsfull of Marrow, of Wine on the Lees
well refined; and he will destroy in this Mountain the Face of the Covering
that is cast over the Face of all People, and the Vail that is spread over all
Nations; he will swallow up Death in Victory; the Lord will wipe away Tears
from all Faces, and the Rebuke of his People will he take away from off all the
Earth, the Lord God has spoken it: And it shall be said in that Day, Do this
is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us; this is the Lord, we
have waited for him, and we will be glad, and rejoice in his Salvation, etc. A
Blessed Sight and Heavenly Prophecy, which the True Christian is come and
coming to the full Enjoyment and Fulfilling of; Glory to God forever.

And the Antitype of the Year of Jubilee is now enjoyed, and the Sabbath of
Rest is entered into; and the holy Mountain in which is no Destroyer, is now
dwelled in; and the Light of God's Countenance is lifted up, which makes the
True Christian's Heart more glad, then the Joy that comes with the Increase of
Corn, Wine and Oil; many Prophets and Righteous Men saw that afar of which he
now possesses; so that he can truly say, Gospel Times are Glorious Times, the
Privileges of the Gospel are Glorious Privileges;
Christ reigning and ruling in his Heart, leading Captivity Captive, and giving
Victory over Death, Hell and the Grave, wiping away all Tears, and taking away
the Reproach (being Sin, which is a Reproach to any People) and giving Power to
bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Fetters of Iron, and no war with Spiritual
Wickednesses in high Places, and to bring down every High Thought and
Imagination into the Obedience of Christ; this Honor have all the Saints, who
receive the Gospel of Peace and Salvation, and arive at the Mark of the high
Calling of God in Christ Jesus.

The Titular Christian he says, he believes in the Gospel, and talks of Life,
Liberty and Salvation by it; he says, he has heard the Sound of the Gospel,
and that he obeyes the Gospel; but how does he show forth the Truth hereof? let
him examine himself; does he know the Light of the glorious Gospel to shine in
his Heart, whereby the Mystery of it is revealed unto him? Has he repented or
turned to the Light, and believed the Gospel? Does he know it to be the Power
of God unto Salvation? And is he saved by it, as Abraham was, when preached
unto him, and as the Primitive Christians were, when they received it? Does he
know Life and Immortality brought to Light through the Gospel? Has he obeyed
the Gospel? And is his Feet shod with the Preparation of it? And does be adorn
the Gospel with a Holy Life and Conversation? No, the Titular Christian knows
no such Gospel, nor the Light of it to shine in his Heart, nor the Mystery of
it to be revealed in him; for he hates the Light, and denies Revelation, and
says it is ceased, and that there is no Revelation to be expected in these
Days, nor no Possibility to live a holy Life, as becomes the Gospel; nor no
inheriting the precious Promises, nor enjoying the glorious Things prophesied
of, while on this side the Grave; nor no having the Vail taken off the Heart,
nor Tears wiped away, nor the Cause of them removed; nor Death swallowed up in
Victory, while he remains in the Body; nor that the Antitype of the Year of
Jubilee, which is perfect Liberty and Redemption, can be witnessed and enjoyed,
by believing in the Gospel; nor that the Mountain of the Lord's House shall be
established upon the Top of all Mountains, or that any can dwell in that where
no Destroyer is; nor that the Sabbath or Rest wherein he shall not speak his
own Words, nor think his own Thoughts, nor bear any Burden, can be entered
into, or dwelled in, while on this Side the Grave:
The Titular Christian has no Faith in any of these Things; therefore his
Faith is feigned, and the Object of it is Imaginary, and is indeed that which
may be called another Gospel, which he that brings is accursed, and is not of
God, but of Man.

And the Titular Christian can be a professor of this Gospel, and a Hearer of
this Gospel and yet never hear the Voice of the Son of God, nor never come to
be quickened unto Life; nor never receive Remission of Sin, nor Inheritance
among them that are sanctified; nor never come to enjoy the Privileges of the
Gospel, signified and showed forth by diverse Types, Figures and Shadows under
the Law, and seen and prophesied of by the holy Prophets, yet can talk of all
these Things, even while in Death, will talk of the Fame of Wisdom, and the
glorious Things her Children formerly enjoyed, while he himself is poor, blind
and miserable, and wants the Possession and Experimental Enjoyment thereof.

And indeed, the Mystery of Iniquity has so far prevailed, and the Darkness is
grown so thick, by Reason of the Smoke that ascend out of the Bottomless Pit,
in this Night o^ Apostasy, which has spread over this Part o^ the World,
called Christendom, since the Apostles Days, that the Titular Christian (which
hates the Light, and dwells in this Darkness is grown so great a Friend to the
Devil, that old Serpent,
that he will not endure the preaching any other Gospel, then such an one,
which will admit of living under the Bondage, Service and Slavery of the Devil
Term of Life (this is he that cannot endure sound Doctrine.)

Now the joyful Sound of this Gospel, which whole Christendom rings of, is, No
perfect Victory over Sin; no Overcoming the Devil; no withstanding him in all
his Temptations; no abstaining from every Appearance of Evil; The Message and
Sound of the Ministers of Darkness, who preach another Gospel.
no perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God; no ceasing from committing of Sin;
no dispossessing the strong Man, and spoiling all his Goods; no sweeping the
House, and garnishing it with Heavenly Goods; no pulling down the strong Holds
of Sin and Satan; no bringing every Thought and Imagination into the Obedience
of Christ; no putting off the old Man with his Deeds, nor putting on the new,
nor bearing the Heavenly Image, nor any such Regeneration or new Birth to be
known, which commits not Sin; no repairing the Breach which our first
Parents made; no finding again that which is lost; no Restoration into
Innocence and a sinless State again, while Men dwell in these Earthly To
bernacles, none of these Things can be effected, says the Sound of this
Gospel, or the Preachers of it in all Sects.

Oh! how greatly is it to be lamented, not only to see and behold the Garden
and Vineyard of the Lord become so great a Wilderness, and so overgrow with
Briars and Thorns, Thistles and noisome Weeds, where many venomous and hurtful
Things are nourished; but also to see those who count themselves Laborers in
the Vineyard, and Dressers of the Garden, sit down and conclude, that it can
never be dressed, nor the Vineyard purged from all that does offend the tender
Grapes, and that the wild Bore and the little Foxes can never be driven out,
nor those Plants which the Heavenly Father never planted be pulled up, nor that
this Wilderness can ever become a fruitful Field, nor like Eden again: and that
there are so many Believers of this sorrowful Tidings and miserable Messengers
and Ministers of Satan, The Sorrow and Misery of Mankind is much increased and
continued by this Unbelief and Sound of bad Tidings, or another Gospel, which
they that have brought, are accursed.
Evil Unbelieving Spies, who discourage and persuade the People they can never
inherit the good Land, nor overcome their Enemies.

Oh thou God of Heaven, appear more and more, and disperse and remove this
Unbelief and gross Darkness, and stop the ascending of this Smoke, which
arises out of the Bottomless Pit, and darkens the Air, and gather thy
scattered People from under those Idol Shepherds and false Vine Dressers, blind
Guides and miserable Comforters; thou have gathered a Remnant from under them,
and made their Folly manifest, and to them their Gospel is accursed; do so for
Thousands and Ten Thousands, which yet know thee not, is the Breathing of the
Soul of the Righteous, and remove this Monstrous Faith out of the Hearts of all
Men, which holds up the Devil's Kingdom there TERM OF LIFE: And let thy POWER
be known and Magnified over all, who art God, Blessed forever.

XVII. The True Christian's Faith and Experience concerning Grace, and Living
under it; and Growing up in it from one Degree unto another; and of the
Possibility of Falling Away from it.
THE Law came by Moses, but Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ: Grace is the free
Gift of God for the Salvation of all, and has appeared unto all men; but all
men did not, nor do receive it, so know not the Teachings and Virtue of it, nor
its Sufficiency and Power to save, being known to none but such as do receive
it: And all that do receive this Grace, Tit. 2,11.
are taught by it to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly,
Righteously and Godly in this present World: Thus it taught the True Christian
in former Ages, and teaches the same now; and all that are so taught by it,
are not under the Law, but under Grace; for, Grace does not destroy the Law,
but fulfils it, and leads those that are under it to the Enjoyment of the
Substance of those Heavenly Things it shaddowed forth, and which the Prophets
prophesied of. And further, it teaches more Spiritual and Evangelical Lessons
then Moses did, by whom the Law came.

And the True Christian not only receives this Grace, but grows in it from one
Degree unto another, and witnesses a being saved by it, and a being justified
by it, having Experience of its Sufficiency when the Enemy does assault, and
Trials and Temptations attend; even as Paul, 2 Cor. 12.19.
the aged, when in Danger, and besought the Lord, the Answer was, My Grace is
sufficient for thee: The Christians are Witnesses this Day of the same. And
Paul could say,
By the Grace of God I am what I am. That was an High and Heavenly State, to be
no otherwise then Grace made him; Self, Sin and Satan is here excluded, and all
Boasting and Glorying in the Flesh is laid aside, and the free Gift and Grace
of God exalted over all: This is a standing by Grace, and a living under it,
being saved by it from transgressing the Law, Romans 5.20, 21.
which is Holy, Just and Good; Here Grace reigns through Righteousness unto
Eternal Life, even where Sin reigned once unto Death, and abounded, here Grace
is known to abound much more.


This was not only professed and talked of by the True Christians in former
Ages, nor is not now in this Age, but really selt, known and witnessed in them,
by the effectual Work and Operation of it; they did not, nor do profess a
living under Grace while they do and commit that which the Law is over, and
which the Law was added because of (viz.
Sin) He that is alive to Sin, the Law has Power over him; and he is indeed
under the Law, notwithstanding he may profess a being under Grace, and living
in Gospel Times; Romans 7. Read and Understand.
for, Paul's Parallel holds good, A Woman is bound by the Law to her Husband,
so long as he lives; but when Dead, she is loosed from the Law of her Husband.
So the Law has Dominion over a Man, so long as he lives (in that Life and
Nature which transgresses it) let him profess what he will: And none are
fitted and prepared to be married to another, even to him who is raised from
the Dead, till they are become Dead unto the Law, and so delivered from it,
that being Dead wherein or whereby they were held (viz. Sin) For says he, When
we were in the Flesh, the Motions of Sin, which were by the Law, did work in
our Members, to bring forth Fruit unto Death; but now we are delivered from the
Law, that being dead wherein we were held, that we should serve in Newness of
Spirit, and not in the Oldness of the Letter: Here the True Christian knows the
Righteousness of the Law fulfilled in him, who walks not after the Flesh, nor
the Motions of it, but after the Spirit, and the Motions thereof; so that his
Words are seasoned with Grace, and walks to the Praise and Glory of his Grace:
And as he here abides, he witnesses a being delivered from under the Law, and
knows the Occasion of it taken away, and so truly lives under Grace, and grows
in it, and in the Knowledge of his Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to whom be
Glory both now and forever.

But now, notwithstanding the Cry of the Tuular Christian is, No Falling from
Grace totally, etc. yet there is a Possibility that after People have received
the Grace of God, and known the Virtue and Operation of it also, that they may
Fall from it again, and of Children of Grace, become Children of Wrath; they
may turn the Grace of God into Wantonness (or rather, turn from it after they
have received it, into Wantonness) they may use their Liberty, which by Grace
they are come unto, as an Occasion to the Flesh, and so not stand fast in that
Liberty wherewith Christ had made them free: And they may fall from
Stedfastness, after by Grace they have attained unto it. And after People have
clean escaped from them which live in Error, and from the Pollutions of the
World, they may Err again, and be polluted again, and turn like the Dog to his
Vomit again, and like the Sow that was washed to the Wallowing in the Mire
again;
and an Evil Heart of Unbelief and Disobedience, in departing from the Living
God, after they have known him, may get in again; and People may crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open Shame; and trample the
Blood of the Covenant, with which once their Hearts were sprinkled, under Foot
again; and do Despite unto the Spirit of Grace, and grieve the holy Spirit of
God; and finally, they may make Shipwreck of Faith and a Good Conscience, etc.
These things may all be done, or else, in vain are the diverse Exhortations
recorded in the Holy Scriptures to the primitive Christians, To Stand fast,
Abide and Continue to the End, that they might not be Entangled again,
Deceived, nor fall into Temptations again: And in vain was all the Labor,
Travail, Care and Exercise of the Apostles, Teachers and Elders among the
Churches, after they were gathered out of the World, and had received the
manifold Graces of God to confirm them and establish them in the same, if there
had been no Danger of their Falling from it again, and corrupting themselves
again. This Titular Christian's Opinion of no total Falling from Grace, is
contrary to the Current of the whole Scriptures, and of the True Christan's
Experience: And Paul's Testimony is, That such, that so fall away, who were
once enlightened, and tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and Powers of the World to
come, Hebr. 6.4. and 10.26.
if such sin wilfully, after they have received the Knowledge of the Truth,
that it is unpossible to renew them again to Repentance, and that there remains
no more Sacrifice for Sins, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and
Fiery Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries; who incur a sorer
Punishment then those that despised Moses's Law, who dyed without Mercy under
Two or Three Witnesses: There is a sorer Punishment then Outward Death, which
the Outward Law inflicted upon the Transgressors of it; and those that have
known the Law of him that is greater then Moses, which is the Law of the Spirit
of Life, and have been Subjects of it, and fallen and apostatized from it
again, shall partake of this sorer Punishment. And as none knows the Joy and
Consolation of those that have the Law of the Spirit of Life, and obey it, and
abide in it; or the White Stone, wherein the New Name is written, which none
knows but he that has it; so none knows the sorer Punishment, the Fiery
Indignation, kindled by the Breath of the Lord, Apostates Punishment is from
God, and not Men. Vengeance is the Lord's: And its a fearful thing to fall into
his hand, by sinning against Light and Knowledge, etc.
nor feels the biting of the Worm which never dies, which attends the
Transgressors, and wilful Sinners against this Law of the Spirit of Life, but
he that has it, and receives it as a Just Recompense of Reward of his
Disobedience, Rebellion and Apostasy.

And the Fitular Christian, who talks of living under Grace, and not under the
Law; and of being married to Christ, etc. before he has known the Law as a
Schoolmaster to bring him to Christ; before he is become dead to that which
the Law has Power over; before he comes to know the Righteousness of the Law
fulfilled in him by the Spirit of Grace, and Righteousness which exceeds the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; before he knows Grace to reign
through Righteousness unto Eternal Life (even where Sin has reigned unto
Death) before he is taught by Grace to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and
to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly; and before he cease from Sin; and
before he knows the Body of it destroyed, and become dead, and Deliverance
from the Dead Body; I say, before this, his Talk and Profession of living under
Grace, is ^ain, he remaining alive in that for which the Law was added (viz.
Sin) For, the main Reason to prove a Person under Grace, which Paul mentions,
is, For, Sin shall not have Dominion over you; for, or because, you are ^ot
under the Law, but under Grace: He that ^ommitteth Sin is the Servant of it,
and Sin ^ath Dominion over him, let the Titular Chritian profess what he will.

XVIII. The True Christian 's Faith and Experience concerning Outward and
Inward Miracles.
ALL Miracles and Wonders, that were outwardly wrought by the Power of God,
before the Law, under the Law, since the Law, by the Hand of M^ses and Aaron,
the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, were in themselves Signs, generally
showed before Unbelieving, Hardhearted, Adulterous, Untoward Generations; and
we read not of very many in the holy Scriptures, that were converted by the
Working of Outward Miracles; Pharaoh and the Egyptians were hardened; the
Israel tes themselves, after they had seen and partook of wonderful
Deliverances and Mighty Miracles wrought before their Face, as, the going
through the Sea on Dry Land, and their Enemies d^stroyed in the same; the
Pillar of Cloud^y Day, and the Pillar of Fire by Night; the Manna and Quales
from Heaven; the Watter out of a Rock, and also drun^ of the Spiritual Rock
which followed them; yet an Unbelieving, Ignorant, Disobedient, Rebellious,
Murmuring Heart got up in them, so that they discerned not the Power by which
they were wrought, nor the End wherefore, being ignorant of both; neither did
they truly regard the Instruments by whom they were wrought, their Wills and
Lusts remained strong, their Hearts foul and gross, their Ears dull of Hearing,
and their Eyes so weak, and their Understandings so darkened, that they could
not look upon, nor behold the Glory of that Ministration, though it was but of
Angels; nor abide and endure the Voice of God in giving forth the Law, for the
Condemnation of the Transgressor (which was Glorious in its time) so that they
could not behold the Glory of Moses's Face without Fear, Exodus 34.30. and 19.22.
nor so much as touch the Mount on which God appeared; yea, the Priests, unless
Sanctified (or made Holy) were not to come nigh the Lord: This was the State of
the Israelites, notwithstanding they were Eyewitnesses of the Mighty Wonders
and Miracles visibly wrought before their Natural Senses; yet through Unbelief,
Disobedience, Murmuring and Rebellion, they perished, and their Carcases fell
in the Wilderness, and entered not into the Promised Land. Let the Reader
consider those things.

And when Christ Jesus, the Great Prophet, came, of whom Moses prophesied, and
wrought diverse Visible Miracles before the Hard-hearted Jews, who professed
themselves the Disciples of Moses; I do not find, nor read, that many of those
that saw them wrought with their Natural Eyes; and that drank of that
M^raculous Wine, made of Water; and that eat of the Five Loaves and Two F^shes,
that f^d Five Thousand, and Twelve Baskets of Fragments to spare,
were converted; nor so much as became his Disciples or Fo^^owers, except for
Loaves, or some Selfish Ends; and some among whom he wrought mighty Miracles,
desired him to depart their Coasts: And from the Chief Priests and Leaders he
met with this Judgment, That he was a Deceiver, a Samaritan, and had a Devil,
and cast out Devils by Beelzebub, the Prince of the Devils; so that his Raising
the Dead, Healing the Sick, Possessed and Diseased, though Mighty Works in
themselves, and wrought by the Power of his Father in him; yet they were not
such great Works, ^o^ the Effects of such great Extent, but that those that did
believe in him should do greater, or he in his Spiritual Appearance in them
would do greater, John 14.12, 13.
according to his Saying, Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes in
me, the Works that I do, he shall do also, and greater then these shall he do,
because I go to my Father; and whatsoever ye ask in my Name, that will I do.
This Saying and Promise was and is fulfilled, fulfilling, and to be fulfilled:
And every True Christian is a Witness of the Power that is received by
believing in Christ, and knows and experienceth greater Works and Miracles,
wrought by the Power and Spiritual Appearance of Christ within, then all the
Outward Miracles he wrought before the Carnal Eyes of Carnal Professors and
Unbelievers in the days of his We read of more Converted at One Sermon of
Peter, then by all Outward Miracles.
Flesh. But this the Titular Christian cannot receive, knowing nothing thereof:
In order therefore to convince him of the Truth of the same, the True Christian
speaks further, as follows;

First, He says, That once he was Dead in Trespasses and Sins, and so Dead,
that though he was loaded therewith, yet he felt not the Weight and Burden
thereof, and not only so, but he had all the Properties of a dead Man
spiritually; his Eye was so blind, that he could not see the exceeding
Sinfulness of Sin; his Ear was so deaf, that he could not hear the Voice of
God, though he often called him out of it; his Feet were so lame, that he could
not walk one Step in the Way of God; and he was so bowed down, that he could
not stand upright, and his Bloody Issue could not be stopped, nor his Wounds
healed, and his Sores ran in the Night, and his Soul refused Comfort, and he
was cast out into the open Field to the loathing of his Person, and the Levite
and the Priest passed by and ministered no Help; he saw no Eye to pity, nor no
Hand to save, nor no Physician of value could he meet withal; all told him he
could never be cured, healed, and made a sound living Man again while he lived
upon the Earth; and to increase his Misery, he was persuaded to believe the
same (which Belief is one of the strongest Links of the Chains of Darkness) in
short, Words cannot express the sad and lamentable Estate of Mankind in the
Fall, which the True Christian once lay in, even bound in Chains of Darkness,
under the Slavery and Bondage of Sin and Satan, captivated in a strange Land,
etc. out of which nothing le^s then the mighty, terrible and glorious Power of
God, by and through his Son Christ Jesus, is able effectually to redeem, save
and deliver.

Therefore in the second Place, the True Christian's Testimony is as follows;
To the Praise and Glory of the Power of God in his glorious Appearance and
heavenly Revelation, through the Son of his Love in this latter Day, wherein
his exceeding Riches and Kindness and Power is manifested, and made known, as
in Ages past, and as in the Generation of Old; and his faithful Promises
fulfilled; John 5.25.
(...) the Hour is come, wherein the dead hear the Voice of God, and the Graves
open and they that are therein come forth, and a mighty Sound is heard of the
dry Bones in the Valley coming together, People dead in Sins and Trespasses,
degenerated and estranged from the Life of God, are as these dry Bones, and are
to be witnesses of the same Power to restore them to Form and Life.
and knitting Bone to Bone and Joint to Joint, and Sinnew to Sinnew, and Flesh
grows upon the same, and the Breath of Life is received, and a standing up is
known of an exceeding great Army, which shall yet increase more and more, and
inherit and possess the Anti type of the promised Land; this was seen and
prophesied of by Ezekiel, and now enjoyed by the True Christian; read Chap. 36.
to Ver. 14. and the Lord give the Understanding: Now to witness these Things
effected by the Spirit and Power of the Lord, is more then to see a dead Body
outwardly raised to Life; and to have the Eye of the Mind opened, and the Ear
of the Spiritual Man unstopped, and the Tongue unloosed, that can praise the
Lord, and the Lam^^ to leap as an Heart, and to run the Ways of God's
Commandments with Delight, without stumbling, Weariness or Fainting; I say,
these Things being wrought by the Power of God in the inward Man, are greater
Miracles then the opening of a blind Eye, or unstopping of a deaf Ear, or
unloosing the Tongue of the dum, or curing the lame outwardly.

And to be cleansed from the Leprous Disease of Sin, and to know the bloody
Issue thereof stopped, and to have the Heart sprinkled from an Evil Conscience,
and the Body washed with pure Water, and the Heart and Mind cleansed from all
that would defile, by the precious Blood of Christ manifest and known within,
where the Defilements are greater Miracles,
and effected by a greater Power, though the same in Nature, then that which
cured the Leprosy and bloody Issue outwardly; and the cleansing of the Mind,
Heart and Conscience, and healing the Inward Man of all its Diseases, is more
wonderful then the healing all outward Diseases whatsoever.

Now the working of outward Miracles are not of absolute Necessity in the
Church of Christ, neither does the Gift thereof always attend the Church; and
we read of no outward Miracles wrought by diverse primitive Apostles, Ministers
and Teachers, Elders and Fathers in the Church:
But these greates Works and Miracles which Christ promised those that believed
in him should do, they were all Witnesses of in a Measure, being of absolute
Necessity to be known wrought by Christ, the Power of God, in every True
Christian now, as then; without which, no Resurrection to Life, nor Entrance
into the Way of Salvation is attained unto (let the Titular Christian profess
what he will.)

And I still well remember, when I was a Titular Christian, and a Hearer and
Disciple of that Generation, which now calls upon the True Christian for Signs
aad Miracles, which no Impostor (or false Christian can give; they used then to
acknowledge and preach for Doctrine, That the Conversion of one Soul to God,
was a greater Work then the Creation of the World; and the main Reason they
gave, was, That in the Work of the Outward Creation nothing did resist and
oppose, God said, Let it be; and it was so: But now in the New Creation and
Work of Regeneration, God meets with much Opposition; He speaks and calls once
and again, and Man regards it not; he stretches out his Hand all the Day long,
and the Rebellious regards it not; he stands at the Door and knocks, but his
Enemy is gotten into the House, and the Door is shut against him, yet he waits
to show himself gracious, according to the Phrase in Scripture, Till his Head
is wet with the Dew, and his Locks with the Drops of the Night; and he woeth
and beseeches with Bowels of Compassion all Mankind by his Universal Love and
Light, and holy Spirit, All have a Day of Visitation.
to be reconciled unto him, and to turn or be converted unto him, that he may
heal them, restore and redeem them out of the Degeneration which they are run
into through Sin, into the Primitive Estate and pure Enjoyment of himself;
which was before Sin entered, or the forbidden Fruit was eaten, or Evil was in
the World; but Mankind slights this great Love, and resist and despises this
Light and Holy Spirit, which would work all these Things in him and for him.

So these Things above considered, which are according to the Phrase and
Language of the Holy Scriptures, it may evidently appear that the Work of the
New Creation, being accompanied with so much Opposition, is greater then the
Work of the Old: In this the Titular Christian, as in many other Things, talks
a Truth with his Tongue, but is not a living Witness and Experiencer of the
same in his Heart;
therefore when the True Christian tells him what the Lord has done for his
Soul, and the mighty Works and Wonders that he has wrought in him, and for
him; how he has raised him from Death to Life, from Sin to Righteousness, and
translated him from Darkness to Light, from the Kingdom of Satan to the Kingdom
of his dear Son; and how he has made him whole every whit (even upon the
Sabbath Day) and that he now sits in Heavenly Places with him, clothed, in his
right Mind; and that he has received a good Understanding to know him that is
true, and is in him that is true; And that he has the Witness of God's Spirit
bearing Witness with his Spirit, that he is a Child of God, and a Possessor of
these Things (which Things no Impostor, Deceiver, nor Titular Christian can
have and possess, while so) I say, when these Things are told, and born Witness
of in the Ears of the Titular Christian, he slights, and disregards, and will
not believe the same; but counts it Delusion, and Fanatic Dreams, and Fancies,
arising from spiritual Pride, Highmindedness and vain Conceit, and so despises
his Testimony, and the Works that bear Witness thereof, even as the Jews did of
old, judge and condemn Christ and his mighty Works, as wrought by the Power of
the Devil; so does the Titular Christian in this Age Judge, Censure, Arraign
and Condemn Christ and his Mighty Works in this Day of his Power and spiritual
Appearance in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of Men, wherein he has
wrought as mighty Works, and done as great Miracles, as in any Age since the
Fall of Man, and many are now living Monuments of the same; blessed is the Eye
that sees them, and is fixed upon the Author thereof, to whom be Glory and
Praise throughout all Generations forever.

XIX. The True Christian's Faith and Experience concerning the Doctrine of
Perfection.
IN the Holy Scriptures are diverse Precepts, and Commands, and Exhortations,
not only to Holiness, 2 Cor. 7 1.
but to the Perfecting of Holiness in the Fear of God, Phil. 3.14.
and to the pressing forwards until it be attained unto, and afull Growth be
witnessed. to the Stature of a Perfect Man in Christ Jesus; Presented to God
without Blemish, Col. 1.28.
Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing: And it is said of Noah, Genesis 6.9.
that he was a Just and Perfect Man in his G^neration, and that he walked with
God: And God said unto Abraham, Walk before me, Genesis 17.1.
and be thou Perfect: And that Job was a Perfect and Just Man: Job 1.8.
And in David's Time he bids, Mark the Perfect Man, Psalm. 37.37.
and beh^ld the Upright, the End of such is Peace: And Christ exhorted his
Disciples to be Perfect, as theirl eavenly Father was ^erfect: Mat. 5 48.
And the Labor and Travail of the Apostles was, that People might be Perfect
and Entire,
Ja^. 1.4.
wanting nothing, and that they might be presented Perfect, Heb. 13.21.
and be made Perfect in every good Work: And he wished the Perfection of those
he wrote to: 2 Cor. 13.9. ^ Cor. 2.6.
And he spoak Wisdom among them that were Perfect.

So the Holy Scriptures contain, not only Precepts and Exhortations to Holiness
and Perfection; but they also give Testimony that several did obey them, and
attain thereunto in Ages past: And the Faith and Testimony of the True
Christian in this Age, is, That Holiness and Perfection are attainable now as
in Days of old, and that the diverse Precepts and Exhortations in the
Scriptures thereunto, may be obeyed, and the State truly enjoyed, even while
People dwell in these Earthly Tabernacles, 2 Cor. 4.7.
they may enjoy, the Heavenly Treasure, in their Earthen Vessels, 1 These. 4.4.
which may be possessed with Sanctification and Honor.

Now this is one of the sound Doctrines which the Titular Christian cannot
endure, comprehend, nor understand, therefore cries out against it, and says,
No Perfection here; no perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God; no coming to the
Mark of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 11.2.
no growing up to the Stature of the Fullness of Christ; no perfect Man in
Christ nor no being presented to God as a Chaste Virgin, Holy, Col. 1.22, 28.
Jude 24.
and Unblameable, Faultless, without Spot or Wrinkle. In Sum, no being now as
the Fathers of old and the Christians in the primitive Times were; No
Possibility of perfect Obedience to the diverse Precepts, Exhortations and
Commands of the Spirit of God throughout the Holy Scriptures; this is the
Language of the Titular Christian; so that herein he commits these two great
Evils;
First, Notwithstanding his pretended Honor to the Scriptures and Holy Men, he
gives them all the Lie. Secondly, He with the sloathful Servant calls God a
hard Master, in requiring that which nont are able to perform: But the
Testimony, Faith and Experience of the True Christian is quite the contrary; he
having passed through the Work of Regeneration, and experienced the diverse
Workings and Operations of the Spirit of God in his Heart (in this small
Treati^e before hinted at) leading him from one Degree of Grace unto another,
from one Degree of Faith and Knowledge unto another, until he is fully saved by
the Grace, and has gained Perfect Victory by the Faith from and over that
which made him Imperfect, Sinful and Defiled, and until the Knowledge of the
Lord so abounds in him, that it covers the Earth as the Waters cover the Sea;
and until he comes to the Sabbath of Rest (the Antitype of the outward
Sabbath) wherein he speaks not his own Words, nor thinks his own Thoughts, nor
does his own Will nor Works, but witnesses a Denial of them all, and a putting
off the old Man with his Deeds, and keeping the Body under, and a Bridle upon
the Tongue, Nature, Will, Thoughts and Desires, which received the Temptation
in the Beginning, always keeping them to the Cross,
though a Rent wing and Restoration be attained unto, and the State of
Innocence known and lived in, even as in the Beginning before the Fall; yet the
Will; Thoughts and Desires must be watched, ruled over, and subjected to the
Will and Command of God, in Truth and Reality, even as Christ has lest an
Ensample, whose Will and Desires were as good, pure and perfect, as Adam's were
before he fell and as any can attain to in this Age) yet said he, when he
prayed to his Father, Not my will, but th^ne, whose Will he came to do.

Now in this Heavenly Self Denial and true Resignation stands the Perfection
and Safety of the True Christian, all which is wrought and effected by the
Power and Spiritual Appearance of the second Adam in him, and for him, who of
himself can do nothing.

And in this is his Happiness and Perfection, that he is come to cease from his
own Thoughts Words and Works, his own Way and Will, and his own Wisdom and
Knowledge also; for in these Things began his Misery,
and while they lived in him, and ruled over him, he continued in the Misery,
notwithstanding his diverse Devices, and Inventions, and Strivings to get out of
it; Death, Misery and Sorrow accompanied him, and clave close unto him, and he
could never be rid thereof, till he come through the Work of Regeneration,
through true Self Denial and Resignation, to that Estate which Paul was in when
he said, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the Life that I now
live, I live by the Faith of the Son of God; this is the Perfection the True
Christian arrives at,
even to know Christ live in him, and Self and Sin dead, then this Life of
Righteousness reigns, where once Sin and Death reigned; and this Life cures
all Diseases, and makes a Man grow to Perfection, makes the Mind sound, and the
Understanding A perfect Sign where Life reigns.
the Heart clean and honest, purges the Conscience from all dead Works, and
brings into the Service of the living God, and makes free, and redeems from the
contrary, viz. the Service of Sin and Satan; and this is a perfect State, and
has been, is, and may be attained unto, according to the Holy Scriptures, and
the Testimony of the True Christian.

And some Titular Christians do pray for, promise and profess as much (...)
Words, The Titular Christian prays for, and professes Perfection, but does
not believe it is possible to attain, till after the Death of the Body: So his
Prayer is vain, and his Belief a strong Delusion.
when they pray for a clean Heart, and the renewing of a right Spirit, to live
a holy Life, and to be cleansed from all Sin, and when they promise one for
another, to forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this
World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and to keep God's Holy Will and
Commandments; this is Perfection, and he that does receive a clean Heart and a
right Spirit, and does those Things, is a perfect Man.

Now he that professes and witnesses these Things before spoaken of, and has
travailed through the Work of the New Creation; he can speak of Perfection in
Truth and Righteousness; he can say, all the Works of God are perfect, good,
yea, very good, being a living Witness of the same, and that the Works of Man
in the Fall and Degeneration, and of the old Serpent whom he obeyes, are all
imperfect and bad, yea, very bad; therefore let all that talk of Perfection
with their Tongues, and profess it with their Lips, see that they are in that
Faith which is the Gift of God, and works by Love,
and does wonderful Things, though it be but as a Grain of Mustard. Seed, it
removes Mountains, and the Effect of it does away all Imperfection, and makes
whole every whit, the Eye being fixed upon the Author thereof, it brings the
Mighty from its Seat, and exalts that of low Degree, it brings to the true
Poverty which makes many rich and inherits all Things, to the Sorrowing wherein
is Rejoicing always; to the having nothing, and yet poffessing all Things; to
the Weakness, wherein is Strength; to the Loss, wherein is Gain; to the Death,
wherein is Life Everlasting; this State Paul was in, when he spoak after this
Manner, When I am Weak, then am I strong, when dead, then alive, as sorrowing,
yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6.10.
as poor, yet making many rich, as having nothing, yet possessing all Things;
these Things are as Riddles and Mysteries to the Carnal Mind, and are hidden
from the Wise and Prudent, but revealed to the Babes, who suck at the Breasts
of Consolation, and are weaned from the Breasts of this World, in all its
Perfection, Glory and Beauty, visible and invisible, and are become Children of
that Faith, without which it is impossible to please God. Therefore if any will
be perfect and have Treasure in Heaven,
they must become as new born Babes, feeding on the Milk of the Word, and know
a growing up in and by the Virtue of the same, to the State of a perfect Man,
out of all Self-Will, Thoughts and Imaginations, self-Wisdom, Riches and
Knowledge; for in the State of Innocence, before the Fall, Man was not rich,
wise nor strong of himself, his own Will, Thoughts and Desires,
though in themselves and in their Places harmless, did not rule over him;
neither did he feed upon the Tree of Knowledge, which was and is good in its
Place, (though not for Food) but he ruled over them all, while he stood in the
Image of his Maker, and obeyed his Command, he had Power over all the Beasts of
the Field, and Fish of the Sea, and the Earth was subdued by him, and he had
Dominion over it, standing in the Life, Power Riches and Wisdom of his God, and
out of his own; here, though he had nothing, yet he possessed all, subdued all,
and had Dominion over all; though he fed not upon the Tree of Knowledge, yet
was he full of Knowledge and Wisdom, to discern the Nature of all Things, and
to give them Names accordingly; though he had no Will nor Defire,
but what was to be subject to the Will of God, nor no Power or Strength given
him of God to act contrary to his Command, yet he had great Power, Liberty and
Freedom given him of God over all the Works of his Hands: And every Herb
bearing Seed, which was upon all the Earth, and every Tree in which was the
Fruit of a Tree, bearing Seed for Meat; only the Tree of Knowledge, which grew
(not at one Corner, but) in the midst of the Garden (even where the Tree of
Life it self grew) he was not to eat of; he that reads, let him understand (for
I testify that Moses,
or the Author of Genesis was endued with the same Divine Heavenly Sight and
Wisdom, when he wrote these Things, as John was when he wrote his Book of
Revelations; and a Measure of the same must give the Understanding of them.)

Now Mankind had nothing to do, but to dress and keep the Garden, which God's
own Hand had planted; and this he was to do in the Will, Wisdom and Power of
God, by which he became a Living Soul, clothed with the Image of God, without
any other Covering but his Spirit; this was his Glory and Perfection: And in
this stood his Joy and Felicity, Power and Dominion within and without (in this
stands the True Christian's now.) But when he suffered his Will and Desire, and
the Eye of his Mind by the Temptation, to be drawn and alured forth, and gave
way to the springing up of a Desire,
to know and be wise for himself to be something of himself, this let the
Temptation over him being deceived, disobeyed his God, even under a Hope of
gaining by it, and bettering his State, The Life and Image of God, which Adam
lost, was inward and spiritual; he dyed not immediately, as to his outward Form
or bodily Existence, but lived many years.
believing the Serpent, who said, You shall be as Gods, you shall not dye: Thus
Death entered upon him, thus the Image of God in him became veiled, and his
Beauty, Glory and Perfection defaced; his own Will and Desires no sooner gave
way to, but Temptationt entered; no sooner his own Eye opened, but his
Imperfection appeared, and his Nakedness was seen;
no sooner he began to live of himself, and to will, and to know of himself,
but Death, Misery and Ignorance followed, and Shame, Fear and Guilt appeared;
and many Inventions and Contrivances, how to cover the Nakedness and Shame, and
excuse the Guilt, was invented: This was the Work of Transgressing Man in the
Beginning, and is the same at this day among all the Children of Men (of what
Nation, Name or Sect soever) who abide in the transgressing State of the First
Adam.

Now the State of Perfection that the Children of the Second Adam do attain
unto, while in the Body, is a True Self-denial and Resignation into the Will of
God, throughout all Trials,
and over all Temptations; he is a Perfect Man in Christ, who is not only
Restored and Redeemed by him into a State of Innocence, Harmlesness and
Uprightness; but also in this State is resigned and given up in his Mind, Will,
Thoughts and Desires, into the Will of God, as clearly knowing it; so that his
Mind being the Mind of Christ,
is eying his Heavenly Father, and his Mind is stayed upon him, where the
perfect Peace is: And his Will, Thoughts and Desires, though Harmless, as
Christ's were, yet subject to his Father, truly saying as Christ did, Not my
will, but thine. In this State of true Resignation unto and Unity with the
Father's Will stands the True Christian's Safety and Perfection; and that which
preserves him in the same; is the Power of God, that thoroughly debaseth Self,
subjecteth Man's Will, and saves to the uttermost through Faith in it. And in
this State of Perfection, as he lives and remains, he is clothed with the
Spirit of Glory and Humil^ty; the greater his Seize are, and the higher
the Heavenly Place is he fits in, the lower is his Mind, and the lesser he is
in his own Eyes; and the greater he is in the Kingdom of God, the more he is
replenisht with true Love, Goodness and Humility; here the greatest is the
Servant, a Helper of others; the highest, the lowest; here the Servant is as
his Lord, and the Lord as him that serves. And among these True Christians
there is no Strife nor Dispute,
who shall be Greatest; though they are Elders, and have Crowns upon their
Heads, yet they throw them down at the Feet of him that sits upon the Throne,
and give Glory to him forever, Rev. 4.10, 11.

XX. A Few Words, by Way of Advice, Counsel and Exhortation, to such as are
newly turned in their Minds from Darkness within, to Light within, from the
Power of Satan within, to the Power of God within, whereby the Work of
Regeneration is begun within, that such may not miscarry in the same, nor sit
down by the Way (short of the Mark of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus)
is what follows written, seriously to be Read, Weighed and Considered.
TEnder Friend, who art turned to this Light and Power, and art a Believer in
it, and desire to hear and obey the Word in thy Mouth and in thy Heart, to
this Light thou do well to take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark
Place, and as a Voice that calls unto thee, saying, Come up hither, and I
will show thee the Bride, the Lamb's Wife.

In Order thereto, thou must understand and regard the End of the precious
Appearance of the Light within, though it be and appear unto thee, but as Light
that breaks forth before the Day dawn within, or before the Day Star arise in
thy Heart, yet the End of its Appearance and Shining in thee, is, that thou
should fix the Eye of Faith upon it, and keep thy Mind toward it, till the
Day dawn, and the Day Star arise within, and this is the Star of the Messiah
(and the Angel of the Lord) that will lead thee to the Inn, where the Virgin is
delivered of a Son, and where the Babe of Glory lies, swadled in a Manger,
unregarded by all the Guests thereof, and thou following this Star, and finding
him, wilt not spare thy Cold, Incense and Mirth, but offer up thy precious
Things unto him, as the Wise Men did.

And when the Light within, the Day Star within, has led thee thus far, thou
must not think within thy self, that thou have now attained to the Mark of the
High Calling of God in Christ Jesus, because thy Eye sees the Salvation which
God has prepared before the Face of all People, think not with thy self that
thou presently possessest and enjoyest the same, because of the Joy, Delight
and Pleasure that accompanies the Sight thereof, yet take thou heed of sitting
down in the Appearance of Light and Heavenly Discoveries, and in the bare Sight
and Knowledge of the Man-Child that is born, but wait thou, and walk in the same
Light within, which will discover unto thee that Spirit that secks its Life
within thy self even after it is born,
under the Pretense of worshipping of it (as Herod did) and in it thou will
receive Wisdom and Counsel, to cherish and preserve it, till the Death of its
Enemies, as J^seph did; in the Light thou may come to read and understand
those Things which are written for thy Learning.

Now whatsoever makes manifest is Light, Darkness and the Works of it, is, and
has been wrought within; the Light that expels the Darkness, and the Power
that destroys the Works of it is also to be known within; None walk in the
Light further then they bring their Thoughts, Words and Works to the Light to
be proved and tried, whether they proceed from, or are wrought in God or no,
Joh. 3.21.
and thou must believe and continue walking in the Light, that thou may
become a Child of it; and abide with the Power that thou may know and
witness the Work of it within thy self, proceeding in Order from the first Day
to the seventh, or Sabbath of Rest: And thou may understand, that thou do
not become a Child of Light so soon as thou see the Shining of it, and begins
to believe and walk in it; thou must not only have Faith, but thou must add
unto thy Faith Patience, etc. for thou have as much need, as some of old had,
which Paul wrote to, when he said, You had need have Patience, that after you
have done the Will of God, you may (wait to) receive the Promise, and it was
after they believed, that the Primitive Christians were sealed with the Spirit
of Promise; the End of Faith is not soon attained unto;
he that believes must not make have, neither must he will nor run, but in
Patience wait in the Faith without Doubt and Wavering, till he receives the End
of it, as some of old did, viz. the Salvation of their Souls: And so thou will
know, as in the Light thou waitest, Salvation come nearer and nearer one Day
then another unto thee, and wilt witness to the Truth of what the Apostle
wrote, when he said, Now is Salvation nearer then when you first believed.

Now tender Friend, I have this principally to advise thee of, that the Wiles
and Devices of the Enemy are many and mysterious, and the Murderer arises
with the Light, and it is against thee, who art come to believe in the Light, he
rages within and without, and about thee he goes as a roaring Lion, seeking
to devour; and as a subtle Fox to get into the Vineverd again, and spoil the
tender Grapes; therefore I counsel thee to wait low in thy Mind, in that
Heavenly Principle of Light, to which thou have been turned, and in which thou
have believed, in this the Devil has no Part; abiding here, thou art as one
armed in a strong Tower of Defense; keep thou thy self that he may never
prevail against thee by Allurements, Baits, Shares and Enticements, and he can
never force thee, nor by all his Strength compel thee to yield unto him and
obey him.

But know this, he will suit and sort his Temptations according to thy
Temperament, State and Condition, seeing thou have turned thy Back upon that
wherein his Kingdom stands, and where his Works and Will is done, and set thy
Face Sionward, and walks in the Light within, that leads thereto; he knows
it is in vain for him to appear unto thee now as a Devil, therefore will he
transform himself like unto an Angel of Light, and propose and promise as great
Things to thee, as he did to Eve in Paradise, if he can but get thee out of thy
Way, the Light within (which makes him manifest in all his Shapes and
Transformings) he will prevail against thee, and cause thee to err, and deceive
thee under the Hope of enjoying a greater Liberty and a higher Glory; thus he
has beguiled some in this Age; for when and where the Woman appears clothed
with the Sun,
and the Moon under her Feet, and a Crown of twelve Stars upon her Head, being
with Child, crying, travailing in Birth, pained to be delivered, then, and
there also the great red Dragon with his seven Heads, ten Horns, and seven
Crowns upon his Heads, appears also, and with his Tail draws Stars from
Heaven, and casts them to the Earth, and also stands ready before the Woman, to
devour her Child as soon as it is born; Read Rev. 12.1, 2, 3, 4. and the Lord
give thee Understanding.

So, tender Friend, If thou desire to travail on with Safety in the Way and
Path of Christianity, from its Birth to the Cross, and from the Cross to the
Crown, thou must walk in the Light, and daily learn of the Grace of God within,
and keep on thy Armor, the Light within, whereby thou have conquered many
Enemies within, and overcome diverse Temptations within; and have known it as an
Ax laid to the Root of the Evil Tree within, abide thou in it, and keep thy Eye
fixed upon him that heweth therewith, that thou may know its Work thoroughly
effected, (viz.) the very Root of the Evil Tree cut up; not only its Branches
lopt off, and the Root struck at, but Root and Branch destroyed; and the
Heavenly Plant to grow and increase into a Tree of Righteousness instead
thereof within thy self, that thou may fit under its Shadow with Safety, and
eat of the Fruit thereof with Delight.

Now, though thou art a Believer in the Light, and a Learner of the Grace, and
art travailing right on in the same, toward a full Enjoyment thereof, know
this, That thou will meet with many Trials, Exercises and Temptations in the
Way, some to turn thee out of it, and others to cause thee to sit down short,
and take up a Rest by the way, and glory in thy former Experiences, Openings,
Sights and Revelations, and Power over Devils, which thou have been endued
withal; so, if the old Serpent cannot prevail in the one, he may in the other;
envying thy Happiness, he will try all Means against thee, to beguile thee, as
he did Eve, tempt and alure thee out of a Heavenly Estate, he will hardly beset
thee within and without; and when thou appearest before God, hewill appear also
with Lies and Accusations against thee: Now, keep thou in the Light wherewith
thou art enlightened, and in which thou have believed, and lean thou upon and
trust in the Grace of God, which is sufficient and present with thee, and ready
and able to save and deliver thee, when his Alurements and Buffetings attend
thee.

And this Light within, in which thou have believed, as thou walk in it,
will show thee the Nature and Tendency of the Bait, though covered with Golden
Pretenses, and the very Hook that is covered therewith: So as thou waitest and
abidest in this Light, in vain is the Snare laid in thy Sight, in vain are all
his subtle Devices against thee, and in vain are all his variable Appearances in
order to deceive and destroy thee, whether he appears as a subtle Serpent, or
as a Satan to accuse (as he did Job) before God, or as a Dragon or Roaring Lion
to devour, or as an Antichrist; or on the contrary, whether he appear as an
Angel of Light, with two Horns, like a Lamb, and in Sheep's Clothing; and
further, In our Age, as in Ages past, the Devil has confessed to the
Appearance of Christ, and preached the Words of Truth, but in O position to the
Power.
though he appears in, and assumeth the Form of Godliness, and preaches and
confesses Christ in his Spiritual Appearance, within in words, and talks of and
professes the Light within, and the Motion of the Spirit, and a Learning of
the Spirit, and a Ceasing from Man, and a Learning of the Anointing, Light and
Grace within, and get into the Throne and Temple of God, and sit there as God;
I say, In vain are all his variable Appearances, Wiles and Works, Formings and
Transformings; as thy Eye is kept single, thy whole Body will be full of Light;
and thou will be able to say, as some of old did, We are not ignorant of his
Devices: And thou will try and discern Spirits; and that Ear will be open that
tryes Words as the Mouth tastes Meat, and judges the diverse Sounds and Voices,
and sees to the In side, Root, Ground and Foundation of things that do appear,
and gives them Names according to their Nature, and judges Righteously
concerning them, and not according to Appearance only, whether within thy self
or without: As in this Wisdom and Discerning thou abidest, thou will travail
safely on, from Faith to Faith, from Knowledge to Knowledge, from one Degree of
Grace and Glory unto another, till thou come to be fully gathered from the
East, West, North and South, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in
the Kingdom of God; and also know the Son surrender the Kingdom to the
Father, and God become all in all; then shall thou know as thou art known, and
see as thou art seen; and Death shall be swallowed up in Victory, Mortality of
Immortality; and there shall be no more Sea, Death nor Sorrow, Crying nor Pain,
former things being past away, and all things made new; this Estate John saw in
his Divine and Heavenly Revelation; and thou abiding in the Light, and walking
in the Spirit, wilt not only see but enjoy the same: Read Rev. 21, and 22. and
the Lord give thee Understanding more and more, and increase thy Joy in
believing; and strengthen thy Faith and Hope, that they may be as a Trusty
Shield of Defense, and as an Anchor sure and steadfast, to preserve thee from
all Assaults, and from splitting upon a Rock or Sands, till thou arrivest at
the Haven of Eternal Rest, and lie down in the Valley, where thy Bread, yea,
thy Daily Bread, (fresh and fresh) from the Table of the Lord will be sure, and
thy Water fail not, where none can make thee afraid, where no Enemy can
prevail, where no Danger of making Shipwreck of Faith and a Good Conscience is,
where no Destroyer is, where all Tears and the Cause of them are wiped away,
where Faith and Hope has an End, and where the Heavenly City is, whose Gates
stand always open, and yet no unclean thing can enter: As thou perseverest in
the Light, and obeyest and followest him that has called thee out of Egypt,
and translated thee from the gross Darkness thereof, thou will thereby be led
to inherit and possess these things; for, It is he that endures to the End,
that shall be saved.

Now, tender Friend, As thou walk in thy Way, the Light within, the Spirit
and Grace of God within, which teaches not only to deny Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, but also to live Soberly, Righteously and Godlily in this
present World, thou art safe. But I do advise thee notwithstanding, to take
great heed, and watch diligently against the Enemy of thy Happiness in all his
Appearances, and especially when he appears under the Form of Truth it self,
with the Words of it in his Mouth, and with the very likeness of it; for I have
seen him there, and he has beguiled and betrayed many thereby in this Age, even
since we were a People; and he effected it by drawing the Mind from being staid
upon God, waiting low in his Light, to wonder after and desire something else,
which he made appear lovly to behold; the attaining of which, he persuaded
them, would better their Condition, and increase their Glory: so, in hope,
many, after they have been presented as a chaste Virgin to Christ, have again
been subjected unto Vanity, in this Age, as Mankind was in the Beginning; and
have lost a present good Estate by believing the Lies of the Serpent, who told
them, They should enjoy a better; some he has drawn out on this wise, and by
other of his Wiles, to that Degree of Apostasy and Degeneration, that they are
become like Trees twice dead, and plucked up by the Roots, never like to grow
in the Garden of God again, whose Way and End is Utter Darkness, out of which
there is no Redempi^on.

Now, his other Ways and Means, whereby he lies in wait to deceive, are more
open and manifest; but his Working under the Form of Truth more secret and
mysterious, and more likely to prevail upon the Mind of ^e Simple, unless a
diligent Watch be kept (then when he appears as he is) By this Means I have
known him not only get into the Temple of God, and sit there, but to be
worshipped as God, and exalted above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped besides him. Now, ^e never got into the Temple, not sat there,
(...) was worshipped under the Name of a D^vil, Satan or Prince of Darkness,
now, (...) in any Age; but mysteriously wrought himself in under a Disguize,
clothing himself like an Angel of Light, that desired and endeavored the Good
of Mankind; by this Means he came and comes to be obeyed and worshipped, not as
he is, but as he appears to be. Now, this Temple, where he sits, and where he
is Worshipped, is the Heart and Mind of Mankind in the Degenerate Stite: And
that which does reveal him with his Mystery of Iniquity, is the Light and
Spirit of God, in which thou have believed, working and Operating in the same
place, and consuming him with the Spirit of his Mouth, and destroying him with
the Brightness of his Coming: But this thou know not effected so soon as
thou believe; it is a Work wrought by Degrees; thy Safety and Duty is, To wait
with Patience for the Coming of the Lord in that Light and Grace which fits and
prepares his Way, and teaches thee how to join with him when he appears, and
to help the Lord against the Mighty, and to meet him in the Way of his
Judgments, by which Sion is redeemed: And so, as thou here waitest, thou will
discern him when he appears from all the Appearances of thy Enemy, and be made
willing in this Day of his Power to yield up thy Heart, Mind and Strength unto
him, and to serve him, love, fear and obey him, this is required on thy Part;
so will thou know him to appear unto thee as a Morning without Clouds, and in
his Light thou will see more Light, and know it shine more and more unto a
Perfect Day, till by the Brig^tness thereof the whole Mystery of Iniquity be
discovered, and the Man of Sin destroyed, and thy Temple cleansed from all that
does Defile, and the Mystery of Godliness displayed therein, and Truth and
Righteousness sit upon the Throne, and reign where Sin and Unrighteousness did
reign, even in thy Heart and Mind, Will and Conscience; then will thy Earth
rejoice, and thy Heavens rain down ^atness, and Everlasting Peace will be in
thy Dwellings.

The which that thou may attain unto, hold fast that thou have; let none
take thy Crown; whereunto thou have attained, therein walk, pressing forwards
to the End of thy Race, where the Crown of Life is laid up; and take heed of
thy own Thoughts and Imaginations, Conceivings and Consultations, and of that
Will that works not the Righteousness of God; these of thy own House will prove
thy greatest Enemies, if thou walkst not in the Light which discovers them, and
takes up the Cross that crucifieth them, and is able to bring every high
Thought and Imagination into the Obedience of Christ; and while this is
bringing to pass, abide in the Patience, bearing the Cross of Christ, which is
the Power of God, and keep thy Eye fixed on the same, and look not downward to
the Earth, nor at the Smoke that ascends out of the bottomless Pit, and darkens
the Air, nor at the Dragon that makes War in Heaven; but join thou with Michael
the Prince, and follow the Lamb, which rides on conquering and to conquer; so
shall thou overcome, and sit down with him on his Throne, as he sat down with
his Father on his Throne, and know thy Enemies made thy Footstool.

And that thou may not fail hereof, Watch, also against the dead Spirit of
Formality; see that thy Form of Godliness is accompanied and seasoned with
Life, Virtue and Power; for though Godliness is not manifested without a Form,
yet there may be a Form without the Power; this Spirit of Formality captivated
some in former Ages, and led them to deny the Power, from such they were to
turn away then, and so art thou now; for if this Spirit of Formality prevails,
though a Form of Godliness be ^etained, as a Form of sound Words; Plainness and
Decency in Apparel; Superfluity of Meats and Drinks laid aside; Respecting
Men's Persons, and Worshipping them with Cap and Knee avoided; Truth and Light
within professed in Words; Meetings and Assembling often frequented; the Sound of
Truth as a lovely Song, etc. Yet if thy Heart be gone astray; if thou feelst
not Life to lead thee; if thou take not up the Daily Cross to thy Will,
Thoughts, Affections, Lusts and Passions, and by the same mortify them; thou
may be a mere Formalist, and thy observing and abiding in thy Form may become
as abominable in the Sight of the Lord now, as it was of old among his once
Peculiar People, the Jews, when he sent his Prophet Isaiah to cry against them,
though they kept and observed the Multitude of Offerings and Sacrifices, Feasts
and Fasts, New Mons and Sabbath Days, Solemn Meetings and Assemblings before
the Lord, etc. which was the very Form of Worship he once commanded; but the
Spirit of Dead Formality being got into their Hearts, corrupted them, So that
he that killed an Ox, was as he that slew a Man; he that sacrificed a Lamb, as
he that cut off a Dog's Neck; he that offered Oblations, as if he offered
Swi^^s Blood; he that burnt Incense, as if he blessed an Idol; the Reason of
all this was, not because these Things were evil in themselves, but because the
Call of the Lord was not answered, and because when he spoke, they did not
hear, but did Evil before his Eyes, and chose that in which he delighted not,
yet observed and performed the outward Part of Worship, and sat before the
Lord as his People, and loved and delighted to hear the Word of the Lord by the
Mouth of his Prophet, but not to do them: Read Isaiah 66.3. and Ezekiel 33.30,
31, 32.

Now dear Friend, let this sore Evil never some near thy Dwelling, in thy holy
Form of Godliness, which thou have been lead unto by the Power, keep in the
Sense and Feeling of the same, in thy Form of sound Words; keep in the Fear of
God and Tenderness of Conscience, wherein thou were at first constrained to
speak them, even in the Cross to self, which took great Offense thereat; yet in
Tenderness, Love and Fear to God, against thy Will, and the Pride and haughty
Spirit of this World, were thou moved to speak them; likewise thy holy Form, in
not Respecting Men's Persons, or having them in Admiration because of Advantage,
nor honoring them in bowing with Cap and Knee; nor giving flattering Titles to
Men; this the Spirit of the Lord led to in the Beginning, keep in the same, and
his Presence and Power will uphold thee in the same, and also lead thee to
honor all Men in the Lord, and to be subject to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lords sake, and truly to honor thy Parents, and rise up before thy Elders, and
give them double Honor, and to be courteous and kindly affectionate unto all;
this will the Spirit of the Lord lead thee to, being the Nature of
Christianity, as thou walk and abidest therein, thou will be like thy
Heavenly Father.

And thy Holy Form of Plainness of Apparel, and thy Avoiding of Superfluity in
Meats and Drinks, etc. keep thou with that Holy Spirit that led thee thereto;
and let not the Sense thereof depart from thee; so shall thou feel the Power
thereof accompanying of thee, and working in thee to remove that Root and
Ground from whence all Superfluity of Naughtiness did arise, and wholely
mortify that Spirit that delighted in these things.

And in thy Holy Form and Manner of Meeting together, always have thy Mind
exercised in that Love and Life, Virtue and Power of the Lord, by which he
touched thy Heart, and met with thee therein in the beginning; so shall thou
enjoy more and more of his Presence, and increase in Wisdom, Life and Strength,
and all the Virtues of the Holy Spirit: And though thou have received an
Unction from the Holy One, which is able to teach thee all things necessary or
needful to thy Salvation; yet this will not lead thee to forsake the assembling
of thy self with the Lord's People, according to their wonted Manner, nor to
forsake the Flocks of the Companions, nor the Footsteps thereof; but to
travail on in the same, till thou come to know where they lie down at Noon,
solacing themselves in the green Pastures of Life, and there to lie down with
them, where none can make thee afraid, and where no Destroyer is, where the
Spirit of dead Formality has no place: Here thy Form of Godliness will be
accompanied with Power, and this Evil will never overtake thee, as it has some
in our Age, who are convinced by the Truth, and love the Sound thereof, yet
come to our Meetings, and frequent our Assemblies formally and customarily,
even as the Unbelievers and ignorant People go to hear the Common Service, or
Studied Sermons; but receive not the Ingrafted Word, which is able to save
their Souls: So, though they hear many Heavenly Testimonies and Exhortations,
they receive and obey them not; neither do they grow and increase in their
Inward Man, from one Degree of Grace, Knowledge and Virtue unto another.

This Spirit of dead Formality has also assumed the Form of Sound Words, and
Plainness of Apparel, etc. and under this Form and Disguize has brought forth
and effected much Evil, deceived many, and laid a stumbling before others, and
brought an Evil Report upon the Truth, and those that live in it. And this Evil
Spirit of Deceit, Hypocrisy and Formality, has wrought more Mischief against
the Truth, and the Holy Profession of it, manifest within (even under this
Form) then all open Opposition and Persecution could ever effect. This is now
(and has been in former Ages) the Way and Work of the Spirit of Deceit, when
he cannot prevail by direct Opposition and Perfecttion, then will he get the
Words and Profession of Truth, and appear and work under the Form thereof; and
by the Evil Fruits he brings forth under this Disguize, he occasions many, who
are waiting for the Consolation of Israel, and strictly observing the
Conversation of the Children thereof, to lose their Expectation, and to sit
down and conclude, These People are but as others, and their Way is but as
other Ways; and they fail in their Profession of Holiness, etc. as others do;
we see Evil amongst them, as amongst others, even under their very Form, etc.
This has occasioned many to take up their Rest in a Latitudinarian Spirit; or
to be ready to say, All Men are Liars, and Religion a Cheat; and some to run
into Atheism it self. But double Woe and Misery will be the Portion of those
Persons, who entertain and join with this Spirit of Deceit and Hypocrisy, and
thereby occasion many to stumble, go backwards, and fall, and speak Evil of the
Way of Truth, which is Peaceable, Peasant and Pure, not only in it self, but
also to all those that love it, and obey it, and become Children of it. But as
for those, that once knew the Way of the Lord, and afterward gave way to the
Spirit of Evil, Deceit, Hypocrisy and Formality; or that took up the Form of
Godliness to deceive, as in former Ages, so now; such are more Abominable in
the Sight of the Lord, and more to be testified against then the very Heathen
or profane Unbelievers: False Brethren are most Perilous, and Hypocrites most
Odious in the Sight of God and all good Men; and the Guilt of Souls lies at
their Door, because of their Ungodly Practices and Evil Doings under the Form,
Show and Profession of Godliness; such, like Unsavory Salt, are good for
nothing, but to be trod under Foot of Men, judged and condemned by God's
Witness within themselves, and without by others; and the Knawing Worm takes
hold of them, and the Unquenchable Fire is kindled in their Bowels, and an
Earnest of Eternal Vengeance they receive, as a Just Recompense of Reward, and
like fallen Angels, are reserved in Chains to the Judgment of the Great Day.

For, my Faith and Belief is, That if all that ever took up the Form and
Profession of the Truth, Light, Grace and Spiritual Manifestation thereof
within, had stood firm in the same, and watched against, ruled over, and kept
out the Spirit of Enmity, Ungodliness, Deceit and dead Formality; and by the
Heavenly Gift and Power, with which they were endued, had judged the Serpent in
all his Appearances, Formings and Transformings, and walked Uprightly in the
same, the Eye of the Nations had been toward us; and Yea and Nay had been of
great Authority in this Nation of England before this day; and Truth in the
Inward Parts, the Law of the Spirit, the Rule of Life and Manners Within,
honorable, and of high Esteem in the Hearts and Minds of Thousands, more then
now it is: Offenses have come, and may come; but Woe to them by whom they come.

So, my tender Friend (who have not had thy spiritual Senses thoroughly
exercised, nor art not yet acquainted with all the Wiles and Devices of the
Enemy) for whose sake I chiefly write this Epistle; this One Thing I would have
thee settle in thy Mind, At the Gate of dead Formality, and under the Form of
Godliness, the Destroying Spirit of Apostasy entered in the Primitive Times; and
soon ecclipsed the Light of the Glorious Gospel; and the Old Adversary effected
that by turning Professor of Christianity, which he could not bring to pass by
Bloody Persecutions and open Opposition.
and fully understand, that the Spirit of Satan working under the Form of
Godliness, is that which has been, is, and will be the greatest Waster, and
Destroyer, and Opposer of the Power thereof: Therefore watch thou against him
in this Appearance, not only in others, but in thy self, so will thou frustrate
his Design, and be able to keep thy self (as some of Old did) that the Evil One
touch thee not.

W. S.

THE END.

