A TRVE COPY OF A LETTER Written From Sir W. SAINTLIGER Lord President of
Munster, To the Lord Lieutenant Of IRELAND.

Also, the votes of the Parliament, concerning Sir John Hotham.

Martis 25. April. 1642.
It is this day ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, that this
Letter be forthwith published in print.

H. Elsinge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for John Frank, and are to sold at his shop next
door to the Kings head, in Fleetstreet. 1642.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
SIthence my last by my Lord of Dungarvan, my own indisposition and imbecility
has been such as in mine own person I have not been able to attempt any
thing, but have by my sickness been confined to my chamber: but the forward
earnestness and zeal to the service in my Lord of Inchequid, Colonel
Vavasor, Captain Iephson and the rest of the officers of the small Army here
has accomplished some exploits whereof you may please to receive the ensuing
relation.

I being besieged on the North side of the City by my Lord Muskry, M Carly
Leath, and all the rest of the western forces, and having notice that my Lord
Roche, my Lord of Ikarne Donbay, the Baron of Loghmay, M. Richard Butler, and
all the tipperary forces were drawing up to beleager me on the South, I
dispatched away the two Troops then newly landed under the command of my Lord
Inchequid and Captain Jephson into the Lord Roches Country, in expectance to
divert him from his intended course hitherwards, which sorted to so good
purpose as that I since understand the tipperary forces have forsaken him, and
that he remains himself upon his keeping in his own Country. During the
stay of these Troops there, they were desired to the relief of a Castle called
Rathgogan by one M. Meade, which M. Iephson having performed with a Squadron of
each Troop, and 80. Musqueters drawn out of his house and mine: in his retreat
he was encountered by two or three Companies from Milmallocke, on whom he with
a Horse, and another Officer with a Foot charged in several places, and routed
them, slaying about 150. besides 50. slain in relieving the Castle. On the
thirteenth of this instant my Lord of Muskry (who has kept his Camp a long
time at Rochforts Town three miles from this City) caused a part of his Army
to chase home our scoutes to the very suburbs where in a bravado they made a
stand, whereat my Lord Inchequid, Colonel Vavasor, and the rest of the
Officers being much incensed obtained my leave to issue forth immediately with
300. musketeers, and two Troops of horse, upon the sallying out they found the
enemy retreated, and pursued him to his quarters, where the maine body
consisting of 36 colors as they were numbered forthwith appeared, and after
several parties sent from the maine body to skermish with our men, had been
beaten back, they began to pack up their Baggage, and forsook their Camp,
after whom our men made all the speed they might, and having chased them two or
three miles, charged upon the rear, routed the whole Army, which betook it
self to flight over a bog unpassable for our horse, and took all their
carriage and luggage, whereof the Lord of Muskeries own Armcur, Tent, and
Trunks were a part, slew about 200 of their men that cook to firm ground, and
retired without loss of a man. Whereby it is very easy to observe with what
facility the enemy might now be dealt withal before he can recollect himself
anew, or receive foreign supplies which they daily and hourly expect, and
being once come to their hands it will not then be trebble the charge and
expense both of blood and treasure that will suppress them, which now would
reduce them to a very great straight.

And therefore I do most humbly beseech your Lordship that speedy supplies of
men, moneys, arms, munition and artilery, with all necessaries depending
thereon, as Conducters, Pyoners, Mattrosses, Carriages, Tackle, Horses and Oxen
for draught, and all other appurtenances may either be sent over, or commission
and means to raise and maintain them here, here being but one Canonere, and
one Clerk of the store in this Province: without these your Lordship knows
that it is to no boot to march into the field* where if the enemy be not too
hard for us, he will certainly retire to his holds, and so secure himself
against our forces.

The necessary use of Firelocks and Dragoones, and of a competent supply of
victual, the stock of this Country being totally wasted, will deserve
serious consideration: and if I had been so fortunate as to have received any
succors by those late Easterly winds it would have so discouraged the enemy
now newly routed and animated the Protestant party, as that I am very consident
by Gods assistance I should have given your Lordship a good account of the
quiet of these parts. Whereas the observing that this fair opportunity has
conveyed us no relief do begin to muster up their forces a fresh, and to take
heart at the apprehension of our being diserted in England and left wholly to
our selves, wherein I cannot sufficiently express how miserable our conditions
is; for having from the beginning of these troubles supported the forces
mentioned, in the enclosed list with moneys gained upon several hard terms
and engagements (besides what I have impressed to the succor sent thence) I
was at last constrained to seize upon 4000 pounds belonging to Sir Robert
Tynte, and ready to be transported out of the Kingdom (and which he refused to
lend upon the public faith of this state, which nevertheless I gave him upon
the seizure) merely to preserve the Army from disbanding, which otherwise it
must have undoubtedly done. And therefore I humbly desire, that money may be
sent over not only to discharge that and other engagements, amounting to 4000
pounds more, but that there may be order taken for the entering of those men
into pay, and continuing them therein ever since the beginning of the present
troubles which I raised at first (by direction from the Lords Justices) for
this service, and that the same course may be taken for them as for the rest.

The height of insolency and arrogance in the enemy will appear by the
enclosed Remonstrance which they sent me after a motion made for a cessation,
which in the condition I was in, I had some inclination to condescend unto, in
case it had been sought for in befitting terms: to which purpose I willed them
to address their humble petition to His Majesty, and in case I did approne
thereof, I would give way thereunto, and to a cessation until his pleasure
were known; whereupon they transmit me that, whereof the enclosed is a copy:
at which I took (justly as I conceive) such offense as caused me to return
them the enclosed answer, which I should have seconded with such further
testimony of my aversion to their insolency as would tend much to their
disincouragment were I enabled with any reasonable strength so to do, which I
earnestly desire I may be, and with instructions what hand to carry in the
prosecution of them, and how to manage the war against them, for that every
day they increase in insolency and riot, hanging such prisoners as are not
able to pay ransom, ransoming others, hanging old women and stripping all they
can lay hold on. All that is left in this Province is the City of Cork, the
Towns of Kingsale, Youghall, and Bandonbridge; the Cities of Limricke and
Waterford being fallen into defection, save that the Fort in the former is able
to command the Town if provided with Munition, wherewith I have sent to supply
it.

For persons in Action, it is far less difficult to nominate those that
adhere to the Crown, which are the Earl of Barrymore, (an industrious
servitour) the Lord Viscount Killmallocke, Sir Andrew Barret, and Edmond Fitz
Gerald of Ballmarter commonly called the Senescall of Imokilly, by whose care
and countenance (joined with my Lord Barrimores that Barrony of Imokilly is
kept in due subjection, and the passage betwixt this City and Youghall thereby
open. But whilst we stand on these unable terms to stir out of these walls,
the enemy is at liberty to range and forage over all parts of the Country.
And indeed our wants of money are so great and pressing, as that for defect of
entertainment and encouragement, the Officers both of horse and foot daily
flock unto me, and importune to be dismissed and left at liberty to seek
their preferment in England: and so soon at this little which is left me to
feed the soldiers with from hand to mouth is spent, I know no way to prevent
their sudden disbanding: and therefore I do again beseech your Lordship to
endeavor that I may not be exposed to the dishonor and misery of being
abandoned by the Kings forces, and left my self single to the mercy of the
enemy; but that moneys may be speedily transmitted unto me with directions what
pay to allow the horsemen, and Officers of the foot, with an overplus of
money, as I have formerly desired, for extraordinary and emergent occasions,
about either the Ordnance or Forts whereas yet nothing is in a right posture,
but things only shuffled together for a shift by reason we had not
wherewithal to the work as it ought.

Cork Apr. 20. 1642. Your Lordships most humble servant, W. Saintleger.

Die Martis 26. April. 1642.
Resolved upon the Question. THat Sir John Hotham Knight, according to this
relation, has done nothing but in obedience to the Command of both Houses of
Parliament.

Resolved upon the Question. That this declaring of Sir John Hotham traitor,
being a Member of the House of Commons, is a high breach of the privilege of
Parliament.

Resolved upon the Question. That this declaring of Sir John Hotham traitor
without due process of the Law, is against the liberty of the subject, and
against the law of the Land.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that these Votes shall be
printed and sent to the Sheriffs, and the Justices of the peace, to be
published in all the Market towns of the Counties of York and Lincoln.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamen.

FINIS.

