A Short Compendium OF SURGERY: CONTAINING ITS GROUNDS and PRINCIPLES.

More particularly Treating of IMPOSTHUMES, WOUNDS, ULCERS, FRACTURES and
DISLOCATIONS.

ALSO A DISCOURSE of the Generation and Birth of MAN, very necessary to be
understood by all Midwives and Childbearing women.

WITH The Several METHODS of Curing the FRENCH POX: The Cure of Baldness,
Inflammation of the Eyes, and Toothach: And an Account of Blood-letting,
Cupsetting, and Blooding with Leeches.

By I. S. M. D.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. and are to be sold by Charles Blount, at the Black
Raven in the Strand, near Worcester-House. 1678.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber

Cambridge University blazon or coat of arms

The Preface,
Courteous Reader,
MY Parents having ever destined me to be a Practical Physician, thought fit to
make me begin the Studies thereof by learning Surgery, probably thinking I
might thereby acquire a better knowledge of Man's Body, and its several parts,
together with their Functions, as also its outward (at least) Indispositions
and Cures, than by only reading such Treatises of Physiologie as were then
extant, which Modern Anatomists and other Authors have since found defective.

But in the performance of their just desires I found no small inconveniency,
for want of some short and compendious Principles, that might give me the
Grounds, and an Idea of that Art, proportionable to my then mean Capacity,
almost frighted with the bulk of large and ill digested Volumes; but there
being no Remedy, I was fain to compile out of them this small Treatise, which I
have since reviewed altering some obsolete Theorems into new ones, and adding
some small agreements to render its Reading less tedious; And all for my own
use without any thoughts of ever troubling the Press therewith. These late
years having brought forth several short Treatises of Surgery, specially the
excellent Principles of Barbetty and Hornius, the former whereof is lately made
English: but finding in mine some things, which are purposely omitted in
theirs, as few dislike their own Productions, I have resolved to make this
short Compendium Public, wishing that it may be to the advantage of young
Beginners in Surgery, and to the Health and Welfare of their Patients.

Thine I. S.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
Surgery defined, page 2. Its Operations, 3. Of Temper or Complexion, 7. Of
the Humors of the Body, 10. The Soul defined, 25. Of Diet, 37. Of Sleep and
Dreams, 40. Of the Passions, 42. A Disease d^fin'd, 45.
CHAP. II. Of Imposthumes.
THeir Causes and Matter, page 53, 54. Their Prognostics. 56. A Cataplasm to
discuss an Imposthume, 57. To resolve an Imposthume, 60. To bring an Imposthume
to S^ppuration, ibid. To mitigate the intense pain of an Imposthume, ibid.
CHAP. III. Of Wounds.
SIgns of a wound that has pierced the Skul, 65. whether a wound has penetrated
the Thorax, ibid. when the Lungs are hurt, ibid. when the Heart, Diaphragm,
Great Artery or Vena-Cava Medulla-Spinalis, Liver, Stomach, Guts, Kidneys,
Bladder, and Ureters, 66, 67. When the womb and Nerves, 67, 68. Of wounds that
are mortal, ibid. To help the Extraction of Bullets, Darts. etc. a Receipt, 69.
Of Sutures, 71. A Receipt to prevent a too great Flux of Blood, 72. A Receipt
to remove pain from the wounded part, 73. An excellent Narcotick for the same,
74. For Convulsions in the wounded, 75. A Palsy defined and cured, 77. Of the
Cure of wounds made by Firearms, 80. A Receipt to bring them to Suppuration,
81. The Definition of a Gangrene, 82. Its Cause and Cure, 83.
CHAP. IV. Of Ulcers.
What they are, 86. Of the several sorts of Ulcers, 88* 89. Of the Cure of
Ulcers, 90, 91.
CHAP. V. Of Fractures and Dislocations.
What a Fracture is, 92. The Cure how performed, 95.
CHAP. VI. Of the Generation and Production of Man.
OF the Matter of Generation, 98. Of the Place, 99. The chiefest and surest
Signs of Conception, 100. To know whether the Child be Male or Female, 101. The
Signs of approaching Childbirth, ibid. Directions to be observed before the
Birth, 102. Directions to be observed in the Birth, 103. A Liniment to be used,
104. An excellent Powder to hasten Childbirth, 105. Directions to be observed
when the Child is dead in the Womb, 108. An Ointment for the Hypogaster, 110.
For the Expulsion of Wind, an excellent Powder, 111. To stanch Milk, an
infallible Receipt, 112.
CHAP. VII. Of the French Pox.
ITs Definition and Signs, 114, 115. Of its Cure, 1. By Decoction, 116. To make
that Decoction, ibid. 2. By Plasters, ibid. 3. By Unction, 117. To make the
Unction, ibid. 4. By Suffumigation* 121. The Method to be used in it, ibid.
CHAP. VIII. Of several other Indispositions cured by Surgery.
OF Baldness and its Cure, 123. Inslammation of the Eyes, 124. Toothache, ibid.
Phlebotomy, 125. Cup-setting, 126. Leeches, 127.
A SHORT Compendium OF SURGERY
CHAP. 1.
THAT part of Physic, which is called in Greek Therapeutick is divided into
three others; namely, Diet, Surgery and Pharmacy: Yet, although this
division be needful, these three Sisters, as the Graces, are so connexed and
linked together, that it is almost impossible for any of them to perform the
least operation, without the help of the two others; but when they conspire and
are together carefully reduced, in act; a most advantageous harmony, for the
preserving and restoring of health, does result of their mixture.

Amongst these parts of Physic, Surgery is the needfullest, and is
therefore by some esteemed the noblest, as being the most ancient and
profitable. It is defined, An Art consisting in a methodical application of the
Hand on the Body of Man, for the preserving of its present Health, or the
restoring of it, being lost. Its Subject is the same Body, and its End the
Health of it.

The words Etymology is composed of the Greek word Cheir, that signifies ^
and, and Ergia, Operation; which being joined together make, as it were, a
Handy or Manual Operation.

The whole Art is divided into the Theoretical and Practical part; the First
whereof is described the seconds Guide and Leader, because it contains the
The^rems, Demonstrations and Precepts of it, which the Practical part only
reduces in act, and nevertheless has been so much esteemed, that the Heroes
and Demy-gods of Antiquity did not disdain to learn it, for it is, as Vincianus
says.

Quod Natum Phoebus docuit, quod Chyron Achillem;
Quod didicere olim Podalirius atque Machaon.
What Phoebus taught his Son, Chyron Achilles,
What learned Machaon and Podalirius.
The operations of it are three, Synthesis, Diairesis and Exeresis; whereof the
first joins what is separated. The second, separates what is joined. And the
third, takes away what is superfluous. And these Operations are to be soon,
surely, and pleasantly performed, with Manual or Medicinal Instruments,
according to certain Indications drawn from the things, 1. Natural. 2.
Notnatural. 3. And against Nature.

Surgery is soon performed, when no occasion of doing the sick person good
is neglected. Surely, if using of known Remedies, we prevent a relapse, and
avoid all worse diseases than the former. And Pleasantly, if, amongst Remedies,
those are first made use of, wherewith we may obtain our ends, with less
molestation of the Patient.

Those things are called Natural, which do enter in the composition of man's
Body, and although its first ingredient may be the universal matter of
Cartesius, out of whose particles, variously figurated and moved, according to
the variety of their figures and motions, those bodies do arise which though
they be not the very first, nor can be demonstrated absolutely simple in their
dissolution, yet because they are of the first order of sensible Bodies,
whereof others are composed, they may commodiously, by a Surgeon, who is an
Artist of sensibles, be conceived in the Body of Man as its 1. Elements, whence
do arise its 2. Tempers or Complexions. 3. Humors. 4. Parts or Limbs. 5.
Faculties. 6. Actions. And 7. Spirits. Whereunto, 1 Age. 2 The Sex. 3 Color. 4
Commoderation. 5 The Season of the Year. 6 The Clime. 7 And manner of Living
are annexed.

Elements are single Bodies, out of which the mixed are composed, and into which
they may be resolved, but they in none of a singler composition. They are
reckoned four. 1 Fire. 2 Air. 3 Water. 4 And Earth, Whose number and station,
Ovid has thus expressed. Quatuor Aeternus Genitalia corpor a Mundus
Continet, ex illis, duo sunt onerosa, suoque
Pondere in inferius, Tellus atque Unda feruntur:
Et totidem gravitate carent, nulloque premente,
Altapetunt Aer, atque aere purior Ignis.
That is, The Eternal World four Bodies comprehends
Engendring all, The heavy Earth descends,
And Water clogged with weight; Two light aspire,
Depressed by none, pure Air, and purer Fire.


Which the Ancient thought to evince by the Argument of mixed Bodies
dissolution, Thus given by Dubart^s.

Cela se voit a locil dans le brulant Tison,
Son feu court versle Ceil, sanatale Maison,
Son air vole en fume, en cendre chet sa terre,
Son cau boult dans ses nocuds, etc.
That is perfectly seen, when burning wood does send
Its Fire to heaven, the place from whence it did des^end,
Its Air then flies in smoke, its Earth in ashes falls,
In its knots water boyls, etc.
But the weakness of this Argument is plainly discovered by the learned Boil
in his Chymista Scepticus; so that, as we said before, These Elements can at
most be reckoned but amongst the first Classes of mixed Bodies.

The Elementary qualities are also four, Namely, 1 Heat. 2 Coldness. 3
Moisture. 4 Dryness. Whereof the two first (though all act in some measure)
compared to the latter, are called Active; the two others Passive.

1. Fire, is of a hot and dry quality.

2. Air, of a hot and moist.

3. Water, of a moist and cold.

4. And Earth, of a cold and dry.

Temper or Complexion, is a proportion of the four primary Qualities, arising
from the mixture of the Elements. But if we consider the universal matter, it
may be defined, A moderation of the Particles endued with contrary Qualities.
There are four single Tempers. 1 Hot. 2 Cold. 3 Moist. 4 Dry. And four
composed, 1 Hot and Moist. 2 Hot and Dry. 3 Cold and Moist. 4 Cold and Dry.
Whereunto is added another, called in Greek (...), that is, Temperate, which is
distinguished, 1. In a Temper according to weight, when the Elements are both
in mass and quality so proportioned, that none can be said to predominate. 2.
And in another according to justice, which consists in a temperature
convenient for the exercising of all necessary actions.

This Temper is either of the whole body, by reason of which Males are said to
be hotter then Females, or of the several parts, whose Rule is this, whatsoever
is Red in the Body is Hot; whatsoever is White, Cold; that which is Soft, is
Moist; and that which is Hard, Dry. Whence it follows, That whatsoever is Red
and Hard, is Hot and Dry, as the Heart; whatsoever is Red and Soft, is Hot and
Moist, as the Flesh; What is White and Hard, is Cold and Dry, as the Bones; and
what is White and Soft, is Cold and Moist, as the Brains.

Childhood, comprehending the first five and twenty years of our age, is of a
hot and moist temper. From thence Youth, proceeding to five and thirty or
forty years, of a hot and dry; Manhood, consisting in the ten or fifteen next
years, is esteemed cold and dry; and thence Old age, till our life's end, is
more or less said to be cold and moist, or according to others, cold and dry;
its moisture being but accidental and excrementitious, though God can yet
extend our life to a long durance, as the German Poet Freinshemius elegantly
expresses. Is It schirr nichts ubrig mehr, als seelen voller schnen,
Als leber voller Thod, als leiber voller plag,
Als zeiten voller qual, als zungen voller klag.
Als hertzen voller angst, als augen voller trahnen.
That is, Though nothing but a soul full fraught with longing fears,
Be left, a deathful life, a body full of pain,
A time full of distress, a tongue but to complain,
A much oppressed heart, and an eye full of tears.


The Spring is temperate, Summer is hot and dry, Autumn cold and dry, and
Winter cold and moist. The Spring begins when the Sun enters the Sign Aries,
and continues as the other seasons, with small difference do, some three
months, whilst the Sun runs through as many Signs of the Zodiac, whose number
and order Virgil thus describes.

Primus adest Aries1, Taurus2 insignibus auro
Cornibus, and Fratres3, and Cancer4, aquatile signum,
Tum Leo5 terribilis Nemeus, atque innuba Virgo6.
Libra7 subit, caudaque animal8 quod dirigit ictum.
Armatusque arcu Chyron9 and Corniger Hircus10,
Fusor aqua11 simul and fulgenti lumine Pisces12.
The name of Humor is given to whatsoever is perceived flowing in the Body of a
living Creature endued with blood. The same is, first, Natural; or, secondly,
against Nature. The Natural is again divided into primary and secundary,
alimentary and excrementitious.

The alimentary or nourishing humors were constituted by the Ancients four in
number; 1. Blood. 2. Phlegm. 3. Choler. 4. Melancholy. But the Modern esteem
that Blood only is a fit nourishment of the Body, and that the other humors
flowing with it, whereunto they have added the Lymphatick and Pancreatical
Juice, do only contribute to its effervescency or temperature, as will be said
hereafter, amongst whcih humors there is no melancholy, except the thickest
and grossest part of the Blood as is found in the Atrabiliary Capsules, or is
evacuated by the Haemorroids, be taken for it. But before we expound how blood
is produced, let us hear how the Ancients did conceive it; It is thus expressed
by the Danish Poet, Arocusis. Du Mauge, good Kock, din mad saa vel for kryder,
At derat, Kortar hid, en kraftig saft ud flyder,
Some Du til Leftueren, vid middel aaren, sender,
Inarings meening Shy, hun den til blod forvender,
Ocs giffuer det igieu, naar saften ny yder,
At samme ferske blod til all Lemmer flyder,
Ued aarr gangr krum, etc.
That is, Thou Stomach, gallant Cook, thy meat so well do dress,
That of it in a trice, thou can a juic^ express
Full of craft, which is then sent, by the middle Vein,
To the Liver, that it may the dye of blood obtain,
Whence it is given out, when the other sap is wanting
And is seen through our Limbs, a free passage attempting
By crooked Channel-Veins, etc.


This was the Ancients meaning, but the Moderns have found, that the aliments
being well chewed in the Mouth, are by the Oesophagus transported into the
stomach, where by the virtue of some acid liquors, proceeding from the relics
of the former Concoction, and the Vapors of the Pancreatical juice, together
with the sub^il descending from the Maxillar Glandules, they are fermented,
agitated and calified, almost in the same manner, as metals are dissolved by
Aqua fortis. In the mean time the aliments, helped by the warmth of the
neighboring parts, do often contract a spontaneous heat, as we see sometimes
hay, too freshly brought in, whereby they are digested, which being done, the
stomach straightning it self, and opening its lower orifice, called the
Pilorus, they are thrust down to the Duodenum, where by an effervescency
arising from the mixture of Choler, descending thither by the biliary conduit,
together with the pancreatical juice, and Phlegm sticking to the Bowels, they
are segregated, and their grossest parts precipitated down to be expelled at
the seat; whilst the subtilest, called Chylus, are transported by the milky
Veins, to the common receptacle, where being diluted by the Lymphatick humor,
the Chylus is carried by the Thoracick conduits to the subclavicular branch of
the Vena cava, where it is mixed with the Blood, descending from the Head and
other superior parts; of whose Nature and Color it begins then to partake,
without coming to the Liver, which therefore can neither be the seat nor organ
of Sanguification.

The Chylus thus mixed with the descending Blood, being come into the trunck of
the Vena cava, is mingled with the Blood which ascends by the same Vein, from
the inferior parts, and is transmitted into the right Ventricle of the Heart,
where it suffers an effervescency arising from the mixture of the Lymphatick
spirit, and the lixivious salt of Choler, communicated to the Blood, out of the
Gall by the Hepatick conduit, whereby the fiery parts of each being freed of
their hindrance, do insinuate themselves in the oily parts of the blood, which
they rarify, whereby the Valvules of the Vena cava are shut up, and the Blood
thus rarefied, craving a larger room than before, the Heart is compelled to its
expulsion, which it effects by the collected fibers, as another muscle, and the
Valvules of the Arterial Vein being opened it is transported into the Lungs,
cooled by Respiration, whereby the Heart and the said Vein is unswell'd, and
the Blood is conveyed by the usual Artery, whose Valvules are then open, into
the left Ventricle of the Heart, where it is again heated and rarefied, and
being carried by the Aortal Artery, whose Valvules then give passage, into the
greatest Arteries, and from thence into the smaller, the Heart and the said
Arteries leave swelling, and the Bl^od is thence received by the Anastomoses in
the Veins, from whence it proceeds, through the vena cava, into the right
Ventricle of the heart, repeating so a continual circulation, a perpetuum
mobile during our Life.

Blood is temperate, of a mean thickness, Red in color, and of a sweet taste,
it serves instead of fuel to the vital heat, which it conveys to the several
parts, to whose nutrition and increase it alone contributes.

The Ancients did divide it into Venal and Arterial, though the place of their
flowing be their chief difference.

Phlegm is of a watery nature, liquid, whitish and unsavory, it serves to the
^^fervescency in the duodenum, tempers the Blood, and renders the Joints
slippery.

Choler is of a fiery nature, a thin consistence, a yellow color, and a bitter
taste, it causes an Effervescency in the duodenum, and another in the Heart,
as aforesaid; it provokes the expelling faculty, and thins all Phlegm sticking
to the inward parts.

The Lymphatick humor is of a pure watery substance, without any color, and of
a subacid taste. Its uses are manifold, but the chief are to promote an easier
slowing of the Chylus, and to convey the blood through the thoracick conduit to
the Heart, and there contribute to its Effervescency, it tempers the Blood and
perhaps, together with phlegm, moistens the articulations of the Joints.

According to the Ancients, Phlegm predominates from Midnight till Sunrising;
Blood from that time till Noon, thence Choler obtains the superiority till
Sunsetting, and they gave the remaining time till Midnight to Melancholy,
which we have said to be nothing but gross Blood.

Phlegm is also more copious in Autumn, Blood in the Spring, Choler in Summer,
and Melancholy or thick blood in Winter.

They esteemed also Phlegm to be moved every day, Choler every third day, and
Melancholy every fourth; supposing the Quotidian Ague to be caused by Phlegm,
the Tertian by Choler, and the Quartan by Melancholy, which De Graff attributes
to the various Obstructions of the lateral branches of the Pancreas; In his
Treatise De succo pancreatico.

The signs of a Bloody Complexion, are a red color in the Face, a moist heat
through the whole Body, sleshy Muscles, great Veins, and a cheerful Heart.

Cholericks are of a yellowish color, a light disposition, and a lean Body;
they are witty and liberal, but wrathful and revengeful.

Phlegmaticks are pale, of a soft flesh, sometimes fat, lazy, sleepy and dull.

Melancholic or thick blooded men have a blackish face, and a sad look, they
are sorrowful, obstinate, fearful and covetous, but withal very capable of
doctrine.

The Arabs instituted four secundary Humors, whereof they called the first
Innominate or Implanted, which they supposed to be contained in the extremities
of the little Veins, where it begun to take some alteration of the several
parts. They called the same Daw, when (as it were) it bedewed them. Gluten,
when it stuck fast to them; and Cambium, when it was wholly converted into their
substance, but the nutrition and increase of the several parts is better
expressed by the Moderns, as will be said, when we speak of Functions.

When the Primary humors exceed the bounds of their due qualities, they are
deemed against nature, and they may be corrupted in the Veins or out of them.

Phlegm, corrupted in the Veins, is of a sower or salt taste, and of no color;
but out of the Veins, it is distinguished in muscous, watery, plastry and glazy,
whereunto the Lymphatick humor, the salive, and the Pancreatical juice may be
conveniently referred when they are vitiated.

Choler, corrupted in the Veins, is called vitellin, or like the yolk of Eggs,
which the Ancients esteemed to be produced by an intense heat, but is more
truly atributed to the mixture of some acid humor, as can be perceived when a
little spirit of Vitriol is powered into some Gall; it often degenerates in
Poraceous, rus^y, and glasteous, according to its degrees of acidity.

The Melancholy humor or thickest Blood, is by some thought to turn by
adustion into black choler, but according to Regnerus de Graaf, this last
proceeds from the mixture of Choler with a too acid pancreatical juice, whereby
it is turned into a greenish black color, as the Ancients describe the
atrabiliary humor.

The Excrementitious humors are also 1. Phlegm. 2. Choler. 3. Melancholy. 4.
And, Serum.

They are called excrementitious, because they can yield no nourishment to the
Body, and therefore are expelled,

1. Phlegm, not to the Brains, as the Ancients conceived, but to the Maxillar
Glandules, and thence through the Mouth and Nostrils out of the Body.

2. Choler, by the Cystick arteries to the Gall, whence the superfluous part is
expelled to the Duodenum, and thence evacuated at the Seat.

3. Melancholy, which is not attracted by the Spleen, as the Ancients
supposed, but is an Excrement of the grossest Blood, which is often evacuated
by the Haemorrhoides, and is also sent to the Atrabiliary Capsuls, to be,
perhaps, voided with the Urine, which therefore appears sometimes of a black
color.

4. Serum, which is either evacuated,

First, In the form of Vapors, by transpiration, whereby, according to
Sanct^rius, more than the half part of our Aliments are dissipated.

Secondly, Or in the consistence of Urine which being separated from the blood
in the Kidneys, and filtred through the Papillar Caruncles into the Pilorus, is
powered through the Uriters, into the Bladder, and having received the thinnest,
and most serous part of the Chylus immediately from the Stomach, by the
Gastrick Vein, is thence evacuated out of the Body.

To Serum, is also referred Sweat and the Tears we shed.

A Part or Limb is defined, A Body adhering to the whole, and partaking of the
same life with it, being created for the exercising of certain Functions.

They are distinguished in Similaries and Dissimilaries.

A Similary part, is that, which cannot be divided in other parts of a
different species; and it is twofold, Spermatick and Carnal.

1. The Spermatick are constructed in the first conformation of the body, out
of the grossest part of the Seed.

2. The Carnal out of the MenstrualBlood.

The Similary parts are Eleven in number.

1. Bones. 2. Tendrels. 3. Ligaments. 4. Tendons. 5. Membranes. 6. Fibers. 7. A
threefold flesh ( the Musculous, the Parenchyme, and the Glandules.) 8. The
Skin. 9. The Veins. 10. The Arteries. 11. And the Nerves or Sinews.
The Bones are joined either by,

I. Diarthrosis, or Articulation with some motion, either by

1. Enarthosis, when there is a considerable quantity of the Bone received in a
large Cavity.

2. Arthrodia, when the receiving cavity is but Supersiciary.

3. Ginglime, when a Bone receives and is received.

II. Symphosis, or Coalition without Motion.

1. Sutures, as in the Bones of the Head.

2. Harmony, as in the Bones of the Nose and upper Jaw.

3. Gomphosis, as the Teeth.

And they are bound either by,

First, Syncondrosis, or with a Tendrel.

Secondly, Syndeurosis, or a Ligament.

Thirdly, Sysarcosis, or with some flesh or muscle.

Note that to the exercising of the Similary parts Functions, there needs only
their due temper and commoderation.

A Dissimilary part is that, which may be divided in parts of a different
Species, Many do confound them with the Organical. Nevertheless there is this
difference, that all Dissimilary parts are Organical, but not all Organical,
Dissimilary; for the Bones, Veins and Arteries are Similary, and yet produce
Organical actions.

Four conditions are requisite to the perfect exercising of the Dissimilaries
actions: namely, 1. A due Conformation. 2. Magnitude. 3. Number. 4. And
Conjunction.


Whereof the last comprehends two others, to wit, Seat and Connection.

These parts are distinguished in, First, Containing; and Secondly, Contained.

And then again, in 1. Common; and 2. Proper. Distinguished in 1. Nobles; 2.
Ignobles.

First, The Noble or principal parts, distributing the Spirits and Faculties to
the whole Body, are absolutely necessary to it. They are three; Viz.

1. The Brains. 2. Heart. 3. Liver.
Which being excepted, all the rest are Ignoble, as being subservient to them,
and they are the other parts of 1. the Head. 2. Trunk. And 3. (...).

1. The Head, is divided in the Soul, and Face; the common containing parts
whereof are, the thin and the hairy Skin, the fat and the ^leshy Membrane; Its
proper parts are the Scalp, or Pericrane, the Perioste, the Muscles, the Bones,
and two Meninges.

The contained parts of it are the Brain, the A^ter-brain, and the Marrow.

The second has in its upper part the sore-head, in the lower, the mouth, and
the instruments of the Senses, as the Eyes, the Ears, the Nose, etc.

2. The Trunk is distinguished in the Breast and lower Belly, the proper
containing parts of the first, besides, the Muscles, Bones, etc. Being the Pap,
the Midriff, the Pleure, and the Mediastin.

The contained are either Bowels, as the Heart, with its purse, the Lungs, a
part of the Weazon and of the throat; or Vessels, as some branches of the Vena
Cava, and great Artery; sustained by the thymus in the Throat and several
Sinews.

The lower Bellies proper containing parts, are the Muscles of the Panch, and
the Belly-rim.

The contained are either employed to Nutrition, namely to Chylification, as
the Stomach, the Kall, the Sweetbread, the Guts, and the Mesentery; or to
Sanguisication, as the Mesaraick Veins, the post Vein, and the Cava, the Liver,
the Gall, the Bladder, and the Milt.

3. The Ioints are divided in the uppermost, containing the great Hand, namely
the Arm, that is, the Shoulder, from the upper shoulder to the Elbow; and the
Cubit from the Elbow to the Wrist. The lesser Hand, divided in the Wrist
between the Cubit and the Palm, and the fist between the Wrist and the
beginning of the Fingers, whose inward part is called the Palm, and the
outward, the Back of the Hand.

The undermost contain the great Foot, comprehending the Thigh, from the Britch
to the Knee, the Leg from the Knee to the lesser foot, which is divided in the
Foot, Pedium, Metapedium, and Toes.

Before we come to Faculties and Functions, it will not be amiss to say what
the Soul is.

They define it The substantial Form of a living Body, and the inward principle
of the actions thereof. For, The Soul a Substance and a Spirit is,
Which God himself does in the Body make
Which makes the man, for every man from this
The Nature of a Man, and Name does take.


Its connection with the Body is called Life, and its separation Death: Neither
is this last greatly to be feared of a Christian, since it is but a passage to
a better Life, and that, as says the Italian Poet.

Altro mal non ha morte chel pensar a morire,
E chi morir pur duce, quanto piu tosto more,
Tanto piu tosto al suo morir sinvola.
A Faculty is a certain disposition of the Body, whereby it can do something,
though it may be, it does it not, so that it is only a power of acting.

Its division is needless, since it is but one power, though it produces
several actions, according to the Vacuity of its Organs.

A Function, is described, the exercise of a Faculty, and is only distinguisted
in Natural and Animal, Pulse being referred by the Moderns to sanguification,
whereof we have spoken in the Theorem of Blood, and Respiring to motion, of
which will be said hereafter.

The Natural Function is divided in, 1. Nutrition. 2. Growth. 3. Generation.


To the first whereof the Ancients made four others to be subservient; for as
Dykes says of the Soul, Here she attracts, and there she does retain,
Here she decocts, and does the food prepare,
There she distributes it to every Vein:
And here expels what she may fitly spare.


Yet the Moderns do exclude from thence all similary attraction and retention,
Deglution being performed by Detrusion only; the several parts of the Mouth,
the Tongue, the OEsophague, etc. contributing thereunto; Retention being also
effected by the Oblique Fibers of the Stomach; but Hunger is produced by the
sourish Vapors of the acid in the Stomach, which do gently Vellicate its upper
Orifice, and the apparent cause of Thirst is the want of moisture.

To Concoction three others are subordinate.

1. Chylification. 2. Sanguification. 3. Assimilation.
The two first whereof, together with Expulsion, are explained in the
describing of Humors, so that only Assimilation and Growth are here to be
expounded, which take thus.

When the Arteries begin to swell, as aforesaid, the particles of the Blood,
which in them are conveyed to the roots of certain filaments, issuing from the
ends of the smallest Arteries, whereby they compose the Bones, Flesh, Skin,
etc. according to the various manner of their application and contexture, or
directed by the same Plastic virtue whereby the said parts were formed, which
they nourish, something distending them, and intruding themselves in their
vacancies; where they remain, when the Arteries return to their former state.

And Growth is likewise effected: The pores of the matter of Chi^drens Bodies
being easily extended, whereby some particles of the Blood, a little greater
than those whose places they fill, may enter and subsist therein, which cannot
be longer done, when their Limbs are grown more solid.

Generation is a Function, whereby a man produces another like to himself,
whereunto the Ancients did subordain two others, 1. Alteration. 2. Conformation.


Which the Moderns do rather attribute to the Plastic virtue of the Seed,
though denied by Rhegius and other Cartesians, who affirm, That the particles
of the Seed, moved by its own heat, and that of the Uterus, because of their
various figures, are necessarily turned into the Brood of an animal, whereunto
they since attribute the whole formation of the Foetus, without the Function of
any intellectual faculty directing it.

The Animal function is divided in, 1. Principal. 2. Moving. 3. Sensitive.


Whereof the first comprehends these three, viz.

1. Imagination, whereby all Objects Species offered to the external senses are
perceived and discerned.

2. Reasoning, whereby a man discourses and understands.

3. Memory, whereby the Species of things perceived, conceived and understood
are preserved, whereof will be further spoken in the period of Sensation.

Motion is thus performed, The most vivid and quickest particles of the Blood,
such as we may conceive the Vital Spirits, do ascend from the left Ventricle of
the Heart, through the Caroties and Cervical Arteries, into the Cavities of the
Brain, where they are turned into a subtle flame or wind, usually called the
Animal Spirits, which being driven by grosser particles, do not enter in the
Pineal Glandule (Steno having showed us how unapt it is thereunto) but in some
(yet unknown) more convenient place of the Head, whence they sally out into the
Cavities of the Brain and the pores of its substance, to be thence conveyed
into the Nerves, where they have a power (which the learned Willis calls
Elastick) to change the figure of the Muscles, and so move the whole Body.

To this manner of moving Respiration is also to be referred, for the Muscles
of the Thorax drawing it up, the Lungs, to avoid vacuity, are extended, whereby
their small cavities are opened, and receive the inspired Air, which is again
excluded in expiration, when the Lungs following the restriction of the
Abdomen, their said Cavities are again straightned.

The Sensitive Function, is the exercise of the five external Senses, which
comparatively to certain Beasts, are comprised in these two Verses. Nos Aper
Auditu praecellit, Aranea Tactu,
Vultur Odoratu, Lynx Visu, Simia Gustu.
That is, The Bore excels in Hearing, and the Spider
By sense of Touch, is a subtle divider.
The Vul^ers Smell, the Apes Taste, and Lynxes Sight,
Excells the Man by far, that solid Wight.


Their respective Instruments are,

1. The Eyes of Seeing in the Retin^.

2. The Ears of Hearing in the Auditory Nerve.

3. The Nose of Smelling, not through the Os Cribriforme, which is not pierced
as the Ancients conceived, but by the Apophysces Mammillares, or the
extremities of the Nerves.

4. The Tongue of ^asting, by the Papillary eminencies, noted by Bellinus,
whence Savours are conducted to the Filaments of the 4 and 7 pair of the Nerves
that end there.

5. The Skin of Touching, by the Pyramidal papils, observed by Malpigius, and
esteemed the extremities of the Nerves of the sixth pair ending in it.

Sensation, is performed as follows, When the small Filaments of the Sinews
are in the least moved by the Objects of the senses, they draw to them the
parts of the Brain from whence they take Origin, whereby they open some pores
of the inward superficy of it, through which the animal Spirits, being derived
into the Nerves and Muscles, do excite those motions, which we perceive our
senses, being thus or so affected, which is to be understood of all Sensation;
and if the said spirits, having the Impression of some Id^a conceived or also
discerned in some fit place of the Brain (as Cartesius esteemed the Pin^al
Gland^le) do often pass through the same pores of the Brains texture, they do
dilate them so, that the Objects being absent, they may be represented to the
Soul, whence Memory does depend. But if opening one or more of them, some
others are dilated, Reminiscency is effected; and if the traces of the Ideas
are conveyed by the small Ar^eries to the heart, and diffuse their beams
throughout the mass of Blood, it may thence proceed, that the Foster is
sometimes noted with certain marks.

Sleep is a Cessation of Motion and of the External Senses, and is produced,
when the Brains substance is not sufficiently ^istended by the Spirits
aforesaid, or when it is over^whelmed with Vapors; for in these cases it falls
together, and oppresses the Nerves of the several Sen^es, that their Objects
cannot be transmitted. And Dreams, which happen during Sleep have their origin,
partly from the inequality of the Spirits issuing from the Souls Domicil, and
partly from the occurring impressions of Memory.

Spirits are defined, A thin, invisible, aethere all and most quick substance,
arising from the subtilest parts of the Blood, t^ be the Vehicle of all
necessary actions.

The Ancients did divide it, in 1. Implanted. 2. Adventitious.


Whereof the first is denied by some who conceive it impossible, that the^ same
cause acting in the same manner should last so long, and produce so many and
often contrary Functions.

They were formerly divided as the Faculties were, in 1. Natural. 2. Vital. 3.
Animal.


But Sylvius de le Boe, admits none bu^ the Animal, and other Moderns the V^^
tal, under which they comprehend the Natural and the Animal; taking the
subtilest parts of the Blood, arising fro^^ the left Ventricle of the Heart,
for the first, which are turned in the Brains into the Animal, serving.

First, To sundry motions of the Sou^ and Body.

Secondly, To the exercising of the internal and external Senses.

3. To the alteration of Humors.

Native Heat is a proper and special quality to all animated creatures, whereby
they live and exercise their functions, uses, and necessary operations.

Thus I think to have briefly explained, not only the Natural things, but also
their Annexes, except the manner of living, which if it be watery and moist, ^s
obnoxious to diseases of that temper; but if it be hot and dry, the contrary
must be expected.

In sum, it appears by the Premises, that the Body of Man is a Microcosme,
composed of several parts, wonderfully effig^r^ted, and adorned with sundry
Functions, created to be for a certain time, the Domicil or dwelling place of
the Rational Soul, so that not without cause, the German Poet exclaimes, O
Edles wundertheir, zur weisheit auserkohren,
Uoll geist, voll luft, voll got, vom himmel selbst gebohren,
Du Herr, du Eben bild, und auszug allerwelt,
Der unter ies den lauff der hohen sterner stelt,
Du weise Creatuur, etc.
O thou noble Animal, wonder to wisdom chosen,
Full of Spirit and God, from Heaven it self rosen.
Thou Lord, Type, and extract of the whole Univers,
Disposing under thee the course of the high stars,
Thou creature full of Wit etc.


Those things are called not natural, which do not enter in the Bodies
composition, but by a right use whereof it may long be maintained healthful and
sound.

They are,
1. Air. 2. Eating and Drinking. 3. Motion and Quiet. 4. Sleeping and Watching.
5. Repletion and Evacuation. 6. The Passions of the mind.
In the administration of all which we ought to consider, 1. The Quality. 2.
Quantity. 3. Manner of Using.


A free, open, serene, and thin Air is to be esteemed the best; as also the
East and North Winds; but the South and Western are held unwholsom.

The simpler our diet is, the healthful^er it is to be esteemed; for as Hora^e
says, the variety of meat is very noxious, viz.

-- nam variae res
Ut noceant homini credas, memor illius escae,
Que simplex olim tibi sederit, at simul assis
Miscueris elixa, simul conchilia turdis,
Dulcia se in bilem vertent stomachoque tumultum
Lenta feret pituita; vides ut pallidus omnis
Coena desurgit dubia. --
That thou may know how various things offend,
Think but what single meat did once defend
Thee from approaching hunger, but at last,
Roasted with boyld, and Birds with Shells thou have
Together mixed; In Choler what is sweet
Will turn it self, and thy Stomach surfeit
With slimy Phlegm: Consider then how pale
Each rises from his Seat, and doubtful Meal.
Meats affording a good juice, and substance, are doubtless the wholsomest, and
nevertheless, in expending them, the sicknesses nature, the strength, age, and
labor of the Patient are to be perspicuously considered, whereunto an
inveterate custom is to be added: for Country Men and Laborers convert meats
of an easy digestion into Choler, but extract a laudable substance of a
courser^ diet, and thus, Consuetudo valet, longos mansura per annos,
Illaque Naturam, vires si sumpserit, aequat.
A constant use a second nature proves,
And if increast, with equal force it moves.


Neither did the Ancients neglect Order in Eating, for they esteemed that what
was easily decocted, should enter first into the Stomach, and that Lubrick meat
ought to precede those that are Astringent: But it is now believed that those
niceti^s may be omitted, since the Aliments are all converted in one mass,
whence the Chylus is afterward separated. Whereunto I shall only add these two
Verses of Drinking.

Aut nulla ebrietas, aut tanta sit, ut tibi curas,
Eripiat, si quae est inter utrumque nocet.
Be never Drunk, or so much let it be
As to assuage thy Cares; else 'twill hurt thee.
Motion comprehends all kind of exercises; the same ought to be moderate, and
we ought to leave it when Sweat begins to break out through the Pores* for
immoderate Labor weakens the Body, and is very pernicious, as Ovid says of
himself.

Me quoque debilitat semis immensa Laborum,
Ante meum tempus cogit and esse senem.
Otia corpus alunt, animus quoque pascitur illis,
Immodicus contra, carpit utrumque labor.
Continual Toil weakens my weary Limbs,
And makes me Old before my time be come:
Body and Mind, by Rest are fed, it seems,
But too much Work precipitates their doom.
Sleep, as we said before, Is a cessation from motion and sense, whose Office
is the restoring of the Bodies former strength. Its proper time is Night, an
hour or two after Supper.

The first lying not being first on the Right Side, as many believe, but on the
Left, where the bottom of the Stomach is and the meat ought to lie, and about
morning, when concoction is ended on the Right; neither should it exceed the
space of Fight hours; wherewith, if some are not satisfied, certainly the
sooner, Longa quiescendi tempora fata dabunt.
The Fates will give sufficient time to sleep.


Dreams do in some manner indicate what ex^retion will be in the Crisis, for if
red and fiery, they presage a Choleric one; if moist and watery, a Phlegmatic.

Moderate watching quickens the senses, and diffuseth heat and blood through
the whole Body. But if it be immoderate, it weakens the same, dries up the
Spirits, and spoils the brains Temperature.

Repletion is either of quality or of quantity.

The first is seen in the Hectic Fever, or Marasmus.

The second has a relation to the containing parts, and is measured by their
distention; or to the Bodies strength, when the same is fuller of humors than
it can well bear.

The repletion of a single humor is called Cacochimy; that of more Pletora.

Evacuation, in the strictest sense, Is an effusion of such humors as are
superfluous and hurtful, and is either of the whole body, chiefly performed by
Phlebotomy, Sweat and Purgation, or of the several parts, by their respective
Conduits, as the Brains, by the Eyes, Nose and Ears, the Lungs by the
Windpipe, etc. In all Evacuation, three things are to be observed and
considered, The Quantity, Quality, and manner of Excretion, V. g. The Empieme
being opened, the excluded matter ought to be answerable in quantity to that
which is included. The most laudable is white, even, and as little stinking as
may be. And lastly, all must be purged out at one time, least the Patient
suffer too great an Effusion of Spirits.

The Passions of the Soul, or Perturbations of the Mind, are very prevalent to
alter the Bodies Constitution; for as the Banished Poet says, Unda locusque
nocent, and causa valentior istis,
Anxietas animi; quae mihi semper adest.
The Sea and place do hurt, but yet I find
A greater Cause, the torment of my mind.


We will therefore brie^ly expound their Effects.

A moderate Joy, dilates the heart, and distributes abundance of Spirits to the
Face, and other parts; it helps Concoction, and renders our habitude more
cheerful, and pleasant.

Anger or Wrath performs the like effusion, but much more rapid and swift^ It
kindles sometimes the Humors so much, that it makes them apt to receive a
sharp volatile Salt, which is thought the cause of putrid Fevers, and
produces also other Symptoms; yet it may be profitably used, to quicken the
natural heat, and render it more active, when it is almost prostrated.

Sorrow and Fear, draw heat and blood suddenly to the Heart, whence the forces
do presently fall, and sometimes death immediately follows, the Vital Faculty
being over whelmed with Blood and Spirits.

This I conceive sufficient, since all other Passions of the mind may be
referred to these three or four.

Those things are termed against nature, which may procure the destroying and
ruin of the Body.

They are the cause of Diseases, Disease it self, and its Accidents, or
Symptoms.

The Cause of a Disease, is, Whatsoever does any way contribute to the being,
or increase of it. Which, though Physicians give them many distinctions, may
nevertheless all be referred to the efficient, especially divided in 1.
External, 2. Internal; For, Alas! How many things may extinguish our light.

The humors within us maintain an equal fight; and least it be too long, Death
has a Pike, a Ball, a Sword, a Knife, a Stone and an Arrow, to cut our feeble
thread, etc.

The External Cause comes from without; the Internal has its seat in the
Body, and is either,

1. Antecedent, that yields aptitude to a sickness.

Or, 2. Conjoined, which immediately, and of it self perfects it.

They are also co-ingendred with the Patient, or have access to him after his
Birth.

A Disease is, A disposition against Nature immediately, and of it self,
hurting the actions.

The same is Simple or Complicated.

The first is, when there is no plurality, or composition of Diseases.

The second, When it is followed of many Symptoms, or when the Cause is so
connexed with it, that it may be looked upon as a particular Sickness.

Diseases are of a threefold species.

1. Intempery. 2. Evil Conformation. 3. Solution of Continuity.
The first is, an Indisposition of the Similary parts, caused by the excess of
a single Humor or the Exuberance of more; The last whereof is called naked, or
conjoined with a Vice of the same Humors, and is termed equal, as being
^qually spread throughout the whole Body, or inequal, as affecting only some
particular part of it.

There are four sorts of evil Conformation. Namely in, 1. Figure. 2. Magnitude.
3. Number. 4. Situation.


Solution of Continuity is a common Disease, of the Similary and Organical
parts, which has several Names, according to the places where it is incident;
For in the Flesh it is called Helcos, in the Bones, Cathagma; in the Nerves,
Spasma.

The Symptoms of a Disease are the Effects and Productions of it; To wit,

1. A hurt action, (that is 1. Abolished. 2. Diminished. Or, 3. Depraved.)

2. A Vice in the Bodies Habitude.

3. Vitiated Excretions.

Of the aforesaid Precepts are collected two Intentions.

1. What is to be done.

2. And if it may be done.

But the third belongs to Art, viz. How it must be done.

The Practice whereof is better declared in the Words annexed, and the
following Chapters, that do briefly comprehend what does belong to a Surgeon.

The Indications are of three first and principal Species, viz.

1. The first is drawn from the natural things which do Indicate their
conservation, by the use of things like to themselves, and of this kind are the
Indications drawn from,

1. The strength and forces of the Patient, which to preserve, the proper Cure
is often to be delayed, for without them, the Surgeon can effect but little.

2. His Temper, viz.

1. Sanguine. 2. Choleric. 3. Phlegmatic. 4. Melancholy.
3. The Habitude of his Body.

1. Soft and delicate. 2. Lean or Fat. 3. Tall or Short.
Least he lose that Symetry which Nahath allotted him.

4. The Condition and Nature of the part affected. Wherein we consider,

1. Its Substance, whether if Similary, it be, 1. Hot. 2. Cold. 3. Moist. 4.
Dry.


If Organical, 1. Principal, 2. Or Ignoble.


If it be, 1. Of a quick Sense. 2. Or Stupid and Dull.


And lastly, its 1. Form. 2. Figure. 3. Magnitude. 4. Number. 5. Connection. 6.
Action or Use.


5. The Age; for many Diseases cannot be Cured in Old Age.

6. The Sex, for Women are easier purged than Men.

7. The Season of the Year, for Hot meat is convenient in Winter, Cold in
Summer, Moist in Autumn, and Dry in the Spring.

8. The time of the Disease, for what is convenient in the beginning, is not so
in the progress, state or end.

II. The second is drawn from the things not Natural; Which do indicate their
Alteration; as if Air does conspire with Nature against the Disease, it ought
to be kept; otherwise, it must be altered.

III. The third is taken from the things against Nature, which indicate their
Ablation, and are, 1. The Cause of a Disease. 2. The Disease it self. 3. The
Symptoms.


Which do often indicate contrary things; but then this is the Rule.

When there is Complication, the first Remedies ought to take away, 1. The most
Dangerous. 2. The Cause. 3. That without which nothing can be done. As,
1. Loss of Blood. 2. Fluxion. 3. Intempery.


A SHORT Compendium OF The PRACTICAL Part OF SURGERY. CHAP. II.
Of Impostumes.
HAving thus far treated of such Theorems and Institutions, as are wholly
necessary to be known of all Well wishers to Surgery, let us now say
something of the Practical part thereof, since it is almost impossible to treat
perfectly of the Theorical, unless the same do give some urgent occasion of it,
and in this it resembles the three Parts of Curative Physic, that can hardly
be separated from one another, for as a French Poet does intricately say; Quand
un Cordier cordant vent accorder sa Cord,
Pour sa cord accorder, trois cordens il accord,
Mais si un des cordons de la Cord discord,
Le Cordon discordant fait discorder la Cord.
When a Ropemaker makes a Rope,
Of smaller Ropes he twisteth three,
But he cannot attain his Hope
If One of them do disagree.


We shall then divide this small Treatise into six other Chapters.

The First whereof shall give the general Documents of Impostumes.

The Second of Wounds.

The Third of Ulcers.

The Fourth of Fractures and Dis^ocations.

The Fifth of the Generation and Production of Man.

The Sixth of the Venereal Disease.

The Seventh of some other Indispositions that are Cured by Chir^rgery.

An Impostume then is defined, A Disease, composed of three others.

1. Intempery. 2. Evil Conformation. 3. Solution of Continuity.
The general Causes of it are, 1. Fluxion. 2. Congestion.


The subordinate ones of the first whereof are commonly,

1. A lower situation of the part af^ected.

2. The Soreness of it.

3. Its Heat, caused by a two violent motion.

4. The outward Proximity of some hot Body.

5. Or the application of sharp medicaments.

The Causes of Congestion are two namely a defect of Assimulation in the
Diseased part.

2. The infirmity of the Expulsive Function.

The difference of Impostumes are manifold but they are chiefly taken of their
quality, whereby they are termed great, of a mean greatness, or little.

Or of the part affected, as Opthalmys in the Eye, Varices in the Legs.

Or of their Accidents, as their Soreness, whence they are called painful,
smarting, insensible, etc.

Or of their Color, by reason of which some are called red, white, livid,
yellow, etc.

But the chiefest and most necessary difference is that which is taken from the
matter whereof they are composed, which the following Discourse will more
clearly manifest.

The Matter of Impostumes is either,

I. Natural, Which is,

1. Hot, as Blood, whence is made a true Phlegm; Or,

Choler, whence a true Erisipelas is produced.

2. Cold, as first Phlegm, whence rises a true OEdema.

Secondly, Melancholy, whence is made a Schirrus.

II. Or Against Nature, which is either First, Blood, whence are made, 1.
Carbuncles. 2. Antraces. 3. Gangrenae. 4. Istiomene. 5. Sphacelus.


Secondly, Choler; whence are produced,

1. Herpes, of the thickest.

2. Herpes miliares, of the thinnest.

Thirdly, Phlegm, whence arise, 1. Waterish, 2. Windy Impostumes. 3.
Scrophulae. 4. Knobs, etc.


Fourthly, Melancholy, whence are engendered, 1. A spurious Schirrus, 2. All
kinds of Cankers.


The signs of a Sanguine Impostume are pain in the diseased part, the heat of
it, its redness, and tention.

Coldness, softness and a lesser pain indicates a Phlegmatic one.

A yellowish and pale Color, and a smarting pain, shows it to be Choleric.

And Tension, Hardness and Lividity, with some pain by fits, do manifest that
it is caused of Melancholy, or thick Blood. The Ancients believed also that
they had the Paroxisms, and moving time of such Humors as they are made of.

Thus the indisposition of an OEdema was more intense from midnight till
Sunrising; a Phlegmon more painful from Sunrising till Noon; thence to
Sunsetting, an Erisipelas; and a Scirrhus or Canker, from that time till
Midnight.

Concerning the Prognostics of Impostumes, those that are caused of cold
humors or thick Blood, are of a longer Curation, and such whose matter is
against nature, are healed with greater difficulty, than those caused of a
natural one; whereunto you may add such as turn themselves in Schirres and
Knobs.

There is to be considered in all Impostumes four times. viz.

1. Their Beginning. 2. Augmentation. 3. State. 4. Decrease.
The first whereof is, when the part begins to swell and pain.

The second when the swelling pain, and other accidents do increase.

The third, when they receive no augmentation.

The fourth, when they do decrease.

They are commonly termined in four manners, namely, 1. By Resolution. 2.
Suppuration. 3. Induration of the part, 4. Or by its Corruption and Gangrene;
which is worst of all.


The Signs of resolution are an itching of the diseased part, with the slacking
of Pulsation, Tension, Heat, and other accidents.

Those of Suppuration are the greatness and vehemence of the Feavour, pain,
pulsation and heat.

A diminution of swelling and pain, and a hardness left in the affected part do
indicate its Induration.

And when the accidents of heat, pain, pulsation and tension are greater, than
they use to be in Suppuration; when the pain cease suddenly, without any
manifest cause, if the part grows livid and blackish, and lastly if it stinkes,
Gangreen is more than fully signified.

The first Indication in the Cure of all Impostumes, is the prohibiting of
Fluxion by repelling and intercepting Remedies.

The second is an evacuation of the matter causing it, whether it be by
resolution, repulsion or suppuration.

If it be caused by Congestion, then the part is to be corroborated, and the
accidents corrected; taking always the Indication from the most urgent.

We ought in this Cure to observe three things, namely,

Whether the matter causing the Impostume be ready to Flow, Flows, or is yet
Impacted in the diseased part.

In the beginning of all Impostumes, we ought always to use repelling
Remedies, unless it be,

1. When the matter is venenous, thick, s^ow, viscous or deep hidden

2. When the Abcess is Critical.

3. The fluxion near the Noble parts.

4. And falls on too weak a Member.

5. And lastly, when the Body it self is wholly Plethorical.

A Surgeon, being but the Helper of Nature, ought chiefly in the increase,
state, and declination of Impostumes, to attend what she aims at, whether it
be to resolution or suppuration, without forceing her to a contrary motion,
when that which she intends is not wholly perninitious: Whereunto to attain I
have here added the Description of some Cataplasms, wherewith one may perform
all necessary Intention in the general Cure of Impostumes.

The matter causing them is discussed and repelled by the following Cataplasm.

Recipe, Barley meal, the Juice of House Leek, and Plantain, of each, two
Ounces, powder made of Pomegranate rind, and of wild Granate Flowers, with a
like quantity of Roses, two Drachms, Oil of Myrtle, and Roses, of each an
O^nce; make a Cataplasme.

They are Resolved by this.
Recipe, Mallows, Marshmallows, of each three handfulls; let them boil, adding
thereunto Barley meal two Ounces, ordinary Honey one Ounce, Oil of Camomile and
Melilot, of each an Ounce and half; make a Cataplasme.

The following brings them to Suppuration.
Recipe, The Roots of White Lillies, and Marshmallows, the Leaves of Mallows,
Pellitory and Grounsel, of each one handful, let them be boiled in Metheglin,
stamped and sithed, add to them Powder of Linseed two ounces, Swines fat, and
Oil of Lilies, of each an Ounce and a half; Make a Cataplasme.

And this last mittigates the pain of them when it is too intense.
Recipe, Crumbs of White bread dipped in lukewarm Milk a pound and half, Yolks
of Eggs three, Oil of Roses two Ounces, and one Scruple of Saffron, make a
Cataplasme.

Note, that though this be the general Cure of Impostumes, they have
nevertheless a more proper and particular one according to their several
differences, but this is as 'twere a Rule whereby to proceed in it.

CHAP. III.
Of Wounds.
THE General Practice of Impostumes, being sufficiently treated of in the
former Chapter, this shall be adapted to expound such Notions, as belong to the
Cure of Wounds, whereof this is the Definition.

A Wound is a Solution of Continuity caused by an external Instrument, in any
part of the Body, but the Bones.

Their Causes are all such things as may violate the outward circumference of
the Body, and unnaturally enter in it; and they are either animated, as the
biting and stinging of Beasts, or inanimated, as Swords, Darts, Bullets, etc.

The difference of Wounds is manifold, and as Samoicus says, Tam varia humanae
sunt vulnera conditionis,
Ut nequeant proprias cunctis adscribere curas.
The Wounds of Men are seen so manifold
The proper Cure of each cannot be told.


Nevertheless I have endeavored to include the most General in the following
Paragraphs.

The Differences of Wounds are drawn either,

I. From the nature of the wounded part, which is,

First, Similary, and that

1. Soft, as the Glandules and Flesh.

2. Hard, as the Gristles.

3. Mean, as the Membranes and Ligaments.

Secondly, Diss^milary, which is either, 1. Principal, as 1. The Brains, 2. The
Heart. 3. The Liver.


2. Ministering to the principal, as 1. Aspera Arteria, 2. The Lungs.


3. Neither of the foresaid, as 1. The Eyes, 2. The Hands. 3. The Feet.


II. From their own Essence, whereby they are termed,

First Simple, when there is no Complication of other Diseases or Accidents.

Secondly Composed, when there is some other Disease or Accident indicating a
peculiar Curation.

III. From their Quantity, by which they are termed,

First, Great, that is, 1. Long, 2. Broad, 3. Deep.


Secondly Mean in all Dimensions.

Thirdly, Little, that is, 1. Short, 2. Narrow, 3. Superficious.


IV. From their Figure, whence we call them, 1. Strait, 2. Round, 3. Crooked,
etc.


When a Wound does pierce the Skul, ^s known by these following Signs.

The wounded party does presently ^all, lying without sense, as if he were a
sleep; the Ex^rements are not retain^ed, and surely, if the blood flows by
the Ears, Nostrils, or the Mouth, and if ^he Vomits Choler, etc.

Whether the Wound penetrates into the Thorax, is known, if the Air com^eth
forth at the Wound, with a difficulty of Respiration, if there be a gravative
^ain on the Diaphragme, which is caused by much Blood lying on that part, that
must afterward be rejected by coughing. A little after comes a Fever, and
stinking breath, the Patient can lie but on the Back, and has a perpetual
desire of Vomiting; it often degenerates in a Fistula.

When the Lungs are hurt, there issues a Spumous Blood at the Wound with
Co^ghing; there is a great difficulty of Respiration, and pain of the (...).

We know the Heart to be Wounded, by the great quantity of Blood that comes
out at the Wound; by a trembling of the whole Body, a little Pulse, a Paleness
of the Face, and a cold Sweat, and ^requent Swounings, a coldness of the
Extremities, and a hasty Death.

When the Diaphragme is hurt, there is a gravati^ pain in that part, with
Frenzy, difficulty of Breath, Cough with a sharp pain, and a contraction of
the flanks upwards. These signs appearing, one may pronounce Death to be near.

The Vena Cava or great Artery being hurt, Death speedily follows, because of
the great loss of Blood and Spirits, whence the Function of the Heart and Lungs
do cease.

When the Medulla Spinalis is wounded, a Paralysis or Conv^lsion, presently
happens, the motion of the lower part is abolished, the Excrements of the Belly
and Bladder either flow unwittingly, or are wholly suppressed.

The Liver being wounded, there comes a great deal of Blood out at the Wound,
and a Pungitive pain is felt as far as the Cartilage Xiphoides, which Death
often follows.

When the Stomach is wounded, the meat and drink comes out at the Wound, then
come Sweats and Cold of the extremities, forerunners of Death.

If the Spleen be wounded* there flows a blackish blood at the Wound, Thirst
troubles the Patient, with a pain of the left side, and the blood flowing into
the Belly, causes many accidents, and often Death.

The Gutts being wounded, a great pain torments the Bowels, the Excrements
issue out at the Wound, and sometimes the Gutts out of the Abdomen, which
afterward pain and swell.

When the Kidneys are hurt, there is a great pain in making Water, the Blood
coming out therewith, and the pain stretching it self to the Yard and Testicles.

The Bladder and Ureters being wounded, the pain reaches to the Flanks, the
parts of the Nombril are extended, the Urine comes out bloody, and sometimes
out at the wound.

When the Womb is hurt, the Blood comes out at the Privities, the same
accidents appearing as when the Bladder is wounded.

The Nerves being pricked or half cut, a sharp pain is felt in the wounded part,
with a sudden inflammation, fluxion, tumor, fever and convulsion, often with
gangrene and death; unless it be remedied in time.

Those Wounds are esteemed dangerous, which do affect some principal Sinew,
Vein, or Artery; Whereunto are added those that are in^licted in the Privities
of Man or Woman, or in their parts dedicated to natural excretion; as also
those that hurt either end of any muscle; but such as are in the fleshy parts,
according to the length of the fibers are esteemed the least considerable.

If a Bone, Sinew, Tendrel, or a portion of the Face, or Prepuce be cut off, it
cannot be repaired.

All Wounds in the Bladder, Brain, Heart, Liver, Lungs Stomach, and smal^ Guts
are deemed mortal.

The general indication in the Cure of Wounds is the adjunction of what is
separated, wherein the Surgeon ought to be furnished with five Intentions.

The first whereof is to extract all strange Bodies, as Bullets, Darts, Arrows,
Splinters, etc. if any do hinder the Wounds agglutination.

The second, to bring the divided extremities together.

The third, to keep them so.

The fourth, to preserve the wounded parts temperature.

The fifth to correct such accidents as may fall out.

The first of these intentions is performed, either with the Fingers, or some
material Instrument, at the first dressing, unless the extraction of the
foresaid things might occasion an Hemoragy, or some other dreadful accident;
for then the safest is to leave their expulsion to Nature: but since it may
sometimes not little be advanced by Medicaments, take this following
description.

Recipe, The Root of Iris of Florence, of Panacis and Capers, of each three
Drachms, round Aristaloch, Manna and Frankincense, of each one Dram, beat
them to a powder, and incorporate them with Honey of Roses, and Turpentine of
Venice, of each two Ounces. Make a Salve thereof.

The second and third intention in the Cure of wounds are performed in bringing
and maintaining together their Extremities, by Bandages and Sutures; of the
first whereof there is three sorts, namely,

1. The Incarnative, which is adapted to simple Wounds, and is composed of two
heads, beginning from the part opposite to the Wound, and proceeding toward it.

2. Expulsive, which consists but of one head, beginning from the bottom of
the Wound upwards to its Orifice.

3. The Retentive, which is destinated to fasten Topical Remedies, and is made
according to the figure of the part which is to be bound.

There are several sorts of Sutures, but of the Agglutinatives the most
approved is made with a needle held in the Right Hand of the Surgeon,
wherewith he traverseth the two sides of the VVound, opposing a pierced
Can^lle, held in the Left Hand to the point of the Needle, which passes
through it, with its Thread, whereon is made a double knot, cutting the thread
a little above it, and thence it is proceeded to the other stitches, remembering
always to make the first stitch in the midst of the wounds length.

There is also another Suture called Dry, fit for wounds in the Face, and is
made by clinging some pieces of Linen upon it, which are, being dry, brought
together with threads pierced through them.

The third necessary Sature is like to that, which Skinners make in sowing
their Skins together, and is appointed for the Bowels and Gutts, when they
receive any hurt.

The others I think needless to describe, these being doubtless the best,
whereunto the ingenious Artist may add what he thinks fit.

The temperature of the affected part is preserved by a good Diet, and a
convenient use of the Universal Remedies.

The first of these ought to be cold and moist, till the time obnoxious to
accidents be passed. Spiced and salt meats are hurtful; the Patient must drink
Barley water, in stead of Wine; and wholly abstain from any violent motion of
the mind.

The most usual universal Remedies are Phlebotomy and Purgation, which have
virtue to refresh, divert and expel the humors, that might prove burthensom to
the diseased part.

Amongst accidents, the most urgent is a too great flux of Blood, which must be
carefully prevented, since it is the Treasure of Life and Strength.

It is performed by astringent, refreshing, and agglutinative Remedies: As,

Recipe, Sealed Earth, and Bole Armenian, of each half an Ounce, Frankincense
Mastick, Myrrh and Aloes, of each tw^ Drachms, Flying Flower, one Ounce. Make
a powder to be applied with the Yolk of an Egg well beaten.

If then Blood cannot be restrained in this manner, the Vein or Artery must be
pressed with the Thumb, till a Thrumbus be made; but if that suffices not, the
flowing Vessel ought to be bound, and this yet not prevailing, we are to use
Escarotides; as are Burnt powder of Vitriol, and of Mercury, with a portion of
pure burnt Alum, leaving the Scars full to mature.

The last Remedy is the cutting off the flowing Vessel, that its Extremities,
withdrawing in the Flesh, the same may stop its flowing. But all these Remedies
will doubtless come out of use as soon as the Stiptick Elixir, to be bought at
Doctor Williams's, his Majesty's Physician, will be known.

Pain, being commonly the cause of much weakness and fluxion to the wounded
part, the sedation of it ought to be carefully procured by expelling and
lenitive Remedies, such as is the following.

Recipe, Diacalcitheos Plaster, four Ounces, Oil of Roses and Vinegar, of each
half an Ounce. Let all be melted together, and applied. For Lenitive, Dip the
Bands and Compresses in Oxicraton (Water and Vinegar is so called) or use the
following Irrigation.

Recipe, Oil of Roses and Myrrh, as much as needs, and with a white of an Egg
make an irrigation. But if the pain continues and is too intense, we must with
some precaution use Narcoticks, whereof here is a Description.

Recipe, The leaves of Henbane, and Poppy roasted under the Ashes, of each
three Ounces, Hogs grease and Oil of Roses, of each one Ounce, Saffron two
Scruples. Make a Cataplasm.

There is often joined to pain another Symptom, called Convulsion, which is
defined a forced contraction of the Muscles toward their Origin.

It is of two sorts, General, and Particular.


The first whereof is divided in three Species; namely,

Tetonos, when the whole Body stands stiff, without being able to incline it
self.

The second is called Opisthotonos, when it is forced backward.

And the third Emprosthotonos, when it is contracted forward.

A particular Convulsion is when the Eye, the Tongue, or any other part
instructed with Muscles is contracted, or deprived of its natural motion.

The Causes are Repiction, Emptiness and Pain. Paul Amanus ^^suting the
Elastick virtue of Will is and its defects.

That which is caused by Repletion, is cured by Evacuating Remedies, anointing
the Back, Neck, and contracted part, with this following Liniment.

Recipe, Oil of Camomile and Laurel, of each two Ounces, Oil of Foxes, one
Ounce, the Salves of Althea and Martii, of each an Ounce, Foxes Grease, an
Ounce, Strong Water, an Ounce and a half, Wax as much as needs. Make thereof an
Ointment.

That which proceeds of Emptiness, or Evacuation, is helped by the use of
restorative meats, such as is the following Broth.

Recipe, Lettice, Bourage, Purcelane, of each a handful, of the four Greater
cold Seed of each half an Ounce, Barberries a dram. Boil all with a good
Chickin and let the sick party take of it every morning.

That which comes of Pain is Cured by Remedies contrary to the cause of it,
and if it be poisonous, the wound must be instantly amplified, that the matter
impacted may flow. And this Alexipharmacon poured into the Wound, viz. Treacle
and Mithridate dissolved in Strong water, in a sufficient quantity with a
little Mercurial Powder. Scarified Cuppings are also very useful to extract
venomous matter, taking care likewise that the Patient, in that Symptom, have
not his Mouth fast contracted, lest he bites off his own Tongue, as it often
falls out, but may conveniently be prevented, by an Instrument called Speculum
Oris, which ought therefore always to be at hand.

Next to Convulsion, a Palsy ought to be prevented, and cured.

It is defined, A Mollification of the Sinews, with the privation of Motion and
Sense, not indeed of the whole Body, but commonly of one side. Its Causes are
either inward, as the humors of either Ventricle, and especially Phlegm
obstructing the progress of the Animal Spirits through the Sinews; or outward,
as Falls, Blows, and such other Accidents.

It is Cured by Diet and Purgation, whereunto the Decoction of Indian wood,
will be very profitable, with this Topical Remedy of Faventinus.

Recipe, Oil of Laurel and Turpentine, of each three Ounces, Oil of Lavender,
and Petroleum, of each an Ounce, Malvesie, four Ounces, Strong-Water two
Ounces, Pyreth. Pepper, Mustard Seed, Juniper seed, Ivy, and Anacardium, pure
Laudanum, of each an Ounce and half. Let all be pounded and mixed with Wine and
Olives, let them boil in a double Vessel till the Wine be consumed, a strong
expression being made, add Galbanum, Bdelium, Euphorbium, Myrrh, Castoreum,
Bear, Duck, and Storks Grease, of each two ounces. Make a Salve in the Form of
a Liniment, whereunto a little Wax if needs be, may be added.

Exercise and Frictions are also very powerful to awake the part affected, and
cause the motive Spirits to flow in.

There is another accident, when the Patient either by weakness, proceeding
from the loss of Blood, poisonous Vapors, or the sight of dreadful Objects,
falls into frequent Swounds.

It is discerned, 1. When Paleness invades the Face, with a Cold Sweat.

2. If a Coldness of the whole Body be perceived.

3. And if the Party do suddenly Fall, when it is in the Paroxysme.

It is prevented by casting cold Water in the Diseased's Face; but if it
proceeds from too great Evacuation, the Patient must be softly collected on the
Ground, or on his Bed, and a little Bread dipped in Wine given him to taste,
whereat the Spirits may return. But if it proceeds from Poisonous Vapors, Let
the Patient drink out of a Spoon a little Treacle and Mithridate dissolved in
Wine.

That which comes of Fear, is easily cured, the Object being removed, with
encouraging and comfortable Admonitions.

The loss of Blood, Pain, and Fever, whereunto Wounds are subject, do often
distract the Patient, in a temporary Phrensy called Delirium, which is defined,
A tempor ary perturbation of the Phansy, and other mental Functions.

Besides the Causes above mentioned, poisonous Vapors, and a Lesion of the
Diaphragme do not seldom effect its Production; this last having a plain
communication with the Brain, by the Nerves of the sixth Conjugation.

If it proceeds from an Obstruction of the Spirits, the same Remedies must be
used, as when the Body is subject to Swounding, but if it coms from an
Inslammation of the Brain, Diet and Purgation must be instituted, and the Hair
being shaved, the Head being bathed over with Exorodine, applying upon it the
Plaster of Diacalcitheos dissolved in Rose Water and Vinegar, and Sleep
provoked by the use of Broths, wherein you must boil refreshing Herbs, and a
knot of VVhite-poppy Seed; and pleasant Company, diverting the Patient from
other sad thoughts and representations of mournful things, may also be very
conducible to his health and recovery.

Of Wounds made by Fire Arms.
THE Industry of men ever clear sighted to their own destruction, having for
about 200 years since, found out a very speedy way to it, namely Gunpowder,
and fire-armes; Whose hurts being often waited on by other accidents, it
obliges us to treat especially of their Curation.

They are either simple or composed, with dilaceration, distemper, and tumor.
Their signs are commonly a round Figure, little effusion of Blood, a swelling
of the part, and a greenish livid color.

In the first apparel, the wound ought to be dilated, if the wounded parts
conformation can permit it, that unnatural Bodies if there be any, may be
sought out and expelled with the matter. In doing which, if it be possible, the
patient must be situated, as he was when he received the wound. After the
extraction of strange Bodies, we must prevent pain and fluxion.

The first by the repelling and lenitive Remedies above described, and the
Cataplasme appointed for its sedation.

The last by Diet and Purgation, whereunto Clysters are commonly used, lest
Catharicks might cause too great an agitation of Humors.

Thence we must proceed to Suppuration, as in all other contused Wounds
whereunto that which is called digestive and the following Oil are most
conveniently used.

Recipe, Oil of Violets, four pound, wherein boil two young Cats, new brought
forth, till the bones be loosed off, adding Earthworms duly prepared, one
pound. Let them boil together on a slow fire, adding Turpentine of Venice, and
strong-water, three Ounces. To be kept in a Glass, till there be occasion to
make use of it.

But if there be any danger of Gangrene, we use profitably of Egyptiacum
dissolved in Wine, etc.

When the wound is brought to Suppuration detersive Medicaments must be
applied, such as is the following.

Recipe, Water of boiled Barley, the juice of Plantain, Parsley, Agrimony, and
of the lesser Centory, of each an Ounce, let them all boil together, and in the
end of the Decoction, add Turpentine of Venice, three Ounces, Honey of Roses,
two Ounces, flower of Barley, three Ounces, Saffron, one Scruple. Mix all
together, and make a cleansing Ointment.

Lastly, having care to prevent other accidents according to Art, the Wound
must be brought to a perfect Cure and Sanation.

Of Gangrenes.
BUT since Gangrene is often a concomitant of Wounds, made by Fire-Armes, and
other Contusions, it will not be amiss here to expound its Nature, Signs and
Curation.

It is defined, The mortification of a part affected with inflammation. And is
only distinguished from a Sphacelus by the more or less, this last being only
when the part is quite mortified and dead. The only Remedy being then its
Amputation.

The general Cause of Gangrene, is a corruption of the parts natural Heat, by
Cold, external Heat, want of Nourishment, stopping of Transpiration, or by the
dreadful effects of some poisonous substance.

Its proceeding is two-sold, either with some humors in flowing, or without it.

We have deduced the signs of it in the Chapter of Impostumes. And for its
Curation, since that which has its origin from the second cause is the most
general, and may in some measure be a Rule for Curing the rest, Take these
following Precepts.

If the Body be in the least Plethorical, Phlebotomy and Purgation being
celebrated, the Air by Nature or Art, ought to be cold and dry, and the
Patients diet of the same temper.

Amongst Topical Remedies, Egyptiacum boiled with some Aloes in salted Water,
adding a little Strong Water in the end, is deservedly much esteemed; as also
the Phadagenick water, or the Gray Salve, which is made by adding a Dram of
corroding Sublimate to an Ounce of Basilicon, in the mean time, to defend the
Body from the Influxion of Morbisical Humors, and putrid Vapors, the following
defensive may be applied on the diseased part, and often renewed.

Recipe, Oil of Roses and Myrtle, of each four Ounces, the juice of Plantain,
Solanum, and Housleek, of each two Ounces, the whites of Eggs, five; Bole
Armeny and Sealed Earth reduced in a subtle powder, of each an Ounce, with as
much Oxycraton as is needful.

If it be too Intense, and yields not to Catharticks and Topical Remedies, we
are obliged to use actual Causticks. And lastly, if that will not serve, we
must proceed to the part's Amputation, which is the only approved Remedy in a
Sphacelus; wherein observe, that to stop the effusion of Blood, actual
Causticks are almost out of Use, the binding of the Vessels being found more
commodious.

Of that Operation, see Fab. ab Aqua ^endente, in his Chirurgical Operations;
but now the Stiptick Elixir of Doctor Williams, overcomes all other Remedies.

Where Bones are discovered, they use the Tincture of Aloes, extracted with
Spirit of Wine, and to fortify the part, they boil Aromatic Herbs in Red Wine,
etc.

CHAP. IV.
Of Ulcers.
ACcording to our intended scope this Chapter is dedicated to ex^plicate the
Theorems of Ulcers and the manner of Curing them*

They are defined, Solutions of Conti^nuity, caused by the Mordacity of
corrodin^ humors, rather hurting in quality than in quantity.

Their external Causes are the excesse^ of cold and heat, for, as says the
Physians Poet.

Sunt diversa quidem mala frigoris atque caloris;
Sed tamen amborum simili nocet Ulcere virus.
The pain of heat and cold are different.
To make an Ulcer yet they both conse^^*
Whereunto is added the apposition of ^harp medicaments, blows contusions and
the touching of impure things.

Their disterences are expressed in the following Discourse.

An Ulcer is either,

1. Simple, Varying either by,

First, Proper, differences, as 1. Figure, 2. Quantity, 3. Quality.


Whence it is termed, Round, Angular, Strait, Crooked, Long, Short, Broad,
Deep, etc.


Or, Secondly, By differences Common and A^cidentar As 1. Its Durance, 2.
Aspect, 3. Generation, 4. Affected part. And thus they are, New, Old,
Appearing, Hid, Incult, Burnt, Fleshy, Nervous, etc.


11. Or Composed, either with

First, A Diseases Cause, whence it is called, 1. Cachochymical, 2. Cathartick,
3. Poisonous, etc.


Secondly, A Disease it self, as 1. Intempery, 2. Tumor, 3. Incommoderation;


Hot or Moist, Phlegmous or Erisipelous* Burnt, Callous.

Thirdly, Its Symptoms, whence it is called, Gnawing, Filthy, Painful, etc.


A gnawing ( Depascence) Ulcer is discerned by the parts exesion, attrition,
cavity and hollowness. The stinking exhaleth a putrid, unpleasant and
cadaverous smell.

The Sordid is discerned by the crassity, and viscosity of its Excrements, and
the softness of the flesh overgrowing it, whereunto if a hardness of the lips
be joined, it is deservedly termed Fistulous.

A Cancrous Ulcer is horrible to look on, its lips being overturned are hard,
livid and moist. That which is called Discrative, is caused by the humors
Intempery; And Cacoethes is so termed for the difficulty of healing it. The
Catherick receives nourishment of some broken or dirupted Vessel, or proceeds
from an evil disposition of the whole Body.

Ulcers having had their beginning during a Disease, or before it, growing
livid, pale or dry, plainly indicate the proximity of Death, their livid or
pale color being not only the sing of Choleric, or Atrabiliary humors
causing them, but also manifesting an extinction of the natural heat.

That which renders the Cure of Ulcers difficult, is commonly a penury of
Blood, the Bodies evil constitution, as also that of the Air, the sordidness of
the Ulcer, and the rottenness of some Bones.

In simple Ulcers, Desiccation is only required, and the breeding of flesh in
them, whereunto the red desiccative Salve, and Unguentum Aureum are convenient.

But in composed ones, we must have an eye to the most urgent, then to the
Cause, and lastly to the Disposition, without whose taking away, the Ulcer
cannot be cured.

Pain is often an accident of Ulcers, whereunto must be provided as is declared
in the Chapter of Impostumes, having a special regard to the humor causing it.

If there be any Bone corrupted, it must be touched with an actual Caustic of
hot Iron, and such Remedies used to breed flesh in the Ulcer as are above
declared, in doing which, two sorts of excrements do commonly appear, namely a
thin matter, and a thick sordity, both which must be purged by drying and
detersive Medicaments.

Whereof take that mentioned in the former Chapter: But sublimate Water or the
Brown Salve of Felix-^urts, are more powerful.

Then the Cicatice must be induced over the Ulcer, to which end the powder of
Burnt Alum and Caleanthum, are wont to produce speedy and wished Effects.

CHAP. V.
Of Fractures and Dislocations.
A Fracture or Bone breaking, is an accident so dreadful, that not without
cause the Physicians Poet being about to speak of it, makes this deprecation.

Infandum dictu, cunctis procul absit amicis,
Sed fortuna potens omen convertat in hosts.
That cursed evil light on none but Foes,
And Fourtune keep our Friends from the like blows.
A Fracture is defined, A solution of continuity in the Bones; and its Causes
are all such things as may break, cut, bruise, and quash; whereby are also to
be understood falls from high places, and the like.

Their differences are manifold; for some are termed perfect, others imperfect,
some are simples, others composed with hemoragy, inflammation, gangrene, etc.

They receive a common difference from their figures, long, transverse, strait
or crooked. Whereunto are added, that which is called in Greek Raphanidon, when
the bone is broken short in two pieces; Cariedon, when it falls in small
Fragments loose from one another; and Asphitidon, when it is ground small as
meal or flower.

A Fractures existence is known by a vehement pain of the affected part, the
impotency of it, the change of its natural Figure, and chiefly by the vacuity
which appears to the fingers touching it.

For the Prognostic; in moist weather, and in youth Fractures are sooner
healed than in dry weather and in old age; But the precise time of the
over-growing Callus cannot be positively assertained, that depending of the
Body's, and ambient Air's disposition, as also of the Bone's thickness. Yet
Hippocrates says, the Nose is glutinated in three days, the Iaws, the
Clavicles and Ribs in six, the Cubit in nine, the Brachium in twelve, and the
Tibia in fifteen; Which may be a Rule for the rest.

When the Bones are broken near the Joints, their motion is thereby rendered
stiff, and difficult, and if there be great Contusions, the part loses its
motion, and the Patient is in danger of Death.

The Cure of Fractures and Dislocations being in many respects one and the
same, we shall speak jointly of them both in the end of this Chapter.

A Dislocation therefore is defined, The detrasion of a Bone out of its proper
place. And it is either Simple by it self, or Composed with other Diseases.

Its Signs are the same as those of Fractures; the place of indisposition and
its Cavity being the chief differenees; Dislocations affecting but the Joints,
and causing but an imperfect vacuity in the Dislocated Place.

If the H^^d be luxated, Death immediately follows.

Recent luxations are easier and sooner cured than Old ones; those that are
invetcrated are wholly incurable; and such as are not far divided are easier
reduced in their Seat, than far separated ones.

The common and general Cure of Fractures and Dislocations is performed by,

1. Setting the Bones in their natural position.

2. Retaining them there.

3. Correcting the accidents.

The first of these is performed by extending the broken or dislocated part
from its origin, either with the Hands or some fit Instrument, then setting it
in its due place so that no eminency or roughness be found to alter the figure
of it.

The second point is obtained by the application of restraining, and defensive
Plasters, whereof the most common is made of Bolarmeni dilayed in wine, and
^he White of an Egg; applying thereupon Bands, Compresses, and Atelles dip^ed
in Oxycrat, or Oxyradinon, fitted to ^he figure of the diseased part; And the
^atient being in a convenient situation ^he accidents must be corrected, as is
de^lared in the former Chapters, according to the Artists best invention and
^olerty.

If the accidents do not oblige us to it, 'twil be enough to loosen the Bands
at the end of three or four days, that fuliginous Vapors may be exhaled, and
the part a little anointed with refreshing Ointments, taking care to give it
sometimes a gentle motion, least the Joint be rendered stiff and immovable, by
the growing of a Callus thereon, and thus being sometimes looked to, the Cure is
brought to its perfection.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Generation and Production of Man.
HAving thus far proceeded on our intended scope, this Chapter shall briefly
express what is requisite to be known in the Generation of Man, and the way of
helping Nature in the Production of the same, as her chiefest work and
masterpiece.

In the Generation of Man is exactly to be considered,

1. The matter out of which he is engendered, and the Instruments of Generation.

2. The Place thereof.

3. In what Time it is perfected.

4. And by what Signs its Con^^^tion, difference of Sex, and approaching time
of being brought forth is know^.

1. The Matter of his Generation is the Seed of both Sexes (whereunto the
Menstrua were added by the Ancients) proceeding from the purest Blood, diluted
with a great deal of Serum (Barbat. page 49.) which is transmitted by (the
Instruments of Generation) the preparing Artery to the Testicles, that are
nothing but a Conglomeration of Spermatick Vessels, wherein the Serum is
separated from the Blood, that is wrought and elaborated in the Epidydemos, or
production of the Spermatick Vein, incumbent on the Testicles; whence it is
carried through the Parastates, into the defering Vestel, and thence into the
Spermatick Vesseles; and according to some, the ^rostata's, ending with them in
the Conduit of the Urethra; where there is extant a Valvul, least the Seed
should involuntarily flow through the Yard. The Nerves probably serving to
render it fertile and vegetative by the eff^sion of Animal Spirits.

There are almost the same Spermatick parts in Women, except their situation,
and the Womb, the Receptacle of the Seed and Domicil of the Foster; Yet De
Graass proves that their Testicles are as an Ovarium, containing perfect Eggs.
Thus new Wonders are daily found in the Microcosm.

2. The Place wherein he is engendered is the Womb; the Foster being found
therein commonly gathered in a round, and wrapped in two distinct Membranes,
the Amnios, and Chorion, (the Allantoides being only found in Brutes) wherein
the three or four first months it is nourished, not of the Maternal Blood, as
the Ancients conceived, but probably of the Chyle, transported by the Lacteal
Vein, and the Arteries, to the Placenta, where it is further elaborated, and
thence partly carried through the Umbilical Vessels, to the Port Vein of the
Foster, whence it flows into the Cava, and finally to the Heart. The other
part being transmitted by the Arteries of the Membranes into the Capacity of
the Amnios, constituting there the pure Colliquamentum, mentioned by Harvey,
which the Foster sucks after the fourth month, for its sustentation.

3. By the Time, which we have said ought to be considered in the generation of
Man, it is to be understood,

First, That of his Conception, when the Seed of both Sexes is mingled in the
Womb.

Secondly, That of his Formation, which is thought to begin the 7 th. day, and
to be perfected, if it be a Male, the 30 th. if a Female the 40 th. or 42. But
it is more probable they are figurated about the same time, which cannot be so
exactly determined.

Thirdly, No more than that of their First Motion, which was conceived, if a
Male, to be in the third Month, and, if a Female in the fourth.

Fourthly, Neither can that of Childbirth be absolutely stated, the usual time
being the latter end of the ninth Month, or the beginning of the tenth; though
admit a Latitude from the seventh Month inclusively to the eleventh and above.

4. The chiefest Signs of Conception, are,

First, A little Quivering presently after Copulation.

Secondly, The Retention of the Seed.

Thirdly, The Suppression of the Monthly Courses.

Fourthly, A Livescency of the Face.

Fifthly, A Pain and Swelling of the Breasts.

Sixthly, A Distaste of Meat. Which Signs, or most of them appearing, one may
judge of Conception, till a more certain one be discerned, namely the Motion of
the Foster.

5. Whether it be a Boy or a Girl is yet more uncertain; though some would
conjecture by the following Signs.

If it be a Boy the Mother has usually a better Color of the Face, and
disposition of the Body, the heat and good temperature of the Child adding
something to that of the Mother; for which Cause also they sometimes power a
drop of the Milk upon a Looking-glass, or such other even thing, and if it be
of such thickness as not to flow easily, they deem it to be a Manchild,
otherwise not, the time of Motion, as is said before, indicating nothing in
this.

6. The Signs of (...)

The flowing of the Excrementitious Humors contained in the Chorion; the
Flanks and Rump are thrust outward; the Secret parts do swell and pain; the
Face grows Red, a kind of feverish quivering seizes the whole Body.

These Signs appearing, if the Surgeon be called, he ought then to prepare
all things ready, and exactly observe what is to be performed,

1. Before the Birth.

2. In Bringing forth.

3. And after the Birth.

1. Before the Birth a special care must be had, that the Air of the Room must
be duly tempered with a moderate heat, and then the Woman must be settled in a
convenient and middle positure, so that she neither lie flat on her Back, nor
be yet sitting, but have her Shoulder and Back something raised, that she may
have a free respiration, and more powerful endeavor to bring forth, her Legs
being as much separated as may easily be, and so bowed that her Heels may
reflect to her Buttocks, which should also be something raised, she holding her
self to a Staff fitly disposed cross the Bed, for that purpose, and when she
feels the most pain, she must be admonished to strive, as much as she is
able, stopping sometime her Breath to express her Foster, whom the Midwife
ought in the mean time to thrust gently from above downwards, having though a
care not to put her in that labor before the time be come, least her Forces
might leave her when they should be most needful.

2. In the Birth, it is to be considered, If it be according to Nature, which
is when the Foster issues forth instantly after the Waters, either the Head
foremost or the Feet, all other manners rendering the Birth difficult, and being
deemed against Nature; But if the Birth succeeds happily, the Surgeon
ought to leave the delivering of the party to the Midwife, who ought to proceed
in this manner; The Child being brought forth she ought presently to let follow
the Secundine, but if they do not instantly succeed, she must gently thrust her
Hand anointed with Oil, or the following Ointment, along the Navel in the Womb,
and draw them out.

The said Ointment is composed in this manner.

Take Oil of Lin-seeds, one Ounce, Oil of Castor, half an Ounce, Nutinge, three
Drams, Laudanum, one Dram, and make a Liniment thereof.

And then free the Child of them, to that end, the Midwife must bind the Navel
with a double thread two thumbs breadth from the Belly, neither too strait nor
too loose, for fear of Accidents. The knot being fitly made, the Navil must be
cut two fingers breadth beneath the knot, and a linen cloth dipped in Oil of
Roses or of Almonds, wrapped about it, with another linen yet over, least its
coldness, till the time of its falling off, might cause the Child some pain and
inconveniency.

And thus far ought to be proceeded in the Birth, when it happens without
extraordinary difficulty.

But because a Surgeon is seldom called unless the Birth be difficult, here
follows the Method, which he ought to observe therein.

The Birth is rendered difficult chiefly by two Reasons.

First, When the Waters which ought immediately to precede it, are evacuated
too long before, whereby the Womb grows dry and intractable, which is to be
remedied by the following Liniment, wherewith the Midwife ought often to anoint
the Natural Parts.

Take fresh Butter without Salt, washed in water of Mugwort, Mucilagines of
Figgs, of Lin. Oil, and of Althea, extracted with Water of Sabina, of each half
an Ounce, Oil of Flower de Luce, an Ounce, make a Liniment.

The following Powder is also esteemed for hastening Childbirth.

Take Cinnamon, Cassia fistula's burk, and Dictamel, of each a Dram and a half,
and as much as the whole of white Sugar, make a subtle Powder thereof, and let
the laboring Woman take half an Ounce of it at a time, in a decoction of
Lin-seed or White Wind.

The following Drink is also much esteemed for the same purpose.

Take broken bark of Cassia fistula, two Ounces, Red Pease half a handful, Boil
them with as much white Wine and Water as needs, add in the end two Drams of
Sabina, and make a decoction; In the Colature add for each dose a Dram of
Cinnamon, and six grains of Saffron, which being taken, provoke the party to
sneeze, putting in her Nostrils a little pulverized Pepper, or white Hellebore,
and causing her, as aforesaid to stop her mouth and Nostrils.

The Second and chiefest reason rendering the Birth difficult is the
discommodious Figure of the Child, coming forth otherwise than the Head or Feet
foremost, which being perceived, the Surgeon ought to settle the Patient in
a convenient manner (as before) and then gently bind her with a broad and soft
fillet ( Fascia) in this manner; The said fillet must first be applied to the
Neck, and thence brought cross-wise before over the Shoulders to the two feet,
where being again crossed, and in many folds about the Legs and Thighs it
ought to be conveyed thence again to the Neck, and there be firmly bound, so
that the party can in no wise stir, and to procure it the better, she may set
the plants of her Feet against the Beadstead, a couple of honest Servants
keeping her Knees as much from one another as may easily be, this being so
disposed; to keep out the Ambient Air, and to perform the Operation more
modestly, a warm double linen cloth may cover the Natural parts and Thighs of
the Laboring Woman, and the Surgeon, having first cut his Nails, and
anointed his Hand and Arm, with the abovesaid Liniment, must by degrees gently
as may be, thrust it into the Womb; where having explored the position of the
Child, and whether it be alone or with another, or a Mole, he ought to turn it
so, that he may come out the Head or Feet foremost, as aforesaid.

But if this do not succeed, or that the Child be dead, which is judged, when
neither the Surgeons Hand, nor the Mother can perceive it to move, and most
sure if the Waters are flowed out, and the Secundines are come forth.

Then he ought to proceed in this manner, having found one of the Feet, he
ought to draw it out, and having bound it about with a soft and broad fillet,
put it in again, then seek the other, which having found, draw it also out with
his hand, and together with it, by the fillet, that which was bound before,
then having drawn the Child out to the Flank, one of the Arms must be retruded
along the Neck over the Head, the other being along the side, and so must be
endeavored to be drawn out.

It happens sometimes that one of the Hands does appear and is thrust out,
which must instantly be throst in again, and the Child turned to a more
commodious figure; but if the Womb's Orifice be so swelled that this cannot be
done, chiefly if the Child be dead, the most convenient is to cut it, the Bones
as deep in the Flesh as may be, least it might hurt the said Orisice of the
Womb, and then so turn the Foster, that it may come out as aforesaid.

But if the dead Child be so swelled either by Tumor or Winds, that it cannot
possibly come out then a Hook must be struck, if the Head be swelled under the
Chin, in the Mouth, in the hollow of the Eyes, or best of all in the Pole, if
the Breast under the Claviculis, and if in the Belly, in the False Ribbs, or in
the Bowels above the Navel (Pubis) specially if the Child comes with the Feet
foremost; Others do endeavor to cut the Foster in pieces in the Womb, with a
crooked Knife and then extract it by pieces apart, in doing which, or the other
operation, if it should happen that the Head alone should remain in the Womb, a
double Hook or an Instrument called by Pareus, a Gryphins Foot must be thrust
in, with a hollow Hand, and struck into some part of the Head, as aforesaid,
drawing it gently forth; and thus far can Art be extended in the Birth.

After the Birth, ought to come in consideration, what must be done first to
the Mother, and then to the Child; For the first, she must be exactly kept from
all cold and ambient Air, which to obtain more surely, it will not be amiss to
keep her Legs some time a Cross, for so the divided parts will besides, be the
sooner conjoined, else ought she to be wrapped with a broad Fascia over the
Epigaster, to the excluding of Air and Blood, remaining in the womb, and then
take the Broth of a Capon, or a piece of roasted Bread dipped in good Aromatic^
Wine, besides, specially in Winter, the Secundines may be applied to the Region
of the Womb, and in Summer the Skin of a Sheep newly flaid to the whole Belly
and about the Loins, which must be taken away about six hours after, the
Patient having rested that time, and the Hipp^gaster must be anointed with the
following Ointment.

Take Sperma Ceti, two Ounces, Oil of sweet Almonds and Hypericon, of each an
Ounce and half, Goats Suet, an Ounce, Oil of Mirrhe, an Ounce, and Virgin Wax
as much as needs; Make an Ointment to be used twice a day.

About the Navel may be applied a Plaster of Galbanum with some grains of
Zibet, Muscus, in the middle, and about the whole belly Gaulbiers Cloth,
described by Ambrose Parry.

But if the Patient be much tormented with Wind, the following Power is
esteemed excellent.

Take preserved Anniseed, two Drams, Nutmeg and burnt Hartshorn; of each one
Dram and a half, Datesstones, three Drams, Aloes, Wood and Cinnamon, of each two
Drams; make a subtle Powder, whereof give her one Dram in a Cup of warm
White Wind.

As for the Child, as soon as the same is brought forth, it ought to be
cleansed from all impurity,

With Oil of Roses, or of Myrtle, Which some do with warm Water, and some
astringent Wine, and then anoint the Child with the said Oils, taking special
care whether the Child be not infected with a Chalky Matter in the Mouth, which
is called the White Canker, for then it must be carefully cleansed with a
little clout fastened to a stick, and dipped in a composition of Oil of Sweet
Almonds, Honey and Sugar, then having explored whether there be no vice in the
conformation or construction of the bodies parts (for if there be any, it must
be maturely corrected) the Child must be gently swadled, and laid in his Cradle.

If the Mother, or a Nurse will have her Milk stancht,

Take Oil of Roses, and of Myrtle, of each three Ounces, Rose-Vinegar, one
Ounce; mix them together, and anoint therewith her Breasts four times a day,
and after the anointing, spread them over with Powder of Myrtles, applying
thereupon the following Plaster.

Take Powder of Mastick and Nutmeg, of each two Drams, of Cypress-Nut, three
Drams, of Myrtle and VVild Granate Flowers, of each one Dram and a half, Ireos
of Florence, half an Ounce, Oil of Myrtle, three Ounces, of Venice Treacle, two
Ounces, and Virgins Wax, as much as suffices.

Some take a Spong dipped in the dec^ction of Cumin Seed or Coriander laid in
very strong Vinegar, and apply it to the Breasts as a secret.

Both may be much furthered by applying setting Cups between the Thighs, and on
the Sides of the Umbilick.

As for the Rest, which is but little accessory to the Doctrine of the
Generation of Man, the Reader is remitted to those, that have treated specially
thereof, as Capuraeins, Pareus, etc.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Venerean Disease.
THE just punishment of God upon our sins has for some hundred years since,
produced a Disease unknown, as some think, to Antiquity, called the Venerian or
French Pox, which may be defined, An Indisposition composed of all other
Diseases and their Accidents, engendered by a contagious touch, but most
commonly by impure Copulation, whence the Seed of several Men Fermenting,
arises a Venenous either fixed, or volatile acid Salt, having usually its seat
in gross and viscid Phlegm, whence it procceds to the Invasion of the other
Humors.

It is divided according to its time and progress, in -- Particular, and
Universal.


The first degree of the former being when there appeaes Venerean Ulcers and
Cancers.

The second, when there is a Virulent Running of the Reins.

The Universal is, when the Virulent Salt spreads it self through the whole
Body, and infects most of the parts thereof.

Its Signs are, an intense and vehement Pain of the Joints; Ulcers in the
hidden Parts; An Inflammation of the Mouth; Pustles over the whole Body, and
specially on the Forehead; Lastly, Knobs and roughness of the Bones, and a
falling off of the Hair, with other Accidents.

If the Disease be Recent, and the Body in Youth or young Age, the season of
the Year being favorable, the Cure is easily performed, but if the Disease be
Inveterate and complicated with many accidents; If the Patient has in vain
been under Cure, and begins to be extenuated by a Consumptive leanness,
proceeding from a Dissipation of the Natural Moisture, the Disease must be
esteemed incurable, and only tried to be palliated.

The Cure of it is performed in four manners; Namely,

1. By the Decoction of Guaiack wood Sarsaparilla, China Root, and Sassafras
which is the gentlest way, and fittest for the first degrees.

2. By Unction.

3. By Plasters.

4. By Suffumigation, rejecting that (...) taking Mercury inwardly, as noxious.

The first is thus reduced in Act, A pound of Guaiac being cut in small pieces,
is decocted in Balneo Mariae, with eight pounds of Conduit Water, to the
dissipation of the third part, and in the end some Cinnamon being added to it,
the Patient must take of it something warmed, five or six Ounces at his usual
Meals, keeping himself afterward very warm, to provoke sweat, which must be
instantly wiped off; And thus using a very spare Diet, the same method must be
continued, as long as the Patients forces can with facility suffer it.

The second manner is more effectual, if the Disease be Recent.

The Body being well disposed and prepared, the Patient is shut up in a warm
Chamber and Closet, and the Friction being begun, proceed from those parts
which pain less, to those that are more painful, and having a special care to
the quantity of Medicaments whereof the Indication is drawn from the ^emper and
Srength of the Patient, the ^^oynts and Emunctories of the noble parts are
usually anointed with the following Liniment.

Take prepared Quicksilver, six Ounces, Sublimate half a Dram, quick Brimstone,
half an Ounce, fresh Porks grease, one pound, the yolks of three Eggs, Oil of
Laurel and Turpentine of each two Ounces, Old Treacle and Mithridate, of each
half an Ounce, let ^ Liniment be made according to Art.

But I rather approve Mercury alone, mixed with Hogs grease, since it does not
expel the Material Cause of this Disease, by any occult or specific virtue,
^eeding Correctives, but only by its mo^ion, joining naturally it self with all
acid moisture, and, as Mercury dissolved in the Spirit of Nitre, or Aqua
Fortis, cor^oding the mouth and opening the (...) whence the Humors flow, till
their acidity be evacuated.

But before the Friction, the Body must be judiciously prepared, for if dry
subjects be not sufficiently humected, the heat of the Stomach sublimates the
Mercury, whence proceeds a Dia^hae^, with Gripings of the Gutts, and if it be
stopped, there follows a Constipation, a Fever, Inflammation of the Throat, or a
Phrens^ with Convulsions, and sometimes the party becomes Deaf, Blind, etc.

Contrariwise if Moist Bodies be not well exsiccated by Sudorisick Decoctions,
the Mercury draws with him to the Throat a great quantity of Humors, with
swelling of the upper Parts, looseness of the Teeth, Exulceration of the Mouth,
and too great a Flux of Blood.

The Diarhaea is assuaged by the decoction of Guaiac, mixed with a little
White Wind, and taken for some days in the Morning, whereby the humors
Acrimony is mitigated and sweetened.

But in general those evils are remedied by changing of Chamber and Linen,
precipitating the Mercury downwards by astringent Gargarisms, and Clysters, by
letting Blood in the Foot, and chiefly by purgations, wherein some Salt of
Tartar must always be added, to sweeten and drive down the Humors.

Some do often swallow a Golden Pill, which becomes white, but it carries away
the Mercury in so little quantity, that the other Remedies are not therefore to
be omitted.

The end of Friction is to stimulate a Chris^s, which does not proceed from
Nature, without it be provoked and helped by some Medicament, whose quantity
ought to be adapted to the vehementness of the Disease, and forces of the
Patient; least the Medicaments being too strong, they cast him into an
incurable Consumption, or being too weak, they do not eradicate the Disease,
which afterward is found much more intense, and incurable than before.

The third Cure is by Plasters, and Cerowins, and is something slower than the
former, but more convenient in Relapses, and for the mitigation of pain, and
the resolution of knobs and hardness, but because it does not act so speedily,
the best of Artists do join to it some Frictions. Besides the Plasters of De
Vigo, the following may be profitably used and applied on the parts mentioned
in the Article of Friction.

Take of Melilot Plaster, and Saffron-Vinegar, of each half a Pound, Quenched
Quicksilver, six Ounces, Oil of Laurel and Land Lavendel, as much as needs;
Reduce all to the form of a Plaster.

The Scope of this Remedy, as of the former, is the procuring of a Crisis,
either by insensible transpiration, Flux of the Belly, or Urines, but oftener
and better by a flowing of the Mouth, which with the Gums and Cheeks is thereby
as aforesaid, often exulcerated, because of the Humors Tenacity and Acrimony,
and these Ulcers must by no means be repelled, but be mitigated by Gargarisms,
composed of Decocted Barley, Cows Milk, and the like; which may diminish the
mouths inflammation, and wash off the Humors sticking to it; but if this
accident, as it happens sometimes, be too intense, that it threatens an
extinction of the natural heat, we must for some time defer the proper Cure to
cohibit so pernicious a Symptom, according to Art. As for the Teeths looseness,
it is cured by astringent Gargarisms, but more powerfully if the Gums be
touched with Aqua secunda of the Goldsmiths.

The fourth manner by Suffumigations is not so much approved, because of many
evil dispositions, which it leaves in the Body. They nevertheless thus proceed
to it; The Patient being seated under a Curtain, well and carefully extended,
they cast in a Chaffing-dish a good quantity of persume composed of Cinabre,
mixed with Brimstone and Quicksilver, whereunto is added Iris of Florence,
Frankincense, Mirrhe, Iuncus odoratus, Assaodorata, Terebenthine and Theriak,
and continue this Suffumigation till the Mouth begins to flow; and that is its
Crisis.

This Diseases Symptoms are so manifold, that I think fitter to remit the
Reader to such Authors as treat of it at large than to say but a part of what
is needful to be known, though most may be referred to the General Cure of
Impostumes.

CHAP. VIII.
Of some other Indispositions which are Cured by Surgery.
HAving thus far proceeded, we are to treat in the present Chapter of some
other Indispositions cured by Surgery, whereof some requiring an experienced
Artist, others yielding themselves to the meanest Capacities, and this little
Treatise being written only for the use of discreet Beginners, we shall only
speak of the following.

Of Baldness.
Baldness is a falling off of the Hair from the Head, caused either by defect
of Nourishment, or the corruption of it; That which proceeds from Old Age, the
Hectic Fever, Burnings or Tinea, is incurable; But that which may be cured is
thus proceeded unto. The Universal Remedies being fitly instituted, the
remaining Hair must be shaved, resolving Fomentations used, and having caused
the vicious humors to be digested by the application of Cups and Leeches, the
Head must be washed in Lie made of Iris, and Aloes; lastly, drawing
Fomentations must be ministered, for the attraction of laudable Vapors. If it
be caused by want of nourishment, the Head must be rubbed with a course Linen
Cloth, till it grows red, and if it proceeds from the Venerean Pox, the body
must be anointed with Quicksilver to a perfect salivation.

Of the Eyes.
The Eyes diseases are manifold but their inflammation is the most common;
their causes are External, as Falls, Blows, Dust, Smoke, etc. or internal,
namely a defluxion flowing to the Eye. It is known by the heavine^s of the
Head, the Eyes redness, pain, swelling, and pulsation of its Arteries. It is
cured by the same administration of universal remedies as in Phlegmons, and the
due application of Topical ones, whereof this Collire is of a perspicuous
effect.

Take Rose and Plantain Water, of each half an Ounce, the mucilage of Gum
Tragacant, two Ounces, and the White of an Egg; make a Collire to Distill
lukewarm in the Eye, applying upon it a double Linen Cloth dipped in the same
Collire.

The Blood of Doves, Pigeons, or Hens instilled warm in the Eye mitigates the
pain of it, and is its proper Balm. But if a Relapse is feared, Cups applied on
the Shoulders, and an Issue in the Pole are very fit to divert the Fluxion.

Toothache.
There is scarce any pain equal to that of the Toothache. It proceeds from the
influxion of a hot or cold humor, or the Tooth being hollow or rotten, from
the entrance of ambient Air, and the refrigeration of cold Meat, or Drink.

The Internal causes are taken away by a due administration of Universal
Remedies, and if the pain proceeds from a hot cause, which is known by its
sharpness and a great pulsation of the Tooth and Temples, it is mitigated by
remedies contrary to it, as to wash the Mouth with Granate juice, Plantain
Water, and a little Vinegar, all being boiled with Roses, Wild Granate Flowers,
and Sumach. If the Cause be the fluxion of a cold humor, which is dis^^rned by
a heaviness of the Head and frequent spitting; the Teeth are profitably washed
with Garland-Libanotis, Sage Pierethre decocted in Wine and Vinegar, whereunto
is added a little Srong-Water and dissolved Treacle. But if it proceeds from a
rottenness of the Tooth, there is no better remedy than the drawing of it, and
if it be but a Root, procure the corruption of it by a Cotton dipped in
Aquafortis, having first tried the Odontalgick Essence of Flubault.

Of Phlebotomy or Blood letting.
Phlebotomy being an Operation necessary to be known of a beginner in
Surgery, I have thought fit to say here something of it. They define it, An
Incision of the Vein, evacuating the Blood and the other Humors contained with
it.

Before it be administered, if there be any Excrements remaining of the former
Coction, they must be evacuated by a Clyst^r or Suppository and thus when
necessity requires, or for precaution in persons neither too old not too
young, Phlebotomy is celebrated in the following manner.

The Patient being conveniently situated, the Surgeon rubs the part, which
is to be opened with his hand or a warm Linen cloth, to cause the Bloods
attraction, then the said part is bound with a Fillet a little above the place
of Incision, which is designed by a touch of the Nail, and the Operation is
performed with a fit Lancet, limiting its evacuation to the strength of the
Patient and the curative intention. Lastly, the incised place must be carefully
bound, least an Hemoragy might happen.

Of Cup-setting.
When the matter is conjoined and impacted, Cupps are commonly applied. I have
commonly thus seen some proceed to operation, having something rubbed the
destinated place, they set on it some kindled ends of Wax Candle fastened on a
Counter or such other thing, and over it apply the Cup, which then draws very
powerfully the Humors up; then taking them off, Incisions are made in their
circle with a Lancet or Instrument called Scarrificatory, and they are again
applied in the same manner as before, laying afterward Plasters of Diapalma,
or Album Rasis over the Incisions, till they be agglutinated.

Of Leeches.
Where Blood-letting, or Cup-setting cannot be performed, Leeches are commonly
applied either by making a little Incision in the skin, or anointing it with a
drop of some other Blood or Sugard milk, for then they will stick fast, and
when you will make them easily fall off, touch but their head with a little
Aloes, or Salt; and if you will know what quantity of Blood they have drawn,
lay them in the things aforesaid, and they will revomit it; besides if you will
have them to draw more than their capacity is, cut their posteriour part, when
they are well fast, and the Blood will run through their Bodies, which also is
stanched, if it flows when they are taken away, by the half of a Bean or some
burnt Linen applied on the little wound.

Thus I finish, and if the Reader takes this short Treatise in good part I have
my Desire, and

END.

