(...), OR The Saints Rising Out of the Heap or Mass of dead Bodies contained
in the Globe of the Earth and Sea, at the first blessed Resurrection Decyphered
by Christ, Rev. 20.5.

Whereunto, by way of Preface, is here prefixed, The Comprisal of the Substance
of our former Parcels: With further, and more evident Discoveries, which may
fitly be called, The Marrow of Divine Revelation Mysteries.

Opened by that Key given By Christ himself for that use and purpose, Rev. 20.
and 21. and 22.

(...).

If by any means I might attain unto the Resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3.11.

The rest of the Dead lived not till the thousand years were ended, Rev. 20.5.

Now I say that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision, for the truth
of God, to confirm the Promises made unto the Fathers, Romans 15.8.

By William Sherwin, Minister of the Gospel.

London, Printed 1674.

The first Bodily Resurrection of the Saints a Thousand Years before the rest
of the Dead, Rev. 20.5.
1. Proved four ways. 1. From the Text, with its dependancy as a Revelation,
and compared with Christ's Doctrine thereof, Luke 20.35, 36. 2. From the
Context, as an explication of Daniels Vision of the same matter and time, Dan.
7.9, 10, etc. 3. From many other Scriptures, Reasons and Arguments (together
with our whole System premised) proving the same. 1. Positively, that it is
Bodyly. 2. Negatively, that it is not spiritual, etc.
4. From sundry Texts in the Old and New Testament, speaking of the same thing
of which this Revelation, chapter 20, etc. is a sure Explication, with Answers to
sundry Objections.
2. Improved to diverse uses. 1. For Information, in nine particulars. 2. By
Reference to Uses of Terror and Consolation before. 3. For Admonition and
Warning to all that profess Christian Religion, now in the due season to
approve themselves as Wise Virgins, both in preparing and watching for the
Bridegrooms coming, shortly approaching, Rev. 16.15. 4. For Exhortation also,
to all such, to thankfulness, etc.

The Comprisal of our whole work, and the Divine Mysteries therein explained
and confirmed by many sorts of Arguments, deducted and drawn from the same
Principles by way of Preface unto a following Tract on Rev. 20.5.
DEar Christians, whose part shall be in the first blessed Resurrection, a
thousand years before the rest of the Dead. We having been, by Gods special
Grace, formerly lead in the way of Discovery, as by many other useful
distinctions contained in our Key, and applied in our whole work, so
particularly by our Distinctions, Assert. 6. of the same, of the several senses
of the comings of Christ, and more especially having first thereupon been led
on in the composing of our Practical Tract upon Rev. 22.20. setting forth
Christ's second Personal coming to destroy Antichrist, 1 These. 2.8. Dan. 7.9,
11, 13, 14. many ways distinguished from his descending a thousand years after,
at the last Trump and general Rapture, and glorious change of all the Saints, 1
These. 4.15, 16. and 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. For at the former he brings all the
Spirits of the deceased Saints that sleep in Jesus with him: at the latter,
they, and all the rest of the Saints, departed afterward, shall in the
twinkling of an eye be rapt up to meet him in the air. From the former Christ
withdraws at the end of the thousand years; after the latter, they shall ever
be with him the Lord. In the former, he comes in the Clouds, that through them
mortal eyes may then behold him: upon the latter, all Clouds will be abolished,
and Heaven and Earth will flee away before his face, and no plaee be found for
them, Rev. 20.11. when the rapt Saints eyes and wicked men's then raised will be
fitted to behold his glory on the great white Throne: at the former the wicked
Quick will be judged with temporal destruction, viz. Turk and Pope, and such as
do offend and work iniquity will be taken out of his Kingdom, Mat. 13.41. at
the latter, the Saints will first be rapt up before the wicked rise to be
judged: at the former, the Saints will be judged with a judgment of reward in
this world in the thousand years, Rev. 11.19. having before there suffered for
Christ, they shall then reign with him, upon the first said Resurrection: at
the latter, they shall be joined with Christ in judging the wicked: at the
former he comes from the right hand of his Father, to make his foes his
footstool; at the latter, he is said to descend with a shout, and the voice of
an Archangel and the Trump of God: at the first, he puts down all Rule, and
all Authority, and Power that stood against him, 1 Cor. 15.24. at the latter,
he destroys the last enemy, Death, v. 25. above a thousand years after: at the
former, Ezekiels Gog and Magog, chapter 38. 39. viz. the Turk and Pope will be
destroyed. The Turk with a complication of Judgments, v. 22. the other, by the
last Vial, Rev. 16. and Rev. 19. and Rev. 11. 19. before the New Jerusalem,
called Jehovah Shamma, shall be set up, Ezekiel. 40. to the end of that book,
wherein Daniel agrees, chapter 11.45. and chapter 12.1, 2, 3. at the latter, the last
Gog and Magog shall be consumed with fire from God out of Heaven, Rev. 20.9. at
the former will be the New Heavens, and the New Earth, being the time of the
restitution of all things; at the latter, will be the end of the world, and the
dissolution of all things: at the former, only the Saints will be raised, at
the first bodily Resurrection which Christ brought with him; but at the latter,
all the rest of the dead, viz. Saints departed since that former coming, and
all the wicked at the last Trump. These, or the like we considered in the
foresaid Tract.

We also found from Acts 3.19, 20, 21. that God had spoken of things to be
before in and after the said thousand years, as we have set down in 36.
particulars in our first convincing Argument in the Word Written) by the mouth
of all his holy Prophets since the world began, which we have in order made
manifest from page 44. of our Irenic. but more especially in chapter 5,6,7,8. of
the same, which may deserve your serious reading, and consideration, as being
another Divine Foundation of the same Truths.

Likewise upon the drawing up of those 16 Divine Theses, or Positions, page 3,
4, 5, 6. of the Irenicon, in the 11 and 12th of them is contained that needful
Distinction of the two fold Consideration of Christ's execution of his three
great Offices. 1. In respect of his Universal Church in the three great Periods
of the world: as the work the Father gave him to do in all times of his
Mediatorship. 2. In regard of the benefit always flowing from that undertaking
to all Gods faithful people by the operation of the holy Spirit in their Souls,
etc. The former we have handled in our next Practical piece on Genesis 3.15.
confirmed therein by Scripture, Reason, Experience, with many improvements made
thereof in the said Treatise, drawn up upon that said account, which I wish may
be well considered by all Christians as another Foundation of them.

In the next place we have as it were in some sort passed per saltum unto the
20th chap. of the Revelation: (many others having of late usefully handled
things in the first 19 Chapters) by our Abridgments thereof, of the order of
the times of the seven Seals, Trumpets and Vials; and of the Seal Prophecy,
and Book Prophecy, and in the Scheme of the Contemporaries in both, all which
we mentioned in our late account, which are almost accomplished, being all
before the Date of the Man of Sin be expired: that we might so more speedily
come to the consideration of the thousand years, chapter 20. wherein Christ will
reign with his raised Saints in the world, as is plainly asserted by the
representatives, Rev 5.10. which was our main drift, by Gods gracious
assistance, for the use of all his faithful people, whose concernment we are
more and more assertained it will shortly more and more appear to be
exceedingly above what is usually by most Christians apprehended of it: And
also by Abridgments of Daniels Visions for the Discovery of the Series, and
order of both those Mystical Prophesies of Dan. and the Revel. and thereupon
(as the 4th head of our method propounded chapter 1. of the Irenicon) we composed
our Book of Parallels to manifest the Revelation to be a Divine Mystical
Comment upon the sealed, or shut up parts or short hints in Daniels Prophecy;
which our Savior has orderly (though Mystically) explained, as we have often
said, (and it is a great truth of this nature to be known) whereby many former
mistakes of many men are evidently discovered (as we hinted formerly, Assert.
5. of the Key) for he that once attains, but competently, to apprehend the
subject, nature, order of times and scope of the book of the Revelation has
made a good progress in the study of that most excellent Divine book of
Prophecy. I will thus for your benefit a little here touch upon them.

1. First the Subject thereof are the Fates and State of the Church, and her
Enemies in the Roman Empire from Christ's Ascension to his coming again, to chapter
20. where first of the Asian Churches Declention, and the great Red Dragons 10
Persecutions till Constantines time for above 300 years to the end of the 6th
Seal, Rev. 6. And then come on Gods Judgments upon the Empire for persecuting
the Saints before, in ruining the Civil State thereof by the blasts of the 7
Trumpets, proceeding out of the seventh Seal; the 4 first whereof being the
milder (yet by the barbarous Nations deadly wounded the Western part in the
sixth head of the Emperors, chapter 8.) and about An. 600, The first Woe Trumpet
the Saracens, Rev. 9.1. fell upon a great part of the Eastern Empire, being the
King of the South, Dan. 11.40. and about 1100. the Turk began to overflow with
his multitudes, Dan. 11.40. being the King of the North, and the 2d Woe
Trumpet, Rev. 9.11. and the utter desolation of the last head who healed the
deadly wound given to the former head will be at Christ's appearance and
Kingdom, Rev. 11.15.

2. Secondly, The nature of this book is a double Scheme of these things that
concern the Civil State and Ecclesiastical State, and accordingly twice running
over the same times, in respect of each of them for about 1660. years and more.
First in the Seal Prophecy, chapter 6, 7, 8, 9. And then again of the
Ecclesiastic State in the little book, chapter 10. which begins chapter 12. with the
said primative persecutions in the Battle with the Dragon, etc. and the
Churches time, times, and an half from her entering into her wilderness
condition: wherein the Lords two Witnesses feed her by their Ministry 1260.
years, during Antichrists persecutions 42. months of years, (which are all the
same time, chapter 13.) and as the true Church was nourished by the said Witnesses
along her Wilderness condition; so by their Preaching shall Antichrist in the
time of the seven Vials be consumed thereby as by the breath of Christ's mouth,
chapter 14. which Vials are set down, chapter 15, 16. and explained and executed to chapter
20. about the time the last said Mystical Trumpet will sound, chapter 11.15. when
the Kingdoms of the world shall become the Kingdoms of God, and of his Christ.

3. Thirdly for the order and times thereof; See our several Abridgments
mentioned in our Account, p. 4. Inreference to the Parallel a Breviate of which
ye may also observe afterward in considering David's sure Mercies to be
performed in Christ, after he as Gods Commissioner upon his receivlng the Book
with seven Seals given to him by the Father, Rev. 11.1. to open the Seals, and
execute the Contents of the same, until he sit upon the Throne of his Father
David, Luke 1.32. which will be David's sure Mercies respecting his Kingdom for
ever.

4. Fourthly, as for the End, Drift and Scope of Revelation Prophecy, we have
of late specially endeavored to manifest it to be to show to the Church of
Christ what advantage and benefit she shall have by means of her former
sufferings for Christ, viz. to reign with him in his Davidical Kingdom in the
world, which as it may be manifest by our 8 Convincing Arguments in the Word
Written, and by our 12 Foundations of Faith: and our New Jerusalem upon Jer.
3.17. and also from our Key and account, yet we having of late obtained, by the
same grace of God, some farther Discoveries to this purpose, concerning this
farther Assertion respecting the drift and scope of Revelation Prophecy,
namely, That chapter Rev. 20. with the Jerusalem State set forth, Rev. 21, and 22.
are the great Key of all ancient revealed and promised Mercies to the faithful
Forefathers and their spiritual Seed, chiefly to be fulfilled in that state and
time of the said 1000. years; which that they shall be in the world, may appear
by our 15 Reasons approved of by the Learned, in our New Jerusalem, page 9, 10,
11. which excellent useful Key, as it is Divinely fitted by our great Prophet
the Lord Jesus Christ, the faithful and true witness, to make a strong, full
and clear Discovery of the Wisdom, Power and Justice of God against his, and
his Churches Enemies: so especially of the Mercy, Truth and Faithfulness of God
toward his faithful Servants, as being revealed, carried on, and to be
perfected; and that in many particulars, chiefly in those times which all true
Christians should in these last times, wherein they draw on a pace to be
fulfilled, know and be well instructed in, for their encouragement and comfort,
at present, to glorify God aforehand in respect of their Faith of them, that
so they may be better fitted and prepared hereafter so to do, when they shall
find in the enjoyment of them from what ancient foundations of Faith, such
manifold great happiness will be then derived unto them, in that world to come,
Heb. 2.5. in the renewed state thereof; which I doubt not to manifest by the
same Divine Assistance, very evidently to all serious unprejudiced and
understanding Christians, in the following Systeme, of Gods most gracious
Oeconomie or ordering his Household the Church in the same respects, of such
revealed, promised, or convenanted Mercies, chiefly respecting those times; but
passing thence to eternal blessedness, for on such, the second Death shall have
no power, etc.

Now as the glory of Gods wonderful free Grace, first published by himself to
Adam and Eve, Genesis 3.15. was by their faith applied as to redound to all their
faithful Posterity; so has God been graciously pleased to derive many rivolets
of like grace from the same fountain head, running their several courses in
their several times, but all falling in their fullest streams (Divine Wisdom
and Goodness so ordering the same) as it were into those more narrow Seas or
Streights of the said 1000 years, and from thence passing into the vast Ocean
of Eternity, whither they Saints shall all be conveyed in due time, order and
manner from their happy enjoyments in that state appointed for them; wherein in
the mean time his Wisdom, Mercy, Truth and Faithfulness will in such respects
shine out gloriously to them in so great enjoyments as they shall then obtain,
and will be thereby many ways more fitted (with the blessed Angels) to glorify
God the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, in their rendering all due praise unto him
for the same, both then, and for ever more: which they could never do if the
raised Saints at the first said Resurrection of their bodies had not a part in
all the happiness of that tryumphant state of Christ's Church in the said 1000.
years; and in all the benefits and privileges thereof, viz. of the said
revealed Promises and Covenants to the Fathers of old and their spiritual Seed,
which we hope to manisest in what follows, to be according to the word of Gods
said Revealed Grace, etc. And to that purpose we now proceed to the said
Systeme of Gods declared Mercy at the fall of Man, and in all the succeeding
Millenniums, or thousands of years in order following.

The System of Gods declared Mercy at the Fall for a thousand Generations, or
seven thousand Years, as by the Divine Guidance of his Word and Spirit (which
we shall ever humbly and thankfully desire to acknowledge to his Praise) he has
discovered to us, from the Fall of Man, to the end of the World: Especially as
is further disclosed by a double Key.
First, of Daniels Sealed hints of Prophecy to chapter 20. of Rev. Secondly, of
Gods most ancient Revealed and Promised Mercies to the end of the Revelation.
[Hinted also from Daniels Lot, Dan. 12.12.]

Of the order of the latter in the first Millen, or thousand years.
WHen God in the beginning had finished his great and good work of the Worlds
Creation in six days, and made Man his Deputy Ruler in it: and the Devil
maliciously, by the Serpents subtilty, and upon the advantage of the woman's
weakness, had brought about the woman's sin and man's fall: The Trinune Diety of
his own mere grace, was mercifully pleased, to manifest his most glorious
divine goodness, by a wonderful Declaration of his said free, and infinite
mercy toward lost mankind, and by himself to publish that Foundation, of all
future happiness (containing in the Womb of it) all future revealed and
promised mercies and Covenants to his Church, and People in all succeeding
times, by declaring that the seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head,
Genesis 3.15. which Christ in his Mediatorship, from that time undertook and has
and does, and will still carry on, until he shall make his Foes his Footstool,
Psalm. 101.1. eminently at the beginning of the 1000 years, by destroying Turk
and Pope, and taking out of his Kingdom all things that offend, etc. And by
binding Satan for that time, and totally and finally destroy all his Enemies at
the end, Rev. 20. which is largely considered in our treatise, upon that Text:
And will not these things greatly concern, the raised and living Saints too at
that time? especially to see the last most obstinate and desperate Enemies,
both taken of, and taken away for ever: Oh how will then the Heavens rejoice,
and the Earth be glad: What Halelujahs will then be sung by Angels and men, etc.

Secondly, When the old world was much heightened in wickedness: God also by
Enoch the 7th. Adam his blessed translation, as a worker of Righteousness,
excited men to well doing by Faith, and as a type of Christ, upon whose
ascension all his Followers shall twice ascend by Christ: First, in this Souls
by his powerful grace, during their natural Life: Secondly, In Soul and Body
both together, at the first blessed bodily Resurrection of the just, and at the
general Rapture of all the Saints at the last Trumpet, when the said 1000 years
shall be ended: And may not real good Christians, by their first ascending into
a state of grace, by Christ, guess what degrees of joy and happiness they shall
rise unto in Kingdom and Glory with Christ, at the Resurrection and Rapture?

And also by Enochs Prophetical Vision, of Christ's coming to Judgment in the
first and second Act thereof; recorded by Jude v. 14. Lo he comes with 10000
of his Saints, to execute Judgment, etc. to warn all men to avoid evil; the
first judicial Act thereof is set down, Dan. 7. at the the beginning of the
1000 years, the second Rev. 20.11. after the 1000 years are ended; and will not
all the said Saints magnify Gods Holiness. Power, Justice and Truth, in both
his so revealed, and then executed Acts of Judgment etc.

In the 2d. millen or 1000 years.
GOd about an 1656. did also by Noah a Preacher of Righteousness, 1. Typifie,
2. Covenant, 3. Prophecy concerning these times, and things after he had
warned the wicked world, then by his Preaching of Repentanae to them in the
time of the Arks preparation 120. years, when their wickedness was arrived to
the height; which Ark as it was for the saving of his own house then, or all
such penitent or believing Sinners, that would then come into it, wherein
safety then (as salvation at all times, is only to be had in the Church of
Christ.) So Christ will be the true and safe Ark of his Church, or Family, when
the the world in part, or in whole shall perish by Fire, at the beginning or
end of the 1000 years; and will not the remembrance of Noah; Ark, illustrate
Christ's glory then being the Antitype thereof, in doing such works for his
Saints, how will he then be admired of them, etc.

2. God also made a Covenant with Noah, confirmed by the Rainbow, the Token
thereof for the worlds preservation, from drowning to the end, and also gave
his blessings to men, and all sorts of Creatures upon the Earth, to make them
fruitful, Genesis 8, and 9. whereby the world continues with its fruitfulness,
ever fince by Seed time and harvest, as the great Stage for all Gods future
actings, in Mercies or Judgments, which his word testifies have chiefly their
fulfillings in the said 1000 years, after which time it must continue the
little space of Satan's loosing, And as the world will so long be the Stage for
such actings of God, until the New Heavens and the New Earth shall cease, so
its fruitfulness was to be the accommodation for all such purposes, but
especially the Earth in those times, must power out its plenty in abundance,
for the Churches-accommodation in that State, then says the 67th. Psalm. The
Earth shall yield her increase of those times, etc. so Joel 3.18. And it shall
come to pass in that day, that the Mountains shall drop down with new Wine, and
the Hills shall flow with Milk: [see more in our Key of Noah's Covenant.]

And as the Saints grace, and Gods goodness in the Earths fruitfulness will be
enlarged (after its so many thousand years bearing Fruit before) so it will be
much more fruitful in those last times of its being, (yet in its renewed
condition) whence also the praises of the Saints will be enlarged, and their
rejoycings also in such fulfillings, of such promised Mercies, etc.

3. For his prophecy when aftor the sin of that cursed Cham, occasioned by the
heinous offense of his Father Noah, (for the best Saints have need of their
Savior) yet when he through grace was awakened, by Repentance from his
drunkenness, God manifests his grace by him, in a like wonderful manner; not
only to Shem at present, entitling him to himself to be the Lord his God: But
also foreshews his purposed mercy to come to the Gentiles, the posterity of
Japhet, and accordingly his word gives witness to a twofold call which they
were after to have to dwell in the Tents of Shem, as Genesis 9.27. the first was
foretold by Hos. chapter 1.10.23. and applied by the Apostle Paul, Romans 9.25, 26.
upon the rejection of the Jews after Christ's first coming, Acts. 13. which was
the riches of the Gentiles, says the same Apostle, chapter 11. which time of grace
continues to the Gentiles, to Christ's 2 d coming; when upon the great
Restoration of the Jews and Israelites, the Gentiles will have their 2 d call,
when their great fullness will come in, which was foretold also by Moses in his
excellent song for pesterity, Deuteronomy. 32.43. Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people:
applied also by the same Apostle, Romans 15. when Christ being the Minister of
Circumsion, as he there styles him, v. 8. for the truth of God to confirm the
Promises made unto the fore, fathers (as he there plainly tells us with several
other Prophesies there, which shall also be thenfulfilled in the said 1000
years: And will not the Saints then be greatly affected in seeing the
accomplishment of such a mercy, and greatly praise God for it when his glorious
grace will shine out so abundantly to them therein, etc.

In the third Millen or 1000 Years.
WHen Lot about the year of the world 2440. had upon worldly allurements chosen
Sodom, and after thereupon was captivated by his Enemies, but delivered by
faithful. Abraham, God sent Melchiscdeck to bless him who had the Promises, as
a Type of Christ's prevailing, perpetual Priesthoed to be of his order: to whom
he then paid Tithes of all, as the payment of all due honor will be rendered
unto Christ by all his Saints in the said 100 years, and by all Creatures also,
Rev 5. but especially by all those, whose great High Priest he shall then
appear to be (and probably will by a presential intercession appear to be then)
for such as shall be in the natural life, viz. a Priest upon the Throne, as
Zach. 6.13. and also the raised Saints security then and for ever: And as this
Melchisedeck Priest of the most high God was also King of Salem; so also Christ
will then be the great King of the New Jerusalem, Mat. 5.35. all the said 1000
years: And as Abraham was blessed by Melchisedeck after the slaughter of those
Kings; so Abraham and his faithful Seed will appear really blessed, when Christ
makes his own and their Enemies his footstool; so the Saints will then find
the mercies derived to them from many currents of long conveyances, and still
more matter to them of praise and rejoicing, etc.

When Abraham that righteous man, as by Esaias he is called, was sent on his foot
by Gods Divine Call, Genesis 12. about the year of the World 2460. God was
gracioufly pleased to make free Promises and Covenants, seven distinct times to
and with Abrahans (as they are particularly set down in our Key) and after him
to Isaac and Jacob successively, to give the Promised Land of Canaan
personally to themselves: which Promise the Apostle declares, Heb. 11. they saw
a far off by Faith, and died, not having received the same; wherefore as he
also showed they did not in their lives seek to possess it, but as men
expecting to have the said Promise of God made good unto themselves at the
Resurrection of the just, they bought burying places there to have their bodies
interred (as also Joseph's bones after were) until they should all rise again
then to possess it in the renewed state thereof: for they looked for an
heavenly country, such as then that state will be, excellently fitted then by
God for that their condition. At first also the said Promise was made to all
Abraham's Seed, natural and spiritual, through that one Divine feed Christ (as
the Apostle teaches) to spring in time from Abraham's Loins according to the
flesh, Gal. 3.16. by whom also all the spitual seed by faith should obtain
their lot in that blessed state by Promise, v. 29. concerning which two sorts,
the Scripture sets forth many differences. The natural Seed was to inherit the
Promised Land after Abraham's, Isaacks, and Jacobs death, 430 years after the
Promise was first made: but the spiritual will be joint heirs not only with
Abraham, but also with Christ in the said renewed state, when he shall sit upon
his own Throne as the Son of David. The former were to be in Bondage long after
the Promise, the spiritual are made free indeed by Christ the Son of God so
soon as they are made the Sons of God by Adoption and Grace, besides what will
after appear they shall be when Christ shall appear, 1 John 3.2. The former
were compared to the dust of the earth for multitude, Genesis 13.16. but the
spiritual Seed was compared to the Stars of Heaven, not only for multitude, but
excellency, Genesis 15.5. explained by the Apostle, Pom. 4.17, 18. and Gal. 3. the
whole Chapter. The natural Seed entered into a Covenant with God in their own
strength and brake it; but as for the other God makes a new Covenant with them,
and undertakes the keeping thereof by them, that they shall not depart from
him. The natural were delivered from an outward bondage, which they were many
ways liable to fall under again; the other are not liable to be enslaved again
by their spiritual enemies: the natural for their provocations, wandered in a
worldly Wilderness long before they obtained the promised land: The other are
in a spiritual Wilderness, amongst such sinners by whom they are persecuted for
well doing: The natural had miraculous provision made for their bodies, yet
through unbelief, that Generation came short, and they died in the Wilderness;
but the spiritual are fed by the Sackcloth witnesses, who are appointed to feed
the woman's Seed in her wilderness condition: the natural were brought into the
land of Canaan long after Abraham, by Joshua the Son of Nun: The spiritual will
be brought into its said renewed state by the Antitype of Joshua the true Jesus
and their great Messiah at his second coming. The natural seed had a rest that
was afterward polluted by their sin, and therefore God foretold them that rest
should cast them out with a sore destruction, Mich. 2.10. (as after it did) but
the spiritual shall be brought into that rest that remains for the people of
God, viz. the Sabbatism of the worlds continuance when Christ's rest there will
be glorious all the said time, and when God will set to his hand the second
time to recover his people, Isa. 11.10, etc. with many illustrations there and
else where declared: for the natural a Jerusalem and Pemple were built by men
for typical worship: the spiritual shall have a New Jerusalem whose maker and
builder is God, where the Lamb will be the Temple of it: for the sin of the
natural seed the Heathens entered and defiled the typical Temple, but no
Canauite shall come into the New, or any unclean thing enter into it: And
though the last Gog and Magog will wickedly, when Satan is loosed at the end of
the 1000 years, attempt to besiedge both the Holy City and the Camp of the
Saints, yet they shall be destroyed by fire from God out of Heaven in that
attempt which will bring on the utter destruction of them all By these and the
like differences may be discerned that what the natural Seed obtained, were but
dark shadows of those excellencies which the spiritual Seed by Faith shall
inherit in that world to come, as the Children of Abraham; for as the Apostle
Paul ye are all heirs according to promise, Gal. 3.29. viz. of the land of
Canaan renewed, or in the New Jerusalem state to come in the world, which will
be perfected in eternal blessedness in Heaven: And therefore God made it his
memorial through all generations, that he was the God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob in giving them personally that promised land in the said renewed state
thereof, and to all their spiritual seed circumcised and uncircumcised, to
inherit then the same, together with them, which Mr. Mede manifests to be the
scope of our Saviors Argument against the Saduces, Mat. 22.32. viz, that since
he was the God of the living; they shall live again to inherit that promised
land; and I doubt not but that these Divine Mysteries will then be found real
verities; and how will the hearts of all those Saints (then) be enlarged from
the said Covenants and Promises accomplished to them, with praises and
rejoycings upon that account also, etc.

Here also may be added Baalams Parable put into his mouth by God when be was
hired by Balack King of Moah to Curse Israel, by turning his intended Curs into
an eminent (...) foretelling of (...), of which (...) but a shadow (...) away
(as was (...) ^^mb. 24.7, 8, 9. and v. 17. (...) the Star out of Jacoh and
Scepter out of Israel that shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the
Children of Seth, v. 18, 19. and out of Jacob shall come he that shall have the
Dominion, and v. 24. she shows that the Ships of Chit, tim (the Roman Navy,
Dan. 11.40, etc.) should afflict Ashur and Eber, being the Jews last oppressor,
should perish for ever, or go into perdition, as Rev. 17. which will be
fulfilled at Christ's appearance in destroying that man of Sin, when that evil
Dominion shall cease in the world. Much more might be here added of Christ's
unwalling the Children of Seth as a prevailing King, when he shall be the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5. and be that Star out of Jacob, and
have the Dominion, v. 17.19. which will be eminently verified in his said 1000
years Reign with his Saints, with other matters agreeing to the Judgment of
Jewish Rabbis, and pious Christians respecting the same; but I study brevity,
etc. This may suffice: Now can we think that when the living and raised Saints;
shall in the said state see these things fulfilled, from such complicated
evidences happily derived unto them, that they will not make suitable returns
to God, for such in-comes of his ancient declared goodness, etc.

Moses also appears in his blessing of Judah, Deuteronomy. 33.7. to be directed by the
Spirit of God, chiefly to respect Christ at that time, when God will bring him
to his People to convert them, about his great appearance approaching, and that
his hands shall be sufficient for him, then to be the Lord, mighty in Battle,
Psalm. 24. with many other expressions elsewhere; and that God would be an help
to him against his Enemies, as Deuteronomy. 33.7. though some gradually applications
hereof have in some sort been not unfitly made yet the chief appearance
according to the tenor of Scripture, to be when he shall eminently make his
Foes his Footstool, Psalm. 110.1, v. 5, 6, 7. subduing the Potentates of the
Earth, then found to oppose him, and especially that head over diverse
Countries for the Original (...) is singular, not heads, but head, fitly
expounded to be the Pope, who assumes himself an universal headship over diverse
Countries: So that hence it may be more and more manifest, that all such
ancient predictions till David's Kingdom, and his sure mercies, in reference to
Christ's said Kingdom; all not only refer to that time and State, but then
shall have their chief fulfillings, when Christ shall then come to reign his
and their Enemies, and reward his faithful Servants, Rev. 11.9. and 22.12.

Come we now to consider that which appears to be the last, anciently revealed
or contented mercy of this nature, wherein all Saints then shall be
intercessed, and chiefly bears the Title of the Kingdom of Christ: For in the
New Jerusalem, they shall be intercessed, as the faithful Spiritual Seed of
Abraham, but in their Reign with Christ, as the meek and upright spiritual
Children of David, whose Soul was as a weaned Child, Psalm. 131. And such then
shall inherit the Earth, and delight themselves in the abundance of Peace,
Psalm. 37.11. which yet they have not obtained, but shall says our Savior,
Math. 5.5. having in that State that Portion and Lot, in this sure mercies of
David, Isa. 55.3.

In the fourth Millen or 1000 Years.
Toward the end of the third, and the beginning of the fourth Millen: We may
place what concerns both David and Solomon, whose Buildings of the Temple is
reckoned by Usher to be about the 3000th. year of the world, and about the
middle of the time of the first 6000 years, (though (happily) the little space of
Satan's loosing, after the seventh Millen, may be allowed to make up some part
of the sixth before it,) yet there are some differences, by several learned
Persons discovered in Chronology, both under the Old and New Testament: And
therefore Chronological Conjectures, ought to be in some probable Latitude, etc.

Come we then in the next place to David's Kingdom, not as it was given him as
the Son of Jesse; specially appointed thereunto by Gods peculiar designment, to
be Anointed by Samuel: But as by a new divine Character, it was by Nathans
Message confirmed for ever, through his one divine seed Christ, 2 Samuel 7.8,
9. to 17. and accordingly by David's Faith, Thankfulness and Prayer, afterward
improved from v. 16. to the end of the Chapter: (which we largely considered in
our seventh Foundation of Faith) which great and most excellent confirmation
was, after David's grievous fall in the matter of Vriah, and his Repentance, and
his many Scourges suffered upon that account, for a long time; (for the
freeness and seasonableness of such, Gods promised mercy to David, ought to be
well observed by us) as in all the former said Examples, given from time to
time) for the glory of Gods divine Wisdom, Mercy, Truth and Faithfulness, to be
then manifest throughout all Ages, and Generations of the world until the
Saints; especially in those times, when they shall see and enjoy all their
greatest accomplishments, both praising Gods holy name for the same, and
exceedingly rejoicing in them, in their several conditions, of both such saved
and newly raised Saints: Therefore by Nathans said Message to David, God took
occasion upon David's good puopose, to build God an house (when David enjoyed
peace after his former troubles, which God well accepted of as to the matter
intended, but yet for some Reasons he assigned that work over to Solomon his
Son; yet (I say) took occasion thereupon to make to David the largest Charter,
and to give the greatest assurance of David's sure mercies, in respect of the
several States of his Kingdom for ever; that was ever given to any mortal man,
in many respects there observable, (as we showed) the one was conditional for
his immediate natural Seed, his Son Solomon (if he stood upright) who was to
build that same glorious Temple at Jerusalem, which after he did being therein
a Type of Christ; yet afterward did by his grievous fall, also cut off that
long intayl of his Kingdom (otherwise) to his natural race, which was soon
after divided by the loss of ten Tribes, in his Son Rehoboams time; being then
engaged in Idolatry upon politic accounts, the Cause of the misery and speedy
captivity, which afterward was in both parts, by the succeeding provocations of
others, taken away from Israel first, and after from Judah also. But the second
was absolute to David's divine spiritual Seed Christ the Son of God, that was to
become man, in an extraordinary way and most wonderful manner, by being born of
that blessed Virgin, that was to come of David's Race, who as the Angel told her
at his birth, should sit on the Throne of his Father David, Luke 1.32. as the
Prophet Isaiah had foretold, that there should be no end of the increase of his
Government, and Peace upon the Throne of David and upon his Kingdom, to order
it and to establish it, with Judgment and with Justice for ever; (as he had
promised in the said Message by the Prophet Nathan) to the end of the World, or
as in Psalm. 89.29. That his said Divine Seed shall continue for ever, and his
Throne as the days of heaven, and that in the greatest extent over Sea and
Land, with the highest Exaltation many ways illustrated, as for Gods first born
higher then the Kings of the Earth, ver. 25, 27, etc. and to be then the Prince
of the Kings of the Earth, as he is styled Rev. 1.5. And though for the
successive great provocations of others also of David's natural Seed, and
especially of Manisseh and Zedekiah, from whom that Crown was then last taken
away with a manifold Declaration of Gods heavy displeasure against him, the
last of David's said natural Seed, as the profane wicked Prince of Israel;
saying by Ezekiel chapter 21. Remove the Diadem, take away the Crown, this shall
not be, and I will overturn, overturn, overturn till hethat is Christ the
spiritual Seed of David) come. Whereupon was that long interim, or interruption
of David's Kingdom, in the four Monarchies following, revealed to Daniel twice,
chapter 2. and chapter 7. (during the Gentiles Dominion all that time (probably) for
the space of 2300 years. Dan. 8.26. for which observe the Reasons in our
summary of Daniel; yet God did also there declare himself (even when the
Tabernacle of David was falling) mindful of David's sure mercies, in and by his
said blessed Seed [Christ] to come, (when all the said four mettle Kingdoms,
at once shall pass away, as the chafe of the Summer threshing floor, Dan.
2.35.) saying, further by the Prophet Ezekiel; (with whom all other Prophets,
some ways concur in the same matter,) when he whose right it is shall come,
namely Christ, that he would give it him; who is now gone to Heaven to receive
it, Luke 19. and when the (...) long interim, of the said four Monarchies is
passed (of which now but little remains) he will return, and the fallen
Tabernacle of David, shall in him be raised up again, as the Prophet James
applied, the Prophecy of Amos, chapter 9.11. at that famous Counsel at Jerusalem,
Acts 15. with reference to the Gentiles great fullness under Christ's said
Kingdom, then to come in also: By whose first coming to take man's nature in a
Tabernacle of our Flesh, for at that time, God according to his prediction,
Dan. 2.28. set up the spiritual Kingdom of the Stone, cut out of the Mountain
without hands in the first State of it, in the time and height of the Roman
Dominion, being one and the last of the said four Gentil Kingdoms, which by
Daniel and Christ's one Revelation, was thence to continue above sixteen hundred
years; wherein Gods said, spiritually powerful and prevailing Kingdom of the
Stone; should Divinely (in the said time of the Dragon and Beast, after to come
and continue, to act their parts so long) proceed powerfully by degrees, to
bring on the ruin of that said last, of the four Monarchies, viz. the Roman
and therewith all the broken parts of the three former which shall be certainly
performed at Christ's appearance and Kingdom, as the Apostle Paul plainly
declares. 2 Timothy 4.1.

And then all Satan's Babilonisn designs in all his three Babets will come to
utter confusion, viz. the confusion of tongues and divisions in the first, will
then be dissolved by oneness of language and unity: Tyranny and Cruelty, by
Meekness and Peacefulness: and the great Mystery Babylon fully be discovered,
defeated, dissolved when the Mystery of God shall be finished; which we largly
considered chap. 5. of our Irenicon of the said three Babels: The foundation of
all which was laid by Nimrod in Assyria; which Title of the Assyrian seems upon
that account to be given to the Turk at his ruin, Mich. 5.5. This man [Christ]
shall be our peace when the Assyrian shall come into our land, and v. 6. Thus
shall he deliver us from the Assyrian, etc. To which purpose

In the fifth Millen or 1000 years
GOd the Father in a glorious Vision of the substance of Revelation Prophecy
both for the order and end thereof, Rev. 5. gives the book to the Lamb that had
been slain and was alive again, to open the contents thereof under the seven
Seals to that coming of Christ, and makes him also his Commissioner (as we
noted) impowering him also to execute the same, as being that Lamb that has
seven horns, and seven eyes, that is, has perfect power, and perfect wisdom,
fully, by degrees in due order, to accomplish the same, according to the double
Scheme of Prophecy contained in the Book of Revelation. First in the
Seal-prophesie, for the ruin of the Civil State, which under the first five
Seals, after rejected the offers of Christ, and bloodily persecuted his Saints
in the time of the ten great Persecutions, with others, by Satan's prevailing
power amongst them: who under the sixth Seal, as a great Red Dragon, was by
Constantine the Great, after 320 years cast down from his heaven of
Paganism-worship to the earth: since which time he has sought upon a new
design to pervert Christian Religion, and the Worship of the true God: First by
Errors and Heresies against the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, above an hundred
years following: and after that to Paganize Christian Religion it self, by his
new design then of two Beasts, Rev. 13. giving thereunto his great power and
authority to contrive and promote a new Paganism, or Idolatry, under a specious
Visour of seeming and pretended Christianity; of which in the little Book chapter
10, etc. But from under the seventh Seal proceed the seven Trumpets, sounding
out the wrath of God by degrees of Judgments against the Civil State of Rome;
by the four first milder Trumpets to destroy it in the West; in Empire, City,
and Senate: And after in the East by the first Woe Trumpet the Saracens to take
away one half thereof, Rev. 9.1. from about An 600. and forward, being that
King of the South, Dan. 11.40. that in the time of the Holy Wars, so called,
seemed to push at the Roman Armies, etc.

And in the sixth Millen or 1000. years.
CHrist has since according to the Fathers said Commission by that second Woe
Trumpet of the Turk. [who is therefore Christ's Servant] as Nebuchadnezzar was
said to be Gods] from about An. 1300. has taken away by his overflowings with
his multitudes, the other part of the Eastern Empire, being that King of the
North, Dan. 11.40. described also in his actings, Rev. 3.11, etc. who is to
continue his day, and hour, and month, and year, to destroy the third part of
men in the same 396 years of his Date, till that Empire cease to be, v. 45.
probably about An. 1700. with which the Beast was in great part to
contemporate, with the Churches time, times, and half, in her wilderness
condition, and also the two sackcloth Witnesses to feed the Church, and consume
the Beast by their Prophecy 1260 years, as by the breath of Christ's mouth,
till he at the end of the Beasts 42 months (all being of the same time) shall
destroy the Beast and the false Prophet at the appearance of his said coming
and Kingdom, 2 These. 2.8. 2 Timothy 4.1.

To which purpose upon the Jews Captivity, and sad fall of David's said
Tabernacle, God did in that time by his contemporary mystical Prophets, Ezekiel
and Daniel, reveal the time of Isreal's Restoration, more darkly by Ezekiel,
chapter 37. also showing Gog and Magog must be removed, chapter 38, and 39. before the
New Jerusalem should be set up, called Jehova Shamma, chapter 40. to the end of the
Book. But then to Daniel God was pleased more fully and clearly to set forth
the [interim] or time of the four Monarchies. 1. Of Babylon. 2. Medo-Persian.
3. Greece. 4. Rome, which were to pass in the said 2300. years before David's
Tabernacle should be raised up again in Christ. But that the Kingdom of the
Stone should first be set up, as God foreshewed, Dan. 2.28. which was done
above 1600 years past, in the time and height of the last, or Roman Empire,
utterly (as was said) to beat to dust the said four Mettle Kingdoms. And God
showed the same to Daniel in Vision of the four Beasts destroying each other,
until the last should be destroyed by Christ at his first act of Judgment
against the Beast, Dan. 7.11. Whereupon he had the Vision of Christ's coming in
the Clouds of Heaven, when the Kingdom and Dominion of all Nations should be
given to him, and that under the whole Heaven, v. 13, 14, 27. which will be
David's sure mercies for his Kingdom and Throne to continue for ever upon that
raising again of his Tabernacle fallen above 2000 years before, and will be
also Christ's Davidical Kingdom of his 1000 years Reign with his Saints,
revealed by himself, Rev. 20.4. whereby as was said Gods wisdom, power, mercy,
truth and faithfulness, will gloriously shine out to all those Saints in that
respect (as in all the former before) both for his destroying the wicked then,
as foretold, and so exalting his Saints to their great rejoicing and triumphant
happiness in that excellent state of the New Jerusalem, and restitution of all
things by Christ their great King, Savior, and Messiah.

In the seventh Millen or 1000 Years.
1. SAtan is bound for 1000 years, but to be loosed again for a little season
when the 1000 years are ended, Rev. 20.3.

2. Christ Reigns with his then raised Saints at the first blessed bodily
Resurrection the same 1000. years, v. 4, 5.

3. The said raised Saints remain in the happy enjoyment of the Vision of
Christ's glory, Joh. 17.24. in his Kingdom given to him by God the Father in the
New, Holy, Great, and Beloved Jerusalem, enjoying then happy communion with
Christ their head, and with one another in that state, being so made perfect in
one, as Christ prayed, Joh. 17. and as his Spouse or Bride one with himself,
Rev. 19. and Rev. 21.9. and with the holy Angels, all joining with the
inferior Creatures in their orders, to praise God the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, for his great and glorious work of Creation and Redemption (as by that
glimps of the end of Revelation Prophecy chapter 4, 5. may be discerned) being all
then in an undisturbed, happy state in their several degrees, whilst Satan is
bound and sealed up in the bottomless pit; that he may not tempt the nations
any more till the 1000 years be ended, v. 3. all remaining in an happy peace,
so long without being attempted against by any enemies.

4. Christ's Servants, viz. the raised Saints, chiefly will then serve him, Rev.
22.3. as their business and happiness so to do, chapter 7.15,

5. Christ will be their light to them both, spiritual and visible, and both
glorious, in whose light, his Saints will then see light at the Revelation of
all things, (probably) as to Mysteries, Creatures and Providence, when the
mystery of God is finished, and the light of the Moon shall be as the light of
the Sun, and the light of one day, as the light of seven days. Is. 30.

6. The Nations of them that are then saved, will walk in the light of the said
great holy and beloved Jerusalem, come down from God out of Heaven, all the
said 1000 years, being the Spirits of just men, before made perfect, to receive
then from Christ their spiritual Bodies, also Rev. 21.24.

7. The Kings of the Earth shall bring their Glory and Honor to it, in the
same v.

8. Also they shall bring the Glory and Honor of the Nations to it, v. 26.

9. God will then dwell amongst them, and all Tears shall be wiped from their
Eyes, chapter 21.3, 4, and 7, 16, 17.

10. All the glorious Privileges of the Paradise of God, of the Tree of Life,
whose Leaves are for the healing of the Nations, and of the pure River, clear
as Crystal, proceeding from the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, and all the
glorious excellencies assigned and belonging to it; which all those happy
raised Saints will then know by experience; how wonderful, great and excellent
they are in their Fruition thereof, the said 1000 years.

11. And though Satan when he is loosed will seduce his last Gog and Magog, to
attempt to besiedge the beloved City, and the Camp of the Saints; yet Christ
has before hand resolved them, that it shall only be an attempt, and the Devil
and all his Agents shall then be consumed by Fire from God, out of Heaven in
the said attempt, and the Fabric of the world shall suddenly then be
dissolved, upon the sounding of the last Trumpet, and the general rapture and
change of all the Saints, to meet Christ in the Air, coming to sit upon that
great white Throne, at the last Judgment, Rev. 20.11. From whose Face, the
Earth and the Heaven shall fly away, and no place shall be found, for them,
Rev. 20.11. And has not Christ himself revealed all these things in an evident
manner: That may suffice all Christians, and rational men of their reallity;
and how then should all sound serious and conscientious Christians, from the
consideration of these things, now hinted to them, with many more that might
from Gods word be set before them to such purpose, be stirred up to love the
appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Apostle professed for himself, with
that great encouragement to all others, to partake with him of a Crown of
Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8.

2. To long for his said appearance, when he comes without sin, having fully
satisfied for that at his first coming; but then only for salvation to his
People, to deliver them from all their Enemies, and even the inferior
Creatures with them; from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty
of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21. And to have their own bodies redeemed from the
Prison, and the corruption of the Grave, and have powerful grace, as the Angels
in Heaven in their condition; and even those also in the natural Life, shall
serve Christ in Holiness and Righteousness before him, all the days of their
life, Luke 1.74, 75.

3. And that they may love his appearance, and long for it, let them labor
continually to be fitted for it, etc. and this rather, because many ways; the
time thereof seems to be near approaching, not only in regard that most of
the preceding Predictions are fulfilled, but also because we find the
computations of years; which the Holy Ghost seems to set down, of the Jews
great Restoration, and of the destruction of the Churches Enemies, are shortly
to be completed, of which two in Daniel, and two in the Book of the
Revelations, appear very considerable to that purpose; which we shall endeavor
here to set down, as some of the Grounds and Reasons of such our Conjecture:
From those 4. Computations of the said mystical Numbers, formerly more fully
explained in our Parallel of Daniel, and the Book of the Revelation, and upon
the ruin and desolation of the Remane Monarchy as follows.

The first is from the 2300. days of years, in Daniel 8, 26. by Palmomi or the
secret Numberer, seeming to refer to the end of the Jews Captivity referring to
the time of the end, v. 17. and to the last end of the indignation, viz. of God
against that captivated People: The like to the same purpose is also
observable, where Daniel declares the Roman Kingdom shall prosper till the same
time, viz. until the indignation shall be accomplished, for (says he) that
that is determined, shall be done, Chapter 11.36. So again upon the same account;
The Sacrifice and Oblation shall cease, for the over spreading of Abominations,
he shall make Jerusalem [taken by Titus and Vespatian] desolate, even until the
Consummation, and that determined, shall be powered out upon the desolate, Dan.
9.27. See many other Reasons upon Dan. 8.26. In our Summary of Daniels Visions:
This Computation of 2300 years, was from the destruction of the Temple by
Nebuchadnezzers Army, then carrying the Jews captive to Babylon, to their great
Restoration at Christ's appearance, is by Scripture and Chronology thus
computed: at Babylon 70. years under the Medes and Persians, about 80. years,
till Daniels 70. weeks, when the Edict went out for building the City
Jerusalem, about 3549; when is reckoned by their Kings Reigns, to be about 80
years more, and Daniels weeks, to the end of the half week; when Christ had
finished his Sacrifice of himself, for our sins; which was in all 640 years
more, and from thence to about that year, which we reckon will be 1700. will so
be made up 2300. years.

Secondly, For the 2335. years, in Dan. 12. from the effectual taking away of
Sacrifice, in Julian the Apostate Emperors time, when not only many Heathen
Idolatries, were encouraged by him, but he also in opposition to Christian
Religion, allowed the Jews out of the public charge, to Rebuild their Temple
for Sacrifice; whereupon Historians Record that God by miraculous Tokens of his
displeasure, by Fire, Tempest, Earthquakes, etc destroyed such as were employed
in the said work, and not only burnt up the very Tools they wrought with: But
cast out the very Stones which they had laid for the Foundation thereof:
Whereupon an Ancient observed that then Christ's words were fulfilled, that one
Stone should not be left upon another, which should not be cast down, which
times reckoned by Bishop Usher to be Anno Dom. 363. unto which if 1335. of
Daniels said account be added, it is near about 1700.

The two other Numbers in the Revelation are first the date of the man of sin,
his forty two months, or 1260 years, conceived to begin before 420. when the
ten Kings were up at one hour with the Beast, Rev. 17.12. to which said 420
years or less; if there be added the 20 or 30 years to come, being the
remainder of the 6th Vial, they will all together amount to about 1700 at the
time of Antichrists destruction.

Lastly, As to the Turks day and hour, and month, and year to destroy the
third part of man, computed by Mr. Mede 396 years, who is the second woe
Trumpet, to destroy the Roman Empire in the East, Rev. 9.11. and Dan. 11.40.
which being added to 1300 or somewhat more, when the Ottoman Family, according
to Chronology, obtained the power; it will with the other 396 make up about
1700. All which computations though by Reason of some differences, in
Chronology before Christ's birth, and since (as Bishop Usher observed) we may
not attempt to determine day, or hour, or year; yet within a competent
Latitude; the Spirit of God seems in these particulars, to give just ground of
conjecture, that men of the world may be admonished of its fleeting state, to
prepare for the great shakings and changes, that seem shortly to draw near
therein: By these Computations and other matters observeable to such purposes,
from the Book of God: Since the Jews Restoration is pointed out by the 2
former in Daniel, and the destruction of the Enemies of Christ, and his Church
in the 2 latter; which the Holy Scripture declares will be the work of Christ,
at his said great appearance now approaching.

Whence also we made our Conjecture of the most literal sense of the Number of
the Beast, Apoc. 13. 666. [as Belshazzers Kingdom was numbered when it ended at
his death] though other observations of the Number 1666. may also be consideder
able to other purposes) but if we reckon the appearance of Christ, and his
Kingdom to be about 1700. according to the the four said computations, at which
said appearance of his presence, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. The Apostle says he will
destroy the man of Sin, then reckon backward for the Epoc. of his Number of
1666. (for it is agreed by learned men, that the whole Number of a thousand is
there understood to be added) and it will fall out so to begin about Christ's
Ascension, from whence to his descending again, will so be made up 1666 years,
viz. about the said time conceived to be the Period, of the said four
computations; and from our Saviors birth, by the common account 1700, at the
said Beasts destruction; and his Ascension, when Christ led Captivity captive,
seems more suitable to point out by the said Number, his Visible conquest over
the remaining Powers of the world that oppose him.

About which time, not only will probably appear the most eminent fulfillings,
of Gods most anciently revealed mercies, in his powerful, effectual and eminent
breaking of the Serpent [Satans] head, by taking away or destroying, such his
Churches Enemies, and treading down Satan himself under the Saints Feet, as the
Apostle Paul foretold, shortly or swiftly, Rom 16.20. in the order of
accomplishment. First, By his binding, Rev. 20.2. and after by casting him
(upon the ruin of his last Gog and Magog) into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone
for ever, v. 18. And then Gods Wisdom, Power, Mercy, Truth and Faithfulness,
will gloriously appear toward both the Jews and Gentiles, as the spiritual
Seed of Abraham, by the destruction of the Enemies of them both: But more
especially then, in the raising up the Tabernacle of David in Christ his divine
Seed, and in setting up of his said Kingdom; who as we have showed shall
gloriously sit upon David's Throne, for ever to the end of the world, in a
peaceful and blessed Estate: And if the word of God did not give Testimony, in
all the said particulars from the said Predictions, promised Mercies and
Covenants; it had been high presumption so to have asserted them: But since as
we have pointed out thus briefly, yet very evidently his word does largly,
fully and clearly hold them out; Let men henceforth upon due consideration of
these things, take heed of opposing and gainsaying these evident Truths, which
he will shortly bring to pass; and no power of Men or Devils shall in the in
the least hinder any of them; as Christ will manifest when the Mystery of God
is finished, Rev. 10. and it is to be hoped when many serious and unprejudiced
and judicious Christians, have sought God by Prayer, and due search of the Holy
Scripture; from these Foundations well pondered by them, that they may be
herein satisfied, that such a blessed rest and refreshment from the presence of
the Lord. remains to the People of God; whereby such persons may evidently
discern with me, that such precious Jewels of Revelation Mysteries, are highly
to be valued, and it is ignorance of these things, which is the great Reason,
why many esteem them not as they ought: and that this most sacred and divine
Book of the Revelation of Jesus Christ; by his beloved Servant and Disciple
Saint John, (which is the Diamond in the golden Ring of Holy Writ) is not duly
prized by them: and particularly in this respect, that it affords light and
Luster to all parts of Holy Script. without which men are not like otherwise
rightly to discern the same; concerning the matters here rendered to them, as we
by experience find more and more, to the Glory and Praise of that true Light,
who lightneth every man that comes into the World, according to that proportion
he is pleased, to dispense the same, unto them.

And thus much of our preparative Preface and Comprisal, both of our said
former work and substance of the divine Mysteries contained therein, with what
further discoveries God has been graciously pleased to offer unto the present
world, by the hand of so weak and unworthy an instrument by the help of the
said last Key, of most ancient prophecy, Rev. 20.21, 22. (as before said) and
to precede our intended Treatise on Rev. 20.5. Of the first bodily Resurrection
of the Saints.

The chief improvement we shall by Gods assistance, endeavor here to make of
what has been said, briefly is, for information of Christians of the exceeding
great usefulness, and manifold excellencies of all such ancient, revealed and
promised Mercies and Covenants, made to and with the said fore Fathers and
Saints, that have their particular and most eminent fulfillings, from the
guidance of this said divine Key, and other parts of Gods word; yet remaining
to be gloriously accomplished by Christ himself, in the world to come, or 1000
years of his Reigh with his Saints; There is an Heavenly Treasure of happiness
contained in them; for all such Saints at the first blessed resurrection to be
given to them thereupon; so that if their said Promises and Covenants, be not
by men extended to that said state, they exceedingly narrow the Mercy and Grace
of God therein, and as much as in them is, deprive all such Saints of their
right then in them: And this may further appear by touching a little upon the
diverse usefulness, and manifold excellencies of the same.

First, They are most ancient, for they are all virtually contained in that
most ancient one, Ge. 3.15. which was not in the beginning (as Christ, the word
was) but in the beginning of man's need of such Gospel Grace, God speedily
revealed it, as the summary of all that followed and all the said branches that
sprang out of that Root, are by the word of God manifest, to be of the same
nature, having a tendency and that chiefly to those said last times.

No sooner had Satan at the fall marred Gods work of Creation, but upon the
trial of all the Offenders, the most glorious Declaration proceeds from Father,
Son and Holy Ghost of restoring lost man, and the whole Creation of God in the
Issue, as many ways since by Gods word is evident, which by Christ and the holy
Spirit are in all times since, carrying on to the end, a work that is every way
wonderful that the Son of God should pay the Ransom in man's Nature, by dying
for sin, who was perfectly Righteous, not to free man and the Creation from
ruin only, but to redeem both it and him to himself; yea to restore both into
a better state, to make him both surely and perfectly blessed, in a way and
state unconceivable and unutterable; for Christ the Woman's Seed is not a
Privative only, but a positive Savior, nor a partial, but every way a perfect
Savior, and this short comprehensive Gospel contains all in it by Christ, to
be obtained for his Saints for ever: Away with false Oracles and Fictions of
vain Heathens, of their antiquities, here is only true antiquity, and the best
antiquity to be found; and all the others issuing from this if a part ante
they be not so ancient, yet a part post they shall be as lasting (as in their
particulars we showed from Gods word) but yet without this divine Key, we had
not known where to fix them, etc. consider them particularly with reference
thereunto, as we have given Scripture Foundation, and as we shall, by Divine
assistance, further manifest, etc. The subduing of the last great Enemies, the
Saints enjoying of the happiness of Christ's Davidical Kingdom, and of the New
Jerusalem State, have all their infallible Grounds from some or more, of the
said Foundations, as was particularly made to appear, etc. and that they were
all as well as the first, freely and graciously given, did appear by occasions
that God usually took to make them known, upon some sailing or trobles of his
Servants or both, etc.

2. They are all uniform, answering fitly one to another in all such ways God
was pleased to manifest his present or future Grace to all that were concerned
in them, or should be, etc.

3. Most true as proceeding from the God of truth, Satan if he speak truth, it
is not truth from him, because he purposes thereby to deceive, but it is
impossible for truth it self to lie or deceive.

4. They are also most wise, tending directly to the best end, and that in the
surest and most prevalent powerful way and means, that cannot fail.

5. Most certain, as coming from the unchangable God, and therefore neither the
best of men nor the meanest of Saints, are not consumed, because by such ways
of Grace saved by him that is unchangeable, etc.

6. Most comfortable, because they contain the consolations of God, which are
not smali; yea the greatest for all said intentions, that such sinners are
capable of for good.

7. These ancient Entails of all the said Saints are very delightful and
pleasant, especially being not only upon good, but upon the best Securities
that can be. I conceive none, upon due consideration, will be so bold as to say
directly any of them is not the Word of God, nor that Christ by this Key has
not laid open the precious excellencies of them, if any wilfully turn away
their eyes or ears: upon them will that deficience remain: the higher the
points of Wisdom, the Children of Wisdom are exercised in, the more delight
they shall find in them; the secret of the Lord is with such as he will show
his Covenant unto; of which, these are a very great and excellent part: our
Savior gives his Key especially for that end as knowing their fitness for it.
I can say much of the delight of them by experience, though men often slight
them and me for them [At mihi plaudo Domi] upon a much better account than it
was spoken; the Testimony of the faithful and true Witness Sealed by his Spirit
answers all objections, their mention or meditation is cordial, in them is
Christ and all his benefits, not only as he is set forth, as to his first
coming to lay the foundation of all future good, as he became the Seed of the
Woman, as set forth to the old world, and was of the Seed of Man, as of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and David, in the new world for consolation to mankind,
but specially made known of what Tribe namly of Judah at what time to w^t when
the Scepter was departed from it, in what place at Bethelem, of what person, of
a pure Virgin of the lineage of David, which with other things in his Birth,
Life and Death he fulfilled: But if we improve the intent of these promised
ancient Mercies, respecting his second coming, and all concurrent Texts
concerning both Jews and Gentiles, the holy Scriptures in such respects much
more abound. It is true, the glorious Promises respecting all these at Christ's
second coming, has much misled the Jews, over-looking the humility of the
first: and it was well if some Christians were not a farther stumbling block to
them in over looking the great Promises at Christ's second coming, and chiefly
what respects the Jews and Israelites, Christ became a light to lighten the
Gentiles upon the Jews rejecting of him at his first coming: but he will at his
second be the glory of his people Israel, when all Israel shall be saved: the
said time is coming a pace that great will be the day of Jezreel, she must
lengthen her cords, and strengthen her stakes: It is a snare of Satan to make
men by dim-sighted Reason to pore so much upon improbabilities as to over look
such large security given by God to his ancient people, who are and will appear
shortly to be beloved for their Fathers sakes, God will make them the wonder of
his mercy, in a wonerful way and manner (as is very probable) it is sad, men's
prayers of late concur in that no more with Gods promises, which spiritual
allegorizing will not answer in their true intent and literal meaning; yet the
best and most excellent spiritual sense is carried on as the foundation of Gods
ancient peoples enjoyments his Covenant is when he takes away their sin, and to
them chiefly is promised to put his Law into their hearts, etc. with many more
of the like nature, wherein we Gentiles have some part; but it is but a small
part in comparison of them to whom they chiefly belong. God will not fail them
in one of his Promises, and they are many and great, and proper to them in the
first place and greatest degree; the Childrens hearts will effectually be
turned to the Fathers, and generally too: though mistakes and prejudices with
the currents of times carry many a contrary way: but there is enough in Gods
Promises to that purpose to answer all, let our faith be exercised in them, and
our prayer will not then be wanting for them; a joyful and pleasant thing it is
to know such a confluence of mercy to Jews and Gentiles is approaching when
they shall both rejoice together, Deuteronomy. 33.43. and that when Christ's days will
be prolonged in the world he shall so abundantly see his seed, and the will of
the Lord shall prosper in his hand, Isa. 53.

8. These said promised mercies so laid open to all his living or raised
Saints, are of exceeding great and manifold usefulness for the present, and for
future times, they are of a very comprehensive nature, intensively and
extensively if rightly understood and applied: in or unto any times, places or
condition for true Christians; they are abundant in blessings, as with Israel
at his death, he had distinct blessings for all his Posterity: let but a
believing soul consider how much comfort it can draw out now by faith and
prayer from them, upon Christ's opening of them one by one as their virtue has
been derived to all Saints past, and may be to all now, and as certainly will
be to all Saints hereafter: for they contain, upon that account, flowing
streams of mercy, if by our Vessels of Faith, and exercise of grace, we will
through Christ go to those waters of consolation, the Woman's promised Seed is
breaking the Serpents head continually, the Children of the Promise,
circumcised, and uncircumcised, are traveling to the Promised Land, and New
Jerusalem. David's spiritual and faithful Race shall have of David's sure mercies
in his Kingdom under, and with Christ, Isa. 55.3. There is present comfort in
them all by faith, as well as sure blessedness hereafter in fruition: but I
must only point out these things at present, etc. others may be added upon due
meditation of these, and the like.

Many other improvements might here be made of these things: As,

1. To convince of many Errors and Misapprehensions of many men, but this has
been done by my self in many respects already, and likewise by others as we
have particularly showed in our Treatise on Genesis 3.15. as page 19. of the
Everlasting Gospel is to be seen.

2. This should admonish Christians to manifest, as there is great reason to
do, a sober and pious acknowledgment of such Divine Truth and Grace herein laid
open for their great advantage if duly pondered, and improved by them.

3. To stir them up to thankfulness for any degrees of such Divine Discoveries
in these said respects tendered to them, that such a state upon such sure
foundations is by the goodness of God, and the wonderful wisdom of Jesus Christ
imparted to them, wherein all sorts of his Saints then living or raised will be
so much concerned, as also in our following Tract of the first blessed
Resurrection: we doubt not more fully to manifest to Christians Consciences by
Divine Assistance.

4. To diligent Study and Meditation of the greatness of these mercies, and of
every believing souls great concernment therein.

5. To excite them from all such considerations of so great mercies shortly
approaching in Christ's said Kingdom to be attained unto; to labor more and
more to be fitted for the same by exercise of a true faith from Gods own
assureance, and of all Godly obedience in the due exercise of every grace both
toward God and Men: which is also in good part done at the conclusions of all
our former Practical pieces on Subjects of like nature, as on Genesis 3.15. Rev.
22.20. Jer. 3.17. and is farther intended, if God permit, on that ensuing, on
Rev. 20.5. In doing of which, although we are restrained at present from much
enlarging therein, yet when Foundations thereof are once well laid, as to
Doctrinal Truths; the other may much be supplied by Christian Communion,
Admonition and Conference upon all fitting opportunities. To which good
purposes, the said unworthy Penman hereof, hereby declares his readiness upon
any suitable and seasonable occasions, to be thereunto subservient.

W. S.
October. 30. An. Dom. 1673.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Title page read (...). p. 4. r. Rev. 5.7. p. 13. col. 2. r. Ruin not Reign.
and 4 lines after r. Covenaneed not Contented. and 4 lines after that, r.
Interessed not Intercessed twice. p. 14. col. 1. r. Bishop Usher. l. 40 r.
Charter not Character. in col. 2. l. 26. r. unto the Saints not until the
Saines. p. 15. col. 1. r. their future. p. 18. col. 1. r. Rev. 9.11.

EANASTASIS OR The Rising out of the Mass of Dead Bodies, etc.
REV. 20.5. This is the First Resurrection.


WE having by the good hand of God been directed to premise diverse things
preparative by way of Preface, tending to manifest the first blessed
Resurrection of the Just, or the Saints Bodily Resurrection to be here, that
which in this Text is by Christ Jesus himself, entitled with this
distinguishing Note from all others, namely, of the First Resurrection: that
is, properly so called and so punctually and exactly decyphered here by him:
which may these four ways following, by his Divine Assistance be made to appear
to all serious unprejudiced and understanding Christians.

1. From the words of the Text, compared with other expressions of our Savior
in the Gospel to the same purpose.

2. From the Context, and occasion of these words.

3. From the Arguments and Reasons agreeable to both the former, etc.

4. From other portions of Scripture speaking to the same effect, both in Old
and New Testament.

First, From the words of the Text (...), where the Particle (...) this is
Demonstrative: We may know what it means by putting the question What is it?
and it will be resolved by what Christ was manifesting by his Servant John for
the use of his Church, by a special Revelation of Gods Divine way of graee
concerning his secret Counsels and Purposes in their order to be executed
according to the book with seven Seals delivered to himself, that Lamb with
seven horns, and seven eyes, denoting his perfect Power and Wisdom, to fulfill
the same, chapter 5. in their due order of accomplishment for the time to come to
the end of this book: namely, the things that shall be hereafter, for we speak
only here of the third head of John's Writings, chapter 1.19. to wit, such as began
above 1600 years past, and now appear to be almost fulfilled to a very little
space to the end of chapter 19. But the 20th chapter with the two following chapter are (as
we have many ways sufficiently proved) and doubt not, by the same Divine
Assistance, farther to manifest, that they are the same Holy man's Writings of
that most excellent part of the same Divine Revelation for the time to come
respecting the happy estate of that world, that the Children of the
Resurrection, namely, of this first Resurrection, shall be counted worthy to
obtain, as our Savior himself Divinely taught, Luke 20.35, 36. and in this
Revelation he teaches by his Servant John, what that World and Resur. are, and
in what order they should have their being; and it is observable, that as there
is in the Text a remarkable emphasis in the Greek by the emphatical Article,
there doubled, (...), that Resurrection, even that first Resurrection. So our
Saviors expressions in Luke 20. of the same matter, are suitable to this Text,
with its dependency: both of that World then to begin, called the World to
come, Heb. 2.5. and also of the same Resurrection, and of the Saints
themselves, and of their being counted worthy of that World, setting them all
four down; 1. By way of Doctrine, and then again makes the same thing known by
Revelation to his Servant John in respect of the time and order of fulfilling
in this chapter which he had before taught and made known by way of Doctrine while
he lived on earth.

1. Says he, the Children of that World, (...), in opposition to (...) to this
present world, where the Children of it are Married, etc. but not so in the
other, where the Children of the Resurrection shall be; which here also he
teaches shall be, when he destroys Antichrist, the Beast and false Prophet,
and binds the Devil for 1000 years, chapter 19, and 20. that is that World which
will then begin.

2. It is the same Resurrection spoken of here emphatically (even that) which
our Savior expresses there by (...), a Rising from amongst such dead bodies
as then shall be left behind, being the same the Apostle strived to attain,
which he calls (...), Phil. 3.11. a Rising out of the heap of the Dead (of
which more afterward) and speaks of it as a peculiar thing belonging to such
as rise out of such heaps ((...), says the Apostle of such Saints before dead)
by the genitive possessive, as if the Holy Ghost would inform us further, it is
the Resurrection only of such dead Persons to whom an (...) properly belongs,
viz. a Rising out of the heaps of the dead left behind.

3. Of the Saints themselves that are to Rise then, they are diverse ways
illustrated there by Christ, 1. by what they are reckoned or counted worthy of
aforehand. 2. By what they are styled by our Savior in two expressions: For
the former, the word is very remarkable, (...), they are such as are counted
worthy of that World: the word is a decompound, denoting them to be counted
worthy, as being Enrolled in ancient Record for it, viz. in the Lambs Book of
Life; and that they are consequently to obtain that World as upon Record for
it: the words seem very forcible in their decyphering of the Saints blessed
estate then by them to be obtained; so here, blessed and holy are they that
have part, etc. v. 6. Again, our Savior there gave them a twofold excellent
style, (...), the Children of Gods and the Children of the Resurrection; so
here they are the Spouse the Lambs wife, being the Children of God, chapter 19. and
21. and this blessed Resurrection we speak of, is proper only to the Saints,
those blessed Persons then.

4. Christ sets forth a twofold excellency of that estate of the Saints, they
are immortal, they can die no more: so here, on such the second death shall
have no power: yea (...) they are like the Angels of God in Heaven; not only
privatively, that they need not outward worldly helps to sustain them, etc. or
not liable to suffering, but as here, blessed and holy, as the Angels of God in
Heaven: and thus Christ by his spirit guided the Apostle John to set forth a
practical Comment in this Divine Revelation of his former Heavenly Doctrine,
Luke 20. so agreeable is all Divine Truth in what the Holy Spirit speaks any
way of the same thing.

To like purpose when our Savior speaks of this first Resurrection in the
Text, he expresses it by these words, Joh. 5.29. (...), they shall come forth
to the Resurrection of life; they shall come out from the rest of the dead,
they shall come into the Resurrection of life, which is also called (...), the
Resurrection of the Just, Luke 14.14. that is, theirs, properly and peculiarly
belonging to them, as before: they are the Synonomous Expressions of the Holy
Ghost, so exact is all Divine Truth delivered by him, if we consider it aright,
as we see all these expressions suit admirably with the text in its expressions
and dependency. Now come we to the thing decyphered out by Christ; 1. It is
called a Resurrection. 2. The First Resurrection. 3. Demonstratively and
Emphatically set down by this Resurrection: we have showed it to be properly
the bodily Resurrection, which is only properly so called in Scripture:
Regeneration (as some would have it) is improperly so taken; only by a
Metaphor, neither is (...), in that Text of Mat. 19.28. to be understood of
Regeneration; but as learned Beza notes in five Copies, it is distinguished in
the Original from the preceding words [you that have followed me] denoting that
(...), there was the New Genesis, or Christ's making all things New then, as
Rev. 21.5. when he the Son of Man sits upon his Throne, that the Disciples that
followed him shall then sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel: or as it is remarkably explained, Luke 22.29, 30. ye are they that have
continued with me in my tentations, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father
has appointed unto me etc. and yet if it could have been proved to be meant of
Regeneration, yet so it is a Resurrection, only Metaphorical, not Proper, which
is only bodily at that first, and also is peculiar to the Saints at that time
only.

2. It is called the first Resurrection in opposition to the other, to
distinguish it from that following, for the rest of the dead 1000 years after
being both to be raised bodily in their due order and time, both properly so
called, and to be actually performed by Christ in their appointed times to
raise both sorts: first the said Saints bodies at the first, and the bodies of
the rest of the dead 1000 years after: viz. such as died in the said 1000
years, and all the wicked at the last Trump.

3. Now for farther resolution what the Demonstrative Article (...) points out
to us; that as we before noted in revealing the order of that matter to be
fulfilled, he shows here that unto the ruin of the Beast and false Prophet
succeeds the Rising of suffering Saints; for Christ and his Word, in that New
World, as he explains chapter 21, 5. when in that Jerusalem State he makes all
things New; they shall Rise to Reign with Christ in his Davidical Kingdom,
which has long been Entailed upon him, as we showed in our Systeme: and he
went, upon his Ascension, to Heaven to receive it; and at his Return shall
possess it, as Dan. 7.13, 14. and wherein the said Saints shall Reign with him
the said 1000 years: and this is exactly set forth to be contemporary with
Satan's binding the said 1000 years; and the times of both are so interwoven and
linked together to make the said Revelation of both more evident: and yet he
Reveals farther, v. 3. that Satan must after the 1000 years be loosed again for
a little Season, who in the same order will be loosed, as v. 7, 8, etc: Now in
reference to the Saints, St. John saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, for to
them the Army of Heaven, chapter 19. in white, the relative expression evidently
relates; (...), the souls of them that were beheaded, which were twice
described in chapter 19.1. the As Bride or Wife of the Lamb, v. 7.2. As of the
Armies in Heaven in white Linen, white and clean, after set forth by the New
Jerusalem Inhabitants, metonimically, chapter 21.9. which are those that sat on
the Thrones: the same Thrones in Dan. 7. which he saw set because of the great
words the Horn spoke v. 11. which were pitched or set, as the Caldee word
(...) signifies, or lifted up, as Arias Montanus renders it, till the Beast was
slain, and his body given to the burning flame, v. 9, 11. and for whom were the
Thrones set, but for the Saints at the time Christ came in the Clouds of
Heaven, and received his universal Kingdom over all Nations under the whole
Heaven, often mentioned in the Gospel; and v. 18. the Saints took the Kingdom
then and possessed it: and again v. 22. Judgment, that is, Potestas judicandi,
the power of Judging was given to the Saints: of the same our Savior tells his
Disciples they shall sit on Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel which
is the same time and thing revealed in this place; but here two things farther
are explained by our Savior then were seen there by Dan. First the suffering,
but then raised Sts. shall then have the said Kingdom and power. 2. That they
shall have it with Christ 1000 years: these are his farther Revelations here of
these things; namely, upon the destruction of the Beast: the Saints that
suffered under him are raised bodily, etc. and power of judging is given to
them, and they reign with Christ in his Davidical Kingdom 1000 years, and if
our Systeme of Promised Mercies be considered well with its Scripture grounds,
none of this will seem strange, etc.

And though some make a stir upon that the Souls were said to live, we there
showed in Scripture, Ideom souls were put for persons, Genesis 40.20. Psalm. 16.10.
Luke 12.19. besides, how they were represented to the Holy Man in Vision; as
souls in taking their bodies is also considerable, for such expressions at that
time, a like description he had Rev. 7.14. where they are said to be arrayed in
white Robes: so chapter 6.11. and farther says Mr. Mede, Animae in sacris literis
non tantum person^^, sed cadavera denotant: Souls in Scripture are not only put
for Persons, but for dead bodies: So Lev. 19.21. Ye shall make no cuttings in
your flesh for the dead, (...) the same word ordinarily signifies the soul, but
fitly here translated for the dead: the like chapter 21.1. none of Aarons sons must
be defiled for the dead among his people the; word used for the soul, (...) but
here for a dead body.

But above all, we may from the word (...), Souls, here take notice of the
exact agreement of the expressions of the Holy Ghost here, and in chapter 6.9, 10.
of the same persons, first of those that had suffered before under the Dragon,
called souls here, and others that were after to suffer under the Beast, there
styled, (...), their fellow servants and Brethren: and here speaking of them
both as rewarded, the first he styles souls, for they we separated souls then,
when there they were said to cry to God under the Altar [as being before
sacrificed] for Vengeance: where by the way, let us take notice how that suited
to Moses's Prophecy, Deuteronomy. 32.41. I will render Vengeance, etc. and v. 42.
from the beginning, of Revenges upon the Enemy, viz. [Antichrist] [here
destroyed, Rev. 19.11. to the end] who before hindered the joyful Union of Jews
and Gentiles, as in the very next words follows, Deuteronomy. 32.43. and the beginning
of revenges seems to be the doubling double unto Babylon her cup of wrath
before, Rev. 18.6. as also Daniel saw in his Vision, chapter 7. and so such ancient
Prophecy will be fulfilled, and the same cry of the Martyrs will blood be
particularly answered from under the Altar, which are the same souls which John
here saw in Vision so rewarded as to live to reign with Christ the said 1000
years, when the body of the Beast, as Daniel speaks, was given to the burning
flame: and to these said souls, the emphatical expressions (...), those souls
of those men (before) beheaded have particular reference; but then the Holy
Ghost speaks as distinctly of the other: by the cause of their suffering,
(...), etc. and those that worshipped not the Beast, nor his Image, etc. in the
masculine gender being their fellow servants and Brethren afterward then to be
killed: and these also are here in the same manner rewarded, as Rev. 11.19.
Thou have rewarded thy Servants the Prophets, and thy Saints, etc. and all
shortly to be fulfilled at Christ's appearance: And by these things we may again
observe the special Divine Excellency, and exact suitableness both of the words
and things contained in this sacred book. And now in this juncture of time, it
is a thing very desirable for many good reasons, as much conducing to the
honor of Christ, and the benefit of the Bride his Church, for which end this
Love-letter was sent by him almost 1600 years past, to prepare for that
approaching Marriage, Rev. 19. and 21. I say therefore it is henceforth very
desirable that more than ordinary endeavors should be used in, and
encouragement given to those Studies by all real Friends of Christian Religion,
who may now expect much return from Christ thereupon: And I confidently believe
that every degree of obstruction unjustly cast in the way thereof (upon
whatsoever seeming good pretense) will by himself be reckoned, when he comes,
as an acting for Antichrist, and against himself, and by how much the greater
degrees the worse: and if young Students now begin early to apply their Studies
thereunto, they may likely find by the assistance of the Spirit and Grace of
Christ (I speak from Experience) a better foundation laid for their future
Studies, than from many others formerly, etc.

Now when he had thus decyphered the said Saints, or Souls, by their suffering
before, and their living and reigning then with Christ; he speaks of the others
dead that lived not again till the 1000 years were ended, both being so
distinguished the former suffered, and lived, and reigned with Christ, but the
other had no part therein: but of the former only that had part in all these he
speaks in the words of my Text, This is the first Resurrection, viz. bodily, so
long, namely, 1000 years before the other dead shall rise again bodily, which
is also called the time of the dead to be judged with reward: and is the same
time in that Parallel text, Rev. 11.19. and that thou have rewarded thy
Servants the Prophets, and thy Saints, and all that fear thy name both small
and great, and all these at the same time when the last Vial was poured upon
the Air of the Beast, Rev. 16. when the Prince of the power of the air is to
be dejected from his Rule at the Beasts destruction, and he himself to be so
securely bound, and shut up, and sealed, etc. then the Saints rose bodily and
reigned with Christ: this is the time, order, cause and end of their rising
then 1000 years before the rest of the dead; to whom only that (...) or rising
out of the heap of the dead does properly belong: and also our Saviors (...) a
rising out of the state of such dead left behind, speaks the same thing: that
the Saints rise 1000 years before the rest of the dead, which is this first
Resurrection.

And that the said time of 1000 years is not taken indefinitely but absolutely
for it self, 1000 year is acknowledged by the learned, even among such as would
understand them by way of Anticipation in the most unfit times of Satan's
prevalency; as Paraus and others, which I doubt not but a clear laying down of
the Truth will here sufficiently resolve: and such men also grant, that that
whole number of 1000 years is always used for it self in Scripture, and not
otherwise. But our blessed Savior has so exactly laid that down in this
Revelation, so as he has taken away all ground to pretend otherwise; both in
laying down the said 1000 years absolutely, and relatively in regard of Satan's
binding, and the Saints reigning, and in several respects what was before, what
in the time, and what after the said 1000 years: so that no Parallel passage in
holy Scripture, or other Writings I believe can be produced; and again so ofren
repeated both absolutely what that time was, namely (...) three times 1000
years, and as often relatively, (...), those, those, those 1000 years, in
reference both to Saints and Satan: and shall vain men presume to pervert this
sense of Christ which he has so fastened upon them, yea I may say, Rivited
into them all along, and so by all circumstances, Divinely and gloriously
illustrated in this most excellent part of his Revelation more plainly and
clearly laid down then all the rest (as Mr. Mede observes) wherein is contained
the sure table of the best times of his Church in the world, and her Sabbatism
of rest to come in it, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 4.9. and thus much from the
first consideration of the Text with its dependancy.

In the next place the Saints bodily Resurrection will appear to be the said
first Resurrection from diverse considerable passages observable from the
Context, of which we gave diverse hints long a go in our Appendix after the
Irenio. page 100, 101, 102.

And the first from the Antithesis or opposing the living of these to the not
living of the rest of the dead till 1000 years after; so that look how these
lived now, the other must not live again so, till that said time take it both
ways, the others live not bodily till then, therefore these live bodily now,
the others shall not live spiritually then therefore these live not spiritually
now for they are opposed as the one living, the other not living again:
opposita non sunt possunt simul esse vera.

2. In what respect the Saints were said to be dead, being such as were
beheaded, in the same respect here they are said to live, but they were dead
only in respect of their bodies; therefore they lived here only in respect of
their Bodies: Again, their Souls were not at all dead since they suffered;
therefore as to them, they are not said to live at that time when Satan was
bound.

3. They were to live, as should be suitable to Christ's being the first Fruits
of the Saints Resurrection, at his coming again; but he was so by his Bodily
Resurrection; therefore they, as the whole Vintage, rise bodily at his said
coming, suitable to the first Fruits of the same kind, 1 Cor. 15.23. Above 1600
years after ((...)) and then ((...)) comes the end which our Savior has
revealed, shall be above 1000 years, after his said second coming.

4. The Saints are then to live as will be suitable to Christ's personal Reign,
to behold his Glory, and to behold the Vision of him, as the object of their
Sense, (then) as Joh. 17.24. He willed that they should be with him, to behold
his Glory, which the Father has given him, which many ways appears by
Scripture, must necessarily be then in his said Kingdom, where they shall Reign
with Christ, etc. Christ also gave a preludium or foreshewing example, of the
first Resurrection of the Saints, at his own Resurrection, Mat. 27. by the
Resurrection of many dead, etc. And the Apostle Paul speaks to that effect, 2
Cor. 4.14. That as God raised up the Lord, he would so raise them and present
them together: But nothing of raising any wicked man till the last Trumpet.

Quest. But is not this Resurrection meant of Regeneration, because such are
said to be blessed, that have part in the first Resurrect. etc. Answer, Some
persons at the first view, are apt to conceit so of it, not considering the
drift of our Savior in this Revelation, nor the Order of it: Besides all the
incongruity of it, to what has been said already, and as for the blessedness
here assigned to it, it much better proves this to be the said bodily
Resurrection of the Saints, when they obtain together a greater and much more
eminent blessedness, then any regenerate Saints have in this life: all Tears
are then wiped away from their Eyes for ever, and their grace perfected, and
Souls and Bodies united in a blessed and holy State, v. 6. though not in such
outward glory (probably) as they shall have at the general rapture, yet will
have then blessed spiritual Bodies, suitable to such a middle State as Christ's
Body was in after he rose again till he ascended, and it may be very congruous
that as Christ's body was in such a state wherein he appeared and disappeared to
his Disciples and others, before his was glorified; so all these Saints should
first rise in such a state, to be the more useful to living Saints (then)
before the said Rapture at the last Trump: Such also were the Saints Bodies,
seen in the Holy City, Math. 27. And should not there be a suitableness of the
Members to their Head? and will not the Communion of such as walk in the light
of the New Jerusalem require the same? How did Moses's glympse of glory trouble
Israel of old, till his Face was veiled: Gods ways to his Saints will all
appear to be full of Wisdom as well as goodness: But this is a condition of a
new living, after men were dead or beheaded, and then no Regeneration is to be
expected, that must be now in this Life or never: And it is also of such as
were regenerate before they died, else they would never have been Martyrs of
Jesus Christ: Again, if this living were Regeneration, then all regenerate men
must be made such in a short compass of time, for all Saints till then that
have died, shall then so live again; and if all regenerate men must live with
Christ a 1000 years in Regeneration, what became of such as died before Christ
took our nature; or when since did all such live with Christ 1000 years
altogether in Regeneration. Again the purpose of this living was to be now
revealed as a mercy not known before as to time, and many other things
respecting the first said Resurrection, as we shall (God willing) show in many
things, but Regeneration was an ancient Doctrine well known, that only
concerned the living but not the dead, the absurdity of such a pretense is so
palpable, it would be but superfluous here to write more upon it, or for the
Reader to spend time in reading over again our said hints, or others like with
further inlargements.

But also many Scriptures show a necessity of the said Saints so living bodily
then; for first, Christ promises to over-comers, that they shall rule over the
Nations, Rev. 2.26. These over-comers by Faith are his suffering Saints that
are dead; therefore they must rise again, whilst such Nations are to be ruled
over: also, says he, they shall sit on his own Throne distinct from his
Fathers, Rev. 3.21. But Christ has none such yet, but he shall have at his
return from his Fathers right hand, they shall therefore then sit thereon, The
meek likewise shall inherit the Earth, and delight themselves in abundance of
Peace, Psalm. 37.11. They never did so yet, but our Savior says they shall
Mat. 5.5. therefore such a time and state, for such, remains that they must
live again, to enjoy these and many other like premises, in the time of Christ's
Mediatory Kingdom, for they cannot in any other state hereafter, etc.

Many other particular promises respecting the said state might here be added:
But I proceed to that great consideration that contains many weighty Arguments
and Reasons in it, namely, that this part of the Revelation of Jesus Christ is
his own Key (as we have sufficiently proved in our said Preface) fitted by
himself to unlock that great Cabinet of precious Jewels, concerning the
revealed and promised Mercies to the Forefathers; chiefly to be performed to
themselves and their spiritual Seed at this first Resurrection peculiar to the
Saints, at the beginning of 1000 years, when they shall behold all the glorious
Grace of Christ, (closed up till then in a great measure, in the Womb of those
promises) which will then have their perfect birth, and speedy growth;
whereupon great Halelujahs will be founded out to God the Father, Son and Holy
Spirit by themselves, Angels, men, and all other Creatures then living in the
world, in their capacity, Rev. 5.10. etc. at the glorious restitution of all
things, and they themselves and all the rest enjoy the good of them, together
in the said 1000 years: Without which state, I may upon many good grounds
assert the main parts of these great promises will never be performed, nor
their chief ends attaine^ (...) want thereof, but God on the one part should
loose the (...) of his Justice, Holiness and Truth designed to be then
manifest, (as by his word appears) in regard of his said predictions, against
th^se greatest last Sinners, and Satan himself, etc. And also of his Wisdom,
Mercy, Faithfulness and Truth then also declared, to be fulfilled toward the
Saints, in and about the same 1000 years, as by considering those particulars
before laid down, will easily appear to such as are not resolved to shut the
light that God has given them, as men, against the same: For has God in his
word so abundantly revealed such a time and state, and is there an excellent
and suitable Harmony in these Revelations, from the beginning to the end of his
word, so revealed; and do the most ancient Promises and Covenants, fitly and
specially refer unto the said state and time, and that upon diverse great
accounts; and has Christ particularly revealed how, in what ways his Saints
shall be brought to receive the benefits therein, to be enjoyed and be fitted
to perform the Service, which thereby they will be engaged unto, as well as to
receive the happiness therein reserved for them; and shall not these things
upon such excellent advantages be carried on effectually? What should hinder?
yea they do all strongly concur to advance their great ends, Gods word gives
witness as we have showed to all these particulars, and not one of them shall
fail: But Christ with his raised Saints shall Reign the said 1000 years, the
blessed New Jerusalem state shall be set up, all Promises and Covenants that
have their particular and chief reference to them, shall be in such respect
fulfilled, Christ and his Saints shall have their just Rights appointed by God
in that condition, whose good pleasure it is to give his little little Flock
that Kingdom; Truth has said it, and will not fail, the great God by his holy
Spirit has revealed them unto his Church, and our blessed Savior has at last
set forth the time and place of their being in the World, in a very excellent
and glorious manner, which all the said ancient Promises and Covenants have
their special and chief reference very evidently unto; and what can be more
done but to work upon men's minds and Spirits, due apprehensions of these
things, and of the nearness of their approach; with true Faith to believe these
things as revealed in the Gospel, as well as other parts thereof? That so God
and Christ may have their due praise and glory in respect thereof, and his
faithful Servants may have the happiness belonging thereunto. Now as all
rational men that are of a sound mind, when they read the Story of the Creation
of the World, how God had made the Fabric of the World, and all Creatures
first, will acknowledge there was great divine Wisdom and Goodness, manifest in
putting man into the possession thereof, who was made capable to discern and
partake thereof, and to display the divine wisdom and goodness of God therein,
whilst he enjoyed the benefit of the same, which should have been his Sabboths
work, had he continued in that condition: So when men but of ingenious tempers
shall come to understand that God promised since man's fall, not only a
deliverance from that sad condition, by the promised Seed of the Woman, and
shows by degrees how it should be carried on and accomplished, and reveals from
time to time, from that Foundation, particular mercies for the advantage and
good of all men in the Old and New World; and these Mercies and Covenants have
several respects to men, present and future as in a natural Life or Spiritual
Estate, and by his holy Spirit instructs his Servants more and more rightly to
know them, and the Son of God the wisdom of the Father in a wonderful divinely
Mysterious way, sets them forth, so as the divine Excellency falls in with the
blessed Revelation thereof: What can ingenious Spirits do less but acknowledge
as these manifestations of Gods divine grace and goodness in disclosing of
them, and of his Faithfulness and Truth in their gradual actual fulfillings:
But how then are beleiving Christians, engaged also by the word to believe
these, upon the aforesaid divine Foundations; and especially since they respect
such a state as Christ has set forth, is shortly approaching, and all faithful
Souls and Persons are therein greatly concerned; yea Angels, men and all
Creatures are interessed therein, as holy Scripture therein declares, and how
fitly will a Sabbatism of rest, after Christ's finishing the great work of his
Restitution of all things, and his making of all things new, succeed to be
celebrated to his glory by his Saints in the World, who by being. (...) God and
man in one person, has so restored all, and being the Son of David according
the Flesh, shall have the sure mercies of God, long since promised to David, by
the enjoyment of his said Davidical Kingdom, many ways in the word of God
secured to him, in the said thousand years, with all the said Saints in the
Restitution of all things; these are no slight matters, though much over looked
by men.

We shall now a little touch upon the particulars in our said Systeme of Gods
Economy, or ordering his household the Church, in regard of his mercies so made
known, and so in the said thousand years to be fulfilled for his Saints; first
in removing or destroying all their Enemies, and doing for them all revealed or
promised good; either first as faithful men from Adam, or as Gentiles from
Japhet, as Jews and Israelites from Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as men after Gods
own heart, meek and holy, etc as David, as faithful Servants and the Overcomers
of the Lamb Jesus Christ, as Christian Martyrs to Reign with him then, and to
enjoy the New Jerusalem state.

First, at the beginning of the said State in the eminent breaking of the
Serpents Satan's head as revealed to Adam and Eve; he will when he comes from
the right hand of the Father eminently make his foes his footstool, when he
will put down all Rule, all Authority, and Power, that stand in opposition to
him, 1 Cor. 15.24. at his second coming; and perfect it after the end of the
1000 years, as we showed: and how will he thereby be gloryfied, and how will
his Saints rejoice at this, as was said at Babylons destruction, Rev. 18.20.
Rejoice over her, thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, etc. So
likewise much more then, when root and branch and the whole body of the Beast
will be given to the burning flame, Dan. 7.11. at the beginning, and also when
after the end of the said 100 years the last Geg and Mogog shall be consumed by
fire from God out of Heaven, Rev. 20.9. But how much more when the Saints then
shall clearly discern that the Divine promised Seed of the Woman has not only
subdued the enemies, but by all his Offices has purchased and procured so
great good as will both then be enjoyed by them, and also provided for them to
all eternity ensuing. And not here to insist on what was said of Enoch or his
Prophecy, Jude 13.14. to encourage men in good in the world by his translation
upon his walking with God, etc. or to warn them against evil by his foreshewing
the Judgment at the said times to be after manifested concurring with the
former, Genesis 3.15. therein as the sacred truth informs us.

We shall in the next place, offer the consideration of Noah a worker of
righteousness in a three fold respect, 1. as a Type of Christ. 2. Of the
Covenant of God made with him for the New World. 3. Of his Prophecy. 1. He
saved his Family in the Ark, as Christ does his Household the Church: and will
be his peoples true Ark to save them at the partial or total Consumption of the
World by Fire, at the beginning, and after the end of the said 1000 years, of
which the Saints will then have blessed experience in both respects. And 2dly.
As the Saints will know that the World according to Gods free Covenant with
Noah, Genesis 8. and 9. was many thousand years preserved till then; (...) that
the most abundant fruitfulness of the earth was in wonderful manner according
to Gods Word reserved for that state and time; in the enjoyment or sight
whereof all the said Saints will pay their due Tribute of Praise and
Thanksgiving: wherefore they must then live to do it.

But 3dly, and more especially, when according to Noah's Prophecy of Japhets
Posterity the Gentiles, that they should dwell in the Tents of Shem (though
strangers before should become the people of God) which the Scriptures witness
they have once fulfilled already to them (whereof at this day we have cause to
rejoice and bless Gods holy Name for the same) ever since the Jews were
rejected: But we, and all Saints hereafter, will have cause more abundantly to
rejoice and praise his Name in those times to come, upon that account when Jews
and Gentiles shall both rejoice together, according to Moses's Prophecy, Deuteronomy.
32.43. which the Apostle Paul applies, Romans 15. with other texts (respecting
the same time, and state) pointing out the truth of God therein, for the truth
of God (says he) to confirm the promises made to the Fathers, v. 8. how will
the knowledge of that foundation, fitted to the top-stone of Gods performance,
then affect Gods Saints with joy, and redownd to his own praise.

And was not Baalams Parable clear in many things forenamed, which in part have
been fulfilled, as respecting the Ships of Chittim, Dan. 11.30. and others,
namely, setting forth the rise of the last Oppressor of the Jews that should
perish for ever, or go into Perdition, Rev. 17. (as we showed) and other things
in the 1000 years which Gods word witnesses shall then be fulfilled, which the
Saints will also rejoice in, and render unto God his due praise for them.

And what in Melchisedeck was shadowed as a type toward faithful Abraham that
had the Promises, will really and completely be fulfilled in Christ to faithful
Abraham and all his spiritual Seed according to Gods word, to the praise of the
glory of his grace.

But especially to Abraham and all his spiritual Seed with him, and also to
Isaac, and Jacob, according to Gods Promises and Covenants made to them and
their spiritual Seed through their one Divine Seed Christ: But the mercy seems
to be chiefly invested in Abraham's Covenant in seven Gradations, as we showed
in our Key: who is thereupon (probably) styled the Father of the Faithful, and
Heir of the world, Romans 4.13. whose natural Seed failed in their first
Covenant, and polluted their rest in the Typical Canaan, which therefore cast
them out with a fore Destruction, Mich. 2.10. But the spiritual Seed of
Abraham, by that one Divine Seed Christ, whose day he saw by Faith, Joh. 8. by
Gods undertaking for them the conditions of this New Covenant which then will
be manifest to the great glory of his so wonderful free Grace made known; and
the benefit from that Foundation derived to them, as both his faithful Seed,
circumcised and uncircumcised will evidently know and find the happy experience
of in the New Jerusalem state (then) both filling their souls with joy, and
making them break forth into praise unto God.

But for David's Promise and Covenant upon whose interest the Title of Christ's
Kingdom (then) does immediately depend, and who must enjoy it as the days of
Heaven upon earth all the 1000 years, though what he promised conditionally as
respecting David's Kingdom in his natural Race was forfeited by them upon the
fall of whose Tabernacle the Interim, or Interruption of his Kingdom took place
in the four Gentile Kingdoms for (probably) 2300 years: yet the sure mercies of
David, in Christ his Divine spiritual Seed, all will be performed for the the
meek, faithful, up right, spiritual Children of David, who shall then have
their sure mercies of David also, Esa. 55.3. in being then joint heirs with
Christ in that blessed Kingdom, when they upon that account and foundation
shall Reign with Christ in that state of the New Heavens and New Earth wherein
will then dwell Righteousness to the superabundant glory of God, and happiness
of all those Saints who shall have their portion then therein, with the
representative living Wights, and 24 Elders to exult as they, Rev. 5.10. not
only that in other respects they have been or shall be Kings and Priests unto
God through the Lambs Blood; but that they then will with them jointly Reign
upon earth: when David's Tabernacle before fallen for the Sin of his natural
Seed shall, by his Divine one Seed Christ be restored for himself and all his
spiritual Seed in that so blessed state and condition to continue the said 1000
years, and after remain to the Saints so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure,
Psalm. 89.36, 37. (though once attempted against in vain) and after (probably)
be translated into perpetual felicity; and were but the spiritual eyes and
understandings of men exercised in these things from the grounds of them, so
Divinely and graciously laid down in the Word, and did they but labor by
Prayer and due means to acquaint themselves with the same, by degrees I doubt
not, but God would really teach in some good measure, all rightly teachable
spirits of men by Faith to believe them, and apply them to themselves, as
finding (if they walk uprightly with him) their own peculiar interest therein,
with all his Saints that then shall have their Lots there with them: both to be
freed from all enemies, to serve him without fear of any, in holiness and
righteousness before Christ then (if they be in the natural life, and walk in
the light of the New Jerusalem) or if raised Saints then such his servants will
serve him, Rev. 22.3. it will be found as well their happiness as their
business so to do: God has not made so great provision for the marriage of the
Lamb, his only beloved Son, and that the Wedding be without Guests; yea, which
is more, that the Wedding be without the Bride the Lambs Wife: What a reproach
would some men by ignorance and unbelief cast upon God the Master of the Feast,
as if his great design to honor them who before had honored him in the World
should then be frustrate and utterly in vain? which must needs be, if those who
are only capable of such happiness for time, and blessedness in both should not
then have it, viz. the raised Sts. in the New Jerusalem state with those that
walk shall then in the light thereof (probably) not fitted then to enjoy the
same with them, neither could the Saints departed before, be capable thereof,
were they not in their spiritual bodies prepared for the same; and how many
sorts of Arguments might be drawn from every of the said Foundations
particularly, let serious and judicious Christians consider: when I formerly
found from Gods word, what would be before, in, and after the 1000 years, I was
satisfied that such things should be in their due time and order; fulfilled in
36 particulars in the first Argument of the Word Written. But it has pleased
God by this Divine Key, Rev. 20, etc. to show me that the chief drift of all
his Revealed Promises, pitch upon such a state so revealed by himself, wherein
all his Sts. interests and concernments concur for the best ends respecting
God, themselves, and all Creatures in that state, in so many and great things,
as we have manifested from the Word of God, whence I am as it were enforced to
do that by Faith in my present employment, that I assuredly, from the same
word, know those raised Saints, with others, will then do in the fruition
thereof; affectionately desiring to set forth Gods special mercy, like the
Woman in Samaria, for others use and benefit also.

For then the faithful Seed of Adam and Eve that had no other Promise, will see
and know that the blessed Seed of the Woman has broken the Serpents head, and
chiefly eminently at the beginning, and fully after the end of the 1000 years.

Then also such as lived from Enoch shall know how both Gods acts of Judgment
will be carried on: then will all saved Saints of Japhets Race see and
acknowledge the grace of the last great call of Gentiles as well as the first:
then all Saints from Noah, will praise God for the Earths preservation and
fruitfulness then in such abundance, as before promised, and then performed:
Then they from Baalams Prophesied mercies then to take place, will find great
matter of joy and praise to God: then they will from Moses his Prophecy know
Christ's hands are sufficient for him when he is so happily come to his people:
Then all Abraham's faithful Seed, through that one Seed Christ shall enjoy the
Promised Land and City in that excellent Renewed State: then shall all meek and
upright ones, with David, possess all the happiness of Christ's Davidical
Kingdom, containing all the rest.

But because some, like Thomas, though Christ was present before his eyes, had
resolved not to believe; so these, upon the near approach of Christ's said
Kingdom, Luke 21.28.31. unless he put his fingers in the holes of his wounds;
when the Doctrine of it is become very evident, will not only not own it, but
not with patience hear of the Doctrine of it; yea, think all such, like the two
Disciples near Emaus, are but idle tales that are said thereof; yea, and say so
too till God shall show them their errors, that they may give due praise to his
holy name in regard thereof: We shall a little expostulate the case, and reason
with such; that so we may convince them of their error, and leave them at least
inexcusable, or rather satisfy them therein, if it may be. What, has God
written so much in his Word, and in so many particulars, as we have heard, all
so fitly answering to each other, and all to no purpose, etc.?

Has God in unspeakable mercy and goodness been laying the soundation, and
erecting a stately Structure, which should be as the Masterpiece of Christ's
workmanship, and almost in the 6000 years past has been carrying the same on,
that his glory in the completing thereof, may shine out eminently before
Angels and Men, and all Creatures, wherein that true Solomon's glory may in due
time appear; and that his Saints may upon the discovery thereof, first by
Faith, and after by actual fruition, receive the benefit thereof: and this the
better to prepare them (with the glorious Angels) for that perfect and
perpetual blessedness, immeadiately to succeed unto it; and all upon so many
excellent accounts, and from such strong foundations thereof? And shall it be
reckoned no better than Satan's three said Babels, but worse? as if it, after so
long preparation for it by God and Christ, and expectation from the Faith of it
in the Saints so long ago; it would yet never at all appear in the world? Shall
men's unbelief darken the luster of so great an undertaking of Christ? Let God
be true, and let all men of such unbelieving hearts be found to be liars. Did
Christ pray for such a state, wherein all those that God had given him should
be made perfect in one, as the Bride the Lambs Wife, Rev. 19.19. and 21. and
will men go about, now the Marriage day is near, to forbid the Banes? he willed
before he died also, that all those which God had given him should behold his
glory in his Kingdom, Joh. 17.24. given him by his Father; viz. his Mediatory
Kingdom: and are all Divine Prophesies, of these things become as wind with
these men? But let such beware, lest as the unbelief of the Israelites cut them
short of enjoying the typical Canaan, so lest it be also found that many such
shall come short of this heavenly City of Gods making through their unbelief:
no obstacle like unbelief to Divine Mercies: and according to the ancient
opinion of some Fathers, there will be mora in the Resurrection of the just, if
men knew but competently the excellency and worth of such an estate they would
take more pains and care to obtain it; and that early too: they would think
every hour, every minute a great loss, wherein it might be attainable. And then
also let such take notice that all Ages ftom Christ's first giving of this
Revelation, have in some degree or other witnessed to these Doctrines; and Men
or Devils could never so suppress it, but it still arose up again; and in these
last days more than ever, now the performance of that state approaches: and I
doubt not as Divine Truth will more and more prevail with many, though (as it
is probable) many will reject it, as the Scripture seems to foreshew (as in our
10th Assert of our Key is observable) yet Satan's seven Vials have not, nor
shall destroy it, Prod. page 41, 42.

It is true indeed, without a spetial Faith, like Abraham's, David's, or the
like, men were not like to see it of old, though couched in many Promises:
neither in the New Testament, were men likely without an extraordinary spirit
to conceive aright of much of these Doctrines; nor could satisfactory knowledge
ordinarily be had without this Key of Christ's making, Rev. 20. and 21. and 22.
that so fitly opens that (before to us) much locked Treasure; but thereby it is
so laid open, that each Jewel may be seen and made good use of by Faith at
present, etc. Gods works of grace are most beautiful in their times, etc.

And consider in the Creation, Was not Gods Wisdom and Goodness therein made
glorious, at first by putting man in possession of the Creatures, being made
fit to glorify God in those his former works by keeping a Sabbath immediately
thereupon, had he stood upright in his estate: and will not this great work of
Christ's Restitution of all things, wherein Gods Divine Wisdom, Power, Mercy,
Truth and Faithfulness will appear much more glorious (as the holy Scriptures
teach) which has been almost 6000 years in carrying on, and a yet more perfect
work of Redemption of his said Saints, viz. of their Bodies, also Romans 8.21,
23. with inferior Creatures, and then living persons from all enemies, Luke
1.74. Likewise, that all of them at length may enjoy that Sabatism of Rest
remaining to them in such a blessed estate in that world of Christ's said
Mediatory Kingdom, which he on casth affared his little little Flock they
should have of Gods good pleasure and free gift, with that New Jerusalem, the
City of him the said igreat King, Mat. 5. which God has prepared for the
Forefathers also, Heb. 11.10, 16.

Now what way soever the Revealed, Promised or Covenanted Right and Enjoyments,
of the Saints in that state, or upon what account soever they shall find it,
(for many Reasons may be grven, they will all clearly know it) whether as the
faithful Seed of Adam and Eve, as men through the blessed promised Seed of the
Woman, the great Redeemer of all men: Or as the Seed of Japhet, being Gentiles
by their first or 2d. Calls aforesaid: or as that spiritual Seed of Abrah.
Isaac or Jacob, by that one divine Seed Christ to come, as the natural and
spiritual Israel also, or the spiritual Israel only, or as any ways having a
Title by and with Christ, in his said Davidical Kingdom; they will upon all
those or the like accounts or interests, whereby such divine goodness is
conveyed to them, accordingly, magnify his name and all together, sound forth
his praise for them all, (as Christ's mystical Members perfected) rejoicing in
the happiness one of another, and all jointly exalt Christ their divine and
glorious Head and Hus band, and both then, and for ever sound forth Praise and
Glory to God the Father, the Lamb that was slain, and to the Holy Spirit for
ever and ever; both jointly, and as upon their several accounts they are in
possession of happiness and glory: It is want of information, and consequently
of the Faith of these Truths, that is the Reason why many are at present no
more affected with the hearing of them; the Reason whereof appears to be,
because God was pleased so mysteriously to lay them down, that unless few by a
special Faith foresaw them, (as we said) that sew others usually discerned much
of them; and though we in the New Testament times, might see much in those
ancient promises contained, as since in Old and New Testament has been further
by degrees explained; yet without this last said divine Key, given by Jesus
Christ himself; we could never have been resolved and satisfied of, or
concerning the time and place, and persons to enjoy them, nor how they should
be fitted in such a state to obtain them, with many circumstances thereunto
appertaining; which from this blessed last Revelation, Christ has graciously
resolved for his Servants present comfort and future happiness in that State,
and for ever.

And to lead unto the use of this said excellent Key, all the former parts of
the whole Revelation, is made to be subservient through all those sad suffering
times, to lead Gods Servants to this triumphant state (in good measure) then
next succeeding, as well as to teach the Sufferers before, that God had
appointed them thereunto; but a Jerusalem state followed, as in the seven
Epistles, and all parts following as we showed, Prod. p. 39.40. and so to
occasion us to look unto what God revealed, of the state of his Church before
by Daniel and others, under the four Monarchies; and so by looking back to the
fall of David's Tabernacle, to consider what is foretold of the raising it up
again; and so of all the said anciently revealed promises, one by one, to
observe by the guidance of Gods Word and Spirit, what they all related unto,
till we came backward to the first divinely published Grace, Genesis 3.15. The
Foundation and short comprisal of all the rest, yea of the whole Book of God;
from whence as the Spring head, all the other Rivolets have flowed in their
several courses, to empty themselves into those narrow Seas or Streights of the
1000 years, to pass in their order and time from thence into the vast Ocean of
Eternity, (as in our said Resemblance) and all in that time and manner before
by God appointed.

Many Arguments may hence from our whole Systeme be drawn for the Saints said
blessed first Resurrection of their Bodies, being many ways their peculiar
interest, arising from many ancient interests, besides manifold respects unto
God himself therein: for these are no new Devices or Fancies of men, but
ancient Foundations of Gods own laying, often confirmed, and much by degrees
explained, but now by Christ irresistably evidenced, so as to leave all men
inexcusable, to whom such Truth shall be thereupon tendered; and all that hear
it ought to judge themselves greatly concerned, to inquire rightly and duly
into it; that is, humbly, faithfully, diligently, earnestly, as being a truth
of the Gospel, but now greater then at other times upon many accounts; and
therefore they ought to hear, read, pray, ponder well and consider with pains
and patience, and willingness to be informed in these things; though they may
be good Teachers other ways: And in such a course men may be Gods blessing,
soon say as the Neighbors of the woman of Samaria, said unto her, now we
believe these things; not because such or such told us of them, but now we find
we are taught by Christ the same Truths, and rejoice likewise in them, etc. But
I conceive so much has been said upon this account, in our said Preface
preparatory, and in this Tract also, with diverse short intimations and hints,
that considerate persons will not think of any of them, without respects to the
Saints bodily Resurrection, revealed here by Christ in so many circumstances,
that an Infidel in Reason shall hardly deny? But only take this along, Christ's
last Revelation must be allowed to be a Revelation of something, not so known
before, or else it had been useless; but it is of such great matters of
concernment as none else could, and is of so great moment as became the Son of
God, the Lamb that received the Book to open this seventh Seal to the
uttermost, no other way otherwise to have been known: And therefore let us all
give all praise due unto the Lamb, and bless the Father who gave the said Book
to him, and acknowledge the gracious operation of the holy Spirit, who teaches
us every degree of Divine wisdom; and so from our said Grounds, Reasons and
Arguments, which have been also drawn from Scripture Foundations: We now
proceed to our fourth way of proving this first Resurrection, to be the Saints
said bodily rising, which Christ will bring with him at his coming in the
Clouds of Heaven, to raise them in their spiritual Bodies, to enjoy the
happiness of the New Jerusalem state, in the said 1000. years of their Reign
with Christ, etc.

But here a great Obstacle seems to lie in our way, for what other Text or
Texts of, Scripture, may some say, teach these things? And for Revelation
Mysteries they are obscure, and they may seem questionable, whether they be
Argumentative or not, etc. for Answer to the first branch, That there are other
Texts of Scripture, in Old and New Testament, that speak the same things in
substance; though more darkly we shall by and by show; and we have before
observed (and it ought here to be remembered) that the Doctrine of the
Resurrection was long, but darkly delivered: our Savior therefore proves the
Resurrection by an inference from the Penteuch of Moses, against the Sadduces;
being that part of holy Scripture, which that Sect only owned, and little is
found of it in all the old Testament, at least that is clear and explicit; in
the Gospel we read of the Resurrection of the just, and as before our Savior
spoke of the Children of the Resurrection in that World, but how few have taken
notice of what World that was meant? So these remained for the most part still
obscure; the Apostle Paul reveals a mystery of it, yea many Mysteries (as we
hope to manifest) the Jews and Israelites civil Resurrection, that is near to
it, and in Scripture adjoined to it, is likewise called a Mystery and rising
from the dead, for the strangness of it Ezekiel. 37. with Romans 11. and Dan. 12.1,
2, 3. and both are again joined by our Savior, Luke 21.28, 31. But our Savior
according to his Divine wisdom, has given light to those and many other Texts
of that nature; and should we in this cavil with our Mercy, and contend with
our most Divine Teacher, as if we were wiser then he, or that Wisdom it self
had erred therein! And indeed it is strange to hear men's perverse reasonnings
in these things, and the like; but we shall give other Scriptures that teach
the same in substance or the like, after all (as we said) both in Old and New
Testament: Only we would speak a word or two to the other branch of the
Objection, in the first place: That the Book of the Revelation is mysterious,
and men have been much mistaken, etc. Ans. It has been in some things a
secret, long but yet not such as were forbidden to inquire into; yea we are
commanded to read it and search this, as other Books of the Gospel, viz. to
understand it, and it is not as in Daniels hints of these things, when he was
commanded to shut them up; but contrary, the Apostle John is commanded to leave
them open, and not Seal them, Chap. 22. v. 10. Yea our Savior pronounces a
blessing to such as read them as they ought, and he has blessed many with very
Remarkable Discoveries by degrees, (though Objectors are injuriously Critical
against them,) instead of being thankful to God, and to them, for what they
have in such kind disco vered, and stumble more at a Conjecture or easy
mistake, then profit by many precious and useful things, so tendered to them,
all have but what measure they receive, to such purpose from God, in one
respect or other, and God has vouchsafed a special assistance in this kind one
way or other; even sometimes by unexpected and unlikely means, and Instruments;
somewhat I could say in that kind, but it may not be convenient, etc. did not
Christ send his Spirit to lead his into all truth, and Revelation Truths are
some of them, yea and very precious ones too: Though some mistakenly would
persuade some good persons to the contrary, and Gods Spirit has not yet laid
down that Office, Christ promised to send him for, though we expect no new
Foundation Truths, but the spiritual and true Explications of old, and of such
ancient Foundations especially as we have occasion now to speak of; for the
Revelation is always of some (before) obscure and hidden Scripture Truths, and
it is a great advantage (as we before noted in our Preface) to know the
subject, nature, time and end of such Scripture Truths; so in this book
revealed, as by this most precious Key that respects the happy estate fore
Prophesied for Gods people in the said 1000 years: it is true, it was long in
those respects, mistaken by many and strangly misplaced, but now they are in a
great measure made evident: it is true also, the times of the great Red Dragon,
and the Beast were for a long time more dark and obscure, till their
fulfillings in many things, have given more light to such things as yet remain
unfulfilled; but particularly, as to these last things the said Key relates
unto (as Mr. Mede well observes) the spirit of God speaks more clearly of these
in chapter 20. of this Revelation, than in the times foregoing: and the two last
chap. are in some measure an explication of the same matters, and times, and
state of things in the said 1000 years; and that 20th chapter is an exact Table of
such times, which if a man once discover what things it relates unto, he is in
a good way to attain the end thereof; and it being once found to be Christ's Key
of ancient revealed Mercies (as Scriptures make evident in many particulars) as
I have, and doubt not, by the same guidance, to give farther and good account
of from Gods Word; which also I am well assured from Scripture, and satisfied,
(whatever some may think otherwise) that for the substance, it will be approved
by Jesus Christ the faithful and true Witness, and our Guide into these Truths,
by the assistance of his Holy Spirit; and I shall ever resolve, with humble
thanksgiving, to ascribe the praise thereof to his Divine Grace, for such a
great mercy to such a poor weak much inwardly and outwardly shattered and
broken Earthen Vessel: But as it is his work of Grace by a weak hand, so
tendered, let none despise it: God stands in need of no man's parts, learning,
esteem, or worldly advantage or interest whatsoever farther than he pleases.

The slighting of this most Divine excellent and sacred Book is much in some
men's minds and mouths; therefore I thought fit here to say thus much to it. Now
let us proceed to the Symphony and agreement of this with other Texts of
Scripture, for the Revelation (as we noted) is of some Divine Truth written
before; yet if we know Christ spoke this of the first Resurrection of the
Saints bodily, and spoke it so plainly in a good degree, it is presumption to
seek a confirmation of his words; but because it is a Revelation, it is of some
Scripture before though darkly delivered, as all the other parts were of
Daniels short hints sealed or shut up before, and so is this of the subsequent
Mysteries in Daniel, in respect of their time (as in part we showed) though
much of this first Resurrection, we hope to manifest from other Scriptures
likewise. We will begin with the Prophet Esay's Testimony, in that excellent
Song, chapter 26. who having said of those Lords that had Dominion over the Jews,
viz. the Heathen Tyrants, v. 13, 14. They are dead, they shall not live; they
are deceased, they shall not rise: viz. at this first Resurrection, v. 19. but
he declares there who shall live and rise (then) thy dead men, says he, namely
Gods Saints, shall live; together with my dead body shall they arise: that is,
at the said first Resurrection, which our Savior has here so fully explained:
So David foreseeing, by the Spirit of Prophecy, that the Just shall have
Dominion at that time, over such wicked men, in the morning of the Resur. and
day of Judgment; it must needs follow as our Savior explains the same; that
the just must necessarily first rise to receive that Dominion, Psalm. 49.14. and
in this Daniel concurs also, for when the Thrones were set or placed, as the
words signify (not cast down, as ours read them) at Christ's coming, then (as
we showed) Judgment, or power of Judging was given to the Saints: it is the
same time, and the same thing which the Apostle is trught here by Christ here
to explain, at the end of the Roman Monarchy, in this 20th chapt. of Rev. who
expressly shows that the suffering Saints before, then lived to Reign with
Christ 1000 years: to this tends also the Apostle Paul's (...), or rising out
of the heap of the dead (then) Phil. 3.11. and our Saviors expression of those
worthy ones to obtain that world by (...), which we explained before to be a
rising from them that were in a state of dead men in the grave: the same
Apostle has diverse texts tending this way; where he, as being guided by the
same Spirit of Christ, speaks evidently in the same sense, both of the times of
both Resurrections, and other things, as the persons rising at both. 1.
Consider 1 Cor. 15.21. where he shows, as Christ was the first fruits of his
first Resurrection, so they must rise at his second coming, before the end;
which Christ shows will be above 1000 years after (as was said) and before he
has put down all Rule, and Authority, and Power, to make way for his own
Reign, v. 24, 25. and then, v. 51, 52. he shows that at the last Trumpet, the
great chang of all Saints shall be, which must be when all have come into
Christ in the 1000 years, not before possible; for not one member of Christ can
then be wanting, besides other Reasons: so of both said comings. At first, he
brings his Saints with him, that slept in Jesus, 1 These. 3. ult, 1 These. 4.14,
15. but (then) he speaks there of his descending from Heaven with a shout, etc.
not out of Heaven (as when the New Jerusalem came from God out of Heaven) but
of three forts then to be caught up to meet him in the Air, v. ^6 just as the
Revelation tells us of the Saints raised in the Jerusalem state, and of the
Nations of them that are saved, walking in the light of the said New Jerusalem,
which being mortal, some of them die in the 1000 years, as Esa. 65.20. and so
lie dead till the last Trump; so here, 1 These. 4.14, 15. of the two former,
faith he, we that are alive and remain ( viz. to the coming of the Lord to the
last Judgment) so distinguishing both the living and the rased Saints remaining
from the dead, and, says he, the dead then in Christ shall rise first, that
is, before the wicked (as the raised Saints also did before in the 1000 years)
and so again in the former text, 1 Cor. 15. concerning the living Saints, then,
says he, we shall not all sleep, ( viz. by dying before a natural death) for
some will be found alive at the last Trump which he speaks of; but of such, and
the raised Saints (says he) we shall all be changed, and from both sorts he
distinguishes a third also; namely, such as are dead in Christ, at that time
the Trumpet sounds, which he says shall then be raised incorruptible, when
both the other sorts shall be changed also in a moment, v. 51, 52. so agreeably
the Spirit of God speaks in all places to his own Oracles; and in the
Revelation Christ gives us the best explication of all such Mysteries, for in
the 1000 years the raised Saints, and they saved in the natural life will be of
one Communion: all to be changed, and all said to live and remain till the the
last Trump; but such as sleep, or are dead (then) are in both places
distinguished from both the other, and in both Texts called the dead; in one
the dead in Christ then, to distinguish them from all the wicked then dead, yet
both said to be the rest of the dead that rose not till the 1000 years were
ended, chapter 20.5. Now to prevent mistaking, the Apostle resolved the
Thessalonians 2 Epist. 2.2, 3. that the coming of the Lord was not at hand in
those ages; for the great falling away, and revealing the Man of Sin was to be
first, and Christ would destroy him with the appearance of his presence, etc.
which is not yet done: but he was guided by the same spirit of Truth in these
Texts, to speak according to these Revelation Discoveries (who also at his
rapture into the third Heaven heard unspeakable words, of which these might be
some) and I believe it was not possible to resolve the riddles in them without
Christ's Revelation given for many such purposes; and here is one coming with
all his Saints, which he brings with him: this Rev. 20. and 21. shows to be at
the beginning of the 1000 years; and there is another after 1000 years, when
all the Saints are come into the Church, and when all shall be rapt up in the
twinkling of an eye to meet Christ in they air, which the Apostle calls a
coming as well as a descending (which we have not till now observed) we that
live and remain to the comeing, viz. to the last Judgment; so three sorts shall
then be rapt or caught to meet Christ that last time in the air; yea, and
(says he) we shall ever be with the Lord; which it is evident will be after
the end of the 1000 years, for when Satan was loosed, they were not with him
personally present. Two sorts are distinguished from the dead Saints at the
time of that rapture in both Texts: of those in that to the Corinthians (says
he) we shall not all sleep: some Saints then will be mortal, but not all dead,
but we shall all, even we all, viz. all Saints raised before, as well as those
in the natural life shall then be changed: so in the Epistle to the
Thessalonians, we that are alive and remain, (...), we that so live, and we
that are left for that long continuance: both the two Articles (...), and the
original word seem to speak the like difference of two sorts of Saints (besides
the dead Saints then) and both these Texts are cleared by Christ's Revelation,
that tells us of the spirits of just men coming with him, as the New Jerusalem
down from Heaven, after said to be the Lambs Wife, and these lived having then
their spiritual bodies from Christ; and also the Nations of them that are saved
are then also said to walk in the light of that Jerusalem, from whose happy
Communion, they will have much guidance and consolation in that state: and both
these are by Christ also differenced from the rest of the dead Saints that
lived not till the 1000 years were ended, chapter 20.5. that then are said to rise
first, viz. at the last Trump and Rapture. Now if men would produce thousands
of Expositors of another mind, I must only in duty humbly Answer, I have
Christ's Resolution in the case (as of Daniels hints before) from this Divine
Revelation, and otherwise I believe no man had ever been able fully and truly
to have opened these Texts, as St. Peter says, by reason of such (...)
contained in them, hard to be understood. Let all men therefore learn to praise
God for this blessed Divine Book of the Revelation; and learn to have its
Explications in exceeding great Veneration; for had it not been useful and
necessary, it had never been so wonderfully adorned with so many glorious
excellencies, which I believe the Saints in that world to come will
acknowledge, to the honor and praise of Jesus Christ, whose that sacred Book
is entitled to be, viz. the Revelation of Jesus Christ.

Now if men were not prepossessed with other groundless notions of the General
Resurrection, and General Judgment without respect unto Christ's Revelation, and
other expressions of Scripture, in many respects agreeing therewith; these
things were easy and familiar to such as were tolerably versed in the way and
style of that sacred Book: but it is hard to remove long settled misopinions of
men upon some easy mistakes, as in this case the Scripture often speaks of
them together without explication: but then we must grant the Spirit of God and
Christ himself may, when and how, and by whom he pleases, make particular
explications in any respects, and it is the usual manner in this Divine Book,
first to hint generals, and after particularly to explain them: Christ will at
the first act of Judgment, Judge quick and dead, 2 Timothy 4.1. viz. the wicked
quick (as was said) by removing them out of the world, and then with a Judgment
of reward to his Servants the Prophets, and his Saints, and all that fear his
name, both small and great: as likewise at the latter act he will consume the
last Gog and Magog, chapter 20.9, 10. as well as rap up the Saints at the last
Trump, and raise the wicked then out of the Earth and Sea to be judged: the
Saints to be pronounced then openly blessed; the other upon Trial to be
declared cursed, etc. and the Devil will then also be cast into the Fiery Lake,
though he was only bound, etc. in the 1000 years. Oh that Christians would
humbly and diligently search these Scriptures, and endeavor to pray themselves
into the right apprehensions of these things; then they might better expect
Gods Spirit would lead them into such fecret things of God, which he will so
reveal unto his faithful Servants, which otherwise (happly) they may not be
resolved of till the Appearance of Jesus Christ, which then his raised Saints
will find true. Which course, if they would take, their Language and
Expressions would not be so antiscriptural; nor their Explications of many
Texts so hererodox to Christ's Explications of these, and some other matters, as
sometimes they are; and so disorderly of Christ's being King, Priest, and
Prophet (which first in due order is last.) And there is more weight in these
things, (however any may slight them) than men usually (that have not learned
otherwise from sacred Scripture) are (happly) aware of, whence many expositions
are put upon some Texts, which I assuredly know, Christ Jesus will not allow
of, besides their holding themselves so more engaged against the Truth: But to
pass from this fourth way of proof of this first bodily Resurrection of the
Saints, by so many Scriptures speaking to the same purpose, diverse ways, with
this Text and Context, whereby our Savior here gives light and strength to
them all: who is only that Doctor irrefragabilis that need not speak ex
Cathedra (as they say) That great deluder of these latter days must do) or else
he may err: But Christ's Revelations in all such kinds, are Divine Resolutions,
that Christians ought not only, not to gain say, but to rest in, as their
ultimate Determinations in the Case; though any, or many men should not own
them. And thus much for the proof of the point in hand; namely, That this said
First Resurrection, is the Bodily Resurrection of the suffering Saints here
spoken of. And so we hope we have sufficiently manifested the same to the
Consciences of serious and judicious Christians: first from the Text, with its
dependancie, and as the matter of the said Divine Truth is explained
Doctrinally by Christ himself, and here again set forth by his own Divine
Revelation, in the order, time, and way of the execution of the same; and that
by variety of expressions in several places to this very purpose, fully
agreeing with the Apostles (...), or rising out of the heap (as was showed
before) wherein the curious exactness of the Spirit of God is very remarkable
(if rightly considered.)

Secondly, From the context, by diverse Reasons therein observable, manifesting
this particular Revelation, to be the Explication of Daniels Vision Chap. 7.9,
10, 13, 14. Of the Judgment set to destroy the Beast, and to give his Body to
the burning Flame at Christ's coming, in the Clouds of Heaven, and his receiving
his universal Kingdom over all Nations, under the whole Heavens; when he brings
with him all his Saints that slept in him before, and and raises them in their
order bodily to Reign with him; which we thirdly prove two ways: First
positively to be a bodily Resurrection from several Scriptures and Reasons; and
Secondly, on the Negative part, showed it could not be meant of a spiritual
Resurrection, setting forth the many absurdities of such a pretense: whereunto
we added diverse particular branches in our Systeme of Gods Economy, in
ordering his Household the Church from the beginning, in regard of those
anciently revealed and promised Mercies and Covenants to the Fathers, remaining
chiefly to be (altogether) fulfilled in that state of his said Davidical
Kingdom, in the 1000 years Reign with his Saints, and the New Jerusalem state
the same time; which contain that inestimable Treasure of Grace, laid up
therein of old for them, which now by our Saviors Divine Key is laid open for
them for the present, to be used by Faith for their great consolation, and
whereby they shall also by the due improvement thereof: assuredly hereafter
inlargedly receive the Frution of the same, without which Divine Key (though
the said promises in the matter of them were sure) yet there could not have
been any satisfactory account given, by Angels or men, unless from some other
such special Revelation when, or how, or where, or to whom; or how long with
all such circumstances by Christ here decyphered those said revealed and
promised mercies should be so performed to the Saints, but by this Key they are
all excellently and divinely resolved here by the Spirit of Christ, in his
setting forth the times of the Restitution of all things; when he makes all
things new; Chap. 21.5. also spoken of by all the Holy Prophets since the World
began, Acts 3.19, 20, 21. Which will then be manifest to be Gods and Christ's
most glorious work, whilst the WOrld shall continue, and the greatest matter
of Glory and Praise, to the Divine Majesty by Angels and men, and even
inferior Creatures (in their capacity) to be rendered to God the Father, to
the Lamb that was slain, and to the Holy Spirit for ever and ever. And
Fourthly, We have by sundry Texts in Old and New Testament, set forth a
wonderful accord and agreement of them, with this said Revelation, which gives
light to them all, and which could not otherwise have been known as was said by
Angels or Men.

And now I hope as Creation Atheists (as we may fitly call them) are generally
exploded by all sober and prudent persons, who have unreasonably fancied that
Atoms, so fell in one with another to make up all things at first in the world:
So allpious Christians will more and more judge them, in some fort to be
counted Creature-Redemption-Infidels at that time, or denyers of the
Restitution of all things, that should profanely assert after so abundant
evidence; that those and all parts of Holy Scripture, respecting these Truths,
fell only in by the Fancies of the Penmen of them in all parts thereof; and
that Christ's opening thusall such divine Mysteries, is but a mere Chymera and
Fantastical Fiction: Of which dangerous Error, let all Slighters and Opposers
of these divine Mysteries, beware of being found guilty at Christ's appearance,
now near approaching; for it is strange in this Case, to consider what a bold
licentiousness of speaking, some men have dared to venture upon even to
amazement, now in such times of Light, etc.

Some such Objections we have already answered, which fell in our way, and
should here answer many more, if many had not in our former parcels been
answered before, and also by many others of late times, as we showed
particularly in the everlasting Gospel, on Genesis 3.15. page 19. is to be seen.

But one thing we shall here by way of prevention, resolve by Divine
affistance: Least some subtle Questionist, rather to obstruct these Doctrines,
then to disprove them, should demand of us in the Case, what special words of
direction have we, for such use of the said Key; whereupon such weight and
stresse is laid?

We might briefly answer, the whole stress is not laid thereon; for before we
had so well observed, and considered the use thereof, by the order of
accomplishment of matters in the Book of Revalation which is of exceeding great
use with the three others, we touched in our Preface, viz. the Subject, Nature
and Scope of the Book: I say we had observed thirty six particulars before,
respecting those times and things; but since upon the exactness of that Chap.
respecting such a change in the World, relating to the ancient Prophets;
whereby all circumstances are so set forth, and the sacred Scriptures before
had brought things to such an height of suitableness, by searching through Gods
goodness, we found that which we hope we shall never lose again; that the 20.
Chap. of Rev. etc. is the great Key of most ancient Prophecy: And as the whole
Scripture is the interest of all and every Saint, and what ever benefit or
comfort is therein already revealed, or hereafter shall be revealed, belongs to
them all as such: So more especially those Scripture Foundations, which concern
so great a Joint interest of all such said Saints together, are therefore more
highly to be regarded, such as those are, which this Key evidently (upon
Warrant from the word, as in good measure we have showed) so evidently relates
unto: If a Father give his only beloved Son all his Estate, and House and
Goods, and Treasures contained therein; though the Heir in his Nonage knew
little of his Fathers possessions, yet when he is pleased to show him some of
his most precious Jewels, though he still reserves them; yet the Son knows
those particularly shall be his; but yet when the Father sets down a time of
sure enjoyment of them if the Fathers security be good) the Son only waits
for the appointed time: Now all Gods adopted Children, (though but adopted by
him with Christ to be his Sons) are both Heirs and Joynt-Heirs with Christ in
his Davidical Kingdom; yea then with him will be Heirs of all things, Rev.
21.7. All having therein one and the same interest, of which Christ has set a
time for the enjoyment, and which will not fail them; And let such a
Questionist know, that when God has once laid the Foundation of such ancient
precious mercies, the gradual Revelation of them is only according to his own
good pleasure, and as in his infinite wisdom and mercy to his People he sees
good: It was so in his first laying the great Corner Stone in his House; Jesus
Christ at his first coming it has been so in respect of all his Offices, and
all his Benefits held forth by the Gospel: But most of all in those matters,
respecting both the Mysteries of his Spiritual Kingdom, till Christ's 2d coming;
and also those Mystiries of his visible glorious Davidical Kingdom; with all
the excellencies of that state, (both of which are the Contents of this Book)
and in all Gods three chief Chronologers, Moses, Daniel, and the beloved John,
their Chronicles are both of large extent of time, (as in Chap. 7. of our
Irenic. is manifest) and mysterious; and to be considered as such: But above
all the Divine Excellencies of this Book, which is the Revelation of both the
other Chronicles as we have showed) are many ways wonderful; yet full of Divine
sweetness to such of his, as Christ is pleased to open such Treasures unto,
shortly from hence to be enjoyed by them; but yet more particulary as to this
Divine Key, we are now speaking of, it is made most fit to open the Lock, which
may largely appear by the Work in it, and the Wards fitted for it: if we
consider them particularly.

The mutual suitableness of them both evidently appears by [The Picture of the
Divine Key] here ensuing.
1. In Predictions.
1. IF we respect the Enemies, or their Removal, Ruin and Judgment, as Genesis
3.15. and when, Psalm. 110. 1. and Enoch's Vision of their Judgment, Jud.
13.14. both in the said first and second acts of Judgment, etc.

2. If we have respect to the Spiritual Seed of Adam and Eve; or the Spiritual
Seed of the Divine Promised Seed of the Woman, Esa. 53. for whom a Paradise is
to be procured by Christ, and restored to them at the Restitution of all
things, etc.

3. If we look at Noah's Covenant for the Earths Preservation and Fruitfulness.

4. If we respect Shems Blessing derived to his Spiritual Race Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, etc. with all the Repeated and Enlarged Promises of Canaan to their
Spiritual Seed Christ, to inherit the same through that one Divine Seed Christ
of their Lineage after to come according to the Flesh.

5. Or to such of Ahrahams, Isaacks and Jacobs Posterity, to be then in the
natural Life, to whom many great Promises are then to be performed: and to the
Gentiles likewise of Japhets Race, then, at their second Call to be United in
one Fold with that people of God, Deuteronomy. 32.43.

6. Or look upon it as the time of the Restitution of all things, as the end of
Christ's undertaking in the world, viz. according to his Promise of the New
Heavens and New Earth, Esa. 65.17, etc. as the first Adam, by the free gift of
God, possessed all things for himself and his Seed if he had stood, etc.

7. If as a Scepter or Dominion foretold by Balaam, etc. or of a Kingdom
promised to the Son of David. for ever, 2 Samuel 7. of which there is very much
in Scripture, and will then be a comprehensive mercy for all sorts of Saints
then.

8. If it be enquired how all those Mercies should be fulfilled in that state
at once to all sorts of Saints in all times both deceased and living, and upon
what accounts to Jews, Israelites and Gentiles then, who it seems should all
have their several conditions then to be enjoyed by them.

2. In Revelations.
1. THis Christ has manifested, Rev. 19.11. to the end, in taking of the
Beast, and false Prophet; and chapter 20.1, 2. in binding Satan, and in consuming
the last Gog and Magog by Fire from Heaven: and lastly by casting the Devil
into the Lake of Fire for ever, v. 8, 9, etc.

2. This is answered by the raised Saints eating of the Tree of Life in the
midst of the Paradise of God, chapter 2.7. which is also said to grow in the
midst of the street of the City, chapter 22.2.

3. It is answered with the 12 manner of Fruits growing upon the same Tree in
each Month, with Leaves for the healing of the Nations then, chapter 22.2.

4. That is answered in this Key of Christ's, by the New Jerusalem state, Rev.
21. as the City prepared for the Forefathers, Heb. 11.10, 16. whose Maker and
Builder is God: and for all the Saints to be raised then bodily, v. 40.

5. They are all comprised in Christ's said Key under the Nations of them that
are saved, shall walk in the light of the said New Jerusalem, chapter 21.24. being
such as are in the natural Life, etc.

6. It is answered by him that sits upon the Throne, chapter 21.5. who says,
Behold I make all things New at that time; and so the second Adam who has a
threefold right, Heb. 1.2, 3. is now appointed by God to be the Heir of all
things, who will at the Restitution of all things also make all his said
spiritual Seed or Overcomers by him and with himself to inherit all things,
Rev. 22.7.

7. That is to be in Christ's Kingdom, or Reign with his Saints the 1000 years,
Rev. 20.4, 6. which is of large consideration when the Kingdoms of the world
are become the Kingdoms of our God, and of his Christ, chapter 11.15.

8. Christ has resolved all those in the raising of his Saints which he brings
with him, to raise their bodies in their order, chapter 20.4. when he will reward
his Servants the Prophets, and his Saints, and all that fear his Name both
small and great; whereby Daniels darker Vision of the same is enlightened: and
by a strange, yet promised, both Civil and Spiritual Resurrection of Jews and
Israelites, Ezekiel. 37. Dan. 12.1, 2, 3. and Romans 11. when the Gentiles of
Japhets Race shall have their second most full and large Call, with performance
of great Promises to them also.

And is not there wonderful Divine Wisdom observable in such a Contrivance, and
wonderful Goodness in giving such an excellent Key to his Church, so Divinely
fitted to open those so ancient Prophesies and Promises? And will not much more
wonderful Wisdom, Mercy, Truth and Faithfulness, with all other Gods
Excellencies shine out to the Admiration of all those Saints at that time in
the said State, to their heightning then to a like wonderful Praise of the
Divine Grace, with Angels, Men, and all other Creatures, as Rev. 5.10, to the
end?

Adam and Eve, and all Saints since them shall be present (then) at once, to
see all their Interests, and well grounded Expectations (then) made good; and
how the order of Times, and of all affairs, which have been suitably ordered
and carried on (to which purpose, a Scripture Harmony might largely and
profitably be written upon the account of this Key in all the particulars, from
the beginning to the end of the Bible: whereby the Divine Wisdom and Goodness
(with other Excellencies) might appear wonderful to a believing Soul (in any
good measure enlightened in such Divine Mysteries:) Yea, if men would but
rightly improve, and not unworthily pervert their very Reason in such things,
they might discern much more than usually they do; and if they were but as
forward to embrace what Evidences are set before them, upon due consideration
of them; as they are studious to find stumbling blocks in their own way, or
cast them in the way of others, there would soon be more consent to, and
enquiry after these divine Truths, than opposition and resistance of them: The
Book given by the Father had seven Seals, and the Lamb is wise and powerful
enough, to execute them in their due order, and so he has done almost in all
of them already; and what now remains may in a good degree appear to such as
give their minds to, and duly use the means appointed for the understanding of
them: But if others will not, and therefore are judged by Christ not worthy, so
to be taught, because (as the unbeleiving Jews formerly) so they now also shut
their Eyes, and turn away from such light of Truth, the fault will then be
their own: And it is observeable Christ's first revealing, and his Spirits
teaching of these things, is in a different way from many other divine
Doctrines: Yea, Christ questioneth whether he shall find faith of these things,
Mat. 17.18. upon Earth when he comes (although his Spirit three times (as we
noted) confirmed the truth of them,) chap. 19. and 21, 22. and yet of all the
matters in that divine Book, no part so evident and clear (as was said) none so
exact and distinct in all respects of order, time, place, persons, continuance,
with all useful circumstances as this said 20th. chap. which has many stamps
of Divine Excellency set upon it, all very useful for the persons concerned;
for the opening of this great mystery of God by the help of the said Key, being
rightly used by them, in some, it has pleased the divine Majesty, according to
his infinite wisdom and grace reavealed, thus by degrees to set forth by Christ
himself, the great concerns of himself and his Saints, the Lambs Wife; then to
be in such excellent Communion with him, as then will appear to them, 1 John
2.3. And let all such critical Persons against these Truths consider, Psalm
25.9, 14. The meek he will teach his way, and his secret is with such, etc. and
the work of Faith must be his own in every branch of Divine truth, tendered to
any from his written word: Such as all these matters are, (though somewhat
mysteriously set down) we have I conceive spoken sufficiently to this purpose
before; I shall therefore here add no more.

Now for Application, We shall only endeavor to give some brief hints
thereof, referring their inlargements to future opportunity, if God be pleased
to afford it, for I cannot speak largby the Press, etc.

1. Use of Inform. This may inform all Preachers of the Gospel, and all wise
and faithful Christians, that desire to be well and surely guided in these
great things of God, respecting the said first Resurrection, of what
concernment it is; to labor well to understand: First, the curious work of
this Key, given by Jesus Christ, since he ascended unto the Father: And
Secondly, the right Use and Improvement of it. The curious work in it, is that
it is Divinely fitted for all ancient Prophecy, and indeed for all Prophecy
respecting the general good of Gods faithful Servants, throughout all the
Bible, and of all times throughout the being of the World; all setting forth
the necessity of the Saints said Resurrection; so revealed by our Savior, as
we showed, etc. And the excellent Improvement and Use thereof, is to show their
special and peculiar interest, as well as the general, in all the revealed
promised Mercies and Covenants, in the whole Book of God, viz. How, or under
what capacity any such special Mercy, is derived to them, and made effectual to
their Souls in such or such a Dispensation of Grace to them particularly; which
has not efficatiously reached to many others, at least, as yet; but in Charity
and thankfulness, to endeavor truly that it may do so also, if it may be; and
according to their understanding well the curious work of the said Key, and the
due improvement thereof: All judicious Christians may find from thence, an
excellent sure guidance; I say again, an excellent sure guidance by divine
assistance, to judge of the true intent and meaning of all Prophetic
Scripture; all hangs upon that one Hindge of such said breaking the Serpent
[Satan] head, viz. both his head of Craft and Dominion, and all drive to the
same end of Restoration, of men and Creatures in the World; as in the several
branches of such revealed Mercies, may appear, if they be rightly considered;
and all to be accomplished by the said promised Seed, within the time of his
Mediatorship: Before those things shall be enjoyed, that Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, nor entered into the Heart of man to conceive; which will be in the
highest Heavens afterward: Whereas these mercies in the interim will be much
of another nature; whilst Christ is redeeming and restoring Men and other
Creatures, from the bondage of Corruption, unto that glorious liberty of the
Sons of God: And though there be many particular and special Prophesies many
times, yet they are in their drift and subserviency, to be reduced thereunto;
and therefore the allegorizing of any sorts of Prophesies, that have a direct
tendencie to any branch of such reavealed ancient Promises and Covenants, must
needs be erroneous upon whatsoever fair pretenses, such sense or senses are put
upon them, by any man or men whatsoever. And therefore if we look unto what God
declared in general to Adam and Eve, and for their Spiritual Offspring,
through Christ that said Divine Seed of the Woman, about 4000 years after to
come in the Flesh: Both in respect of the evil to be removed and the good to be
obtained, answerable to those diverse times and diverse ways after declared
Mercies, acording to the good pleasure of God to the fore Fathers: Or consider
aright the Covenant which God made with Noah, that Type of Christ for the
preservation of the renewed Earth, as the Stage whereupon God would act in all
future Mercies, to be known and performed in their due time and order, to the
end of the World; and thereupon the Mercies then to his people were said to be
as the Waters of Noah unto God himself, that was, sure and infallible; and by
that Covenant, both all Creatures with men have their usual preservation and
Provision, by Seed time and Harvest, etc. and their greatest fruitfulness, is
especially reserved for those last times, when the Serpents head shall be
broken, both eminently at Christ's coming from the right hand of the Father, at
the beginning, or when his shall sully destroy all his Churches Enemies with
death the last, after the said thousand years: Or consider the blessings of
Shem and his Race to Abraham, and thence especially to all Israel, the twelve
Tribes, and so in Christ's lineage and forward; or the Predictions of the Calls
of Japhets posterity, the Gentiles since by holy Scripture explained and
applied; Or as Jews and Gentiles both united under that one King Christ Jesus,
which is that Son of David, that shall sit on David's Throne, so long as the Sun
and Moon shall endure, according to David's sure mercies promised, respecting
his said Kingdom; and all other Saints interest therein through Christ; (for to
them also belongs the sure Mercies of David, Esa. 55.3.) whereby they are also
secured for Eternity; for such shall not be hurt by the second death, as rise
then to Reign with Christ in that Kingdom, which only will continue to the
finishing of his Mediatorship, but then is by him to be given up to the Father,
1 Cor. 15. And is that that must be during the Worlds continuance, as appears
by our fifteen Reasons in the New Jerusalem, page 9, 10. when under him the
said Saints glorious King, Head and Husband, who prayed in that sense before
his death, that they should be so made perfect in one as his Bride or mystical
Body, and willed they should behold his glory then, Joh. 17.21, 23, 24. when
there will (...) very gracious and happy performance of all such promised
mercies, in the (...) to the capacity of the Persons or Creatures, that are to
be so blened, preserved or restored. So that they attend to this Issue, that
Christ may be manifest in the world before all sorts of Creatures, to be as
perfect, yea a much more perfect, yea an infinitely more perfect Restorer, and
Redeemer than the Devil was or could be a dessolator and destroyer: as all
those said predictions in their several times and kinds, with their subsequent
Scripture Confirmations and explication sufficiently restifie: being all opened
by and accommodated unto this Divine Key of the Son of God the Wisdom of the
Father: by whom the worlds were made, viz. the Old World, the New world, and
the World to come shall be, Heb. 1.3. with Rev. 21.5. who has, and does, and
will till then uphold all things by his Divine Power, as well as he has
Redeemed us by his Blood, who shall then accordingly inherit all things,
answerably to this his said threefold right assigned by the Father unto him in
his said Kingdom; and by him to his suffering Saints, Rev. 21.7. in the time of
his said Mediatorship, or of his Davidical Kindom, and said New Jerusalem
state; upon which accounts the said Saints the Lambs Wife shall then with him
enjoy the same in their capacity; and the inferior Chreatures then also be
restored to the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21, 23. all bowing
the knee, and paying their Homage to him as Lord, Phil. 2.9, 10.

And for the large measure of Divine Grace, which will abundantly then be
poured out upon those in the natural life, who shall then walk in the light of
that New Jerusalem when God will Circumcise the hearts of that his ancient
people of Israel especially, as Deuteronomy. 30. to v. 11. particularly respecting the
same time, as many other Scriptures do, for that is the Foundation of all their
outward blessings promised to them (especially in those times) for unto
Godliness are the Promises of that world to come made, so much more than to
this, in regard in that state greater Promises of much larger measure of Divine
Grace, are made in the Scriptures for those times more generally: so that it is
a mere blinding of the Truth for any to say they conceive (that is, only by
guessing) that a more spiritual Church state will be, and yet not yield the
outward visible glory in the said time belonging thereto: for in reference to
the fulfilling of all outward Promises, not only to the said Saints, but unto
Christ himself as such a visible (then) glorious King of those raised Saints,
will those large ^^^ward mercies be given together with the large endowments of
(...) in the natural Life: and the holy Scriptures thall not be broken in any
of these things: but Christ will then most certainly raise the said Saints; and
they as the Wife of him the Lamb shall then Reign with him, or as the members
of that then his visible Body, whereof he will then be their visible glorious
Head; that is, visible to themselves: and when also the then converted Jews
first and especially, with all Israel that then shall be saved, Romans 11. to
whom also the great fullness of the Gentiles is after to come in, who being
united into one fold with them, shall inherit all the said declared and
promised Mercies, yea and inferior Creatures then obtain their liberty
aforesaid, etc. So that the drift of all such Promised Mercies respecting the
said Spiritual Seed of all times before, shows the necessity of such a
Resurrection of the Saints in the time of Christ's Mediatorship, and the
accommodation of this Divine Key unto them, many ways illustrates the glory of
God, and that said happy estate of the Raised Saints, fitting themselves (with
Angels) for a most blessed Eternity, when Christ's final Judgment is ended: and
such as would deny such a state preceding the same, must blot out much in all
parts of holy Scripture, besides the divinely useful accommodation of this Key
of Christ Jesus, so fitted for all such ancient Prophecy, with all the
subsequent carrying on the same design of God for these said happy times in the
world; of which much may be groundedly said under every branch of the same,
etc. yet all along answering fitly to the said necessary (revealed by Christ
Jesus) first bodily Resurrection of the Saints.

2. Use of Inform. Since the said first blessed Resurrection of the Saints, is
to Reign with Christ, and partake of the New Jerusalem State in that World,
etc. This may inform all men of these three things, viz. Of the Antiquity, and
Excellency, and Blessedness appertaining, or to the Doctrine to the said
Kingdom and New Jerusalem state. First, For the Antiquity thereof, it is
contained in Gods first Declaration, as afterward explained; expressed in
Baalams Parable, but abundantly typified in David's and Solomon's Kingdoms;
confirmed and explained by Moses, the Prophets and Psalms, etc. as in our Iren.
chap. 5.6, 7, 8. And the Doctrine of the New Jerusalem, was also contained in
that first said publication, but particularly manifest to Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob; since explained largely in the Prophets and Psalms, and is that City the
Apostle Paul says is prepared for the Forefathers, whose Maker and Builder is
God, Heb. 11.10.16. whose great Privileges have all along the Revelations been
the suffering Saints encouragements.

2. The Doctrine is excellent, of a Divine and Heavenly Excellency; whereof
David's and Solomon's Kingdom were but shadows: And the old Jerusalem was but a
Type of the holy, great and beloved Jerusalem, shortly to be in the World; as
it is gloriously discribed, both by the Prophets and Psalms likewise; but
chiefly by our Savior, Rev. 21. and his Kingly Office is many ways the most
glorious part of Christ's Mediatorship, see the Treatise on Genesis 3.15.

3. That the Doctrine of them contains much blessedness and comfort in it, is
manifest from the time, and occasion of the beginning and setting up of both,
etc. the time is when Christ comes and brings his reward with him, and all his
Saints also to be then rewarded by him, as he promised to such as come to him,
to such as believe in him, and spiritually eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood,
four times over, John 6. viz. That he will raise them up at the last day, which
is at the said Resurrection of of the Saints, to be brought into the same State
and Kingdom, and the large and great promises made to the same are big with
variety of blessings, in the Old Testament; but in all this excellent Book of
Revelations, all sorts of Sufferers in their times, have their consolations and
encouragements from something, respecting that State and Kingdom, as in Prod.
page 39, 40, 41. may particularly be seen, and then at the said Resurrection
they will have the Dominion, Psalm. 49.14. and rule over the Nations as was
said, yea then says the Psalm 149 (Consider the whole Psalmist) shall the
Saints execute the judgment written, viz. by Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.40, 41. For there
will never be such a time or occasion again to do it, as at the Armageddon
Battle when Christ will wound that Head of many Countries, from the beginning
of the Revenges upon that Enemy, [Antichrist] when God whets his glittering
Sword, and makes it drunk with Blood, Deuteronomy. 32.^2, etc. I do but touch upon
these things, much more is said on Genesis 3.15. in the Everlasting Gospel.

3. Use of Inform. Men may likewise hence be informed of the exceeding great
benefit, of this most excellent Key of all ancient Prophecy from Rev. 20. and
21. and 22. Which the whole Book before does chiefly make the way for; indeed
it is a great mercy to Gods Church, both formerly and of late in all the said
times of Christ's overcomers, of Dragon and Beast, that they have been
encouraged therein from such Revelations; of what they should suffer was
ordered by his Sovereign hand; so though wicked Men and Devils were the
Instruments, yet they did suffer under them, according to the good will and
pleasure of Almighty God, and by the strength of his Grace carrying them
through all their Trials; and they found what helps and supports he had
provided for them, both present then, and what is promised for the time to
come, in the Epistles to the seven Churches of Asia, and all Sufferers after in
order to these very times, as in the large paper in our Prodr. page 39, 40, 41.
may be seen: But the benefit of this said Divine Key in the last part, is
incomparably advantageous and comfortable, in showing from the beginning what
Fonndations, of such wonderful anciently revealed and promised mercies, God
has so Divinely couched in them, for all Generations before and in the 1000
years, or New Jerusalem state; (together) in the World wherein everlasting
happiness, will not only be entered upon, and secured to all Saints: (for none
such shall be hurt by the second death) but by that State they will upon many
advantages be fitted, more for Eternal happiness, and more to glorify God in
the enjoyment of it, for evermore! Upon the abundant discovery (then) to be
made of such wonderful ways, of Gods revealed, formerly, and then fully
performed Grace in all branches thereof; which the said Key leads Christ's
Servants to, by Faith till the time come of the fruition of the same, for the
Spouse of Christ, the Lambs Wife, Rev. 21.9. In whatsoever times before of the
Church, they have lived, they will then drink afresh and unspeakably, more
fully the Waters of consolation, by formerly revealed or promised goodness, in
any measure or manner derived to them, in their several Ages in the World, when
they shall all together drink thereof; as the new Wine prepared for Christ's
said Kingdom, in that world to come. First, For those of the Spiritual Seed of
Adam and Eve, which (it is probable) knew little of any other Foundation of
Faith, that the old world had; and it is to be hoped, that though all Cains
cursed Seed perished in the Flood at last when their wickedness was grown to
the height; yet that some of them by some special weyes of mercy, manifest to
them before, might be saved by the Application of the virtue of Gods first
published and declared grace in Christ the Seed of the Woman, (through whom
good Abels offering was first accepted) and that fundamental Revelation leads
us to look foreminent, ultimate and perfect deliverance from all Enemies in
Christ's said Kingdom, and the enjoyment of all good, reserved for the raised
Saints in that state.

And for all such as lived after Noah's time, when the said old World perished
for their great provocations, they had (as we may say) a new string to their
Bow, by Gods blessing of Shem for the present and for the future, the
Prediction of the mercy of Japhets posterity in the calls of the Gentiles;
afterward more particularly made known, as was showed as another Conduit Pipe
conveying also Gods Grace unto them: Also such as had received yet more special
mercy, from the Covenant to Abraham and his spiritual Seed, by that one Divine
Seed Christ to come, by that new conveyance of such Gods Grace to them, had
still thereby a stronger Title thereunto, and also as Isaacs and Jacobs
faithful Posterity, as a new intayle of the said mercy, afterward from the
renewed manifestation of Gods sure mercies to David, in respect of his Kingdom,
which Christ shall as surely possess with his raised Saints in the thousand
years; (amongst which it is probable will be found, many that came in as
Proselytes, under all the said Dispensations of Grace) till the time of the
public mercy of the Gentiles first came in, after Christ was come in our
Flesh; according to all the former special Revelations and Confirmations of the
same, for about 4000 years before; and according to all such several
conveyances of Gods mercy to them, in their several times they lived, (which in
the 1000 years (it is probable) the Saints will largely know,) they will
suitably glorify the same Grace, Faithfulness and Truth of God in the 1000
years, and be filled with rejoicing therein, in greater measure and manner than
we can conceive, when they shall rejoice together as happy Members of the same
mystical body, whereof Christ is the Head, and as the Lambs Wife, at those
Divine Nuptials then to be celebrated, Rev. 19.7. being the Inhabitants from
that time of the New Jerusalem, whose Maker and Builder is God, Rev. 21.9. and
Heb. 11.10. and the wisdom and goodness of God will many ways appear glorious
to all sorts, of such Christ's Subjects, in his said Kingdom; when not only the
raised Saints will so particularly know the revealed Foundations, of their
thenceforth perpetual happiness; but the living Saints of all Nations that then
shall be saved, and will walk in the light of the said New Jerusalem shall be
assuredly satisfied in the security of all their present and future enjoyments,
and in their measure add their halelujahs to the raised Saints with Angels and
all other Creatures likewise in their Capacities, Rev. 5.10, etc. at that time
of the happy restitution of all things, and that ample revelation of all things
in respect of Mysteries, Creatures and Providence past, when knowledge shall
abound in the earth, as the waters cover the Sea, in all that is really good
for either of them to know; and whereby they may more be engaged to sing forth
the praises of the Lamb, etc. as is set before us in the said glimps of that
condition, Rev. 5.10, etc. which will be a School of Instruction for Angels and
Saints more excellently to glorify God the Father, the Lamb that was slain and
the Holy Spirit to all eternity; and enlarge the happiness of both sorts of
such gloried Creatures accordingly for ever: and though this excellent
Love-letter of Christ to his Spouse the Church in this his Divine Key, seems to
some to be close foulded up, and in Charracters, that none but his Spouse shall
comfortably read; yet in due time and manner, he has, and does teach his
Beloved rightly to read in this world for her Faith and Consolation in some
good measure, and fitly open it more and more fully for her in the fruition of
that blessed state and condition in that world to come: of which, much more
from Scripture might he added.

4. Use of Inform. Hence may all Saints be informed what will be then their New
Jerusalem work and employment when they shall be raised at this first
Resurrection, they will be much in praising God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
in, and for the work or Creation, Rev. 4 and especially be exercised in setting
forth the Praise of Christ the Lamb many ways, in a joint and successive Quire
of multitudes of Saints with Angels, and all other Creatures then in their
Capacity, as Rev 5.1. where is, I say, a glymps of that glorious state
represented us, v. 10. to the end. and they will be very helpful to all those
Nations of them that are saved then, which shall walk in the light of the New
Jerusalem to instruct them in what shall be useful for them to know, or do, to
comfort and encourage them therein, etc. as revealed by Christ's Spirit and
grace unto them; as one of the Elders comforted the Apostle John (when he wept)
that the Lion of the Tribe of Judah had prevailed to open the Sealed Book, Rev.
5.5. Then will be a blessed Communion of Saints much above what is possible in
our present state of things upon many advantages: there will be greater Grace
shed forth, greater discoveries made, greater opportunities, heightened Charity,
hindrances removed, powerful and useful helps afforded and made effectual,
great delight in doing good to or for the said living Saints in one Sheep fold
then; undisturbed peace, and security in well doing, and in enjoying all sorts
of blessings useful for both sorts of Christ's said Subjects in his Kingdom
promised, or that shall conduce thereunto, as God shall see good, etc.

And hence we should now labor to act in conformity to the New Jerusalem
state, as we desire our share therein, the New Covenant made with Gods
spiritual Israel then will be fufilled in the highest degree the Sons of Men
that of are capable receiving: Yea, and it seems probable, grace will then be
derived lineally to them, their Seed, and Seeds Seed for ever, as we have
showed in p. 13, 14. of our Foundations of Faith: which will be proper to that
state; therefore suitable means will be then by God provided for them and
blessed by him accordingly when her watchmen shall never hold their peace day
nor night: and when not only raised Saints and Angels will be near assistants
upon all good opportunities, ready to do any good office for them, when all
evil Instruments are removed; as other places of this Divine Book do declare,
as chapter 7. another Elder informs the Apostle of the white Robed Palm bearers;
and chapter 14.6. Angels or Messengers warned the Church, and threatened the
Enemies: so chapter 17.6, 7. another discovers that Whore and Beast, and shows
their destruction; and lastly, another Angel shows the Apostle all these
glorious matters of the New Jerusalem state, and confirms them to be faithful
and true, three times over, when the Apostle seemed so to be rapt with
Admiration, that he would have worshipped the Angel, if he had not restrained
him, chapter 19.10. and 22.8, 9. yea, and Christ himself will be the light of that
City, in whose light they shall see light, immediately, or mediately, and why
are things so decyphered in this most Divine Book but to make them known to his
Church: and it is all according to the Prophets, if rightly understood, and
applied, as Esa. 60. in Rev. 21. and other places as largly might be declared
to diverse purposes, etc.

5. Use of Inf^^^. This may also inform Christians why Satan has so long been
so eagerly bent from age to age against these Doctrines of the Davidical Kingd:
of Christ, and the New Jerusalem state the said 1000 years, which will be the
great privilege of all the faithful, jointly being made then perfect in one,
when they shall behold Christ's glory there, Joh. 17.24 for it is observable
that ever since those seven Vials were revealed to be poured out upon the
Kingdom, Earth, Seas, Rivers, and Throne of the Beast, and lastly upon the
Prince of the power of the Air too, chapter 16. he has spitefully sought to pour
out his seven Vials upon this Doctrine of Christ's said Kingdom, as we showed
particularly, p. 41. and 42. of our Prodr. for indeed the coming of that
Kingdom will not only end his for 1000 years, but when he shall attempt to
restore it again, all his Vassals shall be utterly casheered from the earth,
and himself in the end cast into the lake of Fire and Brimstone: but that is
not all, for his malice is most against it upon this account, that the Wisdom
and Goodness of Christ is manifest by this Divine Key, framed and given by
himself to his beloved Spouse, and fitted by him (in due time) to open this
Cabinet of so precious Jewels, which were formerly so locked up in such
anciently revealed Promises and Covenants; for that without it the Church of
Christ could not have been resolved sufficiently when, or where, or by what
means, or how long she should obtain the wonderful benefits therein contained:
but this most excellent Key is so fitted for her use, that by the due
improvement thereof, the Church cannot choose but see her great Treasure
therein reserved for her against the marriage of the Lamb now coming on: the
foresight whereof, provoked him formerly to great wrath against the Woman's
Seed, Rev. 12.12, 17. when he entered upon his last design of the two fold
Beast, Rev. 13. but how will this Doctrine enrage him the more, that shows his
Kingdoms ruin to draw so near; hence, in these latter times, he stirs up
all sorts to plead against it with many groundless pretenses, and many of them
contrary to others, not only by ignorant, and mean, but by some great and
learned too; and which is more sad, not only by enemies, and bad men, but
sometimes by friends; in the main, and good men, upon interest or error, and
one disadvantage or other, as in Assert. 10. of our Key: and yet so good news
was never made known to mankind since the fall to be obtained whilst the world
continues, as this will be (saving only the particular Salvation of every
believing soul) I say, as this, which all such Saints shall together enjoy at
the said second coming of Christ to Salvation, when our Savior bids them lift
up their heads, for their Redemption draws nigh, Luke 21.28. yea, and this
Kingdom of God also is then nigh at hand, v. 31. when he will send his Angel
with a great sound of a Trumpet to gather his Elect from the four winds into
his Kingdom, Mat. 24.31. This does bring the Devil into an envious Hell of
Torment, otherwise, long before his time, and will plague him with deadly dumps
all the time of his long imprisonment the 1000 years in the bottomless pit;
that like discontented Judas, or melancholy Saul, he would desparately make an
end of himself if it were possible: it is not to be doubted but the Preaching
of these Doctrines upon many considerations will sting him to the heart; and
therefore wherever it is like to prevail, he will busily bestir himself by all
means he can to hinder it: and we shall not need to wonder at it for the
Reasons before said, etc.

6. Use of Inform. This should discover the exceeding greatness of the folly of
all carnal, self-seeking, flesh-pleasing unregenerate persons in the world, who
place all their happiness in the things of this present lise, and have no
expectations of Good for Eternity: indeed in respect of what concerns the body,
which they only, or chiefly look at, it must lie, like the beasts, in the dust
above 1000 years to come; but if they depart the world in that condition, their
Souls will immediately thereupon feel the horror of Gods indignation, with
misery unconceivable; but if they would wisely provide for the body, which they
chiefly seem to regard, they should lobour to get into a capacity of the
blessed New Jerusalem state, with all the said Saints that will produce a
speedy return, for the time draws near of the happiness of the whole man, Soul
and Body: present or speedy possession is a great motive in earthly purchases;
but much better is this, and that for a long enjoyment of 1000 years with
Christ and his Saints, etc. which will also be perfected in Eternity:
ordinarily men's hopes for body and soul together is not till the last Trumpet;
but Christ, that is thebest Teacher has evidently showed the Bodies of all
that sleep in him, when he comes at the first Resurrection, will in their order
be united with their Souls for that happy state 1000 years before: if worldly
men were sure the present state of things would continue but half 1000 years,
how would they be encouraged to lay out for Purchases for that time? but when
there seems to be good* reasons that men may not groundedly hope it may
continue the twentieth part of 500 years, how wary have they cause to be in
laying out their Treasure in such a shaking, tottering, fading World: unto
which the said New Jerusalem will suddenly succeed in that world to come
whereof we speak: If men be born again by sound Regeneration spiritually, then
they shall rise from the dead with the Saints bodily, a thousand years before
the rest of the dead, Rev. 20.5. which is like to prove a speedy possession
incomparably above all worldly enjoyments in the best way they can be had here;
as we showed before in many particulars: but by the way which bad men love,
pursue, or by Gods long sufference enjoy the world; it were better not to have
had a being in this world, than so to have had it without Repentance, for the
abuse of what they have had therein; for all that such persons find in it is
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, the pride of life (the matter of
their present sin) and the cause of their future misery; and now this world of
it self is most vanishing, standing upon its last legs (as we say) and though
that deluding old Harlot, like Jesabel or old, a little before her death,
paints her self to hide her wrinkled face, and ghastly countenance; and adorns
her self in gorgeous Attire, yet is she for very age ready to give up the
ghost, and leave all her Paramors, like old Mystery Babylon the Mother of
Harlots, to make them cry out there, Alas alas, alas alas, when all is lost
and destroyed, chapter 18. Oh then for a Saints part in the New Jerusalem state,
for so excellent, long, secured happiness which will end in eternal
blessedness; what would such men give for it if it could be then had, and they
had withal to purchase it? If men would befriend their bodies; what good
policy would it prove to get them befriended there, and take advise speedily
in that case; when God begins to shake not the earth only, but the Heavens
also: the Scripture tells us (that he that ought to be) the desire of all
Nations is about to come, and are there not great shakings of both at this
present time? and it seems from Script very probable that that next great
shaking fit of the world is not far off, described, Esa. 2.17. to the end, with
Rev. 16. Dan. 12.1. will shake most impenitent unreformed sinners from off the
worlds stage into the bottomless pit, to bear their Master company whose
servants so they are, for that shaking Earthquake will be such as never was,
mighty an Earthquake and so great, Rev. 16.18. and such a time of Trouble as
men never saw, Dan. 12.1. I point out these things only, I cannot now press
them saving by my Prayers, that God would set them home for good, that poor
sinners may now at last be plucked like sire brands out of the fire. And let
all sorts consider now they use the world at present (though they abuse it not
as some sensual brutish persons, wallowing in grossly notorious courses of
licenciousness, hardening and priding themselves in their gross impieties) yet
what do they with their enjoyments? all that men have in the best way are
Talents that God will have account of; how will the great trial be when Christ
shall Judge at last; in as much as ye have not done it to the least of my
Disciples, you have not done it unto me, Mat. 25. go therefore ye cursed, etc.
If men would take off every yoke, and comfort the distressed, feed the hungry,
cloth the naked, if less was spent in vanity, more bestowed on designs to
promote works of piety and charity, men would make better accounts than it is
to be feared most rich and great men will then do; who, if they pervert not
their power and wealth to hinder good, and promote evil, yet will be condemned
an guilty in Christ's day: for not hindering evil, and not promoting good, every
Commandment of God has a positive scope: but otherwise, let such look to have
all pride and hautiness of men in honor, in wealth, in any worldly abundance
to be humbled, and then driven from their Places and Possessions, or perish
with them; when their perpetueties here will utterly end, their worldly honor
will vanish so far as they have not honored. God therewith, their great and
costly buildings will tumble down upon their heads, or otherwise be destroyed
or burnt up, and then they shall leave all their Treasure buried for ever in
the worlds sudden ruins, and neither they nor theirs have any good of those
things that they would not suffer others to have good of before, Esa. 2.17,
etc. and then will be no time to do it when those things shall be no longer
theirs, nor any left to confer them upon within their reach; and yet must
unavoidably be called to an account for them, and condemned, without early
reformation: and our Savior tells he comes as a thief in the night, and his
coming will be as a snare upon the whole earth: but what then will become of
those that by Rapine, or Violence have increased in wealth; that have abused
their Power, and Authority, to Oppress, and Persecute? the plenty of Gods
Creatures to consume them in riot and excess in many sorts of sinful vanities,
the heavier load will hereby lie upon them, that they are not only privitively
evil, but possitively also: make to your selves then friends (sinners) as
Christ your Judge formerly commanded of the unrighteous Mammon, whilst ye have
time; but if ye will not quickly do it, Christ himself will provide for his
meek ones, who shall then inherit the earth, and delight themselves in
abundance of peace, Psalm. 37.

7. Use of Inform. Hence all Christians may be instructed that many comfortable
Doctrines may be drawn from the said Foundations of such consolations to be
enjoyed in the same Jerusalem state to come, at the near approaching
Resurrection, to answer the present wants of them in many particular cases now;
what, are they here personally troubled and molested? then they shall have, yea
delight themselves in the abundance of peace; they shall (says the Apostle
Paul) have rest with us when the Lord shall be revealed from Heaven with his
mighty Angels, 2 These. 1.7. whilst those that troubled them shall have
Tribulation rendered to them: Christ's Church now militant will begin from the
entrance of that state to be more and more Tryumphant: If they want the good
company of such as excelled in virtue, but are now taken out of the world, they
will shortly meet with them again with great advantage, perfected both in Soul
and Body at the said first Resurrection of the Saints bodily: if they would
have more inward grace, or outward supply; both will rightly be supplied in the
Saints Reign with Christ the 1000 years on earth: (stumble not at that
expression, I have it from Jesus Christ, however Satan barks at it.) Would you
get much honor, achieve great things? this honor have all Christ's Saints, as
ye heard, Psalm. 149. the last, Thus you see by the help of this excellent Rey,
the rich Cabinet is opened, that you may take out the Jewels one by one for
your use: The study of these Doctrines to rightly believing Souls, concerning
these things, will be to them a School of Pleasure, seconded with exceeding
great Rejoicing: Christians, I speak it by experience, I wish you all partakers
thereof with me, or that I might be helpful to enlarge your measure.

8. Use of Inform. Let all true Christians know, that the studying and
promoting of these Truths will provean excellent and prevalent means to beat
down Babylon, and the Kingdom of Satan; it is therefore no marvel that Satan's
brood and Babels brats are enemies thereunto upon any occasions; it must be
expected it declares the ruin of both speedily; Babylon the great is fallen,
is fallen almost in the order of accomplishment, and God (says the Apostle)
shall tread down Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16.20. and now his time of
being bound is nigh at hand: it will much disturb both of them to hear much of
that news; and it will put much courage in Christ's Champeons to fit them to
fight Christ's Battles, under his own banner against his and their own enemies.

9. Use of Inform. Hence take notice what an enforcing necessity is now
incumbent upon all Professors of Religion, especially in an higher degree than
ordinary, to take care they fully answer the same, and especially to avoid the
practical consutation thereof in their conversation: let them not be seeming
Saints, but real Saints here; or else they will not be amongst the raised
Saints at Christ's appearearance: they must pass through the first Resurrection
spiritual (only proper to the Saints here) before they can have any possibility
of any part of that first Resurection bodily, of the Saints hereafter: if they
be not first here regenerate with them, it is most certain they will not then
be raised from the dead with them: look to the catalogue of such as will be
shut out of the blessed and holy society, Rev. 21.7. and 22.15. namely, the
fearful, the unbelieving, the abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and
Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars shall not only have no part of the
Saints inheriting of all things, but shall be cast into the lake of Fire, etc.
and again, without, viz. the Holy City, are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and
Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a
a ly, though these last liars seem more especially to respect Idolaters and the
promoters thereof, who have a lie in their right hand, yet the other speaking
of all liars, includes all hollow deceitful, false hearted Hypocrites, that
will pretend much love to God, Christ, and his Saints, but have no true love
for them as such, unless they are carried on by some self respect or other, and
all sorts that rest in a form of Godliness, either by a seeming high profession
only, or the low practice of superstition, two dangerous ways of lying in the
world in these evil days, whilst they both deny the power thereof: they both in
their kinds hinder much good, and promote much evil, toward God and Men: God,
his Religion, his Name is dishonored by them both; their brethren are deluded,
or seduced, or scandalized by them; these do God much disservice, but are the
most useful servants of Satan; and especially the higher pitch of Devotion they
pretend to, the greater scandal they are to true Religion: and how much better
might it be for themselves and others, that they appeared only to be what they
are, than to seem to be what, indeed, they are not; whereby they will be
excluded out of the Holy City, etc. Much Doctrinal information may be had, if
men seriously ponder these Truths, which we shall not here farther at present
set down, etc.

We should proceed to a word of Terror against all obstinate, impenitent,
ignorant and hardened sinners; And also to a word of Consolation to poor,
humble, despised, faithful Christians of all ranks, but these we have done in
others of our Practical Parcels, upon other Texts of like nature: We shall now
add a word of Admonition to all Christians briefly. Use of Adm.

Let therefore all sorts of Christians, into whose hands the Papers may be
delivered, and unto whose ears these Doctrines may have access, be hence
admonished to make use of the short time remaining now to them in this decripit
sading world, to labor the more speedily and earnestly, now to demean
themselves, as wise Virgins, to provide to have Oil in their Cruse, and to have
their Lamps burning: and carefully watch for the Bridegrooms coming: we have
our Saviors own enforcement here of now to be improved in its proper season
about the sixth Vial, Rev. 16. Behold I come as a thief in the darksome night,
of most sinners security, and happly in the time of the night also; and in the
time men are least aware of; as Sodoms flames suddenly kindled by the fire of
filthy prevailing Lusts: then blessed is he, says Christ, that watches, and
keeps his Garments least he walk naked, and they see his shame; for such as
have not on them the spiritual Garments of Justification, and Sanctification
(for the Kings Daughter is all glorious within) yet together with a suitable
holy Conversation, they will when the Bridegroom comes, be ashamed before
Angels and Men: [and now we may observe the Egyptian Froggs are croaking in
Kings Palaces, Rev. 16.15, etc.] otherwise they will not be admitted unto the
happy marriage of the Lamb, near approaching: Wherefore Christians, now or
never, ye must believe as Christians, act as Christians, love as Christians,
seek peace as Christians, suffer as Christians, pray as Christians, rejoice as
Christians, let your whole Conversations toward God and Man be ordered as
becomes Christians; and then with the Spirit and Bride, say, come; and let him
that hears, say, come; and let him that is a thirst, come; and whosoever will
not linger, and be lost, let him now, whilst it is called to day, take the
water of life freely, chap. 22.17. For he that testifies these things, says,
surely I come quickly: It is Verbum Diei in die suo, a word in its due season;
for it appears to be in its due order of accomplishment, and the Links of the
Revelatian Chain have been passing by above 1600 years, the last Link draws
near, to which Christ's Kingdom will immediately succeed: Come in poor Sinners,
get an interest therein and then you will be safe: I pity you all that prize
it not; I pray God give you enlightened understandings, and sanctified
affections now the world is vanishing with all her Vanities together: suppose
it should continue twenty or thirty years longer, yet how soon may you die in
your sins, or be cut off in Gods wrathful displeasure in a moment, whether you
be secret sinners, though nothing is secret to, or hid from Gods all seeing
eye, or open sinners, to him all things are naked and open with whom you have
to do; or if you be great sinners, none are so great but the least stroke of
his displeasure will shatter them in pieces; or small sinners (though none that
is not a Saint can be a small sinner in the sight of God, though
(comparatively) in the sight of men he may: and such as have committed great
sins, upon their Faith and Repentance may be pardoned as soon as the least: But
you that are great sinners, and would fain think your selves out of Gods reach,
and upon worldly advantages seem to bid defiance unto God, saying (as they) let
him hasten his work that we may see it: or you that think with the Fool in the
Gospel, you have enough for many years; or you have great Interests, great
Alliances, great Relations, great Honor, Wealth, Authority, power to execute
your will and pleasure, and what not: if you came well by them, then there is
more reason you should serve God, and honor him with them the more; they are
all Talents, and you must be accountable for every one of them; have you fed,
clothed, visited Christ in his Disciples; if not, go ye cursed, Mat. 25. but if
you came ill by them, and use them contrary to his will, the greater Vengeance
hangs over your head for that reason, without Repentance: Yet to conclude,
there is yet a time of Grace and Mercy to be had for you (great sinners) if you
will improve it aright, before it be quite past; be wise therefore at last,
now, now, now, whilst it is called to day; be not hardened any longer by the
deceitfulness of Sin; then may your Souls safely, and comfortably join with
Christ's Spouse in her hearty Amen for the Bridgrooms coming, saying with her
also, verse 20. even so, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly. Amen.

Last Use. Lastly, for Exhortation to Thankfulness, to all that shall have part
in this said blessed Resurrection of the just upon this particular account, and
now more especially in these times; That Christ Jesus has not only given this
excellent Divine Key to his Church, opening the many great benefits of those
ancient mercies, reserved to be accomplished in the said thousand years; and
also so fitly agreeing with the Doctrine of the said blessed Resurrection of
the Saints, with all the concomitants thereof: But now in these times is so
graciously pleased to discover and vouchsafe unto us the comfortable Use and
Benefit thereof, by Faith upon such excellent Divine ancient most sure
Foundations, as those before set down, and also by holy Scriptures so explained
and carried on to those intents in the said times, and that the said blessed
Resurrection should be the inlet to all former Saints, to those happy
enjoyments then for their Souls and Bodies in such a blessed Communion, many
ways as the said Saints shall then attain unto: The abundant strong evidence
whereof is not only sufficient, if duly weighed to stop the Mouths of
gainsayers, but to convince all soundly rational men, that Gods great Provision
for the marriage of the Bride and the Lamb, at the time so by his word declared
and published, will not be in vain and lost; for God is not like men to change
or be deceived in, or frustrated of his end: But what Thankfulness in these
respects, do all such true Christians owe to the great God and our Savior
Jesus Christ, that from all such said Foundations, he has wrought Faith in
their Souls to foresee with faithful Abraham, Christ's day to come by Faith and
receive such comfort in so happy news of such manifold approaching mercy;
wherein they have such particular interest and concernment; and all this so
strongly founded upon evidences throughout the whole Scripture; so clearly
explained by Christ, and by the Holy Spirit to be words faithful and true three
times over; and delivered for their use by his Servant John: Besides the many
renewed particular promises, since set down with sundry explications of them,
both in Old and New Testament, which do evidently lead us to the use and
benefit of this said divine Key, so given by Christ Jesus to his Church for
such excellent purposes: how should the approaching reign of Christ with his
said Sts. in the world in that time of the new Heavens and new Earth, fill such
beleiving Christians Souls with praise and thanksgiving? when a double
advantage will redound unto them, first that the great last Enemies of Christ
and his Church, will be removed and taken away, that so long have obstructed
her joy and peace, but that the Church of Christ shall also enjoy the end of
her hope, from all the said Foundations, and promised Mercies, then to be
performed in the foresaid state to be upon the said blessed first Resurrection
of the said Saints.

And what stronger evidence than from that first most large comprehensive
Foundation, given by God himself, Gen, 3.15. which about 3000 years after, had
such a particular explication of Christ's carrying on the same upon his
Ascension after his actual laying the Foundation of his Churches Redemption, by
his sufferings at his first coming, which should so eminently be carried on by
making his Foes his Footstool, at his second; when he shall come from the right
hand of the Father, to judge the quick and the dead, at the same time of his
appearance and Kingdom, according to that ancient divine Oracle, so often
repeated, illustrated and explained in the New Testament. The Lord said unto my
Lord sit thou on my right Hand, till I make thy Foes thy Footstool, Psalm.
110.1. viz. at that said time as many Scriptures teach, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. 2 Timothy
4.1. Rev. 19. also consider Ezekiel. 38. and 39. Dan. 11.45. of the Turk, with
many others, both respecting the ruin of Pope and Turk the first Gog and Magog
before the said thousand years, and for the ruin of the last Gog and Magog
after the said thousand years; Our blessed Savior has most orderly, exactly,
and strongly confirmed the same in those many circumstances thereof, in the
following part of this Chapter: when the last Enemy death will be destroyed,
and the Devil cast into the Fiery Lake; and I hope no Conscientious knowing
Christian of any rank will dare to deny or gainsay any particular, in this
great Foundation so explained, carried on and applied all along in the word of
God, etc. of which much more is said in our Everlasting Gospel, on Genesis 3.15.

And Enochs Vision of the first Act of Christ's Judgment, Jude 14. also
confirms the same as it is explained by Daniel 7.7, 8, 9. when the Judgment is
said to be set and the Books opened to give the body of the Beast to the
burning flame; which will be at the beginning of the said thousand years, as
also Gogs [the Turks] destruction, Ezekiel 38. and 39. before the setting up of
the New Jerusalem, chap. 40. to the end of that Book, with the taking away
others that do offend then, Mat. 73.41. when also he will judge the Saints with
reward, Rev. 11.19. so judging both the quick and dead then, 2 Timothy 4.1. and
likewise Revelations 20.7, 8, etc. is contained Christ's last proceeding in his
Judgment after the 1000 years, against the last Gog and Magog, as by Christ's
Revelation is here explained, to judge those quick, and then the dead, when
their Judgment is said again to be set, and the books opened: first by
declaring the absolution of the Saints written in the book of Life, and
pronouncing against all the wicked, a Sentence of condemnation to eternal
death, etc.

Of the first Act of Judgment, also Balaam speaks Numbers 24. when the Roman
Kingdom should perish for ever, explained again by our Savior, Revel. 17.8.
when in the last Head it should go into predition: whereby an utter end will be
put to the four mettle Kingdoms or the Gentiles Dominion, and so this Prophecy
passes in the same course with the former, as another Confirmation of the same
Truth: How Christ will eminently at the beginning, and fully at the end of the
said thousand years break the Serpents [Satans] Head, etc.

And these are strong and clear evidences from Gods Word, of Christ's taking
away the Enemies of himself and his Church in those times; and that state of
things shortly coming on: to these we might add the Type of Abraham's subduing
the five Kings, and rescuing Lot: And of David's overcoming all his Enemies at
last, and leaving his Kingdom to Solomon his Son in a peaceable condition, etc.
and as the Enemies destruction will be a great matter of the Saints Praise and
Rejoicing at their first said blessed Resurrection; so will also their
enjoyment of the happy Vision of Christ's Glory in his Davidical Kingdom then be
given to them; as John 17.24. with the happy communion with him, and one with
another; and their inheriting all the promised Mercies of that time, and state
of the New Jerusalem, Revel. 21. and 22. by the Divine promised Seed of the
Woman, who shall then prolong his days in the world, and abundantly see his own
Spiritual Seed; so that he will therein be satisfied when the will of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand, as foretold, Esa. 53. namely, when all Saints are
come in at the general Rapture, and change of them all, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52.

And that the earth might continue to be the stage for all such actings of God
in the world, God upon his smelling a sweet savor from Noah's offering through
Christ to come, makes a Covenant with him after the Flood for all Creatures, to
that happy time; and that then there should be the greatest fruitfulness in it,
his word is clear: and as in Noah, as a Type, was signified how Christ would be
the safe Ark of his Church, in the beginning, and after the end of the said
1000 years; and also by his Prophecy of the Gentiles, Japhets Posterities,
mercies at their foresaid first and second Call and Fullness, which last will be
performed in the said 1000 years, when Jews and Gentiles shall both rejoice
together, when all those many Promises concerning that state of the Gentiles
happiness in the whole book of God will take their full effect.

And as surely by virtue of Gods Covenant with Abraham, shall all his spiritual
seed through that his own divine seed Christ, then enjoy the many Promises
still remaining in Old and New Testament to be made good to them in the natural
life (then) whether circumcised or uncircumcised and such raised Saints then
that are interessed therein, will also enjoy by the same Covenant that happy
New Jerusalem state in that City prepared for them then, Heb. 11.10, 16. and
also all the spiritual seed of Isaac and Jacob with them in all the privileges
and benefits belonging to the same, which the said Saints shall then be raised
to inherit, etc. as the spiritual seed of Abraham; and I doubt not but the
greatest part of the Promises in Old and New Testament made to God's people as
the spiritual seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, both circumcised and
uncircumcised, will chiefly have their fulfilling in that state and time
wherein all such their natural race will have the greatest share, and such
promises as are made to all Israel, or to Ephraim, or Joseph jointly with Judah
do especially refer unto (though not only unto them) of which if duly
considered a large volume might profitably be written.

And if lastly we look to that last sure foundation of David's sure mercies,
concerning his Throne and Kingdom, which Christ the Son of David should enjoy
as the days of heaven upon earth, or as long as the Sun and Moon shall endure,
(though David's natural race had forfeited their interest before, Mic. 2.10.)
yet God laid sure foundations for the other, 2 Samuel 7.8, 9. to the end, and
Psalm. 89. with multitudes of Scripture evidences to the same purpose, and all
Believers, as Esaias shows, shall also have their part in the same sure mercies
of David, Chap. 55.3. appertaining then to that time and state, and very many
other Promises were made to that end likewise: And the interest of Christ's said
Davidical Kingdom seen by Daniel a long time past in Vision to be at the end of
the fourth Kingdom, chap. 7.13, 14. which at this time Christ continues in
heaven to receive, and then to return, Luke 19.17. it is that that contains in
it eminently all the other said mercies to all suffering Saints that must then
reign with Christ the said thousand years, and jointly enjoy all the happiness
thereof, and thence forth and for ever whatsoever things God has provided for
them, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. (though the things of this
state may mostly be both heard and sten, as decyphered by Gods Word:)
Concerning which I conceive sufficient has of late been said, by us and
others, both to satisfy all serious judicious and well principled Christians
that know how to value Divine Authority without respect to men, etc. and to
convince many others, and what greater arguments could be used for strength and
clearness to confirm such a long sealed or concealed truth, I know not: if Gods
Spirit shall at any time set them home upon their souls and consciences, which
he is only able to do, viz. to work faith thereof, as in all other Divine
(especially mystical parts of) Doctrines, that so they with all true
Christians, both now by faith aforehand, and then by fruition of the same, may
be better enabled thereby to render all honor, thanksgiving and praise, both
now and then, due unto the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, upon all
those manifold and great Scripture foundations and engagements upon account
whereof Christ will then be so admired of all his said Saints, 2 These. 1.10.
How glorious will Christ appear (then) in his wonderful, national, sudden
Conversion of the Jews, and Uniting of the two Sticks of Ephraim and Judah,
Ezekiel 37. which were as iscattered dry Bones before compared there, and
Romans 11. to a Resurrection from the Dead: Shall not they have then the chief
Dominion? Will not God then give Nations for them? Shall they not then lengthen
their Cords and strengthen their Stakes? Will they not be Gods Battle-Bow and
Ax to cut down Enemies, who shall then be as Ashes under the soals of their
feet? and all People be destroyed that will not serve or be subject to the Holy
Jerusalem then? Many and great will be the Privileges of that ancient
Inheritance of God, then saved by the Lord, when he takes away their Sin, and
circumcises their Hearts, as anciently Moses foretold of that time, Deuteronomy. 30.1.
to 11. it would requne a large Volume to set forth the many great and excellent
privileges of that People of God at the same time, and as our faith of that
Mercy should enlarge our thanksgiving and praise, so by both should Christians
be stirred up to earnest Prayer for them for the hastening of their Mercy: the
neglect of which is a great error and scandal too, in these our days, and the
great neglect thereof cannot be answered to God or man, when Scripture Promises
of the manifold enlarged mercies and goodness of God reserved for that now
abject obstinate people at present, yet will, e're long, be those that will
meet with the most miraculous and wonderful, many ways enlarged and
illustrated free grace of God in Christ that ever was showed to any people in
the world, of which all the Prophets, and diverse Texts in the New Testament
declare great things shall be accomplished, and the Thanksgiving and Prayers of
all faithful Christians ought, what in them is, to hasten them: It is Gods way
to bring on his revealed and promised Mercies, though he needs none such helps
to mind or move him, yet he will so own both his Saints Graces, his own
Ordinance, and gracious Promises: And the like may be said of all other the
aforesaid great mercies then to be fulfilled, concerning which very much might
here be added instead, whereof I only now add my Prayer to what has been said
already. The Lord God give his blessing to what according to his revealed Truth
has of these Divine Mysteries herein been delivered, for the glory of his own
holy Name, and the real good, edification and comfort of all faithful
Christians, Amen.

This useful Treatise for all Christians, setting forth the Marriage of the
Lamb with his Bride, Rev. 19.7. shortly to be Celebrated, may be had at the
Turks Head over against the Royal Exchange: or at the Herne in Paul's
Churchyard.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 22. col. 1. line 26. dele more. p. 24. c. 2. r. satisfied not fulfilled.
and after r. men are not means. p. 28. c. 1. l. 9. r. mercy not merit. and l.
10. r. sad not said. p. 33. r. (...) and (...). and (...). and (...). p. 35. r.
to them of the Army. p. 36. r. (...). p. 47. l. 39. to believe join unless he
put his fingers, etc. p. 53. r. as we are not as were. p. 63. l. ult. dele
Christ. p. 69. r. all tend not attend.


