LOVE will find out the Way. An Excellent COMEDY.

By T. B.

As it was Acted with great Applause, by Her Majesty's Servants, at the Phoenix
in Drury Lane.

LONDON: Printed by Ja: Cottrel, for Samuel Speed, at the Sign of the
Printing-Press in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

Actors Names.
Hartwel, a decayed Gentleman, lover of Mrs. Frances. Playfayre, Hartwel's
kinsman and friend, lover of Hornet's Niece. Lambert, another of Hartwel's
friends, counterfeit King. Three or four counterfeit Lords of Poland. Poldavis,
Master of the Horse. Horner, a great Usurer, suitor to Mrs. Belamie. Doctor of
Physic to Hornet's Niece. Startup, a clownish Gentleman, Hartwell's rival to
Mrs. Frances. Another Country-Gentleman, his Neighbor. Close, an old trusty
Servant to Hartwel. Three more Servants cashiered. Justice of Peace. Pursevant.
Officers. Constable and Watch.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Belamie, a rich Widow. Mrs. Frances, her daughter, Hartwell's Mistress.
Hornet's Niece, Playfayres Mistress. Nurse.
LOVE will find out the Way.
Actus Primus.
Enter Hartwel and Servants. Heart. NAy let us not part so heavilie.

Close. For my own part, it does not trouble me so much,
That you have broke up house.

1 Ser. And yet that sticks in my stomach:
For hospitality went out of fashion, with crop-doublets and codpieces.

Close. But I have worn out so many liveries, under your worshpful father.

Heart. My father had an office which brought in
A fair Revenew; I inherit but
His little land, whose annual profits will not
Encourage me to live at the same hight:
You may meet better fortunes; there is enough
Preferment in the world: my love and best
Assistance promise to your selves.

Close. I do not stand upon wages, sir, I wont leave you.

Heart. Not leave me? how will thou live?

Close. Live? as other mortals do: yet I wont play the thief, that is a course
may be taken, by which a man may ascend the ladder of preferment; but I never
loved to climb trees: I must confess I cannot cheat; I have heard there is a
devilish deal of knowledge in the dice, and if men wont lend money, they will
fetch it out of the bones: but it is best casting in a Tavern, when the reckoning
and the wine come up together. Some men have a trick to spin out a living by it:
there be many secret ways for Servingmen to live: alas it is not wages that does
maintain all our tribe; especially those that have Mistresses.


Heart. But I am a batchelour.


Close. I pray let me be one of your buttons still then; I am not half worn
out; ye know what mould I am made of: I ever did you honest service: and though
the rest of my fellowvermine can leave your falling house, I do not fear the
rafters: By this hand I will wait upon you, though as some great men's servants,
I live upon nothing but the air of commendation.


Heart. Well, since you are so resolute, still attend me; the rest
I here discharge: there is somewhat more, not worth the
Name of bounty; I will all
A happier entertainment.

2 Ser. Heaven bless you, sir, and there be no remedy.


1 Ser. Farewell Close.


Close. Pray give me leave to wet my lips with my old fellows; sorrow makes a
dry proverb; I must to a Tavern, and condole a quart with 'em.


Heart. Meet me at Mistress Bellamy's. --


Exit Heart. Close. I shall, sir.


Enter Playfaire. Play. How now, my Masters?


Close. You do not speak to me, sir? I am a servant still: indeed, the case is
altered with them; they are Masters for want of a service.


1 Ser. Oh Master Playfaire!


2 Ser. It is not now as when Andrea lived.


3 Ser. This place was made for pleasure, not for dearth.


1 Ser. There was a time, when Mortals whetted knives.


Play. What Is the matter?


2 Ser. In time of yore, when men killed brutish beasts.


3 Ser. Oh cruel butcher, whosoere thou were!


Close. Do you not know what all this signifies?


Play Not I.


Close. My Master has given over housekeeping.


2 Ser. Burglary, sir, burglary; our young Master has broke up the Celler, and
thrown the Kitchen out of the Hall-window.


Close. Nay, he has thrown the house out at window; it has a superscription
already; and is directed to his next loving friend, that will pay the rent.
You Will hardly know me, I have no fellow.


Play. You Are very merry.


Close. He has casheer'd a company.


3 Ser. And taken our good names from us.


Play. I know his nature is more noble; thou were his groom.


3 Ser. Right, and now I am turned off, that good name is taken away; nay I am
not company for his horse.


Close. Grass and Hay, we are all mortal.


2 Ser. We may see what it is to be pricked with provender; now we must bite
of the bridle for it; all discharged.


Play. Certain?


Close. Yes, certain of us are; for my Master only belongs to me: if you would
speak with him, you may overtake him, he is gone to Mistress B llamies: in the
mean time I give you to understand, that I Close do still follow my Master;
have great hope to continue eating, though the rest of my fellows here be
blanks, and want filling.


Play. My Masters, I have known you long; and though you be at loss, in the
confidence of your future honesties, I will employ you in a device, which if it
prove happy, mayreward you handsomely.


Close. And me too?


Play. No, sir, you are another man's servant; follow you your Master: if there
be occasion, I Will enquire for you: will you be faithful to a project of mine?


Omnes. Doubt it not, sweet Master Playfair, any thing.


Play. Follow me for your instructions: Farewell Close, commend me to your
Master.


2 Ser. 'Buy Close, honest Close, we are blanks. --


Ex. Playfaire and Servant. Close. Roll your selves up, and be drawn at the
next lotterie: I wont leave my certainty, for all your projects, take my word
for it; if your project fail, I shall find some of you in Paul's, watching behind
a pillar, with a prayer that some gentleman will read the bedrol, and take
pity of a very serviceable fellow, to wait on him; but wants a cloak. Much
good do ye with your Project. --


Exit. Enter Hornet and Mistress Bellamy. Hor. Come widow, be ruled by me; I
know the world,
And I have studied it these fifty years:
There Is no man to be trusted.

Bell. Without good
Security, you mean.

Hor. No young man, widow,
That talks and says he loves you, writes you verses,
And swears he shall go hang himself unless
You pity him: take me an old man.

Bell. Take you an old man: so.

Hor. Seasoned with care and thrift, not led away
By vicious conversations, nor corrupted
With pride and surfeit: one that knows the use
Of money? do you mark? the use.

Bell. Yes, sir; use upon use, you mean.

Hor. And dares not spend it prodigally; knowing
The principal end it was ordained to was,
To relieve necessity, and lay up
What is above.

Bell. To help the poor.

Hor. You may,
If you be so disposed; but it is as commendable
To give it in our will, to build an hospital,
And so our charity comes all together.
Besides, who knows what tempests while we live
May rise? it is wisdom not to be without
A sunshine in our bags to quiet all:
I know you want no suitors in the City,
There be courtiers, great ones, with large titles,
Cold in their own estates, would warm themselves
At your rich City-bonefire: there is no Alderman
Or wealthy Merchant, leaves his widow wealthy,
But straight some noble blood, or lusty kindred,
Claps in with his guilt coach and Flandrian Trotters,
And hurries her away to the next Countess:
No matter for corruption of their blood;
Some undone courtier made her husband rich,
And this new Lord receives it back again.
I would not have your state thus eaten up
By caterpillars, but preserved and made
Greater by marrying a discreet old man.

Bell. And such a one you show your self.

Hor. You happily interpret me.

Bell. I will not tell you till we meet again,
What operation your good counsel has upon me.

Hor. She inclines; it is your good nature.
I Am plain Hornet, and have no tricks; I Will tell you all
My fault, I Am given much to gather wealth;
No kindred, only a niece, left to my trust
With a great portion; one that is never like to marry.

Bell. Why?

Hor. She never thrived since she came to me.

Bell. I easily believe it.

Hor. Melancholy
Will kill her, and yet I pursue all ways
That promise her delight; I spare no cost
Of physic; what her Doctor says, is done.

Enter Hartwel and Frances. Bell. It Is lovingly performed.

Hor. What Is he?

Bell. A Gentleman that bears my daughter much affection.

Hor. Sure I have seen him.

Bell. Master Hartwel.

Hor. Oh he is a beggar, or must be very shortly.

Bell. Have you his lands in morgage?

Hor. Not yet, not yet, but he will want money too:
His kinsman Playfair keeps him company;
Take heed on him.

Bell. He has good breeding.

Hor. Hang breeding, it is unluckie:
They never keep their state that have too much on it:
Counsel your daughter, Mistress Bellamy,
To throw him off.

Bell. You direct well.

Hor. When we are married, I Will provide a match
For her.

Bell. You have care on us.

Hor. It will become me.

Heart. Is a suitor to thy mother.

Fran. He would be such a thing, were I not happy
In such a jolly father in law.

Heart. A looks like some cast money-bag, that had given up
The stuffing, and for want of use grown moldy:
He dares not keep a fire in's Kitchen, lest
VVarming his hands, which rather look like gloves so tan'd,
And thin, he lets 'em scorch, and gather into a heap.
I do not think he ever put off his clothes:
He would run mad at sight of's own anatomy.
That such a wretch should have so vast a wealth!

Fran. I Will not be his Niece,
For all his fortune.

Heart. I presume
Your mother is more noble, then to encourage
Him in his courtship: her estate would mix
Not well with his ill-gotten wealth, extorted
From widows and from orphans: nor will all
His plenty keep his soul one day from famine:
It Is time ill spent, to mention him; let us talk
Of something else.

Fran. Of what?

Heart. Of love again,
Whose flames we equally divide.

Hor. Your table
Is a devourer, and they shut up doors
First, that keep open house and entertainments:
This Lord is feasted, and that young Ladies sweet tooth
Must have a banquet: the other old
Madam with never a tooth, must have some marchpane
Coral to rub her gums withal: these are
Vain and ridiculous expenses.

Bell. It Is not too late to thrive.

Hor. This room has too rich furniture, and worse
Hangings would serve the turn; if I may be
Worthy to counsel, pictures are too
Superfluous, of this and the other masters
Doing: hang Michael Angelo and his oils;
If they be given, you are the more excused
To let 'em hang; but have a care you let not
Appear either in Arras or in Picture,
The story of the prodigal, 'twill fright
Young gentlemen from spending of their portions
That come to visit you; whose unbounden Riots
May enrich you, with their forfeited estates:
I have a thousand precepts more.

Bell. But do you not
Think all this while of Heaven?

Hor. It Is in my wealth.

Bell. Or hell?

Hor. A fable to fright fools and children; but
I cannot stay, my Scrivener does expect me;
I Will visit you another time, sweet widow,
And give you more instructions.

Bell. Spare your labor,
I shall not practice these in haste, and must
Declare, these precepts make not for your welcome.
My patience was no virtue all this while.
If you but think you have a soul, repent:
Your rules I am not covetuous to follow;
I dare not love 'em.

Hor. Live, and be undone then;
You Will tell me another tale hereafter, widow. --

Exeunt Hornet. Enter Nurse and Close. Nurse. If it please you, here is a letter
from Master Startup
The Country-Gentleman.

Heart. What Is he?

Fran. A fresh fuitor of my Nurses commendations.

Close. Heaven deliver me! What have I seen? sure this
Thing was once at Bartholomew-Fire, or such another
Furred Baboon for all the world: do know him?
And yet why do I ask? the devil would hardly
Take acquaintance with him.

Nurse. It Is master Hornet the great Usurer.

Close. Hornet?
Nay then my wonder's over; and the devil himself
Be such another, they may be sworn brothers, and divide
Hell betwixt 'em.

Heart. Who Is that you talk on, sirrah?

Close. Of the disease that heaven be thanked has left you,

Hornet. But sir, I have news for you.

Bell. Franck?

Heart. I Will hear it in the Garden. --

Exit Hartwel and Close. Bell. Do you love this Gentleman?

Fran. I hope you move not this as if you doubted;
I took him first upon your character,
Into my good opinion.

Bell. But things alter;
What then I thought him, I delivered you,
Nor since has he deserved a less esteem
In his own person: but the circumstance
Is not the same; his fortune I have examined,
Which rises not to such a value I
Did apprehend it; it becomes my care,
Being at one gift to depart with thee
And my estate, to look for one whose purse
May carry a proportion.

Fran. Make me not
Imagine you would wed me to a heap
Of shining dust, a golden bondage.

Bell. Nor to penury:
His birth and education are not unworthy, he is hansome too:
But be not governed by your eye too much;
Children and age pursue us, and some storms
Hover about our frail conditions:
All these must be provided for: they are not
Kisses will make our winters warm; and therefore
Confident of your obedience, I propound
Another to your best thoughts.

Fran. Oh my unhappyness!

Bell. A Country gentleman of spreading fortunes,
Young too, and not uncomely; for his breeding,
It was not spun the finest: but his riches
Able to guild deformity, and make
Even want of wit a virtue, when your life
Renders it self more sweet by your command:
His name is Master Startup, expected
Our guest to morrow; that is his letter, read it.
This may seem strange, while it is coming toward you:
But when discretion comes to examine what
A fruitful consequence attends it, you
Will thank me for it.

Fran. But with your pardon, mother:
Although I could dispense with my own thoughts,
And frame them to obedience, will this change
Be for your honor, or mine own? when such,
When such a noble gentleman shall boast he had
With your consent my liking? or admit
That which we gain by riches of the second,
Seem to authorize, and may justify
The act with some: How can it cure the wound,
Which the poor heart that loves shall find too soon,
When it is neglected, and so cruelly,
Where it hopes for cherishing? Oh think
How you did love my father, first; and be
Now gentle to your daughter: your estate
Is above needy providence, or grafting
Into a new stock; it does grow already
Fair from his own root, and does want no piecing;
Nor are the means of Hartwel so contemptible.

Bell. No more: when you have considered well, you will shape
Another answer; in the mean time dispose
Your countenance to entertain this new
And able lover: leave the satisfaction
Of Hartwel to my care; he is here, to your chamber. --

Exit Francis. Enter Hartwel and Close. Close. I know not what is the trick
on it, nor themselves yet,
But he has a project to employ 'em in.

Heart. I wish it well -- But do you work your self
Into the opinion of the Nurse, she is
The Major Domo, and has all the intelligence.

Close. Let me alone, I Will work her, sir, like wax,
To print what form you please upon her; it is
A loving croan to me already:
I Will speak her fair, and in my drink may marry her.

Bell. Master Hartwel?

Heart. About your business.

Bell. There is a business, sir, which I must open,
And you perhaps will wonder at.

Heart. You prepare my attention.

Bell. You do love my daughter,
At least I think so.

Heart. If you knew my heart,
You might be confident; in her I sum
All my desires on earth.

Bell. Be not so fixed.

Heart. How, Lady?

Bell. When you have heard me out, perhaps you will find
Your consent easy to call back a promise
Made to your disadvantage.

Heart. I acknowledge
This makes me wonder; pray interpret Lady,
And speak a language I may understand;
I love your daughter.

Bell. But must never glory
In the reward which you expect should be
Her marriage.

Heart. In the number of my actions
There is not one that is guilty of so much
Offense to you, that I should be so soon
Lost to your favor.

Bell. Have no thought so poor,
You can deserve less; my opinion
Is sicher laden with your merit then before.

Heart. Now
I fear again, this violent turn of praise,
Makes me suspect my state: if I be fallen,
Teach me to know my trespass.

Bell. I never looked
With so clear eyes into your worth; and 'twere
A sin to general goodness to delay
The free resign of that, your truth may challenge.

Heart. If this be meant, pray pardon my mistake
Of something went before: love made me fear
You said I never should enjoy your daughter
In marriage, which your self so late incline to.

Bell. And must again repeat, you sha' not call
Her bride.

Heart. Can you forbid this happiness, and love me?

Bell. Yes, so dearly, Hartwel, I present
My self to thy affections.

Heart. You amaze me, and fright my understanding.

Bell. Does the name
Of widow sound displeasing? I have learned
Already to obey; my years are not
So many with a thought to freeze your blood;
I wear no print of time, deep on my brow,
Nor have my hairs the innocence of age:
Gentlemen active, and of noble birth,
Think no dishonor to beseech my love,
And if they flatter not, commend my person:
Add unto this my wealth, no narrow fortune,
And without competition, my daughter
Depending on my love, whose portion must
Flow from my bounty, or be nothing: make
A sober apprehension of this Tender,
And think I was not able to suppress
These flames of love increase still by your virtues:
This minute quit all hopes of Frances,
Whose mother will admit no Rival; it is
Within your own election to be happy:
My love accepted comes with fair attendance;
Denied, you hasten your own exile; think on it,
To morrow sometime, I Will expect your answer. --

Exit. Heart. What have I heard? Was it her Mother spoke thus?
As Pilgrims by mistake of some small path,
Having told many weary steps, at night
When their hopes flatters 'em they are not far
From some kind entertainment, find themselves
Lost in a wilderness; so am I miserable:
Thus Love delights to wound and see us bleed,
He were a gentle god to kill indeed. --

Exit. Finis Actus Primi.
Actus Secundus.
Enter Nurse and Close. Close. Would thou wo'dst speak a good word for me: I am
Weary of my indentures: I like a fool was in good hope
He should have married Mistress Frances.

Nurse. He Is a beggar; she his wife? no, Master Startup
Is the man, the man of lands and money.

Close. Into whose service if I could wriggle my self, a
Word of thy mouth does it.

Nurse. I must tell you by the way, he is little better then a
fool.

Close. The fitter for her husband, and my master.

Nurse. You Are in the right, he is innocent to your hands, and
You may soon come to nonage his estate

Close. Which if I do, thou shall want no petticoats,
All Is thine own.

Nurse. What?

Close. Why all that I can beg, borrow or steal from him:
What should he do with so much riches? I Would persuade my young Mistress, after
the first year, to put him to his pension: he should pay for's diet; and after
a month or two, for every time he comes aloft. Hang him, Cuckow-pintle.


Nurs. Nay, let her begin betimes, if she mean to rule the roast: I Will give her
Documents; and be you sure you stick close to your Mistress; there is something
to be got that way.


Enter Hartwel and Playfair. Close. Excellent Verges!
How I do love thy documents! I but he is here,
I Will not be seen with thee; farewell:
At night we'll talk the rest over a sack-posset. --

Exit Close. Nurse. I will use this advantage to over-hear a little.

Play. You tell me strange things; is it possible
The widow her self loves you?

Heart. Would I had reason but to suspect.

Play. Turn Colt again; this love will kill's all:
And can she make no choice, but where her daughter
Has the same longing? not her dancing days done yet?
Why there is no remedy, you must love her.

Heart. How? and violate my faith to Frances?

Play. Thou will not be so much an infidel,
To think I mean thou should forsake the wench.
Tell me the mother a fine tale of love,
Print kisses on her paper-lip, and hug
Her reverend body; any thing but lie with her:
Write sonnets on the ivorie tooth before;
Swear she does cough distinctly; get a rhyme
To bless her when she sneezes, and cry up
The method of her nose, which sweats and falls
So perpendicular; admire the motion
Of her blew eyes that look three ways at once:
Praise her above thy reason, or her daughter,
And then she will believe, thou may be mad for her.

Heart. Is this the way to do me good? she comes
Too fast upon me already.

Play. Let her fly to thee,
Thou may clip her wings the sooner, this secures thee:
Should you hold off, and play the modest creature,
Nay but deny as maids do, when they love it,
And bending of your hams cry, No forsooth,
Profess your self, with coxcomb-like civility,
You are not worthy of her carnal favors,
She may believe it; and in very spite
Marry her daughter to a Citizen;
Or should you be so mad to think to win her
To your first choice, withholding your passions
For Mistress Frances, complaining how Don Cupid
Has sacrificed your heart; you may go hang your self:
Go to the Barbers, let him firk your hair up,
And spend his powder; wash your sullen face,
And starch your infant, upper-lip to look
Like one that would run desperate on a widow.

Nurse. Here Is precious conspiracy!

Play. This is the way:
At leisure, you may tell your natural Mistress,
Like Jove you have but put another shape on
To cheat the Beldame Juno.

Nurse. Foul-mouth rascal, I Am glad I know your plot.

Heart. I apprehend, thou have given me good counsel:
I Will watch the first occasion to assure,
I have preferred her in my heart already.

Nurse. I Will conjure up a cross plot, and that quickly,
Shall mar your mirth, and pay your fine dissembling;
Are you so cunning, my love gamester? --

Exit Nurse. Play. So I Will take my leave then, you have no other service
To use my stay: I have a project, Hartwel,
That must not be neglected.

Heart. May not communicate?

Play. Thou art engaged to wait
Upon thine own affair, or I should trouble thee
To be an actor in it; thou know Hornet.

Heart. He is a suitor to the widow, and
After the rate we cast the plot, my rival.

Play. I Will rival him; he smothers a poor gentlewoman
At home with Sea-coal, and allows her no
More light then serves to read in painted cloth,
The exposition of the harlots story.
Hartwel, I love her; and before her Father
Dyed, we exchanged our honest hearts; it is here
To free her from that slavery she lives in
Under the iron-hearted Jailer, else
I shall repent my aim; he broods upon
Her portion, but I have a trick may spoil
His hatching of young bags; thou shall know all
Hereafter; to the widow, Hartwel: I am
For state affairs; be faithful, and pray for me.
We must be bold: farewell, if something hit,
We'll laugh in spite of Dives and the Devil. --

Exit. Enter Belamy, Frances, Close, Startup. Close. This is the thing, sir,
that must carry away
The garland; they have given him a cup or two
Of sack, and he has the prettiest humor,
He does so whistle out his complement:
He wears his feather like the captain of
A country team, and would become a horse-coller
Rarely; I do not think, but were he put to it
With little switching, he would draw the Cart well.

Star. Sweet Lady, I am your humble servant; it is well known what I am, where I
live; my father dyed since I was of age, and left me a younger brothers portion.


Bell. A younger brother?


Star. Sweet Lady, I know what you would say, my father had no more children;
but I speak modestly of my estate; I have land enough for two or three wives; I
have a horse in Town; your daughter shall ride behind me; Sweet Lady, did you
ever see the country?


Fran. What country, sir?

Star. Why, any country living: sweet Lady, I am your humble servant; if you
love hawking, hunting, or drinking, there be good fellows will bear you
company. Is there any good Tobacco in London?


Close. Virginia-Tobacco grows here.


Star. Sweet sir, I am your humble servant, you seem to be a gentleman will
fetch me a pipe: there is half a piece, if I be not troublesome: perhaps, sweet
Lady, you do not love it: if it offend you, let it alone.


Close. A very precious widgen.


Star. La, la, la, lere.


Sings and Dances. Fran. You dance well, sir.


Nurse. He has a strong back, I warrant him.


Star. Sweet Lady, is this your daughter?


Close. Ask that question now?


Bell. I was her mother, sir.


Star. That may be too; what gentleman is that? sweet sir, I am your humble
servant likewise.


Heart. You are too humble, sir, to stoop so low; It would become my duty.


Star. Sweet sir, it is all one; a leg or an arm is not cast away among friends:
I am a Country-Gentleman, all the world knows; sweet sir, I have no business in
Town.


Bell. I thought you came to see my daughter.


Star. That may be too; sweet Lady, pray excuse me, I honor your fair
daughter; for I know as well as another, what belongs to a gentlewoman: she is
not the first sweet Lady I have loved in the way of Matrimony.


Heart. Were you ever married?


Star. Sweet sir, no; all men are not alike.


Heart. For some are fools.


Star. Sweet sir, I do confess it;
But wit is never good till it be bought,
They say; there are very good wits in Town,
I have brought money a purpose with me to buy;
If any will sell me a good pennyworth,
I Will give him a hundred pieces, because
I would carry a little down into the Country.

Heart. Is there a dearth in your Country?

Play. Sweet sir, there is plenty.

Close. Of wild-oats; I heard you had much to sow still.

Star. My Tenants have, sweet sir, but it is all one;
This Lady shall be Lord of the Soil: I will not
Give any man six pence for a bushel of money.

Close. Oh brave sack!

Star. I am a gentleman, my Father was a Yeoman;
But that is all one, sweet Lady: howsoever I am yours,
And every limb is at your service;
My hands shall walk, my feet shall run.

Fran. Away, away.

Star. By this bright gold they shall.

Close. He keeps his oath. --

Star. Not run?
My Grandfather was a Noblemans Footman, and
Indeed he run his Country; my Father did
Outrun the Constable.

Close. And he, sweet Lady,
Being his fathers issue, must run naturally.

Star. If I live. --

Close. He Will run himself out of all.

Star. Not run,
Sweet Lady? if you have occasion to use me,
I will not stand upon my feet.

Fran. No, sir?

Star. Nay I Will stand upon my head, sweet Lady,
To do you courtesy.

Close. Then his heels were upwards.

Bell. Please you, a sorry dinner stays for you.

Star. Sweet Lady, I am your servant; will this Gentleman
dine with us?

Bell. I Will prevail with Master Hartwel.

Close. Do You know what you have done? he is rival
Mistress; why, do you mean to invite him?

Star. Sweet sir, I invite nobody; if you love
Any body here. --

Heart. What then?

Star. Sweet sir,
I shall not take it kindly, I do not use
To quarrel.

Close. When you are beaten, sir, he shall not wrong you:
Then lay lay him over the face.

Star. Sweet sir,
It Is dinnertime, fair Lady.

Bell. Mastert Hartwel? --

Exeunt. Close. I had a great mind to have him beaten;
But he is not valiant at meals: would I
Were hired to beat him hansomly after dinner,
And make him thank me for it; I Will have some plot
Upon your precious body, my sweet sir. --

Exit. Enter Hornet and Doctor, Playfaire's Brother. Hor. You ell me wonders,
Doctor.

Doct. I have cured
Her melancholy; but she is o't'other side
Now extreme merry, dance and sing, all air.

Hor. It Is strange methinks, nothing but extremities:
Good Master Doctor, could you not have pared
Her the other leaden humor?

Doct. Sir, I could not
Kill the malignity of her melancholy
Another way: extreamities must be cured
With extreme applications: my next work
Shall be to abate this levity of her brain,
To qualify her spleen, sir, by degrees;
So state her body in that modest temper
She was possessed of.

Hor. I complained before
Of quietness; now she is all noise and madness,
By your description.

Doct. You must have patience
A month or so, she is not mad but merry;
Some stange figaries: you must understand,
I have opened, sir, her fancy, wherein lay
All her imaginations confused,
And of a heap, smothered for want of vent;
And now the spirits that were imprisoned
Rush out, which causes all her faculties
Before oppressed, to exercise themselves
So unexpectedly, as the agitation of her tongue
Soon will manifest: she is here.

Enter Niece. Niece. Uncle, how does your body? you appear
As lean as Lent: I Have a great mind to dance
About a Maypole; shall we?

Hor. She is mad.

Niece. This Doctor has so tickled me,
I cannot choose but laugh; ha, ha, ha:
Uncle, if you will procure a dispensation
To marry me your self, de duct the charges
Out of my portion: I Will have no other
Husband; I could affect an old man now
With all my heart.
An old man with a bed full of bones,
Turn to me honey and give me a kiss, etc.
Uncle, when did you put on a clean shirt?
Not since your wife dyed; that was a pretty shift.
Indeed I dreamed of the devil the last night;
They say it is good luck: do you not know him, Uncle?

Hor. I know the devil!

Niece. He Is a fine old gentleman,
And something like you; no such bugbear as
The world imagines; you and he will keep house
Together one day: but you will burn sea-coal too,
To save charges, and stink the poor souls so.
Shall we go hunt to day? I long to strike
A Deer; pray lend me a Cross-Bow, will you, sir?
I Will pay you use for it.
And still she cried, Shepherd shoot home.
Uncle, you are not merry, I pray laugh
A little; imagine y'ad undone a widow,
Or turned an orphan begging now: ha, ha!
How many Churches, 'faith, will you build when
You dye? I Will have six Bells in every Steeple,
And they shall go to th'tune of Turn again
Whittington, who let out his land
For nine lives, 'cause it came in by a Cat.
Die Uncle, die, at all adventures.

Hor. Why does she talk of dying? she is stark mad;
Could you not put into the next receipt,
Something to make her sleep well?

Doct. Opium.

Hor. In a good quantity.

Doct. I could so proportion it,
She should not wake at all to trouble you:
I did it for a Merchants wife last week,
Which loved a Knight. A great man not long since,
Was weary of his Countess; and I cured him
So artificially of the disease. --

Hor. She hears.

Doct. But collects nothing, yet her senses
Are scattered.

Niece. You shall give toward the building
Of Paul's -- Nothing: see the money first
Laid out that is given already; it were much
Sin to belly the dead; but it is no matter,
You may be as famous, sir, for pulling down
The Parish; for the Church will fall often self,
With a ding dong Bell.
Why did they put the poor fellow in prison?

Hor. Whom? what fellow?

Niece. Why the Corn-cutter,
Poor gentleman he meant the City
No harm; his feet were weary, and that made him
In every street cry out, Have ye any Corns
IN your head or toes?

Enter Pursivant. Pur. Which is Master Hornet?

Hor. Ha! with me?

Pur. A word, sir.

Niece. Prithee what is he? he comes to borrow money
On his wives wedding-ring, or his child's whistle now:
You may see by his nose, he has no land, he looks
As hungry as a Hawk: what do you dream on?
Or what Ladies tympany is your next cure?
Or whose state body must be rectified
With your quaint glister?

Pur. There is no disputing, I must attend you.

Hor. I am sent for by a Pursivant: the King?
Alas, I am undone, I never saw him;
How should he know me? a poor wretch.

Doct. Is It not
Some complaint? think.

Hor. That Is my fear, there be
Too many Knaves in the world; and a man cannot
Grow rich, but one state-surgeon or other
Must practice on his purse: before this Lord
One veyn is opened, in the other Court
So many ounces he must bleed again.
Let me see: all the treason I committed,
Is, that I shifted houses; for I took
Delight to cozen him of his subsidies.
I live obscurely, to avoid
Taxations: I never paid the Church
Her superstitious tithes, nor come to trouble
Sermons, for fear of homilies before,
That beg for burning.

Niece. Why how now, Uncle? Is your Scrivener broke,
You talk such lamentation?

Hor. I am sent for
To the King, Niece, and shall be made a beggar,
As I was born: I see my Chattels seized;
This Chest is ransacked, and that bag deflour'd;
My door sealed up; and with this hungry messenger
I am already marching to the Fleet.

Niece. Nay, and you be at that ward, I leave you.
Masty, farewell: pray do not bite my Uncle
Too hard; and so I leave you all to the mercy
Of the Bear-Garden.

Hor. Best make fast her chamber.

Niece. I, I, cursed Dog: and
Set a thousand guards about her,
Love will find out a way.

Exit. Doct. Will Not some money qualify your haste,
And give him time to appear?

Pur. Good Mr. Doctor,
Teach your Apothecary: Galen nor
Hippocrates can persuade me from my duty.
Will you go, sir? or shall I certify?

Hor. Go! I must go.

Doct. Have comfort, sir: this cloud
May soon blow over.

Hor. Yes, when I Am blown up:
I read imprisonment in his very looks,
And all my gold confiscate.

Exeunt. Enter Nurse and Startup. Nurse. I heard her say, she would walk up to
her chamber:
The trick was but to teach him whither he
Should follow, who as nimbly apprehended,
To acquaint her with his new affections.
I did this for your good, that Mrs. Francis,
Whom I Will send presently to you, may be
Convinced in Hartwel's falsehood, and transplant
Her love on you.

Star. This will be excellent!
So shall we strangle him in his own noose,
And he never know who hurt him.

Nurse. I Will loose no time, you know my instructions.

Star. I almost had forgot; there is a cast
Of angels more.

Nurse. They are not cast away.

Star. If thou do fear they will drown, Nurse, I can give
Thee lighter, I have some want weight.

Nurse. If you have an evil angel about you, your business
will thrive the better, when it is departed.

Star. There, Mother of the Maids.

Nurse. Now all the good ones wait upon your worship.

Star. These things that go to and again, must have
Their fees, they will never speak in our cause else.
Enter Frances. Aha, sweet sir! we'll be too cunning for you.
She Is come already: sweet Lady, how do ye do?
You Are melancholy, you shall have some cause
If I can help you to it; if you be sad
Because I love you as I do, be merry
Again: there is no man cares a button for you
Besides my self.

Fran. I am very ill befriended.

Star. You are deceived in some body, and me too;
I love you I confess, but how? not for
Want of a Mistress; I came not a woing
For such necessity, although you have
So little wit, to believe something that
I know concerning the other party.

Fran. How Is this?

Star. Tell me, have you opinion, sweet Lady,
That any man besides my self does love
This face of yours? but understand, I Will mak't
Appear, and presently.

Fran. Why I dare show my face:
My glass cannot so much deceive me, sir:
I should be ashamed it should appear.

Star. Nay I am
For that, a your side; do you conceive me right?
A worse face will become the Country, and
Show well enough at the mustering; but that
You should be such an ass.

Fran. This is plain Courtship.

Start. Be sure you understand me, and you do not
Repent it, I dare give one of these ears.

Fran. You do not threaten me?

Star. Understand me right,
But if I do, and will threaten you again,
Because you shall live long to see your folly,
And what a Coxcomb you have made your self,
To love a man that is a suitor to
Your mother: ha, ha!

Fran. Whom do you mean?

Star. Even Mr. Hartwel:
Are you such a buzzard
You cannot see it? then you shall hear it: step
Behind these hangings, and he will justify it.

Enter Hartwel and Mrs. Bellamy. Heart. I have considered perfectly; and if
You will vouchsafe me hearing, dare pour forth
My heart, which full of love renders it self
To your acceptance: I acknowledge, Lady,
My passions are but young, for told I hope
You should with so much favor look upon me?

Bell. But may I credit this?

Heart. But to suspect,
Were an injustice to my faith, which looks
Upon your virtue with as much religion
As love is able to receive: your age
Has struck a reverence into my eye;
And what you want of youth and spring upon you,
Your wisdom richly satisfies. Those characters
Which time has written on your careful forehead,
Are but his envy, and your ornament,
When it shall come to pass by your example,
That youth shall be esteemed an infancy,
And women never ripe for love or marriage
Without your age upon them; it is a fault
That men not guided by the tract of reason,
But heat and wantonness of blood, run giddy
To seal such weighty covenants; better 'twere
The world should end in our Virginity,
Then spin it self more length, by inconsiderate
And hasty marriages.

Bell. Have you already
Retriv'd the affection which pursued my daughter?
Shall I believe no seeds of love remain,
Which may grow up and ripen with repentance?
For this exchange I do allow you, sir,
The consideration of my fortune, which
Might in it self incline you to accept me.

Heart. That is but an attendant, as you use it,
I must confess a welcome one, although
The mind is the first beauty which true love
Aspires to, when it is waited on with person
And an estate; it comes with greater privilege
To win upon's: I do not wish you, Lady,
Rashly believe what I profess, but measure
My service by the trial; I Will expect,
And write your smiles a competent reward,
Till time and your demand demonstrate me,
Although not equal to your full deservings,
Yet one that has ambition to be thought
Not too unworthy.

Bell. And I guess ere long,
Such an occasion will present it self.

Heart. Till then have Hartwel in your loving memory,
Who wishes no more happyness of life
Then to be called yours. --

Exeunt. Fran. What have I understood?

Star. Will you believe me another time, sweet Lady?

Fran. It is not he, some devil does out cozen us,
And mock our sense, with these fantastic bodies.
Hartwel!

Star. Nay it is the man, I hope you will be converted,
And think a Country Gentleman worth favor
That brought you to this knowledge; I deserve. --

Fran. My curses for this black discovery:
Whereas before 'twas not impossible
In time I might be brought to pity thee;
Henceforth I Will look upon thee as my sins,
And beg as much forgiveness, that I knew thee.

Star. Nay, but do you hear?

Fran. Die quickly, and be forgotten.

Star. This is very fine, sweet Lady!

Fran. My mother! Oh my fate! see me no more,
And I Will forgive thee. --

Exit. Star. Is It come to this? I see
I am a fool, and there is no remedy --

Exit. Finis Actus Secundi.
Actus Tertius.
Enter Startup and Nurse. Nurse. Fie, fie, I am ashamed on you, a Gentleman
Of your high promising, and be put off
So slightly?

Star. Why Nurse? what would you have me do?

Nurse. Do? I would have you do -- something; a man of your ability, and cannot
turn and wind a woman?


Star. You would not have wished me
To have put her to it behind the hangings?

Nurse. You should have been round with her.

Star. I was round
With her; I called her ass, I think, and coxcomb:
Unless I should have given her the lie,
And called her whore, I could not be more round with her.

Nurse. I do not mean that way.

Star. And she called me,
I think, her --

Nurse. What?

Star. Why no worse then all her sins; heaven forgive her,
She has the more to answer; nay she did
Not stick to bid me dye too, in that desperate
Estate.

Nurse. Come, you shall take another course.

Enter Close. Close. What ailes my Masters sweetheart? is she frighted?
I met and asked her for my Master, and
She turned tail like a hound had lost the sent:
There Is something in the wind: my three pil'd worshipful,
Are you there, with my Lady of the larder?
Now in that posture, do not they two look like
A fine Brick-House and a Thatch'd-Barn in the Country,
Laying their heads together? without doubt
Some precious consultation: what poesy
Will fit his joint ring, or how many yards
Of Holland without seaming-lace will make
His Mistress smock: they have spied me.

Nurse. Close,
Come hither; nay he is faithful, and one that
Has a desire to serve you: you may trust him.

Close. Your worship may trust me abed w'ye; I
Have had an itch this great while, sir, a kind
Of longing, to be one of your appurtenances;
I have some faults, and I Will confess 'em: I have
A humor now and then when I am asked
A question, to tell truth, though I be chid for it;
And I do not love blows: you may sooner beat
My brains out, then a word of flattery:
I cannot batten upon commendation,
Without my wages, nor be valiant
Upon small beer; I am not overmuch
Given to be drunk, but I Have a trick of the Dutchman,
To do your business as well drunk as sober:
I have not impudence enough to pimp
For you; but I have a gift, I can say nothing
As well as your chaplain; I sucked secrecy
From mine own mother, once a baudy Midwife:
I was born upon Shrove-Tuesday, and shall be
Now and then given to rebellion:
My flesh will once a year rise at a chambermaid,
If none such take me down; I shall in malice
And deep revenge, fling out upon May Day
Among the Apprentices without fear or wit:
If you chance to be arrested, I dare kill
Any thing, but a Sergeant; he is lapt
In law, a wearing stronger far then buff:
If any gentleman never so much provoked,
Prick him between the seams, or knock his brains out,
Which is the surer way (for most a these
Vermin, would fain be killed) he is sure to take
His leave at the Towns end; his breakfast is
Tied up, and stays for him, near my Lord Mayors
Banqueting house, made for the City-progress.

Star. I like his humor.

Nurse. Nay he has a sconce,
And shall be of our counsel; afterward,
Your worship may entertain him: Look you Close,
There is a plot to help this Gentleman
At night, when they are abed: and if you went
To bed betimes, to avoid suspicion,
'Twere never the worse; I Will say you are not well:
Do You mark? this honest Gentleman shall be
Let into Mrs. Frances bedchamber.

Close. Without her knowledge?

Nurse. You shall only attend
To give him notice from me when to come,
And watch about the house, he may get off
Without discovery; this is all.

Close. So, so, I sha' not keep the door.

Nurse. I can do that.

Close. Let me alone to give you notice who
Stirs about house.

Enter Hartwel. Nurse. Away, it is Master Hartwel,
We'll not be seen together,
Go your ways. --

Exit Nurse and Startup. Close. A foolish knave and baud, that do want nothing
But carting; I would sooner see that Triumph
Then all the Pageants a day after Simon
And Jude, when the fine City goes a feasting.
Oh sir, I have news; yes, they are gone, brave news,
Your gentlewoman can hold out no longer:
This night there will be a stratagem; the governess
Old madam Humpeapampe, the Nurse, has promised
To admit the Country Gentleman, when all
Are abed, into her chamber; yes, your Mistrisses:
I Am of the plot to lie perdue, and give
The word if any fire-lock approach;
The rest imagine: if he have not art to
Persuade her to the feat with him, yet there
Be tricks, and he may be surpised in the chamber,
And she may be compelled to marry him, in
Her own defense: there have been such devices.

Heart. Does she consent?

Close. She is betrayed to it, Sir.

Heart. Thou wo't not be so base.

Close. And I had meant it,
I never had told you this: can you make use
Of this intelligence?

Heart. Thou Art my honest servant.

Close. I promised to be his.

Heart. I have it, can
By any means procure me but his clothes?

Close. With ease: he will go to bed betimes, to void
Suspicion, that is a part of our design.

Heart. I could not wish a happier opportunity,
To try how she affects this gaudy fool,
And clear my faith to her; which her mothers watch
Will not permit: she has I fear observed
My new familiarity with the mother,
Which I Am compelled to, and must cure this way:
Fail me not, Close, and propound thy own
Reward.

Close. Tell me your purpose, and let my wit
Dispose of him.

Heart. Prosper me Love in this.

Close. And you fall to your prayers
With good Love look about us, I shall suspect
You will not thrive: you should go to a wench
As gentlemen fall to Oysters, without ceremony,
Or saying grace; devotion will spoil all. --

Exeunt. Enter Playfaire and Doctor his brother. Doct. Right as an arrow.

Play. Witty engineer:
But was she taken with the plot?

Doct. I was
Compelled to frame an outside of a reason,
Lest her own mirth should play the traitor with us,
Her spleen was so dilated; he believes
She Is mad: which change makes for us.

Play. Excellent.

Doct. And he that you employed, the Pursivant,
Showed such a surly rascal, the poor Usurer
Trembled as Bauds beneath the lash.

Play. He comes then.

Doct. With as much joy, as to receive a hanging.

Play. He would be whipped, and say his prayers at Paul's in a white sheet.


Doct. That were penance to him:
Nay he would pay as much as he should fine
For Alderman, though half his soul went with it,
For his Quictus; he does apprehend
Nothing but earthquakes.

Enter three Lords. Play. How I am rampant
With the imagination? bid the music
Be ready, they know all their flourishes:
But shift you quickly -- My honorable Lords. --
Exit Doctor. How they do look like Statesmen! where is your tooth-pick?
Excellent! beat your staff hansomly; contract
Your brow, and look more superciliously.

1 Lord. I warrant you for my part.

2 Lord. We came now from practice.

Play. Can ye do it with confidence?

2 Lord. These very clothes have made me proud already:
It was some Lords cast suit, I Will lay my life.

3 Lord. And mine; it smells of honor.

Enter one with perfume. Play. More perfume, so, so; how now man?

2 Lord. He looks pale; my Lord, how do you?

3 Lord. Well, well, I hope it is but conceit.

Play. Of what?

3 Lord. Will the pox lie in clothes? I cannot tell,
I find some alteration in my body
Since I shifted.

Play. It Is a mere conceit;
They were an honest man's, upon my knowledge,
A Captain of the Train'd-Band in the Country:
They were bought against the general muster last;
He wore 'em that day, and most carefully sent 'em up
To taste our London lavender.

3 Lord. Sir, you have
Satisfied me.

Play. Be sprighful: where is this Prince,
Whose nod must make us double before age?
I long to kiss his hand.

2 Lord. He Is here.

Flourish. Enter Lambert, Playfaire's brother, for the fourth Lord, Sir
Poldavis and attendants. Play. Now by that sprig, a pretty lump of Majesty,
No actor could become it half so royally:
But will thou not be out of thy Kings part,
And when wine is wanting at the banquet,
Call upon drawers, quarrel with your Nobles?
Or when we shall present our man of morgages,
Take him aside, and borrow half a crown
To give your whore benevolence, which trusted
For you last tilting; or be drunk too soon,
And leave our project in the dirt?

Lam. My Lords,
This fellow's insolence must be corrected:
Dispose him in what prison you think fit.

4 Lord. He Is mad, I think.

Lam. To Bedlam with him then:
Is this a place for fools and madmen? who
Admitted him? take him away; see you
He be well whipped, and let him thank our mercy,
Bandog.

Play. I quake already; excellent Lambert!
Cool, cool thy lungs, and whisper with some Lord,
Thou wo't be a key too high else: good sir Poldavis,
Master of the house, at whose cost we are
Entertained!

Pol. My part is rotten
In my head, doubt not.

Enter Pursivant. Play. Is he come?

Pur. He waits at the first chamber.

Play. Then let the Lutes
Begin, and then admit him.

Enter Hornet. Hor. Here Is revelling, my purse must be squeezed for it:
That Is the King, the rest are bare; how supple they are
In The hams? that Courtier has oyled his joints:
He looks this way, they point at me; a rot
O'that knaves finger.

2 Lord. What fellow's this? who waits?

Pur. It was his Graces pleasure he was sent for.

2 Lord. My good Lord.

4 Lord. My Lord of Noland, as you were saying.

Lam. Is this the man whom you so much commended for his abilities?

Hor. I smell no good from that word ability.

Lam. Discreet, and read in the Commonwealth, a man
Fit for employment in some Embassy?

Pol. The very same.

Lam. His countenance is promising.

Pol. If the King
Of Spain had but his head, that politic head,
I know who might go fish for the Low Countries.

Lam. His garments are but course.

Pol. His mind is rich.

Hor. They praise me: I am a thousand pounds the worse.

Lam. Kneel down, thy name?

Hor. Gyles Hornet, your poor creature.

Lam. We'll knight him.

Hor. I do beseech you, sir, to spare this honor,
I am not able to maintain my self;
There be more Knights then can live well already.

Pol. Neglect his favor?

Lam. Be it your care
To give his body more becoming ornaments,
He shall be like himself then; we will confer
More honors on him.

4 Lord Do you make haste, his Grace
Will have you new thatched; you must have rich clothes
Fitting your state and honorable title.

Hor. These will be good enough for me, alas I am not able.

4 Lord. Nay you must have them from his Wardrobe, sir,
They Will cost you nothing; you will not look in these
Like a poor Knight of Windsore.

Lam. Where be the Ladies, and the Bride?

Pol. She Is your Graces handmaid; they
Are dancing, sir, within.

Lam. Direct us to 'em prithee;
When he is ready give us knowledge --

Flourish. Exeunt. 4 Lord. Yes, sir.

Hor. What will become of me?

4 Lord. You were best prepare,
Your clothes will be here presently; the King
Will send to you before you are ready; cast
Your old skin off: do you not to save sheets
And trouble, wrap your self anights in the blankets?
Chare they ashamed to show the linings?

Hor. Hum; if this be but a preparative for a whipping,
What case am I in?

Enter Servant with clothes. 4 Lord. Well said, now they are come,
Be nimble now, and help to strip him.

Hor. Alas, must I wear this doublet? it would yield
Heaven knows how much to burn.

4 Lord. You may be desperate
When it is on, and burn your body with it, sir.

Hor. I shall not know my self.

Ser. Fit as 'twere made, sir.

Enter Playfaire. Play. Which is sir Gyles?

Hor. I am not Knighted yet.

Play. You have your grace, and may be called so.

Hor. Have I the grace to be a Knight?
I am the man you please to call sir Gyles.

Play. Then I congratulate your happy fortune;
You Are like to be exalted; his Grace talks
Much on you; I Will be proud to be your servant:
Sir Robert, a word.

Hor. What gentleman is this?

Ser. The Bridegroom, sir; in great favor I can tell you,
And new created by his Highness, Baron
Of Landscape; his living is far off.

Hor. My very good Lord, my breeches are almost on.

Ser. Here be your keys.

Hor. His Majesty has pleased to shine upon
A piece of barren earth.

Play. You are too modest:
The King has been informed, sir Gyles, you are
One of the ablest men in his Dominions:
Should virtue still be clothed in rags? advance it
To honor and regard: you waste your brain
At home in cheap and low engagements, sweat
Your soul out, for a poor and paltry living:
Old houses, let 'em fall to the dull Lord
Of The Manner; switch me up a town together,
Or meddle not; this and that strading Acre
Not worth your care: study some Monopoly,
May sweep the Kingdom at a stroke: despise
A project will not bring in half the City:
Find out a way to forfeit all the Charters:
Have an exchequer of your own, and keep
The Princes round about in pension:
These are becoming businesses, and speak a Statesman.

Hor. You do talk strange things, my Lord:
So, now my keys, good gentlemen, my keys.

4 Lord. You have 'em, sir.

Hor. Cry mercy.

Play. They are things
Material to our business.

4 Lord. And we'll have 'em again:
Let me alone, the Harbor has not done yet;
When he is in the suds, we may be more familiar
With His worships pocket, and return 'em quaintly.

Play. I will account it one of my felicities
To be a witness of your honor, sir.

Hor. Oh my good Lord of Landscape. --

Ser. How shall we dispose of these?

4 Lord. The Hangman will not have 'em; and I fear
They will corrupt the well; faith give 'em stable-room,
The are dung already. --

Enter 1 Lord. 1 Lord. My Lord, the King asks for you; good sir Gyles, it is
so decreed; write me in the number of your faithful friends.

Play. We must attend.

4 Lord. Do not yet say he is ready,
The Barber has a duty to dispatch,
He will be an hour a rubbing, washing, powdering:
Then I Will attend him to his presence.

Play. We shall excuse him so long, still your servant --

Exit Playfaire and 1 Lord. 4 Lord. The Barber, sir, attends in the next room.

Hor. I wo'not shave.

4 Lord. He fears his throat.

Hor. I never
Give above three pence.

4 Lord. Talk not you of charge,
You have but yet your welcome; do not you
Think, good sir Gyles, but we can shave you too. --

Exeunt. Enter Close and Startup. Star. Where is he, Close?

Close. I told him, sir,
You lay in a chamber of the the other side
The house, whither he is gone with his sword drawn,
And curses of themselves able to kill you;
You did affront him once, and now his Mistress
Has quite neglected him, for your love, he thinks;
He Will make you an example to all rivals;
I Will bring your clothes to ye after: yet your fear
And running, sir, will keep you warm enough.

Star. Honest Close, thou have saved my life.

Close. Death, is he not behind you? this way, good sir. --

Exeunt. Enter Nurse and Mistress Frances. Nurse. Have you not made a fine
choice? I did ever
Think he was false; your mother did but counterfeit
The lovesick widow, all this while, to try him.

Fran. To try him, Nurse?

Nurse. She told me so her self,
Assuring him the state was hers, and you
At her devotion: put him to his choice
To take her with the wealth, or you with nothing;
What followed you have heard: come, be wise yet,
And love the Country-Gentleman, that dotes on you;
He Is rich and half a fool: I Will fetch him to you. --

Exit Nurse. Fran. My mother counterfeit? why may not Hartwel
Pretend as well as she, fearing her anger
And policy, if he refused her love?
I have observed some sorrow in his gesture,
As he were willing to deliver something,
If opportunity would give him leave:
He cannot be so false; now I suspect
He does obey some dire necessity;
Twould puzzle a wise lover to be so
Severely put to it.

Enter Nurse and Hartwel disguised. Nurse. On like a bold Captain,
Give her a broad side, she is within your shot;
I Will leave you. --

Exit. Fran. It Is the fool; why Nurse?

Heart. Nay, flee not,
Before you hear.

Fran. It Is Hartwel.

Heart. If my voice
Betray me not.

Fran. Why in this shape? some trick in it,
He hides his face; I Will put him to it however,
Although the hour be unseasonable; any time
We may express our joy: my Nurse once told me
You were not well, and gone to bed: your health
Is welcome as mine own; I dare not, sir,
In modesty presume to bid you stay,
And to requite your pains, kind Master Startup.

Heart. She knows me not.

Fran. Forgive me if I blush:
I have no other way, but to declare
My eyes that late frowned on your love, shall smile.

Heart. On me?

Fran. On none but you: I have been too
Unkindly dealt withal by Hartwel, whom
How dearly I affected, good heavens knows:
But I have read discretion to my fancy,
And were he here, he should be witness of
My vows to you, if you accept my heart,
And can with equal truth embrace it: I
Will choose my husband here; you, only you:
This Faith is registered in heaven, shall challenge
From me a wives obedience.

Enter Nurse, Hartwel Planet-struck. Nurse. Away, her mother's up; I would not
for
A thousand pound she find you in this chamber. --

Exit Frances. Heart. I have undone my self.

Nurse. Sweet Master Startup
To your own lodging, take this close lanthorn with ye.
Passion of me, what makes her rise?

Heart. I will discover yet.

Nurse. Discover what?
How! Master Hartwel!

Heart. You have midnight-plots.

Nurse. Oh we are wretched miserable! what have I done? --

Exit. Heart. Oh who shall lead me to a world where are
No women! farewell all: I Will be above
Your charms, and find out death a cure for love. --

Exit. Finis Actus Tertius.
Actus Quartus.
Enter Startup and Close. Star. WHere are we now? it is very cold, why do not
Lead to some house?

Close. What at this time of night?
All people are abed; the very Owls
Are in their dead sleep: or if we could
Be admitted, would you venture a this fashion,
And publish your disgrace? proclaim your self
Coward, and lay some imputation
Upon the place you came from, where your hopes
May yet be fair for marriage? this brunt over,
To meet a drunkard now were comfortable,
Whose eyes inflamed would serve instead of torches,
Or he might spit Flap-Dragons from his fire
Of Sack, and light us; but no sober man
Considering what case you are in, sir,
By my consent should see us. --

Star. Ha, what is that?

Close. Where? where? a fire-Drake?

Star. Now it is gone, it is bright
Again, is it not a spirit? Oh deliver me!

Close. I have heard some such things use to walk the Fields.

Star. What shall I do?

Close. Pray, pray, with as much strength
As if you had no land, or were confined
To my Annuity; now I hear no spirits,
This riches makes us cowards: hide your self,
I will go nearer. --

Exit Close. Star. Do know the devil if thou see him, Close?
A pox a love, if this be the reward on it;
Some call it fire, but I find no such matter;
I am frozen to the blanket, and my teeth
Strike one another, and keep time like hammers;
I do believe if they were beaten out,
They would make false Dice, there is Quicksilver in 'em
Already by their dancing.

Enter Close. Close. Sir, where are you?

Star. Here I am, here still.

Close. You Are a dead man.

Star. More terror? what is the matter?

Close. It Is my Master
With a dark lanthorn, and pursues us, by
This darkness; it is his voice, wrap your self up,
And roll into some ditch; flight will betray us.

Star. I were as good be killed, and yet I Will venture. --

Exit. Close. It Is he indeed, and more then I expected:
The matters do not fadge well with his Mistress.

Enter Hartwel with a dark lanthorn. Heart. What a sweet thing is night! how
calm and harmless!
No whispering but of leaves, on which the breath
Of heaven plays music, to the birds that slumber:
Here are no objects to betray our sense
To a repentance; nor can women thus
Advantaged by the tapers of the night,
Spread their temptations to undo poor man:
What a fine book is heaven! which we may read
Best now when every star is a fair letter:
How much they wrong thee, night, that call thee guilty
Of rapes and murders? it is the day that like
A glorious whore ingageth men to act 'em;
And taking then the darkness to obscure 'em,
We unjustly lay the shame upon thy brows
That art so innocent, thou never sawst 'em:
Befriended with the silence I begin
To wander; there is no wilderness abroad
To him, that is lost at home.

Close. Sir.

Heart. Who Is that?

Close. One that has taken some pains for you to night:
I am Close.

Heart. What make thou here?

Close. I wait upon my charge,
I lead your Rival a procession
In's shirt, persuading him you had resolved
To cut his throat else: he is hard by at's prayers,
And thinks you have pursued him.

Heart. Ha! I Will do it:
Show me the fool, by all my hopes I Will kill him,
And send his base heart, as a present to her:
Fate has presented me with this revenge,
And I will not delay his death a minute.

Close. Indeed, indeed you shall not.

Heart. How?

Close. You dare not.

Heart. My drudge offront me? are you grown his champion?

Close. Not I, sir, but you dare not do an act
So much against the honor of a gentleman;
You wo'not kill him basely.

Heart. No.

Close. Why then
There is no fear, but he will live long enough:
I Will undertake, he never shall grow provided
To fight with ye; and other satisfaction,
Name it and take it; so I Will fetch him to you.

Heart. Stay, I have been too passionate, let him live
To be her punishment; that is revenge enough
While I pursue my own ways.

Close. VVhither now?

Heart. VVhither you must not follow, by thy honesty:
I charge thee come not after me.

Close. That binds my attendance, sir.

Heart. But not when I command the contrary:
If thou do move this way, thou draw'st mine anger:
Mind the preservation of the same thing you
Undertook: farewell; if thou do love me,
Follow not, nor question; it is in my power
To loose thee or my self. --

Exit. Close. I cannot see in the dark with spectacles,
And mine eyes have lost him of the sudden;
Well, I must hope the best: what shall I do
With my hen-hearted lover, who would give
Half his estate, this cold fit were well over?
I shall make work for the Physicians:
Caudles and Cullices will not restore him;
If he but escape with life, I am not sorry:
He may be a soldier, and endure the trenches;
I put him first to the becoming sufferance.
But what are these? an army of horns and halberts?
Upon my conscience the VVatch: I thought
The Fields had not been haunted with these goblins:
I cannot run; if I should squat, and they
Find me, there were no mercy but Bridewel,
Or some such lousie place: I am resolved
To cast away a few good words upon 'em;
A leg, and worshipping the Constable
That leads the rusty regiment, will quit me;
I pass the gates with it often, and so may
The devil, if he pay the Porter. Bless ye
My Masters, what a clock is it?

Enter Constable and Watch. 1 Watch. Who goes there?

Constable. I charge you stand.

Close. Your worship may do much.

Constable. Where have you been?

Close. At Istington, an't please you, about business.

2 Watch. Some thief I warrant him, no honest man,
I know by his basket-hilt; some rogue that watches:
The Fields are pestered with such sturdy robbers.

Close. He is a rogue that watches, for my part.

Constable. He calls my VVatch-men rogues, perfidious traitor.

1 Watch. How! Master Constable,
You are one your self.

Constable. Sitrah I will teach you to commit felony.

Close. How, sir? will you teach me to commit felony? take heed what you say,
if I commit felony by your authority.


Constable. My tority shall stretch for it: away with him; if you be not whipped for
these intergatories, his Majesty shall keep his own peace himself; is this a
time anight to call honest men rogues? away with him.


Close. Good fir.

2 Watch. We will provide you lodging.

Close. Where?

2 Watch. New prison.

Close. But are you in earnest, gentlemen? for what?

1 Watch. For answering the Constable.

Close. Cry him mercy,
I showed him too much manners, if there be
No remedy.

2 Watch. We'll humble you.

Close. I have a
Companion hereabouts: where are you, sir?

Within. Star. Here in a ditch.

1 Watch. They seldom go alone,
We'll find him out. Ha sirrah?

Close. Do you hear,
You watch about these places for no good,
It seems.

Constable. We watch indeed for knaves.

Close. You dare not
Speak to their faces: some of you I am sure
Do watch for your good Masters of the Parish.

Enter Startup. Star. I thank you honest men; where art thou, Close?

Close. Here: these good men will help us to a lodging.

Star. Blessing a'their heart; I am almost starved.

Constable. Yes, yes, we'll do you that favor: come away, sir.

Star. Where shall we go now?

1 Watch. To prison.

Star. How, Close?

Constable. You shall be close enough.

Close. I follow, sir,
I cannot leave you in adversity:
All this is for your health: clean straw is warm, sir.
You have the benefit of being naked;
I shall have work to morrow in my woollen.

Constable. Away, away, bring 'em away. --

Exeunt. Enter Mistress Bellamy and Nurse. Bell. I heard some noise, look, call
up the servants,
See if the gentlemen beabed; I Am troubled
Exit Nurse. I have not dealt so nobly as became me
With Hartwel; and that love which I pretended,
If I have drawn his fancy to affect me,
Must make him satisfaction; his language
And soft demeanor, when he gave me up
His resolution, made me quite forget
My purpose to have chid him for his levity,
So soon to leave my daughter, who I know
Has placed him near her heart; and I have done
Her injury, by this trial of her truth.

Enter Nurse. Nurse. Oh Mistress!

Bell. What Is the matter?

Nurse. Master Startup
Is not abed, nor Master Hartwel.

Bell. This is very strange.

Nurse. I dare not tell her of his shift, they are gone,
The doors I found left open, and no sign
Which way they are bestowed.

Bell. This puzzles me:
Pray heaven there be no mischief in this absence:
Is Franck abed?

Nurse. Yes.

Bell. What should
Move 'em to leave my house so late? and Master Hartwel
Without his clothes? some knock; they are there; go see. --
Knock. Exit Nurse. Beshrow me but I trembled.

Enter Nurse. Nurse. It Is a stranger,
And says he would speak with you.

Bell. At this late hour?
What accidents are these? from whence?

Nurse. I know not.

Bell. Has he no name? what should this mean?

Nurse. He says,
He is a Countryman of Master Startups.

Bell. Admit him, he perhaps may bring some news.

Enter Country-Gentleman. Coun. By your leave Mistress, pardon my importunity
At so unfit an hour.

Bell. You Are welcome, sir.

Coun. I met with fortunate directions,
Though I came late: I understand you have
A guest, one Startup, of Northamptonshire,
That comes a woing to your daughter.

Bell. Such
A one there was that supt with us, and went
To bed; but since, as I have faith, I know not
Which way he has conveyed himself: another
Gentleman too is missing, and his rival.

Coun. Pray do not mock me, Lady; I have rid
A great way, and the business much concerns him.

Bell. You may believe me: he is no such treasure,
I should conceal him

Enter Frances. Coun. Then I see you dally;
Know, Mistress, you may slack your preparations,
Your daughter must look out another husband;
He is contracted.

Fran. How!

Coun. And something more,
Gotten with child one that without blushing
I cannot call my daughter; he shall make
Her credit straight again: although my fortunes
Have no equality with his, I shall
Find law to force him.

Fran. You preferred this suitor:
This news returns my blood.

Bell. Sir, you shall find
All truth I have delivered; I am not sorry
To hear this news; this is no time to seek him:
Plcase you accept the lodging that was his:
My servant shall attend you in the morning,
To help you search.

Coun. You seem a noble gentlewoman,
I take your courtesy.

Bell. Nurse, a light: pray walk, sir. --

Exit Coun. and Nurse. Fran. I was unkind to Hartwel, he not wise:
But love still apprehends too much or nothing.

Bell. Frances, a word: do you not know what is
Become o'these Gentlemen?

Fran. Not I, their absence is strange to me.

Bell. Oh Franck, I am undone.

Fran. Good heaven forbid.

Bell. This Gentleman, Master Hartwel,
Whom we shall never see again, I fear.

Fran. How, mother! are you acquainted with any cause to
fear thus?

Bell. It Is in vain to tell thee how I loved him.

Fran. Bless my senses! you love him?

Bell. 'Bove all the world, affectionately placed him
Too near my heart.

Fran. I heard you made pretense
Of love, to try him for my sake; and pardone me
If yet I dare not believe more.

Bell. Oh Franck!

Fran. My heart does tremble, I feel coldness run
Through all my veins.

Bell. I had no other thought
At first, but wisely to distinguish whether
His heart was fixed on thee, or my estate;
With resolution, if I found him more
A courtier of thy fortune, then thy person,
To punish him with loss of both: but love
Has changed the scoene and title of our Comedy;
And what I meant should slip -- All his hopes,
Has ruined us: his modest and calm answer,
To accept my tender, with such force and reason
Directed to my fancy, turned my purpose,
And made me his indeed, his perfect lover:
But now we have both lost him.

Fran. All the piety
That ever taught children to love their mother,
Will but suffice to keep my heart obedient:
Was ever maid so miserable? was there
No other in my fate to be my rival?
I live too long. Oh break, my poor heart, break;
Then she that gave me life, has took it from me.

Bell. Why do you weep?

Fran. I do not weep; or if
I do, I know not why.

Bell. Now I perceive,
Thy duty was but counterfeit; you love him,
Upon my life you love him still: have my
Commands no more respect? my care and love
So ill rewarded? that I desiring
One comfort in the world, and shall my child
Rise up to take that from me?

Fran. Alas, I knew not
You loved him too; indeed I had rather die
Then you should call me rebel: parents often
Affect not where their children love; but you
With too much loving what my thoughts delight in,
Have quite undone your daughter.

Bell. Now I see
The cause of his departure in this fashion:
Pray heaven he have not made away himself:
Did ever child deceive a mother so?
I have a sad presage: you may to bed,
And rise again without my blessing; yet
You may stay -- Wherefore should I despair
Of his return? you say you could not tell
That I affected him.

Fran. Indeed not I,
And do believe it now against my will;
But I am your daughter.

Bell. Showing it in conforming
Your self to my desires, and what is past
I can forgive you: if he come again,
Will you be ruled, and show no favor to him?
For it is in you I see to make me happy:
I will not tie you to affect the other:
Choose any for your husband, but this man,
My love and prayers shall go along with you.
Answer.

Fran. Indeed I dare not, yet could I
Put off the knowledge that you are my mother.

Bell. What then?

Fran. Though my imagination allowed you
The greatest Empress in the world, whose frown
Could kill, and eyes at pleasure make alive
Again, thus I could answer.

Bell. pray let us hear?

Fran. You do not well to heap oppression:
Authority was given to preserve,
Not kill the poor beneath you: I durst tell you
In confidence of my cause, that you betray
Two innocents to sorrow; and though heaven
Look on, and seem to smile upon your cruelty,
Yet there is thunder, for divorcing those,
Whose hearts That has conjoined: I durst fay more,
Though all your terrors were prepared to punish
My bold defense, and call you tyrant.

Bell. How?

Fran A most unjust, a sacrilegious tyrant.

Bell. You would not be so violent.

Fran. That do
Not only ruin and deface the altar,
But steal away the very sacrifice:
And I durst add, and smile upon your anger,
Though as you frowned, death lurked in every wrinkle,
My soul's above your tyranny; and would
From torturing flames receive new fire of love,
And make your eye faint to behold the brightness
Of my poor bodies Martyrdom; and if ever
Love showed a miracle, my heart should bear
The characters of him you have torn from it,
With beams about it like a Saint that suffered.
But as you are my mother, thus I kneel,
And beg a pardon for my innocence;
If that offend you, live you happy still,
And be the Mistress of your vows: live to
Enjoy whom you affect; may every hour
Return new blessings on you both; renew
Your spring, and let him think you young again;
And let me beg but this for all my duty,
Against the day you marry him, to provide
My coffin; for I fear, I shall not have
Breath many minutes after, to pray for you:
The herbs that shall adorn your bridal chamber,
Will serve my funeral, and deck my hearse:
Beneath which you shall say, There lies your daughter
That died to show obedience.

Bell. Why should thou
Continue thus to him?

Fran. I know he loves me
Still, though hereafter your affections
May meet.

Bell. And they shall meet,
But never to procure thee one bad thought:
Now I have tried you both, assure my child
I loved him but for thee; dispose thy self
To be his bride; this news at his return
Will make all well: -- To rest.

Fran. Can this be true?

Bell. 'Twere sin to mock thee any more -- To bed.

Fran. No, I Will spend all this night in prayers for you,
My dearest mother: Oh my Hartwel! --

Exeunt. Enter Playfaire, and the Doctor his Brother. Doct. How like you her
now?

Play. The morning never bloomed
So fresh, nor Venus with more charms upon her:
Adon would melt before her eye, and woo
Her kisses at the expense of her last breath:
Cupid himself, could he but see, would fall
In love with her, and throwing away his shafts,
Offer the empty quiver to her eyes,
Ambitious to fill it with her beams,
The least of which would wound more hearts, then all
His stock of golden arrows.

Doct. No more raptures.

Play. Did thou not know before, that love is able
Without the help of sack to make a poet?
My nimble Mercury; Joves Herald in
Reversion.

Doct. I confess,
I had a trick of Mercury, when I picked
His pocket for the keys.

Play. He never mist 'em.

Doct. His eyes were drenched in suds, and we returned 'em
Ere they recovered light.

Play. 'Twas excellent,
He was in darkness still.

Doct. Do You think he will know her?

Play. His clothes already have.
Made him forget himself; or if he have
But the remembrance of such a woman,
The more he sees her now, the more he will think
The change impossible.

Doct. Where have you left him?

Play In The Gallery, where with much patience,
He does expect his Highness will send for him.

Doct. Then all runs smooth, his wonder does continue.

Play. I fed that humor artificially,
He is half persuaded all is but a dream yet:
To which imagination, his clothes
Are a great help, because he paid not for 'em:
Sometimes he is very merry, then again
He struts about with such a scurvie pride,
As some new crept into nobility,
When some of their first livery come to see 'em.
His honor has so changed him, that he now
Knows not of what religion he is;
Or if by chance he thinks of his first faith,
He spits of the hangings, and excuses with
I do not like the story, it is apocryphal:
Sometimes he will offer at a jest,
Frown upon any man that will presume
To have more knowledge in worse clothes: I told him
It was his Graces pleasure he should be
Controuler at the Mask, and he did sweat
As he were studying for some mighty oaths
To cleat the presence. -- He is here, away --

Exit Doctor and Playfaire. Enter Hornet and Poldavis. Hor. Are you the Master
of the house, sir Poldavis?
I heard you called.

Pol. It is my name,
Sir Gyles, unworthy of this Grace his Highness
Is daign'd to show in honoring of my daughter.

Hor. And was she married this morning, say you?

Pol. This morn she lost her Virgin-Name.

Hor. I have
Not seen her yet, nor any of the Ladies;
You have but little noise methinks in the house.

Pol. It would offend his Grace.

Hor. Who as you say
Came hither privately, with a small train
Of Lords: would I might see his face again:
I am not sent for yet; I have been ready,
Sir Pol -- these three hours; and I do wonder
His Grace so much for gets himself.

Flourish. Pol. That music
Speaks him on entrance.

Enter Lambert, Playfaire and attendance. Lam. I, this garb becomes him;
How was his person lost within that shape
He was first presented to me!

Hor. Indeed the case
Is something altered, by your Highness bounty,
To your poor servant Hornet.

Play. How he looks
As he did scorn the Quorum, and were hungry
To eat a Statesman! alas an office in
The household is too little for a breakfast,
A Baron but a mornings draught, he will gulp it
Like a round egg in Muscadine; methinks
At every wiping of his mouth, should drop
Agolden saying of Pythagoras:
A piece of Matchiavel see already
Hang on his beard, which wants but stroking out;
The statutes and the Magna Charta have
Taken a Lease at his tongues end.

Lam. We'll think on it; he shall be -- But
To the banquet: Then let the Mask be ready,
There we shall employ your worthy diligence. --

Flourish. Exit Lambert and attendance. Hor. Heaven bless your mighty Grace.

Play. You Will follow. --

Exit Playfaire. Hor. I attend you presently:
I know not what to think of these things yet;
It Is very strange I should be thus exalted,
Without desert, best known unto my self:
Princes I see are mortal, and may be
Deceived in placing of their honors: I
Am little better then a favorite,
If these be true, if these be true; it is a question,
Let me consider wisely; it may be
I am not I, not Hornet, no, I Am a Knight:
Are these my clothes? I do not use to wear such:
A pocket in my sleeve, and velvet hose,
Six times translated since they were a Midwifes
Forepart, were things I wore on holydays:
The price of these would break a Camels back;
And yet some men walk under them like Elephants,
And have variety as the devil were
Their Taylour; who best knows where all their land lies:
Then why this cost on me? -- It Is a dream;
I am now confirmed, a very idle dream,
And I am very glad on it: it is impossible
It should be true, it does not hang together:
I will have paience, till I wake again,
And care not what becomes on it.

Enter Playfaires brother for the 4 Lord. 4 Lord. It Is his highness pleasure,
Now the banquet's done. --

Hor. How, the banquet done! I was coming to't'
You could hardly say grace by this time.

4 Lord. That Is a ceremony
Grown out of use; it was a running banquet.

Hor. A running! so it seems, it was a galloping banquet,
For you made haste: I do dream certainly,
There Is no sense nor reason in any thing they do.

4 Lord. You know your place,
The Mask will straight begin; and his Grace will not
Have any one admitted: he resolves,
If the conceit affects him, it shall be
Performed at Court hereafter: in the mean time
He does command all privacie; they are
Some set to guard the door, but your care must
Provide his Highness be not interrupted:
Hark, they are rude already --

Exit. Hor. Let me alone:
What turbulent knave is that?

Within. I am a Country-Gentleman, sir Gyles;
And if I may presume upon good clothes,
You may before his Grace call me your Cozen,
And not be ashamed: here is a Lady too.

Hor. A Lady too? is she with child? what makes she
Here, and she be with child already? I
Tell thee, none such shall be admitted while
I am in place -- More rapping? -- Keep the doors,
If I do fall a swearing once, look to it.

Within. I beseech you for my wives sake.

Hor. Thy wives?
What Is he that pleads in forma pauperis?

Within. A Citizen, and like me.

Hor. Like me? thou lie, I am more like a Lord,
Thou shall fare never the better for that word:
Knock down the women, if there be a hundred,
And make their husbands drunk, the guard are lazy:
These women's insolence will force a statute:
I will petition to the Prince my self,
They may have liberty but once a year
To see the galliefoyst, then be confined
To their chamber and one 'Prentise -- Yet again?

Within. Sir Gyles, sir Gyles, you know me well enough.

Hor. But while I am in office, I know no body.

Within. I am your Scrivener.

Hor. Draw the purse wherein
Thou keptst thy ears, and leave 'em at the door,
The guard trusts none without a pawn; they will serve
If they be never redeemed, to sees in milk
For a sore throat.

Within. Sir Gyles, here is your Niece.

Hor. My Niece! the devil she is.

Niece. Within. Pray Uncle let me in.

Enter Servant. Hor. Her very voice -- Ha, open the doors there:
Where is she?

Ser. Whom?

Hor. My Niece that called me?

Ser. None called, nor was there any women here.

Hor. No, nor my Scrivener, bawling out sir Gyles?

Ser. Not any named your worship.

Hor. Then I dream,
And I am a fool to make a question on it. --

Exit Servant. Within. Ha, ha, ha.

Hor. The Knaves laugh at me too; but let 'em: I
Shall be as merry with this tale to morrow.
Flourish. What fancies men have in their sleep sometimes!
His Highness! where be the Ladies?

Enter Lambert, Poldavis and atttendants. Pol. They are all in the Mask.

Hor. Nay, no matter where; why do I ask the question?

Pol. You Will see them, sir, anon.
Poldavis gives papers to Lambert and sir Gyles. Wilt please your Grace,
And you, sir Gyles, the subject of the Mask?

Hor. What Is here? The three Goddesses Contention for the Golden Ball.

Dance. Enter Playfaire in his own apparel: He dances with a golden Ball in his
hand. Hor. This is Paris, ha! I have seen that face before now.

Enter Juno, Pallas and Venus. Hor. These are the three Goddesses.

Lam. Juno, Pallas and Venus.

The Goddesses dance, and court Paris for his Ball: To Juno enters one like a
King; She takes off his Crown, and offers it to Paris: he accepts not. Hor.
Juno does woo him with her State and Kingdom.

Lam. But he refuses.

To Pallas enters one like a Soldier, plumed and rich: She presents him to
Paris, with a book; he refuses. Lam. He is not for her service, though she offer
To make him Scholar and a Soldier,
A complete man.

Hor. That Fairy wins the Ball.

To Venus comes Cupid, leading in Hornets Niece, riehly dressed. Hor. Ha! that is
my Niece.

Pol. Which, sir Gyles?

Hor. That Lady whom Dame Venus and her brat are busy
withal.

Pol. Contain your self, sir Gyles, that is the Bride.

Hor. The Bride quotha!

Pol. Married this morning.

Paris gives Venus the Ball: Juno, Pallas, King and Soldier. -- Exeunt
Maskquers. Hor. These are my keys; she is safe enough at home,
And has but half her wits, as I remember:
The devil cannot juggle her from my custody: Ha, ha,
I do dream still.

Lam. It Is time to break off sports: how like you this,
Sir Gyles?

Hor. A very pretty dream.

Lam. I see you would be abed, you are not used to such late
hours.

Pol. Lights for his Highness.

Hor. I humbly beg your license,
I may return to my old lodging.

Lam. Well sir, it is easily granted. --

Flourish. Exit Lambert and attendants. Pol. Lights for sir Gyles, one shall
attend you home.

Hor. Ha, ha, ha.

Pol. Why do you laugh?

Hor. At a conceit, at a conceit:
What did I eat last night, to make me dream thus? --

Exeunt. Finis Actus Quartus.
Actus Quintus.
Enter Hartwel, Country-Gentleman, Servant and Officers. Heart. YOu have done
well.

Coun. Would you had done no worse:
These are his clothes, and you must give account
How you came by 'em, and produce him safe,
Ere you acquit your self: we may suspect
You have killed him.

Heart. Then I obey my destiny:
Justice will still pursue the guilty person;
Dispose me where you please.

Ser. He does confess.

Heart. What ere you be, you can but have my life
For his; all your revenge can reach no higher,
And to the law I yield my self.

Coun. My hopes are
Cold as his blood whom thou have slain: thou have
Been cruel in this act, to me and mine,
Whose fames in him are miserably wounded;
But look for the reward.

Heart. I must expect it:
In the mean time, I wo'not beg your mercy;
Life is a burden I would fain be rid of,
Does weary me to carry it.

Ser. I Will acquaint
My Mistress.

Coun. Do so: to the next justice with him,
Come away. --

Exit. Enter Hornet. Hor. She Is gone; she is gone, I shall run mad: my Niece,
Robbed of three thousand pounds in her escape,
And yet the doors were safe: some witch has taught her,
Or some French boy, to clime a chimney; else
I cannot think which way she is conveyed:
I find too late, I am awake and gul'd,
Nor know I whom to accuse for my tormentors,
Devils or men; but sure they were not men,
But very fiends I revell'd with last night:
Though mortals want no malice, they have not art
To undo me of this fashion: Oh that I
Knew where to meet the prince of devils knighted me;
The Poets call him Pluto, god of riches;
I and my learned counsel would undo him
In law, in very law, which he should find
Hotter ere I had done, then hell it self,
And call his place of torments in three terms,
But a refreshing to it: yet let me see,
I have her portion still, though she be vanished;
That Is better then my Niece; but if she marry,
I loose it all; there, there is the vexation.

Enter Lambert. Lam. Save Master Hornet.

Hor. It Is too late, away,
I do not love unnecessary complement.

Lam. This he?

Hor. Yes I am he, am I not very fine?
What do you think this trim will cost me? ha!
Three thousand pound, no more.

Lam. The broker wo'not
Lend half the money.

Hor. Will you, sir, be gone?
I have no money to lend now; it is not
You know in fashion, with rich clothes.

Lam. I am
For other purpose, and with news perhaps
You would be willing to receive; you have
A Niece. --

Hor. No, such a creature was in my possession:
Do you know where she is?

Lam. I imagine.

Hor. Ha! good Master Lambert, on, pray forward;
You shall have money upon good security.

Lam. I thank you sir, for nothing; I owe you
Too much already, on these terms.

Hor. My Niece,
As you were saying.

Lam. Were you knighted lately?

Hor. Ha! is that talk abroad?

Lam. No general rumor; by a chance I came
Where such a thing was whispered, only whispered,
Just as he was described: in my opinion
You Are very hansome, and do look as like. --

Hor. An ass.

Lam. Why you shall have it, sir.

Hor. But touching
My Niece, good sir, that most ungratious giglot,
That Is run or stolen away, juggled last night
Out of my doors.

Lam. Did she not leap the Casement?

Hor. Do not increase my agony, you came. --

Lam. With civil meaning to discover how
You may be abused.

Hor. What money do you want, sir?
Your own bond shall suffice.

Lam. I have forsworn
Writing my name, or mark; but I can tell you. --

Hor. Where I may find this Girl?

Lam. More I can do,
If need require; it is in my power to give
Her back to your possession, and I am willing.

Hor. An honest man.

Lam. On reasonable conditions,
And such as shall not trench on borrowing money.

Hor. Honester yet.

Lam. For you shall give it freely, and get by it:
Sir, you must understand, if I do this,
I shall betray a friend of mine, that has
Put me in trust; one that intends to marry her,
Do You mark? and get three thousand pound upon her;
One that has lent me sums too, without parchment,
Or foolish circumstance to be returned;
Which you were never yet so much a Christian,
As to be guilty of, in your Usurers Gallon
Of Conscience-melting Sack: this deserves something,
It Is part of my revenew: younger brothers
Are glad of pension; it helps to took
At Ordinaries, and pay trifling reckonings, that
Arise to a bill or tedious circumstance
Of clear Orphographie, for Cock and Mallard,
Which puts the Bar-boy to Arithmerick,
Because some expedition is required;
You have a bond of mine.

Hor. For fifty pounds.

Lam. I had but forty, and the Scrivener paid;
With whom your worship too perhaps divided:
If you remember, there were precious dinners,
Ere I could count the chickens all together;
Which was your thrift and my expense: you shall
First cancel that bond; nay this wo' not do it,
And give, do you mark? give me a hundred pieces,
Perhaps I Will drink your health; this shall betray
Your Niece again, give her into your hands,
Though for my treachery I be sung in ballads,
And have the Town-curse, if I ever marry,
To show my wife can graft well.

Hor. It Is too much,
For no more labor, sir.

Lam. If you consider,
Two hundred will not bring me to it again:
Thus fair I Will deal with ye, I Will not have a cross
Till I have don't, but then I will be sure on it:
Fetch, fetch the business.

Hor. The bond is ready.

Lam. I will have ready money too, you have
Bags of all sizes, and denominations;
Those things do promise well,
Now I attend you.

Hor. Do this feat for me, and it is all thine own. --

Exeunt. Enter Justice, Playfaire, his Brother, Niece. Just. Now we may wish
you joy, the Priest has tied
That knot, no subtlety nor malice can
Dissolve; and I repent not I have been
An actor in your Comedy; though I should not
Be temped easily to such another
Engagement: for your sake, I have dispensed with
My person and my place.

Play. You were always
My loving Uncle.

Niece. Sir, you have in this
Deserved our lives and fortunes.

Bro. I have played
My part too.

Play. Thou have showed thy self a Doctor,
Which shall be a happy Omen to thy studies.

Bro. I have showed my self a Brother, sir.

Niece. That name
I must know often too.

Bro. Most happy in
A virtuous Sister, I congratulate
Again your wished enlargement, and the meeting
Of both your loving hearts.

Play. It was good mirth,
To hear him confident all our device
Was but a dream.

Just. He is awake by this time,
Should Lambert fail, we'll have another way
To invite him; and if honesty prevail not,
Force shame, till he consent.

Enter Servant. Ser. Some offenders, sir,
Are brought to be examined.

Just. Nephew, withdraw, with your fair Bride; these troubles
Are incident to my place, I Will soon dispatch 'em. --

Exit Playfaire, Brother, Niece and Servant. Enter Hartwel, Country-Gentleman
and Officers. Just. How now, my Masters; Master Hartwel? ha!

Har. Look on me, sir, as a delinquent: these
Are able to accuse me.

Just. What Is his offense?

Coun. Nothing but killing of a man.

Just. What proof?

Coun. He has confessed it, sir.

Enter Mistress Bellamy and Frances. Just. Mistress Bellamy,
You Are come in a sad time; here is Master Hartwel
Accused for killing. --

Bell. It Is not possible:
Good sir, be lieve it not.

Just. He does confess.

Heart. I am not worth your pity, gentle Lady:
In vain I should extenuate my fact,
To save the trouble of examinations;
Here I confess again my hand is guilty
Of killing him, whose feeble arm durst not
Lift up a weapon to defend himself.

Just. That was not manly.

Heart. I but slew a coward so,
Startup; and could I call his life again,
I should as soon destroy it; you perhaps
Know not my provocations; he was
My Rival, sir: pardon me, Mistress Bellamy,
To whom I only seemed a proselyte
In love: I had no heart to give from her;
And in my study to decline your anger,
I fell upon her scorn; which in a few minutes
Engaged me to this fate: nor am I troubled,
That I must die; when she upon whose faith
I durst have laid the hopes of my eternity,
Has violated all the trust of woman.

Coun. Will It please you, sir?

Just. Forbear a little.

Heart. Tell me, thou most unkind, if thou durst love
At all; how could thou think I could be such
A desperate Atheist, that thou so soon,
With so strange Apostacy, should revenge it?
These swelling drops, which in thy innocence
Might have prevailed to have restored the dead,
Heaven now does look on, and despise; and though
Thou shed moist tribute on this tomb, 't shall slide
Neglected on the marble, and be lost;
As if the stone had sense, to punish thy
Disdain of me; I can behold thee weeping,
And not be moved to wish I were not guilty
Of killing him, whose love had been thy triumph;
And I dare boldly still stand in the contempt
Of what I am to suffer, and the justice
Of my own truth: challenge thy soul to answer,
In what I was beneath that gaudy fool,
Excepting that he had more earth then I
To help his scale, which yet he may be in debt for
To his fathers sins; alive he could not merit
One cold disdain from thee; and dead, how comes it
He should be worth thy tears? but let thy eyes
Chide this unruly sorrow: dress thy cheeks
With thy fresh blood again and let thy face
Open a book of smiles, in the assurance
I have not long to live: when I have numbered
A few sad minutes, thou shall be revenged,
And I shall never trouble thee; if this
Be not enough, extend thy malice further,
And if thou find'st one man that loved me living,
Will honor this cold body with a grave,
Be cruel, and corrupt his charity:
So fare you well.

Fran. Yet you must stay and hear me.

Bell. He shall not suffer, if my friends or state
Can purchase him a pardon: where is the body
Of him that is slain?

Coun. We know not, here is all
The free confession of the fact.

Bell. This may
Proceed from discontents: life to some men
Is but their torment, in whose pain they will
As on the rack, often confess what never
Was in their thought.

Heart. Speak it again, and I
Dare promise thee to live.

Fran. My heart was ever
Constant, my mothers love was but thy trial,
As mine, a seeming change in thy disguise,
Applied by thy too tender apprehension;
The words were, I would choose my husband here:
But what will this avail us?

Heart. Master Justice, I here discharge you.

Just. How!

Heart. My joy obeys
No limits, I accused my self unjustly:
Startup's alive.

Just. Where?

Heart. Nay I know not that:
My servant's with him; but if he have played
The hangman, starved or smothered him in a ditch,
I have made fair work.

Bell. This were a welcome truth.

Enter Servant. Ser. Sir, the Constable.

Just. I had rather it had been Lambert and the Usurer.
But wait, and give me knowledge when they come. --

Exit Servant. Enter Constable, Close, Startup, Officers. Constable. Where Is Master
Justice?

Heart. Ha! it is he and Close,
Then I am secure, your pardon and thy love.

Bell. You have it freely, and a mothers prayers
For both your happiness.

Constable. Please your worship, I have brought before you two
vagrants that we took last night in the field, between one and
two a clock in the morning; very suspicious vagrants; and by
my own authority, I condemned 'em because it was late.

Star. Shall we be hanged, Close? we are condemned already.

Constable. Coming this morning to the prison, I found them drinking away sorrow in
double juggs, to the very staggering of my authority: I beseech your worship to
draw a pair of Mittens for 'em both; for they deserve to be made samplers, and
whipped for the edification of the Commonwealth.


Heart. This is the Gentleman was killed, sir.

Star. No, sir,
Not killed outright, but I was almost starved
With cold; these Gent lewomen know me,
And I should know that hose and doublet;
Those garments that you wear, I often have seen.

Heart. Well said Jeronymo.

Star. I was fain to borrow
These of a prisoner, that lies in upon
A diamond.

Just. Officers you are discharged --

Exit Officers. Star. And we too?

Just. Yes, and joy in every bosom.

Heart. Close, you must know this Mistress.

Star. How!

Heart. My wife, sir.

Close. It is enough for you to know her, sir,
And me to acknowledge.

Coun. Do You know me, sir?

Star. Yes, and your daughter too:
Who brought you to town?

Coun. And you shall right her.

Star. Is she grown crooked? pox on her, I know too well:
Peace, not a word more, I know your meaning,
Do not discredit me, and we'll steal down
And marry her, ere any be aware on it:
I wo'not stay to shift me, take no leave:
The jest will be, when I am in the Country,
How like an Ass he will look on my apparel. --

Exit Start up and Coun. Enter Servant. Ser. Sir, Master Lambert, and if I be
not
Mistaken, the Usurer Hornet very gallant.

Just. I must entreat your patience a while;
You Will meet with friends in the next room. --

Exeunt: manet Justice. Enter Lambert and Hornet. Lam. Excuse
Our boldness, sir, this gentleman.

Just. I should know him:
Master Hornet, you are very welcome.

Hor. Good sir,
No ceremony, we are come to you
'Bout business: I have lost my Niece, and would
Know where she is.

Just. Do You take me for a Wizzard?

Lam. With your favor, our desires are that you would
Be witness to a bargain, and receive
Some trifles, sir, in trust to be delivered
To me, if I restore his kinswoman.

Hor. Not else, on that condition I deposite
These hundred pieces and a bond; if he
Deliver me my Niece, they are his fraught;
If not, they call me owner.

Lam. Pardon, sir,
That I presume to bring this trouble to ye.

Just. It Is none at all.

Lam. You shall not expect long;
So rest you merry. --

Exit Lambert. Just. How fare you, sir?

Hor. As you see, fallen away an inch since morning;
But this will physic me: if I possess
This harlotry again, I Will make her sure:
Trust not a woman, they have found the herb
To open locks, not brazen towers can hold 'em:
Or if they get not loose, they have the virtue
Of Load stones shut up in a box; they will draw
Customers to 'em; nay being dead and buried,
There is suspicion they will break the grave;
Which puts so many husbands to the charge
Of heavy stones, to keep their bad wives under.

Just. You are moved.

Hor. Oh Master Justice, you are honest:
I have been abused, so miserably cheated,
I am ashamed to think on it: stay, what Music? --
Music, Ha! it is my Niece; the very, very same.

Enter Lambert and Niece. Lam. There, sir, you have her, and the rest is mine.

Hor. Take it -- And you shall go along with me.

Niece. How, Uncle!
A reveller? you will lead me a Coranto.

Hor. You shall dance homewards.

Enter Playfair and his Brother. Play. What make you so familiar with my wife?

Hor. Ha! wife! is she married?

Bro. It Is upon record,
I Will bring a Parson that shall take his oath on it.

Hor. Give me my bond and money, Master Justice:
Where? where?

Lam. Here, but they are not to be recovered
By law: I have a judgment, sir, against you.

Hor. You have conspired, to rob, cheat and undo me:
You shall be all (...)-Chamber'd.

Niece. Sir, be calm, and hear us.

Hor. I Will hear nothing.

Play. Yes, you shall,
It will be necessary: I am bold,
Persuming on her favorit to (...)
A parcel of three thousand pound; the sum
Belongs to me by virtue of a marriage,
And I must have it.

Hor. Virtue of a marriage?

Just. I saw the Priest conjoyn their hands; he will
Deserve your love.

Lam. Perhaps you may continue
A thousand, or two thousand on security.

Hor. What persecution this?

Bro. Faith sir consider,
It Is more safe to see her thus bestowed,
Then trust a Jury; if the Doctor had
Given her too much Opium, or purged
Her soul away, things might go worse: but I Will
Keep counsel.

Hor. So, so, have ye mortified me yet?

Lam. For your own sake, and as you are a true knight,
I Will tell no tales.

Enter Mistress Bellamy, Frances, Hartwel and Close. Hor. Now have ye done? --
The widow,
Not a word more: take her, I Will pay you, sir,
Three thousand pound to morrow: Noble widow,
You were in the first list to be invited;
My Niece I told you of, is married to
This worthy Gentleman.

Bell. You look like a bridegroom.

Hor. It Is in your power to make it good, what say you?
Shall we join issue?

Bell. I will never marry.

Hor. You are resolved, why so? come hither Nephew,
Shall be my heir, I love thee for thy wit;
But charm thy friends, they do not laugh at me:
I Will be a knight too, if I live, and build
An Hospital for twenty more of the Order;
Which I Will reduce my self, out of the Suburbs,
In women's petticoats, and turn Squires again
To Whores, or Parasites to Noblemen,
For want of fit provision.

Play. An excellent
Foundation: but where is Startup?

Lam. Sunk, I think.

Heart. Never conjure for him: we are ungrateful to
Our bliss, for wasting of these precious minutes,
Which are so many ages, till the Church
Has made us perfect.

Hor. Is there any more work
For the Priest? then give you joy beforehand,
And let us celebrate the day together.

Close. I am glad of your conversion, you are the first
Jew, that in my remembrance has turned Christian.

Play. Walk on to joys;
Twixt Love and Fortune, now the accounts are even.

Heart. A chain of Hearts, and the first linck in Heaven.

Exeunt omnes EPILOGUE.
THrough many hazards, Love has found a way
For Friends to meet: good Omen to our Play.
If love has brought you hither, Gentlemen,
Love will find out the way to come again.
And we dare promise, if you relish these,
Our Loves shall find out other ways to please.
T. B.

FINIS.
There is lately Printed two excellent Comedies, entitled, The Old Couple: By
Thomas May Esquire.

The City-Night-Cap, or Creed quod habes and habes. By Robert Davenport.

Both these, with variety of other Plays, are to be sold by Samuel Speed, at
the Printing Press in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.


