A GREEK IN THE TEMPLE; Some Common-places delivered in Trinity College
Chapel in Cambridge, upon ACTS xvii, part of the 28. verse.

By JOHN SHERMAN Bachelour in Divinity, and Fellow of the same College.

(...). BASIL. in Homilia, Ad Juvenes quomodo e Graecis utilitatem caperent.
Alma Matter
HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA printer's or publisher's device

Printed by Roger Daniel Printer to the Universitie of Cambridge. 1641.

To the Right Honorable, Right Reverend, Right Worshipful, the Governors of
the Free School in the CHARTER HOUSE.
MUch is spoken which should not be thought, and written which should not be
spoken, and printed which should not be written. Such may this discourse be, or
such accounted: I am contented. Yet I go on with an ingenuous boldness, in
this small bundle of Common-places, (as we call our morning Exercises) to
represent, next unto God, unto you my thankfulness, for my education in that
House, whereof you are the Worthy Governors. If I thus discharge this debt,
the adventure of my credit will be less dangerous, the loss more easy; since
we are not bound so to a perfection of learning as we are bound to a perfection
of Duty. The Stork is said to leave one of her young ones where she hatcheth,
as it were out of some instinct of gratitude: and I, to return an
acknowledgement of my breeding, present you with this little offspring of my
mind, penned indeed rather then plumed.

They are next unto the first Common-places which I ever made. Since, much
time, and years have run, wherein I might have added much, varied somewhat,
polished all: but I desire to serve them up in their first and natural dress,
and not to deceive you with my first Common-places last made.

The Poet calls his books his children; This of mine is but a daughter;
slight, slender, impertinent, unprofitable. Yet the raritie of the subject
comfort the Author, that what cannot satisfy, because not so useful, may
please because so unusual. Few such texts there are; this, to my knowledge,
not touched before.

In the way of the discourse Hagar waits diligently upon Sarah, Humane
learning carries the candle to Divinity: now the candle may be set down, and
the servant may go out.

Be pleased to signify the height of your Greatness in a condescent of
acceptance. The Press has delivered it into this legible fashion in respect
to your Quality: But I mean not that the world shall see it, either because I
would save my modesty, or serve you more peculiarly. Do it the justice of
favor, to think of it better then it deserves; and me the honor, to
vouchsafe me to be

Your most obliged and humble servant, JOHN SHERMAN.

Ad virum optimum and integerrimum, Mr JOHANNEM SHERMANNUM, de eruditissimo hoc
suo pientissimoque tractatu, (...).
Psalm. 89.35, 36.
IN coelo testes sunt Sol and Luna fideles,
Major emque probant lumina magna Deum.
Quando igitur verus fuerit de numine Testis,
Ovid.
Cum Sole and Luna semper Aratus erit.
Tu quoque, qui Cilicis narr asti verba poetae,
Et tua cum coelo famaperennis erit.
Ne temne augurium; nam nos quoque numen habemus;
Creed mihi, vates enthea turbasumus.
(...). --
Ad Lectorem in laudem Operis and Autoris.
LEctor, in hoc certant Pietas, Doctrina libello:
Nescio number primas illa vel illa ferat.
Hoc scio, quod punctum, qui tam been sacra profanis,
Ethnica divinis miscuit, omne tulit.
Scintillam very dum Sanctus Apostolus ist^
Ex Allusio ad patriam and urbem and nomen poetae cujus hemistichium enarrat
author.
Cilice excudit, porrigit ille facem.
Sacrum Gentili de stercore colligit aurum,
Dum vertit Graeci jugera multa Allusio ad patriam and urbem and nomen poetae
cujus hemistichium enarrat author.
Soli;
Eruit and gemmas, veterum dum ruspat in agris
Paucis ingenii tam been Allusio ad patriam and urbem and nomen poetae cujus
hemistichium enarrat author.
Aratus ager.
In Poetam a S. Paulo citatum.
CRetes and Cilices inter (...)
Sunt duo; quos testes paginasacra vocat:
Nec puduit Paulum Graecos citare.
laudare poetas,
Hic vel Cretensis sit licet, ille Cilix.
Sic Deus e tenebris educit lumen; amaris
Sic vos ex herbis mellificatis, apes.
Inscriptis hominum sit quodvis (...),
Ast in divinis (...).
Scilicet hic nulli narrant mendacia Cretes,
Neve Soloecismos ipse Solensis habet.
JACO. DUPORT, S.T.B. Coll. Trin. Cantab. Socius, Graecae Lingua Professor.

ACTS XVII. 28. As certain also of your own Poets have said, For we are also
his offspring.
IT is a principle, Contra negantem principia non est disputandum, Against him
that denies principles we must not dispute: But the sense and importment of it
is not to be taken otherwise then by way of specification, That upon those
principles which are denied we cannot make a convenient discourse. Argue with
the Jews, who believe not in Christ, out of the Old Testament, as our Savior
did, and S. Paul in the second verse of this chapter. The Cerdonians deny the
Old Testament; dispute with them out of the New: with orthodox Christians out
of both: with Heathens out of neither. Reason is the natural and common ground
of argumentation: And those that either never read a verse in sacred page, or
deride what they have read, unless they will in a peevish humor do that which
for religion they will not do, namely deny themselves, must be ruled by
reason. Natures light is a subcelestiall star in the orb of the microcosme,
Gods voice, man's usher in the school of the world. As truths supernatural are
not contradicted by reason; so neither surely is that contradicted by Scripture
what is dictated by right reason. The Doctor of the Gentiles therefore in his
encounter with the Epicureans and Stoics, as in the eighteenth verse of this
chapter, leaving those principles of Scripture, the object whereof, Christ, was
so strange unto them, yea and the point of Resurrection also, which natural
knowledge has some glimpse of, disputes with them out of their own principles
of rational light: which being the fountain of natural Divinity, and this
natural Divinity consisting partly in artificial discourse, partly in
inartificiall authority, the Apostle uses both; the first in the next verse,
the second in this. Here he produces a testimony; in the next verse he makes
an inference out of it. Thus he confuteth the Heathens with an Heathen, the
Philosophers with the Poet Aratus: (...).

The words are little else then an indefinite Quotation and a rational
Aphorism. An indefinite Quotation; As certain also of your own Poets have
said. A rational Aphorism; We are also his offspring. In the quotation we may
observe, 1. the Quoter, S. Paul; 2. the Quoted, certain of your own Poets; 3.
the Form of quotation, as they have said. In the Quoted we have again, 1. the
Manner of speech touching them, certain; 2. the Profession of them, Poets; 3.
the Appropriation of them, your own Poets: As certain also of your own Poets.
Certain; there is the manner of speech concerning the quoted: And in this we
have subincluded three considerations. First it sounds plurality: certain;
not one only. Secondly, it imports restriction: certain; not all: certain,
not many. Thirdly, it represents a kind of disrespectivenesse, an overly
speaking, not so much as honoring them with their naming: certain of your own
Poets. This is the division of the first part of the text, the indefinite
Quotation.

Concerning the second part, the rational Aphorism, we shall first propound
an Exposition, and then raise three Propositions. An exposition first, of the
HIS in the text, who this HE is whose offspring we are: secondly, of the
particles FOR and ALSO, which seem to be of no use, since the sense of the
Aphorism is entire without them. The propositions do issue out of the several
respects, wherein we may be said to be his offspring; his, that is Gods, as we
shall hereafter declare. The three respects make the three propositions: We are
Gods offspring in respect of our bodies; We are Gods offspring in respect of
our souls; We are Gods offspring in respect of both together.

First now of the first particular of the first part of the text, the Quoter,
S. Paul. I have formerly spoken of him upon another text: but he deserves
second and third thoughts. Surely never can be said enough of so devout, so
seraphicall, so industrious, so eloquent, so learned an Apostle. Learned, I
say, and eloquent: these qualities are considerable in our present purpose. As
Moses, the promulger of the Law unto the Jews, was learned in all the learning
of the Egyptians; so S. Paul, the Preacher of the Gospel unto the Gentiles, was
learned in all the learning of the Heathens. Neither could he well otherwise
confute them. As one says somewhat quaintly of Logic, that we cannot prove it
to be unnecessary, but by it; semblably, neither could the Gentiles be refuted
in their idolatry, but by the knowledge of them, and the use of their
knowledge. It is very remarkable, what is said of Apollos in the next chapter
and the 24 verse, that he was (...), and (...), an eloquent man, and potent in
the Scriptures, as we read it. And an effect and success proportionable to
this his ability, we have in the last verse; he mightily convinced the Jews,
and that publicly, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ. How
did he (...), mightily confute them, but by his potencie in the Scriptures? how
was he potent in the Scriptures, but in that he was (...), which in the notion
of the term may import two things, skill in the words, that he could expound
well; and faculty of speech, that he could express well his exposition.
Matter and Form do all in nature; matter and form do all in art: our Apostle
was furnished with them both, and abundantly; so that he who was to teach the
Gentiles Christ, might have taught them humane knowledge, might have taught
them also Rhetoric. Scholarship we see is not out of date, neither in the
times of the Law; for Moses had it: nor in the times of the Gospel; for S. Paul
expresses it here. Though in respect of the glorious and fun-like light of the
holy Scriptures it be but as straminea candela, as one says, a rush-candle, a
mean light, a small light, and soon out; yet some light it gives. S. Paul
uses the mention of the Poets. And thus briefly we pass from the Quoter to
the Quoted.

And in the quoted we have first the manner of speech concerning them, certain:
And in the manner we observed three branches of discourse. First, as it
sounds plurality: certain, not one only. (...): Bernardus non videt omnia.
Two are better then one, says the Preacher. Multitude of witnesses makes an
evidence more probable. Alas, Master, what shall we do, says Elisha's servant,
when the host of the Syrians environed the city. Elisha soon resolves the
question; Fear not: for those that be with us are more then those that be with
them, 2. Kings vi. 15, 16. Exemplatrahunt, Many draw much. It was a very
strange speech of him that said, Malo errare cum Origene quam cum aliis vera
sentire: Extraordinary partiality, to hold with one against many, with one
erring against many having truth on their side. Plato speaks well, (...). So
truth is truth, say it you or say it you not, be we more or be we fewer that
affirm it: And the reason is, Because truth is fundamentally in the thing, not
in the words. Nevertheless an assertion confirmed by many voices sooner takes
off suspension of consent, sooner persuades the belief of it. Multiplication
of testimonies does not increase the truth, yet it increases assent. The
Church of Rome understands the virtue of this plurality too well. It is none
of the least of her flourishes, wherein she so bravingly vaunteth, that she
has ever had a world of authority for her religion, multitudes of
Professors; and that little petty England thrust up into a corner of the
world, enterteineth a religion which now has not so great a number of
followers, one century ago and a little more had scarce enough to conserve the
species: Seculis omnino quindecim non oppidum, non villam, non domum ullam
reperiunt sua doctrina imbutam. But we shall have a restriction for Campian by
and by. Before we leave this point of plurality, it is not unworthy of some
disquisition, why our Doctor intimating more suffragants then one, yet
produces the testimony only of Aratus: There is none here that brings glory
to God but this Aratus. I can scarce imagine, I dare not pronounce, but that
our Apostle knew there were more of the Poets of the same mind. He could have
produced a long list of those authors, all agreeing in the same position and
sentence: as Homers, -- (...). and Hesiods authority, (...),
(...).
Another also calls God (...), the best Artist, either in general, in
respect of the frame of the world; or specially, of man's body. So Hymno, cui
titulus, (...).
Orpheus, (...)
(...)
as if he would make confession of his faith, O glorious and immortal Jupiter,
this testimony and expiatory supplication we present unto thee. (...)
(...),
(...).
O King, by thy wisdom were all things easily produced; the Earth the sacred
mother, and the high-topped mountains; the sea, and whatsoever is comprehended
under heaven. Callimachus, -- (...); (...). Who shall declare the works of
Jupiter? But I will add no more, lest I should seem to offend against S. Paul's
example, who balked a number of authors whom he could have cited. Sanctius, an
Expositour upon my text, is of opinion that he had collected a syllabus, a
roll, a pandect as it were of all the sentences which the Heathens had spoke
concerning the immensitie and power and works of God. Why therefore does he use
but one of their authorities? If we may make a conjecturall descant where we
cannot find a certain demonstration, happily, first he concealed the
testimonies of the rest out of humble modesty. The Teacher of the Gentiles had
learning enough to boast of, and reading to glory in, and eloquence to triumph
in: and he confesses of himself, I have tongues more then ye all, 1. Corinthians.
xiv. 18. and yet he seems to keep the same posture of humility which our
Savior struck him into when he was in the heat and ruff of persecution. Many
strains of Rhetoric he has in his Epistles, and in the Acts, but all
subordinate as it were unto the strain of modesty; I knew a man in Christ
above fourteen years ago, 2. Cor. xii. 2. When he was to speak of his rapture,
how the Apostle denies himself, and pronounces it in a fashion upon another
man, in tertia persona, as if so transcendent an elevation did not well become
him who in his own esteem deserved rather to be thrown down below the earth! O
excellent grace of Modesty, ever in season but when thy self art to be
commended! Modesty with ignorance is due and proper: Pride with ignorance is
heinous and insufferable: Learnednesse, worth, excellency with modesty, is
(...) nothing so amiable, so comely, like the coupling of a Muse and a Grace;
-- aut, ubi flavo
Argentum Parius ve lapis cum cingitur auro.
As in the clothing of thy real matter, thy body, so in the dressing of thy
notionall matter, thy discourse, it is very ingenuous to be civil and modest,
in a kind of negligent handsomeness, or handsome negligence, lest to avoid
nakedness in the one and in the other, thou runnest (...), into another shame,
as an Ecclesiastic writer speaks of flaunting apparel. A fastuous,
affected, swelling exercise does at once undo thy commendation, if it be cared
for, and the end, which should be. S. Paul knew more, spoke less, as was said
of an Heathen. He acted his own precept, Romans xii. 13. (...), to be wise unto
sobriety.

But secondly, I conceive art in this sobriety, that by the meek concealment of
the other authors sentences he might the more win upon his Auditors, taking
off from himself the envy of much reading, and in a couchednesse granting that
they themselves were very well read in such books, as questionless they were,
and were not a little (I suppose) proud of it: the scope and end whereof might
be, that in his modesty of himself, and respective commendation of them, though
privately intimated, he might make his person more gracious, and consequently
his discourse more acceptable. For as God does to man; so man to man. God first
accepts Abels person, then his offering: so man first accepts man's person,
then likes his exhortation. Therefore when a bad man in Rome propounded a good
law for the people, the Senate knowing that the naughtiness of the person
would countermand and be prejudicial unto the virtue of the law, put it into
an honest man's mouth to be promulged. Rhetoric is an artificial goodness of
the speaker; goodness in the speaker is inartificiall Rhetoric. And the
approbation, as it might appear unto the Philosophers, of their knowingnesse in
this point, might especially work upon them. It is none of the least things
which belong unto the faculty of eloquence, respectively to take notice of the
auditors understandingnesse in the present matter of treatise. Our S. Paul, I
think, one of the best Rhetoricians that ever spoke, was not seldom in this
insinuation: Acts xxiv. 10, 11. unto Felix; and Acts xxvi. 27. unto Agrippa the
King, For the King knows of these things, before whom also I speak freely.
For I am persuaded that none of these things are hidden from him: for this
thing was not done in a corner. King Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? I
know that thou believe. as if he would persuade him into a persuasion
concerning the Prophets. And the power of this manner of speaking the king
himself expressed: for he says to Paul in the next verse, Almost thou
perswadest me to be a Christian.

Thirdly, as there was Modesty in the use of but one saying of the Heathens,
and Art in that modesty, so was there also (I conceive) Discretion in that art.
It was a mixed audience, as we may suppose in such a solemn place, and as we may
gather by the last verse of this chapter, wherein there is mention made of
Damaris and many others, besides Dionysius the Areopagite, who were converted
by that dispute. Now a large enumeration of a beadroll of Poets and of their
sentences had been out of question lost unto the meaner of the assembly, which
like little fishes usually bite more then the greater. Rational souls are all
equal; (and the reason is, because they are not ex traduce, but from God) as
God says himself, Ezekiel. xviii. 4. Behold all souls are mine: As the soul of
the father, so also the soul of the son is mine. The soul that sins, it
shall die. And as God here signifies a general care of souls, without any
different respect; so that he will not punish the son for the fathers fault,
but the soul that sins it shall die: so the Apostle would not have the
meaner sort to be punished with hearing so much which they understood not,
because the Philosophers were better read. The punishment of the ignorant,
Plato says, is to learn of the wise: but then it must not be the untowardnesse
of the Teacher not to condescend unto the capacity of the illiterate. Mixed
assemblies require at least mixed discourses; that the plainer form may win the
plainer sort, the learneder the learneder.

But neither does our Doctor say all the Poets, as he might unto the
Philosophers, though he had produced the testimony but of one. Here we have a
restriction; certain, not all, not many. And this is the second considerable in
(...). With a fairer ingenuity does our Disputant proceed in his discourse then
some Athenians in theirs, who having found the suffrage of one or two Fathers,
or Schoolmen, or Expositours, or of any other order, take their writing and set
down all: much like the fellow who having read an obscure Author, and being
asked his judgment of him, replied, (...), That which I understood is good;
and so is that which I understood not, as I suppose: So, those which they have
read say so; and so do the rest, they suppose. With very good confidence might
S. Paul have spoke in a catholic form, in a full universalitie, the thesis
being at first imprinted in them, as men; and therefore the matter was
necessary: yet he speaks in a mortal number, in a paucity; certain. Now
certain are sufficient to make an evidence. (...), as Aristotle in the second
book of his Rhetoricks: even one good witness is considerable. At the mouth of
two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses shall the matter be
established, Deuteronomy. xix. 15. May Rome then be a little more moderate in her
brags of multitude of Professors, of swarms of her Catholics. The Species may
be conserved in one Individuum: A few are enough to make a being of religion;
though not a flourishing visibility, which is no way essential unto to the
truth of a Church. And very good authority may be brought for the proving that
in every century since Christ we have had some or other, more or fewer, who
have maintained the greatest parts of the Protestants most important and
fundamental opinions, whatsoever Campian prattleth. And let them enjoy their
multitude. Surely it is not like to be good friendship which is amongst very
many: and the reason is very good, as he in his Ethics, (...), For there are
very few truly good: So the religion may be suspected whereof so many are
studious, because there are so few truly religious. Moreover, Number belonging
unto Quantity, which issues from the womb of Matter, by sequel of a
proportionable effect, must be as dull, as uneffectuall as its mother, and
skilleth as little to any importance, being in it self indifferent, or rather
of the two supposing weakness. Multitude is of little use in nature, but where
there is deficiency: and therefore some would have every angel to be a distinct
species, because plurality of Individuums under a species is only by reason of
their mortality; which is not competible to angels. Certainly a strange canvase
it would be, wherein truth should go by voices, and be judged by the poll as it
were of freeholders. Non tam autoritatis in disputando, quam rationis momenta
quaerenda sunt, as Tully in his first De natura Deorum. Disputations are to
have more reason in them then authority. But if Rome will yet glory in number,
let her glory in the septenary number of her hills, spoken of in the
description of Antichrist, Rev. xvii. 9. let her glory in the critical number
of the Beast DCLXVI, which the numerall letters of (...) (that signifies their
nation) do amount unto; let her glory in the title of universal Bishop, which
Gregory predecessor to Boniface (who first usurped the appellation) affirmed
to be an antecedent sign of Antichrist: As for us, we are not ashamed of our
paucitie in the times of their persecutions: The gleaning of Ephraim is better
then the vintage of Abiezer. Verity has its exsistence, though there were
never a man in the world to own it: and Falsity will be nothing, though all the
men in the world maintein it. Humane testimonies are but probable arguments.
Many are better for the multitude: fewer are sufficient for the wiser sort. So
the Apostle, certain; not one only: certain; not all, not many.

Thirdly, we have in this manner of speech a certain disrespectivenesse,
without so much as naming the Quoted: (...), confusedly: neither Who nor What:
neither welt nor guard; plain Certain. Not -- (...); Did he not so much as call
them by their names? No surely our Apostle mentioned them rather for his own
use then for their credit; to shame the Philosophers practice, rather then to
honor the Poets sayings. There is not (as ye know) the name of a great learned
Heathen man in all the holy book of God, neither Poet, nor Philosopher, nor
Historian, nor Orator. Where is Homer, either in Greek, for whom several
nations contended to honor themselves with such a countreyman? or where is
Homer in Latin (as he is called) Virgil, the stately Poet? Where is Alexanders
Tutour, Aristotle, though the Patriarch of Philosophy, as one terms him?
Where is Seneca, the divine Moralist, whatever Salmeron feigneth of letters
which he wrote to S. Paul, and S. Paul again to him, the matter whereof, he
says, is not much unlike that of S. John to the Elect Lady, and to Gaius, or
that of S. Paul to Philemon? Where is Plato, whom Zanchy supposes to have read
the books of Moses? In Tullie's Hortensius S. Augustine could find nothing of
Christ: In the Christians book there is none of Tully. We have mention of
Philippi, but of no Philippick; not the divine one, as Juvenal calls it.
(...); where do we find the grave orator of Greece, Demosthenes? yet would not
the Doctor of the Gentiles, who said that he magnified his office, vouchsafe
so far as to name those Authors whose sayings he is pleased to insert into
sacred Scripture, and by his consecration of them to make them more divine then
any of Plato's works; neither Aratus, nor Menander, nor Epimendies, nor any
other, if there be any other, whose sentences he borrows? Was it the wisdom
and policy of this Teacher of the Gentiles to leave their names out on
purpose, that so he might engage us to the reading over of the Greek Poets, as
if we should find in them some great matter worthy of our pains? Or did he well
remember the speeches, but forgot the Authors names? or had he not his books
and parchments about him? or could he not in that ex-tempore dispute look in
them? One would have thought he might have named Aratus, though none else, if
it were but for his beginning, the piety of his beginning, (...), Let us begin
from God, as S. Paul expounds him; or for the continuation of his devotion,
-- (...)
(...),
(...). --
Let us never cease to extol him. Every street, every assembly abounds with
him.; or again, for the divinenesse of his subject, the heavens, more sublime
and pure matter then uses to be in the wanton and obscene pages of some other
Poets. We have indeed in the last verse of this chapter mention of Dionysius;
and lest the honor should miscarry upon another of the same name, for
distinction, the Areopagite, (...). But first happily this Dionysius was no
very great learned man. As for that saying which is received as his, at the
passion of our Savior, Either the God of nature suffers, or the world will
be dissolved, me thinks it was no argument of any extraordinary knowledge, it
being easy for them to know that the eclipse then was supernatural, it being
not then conjunction-time of sun and moon, and also in regard of the
continuance of the eclipse, as Thomas Aquinas observes. Upon this saying also
is conjectured that he caused the consecration of an altar to the Unknown God,
which S. Paul speaks of. But whether he was the author of this is very
doubtful, if not improbable: For they had more anciently an altar inscribed
UNTO THE UNKNOWN GODS, which Pausanias makes mention of in his fifth book,
(...). And concerning the books which the Pontificians father upon his name, De
caelesti hierarchia, Deecclesiastica hierarchia, De Divinis nominibus, it were
not very difficult to determine them not to be his. For Hierome in his
Catalogue of Ecclesiastic writers makes no mention of them. Valla and Erasmus
have proved by many arguments that they are none of his, as Chemnitius
relates. And in his Ecclesiastic Hierarchy he speaks of Temples, of Altars,
of Monks, whereof in Dionysius the Areopagites time, whom S. Paul converted,
certainly there was no being. In his fifth chapter De ecclesiastica hierarchia
we have them in a manner all in one line; (...), The Priest standing before the
Altar chanteth out some monastical invocation. Where the Altar is and the
Priest the Temple may be supposed. Now settled temples in Dionysius his time,
almost certain it is, there were none: Questionless no Monks, the order
whereof was instituted first by Paul the Hermit some two hundred and seven
years after the conversion of Dionysius, as the Chronologer has it. Dionysius
then who is named in Scripture was no very learned scholar, for ought we know.
But secondly, if so; surely he was a Christian before he had the honor to be
mentioned in the book of God. God, I see, respects not excellency of
learning where there is no measure of grace: but he respects the least degree
of grace in whatsoever person: Damaris is named with Denis; a woman with an
Areopagite. O Christianity, that either find us or make us honorable,
yea oftener make us then find us so, yea ever make us, yea never find
us of any real worth, only in a show and (...)! Until we come to be
Christians we are not worthy the naming. Silly were the Heathen, who knew not
this religion: impious they were for hating it; unjust, for hating they knew
not what: as Tertullian in his Apologeticus, Vacant meriti notitia unde odii
justitia defenditur? Though it was sometimes a stranger on earth, and none
would own it, yet it had genus, spem, gratiam and dignitatem in caelis, as the
same Father. Very respectively does Scripture speak of religious Christians.
The Bereans were more noble then those of Thessalonica, in the seventh verse of
this chapter; more noble, (...), as it were of better descent, which is, as we
may speak, the very blood of Nobility. But how more noble? Non per civilem
dignitatem sed spiritualem dignationem: It is subjoyned, in that they received
the word with all readiness of mind, and searched (not the records of their
antiquity, but) the Scripture daily whether those things were so. And whereas
in the next verse the Scripture mentions honorable women; happily they are
said to be honorable in way of a Prolepsis, as being to be believers.
Nevertheless also, if I seem not somewhat too critical, we may observe that
those in the former verse have the better term in the notion of the original:
These are (...), women of good fashion; the other (...), more noble. Not as if
the honor of every ones place were forfeited by the badnesse of the person in
an humane society: but thus it is with God. Plato commends the Attick
country, (...). and Thucydides more plainly in the beginning, speaking of the
same country, says, (...), The same men ever inhabited it: not as if they
were immortal, but the same of nation: it was the mother and nurse to them all
in his opinion. By the way, that is false, as may be demonstrated out of the
twenty sixth verse of this chapter, where God is said to have made of one blood
(that is, of one man, Adam) all men to dwell upon all the face of the earth.
From one Adam were derived all mankind, which after the confusion of Babel
severally dispersed themselves throughout the earth: so that those who first
inhabited the Attick country were not born there, as Plato supposes; nor did
the same men ever inhabit it, as may be supposed, men of other languages very
likely mingling themselves after that dispersion. Yet if so, as Plato and
Thucydides would have it, it would be no commendation to that which follows
in Plato, as himself confesses, (...), The first and greatest is, (...),
either actively or passively, either loving of God, or beloved of God: They go
both together. Meats commend us not to God, as S. Paul: so neither nation, nor
whatsoever other secular respect and quality. Nor does he like what he is
himself Author of in a subject which is not such as it should be. Wit and
Eloquence, and Erudition are Gods creatures; yet does he not vouchsafe them a
power to move his delight, unless they be exercised to his glory. Melior est
humilis rusticus qui Deo servit, quam superbus Philosophus qui neglecto seipso
coeli motum contemplatur, as a devout Dominicane. The Greeks express learning
and goodness in one word: (...) is for both; as if they were not learned who
are not good. So (...) is usually understood by S. Chrysostom for Action: and
the Scripture calls a wicked man generally a fool.

Now in this mean esteem of humane knowledge without divine goodness we are
the more fit to pass over briefly the Poets without envying them. And this is
the next particular according to our division, the Profession of the Quoted,
Poets. What shall I call them? real men of an imaginary world, or imaginative
men of a real world? who, as if nature were not fruitful enough to bring
forth real entities, must multiply to the world a new brood of things which
live only in a fancy. Plutarch calls Poetry (...), a part of the Muses, or
a piece of learning; Simonides, (...), a speaking picture; Plato, (...), an
imitation. Plato is said to have banished them out of his Commonwealth;
Proclus upon Plato gives us the reasons; (...), etc. Since Poetry is an
imitation, according to Plato, and the subjects whose lives and actions they
imitate, being the gods, and the Heroes their sons, the Poets not knowing
certainly what they did, but supposing they lived in pleasure, phansied unto
them such pleasure as men then or themselves delighted in: just as Eusebius
says of Cerinthus, that he held that our Saviors kingdom after the
resurrection should be voluptuary, because he himself delighted so much in
carnal pleasure. So that the Poets did not only attribute unto them such
things as were merely humane, as Eating, Sleeping, and the like, but such also
as are against reason, as Intemperance, Adultery, and the like. Whence Cyrill
of Jerusalem mocketh the Heathens for calling Jupiter an adulterer, a God;
(...), If he be an adulterer, let him not be called a God. Plato now seeing the
engagement unto vice by these examples (as the fellow in Terence, Ego vero feci
and lubens; He braggeth what he had done in imitation of Jupiter) was provoked
for this cause to remove them. Secondly, because it was not meet that such
obscene borborologie and filthy speeches as they used should proceed out of the
mouth of man. The words are good; (...), It is not to be thought fit that the
tongue, the instrument of Gods praise, and of conference with good men, should
be soiled and polluted with such speeches. Nevertheless he does not absolutely
condemn them: For in the beginning of the eighth of his Laws he prescribes
what kind of poemes are to be used in a solemnity, and the qualification of the
Poets; and himself now and then uses their sayings. Our Apostle S. Paul, Tit.
i. 12. where he quoteth Epimenides his saying, calls the Poets Prophets;
(...): whereby he seems to express the nature of the profession in a way of
resemblance; and that may be two ways, either ratione personae, or ratione
officii. First, Ratione personae, in two respects, either as accounted by
common esteem as Prophets, or by great ones honored like them. As Jeremiah,
xxxix. 11. was honored by the king of Babylon, so were Poets respected by
kings, and were familiar unto them, as Pausanias writes; (...): with
Polycrates Anacreon, with Antigonus our Aratus. Secondly, there is a
resemblance of Poets with Prophets ratione officii, and that three ways:
either 1. in regard of dictation of their poemes; so that as the Prophets were
inspired by God for the penning of their prophecies, so the Poets were
accounted to have been inspired in their poetries. Whence Plato says of them
in the third of his Laws, (...), The generation of the Poets is a divine and
inspired generation. Or 2. in regard of their style. The Prophets of God spoke
in a high style and strain, hyperbolically, obscurely, as Ezekiel; (and
therefore the Jews forbad Ezekiel to be read before the thirtieth year; whence
that is called annus sacerdotalis, the Priests year, besides other reasons:)
so also did the Poets, as might be shown. 3. In regard of their end. The
Prophets, as they are taken largely were rebukers of sin, and exhorters unto
godliness: (although, ut sic, the proper denomination is from Prediction,
foretelling:) This also was the peculiar office and scope of the Satyrists
amongst the Poets: and the very worst of them now and then gave virtue a
commendation, and vice a censure.

But now out of S. Paul's use and expression of them, what deduction, what
inference, what corollary shall we raise? That they promiscuously are to be
read? or if the choice ones, much? or if sparingly, at times, with immoderate
delight? Nay, shall we at all read them? Shall Plato banish them, Christians
use them? I would Christians did not use some things which Heathens forbid.
Aristotle in the fourth of his Ethics the first chapter, and in one page,
condemns both (...) and (...), the usurer and the dicer; and yet some
Christians blush at neither. Plutarch passes a determination upon Poetry,
(...). And surely plus aloes quam mellis habet: There is picking work enough.
Yet as Virgil being asked what he meant when he read Ennius, replied that he
did e coeno colligere margaritas; so if a Christian did read Virgil, he might,
being asked the same question, answer in the same manner. Or if from this hint
of Poets we should rise to a general discourse of humane authors, as the
fellow that was asked whether light was pleasant, said, It was a blind man's
question; so if it should be asked, Whether humane knowledge were useful, it
might be answered, It is an illiterate question. Certainly there is some good
to be gotten in the study of Greek authors, or else Julian the Apostate would
never have interdicted to the Christian youth the use of them. Nicephorus in
his tenth book of Ecclesiastical history brings in Julians reason why he
forbad the use of Greek authors, Ne linguis eorum acumine perpolitis facile
disputatoribus nostris resistere, and sacra quidem sua amplificare, religionem
autem nostram refellere facile queant. I might now tell you Nicephorus his
arguments for the point, and that Basil has wrote a book to this purpose; and
I might tell you what S. Augustine says concerning this in the end of his
second De doctrina Christiana, and what others, and how learned the Fathers
were, and that S. Paul after conversion did not burn his books nor parchments:
But it is an error to bring this into question in an Universitie. In lieu of
all arguments this may serve, that in this dispute of S. Paul, where he uses
both Philosophy and Poets, a woman, Damaris, and many others, likely not of the
learned nation, were converted.

From hence also the Teacher of the Gentiles instructs us Christians not to
disembrace goodness in any, nor truth in any. Plato's rule is good, (...). Let
us not consider so much who says, as what is said; who does, as what is done.
Let not the authority of the teacher tempt thee to err; as Vincentius
Lirinensis says, the errors of the Fathers were temptations to the Church:
nor let the badnesse or meannesse of the preacher spoil thy attention. Learn
not badnesse of the best; but learn goodness of the worst.

Lastly, me thinks from hence we may raise a meditation upon an emblem of
the strangeness of the happiness of the Gentiles being received into grace.
As unlikely as Poets sayings were to be made canonical, were Gentiles to be
made divine: As unlikely as an Heathens saying to be put in the book of truth,
was an Heathens name to be wrote in the book of life. The Heathen are come into
thine inheritance, O God, may be sung now with joy, as it was sometimes by
David with complaint. And so much of the Profession of the Quoted, Poets.

Nextly follows the Appropriation of them; YOUR OWN Poets: As certain also
of YOUR OWN Poets have said, (...), or (...). S. Paul makes use of their
writings, but rejects them; he approves what they say, but he owneth not
them: YOUR OWN Poets. They bring their gift unto the altar, and then go their
way. One or two read it vestratium, in reference unto their country. But that
is very disputable in two respects; of the thing, and of the phrase. For the
first, though we know not what countrymen they were whom S. Paul includes in
the CERTAIN, and therefore cannot judge whether they were conterraneous unto
the Epicureans and Stoics, yet we know what Aratus was, whom he uses in the
place; even S. Paul's own countreyman, as may be gathered out of Pausanias in
the place forementioned: where speaking of those Poets which were familiar unto
kings, he says, (...), There lived with Antigonus king of the Macedonians,
Antagoras of Rhodes, and Aratus of Soli a city in Cilicia. S. Paul was of
Tarsus a city of Cilicia, as himself witnesses Acts xxi. 39. Now that those
Epicureans and Stoics were all Cilicians, is very improbable. Secondly,
neither is that exposition likely in respect of the notion of the phrase; (...)
being very seldom, perhaps never read in that sense without some other
connotation of locality. We may therefore (salve meliori judicio) interpret
(...) here as it is used Coloss. iii. 10. (...), according to, or in similitude
of, the image of him that created; or as it is used Acts xxvi. 3. (...), where
it imports a correspondence in discipline: so here (...), Poets concluded
under the same sect of Heathenisme; and that is a general habitude and
likeness of the Poets unto the Epicureans and Stoics, as Heathens: or
secondly, YOUR OWN Poets, (...), by a particular reference and distinct
agreement in your several sects, as questioning Providence upon every seeming
disorder and ataxie of secular events, that those that are virtuous are
oppressed with wrong, those that are lewd are full of all prosperity, that
offenders have not presently their condign punishment: Thus the Poets were
Epicureans. And again, some of them held that all things did proceed according
to a necessary connection of causes and effects, which, being once set, the Gods
themselves could not alter: so Homer and Horace amongst others, as might be
shown: And these were in likeness of opinion Stoics. Heathens then however
the Poets were; so theirs, the Philosophers. Poets; yet (...). Prophets; yet
yours. As being rational, so S. Paul's: as learned, so S. Paul's: as Poets, so
happily S. Paul's, in regard at least of his use of them: Aratus a Cilician, so
S. Paul's. Rational, but no more; no faith: (...): Learned, not good: (...):
Poets, Prophets, but Heathens: (...): Aratus, his countreyman, but not from
above; (...). His saying is taken; he left. We have two lessons from hence.

1. Good speeches make us not good. Word and Work are two things. It is an
easy matter for our saying to be betterthen our doing. Sermocination in the
most exact complement and perfection of it, by Congruity, by Truth, by
Ornament, which Bonaventure requires unto a speech perfect in it self; or let
there be added in regard of the end (as the same Bonaventure) good Expression,
good Information, Moving; yet it neither persuades in the hearer of it self,
nor proves in the speaker a real virtue. Understanding and affection are
remote of themselves: grace is in both. Some live ill, speak well; some do
neither; some do both. We are in a mighty error and in a deep ignorance, if we
think (as the Gnostics) to be saved for our knowing or speaking only the
truth. If we would be Christ's disciples, we must do what he commands us.
Aratus said well here: yet he is none of Christ's disciples; S. Paul rejects
him: YOUR OWN Poets.

2. Learn we then secondly, to give every one his due, and not to believe vain
words, empty words. The profession of the truth only makes not a true and
solid professor. S. Paul in the main casts off these Poets, and sorteth them
with their own, Poets with Epicureans, and Poets with Stoics. Epicureans and
Stoics, they differed amongst themselves, they agreed in idolatrous
Heathenisme. As there is a civil justice in giving every man his due in a
temporal and secular estate, so is there also an ecclesiastical justice in
giving every man his due in a spiritual estate: and to a delinquency in this
also God denounces a woe Esaias v. 20. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good
evil. Take we heed that we make neither Censures whip nor Charities cloak too
long: we may offend in both. Surely through want of charity in being, and
through too much in thinking, God has not his own. If the Teacher of the
Gentiles had flattered those Athenians, and had accounted them a great deal
better men then the Poets, had he reckoned them amongst true worshippers, had
he made them of the Church and not strangers from God in respect of the right
way of serving him, Dionysius likely, who was one of them, out of a good
opinion of himself had continued in his Paganism, and had not been converted
unto Christianity. These Philosophers then and Poets are not acknowledged here
to be of the Church visible: and whether they or any of them be members of the
Church invisible, of the Church triumphant, now, God knows. I am not here
engaged to speak definitively of their eternal condition: But if I were, I
should first in equity do that which yet they would not do in the primitive
times to Christians, namely, hear what they could say for themselves in the
next part of my text, the Form of quoting, AS certain also of your own Poets
have said, (...), AS they said.

The (...) implies a similitude of their saying unto Divine truth. And it is
not amiss to see what the twilight of humane reason can see of God, and
toward God, and what analogy there is betwixt some of their speeches and some
of Scripture. And by this discourse, we finding in it no mention of the formal
object of Christianity, may perceive how little knowledge they had of it: yet
they have spoken very fairly. I know not how it comes to pass, but too many
Christians have too much of Heathen talk: And so also in a reciprocation, some
Heathen have very much of that which seems correspondent unto sacred
Scripture. To omit many fictions of the Poets, which are little else then
fabulous histories, allusions unto real things before the flood, as if in a
manner they would redeem the loss of the history of the old world; as also to
omit how the names of their Heathen gods may seem to relate unto true men in
those times: Were it Moses, or were it David (one says Moses, another David)
who said that the days of our age are threescore years and ten, Psalm. xc. 10.
Solon jumpeth upon the very same number, as Diogenes Laertius speaks of him
in his Life, (...), Solon says that the term of a man's life is seventy years.
Plutarch says in the Life of Numa, (...), God is not a lover of horses: Psalm.
cxlvii. 10. He delights not in the strength of an horse. (...), says Hesiod
in his (...). Jacob to Pharaoh interprets the verse (as we may speak) Few and
evil have been the days of my pilgrimage. Matthew. vii. 14. Narrow is the way
which leads unto life, (...): Hesiod says the like of Virtue, -- (...)
(...).
and a little before, to Vice it is (...), a little way to it; -- (...), It
dwells hard by. Our Savior, John xix. 27. to his beloved disciple S. John,
(...), Behold thy mother: (...), I give thee this woman for thy mother, was the
speech of the Samians, when to the richer of the citizens the mothers of those
who died in the wars were given to be maintained by them. And did not our
Savior die for S. John? 1. Tim. v. 6. S. Paul speaking of a widow which lives
in pleasure, says, (...), She that lives in pleasure is dead while she
lives. Talis vita nunquid vita erat, Domine? but that is S. Augustines,
speaking of a licentious life; Lord, what a life was that? But Terence in
Hecyra comes nearer; Sane hercle homo voluptati obsequens
Fuit dum vixit.
Pamphilus speaks it there of a woman too. S. Paul's Greek cannot well be
rendered but by Terence's Latin, and Terences Latin cannot be put well into
other Greek, Aristotle, Rhet. ii. c. 23. (...), Th^se that looked not well to
other men's horses, by Th^^dectes his law were not to have their own given them:
Like unto this may that of our Savior seem, Luke xvi. 12. And if ye have not
been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you that which is
your own? AEsop being asked by Chilo, one of the seven wisemen of Greece, what
God was doing, answered, (...): and Psalm cxlvii. 6. The Lord sets up the
meek, and brings the ungodly down to the ground, (...): as if one place had
been taken from the other. (...), says Chilo to his brother, who took it ill
that he was not chosen to be one of the Judges: (...), says S. Paul, I know
how to be abased. One of Chilo's precepts (as appears in the Life of Chilo by
Diogenes Laertius) was, (...), To rule ones own house well: S. Paul 1. Tim. v.
4. has the same precept in effect, (...): but more patly chap. iii. verse. 12.
where he speaks of the qualification of Deacons, (...), ruling their
children, and their own houses well. Moses, Exodus iii. when he was to be sent
to the children of Israel by God, desired to know Gods name, that he might tell
them who sent him; and God expressed himself by I AM: Thus thou shall say unto
the children of Israel, I AM has sent me unto you, verse. 14. So Plato calls
God (...), that which is; and (...), that which is indeed; as if nothing had
any real existence but God. Plato in his dialogue Of Death calls man's body
(...), a tabernacle; so does S. Paul 2. Cor. v. 1. Plato in the eighth of his
Laws, (...), The communion of the soul with the body is not better then the
dissolution, as I would say if I were to speak in earnest: (...), says S.
Paul, Phil. i. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, (...), having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ: which is far better. To be with Christ, far
better being, far better saying. We hear no more of the Heathens when we
speak of Christ. As the Oracles are said to have ceased at Christ's nativity, so
the Heathens are silent concerning Christ. Yet there is a sort of writers
behind which go thus far, namely the Sibylls and Trismegist, and if there be
any more such. Nothing spoken of Christ with more dilucidation then by the
Sibylls. By one of them, (...), Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Savior;
the initiall and beginning letters of which prophecy being put in order
together, make up the word (...), which signifies a Fish: whence Tertullian
calls our Savior Piscem. And one of these Sibylls Virgil in one of his
Eclogues is supposed, with good probability, to have imitated, namely in the
fourth eclogue, Te Duce, si qua manent sceleris vestigia nostri,
Irrita perpetua solvent formidine terras;
meaning by Te Duce Christ, according to the Sibyll: And Christ is called Heb.
ii. 10. (...), the Captain of our salvation. Many other passages also there are
in the same eclogue to the same purpose. And as for Trismegist, who is quoted
so much by great Authors only for rational knowledge, as if he had no other
light to direct him in his writings besides the light of nature; in the second
page of his Poemander he speaks of the Trinity as if he had been in heaven:
and therefore for his opinion of the Trinity he was called (...), Thrice-great,
or Greatest, as Suidas says. In that second page of the Treatise we have his
authority against the Arian heresy: And the very term which Arius would not
subscribe unto we have there, namely (...); he says that he is COESSENTIALL
with the Father. And concerning the creation he speaks as if he had read
Genesis; (...): as if he should say, that God presently after the creation
spoke to man, Increase and multiply, and replenish the earth, as it is Genesisi.
Our Savior says there is none good but God: Trismegist; (...), God is the
only Good: and how? as if he commented on Scripture before it was written, not
good only as by an honorary term, but the Good by essence. And in the
thirteenth chapter of his Poemander, (...), The Author of regeneration is the
Son of God, a man by the will of God. But it is objected or may be, that
these passages out of Trismegist and the Sibylls are not to our purpose, seeing
(as the opinion is of some) these Treatises were made by Ecclesiastic writers,
and then ascribed unto Gentiles, to make by an holy kind of deceit, the
doctrine of the Gospel more passable amongst the Heathen. For answer; Cicero
may refute this tenet, who in his De natura Deorum makes mention of the
Sibylls, and produces somewhat of theirs. And as for Trismegist, he was an
Egyptian Doctor, as Reuchlinus and Suidas, and lived before Pharaoh, as Suidas
says, (...). That then there were such Heathens, and they authors of these
sayings which we spoke of, is more then probable. But whether their divine
speeches proceeded merely out of the principles of nature, or whether they
sprang from some other light, either of Divine revelation or Diabolical (as
Augustine thinks De Civit. Dei, viii. 13. concerning Trismegist) I know not
how to determine; I leave it in medio. Concerning the other kind of Gentile
writers which we named before, it may also be said that some of them had read
the five books of Moses, as likely S. Paul had read some or many of them. But
whether so or not; whether some of them had borrowed their expressions from
Scripture, and whether again S. Paul borrowed some of his other expressions
from some of them, without mentioning any way such Authors (as he makes use
of Menanders sentence, 1. Cor. xv. 33. without any notice from whence he had
it, (...), Evil words corrupt good manners) I refer to better judgments.
Only this I may say, that Zanchy indeed thinks that Pythagoras and
Trismegist and Plato had read some part of Scripture, and peradventure had
learned some notions from the Jews: but he names none else in that place: And
one of the passages we mentioned out of Plato bears a similitude unto such
another in the Epistle of S. Paul to the Philippians: Now that could not be
taken from S. Paul. And as for Trismegist, he speaks more clearly concerning
the mystery of the Trinity then any place of the Old Testament. But suppose we
now that all these places quoted out of them were absolutely theirs, and not
deduced from any higher doctrine, and not revealed by a supernatural way; and
suppose we a great many more of such divine passages in them: what then?
Happily it is expected now that from this little survey of their knowledge some
conclusion should arise toward the eternal state and condition of those
Heathens; and a conclusion also very favorable and charitable: as if by the
small posie we have gathered and made up of the best flowers in Natures garden,
we might collect that their knowledge and goodness and virtues and education
were means likely able to put them not only into a saveable estate, but also
into a hopeful condition. For this I answer, I am not engaged any way by the
text to speak at all, much less definitively, touching the final end of the
Gentiles. But he that thinks too well of them, understands not sufficiently
the privilege of the Gospel: And God who is best able to judge, accounted the
times of Paganism before Christ, for all their knowledge, even times of
ignorance; and accordingly he respected them, as our Apostle in the second
verse unto our text, And the times of this ignorance God winked at; (...), in
the original: which we may expound of a neglect; as if God looked over or
beyond those times, and had respect only unto the times of Christianity. And
they have left Christians to do in the rights what they have said. And if we
should take a note of what they have not said, we should rather pity their
blindness then admire their knowledge. God Creator they might know per
species Creaturarum (as they speak) either in way of Negation, or Causalitie,
or Eminence: but God Redeemer is not so perceiveable by light of nature. For
nature is not able to see the need of a Savior, it being ignorant of the lapse
of mankind, of which there appears not a word, not a syllable, in a direct
expression, not in any of their massy volumes. And where find we any mention
of Faith in a Christian notion? Insomuch that what we even now demurred of,
from whence Trismegists and the Sibylls speaking of Christ should flow, we may
here resolve negatively, That they spoke not so of Christ by the virtue only
of rational knowledge. For first they could not by the light of humane reason
see the use of any Savior. Secondly, they could not moreover foresee a Savior
by light of nature, if we account them to have been Prophets. And if some of
them were as Christians amongst Heathens, yet Heathens they are amongst
Christians. We might use somewhat of their science, they needed some of our
Scripture. For in a particle of the Poets saying there lies a grand error of
idolatry. There is a Jupiter in the HIS, in the TOY: through whom yet S. Paul
discerns the true God; better understood then spoken. So we may pass here
from the Form of quoting to the Sentence quoted; For we are also his generation.

But because of dependence with our former discourse, we will consider the
words in way of exposition, according to the order in the original, (...). In
the little particle (...), we said, is couched a little God, one Jupiter: and
yet Saint Paul interprets the Poet as speaking of the true God. That the Poet
seemed to speak it of Jupiter, appears by his beginning, (...) -- Let us
begin from Jupiter, or with Jupiter: And that Saint Paul interprets him of
the true God, appears by the context. For having in the twenty fourth verse
of this chapter described the only true God by his effects of Creation and
Sovereignty of governance, in the twenty fifth verse by his All Sufficiency in
himself, in the two next verses by the manner of creation of man and end of
that creation, and in the former part of this verse (whereof our text is a
part) epitomizing all by three expressions wherein we are referred unto God, In
him we live, we move, we have our being, he superaddeth to refute their false
tenets against the one true God, by the testimony of their Aratus, although the
intention of the Poet at the first sight appears to be otherwise directed. So
that what these Philosophers said to our Apostle preaching Jesus and the
resurrection, He seems to be a setter-forth of strange Gods, (...), may very
well be retorted on their Poet; He seems to be a setter-forth of a strange
God, telling us of one Jupiter. What shall we say then? The Heathen speaks of
the Heathen God: the Apostle understands him of the true. What? does our
Apostle mingle seeds? Is there any fellowship betwixt God and Belial? Can the
Ark and Dagon stand together? Shall that son of Saturn, Jupiter, be as the
Son of God, Christ, God-man? God forbid. But as our Savior answered the Jews
thoughts oftentimes, not the outward tenor and drift of their words (whereby
he manifested his Divinity) so S. Paul by a Divine Spirit searches the Poets
intimate or ultimate intendment, and gives not the sense according to the
strict importance of the terms. The reason and ground of this exposition we are
now briefly and (...) to discourse of.

The Scholiast upon the Poet says it may be interpreted of the Air; S. Paul
otherwise. The ground and lawfulness of S. Paul's exposition depends upon the
discussion of this question, Whether the Gentiles did absolutely and ultimately
determine their adorations and worships in those false, those made Gods; or
whether they did not through them aim at a true Deity. Toward the determining
of this Problem I may premise a proposition or two: first, That Jupiter and
his brethren and his kindred were not Deities. This proposition is supposed,
not to be proved. Secondly, That some of the more ignorant sort of the Gentiles
might take them to be Gods, not knowing their original, and mistaking their
Prophets when they spoke of them; as also because their understandings were not
fitted by conte^plation to extract out of the species of the creatures a
conceit of the nature of a pure Divine essence. For neither is this so great a
stupidity as that of the vulgar and baser sort of the Papists, who terminate
their worship in the images themselves, by Parisiensis his own confession, cap.
23. De legibus, Sicut and multi simplices homines hodie sunt qui inter imagines
sanctoru^ and ipsos sanctos in suis or ationibus non distinguunt, They have not
the trick, when they pray before an image of a Saint, in every act of their
worship to frame an elevation of their minds from the representation unto the
Saint. Very likely then it is that the worst of the Gentiles might think those
false Gods very Gods; and also might (as the Papists before) place their
worship in the images of their Gods, because the devil now and then did speak
his oracles through them. But thirdly, Though the fillier of the Heathen might
think them to be the only Gods, yet the more learned and intelligent of them
did not firmly believe their absolute Divinities. Tertullian therefore in his
Apologetick speaks plainly to the Heathen, and appealeth unto their
consciences, Appellamus and provocamus a vobis ad conscientiam vestram: illa
nos judicet, illa nos damnet, si poter it negare omnes illos Deos vestros
homines fuisse. And this may appear out of their practice to wards them; which
was so gross that the same Father tells them, Nescio plusne de vobis dii
vestri quam de Christianis querantur, I know not whether your Gods have more
reason to complain of you or of Christians. Witness their fowl uncleanness
in their temples even by their Priests, witness their personating their Gods
by that tetrum genus pantomimorum, and their whipping of their Diana on the
stage. And he tells them also how coursely they used their domestic Gods;
Domesticos Deos domestica potestate tractatis, oppignerando, venditando,
demutando aliquando in trullam de Minerva. And Varro, he says, brought into
public view no less then thirty Jupiters without heads. Diogenes (as the same
Father) but rather Diagoras, being in an inn, and having nothing to sees his
supper with, took Hercules his image and made a fire with it, with this
insultation, Now, Hercules, to thy thirteenth labor: sees me my pottage. And
S. Augustine, De civit. Dei, ii. 12. besides many other places, taxes them
that they forbad the Poets to speak any ill of any citizen of Rome under a
great penalty; but let them speak what they would of the Gods; as if they had
majorem curam Romae unius quam totius coeli. I might also tell you what
handling they had in Homer: Venus wounded, and comforted by a Goddess, by
telling her it was their fortune: (...), We suffer in heaven many things from
men on earth. Mars was imprisoned 13. months, Juno wounded by Hercules, Pluto
hurt with a dart. Surely blind Homer jeered them. Socrates in contempt of their
Deities swear by an Oak and a Goat, as Tertullian again: And one God would
suffice him; for which he died as an Heathen martyr. Excellent is that of
Plato, (...). Plato makes a difference betwixt his serious epistles and not
serious by this sign; His serious ones he begins with one God, the other
with Gods. And Tertullian says, Multi Dii habuerunt Caesare miratum: and we do
not use to be angry with our superiors, as Aristotle says in his Rhetoricks.
And that the better and learneder of the Heathens could not heartily believe
that they were very Gods, may be collected out of the lives of the Gods, their
conversation, such as did not become men, much less Gods. Nay, Tertullian
speaking to them of the behavior of their gods, asks them, Quot tamen
potiores viros? Although they were somewhat good, how many better men have ye
left below? as Aristides, and Socrates. And Augustine says merrily, Neque enim
erant suo Pontifice meliores, The Gods were no better then their Priests. And
Cyrill of Jerusalem flouteth Jupiter, (...), as before, If Jupiter be an
adulterer, for shame let him not be called a God. What reverent esteem could
those have of their God in the night, who worshipped the Sun? and in the day,
who worshipped the Moon? They were (...), Atheists in the night, which
worshipped the Sun; and Atheists in the day, which worshipped the Moon, as
Cyrill wittily. But as the same Author upon this subject breaks out, (...),
so I, We rake a dunghill in this discourse of dunghil-gods. We will therefore
roll up this proposition in a better, which is the principal one for the
exposition of the text; That the learneder sort of the Gentiles, some more
clearly, some more indistinctly, according to the measure of common
illumination from God, and light of their own reason, did ultimately aim at a
true Divinity, even amongst their false ones.

Here might I enlarge my self by treating of the cognoscibility of God by
humane understanding without any supernatural doctrine, which Lombard handles
in the third Distinction of his first book, and which the Schoolmen dispute of:
and I might speak of the ways how we may come to the knowledge of God: and I
might tell you that a rational faculty without an infinite second
depravation, and some thicker mist of Satan, does not, nay cannot frame to it
self a conceit of an absolute Deity of such a nature as is either inferior to
it self or not transcendently above it: here also might I again enter upon that
large theme, How far the Heathens have gone in their expressions of God: But
to confirm this conclusion, I will only produce one or two testimonies out of
the Fathers, and one out of sacred Scripture, and so pass this natural
Divinity. Arnobius in his first book adversus Gentes brings in the Gentiles
endeavoring to clear themselves of a supposed imputation and slander, that
they acknowledged not the true God; and they speak as if they were angry that
Christians should think so of them; Sed frustra nos falso and calumnioso
incessitis crimine, tanquam eamus inficias esse Deum majorem, cum a nobis
Jupiter nominetur, and Optimus habeatur and Maximus. And the same Ecclesiastic
writer tells them that they mingled the true God with the false, Dissimilia
copulare atque in unam speciem cogere inducta confusione conamini. And to
confirm this opinion of the Father we may make use of a place in Macrobius in
the first book of his Saturnalia, where he undertaketh to reduce all the
Heathen Gods unto the Sun, which very likely was the first object of
Idolatry? Now amongst the attributes of the Sun he finds in Orpheus the
name JAH put into a Greek termination, which otherwise is one of the names
whereby God is expressed in Scripture; Psalm. lxviii. 4. Praise him in his name,
in the original, (...) in his name JAH. And Hallelujah in Scripture is no
other then Praise the Jah, or the Lord. Whereby it is manifest that they
shuffled in the true God amongst the false ones. For certainly a full ignorance
of a more superlative Deity then the other false Gods were of, is scarce
conceiveable amongst the wiser of the Gentiles. Arnobius therefore in the
beginning of his second book brings in the Heathens again speaking for
themselves, or rather in behalf of their Gods, Sed non idcirco Dii vobis
infesti sunt, etc. Our Gods are not therefore your enemies, O ye Christians,
because ye worship an omnipotent God, but because ye maintein a man, born, and
also crucified (which only is for base persons) to be a God, and believe him
yet to be alive, and do also worship him in your daily invocations. If we would
analyze this place, we might make out of it a full demonstration to our
purpose. Here is a confession of an omnipotent God: Here is an implicit
assertion that this God is to be worshipped: Here is a denying of Divine
worship to man; therefore (they say) Christ is not to be worshipped, because
man. Could they then determine their adorations upon their Gods, whom some of
them knew to be men? nay, some of the Heathen were ancienter then their Gods.
Varro therefore propounded to himself this method in writing; First to write of
things humane, then of things divine: A strange order one would think; but his
reason is good and witty, Quia civitates Diis quos ipsae instituerant, ut
pictor tabella, priores sunt, Because as the painter is before the picture, so
the cities are before the Gods whom the cities created. Amongst the sorts of
Gods also which they made, namely three, Poetical, Civil, Philosophical; the
Philosophical Gods (which one would imagine to be the best) were not accounted
by the Philosophers to be true Gods: only the common people might not know so
much, as an Author has it. But come we now to an authority out of Scripture
for the establishment of our point. No place so pregnant as where Saint Paul
discusseth the knowledge of the Gentiles, in the first chapter to the Romans,
from the eighteenth to the twenty fourth verse. Especially to our purpose he
speaks in the twenty first and twenty second verses. In the twenty first
verse, Because that when they knew God; They, the Gentiles: they knew God two
ways: by the book of the Creature in the twentieth verse; by natural light, in
the nineteenth verse, That which may be known of God is manifest in them. Or if
you please, natural knowledge was able to collect a Divinity out of the book
of the Creature: So God manifested what may be known of him to them, as in the
nineteenth; God expressed himself to them in the vast and ample volume of the
world. To return unto our twenty first verse; Because that when they knew God,
they glorified him not as God. Glorify him then they did, but not in the right
manner, not in the right (...), not immediately, not distinctly, not only, not
so well as they knew him, but, as in the three and twentieth verse, they
changed the glory: that is, relatively, and quoad nos (for absolutely and in it
self Gods glory cannot suffer any alteration) they changed the glory of the
incorruptible God, (...), into the similitude, or by the similitude, of the
image of corruptible man; that is, as Calvine expounds it, They made man to
represent God: Whence it is evident then, that they did worship ultimately the
true God through those true men, false Gods. As for the adoring of the Images
of their Gods, that the learneder of them disclaimed, as the Reverend Primate
of Ireland quoteth them speaking in the sixth of Arnobius, Deos per simulacra
veneramur; and through or by those false Gods they aimed at the true. The
knowledge of a God was so evident, (...), and it was so firmly grounded, it was
(...), in them, in respect of the principles they had of God, and in respect of
an ability of understanding to infer a Divinity out of the creation, that
unless they would deny what they saw, they could not disacknowledge a God: and
if so, then it would follow to them that he is to be worshipped. That there is
a God, is principled in nature: and from hence resulteth naturally by a most
strict and necessary connection, That this God is to be served and honored and
worshipped. For the apprehension of a Divine nature cannot but conceive in it a
right unto this homage by a double relation of it unto the creature, of
sovereigne Power, and of Goodness. The former requires a reverent fear, the
other an affectionate love, which will exercise themselves in outward worship.
And let us now suppose this for a principium secundo-primum (as they term it)
namely, That God is to be worshipped: from hence also by consequent will ensue,
That an Idol is not to be worshipped; for an Idol is not God. That rational
light that sees a God, is able to see one God only: that light that sees one
God only, must reject an Idol. Now since in a Divine essence there is
considered so much majesty and glory that they might think it an impudent
presumption to make an immediate address unto this great God, therefore they
might think they should do God service in showing their honor of him by the
doing honor unto his glorious creatures, the Sun, the Moon, and the like,
and in making great men after death as mediators betwixt him and them (as the
Papists upon the like plea make Angels and Saints their intercessours) which in
process of time by men's ignorance and the devils deceit came to be esteemed of
the common sort as complete Gods: not so of the more intelligent of them, as we
have showed; these did not terminate their adorations in the Heathen Gods, but
looked further at God the Ancient of days, whom Thales one of the Seven of
Greece called (...), the most ancient of all things, as Laertius says of him
in his Life. So that the difference of the worship of these from the worship of
true Christiaus, is this; True Christians worship God through Christ God-man;
they worshipped God by men supposed Gods. So Aratus through Jupiter means
GOD: So Saint Paul understands him. Nevertheless this worshipping of God by
mediation and image, whether of man or beast, God accounts a false worship:
So he esteemed the Israelites worshipping him by a calf. Man does indeed, but
God does not make such a distinction; therefore God says, Exodus xxxii. 8. to
Moses concerning the people of Israel, They have made them a molten calf, and
have worshipped it: IT; God would not own that worship and service exhibited
under the representation of that calf. Deuteronomy. iv. 15. God bids the people of
Israel take notice that when he spoke unto them out of the midst of the fire
they saw no similitude of him, Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves:
for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in
Horeb out of the midst of the fire. No manner of similitude; as if he should
have told them that he on purpose did not appear unto them under any visible
form or similitude, lest they should represent him by that form, and under it
worship him; which he so much warns them of in that place. For that of Varro
upon this point is very true; the worshipping of the Gods by images increased
the error, took away the fear of the Gods: Qui primi Deorum simulacra
induxerunt, errorem auxerunt, metum demserunt, as Calvine cites his words.
Thus we have in some sort given you the reason and ground of our Apostles
interpretation of the Poet.

Now by this, though hasty and short discourse of the Gentile worship
occasioned by S. Paul's expression, we may in some manner calculate and decipher
the difference betwixt the false worship of Rome Pagane and Rome Christian, of
Gentiles and of Papists, which difference in a Pontifician eye is so wide and
mighty. All the distinction must either be in the object worshipped, or the
manner of worshipping. Christian Rome worshippeth God: So did Rome Pagane, as
we have heard. Christian Rome by Images; so Rome Pagane. Pagane Rome worshipped
by men, though not only by men: Christian Rome by the form of an old man
worship God the Father. And Christian Rome worshippeth God by men-saints
(besides by Angels) and some of those Saints happily as bad for Christians as
the other were for Heathens; nay such some of them were who had only Christian
names but Heathen lives. The sillier of the Heathen might worship the men for
true Gods: the best of Rome Christian give a kind of Divine worship to Saints.
The sillier of the Heathen might worship the Images of their feigned Gods: the
sillier of the Papists distinguish not betwixt the Image of the Saint and the
Saint, as Parisiensis confesses. But the Heathens worshipped by other
creatures: but Aquinas gives (...), the proper Divine worship, to the Wood, to
the Cross, and to the Bread. But the Heathen worshipped by a multitude of
Gods: but the Papists by more Saints and Angels. The Heathen had for every
occasion a several Tutelar Mediator: the Papists likewise have a several
Saint, beside their particular Angel. But Tertullian says, Multi Dii habuerunt
Caesaremiratum: what is this to our purpose? and yet we can answer them; Multi
Caesares habuerunt Papam iratum, and more then angry too; they have felt his
anger and his fury, and his state, and his cruelty. But the Roman Senate (as
Eusebius says) made Gods of men; just as the Pontifician Senate makes Gods of
Saints. But the Papists sin not yet in worshipping by Images. For sin being
a transgression of the Law, and where no law is there is no transgression, Romans
iv. 15. they have taken an order to take away the law by which they are
forbidden to worship by Images, namely the second Commandment; for they leave
out this in their Catechism. Is this thy piety, O Rome Christian? Is this the
difference of thy Religion from Paganism? Plutarch says it is sacrilege to
worship by Images, who was an Heathen; and thou blottest out the Law of God
whereby it is forbidden, that thou may do it more freely. Thus to thy doing
what God and Nature has forbidden, thou addest a transcendent offense in
proscribing in a manner what God has written with his own hand. This
unfaithful and sacrilegious dealing with sacred Scripture hinteth me to the
next particle in our text, (...), which is a testimony of a faithful
quotation, (...) --

The Philosopher told his friends, when they came into his little and mean
cottage, for their comfort, (...), The Gods are even here with me: So there is
Divinity and a sacred use even in this little slender particle (...). Deus
magnus in minimis: and there is much importance in this little word. It may be
taken (as other words) either formally or materially: formally, and so it is
significative; materially, so not. It may be taken in this place
significatively in reference unto the former words of the verse, In him we
live, we move, and have our being. In him we live, and move, and have our
being: FOR; because we are his offspring. This sense is good, as Hushai said to
Absalom of Achitophels counsel; it is good, but not at this time. Several
senses in Scripture may be true in the thesis, but not proper in the
hypothesis, in the particular (...) and connection of the words; so neither
this: Because 1. the former words, in him we live and move and have our being,
do render the cause of the precedent verses, as (...) signifies there, and
therefore have more immediate and necessary respect unto them. 2. Because our
Apostle here intends to produce only the authority of some Heathen to be
symbolicall to what he had said before, out of which testimony he would deduce
his inference against Idolatry, as he does make use of this saying to that
purpose in the next verse unto my text. 3. Because it is very likely that the
particle (...) is to be taken in the same manner as (...) in the text: Now we
cannot well conceive any use of the significativenesse of (...), therefore also
(...), semblably, is not significative. It is significative and connexive in
the Poet, not in the Apostle. To what end serves it then, it may be demanded.
Are there any redundances in Scripture? Is S. Paul to please the Philosophers
become Homericall in his expletives? There is a painted heaven, and a printed
heaven, an heaven painted with stars, an heaven printed, the sacred
Scripture: And as God a most intellectual Agent (intellectual above our
understanding) wrought neither magnitude nor multitude without some end and
reason; so neither such a number of stars in the heaven above was made
without good purpose, so neither such a number of words in the heaven below.
The Jews (as it is said of them) numbered the verses, the words, the letters in
the Old Testament: and is it not written in the New, Not an Ita shall perish,
as not an Ita put in? (If so, Arius might have urged the place) Whatsoever is
written is written for our instruction. The very unsignificativenesse of the
particle is significative: for it is testimonium fidelis citationis, as
Sanctius a good Expositour observes upon the place. Our Apostle, happily,
thought it to have the weight of a moral argument toward the persuading of
the Heathens unto the truth of religion, to exhibit to them a sign of the
truth of his quotation. He is so far from concealing any thing which should
make against him, that he takes in the small words also of the hemistich,
although they be of no use in the sentence. We have hence first an occasion of
an observation; secondly, we have hence the use of a divine example.

First, we have an occasion of an observation, That our Apostle differs in
the quoting of the Heathens from his quoting of Scripture, the Old Testament.
The Heathens he quoteth punctually without any alteration, ad verbum, (...): He
quoteth places of Scripture not so; but sometimes with amplification, sometimes
with omission, sometimes with alteration: And so do the other Penmen of the New
Testament. Now the reason why S. Paul and the rest did not cite strictly the
words and terms of the Old, but rendered the sense of the places with some
variation, was, because they being appointed to be Teachers of the Gospel, were
inspired with infallible knowledge, and enabled with full authority, not only
to quote and produce but also to expound, and not only to expound but also to
apply the Testimonies of the Old Instrument or Covenant for the manifestation
and use of the New, according to their purpose, as is observed. 1. Cor. ii. 9.
our Apostle quoteth a place in Isaiah, But as it is written, Eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, the things which
God has prepared for them that love him. The place is written Isaiah lxiv. 4.
For since the beginning of the world men have not heard nor perceived by the
ear, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for
him that waits for him. S. Paul in this one place omitteth somewhat which was
written in the Prophet, and varieth somewhat; and adds, neither has it
entered into the heart of man: and this addition is for greater amplification
and emphasis of the matter. Isaiah lii. 7. How beautiful upon the mountains
are the feet of him that brings good tidings? S. Paul Romans x. 15. makes use
of this Scripture, As it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Gospel of peace? He leaves out, upon the mountains, which Isaiah
has; and also the Prophet Nahum speaking of the same thing, chap. i. verse. 15.
And S. Paul leaves out that, because the Prophets (as is observed) were to
preach only unto the Jews, in a mountainous country; the Apostles were to go
to preach the Gospel to all the world. Likewise S. Paul differs from the text
in alteration: as Ephesians. iv. 8. Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high,
he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men: This is said Psalm. lxviii. 18.
Thou art gone up on high, thou have led captivity captive, and received gifts
for men. The Psalmist says, Thou have received, S. Paul says, He gave. Now
that he gave gifts to men explaineth the end of his receiving gifts: He
received that he might give. With which if we compare that of S. John, in the
first of his Gospel at the sixteenth verse, Of his fullness we have all
received, and grace for grace, we may make an other manner of exposition of it
then those who interpret (...), grace upon grace, against the propriety of the
Greek; or then those who can here find any Merit on our part, as if God gave us
more grace for the merit of what we have; or then he who expounds by the
former grace the Old Testament, by the latter the New, as if Christ's fullness
of grace should not rather infer our receiving of grace from him by the merit
of his grace, then that we should receive the New Testament for the Old, since
under ALL WE have received are included also those faithful that lived before
Christ, who indeed had received grace, though not the Gospel, rem Evangelii,
though not Evangelium, not in exhibition actual; they had received it in a
promise, and in types, and by prophecy. Thus our Apostle in his quotations of
Scripture adds for illustration and amplification, omitteth for pertinence,
alters for explanation: but he does not in the Poet here; he recites the
very words in their order; he takes the testimony whole, that the Philosophers
should have nothing to except against the quotation.

Secondly therefore, we have from hence a divine rule and example, or a rule
divine by example, concerning an honest and faithful and ingenuous citing of
anthours. S. Paul produces the very words, the very particles, which yet were
of no moment toward his drift of inference. Whereby I believe our Apostle read
the author himself. And to this end, that I may cite an author truly and
certainly, let me read the author and the original; let me read them my
self. The quotations of others which they make of authors may be false, and
therefore will deceive. The connection, the interpunction, the accent, the sense
of the term in the writers time, may turn the sense of the place; and so what I
read of an author at the second hand may seem to be the authors, but
peradventure it is the quoters: therefore let me read the author, or at least
quote the quoter. Let me read the original: Translations may vary. They may
be either false or slender, inexpressive, obscure, obscurer sometimes then the
Text. As one answered, being asked whether he should read such a comment upon
Aristotle, answered, Yes, said he, when Aristotle is understood then read the
comment: So interpretations may be as perplexed as the text.

And by S. Paul's particular usage of an author here in the text, I might take
a rise unto a general treating, in way of reprehension, of the Abuse of
authors, contrary to our Apostles practice: And then I might note who, and
how, and wherein, and who most, and how far they have proceeded in this most
disingenuous injury unto writers deceased or living. But this would be a theme
for some grave Aristarchus and learned Critic, not for a man of yesterday.
Besides, I might be afraid of that of Solomon, He that reproves the wicked
gets to himself a blot. Surely Solomon was herein a Prophets son in an
extraordinary sense, in the Scripture Phrase, that is, a young Prophet; as if
he had prophesied of a generation which make it as true as they are false, who,
if one has but chanced to raze in his writing the utmost skin, and to wipe but
as it were the superficies of their doctrine or manners, though never so
deservedly, have given him a blot in their Indices Expurgatorii, DELEATVR,
DELEATVR. The Pontifician falsifications Chamier reduces unto two heads; a
(...), and a (...), a false Interpretation of Authors, and a false Printing:
The former they are not a little guilty in; as Bellarmine, and Grodecius, and
others: but it falling not so directly under our censure from the example of
our Apostle, I will omit it. Their falsification in (...), false Printing, is
in three respects or ways; by Addition, by Detraction or Taking-away, by
Alteration. 1. by addition they abuse authors, commanding in their Indices,
that whereas any Author speaks against them, in the next edition of those
authors they should be branded with this marginall addition, Author est
damnatus; and sometimes, Author est damnatus, sed jam permissus post
expurgationem; and sometimes; Hic caute legatur.2. they abuse by detraction. No
less then 800. writers are purged in one of their Indices, that of Spain, by
the Archbishop of Toledo the general Inquisitour. Deleatur here such a
passage, here such a sentence; in this author this, in that author that; here
an whole Epistle of Hulderick; there an Epistle in the first Tome of
Athanasius, as ye may see in the 37 page of the forenamed Index. Here such a
sentence of such a Father is to be left out in the next edition, as appears
in the front of that Index. All kinds of authors are purged thus by them;
ours, theirs; sacred, profane; all Humanity without any humanity. Thirdly,
they abuse by variation, by alteration: so in Vatablus his scholia upon the
cvii. Psalm, the 7. verse they command in the next Editions to be read for
Imagines, Idola. The marginall note there is, confusio iis qui adorant
imagines: they say, Read it IDOLA, in the lxxx. page of the Index. Besides
they abuse authors in the Indices of the authors, commanding the references
unto any place where they are touched any whit boldly, or in their grand
articles and points, to be put out. But they will say, no Author has been
actually falsified thus. Nevertheless they have showed their good will, or
rather their ill will, their malice, their villainy, in commanding that they
should be corrupted: and God has showed his providence and approbation of the
truth of the Protestant religion, in that he prevented the effect by discovery
of the Indices, whereby Protestant Divines were warned and admonished to keep
fast their old editions, of the Fathers especially, which otherwise (as near as
they could) they would have called in. And yet God has in his wisdom
permitted some to be indeed falsified, that we might have instances de facto
for the confirmation of our belief that they had such treacherous minds unto
the truth, and that they repented not of that transcendent design, to silence
all the world that had or should speak against them. For besides the Indices
expurgatorii, whereof we have some with us, which are sufficient witnesses of
their intention, Ferus, one of their own, yet in many points of our religion
ours, (as appears by their dealing toward him) in his comment upon the first
epistle of S. John, in fifty leaves is falsified thrice fifty times, as is
exactly observed. In thrice fifty places does the Roman Edition of him, which
came out 1577. differ in the former ways, either adding or taking away or
altering from the Antwerp-edition, which came out 1556. And not only Ferus,
but Fulbert also Bishop of Chartres, who lived in the eleventh centurie, is
falsified by addition. He speaking upon the Eucharist has these words, NISI
MANDUCAVERITIS, inquit, CARNEM FILII HOMINIS, ET SANGUINEM BIBERITIS, NON
HABEEITIS VITAM IN VOBIS. Facinus vel flagitium videtur jubere: figura ergo est
praecipiens passioni Domini esse communicandum tantum, and suaviter atque
utiliter recondendum in memoria quod pro nobis caro ejus crucifixa and
vulnerata est. in the 168. leaf: Now in the year 1608. there was set out an
Edition of him in Paris, where we have interserted after Figura ergo est, DICET
HAERETICUS, thus; Unless (says Christ) ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,
and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you. He seems to command an
impiety and great wickedness: it is therefore a figure, WILL THE HERETIC
SAY. These words will the heretic say, are put in by him that set out
Fulbert, to make what Fulbert spoke assertive from Augustine, to speak
recitative of the heretic, as if the Heretic should say, This is a figure,
etc. For if Christ's words be to be understood in a figure, by a trope, as
Fulbert from Augustine, then the bread and the wine in the Eucharist are not
transubstantiated. This testimony therefore being peremptory against them, they
thought to take an order with, and to make to speak for them. The Pope makes
Bishop Fulbert recant five hundred and more years after his death. But by the
bargain in their own opinion we have S. Augustine an heretic, and therefore
he is ours, whom yet by all means they would have to be a very absolute Papist:
For the words which Fulbert produces there for the expounding of our Savior
(although he approves them in the reciting) are indeed no other man's then
Saint Augustines in his second book De doctrina Christiana, the sixteenth
chapter. And the publisher of Fulbert being told hereof, that the words were
Augustines which he had branded with heresy, he put afterward his DICET
HAERETICUS amongst his Errata, as ye may read in the learned Primate of
Irelands Answer unto the Jesuits Challenge, in the fiftenth page. O sea
Apostolical, how far art thou from imitation of our Apostle S. Paul here,
who deals truly with his Author, and recites strictly the words! O thou
sacred virgin Truth, how art thou defloured by those who account it a sin for
them to marry! Shall not now Adulteration of authors be one sign of the
Whore? Shall not falsification of writers be a sign of the false Prophet? Is
this the way to prove the truth of their Religion, and of their Church? It
seems where Peter's keys cannot open the difficulty, his sword must cut the
knot. This abuse of authors is one of the scandals they give the Jews, who
live amongst them, which is so offensive to them amongst other things that they
are never like to be converted to Christianity in Rome, as Sandys observes.
Tell me if ever the Christian world conceived such a monster of injury and
inhumanity (to say no worse) which reached not only to the living but to the
dead, to the dead Saints, and made those reverend Authors and Professors of
divine truth speak so flatly against their consciences in their graves. We
cannot leave these men better then abruptly, in an indignation: And so we may
pass from a kind of Satan's brood unto Gods offspring; For we are also his
offspring.

Having now expounded the HIS in the text to be Gods, and the particles FOR and
ALSO to be only testimonies of an ingenuous quotation, and so not essential
to the sense of the proposition, the strict and clear substance of the words
will be this, We are Gods offspring. The question now is concerning the
supposition of the subject of the proposition, WE, how much it imports.

If we consider the words without any reference unto Saint Paul's consequence
out of them in the next verse, this WE may signify in a double acception,
reduplicative, specificative. First reduplicatively, most universally,
comprehending all Entities, all creatures, whether of Being only, or Life
besides Being, or Sense besides both, or Reason besides all, or pure Reason
without Sense, as Angels; all of him and from him, from the highest Angel in
heaven to the lowest in hell. Bad ones, as of men, so of Angels: as ones, his,
Gods; as bad, their own. It is a rational creatures weakness to be able to
sin: It is Gods omnipotence to create; from the king to the beggar, from Dan
to Beersheba, from the greatest mountain to the slenderest atome, all of all;
all proceed from him who proceeds from none. But this all is too much for S.
Paul's drift, and for the common expression WE. This sense is fit for the
proposition, but too wide and redundant for the inference. Secondly then WE
specificative, or indeed specially, We men. So the Apostle means it in the
next verse, Since then we are the offspring of God, we are not to think that
the Godhead is like to gold or silver or stone graven by art or man's devise; as
if man should be the image by which God should be worshipped, if he would be
worshipped by any. In man is the image of God though defaced by that original
sin. And no better Emblem for representing the God of the whole or of all,
as Ignatius in his Epistles, and Theodoret in his Questions calls him, then
Man, who is the Epitome of the whole, of all, the Docquet of the book of the
creature, (...), a whole world in a world, a little one in a great one, so that
Democritus in his opinion of more worlds was out but in quantity, for there be
many little worlds.

And we are Gods offspring in a threefold respect; in respect of our bodies, in
respect of our souls, in respect of both together. These several
considerations for our more distinct proceeding may serve, if you please, in
lieu of a division.

First of the first; we are Gods offspring in respect of our body. Now God is
the Author of our bodies (to speak in an universalitie) two ways;
immediately, or mediately: immediately, of our first Parents, though in some
difference of manner; mediately, of the rest. The immediate production is also
twofold; Ex part Materiae, ex part Efficientis. Immediate production in
respect of matter makes a simple creation, when somewhat is made out of no
praeexistent subject at all: So Adam was not made in respect of his body, it
being formed of the dust of the earth, Genesis ii. 7. And God formed man of the
dust of the ground. The second immediate production is in respect of efficient:
So Adam was created immediately by God, no other Agent coming betwixt and
helping the Divine omnipotence in raising so glorious a fabric out of so
unlikely a subject. And therefore this is also called a Creation secundum quid;
no created virtue being able out of such an indisposed matter to make such a
work. And as Adam was thus immediately produced by God in respect of his body,
so was his wife Eve: They had a different matter, but the same efficient of
their being: God made the woman off the rib of man. Indeed Constantinus
Manasses says that Adam was to Eve (...). (...),
(...).
But the Author spoke here as a Poet, as the Fathers sometimes like
Rhetoricians. Adam concurred not in any way of Agency toward the production of
his Wife: he was not married to his daughter. God took the rib from him when he
was in a deep sleep, and off it framed the body of Eve. Matter in the beginning
of time was taken from man to make a woman: and matter in the fullness of time
was taken from a woman to make a man, even the man Christ Jesus. So God was the
Author without any other of the bodies of Adam and Eve. God by this immediate
production had a son and a daughter, as we may speak. And this son and
daughter immediate causes of our ordinary generation are the causes why to us
God is not the immediate. God almighty who showed what he could do in that
extraordinary production of our first parents, is now pleased to bring men into
the world in way of a successive traduction by them. Parents we have: and God
will have us account them so; for he gives us a law to honor them, by
reverence, by obedience, by gratitude, as it is expounded: Yet not so are they
the authors of our being according to the flesh, not so fathers of our flesh,
(as they are called, Hebr. xii. 9.) as if God were excluded from being our
Father also according to a common manner of expression. God by a proper
generation, a generation natural, has but one Son, the second person in the
Trinity: yet God in Scripture is commonly called a Father without any
reference unto the second Person. God says, Mal. 1. If I be a Father, where is
my honor? And he is a Father as Creator, expressly, Mal. ii. 10. Have we not
all one Father? has not one God created us? What more usual in the Greek then
to express Author by (...)? there is scarce any other word for it. So
Martial for the Latin calls his books his children. So God is said to be
the Father of Spirits, Heb. xii. so the devil the father of a lie, in S. John.
And thus we have expounded how God is said to be our Father, and how in the
text we are called Gods offspring; not in strict proper speech, but according
to the common use of expressing the producer of any thing by the Father or
Parent of it. So Tertullian to our purpose in his book De Anima, Omne quod
quoquo modo accipit esse, generatur. But more directly in the following words,
Nam and factor ipse parens facti dici potest, sic and Plato utitur. Now that
God is the Author of our bodies by our Parents, that he has a finger, nay a
hand, nay hands in framing our bodies, we have the express testimony of the
Prophet David, Psalm. cxix. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me. And again,
Psalm. cxxxix. 12. For my reins are thine: thou have covered me in my mothers
womb. I will give thanks unto thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made,
(...), mirificatus sum mirabilibus operibus tuis, as Montanus renders it; I am
fearfully and wonderfully made. I am molded, I am made as it were and composed
altogether in wonders, beyond all understanding and expression, so strangely,
so subtly, so beyond the power of man. The words import more then we can say.
The Prophet may well go on; Mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows
right well. It knows only that they are mavelous, and so above knowledge.
My bones are not hid from thee, though I be made secretly, and fashioned
beneath in the earth. Thine eyes did see my substance yet being imperfect, and
in thy book were all my members written; which day by day were fashioned, while
as yet there were none of them. To this place happily S. Augustine alludeth in
his Confessions, speaking of his parents Patricius and Monica, per quorum
carnem introduxisti me in hanc vitam; quemadmodum, nescio, how, I know not. The
womb is Gods door, which he opens to give men induction into the world.
Think we that a little petty matter of seed by the created virtue of a created
faculty, (...) or (...), as they call it, could or should without a
supernatural direction and superefficiencie elaborate, and frame, and square,
and polish in the obscure womb, in no long time, such a structure of flesh, so
fashionable, so serviceable, so strong and trim, so ordered and connexed,
that an Heathen hereupon called God, (...), the best Artist; and another called
man's body (...), a fair variegated piece of a wise builder? Job excellently in
this matter, chap. x. 8. where speaking to God, he says, Thy hands have made
me and fashioned me together round about; yet thou do destroy me. Remember I
beseech thee, that thou have made me like the clay; and will thou bring me into
the dust again? Have thou not poured me out as milk, and crudled me as cheese?
Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fensed me with bones and
sinews. Nature, that particular power which God has put in every creature to
do actions convenient to its species, is it self Gods servant in the working as
his creature in the being: and although it could by the solitary virtue of its
own form without a Divine concurrence work an effect, yet that effect also
should be Gods, it self and the form of it being Gods: How much more shall God
be the Author of that which he works by it? As of the grain committed to the
ground S. Paul says, God gives it a body; so it may be said of this humane
seed, God gives it a body. The Father who knows the child better then the
child the Father, and the Mother that knows the child better then the Father,
(and therefore the Father loves the child better then the child the Father,
and the Mother loves the child better then the Father, as he speaks in his
Ethics) know not yet how the child is wrought and made in the womb. They know
the effect, they know not the manner of the effecting. Eccles xi. 5. the
secrecy of Gods way in making all things is expressed by the privatenesse and
obscurity how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child. This
is one of the ways whereby he describes there symbolically the abstrusenesse
of Gods works: As thou know not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the
bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child; even so thou know not
the works of God who makes all. Certainly the matter of generation is not much
unlike that matter out of which all things were created at first, which matter
Moses Genesis i. calls the heaven and the earth: not formally so; but because
there was out of it to be produced, not by a physical but omnipotent
virtuality, the particulars of heaven and earth. And the same power that could,
and goodness that would, and wisdom that knew how to fashion out of such a
disguised matter so brave a world, does and must (if ever it be done) raise out
of the semblable subject the most exact and excellent structure of the body of
the model of the universe. The Egyptian Doctor Trismegist shall conclude the
truth of this point, (...), Understand, O Son, the framing of man in the
womb, search out accurately the art of the building: learn who made this fair
and divine shape of man, as he goes on. (...); Who turned the eyes? who bored
the nostrils and ears? who extended and tied the sinews? who derived the
veins? who set and firmed the bones? who invested the flesh with skin? who
divided and branched the fingers? who has enlarged our steps? who has dug
our pores? who has stretched out the spleen? who has made the heart like a
pyramid? who has drawn out the liver? (...); who has made the lungs like a
pipe? who made the capacious belly? who made the honorable parts of the body
so visible, (...); who made all these? (...); what mother? what father? who but
the invisible God who made all things with his will? Thus we see that God is
the Author of us, and we are his offspring in respect of our body.

Now from this discourse of Gods being the Author also, though mediately, of
our bodies we may raise some inference to the good of our soul; but in a word
or two. A little Philosophy from heaven for our practice, and we pass to the
second point. Lord, did thou make our bodies; and yet do we use them as if we
had made them our selves, or sin, or Satan? or as if they had been made by
thee for them? How many organs have thou framed for the multiplicity of our
operations, and yet how few, how little do we use those few, if we use any for
thy service! Let us not dishonor this temple of the holy Ghost by
uncleanness, by fornication, by adultery, or any such turpitude. Other sins,
as S. Paul 1. Cor. vi. 18. are without the body, (...), objective; they pass
no special actual pollution upon the body: but he that commits fornication
sins against his own body. It was for this that Democritus pulled out his
eyes, lest he should lust upon sight, as Tertullian in his Apologetick, not
that he might the better addict himself to contemplate in Philosophy. And
Pythagoras his precept, (...), was a precept against uncleanness, (...)
signifying somewhat else besides beans, wherein he himself delighted, as
Gellius says by the testimony of Aristoxenus, in his fourth book and 11
chapter.

Again, the body is an accurate structure; admire the Artist, the Builder. And
what will thou admire? what part? what member? will thou commend the breast?
all thy Rhetoric is not enough for the belly. Will thou commend the belly?
thou have not praises enough for the Head. What, the Ear? O glorious Eye! I
should admire the Arteries that come from the Heart; but the Nerves draw me
back which come from the Brain; I should praise the Nerves, but I am astonished
at the Veins which flow from the Liver. What shall I say of the Legs the
pillars of the house? or rather of the Hands, the agents? What not of the
Mouth, the door, into which mortal things enter, out of which immortull
things proceed, as Philo the Jew? But the Teeth, that (...), as he calls
them, barracadoe the Tongue, lest it should wander too much and be too
talkative. O admirable creature in that we see of thee, the Body, though more
admirable in that we see not, the Soul! Keep this piece, this brave piece,
handsome and clean: let it not be sordid, untrim. It is the temple of the holy
Ghost: bestow on it a decent ornament, not gaudy. It is the servant to the
soul; give it food sufficient, and so tune the instrument the organ. Make not
thy body as it were a trough by drunkenness; that thy soul should be as salt,
as he said, to keep thy body from rotting. Make not thy belly thy God, nor thy
head thy Idol: They are Gods creatures: God does not use to make Gods. Pride
not thy self in the ampleness^ or majesty or proport of thy body; God could
have made thy body a great deal bigger. God has given thee the less body that
thou should be the less proud. So Theodoret in the exposition of that place
in Genesis, There were then giants upon the earth, gives the reason why God
does not make our bodies of that vastness as he could, (...); For if in those
small bulks they swelled in pride, not only against one another but also
against God himself, what would they not have done if they had had more tall
and mighty bodies? But because thy body is not so great, happily therefore more
neat; and thou have vires ingenuas, as the Poet expresses it: and so thou will
glory in the feature of it: Nay, rather give glory to God in expressing the
humility and subjection of thy spirit unto God by bodily worship. The service
of the body who will deny God, unless those who will deny God to be the
author of it? Nay, the Manichees, who denied God to be the author of the
body, did not: for they fasted on Sundays, as it is storied of them; and in
fasting they exercised an humiliation of the body. This shall be left for
Schwenckfeildians only, who (as Zanchy of them) took away all external
service. As Christ's Divinity was manifested in the flesh; so should our
spiritualnesse be manifested by the body. Man consists of body and soul; the
service of man therefore is the service of both: Both are to be glorified; both
are to glorify: Both are from God; both are for God. Some give God the soul,
not the body; these are few: such Schwenckfeeldians: Some give God the body,
not the soul; and many do so: such are hypocrites: Some give God neither;
Atheists: Some give God both; men Christians. As Tertullian therefore of the
old Christians, so we; Illuc suspicientes manibus expansis, quia innocuis,
capite nudo, quia non erubescimus, oramus; Looking up thither, unto heaven,
with our hands stretched out, because innocent, with our head bare, because we
are not ashamed, we pray. And this service of the body is indeed a small and
easy matter to perform, as lying in the power of freedom of will: and yet
this is very requisite. And we may err in the service of the outward man: yet
hereby is not taken away the duenesse and right of a rectified outward worship.
S. Paul discoursing of the Christians complete armature, Ephesians. 6. bids us
to have our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. We may tread
this Gospel awry: and we may tread it too much outward: and the sect before
mentioned treads it too much inward. Remember that good counsel, (...): or
that of the Satyrist Persius, -- pone in pectore dextram. Pass we now to our
second proposition, We are the offspring of God in respect of our Souls.

That God is the Author of our bodies mediately by our parents, and that he
was the Author of the bodies of Adam and Eve immediately in regard of the
Efficient, we have determined: And is he the Author of our materiated bodies,
not of our immateriall souls? The efficiency of these we are come now by order
to discourse of; which deserves indeed rather a volume then some circumscribed
treatise and hasty disquisition. The knowledge and science of it is very noble
as Aristotle begins in his book of it; and none more difficult, as it may
seem by Dicearchus, who doubted whether there were such a thing in rerum
natura, as Tully of him in his Tusculane Questions. Yet if he would have
examined his doubting, he might have found by it an evidence of its being; He
could not have doubted of it without it. But the beginning and original of it
has ever been matter of dispute in a threefold respect. 1. of the Efficient,
from whom it proceeds: 2. of the Matter, out of which it should be made,
whether out of nothing terminative, or out of some preexistent subject: 3. of
the Time, when produced; whether from eternal or in time: and if in time,
whether before the body be composed, or whether in the very instant of the
finishing of it. Learned Zanchy, who stateth these heads of controversy
concerning the soul, lib. 2. part. 13. cap. 5. does there reduce all the
varieties of opinions concerning the soul unto these eight.

I. The first opinion is of those who held that the soul is of God, but that it
is made by God of the soul of the world, namely, the substance of the heavens;
and that it is like the stars; therefore incorruptible, immortal and that
there is a certain number of them, without increase or diminution and that
their mansion is in heaven, from whence they descend into particular bodies as
they are framed. This was the tenet of Pythagoras and Plato, and of the
Academicks, as Zanchy says: and also this was not much different from the
opinion of the Egyptian Doctor. This opinion was the ground of their (...) or
Transanimation: Which some of the Jews may be thought to have inclined unto,
some of them saying that Christ was Elias, some that he was John Baptist, as if
either of their souls had lived in Christ's body: although others are of another
mind, that they deemed that one of them were raised from the dead, as Barradius
notes. This was Herod's fancy of Christ, Matthew. xiv. 2. This is John the
Baptist, he is risen from the dead: and therefore mighty works do show forth
themselves in him. II. Others with Origin held that the souls were made in
time, of nothing; by God; but all at once: and they held those to be kept in
thesaure Dei, to be sent afterward into their particular bodies. III. Some
held not only that they were made at once, but also of the substance of God;
So the Stoics; after them the Manichees. In this opinion the souls are ex Deo
and de Deo; in the two former, ex Deo, not de Deo. IV. Another sort would have
the souls to be made by the Angels, ex igne and spiritu: neither de Deo nor ex
Deo: So Seleucus, Hermeas, and the Carpocratians, who held that all the world
was made by the Angels. These four opinions the Author says are antiquated
with those who profess assent unto sacred Scripture. V. The first of the other
quaternion maintained the first soul indeed to be created by God of nothing,
and breathed into Adam, but the rest to be propagated successively with the
propagation of the body, yet to be immortal. These also were divided in their
conceits: Some thought the soul to be corporeal, and corporeally generated:
Some thought it to be a Spirit, and spiritually produced, somewhat like as one
candle is lighted by another: Thus Apollinaris and others in the western
Churches, as Zanchie faith. VI. Others denied the production of it per
traducem, affirming that new souls are created simply by God, and each put into
their proper bodies: This Jerome says was the general tenet and doctrine of
the Church in his time. VII. Augustine neither condemned those who say that it
comes per traducem, nor those that say that souls are created de novo by God:
yet he says, he could not see how this opinion of the absolute creation of the
soul could be confirmed by Scripture; therefore he desired Jerome to help him
in this point with his advice. VIII. Lastly, some thought that the souls are
daily created by God: But some of these again imagined that the souls are
created without the body, extra corpus, afterward put in; others, that they
are created in the infusion, and infused in the creation. But amidst and maugre
all the rest, this is Zanchie's and may be our determination, That rational
souls are created immediately by God of nothing after the organizing of the
body, or, when the body is entirely organized, in the body. Not to meddle with
the anasceuasticall or refutative part of the contrary assertions, (For rectum
est index sui and obliqui) this thesis may seem more consonant to Scripture, to
Ecclesiastic writers, to reason, to Heathen Authors: by all which we shall in
order, but very briefly, try it. Only we must premise here, That the time of
the creation of the soul bears an intimate respect unto the latter
proposition, and that we need not make a distinct proving that it is created of
nothing, since thus we have Zanchie for our praecedent: and 2. because those
who contend for a matter out of which the soul should be made by God, are more
exotic authors; and 3. their matter is altogether inconvenient; and 4.
Creation in a proper sense, which is an absolute and simple creation, excludes
whatsoever matter; and 5. because by this creation, abstracting the
consideration ex quo from whence it is created, namely, out of nothing, we
shall conclude against the way of production per traducem, which is the
principal opposite opinion. So that now to the second proposition, as at first
we named it, That God is the Author of our souls, we shall add in our
discourse a differencing of his efficiency of the body and the soul. Of our
body he is the Author by our Parents; of our soul absolutely, by himself, by
creation.

This we endeavor to prove first by Scripture. And the first place in
Scripture should be Exodus xxi. 22. wherein God gives them a law concerning the
striking of a woman with child: But then we must read the Scripture in the
Septuagints translation; and then two things are to be granted: first, that we
have the right and true translation of the Septuagint; and secondly, that this
translation is true, which indeed great Ecclesiastic writers have followed.
The words in their version are these, (...), If two men strive together and
strike a woman with child, and the child abortively comes forth not shaped, he
shall be mulcted: but, (...), if the child shall be fully shaped, then thou
shall pay life for life. Whereupon is inferred by this Greek version, that
during the time of the embryo there is no soul in it, and therefore if it
perish by the stroke, and the woman escape, the punishment must be but
pecuniary; because no murder, because of no man, because the soul is not in
it: but if the child proves abortive, and comes out fully shaped, both must
die; because then the body is animated, and therefore it is murder. So that
the soul is not propagated with the seed: for then the soul should successively
grow to perfection with the body; and then there could be thus no abortive
without murder. This reading the Greek Fathers, and others who generally do
follow the Septuagint, do follow. Yet since the original (which our English
translation follows) makes not at all for our purpose, we will pass over
this place without any urging of it, and without any observation how the
Interpreters, and in how many respects, were here mistaken. Only by the way we
may take notice, that we have here the judgment of the Septuagint delivered in
favor of our cause, and also the judgment of the Greek Fathers, and others
who use their interpretation of Scripture, and also the determination of Canon
law grounded (as one notes) upon this place according to the Septuagint, That
he is not a murderer who makes an abortive before the infusion of the soul.
The second authority in Scripture may be Zach. xii. 1. The burden of the word
of the Lord for Israel, says the Lord, which stretches forth the heavens, and
lays the foundation of the earth and frames the spirit of man within him,
(...) in interiori ejus, as Montanus renders it; in medio, as Pagnine. This
place seems not only to conclude the peculiar production of the soul by God,
but the time also, especially the manner, in the body, nay in the heart likely,
which is (as they say) primum vivens, ultimum moriens. Isa. lvii. 16. For I
will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: for the Spirit
should fail before me, and the souls which I have made. In this sacred
testimony I conceive two objections excluded: That it may be understood of the
souls of our first Parents; this may be the first: But then it is to be
answered, Dicit pluraliter, he speaks in general, SOULS; and he speaks as
de futuro, I WILL not contend FOR EVER, I WILL not be ALVVAYES wroth.
Secondly, It may be objected, That God may be said to be the Author of our
souls, and to make our souls, although our parents do conduce, as God is said
to be the Author of our bodies. It may be answereed, that God speaks here of
the making of the souls, signanter, in way of especial appropriation, which I
have made; I have made them. Eccles xii. 7. Then shall the dust return to the
earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to God that gave it. This
Scripture was very potent with Augustine, as he confesses in his tenth book De
Genesi ad literam, and the ninth chapter: But after some doubting he inclines
to the exposition of it touching the foul of Adam, although the preacher
seems to speak it in commani. And if you say that God gave the Spirit by our
parents; so he did the body: why then does he speak particularly, and only of
the Spirit, that he gave that? The last authority which we will use out of
Scripture is, Heb. xii. 9. Furthermore we have had Fathers of our flesh which
corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be subject
to the Father of Spirits, and live? Here is an (...), a contradistinction
betwixt Fathers of our flesh and Father of our Spirits: Fathers of our flesh,
subefficiently unto God; Father of our Spirits, absolutely, immediately. And
Father of our Spirits must be understood in respect of production, not
regeneration, that the opposition may be strictly ad idem. If, as before, ye
say that he is Father of our Spirits by our Parents, so he is also of our
flesh, as before. Memorabilis locus ad quaestionem, as Paraeus breaks out
upon this place; This is a pertinent text for the deciding of the question
betwixt Augustine and Hierome concerning the beginning and efficiencie of the
soul. Hierome could not produce a more pregnant testimony for the determining
of Augustine unto his tenet. Now to these divine testimonies we might add an
argument or two drawn out of sacred writ. Zanchie argues from the manner of
the creation of Adams soul and of Christ's, the like in all others.

But we will pass unto the second head of our confirmation, That the creation
of souls is more consonant unto Ecclesiastic writers, Fathers. The consent of
these has always been accounted a moving argument. (...), as he in his
Rhetoricks; It is not ingenuous to determine any thing contrary to the Gods, to
a Father, to a Master. Doctors Fathers then must have in them some persuasive
virtue toward assent unto their judgments. Zanchie therefore cites Hierome,
Gregory Nyssen, Theodoret, Leo. And Hieromesaith, as before, that it was the
general opinion of the Church in his time, that God is the Author of souls by
creation. Indeed we want herein the suffrages of Tertullian and Augustine.
Tertullian says plainly that the soul is corporeal: we have it in his book De
resurrectione carnis, IN TERMINIS TERMINANT IBUS; Nos autem animam corporalem
and hic profitemur, and in suo volumine probamus: And he gives us his reason,
because of the souls suffering of torments; making account that the soul,
unless it be corporeal, cannot suffer. Angustine in his tenth De genesi ad
literam goes about at first to excuse this expression of the Father, in saying
that the reason of this speech was, because he could not otherwise concieve it
to be then in a corporeal notion: neither could be otherwise conceive of God,
as Rhenanus in favor of him, Timuit ne Deus nihil esset, si non esset corpus,
He was afraid lest God should not be, or should be nothing, if not a body. Yet
Augustine soon after his excuse of the Father understands him otherwise in
his term of CORPUS, even by his own words; because he says, Omnecorporale est
passibile, as if he meant by CORPORALE not only a real substance, but a
substance material. Debuit ergo mutare sententiam, says the Father, because
hereby he makes God passible. So that Augustine holds not with Tertullian,
that the soul is corporeal; yet he doubts whether it be created. And his
reason is, Because, if it be created by God, he cannot see how original sin
should be conveyed unto it, which he knew so well, and defended so stoutly
against Pelagius. To conclude therefore: If we could determine three
conclusions in reference unto these two Fathers, we might obtein their voices
also. First, in reference unto Tertullian, That the soul, although not
corporeal, yet is passible and sensible of grief. So Christ says of his own
soul, my soul is heavy unto death. And that Christ's soul was immateriall who
can deny, especially since he was not born in the common way? Secondly, in
reference unto S. Augustine, That although the soul be created, yet there is a
way conceiveable for the intromission of original sin without any danger of
making God any way the Author of sin. This Zanchie makes good. Thirdly, in
reference unto them both, That a probable truth is not to be discarded for some
particular inconveniences, which in our apprehension may seem to arise out of
the position of it. And de facto, that Saint Hierome won S. Augustine unto
his side in this point, Paraeus and Zanchie are my Authors; nay Lombard and
Biel do cite Augustine in the three and twentieth chapter of the Questions ex
Veteri Testamento, for the creation of the soul, Inhonestum puto si animae
dicantur cum corporibus generari, ut anima nascatur de anima. And Biel to this
purpose cites Augustine, De Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, Non seminantur animae
cum corporibus. But to deal ingenuously with my audience; The former book of
the Questions ex veteri Testamento is none of S. Augustines, as Bellarmine and
Erasmus and others do hold. And again, the Treatise De Ecclesiasticis
dogmatibus, is supposed to have been made by Gennadius. That the former is not
the Fathers own is more then likely (beside the judgment of those before
named) because in it he cites Augustine, whosoever is the author of it.
Nevertheless, deducting the suffrages of these two Fathers, the greater part
(as Zanchie accounts) are of opinion that the soul is created. Our Thesis
then appears to be more consonant unto the Fathers, to more of them; and to
the rest also happily it is more agreeable then the contrary assertion: and
also those two Fathers do show more dislike unto this tenet in respect of the
consequents, then in respect of the simple consideration of it in it self.

The third trial of the truth of our Thesis is by the consonance unto reason.
And the first Argument may be thus; Either the soul is created by God or
propagated by our parents. Not propagated by our parents: For if so, then by
some seed, or by nothing. If of nothing, then it is not of our parents, but it
is created: If it be of some seed, then either (...) or (...), either corporal
or spiritual. If corporal; the soul is material; so corruptible, so mortal:
If the seed be spiritual, then either that seed is corruptible and mortal, or
incorruptible and immortal. If corruptible and mortal; so is the soul, the
effect bearing proportion and similitude unto the cause: If incorruptible and
immortal; then either the soul is not generated, and therefore why seed? (and
indeed how seed of the soul, whether corruptible or incorruptible? and
therefore how generative?) Or if the soul be generated, then what is in its
nature incorruptible must be corruptible by generation; for generation
imports corruption. This is in effect Zanchie's argument in the forecited
place. Secondly, as we argue a priori, from the Immateriality of the soul unto
the Immortality of it; so reciprocally we may argue a posteriori, from the
Immortality of the soul to the Immaterialitie of it. And we need not fear a
circular demonstration in diverso genere demonstrationis. Now if we prove it
immateriall, then it is not ex traduce, not by our parents; and if it be
immortal, then it is not materiated. Now the immortality of the soul those
Ecclesiastical writers could not deny, who yet would not grant that it is
created, but thought it might be produced cum semine. Aquinas, part. I. quaest.
118. art. 2. concludes that it is heretical to hold the traduction of the
soul: Sure much more is it heretical to hold the Mortality of it. And indeed
he gives his reason why it is heretical to maintein the traduction of it, in
regard of the consequent, because so it would be mortal: if mortal, where is
our resurrection? if no resurrection, where is our Christianity? The
immortality then of the soul we may take as confessed and granted; which was
assevered even by the learned Heathen, Trifmegist, Plato, Thales, Plutarch,
Pindar, Virgil, as we might see by their several testimonies; if it were
necessary to recite them, they being so well known. As for Aristotle in this
point, it is commonly said of him, -- (...), as if he were a Vertumnus,
determined neither pro not con: Yet were he well inquired into, we should find
him to be on our side. But thirdly, Bonaventure's Argument, as Biel cites it,
is worth the naming, though it be not fit for urging, as being drawn from
convenience only: Since the soul is the image of God, and nata immediate fieri
in Deum, made to be happified in him by a clear vision of him, and by a
fruition in loving him with all our soul, by which love our soul is spiritually
united unto him, it becomes, it is fitting that the whole being of it should
be immediately from God, with whom it is to be wholly united. And so much, or
rather so little, in respect of what might be said for the third way of the
trial of our Thesis.

The fourth and last is, the inartificiall argument of Ethnic authority. This
assertion of the creation of the soul by God is not destitute of humane
suffrages. Besides all their opinions who hold that the souls were created from
eternal, we have other testimonies. I will give you one or two, which may be a
sign of more. Learned Zanchy quoteth Pythagoras, Epictetus, Trismegist,
Simplicius, Zoroaster, Aristotle. First, Pythagoras; (...), Be of a valiant
spirit, since Man's descent is Divine: which he supposes Pythagoras understood
in regard of the soul, as surely he did. As for his (...) or Transanimation, if
it concerned very much our purpose, it were not very difficult to vindicate him
from it, and many other absurdities, which either ignorant or envious men
attributed to him as Reuchline observes in his second book. Epictetus; (...),
We are akin to God, from him we came: Suffer us to go from whence we came.
Simplicius; (...), The soub is said to proceed from God as a beam from the
sun. Zoroaster very clearly; (...) (...). Thou must make speed unto the light
and the glories of thy father; from thence was thy soul sent down endued with
much understanding. Trismegist; (...). But the question now is, how we shall
construe (...), what it signifies with Trismegist. Salvo meliori judicio, I
cannot see what sense or notion may be framed of his (...) to our purpose. He
seems not to understand hereby the Mind or Soul: For he often distinguishes
(...) and (...): and immediately after the place which Zanchie quoteth he
speaks thus, (...), This (...) in men is a Divinity: and therefore some men
are Gods. Me thinks he intends hereby some intelligent power separated from
the soul. To pass him therefore; Aristotle may be next: who brings in as
clear an authority for our behalf as any: Nay none so clear as that in his
second book De generat. animal. c. 3. (...). And the reason follows; (...),
It remains that the mind comes from without, and is only divine; because no
corporeal operation is mixed with its: by which place and another in his De
Anima we may infer Aristotle's opinion concerning the immortality of the
soul. He says in his first book De Anima, (...), If there be any operation
proper and peculiar to the soul, it may be separated: if separated, then
immortal. Here he assumeth; The bodily operation is not mixed with the
operation of the mind: therefore separable; therefore immortal. Parisiensis in
his treatise De Legibus says, Omnes enim animae creantur in corporibus suis,
sicut declarat Aristoteles. He names not where Aristotle declares himself
thus; but surely there cannot be a clearer passage for that opinion then the
forenamed in his second De generat. anim. If it be objected that Aristotle
takes (...) as Trismegist does, it may be answered, 1. we may understand his
meaning by the title of the book, according to the rule, Titulus libri saepe
est legendus. 2. he discusseth in that chapter the production and the time of
the production of souls. Tully is plain in the first of his Tusculane
questions, Animorum nulla in terris origo inveniri potest. Pindar also, as I
find him quoted, speaking of the soul, which he calls (...), says, (...),
This only comes from heaven. Seneca in his cxx. epistle, Maximum inquam, mi
Lucili, argumentum animi ab altiori venientis sede; A very great argument of
the souls coming down from heaven it is, if it accounts these things wherein
it is here below conversant, base and low and too strait for it; if it fear not
to go out: for knowing from whence it came, it knows whether it is going. To
these testimonies more might be added, as Morney collecteth them in his
fifteenth chapter, where he treats de immortalitate anima. Zanchie believes
that this was Aratus his meaning, not only, That God was the first and
universal cause of the soul, as he is of the body and all things else, but,
That the substance of the soul is not made of the Elements or of any heavenly
substance, but that it is a creature absolutely divine. Thus we have seen our
Thesis agreeable to sacred Scripture, to Fathers, to reason, to Ethnic
authority. We have touched a ticklish cause and a grave controversy. A young
man, one Vincentius Victor (as Chemnitius relates) when learned Augustine
demurred and would not determine this point concerning the original of a
rational soul, censured boldly the Fathers unresolvednesse, and vaunted that
he would undertake to prove by demonstration that souls are created de novo, by
God: For which peremptory rashness the Father returned the young man a sober
reprehension. But I therefore, lest I should be obnoxious to the like reproof,
have not so much determined the point evident, as argued it probable. However,
it is res quaestionis, not res fidei. It stands not upon our salvation to
believe the one or the other; either that it is, or it is not created. As he
then concludes his Rhetoricks, so I this little discussion of this great
controversy, (...).

The third respect wherein we are Gods offspring is the Union of body and soul
together, which makes our third proposition, as we formerly propounded it, We
are Gods offspring in respect of body and soul together. I will not here run
into the nice dispute, whether A B be Ab; Whether the whole man really
differs from the parts taken together: and so whether God in the uniting of
them be a cause of a new Entitie. God almighty, who made bodies and souls
(though in a different manner betwixt the first bodies; namely of our first
Parents, and the rest, and in a different manner betwixt bodies and fouls) made
one for the other, the body to receive the soul, the soul to enlive and inform
the body. And here we are to consider the time of the creation of the soul,
according as we apprehend it in probability to be created: And here we have the
way how we are the offspring of God in respect of body and soul together, in
that the form is framed in the matter prepared. As God made man when all things
in the world were ready and dressed to show him enterteinment, so likely he
makes the soul when the body, the house, is furnished with rooms for the abode
and working of it. And that he makes not the soul extra materiam, without the
body, but in it, Biels argument may evince, beside whatsoever may be said out
of the places in Scripture before named against the contrary. His argument is
this, Quia tunc anima haberet aliquem actum volendi vel intelligendi priusquam
infunderetur: If the soul were created out from the body, then it would
exercise some act of understanding and willing before it were infused: For such
a divine creature cannot be idle and unactive. If it should exercise any act
before the union, it should merit before the union, as he says: We deny his
merit, but we cannot well imagine how the soul should exercise any act of
understanding and will before it be in the body. And this S. Paul supposes, as
Biel notes, Romans ix. 11. For the children not being yet born, neither having
done good or evil: Neither good nor evil is done before birth. Moreover, how
that good act, if any, though not meritorious, yet should be rewarded to the
soul peculiarly, besides the reward for those actions of it in the body, we
cannot well conceive. For every man shall recieve according to what he has
done in the body. The Person shall receive according to the actions of the
person; the Soul is not a Person. A question here may arise, Why God should
unite this soul to this body: Why should this glorious soul dwell in this
corruptible body? this royal tenant in so low a cottage? this vast spirit in a
circumscribed skin? as if not only Galba's wit but all our souls did male
habitare. For answer, 1. The highest cause is the best, Gods pleasure, Gods
(...) (his reason, as we may say) and his (...), his will, the Egyptian Doctor
takes for the same. 2. Likely for the order of the Universe; that as there is
a created rational spirit without a body, namely the Angel, so there should be
a created rational Spirit (though not rational in that degree of perfection)
in a body. 3. The Poet; -- Et quod dominari in caetera possit
Natus homo est. --
Lombard upon this question, in his first Distinction of the second book,
gives another, That by the conjunction of the soul with the body, so far its
inferior, man might learn and believe a possibility of the union of man with
God in glory, notwithstanding the vast distance of nature and excellence, the
infiniteness of both in God, the finitenesse of both in man. But our soul in
the moment of union with the body is defiled with original sin: But our
nature sinned in Adam; and the order of the Universe and the glory of Christ's
redemption are of greater moment, as Zanchie.

Now out of the conjunction of soul with body we might have the resultance of
deductions and inferences many and important ones. We might have raised an
exhortation peculiar unto the soul, That it is the bravest substance under
heaven, and therefore that we should fit it with the purest accident: We should
adorn it with the best habit, of Faith, of Love, of Hope: That when we think,
we should think of our selves; when we think upon our selves, we should think
upon our soul; when we think upon our soul, we should think that it is from God
absolutely, and that it is immortal, and that we should provide for it
accordingly. Get this soul beautified with white and red, Christ's Blood, his
Righteousness.

And when thou think of thy self composed of body and soul (for who in the
body, even while he thinks of the soul, will forget his body) 1. consider
what is due from hence to him that made thee a man, not a beast; what piety,
what devotion, what obedience, what rational service, what rational or
reasonable sacrifice, as Trismegist speaks. 2. from hence also consider what
an engagement there is of love and friendship and justice unto our neighbor,
since he who made him made us: We are all of the same make, all of the same
nature. Job is moved hereby to do no wrong, no not to his very servant, Job
xxxi. 15. Did not he that made me in the womb, make him? and did not one
fashion us in the womb? 3. from Gods conjunction of both together we are bound
to maintein the union. As in the conjunction of man and wife, so in the
conjunction of body and soul, What God has joined together, let no man put
asunder, no private man, no Magistrate unjustly; not our selves, for no cause.
Let both grow together (as we may speak) until the harvest, until thou be
fairly cut down by that common sickle of Death, and laid in the granary of the
grave. 4. We learn hence humility. Our best excellence is in our soul: Our soul
is in an earthly tabernacle, easily resolved into its principles, undone with a
fly, destroyed with a grapestone, cracked with a shell. All our learning is
soon refuted with one black o, which understanding us not, snappeth us
unrespectively without any distinction, and puts at once a period to our
reading and to our being. Look we upon our black feet; nay below our feet unto
the dust: read we, and meditate, and learn meekness and humility in this
original. 5. It is our duty, since God is thus our Father in regard of body
and soul, to rely upon his care and providence for a living in the world, and
infinitely more then upon the care of the fathers of our flesh. God is more
principally our Father: They of the body, subordinately unto God; God of the
soul, excluding them: They men, not God; therefore not able to see what is best
for us: They men, not God; therefore not able to foresee all dangers: They men,
not God; therefore not able always to help us: They men, not God; therefore
changeable in their affection: They men, not God; therefore changeable in their
being. What power the Father of our flesh has, he has from God; what
goodness, from God: God susteineth his nature, concurreth with his action,
blesses the effect. 6. Lastly, we have hence S. Paul's conclusion (in the next
verse) which shall be mine, For as much then as we are the offspring of God, we
are not to think that the Godhead is like unto silver or gold or stone, graven
by art and man's devise: Whereby is intimated, that the Heathens did make
memorials of God by creatures, which they represented in images of filver, of
gold, of stone. This conclusion we have touched before: to prosecute it were to
begin another text.

FINIS.

