PPODPOOS: THE FORERUNNER OF CHRIST's Peaceable KINGDOM upon EARTH.

Mal. 4.5. Behold I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the
great and dreadful Day of the Lord.

Matthew. 17.11. Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come,
and restore all things: but I say unto you, Elias is come already, and they
knew him not, etc.

The Evening and the Morning were the first Day: so of the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th,
and 6th days, Genesis 1.5, 8, 13, 19, 23, 31.

Likewise will the dark Evening precede the seventh Millenary of the World: in
reference whereunto note the words of St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.8. A thousand years
as one day.

Post funestam Gogi and Magogi cladem, (i.e. Papae and Turcae) Ezekiel. 38.39.

Describitur Nova Jerusalem cui nomen [Jenovah Shamma] Dominus. Ibid. c. 48.
ad finem.

Baptistes Dominum, Messiam praeit Elias,
Aurorum Vesper, funebria tetra triumphum.
The Baptist did the Lord precede:
Elias Moshahh will:
The Night, the Day: Christ's triumph shall
The Earth with slaughter fill.
Hoc Omega suis Munus, and Alpha tulit.
Christ this for his did bring; so Munus for his friends.
London, Printed in the Year, 1665.

To the Reader.
True Christian Friend, whoever thou art or may be,
AS in the sequel both of this little Parcel, and of the therein-named Tract of
Christ's Kingdom on Earth to come, I have endeavored with the Woman of
Samaria, to impart to thee, and all that truly fear God, as good news for thy
whole spirit, soul and body, as I have received from Christ; and am persuaded
in my own heart that I have been taught chiefly and remarkably from his Word
and Spirit: Yet since that there are (I conceive by the same means) settled
apprehensions wrought upon my heart, of terrible things to come upon the World
before that time; If such admonition thereof may be useful unto thee, or such
Warning made profitable to any persons that hereafter God may (in mercy) bring
out of the Mystical Babylon, or any other bondage of Satan, before the great
ensuing Destruction come, and so by this or any such means, thou may receive
benefit to thy soul, or promote it to others: and that I may self may at least
be clean from the blood of all men (as the Apostle spoke to those refractory
Jews, his Brethren according to the flesh, Acts 18.6.) I have (under the Glory
of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, shortly to appear, as Tit.
2.13.) attained my end herein. And for what remains, I shall not cease to pray
in the behalf of thee and others, that by the Blessing of God upon this poor
endeavor, or any other good means, which he may in his good pleasure raise up
to such blessed purposes: that so from all of us, to his most holy and glorious
Majesty the due praise of all his glorious Grace may evermore be rendered
through Jesus Christ, and by the Lord the Spirit. In whom I am and ever shall
be thine, in all he has, or may hereafter make me useful to serve thy soul as
such.

MUNUS.
September. 29. 1664.
(...), Matthew. 3. Or, A Warning to the wicked World. A Watchword to wise
Virgins Rev. 14.4.
Dan. 12.10. None of the Wicked shall understand. -- But the Wise shall
understand.
Mal. 4.1.
BEhold, the Day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea, and
all that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and the Day that comes shall burn
them up, says the LORD of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor
branch.

Mal. 3.1, 2, 3. Behold, I will send my Messenger [to wit, to the Jews] and he
shall prepare the way before me: and the LORD, whom ye seek, shall suddenly
come to his Temple; even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in:
Behold, he shall come, says the LORD of Hosts.

Ver. 2. But who may abide the Day of his coming? and who shall stand when he
appears? for he is like a Refiners fire, and like Fullers soap.

Ver. 3. And he shall sit as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver: and he shall
purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as Gold and Silver, that they may
offer unto the LORD an Offering in Righteousness.

Luke 19.27. But those mine Enemies, which would not that I should reign over
them, bring hither, and slay them before me: Even,

(2 Thessalonians. 2.8.) The Wicked-one [with his followers] whom he shall destroy with
the appearance of his coming.

Dan. 12.1. -- There shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there
was a Nation.

Numb. 24.23. Alas, who shall live when God shall do this?

Rev. 16.15.
BEhold, I come as a Thief. Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

Haggi 2.6, 7. Thus says the LORD of Hosts, Yet once it is a little while, and
I will shake the Heavens and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry Land.

Ver. 7. And I will shake all Nations, and the Desire of all Nations shall
come. With Heb. 12.26.

Mal. 4.2, 3. But unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun of Righteousness
arise with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves
of the stall.

Ver. 3. And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the
soals of your feet, in the day that I shall do this, says the LORD of Hosts.

Mal. 3.17, 18. And they shall be mine, says the LORD of Hosts; in that day
that I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son
that serves him.

Ver. 18. Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the
wicked; between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

Rev. 14.4, 5. These are they which were not defiled with Women, [avoiding the
Idolatry of the times] for they are Virgins For being espoused, as a chaste
Virgin unto Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. They reject Image and Idol-worship: Worship of
evil men departed, and Saints, of Crosses and Crucifixes, Opinion of merit,
works of Supererogation, Church-Treasury, Saints Intercession, Men's Pardons,
Indulgences, and all such devices, for freeing them from their sins: as also
all opinions of Self-sufficiency, Free Will, Light within them,
Natural-conscience, Creature-sufficiency, or any thing that intrencheth upon
any of Christ's Offices, as their Prophet, Priest or King, who is all to them
for Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 11.30.
: these are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: these were
redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb.

Ver. 5. And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault
before the Throne of God.

Certain suitable and seasonable portions of Prophetical-Scriptures, left for
the benefit of Wisdoms Children, here tendered to be observed by them in order
following.
THe first is, Rev. 16.12. And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the
great River Euphrates, and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the
Kings of the East might be prepared.

Ver. 13. And I saw three unclean Spirits, like Frogs, come out of the mouth of
the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the false-Prophet. [Which three unclean
Spirits (according to Paraeus) may be first those Legati a Latere, or
Plenipotentiaries, sent to Princes. 2dly. Popish Bishops and Doctors. 3dly.
Priests, Jesuits, etc. by a joint mission, 1. from the Devil, the old Dragon
by instigation. 2dly. From the Popes Council of Cardinals, and their Associats
by advice. And 3dly, from the Beast himself, viz. the Pope by his authorized
Commission.]

Ver. 14. For they are the Spirits of Devils, working Miracles, which go forth
unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole World, to gather them to the
Battle of the great Day of God Almighty.

Ver. 15. Behold, I come as a Thief. Blessed is he that watches, and keeps
his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

Ver. 16. And he gathered them into a place, called in the Hebrew tongue,
Armageddon.

Ver. 17. And the seventh Angel poured out his Vial into the Air, and there
came a great Voice out of the Temple in Heaven, from the Throne, saying, It is
done.

Ver. 18. And there were Voices, and Thunders, and Lightnings: and there was a
great Earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the Earth, so mighty an
Earthquake, and so great.

Ver. 19. And the great City was divided into three parts, and the Cities of
the Nations fell: and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give
unto her the Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his Wrath.

Ver. 20. And every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found.

Ver. 21. And there fell upon men a great Hail out of Heaven, every stone about
the weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God, because of the plague of the
Hail: for the plague thereof was exceeding great.

That probably this Prophecy has already begun to take place: see further in
the second Letter, dated the 20th of May 1664. But the latter part of the
former Prophecy seems again to be decyphered (according to Mr. Mede) Revel.
14.14. to the end; which he conceives may be fulfilled in the utter ruin both
of Pope and Turk, by an immediate hand of Christ, at his coming with his
glorious Angels, at the beginning of the Thousand years, Rev. 20. Which great
Destruction is set forth by two resemblances of the ripe Harvest of the Earth,
and the ripe Clusters of Grapes of the Vine of the Earth: [by the first,
namely, the ripe Harvest of the Earth, he understands the Turk with his
Adherents, in ver. 14, 15, 16. as follows,

Rev. 14.14. And I looked, and behold a white Cloud, and upon the Cloud one
sat like the Son of man: [which description, he observes, always in the
Scripture belongs to Christ] having on his head a Golden Crown, and in his hand
a sharp Sickle. Vide Joel 2.13.

Ver. 15. And another Angel came out of the Temple, crying with a loud Voice to
him that sat upon the Cloud: Thrust in thy Sickle and reap, for the time is
come for thee to reap, for the Harvest of the Earth is ripe.

Ver. 16. And he that sat on the Cloud, thrust in his Sickle on the Earth, and
the arth was reaped. This he understands of the Turks ruin: then follows the
Popes, under the resemblance of the ripe clusters of Grapes, of the Vine of the
Earth, ver. 17, 18, 19, 20.

Ver. 17. And another Angel came out of the Temple which is in Heaven, he also
having a sharp sickle.

Ver. 18. And another Angel came out from the Altar, which had power over fire,
and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in
thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the Vine of the Earth, for her
grapes are fully ripe.

Ver. 19. And the Angel thrust in his sickle into the Earth, and gathered the
Vine of the Earth, and cast it into the great wine press of the wrath of God.

Ver. 20. And the wine press was trodden without the City, and blood came out
of the wine press, even unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and
six hundred furlongs. Thus of the Pope and his Adherents likewise (though that
last destruction is like to be of both Turk and Pope at once) as making up in
both the whole mystical Antichrist, Dr. Homes.
as another learned man conceives, when they are gathered unto the
Armageddon-Battel at the great day of God Almighty, as before, Chap. 16. for
they may both be said to sit in the Temple of God; the Turk holding the Land in
his possession where the material Temple of God formerly stood, keeping out the
Jews, which shall be converted, and possess it, and yet holds in part the Old
Testament and Circumcision, though grossly perverting both: the other, namely
the Pope, sits where the mystical Temple should be glorious, but he hides
the glory of it, and sets up himself there as if he was God, being as it were,
the one Eye, one Arm, and one Leg, making up one half of the mystical
Antichrist, as the Turk does the other, according to the said learned Authors
illustration. Or further, says Mr. Mede, The Harvest may denote the
destruction of the great City, and the Vintage of the ripe Grapes of the Earth
may set forth the destruction of the Kingdom of the Beast soon after to follow;
even as the Vintage follows speedily after the Harvest, which seems to be
most probable, and suitable to Rev. 19.

But a third mystical Prophecy, as Mr. Mede again observes, seems more fully
to set out this last destruction of Antichrist in the utmost latitude, as
follows Rev. 19.11. to the end of the Chapter; which is set down after that
excellent description of the Jews Conversion, Isai. 66.8. [when that Nation
will be born in a day] Ver. 7. when there will be such joy and gladness, that
that Bride especially has made her self ready for the marriage of the Lamb,
(yet probably with other Gentiles likewise) and after those many Hallelujah's
both for that and the destruction of Babylon, first by much people, verse. 1, 2,
3. then secondly, by the four and twenty Elders, and thirdly by the great
multitude, verse. 6. but in the seventh verse follows the exceeding joy for the
great Grace bestowed upon Gods Israel, (with other Gentiles coming in at that
time) saying, Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him, for the
marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready, etc. But
after all these, ver. 11. begins a peculiar Vision given to St. John, in what a
glorious manner Christ, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, would come to
destroy those great Enemies at that time, formerly mentioned, with an utter
sudden and irresistible desolation: Rev. 19.11. And I saw Heaven opened, and
behold a white horse, and he that sat upon him was called, Faithful and True;
and in righteousness he does judge, and make war.

Ver. 12. His Eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his Head were many Crowns,
and he had a Name written that no man knew but he himself.

Ver. 13. And he was clothed in a Vesture dipped in blood, and his Name is
called, The Word of God.

Ver. 14. And the Armies that were in heaven followed him upon white horses,
clothed in fine linen, white and clean.

Ver. 15. And out of his mouth goes a sharp Sword, that with it he should
smite the Nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron: and he treads
the Wine Press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.

Ver. 16. And he has on his Vesture and on his thigh a Name written, KING OF
KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

Ver. 17. And I saw an Angel standing in the Sun, and he cried with a loud
voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of Heaven, Come and gather
your selves together unto the supper of the great God:

Ver. 18. That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and
the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and them that sit on them,
and the flesh of all men both free and bond, both small and great.

Ver. 19. And I saw the Beast, and the Kings of the earth, and their Armies,
gathered together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against
his Army.

Ver. 20. And the Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet [happily
Mohammedan, as well as Popish] however all Antichristian Enemies] that wrought
miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of
the Beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into
a lake of fire burning with brimstone.

Ver. 21. And the remnant were slain with the Sword of him that sat upon the
horse, which Sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the fowls were filled
with their flesh. Thus largely is explained this conquest of Christ at the
Armageddon-Battel, when his Enemies shall eminently be made his Footstool, as
Psalm. 110.1.

Thus having briefly touched on these three approaching Prophecies out of the
[(...)] or little Book given to St. John to eat up, Chap. 10. we shall add one
contemporary with them out of the same Prophecy, about the end of the Roman
Empire, and the entrance of Christ's Visible Dominion in the room and place
thereof, and of all other, being a short abridgment of the Seventh Trumpet,
which there ends all time: Rev. 11.13. And the same hour there was a great
Earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell; and in the Earthquake were
slain of men Seven thousand [ viz. Men of eminent name or note, though happily
civilly] and the remnant were afrighted, and gave glory to the God of Heaven.

Ver. 14. The second Woe is past, and behold, the he third Woe comes quickly.

Ver. 15. And the Seventh Angel sounded, and there were great Voices in Heaven,
saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.

Ver. 16. And the twenty four Elders, which sat before God on their seats,
fell upon their faces and worshipped God,

Ver. 17. Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and
wast, and art to come: because thou have taken to thee thy Great Power, and
have reigned.

Ver. 18. And the Nations were angry, and thy Wrath is come, and the time of
the Dead, that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto
thy Servants the Prophets, and to thy Saints, and them that fear thy Name small
and great, and should destroy them that destroy the Earth.

Ver. 19. And the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in his
Temple, the Ark of his Testament, and there were Lightnings, and Voices, and
Thundrings, and an Earthquake, and great Hail.

Now as this last Prophecy (with all the former) speaks terror to the enemies
of God in these latter days; so, much comfort to his faithful People to ensue
thereupon: as likewise did the forementioned first part of the 19th Chapter.
And therefore upon both considerations, let all such as would approve
themselves in the number of wise Virgins, seriously consider, and diligently
enquire into the series and order of these Prophetical Predictions, the better
to discern the seasonableness of the matter contained in them, that so they may
be enabled to make a due improvement thereof, especially by earnest and
faithful prayer, which is God's Peoples usual prevailing means for obtaining
both the removing of evils, and the enjoyment of good: as Daniel, David,
Hezekiah and others, have frequently by experience found. In reference
whereunto there are part of two Letters, with other Papers hereunto subjoyned:
The one containing some affecting previous apprehensions concerning the New
Jerusalem coming down out of Heaven from God, Chap. 21.10. The other containing
some subsequent serious considerations in reference to the order of
Revelation-Prophecies, and other things, the better to set home such due
consideration and improvement thereof; which are now so much the more necessary
by how much the times of any of their accomplishment may be near approaching:
the one of the said Letters preceding, the other occasionally following a Tract
entitled, [A peaceable Consideration of Christ's peaceful Kingdom upon Earth, in
the thousand Years, Rev. 20. under or after the seventh Trumpet:] Unto which
are annexed certain Theses or Positions agreeing to holy Scripture, and the
Analogy of Faith, tending to make way for the Doctrine of the said Kingdom of
Christ: All being apt to be premised before the said Tract.

I shall here set down these Theses or Positions agreeing to the Scriptures and
Analogy of Faith, which hold out the Symmetry and fit proportion, suiting with
the Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom upon Earth, from the most general and eminent
manifestation of Christ's three great Offices, of Prophet, Priest, and King, in
the three great Periods of the World; whence are drawn six Inferences to prove
the Kingdom of Christ, in the Tract called (...).
THe first thing we named to be done, was the laying down of those Theses or
Positions agreeing to the holy Scripture, and the Analogy of Faith, that may
make way for Doctrines of this nature: Which are these that follow:

First, That as the Job 11.7, 8, 9.
infinite excellency of the Nature and Being of the Trin-Une-Deity Deuteronomy 6.4. 1
Cor. 8.4, 6. 1 John 5.7. Mat. 3.16, 17. and 28.19.
was everlastingly Psalm. 145.3.
incomprehensible in it self, saving only so far as the same Divine Essence
has been pleased to communicate any discovery of it self by Exodus 3.13, 14,
15, 16. Exodus 34.6, 7.
Word, or Psalm. 19.1. and 145.10. Romans 1.20.
Works, or both, unto any Creatures in Heaven or Earth; so has the Trinity of
Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence, both in the Eternal Decrees, and in
the execution of all Psalm. 33.6.
jointly in their order concurred, and so John 5.17. with John 14.10, 11, 16.
will do from Eternity through all Times unto all Eternity.

Secondly, that all the glory of God the Father was by the Eternal Decree to be
manifest 2 Cor. 4.6. Heb. 1.3. Joh. 1.3, 4, 5.
in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son, the Lamb slain in the Eternal Decree
of the Father Rev. 13.8. 1 Pet. 1.19, 20.
before the foundation of the world was laid: And according to the said Eternal
Decree, the holy Ghost 1 John 5.7.
one God co-essential and coequal with the Father and the Son, John 15.26.
proceeds from the Father and the Son, the 1 Timothy 2.5.
Mediator between God and Man, as the sole Genesis 11.2. John 14.16, 17, 26.
efficacious Worker and Accomplisher of all spiritual good, in and for Angels
and Men, and Jam. 1.17.
all real good in all Creatures, which in their several Exodus 20.11.
Orders and Natures they were capable of receiving.

Thirdly, Accordingly in the Creation God made the Prove. 3.19. Prove. 8.27, 28,
29, 30.
World by his Wisdom, the Eternal Word, John 1. the Spirit sitting (as it were)
upon the surface of the Waters then covering the Earth, powerfully to produce
the Creatures then to be made, and so both the Heavens with the Angels (as
Divines conceive) and the Earth, were made the first day, Genesis 1.1. as all that
were made in the whole World afterward, in the five following days; which the
word Elohim in the plural number, put with the Verb [Barah] in the singular
number, denoting the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of Essence, seems to
declare; whose concurrence in the making of man, is likewise very remarkably
expressed, when God said, Let Us make Man after Our own Image, after Our
likeness, Genesis 1.26.

Fourthly, The making of Ephesians. 1.11.
Angels in Heaven, and Man, and all Creatures in the World, was in the
execution of the said incomprehensibly glorious Trin-Une-Deity, in their
several Orders, Natures, Stations, and Conditions.

Fifthly, As no other but the holy and good Will and Pleasure of the infinitely
glorious and incomprehensible GOD, was the reason and cause why they were all
made absolutely as they were; so that they should be for Himself, as Prove. 16.4.
his Word witnesses, as their utmost End, and no other inconsistent Reasons or
Ends ought to be given or assigned by men.

Sixthly, As the Genesis 1.31.
whole Creation was all good, suitable to the Author of it, so the preserving,
ordering, overruling and disposing of all Creatures, according to his good
Pleasure, by his infinite Wisdom, Power, Providence, and Goodness, Romans 11.33.
is not to be measured or judged by any scantling of any created Capacity; who
will notwithstanding be Psalm. 51.4.
justified in his saying, and clear when he is judged; there being in such his
proceedings so many fathomless depths in respect of Creatures, which it is not
lawful for any men to search into, further then Gods Word does warrant them;
but in things not revealed, or forbidden, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
they are not to enquire.

Seventhly, Since God according to his said Eternal Decree, and good pleasure
of his will, at the Fall of our first Parents in Paradise, revealed and
testified his wonderful powerful Grace, That the blessed Seed of the Woman
should break the Serpents Head; there is sufficient ground Psa. 51.5.
for ever to humble all mankind, and 1 Cor. 15.10.
for ever to exalt Gods free and rich Grace therein; and Matt. 11.28. Tit.
2.11, 12.
all men are thereby engaged to use all GOD's means to obtain their part
therein.

Eighthly, According to the Declaration of that wonderful rich and free Grace of
God, for the Salvation of his People, and for carrying on his great Design
therein: As the Father Son, and holy Ghost, by an Eternal Decree had purposed
so to be wonderfully glorified in the powerful Redemption and Salvation of Romans
8.28, 30, 33.
his elect People, in such a way of free Grace; so in the creation of all
things, all sorts of Creatures were made Act. 15.18.
in a capacity to carry on that Design; and from that very period of their
first being, holily and most wisely overruled and disposed of Psalm. 119.91.
in reference thereunto; and so ever since have been, are, and shall be most
wonderfully, holily and powerfully (though many times secretly and
unsearchably) throughout all Ages, by the joint concurrence of all the said
three Persons of the most sacred Trinity, in their order of working, Ephesians. 1.11.
Heb. 6.17. 2 Timothy 2.19. John 13.18.
to the infallible perfecting and completing of the said Design, Decree, and
Purpose.

Ninthly, That the Isa. 42.2. 1 Pet. 1.19.20. John 3.16. 1 Timothy 2.5.
mannagement and administration of the great work of Mediatorship between God
and Man, ever since the said promised Seed was revealed to our first Parents,
has been committed to Jesus Christ the Son of God, who in his Word commands
all men Mat. 17.5 Luke 9.35.
to hear him, Psalm. 2.12 1 Pet. 2.6.
by acknowledging, receiving, and obeying him.

Tenthly, That the mannagement and administration of Mediatorship between God
and Man has ever since been executed by Christ in his three great Offices,
wherein He, and he only is to appear most powerful, wonderful, gracious and
glorious to his Church upon Earth, as her great Act. 3.22.
Prophet, Heb. 5.5, 6.
Priest, and Psalm. 2.6.
King.

Eleventhly, Christ's execution of the said three great Offices, is two ways to
be considered:

1. More generally, for his universal Church, in respect of the Genesis 3.15 Psalm.
110.1. Rev. 11.15.
several seasons wherein in order he was to execute them severally most
eminently, until his work of Mediatorship should perfectly be accomplished, and
2 Cor. 5.18 19, 20, 21.
full reconciliation made between God, and all his elect People, his 2 Cor.
12.12, 27.
mystical Body the true Church being complete in all the Members of it, and
perfect Union and Communion attained with himself as their Mystical Head,
together with the 1 John 1.3.
Father, and the holy Spirit; as also with the glorious Angels, and one with
another, in most happy enjoyment of all Good, to all Eternity.

2. It is again considerable, particularly and specially in respect of every
truly believing Soul, in the particular application of the efficacy of those
three great Offices to them by his holy Spirit, making good means and
ordinances efficacious to every faithful Soul, so exhibiting himself to them,
Act. 3.22.
as their great Prophet, inwardly, powerfully, and savingly, teaching them all
necessary Truth and Doctrine: secondly, Heb. 7.15,
as their great High Priest, in the like way evidencing their Peace and
Reconciliation with God, through that expiation that he should or has made for
their sins: thirdly, in the like way also to evidence to them at one time or
other Act. 2.36.
that he is their powerful King and Protector, that has, and does, and will
subdue all his and their Enemies, and keep them in a loyal and good condition,
by Faith and Grace unto Salvation.

Twelfthly, Consider that the general, more eminent, and glorious execution of
those three great Offices for his universal Church, more remarkably in the
World, is in these three great Periods of his manifesting himself in the World,
according to all that his Joh. 4.34.
Father had given him to do.

1. As 1 Pet. 3.19 20.
the great Prophet of his Church, by his Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in
all his immediate Messengers, till his coming in the Flesh; and so Christ is
said to preach in the time of Noah, to the Spirits in Prison, as St. Peter
speaks, 1 Pet. 3.19, 20.

2. As Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 5.6. and 7. Chap.
the great high Priest, in the second Period after his coming in the flesh,
when putting an end to all the Types and Shadows of his Priesthood, he actually
undertook in his Person, and executed the Work and Office of Priesthood, as the
great High Priest, having made a full and perfect atonement and satisfaction
for the sins of all his People, he ascended into the Heb. 8.1.
Holy of holies, the highest Heavens, there sitting at the right Hand of God
the Father, powerful and glorious, there to execute and improve that Office, by
making intercession for his People till his coming again.

3. Rev. 11.15 and 5.10.
In the third great Period of the World, under the seventh Trumpet, Christ will
appear more eminently in executing the Office of a King in this general
consideration, in respect of his Universal Church, subduing wonderfully and
manifestly in the world Rev. 2.27. Rev. 19.11. to the end.
his own and his Churches Enemies powerfully Deuteronomy. 30.4, 5, 6.
graciously enabling his Saints to walk in the obedience of his Laws, taking
away, in a great degree, the evils of sin and suffering, with the causes of
both, by Rev. cap. 19, 20.
binding of Satan, and destroying the wicked powers of the World, etc. I say in
a great degree, though not then Rev. 20.7, 8, 9, 10.
totally nor finally.

Lastly, Consider how Christ has and does and will work in these three great
Periods of the World; In the first he wrought by 1 Pet. 1.11, 12.
his Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, making known the Will of the Father in
all things for substance, respecting Faith and Obedience; In the second, By
Joh. 1.17. Joh. 14.17. Joh. 17.17.
his Spirit of Grace and Truth, powerfully sanctifying his people more
eminently and largely then in the former: In the last, When he will take to
himself his Kingly Power, Rev. 11.15, and 19. by 2 Cor. 3.18. 2 Timothy 1.7.
his Spirit of Power and Domination.

What things concern this third Period, see further after the large Paper,
December 7. 1664.

November. 3. 1663. Part of a Letter, sent to a Friend, not long after the Writer
thereof had more intensively inquired into the last times, in order held out in
the Book of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, contained under the seventh
Trumpet, Rev. 11.9 and Thousand years of Christ's Reign on Earth, Rev. 20.
AS for the New-Jerusalem, since the bar was taken away, whereby I have
formerly conceived it to be an Article of Faith, which the Scripture expressly
declared, viz. [That the Heavens must contain Christ's Person till his coming
the second time to Judgement] My meaning was, to the last Judgment. I have (I
say) found much since in Scripture (but especially in the Book of the
Revelation) to tend to a coming of Christ, as the great Monarch, to set up his
glorious Kingdom, upon the putting down all other worldly Powers that stood in
opposition to him, 1 Cor. 15. when he will begin to judge the quick and dead,
Rev. 11.17, 18. I have lately perused Mr. Archers Book of Christ's Personal
Reign, and though in all things therein I am not satisfied, yet I cannot find
solid reason in many things, to dissent; and in other things it seems
convincing; and doubtless in his time he was a very discerning Christian, and I
had of late, (before I read that, or any other of the like nature, since my
most earnest search into mystical Prophecies of the latter times) the same
apprehensions of diverse passages in Scripture, which I find to agree with his
Book: as the applying what our Savior promised to his Disciples when he came
to his Kingdom, [which I find will be in the Thousand years, Rev. 20.4.
promised to the New-Jerusalem Inhabitants, Rev. 3.21.] that then they should
sit on twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. And that of our
Savior, Luke 21.24. that Jerusalem should be trodden under foot till the times
of the Gentiles be fulfilled, [but to be raised up again then.] And when he
wept over Jerusalem, he said, They (namely that People of the Jews) should not
see him thenceforth, till they said, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of
the Lord, Mat. 23. ult. denoting that then they should see him. And that
Promise, Zech. 12.10. to the end, which is in a way of mercy, foreshewing how
upon their Conversion, they should mourn in humble contrition, and look to him
at his appearing [when that Nation shall be born in a day, Isa. 66.8.] which
judicious Expositors apply to the expression, Rev. 1.7. Behold, he comes with
Clouds, and every eye shall see him; and they also that pierced him (that is,
the People of the Jews, that after their imprecation on themselves, and on
their children, shall be accomplished) will (as the Apostle Paul speaks, Romans
11.) appear to be beloved for their Fathers sake, when those times of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Act. 3.19. and then all
Israel shall be saved (both of Jew and Gentile:) And though many grave Divines
for a long time interpreted all that has been spoken to this purpose, for the
most part to a spiritual sense, yet the things that some hold out to the
contrary, seem easy to be answered: so that if this Opinion, or rather matter
of Faith, be but freed from those evil additions that the subtilty of Satan in
the primitive times thrust upon it (as if it should be a Kingdom of sensual
pleasure;) for before this misrepresentations, or false aspersions rather, as
Mr. Mede notes, it was very ancient. And freed likewise from that bold
presumption and scandalous wickedness of our latter times, for any, under
pretense of Christ's Kingdom given to the Saints, to go about by the Sword, or
any other unlawful means, to divest Magistrates and Governors of their Offices,
to take that Kingdom before Christ give it to them to whom it will belong, as
being appointed to them by his Father, in his own time, namely, at Christ's
appearing. [Here consider that Christ says, he came not to destroy the Law;
and Paul says, he established the Law; and this is necessary to vindicate this
Doctrine from scandal, and to warn well-meaning persons that they think not
upon seeming-fair pretenses of good, to attempt to do evil; God having
revealed, that he will set up that Kingdom himself, and that only in his own
appointed time. On the other side, says our Savior, He that breaks the
least Commandment, and teaches men so, shall be the least (that is, none) in
the Kingdom of Heaven] As he answered the mother of Zebedees children, Mat.
20.23. It shall be given to them for whom it is appointed of my Father:
appointed as well for the time when, as persons to whom. These and the like
errors being removed from it, I think it may have an honorable and comfortable
place in matter of true Christian Faith, as containing the best times of the
most holy Catholic Church upon Earth, that we are to believe or hope for, and
the excellentest Communion of Saints that we are in this world to expect. And
likewise, that we are now specially by our prayers to labor to promote (as God
of old directed his People, when their time of deliverance from Babylon drewon,
Jer. 39. Then (said he) they shall call on me, and I will answer, etc. And when
Daniel by Books understood the mind of God, therein he set himself by fasting
and prayer, to seek for, and help forward (if it might be) the accomplishment
of such revealed Grace: So now also that new Babel is abundantly revealed to
God's People, to be shortly to be thrown down, and the New-Jerusalem, much more
abundantly revealed in Scripture, shortly thereupon to be set up: The Faith and
Prayer of God's People ought in their sphere to seeks to promote it; and I
observe the Dutch Notes (though by men of different Judgments) yet in the
Preface of the nine last Chapters of Ezekiels Prophecy, apply what is there
said to some wonderful Glory of a Jerusalem to come, of which the former
restoring of the Jews from old Babylon was but a Type: Besides, I observe many
Psalms, and many passages in many other Psalms more than I read in Mr. Archers
Book, to tend so this way, that otherwise (as such Prophetical-Scriptures
besides) seem not to have any probable fulfilling [but according to Revelation,
Interpretation (as I may call it) which I must acknowledge I never did, nor
ever was like rightly and groundedly to have understood, but according to the
tenor of that blessed Book. And as Isreal's coming out of Egypt, tended to the
actual giving of them, after forty years space, the possession of Canaan of
old: so God's Peoples coming out of the spiritual Egyptian Antichristian
bondage, now approaching, tends to bring all God's true Israel into the
New-Jerusalem, that comes down from Heaven, Rev. 20. and is it not a main drift
of the most, if not of all the petitions in the Lord's Prayer to this purpose?
for when has Gods Name been so comparably hallowed in Earth as it is in
Heaven, as then it will be, both by Men and Angels, in all he is made known by
to his People? When will his Kingdom come with such power to any sutableness in
Earth as it is, and will be in Heaven, but when the Kingdoms of this World are
the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ? Rev. 11.15. And likewise when at
the same time, Rev. 19. God's People shall so rejoice when the Lord God
Omnipotent reigns; because, as it follows in the next verse, his Bride has
made her self ready: And consequently when will the Will of God be done in
Earth, as it is by the blessed Angels in Heaven, but when his Subjects are of
most obedient hearts and loyal spirits, as they will be under such a prevalent
reigning of Christ.

When may daily Bread, this day [any day] be so comfortably and confidently
prayed for and expected, as when the particular promises of the greatest
confluences of Temporal and Spiritual Blessings are to be fulfilled in their
proper season to their best purposes? etc. When may we with such comfort and
confidence pray for forgiveness of our Trespasses, this day, [any day] as when
our hearts shall witness with us we least allow our sins? When shall we be so
assured of our own pardon, as when our spirits are most free and clear in
pardoning others in case they offend against us? When can we so confidently
pray to be delivered from the evil one, and evil works, with the consequents
thereof this day [any day] as when Satan shall be known to be bound, Rev. 20.3.
and many great temptations removed, and a very great measure of Grace attained,
and near Communion with Christ enjoyed in this World? Yea, and will not the
following enforcements of Prayer set down by our Savior be then most clearly
applicable, when the Kingdom is most manifestly Gods, and the Power both, to
obtain it at his own time and pleasure? and so likewise to retain it, appears
clearly his; and consequently all Glory as his due, shall be rendered unto him
to all eternity. Amen, Amen.

And for the Martyrs and Saints to be raised at the entrance of Christ on this
his Kingdom, to have their part in the New Jerusalem: I had the like thoughts
before to what I find in other Authors, That they should be in a state, such as
Christ was in after his own Resurrection, while he was not ascended to his
Father; but when I consider the many Prophesies of all those great things in
the Old Testament, so confirmed in the New, and specially applied in the
Revelation to the New Jerusalem, not only by allusion, but by application of
the Spirit of God and Christ himself in a special manner, Rev. 10.7. as he
declared to his Servants the Prophets: And at that time reward is to be given
to his Servants the Prophets, Rev. 11.18. and to his Saints, and to them that
fear his Name, both great and small, as it follows in the same Scripture: And
it is of main weight in this point, that when the Chorus was set about the
Throne, Rev. 4.1, 2, 3. etc. when Saint John was to receive the Visions of that
Book, there is a glorious appearance of God described, and the Rainbow round
about the Throne, as doing all to his Church through the Covenant of Grace,
through the Blood of Christ his only begotten Son; and the seven Lamps burning
before the Throne, deciphering the seven Spirits, or the Holy Ghost with his
Gifts and Graces, as Rev. 1.4. more clearly in Rev. 5. there is a Book in the
Hand of him that sat upon the Throne, which none was found worthy to open but
the Lamb, that had been, as it were, slain, having seven Horns and seven Eyes,
verse. 6. which occasioned the four living Wights, and twenty four Elders, to
sing a new Song, and afterward fall down and worship; but the top of rejoicing
for all that was in the Book, and after all that should be done and suffered
by, and for, and in Christ's Church, (which they represented in that vision) it
was this, which was the great enforcement of their joy while the World was to
continue; And (say they, verse. 10.) we shall reign upon Earth; And that
Subject, of such their reign there, after all their labors and sufferings of
the Saints, as their time of refreshment, Acts 3.19. and Sabbatism or rest,
Heb. 4. is largely treated of in sundry Particulars, in the 19, 20, 21, 22. the
four last Chapters of the Book of the Revelations, and that those things
therein contained, must necessarily be understood of the state of God's Church
upon earth, according to the series and order of the Book in the last times,
and therefore were never yet accomplished; take into serious consideration the
brief abridgment of Reasons and Testimonies following to that purpose.

1. The New Jerusalem is said to come down from God, chap. 21.2. and not to
ascend up, or be taken up unto God, as the Church Tryumphant at the last day
shall be, 1 These. 4.17. Christ will take the Church up to himself, John 14.3.
it shall not come down after the last Judgment to remain here. 2. The Church is
said to be prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband, I conceive the New
Jerusalem that comes down from God, will be a kind of tryumphant Church,
consisting of the raised Saints, though in the thousand years, it be not fully
glorified, yet perfectly sanctified and saved, Rev. 20. knowing in due season
they shall be so glorified, as 1 John 3.2, 3.

But all others of the faithful, in the natural life, shall walk in the light
of that Jerusalem, the Mother of us all, Gal. 4. Rev. 21.24. and accordingly
the several Texts relating to either, are to be destinguished.


verse. 2. Now the Church Tryumphant, of all the Elect gathered together, is not
a Bride prepared, but a Wife in marriage fully accomplished. 3. Because it is
called a Tabernacle, a removing state, and God also said to be with men, and to
dwell as in a Tabernacle with them; but concerning the Church Tryumphant in
Heaven, the manner of speaking is to say [It is with God.] 4. Because the Holy
Ghost so strongly confirms this renovation of all things, avouching it again
and again, verse. 1.5. commanding to write, and affirming the words to be
faithful and true, which needed not in so generally approved believed truth,
touching the state of the Church Tryumphant. 5. Because John is made to ascend
on high, to see this new City below him descending out of Heaven from God. 6.
Because it is said to be measured, and that with the measure of a man, v. 16,
17. which shows it to be the Church on Earth, which is only measurable, and
to be measured, c. 11.1. Zach. 1.16. but not the Tryumphant in Heaven. 7.
Because here is said, That Nations shall walk in the light of it, and Kings of
the Earth shall bring their glory and honor to it, verse. 23, 24. yea the glory
and honor of the Nations too, v. 26. But none can bring earthly glory and
honor (for of such he speaks) into Heaven above, to beautify it withal. 8.
This seems not unreasonable (though something in the Letter carry our
thoughts to a state of full perfection, chap. 21.4. and 22.3, 4, 5. because the
like speeches have been used by the Holy Prophets aforetime, to set out the
graceful and peaceful state of the Church, Isa. 65.17, 18, 19, 25. and 60.18,
20. and 25.8. and 60.21. and yet further observe, after those high expressions,
it is said, chap. 22.6. These sayings are faithful and true, the Lord God of
the Holy Prophets (who had spoken of old time) sent his Angel to show unto his
Servant John the things [which must shortly be done] which words, shortly be
done, seem always in this Book to note the state of the Church on earth.

Now for Testimonies in the next place: Some such thing is promised to the
Jews, in the Books of the Prophets, which seem not yet to be fulfilled, but
deferred till the seventh Trumpet be blown, when the Mystery of God shall be
finished, as has been declared to his Servants the Prophets; by which words it
is clear, that all things in the Prophets are not accomplished, till this Book
of the Revelation be fulfilled; for the Prophets have formerly spoken of this
Mystery to be finished under the seventh Trumpet. Now that we may not wonder at
the New Jerusalem here set forth, look unto the prophesies of old, and mark
what by them the Lord did promise unto the Jews after their captivity. 1. He
tells them, They shall be brought back again to Jerusalem and to inhabit Judea,
Zach. 8.7, 8. and 10.8, 9. Isa 60.10, 15. and 62.10. And this shall the Lord
do, who shall cause Righteousness and Praise before all Nations, Isa 61.11. 2.
He will pour upon them the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and they shall
look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, Zach.
12.10, 14. 3. He will make them strong to overcome all their enemies, and they
shall inhabit Jerusalem again, Zach. 12.6. and build the old wastes; they shall
raise up the former desolations; and they shall repair the waste Cities, and
the desolations of many Generations, Isa. 61.4. and 58.12. and that by the help
of strangers and their Kings, Isa. 60.10. 4. Being so built, whereas it had
been forsaken and hated, so as no man went through it, he will make it an
eternal Excellency, and a Joy of many Generations, Isa. 60.15. For, 1. Violence
shall no more be heard in the Land, wasting nor destruction within the borders,
but her Walls shall be called, Salvation, and her Gates, Praise, Isa. 60.18.
The Sun shall be no more her light by day, neither for brightness shall the
Moon give light unto her. Isa. 60.19, 20. 2dly. All the people shall be
righteous, Isa. 60.21. and no Canaanite there, Zech. 14.21. 3dly. Her Officers
shall be Officers of Peace, and her Exactors, Righteousness, Isa. 60.17. 4thly.
Her Watchmen shall never be silent, Isa. 62.6. neither shall her Vision ever be
wanting, Isa. 59.21. But the false Prophet, and the unclean spirit shall be cut
off, Zech. 13.2. So as by this glorious and graceful state she shall be called
by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name, Isa. 62.2. that is,
Hephziba, and the Land, Beulah; for the Lord would delight in her, and marry
her: or Jehovah there shall be the name of the City, Ezekiel. 48.35. 5thly,
Hereupon they shall be known among the Gentiles and People, and all that see
their Seed and Offspring, shall acknowledge them the Seed which the Lord has
blessed, Isa. 61.9. An holy People, the Redeemed of the Lord, fought out, and
not forsaken, Isa. 62.12. 6thly, The Gentiles and their Kings shall see her
Righteousness and Glory, Isa. 62.12. whereupon they shall come to her, Isa.
60.3. and that with earnest desire, and high estimation of her, Zech. 8.22, 23.
and be joined to the Lord and become his People also with her, Zech. 2.11.
These Nations and Kings shall bring to her Sons and Daughters, Isa. 60.4. and
49.22. Enrich her mightily with abundance, and precious things, Isa. 60.6, 17.
She shall eat the Riches of the Gentiles, Isa. 61.6. and suck the Milk of the
Gentiles, and the Breasts of Kings, Isa. 60.16. who shall be her Nursing
Fathers, and Queens her Nursing Mothers, Isa. 49.23. bringing her Presents and
Gifts, Isa. 60.6. and 45.14. they shall fall down, and make supplication, Isa.
45.14. they shall worship with their Faces to the Earth, and lick the dust of
her Feet, Isa. 49.23. Zech. 14.16. Strangers shall be her Servants, Isa. 61.5.
Yea, such as will not serve her, shall be destroyed, Isa. 60.12. Zech. 14.17.
She shall be a Crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, and a Royal Diadem in
the hand of her God, Isa. 62.3. And this her Excellency shall never be changed,
her days of mourning shall be ended, Isa. 60.19, 20. Her Joy everlasting, Isa.
61.7. For ever shall her Land be inhabited, Isa. 60.21. Zech. 14.11. For to the
Lord is she married, Isa. 62.4. who swears by his right Hand, and the Arm of
his Strength, to give her no more over to her Enemies, Isa. 62.8. At that day
the Lord shall be King over all the Earth; and in that day shall there be one
Lord, and his Name one, Zech. 14.9.

Thus we see what glorious Promises are made to the New Jerusalem, when the
Promises of the New Heavens and the New Earth shall be accomplished, with many
other of the like nature: whence it may appear how strongly pre-possession of
prejudice against an Opinion, or Doctrine, may carry grave and otherwise
judicious men away from the Way of Truth; sometime upon one advantage or other,
as by Prescription, by Multitudes of wise, learned, or even good men (if they
try not all things, to hold that which is good, (which was mine own late Error
in this particular) or at least want of defecation of appendant Errors,
cunningly by Satan affixed on this Truth (as we observed in ancient and modern
seducements, not distinguishing between the Depravation and Corruption of that
Truth, and Truth it self, which in its Original was pure and untainted (as in
other cases many times) when the corrupt super-additions of men have long
prevailed to mingle themselves with anciently untainted Truths, which when men
can learn to view with unprejudiced minds, and adhere to with uninterested
Affections, will soon appear to them in their native excellency.

But for the said New Jerusalem, the more I observe many places of Scripture,
not only in the New Testament, and Revelations, but in the Psalms, the
Prophets, and even the Historical Parts, the more I am minded thereof, from
time to time. And besides, Psalm. 2. and 8. and 96, 98, 99. which one mentions
specially, I have taken notice of sundry others (since God has opened my eyes,
as he did Hagars of old, to see these refreshing Waters of Comfort) as Psalm.
89. and 50. and diverse passages in others, which seemed to tend that way, as
Psalm. 146.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and 148.11, 12, 13, 14. and 149. throughout; and
those nine last Chapters of Ezekiel, which the Dutch Bible reckons like
Daniels, to be Revelations of the Old Testament, which set forth things to be
accomplished in the New (though they seem not to own the Opinion) yet sometimes
again lay grounds of it. The second and seventh of Daniel speak much of Christ's
Kingdom, and many other places, too largely here to rehearse. The Spirit of God
seems to me to have spoken so largely thereof, and in many specialties likewise
to these purposes, and the things themselves seem so to approach, as evidently
may appear from the Book of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, (the best Expositor
of the meaning of his own Prophetical Spirit) that it much concerns all Gods
People diligently to search and examine all such Truths as he has set down
there for our now seasonable Instruction and Consolation, being sunk down near
to the very dregs of the Worlds evil Times. And as our Savior on Earth
directed to search the Scriptures for Salvation; so now being in Heaven he
directs his People to search them in this for consolation: And as then he said,
In Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms, it is written of me, for the former; so
for this he not only points out Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms in the old
Testament, but has likewise taught the Apostles, the Evangelists, with many
other persons divinely inspired in the New Testament, to give witness to these
things; Vide the (...), or peaceable consideration of Christ's Kingdom etc.
and lastly by his own wonderful, gracious, divine, though mystical Revelation
to the beloved St. John, wherein very much is held out concerning his own
Kingdom, and the New Jerusalem; and as it was when by the Ministry of Christ
and his Apostles, the Doctrine of the Resurrection had been more cleared then
in former times; yet afterward the Apostle Paul shows a further Mystery
concerning the same, 1 Cor. 15. We must (says he) all be changed, though not
all dye; so many things are still Mysteries to us, concerning both the New
Jerusalem, and the Resurrection, though concerning both, our Savior in his
Revelation has last super-added greater further Discoveries in both, than any
were before, at least in evidence and clearness; Yet how are the Eyes of very
many withheld from discerning these things? and in great part it is like to be
so to all, save to them to whom it is given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of God, which he uses to do, as Christ himself informs us, to Babes
and Sucklings, when they are hid from the Wise and Prudent, Mat. 11.25. and
therefore to be humbly and faithfully sought: And though the Apostle Paul
concerning the Jews general Conversion, had discoursed largely in the ninth,
tenth, and eleventh Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans, yet still he reckons
that Doctrine mystical, v. 25, etc. Let all such therefore as are of truly
Christian Spirits, wait upon God, as by other means, so by faithful and earnest
Prayer to the true Teacher of his own Mysteries, as may appear requisite in a
matter of so great importance, concerning all Gods faithful People, who seem to
have their peculiar interest therein, Rev. 3.21. and 20.4, 5. and 10.18. which
is incomparably greater and better for that thousand years, then all the
Crowns, and Scepters, and Kingdoms of the World (not improved in Christ's
service) in the mean time.

Part of a Letter dated May 20. 1664. tending to the opening of the seven
Seals, Trumpets, and Vials, with the Order of their Times; useful for such as
are unacquainted with Revelation-Mysteries; with some Additions to the like
purpose.
THe first six of the seven Seals, are the first Times after the giving of the
Revelation to St. John, toward the end of the first Century, or first hundred
of years after Christ's coming in the Flesh; the which said six Seals reached to
the time wherein Constantine the Great threw down the Heathenish Idolatry in
the Roman Empire, about the year 320. after Christ; they are set down Rev. 6.
But out of the seventh Seal proceeded the Seven Trumpets, whereof the six first
contain all the ensuing time of the Roman Empire, both Christian and
Antichristian; and the seventh Trumpet will begin at the ruin of Antichrist,
Vide, Paper of December. 7. 1664. Where diverse Reasons are given for it.
and continue, as some conceive, to the last day of Judgment, or rather to the
beginning of the thousand years. The first four Trumpets (which are reckoned
the milder miseries upon that World of the Roman Empire) contain somewhat above
two hundred years after Constantine, Rev. 8. When the Goths, Vandals, Hunnes,
Almains, etc. by degrees took away the Emperor, who was he that let the
revealing of Antichrist, spoken of 2 These. 2. The other three Trumpets, called
the [Vae, vae, vae, Tubae,] or three Woe-Trumpets, Rev. 8. last verse. are as
follows; The first Wo-Trumpet, or fifth Trumpet, is conceived to begin Anno
Domini 622. according to Helvicus, when those Locusts out of the bottomless
Pit, viz. the Saracens, subdued and overran, one half of the Eastern Roman
Empire, bringing in with them that horrible Imposture of Mahometism, Rev. 9.
first part of the Chapter, which continued till about Anno Domini, 1300. When
the second Wo-Trumpet or sixth Trumpet is conceived to have begun, when the
Turks, the other Mohammedan Locusts overcame the Saracens, and overcame likewise
the other half of the Eastern Roman Empire, Rev. 9. latter part of the Chapter,
which Trumpet will end with the utter perdition of the last Head of the Roman
State, viz. the ruin of the Popedom, being the Feet and Toes of the Image
expounded by Daniel cap. 2. And for the state of the Church, contemporary with
these contained in the little Book in the Angels Hand, Revelations 10. after a
short Chronological Table (as it were) of both Prophecies, chap. 11. to verse.
15. and thence to the end of the Chapter, a short Relation of the sounding of
the seventh Trumpet and state of the World, then and thence forward (as after
follows.) The first Contemporary State of the Church is set down, chap. 12.
containing the Primative times, till Constantines, and the Dragons flood of
Arrian Persecution; from those times, till the Woman's, the True Church her
flight into the Wilderness, not long after the Year of our Lord 400. when its
probable the Date of the Beast began, the false Apostatical Church, when the
Western last Head of the fourth Beast, which had received a deadly wound, was
again healed, set forth by two Beasts, chap. 13. The first having seven Heads
and ten Horns, deciphering the Politic State; the other with two Horns like a
Lamb, and speaking like a Dragon, the Eclesiastick State thereof, whose time is
forty two months, the same with the Lord Christ's two Witnesses prophesying in
Sackcloth, 1260 days of years, Rev. 11. and the Woman's, the True Church, her
abode in the Wilderness, for a time, times, and half a time, as chap. 12.14.
where the Lord's said Witnesses nourish her to the end of the said time, and
last period of the sixth Trumpet, under which most (if not all) of the seven
Vials, the seven last Plagues, Rev. 15.16. are poured out upon the Beast, the
Popish State and Church, to the utter destruction thereof, whilst the 144000
followers of the Lamb stand with him upon Mount Zion, Rev. 14. harping with
their Harps, and singing, as it were, a new Song before the Throne, and the
four living Wights, and twenty four Elders, who are excellently described, ver.
4, 5. till all the Angels had done their Messages, and the Son of Man that sat
on the white Cloud, had thrust in his sharp Sickle several times, at the
request of the last Angels, to reap the Harvest and Grapes of the Earth fully
ripe, to the end of the chap. Which Angels seem contemporary (if not the same)
with the seven Angels pouring out the seven Vials, chap. 16. particularly set
down; And it seems probable that the sixth of those Vials is now pouring out by
the Turkish Army, drying-up the great River Euphrates of the German Emperors
Dominions, and forward toward Rome, whereby the maintenance, honor and
defense of the Popedom has been long upheld and conveyed to it. As the great
River Euphrates was useful unto old Babylon, until the great Army of Cyrus,
having turned the waters another way, passed through the Channel thereof into
old Babylon.

Or, if by such means, with others, as by the conversion of some, and plagues
and confusions in others, the Turks Dominions, as the great River Euphrates
shall be dried up in the issue, to make way for the Jews, the Kings of the
East, to come into Palestine; yet so it will be, the sixth Vial upon the great
River Euphrates, and it may not improbably be true of both. The seventh Vial
will end the Popes Being, and all evil Dominion, being poured upon the Air,
where the Prince of the power of the Air has so long prevalently ruled, which
is called the end of the second Woe, Rev. 11.14. at the end of which the seventh
Trumpet will sound, which is called the Wo-joy Trumpet; first, bringing for the
most part destruction to the Wicked in the World, and likewise bringing-in
great happiness to God's faithful People following in the thousand years, Rev.
20. and other things concerning the New-Jerusalem, and the contemporaries
therewith in the two last Chapters of the Book of the Revelations: Concerning
which state of things in the Church (then) I conceive the not distinguishing
between the seventh mystical Trumpet, and the last loud-sounding Trumpet, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. is the occasion of some misapprehensions of some things to be in
the said thousand years, which are also an occasion of stumbling to many, as to
the matter of the Doctrine of the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth, whence the
great and sudden change of all the Faithful is apprehended to be at the
beginning of the seventh mystical Trumpet (which I conceive from the Apostle's
words) will not be until the other loud-sounding Trumpet, above a thousand
years after, at the last Resurrection and great day of the last general
Judgment at the end of the World, 1 Thessalonians. 4. which will follow the last
attempt of the Devil by Gog and Magog, Rev. 20. at the end of the thousand
years; at which great sudden momentany change, in the twinkling of an eye, at
the Voice of the Archangel, and sounding of the said Trumpet, both all those
that were raised at the beginning of Christ's Reign, or all-along the thousand
years, as learned Mede conceives; and all the Faithful that are found alive at
last on Earth, must then pass through that momentany change, and be wrapped up
with the Faithful likewise, then raised to meet Christ in the Air in a glorious
condition: For, though such as were raised before in the beginning of Christ's
Reign, were before in an excellent state in regard of their bodies, suitable to
what Christ's was in before he ascended unto the Father; yet then it seems
probable they will be more glorious bodies, than formerly mortal eyes could
endure to behold: therefore says the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 15.51. We shall not
(then) all sleep, but we shall all be changed, both living and dead. All be
changed both living and dead, or raised before, namely, all that are faithful;
and he repeats it again, the more strongly to assertain it, ver. 52. latter
part of the verse; for the Trumpet (says he) shall sound, and the dead shall
be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. It seems also necessary that
there be a distinct consideration of the state of such as are of the
New-Jerusalem come down from Heaven, which seems to be the City, whose Maker
and Builder is God (as it is said) Heb. 11.10. which is again said, ver. 16. to
be prepared by him for the faithful Forefathers that dyed not, having received
the Promises, ver. 13. who without us will not be made perfect, ver. last,
having all dyed in Faith; which is probable to he meant by our Savior, when he
calls it, the City of the great King, Mat. 5.35. where his Deputies, the twelve
Apostles, shall sit on twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel,
Luke 22.30. on whose twelve foundations of the Wall thereof shall be written
the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, Rev. 21.14. and seems to be the
chief mansion-place of the blessed, holy, then raised Saints, having part in
that first Resurrection, wholly then freed from the second death, Rev. 20.6.
upon which the Glory of the LORD will then eminently shine continually, to the
eclipsing of the glory of the Sun and Moon, Isa. 60.19. Rev. 21.23. and 22.5.
Very glorious things (says the Psalmist, in a prophetical rapture) are spoken
of thee, O City of God, Psalm. 87.3. (as is observable in that whole Psalm.)

Again, the (then) happy estate of the converted and reduced twelve Tribes of
Israel and Judah, those two sticks united into one, Ezekiel. 37. together with the
converted Gentiles in their fullness then come in, Romans 11. who together with
very large endowments of inward spiritual Grace, and therewith abundance of
temporal prosperity, which the Prophets largely spoke of, with very much
exemption from the evil of sin and suffering, when Satan is bound, the Churches
enemies destroyed, or subdued and brought under; which happy estate they and
their posterity will successively enjoy through all the Generations of the said
thousand years, according to the Prophecies or Promises, Deuteronomy. 30. ver. 1 to
11. Isa. 61.9. The Seed which the Lord has blessed, Ezekiel. 37.25. They and
their Childrens Children for ever, and my Servant David, that is, Christ the
Messiah shall be their Prince for ever, Isa. 59. last. Deuteronomy. 4.30, 31. with
many texts more; and which were theirs, not in a mortal, (that is) a changeable
condition from a natural life, by some removal or Translation; as otherwise
they should have no Seed or Posterity to enjoy those many Promises all the
thousand years, so neither should they at last be liable to any evil attempt of
Satan, and wicked men, called, Gog and Magog; (though by gracious Promise, such
as live at that last Period of time, are secured from the evil even of the
attempt likewise) Many other things the holy Scripture seems to hold forth, in
reference to the differing state of the naturally living, and the Saints raised
at the beginning of the thousand years; and as for the restitution of all
things, in respect thereof, without Scripture-Warrant, why look we for any more
than Gods removing the Curse? as the inflicting that from the Fall has been
the efficient Cause of all that Bondage that has been ever since upon the
Creatures, held on by the means of Satan, till then when he shall likewise be
bound. Thus in such a way, if the distinction between the last mystical
Trumpet, and the last said sounding Trumpet, and the state of the raised
Saints, and such as then will remain in their natural Life, be well observed,
it may greatly make way for the clearing by degrees (by the help of Gods Word
and Spirit) many excellent Truths respecting these things, wherein much caution
and moderation will still be very useful and necessary in what things are not
clear and evident, etc.

December. 7. 1664. This Paper sent upon occasion of a Book, to be perused, not
having the right Series or Order of the Book of the Revelations; and is added
here as a Supplement to the former Letter.
AS for the perused Author, he was manifestly a man of great Abilities, Worth
and Piety, as is evident from his grave, judicious, and truly pious
Determinations, Discourses, Cases and Treatises of several Subjects, and many
Expositions along that large Book of his upon the Revelations; and first, more
particularly in the most things handled by him on the three first Chapters to
the seven Churches of Asia, and on the fourth and fifth Chapters, setting forth
the Glory of God the Creator, and Christ the Redeemer; But as for the right
series of things, following in that Divine Book, he appears not to have
attained the right Key, so far as I can, by the guidance of God's Word and
Spirit (as I believe) with such other helps, which in special mercy have
hitherto been afforded me, discern; and to this purpose I shall endeavor by
his Grace to set down some brief hints of Differences between him and others,
which upon the former accounts I much rather approve of, as namely of judicious
Mede, and some others since him, yet living; though happily in some things I may
differ from all, yet I conceive Light and Darkness may so thereby the better
discover themselves and illustrate each other, that whosoever, like the Noble
Bereans, shall search the Scriptures answerably, concerning what shall be set
down, may probably find whether all these things be so: for as no man's eminency
should lead us into error, so no man's meanness should make us neglect or
despise the Truth he tenders, especially the Divine and Heavenly Truths which
God has set forth in his Word, for the true Comfort and Edification of his
Church; I shall briefly, for what is past, give only some hints of both, for
the most part refering to a former Letter to such purposes, dated, May 20.
1664. which this Paper may be a supplement unto; but happily somewhat more
largely of what is to come, as God shall direct and enable me, whose
assistance, I must confess to his Glory, I have formerly experimentally found.

First then, What this Author understands in the Seals, That the Horses
signify the Church, and the Persecutions thereof along the Primitive Times,
seem to me more aptly otherwise to denote with Mr. Mede and others, the
dispensations of God in the world, (as in Zach. 1.10.) both toward the Church
and others with whom they had to do, namely the Roman Empire, called the (...)
in the New Testament; and though both the Books of the Seal-Prophecie, and the
little Book, chap. 10. speak much in some sort of both, yet each chiefly
relates to one, as namely the Seal-prophecy for the most part to the Empire,
and the Book-prophecie for the most part to the Church, as after may more by
Gods assistance appear; which is to be observed until the Empire and Church
become one under Christ's Kingdom, in the time, or happily after the time of the
seventh Trumpet.

Therefore after the Lamb Christ Jesus had received the Book at the Hand of him
that sat upon the Throne, chap. 5. in the Chapter following, John heard the
thundering Voice of one of the Beasts, saying, Come and see, when the Lamb
opened the first Seal; where he beheld a white Horse, and he that sat on him
had a Bow, and a Crown was given to him, and he went conquering, and to
conquer; denoting the dispensations of God's Grace in the world through Jesus
Christ, who received of the Father this Book of Revelation of the things
concerning the Church and her Enemies, and has all power to fulfill and execute
them accordingly here; first, set forth by the white-Horse, so tendering Peace
by the Preaching of the Gospel, which like a Bow, shoots out Arrows, (as Psalm.
45.) piercing the Hearts of all sorts it is sent unto, and by which Christ will
be Victorious and Glorious, etc. and therefore in the sending abroad of this
Gospel, he goes conquering of all sorts thereby, and to conquer and subdue all
such as shall oppose and persecute it. This has been his design ever since
this white-Horse was sent abroad, guided by that Rider; and this is and will be
pursued till he fully have the Crown of Victory, when his Enemies shall become
his Footstool, Psalm. 110. at the day of the glorious appearing of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Titus 2.13. to begin, at or about, the
destruction of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. when he will come with Clouds, Rev.
1.7. and when all Families of the Earth shall mourn, seeing the Son of man
coming in the Clouds with Power and great Glory, Mat. 24.30. and 26.64. of
which design the Spirit of God, by the Holy Prophet, speaks eminently, Psalm.
45.4. saying, Ride on in thy Majesty because of the Word of Truth, of Meekness
and Righteousness, viz. to subdue unto his Obedience by conquering; and his
right Hand will teach him terrible things, by conquering and subduing his
Enemies, and such as withstand him: And this in all parts of the Revelation
will be evident; for persecution will follow the Gospel, as the Shadow the
Substance, so long as the Seed of the Serpent and the Seed of the Woman have
their abode together in the world: and therefore, in this Book, in the
following Seals, God seems thereby to manifest what dispensations be would show
toward such persecuting Enemies in all the following Seals and Trumpets, till
that time of eminent victory and conquest, begin to be manifest unto men in the
World at the foresaid Period, for the great comfort of his Church to be
believed from his Word, and which should be applied daily for the warning of
wicked men if they will be admonished. Mr. Mede does very appositely apply the
Red, Black, and Pale Horses, to such purposes in the three following Seals,
observing from the Histories of the Primitive times how they were accomplished;
and (as likewise Mr. Fox observes remarkably) that after the Roman Governors
had rejected the offer of receiving Christ, and that Satan bad engaged them in
Persecutions, above thirty of their Emperors successively came to untimely
deaths; but how such Judgments, of Sword, Famine, Pestilence, followed one
another upon the Empire, and sometimes all together besides, as may be observed
from the first, second, and third Seals, but especially from the fourth, as
more particularly is set down by the aforesaid Mr. Mede.

I would therefore have observed in the fifth Seal the remarkable different
dispensation of God, Rev. 6.
when most of the ten Persecutions had raged, and sent home such multitudes of
believing Christians to blessedness by their sufferings; that by the opening of
that fifth Seal, is signified to the Church how God was mindful of the Blood of
the Martyrs, by the crying of the Souls under the Altar, for revenge; not that
they in Happiness then did complain, or so did really cry for Vengeance, but
that God looked upon what had been done to them, as an occasion whereupon he
would revenge them, but yet not presently, but after their Brethren, which
should soon after suffer as they had done, had been likewise killed; which
seemed to have been fulfilled in the Tenth Persecution under Dioclesian, and
Others, which continued ten years together, which probably was the ten days
Trial and Tribulation formerly spoken of, Rev. 2.10. And accordingly in the
sixth Seal came the great Earthquake, when the Sun became like Sackcloth of
Hair, and the Moon like Blood, and the Stars fell, and the Mighty men hid
themselves in the Caves of the Earth, when the wrath of the Lamb was two ways
manifest: first, In dethroning the Dragon, and casting him down to the Earth,
in abandoning the Heathenish Idolatry: and secondly, By cutting off his
Instruments, the-then-wicked Rulers of the World, by the means of that
Reforming Victorious Conqueror, the Emperor Constantine the Great, when God's
hand was so heavy upon Dioclesian, Maximianus, Galerius, Maximinus, Maxentius,
Licinius, and many Governors under their Command, with their Armies; and
particularly on Ponticius, Culianus, Theotimus, with many others, as Stories
testify.

And afterward by taking away by degrees the Seat and Throne of the former
Beast, who received afterward the deadly wound, upon which the Dragon had so
prevailed before to persecute the Saints, as appears in the Trumpets following,
which proceeded out of that seventh Seal; all of which sounded their several
Wrath and Judgments against it, till it went into utter perdition under every
form, both East and West.

But before the execution of that Wrath, God would (Chap. 7. Rev. 7.
and 14.) have both his 144000's of the Faithful, sealed, where those Trumpets
Blasts should come, who should be saved from the spiritual mischief of them:
and after the sealing of those 144000, Cap. 7. are an innumerable company of
Palm-Bearers, of all Nations and Tongues; which the said Author rightly
conceives to be the great confluence of Christians, when the Jews, with the
fullness of the Gentiles, shall come in, which will (I doubt not) be in the time
of Christ's powerful Reign, (for this is the course observable in this Book, (as
may hereafter be more manifest) that the Spirit of God first sets down what
Blessedness shall ensue the sufferings of his People, before those sufferings
come) Now I conceive (with a Learned Author now living) that these 144000
sealed Ones, Cap. 7. are another from those 144000, Cap. 14. for which he gives
diverse Reasons, showing those in Cap. 7. were to be preserved in the Greek
Church, in the Eastern Empire, and that from the fifth and sixth, and the part
of the seventh Woe. Trumpets that might fall there, as to what evil might there
fall at the beginning of the sounding thereof; which said sealed Ones are
specially to be preserved and secured at the entrance of the fifth or first
Wo-Trumpet, by the Saracen Mohammedan Locusts, Cap. 9.4. and so it is to be
noted (which I also add) that the blasts of the first four Trumpets, being the
milder miseries on the Empire, were stayed ( Rev. 8.1, 2.) until much Incense
was offered by Christ, with the Prayers of the Saints, that they might be
accepted, where those four Trumpets took effect, namely upon the Western part,
from the time the barbarous Nations came in there, for the most part till he
that let, as the Apostle speaks, 2 These. 2. should be taken away in the West
(as he was there first) to make room for Antichrist, to whom the Dragon by
degrees gave his Seat, and Power, and great Authority: And that the 144000 were
to arise out of the Greek Church, viz. which were sealed, Cap. 7. Some of the
said Authors grounds are further, namely, That the Angel that would have the
four Winds stayed till they were sealed, is said to arise out of the East, and
the evil of the Wo-Trumpets was to fall upon the East chiefly; and that if
those sealed ones, Cap. 7. be not of Christians in the East Church, in the
times of the Wo-Trumpets, there is nothing spoken of them in all the Book of
Revelation remarkable, which have so long been under such sad tribulation; and
their being said to come out of great tribulation, does more fitly seem to
decypher out the Christians of the Greek Church, than any others under those
Trumpets: To which I may add, as being of the same Judgment, That they are
further described to have specially washed their Robes in the Blood of the
Lamb, whom they would not leave for Mohammedan Impostures at the highest Price
of Fears or Favors, and seem to differ from what is set down of those 144000,
Cap. 14. with the Lamb in Mount Sion, having their Fathers Name in the
Forehead, which seems to be in the Western Church, preserved in the darkness of
Popery from spiritual ruin by Antichrist, who are called there, The Followers
of the Lamb wheresoever he goes, keeping close to him, and not turning into
the Beasts by-ways and thickets, though he pretended never so much to be the
Lambs Deputy, and Vicar General on Earth; and they are said to be Virgins,
which denotes their avoiding of Antichrists Idolatry; and have no guile in
their mouths, to pretend for Christ, and follow Antichrist; with other
particulars observable, Cap. 14. which seem to set them forth to be the sealed
ones in Antichrists Dominion, rather than in the East parts, where Mahometism
prevails, etc. and therefore the four Angels stayed their four Winds while the
former 144000, Cap. 7. were sealed, which seems to signify they were not to be
within the reach of their four first Trumpets, that for the most part fell upon
the Western Empire, till that Seat of the former Beast was taken away, and
preparation should be made for the new Beast, the Dragons next Substitute, to
whom he after gave his Seat, and Power, and great Authority, Cap. 13.

For by the first Trumper, Rev. 8. seems to have been weakened the Dominion of
the Western Empire, by the incursion of the barbarous Nations; by the second,
the great City or Mountain sacked or burnt; by the third, the Emperor in the
person of Augustulus, the last of that Order there, utterly taken away, being
plucked out of his Throne; and in the fourth, the light and glory of all that
Kingdom formerly, by taking away their ancient Senate, by means whereof Rome
had so long shined so glorious with all her Lights in that Orb before, was
wholly extinct: but in the fifth, or first Wo-Trumpet, ( Rev. 9. to verse. 11.)
Gods Dispensation seemed very evident (not in respect of Antichrist, as the
forementioned Author conceived) for all the particulars Chap. 9. to the 11th
verse, seem better to agree to the Saracens, than to him. [ Vide Notes of the
Bible on that chapter, and the Sober Guess, etc. with others.] But against the
spiritual hurt, falling on the one part of the Eastern Empire by the Incursion
and Conquest made by the Saracens, some of those before sealed, chap. 7. were
preserved as by means of the two Wings of an Eagle, spoken of chap. 12. on that
part where the Saracens settled; and after on the other part, which the Turks
took away, besides what the Saracens formerly had; as likewise that Woman, the
Church, had her other Eagles Wing in the West, that Eagle denoting the Roman
Empire after Constantine had built Constantinople in the East, dividing the
Empire into two parts in East and West; and the Eagle, with her two side-wings,
being the Ensign thereof: upon which advantage, the Woman, the true Church,
fled into the Wilderness, chap. 12. about the end of the second Trumpet, or
beginning of the third, (when probably Antichrist had his rise, with his ten
Kings, or Crowned Horns, soon after the beginning of the fourth Century; from
which time the said Woman, the Church, has been fed by her true Pastors, the
two sackcloth-Prophets, in her Wilderness-condition, which she is shortly to
come out of. But on the other part, that said Woman, the Church, brought into
the East by the other Eagles wing of the Eastern Empire, before into her
Wilderness-condition, or rather miserable bondage and great tribulation, being
cast under the stroke of Mohammedan Tyranny by the prevailing of the Saracens,
at the beginning of the fifth (or first Woe) Trumpet, about the year of our
Lord, 600. or not long after: who then (I say) began to bring her into her
great tribulation in the East on one part, wherein she so continued until the
second Wo-Trumpet under the Turk, about the year of our Lord 1300, by whom the
other part of the Eastern Empire was subdued utterly, and Mahometism likewise
prevailed wholly over that formerly famous visible Greek-Church, etc. only the
said 144000 of sealed ones have been and are still wonderfully preserved
amongst them; and even of late, anno 1629, or thereabouts, an excellent
Confession of Faith, sent from Constantinople by Cyril late Patriarch there,
well approved by judicious men amongst us, as an evidence of the abiding still
of such poor, persecuted, oppressed souls in those parts, whose great
tribulation, spoken of chap. 7. for about a thousand years now past, and still
are like to be under the Turk for his day, and week, and month, and year, as
Mr. Mede computes them, his three hundred ninety six years, be expired.

Now when the Spirit of God (as seems probable) having set forth the Wrath and
Judgment upon the very seat of the former Beast in the seasons of the six first
Trumpets, both East and West, where in their order they fell; the greatest part
contemporating with Antichrists Tyranny, both which should be finished at the
beginning of the seventh Trumpet, whereby the same Spirit of God seems to lead
us by the hand (as it were) to the borders of Christ's glorious Kingdom upon
Earth, approaching upon the beginning of the seventh Angels sounding, chap. 11.
2d General Prophecy, Rev. 10.
He then, in the little book, chap. 10. begins again with the affairs of the
Church more especially, having set forth God's dispensations in respect of the
Empire, both while it was Draconized, and after it had been Christianized.

Which little Book when John had eaten up, he is told by the mighty Angel of
the Covenant, that he must prophecy again before Peoples and Nations, and
Tongues, and Kings, so that they might have advantage to know these Prophecies,
had they enquired, as he had so prophesied: for as it was otherwise of them, so
it was before them; and as he had done it in one respect before, (namely) of
the Empire, wherein the Church had her being, so he should do it again in
another respect, namely of the Church, who had her being there: but chiefly
under Antichrist in his time, where there was another 144000 followers of the
Lamb to arise, chap. 14. Rev. 11
Therefore after the Table of the Times in part of chap. 11 to ver. 15. wherein
we may see, ver. 1. a description of the state of the Primitive Times; in ver.
2. her state in Antichrists forty two months; and ver. 3. the true Churches
state, in regard of the most eminent part of it, namely of the Two Witnesses,
her Pastors, their thousand two hundred and sixty days of years, who should
feed the Woman in her Wilderness-condition, and stand on Christ's part against
Antichrist, powerfully and successfully, till about the time of finishing their
Testimony, to ver. 7. and then what should befall the Beast upon his last War
against the finishing Witnesses upon their Resurrection and Ascension, after
the Beast had killed them, to ver. 17. where is the ending of the second Woe,
and thereupon comes in a short abridgment of the seventh Trumpet, containing
the great Changes of the Affairs of the World and of the Church, namely, evil
to the wicked World, but happy to the true Church: and this excellent
Abridgment seemed needful, in regard of the great concernment of all sorts, to
understand this, as of main use to the whole Book. Again, the foresaid Author
fails in not distinguishing between the first War the Beast makes against the
Saints and Servants of Christ, wherein he kills and prevails, whereupon all the
World wonder after the Beast; and the second War against the Witnesses, which
is dismal and fatal to himself, as Mr. Mede well observes; and hence the said
Author reckons the Witnesses slain above an hundred years ago, and so passes
without taking notice of the last finishing Witnesses, as then counting the
Beasts forty two months expired, reckoning the Vials in the seventh Trumpet
before the second Woe be past, or almost any thing of the Beasts ruin begun;
which work the Angels that have the Vials are to begin and finish, as Mr. Mede
and others judge upon considerable grounds, etc.

But in chap. 12. Rev. 12
is begun the story of the new Prophecy of the true Church in the Primitive
Times, which is there represented by a Woman clothed with the Sun, and having
the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars, whereby was
described the excellency of the Primitive Church of Christ which soon contested
with the great red Dragon and his Angels, till she by Faith and Prayer obtained
the Man-child, Constantine the reforming Emperor, by whose means God cast down
the great red Dragon from his heaven upon earth, together with his Angels, by
which means the Woman had two wings of an Eagle given her, to fly into the
Wilderness for a time, times, and half a time; but before her flight into that
retired hidden condition, the Serpent cast out his flood of abominable
Heresies, chiefly against the Persons of the Holy Trinity, by Arrius, Eutichus,
Macedonius, and others, to have carried her away thereby, which took up
probably almost an hundred years before her time, times, and half, with
Antichrists 42 months, took place; all which time from Constantine, the
forementioned Author reckons within the date of the Beast, and consequently he
ends it as much too soon, as may further appear; and yet for the Earths opening
her Mouth, and swallowing up of the Dragons flood of Heresies, what he objects
against the usual opinion, to wit, That it was not the incursion of the
Barbarous Nations, because some of them favored Arrianism; the same might
likewise be objected against what he says of the visible Professing Rulers to
be the Earth then opposing those Errors in many Councils, though they favored
Superstition, and so might be accounted the Earth; but to that might be
answered, amongst them were many in those times good and Orthodox men about the
fourth Century, and yet (perhaps) more fitly it might be applied to the Bishops
of Rome, and their party, that in those times, to get to themselves
pre-eminence, did take upon them to end differences in Religion, and became in
a sort famous thereby, getting honor and credit among men thereby, and being
to be the Beast out of the Earth, acting for earthly ends, the Earth might be
said to help the Woman, by withstanding errors against the Sacred Trinity, yet
promoting superstition, etc. and so might swallow up the flood.

Concerning the two Beasts in the thirteenth Chapter, Rev. 14.
the said Author is very excellent, full and clear, above any I have seen, if
he had timed their rising rightly, only he seems to confound the number of his
Name, verse. 17. with the number of the Beast, verse. 18. whereas the first
denotes evidently the remotest sort of Antichrists followers, that only may be
reckoned or numbered amongst his party, which were to be in the last days, as
they are described by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. when others of the
Beasts party come in the latter times, which forbid Marriage, and command to
abstain from Meats, etc. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. But the number of the Beast, verse.
18. belongs to the Beast himself, concerning the Exposition whereof, he gives
a probable conjecture of his many errors, as the Sober Guess and others produce
many more, which learned and industrious men have observed, and particularly
opposing the Beasts number, to the 144000, or the measure of the Holy City; and
I conceive the considering, it as numerus Terminans, as Dan. 5. may be more
considerable then many think, as was (...) in another consideration, setting
out what Country man Antichrist should be, and what Language he should use in
his Laws and Worship, wherein I conceive the wonderful Divine Wisdom of God is
much to be acknowledged in setting down Mystery Babylons name, so to exercise
the several gifts he has given to several men, several ways, to have their
apprehensions agreeable to truth, and considerable in reference to this
manifold monstrous Beast, wherein they are to be found in one respect or other;
and so the largest comprehensive sense is like to prove the true sense, and
many of them, to be acknowledged real in such a strange compounded Creature of
many, as he is described Dan. 7. And in this Book, chap. 14. is conceived by
judicious men upon considerable grounds, to be contemporary with the two
Beasts, Rev. 14.
setting out the opposite state of the true Church, in the same time, not
successive (as this Author takes it) though the Beasts ruin is therein more
fully described; yet he has many considerable things against and concerning
Antichrist in this Chapter; and likewise, he is very excellent upon the
seventeenth and eighteenth, being a like subject, to prove the Pope to be
Antichrist.

But for the particular Vision concerning the Vials, chap. 15, and 16. Rev. 15,
and 16.
which appears to be a larger explication of what was spoken of Antichrists
downfall and ruin in the latter part of chap. 14. As the seventeenth was an
explication of diverse things concerning the Antichristian Church of Rome; and
the eighteenth, a special Vision of the terrible, sudden, irresistible and
cursed destruction and desolation of Rome about the sixth Vial, after which
(probably) will succeed the conversion of the Jews, and the Armageddon-Battel,
of which he has many profitable notes upon chap. 19.

But for the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, at the beginning of the pouring
out of the seven Vials, and placing so many of the Vials, after the time
wherein the thousand years ( chap. 20.) is begun, and making the casting of
Satan into the Lake, after the Battle of Gog and Magog, chap. 20. to be the
seventh Vial, I conceive to be much differing from the sense of the Scripture;
and for that the seven Vials are called the seven last Plagues, which phrase is
the same in sense with the end of the days, Da. 12. both setting forth the
period of wicked Monarchy, when the Feet and Toes of the Image he saw before,
are wearing out toward the expiring of the Roman Monarchy, and are both spoken
of the Beasts ruin, and poured out to accomplish it by degrees, which the last
Vial finisheth, and reach no further; and in this sense learned men understand
the (...) of the Angel of the Covenant, chap. 10. That time should be no
longer, viz. to that wicked Dominion; for thenceforth was to begin a new
World, as after Noah's Flood, wherein Christ's Glorious Reign on Earth should
take place in an eminent manner, for then the Scene of the World will be
visibly changed, the old being ended, and the new begun, wherein a King shall
Rule in Righteousness, whose Officers shall be Peace, and his Exactors
Righteousness, as the Prophet foretold, etc. then will come in that (...), that
world to come, Heb. 2.5. but the Vials are the last Plagues, because they at
last dispatch and rid Antichrist and all his supporters out of the Earth;
neither are any such Plagues suitable to, or seasonable in the state of things
in the said thousand years, while that happy World remains, and the Kingdoms of
the World, become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; which this
Author applies to the time of Luther, which he judges to be the beginning of
the Vials (I conceive unwarrantably) when he thinks the Witnesses were slain,
chap. 11. not distinguishing of the former and last flaying, as we observed.

Grounds of the Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, throughout the whole
Book of the Revelations.
ANd here I shall take occasion to hint what I have all along observed this
Learned and Religious Author to have been defective in; namely, as one not
owning the Doctrine of the Glorious Kingdom of Christ to come on Earth in the
thousand years, Rev. 20. That he passes over many things in the Book of
Revelation, which evidently respect that time, without observation; as first,
in the Epistles to the seven Churches of Asia, wherein those promises are set
down again, repeated, c. 21, 22. concerning the New Jerusalem, many of which
are evidently incompetible to any other state of affairs, but of that time, as
to have power over the Nations, chap. 2.26. to receive the Morning Star, and to
eat of that Tree, whose Leaves shall be for the healing of the Nations, to sit
on a Throne of Christ distinct from his Fathers Throne, chap. 3.21. and to have
a Name written of the New Jerusalem, which comes down from Heaven, which are
inconsistent with the state of the Church Triumphant in Heaven, with diverse
others, which the Primitive Christians were so well resolved of in the best
times, to belong to those that obtained a better Resurrection, as the Spirit of
God expresses it, Heb. 11.35. which Saint Paul seems to aim at the attaining
to, by the fellowship of Christ's Sufferings, Phil. 3.10, 11. whence the
Faithful are called the Children of the Resurrection, Luke 20.36. Yea observe
further, they are called by our Savior, Such as are accounted worthy to attain
that World, and the Resurrection of the dead: And to this purpose it is storied
of the Primitive Christians, (such was their Faith in this particular) that out
of an holy-ambition (as it were) to have a share amongst the raised Martyrs,
they were forward to suffer (upon that account) for the Name of Christ.

But in the next place likewise, he passes over what evidently refers to that
state, chap. 5.10. though he spoke of what the representative Church are said
there to obtain from Christ, to be Kings and Priests (spiritually) unto God:
but he altogether passes over what the holy Ghost teaches them there to
praise God so for the time to come, and which they greatly exult in, and
rejoice in aforehand, for the time to come, as a duty belonging to all Saints
in that happy privilege upon Earth till then, and say they (We shall reign
upon Earth) which is joined to the other, as another part of their joy, and
matter of praise, foreseen by the eye of Faith; as if they had said, For so we
all, Ministers and People, shall then reign, not only as we did spiritually, in
our former condition in the world, but as will be suitable to that world to
come in Christ's Kingdom on Earth, We shall reign with him there a thousand
years, as chap. 20. is further explained; and to make it clear, it must not be
taken for Celestial Eternal Glory, the place is set down where that Reign shall
be, namely, on Earth; and for the time, future, noting that it was not their
present spiritual Reign, but they shall so reign there, viz. on Earth: What can
be spoken more clearly? yet by him altogether overlooked: So usual it is for
prejudice to blind the eyes, even of otherwise judicious and good men: though
some Mysteries of God are discovered in their seasons, only to whom, and when,
and so far only as he is pleased to reveal them; as Mr. Mede records of a
Tradition, that the Apocalypse should be little understood in Antichrists time,
till about the twelfth Century, and suitable in some things afterward, in such
times as God sees good, etc.

Again, he takes notice of another innumerable company, clothed in white,
besides the 144000 sealed ones, chap. 7. which innumerable company of all
People, Nations and Languages, having Palms in their hands, he seems to
understand of the flourishing state of the Church, when the Jews shall be
called; and he has many considerable Testimonies to that purpose in sundry
places of his Book, but yet he does not observe these of both companies are set
forth to be clothed in white, which is after (as likewise before) the clothing
of the Inhabitants of the New-Jerusalem that comes down from God, and makes
this 144000, c. 7. and the other 144000, c. 14. the same (though they arise
from several parts, as we showed, besides many differences) But that their
clothing in white is the badge of the Jerusalem-Inhabitants, consider how the
fundamental Promises made to Christ as Mediator, first, to Adam and Eve, then
to Abraham and Sarah, after to David, tend all this way, to advance such a
Kingdom of the Mediator Christ Jesus upon Earth. First, after that God's
everlasting Gospel, preached by himself when man had forfeited his dominion
before-promised, chap. 1.26. and after could have no right in that or other
benefits, but through the Promised-Seed; See how this is ascribed to Christ, as
his peculiar right belonging to him, in Psalm. 8. And see how the Apostle, Heb.
2. expounds it so, and that with referring it unto that world to come, ver. 5,
6, etc. in which world those white ones shall have their share, namely, in their
reigning with Christ upon Earth: Having suffered with him, they must reign with
him there, as their Captain and King of the New-Jerusalem. See this further in
the personal Promise to Abraham first, and his Seed; Not seeds, as of many, but
unto Thy Seed: As says the Apostle, of one, viz. [Christ] concerning the Land
of Canaan, who yet personally possessed not a foot, as the Scripture phrase is,
save what he purchased for a Burying-place with money, to show his part of that
Inheritance; and his faithful posterities part was to be had after the
Resurrection, and their bones, as Joseph's, took and have kept possession
thereof ever since, and will do, till they be raised to live upon it again. And
so after again, the said Promise was renewed to Isaac, the type of Christ, the
Seed of the Woman, in a supernatural way, though Abraham's likewise: And to
Jacob, that was Israel for prevailing with God, having seen the Vision of God
before. And therefore the Apostle says of them both, They were Heirs with
Abraham of the same Promise; to whom it was said, Genesis 17.8. I will give unto
thee, and thy Seed after thee. The first right is his own, which is held only
by Faith while he lived, and therefore the actual possession yet remains to be
enjoyed; Vide Genesis 26.3. to Isaac, and Genesis 35.3. the like to Jacob; and to all
three Abraham, Isaac and Jacob together, Ex. 6.4, 8. Deuteronomy. 11.21. and 30.20.
and so to Isaac and Jacob, who possessed it no more than Abraham in their
lives; therefore Gal. 3.16. with Heb. 11.9, 10. they so journed in that Land of
Promise, as strangers, dwelling in tabernacles, with those Heirs with him of
the same Promise: and ver. 17. shows the drift of this Promise was to be
fulfilled in Christ the Promised Seed, to possess that Land, and the rest, by,
and with him. Let these Scriptures, and their contexts, be well weighed, with
Heb. 11.9, 10. for what these Promises did refer to, is evident, ver. 10.
namely, the Jerusalem coming down from Heaven, whose maker and builder is God:
and verse. last, he has provided for them a City: again, ver. 14. They sought a
Country [not Mesopotamia] but a better Country, ver. 16. and for which God is
not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a City: To
this purpose he tells Moses, Exodus 3.15. that that should be his Memorial
throughout all Generations, that he is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:
and upon this Foundation are those many Promises in Moses and the following
Prophets, that God would reduce their posterity after all their dispersion, to
possess that Land, as in Deuteronomy. 30. to ver. 11. and many other places, too many
here to rehearse; and in Vision revealed the same to Daniel, chap. 7. both how
and when all should be fulfilled, when the Kingdom should be given to the
Saints of the most High: which is yet more clear and manifest by Christ
himself, Rev. 20. which is the same which this Author misapplyed, c. 11.15.
When the Kingdoms of the World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his
Christ; that is, in another manner than at the first revealing of Antichrist
(as he understands it) but gloriously, eminently, visibly, when he has taken
unto himself his Great Power, and Reigned, having begun wonderfully to subdue
his enemies under his feet at the destruction of Antichrist: And this is the
drift of our Saviors argument against the Sadduces, as Mr. Mede makes evident
on Mat. 22. Mark 12. that God was the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob:
therefore they shall live again to inherit the Promise of the Covenant to
possess the Land of Canaan: I do but here briefly hint a few things out of
multitudes to the like purpose: Vide the (...).

And here from the whole Book of Revelation, I may offer this one thing
observable, namely, That all sorts of faithful Christians in their several Ages
and Conditions, have their special Encouragement held out in something
referring to the New Jerusalem on Earth, though many overlook them, or at least
they have not been revealed to them; for men in this case are like Hagar, till
God opened her Eyes in a special manner, she saw not the Well of Water before
her; so no sort seem to discern these things, till in some remarkable way they
be made manifest to them.

First, The seven Churches of Asia in the first Vision have each their Promises
made, in reference to the State of the New Jerusalem upon Earth.

Secondly, The Representatives of the whole true Church, viz. the four Beasts,
and four and twenty Elders, Rev. 5.10. in particular praise for, and rejoice
in, their reign upon Earth, to come, which by faith they see aforehand; and
more especially that seems to be the encouragement to the Sufferers under the
five first Seals; and (as was said) seemed so to be applied by them.

Afterward, the sealed Ones in the East, Chap. 7. under the wo-Trumpets, as
Rev. 9.4. they have the New Jerusalem habit upon them, as they shall be there
happy, and celebrate Gods praise; and so do the innumerable company of all
Nations after them, Chap. 7. as is evident in the last part of that Chapter.

Again, The four Angels are stayed from their blowing the four first Trumpets,
which fell for the most part upon the Western Empire, until the Angel, Chap.
8.3, 4, 5. (probably the Angel of the Covenant) had made intercession for the
faithful Christians under those four first Trumpets, with much Incense, with
the Prayers of the Saints there abiding, that they might be accepted, who was
their spiritual Priest to intercede for them, and their King to protect them
spiritually.

Again, Chap. 11. the two Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth 1260 days, have as
a general Consolation to the Church, all that time foreshewed to them that they
shall rise again, and ascend into Heaven at the end of the days; and soon after
have the state of the Kingdom of Christ on Earth, foreshewed unto them in the
end of the same Chapter.

So likewise the other 144000 Lamb-Followers in the Western-Empire, are set
forth to be with the Lamb in Mount Sion, and have this Character of the New
Jerusalem upon them, That they have his Fathers Name written upon their
Foreheads, Chap. 14.1.

Again, Those that should be Sufferers under Antichrist, toward his fall, they
sing the Song of Moses, coming out of their Wilderness-condition, and praise
God for his Judgments upon their Persecutors, and have the entrance of Christ's
Kingdom upon Earth, set before them, for their comfort, Chap. 15.4.5. so that
unto this scope drive the Consolations of the Sufferers and faithful Christians
of all Times, since this most holy and comfortable Book was given to Christ's
Church; and so both those Arms of that red Sea of Blood, running through the
Eastern and Western Empires in the Churches, meet together at the borders of
the Land of Canaan, promised to the Forefathers and their Seed, about the end
of the sixth Trumpet, and entrance of the seventh: And whether it reaches
further then unto that New World, may seem questionable; first, Because it is
one of the Wo-Trumpets, and no such things seem suitable to the Kingdom of
Christ upon Earth in the thousand years: secondly, Because the whole
continuance of that is set forth by another title, for the Comfort of the
Church, namely, Of the Saints reign with Christ a thousand years, as it were by
way of distinction from the former suffering Times of the Church: thirdly,
There is nothing clearly said in the Text that it should continue longer than
to bring the Woes upon Antichrists Kingdom, and other Enemies in the World, and
seems to end with the last Plagues, so called, because they are the portion of
the Churches Persecutors before the thousand years, and utterly bring them to
perdition; and as the sixth Vial seems to end with the Armageddon-Battel, Chap.
19. so the seventh binds and shuts up Satan for that thousand years, wherein he
must no more seduce the Nations, Chap. 20.

And what this Author says of Satan's being cast into the Lake after the
thousand years, as a Vial, and the last Vial of the seven, is contrary to the
Text, Rev. 16. at the latter end of the Chapter, where it is said, That when
the seventh Vial was poured out, the great City was divided into three parts,
and then great Babylon came in remembrance before God, executed Chap. 18. which
will be done above a thousand years before Satan's casting into the lake of
fire, where the Beast and the false Prophet were cast so long before: Besides,
Satan's casting into the lake, seems not to be reckoned in the nature of such
Vials as gradually brought destruction on the Beast, and other persecuting
Enemies on Earth, but as his last doom at the consummation of all things, and
the dissolution of the World; which is as much a mercy to such as are saved,
as a beginning of woe and wrath to Satan, and all damned Men and Devils; but an
end only to the being of inferior Creatures, which had long before in the
thousand years enjoyed the liberty of the Sons of God, as is said, Romans 8.21.
Again, The drift of the Trumpets were to blow out Wrath and Judgment upon the
Earth, and Grass, and Trees, Chap. 9.4, etc. and such things as were upon the
Earth belonging to wicked men, till they should be destroyed from off the face
of it, and there to end; and Satan was then bound in the pit, when there was no
work for him to seduce such after their destruction, who was their Captain and
Counselor before.

It is likewise observable what Mr. Mede says of the thousand years wherein
the Saints were to reign, That Satan aforehand in the time of Antichrist set
them up in a false way of reigning, to eclipse their true reigning that
afterward they should have on Earth, and therefore taught Antichrists Followers
to set them up superstitiously and idolatrously, to worship and pray to them,
and before their Shrines and Images, making them sinfully to have a reign with
Christ on Earth, in show, but really against him and his Father: And all that
said time of Antichrist, he has played the Ape, in seeking to pour out the
Vials upon Christ's Kingdom to come, as Christ had before declared, that he had
seven Angels in their times to pour out seven Vials to the destruction and
ruin of Antichrist.

The first of Satan's seeming Vials, was, By imposing Chiliasm upon it, by
carnal pleasures, and typical Worship, though upon slight, unjust and false
pretenses, as Mr. Mede manifests.

Secondly, By the advantage thereof, he obtained that some of the ancient
Fathers were so prejudiced that they wrote against it, though the former for
the most part were for it.

Thirdly, By such prejudice, and the like, he obtained that good men all along
misplaced the thousand years by way of anticipation, though differing in the
time they began, and expounding them all along the Popes time, only of a
Spiritual Reign.

Fourthly, By Popish false Glosses and Expositions upon all the Revelation, and
that part in Particular, etc.

Fifthly, By seducing men of latter times, since the Light of Truth began more
then of a long time before, to break forth, to seek disorderly to set up
Christ's Kingdom, which will be Gods own work in his own time, to anticipate
the same, and that by acting against the Divine precepts that Christ came to
establish in casting off due Obedience unto Magistrates, and endeavors to
suppress the Ministry, thereby to scandalize the Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom
on Earth.

Sixthly, Gr. and Ha.
More lately by such as this Author names in the end of his Book, concerning
whom he declares much in a few lines, who would make the Revelation an History
of things past, rather then a Prophecy of things so long to come; so that the
Pope should not be Antichrist in his forty two months, much less Christ have a
thousand years Reign on Earth afterward.

And lastly, The seventh Vial that Satan has to pour on Christ's Kingdom,
seems not unfitly to be conceived, to be by displacing the Vials, chap. 16.
from their own time unto Christ's Reign, whereunto they are not competible,
whereof the subject matter will be then taken away, or making a groundless
great Chasm of above a thousand years difference, from the sixth to the
seventh, when Satan is to be cast into the fiery Lake, which is a business of a
much differing nature many ways from all the Vials, as well as in time, etc.
And thus of Satan's seeming seven Vials on Christ's Kingdom; but the glorious
appearance of Christ will shortly abolish all appearance of truth in them, and
so all Satan's Vials upon Christ's Kingdom will be utterly ended, and yet will
not that Kingdom be thereby in the least degree impaired.

Lastly, Whereas the said learned Author interprets the New Jerusalem to be
the Church Tryumphant, besides the many considerable reasons to the contrary,
in the Letter of November 3. 1664. he might have observed that the Lamb's Wife
was spoken of before, chap. 19.7. by which he there understands, the coming in
of the Jews to the Catholic Church, (I conceive rightly) and that the beloved
City, cap. 21.2. spoken of chap. 20. as being before the Battle of Gog and
Magog, when the Devil stirred up the Hypocrites of those times, which had been
long held under by good Government, then to attempt to besiege that Beloved
City, though to his and their utter ruin, that so they might receive that
portion of Hypocrites, as the Antichristian Scoffers had theirs before, when
both sorts should meet with their Leaders, the Pope and the Devil in the Lake
of fire; and chap. 21. being but a further decyphering of the same City, should
therefore be expounded accordingly of that City that was in the thousand years,
it being the observable Method of the Holy Ghost in that Book, after some more
obscure expressions of things more generally, afterward to give more full and
particular explications of the same, as in the seventeenth Chapter, an
Explication of Babylon and the Beast, etc. and what was said of the ruin of
Babylon, chap. 14. explained by the Vials, chap. 15, and 16. and further, of
the last Vials, chap. 18, 19, and part of 20. and so sometimes in the 19, and
20. further explained, chap. 21, and 22. besides many things belonging to the
New Jerusalem, are incompetible to the state of the Church Triumphant in
Heaven; see the forementioned Letter, November. 3. 1663. And for the first
Resurrection, it may appear not to be of the Spiritual Resurrection of the Soul
from sin, both from the drift of the Holy Ghost, further, to open the Mystery
of the Resurrection, which Saint Paul had in some respect showed before, 1 Cor.
15. And the Doctrine thereof has been gradually set down in the Scriptures,
and this, chap. 20. gives light thereunto above all others, both as to the
Resurrection of the Just and Wicked, which are opposed one to another, as first
and second, and their distinct times set out; for as chap. 11.18. When the
Kingdoms of the World shall be Christ's, then he gives reward unto his Servants
the Prophets, and to his Saints, and to all that fear his Name, both small and
great; such as not only suffered for him, (who are said, chap. 20. to be
beheaded for him, etc.) but such as have done his Will on earth, shall have
such reward from him in earth, as 2 Timothy 2.12. And for such Souls [that is,
Persons, in Scripture language] to live again, what sense in Reason or Religion
can fitly be applied to such sufferers or others, but such first Resurrection?
I know many learned men have tired their parts to find shifts to avoid this,
but have been more sollidly and substantially answered, (besides many others)
by Mr. Mede, and Dr. Homes, in his Answer to Pareus, Dr. Predeaux and others,
in one part of the Dawning of the Day Star: read them seriously, etc.

Mr. Mede, conceives that Resurrectio Justorum, will be in acting all or most
of the thousand years, every one in their own Order; and the Ancients conceived
there will be (mora) delay in respect of some, etc. but that the living again
of such as were so beheaded, to be meant of the Spiritual Resurrection, is far
from the scope of the Text, besides all other considerations about it; see the
Appendix in the (...), and the forenamed Authors, it is, actum agere, to say
much of it, etc.

And for the number of a thousand years to be taken indefinitely, as it is
contrary to the judgment of learned men on both sides, for many considerable
Reasons; so somewhat this learned Author mentions himself, namely, That, that,
that Thousand Years, so often spoken of in respect of Saints and Satan, and
with all the considerable circumstances, what was done at the beginning of
them, with all the continuance, and what should be at the end of them, etc.
might have swayed his judgment otherwise, if he had not been prejudiced
against the whole Doctrine thereof, and all that concerns it: for those Souls
said to be Beheaded, cannot fitly be said to live again, but in respect of that
state, namely, of their bodily living again, wherein they had died before; for
as the Spirits of just men, they lived ever since their departure from their
Bodies, so that living again, denotes their living bodily, and living in a
different manner then they had done before. Now the drift of all these things,
being for the comfort and edification of all God's People, in this great point
of the Resurrection of the Just, and being specially useful against the evil
times, going before the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, when Antichristian Tyranny should most rage in the World; God, in
Mercy to his People, is pleased now again, to cause the Light of these Precious
Truths to break forth again, more then they have done in many Ages last past,
when that said Glorious Appearance of Christ, and beginning of the Day of
Judgment, and Joyful Resurrection following upon it, do in their order near
approach; It is much to be desired, and earnestly prayed for, that true
Christians would duly weigh and consider them, being so mainly for their
Edification and sound Consolation, if they will not overlook their own good, or
put it off from themselves, since the great goodness of Christ is therein
manifest toward them.

And now for a summary of these things, I shall add, to make up the former
Theses, concerning the third Period of Christ's Kingly Office to be eminently
manifest therein, where he will work, as I said, by his Spirit of Power and
Domination; as he did in the Old Testament by his Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation, and in the New, till his Glorious Appearance, by his Spirit of
Grace and Truth.

In setting down therefore what concerns this third and last Period, I shall
endeavor to express them, either as matter of Faith, or as things that are
probable, or lastly, as things only conjectural, as the nature of the things
may be, and as the clearness or obscurity of the grounds of them may give
occasion.

First, I believe there is abundant evidence from Scripture, that Christ our
Savior will (after the coming of Elias) Personally, in a glorious manner
appear with Clouds, as Rev. 1.7. or in the Clouds, at or about the great
destruction of Antichrist, which will be as Lightning shining from one end of
the Heavens to the other; and such appearing of his to the Jews, seems to me
probable to be the means of their more general Call and Conversion, when that
Nation will be born in a day, (as it were) Isa. 56.8. and thereupon will be
their mournful contrition promised as a Mercy, Zach. 12.10. And then will
likewise be the Conversion of many Nations of the Gentiles, not yet called, to
bring in their fullness, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 11. And then (Satan being
bound from seducing the Nations for the thousand years) the Glorious Kingdom of
Christ upon earth will be set up, wherein the New Jerusalem, coming down from
God, in the time of the new Heavens and new Earth, wherein Righteousness shall
dwell, or a King shall Rule in Righteousness, (as the Prophet speaks) The
State of that New Jerusalem, whose Maker and Builder is God, will be exceeding
glorious, a kind of Triumphant State, for the raised Saints in their Order, who
probably shall have their chief Mansions there, till all the deceased Just
shall be raised, and to the end of the world, the Apostles, or other eminent
Saints (probably) shall be Rulers there by Christ's appointment, and all other
Governors that are converted to the Truth, and live their Natural Life, shall
have their directions in Government from them in the New Jerusalem, and all the
Teachers in the Church, shall, probably, have much instructions from them, as
they from Christ, in whose Light they shall see Light, the Lamb being the Light
of the City, Rev. 21. and that both Spiritual and Visible, whose Tabernacle is
then said to be with men; when (I conceive) he will be in some glorious manner
manifest unto the raised Saints there, whose glory they shall then behold
visibly, being then made capable to behold it, that none else then living can
do, except so as it was made discernable to them by Clouds at his first
appearing: Yet they likewise shall all be abundantly filled with his Grace and
Wisdom, and exceedingly rejoice in all manner of his goodness then manifest to
them, according to their then present capacity, yet in different degrees and
measures; and this state will be as intailed to the posterity of the Faithful,
that they and their Seed shall be blessed, they shall live long lives, but how
long, I dare not say, (but as the days of a Tree shall their lives be) nor
what way of removal, or manner of death, or translation, or change, I know not,
but I believe much Mercy and Grace will be bestowed upon them and their
offspring, suitable to such an happy Reign of Christ, wherein he shall be
acknowledged Sovereign by all the Faithful, and all authority managed under
him and for him; Isa. 49. When Kings shall eminently be Nursing-Fathers, and
Queens Nursing-Mothers, to his Church and People, and the Government upheld in
good hands, to promote good, and restrain evil, (as it was for the most part
contrary before) but when Satan being loosed out his Prison for a little space,
shall seduce the wicked Hypocrites of those times, and draw them from all
quarters of the Earth, against the Camp of the Saints, and the Beloved City,
upon which attempt God will destroy them, casting the Devil into the Lake of
Fire, where the Beast and false Prophet had been long before, and put an utter
end to the World by the dissolution thereof, at the consummation of all things,
with the last general Resurrection of the wicked, and general momentany change
of the Saints, at the sound of the last Trump, and Voice of an Archangel, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. both such as were alive on Earth, and such as were asleep, to meet
Christ in the Air (from thenceforth ever to be with the Lord) whereupon follows
the general Judgment.

Many particulars of these natures, it is probable, will in God's time be
apparent from Scripture, which we can now but guess at, which God to his
Faithful Servants may discover, concerning which we shall only say with the
Ancients, Elias cum venerit nodos solvet.

Now for the main substance of all this Doctrine, what is it, but the
explaining of such Articles of Christian Faith, as we all profess to believe
concerning these things in the true Scripture sense, wherein Christ has taken
special order to have his Faithful People rightly instructed, as in many
particulars forenamed? First, When we Profess, We believe that Christ shall
come from the Right Hand of the Father, to Judge quick and dead; He will so
come at his glorious appearing to destroy Antichrist, to begin his Judgment,
and make his Foes his Footstool, Ps. 110. until which he was to sit at his
Fathers Right Hand in Heaven; then the Scripture says, He judges quick and
dead, as Rev. 11.18. and elsewhere (though afterward likewise) in this sense,
Rev. 10. the Angel (Christ) Swears, Time should be no more, which seems to be
(...), Mat. 28.20. so the end of the days, Dan. 12. for the same Period, vide,
(...), and that it is the day of Judgment at least begun, Mr. Mede largely and
excellently shows, in his fourth Letter to Mr. Hain, and to Dr. Twisse, etc.
both from Scripture and Antiquity, and that he will wonderfully Reign with his
raised Saints a thousand years; Why should it be doubted, when his Word speaks
so much and evidently for it? though the Truth has, by Satan's slights, been
clouded for a time, wherein there seems to be, as it were, an appointing of the
great last Assizes, and calling together the Assessors thereof, the Saints;
does not the great Lawgiver and Judge, inform his Church of these things? and
he must needs be the best Expositor of his own Will, etc.

Sept. 27. 1664. A Paper sent upon occasion of some discourse concerning the
great and glorious Appearance of Christ about the time of finishing his Kingdom
of Patience, and of setting up his Kingdom of Visible Power on Earth, the first
being the Kingdom of the Stone, cut out of the Mountain, Dan. 2. Then the
Kingdom of this Stone becomes a Mountain [ as Mr. Mede fitly distinguishes
their times by Regnum Lapidis and Regnum Montis.]
AS for the personal appearance of Christ at the destruction of Antichrist, and
the general calling of the Jews, when that Nation shall be born in a day, as
Isa. 66.8. many Texts of Scripture seem to me fully to evidence it; as first,
that great Promise, That they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and
mourn, with such a penitent Contrition promised to them in mercy, Zac. 12.10.
compared with Rev. 1.7. with Even so Amen, as a great mercy in its time to be
accomplished. And from St. Peter's Sermon to the Jews, when he tells them, That
the times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, at the restitution of
all things, shall come, when God will send Jesus, whom the Heavens must contain
till then, Act. 3.19, 20, 21. which the Apostle Paul calls, Christ's apearing at
his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. and in Dan. 7. after the little Horn (the Pope) spoken
of before, verse 9. the Ancient of Days did sit, and in verse 21. the little
Horn prevailed until the Ancient of Days came, verse 22. which is further
explained, verse. 26, 27. And Matthew. 24. after the coming of the Son of man was
described by the Lightning from one part of the Heaven to the other, and after
the trouble then to be upon the Earth, verse. 29. it is said, Immediately shall
appear the sign of the Son of man, which is probably conceived to be Christ
himself, as a sign then to the whole World; and the time seems decyphered,
verse 24. that that Generation shall not pass, namely, in that the Nation of
the Jews was to remain distinguished from all other People, [for they have
been, and will be preserved mostly unmixed with others, until the appearing of
Christ] and as, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Antichrist is to be destroyed at the appearance
of his coming: So likewise, Matthew. 23.39. Ye shall not see me till ye shall
say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord; implying that then they
shall see him: And in that Parable up-upon the occasion of the time of the
appearing of the Kingdom of God, verse 11. having before, Chap. 17. compared
the days of the Son of man to the days of Noah and Lot, which latter, of Lot,
seems to resemble the next appearing of Christ, and the former, namely, of
Noah, his last coming to Judgment, those two days of the Son of man: Now as
Lot and his Family were sent out of Sodom first, before Sodom and Gomorrah were
destroyed in that particular destruction, so the Faithful shall first come out
of Babylon, and spiritual Sodom, before it be destroyed in that partial
destruction, though like to be very great and terrible: And as Noah and his in
the general Deluge were carried by the Ark above the destruction of the old
World by Water; so in the general conflagration of the World at Christ's last
coming, all the Faithful at their great and general change, shall be caught up
to Christ their safe Ark, in the Air, above the destruction of the Wicked by
fire, at the Worlds last destruction; and, as the Rabbis speak from the
Prophet, Their strength shall then be renewed like the Eagles, and be there
with Christ in safety, as neither liable nor capable any more of any such
misery: (I say) then in the 11th Chapter, he speaks of such a coming, verse. 13.
when he will reckon with such as would nor have him reign over them, and with
the unprofitable Servant at his coming, v. 23. and will have those his Enemies
then brought and slain before him, verse. 27. when he shall receive his Kingdom,
and return, as verse. 12. and this Parable was particularly spoken by our
Savior to resolve the mistake of such as thought the Kingdom of the Messiah
should then immediately appear, verse. 11. And many of the Prophers expressions
import as much, which I shall not now insist upon: But for how long, and in
what manner he may be personally present, so as Rev. 1.7. he is said to come
with Clouds (happily) to unvail the brightness of his Glory, which otherwise
mortal Eyes could not endure, I dare not say: for as the Apostle Paul speaks,
he dwells in the light which no man can approach unto; (otherwise) As no man
has seen him, so no man can see him, 1 Timothy 6.16. and whether after some time
of his appearing personally, that expression of the Tabernacle of God its being
with men, as Rev. 21.3. imports some wonderful Glory and Grace upon the New
Jerusalem, as upon the Tabernacle of his Grace of old; or the Glory of God
shining upon it, as Isa. 60.1. whose Sun and Light sets not day nor night,
verse. 19, 20. by some brightness of Glory and Grace shining upon her
continually, making glad the City of God, when the Lamb shall be her Light, as
Rev. 21.23. or their beholding of him, as Stephen did miraculously at his
death, sitting at Gods right Hand; or in what manner the Ark of Gods Testament
shall then be seen, when the Temple of God is opened in Heaven, Rev. 11.19.
with many expressions to like purpose; or how long that Resurrectio Justorum
shall be in finishing which Mr. Mede in one of his Letters seems to conceive
may be a great part of the thousand years, and according to their order (as the
Apostles phrase is) first of the Martyrs, and most eminent Saints, and so of
the rest successively; concerning which, and the like, as I am in the dark, so
I must be silent: God in his own time will reveal what he knows best for his
People; in the mean time there is matter enough of Comfort and Rejoicing in
respect of both Quick and Dead, in the good and blessed Condition of his
Church, in the said thousand years upon Earth, to all such as so wait upon
Christ here, as the true Followers of the LAMB, Rev. 14. that they may be in a
capacity of the Happiness reserved for either sort in those times; for which
the Holy Scriptures give plentiful Evidence, if Men will not hide their Eyes
from the Light thereof.

Thus, Christian Friend, I have as in a Mirror briefly (being led by the Hand
of Divine Providence, and assisted by his Grace and Spirit, according to his
Word) endeavored to set before thee these Materials of the New
Jerusalem-Doctrine, hoping that hence thou may (with me) have gladness put
into thy Heart, above what men have when their Corn, and Wine, and Oil
increases, Psalm. 4. I conclude with this Prayer for Thee and my Self, That the
Knowledge and Faith of these things may be sanctified daily more and more unto
us, and may more and more engage our Hearts unto the LORD, to whom all the
service of our whole Spirits, Souls and Bodies, is ever due: and in the
faithful endeavor therein, our labor will never be in vain:

Many other things I should here have added to like purposes, but am now forced
to defer them, till God may afford some further engaging Opportunity: In the
mean time, let us render unto Him the Glory of all we are, or have, or do, or
expect, which ever of Right will belong unto His Divine Majesty.

To Glory's GOD all Glory's due for aye:
To Him alone, This Due, let all His pay.
(...). The End.
(...).
ERRATA.
In the Title Page, for Aurorum read Auroram; page 26. l. 7. r. they, p. 25. l
4. r. cast up, p. 31. l 36 r said wings, and l. 40. r. fifth Century, p. 32. l.
21. add to be expired.


