Haec summum vatem Shirleium pingit Imago,
Solemn sic reddit debilis umbra suum:
At si nativa fulgentem luce videbis,
Exhibet en propria picta Tabella manu
W. Marshall sculpsit, 1646.



SIX NEW PLAYS, Viz. The
BROTHERS. SISTERS. DOUBTFUL HEIR. IMPOSTURE. CARDINAL. COURT SECRET.


The Five first were acted at the Private House in BLACK FRIARS with great
Applause.

The last was never Acted.

All Written by JAMES SHIRLEY

Never printed before.

London, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the Three Pigeons, and Humphrey
Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Curch-yard. 1653.

THE BROTHERS, A COMEDY, AS It was Acted at the private House IN BLACK FRIARS.
WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY.

Never Printed before.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the Three Pigeons, and Humphrey
Moseley at the Prince Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

To his truly Noble Friend THO: STANLEY Esquire
SIR,
The Memory and Contemplation of good Offices received, which, by their own
nature, and impulsion, have inclined other men to be active in their returns,
have not wrought me into so much boldness; For when I considered my obligation
to your favors I was still deterred by their greatness and number; For in my
poverty I had thoughts not without Ambition to reach them with some merit, but
when I was studying to proportion my gratitude, I fell much lower than when I
was the object of your mercy. The way to releeve my self, is no more to look at
what you have conferred, but on the bestower, for I have now learned to separate
you from your benefits, and to convey my self into your pardon, by the exercise
of your Charity. Thus in place of cancelling my former debts, I put your virtue
to a new disbursment: Witness this Composition, which after its birth, had in
my thoughts a dedication to your name, although it but now took the boldness to
wear it in the forehean both as an Ornament and preserver. You were pleased to
grace it with your fair opinion, when it was represented, and though it appear
not in that natural Dress of the Scene, nor so powerful, as when it had the
soul of action, yet your smile upon it now will give it second animation; by
which I shall derive after so long a silence, a Confirmation of my happiness,
in being still received

Sir Your most humble Servant JAMES SHIRLEY.

The Prologue.
TRoth Gentlemen, I know not what to say
Now I am here, but you shall have a play;
I hope there are none met but friends if you
Be pleased to hear me first, I Will tell you true,
I do not like the Prologue, it is not smart,
Not aerie, then the play is not worth a --
What witty Prologues have we heard? how keen
Upon the time, how tickling of the spleen?
But that wits gone, and we in these sad days
In corse dull fleam, must preface to our plays,
I Will show you what our Author meant should be
His Prologue, -- Gentlemen, he shall pardon me
I dare not speak a line, not that you need
To fear a satire in it, or wit in deed.
He would have you believe no language good,
And artfull, but what is clearly understood,
And then he robs you of much mirth, that lies
In The wonder, why you laugh at Comedies.
He says the times are dangerous, who knows
What treason may be wrapped in giant prose,
Or swelling verse, at least to sense? nay then
Have at you Mr. Poet, Gentlemen,
Though he pretend fair, I dissemble not,
'are all betrayed here to a Spanish plot
But do not you seem fearful; as you were
Shooting the bridge, let no man shift, or stir,
^'le fetch you of, and two hours hence you may
(If not before) laugh at the plot, and play.
The Persons.
Don Carlos. Luys his Son. Don Ramires. Sons to Ramyres.
Fernando Francisco
Don Pedro a Noble man. Alberto, a Gentleman, lover of Jacinta. Thodoro,
brother to Don Carlos. Jacinta daughter to Don Carlos. Alsimira, a Noble
Widow. Felisarda, Teodoros Daughter Physicians. Notary. Confessor. Servants.
Scene Madrid. THE BROTHERS.
ACT I.
Enter Francisco, Iacinta, Felisarda. Francisco. I Take my leave Iacinta, and
cannot wish you
More happiness than you possess.

Iacin. You must
Dissemble, or it is within your wishes
To make you self, Francisco, mine, which would be
A fair addition to me, in my faith
Of that most noble love you have professed.

Fran. When you but dare to own me, I am past
The fear of any destiny that can
Enter Don Carlos and Servant Divide us -- but your Father. Your own virtue
Be still you guard. I do not like this watch
Upon our meeting, pretty Felisarda.
Exit
Car. Tell Signior Francisco I would speak with him.
I do not like his frequent visites: though
His birth and generous parts deserve to march
With men of honorable name, I am
Without ambition to sacrifise
My daughter to his pension for life.

Enter Francisco Fran. Your pleasure sir?

Car. Has hitherto Francisco
Been to affect you in the list of those
I held my friends.

Fra. I hope no forfeit made
By me, has lost that good opinion
You placed upon me.

Car. I cannot tell
How you may be transported with desires
Above my thoughts to allow, I would not have
My silence, and the free access y' have had
To my house, (which still is open to wise guests,)
Betray me, or my Daughter to the mirth
And talk of men in the Plassa, My estate
Does walk upon sound Feet, and though I make
No exception to your blood, or person, sir,
The portion I have fixed upon Iacinta,
Beside the wealth her liberal Aunt bequeathed her,
Is more than your thin Younger brother's fortune
Should lay a siege, or hope to. I am plain.

Fr. And something passionate (if I understand you)
Without a cause. I am a gentleman,
With as much sense of honor, as the proudest
Don that does ride on's foot cloth, and can drop
Gold to the numerous minutes of his age
And let me not be lost for want of that,
Deserves not to be named to fill the balance
Against true honor -- let me tell you sir,
Virtue and blood are weighed against themselves,
You cannot know the price of these, when either
Scale is not poised with things of the same nature.

Car. You Are very right, and therefore I do weigh
My Daughters wealth against your fortunes sir,
I t^ke it they are things in the same specie,
And ^ind it cafie to distinguish, yours
Can hold small competition, and by
A consequence that Fathers use to infe^re,
As little hope to equal in affections.
Sir I must tell you I esteem Iacinta
Fit every way to meet your Elder Brother,
Whose Birth will intrest him so much in that
Full fortune which your Father now is Lord of,
Your expectations may prompt you look
Without much curiosity for a Bride,

Fran. I shall believe thy soul is made of Atoms,
That places so much happiness in Dust.
asid^ Sir, I can quit your Jealousy, my thoughts
Level beneath your Daughter, and shall be
Happy if you consent I may devote
My applications to Felisarda, your Niece.

Car. Is it my Niece? I ask your pardon.
Nay then be welcome, and t'encourage you,
Although her Father a poor Gentleman
My brother, by the malice of the sea
And winds, have lost what might have ranked him even
With some that ride upon their reverend mules,
I Will find a portion for her, if you strike
Affectionate hearts, and joy to call you Nephew.
Pray be not angry, that I take a care
To place my own, where I may see it answered
With State, as well as Family.

Fran. You show
A provident Father. I shall not then
B' endangered to your scruple, if I address
My services to her, whose humble fortune,
In the relation to your blood, and nobleness,
Is wealth enough to me?

Car. I wish it prosper.

Fra. You have much honored me.
Exit,
Car. That scruple's vanished.
These are considerings, with which Parents must
Timely prevent the folly, and the fall
Of Children, apt to lose themselves in shadows
And gaudy apparitions.

Enter Servant. Ser. Your Son
Is come from Salamanca Sir.

Car. I hope
Philosophy has by this time tamed his wildness,
I have been careful not to feed his riots.
He Is welcome; my next study is to choose
A wife for him,

Servant, With him a Gentleman.
That seems of noble quality.

Enter Luys and Alberto. Luys. Your blessing,
Next which 'tvvil be a happiness, if you
Embrace this noble Gentleman Don, Alberto,
To whose affection I have been engaged.

Alber. Our studies grew together, and o^r loves.

Car. You do an honor to us.

Lu. If he thrive
Upon his fair intents sir to my Sister,
Whose character he has took delight to hear
From me sometimes, it will enlarge our honor.

Car. He has improved in language -- his estate?

Lu. Six thousand ducats sir per Annum clear
In his possession, beside
The legacy of a Granam when she dies
That has outlived 6. cats within their family.

Car. This tastes again of the old humor, he is
Not settled yet.

Lu. Your pardon sir, I cannot
With any patience think of an old w^man,
They are agues to my nature, she that lives
To three score is a witch, and fit for fuel
By the Civil law. I hope my mother's well.
Sir I beseech you, be not you mistaken,
I am not what I was, I Am strangely altered
From the wild garb, and can discourse most gravely
Of any thing but old and toothless women.
Do not you think it fit, she should be burned sir,
That lives within an Hospital till the roof
Consume to dust, and no more left for covering
Than is kept up in one continued Cobweb,
Through which the birds may see her when she creeps
Under a spiders canopie; what think you?
Speak your own conscience.

Car. A young wife will cure
This angry heat of blood. You are most welcome,
Command my house, and if you can affect
My Daughter, for whose love (as my Son here
Prepares me) you took this pains, I shall
Make equal propositions. I knew
Your Father well, Don Roderigo, who
Gave up his life with honor against the Moors.
Once more y' are welcome: Son Luys show
The way to your Sister, and bid her entertain
Your friend with all the love her modesty,
And my commands may prompt her to.

Alber. You much oblige my services.

Lu. Remember Don
Conditions, if my Sister and you join
Your coppiholds, I have a life must be
Maintained till the old man dye, hang his pension,
Two'not keep me in salads. I Will conduct you.
Exe. Alb. and Luys.
Car. I like his person well, and his calm gesture
Speaks for his other composition.
The estate is competent, my Daughter is
Obedient, which rich Parents call a blessing,
Whose wisdom is to advance their name, and fortunes.
Enter Don Ramyres My Son is all my study now.
My noble Don Ramyres, you look cheerful.

Ramy. It Is a good omen, I have buisness w'ee
^uch as cannot despair your entertaiment;
You have a Daughter.

Car. I would you had one;
^ should be willing to translate a Son,
^^d by his marriage be most proud to call
^^ur Daughter mine.

^ amy. You are next a Prophet, Signior,
And but the Sexes differ, speak my thoughts;
^ is harmony on both sides; to be short
(...) let our gravities not waste time, and breath
(...) our affairs, give the Young leave to court
And spin out days in amorous circumstance;
(...) Son Fernando, I need not call him Heir,
(...) birth concludes it, I would commend
(...) fair Iacinta: 't can be no dishonor
(...) Family to mix with mine.
(...) It Is an addition
(...) a luster rather to our blood.
(...) It Is my affection to you Daughter, which confirmed
(...) ^^rvation of her virtue, makes
(...) this tie between 'em; I may safely
(...) you will assure a portion that
(...) fortunes will deserve, who must enjoy
(...) I possess, unless you disaffect
(...) person, or decline his education,
(...) ^ich has not spared my coffers to advance him
(...) ^he best form of Gentleman.

^ar. I want
(...) of tongue to answer this
^our freedom, and the bounty of your nature,
Toward my Daughter, and so far am from
Exception to Fernando, there is no Cavalliero
In Spain I wish to thrive so well in her opinion.

Ramy. T will be his encouragement,
If he entrench upon no^others interest,
I mean not to except, how well he can
Deserve her nobly from a Rival, if
Her heart be not contracted, this were to
Engage'em both to loss of Peace, and Honor,
Perhaps betray a Life.

Car. You argue nobly,
She is yet Mistress of her thoughts, and free,
While her Obedience does keep in trust
Her heart; till I direct it, which shall be
To love, and choose your Son to live within it.
Have I said home?

Ramy. You have. When they have met
We may conclude the Doury, and confirm
Our mutual assurances, till then farewell.
Exit.
Car. I like this well; Ramyres has
A fortune for a Grande. Don Alberto
Must now excuse me, if my vote prefer
Fernando, whom my Daughter must accept
Or forfelt me. The new guest is not warm
In his access, and shall not feel with what
Soft art, and subtle ways, I steer her passion;
Yet were Alberto's state ten Maravides
Above Ramyre's, I should place him first.
Fame is an empty noise, Virtue a word
There Is not a Jew will lend two Ducate; on.
He is returned, I must prepare Iacinta.
Exit.
Enter Ramyres and Fernando. Fer. I hope my past life has not sir so ill
Deserved, you should be jealous of my duty
When you command, although in things of this
High nature, man being nothing more concerned,
Next the divine considerations,
Than in the choice of her that must divide
The joys and sufferings of his life, a Son
May modestly insist upon the privilege
That Love by his great charter has conferred
On every heart, not to be forced, yet I
Freely resign my will, and what men call
Affection, to that object you present me.

Ramyr. Apply your self then to Don Carlo's daughter
She Is young, fair, rich, and virtuous, and I Have had
Full treaty with her Father, who expects
Your visit.

Fer. Young, fair, rich, and virtuous,
Four excellencies seldom met in one;
She cannot sure want servants, that commands
Under so many titles. I could wish,
(So much I have ambition to be thought
Obedient sir,) she were but one of those.

Ramy. She is all, and one.

Fer. My duty were not less
If I forgave my self a happiness
To perfect your comands; sir, I am ready,
To try my fortune.

Ramy. There is no fear of thy repulse, and when
Thou do confirm her gained to thy affection,
My greatest act, and care of life is over.
Go on and prosper.
Exit
Fer. He is passionate,
And like the fury of the winds, more loud
By opposition; such a providence
May be mine one day when I am a Father,
And he for whose advance my cares are meant,
Like me, may with a fair and formal show
Disguise his thoughts too, yet I am to blame,
For my affection to a dream, a thing
With which my eyes only converst, to hazard
A Fathers love, and the rich peace it brings;
Enter Francisco. I Will uncreate the face I dote upon
And be my self, or -- what? my brother?
Now Francisco, you met my father?

Fran. Yes, and he
Looks as some news had much exalted him.
You are not so merry in the face, what Is It?

Ferd. Nothing.

Fran. You held no controversies with him?

Ferd. no.

Fran. I cannot guess he was angry by his smiles;
How did you part?

Ferd. exceeding kindly.

Fran. What changes your complexion?

Ferd. Thou Art deceived.
Pre'the' how do men look that are in love?

Fran. Why? as they did before; what alteration
Have you observed in me?

Ferd. You have then a Mistress,
And thrive upon her favors; but thou art
My brother, I Will deliver thee a secret,
I was at St. Sebastians last Sunday
At Vespers.

Fran. Is it a secret that you went to church?
You need not blush to tell your ghostly Father.

Ferd. I prithee leave thy impertinence; there I saw
So sweet a face, so harmless, so intent
Upon her prayers, it frosted my devotion
To gaze on her, till by degrces I took
Her fair Idea through my covetous eye,
Into my heart, and know not how to ease
It since of the impression.

Fran. So, proceed.

Fer. Her eye did seem to labor with a tear,
Which suddenly took birth, but overweigh'd
With it is own swelling, dropped upon her bosom,
Which by reflection of her light, appeared
As nature meant her sorrrw for an ornament;
After her looks grew cheerful, and I saw
A smile shoot graceful upward from her eyes,
As if they had gained a victory o'r grief,
And with it many beams twisted themselves,
Upon whose golden threads the Angels walk
To and again from heaven.

Fran. I do believe
By all these metaphors, you are in love;
I see you have a fancy, but proceed,
And be not melancholy.

Ferd. I have told thee all.

Fran. This is indeed a vision; you have
But seen her all this while, if I may counsel you
You should proceed, her face is nothing when
You have perused the rest.

Ferd. It Is dangerous.

Fran. You must excuse me Brother,
There can be no hurt in a handsome woman,
For if her face delight so much, what will
The enjoying of so sweet a pile of beauty?

Ferd. Thou have infused a confidence, I will
Embrace this counsel, you shall with me Brother,
And see how I behave my self, the Lady
Is not far off.

Fran. Withal my heart, I'e pawn
My life you shall enjoy her; what is she
Of flesh, and blood, that will deny, when she
Is fairly courted? may I know the name
Of this loved Mrs? you may clear your thoughts,
I dare have no design to wrong your love.

Ferd. What think you Brother of the fair Iacinta?

Fran. Don Carlo's Daughter?

Ferd. To that happy coast
I now am sailing; we lose time, clap on
More wings thou feathered God; thou have put fire
Francisco into my drooping thoughts, and as
They had already bargaind with the wind,
They are aloft, and chide loves lazy motion.

Fran. A word before you fly; but is Iacinta
Your Mistress then?

Ferd. The beautiful Iacinta.
Do think I shall not prosper? what is she
Of flesh and blood, that can deny, when she
Is fairly courted? add to this my happiness,
That she is the Mistress, whom, from all her sex
My Father has made choice of for my courtship;
He has already treated with Don Carlos,
And 'twas his last command, I should address
My present visit to her.

Fran. Very well;
If this be truth, you need not trouble wings
To overtake this Lady, to my knowledge
(I Am serious now) she has bestowd her heart
Upon a friend, who has already fortified
Himself against the world, that would oppose
His title to it.

Ferd. From what intelligence
Have you gaind this? her Father knows it not.
Come, these are but subtle pretenses scattered
By some, who cunningly thus hope to make
Themselves a victory, by cutting off
More fruitful expectations, this must
Not disingage me, prithee walk.

Fran. I can produce my Author, here, Fernando.
And with my blood defend that interest
She gave me, with intent I should preserve it.

Ferd. How, is she yours Francisco?

Fran. Mine, if hearts
Have power to make assurance.

Ferd. It Is some happiness
I have no stranger to oppose, whose high
And stubborn soul would not release this treasure
But make me force it through his blood. Francisco
And Fernando are two rillets from one Spring,
I will not doubt he will resign, to make
Me fortunate; or should his will be cold
And some close thoughts suggest I had no privilege
By Eldest birth, but came a sly Intruder
Upon his right of love, there is a tie
Of Nature and Obedience to a Father
Will make him give this blessing from his bosom,
And strip his amorous soul of all his wealth
That may Invest my wishes.

Fran. I read not this
In any of the reverend Casuists;
No inequality being in our blood
The la^ of nature meant we should be equal;
It was first tyranny, then partial cu^to me,
Made you more capable of Land. Would you
Be lord of us, because you are first born,
And make our souls your tenants too? when I Have
Named you my Elder brother, I exclude
All servitude; Justice that makes me love you
Carries an equal law to both;
Nay I can love you more if I consider you
(Without the chain of blood) a friend, than all
The bonds of nature can enforce me to;
In both relations give me leave to love you
As much as man, but not resign my Mistress.
You ascend higher, and persuade by what
Obedience is owing to a Father,
They give us life, a good Son keeps it for him,
And every drop bled in their cause, a glory;
I can acknovvledge this, and sacrifise
Life, Fortunes, a poor recompense to lose
(Were they all multiplied) to show my duty;
But these are things may be resigned, a Mistress
Is not a wealth in balance with the world,
But much above the poize of all it is happiness,
And equal with our honor, riveted
I^to our so^l, it leaves her not, when death
Has ^^ook this body off, but flies with it
Mo^e swift, t^ love it in the other world.

Ferd. You are very pa^^ionate.

Fran. I am very j^^^,
And you s^all find it brother ever you tvvine
With my Iaci^a, mine, if vows may give
Posse^^ion of each other's soul.

Ferd. No more
May she be worthy of thy heart, till mine
Do entertain a treason to divide you;
But I, to sati^fie my Father, must
Present my self, and trust me, will so manage
My love to her, as thou shall have no cause
To Interpret me a rival. O Fra^cisco
Our loves are of a kindred, for mine is
Devote to Felisarda, to her Cosen
Poor Felisarda.

Fran. Theodoros Daughter?

Ferd. We never yet changed language, nor does she
Imagine with what thoughts I honor her;
But here is the distraction, thou can not
Expect more opposition from (...) Carl^s,
Than I must from my Father, if he knew
Where I have placed my heart.

Fran. Let us assist
Each other then, till time, and some kind ^^arres
Mature our love.

Ferd. Let Fathers look at wealth, it is all their Saint:
Hearts are freeborn, and love knows no constraint.

Exe^^t ACT II.
Enter Luys and Iacinta. Luis HOw do you like Alberto Sister? is he not
A gallant Gentleman?

Iacin. For what good Brother?
cannot Judge his Intellectualls,
But we have plenty of more proper men
(...) Spain.

Luys He i^anexcellent Scholar,
He was still Emperor in the Schools, and since
He studied Logic and Philosophy,
He was the flower of's time at Salamanca.

Iacin. It Is pity he should be gathered then.

Lu What be gathered?

Ia The flower you talk on.

Lu. If you affect him Sister, he may grow,
And you may keep him still for seed please you.

Ia. And sell him out at sowing time to Gardners.

Lu Come, you must love him.

Ia. Has he the Black-art?
I know not how Magic or Philters may
Prevail, and yet he looks suspitiously.

Lu. You think y' are witty now, do you hear, you must
Affect him for my sake.

Ia. Now you speak reason;
I may for your sake dote upon him, Brother,
This is a conjuration may do much.

Lu. Well said,
Thou art my Sister, this good nature shows it.
And now I Will tell thee, I have promised him
As much as marriage comes too, and I lose
My ho^or, if my Don receive the canvas.
He has a good estate, and I have borrowed
Considerable moneys of him Sister,
Pieces of eight, and transitory Ducats.

Ia. Which must be paid.

Lu. Not if you marry him;
Conditions have been thought on.

Ia. How? conditions?

Lu. And some revenew was convenient
To do things like a Gentleman, I may
Tell you, my Father is a little costive,
Purse-bound, his penfion cannot find me tooth-picks,
I must live till he dye it is fit you know;
Alberto has an Exchequer, which upon
Thy smiles will still be open.

Ia. Very good;
Then you upon the matter have sold me to him
To find you spending money?

Lu. No, not sold;
W' are at no certain price; sums have been lent
In expectation, or so, and may again.

Ia. You deserve Brother I should hate you now.

Lu. It Is all one to me, so you love him;
For my part I desire but my expenses.

Ia. What if another man supply your wants
Upon the same conditions of my love?

Lu. I am indifferent, so I have my charges,
My necessary wine and women paid for,
Love where you please your self; I am but one,
I would not see him want that is all, because
My Father is not yet resolved about
His going to heaven.

Ia. Well sir, for Don Alberto,
You shall be his advocate no more, and there is
A Fee to bribe your silence in his cause.

Lu. Why, thank you sister, -- will you dye a virgin?

Ia. Why do yo ask?

Lu. I would speak for somebody, tell me but whom
You have a mind to, and I Will plead for him,
And if he be a Don he will consider it;
You may give me what you will, besides.

Ia. When I
Resolve, You shall be acquainted.

Lu. But do you hear,
Until you do resolve, I would lose no time,
It Is good keeping a friend, and a warm client;
You may look lovingly upon Alberto,
And let him hope at all adventures, in
Two months you may be otherwise provided
And he may hang himself, in the mean time
Some favors now and then to the poor Gentleman
Will do him good, and me no hurt, besides
You Will please my Father in it, whose vote is for him,
And that is a thing material. I am
To meet with Don Alberto, and some Gentlemen,
I will preserve his confidence, and tell him
I have talkd with thee. Have you any more
Of this complexion? cause I know not what
Occasions I may have to keep my credit
With men of mark and honor, where I am going;
You are my Fathers darling, and command
His yellow Ingots; the other Doblon D'oro.

Ia. So I may bring a rentcharge upon my self.

Lu. The the other drop of orient mercy, come.

Ia. You care not what accounts I give my Father.

Lu. Thou have twenty vvayes to cosen him, wedge i^
Into the next Bill, he vvears Spectacles,
And loves to read -- Item for pious uses.
Can it be less to help a brother? well said.

Ia. Let not this feed your riot.

Luys By no means.
I am for no Carthusians to day.
Enter Carlos, Fernando, Francisco, and Felisarda. Farevvell dear Sister --
who is that?

Ia. My Father

Lu. I cannot endure that old man's company.
Exi^
Car. I am past complement, and must acknovvledg^
Your fair intentions honor us, she is no Goddess
Of beauty Sir, but let me without pride
Boast my self blessed, Fernando, in her virtues,
And that which crowns em all, obedience^.
Iacinta, Entertain this Gentleman
With all becoming thoughts of Love, his merit
(Out of no rash, but mature judgment,) has
Prevaild with me, to name him to the first
And noblest place within your heart.

Ferd. Until this hour I never had the confidence
More than to think of love, and hide a flame
That almost has consumed me. You may think
It worth a smile, and that I only flourish
To show my vanity of wit or language,
But when you understand that I bring hither
No young affection, but a love took in
Long since at my ambitious eye, it may
Beget your gentle thought, or will, to cure me.

Iac. Pardon me, if the more you strive to print
A truth on this short story of your passion,
The more I find my self inclined to wonder,
Since you seem to infer, You took in the
Disease at fight of me, I cannot be
So ignorant, as not to have received
Your Name and Character, but never kn^^
^^fore, when you did grace us with a visit*
And how then at such distance you contracted
A danger so consuming, is above,
My knowledge, not my pity, if you could
Direct me to the cure with Virgin honor.

Car. So, so, I leave you to the amorous Dial^gue,
Presume you have my voice.

Iac. Sir, with your pardon,
You lead me to a Wilderness, and take
Your self away, that should be guide; do you
Engage me to affect this Don Fernando
^n earnest?

Car. Yes.

Iac. You did direct my love
^o Don Alberto.

Car. I dispense with that
^ommand; you may by fair degrees, and honor,
Quit his addresses, and dispose your self
^istris and Bride to Don Ramyres heir.

Felis. It does not thus become you sir, to mock
(...) Virgin never injured you; he is
^our elder Brother, I am here beneath
^he level of his thoughts, in the nature of
(...) servant to my Cosen, and depend
Upon my Uncles charity.

Fran. May I be
Cursed in my own affections, if I
Delude thee, though to atchieve our best desires
We seem to dissemble thus before Don Carlos.
This is a secret yet to poor Iacinta.

Car. You have my will; obey it.

Ia. Has Francisco broken his faith already?

Car. May you both joy, where you have placed your loves.
You apply close Francisco.
Exit
Fran. With your good favor,
I fairly hope.

Ferd. Your Father's gone Iacinta.

Ia. I should be
Equally pleased if you would leave me too.

Felis. This is a change.

Ia. Unkind Francisco hear me.

Fran. It Is my meaning. Brother I have prepared
Your story there with Felisarda; lose
No time.

Ferd. Iacinta, clear your thoughts again,
And ^ardon that I took a shape to fright you;
I shall not grieve to see Francisco prosper,
And merit all your favors, since my hopes
Must thrive, or have their Funeral here.

Ia. Are we
So ble^^ Francisco? thou have a noble Brother.

Ferd. I may suppose my Brother, Felisarda,
Has made it now no secret, that I love you;
And since our stars have so contrived, that we
Have means to assist our mutual ambitions,
D^ not you make their influence unprofitable;
It Is the first boldness I ere took to visit you,
Al^hough my eyes have often with delight
And satisfaction to my heart observed you:

^elis. You seem a noble Gentleman, and can take
But little glory to undo a Maid,
Whose Fortunes cannot bring you any triumph.

Ferd. How mean you fairest?

Felis. Not to be flattered Sir
Into a sin, to cure my poverty;
For men whose expectations are like yours,
Come not with honor to court such as I am,
(Lost to the World for want of portion)
But with some untamed heat of blood.

Fer. I dare
With conscience of my pure intent, try what
Rudeness you find upon my lip, it is chaste
As the desires that breath upon my language.
I began Felisarda to affect thee
By seeing thee at Prayers, thy virtue winged
Loves Arrow first, and 'twere a sacrilege
To choose thee now for sin, that have a power
To make this place a Temple by thy Innocence.
I know thy poverty, and came not to
Bribe it against thy chastity; if thou
Vouchsafe thy fair and honest love, it shall
Adorn my fortunes, which shall stoop to serve it
In spite of friends or destiny.

Fran. My Brother
Knows my whole Interest in thee, to whom
My Fathers care directed him, but we
Thus mutually resolve to aid each other.

Ia. This must be wisely managed of all sides;
Parents have narrow eyes.

Fran. Our meeting thus
Will happily secure us from their Jealousy;
Our Fathers must not know this countermarch.

Enter Carlos. Car. Ha; I like not this; Fernando at busy courtship
With Felisarda, and Francisco so
Close with my Daughter.

Iac. Las we are betrayed.

Felis. My Uncle.

Ferd. You are her Kinswoman, and of her bosom,
I prechee in my absence, plead to ^air
I^cinta for me; as an earnest of
My (...), accept this trifle from me.

Car. (...) it is a jewel.

Felis. Without this reward
I should solicit sir your cause, and do
My duty to Don Carlos, who desires it.

Ferd. I take my leave.

Fran. Madam, I shall be proud
To call you Sister, but you will prepare
Another happiness if you vouchsafe
To speak for me to pretty Felisarda,
She Is bound to hear your counsel and obey it,
If I may owe this favor to your charity.

Iacin. Your goodness will deserve more.

Fran. I must follow him.
Exit.
Car. Do you take notice Felisarda, that
You live here on the bounty of an Uncle?
Your Father had but ill news from the Indies.

Felis. Sir, as your goodness wants no testimony,
I shall attend it with all humble services.

Car. How durst you in the presence of my Daughter,
Maintain such whispers with Fernando, ha?

Felis. Sir, he was pleased --

Car. No more, I here discharge you.

Iacinta, I Will provide one to attend you
With less relation to your blood. I Will hear
Of no de^ence, away -- out of my doors.
Go to your Father Signior Teodo^o:
Hi^ ships may rise again were sunk by the Hollander,
And Fle^t from St. Thome, he may prefer you
To some Rich Don, or who knows but you may,
Born on the Plumes of his estate, be made
In time a proud Condessa, so adios
M^i illustre Sennora Felifarda.
Exit.
Ia. Thus have I heard a tall ship has been wracked
By some strange gust within the Bay: his passion
Admits of no dispute. O my poor Cose,
I fear my turn is next to be an exile,
Thy absence must deprive me of Francisco,
Who can no more glad his Iacintas eyes,
With a pretense to visit thee.

Felis. It Is not
My fear to suffer want so much afflicts me,
As that I must lose you, but he returns.

Enter Carlos with a Letter, and Servant. Car. Don Pedro de F^ente Calada
coming hither,
With Don Alberto, and my Son?

Serve. Yes sir, the Count desires to see Iacinta
Whom your Son has so commended, and sent me
To give you notice.

Car. Ha Iacinta, retire
To your closet, and put on your richest Jewels,
A Count is come to visit you; Felisarda
There may be some more art used in her dress,
To take the eyes of greatness.

Iac. Sir you speak
As I were meant for sacrifice, or sale;
The C^unt Don Pedro --

Car. No reply; be careful,
And humble in your office Felisarda,
And you may live, and eat here, till Iacinta
Provide another servant to attend her,
Which may be three whole days; my anger is
Not everlasting; bid my Wife come to me.
Enter Al^^ira. ^ expect an honorable guest, the Count Don Pedro,
To see our Daughter, whom I have commanded
To appear with all her riches to attract him.

Alsi. If his Intents be honorable, I have heard
Don Pedro loves a hansom Donna.

Car. He had better cool his hot blood in the frosen
Sea, and rise thence a rock of Adamant
To draw more wonder to the North, than but
Attempt to wrong her chastity.
Enter Don Pedro, Luys and Alberto. This from Don Pedro is an honor binds
The service of our lives.

Ped. Noble Don Carlos.

Alsi. If we had been prepared, we should have met
This grace with more becoming Entertainment.

Ped. It Is fair, and equal to my wishes, -- she
He ki^ses (...) Does smell of roasted Garlic; this your Sister?

Enter Iacinta and Felisarda. Luys That is my Mother, here is Iacinta Sir.

Ped. She has a tempting shape, I now am pleased.
I Use to kiss all; hum a pretty thing?

To Phelis. Car. I like not his busy eyes on Felisarda.

Alber. You will be faithful to me?

Luys Who, I faithful? how shall I live else?

Car. Son Luys.

Alber. Madam.

Ped. Will you be pleased admit Don Pedro, by
The Title of your s^rvant, to presume
Sometime to wait upon you.

Iacin. It were pride
And saucy ambition sir in me, to think
You can descend so much from your great birth,
To own a name, and office so beneath you.

Ped. I that before thought women easy trifles,
And things which nature meant only to quench
High flames in man, am taken with this Lady.
Luys thou have wronged the fair Iacinta,
Thy praise was thyn, and cold, Spain is not rich
Enough to boast her equal: and I love her.

Luys Oh she will be to proud to know it Sir.

Ped. Proud, she must be, whose eyes have such command.
She has a pretty servant too, Luys,
I like 'em both.

Luys How, both?

Ped. They will do well,
One for a Wife, the other for a Concubine.

Luys It will become your high blood.

Ped. Say I kiss
Her white hand, and present her with these Pearls?

Luys Your honor shall command.

Ped. Your Daughter has a most magnetic face,
And I pronounce her happy, your consent
Confirms her mine.

Car. There Is nothing in my blood, or fortune, but
Don Pedro shall command. I was Prophetical?
Come hither Alsimira, would imagine?
He Is taken with Iacinta, and has praid
Already my consent.

Alis. Believe not all
That great men speak are Oracles, our Daughter --

Car. If she be stubborn, uncreates her self,
Be you wise, and counsel her to this ambition,
Or thus I loose you all; ha turn away,
That Faery she is a Witch, the Count talks with her.

Alb. I hope you hold me not Sir less deserving
Than when you gave me free access to plead
My service to your Daughter -- if that Don --

Car. Sir you too much prejudicate my thoughts
^ must give due respects to men of honor,
Nor is it fit I should impose upon
The Freedom of Iacintas love.

Alb. You Are noble.

Car. My Lord.

Alb. I do not like this Don.

Luys Thou Art of my mind, I do not like him neither,
And yet the blackbirds in the bush, see what
present ^e would give my sister.

Alb. Did she refuse it?

Luys I never mean she shall, what wrong my friend?
Yet I Will take all, and let him hang himself;
(embraces him: If he would send his ey^^, I would undertake
To (...) 'em to the Ieweller, they would off,
For (...) toadstones. Have no fear, my Mother
Is for you too, you must fee both your Advocates.

Car. Iacinta.

Iacin. Sir.

Luys She takes her self much honored.

Ped. You oblige.

Luys Let me alone to carry things.
Be confident to trust me with your honor,
If it would pawn for any thing.

[aside] Iac. I Am not perfect
How to neglect Alberto yet, and must I
Throw off Fernando, but new Entertained
By your command? the World will censure strangely.

Car. The World will praise thy wisdom, and my care;
Or if some giddy tongues condemn what is good,
Must we be servile to that fear, and lose
That which will make us Judges of their folly,
And damn it with a frown of state? they are fools
That dote upon those shadows, Idle talk,
The slime of Earthworms, that does shine to cosen
Infants, it is fit we raise our thoughts to substances.

Iac. Let modesty and nature plead a little,
If I appear not found to Entertain him.
I may collect more strength by time and counsel,
And for your satisfaction dare profess
My Lord has too much graced the low Iacinta
With a pretense so noble, but I should
Be held not worth his person, and too light
At his first breath of courtship to fall from
My Virgin strength, and give my self his captive.

Car. I shall allow that ceremony; the Count
Makes an address.

Ex Alsi. Felisard. Ped. I must use thrift in my delight, my eyes
Are proud, and must be taught by absence how
To value such a Mistress. I do miss the chambermaid.

Car. It will become me to attend.

Ex. Alber. and Iacin. Ped. Your pardon.
I Will take it for an honor, if your Son
Be pleased -- but to my coach?

Luys. Oh my good Lord!
So much I am your creature, if you knew
But where to match me, I would be your coach-horse.

Exe. Pedro and Luys. Car. So, so, Iacinta's stars do smile upon her,
'Twil be a match, were but my Son as fair
In expectation of a bride, I Would write
N^l ultra to my cares, he is to aerie
And volatile, a wife would timely fix him,
And make him fit to manage my estate.
Enter Luys. But he returns, I Will feel his pulse.

Luys, thou see how near Iacinta is to happiness.

Luys I did some office in it, she may thank me.
I first inspired his Lordship.

Car. Such a providence
To build thy self a Fortune by some brave
And noble marriage would become thy study,
And make thy Father willingly resign
His breath, with confidence to know thee wise
To govern what my Industry has gatherd;
What think thou of a wife?

Luys. I think little sir.
What should I do with a Wife?

Car. Imitate me, and study fame, and wealth
To thy posterity. Have I with care
Acquired such an estate, that must not last
Two Generations?

Luys. The way to make it
Last, is not to think of Wiving; for my part
(Sir with your pardon, if I may speak freely)
I had opinion once I was your Son,
But fearing by your narrow exhibition
You loved me not, I had a controversy
Within my thoughts, whether I should resolve
To geld my self, or turn a begging Friar.

Car. A begging Friar?

Luys It Is as I tell you Sir;
This last I fixed upon, and have been studying
Where I conveniently might raise a sum
To compass a hair shirt Sir,
To make trial before I thrust my self
Point blank into the Order.

Car. Thus wild Sons interpret still
A prudent Father; but you may discharge
Your Jealousies, unless it be your own
Devotion to be chaste, and live a recluse.

Luys For that I can be ruld; I have not lived
After the rate of hating any women
But I can hear of Marriage, if it be
Your pleasure: but these Wives Sir are such tickle
Things, not one hardly staid amongst a thousand;
Beside, unless you find one very rich
A man may cast a way himself, and get
A bundle of Beggeries, Mouths, that day and night,
Are open like Hell Gates, to feed; I would not
Hazard my Freedom, and the blessings Heaven
Has lent you Sir, upon a Wife with nothing.

Car. Thy pension doubles for that word; in Earnest,
How much I like this wisdom; take this Purse,
I will have no account, and find me out
A wealthy Maid or Widow but not ugly.

Luys No? not ilfavourd Sir, if she be rich?
A little old or crippel'd?

Car. I wo'not have thee
Mary a crooked, deformed thing, because
She may have children --

Luys Not, unless she have
An Infinite wealth to make 'em strait sir;
I Will marry a witch so she have money sir.

Car. No, on no terms a Monster.

Luys Then I wo'not.
And now it comes into my mind, they talk of
A young rich Widow, Donna Estifaniar,
What do you think of her?

Car. Thou have named one
To my own desires, she lives a Widow still,
But she has refused many brave Dons.

Luys. No matter,
I like her sir the better.

Car. She gives good entertainment.

Luys I will have her
If you but say the word. I wear a charm
To catch a Widow; but this Purse will hardly
Last till we finish, I must do things with honor.

Car. Thou shall be furnished like my Son; kneel down
And ask me blessing, I do long to give it thee.

Luys I have your blessing here.

Car. I Will find thee out
Some Jewels to present thy Mistress too.

Luys 'Two'not be much amiss, the Gold will go
The farther Sir. I know not how this
Exit Car. Came about, unless Don Pedros coming to
My Sister have made him mad, and wrought this miracle.
How careful he was I should not mary one
Deformed, I have chose the hansomest things thus far,
And I mary with a Witch at these years, let the Devil
Ride my wild Mare to death; and now I
Consider on it I wo'not have the Widow
For fear of the worst, yet I Will to her,
And make a business on it to keep the old
Man's Baggs in motion; this with some good
Husbandry, and no play, may last a Fortnight,
It Is very Gold: yes, it will pay some scores,
Maintain my Negro, and a brace of Whores.
Now fiddles do your worst.
Exit.
ACT III.
Enter Ramyres, Fernando. Ramy. How, no success? where lies the opposition?
Don Carlos equal with my self professed
His free desires, and to dispose his Daughter
To meet thee with all loving entertainments.
What can she argue to thy birth, or person,
Attended with so plentiful a fortune?
I must believe thy courtship dull and faulty:
When I was at thy years and spring of blood
I wound my self like air among the Ladies,
Commanding every bosom, and could dwell
Upon their lips like their own breath, their eyes
Doubled their Beams on me, and she that was
Of hardest composition, whom no love
Could soften, when I came with charm of language,
Her Frost would strait dissolve, and from her eyes
Her heart came weeping forth to woo me take it.

Ferd. Yet you that did with a Magnetic Chain
Attract so many, could possess but one;
I came not to Don Carlos house with cold
Or lukewarm thoughts, but armed with active fire
That would have melted any heart but hers,
Bound up with ribs of treble Ice against me,
By which I found there is another fate
That governs love, against whose secret doom
In vain is eloquence or force.

Ra. So Obstinate?

Ferd. Nothing that I could say
In my own cause, could make her tongue or looks
Promise an expectation to thrive
By any after service, this disdain
I did resent, as it became my honor,
And now confirmed against her pride, have thought
Of something, that with your consent, may tame
Her scorn, or punish it to her repentance.

Ra. Name it.

Ferd. She has a Kinswoman lives with her,
Felisarda Daughter to Signior Teodoro,
A trade fallen Merchant, Brother to Don Carlos,
This Felis* that now lives on the charity of her Uncle,
Half servant, half companion to Iacinta,
And fair, I would pretend to love, observe me sir,
And in their presence court her as my Mistress;
Me thinks I see already how Iacinta
Does fret and frown.

Ra. I like it well.

Ferd. To see her Cosen so preferred, it is
The nature sir of women to be vexed
When they know any of their servants court
Another, and that love they thought not worth
Their own reward, will sting 'em to the soul,
When it is translated where it meets with love,
And this will either break her stubborn heart,
Or humble her.

Ra. But what if this pretense,
By such degrees convay away your heart,
That when Iacinta comes to sense, you cannot
Retrive your passion from the last, or say
Felisarda should believe you, and give up
Her heart to your possession, when you
Are by your first desires invited back,
What cure for Felisardas wound, if you
Affect her not? although I like that part
Of your revenge, I would not have my Son
Carry the hated brand of cruelty,
Or hear Fernando broke a Ladies heart;
But live upon his clear, and honest truth,
And if Iacinta have not valued him,
Find his own estimation in some other
By fair and noble Courtship; Virtue is
Above the gaudy shine of Gold; and if
My Son love where his honor cannot suffer,
The want of Dower, I can forgive.

Ferd. You now, read exc'lent charity, and like a Father,
It is the harmony I would hear, I chide
My fears that did suspect you would prefer
Wealth in a Bride; there is no beauty, or estate, compared
To that resulteth from the soul; I dare
Now open this narrow Closet, and present
The name I love above the World, it is
Sir Felisarda, equal in her blood,
Within whose virtuous poverty
More Treasures are containd, than in those veins
Of earth, which opend by our slaves, do bleed
Such floods of Gold into the lap of Spain.
Pardon my long concealment of her name,
It Was sin against your virtue, and once more
Speak in that blessed Language, I may hope
To call this Virgin mine.

Ra. How long have you
Been taken with this female holiness?

Ferd. Before Iacinta was propounded, this
Took firm possession of my faith.

Ra. Thou have discoverd thy destruction, foolish Boy.
Was this your policy to be revenged
Upon Iacinta, whom my providence
Elected to preserve our name and family,
To (...) upon a Beggar? thou have flung
A fire into my brain^ either resolve
To perfect (...) command, and throwing off
That (...) thou have prai^'d, prefer Iacinta
To the best (...) within thy heart, and marry her
Or live a stranger to me, and divested
Of all those rights, which nature, and thy Birth
Have sla^ter'd thee with hope to find; expect not
Alive, the stipend of a Groom to feed thee,
Nor dead, (...) naked charity of a shroud
To hide thee from the Worms.

Ferd. O^r* call back
That (...) sentence, it were sin to let
This passion dvvell upon you, nor would Heaven,
Whose eyes survey our frailty, suffer
So vvild a rage possess you.

Ra It Is within thy own obedience to divert it.

Fe^d. When you have heard what I can say more,
You will chide your fierce command.

^a. What Riddles this?

Ferd. Iacinta is already made another, and my force
Upon (...) vows, can be no less than sacrilege.

Ra. This is some new pretense.

Ferd Sir, not to vvast your patience, she has given
Her self by holy contract to Francisco.

Ra. Thy younger Brother?

Ferd. This I know will calm
Your fury, and those eyes that threatend lightning
With smiles applaud Franciscos fate, and praise
^y disobedience.

Ra. Franciscos Mistress?

Ferd. His wife confirmed by vows, and change of hearts,
I had it from themselves, when either strove
Whose circumstance should credit most their story,
Her tear or his conclusive groan, to seal
Their marriage, but both were equal sir,
What curse had I deserved, that should divorce
This Innocent pair of lovers?

Ra. All this talk
Which foolish thou interpret'st thy defense,
Has but enlarged thy folly, and that act
Which in Francisco I commend, upbraides
Thy own degenerate baseness: shall thy brother
Who carries all his portion in his blood
Look high, and careful of his honor aim
At fortunes, and with confidence atchieve
His glorious end, and shall his Elder brother
Engaged by nearest tie to advance his name,
Lie beating in the common tract of guls,
And sacrifice his birth and expectations
To a cozening face, and poverty? instead
Of adding mon'ments, that to the world
Should be his living Chronicle, to bury
His own, and all the antique honors (he
Never sweat for, but were cast into his blood)
Within a dunghill? thou have forfeited
Thy birthright, which Francisco shall inherit,
Nor shall the loss of my Estate be all
Thy punishment; hear and believe with horror,
If thou renounce not her that has bewitched
Thy heart, Felisarda, and by such a choice
I shall affect, redeem this scandal nobly,
Fernando from this minute I pronounce
Heir to his Fathers curse; be wise or perish.
Exit. Ra.
Ferd. Why does not all the stock of thunder fall?
Enter Francisco. Or the fierce winds from their close Caves, let loose,
Now shake me into Atoms?

Fran. Fie noble Brother, what can so deject
Your Masculine thoughts? is this don like Fernando!
Whose resolute soul so late was armed to fight
With all the miseries of man, and triumph
With patience of a Martyr? I observed
My Father late come from you.

Ferd. Yes Francisco,
He has left his curse upon me.

Fran. How?

Ferd. His curse, do comprehend what that word caryes
Shot from a Fathers angry breath? unless
(...) tear poor Felisarda from my heart,
He has pronounced me heir to all his curses.
Does this fright thee Francisco? thou have cause
To dance in soul for this, it is only I
Must lose, and mourn, thou shall have all, I am
Degraded from my birth, while he affects
Thy forward youth, and only calls thee Son,
Son of his active spirit, and applauds
Thy progress with Iacinta, in whose smiles
Thou may see all thy wishes waiting for thee,
Whilst poor Fernando for her sake must stand
An excommunicate from every blessing,
A thing that dare not give my self a name,
But flung into the Worlds necessities,
Until in time with wonder of my wants
(...) turn a ragged statue, on whose forehead
^ach clown may carve his motto.

Fran. Will it call
^is blessing back if you can quit your love
^o Felisarda? she is now a stranger
^o her Unkles house, I met one of his servants
^ho told me on some Jealous apprehension,
Don Carlos had discharged and banished her.

Ferd. He could not be so barbarous.

Fran. You know her Fathers Poverty.

Ferd And her Wealth of Virtue.

Fran. It is worth your Counsel,
To ex^min what you may preserve, if wisely
You could persuade your heart to love some another --

Ferd. What was it Francisco said?

Fran. Whose equal Birth,
And Virtues, may invite a noble change.

Ferd. Do not you love Iacinta?

Fran. Most religiously.

Ferd If you can but contrive your hearts at distanc^
And in contempt of honor, and your faith
Sacred to Heaven, and love, disclaim your Mistress,
I may be happy yet, what say? I know
Iacinta's Wise, and when she understands
How much it will advance, her charity --

Fra. Our case is not the same with yours good brother*
We have been long acquainted, to contract
Affections, if I understand, your loves
Are young, and had no time for growth.

Ferd. Do not wound me.
It Is false, by Love it self thou have deserved
^I should forget thee now; do thou consider
Love, (that does make all harmony in our soul,
And seated in that noblest place of life,
The heart) with things that are the slaves of time,
And that like common seeds, thrown into Earth,
It must have leisure to corrupt, and after
Much expectation, rise to name and vigor.
Love is not like the child that grows, and gets
By slow degrees perfection, but created
Like the first man, at full strength the first minute,
It makes a noble choice, and gains from time
To be called only constant, not increased.
Preserve thy own affections, and think mine
Noble as they, I shall suspect thy love
To me else; prithee leave me.

Fran. I Will obey,
And study how to serve you.
Exit.
Enter Felisarda. Ferd. Ha, it is Felisarda.

Felis. Turned out like one that had been false, where shall
Poor Felisarda wander? were it not
To ask a Fathers blessing, I would visit
Some Wilderness, ever thus present my self
His burden and his sorrow.

Enter Pedro. Ped. Had you no relation to Iacinta pretty one?

Felis. I was her servant.

Ped. Come, you shall be my Mistress; they have used
Thee scurvily, I will provide thee a lodging.

Felis. I shall not use your bounty sir for that.

Ped. Thou art a hansom Dona, here is a Pistolet,
Meet me i'th'evening, wot?

Felis. Where, and for what?

Ped. The where, at thy own choice, the what, thy honor.

Felis. You are not noble.

Ped. Don Pedro will Embrace thy buxom body.

Ferd. You must unhand this Virgin.

Felis. For goodness Sir,
Add not your anger to my sufferings.
Unhappy Felisarda.

Ped. Is she a friend of yours Signior?

Ferd. She is not for your sinful knowledge Don.

Ped. Baser los manos, adios Signiora. Diabolo!
My blood is high and hot, unless I marry timely,
^ must seek out a Female Julip.
Exit.
Felis. Don Carlo's fear of you was my first error,
But I accept my banishment, and shall
Humble my self to my poor Fathers Fortune;
You will be sir dishonored to be seen
With such a walking mis^ry.

Ferd. Thy Uncle
Has played the Tyrant with thee, but lose not
Thy virtuous courage; how our stories meet
And challenge kindred in affliction!
Oh Felisarda! I do suffer too,
And for thy sake, thou shall know more; til I
Salute thee at thy Fathers house, preserve
Good thoughts of thy Fernando, and accept
This little Gold, no bribe against thy honor.

Felis. My best return must be, my Prayers.
Exit.
Ferd. Farewell.
It Is not impossible my Father may
Retract his cruelty, and by time, and some
Discreet ways yet be wrought to like, what now
His passion wo'not let him see, her virtue.
How many Seas are met to wrestle here?
Exit.
Enter Iacinta and Alberto. Iac. I love you sir so well, that I could wish
You were a Witch;

Alb. A Witch, your reason Lady?

Ia. Then twere within the circle of your art
B^ some device to rid me of Don Pedro,
Or if you could by any spell but get
My Father disaffect him --

Alber. A Witch? that's a way about, I were best cut his
Throat a little.

Iac You 're much beholding to my Brother sir,
He still commends you; such an Advocate
Deserves his fee.

Alb. Unles my cause succeed
He has been feed too much; your Brother, Lady,
Preserves a noble friendship; if I were sure
You would be mine Iacinta, I could tarry
Till your Father dye.

Iac. But how can you procure
Don Pedro to have patience so long,
Whom my Father pleads for and prefers?

Alber. There, there is the mischief, I must poison him;
One Fig sends him to Erebus, it is in
Your power and wit to spin out time, I may
Invent a means for his conveyance. Ha!

Enter Carlos, Estefania, Luys. Ia. The Lady Estefania.

Car. Welcome again,
This is an honor to us, where is Iacinta?
Salute this noble Lady. Ha, Luys,
Have thou prevailed already?

Luys I Am in the way you see,
She has not been observed they say to walk
So freely with some men that boast more favor.

Enter Pedro. Ped. What makes the Lady Estefania here?
I like not their converse, this day is ominous.
Exit.
Car. Was It not the Count Don Pedro that retird?
What object here displeased him?

Alber. Ha, ha, did see the Don?

Car. Preserve your mirth -- I must be satisfied.
Exit.
Luys I Will lay a thousand Ducats that my costive
Don has been tampering with my Widow, I
Observed (when I by chance let fall discourse)
How much he was an amorous servant to
Iacinta, she changed her colo^r and did make
Such business how my Sister did affect him,
That I may guess, though I make use on it otherwise
To the old man, to keep the pulses of
His Purse in play, she came to examine chiefly
How matters here proceeded; well, if she love him --

Alber. She is thy Mistress.

Luys My Mistress? yes, but any man shall mary her.

Alb. How?

Luys. She is a Widdovv, Don, consider that,
Has buried one was thought a Hercules,
Two cubits taller, and a man that cut
Three Inches deeper in the say, than I, consider that too,
She may be cock a twenty, nay for ought
I know she is Immortal.

Alb. What do with her?

Luys Faith nothing yet,
And have but little hope, I think she is honest.

Alb. Does she love thee?

Luys At her own peril, vv'are not come to articles;
There is not wit in vviving, give me a whore;
But that I ovv thee money, thou should never
Marry my Sister neither?

Alb. Not Iacinta?

Luys No, nor any other simpering piece of honesty,
If I might counsel thee, while any vvench
Were extant, and the stews inhabited;
Is It fit, a Freeborn Gentleman should be chained
Tenant for life to one? Hang marriage shackles,
Ty the Town Bulls to'th'stake, we must have concubins.

Iac. Don Pedro was too blame, and trust me Madam
He shall find nothing here to advance his triumph.

Estef. You are Virtuous Iacinta; I presumed
When I should land my sufferings on your knowledge,
You would excuse my unexpected visit.

Iac. My Brother has been Just in the relation
How he pursues my love, but I shall be
Happy to serve your Justice, and must tell
The noble Estefania, my heart,
By all that love can teach to bind a faith,
Is placed where it shall never injure what
Your mutual vovvs contracted; I smile not
With mine own eyes upon him, it is my Fathers
Severe command to love him, but this story
Cleared to my Father would secure us both.

Estef. If any faith or service in me can
Deserve this goodness, cheerfully employ it.

Iac. I will be confident to use your Virtue.

Enter Carlos. Estef. I will refuse no office.

Iac. My Father comes most aptly.

Alb. Ha, ha, ha, have pity on my spleen,
I shall crack a rib else, ha, ha, ha.

Car. You are very merry, Don Alberto; Son,
You may be of the counsel too, this house
Is mine I take it, I advise you would
Frequent it less.

Alb. How Sir?

Car. I do not like your visits,
And to remove the cause, my Daughter is
Already sir disposed, to one above
Your birth and fortune, so fare-you-well.
You understand, now laugh and pick your teeth.
Daughter --

Alb. Did you hear this Luys?

Luys I, the old man raves.

Alber. Must not frequent his house.

Luys Would 'twere in a flame, so his money and I
Were out on it.

Alb. But thy Sister --

Luys Would be refined in the fire, let her burn too.

Alb. My friend, if I have not Iacinta,
There are certain sums of money --

Luys I am not of your mind Don, the sums are most uncertain.
Come, you did laugh too loud, my Father is
A Stoic, but despair not; go to your lodging,
I Will see thee anon, and either bring thee money
Or else some reasons why I do not bring it,
We will not go to Law, I Will pawn the widow
Rather than thou shall want; go say thy prayers,
And show thy tenth no more, till I come to thee.
Now the business here?

Exit Alber. Car. We have agreed Iacinta,
And he to morrow privately
Will at the Church expect thee; it is an age
Till I salute the Bride to this great Don,
Whose thoughts are winged to enjoy thee, and resolve
No more delay, prepare to meet this Honor.

Luys To morrow? this must be crossed.

Car. My next ambition Madam will be perfect*
To call you by some nearer name; my Son --

Est. Is a most noble Gentleman, I know not
Where lives so clear a merit.

Luys. Oh sweet Madam.

Car. Iacinta.

Luys I have a suit to you.

Est. To me?

Luys Only that you would not dote too much upon me,
A gentle easy sober pace in love
Goes far, and is much better than a gallop; if you please
We may hold one another in hand, and love
This seven years, without sealing and delivering.

Est. Withal my heart.

Luys You Will do me a pleasure Madam.

Est. You instruct well.

Luys This Courtship is not common.

Est. I confess it.

Car. Son Luys.

Luys Sir.

Car. Let her not cool.

Luys And she do,
I know the way to heat her again.

Est. I will not yet reveal my abuse Iacinta,
And if you please to favor a design,
I have a plot may serve to both our happiness.

Iac. I Will obey.
There is a trembling in my heart.

Car. You must not leave us yet Madam.

Est. You may command me.

Luys My Don so rampart, there is something in this pannier
Shall spoil your match to morrow; Don Alberto,
When I disclose, shall worship me: be drunk,
Cancel arreers, and beg to lend more money.
Exe:
ACT IV.
Enter Ramyres, Francisco and Notarie. Ra. It Is most exactly done, and firm.

Notar. I could,
Omiting or inserting but a word, or particle,
Trouble the whole conveyance,
And make work for the law till doom's-day: but --

Fran. Is It possible?

Notar. You do not know the quirks of a Scrivano,
A dash undoes a Family, a point,
An artificial accent i't'h wrong place,
Shall poison an Estate, translate your Land
In Spain now into either of both Indies,
In less time than our Gallions of Plate
Are sailing hither; but you are my friend,
And noble benefactor.

Ramy. There Is more for your reward.

Notar. I humbly thank you Signior. Su Criado.

Fran. Farewell.

Notar. Su Servidor.
Exit.
Ramy. This deed makes thee my Heir Francisco, and
Will like a powerful spell upon Don Carlos,
Whose soul is superstitious upon Wealth,
Win his consent to make Iacinta thine.

Fran. Sir, I cannot say my duty shall deserve it
Since nature, and religion, without all
This bounty challenges my best obedience.

Enter Fernando. Ramy Away, thy sight
Is my disease.

Fer. Your blessing sir I kneel for.

Ramy. What Impudence is this? will thou subscribe
To take off mine, thy curse on Felisarda?
For I do hate her heartily; disclaim
All promise, contract, or converse for ever,
I Am else inexorable.

Fer. Sir.

Ramy. His eyes shoot poison at me, ha? he has
Bewitched me sure, what coldness thus invades me?
There Is something creeping to my heart. Franscisco? ha*
Possess this gift of thy Inheritance;
Convey me to my chamber, oh -- Fernando,
If thou do hope I should take off my curse,
Do not approach my sight, unless I send for thee.

Fran. Forbear good Brother; Diego, Roder^go,
Your hands to assist my Father, one go for his
Physician.

Enter two Servants. Fer This turn is fatal, and affrights me, but
Heaven has more charity than to let him die
With such a hard heart, 'twere a sin, next his
Want of compassion, to suspect he can
Take his Eternal flight and leave Fernando
This desperate Legacy, he will change
The curse into some little prayer I hope,
And then --

Enter Servant and Physician. Serve. Make have I beseech you Doctor.

Phys. Noble Fernando.

Fer. As you would have men think your art is mea^
Not to abuse mankind, employ it all
To cure my poor sick Father.

Phis. Fear it not sir.

Ex. Phys. Serve. Fer. But there is more than your thin skill required
To state a health, your Recipes perplex't
With tough names, are but mockeries, and noise,
Without some dew from Heaven, to mix and make 'em
Enter Servant. Thrive, in the application: what now?

Ser. Oh sir, I am sent for the Confessor,
The Doctor fears him much, your Brother says
You must have patience, and not Enter Sir;
Your Father is a going, good old man,
And having made him Heir, is loath your presence
Should interrupt his Journey.
Exit.
Fer. Francisco may be honest, yet me thinks
It would become his love to interpose
For my access, at such a needful hour,
And mediate for my blessing, not assist
Unkindly thus my banishment. I Will not
Be lost so tamely, shall my Father dye
And not Fernando take his leave -- I dare not.
If thou do hope I should take off this curse,
Do not approach until I send -- 'twas so,
And it is a law that binds above my blood.
Enter Confessor and Servant. Make have good Father, and if heaven deny
Him life, let not his charity dye too.
One curse may sink us both, say how I kneel
And beg he would bequeath me but his blessing*
Then though Francisco be his Heir, I shall
Live happy, and take comfort in my tears,
When I remember him so kind a Father.

Confess. It is my duty.
Exit.
Fer. Do your holy office.
Those fond Philosophers that magnify
Our human nature, and did boast we had
Such a prerogative in our rational soul,
Converst but little with the World, confined
To cells, and unfrequented woods, they knew not
The fierce vexation of community,
Else they had taught, our reason is our loss,
And but a privilege that exceeds sense,
By nearer apprehension, of what wounds,
To know our selves most miserable. My heart
Enter Physician and Francisco. Is teeming with new fears -- Ha, is he dead?

Phy. Not dead, but in a desperat^ condition,
And so that little breath remains we have
Remitted to his Confessor, whose Office
Is all that is left.

Fran. Is there no hope of life then?

Phys. None.

Fer. Is he not merciful to Fernando yet? no talk of me?

Phys. I find he takes no pleasure
To hear you named: Francisco to us all
He did confirm his Heir, with many blessings.

Fer. And not one left for me? oh take me in
Thou gentle Earth, and let me creep through all
Thy dark and hollow crannies, till I find
Another way to come into the World,
For all the Air I breath-in here is poisoned.

Fran We must have patience Brother, it was no
Ambitious thought of mine to supplant you;
He may live yet, and you be reconciled.

Fer. That was some kindness yet Francisco; but
I charge thee by the nearness of our blood,
When I am made this mockery, and wonder,
I know not where to find out charity,
If unawares a chance direct my weary
And withered Feet to some fair House of thine,
Where plenty with full blessings crowns thy table,
If my thin fac^ betray my want of food,
Do not despise me, cause '^ was thy Brother.

Enter Confessor. Fran. Leave these imagined horrors, I must not
Live when my Brother is thus miserable.

Fer. There Is something in that face looks comfortably.

Confess. Your Father sir is dead, his will to make
Francisco the sole Master of his Fortunes
^s now irrevocable, a small Pension
He has given you for life, which with his blessing
^s all the benefit I bring.

Fer. Ha, blessing; speak it again good Father.

Confess. I did apply some lenitives to soften
His anger, and prevailed; your Father has
Reversed that heavy cen^ure of his curse,
And in the place bequeathed his prayer and blessing.

Fer (...) new created by his charity.
(...) ceremonies are behind, he did
(...) 'd within our Covent,
(...) Sepulture to me, I am confident
(...) will give me leave --

Fran. His will in all things I obey, and yours
Most ^^^rend Father; order as you please
(...) Body; we may after celebrate
^ith all due obsequies his Funeral.

Fer. Why you alone obey? I am your Brother:
My Fathers Eldest Son, though not his Heir.

Fran. It pleased my Father sir to think me worthy
^f such a title, you shall find me kind,
(...) you can look on matters without Envy.

Fer. If I can look on matters without Envy?

Fran. You may live here still.

Per. I may live here Francisco?
Enter a Gentleman with a letter ^onditions? I would not understand
^his Dialect.

Fran. With me, from Madam Estefania?

Gent. If you be Signior Francisco.

Fer. Slighted? I find my Father was not dead till now.
Crowd not you Jealous thoughts so thick into
My Brain, lest you do tempt me to an Act
Will forfeit all again.

Fran. This is Iacintas character [Reads] -- Fail not to meet.
As you timely will prevent the danger of my rape.
My soul! Estefania can instruct you all particulars --
My service to your Lady, say I shall obey her commands.

Exit Gent. Fer. Is that an Inventory you peruse?

Fran. Fernando you must pardon me, there is something
Of Essence to my life, exacts my care,
And person, I must leave you, we may seasonably
Confer of things at my return. Iacinta.
Exit.
Fer. It Is clear I am neglected, he did name
Iacinta too, in triumph, and is gone,
Big with his glories to divide '^m there,
And laugh at what my constant love has made me.
My heart is in a storm, and day grows black,
There Is not a star in Heaven will lend a beam
To light me to my ruin. Felisarda!
That name is both my haven, and my shipwreck.
Exit.
Enter Alberto and Luys. Alb. Excellent.

Luys You Will give me now a general release
For all the sums I ow you?

Alb. Thou have blessed me.

Luys. I was born to do you good; about it presently
Now you know where to ambush, away I say
And get comrads: Iacinta and my Mother
Is all the carriage, you may know the coach
By the old woman's cough ere it come near you,
She has a desperate malice to one tooth left
Still in her gums, till she has shook that out;
You wo'not need a warning piece, farewell.

Alb. Farewell, why what is the matter? you shanot leave me;
Thy Mother wo'not know thee in a Visard.

Luys You must excuse me friend, I would Join w'ee
In The ^urprise, but that --

Alb. What I prithee?

Luys I have extraordinary business, that concerns me
As near as life.

Alb. May not I know'^? thou art going
To the Widow now, thy Mistress.

Lu. It Is a business of more consequence;
Do think I would leave thee, and there were not
Such a necessity?

Alb. For what?

Luys And there were no more Sisters in the World,
You must excuse me.

Alb. Nay, nay, we must not part, unless I know
This mystery, some reason why you leave me.

Luys If you will needs know, there is a vvench stays for me,
The toy I told thee on; farewell Alberto.

Alb. But will you leave such business and a friend?

Luys Business? art thou a Gentleman and would have
Me leave a Lady I have not seen this three year
For business or a friend?
I must to her; if I had a heart
Ten Tu^ of Iron,
This Female Adamant would dravv it to her,
I feel it going; I do tell thee Don,
There is no business so material
In nature as a vvench, and if thou art my friend
Thou would leave my Sister now in such a cause
And bear me company, I must be drunk,
And she must pick my pocket too, that is
Another secret when we meet together
That never fails.

Alb. Why art thou desperate?
Do not thou fear thy body?

Luys A wench is Physic
My body has been used too, leave thy prating,
And let me take my course.

Alb. And you be so resolute --

Luys I must give you one advice before you go;
When my Sister's in thy custody, observe
The time and place, and things convenient,
And stand not fooling about ceremonies
But put her to it.

Alb. Thou would not have me ravish her?

Luys. Yes but I would,
She Is no Sister of mine if she cry out
For such a business, she has more wit.

Alb. Was ever such a mad-cap.

Luys I Will not pray for thee.

Alb. I shall not prosper if thou do.

Luys Thy hand, I Will drink thy health, and hang thy self.
Farewell.

Exeunt. Enter Iacinta and Estefania. Iac. You tell me wonders Madam, Don
Ramyres
Dead, his Son Fernando disinherited,
And young Francisco made his heir?

^stef. I took
Franciscos word.

Iac. It Is strange.

Estef. Your stars smile on you.

Iac. Yet I much pity the poor Gentleman.

Est. Busy your thought about your own, Francisco --

Ia. Has promised not to fail?

Est. He waits where he can easily observe
How soon the coast is clear to visit you.

Ia. So, so, thus hooded
The day cannot distinguish our two faces,
And for your voice, you know how to disguize it
By imitation of my cold and hoarseness,
And when you come to Church --

Este. Let me alone, there I Will produce the Contract,
Which will surprise Don Pedro, and your Father,
To see me challenge him, I have prepared the Priest too,
Whose holy Eloquence may assist, how ever
This will give you opportunity to perfect
Your wishes with your servant, put the rest
To fate Iacinta.

Iac. I hear some approach, retire into my Closet. --

Enter Carlos and Pedro. Car. Iacinta. Iac. Sir.

Car. Not thy voice recovered?

Ia. A violent cold --

Car. Count Pedro must salute you ere we go.

Pedro Impute it to devotion, that I make
Such have to be within thy arms,
One kiss and I shall carry with me
Another soul, and count with Joy the minutes
I am to expect this happiness.

Car. Iacinta you follow with your Mother in the Coach;
My Lord I wait you. Ped There Is Heaven upon her lip.

Iac. He has kissed, and took his leave I hope.
Enter Estefania. I must owe all my happiness to you sweet Madam,
I had been lost without your art to help me.

Este Love wo'not leave his votaries.

Cough within. Iac. I hear my Mothers cough, I have finished
And you must act your part:
Exit.
Enter Alsimira. Als. Come ^are you ready Daughter? the Coach stays.

Esty. I attend

Alsi. Don Pedro will cure your cold before the morning.

Enter Francisco and takes away Iacinta. Enter Teodoro and Felisarda. Teo. What
duty Felisarda shall we pay
To Heaven for this last care of us?
Let not thy eyes,
Although thy grief become 'em, be in love
With tears, I Prophecy a joy shall weigh
Down all our sufferings, I see comfort break
Like day, whose forehead chears the world; if Don
Fernando love thee, he is a Gentleman,
Confirmed in all that is honorable, and cannot
Forget whom his own virtue has made choice
To shine upon.

Felis. Unless my Innocence,
Apt to believe a flattering tongue, see not
The Serpent couch, and hide his speckled breast
Among the flowers; but it were sin to think
He can dissemble, Father, and I know not,
Since I was first the object of his charity,
I find a pious gratitude disperse
Within my soul, and every thought of him
Engenders a warm sigh within me, which
Like curles of holy Incense overtake
Each other in my bosom, and enlarge
With their Embrace his sweet remembrance.

Teo. Cherish
Those thoughts, and where such noble worth invites,
Be bold to call it love.

Felis. It is too much
Ambition to hope he should be just
To me, or keep his honor, when I look on
The pale complexion of my wants; and yet
Unless he loves me dearly, I am lost,
And if he have but mocked me into faith,
He might as well have murdered me, for I
Shall have no heart to live, if his neglect
Deface what my affection printed there.

Teo. There is no fear of his revolt, lose not
His character. I must attend some business.
If Don Fernando visit thee, preserve
His fair opinion, and thou may live
Above thy Uncles pity.

Felis. Will you leave me?

Teo. My stay shall not be long; the Garden will
With smiling flowers encourage thee to walk,
And raise thy drooping eyes, with hope to see
A spring like theirs, upon thee.
Exit.
Felis. Why should I
Give any entertainment to my fears?
Suspicions are but like the shape of clouds,
And idle forms in the air, we make to fright us,
I will admit no jealous thought to wound
Fernandos truth, but with that chearfullness,
My own first clear intents to honor him
Can arm me with, expect to meet his faith
As noble as he promised -- Ha! it is he.
Enter Fernando. My poor heart trembles like a timorous leaf,
Which the wind shakes upon his sickly stalk,
And frights into a Palsy.

Fer. Felisarda!

Felis. Shall I want fortitude to bid him welcome?
Sir, if you think there is a heart alive
That can be grateful, and with humble thoughts,
And Prayers reward your piety, despise not
The offer of it here; you have not cast
Your bounty on a Rock, while the seeds thrive
Where you did place your Charity; my joy
May seem ill dressed to come like sorrow thus,
But you may see through every tear, and find
My eyes meant Innocence, and your hearty welcome.

Fer. Who did prepare thee Felisarda thus
To entertain me weeping? sure our souls
Meet and converse, and we not know it; there is
Such beauty in that watery circle, I
Am fearful to come near, and breath a kiss
Upon thy cheek, lest I pollute that Cristall,
And yet I must salute thee, and I dare
With one warm sigh meet, and dry up this sorrow.

Felis. I shall forget all misery; for when
I look upon the World, and race of men,
I find 'em proud, and all so unacquainted
With pity to such miserable things
As poverty has made us, that I must
Conclude you sent from Heaven.

Fer. Oh do not Flatter
Thy self poor Felisarda; I Am Mortal,
The life I bear about me is not mine,
But borrowed to come to thee once again,
And ere I go, to clear how much I love thee --
But first I have a story to deliver,
A tale will make thee sad, but I must tell it,
There is one dead that loved thee not.

Felis. One dead
That loved not me? this carries sir in nature
No killing sound; I shall be sad to know
I did deserve an Enemy, or he want
A Charity at death.

Fer. Thy cruel Enemy,
And my best friend, has took Eteranll leave
And 's gone, to heaven I hope, excuse my tears,
It is a tribute I must pay his memory,
For I did love my Father.

Felis. Ha! your Father?

Fer. Yes Felisarda, he is gone, that in
The morning promised many years, but death
Has in few hours made him as stiff, as all
The winds, and winter, had thrown cold upon him,
And wisper'd him to marble.

Felis. Now trust me,
My heart weeps for him, but I understand
Not how I was concerned in his displeasure;
And in such height as you profess.

Fer. He did
Command me on his blessing to forsake thee;
Was It not a cruel precept, to enforce
The soul, and curse his Son for honest love?

Felis. This is a wound indeed.

Fer. But not so mortal;
For his last breath was Balsom poured upon it,
By which he did reverse his malediction;
And I that groaned beneath the weight of that
Anathema, sunk almost to despair,
Where night and heavy shades hung round about me,
Found my self rising like the morning Star
To view the World.

Felis. Never I hope to be
Eclis'd again.

Fer. This was a welcome blessing.

Fe. Heaven had a care of both; my joys are mighty.
Vouchsafe me sir your pardon if I blush
And say I love, but rather than the peace
That should preserve your bosom, suffer for
My sake, 'twere better I were dead.

Fer. No, live.
And live for ever happy, thou deserved'st it.
It is Fernando does make have to sleep
In his forgotten dust.

Felis. Those accents did
Not sound so cheerfully.

Fer. do love me?

Felis. Sir.

Fer. Do not, I prithee do not, I am lost,
Alas I am no more Fernando, there
Is nothing but the Empty name of him
That did betray thee, place a guard about
Thy heart betime, I am not worth this sweetness.

Felis. Did not Fernando speak all this? alas
He knew that I was poor before, and needed not
Despise me now for that.

Fer. Desert me goodness
When I upbraid thy wants. It Is I am poor,
For I have not a stock in all the World
Of so much dust, as would contrive one narrow
Cabin to shroud a worm; my dying Father
Has given away my Birthright to Francisco,
I Am disinherited, thrown out of all,
But the small Earth I borrow, thus to walk on;
And having nothing left, I come to kiss thee,
And take my everlasting leave of thee too.
Farewell, this will persuade thee to consent
To my Eternal absence.

Felis. I must beseech you stay a little sir,
And clear my faith* Has your displeased Father
Deprived you then of all, and made Francisco
The Lord of your Inheritance, without hope
To be repaired in Fortune?

Fer. It Is sad truth.

Felis. This is a happiness I did not look for.

Fer. A happiness?

Felis. Yes Sir, a happiness.

Fer. Can Felisarda take delight to hear
What has undone her servant?

Felis. Heaven avert it.
But it is not worth my grief to be assured
That this will bring me nearer now to him
Whom I most honor of the World; and it is
My pride, if you exceed me not in Fortune,
That I can boast my heart, as high, and rich,
With noble flame, and every way your equal,
And if you be as poor as I Fernando,
I can deserve you now, and love you more
Than when your expectation carried all
The pride and blossoms of the spring upon it.

Fer. Those shadows will not feed more than our fancies;
Two poverties will keep but a thin table;
And while we dream of this high nourishment,
We do but starve more gloriously.

Felis. It Is ease.
And wealth first taught us art to surfeit by;
Nature is wise, not costly, and will spread
A table for us in the Wilderness;
And the kind Earth keep us alive, and healthful,
With what her bosom does invite us to;
The brooks, not there suspected as the Wine
That sometime Princes quaff, are all transparent,
And with their pretty murmurs call to taste 'em.
In every tree a Chorister to sing
Health to our loves, our lives shall there be free
As the first knowledge was from sin, and all
Our dreams as Innocent.

Fer. Oh Felisarda?
If thou did own less Virtue, I might prove
Unkind and marry thee, but being so rich
In goodness, it becomes me not to bring
One that is poor, in every vvorth, to vvast
So excellent a Dower, be free, and meet
One that has Wealth to cherish it, I shall
Undo thee quite, but pray for me, as I,
That thou may change for a more happy Bridgroom;
I dare as sson be guilty of my death,
As make thee miserable by expecting me.
Farewell, and do not wrong my soul, to think
That any storm could separate us two,
But that I have no fortune now to serve thee.

Felis. This will be no exception sir, I hope,
When we are both dead, yet our bodies may
Be cold, and strangers in the Winding sheet;
We shall be married when our spirits meets.

Exeunt. Act V.
Enter Carlos, Pedro. Pe. Your daughter does not use me well Don Carlos.

Car. I know not what to think,
Some great misfortune must be the cause.

Ped. Not yet appear? they might,
And they had crept like Tortoyses, Ariv'd
Before this time.

Car. There is some strange disaster.

Ped. The Coach orethrown, and both their lives
Endangered, can but excuse 'm.
Enter Alsimira. Oh my Lord, Don Carlos.

Ped. The Tragic voice of women stricks mine ear.

Car. Alsimira?

Ped. Madam.

Car. Where is our Daughter?

Alsi. My fear almost distracts me, she is gone,
Stolen, ravished from me.

Ped. Ha.

Alsi. An armed Troop
In Visards forced her from my coach; and heaven
Knows where they have hurried the poor Iacinta.

Car. A troop of armed Devils.

Ped. Let them be
A legion, they are all damned.

Al. Nay they were men and mortal sure.

Ped. I w'on'ot leave one soul amongst them all.

Car. Mine is in torment.
In The hope and height of my ambition
To be thus cros'd! how escaped you?

Alsi. Alas I was not young enough, I offered
My self to bear her company, and suffer
As much as she did, but one boisterous fellow
With a starched voice, and a worse vizard, took me
Just here above my Sciatica, and quoited me
Into the coach again upon my head,
I had a larum in it for half an hour,
And so I escaped with life.

Ped. Did they sue her with any rigor?

Alsi. To say truth they were gentle enough to her.

Ped. That mollifies* and they may live.

Car. Hell overtake 'em, lets return, they had better
Committed incest, than this rape.

Ped. They had better ravished Proserpine before
Don Lucifer's own face. I am all fury.

Exeunt. Enter Alberto and Estefania. Alb. Pardon my dear Iacinta, It was love
That threw me on this act, I had no patience
To see thee forced into a marriage
By a covetous Father, whose devotion
Is only Wealth and Title; I esteem
No danger, if at last the fair Iacinta
Smile and allow this duty; let not silence
Deprive me longer of thy voice, whose every
Accent will please, though it pronounce my sentence;
There Is death in this Eclipss too, sweet dismiss
Thy ungentle veil, and let thy eyes make bright
This melancholy air, that droops and dies
For want of thy restoring beams.

Est. Now sir,
What think you of your Mistress?

Al. You are the Lady Estefania I take it.

Est. Yes, you did take me from the coach Alberto
But by a consequence I find, you thought
Iacinta in your power, I could have told you,
Had you discovered sooner what you were,
Where to have found your Mistress, but she is now
Above your hope, and by the priest ere this
Made wife to Don Francisco.

Alb. To Don Pedro?

Est. It was not sir impossible that I
(Had not your violence prevented me)
(By a plot between Iacinta and my self,
To take her place and person in the coach)
Had by this time been married to Count Pedro,
Whom I have power and Justice sir to challenge
If Contracts carry weight.

Al. Have I so long
Ly'n beating at the bush, and is the bird
Fled to Francisco?

Est. I should show I had
A passion sir, and sense of this captivity,
But that I find 'twas error, and not will
Lead you to this; and your own loss now made
Irreparable, helps to tie up my anger.

Al. Madam, I must confess a wrong, and dare
Submit to let your anger punish me,
For I despise my self, now I have lost
My expectation, and if you please
To think I had no malice in this act
To you, You can propose no satisfaction
I shall esteem a penance to repair you,
As far as my poor life, if you will direct it.

Est. It Is nobly promised sir. You shall redeem
In my thoughts what is past, if you be pleased
To make my stay no longer here; I have
No desperate aim to make Don Pedro yet
Know how to right me, or make public what
Should bind his honor to perform.

Al. Was not Luys Madam entertained your Servant?

Est. I shall make known the story if you walk
But to Don Carlos House.

Al. You shall command me.

Exeunt. Enter Carlos, Alsimira, and Servant. Car. No news yet of Iacinta?

Al. None.

Car. He must
Not live in Spain, nor in the World, if my
Revenge can overtake him, that has stolen
My Daughter; could you not by voice or habit
Guess at the ravisher? Ye are traitors all.

Alsi. Now I consider better, I suspect
Alberto one of the conspiracy,
Some voice did sound like his. You know he loved her.

Car. Ha! Alberto?

Alsi. And how he might engage some Ruffians
To cross Don Pedro.

Car. 'Twas he, where is Luys?
I do not like his absence, thei'r both guilty;
My own blood turned a rebel? send for the Alcaides,
They shall both trot like thieves to the Corrigidor.
Where is Count Pedro?

Alsi. Gone in search of his lost Mistress.

Car. When all things were ripe,
The very Priest prepared to seal our Joys,
A work my brain did labor for, and sweat
With hope to see accomplished, undermined?
And in a Minute all blown up?

Alsi. Have patience
She may be found again.

Car. But how my Lord
May be inclined to accept her foiled, or wounded
Enter Luys drunk. In fame --

Alsi. Luys is here.

Car. Borachio, here is a spectacle! more affliction?
Where is your Sister, what is become of Iacinta?

Lu. My Sister and Iacinta are gone together.
I know all the business.

Alsi. Where is she?

Lu. She is very well, I know not where she is.
But Don Alberto is an honest Gentleman,
And has by this time done the feat.

Car. Confusion --

Lu. You think you had all the wit, it was my plot.
You may thank heaven that you are old, and ugly,
to Alsi. You had been no Mother of this World. But sir,
I have some news would be delivered privately.
Mother of mine, avaunt.

Car. Thou Art not my Son.
Was ever man so miserable? away
Thou sponge; get him to sleep,

Alsi. I dare not meddle with him.
Exit.
Lu. In sobriety a word.

Car. Where is Alberto?

Lu. Where every honest man should be a bed, with my Sister,
Old man, I have considered of the former matter we talked on
And would do things like a dutiful son, but I find that a
Wife is not altogether of convenient for me as a --

Car. Will none deliver me?

Lu. They are somewhat slug,
Now I have found out an excellent tumbler,
That can do the Somerset, please you to be acquainted
with her, and give me your opinion, She shall play
with all the stews in Christendom, for all your are
worth, if I live, and yet she is but 17 there is a periwinkle,
I had a Gemini, before I went to travel, And
I am bound in conscience, if you think fit, to see her
well Provided for --

Car. With whips, i will have her skin flead off.

Lu. Her skin flead off? do thou know mortal man
What thou have said? I tell the Don, nothing can come near
Her in the shape of an Officer, she is a very Basilisk and will
Kill em with her eyes 3 score yards point blank, but you
May talk, and do your pleasure with her, for I came a
Purpose to bring her to your lodging, if you love me,
Do but see her, it shall cost you nothing, you shall
Be my friend, hang money?

Car. Thus will my state consume, vexation!
What shall I do? when you have slept, Luys
I Will tell you more, attend him to his Chamber
And make his Door fast.
Luys You will consider on it, upon those terms, I vvil go
Sleep at vvinckling.
Exit.
Car. And vvo'not all this take a way my senses?
My Son is lost too, this is all a curse
For my ambition and my Avarice.

Enter Alsimira and a servant with a Letter. Als. Nevvs Don Carlos from our
Daughter.

Car. Ha, a Letter! it is Iacintas hand.

Alsi. Knovv'st where she is?

Ser. Yes Madam, and her resolution

Carl. reads.
To attend her Father, with my Master Don Francisco
If Don Carlos please to admit 'em, the matters done.

Alsi. What matter?

Ser. They are as fast as any Priest can make em.

Car. Wife to Francisco, now his Fathers heir?
That Is some allay, if it be true, she writes,
Don Pedro was contracted to Fstefania, who supplied
Her person in the Coach -- it was not Iacinta was ravished
Then, Don Pedro was not noble, after he had made faith,
To entangle my Iacinta. Hum, say they shall
Be welcome.

Ser. They are present sir.

Enter Francisco and Iacinta. Car. I am nor yet collected, but if this
Paper be justified, I receive you both.
Peruse those wonders Alsimira.

Iacin. Sir, though by the tie of nature you may challenge
All duty, this is done so like a Father
It exceeds all your care.

Fran. Let this confirm,
I bring a fortune not to be despised,
But were I Master of the World, I should
At price of all my wealth, think this a treasure
Purchac'd too cheap.

Car. My blessing and my prayers, I Am new created,
And bow to that great providence; all Joy
Spread through your souls; this is not much amiss.

Fran. But what is become of Madam Estefania
That took Iacintas place?

Alsi. Forced from the Coach
By Don Alberto, thinking her my Daughter

Iacin. That part of our plot failed, but my intents
Were fair, and to assist this injured Lady

Ser. Don Pedro sir.

Enter Servant. Car. You shall for some few minutes.
Withdraw into that Chamber, in his passion
He may be violent, leave me to moderate.

Fra. I shall obey you sir.
Exit.
Enter Pedro. Fed. Was ever man of my great birth and fortune
Affronted thus? I am become the talk
Of every Picaro and Ladron, I challenge
A reparation of my honor; where is
Iacinta? it is a plot, a bace contrivement
To make my name ridiculous, the subject
Of every scurrill language.

Car. My Lord with pardon
Of your Altesa, you are not Injured here,
Unless I have been faulty in too much
Observance, and desires to serve your person,
With almost sacrifice of my Daughter.

Ped. Ha! too much to me?

Car. I would you had remembered
How much your Honor was engaged before,
By Contract to another, when you mocked
The Innocent Iacinta, now not mine.

Ped. Who has traduced my fame, or mentioned me
With that dishonor? I disclaim all Contracts.
The unconfined Aire's not more free, than I
To all the World, except your beauteous Daughter.

Car. Do you know the Lady Estefania?

Ped. Dares she make saucie claim? my breath dissolves it
If every Lady whom we grace with our
Converse should challenge men of my Nobility --

Car. I wish my Lord you could evade it, for
The honor of my Family; if your conscience
Or Art can nullify that Ladies sinterest
I am resolved -- my Son Luys shall
Aside^ Then marry With that Widow, I have no other
Ambition.

Ped. You are wise, and I
Am fortified to clear my self thought-free
Enter Alberto, Estefania with a Letter. From any promise to that sullen Madam.
Ha! it is Iacinta, and she wears the Jewel
I did present, conspicuously; I ask
No reason for thy absence, let me chain
My darling in this amorous curl, it is happiness
Enough to repossess thee, not the policy
And power of Hell shall separate us again.

Este. It is but Justice sir.

Ped. Ha! Estefania.

Alb. Do you know her sir?

Este. Do You know this character?

Ped. Conspiracy.

Est. When this is read Don Carlos
You will imagine he has wronged your Daughter.

Car. Is this your hand Count Pedro?

Ped. Mine -- it is counterfeit
Upon my honor, and I thus dissolve
Thy insolent claim.

Este. Nothing can bind I see
A false heart

Car. This must give you freedom Madam,
If you release his hasty vow.

Este. Faith cannot
Be compeld sir.

Ped. These are all Impostures;
I take my self into my self.

Alb. What shall become of her my noble Count?

Ped. I pity her
But cannot cure her wound, and if you be
Her friend, advice her to contain her passions,
And wisely love one that can entertain it.

Alb. You hear this Madam?

Este. And can smile upon
His violated fath.

Car. Now for Luys,
To strike in with the Widow,

Servant. He Is a sleep.

Car. I Will wake and quicken him.
Exit.
Este. Had thou bin worth my love, I should have held
Thee worth my anger shadow, of a Lord.
Thy greatness I despise, and think thee now
Too poor for my revenge, and freely give
Thee back thy barren promises, and when
I read in story, one that has been perjured,
I Will write Don Pedro in the place of him
That brok his faith, and thank my fate to have mist thee.

Alb. If you please Madam, while he is in the humor
Of being base, I Will make him gather up
These paper relics, which he shall make him self
Up into rolls, and having swallowed 'em
For Pills, thank you, his Physic was so gentle.

Este. It will be too much time and breath lost on him.

Alber. It will become me Madam to attend you.

Exit Este. Ped. So, she is taken off' and my path free
To Carlos Daughter.

Enter Carlos and Luys. Luys. Contracted to Don Pedro? say.

Car. She was, where is Estefania?

Ped. Gone with Alberto; proud to wait upon
The Lady I neglected.

Car. Follow 'em Luys?
I do not like he should insinuate
Now she is free, and his hopes desperate in

Iacintas love.

Luys How long have I slept sir?

Car. Thou do dream still, pursue the Widow now
Or never look at such a fortune.

Luys Is she gone with Alberto? what if I say,
I have lain with her, and that she is with child by me?

Car. That would stain both your fames; away and welcome
When thou return'st, and she confirmed.

Luys I Will confirm her, or confound somebody,
No more, I am awake, this is Don Pedro
I Will talk with him first, will you justefie,
The Widow is a Widow still, and sweet
For all your Contract, that you have not been
My rival as they say after the flesh,
And that you did not know I had a mind,
Or not a mind, to do the deed of Matrimony?

Ped. Not I upon my honor.

Luys You are vvitness -- now to Alberto.

Car. Manage the business temperatly.

Luys Let me alone to be temperate, if I do not cosen
Some body, let me never drink Sack again.
Exit.
Car. What think you of Iacinta now my Lord?

Ped. As on the Saint I pay my chief devotions.

Enter Fernando. Fer. I come to seek one, that I late called Brother,
But he has forfeted that Name, and Justice
Weary of such a prodigy in nature
Has armed me thus in he revenge, Don Carlos,
Obscure him not, no darkness can protect him,
My svvord shall forage every room like lightning,
No Cave but it shall visit, and through ribs
Of steel compel my passage to his heart,
Although I meet him in his Mistress Arms,
The lovers Sanctuary, I dare force Francisco,
And with my Svvord cut the Embrace that chains him,
Rather then he shall glory in my ruins,
And revell out, those honors, with her, he
Took from my blood.

Enter Francisco with a Parchment. Fra. It shall not need Fernando.

Ped. Hum, here is like to be a bloody business,
I Will not disturb 'em.
Exit.
Car. As you are Brothers, by your Fathers dust
That should sleep quiet in his Urne, by her
Dear name that gave you life, that now prays for you,
Chide this unnatural fury.

Fra. What demands Fernando?

Fer. My inheritance wrought from me
By thy sly creeping to supplant my birth,
And cheat our Fathers easy soul, unvvorthily
Betraying to his anger for thy lust
Of wealth, the love and promise of two hearts,
Poor Felisarda and Fernando now
Wither at soul, and robbed by thee of that
Should cherish virtue, like to rifled Pilgrims
Met on the way, and having told their story,
And dropped their even tears for both their loss,
Wander from one another.

Fra. It Is not sure
Fernando, but his pasion (that obeys not
The counsel of his reason) would accuse me,
And if my Father now, since spirits lose not
Intelligence, but more active when they have
Shook off their chains of flesh, would leave his dwelling,
And visit this course orb again: my Innocence
Should dare the appeal, and make Fernando see
His empty accusations.

Fer. He that thrives
By wicked art, has confidence to dress
His action with simplicity, and shapes
To cheat our credulous natures; it is my wonder
Thou durst do so much injury Francisco
As must provoke my Justice, to revenge,
Yet wear no Sword.

Fra. I need no guard, I know
Thou dare not kill me.

Fer. Dare I not?

Fra. And name thy cause, it is thy suspicion not Francisco
Has wrought thee high and passionate, to assure it,
If you dare violate, I dare possess you
Withal my title to your Land.

Car. How is that?
Will you resign the interest to such
A fair Estate, and wrong my Daughter sir?

Fra. Let him receive it at his peril.

Fer. Ha!

Fra. It was my Fathers act, not mine, he trembled
To hear his curse alive, what horror will
His conscience feel, when he shall spurn his dust,
And call the reverend shade from his blessed seat,
To this bad World again, to walk and fright him?

Car. I am abused

Fer. Can this be more than dream?

Fra. Sir you may cancel it, but think withal
How you can answer him that is dead, when he
Shall charge your timorous soul for this contempt
To nature and Religion, to break
His last bequest, and breath, that sealed your blessings?

Car. These are fine fancies.

Fer. Here, and may it prosper,
Where my good Father meant it, I Am overcome.
Forgive me, and enjoy it, I may find
Some Earth that is not thine, where I may die
And take up a dark Chamber, love Iacinta,
And while I seek out where to be forgotten
Live happy, and devide the spring between you,

Enter Ramires, Felisarda, and Teodoro, a loof. Fra. So, so, all is well again.

Ram. Fernando stay.

Fer. Ha, my Father and Felisarda?

Car. Don Ramyres and my Niece?

Fer. Are they both dead?
[Fer. Kneels. I dare kneel too, they do converse. Don Carlos
Do not you know that shape? it is wondrous like
Your Niece.

Car. And that your Father, ha!

Fer. How long has Felisarda been a sad
Companion to the shades? I did not think
To find thee in this pale society,
Of ghosts so soon.

Felisar. I am alive Fernando,
And Don Ramires still, thy living Father.

Fra. You may believe it sir, I was of the counsel.

Fer. It is a joy will tempt me, wish to live
Here, without more ambition to change
For blessings of the other World; and is
My Father willing that we both should live?

Car. Men thought you dead.

Ramir. It lay within the knowledge of Francisco and some few
By this device to advance my younger Son
To a Marriage with Iacinta sir, and try
Fernando's Piety and his Mistress Virtue,
Which I have found worth him, and my acceptance,
With her I give thee what thy birth did challenge.
Receive thy Felisarda.

Fer. It Is a joy,
So flowing, it drowns all my faculties,
My soul will not contain I fear, but lose
And leave me in this extrasie.

Car. I am cheated.

Ra. Not so, what dower you add above that fortune,
Descends upon her by your Sisters Legacy
Francisco shall deserve, with a proportion
Enter Francisco and Iacinta. Out of my state; live, and be happy both,
You shall not want a Father in my care.
Our children thus increased Don Carlos, it is
Our shame if we neglect 'em; Teodoro
You now may call me Brother.

These. I Am honored.

Car. Well, take my blessing too, love her Francisco.
My bounty is to come, and if my Son
But finish with his Mistress -- he is returned,
Enter Luys. Where is the Widow?

Lu. Sure enough.

Car. And Don Alberto.

Lu. I ha made him sure too, I ha peppered him.

Car. How?

Lu. In your ear, I ha cut his throat, do none pursue me?

Car. I hope thou have not killed him? ha!

Lu. You hope to late, I could not help it, you said
He was my Rival.

Car. Not to loud.

Lu. Where, where shall I obscure me, the Alcaides
Will be here presently, and search for me.
I left him giving up the ghost, at a cranny
I made into his side, through which a man
Might see into his midriff.

Car. Art thou desperate?

Lu. Beside one window that did look into his lungs,
From whence his wind came strong enough,
In six hours sail to dispatch a Carrack to the straightes.

Car. I Am mad.

Lu. I should neglect my life, but 'twould not sound well
With your honor that Don Carlos Son was hanged,
Or put into the Galleys; are they not come yet?

Car. I am undone, there is no safety here,
Make fast those doors, and by the Postern gate
Thou may escape, take the best Horse, away.

Lu. I shall want money sir.

Car. Come follow me?
This accident I fear will quite distract me.

Lu. You must dispatch me quickly sir, there is
No staying to tell the money, gee't me in lump,
I Will count it afterward, good sir make have.

Exit. Lu. and Car. Ra. Something has happened that does fresh
Perplex him.

Fra. Where is Don Pedro?

Enter Pedro. Fer. He Is here.

Ped. The storm is over sure, I hear no noise,
Toledos are asleep, Iacinta? have
I found my love?

Fran. Here 'twas lost indeed,
I must allow no such Familiarity
With my Wife.

Ped. How? married?

Ia. It Is most true my Lord.

Ped. You have not used me thus?

Fra. It had been Impious to divorce your heart
From Estefania; My good Lord, we know
Your Lordship is religious in your promises.

Ped. I defy all Estefanias, Lady you are civil.

To Felis. Fer. It will become my care so to preserve her
My Honorable Count.

Ped. Honorable?
It appears not by these contempts.

Ramyr. Your Lordship cannot want a Female Furniture.

Enter Alberto and Estefania. Ped. I must have some body now I Am prepared, my
blood
Will take it ill, would I had Estefania;
She Is here, Madam I hope you have
A better faith than to believe I was in Earnest,
Don Pedro is only at your service.

Este. It Is too late sir, this Gent. is witness,
Of your surrender, and is now possessed
Of all that is mine.

Al. It was your Noble bounty,
For which I cannot study a return
More apt than to resign to your good Lordship,
My Interest in Iacinta, give you joy Count.
Such a rich Widow serves my turn.

Ped. So so,
If I consider well this is but Justice.

Enter Carlos. Car. Ha, are not you Don Alberto: fetch back Luys.

Al. The very same sir, and this Lady is my Wife,
Please you salute her.

Enter Luys. Luys Sir for the credit of your wisdom talk not,
The man you see's alive and married too,
With my consent, alas I owed him money,
That Widow has paid all, I must be honest,
I had no heart to leave you so unsatisfied,
These sums must go for other debts,
My debts do clog my conscience, and are better
When they are timely paid sir, then let run
With their long Teeth to bite your state hereafter,
And if when I am free you dare but trust me --

Car. Was ever Father cheated thus, come hither,
How dare thou be so impudent?

Lu. I cannot help it sir, unless you dye
Or give me better means, I shall make bold
With these devices, you are my Father sir,
And I am bound --

Car. To cosen me?

Lu. All must be mine, and if
I pay my self a little before the day,
You shall be no loser when you come to reckon,
This shall not make a breach twixt you and I,
They are honest men I ow this money too,
When I am clear prescribe me any method
And rank me like your son, I will deserve
You shall forget my wildness, and acknowledge me
A convert without blemish to your family.

Rami. I must be Intercessor.

Iacin. And we all.

Car. I Will think upon it.

Ped. Since I cannot have Iacinta, I desire
I may have her Brother.

Lu. Not in marriage.

Fed. I like his wit, his spirit, and his humor,
Do not you love a wench?

Lu. Yes sir.

Ped. Thou shall never want.

Lu. Wenches?

Ped. We Will live together, and* if thy Father
Be not bountiful, thou shall command my fortune.

Lu. You speak nobly.

Ped. Ladies, I ask your pardon
Unless you hold me desperate, disdain not
That I may this day wait upon your triumph,
And to each Bride offer some gift to expiate
My folly and offense.

Rami. You are too bountiful.

Car. You Are all my guests to day.

Rami. I beg your next
Remove may place the Scen' of Joy with me,
My house shall be much honored, lead the way
With Verse and Wine let Poets crown this day.

Exeunt omnes. Epilogue. Pedro.
SO so, your dangers over, and the state
Secure, as when our Fleet in Eighty Eight
Was fired and scattered, to confirm it true
Here is Don Pedro taken Prisoner too,
I Am at your mercy Gentlemen, and I
Confess without a rack conspiracy,
So far as my poor part in the Play comes too,
But I am innocent from hurt to you,
And I dare quit the rest from any plot
Meant but to please, if you believe it not
I dare make oath, your hands can do no less
Than certify your friends what I confess.
FINIS.
THE SISTERS, A COMEDY, AS It was acted at the private House IN BLACK FRIARS,
WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY.

Never Printed before.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the Three Pigeons, and Humphrey
Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

To the most worthily Honored William Paulet Esquire.
SIR,
COmposi^ions of this nature, have heretofore been graced by the acceptance,
and protection of the greatest Nobility (I may say Princes) but in this age,
when the Scene of Drammatick Poetry is changed into a wilderness, it is hard to
find a patron to a legitimate muse. Many that were wont to encourage Poems, are
fallen beneath the poverbiall want of the composers, and by their ruins are only
at leisure ^o take measure with their eye, of what they have been. Some
extinguished with their fortune, have this happiness, to be out of capacity of
further shipwreck, while their sad remaynes peep out of the sea, and may serve
naked marks, and caution to other Navigators, Malignant stars the while! In
this unequal condition of the time, give me leave to congratulate my own
felicity, that has directed this Comedy unto you, who wear your nobleness with
more security, than titles, and a name that continues bright and impassible
among the constellations in our Sphere of English honor. I dare not detain
you, Sir, with too long a Preface; if you please to entertain these Papers, as
the modest tender of my service, I shall receive it as a most kind influence
upon me; and you will engage to all your commands, the humble heart of

Sir, Your faithful Honourer, IA. SHIRLEY.

Prologue at the Blackfriars.
DOes this look like a Term? I cannot tell,
Our Poet thinks the whole Town is not well,
Has took some Physic lately, and for fear
Of catching cold dares not salute this Air.
But there is another reason, I hear say
London is gone to York, it is a great way;
Pox of the Proverb, and of him say I,
That looked ore Lixcoln, cause that was, must we
Be now translated North? I could rail to
On Gammar Shiptons Ghost, but 't wo' not do,
The Town will still be flecking, and a Play
Though never so new, will starve the second day:
Upon these very hard conditions,
Our Poet will not purchase many Towns;
And if you leave us too, we cannot thrive,
I Will promise neither Play nor Poet live
Till ye come back, think what you do, you see
What audience we have, what Company
" To Shakespeare comes, whose mirth did once beguile
"Dull hours, and buskind, made even sorrow smile,
"So lovely were the Wounds, that men would say
"They could endure the bleeding a whole day:
He has but few friends lately, think of that,
He 'l come no more, and others have his fate.
"Fletcher the Muses darling, and choice love
"Of Phoebus, the delight of every Grove;
"Upon whose head the Laurel grew, whose wit
"Was the Times wonder, and example yet,
`Tis within memory, Trees did not throng,
As once the Story said to Orpheus song.
"Johnson, to whose name, wise Art did bow, and Wit
"Is only justified by honoring it:
"To hear whose touch, how would the learned Quire
"With silence stoop? and when he took his Lyre,
" Apollo dropped his Lute, ashamed to see
"A Rival to the God of Harmony.
You do forsake him too, we must deplore
This fate, fot we do know it by our door.
How must this Author fear then, with his guilt
Of weakness to thrive here, where late was spilt
The Muses own blood, if being but a few,
You not conspire, and meet more frequent too?
There are not now nine Muses, and you may
Be kind to ours, if not, he bad me say,
Though while you careless kill the rest, and laugh,
Yet he may live to write your Epitaph.
Persons.
FArnese, Prince of Parma. Contarini, a Noble man. Antonio, Uncle to the
Sisters. Frapolo, the chief Bandit. Bandits.
Longino Strozzo Rangino Pachequo
Lucio, Paulina's Steward. Servants to Paulina.
Giovanni Stephanio
Fabio. Piperollo, Son to Fabio, Countrymen. Citizens. Petitioners. A
Scholar. Pulcheria disguised, and under the name of Vergerio. Sisters.
Paulina Angellina
Morulla, Wife to Fabio. Gentlewomen.
Scene parma* THE SISTERS.
ACT I.
Enter Frapolo, Longin^, Pacheco, Rangone, Strozzo, and other Banditi. Lon. I
Like not this last Proclamation.

Ra. Nor I.

St. It startled me to read it.

Fr. Did you read? it is a fault Strozzo a fault!
I Will have no thief hereafter learn to read;
Threaten us with long winded Proclamations?
We are safe within our Woods, and Territories,
And are above his Edicts; Have not we
A Commonwealth among our selves, ye Tripolites?
A Commonwealth? a Kingdom; and I am
The Prince of Qui-Vala's, your Sovereign thief,
And you are all my Subjects.

Lo. We are --

Fr. And is there one so base to change Complexion,
Because we are proscribed? I Will be no Prince.
I have a grudging on me to be honest,
And leave you to the fear of hemp, and hunger;
Have I by stratagems so often preserved you,
When you were howling out your lives, and lead
Away in Dog-couples by rusty Officers?
And are you struck dead with a Paper pellet?
Your blood turned Whay, because there is reward
Promised to bring our heads in? I renounce you --
Land R^ts --

Pa. Most excellent Frapolo, they recant;
A little humane frailty may be pardoned.

Fr. Shall thieves, whose predecessors have been Kings,
And conquered worlds, be factious, and schismatic?
I speak not for my self, but your own sakes,
Whose Impudence, and art in valiant theft,
Hereafter, may advance you to be Princes.

Lo. You have confirmed us.

Fr. You were best be rogues, and one betray another,
To get the base reward; do, lose your honor,
Live branded* and be pointed at in the street,
There goes a Rascal that betrayed his Prince,
Or cut the throat of his Comrade, this will
Show well in the Chronicles -- Stand fair you varlets,
Because we cannot tell whose heart is treacherous,
I will examine all your Phisnomies,
And in whose face soever I can find
A scandalous line, or look that may beget
Suspicion of a Man that wo'not die
An honorable Rebel, and defy
The Laws, I Will shoot him presently.

Lo. Hang Laws,
And those that make 'em, Conscience is a Varlet;
Stand fair and show complexions.

Fr. Ye are all valiant, honest theeve landers,
And I will be your Prince again, and die w'ee,
As boldly, as they dare invent --

Ra. Hang Cowards.

Fr. I will not have you thieves among your selves.

Lo. How Is that, and please thy Excellence, not thieves?

Fr. Not thieves one to another; but Religious --
There is a kind of a Religion
We Outlaws must observe.

St. I never knew
Religion yet, and 'twill be now unseasonable
^o learn.

Ra. I Will be of no Religion.

Fr. Who was so bold
To say he would have no Religion?
What man is he, hopes to be drunk, to whore,
To sc^pe the wheels, the Galleys, and the gallows
And be of no Religion?

L^. He says right.

Fr. Ye shall be of what Religion I please.

Pa. It Is fit we should, Frapolo is our Monarch.

Fr. And yet I must consider of some fit one
That shall become our trade
And constitutions; hum! Silence.

St. Nay, nay Prince, take time to think on it,
There Is no have.

Fr. I have thought,
And you shall be no Pagans, Jews, nor Christians.

Lo. What then?

Fr. But every man shall be of all Religions.

Ra. I like that well.

Fr. Why should I clog your Conscience or confine it?
Do but obey your Prince, and I pronounce
You shall live Grandees, till the State Phangs catch you*
And when you come unto the Wheel, or Gibbet,
Bid figo for the World, and go out Martyrs.

Omnes. A Prince, a Prince!

Fr. Provided, that no thief
Makes a Confession at his Death, or peach
His Tribe, or make a show of penitence,
To make the Butter-women melt, and draw
Compassion from the toothless musty rabble;
This will exclude the benefit of that Canon
Declares you Martyrs for the Cause.
Scout and discover.

A noise within. Exit Longino. Ra. It Is a howling voice.

Fr. What Cry was that?

Enter Longino. Lo. Of one, whose pocket has given up the Ghost,
And with the fear his body should do so,
He howles Of This fashion.

They put on Vizards: Fr. Bring him to our presence.

Piperollo brought in. Pi. Gentlemen, it is very cold, I beseech you
Do not strip my Skin off, you are not sure
I shall go to a fire when I go out of
This World; and yet as I am I confess
I shall yield very little burned.

Lo. Knock out his brains.

Pa. Pistol him.

St. Cuts throat.

Pi. Gentlemen, hear me -- I am very sorry,
I had no greater sum -- but if you please
To reprieve a poor wretch, I may do you service,
And if you knew my inclination,
You would not be too Cruel.

Fr. To what are you inclined Sir?

Pi. I have been commended for a Dexterity
At your fellonious trade; for Gentlemen,
I have been a Pickpocket of a child, and have
These many years been thought a pretty house-theef*
Mary I have not yet breeding abroad
With such deserving men, but I shall be
Most glad to learn, and if you please to accept
Me to your tribe, I have Intelligence
Where money lies hid, and very few Spirits
To guard it.

Fr. Be confident, and be covered.

Lo. Let him be one of us.

Fr. Be brief, where is this treasure?

Pi. I have an old Father, and Mother, Gentlemen,
Please you bestow a visit upon them;
They have some Goldfinches, having new sold
A piece of Land, was given 'em by the rich
Vincenzo, Father to the famous, proud
Paulina, now his heir.

Lo. The glorious Daughter
Of old Vincenz^? she is a Semiramis.

Pi. The very same; if you would visit her,
I am acquainted with the house.

Fr. We Will take a time to think on her; to th'point,
What ready money has your Father Sir?

Pi. It Is but two days ago since he received
Six hundred Pistolets, I can direct
To a Cedar Chest, where the fine sum lies dormant.

St. What Servants has your Father?

Pi. Alas none, they are miserable Hinds,
And make me all the drudge, you need not fear
The Court-du-Guard; if you please let me go
An honest thieves part, and furnish me
Wi^h a Devils complexion, to hide my own,
I will conduct you.

Fr. A very honest fellow!

Pi. I do not love to be ungrateful where
I Am kindly used, my heart is honest.

Fr. Is he thy own Father?

Pi. My own Father and Mother Sir, the cause
Would not be so natural else, and meritorious.

Fr. A precious rogue, fit him instantly
With a disguise, and let him have that face
The Devil wore in the last anti-masque.

Pi. It cannot be too ugly Sir to fright 'em.

Fr. But if he fail in any Circumstance --

Pi. It Is not far off, I know the nearest way.

Fr. Or give the least suspicion to betray you,
Be sure you cut his throat.

Lo. We shall.

Pi. I thank You Sir, do you think I Will be a Traitor?

Lo. Come first along with us.

Exeunt. Fr. You heard this fellow name the proud Paulina,
Her Chests are worth the rifling.

Pa. The Castle is impregnable she lives in.

Fr. Was that spoke like an understanding thief,
A true Bandit? How I do blush for thee?
Was not the Orchard of Hesperides
Watched by a fierce, and flaming Dragon, robbed?
Shall we despair to reach her golden Apples?
We Will make discovery of the place, and persons,
Put it to Fate, let Stars do what they please;
Mercury is a Stronger thief than Hercules.

Exeunt. Enter Giovanni Stephanio. Gio. What a brave time have we had, since our
Old Master died?

St. Though he were a gallant man, his Daughter
Makes his Memory burn dym, and (compared
To her) he lived but like a Hermit in a Cell,
She is all Magnificent, a (...),
Every hair of her head worth stellyfying.

Gio. But my Lady, for so we must call her,
May be of kin to Lucifer for pride;
How many brave Gentlemen has she despised,
When once their blister of Love broke out,
And they made offer of Marriage?

Enter Antonio, Angellina. Ste. Here is her Sister Angellina a virgin
Of another constitution, their two natures
As different are, as the two Poles, our Mistress
Cannot be so Tyrannically proud
As she is sweet, and humble.

Gio. That Is the reason her Father left her only
As much as would commend her to a Nunnery.

St. Her Uncle dotes upon her.

Gio. He does love her.

St. It Is an old blunt brave fellow; but he has
Quite lost our gallant Ladies good opinion,
He is out of grace.

Ex. Ant. Ang. Gio. Because he would correct her insolence,
Who obliged by her father to the care of
Her governor, wo'not tie up his Counsel,
Which he enforces sometimes so passionately,
It is a sport to hear her contempt of his gravity.
Enter Paulina, Antonio. He has met my Lady, I see a quarrel
In their looks already, let us withdraw
Behind that Lobby, we may hear, and
Laugh securely.

Exeunt. An. How long have you been speechless? am
Not I your Uncle? why do you look so scurvily?
I do not think you are a Princess yet,
And therefore take the boldness to salute you,
Without the Ceremony of Petitioners
That haunt your Ladyships charity; or if
You thought me despicable, your Sister has
Deserved your smile.

Pa. It may be so --

An. Buffoones,
That make an Idol of you, and can pawn
Their Souls to flatter you, should be entertaind,
And Courted to your vanity. I blush for you;
Will nothing bring you into sense of Honor
Or Modesty? I ha done.

Pa. It will become you;
You do presume too much.

An. Presume? why, are
Not you Paulina am not I Antonio
Your Uncle? speak.

Pa. I do remember Sir,
I called you so, while you preserved your wits,
And may acknowledge you again, upon
Sober Conditions, and your Senses perfect.

An. Sober Conditions? am I Drunk, Gipsey?
What flesh is able to forbear. Do hear?
Thou have drunk a Devil.

Pa. I did not see him in my Cup.

An. And he has sweld thee to this monstrous pride,
More than thy Sex beside; if thou go on
At this rate, thou will make Lucifer an Ape,
He must be thy Disciple.

Pa. The Old thing raves:

An. Thing? what thing? thank heaven thou
Art a woman; I would beat thee into a Poltise --
When did thou say thy prayers?

Pa. You know I keep a Chaplain.

An. Thy Soul wants desperate lancing;
There Is an eternal Ulcer in thy heart,
Te^ Witches cannot suck it dry, there is
A bath of Poison in thee.

Pa. I shall pity him;
A Posset, and to bed with him, his head
Does want the benefit of sleep; how wild
The good man looks?

An. Thou art --

Pa. The Mistress of this Castle as I take it,
Without your Legacy.

An. I could rail upon the dead for it; do thou not fear
Thy Fathers ghost should haunt thee?

Pa. I never think upon him, and it was
His providence to leave me an estate,
To keep me from those Malancholy fancies,
And I will have you my caprichious Uncle
Know, in the Circle of these my Dominions,
I will have no Competitor.

An. Dominions?
Was ever such an insolence? are not you
Some Queen conceald?

Pa. I am Independent, and sole regent here.

An. So so,
Where Is your Nobility? they are to blame
Not to attend --

Pa. Who waits?

Enter Giovanni, Stephanio. An. But they do want white Staves, this is
Not State enough.

Pa. It shall be mended, let them be remembered.

An. She Is in earnest -- and
If I were worthy to advise you Madam,
Your grace should be a little more reserved,
And entertain none that did treat of Marriage
To your private conference, until they had
In public received audience like Ambassadors.

Pa. I like the Counsel well, it shall be so,
The next that comes shall find it my good Uncle.

An. She Is incorrigible.
What if you commanded those that do attend
Your person to observe you on their knees
Sometimes, they must be humble to your highness;
I can forget my gray hairs, name, and blood,
And teach your Servants duty.

Pa. The example
Will edify the household, and you may,
By fair degrees rise to our Princely favor.

Enter Lucio. Lu. Madam, the Lord Contarini is arrived
The Castle.

Pa. He comes a woing to me, let it be
Your Office reverend Uncle to acquaint him,
Our pleasure is to give him Audience
To Morrow in full State, until when Uncle,
Make it your care, his entertainment be
Such as becomes the greatness of his blood,
And one, on whom the Prince, we know, bestows
His special grace.

An. Do You h^ar sweet Niece? be not you transported;
This is no dream, the man is no mock-lord.

Pa. I Will be a Princess here, as you directed,
If he can humble himself to Ceremony,
Promise him honorable access, and freedom,
If the Conditions please him not, he may
Return, and leave our Court.
Exit.
An. Is this in Nature? well I Will follow her,
And if she be not past a^l shame, and senses,
I will humble or confound her.
Exit.
ACT II.
Enter Longino, Strozzo, Binding Fabio, and Morulla. Mo. AH sweet Gentlemen, we
are very poor,
And have a great Charge.

Str. We do come to ease you of your charge.

Fa. Pity my age.

St. You must then pity our youth.

Enter Piperollo visarded with three bags. Pi. Here, share and share like.

Mo. Alas we are undone.

St. What shall we do with them?

Pi. If you have bound her hands and feet, you
May try whether she be a Witch or no, there is
A Pond in the backside, if she swim, so --
For him?

Fa. Have some compassion, it is our whole estate.

Lo. You have a Son, a pious child we hear.

St. He will not let you want.

Mo. Alas poor boy, he little thinks what we
With care and providence laid up for him
Should thus be lost. O pity Gentlemen.

Pi. Boh -- Lets away.

St. I begin to find a kind of a compunction,
Let us be charitable thieves for once --

Lo. And return half,
What say you?

Pi. Not a gazet, you are not such foolish thieves;
Part with present money? part with my life first.

St. Not to your Parents?

Pi. We use them well, because we do not carry
Their Cowes away; there they have Cheese, and Butter,
Bread comes by nature, and they both can glean,
There Is water in the Well too; not a penny --
If you will be so charitable, defalk
From your own shares, mine is a just thieves part;
I look for thanks, distribute your own alms;
These things must be employed to better uses.
Is a Father, and Mother considerable
To ready money; oh! fie -- boh!

St. Then we must overruled you.

Trips up his heels. Pi. Ah what do you mean?

St. Baul and betray your self at your own peril.
We will be bold with your thieves part --
Come nearer -- Look you good Woman,
You shall not lose your thirds, say you have met
With honest thieves; this shall suffice at present,
Which we but borrow neither, that you may not
Suspect our payment, you shall have security,
This honest man bound for it, and so we leave you.

Fa. It Is money.

Mo. And left one of their fellows bound.

Fa. Do we not dream Wife? I dare not come near Him.

Mo. They are gone, I Will see his complexion;
Who Is this?

Fa. Our own Son Piperollo?

Pi. Pray Father give me your blessing, ah --
Mother do not stone me to death with that
Money bag, I am your Son.

Mo. My Son? ^ know thee not.

Pi. A liar, you know Mother, is worse than a
Thief; do not destroy the hopes of your Family,
Alas, I was drawn in, and made a thief
In my own defense, they swore to cut my throat
Else, do you think I had so little grace --

Mo. Did they so? I Will try what I can do.

She draws her knife. Pi. Oh my quibibles! sweet Mother* remember
You were a woman in your days, that knew
What Is what, and the true difference of things.
I am a man yet, your forgiveness may
Make me a true man. Libbing, and hanging
Are no helps to posterity, I am your own
Sweet flesh and blood -- Oh.

Mo. Kick him out of doors.

Pi. I thank you, this Correction may do me good;
Gently, ah gently; shall I not ask you blessing,
A twelvemonth hence?
Both Never.

Pi. I wo'not.
My Mother has a deadly life with her leg.

Fa. Boh, you tadpole.

Exeunt. Pi. I shall do no good of this trade.
Now to my wits, this is no world to starve in.
Exit
Enter Lucio, Giovanni, Stephanio, with white Staves. Lu. This is very fine; do
not these Staves become us?
But will my Lady be thus mad, and give
The Lord C^ntarini Audience in such State?
She takes upon her like a very Princess.

Gio. But is it not strange her Uncle should thus humor her?

Ste. He gave her the first hint, which she pursues
To his vexation.

Luc. But will my Lord stoop to this mockery?

Gio. He is prepared by her Uncle; 'twil be sport,
If she but carry it with pride enough.

Gio. Let her alone.

St. And if my Lord wants confidence --

Gio. I think her impudence will make him blush,
And put him out; I have seen a Counterfeit
With such a Majesty compose himself,
He thought himself a Prince, could frown as scornfully,
And give his hand out to great Lords to kiss,
With as much grace, as all the Royal blood
Had musterd in his veins.

Lu Some Monarch
Of Innes a Court in England sure; but when
His reign expires, and Christmas in the grave
Cold as the Turkies coffind up in crust,
That walk like Ghosts, and glide to several Tables,
When Instruments are hoarse with sitting up,
When the gay triumph ceases, and the treasure
Divided, all the Offices laid up,
And the new clothes in Lave der, what then?

Gio. Why then the man that kissed his highness hand
O'r night, may justle him for the wall next morning,
And have it too; if he come off with all
His wits the Play is paid for, and he fit
For travel.
Enter Contarini, Antonio, Vergerio, they whisper. My Ladies Uncle, and the
Lord Contarini.

Ver. My Lord Contarini expects when he
May have the happiness to present his service
To your great Lady.

Lu. We shall Sir acquaint her.

Ver. Your Office Sir?

Lu. Her Steward.

Ver. Yours I pray?

St. Mine, Treasurer.

Gio. Mine, Controller.

Ver. I kiss your hands; this may be worth my Lords
Curiosity.

An. For the mirths sake, my Lord be pleased, you may
Do an act of Charity and restore her Senses;
I Will wait on you again.
Exit.
Con. Now Vergerio?

Ver. The expectation is increased, her Officers
Observe the State; were your affections earnest
And I my Lord your Mistress, I should trust
Her pride.

Con. Unless she ravish me.

Enter Antonio. An. She Is upon entrance, her madness holds,
Your confidence may convert her, she is my Niece
And I am sorry for it.

Enter Paulina attended in State, Angellina, Ladies. Pa. Give him access.

Con. What Ladies that stands on her right hand?

An. Her younger Sister, that does vex me as much
With her humility, as the other with
Her impudence.

Con. An excellent piece, Vergerio.

Ver. Which my Lord?

Con. Madam, the glory of your time and Nation,
Whose looks do shine with Majesty, and shoot
A flame to undo the admirer, O call in
Some beams that wait upon the thrones of light,
Or I shall fall your sacrifice, and not finish
What my great Master gave me in charge.

Lu. Has the Prince a mind to her himself.

St. It Is not impossible.

Pa. Speak on my Lord.

An. Gipsey, she does believe the lightning of her eyes
Will blast indeed, how scornfully she squinnies?

Con. I come from the great Sovereign of hearts,
Whose glorious monarchy uncircumscrib'd,
Extends to all the habitable world,
Where ever land or lover^stretch'd his arm,
Whose Scepter's not like that of common Kings,
But a bright golden shaft feathered with sighs,
And headed with a flame, which finds access,
Like subtle lightning to the most secure,
And stubborn Cell that ever yet enclosed
A humane thought --

Lu. He flies high.

Gio. It Is his arrow --

Pa. Speak this great name.

Con. The most immortal Prince of Love --

Gio. A high and mighty Prince indeed.

Lu. It Is not our Prince of Parma then?

Con. Unto your beauty Madam, that makes sweet
The breath of Fame, in his name I am sent
To offer up a Servant, rich with wonder,
And humble thoughts that honor you; who can
See those perfections and not adore
The Divine Owner? Brightness that offends
The innocent eye that gazes, is in you
The cure of blindness, and the filmes that hang
Upon the humble sight, fall off and vanish,
That it may take new life and light from you.

An. Is she not yet ridiculous to her self?

Con. I can leave Cupids Court to live with you,
And all those bowers, where an eternal spring
Makes every flower in love with it is own beauty.
The wind whose airy wings convey all sweetness
That sense can entertain, I would exchange
But to be near your breath; and think there dwells
A harmony in your voice, above the airs
Of all those charming Birds by love selected
From every wood to be his quire. I fear
I am too bold, and may be thought to wander;
If Madam you accept my amorous vows,
Which live yet in the weak expression
Of him that honors you, time will produce
A white and fortunate hour to crown our loves
With nuptial happiness.

Pa. You have relation
To the Court of Parma, your name Lord
Contarini, you have no Message from you Master?

Con. Madam your fame has filled his Court, and he
Presents by me his Princely wishes of
Your happiness, and should he see your person,
Like mine, his heart I fear would melt into
A stream of Love and Admiration.

Pa. Sir, we accept in good part greeting from
The Prince, but you have no commission
To treat for him; the substance of your own
Affair will ask our pause, we will take time
To answer, which till you receive, you may
Command our Court.

Exeunt Paulina, Servants Angellina stays. Ver. Proud folly!

Ant. Prodigious impudence!

Con. What think you Signior?

Ant. I am confounded, I Will to her again.
Exit.
Ang. When shall I awake?
This sure is but a dream, the Gentleman
Cannot so much mistake his time and Language.

Con. I came with Curiosity to see
Her pride so talked of, but my heart I feel
Is taken with an object of true sweetness.
Is It not a lovely figure? say Vergerio.

Ver. If but her mind answer that fair proportion,
My Lord she is worth love, but being Sister
To a woman of such pride --

Con. I prithee leave me.

Ver. She is very beautiful; my Lord is taken.
Exit.
Con. Lady, but that there is story for your births,
I should make judgment by your modest face,
This arrogant woman could not be your Sister.

Ang. Sir, if your expectation be not answered
With her full worth, I shall beseech you name her
With less disgrace, (our blood so near) it cannot
Be grateful to my ear, to hear her blemishes.

Con. I was prepared before to meet this goodness;
These words and looks become that innocent spring
From whence they flow, virtue has such an army
About your heart, there is nothing can approach
Ill to betray it, or proceed from you
But warranted by honor.

An. I know not,
But sure my Lord, you talk too fine a language
For me to understand; we are far from Court,
Where though you may speak Truth, you cloth it with
Such trim and gay apparel, we that only
Know her in plainness, and simplicity,
Cannot tell how to trust our ears, or know,
When men dissemble.

Con. By your own love
To truth, you must believe me, when I say,
Although it took beginning from this visit,
I love no beauty but your self.

Ang. You said you loved my Sister, and expressed
Your passion in such mighty phrase and fancy
I thought your soul had made a business on it,
Pardon the weakness of my faith if I
Dare not believe this change.

Con. Your Sister, Lady,
I came to visit, not affect, I heard,
And had a purpose but to try how near
The wonder of her pride (pardon sweet Virgin)
Came to a truth, nor did I Court her with
The language of a meaning lover; but
Prepared by your Uncle, meant to make her see
Her miserable folly; I dare not
Present such Mockeries to you; suspect not
This hasty address; by your fair self, I love you.

Ang. My Lord, If I believed this, real Courtship,
I should not entertain your honor with a
A fruitless Expectation, but declare,
Besides my want of fortune, beauty, birth,
To make me worth your love, I am already
Contracted by my Father to Religion,
Whose will I cheerfully obey, and wait
When my good Uncle will dispose me to
A Nunnery.

Con. A Nunnery?

Ang. Where for
So great an honor you pretend to me
A most unworthy maid, I Will offer up
My prayers, that you may choose a heart more equal
To your own love, and greatness.

Enter Antonio, Paulina, and Servants. Con. Nay you must
Not leave me so, we are interrupted, you
May trust me fair one with a nearer Conference,

Exeunt. Pa. Alas poor old man.

Ant. The Old man before your borrowed Ladyship
Is bold to keep his head warm, and to tell you
You are a Puppet, take that to your titles
Of honor.

Pa. So Sir, none restrain his insolence?

Ant. I Will make him swallow down his staff of Office
That stirs. I have not done. Can be so impudent
To think his Lordship does not laugh at thee?
Your eyes the thrones of light? a brace of Lanthorns,
In which two snufs of Candle close to th'socket,
Appear like fire-drakes, and will serve to light
A traveller into a Ditch. You Madam Majesty,
And the glory of a Nation?
Tho'art a disease to Honor, Modesty,
A Fever in thy Fathers blood, a Gangren
Upon his name, a Pox upon thee for it;
There Is one disease more, yet I have not done.

Pa. My Charity may invite, if these fits hold,
Some close provision for you among mad men;
I do command you leave my house.

Ant. I wo'not,
I Will fire the house; do hear? thou wo't burn well,
Thou Have Oil enough about thy face, and all
Thy body Pitch, very combustible.
But I Will not be damned for thee, now I think on it,
And since no Counsel will prevail, I Will save
My self. Before I go, give but a reason
Why thou do slight this gallant Lord, and squint
As if he were Groom or Foot man.

Pa. I Will tell you,
You would have the truth.

Ant. If thou can speak any.

Pa. I do esteem my self
More equal for his Master.

Ant. Who, the Prince?

Pa. No, the blind Prince of Love, you are wise Uncle,
But I am out of Poetry.

Ant. I think I were best cut off thy head, and save
The Laws a labor -- There Is no talking to her.

Pa. I am of your mind Uncle, you may edify
Your charge, my younger Sister, she is not proud,
Pray take her w'ee, she will become the Cloister;
Go, and be mortified together, take her,
I am weary of her.

Ant. And I of thee;
She shall be further off too, thou wilt infect her,
Although her foolish Father, (yet he was
My Brother) I have not power to speak
Well of the dead, gave thee his whole Estate,
I have a fortune, do thou hear? I have,
And to vex thee, thy Sister shall have that,
I Will see, and I can make her proud, I Will do it;
She shall have Servants, Suitors, Fiddlers, Flatterers,
Fine Clothes, and all the food that can provoke
Yo glorify her sense; I have bags to spare,
She shall not to a Nunnery to vex thee,
I say again she shall not, we will have humors;
The to'ther Pox upon thee, and farewell.

Pa. I fear he is mad indeed. Let me have Music,
This talk has made me Melancholy.

Exeunt. ACT III.
Enter Lucio, Piperollo. Lu. FOr thy Mothers sake thou shall be entertained.

Pi. An under Butler would fit me rarely,
There Is none in the house that shall be sooner drunk,
Nor oftener for my Ladies credit Sir.

Lu. Can you write?

Pi. And read in print Sir.

Lu. Art thou faithful? may a man trust thee?

Pi. For more than I Will speak on; trusted? I was bound
For two Gentlemen lately, that could not take up
Five hundred Pistols upon other security,
My Father and Mother knows it; I shall never
Endure a thief for a thing that I know, alas
You know I am a neighbors child, my mother
Was your good Ladies nurse.

Lu. Do not I know thy Mother?

Pi. Better it may be, than I know my Father.

Lu. Till some Office fall in the house, you shall serve me,
And ride with me, to receive my Ladies Rents.

Enter Controller Giovanni. Gio. Mr. Steward, yonder are the rarest fellows,
In such fantastical habits too, they call
Themselves Mathematicians.

Lu. What do they come for?

Gio. To offer their service to my Lady, and tell fortunes.

Lu. Have they no chief?

Gio. Yes a quaint philosophical fellow, they call
Him a Caldean, a great Scholar, they do
Not come for money like your starched faced
Egyptians, but carry things for the credit of
The Mathematiques honorably; my Lady has
Given the Caldean her Nativity, who is to consult
With the Ephemerides, and give account how
The Stars will dispose of her.

Pi. We shall know all our fortunes then.

Gio. The worst of his train can discipher hands,
Tell foreheads.

Pi. And Noses.

Gio. One at the first sight did but whisper to my
Ladies Gentlewoman, and she did so blush
Through her Tiffany.

Pi. That Is no great matter, I have seen one blush
Through a Plaster of Paris.

Lu. How Is that?

Pi. A kind of French painting Sir.

Gio. Well said Piper^ll^;
I have entertained him; but my Lady.

Enter Paulina, Gentlewomen. Pa. The Caldean
Pleases me, I long to hear my fortune,
If it be good he shall have a reward
To cherish his great Art, and worth my bounty;
What if my Stars should frown?
Did bid 'em follow?

Ste. They are all ready Madam.

Pi. Musical knaves.

Enter Longino, Rancone, Pacheco, Strazzo, in queint disguises. A Song.
Beauty and the various grace,
That adorn the sweetest faces,
Here take their glorious throne; may he
That is the God of Archerie,
Never aim one angry Dart,
But soft, and gentle as your heart,
Court it with flame, and rich perfume,
To light, and sweeten, not consume.
Pa. Not the Caldean come yet? my thoughts are
Inflamed with fierce desire to know my Destiny;
You have skill Gentlemen; but I Will expect
The judgment of your Master on my Fate;
When the great man of art returns acquaint me.
Exit.
Ste. Come my friends, lets lose no time; Sir.

Lo. I am for you to the extent of my Art Signiour.

Ra. If it please you, let me peruse your hand.

Lu. It Is at your service.

Pi. Please you to examine my Palm; can you
Tell me learned Sir, what is past?

Pa. You know that already.

Pi. 'Twill be a satisfaction to me, if you can
Make it appear, that you know something
In that point.

Lo. A Fracture in the Mercuriall line, and the
Mount of Saturn ill characted! you are
[Strazzo picks Near a misfortune Sir.

[Stephani. pocket. Ra. Jupiters Mount is well formed and colored
A Cross conspicuous, the Suns Mount well
Figured, and linca solis, without any intersection,

Lu. Your Judgment upon that Sir?

Enter Antonio. An. More Anticks yet? What Nation have we here,
Fortune flingers!

Str. You shall know yours immediately.

An. Her house is open for these Mountebanks,
Cheaters, and Tumblers, that can foist and flatter
My Lady Gugaw; Every office open,
When Poor men that have worth and want an Alms,
May perish ere they pass the Porters lodge;
What are you Sir?

Str. One of the Mathematicians noble Signior.

An. Mathematicians? Mungrell,
How durst thou take that learned name upon thee?
You are one of those knaves that stroul the Country,
And live by picking worms out of fools fingers.

(Cato. Str. And something out of your trunks, my reverend

An. Busy the raskals are, how the rogues stink?
I Will send your Regiment a Quartermaster.
Exit.
Str. Now to my other gamester.

Pa. You have been --

Pi. What Sir?

Pa. In your ear -- a thief.

Pi. He has a Devil; good Sir not too loud.

Pa. And you shall be --

Pi. Hanged I warrant you.

Pa. Let me see the other hand.

Pi. Shall it escape with burning?

Ra. You shall be a Lord.

Lu. A Lord.

Ra. Hum, yes, a Lord infallibly.

Pa. You shall be a Knight Sir.

Pi. Of the thieves Order, and wear my rich
Collar of hemp; is it not so?

Pa. An honorable Knight, upon my word.

Lu. A Lord -- Pray give your opinion.

[To ^ on ino. Lo. Your hand -- you shall be a right worshipful --

Lu. One of your tribe told me I should be a Lord.

Str. And shall be used accordingly, Lords are transitory.

Strozzo picks Luc^oes pocket. Lo. Let me see the other hand. I marry Sir, this
line
Cleeres the doubt, and marks you right
Honorable, which makes up the the other half
Of your fortune Signior, these two parallel lines
From the dexter angle to be the Mount of Sol,
Has made all plain, you must be a Lord.

Pi. He has given you a very good reason Sir,
A man can have but half his fortune in one
Hand, and two right worshipfulls makes up
One right honorable; these are rare fellows,
I am predestinate to be a Knight,
The Stars may do their pleasure, I obey.
This should be the Caldean.

Enter Frapolo, Castruehio be whispers to the rest. Fr. I have narrowly
observed the Castle, and
Where the treasure lies, I know my Lady
In honor will entertain us this night, and
When they are asleep we will take our opportunity
To rifle her Exchequer, boys, mean time
Let me alone to humor her proud Nature;
I will so claw her ambition.

Lu. In the interim, I Will put a question to
His Astrology. Sir, If you please till my Lady
Return to satisfy her Seward, and oblige him
By your Art, one of your under Mathematics
Has given me a Comfortable Destiny.

Fr. Your hand. When were you born?

Lu. I know not Sir. Ran. A Lord -- [ R. whispers

Fr. No Matter, Venus in the Ascendent with
Sol, being Lady of your seventh; hum, hum,
With Jupiter, designs you to be a Lord.

Lu. They all agree; the miracle of learning!
One question more I beseeth you Sir, I
Am to ride with my Man to receive my Ladies
Rent to morrow through the Forest --

Fr. Go to.

Lu. Now I desire to know, whether we shall be
Robbed in our return or no?

Fr. What time do you think precisely to come
Back Sir, for we should know the very minute.

Lu. The Money is ready Sir, and we do purpose,
In your ear --

Fr. Yes, you shall be robbed, there is nothing in
Nature to prevent it.

Pi. Will they kill us, and please you?

Fr. No, they shall not kill you, they shall only
Take your money, and break your pate, that
Will be all.

Pi. Why let 'em rob us Sir, the loss of our Money
Will be an evidence of our preferment, and you
May have more assurance to be a Lord, and
I of my Knighthood -- My Lady Sir.

Enter Paulina. Fr. Madam, the Stars shine with their full beams
Upon you, Who by me their interpreter, salute
You with a glorious fortune: For Leo's Lord of your
Horoscope in the right angle of heaven, and a royal
Fixed Sar called Regulus, or the Lions heart, culminating
With him, and a natural reception between Mars,
And Sol Lord of the tenth, being in the first with
Mercury and Venus in the house of honor, besides
A Conjunction of Jupiter and Luna in Pisces, in
The house of Marriage, I must give Judgment.

Pa. I shall beseech your cleerer language.

Fr. You shall be Married to a Prince, it is inevitable.

Pa. A Prince?

Lu. May not I come to be a Lord then?

Pi. And I a Knight?

Pa. When shall I see him?

Fr. He shall within few days visit your Castle,
Drawn hither with the fame of your person,
And bravery. I need not instruct you to entertain
Him with State and Ceremony becoming his
Excellence, but if he Court you not into his arms,
I will renounce the Stars, and say there is no
Truth in Astrology.

Pa. How my thoughts swel already.

Fr. She has swallowe'd it.

Pa. Give him five hundred Pistolets.

Fr. Do not wrong so much
One that does honor you; as I bribe not
The Stars to tell me their Decrees, I dare not
For money sell their Secrets, and if any
That have relation to me presume
To take a Iulio --

Lo. By no means Madam --

Pa. I like it that no Mercenary ends
Guide 'em to flatter me.
[A Drum (...) off.
Lo. Is not that a March?
Exit.
Pi. If it entrench not too far upon your art,
This Prince, Sir, has a Name.

Fr. And rules this Province,
Fernese is a Bachelour.

Pa. The Prince of Parma?
My blood refines in every vein already,
Dull heavy Souls that are content to drudge
In humble thoughts.

Enter Longino and whispers to Frapolo. Lo. I Fear we are betrayed;
The Countries up and marching to the Castle,
We may be all surpised let us to, horse --
Exit.
Pa. Deny not, Sir, this night an entertainment,
Such as my Castle yields, it shall not spread
To receive guests more welcome.

Lu. A Drum Madam.
Exit.
Ra. Must we not stay and rob the house to night?

Er. Madam, my art foretells I cannot be
Safe to remain here, at my return
I wo'not baulk your Castle, in the mean time
Cherish high thoughts, your Stars do call you Princess,
So kissing your fair hand --

Pa. Make me not so unhappy.

Fr. There is no dispute with Destiny,
I take my humble leave, away to horse.

Exeunt. Pa. This more amazeth me, what danger should
Provoke this have, if it prove their concernment,
I must believe they do converse with Fate,
And trust to them as Oracles; a Princess?
Was not my Soul Prophetical?

Enter Lucio. Lu. Madam, some accident has raised your tenants,
They march in fury this way, in strange postures
And Arms, as if they came to storm the Castle.

Enter Piperollo. Pi. Madam, we are all undone, the Clubs are up,
Your Tenants are turned Rebels, and by this time
Entered the Hall; and threaten to surprise
I know not whom; But the Caldea^, and
His troop are vanished, they foresaw this tempest.

Pa. What should this mean?
Enter Countrymen armed. I Come on you men of lusty Chine, Dear Lady
Be not affrighted, Captain of thy Guard
Am I, thy natural Tenant, and thy Vassal;
Where be these Sunburnt Aethiopians?
I wo'not leave one Canting Rogue alive.

Pa. What Aethiopians, what Canting Rogues?
Do not your Clounships know me?
I Know our Princess?
We honor thee, and rise in thy defense;
Where be these thieves? we heard there were
A Regiment, that came to Cheat and Plunder.

Pa. You Are a Knot
Of knaves and fools, and shall repent this insolence;
You that command in chief, good Captain Bumbard,
May teach your Raggamuffins face about,
Was it your stratagem to fright my guests?
I Your Uncle told us Madam, and commanded.

Pa. Was it his plot? he is still my enemy.
I Pardon us Madam,
We came simply hither to do you service;
Kneel, or we shall all be stripped out of our Tenements.

Pa. My Uncle has abused you,
But this submission takes our anger off,
Continue dutiful to my Commands,
And you shall be remembered; Piperollo --
Exit.
Pi. I know the Buttery Madam; follow me,
It is my Ladies pleasure you be drunk,
And thank her grace ye keep your Copiholds;
Dee you bring up the rear, I Will march in front.

Exeunt. Enter Antonio, Contarini. Ant. Passion Of Me, it is to great an honor,
Refuse a man of your high blood and name,
That Courts her honorably? I could beat her.

Con. It Is not impossible at my return
To find a change. I must to Court again.

Ver. The horses my Lord are ready.

Con. Vergerio --

Ant. What a Baggage it is, she is all for the Nunnery,
She shall not have her will, I Will undo my self
But I Will destroy this Modesty; if I could
But make her proud there were some hope on her.

Ver. My Lord you may command, but how unfit,
I am to manage this affair.

Con. Thou have a powerful Language, it prevailed
On me when I first saw thee, since which time
I have not deserved unkindly from thee, and
This trust speaks more than Common favor.

Ver. Make me his advocate to Angellina?

An. My Lord, if you can still preserve these thoughts
Of honor to us, leave her to my Counsel.

Con. Most cheerfully, I am not desperate;
This Gentleman I Will leave to wait upon her,
Who is privy to my Counsels, and affection.

An. Your Lordship has found trust in him, but that
Shall Not excuse my care, to make her know
Her happiness, and the Honor of our Family,
By meeting your commands. She Is here.
Enter Angellina, Francescina. Francescina tell me, what hope of your Mistress?
How does thy Counsel work? does she pray less
Then she was wont? or listen now and then
When thou talk wantonly, does she smile upon it?

Fr. Between our selves, I put her to a smiling
Blush.

Ant. What said she, tell me on thy modesty,
When she found her dear delight, the legend
Of the Saints removed, and Ovids tales of
Jupiter put in the place?

Fr. She said, that Jupiter
Was a most sensual Heretic, and the cestus
That Venus wore was not St. Francis girdle.

Ant. How did she like the picture of Leander,
Swimming the Hell^spont upon his back?
How that of Cleopatra kissing Antony?

Fr. She Says that Queen was none of the poor Clares,
But one bread up in black Egyptian Darkness;
All I can say, she is not desperate,
I sing no Anthems to her.

Ant. What says she to her dancing Master?

Fr. She is past her honor; that is a precious fellow,
She Will laugh to see him gamboll with his limbs,
His head flies like a Ball about the room;
You Would think he were at Tennis with it.

Ang. Though in the guilt and knowledge of my own
Defects, to answer such an honorable
Esteem of me, I dare not yet presume
To meet it; I shall want no pious thoughts
For this so great a bounty to a poor
Desertlesse Virgin.

Ant. Hang your pious thoughts
And love my Lord.

Con. Not for the wealth of Parma
Should my Cause force one cloud upon her face
Or put her eyes to the expense of tears,
It shall be argument for me to hope,
If she accept this youth to wait upon her,
Who may in some auspicious hour, prepare me
A gentle seat within her heart, mean time
I leave upon your Virgin lip the faith,
Of your true Servant Lady.

Ant. I Will attend you
To horse my Lord.

Exeunt. Ang. Poor miserable maid,
Fallen now beneath the pity of thy self;
My heart, on which so late a flame of Heaven
Streamed comfort in my holy resolutions,
Is filled with love, but not of Contarini,
Whose passion may deserve another welcome,
I prithee Francescina take thy Lute
And let me hear thy voice.

Fr. I can sing Venus and Adonis to you.

Ang. Any thing.

Fr. Or will you hear the pleasant Dity
How fair Calisto first became a Nun.

Ang. I prithee do not name a Nun, the flame
That I feel here deserves no Vestall name.

Fr. I Will do my best to fit you,
There Is no such tool in nature as a Chambermaid
To work upon her Mistress.

Exeunt. ACT IIII.
Enter Frapolo, Longino, Strozzo, Pachcco, with the rest. Fr. IT was a fatal
business to lose such
An opportunity.

Lo. My Lady was wound up so rarely.

St. We were betrayed for certain; 'twas high
Time to scud, and get into our Territories;
Now we are safe in our Grots, secure as
The Minotaur, and keep the clew of our
Own Labyrinths.

Pa. We lost a rare design, but in my opinion,
It Is better scouting here with our heads on,
Than have 'em carried in by Clowns at the Court rate.

Fr. The ignorant Rogues would nere ha 'sold
Them to their worth.

Lo. And they dare as soon venture upon Hell,
As Shoot their heads into this Furnace.

Fr. But this Claridiana shall not escape so,
I am resolved to visit her again, and I am
Glad I prepared another expectation, these
Difficulties shall make our next attempt
More glorious.

Lo. Those shapes will conjure up the Bores again.

St. She does expect the Caldean.

Fr. Hang the Caldean. I have a new device
Shall scour the Castle; and make Dame
Guinever with all her pride, thank and adore
The invention.

Lo. How dear Frapolo? how?

Whooting within. Fr. Scout and discover, Strozzo.

Str. I see but two men coming down the Hill.

Fr. Cannot their worships travel with less noise?

Lo. They durst not be so confident without a number,
It Is good to be secure, the noise approaches,
Lets to our shells.

Fr. Do you lie perdue still.

They retire. Pa. I do not like their confidence, these may be
The enemies scouts, lets non engage to soon
For fear of a reserve. The State has threatened
To send their Vermin forth.

Fr. Obscure: close, close.

Enter Lucio, Piperollo. Lu. What do thou mean?
Thou have a mind to be robbed indeed.

Pi. I would have art maintained in reputation,
You know my Lady is to be a Princels,
And you must be a Lord, and I be dubbed,
But if we be not robbed, I know not how
To trust the Mathematics or the Stars;
I am afraid all the Bandits are hanged,
A thousand Pistols should not fear to travel.

Lu It is not wisdom to proclaim our charge,
Though I could be content to be a Lord,
I am not over hearty, thieves are thieves,
And life is precious, prithee lets make have.

Pi. Illo ho ho,
Think upon your honor, are there no Gentlemen?
No wanting Gentlemen that know how to spend
A quantity of Gold?
There is no thief in Nature.

Str. The Gentleman
Is very merry, they that mean well, and
Have their wits about 'em, do not use
To call upon our Tribe. This is a plot,
A very plot, and yet the Coast is ^leer,
Now I may reach their voice.

Pi. It wo' not be, was ever men distressed so?

Lu. Come we are well yet Piperollo, if
The Stars Decree our robbery, it will follow.

Pi. I pray Sir lets sit down here, as you hope to
Be a Lord, we must do our endeavor and help
The Fates. Do but hear reason Sir.

Str. It Is my proud Madams Steward, and our quondam
Fellow thief; they were told their fortunes
To be robbed; Here had been a purchase lost
If I had not lain perdue. You shall be
Disparcht presently, never fear it.

He Whistles. Lu What Is that? I do not like that tune.

Pi. Hum, I am not in love with that Quailpipe.
I could dwindle, but that I have a strong
Faith in the Mathematics* Thieves and be
Thy Will.

Lu. If they should cut our throats now -- this is
Your folly; would I were off.

Pi. Would I were a Knight in an embroidered
Dish clout. Have a good heart Sir, there is
No more to be said in it, let the Stars take
Their course, it is my Ladies money -- and if
We be robbed, we are so much the nearer to preferment.

Enter Frapolo and the rest. Lu. Ah sweet Gentlemen take but the Money --

Pi. It Is ready told; nay, nay, we are friends;
Give us but a Note under your hands for
My Ladies satisfaction, that you have received
It Gentlemen.

Lu. You need not trouble your selves to tell it Ge^^^^^men,
It is all right.

Lo. So, so, we will take your words.

Pi. I should know that vizard, the garments
That you wear too I have seen Old acquaintance?

Fr. Does he know you? cut his throat.

Pi. No Sir, I do not know him, nor any man, nor
My self, I was not once robbed before, neither
Did I help any man to rob my own Father and Mother;
I knew no Cedar chest I, I disclaim it, nor
Was any man that I know left bound for the
Money; ye are all honest Gentlemen,
And I congratulate our good fortune, that you
Came so luckily in the very nick, we had carried
Home the money else in good sadness -- Sir,
We are made for ever -- rare Mathematicians!

Fr. What Is that you talk sir of Mathematicians?

Pi. It pleased some of the learned tribe to visit
My Lady not long since, but they are well I
Hope, they told us we should be robbed, and
It Is done; blessed Caldean!

Fr. What became on 'em?

Pi. They escaped a scouring, for my Ladies Cinicall
Uncle, in mere malice to learning, rai 'd
The Towns upon 'em, persuading the hobbinolls
They came to rob the house; but honored
Be the Stars, they brought 'em off at the
Back gate.

Fr. They seem honest fellows, let 'em live, and
Pass.

Lu. We humbly thank you Gentlemen, come
Piperollo.

Pi. And yet, now I remember, there wants a
Circumstance, my pate is not broke yet,
That was a Clause, the Caldean was a little
Out.

Fr. I had forgot, will you be prating sir?

[Fi. breaks his head. Pi. Now it is done, I thank you, dear Gentlemen,
I thank you* go forth and be a Knight;
Mathematician I adore thee, it bleeds;
Where are you Sir? all is complete, and my
Head is broke according to prophecy. Oh
Admirable Caldean!

Exeunt. Lo. We have not lost all my Ladies money, but
To your plot Frapolo.

Fr. This has ripend it, and I appear a
Blazing Star already.

Str. What Is the mystery?

Fr. You know I am your Prince.

Lo* It Is Acknowledged.

Fr. We will in State visit the proud Paulina,
I am the Prince Farness, and you
Are all my Lords and privy Counselors
Bear up for honor of your Prince.

Lo. I apprehend it, it is a most rare design,
She will be mad to meet it.

Pa. Will you marry her?

Fr. I cannot tell, there may be a necessity,
But when I have the wench, her Plate and Jewels,
And other sums, I have cast already whither
We must transport our selves -- we will divide all.

Lo. And the wench too?

Fr. No not the wench, until I cast the Concubine;
Remember who I am, the choice of flesh
Is my prerogative; no murmuring,
You shall provide our Robes.

Str. Now we are rogues to purpose.

Fr. I am your Prince, and the worst thief
A Statesman.

Omnes A Prince, A Prince. Exeunt. Enter Angellina, and Francescina. Ang. Where
is Vergerio?

Fr. I know not Madam.

Ang. Madam? I prithee leave that folly,
I am no Lady, call me Angellina.

Fr. I Will call you Madam, it is a name in fashion,
What do you want to justify that title?
Have you not Beauty, Jewels, Gold at pleasure?
Fine Clothes, high Food, and men as motley, as
The Ambassadors to wait? does not your Uncle
Allow you all that can make up a Lady?
Pardon my boldness Madam, I beseech you.

Enter two Gentlewomen. Ang. What are these?

Fr. The Gentlewomen were commended, Madam,
Most excellent in their Art about great Ladies;
And come to tender you their humble service.

1 Most proud if you accept our duties Madam.

Fr. Look you, they are proud already, they have nothing
But their trade to live on; she with the face
Spotted with Ermins, has been late in France,
And knows the mode to a Mathematical point,
She has the theory of Song, but lost
The practick part by sitting up a nights;
She danceth still, can talk in several languages,
And has the art of every game, to instruct
A novice Lady --

Ang. To lose time.

Fr. And what
Age, do you think the other Gentlewoman
Carries? that simpers so? the miracle
Of Painting! she presents scarce five and twenty,
But if you credit Church Records, she numbers
But five short of threescore, Medea had
No charms like her, to preserve youth, and beauty;
She has the art of making eyes, new hair,
And Ivory teeth, has skill in making fruitful,
And is an excellent Midwife; she has cured
A man that had no Nose, and a Court-Lady
That had no Tongue.

Ang. These are transcendent qualities;
Since it is my Uncles pleasure, they may wait,
But not to serve me.

One knocks. Fr. Who Is that knocks so modestly?
It Is not your Dancing Master, nor the Doctor,
They have more confidence.
It Is the Parsons Nephew, come from the University,
Some say a pretty Scholar, and a wit;
Has an Ambition to kiss your hand
And tender his first fruits.

Ang. What Is that?

Fr. Some Poetry.

1 By any means Madam, you must be flattered,
Great Ladies cannot live else.

Ang. Let him enter.

Enter Scholar. Sch Darling of beauty, fairest Angellina,
Thus low the Muses bow, and send by me
An abstract of your self; oh make the Paper
More white by kissing your fair hand, and with
Your breath, like a soft Western gale, perfume
These lines created in your praise.

Ang. What Is here? -- I am
A stranger to you Sir, and to your language,
These words have no relation to me;
I pity men of your high fancy, should
Dishonor their own names, by forming such
Prodigious shapes of beauty in our sex.
If I were really what you would commend,
Mankind would fly me; get a Painter Sir,
And when he has wrought a woman by your fancy,
See if you know her again; were it not fine,
If you should see your Mistress without hair?
Dressed only with those glittering beams you talk of?
Two Suns instead of Eyes, and they not melt
The forhead made of Snow; no Cheeks, but two
Roses inoculated upon a Lilly?
Between, a pendent Alablaster Nose?
Her Lips cut out of Coral, and no Teeth,
But Strings of Pearl; Her Tongue a Nightingales;
Her chin a rump of Ivory, and so forth?
Would not this strange C^imera fright your self?
And yet you take the boldness to present us,
And think we must applaud, and thank you for
Our selves made Monsters by your art; no more
Of this for shame; lose not your time and honor
In this fantastic Idol; you will say,
The world is peevish, and not kind to virtue;
Give him ten Pistolets to cure h^s poverty,
There are good seeds in him and they may
Grow with some Cherishing.

Sch. You are enough
To vindicate your Sex, I shall not blush
To write your story.

Fr. You shall owe me Sir
An Anagram, and a Poesy too for
My next Ring.

Sch. You shall command my faculty,
My dearest Abigall
Exit.
Fr. Thank you sweet Sir Roger.

Enter four Citizens. 1 Is her Ladyship at leisure?

Ang. What are these?

2 We are humble suter Madam for your Favor.

Ang. Speak your request.

1 I am a Tailor Madam
That holds intelligence with foreign Courts
To furnish Ladies with new Fashions,
And I have patterns of the strangest shapes
That ever Ladies longed for.

Ang. I believe it.

2 I have the ambition to own the name
Of your Perfumer Madam.

3 ^ your Jeweller;
What think you of that Carcanet sweet Madam?
The Pearls are Orient, I have a Diamond
The Sultan gave one of his Concubines,
It weighes -- 20 caracts, if it please you Madam,
To wear it in the Court, and I Will attend
Your Ladyship six months hence to pay me for it;
I know your Uncle Madam.

Ang. This is his plot.

Fr. By all means take it.

Ang. Excuse me; what are you? speak your desire.

4 I would present you Madam with a pair
Of curious Spurs.

Ang. For what use prithee?

4 For what you plea^e, I see all men of trade
Apply themselves to gain relation to you,
And I would be your Spurrier.

Ang. Do Ladies wear Spurs my friend?

4 They may in time, who knows what may be done,
If one great Lady would begin, they ride
Like Men already; it is all one to me,
So I may have the Credit of your name,
And privilege to swell above my neighbors.

Ang. When I stand, Gentlemen, in need of your
Professions, I Will send for you, in the mean time
You shall need no Solicitour.

Omnes. Your Servants.

4 Buy a Spur.

Exeunt. Ang. I prithee let me not be troubled with
This kind of People Francescina; Ladies
Have a fine time, if they be all thus visited.

Fr. You are rude and fawcy fellows to intrude
So far without my Ladies license.

Ang. What makes thee so impatient? will they not
Be gone?

Fr. Gone? here is a new regiment is pressing forward

Ang. What are they?

Fr. Beggars.

Ang. How?

Fr. And tell me I abuse your Charity,
To keep off their Petitions; we must have
A Court-du-guard, I think, and Centries placed
At every door.

Ang. I prithee let 'em enter.

Enter three Petitioners. Fr. The room will not be sweet again this three days;
But if it be your pleasure -- know your distance.

Ang. The blind, and lame, what is your condition Sir?

1 As miserable Madam as the Sea,
That swallowed all my wealth, can make a man,
That once commanded thousands, I blush to beg
But Nature too impatient of sterving
Compels me to this boldness, you may soon
Peruse my tragic story there.

Gives a Paper. Ang Good old man!

Fr. What is his loss to you?

2 My Petition too;
A poor blind man, that has lost more by fire
Than his estate valued a thousand times;
And it is but equal, fire should spoil my eyes,
That ravished me of all, was precious to 'em,
A wife and pretty Children.

Ang. Burned?

2 All burned;
And what my eyes cannot afford their memory
My poor heart weeps in blood.

3 I am a Soldier
That in my Countries service lost my limbs;
I Have had more lead in bullets taken from me
Than would repair some Stee^le.

Fr. Ring the bells,
That was a loud one!

3 I have given wounds have killed the lookers on
With horror of their gaping, and have marched
Ten miles a day thus deep --

Fr. In dirt?

3 In blood.

Fr. Upon those wooden legs?

An. Poor souls! I pity 'em here honest men,
Divide this bag, and pray for my good Uncle.

Omnes. Blessings on you, Madam.

2. Equal division, come.

1. Stay, in the first place, I brought you hither,
Therefore my part is most considerable.

3. I Will have no Prerogative.

2. Nor I.

1. But I will.
Do not I know you both for cheating Rascals?
Thus are good meanings cozened, and you shall not
Lose your reward; send for some Officers.

2, 3. We are betrayed.
Ex. 2, 3.
Ant. My Uncle.

Ant. They have found their eyes and legs again,
Niece I observe your Charity, but you see not
The inside of these things, and I did mean
And hope these sums might serve your self;
Some Ladies would have considered
A new Gown and trinkets; Francescina,
I see little amendment, she will undo me
In pious uses.

Fr. She has entertained these Gentlewomen.
Enter Vergerio. And that young Gentleman does good upon her.

An. I like it well, he is careful of my Lord,
And if she meet his honorable treaty,
She may learn Pride at Court, should our Art fail.
She smiles -- I wo'not interrupt 'em.

Enter Giovanni. Gio. My Lady entreats the presence of her Sister.

An. Does she entreat? Yes, you may visit her
Sir if you please, I Will trust her to your conduct.

Ver. It Is my ambition to attend her.

An. Hark you,
Remember who you are, and carry things
For the credit of my heir, and one that must be
Right Honorable shortly, if I hear
Thou flout'st her, thou shall have another Gown
And Petticoat embroidered, or but beat her
And put me to a pension; fare you well,
Francescina wait, wait all upon you Mistress.

Exeunt. Enter Paulina. Pa. No news yet of the Prince? he filled my dreams
Last night, it was a golden glorious slumber;
Me-thought we both were led into a Temple,
Where all our rites of Marriage were performed
In the presence of a thousand Angel- Cu^ids.

Enter Piperollo, and stumbles. Pi. 'Twas my devotion Madam, to present you
The News, I could not break my neck upon
A better cause.

Pa. Is the Prince come?

Pi. The Prince is at your service; though I slipped
At Chamber door, it is my happiness
To be the first Messenger.

Pa. Of what?

Pi. I desire no reward Madam, it is sufficient
I know what will become of us all, you
Remember the Caldean; all has happened,
I thank Astrology.

Pa. For what?

Pi. Your money is gone, your rents have been received,
And my head broke to purpose; things are visible.
Enter Lucio. My Master can confirm it.

Pa. What Is this prodigy?

Lu. Madam it is done, we have been robbed.

Pa. How?

Lu. As the Caldean and the Stars would have it,
Just to a minute.

Pi. Rare Mathematician!

Pa. I Will hang you both,

P^. You may, and be no Princess.

Pa Did he foretell this loss?

Pi. Is my pate broken? Do I live, and hope
To kneel, and say, If please your Grace, to call
Him Lord, and answer to a Knight? -we 're made.

Pa. Be at a distance,
If there be truth in the Caldeans Art,
These inconsiderable losses are
A new presage of my approaching greatness.

Enter Stephanio, and Longin^, disguiz^d. St. One from the Prince.

Lo. His Highness Farnese, Madam, greets your
Ladyship, and intends to be your Guest this night,

Pa. It will be an honor
My life must ow him duty for.

Pi. Do not you feel a Lordship creep up
By your short ribs?

Lo. His Grace is not far off.

Pa. Present the humble duty of his handmaid,
And say my Castle droops til it receive him;

Lo. I shall Madam.

Pa. We must prepare to meet and entertain him;
All things have been Prophetical.

Pi. My very good Lord.

Lu. Right Worshipful Piperollo.

Exeunt. Enter Vergerio, Angellina, Servants aloof. Ver. In my pity
That so much innocence should not be lost
On faithless Contarini, I have landed
Upon your knowledge this unhappy secret.

Ang. Promised his faith to another? it was ill done,
To work my Uncle, and destroy my thoughts
Of a religious life.

Ve. You may collect
Those pure desires again,
Heaven will be soon invited, and a second
Resolve confirm that happiness.

Ang. May we not,
Without so (...) forsaking of the world,
Be capable of blessing, and meet heaven
At last, though erring Nature guide sometime
Out of the nearest way?

Ver. Yes Angellina.

Av. I must be no Votary,
But when you turn a Friar then,

Ver. How Lady?

An. Sir you have merited for this discovery
All that I am to serve you, and unless
You help me in this Labyrinth, I must
Live in despair of Freedom.

Ver. Any service;
There Is so much sweetness in you, I could lay
My life a Sacrifice, be confident
I must be left of heaven, when I forsake you.

An. And I dare trust your Virtue with a secret
I have not told my Ghostly Father.

Fr. I know not what opinion my Lord has
Of his smooth Advocate, but I should gather
By Symptoms of my Mistress, she is sick
Of the younger Gentleman.

Ver. I dare not hope
This blessing, it is an honor placed on me
That has no value, I am a stranger,

An. You are no stranger here.

Ver. Your Uncle too --

Ang. May err in his election.

Ver. But his anger --

Ang. My prayer and tears may soften.

Ver. Do not dress
Your eyes with sorrow Angellina, this
Too gracious an influence upon
Your servant must command my utmost duty.
Upon this white hand I breath out my heart,
And when I pay affection to another
Mistress, in Your revenge, her beauty blast me!
But we may be observed.

Ang. Be all my guide.

Ver. This must be marag'd wisely, we are lost else.

Ang. We are now arrived the Castle Francescina.

Fr. We attend.

Exeunt. Enter Prince Farnese, Contarini. Fa. I am obscured sufficiently.

Con My life on it.

Fa. Here are great preparations, and the people
Flock as to see some triumph, this Paulina
Will be adored in the Country.

Con. But her Sister,
With an extreme of sweetness, and humility
Will take the wonder off, she so transcends.

Fa. Your words fall from you,
I have observd my Lord, with too much passion;
She Is but a woman, and may be no miracle,
When a clear eye is Judge.

Con. Sir I owe
All that I am in fortune, name and greatness
Unto your person, next whom, give me leave
To say I rate no expectation
Equal to be her servant, yet I find
Her cold to those desires, that court her with
All honor, I snall humbly beg, your grace
When you converse, will interpose your favor,
And by your Mediation perfect all
That can be named my happiness.

Far. You express
A strong Captivity in so small acquaintance;
Well my Lord trust to me; is this her Castle?
Enter Piperollo. By your favor Sir.

Pi. Speak quickly what is your business?

Far. Is this Paulina's Castle?

Pi. Plain Paulina? and is this her Castle?
My friend you want some breeding, she that owes
This Palace, for a Prince has made it so,
Is not far off; turn your eyes backward Sir,
And tell your self without a perspective
What man is coming toward us?

Far. Worthy Sir.

Pi. Put of your hats and hear his name, Farnese
The Prince of Parma's there, I kissed his hand,
My breath is since the sweeter.

Far. The Prince, where?

Pi. You Will find him with my Lady whom he came
To visit, if you will promise to be drunk,
Take what is a secret yet, he comes to marry her,
Or there is no truth in Stars, she is to be
His spouse; farewell, and thank my worship heartily.
Exit.
Con. This fellow's mad!

Fr. He kissed the Princes hand,
What mystery is this?

Con. See, they approach.

Far. I am not lost sure in this cloud, they march
In State this way.

Loud Music. Enter Frapolo, Paulina, a Train of Gallants and Ladies, Vergerio,
Angellina. Ang. How, an Impostor?

Ver. Sure I know the Prince.

Aug. Conceal it yet.

Far. What Gentleman is that?

Lon. The Prince of Parma Sir.

Con This will be worth observing.

Far. Do we not both dream? that Paulina?
How disdainfully she moves?

Con. That Is her younger Sister upon whom
Vergerio waits.

Far. He knows I am the Prince.

Con. How do you like her Sir?

Fa. Ha? it is not fit to tell thee.

Con. Does she not answer my Character?

Fa. On my heart a fair one?

Con. Pray tell me how you like her Sir.

Fa. Not yet.
I am lost in wonder of her sweetness. Bid
Vergerio bring her to Antonio's;
I Will be his guest to night.

Con I shall obey Sir.

Pi. Make room for the Prince, fellows bear back;
You are not to be Knighted friend I take it.

Fa. Thus can the flame of Heaven with subtle art,
Leave the skin whole, yet quite consume the heart.

Exeunt. ACT V.
Enter Contarini, Antonio. An. MY Niece has had a pretty warm night on it,
It Is a bold knave to take the Prince upon him
I did believe the noyes, and was considering
How to contrive my peace with her good grace.

Con. You have no fear to suffer now?

Ant. I thank
Your Lordship, that has made my house and knowledge
So fortunate, by the presence of our great
Farn^se, it is an honor makes me young;
And yet this Rascal troubles me, that durst
Come in the Princes name, and charge my Niece
So home too; Is It not ^reason Sir?

Con. Of highest nature.

Ant. Let him then taste the Law; yet I commend
His Spirit, that would scorn to die for Felony,
And when his head goes off the shame and grief
May help to break her heart: I do not love her,
And then my Girl, my Angellina's heir,
And you her Lord and mine.

Con. My hopes are fair,
The Prince himself having vouchsafed to be
My Advocate.

Ant. He must command all here.
Enter Farnese, and Angellina. It Is a good Prince, and loves you well, and let
me
Without boast, tell you my Lord, she brings
No common Blood, though we live dark in the Country
I can derive her from the great U^sini,
But we have been eclipsed.

Far. Contarini leave us. You may stay Antonio;
Is It not an honor to your Family
A Prince should court your Niece into his arms?

Ant. I must confess, it is good enough for such
A Baggage, they will make together Sir,
A most excellent show upon the Scaffold.

Far. The Impostor, and Paulina's pride, takes off
Your understanding; I do court your Niece
Fair Angellina. Ant. How Sir?

Far. And as becomes a Princess.

Ant. Your Grace is merry.

Far. I know not, but there is Magic in her eyes.

An Magic? and she be a Witch, I have done with her.
Does he love Angelina? Please your Highness --
Do you affect this Girl?

Far. Religiously.

An. And have you all your Princely wits about ye?

Far. This Language is but coarse. I tell you Sir
The Virgin must be mine.

An. Your Whore?

Far. My Princess.

An. That Is another matter.

Far. Show your obedience,
You have commands upon her as a Father.

An. I know not what to say, but I Will persuade;
Hark you Niece, you hear what the Prince says,
It Is now no time to think of Nunneries.
Be ruled then, and love somebody; if you have
Promised my Lord, I say make good that promise,
If not, the Prince is worth considering.
The Gentleman will make you a round Iointure.
If thou be free, love him, to vex thy Sister,
Who may upon submission be received
To Grace, and rise in time a Madam Nurse
To your heir apparent. I have done my duty.
But this is no great honesty, to cheat
My Lord. I see the greatest men are flesh
And blood, our souls are much upon a making;
All men that are in love deal with the Devil,
Only with this difference, he that dotes
Upon a Woman is absolutely possessed;
And he that loves the least is haunted
With a Familiar.

Enter a Servant Ser. Old Fabio Sir your Tenant, with much business
In's face, desires to speak with you, I could hardly
Keep him from pressing in, his Wife he says
Is Lunatic.

Ant. We shall all be mad shortly,
Where is the Knave?
Exit.
Ang. I dare do Sir as much to show my duty
As any Maid alive; I dare dye for you.

Fa. And yet you dare not love.

Ang. Not in that sense
You invite me to.

Far. My Courtship carries
No stain to fright you, what I have propounded
Is worth the Ambition of a greater Lady;
Though you profess so liberally, I find
Your cunning, and because I have so much
Descended from my Title, you assume
This unbecomming Nicety, take heed,
I can be angry.

Ang. As you are a Man
That passion may come near you Sir; and as
You are my Prince, you may command my death
To follow and Appease it, but you said you loved me.

Far. I do, if you can wisely entertain it*

An. Then you must love my honor,
A Virgins wealth, for every honest Man
Or Woman has an honor, and that has
Engaged my heart already by a Contract;
This tie dissolved with justice, I should kneel
To ask your Princely favor.

Far. I am answered.
Who waits? call my Lord Contarini hither.

Enter Contarini. Con. Sir.

Far. You might have mocked another person,
And not have made me a ridiculous story
To your Mistress Sir.

Con. I understand you not.

Far. Engage me to mediation for her love,
With a pretense how much my act should honor
Your faint hopes, when you are conscious of a
Contract, already past between you.

Con. Contract Sir?
She never yet gave me any language
Did promise hope, she still concluded me
With going to a Cloister.

Far. How Is this fair one?

An. It is most sure I am contracted.

Con. To whom?

An. Vergerio your Lordships Agent.

Con. That boy betray me?
In whom I took delight, made him my friend,
He play the Traitor? I Will be revenged upon
His heart.

Far. Contain your passion Contarini,
Her beauty had apower above my friendship,
It well might shake his faith, and yet it is strange.
Call in Vergerio.

Enter Vergerio. Ver. I have heard all,
And come to meet my sentence. You're a Prince
Against whom I dare not lift a thought; I see
What storm is rising, yet let this, great Sir,
Invite your mercy to me, I have made
No breach against your love, and that which was
My fault to his, may be excused, by what
He felt himself love, not to be resisted.
This Virgin I lay claim to, and her vows
No Subject must compel me to resign;
But if the Prince think me unfit, and call
This treasure from my bosom, and can place
His love, where I so chastely have delighted,
I will not keep a thought that shall repine,
When I am miserable in her absence,
But give my interest cheerfully; to you,
My Lord, I answer, I have made no trespass,
And shall, so please your highness to be Judge,
Make it appear.

Con: Was ever such an impudence?
This presence does protect him, I should else
Write treason on his heart; But Angellina
I pity thy undoing, how can thou
Expect a truth from him, betrays his Master?

An. My Lord, you have been faulty sure, and this
(not worthy to be called a loss of me)
Was meant by Providence to wake your faith,
That Is owing to another.

Far. Possible?
The Viceroy of Sicilies Daughter? Pulcheria.

Con. Pulcheria here?

Ver. Here Contarini.

Con. Ha. proved a Woman, oh my shame and folly!

Ver. Pardon my too much love, that made me fear
You had forgot Pulcheria, though you left
Your vows and me at Sicily, when you were
Ambassador from the Prince.

Con. Whence embarked
Thou brought me news Pulcheria was dround,
And thou for her sake entertained my servant,
Welcome, at once receive me and forgive me.

Fa. I had your promise, were this contract void
In honor, nor will take from my own merit
To think when your considerate thoughts come home,
You can pretend excuse to your own happiness,
Which lest you may suspect, let us in state
Visit Paulina, and unmask that counterfeit
Which has usurped our name.

Ver. Sir we attend you,

Con. This blessing must require a spacious soul,
Mine is too narrow to receive.

Exeunt. Enter Steward, and Piperollo. Lu. I am not yet created honorable.

Fi. Sir, things must have their time, but will his highness
Remove so suddenly, and carry my Lady
To the Court with him? it is a most sweet young Prince.

Lu. Order was given to pack up her plate,
Her gold and Jewels, for he means to have
Tiltings and triumphs when he comes to Parma.

^i. There it is fit we should expect our honors.
I will attend the Prince.
Exit.
Enter Contarini. Con. Signior Lu^io.

Lu. Your good Lordship.

Con. Pray tell my Lady, I would kiss her hand,
And shall present news will secure their welcome.
I come from the Prince.

Lu. The Prince my Lord?
He is within --

Con. A small march off the Castle, and commanded
Me to prepare her, that he comes to be
Her guest.

Lu. My Lord, I will acquaint some of the bedchamber, but,
When did your Lordship see his Highness?

Con. I left him at the Park gate.

Lu. This is the nearest way unless his highness
Have leaped a window, or can walk invisible.
Your Lordship may have some conceit. I Will go Sir.
Exit.
Enter Piperollo. Pi What is the meaning that there is such a guard
Upon our Castle? it is besiedg'd, and no man
Suffered go forth; this is some Lord or other
By his stradling.

Enter Lucio, Longino, Strozzo, and the rest. Lo. From the Prince? that he?

Pi. It Is as I tell you Sir, there is a little army,
Surrounds the Castle.

Lo. They have no order from his highness.

Str. We are betrayed again.

Lon. Sir, would you speak with the Prince?

Con. Why have you such a thing within the Castle?
Who dares be so much Traitor to usurp
That title? Where Is that Puppet, Gentlemen?

Lu. That is his Secretary.

Pi. The rest are Lords and Privy Counselors.

Ca. We are undone.

Enter Far^ese, Vergerio, Angellina, Attendants. Lo. It Is he, the very he, I
dare not look on him;
Oh for an impudence worth a Chronicle,
To outface him now, it were a possible thing,
If People would believe --

Lu. I Will tell my Lady, they are vanished; hum,
I do not like that face.
Exit.
Far. Come hither fellow, whom do you serve?

Pi. I know not Sir.

Fa. What Prince have you within?

Pi. The prince of Darkness.

Fa. What is this fellow?

Pi. a Knight of the Post, the Pestle is too honorable.

Fr. Where is your Excellent Lady?

Pi. I have a guess
If things go on, as I suspect, she will be --

Fr. Where?

Pi. At her wits end very shortly.

Fr. An ingenious fellow?

Pi. I have conversed a little with the Mathematics,
Sir, Who is that Gentlewoman, not that I am ignorant,
But to satisfy a doubt?

Ver. She is one that may be
The Prince of Parma's Lady, when the Priest
Has done his Office.

Pi. If I be not mistaken
Here comes the Princess, that is Angellina
The younger Sister.

Enter Paulina. Pa. It is my wonder you that have the face
And garb of Gentlemen, should dare to be
So insolent, to affront our person,
And his, to whom your hearts and knees owe reverence.

Far. Command the Impostor forth,
Seize on the Traitors.

Enter Longino. Lo. His Grace will be here presently, fear not Madam,
I would venture a Neck-breaking at some window,
And be content to crawl away a Cripple;
But there is no hope to escape the Multitude
That will be scrambling for my limbs. Great Sir,
I challenge the privilege of the last Bando,
Kneels. He that can bring Frapolo the chief Bandit,
Beside what was proclaimed other reward,
Shall have free pardon for all past-offences;
To that Grace I appeal, and here produce
Frapolo.

Enter Frapolo, Strozzo, etc. Pa. This amazeth me.

Fr. Can you stand
The dazeling Sun so long, and not be struck
Blind for this bold affront? what wildness brought you
In multitudes to fright my happy peace,
And this good Ladies, my most virtuous Consort?

Lo. He bears up still!

Fr. Have all my cares and watchings to preserve
Your lives, and dearest liberties, deserved
This strange return, and at a time when most
Your happiness is concerned, since by our Marriage
With this sweet Lady, full of grace and beauty,
You may expect an Heir to bless your Country.

Con. Will you suffer him?

Fr. It Is time your Prince were dead, and when I am
Companion to my Fathers dust, these tumults
Fomented by seditious men, that are
Weary of Plenty, and delights of Peace,
Shall not approach to interrupt the calm
Good Princes after Death enjoy. Go home,
I pray depart, I rather will submit
To be deposed, than wear a power or title
That shall not all be dedicate to serve you;
My life is but the gift of heaven, to wast it
For your dear sakes, my People are my Children,
Whom I am bound in Nature and Religion
To cherish and protect. Perhaps you have
Some grievance to present, you shall have justice
Against the proudest here; I look not on
Nobility of Birth. Office, or Fortunes,
The poorest subject has a Native Charter
And a Birthright to the Laws, and Common wealth,
Which with an equal, and impartial stream,
Shall flow to every bosom.

Str. Pious Prince!

Far. I am at a loss to hear him; sure I am
Farnese, if I be not lost by the way.

Pi. Stand off Gentlemen, -- let me see -- which?
Hum! this -- no, the other. Hum! send for a Lion
And turn him loose, he wo'not hurt the true Prince.

Far. Do not you know me Sir?

Fra. Yes, I know you too well, but it stands not
With my honor; what composition?

Far. Who am I? Gentlemen, how dare ye suffer
This thing to talk? if I be your Farnese.

Fra. I say I am the Prince,

Far. Prince of what?

Fra. Of Rogues, and please thy Excellence.

Pa. How?

Fra. You must excuse, I can hold out no longer
These were my Subjects Sir, and if they find
Your Mercy, I Am but one, whose head removed,
Or nooz'd, this Lady will be soon a Widow,
Whom I have not deceived, 'twas her Ambition
To go no less than Prince, and now you have one,
During this Gentleman's pleasure.

Pa. What scorn shall I become?

Far. Let him be guarded, and all his puppet. Lords.

Enter Antonio, Fabio, Morulla. An. News, news, excellent news; I shall leap
Out of my flesh for joy. Sir I have undertook
For your pardon to this reverend couple,
They heard my Niece was to be married
To the Prince, and thought it treason to conceal --

Far. What?

An. Paulina is not my Niece, no blood of mine;
Where is this Lady and her Pageant Prince?
The truth is, she is not Paulina, but their
Own Daughter.

Fra. Possible? then we are both cheated.

An. Whom she obtruded on our Family
When our Paulina died an Infant, with her,
A Nurse to both; Does your Grace apprehend?

Fab. We do beseech your pardon.

An. Now Angellina thou art heir to all.

Pip. By all this Circumstance you are but my Sister!

Con. The Prince is proved a Prince of Thieves.

An. Why there is a Baggage and a Thief well met then.
I knew she was a Bastard, or a Changeling.

Pau. Where shall I hide my shame? O cursed Ambition!

Ant. Give you joy Sir, my most illustrious Nephew,
Joy to thy invisible Grace.

Fra. Thanks to our loving Uncle:

Far. Take hence the Traitors.

Ang. Sir I beseech a pardon to their lives.
Let nothing of my story be remembered
With such a Tragedy, it is my first Petition.

Far. I must not deny thee; all thank her Virtue;
Live you, and love that Gentlewoman; But
It were a sin to innocence, and our honor
Would encourage Treason by example,
If they should escape all Justice, take 'em to Custody:
Frapalo, we confine you to this Castle,
Where If she please your Bride may accompany you
Till we determine otherwise.

Fra. It Is some mercy; but
I shall be getting Children, and two nothings
Wo'not maintain a Family, 'twere as good
To hang me out of the way, 'ere Charge come on,
Or take away my tools, I shall be working.

Far. Provision shall be made you shall not sterve
Nor surfeit Sir.

Ang. Because I called her Sister,
I will contribute something to their fortune.

Far. What thy own goodness will direct; and now
Remove the Scene to Court, to perfect there
My own, and Parma's happiness; pride has
Met with severe reward, and that high justice
(That Governs all) though envy break with her
Own Poison, calls the Amazed World to see
What blessings wait upon Humility.

Exeunt. FINIS.
Epilogue.
Frapolo. GEntlemen, do not say you see me; I have made an escape from the
Prince and Paulina; his graces word is but mortal, and not security enough for
me; for all this Sunshine he may hang me, when I come to Parma, for an
example, and therefore I have chosen, rather to trust to my legs, than a
reconciled State-Enemy.


Two'not be worth your glory to betray
A man distressed, whom your own mercy may
Preserve to better service; rather then
Go back I Will stand your Justice Gentlemen.
I Have played the thief, but you, as the case stands,
May save or kill, my lif's now in your hands.
THE DOUBTFUL HEIR A Tragi-comedie, AS It was Acted at the private House IN
BLACKFRIERS, WRITTEN BY JAMES SHIRLEY.

Never Printed before.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the three Pigeons, and Humphrey
Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

To the most worthily honored Sir Edmund Bowier.
SIR,
MAny years are vanished, and a period, not only of the Scene, but more
considerable revolutions have passed, since I had the happiness to be first
known to you. I read excellent Characters of you, when you writ but a small
Letter, and though my observations, like seeds, were not cherished (by the
fault of time) to a maturity, yet they begat in me such great respect to your
person, then budding with honor, and expectation, that now after so long
absence, I find them not extinguished; and howsoever at the first complexion, I
may appear bold, in this hasty interruption, yet your candor will be so far in
my defense, that I have presumed thus, rather to let you know I can still
honor you, than unsatisfie my self, by neglecting the first opportunity of
presenting my service. Sir, it is a piece, which perhaps you have seen in the
active representment; the estimation it gained from thence, will be short of
that grace it shall derive from your acceptance, by which you will show, how
still you dare retain your nobleness, and by renewing your smile upon me,
encourage me to write my self

Your humble Servant, JA. SHIRLEY.

Prologue.
ALl that the Prologue comes for, is to say,
Our Author did not calculate this Play
For this Meridian; the Banckside, he knows,
Are far more skillful at the Ebbes and flows
Of water, than of wit, he did not mean
For the elevation of your poles, this scene.
No shows, no dance, and what you most delight in,
Grave understanders, here is no target fighting
Upon the Stage, all work or Cutlers barred,
No bawdery, nor no Ballets; this goes hard;
But language clean, and what affects you not,
Without impossibilities the Plot;
No clown, no squibs, no Devil in it; oh now
You Squirrels that want Nuts, what will you do?
Pray do not ^rack the benches; and we may
Hereafter fit your Palats with a Play:
But you that can contract your selves, and sit
As you were now in the Blackfriars pit;
And will not deaf us, with lewd noise and tongues,
Because we have no Heart to break our Lungs,
Will pardon our vast Stage, and not disgrace
This Play, meant for your persons, not the place.
The Persons of the Play.
Leonario. Prince of Arragon. Ferdinand, King of Murcia. Noblemen.
Rodriguez, Ernesto, Leandro,
Alfonso, Father to Rosania. Olivia, supposed Queen of Murcia. Rosania,
Alfonso' s, Daughter. Violinda. Captain. Citizens. Courtier. Officers.
Soldiers.
Scene Murcia. THE DOVBTFVLL HEIR.
ACT. I.
Enter Rodriguez and Ernesto. Rod. THis turn was not expected, Prince Leonario
Is much perplexed.

Ern. I cannot blame his Highness,
So near an expectation of a blessing,
To be thus crossed.

Rod. The Day of Marriage sef,
With the applausive Vote of both the Kingdoms,
By an unlookt for War to be put of,
Would vex a royal spleen.

Er. It Is but deferred.

Rod. I do not like the hope on it.

Er. I pity
The Princely lover, worthy (without blemish
To the excelling virtues of the Queen)
Of as much goodness as her sex contains,
So Noble in his Nature, Active, bountiful
Discreet, and valiant, if we may believe
What his young fame profers to every knowledge.

Rod. This character is not flattery, and yet
The Queen our Mistress is not lost in this
Just praise of him.

Er. I have no thought so Impious,
My duty never taught me to commend
But to obey, her Virgin sweetness makes me
Her just admirer but when I observe
Her prudent manage of the State, a strength
Would become many years, her pious Laws,
But that without example, made to advance
Her sexes Chastity, I forget all
Beside worth praise, though every least of her
Desert would ask a volume. It Is his Excellence.

Enter Leonario, Captain. Rod. There Is one not sorry for these Wars.

Er. It Is his
Profession; Soldiers batten in a Tempest.

Rod. And he deserves employment; yet I think
He Will never purchase with his pay.

Leo. Be confident;
Your worth will plead alone; the Queen expects me.

Ex. Leon. Capt. Your Highness humble creature; -- so, there is hope yet
After a time of ease, and surfeit, we
May cure our selves by letting others Blood.
My Noble Lords.

Ernest. 'Morrow Captain, you look blithe, and bright.

Capt. I Will put my Sword to scowring that shall shine.
I thank Heaven my prayers are heard.

Rod. What prayers?

Cap. That honest men may cut knaves throats, and bid
Defiance to the Hangman; Musk, and Civet
Have too long stifled us, there is no recovery
Without the smell of Gunpowder.

Enter two Citizens. Er. But Captain --

1 C. It Is he, we must not lose him,

2 C. He has credit with the Lords it seems.

1 C. He has spied us.

Capt. My honest friends, welcome to Court. My Lords
(...) these honest Gentlemen, they will
D^erv^ to kiss your Hands.

1 C. O^r business
Is to you Captain.

Capt. Do you think what these brace of Baboons come for?

Rod. Not I.

Capt. By this day for money, moneys that I owe 'em.

Er. Is It possible^

Capt. I have moved your suit Gentlemen. 1 C. What suit?

Capt. Touching the Masque. Which you two in the name
Of the whole City, offered to present
At the Town charges to congratulate
The Queens intended Marriage; I know
This Egg was long a hatching, and expected,
But that your Heads could not agree, they being
Of several sizes, some upon the shoulders
Of your long-winded Officers, whose purse
Was made of the Leather with their conscience.

1 Ci. Does he talk to us of a Masque?

2 Ci. Good Captain put your Masque off, and give us.
The money that you owe us.

Capt. Was It not meant nobly?
But you my good Lords know how much
The Queen and Prince are sorry, that so rare
A President of their duty should not be
Upon record; this villainous War distracts
All civil mirth, but you will be remembered.

1 Ci. We know not what you mean, we have no anticks
In agitation; if your Captain-ship
Will pay your debts so; there is Law and courses
To be taken, and you will find that Justice
Can deal Sir with the Sword as well as Balance.

Capt. The Puppys talk Philosophy; nay then
I must be plain, would I could tice 'em to
A little treason, they I ner hang for felony.
Why, whither do you think I am going now?

1 Cit. We care not whither^ so you pay us first.

Capt. Let their own Fathers swing, so they have money.

2 Cit. May be you are going to the Wars.

Capt. Yes Mongrels,
To fight for your chamlet Faces, while you stay at home
And catch the cramp with telling money,
Putting your Guts to Pension every Day,
And roots, until the wind cry out again you,
And with your belching backwards stifle Men
That walk the Street, until the Air be purged;
Must we Eat Bullets without Butter, Whelps?
Have our Throats cut, or drop like Sheep by'th' hundred,
OF the rot, to buy your Peace you boding Screechowls?
And have your confciences so course a Nap
To ask money of us?

1 Cit. You had the conscience
To take up our commodities.

Capt. Reason good;
Should I go naked leeches?

2 Cit. No but there is reason
That you should pay good Captain for your warmth.

Capt. Pay you? for what? for Clothes, such things as these?
Your tribe is bound to keep us.

1 Cit. How?

Capt. Yes, and desire us to accept your wares,
To recompense our sufferings; it is we,
It Is we that keep your Worships warm and living,
By Marching, Fasting, Fighting and a thousand
Dangers. (you o'r grown moths) you that love gold,
And wo'not take an Angel sent from Heaven
Unless you weigh him, you that spend the Day
In looking o'r your debt -- Book, and at Night
Can lap and lecher in your Feather Beds,
Then snort, and dream of fourscore in the hundred,
Afraid of nothing but the Gou^, or what
Is a more just reward for your hard hearts
The stone, which puts you to the charge of Physic
To make you piss out your last Usurers Gallon,
Or of a Surgeon, to cut you for
The Pibles which (if you survive Incission)
You keep in penny Boxes, like deer re^iques,
And show your friends, when you intend to visit 'em.
And beg a Dinner.

Er. Let not passion
Make you too much abuse their qulaity;
The City does contain brave fellows Captain,
As generous, as bountiful, discreet,
And valiant too, as any boast themselves
In Court or Camp.

Cap. I grant you my good Lord,
And honor all the Noble souls within it,
But these are walking sicknesses, not Citizens;
Two such prodigious things with crooked consciences,
Though Young, yet Old in Usury --

2 Cit. All this Captain
Woe 'not pay us our money, which we must
Have* or Petition for to your disgrace.

Cap. Well since there is no remedy, will you take
These two Noblemens words for what I owe you?

1 Cit. Withal our Hearts.

Rod. That bargain is to make.

Er. Good Captain, at this time you may excuse us,

Capt. Why, do your Lordships think I Would let you suffer,
Come, you are my honorable friends; pass, pass
Your word, I Will pay the money; hang 'em dottrels
I Will not be beholding to 'em.

Rod. We had rather you should good Captain.

Capt. No, -- come hither Capons
Will money content you; shall I walk the Street
Without a Head ache, with your bawling for
The debt when I have paid you?

2 Cit. It Is but reason.

Capt. I Will fetch you money presently, -- you may follow
If you please, but these Noblemen shall see
And witness what I pay you, I Will not trust
Your Memorandums.

1 Cit. Withal our Hearts Sir.

2 Cit. We desire no more.

Capt. I Will wait on you again.

Ex. Manent [Rod. Ernesto. Enter Leandro, reading a Paper. Rod. Fortune de la
guerre.
My Lord Leandro? what papers that
He so intentively peruses?

Lean. I like it, and could willingly allow
The change; the Queen grows mighty in her spirit,
And this match with the Prince, would swell her State
Too much; my Lords. Rod. We are yours.

Leand. See what dangerous Papers have been scattered
To wound the Title of our Royal Mistress;
My servant brought me this; our Enemy
Who calls himself Prince Ferdinand would fain
Have us believe him Cosen to the Queen,
She an usurper of his Crown.

Er. We all know him dead.

Rod. I Am sure I did attend his Funeral.

Lean. I think I waited too.

Er. This paper says he was conveyed away,
And so escaped his Uncles cruelty.
To whose protection he was left an Infant;
He dying we translated our obedience
To his Daughter, now our Queen.

Rod. Here Is an Impostor.

Leand. Heaven aid the Innocent say I; he has
Valentias aid and comes not to Invite
But force a resignation; I wish things
Were calm again.

Er. Prince Leonario, if she prosper not,
Is like to be a loser too.

Leand. For him
It matters not, we have more to think on now,
Than love and complement.

Rod. I thought he would be General
Against this pretended Ferdinand.

Leand. What else?
Her sweet Heart* that gives Cupid in his crest.
Alas! there needs no art, nor strength of War
To advance her cause Justice will fight for her
In The Clouds, and victory sent from Heaven, without
Her soldiers sweat, will gloriously descend
To Crown his Head with Laurel.

Er. May it prove so.

Leand. I could say things would stagger your belief,
But I forgot the Queen sent for me; to
You both a servant --
Exit.
Er. I do not like my Lord Leandros winding,
He has been faithful.

Rod. Always honorable. The Queen.

Enter Queen, Leonario, Captain, Leandro, Violinda, Attendants, Ladies,
Gentlemen. Leon. I take this as the greatest honor Madam
You could confer; my name is young in War,
But my affection to your royal person,
Armed with the virtue of your cause, shall make me
Do something worth your name.

Que. 'Twas your request,
Nor could we place our chief command, but where
It Is equald with your Interest in us
And your own merit.

Leon. Sure my Stars did mean
This way to make you know, how much my heart
Dares in your service; and if Ferdinand,
For so he calls himself, possess a soul
Above the vulgar making, we shall spare
The Blood of many, and conclude the War
In single opposition.

Leand. With your Highness pardon,
It not becomes you should Engage your Person,
And so great a cause so dangerously;
It will be too much honor to the Impostor,
And in the supposition of the World,
A strength to his pretense, to bring your Birth
So low, to humble both your self and fortunes
To his unworthy Levell^ a thing grown
Up in the Night. a Meteor hanging in
The Air* prodigiously, fed with vapor, and
Black Influence, ambitious to deceive
The World, and challenge kindred with the Stars;
It is too great a venture Sir.

Er. Since there must be a War
Let the armies meet in Battle, there is more hope
After the worst to reinforce, and prosper,
Than when the kingdoms put upon one stake,
And one Man's chance to assure it.

Que. I allow
Your Counsel Lords; but have more argument
Convincing me, not to run such a hazard
Of what must make Olivia rich hereafter;
A kingdoms loss may be repaired, but your
Life made a Sacrifice to tyrant War,
May find a welcome to the other shades,
But no tears can Invite you back, to share,
Or grief, or Joy with me; I Will have no Duel.

Leon. It Is a command, and my obedience
Shall meet it, though I fear 'twill be a sin
To be too careful of my self but I
Shall still remember I am your Soldier,
And this considered shall not make me rash,
But wisely teach me to deserve this title
Which lives but in your honor.

Que. I Will pray for you.
And not so much for what concerns the State,
As what your merit has already gained
Upon my Heart.

Rod. Blessings upon 'em both,
A curse upon these Wars, that spoil their mirth.

Que. My Lord Leandro.

Leon. There Is your Commission Captain, I suppose
You have found ways to empty your Exchequer.

Capt. My Baggs are not brimfull my Lord. I have
Defalk'd, and made an ebb for Wine, and Women,
And other things that keep poor men alive
To do their country service.

Leon. Please you walk
With this Gentleman Captain he shall pay you
Five hundred pieces that I owe you.

Capt. Me, your Grace owes me nothing,

Leon. I could not pay the debt in better time Sir.

Capt. Umh! I will take the money, and allow the miracle.

Ex. Capt. and Gent. Er. Did you observe the Princes nobleness?
Although the act become him. Yet the manner
Takes me especially, Heaven preserve the Captain
From being Mad.

Leon. I prosper in your Vote,
But shall I Madam, if that power, which Crowns
With victory, guides me with fair success
In this your War, and triumph smile upon us,
Shall I at my return have that reward
My soul next Heaven affects? shall no delay
(Colder than Frost to lovers blood,) afflict
My expectation of our Marriage?
Although to doubt this be a sin, yet where
The ambition is so Just. I shall but right
My Heart, to have it often assur'd^ nor can
It make your eye less rich in smiles, when it is
Only my love Encourages me to make
The busy harmless question.

Que. It does please me,
Nor can you ask so often, as I have
A cheerfulness to answer, that I love you,
And have propounded nothing dearer to me,
Than that which perfects chaste affection,
And chains two Hearts; the Priest with sadness will
Expect you safe again, but from this War
When you return, he shall not in his Register
Of Lovers, find one with more wing has met
The bosom of her friend, than glad Olivia
To make one soul with you.

Leon. I have enough,
And thirst for action in the Field, from whence
I will bring Harvest home, or leave my self,
Happy in life or death to do you service.

Ex. Queen, Leon. L^an. Ladies, attendants. Rod. Well, I Am afraid if Hymen
should set up
His Tapers now, they would not last to light
His Priest, at their return to say his Office.

Er. Hope fairly.

Rod. I allow his spirit, but
The Prince has not been practiced in
The School of War, where stratagems prevail
Above all personal resolution.

Er. He cannot want fit counsel to direct
His early valor, besides
Ferdinand by computation as young as he
Enter Captain, two Citizens, and a Soldier. May poize the scale. See, the
Captain.

1 Cit. We always thought you Noble, and we hope
You Will take no offense, that our occasions
Prevailed above our modesty.

Capt. I know
You two are very modest; well I Am glad
I am furnished for you: my good Lords I must
Int^eat you to be witnesses of what money
I pay these Gentlemen, that have trusted me.

2 ^it. And will again; command our Shops.

Capt. No^ sit there, and starve,
Or if you like it better take a swing
At your own sign Post.

Er. Good words Captain.

Capt. They expect good money, and both good are too much.

1 Cit. We alwa^es loved you.

2 Cit. And do so still most virtuously.

Capt. It does appear.

1 Cit. And you shall find us ready --

Capt. I Will make but one fair motion, it will be
Sufficient trial of your honesty;
I have five hundred pounds* you see me tell it,
Faith make it up a thousand 'twixt you both
Till I come back, you will be Aldermen.

1 Cit. Never a whit the sooner.

2 Cit. Alas Sir, if it were at another time --

1 Cit. Hereafter, upon good occasion you shall find --

Capt. You both in the Pillorie, for selling Copper
Lace by a wrong name; well there is no remedy,
I Will keep my word; the money's ready for you.

1 Cit. You are noble Captain.

2 Cit. May you kill all the Queens Enemies.

Capt. You would not escape,
That Cosen her liege people every day, then.

2 Cit. This payment Captain will come most seasonably.

1 Cit. And do us as much good, as you had given us
The sum twice told, another time.

Capt. Before
These Noblemen, have you such want
As you profess? you have no Wives nor Children.

1 Cit. I protest upon my credit, I am to pay
This day two hundred pound, or be endangered
To an arrest.

2 Cit. And I must go to Prison
If before Sunset --

Capt. Then 'twill do you a pleasure.

Both. Cit. Above expression.

Capt. Here Is twelve pence a piece for you you are fit Men
To serve the Queen:

Both Cit. How Captain?

Capt. Why in the Wars, choose either Pike or Musket,
You shall have that favor.

Both Cit. We are both undone.

Lords. Ha, ha, but will you use 'em so?

Capt. Have they not ready money? why do you stare?
No thanks for my protection?

Both ^it. Protection?

Capt. Did you not protest you should to prison else?
Why you unthankful sons of false light, Sergeant
Take 'em to thei'r Rendevous

1 Cit. Captain, a word-we are content --

Capt. I Am glad on it, Why do you stay then.

1 Cit. To abate half our money.

2 Cit. All, all good Captain, he shall have all, rather
Than be sent a souldiering; do you know what it is?
It Is no Artillery Garden, where you come off
With as you were.

Rod. This was his Project.

Capt. Umh'. You will forgive me both your debts?

2 Cit. And pray Heaven to forgive you too.

Capt. My Lords, bear witness,
These two would bribe me to abuse the Queen
And the present service, is this less then Treason?

Both Cit. Oh.

Er. Nay* nay Captain.

Capt. There are not two more able Men in the Army,
I mean for bulk; ram me into a Cannon
If you shall buy your selves with your estates
From this Employment; Il not cosen you,
Your money is good debt still, you may live,
And ask me for it again, and I may pay you.

Rod. But shall they serve indeed?

Capt. That Is at their peril
When they come to 'th, field, but go they shall,
And they were my Cosen-germans.

Both Cit. Good my Lord speak for us.

Capt. You do not know my Lords, but a little suffering
May save their souls, and teach 'em, if they come
Off, with a quarter of their limbs, compassion
To other Men, that venture their lives for 'em,
Their consciences are tough, and must be suppled,
When they shall fast, and march ten months in armor,
Sometimes through Rivers, sometimes over Mountains,
And not have straw at Night, to keep their Breech
From growing to the Earth, in storms, in heats;
When they have felt the softness of a trench
Thigh deep in water, and their dung to fatten it;
When they shall see no meat within a month,
But chaw their Match like Liquorish, and digest
The Bark of trees like Sallads in the Summer;
When they shall live to think there is no such thing
In Nature as a thirst, and wonder why
A Tailor was created; when they have
As much in ready shot, within their flesh,
As would set up a Plummer, or repair
A Church with Lead, beside ten thousand more
Afflictions, which they are sure to find,
They may have Christianity, and not put
A Soldier to the payment of his debts.

Rod. It Is a Mad Captain, come my Lord lets leave
him.

Ex. Lords. Capt. You shall have time and place to send for money,
Or make your Wills; set on, who knows but you
Hereafter may be honest, and prove Captains;
You may have preferment in the Wars for money,
And so my Gentle Creditors, march on.

Exeunt. ACT. II.
Enter Leandro with Letters. Lean. THe hope, and care of many years, are in
One day destroyed; has Heaven no stroke in War?
Or is old providence asleep? Leonario
Is coming home with victory, and brings
Young Ferdinand, whom I expected to
Salute a King, his Prisoner, and the Queen
With her new Conqueror, glorious in the spoils,
By putting out this light, will mix their beams
And burn our eyes out with their shine; there is
No talk but of this triumph, and the people
Whom I by art and secret murmurs had
Made doubtful at the first noise of this Conquest,
As they had borrowed souls from fear, and folly,
Adore the rising Star, and in the praise
Of him and his great fate, wonder that Heaven
Should hold a Sun, and he so bright; nor with
This flattery content, but they condemn,
(As low as all their sins shall one day them)
Him whom the chance of War has made a Prisoner.
There is no trust to policy or time,
The things of State are whirld by destiny,
To meet their period, Art cannot repair 'em.

Enter Servant. Ser. My Lord, the Queen has sent for you,
She is going forth to meet the Prince, and has
Commanded none be wanting to attend
With all the State that may become her^ to
Congratulate the triumph now brought home.

Leand. I shall obey* I must attend this glory;
It is not safe to wear a brow, but what
The Queens example first forms into smile.
I here contract my knowledge, and seclude
My wishes, since they prosper not. I am
Her Chancellor as great Offices, and high
Employments, do expose us to most danger,
They often teach those possess 'em a State-wisdom,
And by Inherent virtues of the place,
Our fear to lose, makes us secure our selves,
By art more often, than by conscience;
But I may be endangered to suspicion;
I like not things; but I delay my attendance.
Exit.
Enter Captain, Lieutenant, Ancient and Soldiers. Capt. Lieutenant.

Lieu. Captain.

Capt. Ancient, what think you of the Wars now?

Ant. We are come off with Honor.

Lieu. And our Limbs, Captain.

Capt. Is that all? who made you a Lieutenant?
And you Ancient? these titles were not born w'e,
You did not wear these Buffs and Feathers in
The memory of Man, when you received
The binding twelve-pence, it was otherwise.

Ant. But you received, if you remember Captain,
Beside what we releast in honest debt
Sums for this great Instalment, we have paid
I take it for our names.

Capt. And it became you,
Now you are Gentlemen my Comrades of honor,
And I dare walk and drink at Taverns w'e,
Your oaths become you now, and your splay feet;
You looked before like Magots, City Worms,
I have made you both brave fellows, fellows to Knights.
You may be Squires to Ladies too.

Ant. I think so. Capt. We are all now of a trade,
For Mars is Master of our Company,
Our Shop is the Field, Resolution our Stock,
Honor our Purchase, and Fire and Sword
The Tools we work withal.

Lieu. But now the Wars are done, I think
We may shut up our Shop, there is no more
Pay, is there?

Capt. Pox upon you; I see your souls bleat after
Profit still, a bullet in the right place would
Have knocked out this humor of getting money;
But fear not, though you come off with more
Limbs than you deserve, you shall have pay.

Ant. Shall we, and not be troubled to fight for it?

Capt. Yes^ it will be necessary you fight, you will
Have your throats cut else, and be sent off like Sheep,
Do not fear payment here be Mandrakes,
That will rore, and cudgel you to your hearts content,
You shall not walk the Screets now you are
Officers without a quarrel: pay enough.

Lieu. A Man had as good be no Lieutenant, as be
Beaten when he comes home what think you Ancient?

Ant. For my part I can endure beating as well
As another, if that be all.

Capt. Will you to your Shops again?

Ant. I have no mind to Woosted Stockings again,
And Shoos that Shine, I would were colors still.

Capt. Well said Ancient, come I Will take your fears off;
Do not confess you are a Lieutenant, or you an
Ancient, and no man will quarrel w'ee, you
Shall be as secure as Chrysome Children.

Lieu. Shall we? they shall rack me ever I Will confess I am
A Lieutenant or ever see the Wars.

Ant. Or I an Ancient. I Will take it upon my death
I was never a Soldier in my life.

Capt. It Is well done; now because I love you,
And see you have an Itch after honor, so
It may come without blows, Let me advise you,
You have moneys at command.

Lieut. And good debts too.

Cap. You shall both turn Courtiers.

Ant. Shall we?

Cap. I say it; for if my phisnomy deceive me not,
You two are born to be --

Both. What?

Cap. Coxbombs. I Will help to make you too;
You shall presently kiss the Queens hand;
You have moneys you say, You shall never turn
To your vomit of small Wares. I have friends
At Court, you may in time be great; And when I come
With a Petition to your honors, for moneys in arrear,
Or knocking out some rascals brains, such as you were
When you wore a girt under your chops, you two
May stand between me and the Gallows.

Ant. Hang us if we do not.

Capt. You shall buy places presently. But stay,
Have you a mind to be Officers to the Queen
In ordinary, or extraordinary?

Ant. Extraordinary by all means.

Lieut. We scorn to be ordinary Courtiers.

Capt. I commend your judgment, that will be more
Chargeable: But --

Ant. Hanged, we will find money enough, but I
Resolve to be extraordinary.

Capt. I Will bring you to a Court-Merchant presently;
You will get infinite estates.

Both. A ha Captain.

Capt. And so command the Ladies, if you be bountiful.

Both. A ha Boy.

Capt. For I know you do love Wenches;
You will have all the business and the Country
Come tumbling in upon you like the tide,
After a month: You must keep twenty men
Between you, night and day to tell your money.
Oh it is unknown what will become on you,
If you be ru^^d, and take this course: Had I
Moneys like you, I would be --

Lieut. Come, we will lend thee moneys too hereafter.

Cap. Will you, come on, no more Lieutenant now.
Nor Ancient.

Ant. Do ye think we long to be beaten.

Exeunt. Enter Ferdinand (in prison) Rosania (like a Page.) Rosa. Pray do not
grieve for me, I have a heart
Tha^ can for your sake suffer more; and when
The tyranny of your fate calls me to die,
I can as willingly resign my breath,
As go to sleep.

Ferd. Can I hear this Rosania
Without a fresh wound? That thy love to me
Should be so ill rewarded, thou have engaged
Thy self too much already; it is within
Thy will, yet to be safe, reveal thy self,
Throw of the cloud that does eclipse that brightness,
And they will court thy person, and be proud
With all becoming-honor to receive thee,
No fear shall rob thy cheek of her cha^te blood.
Oh leave me to my own Stars, and expect
What ere become of wretched Ferdinand,
A happy fate.

Rosa. Your Council is unkind,
This language would become your charity
To a stranger, but my Interest is more
In thee, then thus with words to be sent off;
Our vows have made us one, nor can the names
Of Father, Country, or what can be dear
In Nature, bribe one thought to wish my self
In Heaven without thy company; it were poor then
To leave thee here. Then by thy faith I charge thee,
By this -- the first and last seal of our love.
Kisses him. By all our promises, when we did flatter
Our selves, and in our fancy took the world
A pieces, and collected what did like
Us best, to make us a new paradise,
By that, the nob est ornament of thy soul,
Thy honor, I conjure thee, let me still
Be undiscovered; What will it avail
To leave me, whom thou love, and walk alone
Sad pilgrim to another world? We will
Converse in soul and shoot like Stars, whose Beams
Are twisted, and make bright the sullen Groves
Of Lovers as we pass.

Ferd. These are but dreams
Of happiness, be wise Rosania,
Thy love is not a friend to make thee miserable,
Society in death, where we affect,
But multiplies our grief; Live thou, Oh live.
And if thou have a tear, when I am dead,
But drop it to my memory, it shall
More precious then embalming dwell upon me,
And keep my ashes pure, my spirit shall
At the same instant in some innocent sh^pe
Descend upon that earth thou have bedewed;
And kissing the bright tribute of thy eye,
Shall after wait like thy good Angel on thee.
There will be none to speak of Ferdinand
Without disdain, if thou die too: Oh live
A little to defend me, or at least
To say I was no Traitor to thy love,
And lay the shame on death and my false Stars
That would not let me live to be a King.

Rosa. Oh Ferdinand,
Thou do not love me now.

Ferd. Not love Rosania?
If woing thee to live, will not assure thee,
Command me then to die, and spare the cruelty
Of the fair Queen: Not love Rosania?
If thou will but delig^t to see me bleed,
I will at such a narrow passage let
Out life, it shall be many hours in ebbing,
And my soul bathing in the Crimson stream,
Take pleasure to be drowned. I have small time
To love, and be alive, but I will carry
So true a Faith to woman hence, as shall
Make poor the world, when I am gone to tell
The story yonder. -- We are interrupted.

Enter Keeper. Keep. You must prepare your self for present trial;
I have command to attend you to the Judges.
That Gentleman, and all that did adhere
To your Conspiracy, are by the Queens
Most gracious Mercy pardoned.

Ferd. In that word
Thou Have brought me more then life; I shall betray,
And with my too much joy undo thee again.
Heaven does command thee live, I must obey
This Summons, I shall see thee again Tiberio,
Before I die.

Rosa. I Will wait upon you Sir,
The Queen will not deny me that poor office;
I know not how to leave you.

Ferd. Death and I
Shall meet, and be made friends; but when we part,
The world shall find thy story in my heart.
Exit.
Enter Officers with Bar, Table, Stools, -- then Ernesto Rodriguez, Leonario,
Queen, supported by Leonario, Ferdinand, Rosania, Ladies Gentlemen, and Guard,
who set Ferdinand to the Bar. Queen. Is that the prisoner at the Bar?

Leon. He that pretended himself Ferdinand,
Your Uncles son.

Q. Proceed to his Arraignment; my Lord Leandro,
You know our pleasure.

Lean. Although the Queen in her own Royal power,
And wit^out violating Sacred Justice, where
Treason comes to invade her, and her Crown
With open war, need not insist upon
The Forms, and Circumstance of Law, but use
Her Sword in present execution;
Yet such is the sweet temper of her blood,
And calmness of her Nature, though provoked
Ino a storm, unto the great'st offender
She shuts up no defense, willing to give
A satisfaction to the world how much
S^e does delight in mercy. Ferdinand,
For so thou do pretend thy self, thou art
Indicted of High Treason to Her Majesty,
In that thou have usurped relation to
Her blood; and under name of being her Kinsman,
Not only have co^triw'd to blast her Honor
With Neighbor Princes, but have gathered arms
To wound the precious bosom of her Country,
And tear the Crown, which Heaven and just Succession
Has placed upon her Royal Head: what can
Thou answer to this Treason?

Ferd. Boldly thus.
As I was never with the height of all
My expectation, and the aid of Friends,
Transported one degree above my self,
So must not Ferdinand, though his Stars have frowned
And the great eye of Providence feem to slumber
While your force thus compelled, and brought me hither
With mockery of my Fate, to be arraigned
For being a Prince, have any thought beneath
The Title I was born to; yet I Will not call
T^is cruelty in you, nor in the Queen,
(If I may name her so without injustice
To my own right) a Kingdom is a Garland,
Worth all Contention; and where right seals not
The true Possession, Nature is forgotten,
And blood thought cheap ^o assure it; there is something
Within that excellent Figure, that restrains
A Passion here, that else would forth^like lightning.
It Is not your shape, which yet has so much sweetness,
Some pa^e re^igious Her^it mig^t suspect
You are the blessed Saint he prayed too; no,
The magick's in our nature, and our blood;
For both our veins full of one precious purple
Strike harmony in their motion, I am Ferdinand,
And you the fair Olivia, brothers children.

Leon. What insolence is this?

Qu. Oh my Lord set him
Be free to plead; for if it be no dream,
His cause will want an Orator: By my blood,
He does talk bravely.

Rodri. These are flourishes.

Ernest. Speak to the treason you are charged with*
And confess a guilt.

Leond. He justifies himself.

Ferd. If it be treason to be born a Prince,
To have my Fathers Royal Blood move here;
If it be treason, in my infancy
To have escaped by Divine Providence,
When my poor life should have been sacrificed
To please a cruel Uncle, whose Ambition
Surprised my Crown, and after made Olivia
His Daughter Queen; if it be treason, to
Have be^n a stranger thus long from my Country,
Bred up with silence, of my name, and birth,
And not till now mature to own my self
Before a Sunbeam; if it be treason
After so long a banishment to weep
A tear of joy upon my Countries bosom,
And call her mine* my just inheritance,
Unless you stain my blood with bastardy;
If it be treason, still to love this Earth,
That knew so many of my race, her Kings,
Though late unkindly armed to kill her Sovereign,
As if the effusion of my blood were left
To make her fertile, if to love Olivia,
My nearest pledge of blood, although her power
Has chained her Prince, and made her Lord her prisoner,
Who sits with expectation to hear
That sentence that must make the golden Wreath,
Secure upon her Brow, by blasting mine.
If this be treason, I am guilty Ferd^nand.
Your King's become a traitor, and must die
A black, and most inglorious death.

Ernest. You offer
At some defense, but come not home; by what
Engine were you translated hence, or whether
Convei'd? There was some trust, deceived, when you
Were carried forth to be preserved, and much
Care taken since, in bringing of you up,
And giving secret Fire to this Ambition.

Ferd. There wants no testimony here, of what
Concerns the story of my Birth and Infancy,
I^ one dare speak, and be an honest Lord.

Leand. Hows that?

Ferd. Whose love and art secured me from all tyranny,
Though here my funeral was be^iev'd, while I
(...) to an honorable Friend his Kinsman,
^rew safely to the knowledge of my self
At last, till fortune of the War betrayed me
To this captivity.

Leand. I blush at thee
Yong-man, whose fate has made thee desperate,
And car'st not what man's blood thou draw'st along
In thy b^ack stream, or what man's faith thou make
As hateful as thy crimes.

Ernest. That confederate
Sure has some name, declare him, that he may
Thank you for his reward, and lose his head for it.

Quee. We always see that men in such high nature
De^orm'd* and guilty, want not specious sh^^es
To gain their practice friendship, and compassion,
But he shall feel the punishment; do you smile?

Ferd. A woman's anger is but (...) it Madam;
And if I may have freedom, I must say*
Not in contempt of what you seem, nor helped
By overcharge of passion, which but makes
A fruitless noise; I have a sense of what
I am to lose, a life, but I am so fortified
With valiant thoughts, and innocence, I shall,
When my last breath is giving up to lose
Its self in the air, be so remote from fear,
That I will cast my face into one smile,
Which shall when I am dead, acquit all trembling,
And be a story to the world, how free
From paleness Ferdinand took leave of earth.

Rosa. Alas my Lord, you forget me, that can
Part with such courage.

Ferd. I forget indeed,
I thought of death with honor, but my love
Has found a way to chide me; O my Boy*
I can weep now.

Leon. A sudden change, he weeps.

Quee. What Boy is that?

Ferd. I prithee take thy self away.

Quee. Your Spirit
Does melt it seems, and you begin to think
A life is worth preserving, though with in^amy.

Ferd. Goodness thy aid again, and tell this great
Proud woman, I have a Spirit scorns her pity.
Come hither Boy, and let me kiss thee; thus
At parting with a good, and pretty servant,
I can without my honor stained shed tears:
I took thee from thy Friends, to make thee mine;
Is it not truth Boy.

Rosa. Yes my Lord.

Ferd. And meant when I was King to make thee great,
And shall I not, when I can live no longer,
To cherish thee at farewell, drop a tear?
That I could weep my soul upon thee, -- But
You are to slow me thinks, I am so far
From dread, I think your forms too tedious.
I expect my sentence.

Quee. Let it stay a while.
What secret flame is this? Honor protect me!
Your Graces fair excuse, for you -- I shall
Return again --
Exit.
Ferd. And I, with better guard
After my silence in the Grave, to meet
And plead this cause.

Ernest. He is distracted sure;
His person I could pity, but his insolence
Wants an example; what if we proceed
To sentence?

Leon. I suppose the Queen will clear
Your duties in it.

Leand. But I Will acquaint her.
Exit.
Rod. My Lord Leandro's gone.

Ernest. His censure will
Be one with ours.

Ferd. Yet shall I publish who
Thou art? I shall not die with a calm soul
And leave thee in this cloud.

Enter the Queen and Leandro. Rosa. By no means Sir. -- The Queen.

Quee. Whose service is so forward to our State,
That when Our pleasure's known, not to proceed,
They dare be officious in his Sentence? Are
We Queen, or do we move by your Protection?

Ernest. Madam, the Prince --

Quee. My Lord* you have a Queen.
I not suspect his wisdom Sir, but he
Has no Commission here to be a Judge,
You were best circumscribe our Regal power,
And by your selves condemn, or pardon all,
And we sign to your will* The offense, which you
Call treason strikes at us, and we release it,
Let me but see one curl in any Brow:
Attend the prisoner hither; -- Kiss our hand.
Are you so m^rciless to think this man
Fit for a Scaffold. You shall Sir be near us,
And if in this confusion of your Fortunes
You can find gratitude, and love, despair not.
These men that now oppose, may find your title
Clear to the Kingdom too: Be Sir collected,
And let us use your arm.

Exit. Supported by Ferdinand. Rosa. What change is here?

Leand. What think you of this Lords?

Rodri. I dare not think.

Leon. Affronted thus? O my vexed heart.
Exit.
Rosa. I Will follow still, and if this be no dream,
We have escaped a Brook, to meet a greater stream.

Exeunt. ACT. III.
Enter Rodriguez, Ernesto. Ernest. THough I believed her passionate, and like
A Sea, tempestuous in her anger, I
Never thought she would marry him.

Rodri. She Is the Queen*
But with what honor she could quit the Prince,
Who (without treason) did deserve her too,
Comes not within my reach.

Ernest. If you consider
He has been valiant for her to great purpose,
And brought a prisoner home, to mount his Gennet:
It was a pretty service.

Rod. How does he bear it.

Ernest. He Is here you may enquire it.

Enter Leonario (with Letters) and a Servant. Leon. B^ swift and faithful,
Arragon bleeds here,
Nothing but W^r can right my cause and honor.

Serve. Expect an army great as your own thoughts
To cut the way to your revenge.
Exit.
Leon. My Lords Rodriguez and Ernesto.

Ambo. Your Graces servants.

Leon. A man may take the benefit of this Garden,
Without a Court offense, you have had the day
Of triumph, and the Queen already teeming,
To bless the Kingdom with an Heir; and yet
You see I walk like a poor Neighbor Prince,
And have my heart still.

Rod. I am glad you bear it so.

Leon. Not have I a meaning
To run my self into despair, or strangle
My better hopes, out of pure melancholy.
I praise the influence of my Stars; there is
A fire in Cupids Quiver, that will siorch
Through armor; and what is woman's flesh and blood
To make resistance, though I d^d not dance
Upon the marriage night, I wished her joys
IN the morning.

Ernest. Her heart showed she was pleased
With what she had done; she was as active as
The air before she went to Bed.

Rod. But I
O^serv'd a declination in the King,
And as the night approached which should have more
Enlarged his mirth, he grew more melancholy.

Leon. Strange! And such a Bride that took him from
So great a loss, to place him in her bosom;
But he was marked for the Queens thoughts, and I
By destiny to bring this pair of Pigeons
Together. I expect no more reward,
The Willow Garland Crowns me, but the Prince
Is here still.

Ernest. Your highness has a noble temper.

Rod. How ere he seem to cover it, his soul
Has a deep apprehension of the affront.
Let Us leave him, our discourse may be displeasing.
We are servants to your Grace.

Exeunt Lords. Leon. You Have honored me.
Think I am tame still? let the inconstant Queen
Secure her thoughts, and glory in my silence;
This heart is laboring a revenge.
Enter Captain. Captain, what news? the Court is merry sti^l?

Cap. Not altogether ^o merry as it was hoped for.

Leon. Can there be an eclipse already?

Cap. I have not read the Almanac for this year,
But by my Court Astronomy, I find
Our Sun and Moon are in no Conjunction;
They take their fit by turns, the King was cold
And full of phlegm last night, and they that wait
Near both, report the Queen this morning looked
As she had wept.

Leon. O, tears of joy.

Cap. Of anger rather, if you saw her fullenness.
She frowns on every man, she turned away
One of her servants but this morning for
Presenting her with Verses, that did praise
The King, and wish her fruitful. Her own Page
Was whipped for saying the King lay with the Queen
And might for ought he knew* get her with child ere morning*

Leon. Thou art humorous.

Cap. And so are they.

Leon. This begins well; and what
Do people talk abroad of me, and my
Affront?

Cap. Why, they say they are sorry for you,
Especially the women.

Leon. Thou art pleasant.

Cap. Some that are chief in counsel, privately
Suspect it but a trick of State; and that
You had discovered underhand the Queen
Was not --

Leon. Leave this mirth; let me indear thy care
For my intelligence at Court; I must
Not off so tamely; and expect me here,
After a small dispatch, I have more to impart.
Exit.
Cap. Your humble creature still Sir. Alas poor Gent'
Were ^ has capable to be entertained now, in revenge
I would mount all the Madams in the Court,
There should be nothing like a woman in it,
But I would touz and tumble: Who are these?

Enter two Citizens. 1. Cit. Save you Sir.

Cap. It may be so.

2. Cit. Pray Sir take no offense, we have been enquiring
About the Court for two Gentlemen.

Cap. And cannot your four eyes see two Gentlemen
IN the Court?

1. Cit. Excuse us Sir, we have seen many, you
May guess we have relation to the City Sir,
And would be glad to meet two of our old acquaintances,
A brace of our Tribe,
We hear, translated first out of the City,
To be Sons of the Sword, are since turned Courtiers.
Pray do you know 'em?

Enter Lieutenant and Violinda. Cap. Yes children of the Gown, but their
employment
Woe ^ot give 'em leave to attend such vulgar conference,
And here comes one of the Moon-calves, does he look
Like a Haberdasher, that is one of the Maids of Honor,
The Weisel loves a Hens-Nest, and I have settled
This persuasion, That no woman can hold out,
Now he is sworn a servant extraordinary.

1. Cit. Sir do you know us?

Lieut. No.

2. Cit. We were your neighbors, and of the same trade.

Cap. They Will make him sweat; how the Rogue glotes upon 'em.

1. Cit. We were of your acquaintance, when you sold Garters.

Lieut. Go hang your selves.

2 Cit. And Statute-lace.

Viol. What are these?

Lieut. Poor me^ that had some losses late by fire,
And wou^d become my Clients to procure
Some Letters Patents to beg by; alas, they are half distracted.

1. Cit. He Is proud -- I have a parcel of Periwigs
Please you* for old acquaintance, put 'em off for me,
Among some friends of yours at Court, whose skulls
Are but thinly furnished; the hair is of a
Gentlewomans spinning.

Cap. I could love this Citizen, and ow him any money
For his confident abusing him.
Exit Violinda. He has bribed her absence with some Ring or Bracele^,
Least she should taste the discovery now.

1. Cit. Methinks you need not be so proud.

Lieut. I would have you to know that I am an extraordinary --

Cap. Proud Coxcomb.

Lieut. Servant to the Queen. What I was,
I am willing to forget;
What you are, is apparent, I defy the
Dunghill I came from, and it is scandalum
Magnatum to be so saucy.
Exit.
1. Cit. I will not leave your worship so.
Exit.
Cap. What will this Rascal do with himself?
Here comes the other Fool to make up the Gemini.

Enter Ancient with two Petitions. Ant. Hum, I will not know him -- Let me see
--
The humble Petition of --

2. Cit. Save you Master --

Ant. Prithee fellow do not trouble me --
Humbly praying -- The Queen shall sign it.
Let me see this other --

Cap. Who the devil will bring him a Petition,
This Whelp has discovered him, and now would
Pretend himself most busily employed
About Petitions to the Queen.

Ant. Hum, shall daily pray for -- Hum.

Cap. More wit and money a your side; for your
Extraordinary place will not hold out.

2. Cit. Sir I have a suit to you.

Ant. Is it Embroidered Satin Sir, or Scarlet?
Yet if your business do hold weight and consequence,
I may deserve to wear your thankfulness
In Tissue or cloth of Bodkin; Ermines are for Princes.

2. Cit. Alas my Suite is not worth your wearing.

Ant. Good faith Sir you must excuse me, at this time
My attendance is expected at the Counsel, come
To my Chamber by five a clock in the morning
Four days hence, and you shall be sure to find
Me --

Cap. A sleep.

2. Cit. But do you not know me?

Ant. Hum. Yes I have seen your phisnomy, were you
Never in a conspicuous place, called the Pillorie.

2. Cit. How the Pillory?

Cap. A skirmish, and it be thy will.

2. Cit. If it were not in the Court Garden,
I would beat out thy brains.

Ant. Take heed, for I am an extraordinary --

2. Cit. Ratcatcher.

Cap. You may beat out his brains here as securely Sir,
As if you met him in the market; Marry if you do
Not kill him outright, it is but the loss
Of your hand.

2. Cit. I would it were but the loss of my left hand
To beat one of thy eyes out -- Are you an Ancient?

Ant. Thank you for that, so I might deserve
To be beaten. I am an extraordinary Sir.

Cap. And deserves to be beaten accordingly.
You may kick him without danger.

2. Cit. May I?

Enter 1. Citizen kicking the Lieutenant. Cap. Look, your friend will show you
a president'
He is acquainted with the Court latitude.

1. Cit. This is no striking.

Lieut. I know it is not.

Cap. They are subtle knaves, and know the Law.

Lieut. A pox upon 'em, I feel it.

Ant. At their peril say I, these poor things
Do not believe that we are extraordinary men,
I shall know you another time, I shall.

Cap. If you had known him now it had been better
For your hanches. Well, I have not done with
These whelps yet, till they are undone.
I shall never be sufficiently revenged for their affront
At Court. The Prince commanded me to
Expect his return here, I Will not leave
Enter Rosania. The Garden. Who Is this?

Rosa. Is perjury no sin? or can Heaven be
So busy or a sleep? Such crimes of men
Pass with impunity? Let this wake your anger:
This; Ferdinand is married, all his vows
Scattered in the air, dispersed like witherd leaves,
And hurried on the wings of some rude Wind,
Whose pride was to deflour the Spring; Oh Ferdinand,
Could thou, whilst yet thy breath was warm with love,
With love of me, call back thy faith, and tear
Thy Heart from mine to plant it in her Bosom?

Capt. How Is this?

Rosa. What though she be a Queen? could any thirst
Of present title flatter thy Soul from me?
I that left all for thee, and would have called
Death for thy cause a triumph, now must live
The scorn of my own thoughts, despised by thee.

Capt. Here Is a new business; this obscures me quaintly.

Enter Leandro. Lean. The King commands you not to leave the Garden.
He espied you from the Gallerie Window, and
Would have you here atrend him.

Rosa. Sir, may I
Without offense* ask if the King be merry?

Leand. We are scarce yet acquainted with his nature,
But we observe no Jubilie in his eyes,
Nor is the Queen so pleasant as our hopes
Did promise after Marriage.

Rosa. Pray excuse this boldness.

Leand. You Will expect his pleasure here?
Exit.
Rosa. It Is my ambition once more to see,
And speak with him, and if his language break not
Enter Queen, Leandro. My Heart, I Will take my leave -- the Queen.

Leand. He is a Servant to whom the King
Was pleased to show affection* when he had
No expectation of your Royal favor.

Que. I do remember, I observed him once
Use more than common passion to this servant,
And if we may build any confidence
Upon a fair aspect, he may deserve it.
Say we would speak with him; my Heart's oppressed
With melancholy, something tells my spirit
I am too tame; have I advanced a thing
Without a name to perch on the same Cloud
With me and for his sake slighted a Prince,
My Honor, and his Faith transported with
My folly and his charms of tongue and person?
And dares he pay me with neglect and coldness?
Oh my vexed soul! but he shall find I have
A sense of my dishonor; and yet open
Ways become trivial and poor revengers,
I will do something that shall sting him to
Repentance; my Lord you now may leave us.
Ex. Leandro. Sir of what Country are you?

Rosa. Of Valentia.

Que. Your name?

Rosa. (...).
My Parents not ignoble, yet too hasty
In The apprehension of Prince Ferdinand;
His Fortune (if I may yet call him so)
Gave me to be his page I must confess
My diligence thrived so well since I came to him,
That he did value me above his servant.

Que. Yet I Have not seen you wait since we were married.

Rosa. It was no want of duty Madam, I
Had late some wrast^ing with a Fever that
Compeld me to my Chamber, and disabled me
For fit attendance.

Que. Why do weep?

Rosa. I Madam?

Que. I see the tears.

Rosa. They are not sorrow then to see my Master
Possessed of so much happiness in your love,
And I am confident his soul so full
Of Honor and regard to your great virtues
Will seal him worth your gracious favors Madam,
And the worlds Envy.

Que. I Will not blame him now
For loving thee; and so much has thy faith
And innocence prevailed, thou shall translate
Thy service, and be mine, he shall consent.

Ros. I am to both most humble.

Que. Prithee tell me,
Making so much of thee, he does impart
Sometimes the secrets of his bosom to thee.
Tell me what fault he has, for thou know all.

Rosa. Alas Madam I know none,
Or if I did, it ill became the trust
And duty of a servant to reveal'em

Que. Thou were his bedfellow?

Ros. Gracious Madam --

Que. Does he not wanton in the night, and talk
Of M^stresses.

Ros. By truth not to me Madam.

Que. Dissemble not
I know he has a Mistress.

Rosa. If love were ever so unkind to him --

Que. Unkind? why Is It a sin to love? I shall
Suspect thy Youth has not been free, thy looks
Betray some seeds of Love.

Rosa. By all that is good
I never was in love but with my Master.

Capt. Good.

Q^e. He is not worth it.

Rosa. Madam.

Que. Be wise, and govern well thy hopes. I Will help
Thee to a Mistress; thou have no Mistress yet?

Rosa. But you self Madam.

Que. It shall be no other.
Thy Master is ungrateful

Ros. Goodness aid him.

Que. And wisdom thee, thou art a pretty youth,
I will reward thee better, if thou can
Be faithful and obey.

Rosa. In all things Madam
That shall become your creature.

Que. It Is not safe
To play with a Queens favors, you shall want
Near us, forget thy Master, and be happy.
Exit.
Ros. What clue can guide me in this Labyrinth?
I would when I had lost Ferdinands Heart
I had lost my understanding. She returns.

Enter Queen. Que. The King is coming this way; now be free,
Thou shall have reason afterward to bless
Thy fate, this cannot chose but vex him.

The Que^n is pleasant with Ros. Enter Ferdinand. Fer. The Queen so pleasant?
she has lost her ^ullenness,
Plays with his Hair, and smiles.

Ros. Madam, the King
Observes us.

Ferd. Strokes his cheek too, she does want
A Ganimed^; my poor Rosania
Art thou the path she walks on to revenge,
All is not well within her Heart* but mine
Sinks with the heavy pressure -- she is gone.
Exit Queen. The Queen does grace you much Tiberio,
Those favors are not common.

Rosa. She is pleased
For your sake Sir to cast some smile upon me.
I know 'twas your request she should be kind,
To keep my Heart a live.

Ferd. Thou Art not discovered.

Ros. Did not you discourse
My story to her?

Ferd. I?

Ros. Take heed, yet this
Will add but a thin Feather to the scale
Of my misfortune, she knows all* and in
The pity of my sufferings says you are
Not worth my love, and calls you most ungrateful

Ferd. We are both lost, till now there was some hope
How to repair thy sorrow.

Rosa. Do not mock me;
It Is a worse tyranny than to kill, to laugh
At what you have made wretched, it is as possible
To call past ages back.

Ferd. Take heed Rosania,
And be not Judge of what thou know not, dearest.

Rosa. I know too much.

Ferd. That I am Married.

Rosa. There Is no truth in Man.

Ferd. You are too rash; for there is truth in me,
In Ferdinand, though in thy thoughts held black
And staind prodigiously with breach of faith,
I have not broke my vow, do not compel me
By thy unbelief to do a Sin I hate
As much as I love thee.

Rosa. Have you a Soul?

Ferd. Yes, and thy Eye shall read it, be but calm,
That Soul, thou once did love, white with his first
Simplicity and faith; I wo'not urge
In my excuse the beauty of the Queen
Enough to melt a Scythian into love,
But call to mind my dear Rosania,
And do but put upon thee Ferdinand
So late forgotten by his Stars, a prisoner,
Slav'd like a villain at the bar, expecting
At every breath his sentence, nay admit
Rosania, the best part of his Soul
Stood like a weeping fountain to take leave
Of what she never must salute again:
In this extreme, to preserve Ferdinand
And save Rosania, would thou scorn the breath
Of mercy, that did Court thee from the Lips
Of a great Queen? could thou love Rosania,
If thou were Ferdinand to lose thy self?
Whom she would follow in a stream of tears,
And when she had made an ^land of thy tomb,
Striving to swim to thee, she could not choose,
But drown her self in her own waves. I prithee
Take reason to thee* and when thou have considered --

Rosa. Persuade me I am not Rosania,
And I will say it is virtue and that yet
Your heart may grow with mine; is not the Queen
Possessed of that which should have been my title,
A Wife to Ferdina^d?

Ferd. It Is confessed the world
Does think it so, I did consent to ceremony.

Ros. Call you enjoying of the Queen but ceremony?

Ferd. Pause there, and if thou have but so much charity
To think I dare not blaspheme Heaven, I Will call
That, and the Angels boldly to my witness,
The Queen's to me a stranger yet.

Ros. A miracle.

Ferd. Retain but love, as thou preserv'st thy sweetness,
And that will teach thee to believe that Ferdinand,
How ere saluted King is still thy subject,
And though her Husband* in my faith to thee
The Marriage Bed has still our Virgin sheets;
A Brother might embrace a Sister, with
The heat I brought; that this is truth, the power
And name I have, shall only serve to make
Our flight secure into another Kingdom,
And when I part with these new shining glories*
Thy faith will be confirmed, and thou acknowledge
I ventured much to keep my Heart thy servant.

Ros. I know not what to say; is not the Queen
Displeased?

Ferd. She is, but cunningly disguiseth
Her passion to the World; but I forgot
What must enlarge my fears of her revenge
If thou be known Rosania.

Ros. Lose that fear,
I am still safe, and now I see the cause
Makes her repent her favors, and thy greatness;
Forgive me Ferdinand* and yet I know not,
All is not well there is poison in this Balsom
Prepared for thee.

Ferd. From whom?

Ros. Rosania.

Ferd. When she shall but consent to have me dye,
She shall not trouble poison to send off
My despised life, my soul in just obedience
To her command will take a cheerful flight
In hope to serve her in the other World.

Ros. You shall know more hereafter, and let this
Secure your thoughts, she yet believes me what
This shape presents, but without wise prevention,
I fear I shall not live too long concealed;
I dare not say her honor is a bleeding*
But a Queen thus distasted may not find
That Ice within her blood; we are interrupted.

Enter Rodriguez. Rodri. Your pardon Sir; it is the Queens pleasure
This Gentleman attend her in the Gallery.

Ferd. He shall wait her commands --
Ex. Rodri. I know not what to counsel, it is not safe
Sweet to neglect her, yet my fears of some
Ill fate, are round about me like a mist,
And dark my understandings; let a kiss
And silence teach our souls some new discourse.

Capt. Why here is a volume of Intelligence.
I Will stay no longer to expect the Prince,
But seek him out immediately; disguises?
King by your leave, I shall untruss your Mistress.

Ex. Rosa. I know not what I feel* nor what to fear,
If love ever meant a Tragedy; it is here.

Ferd. If we never meet again, one more salute
Shall fortify our lives by joining breath,
Nor shall our last hard fate deny us this,
To change our faithful Souls at our last kiss.

Exeunt severally. ACT. IV.
Enter Rodriguez, Leandro, Ernesto. Ernest. I know not what to think on it, but
if I
Have any sense, there is some new state madness
Crept into Court.

Rodri. Are we not all a sleep,
And these fine dreams perplex us?

Leand. No it is waking.

R^d. Show me the renth part of a reason why
The Queen did Marry him.

Lea. 'Twas destiny.

Ernest. Why since should he be melancholy?

Rod. Or she so humorus?

Ernest. Not lie together? pray Heaven the Gentleman
Be found with no defective title in him.

Leand. Ob^erve her favors to that Boy, he was
His servant, now her minion. I like not
These violent wheels; the whole frame may be soon
Endangered, if these passions be not cured.

Rod. New lodgings for him, near her own, and he
Given free access to the Bed chamber.

Leand. It Is naught
Or will be so, I pity the good King;
Though she have raised him to the highest glory
Her power extended too, yet to make this height
His precipice, and throw him into scorn,
Nay poison the best hopes he had of honor,
And love from her, and in his sight to Court
A Boy, his servant? It would vex the best
Of all our tempers, if we felt the sting on it.

Enter Rosania and Violinda (passing over the Stage.) Er. He Is here, that Lady
is the Queens Cabinet.

Lean. They are merry about the Mouth.

Er. Another summons?
It Is possible the Queen may Marry him too.

Lean. There is some mystery we cannot reach.
If we do well remember, there is a Law
Made by her self, as soon as she was Queen,
To keep Wifes Pulses temperat, and correct
The insolent Blood of Women that had Husbands.

Er. And Men were not exempted.

Leand. I say no more.
But Heaven maintain the Law, and the Lawmakers,
And conjure down that Devil,
It Is the King and the smooth Boy, lets leave 'em.

Exeunt Lords. Enter Ferdinand, and Rosania. Ferd. Was this the Ladies Message?
does the Queen
Take thee into such favor?

R^sa. I tell truth,
And though it found but ill on the Queens part,
Because she thinks me wh^t I seem my Lord,
You need not to wear one Cloud upon your Face
When you remember who I am, my fears
Are thick upon my Heart, how to secure
This shadow any longer.

Ferd. That afflicts
Me most Rosania, for it pleases me
To hear she can affect thee; but what way
To keep her expectation high, and thee
(My dearest) safe? her passions may be violent.

Rosa. They are already Sir, if I mistake not;
I wish to Heaven that you were reconciled
To do the office of a Husband to her*
That peace would keep her Bosom clear, and I
Should live to all the World except your self
A stranger still.

Ferd. What language speaks Rosania?
There Is death in every syllable* should I
Obey what thou desir'st, and do the office
Of a Husband, ha?

Rosa. I Will wait upon you still,
And hope you will vouchsafe me now and then
A harmless smile; her beauty will deserve
Your whole heart, and there is something in the memory
Of what she has advanced you to, will help
To make you kind.

Ferd. Should I enjoy the Queen?
Because the misery of my fate compeld
A ceremonious si^? shall I betray
The essence of my faith, and leave a curse,
When thou art known, upon my name for ever?
If thou have taken new resolves against me,
Punish my hear^ some other way; had she
More ornament than ever met in woman,
Mistress of more perfection* than Poets
Invented for the Queen of love to this
Were the proud Empire of the World her own,
And she would make me Lord of her, and these,
It would not buy me to the pleasure of
One Nights embrace, my body shall not carry
My soul so far astray; the Man condemnd
To live in a perpetual Snow, has not
A purer Frost within his blood.

Rosa. This but
Ingenders a new grief* although it bind
Rosanias Heart there is yet one way left
And that ere I pronounce you must forgive;
There is a trembling in my tongue* and I
Already feel such Winter in my breath,
My timorous Lips do wither.

Ferd. Do not fright
My Soul too much, there is something threatens me
So like a loss of these, that I am left
A piece of shaking Earth death cannot look
To make me tremble so; can thou forsake me?

Ros. Not in my Heart, but give my body leave
To seek some other place my Lord to dwell in.
When I am gone into some wilderness,
You will find ease at Heart, and love the Queen,
And perfect all; I Will pray you may live happy,
And hold Intelligence with some gentle Winds
That shall convey my wishes and return
What joys do follow you; the purling Rivers
I Will teach your name and they which g^ide this way
Shall bring thee something Ferdinand of mine;
My tears I know will not be lost, which I
Will send thee daily by the courteous stream,
Clear pledges of my faith; consent my Lord
I may depart and you shall choose your way,
To every blessing here.

Ferd. Not till we meet
With one embrace, and take our flight together;
And I have thought a way to perfect it,
Observe my sweet Rosania, the Queen
Thou say affects thee, cherish it, with all
The softness of her creature; if she allow,
Kiss her, and promise what young lovers do,
Examine not, but by thy love to me
Be free in amorous language, if she have
Heat to a private meeting in her Chamber,
Obey, this shall secure our loves ambition.
Enquire not, but resolve, and let me know
The time.

Ros. You will attempt no violence
Upon the Queen?

Ferd. By this --

Kisses her. Ros. What if she have commanded me
This Night?

Ferd. To meet?

Ros. In her Bedchamber.

Ferd. Ha* obey it.

Ros. At a late hour.

Ferd. It shall beget our comfort
If thou consent.

Rosa. But shall I not expose
My self to danger, if her love pursue
Immodest ends, since you advise I should
Apply my self to her desires?

Ferd. If she
Take too much flame, by some soft art delay her,
Till I come to close all; keep still thy person
Secret, the least discovery will destroy
Us both; the Evening with much have prepares
Thy visit and our happiness.

Rosa. I Will obey,
But be you sure to come.

Ferd. Lose thou no time
Now to indear thee to her, let us part
Love will find balm to cure the wounded Heart.

Exeunt severally A Table, and Lights, set out, then Enter Queen, and Violinda.
Que. Was he not cheerful when he promised thee?

Viol. He was, and he was not.

Que. I have a strange apprehension, and this does feed it.

Viol. I told him 'twas an honor worth his joyful
entertainment.

Que. If it should prove succesfull, my revenge
Were perfect, I Am resolute to pursue --

Viol. It makes well
For your contrivement that the King and you do
Lodge at distance -- stay, I hear a tread.

Que. I hope it is he.

Enter Leonario. Viol. Prince Leonario Madam.

Que. What comes he for?

Leon. Although I have small expectation
For my own sake, that you can pardon Madam
This bold access, and at so dark an hour,
Yet when you have heard my business, You will know
Your self so much concerned, I Will not despair
To find your mercy.

Que. You prepare me for
Something of consequence.

Leon. Please you to dismiss
Your Lady, I have something to deliver
Wo'not become her knowledge.

Que. Leave us -- now,
Ex. Violinda. Our conference is free, your Graces pleasure?
It must be matter of much essence, that
Could not expect till morning* but you are welcome.

Leon. This time and darkness Madam best becomes him,
Who for your sake blushes to see the Day,
But I came not to chide my wrongs have learned
A modest silence, my approach is not
To name a suffering of mine, but to
Discover what already is prepared
Against your peace and honor.

Que. Is it treason?

Leon. It is, but threatens not your life, you may
Live many years upon the wound.

Que. You fright me.

Leon. Lose not the beauty of your cheek so soon,
Hide not beneath that cold and killing Snow,
One Rosy blush* and yet that pale would show
Like Innocence which you have lost; oh Madam
Had you not made a forfet of your truth
To me, no storm could shake you, but your soul
That made no change* could know no fear; I come
To tell you what just providence has done
In my revenge, your breach of vow is punished
With loss of faith in him, to whom you gave
The Heart you promised me, the King, whose pride
You built on my dishonor, is as false,
As you were.

Que. This is passion but be
Not yet too rash in censuring him. Whom I
Have placed so near, I must defend, nor will
He need my strength, to make their blood account
That dare traduce his honor; he has a Heart --

Leon. A false one. I was born without a fear,
And dare upon his bosom (wear he worth
The manly contestation*) write him perjured.

Que. I would this were not envy; but admit
He be thus guilty, it is a fault in him.

Leon. No Madam, it is yours; that sin that poysond
The expectation of my joys in you.
Has made him false and will excuse his story,
When you are named that broke your faith to me;
I can have no hope now to be repaired,
But if it be worth memory to know
The triumph waits on Innocence, the World
Shall say the Queen deserved to meet a scorn
Deep as her wrongs to me.

Que. It cannot be.

Leon. Think so, and help to make the revenge greater,
Till the winds catch the black report, and multiply
The shame, by scattering it about the Kingdom,
Sit still, and careless of your fame, encourage
His private lust, his Mistress now in Court.

Que. A Mistress in the Court?

Leon. Yes Madam, in the Court,
And may one day think any second place
Too narrow to contain her greatness* she --

Que. As you are a Prince no more; I have done ill,
And find the penance here, It does agree
With his neglects, and adds new flame to my
Young jealousy; I feel a tempest rising;
By all your goodness leave me Sir; I cannot
Now right you more than mourn, and give belief to you.
No more I pray you, by all your love to honor.

Leon. I have done,
And take my leave, my everlasting leave,
It Is time; how like the day, that flatterd us
With cheerful light, are my desires fled hence,
And left me here a prodigy of darkness,
A walking Hearse, hung round about with night,
Whose wings must one day cover all? farewell.
If any Star look forth, it is to call
Me hence, and light me to another World.
Our Lips are never like to meet again.
Kisses Farewell, if I but stay, I shall forgive her.
Exit.
Que. A Mistress in the Court? something is busy
About my Heart.

Enter Violinda. Viol. The Prince is gone.

Que. No matter.
Affronted thus? but I forgot to ask
Her name that rivals me; how this passion
Befools our understanding, and prevents
The knowledge, and the cure of what afflicts us!
The Morning will assure all, but shall this
Strike me to ashes? I may find a way
To my revenge.

Enter Violinda. Viol. Tiberio is come Madam.

Que. Wait carefully.

Viol. I know my duty.

Enter Rosania: (Kneels and Kisses her Hand.) Que. Rise,
This meeting was not meant for ceremony,
There Is something in this presence will deserve
We should put off all state, and speak like friends.
You must be covered too. I Will have it so.
We are private now.

Rosa. These graces will
Undo a youth, whose birth, and careless Stars
Ordained him to be humble, and with duty
Wait on your meanest servant.

Que. Thou shall soon have cause
To think thy Stars are careful of thee, if
Thou can be wise.

Rosa. Alas! my years are few.

Que. Thy knowledge is not wanting to distinguish
Whose favors Court thee, and apply thy self
To understand, and thank the kind bestower;
It Is in my power to make thee great.

Rosa. You may
Advance this worthless walking shadow Madam,
And when you like the free and bounteous Sun
Have blessed me with your rays, it is but like
His glorious warmth bestowed upon a piece
Of rude and barren Earth, which takes not from
The luster of your Beams, but shows more clearly,
By your own light, what poverty you shined on.

Quee. This modesty becomes you not, look in
My eye, and read what is there.

Rosa. Some thing like anger,
Enough to strike me dead.

Quee. What now?

Rosa. A smile,
And such attending sweetness --

Quee. Thus it shall
Invite thee still to gaze, and love, Tiberio,
No frown shall point on thee; I find my eyes
Were meant for thee, and all they graced before,
But objects of mistake. Here here, O turn
Thy lovely face away, lest I be seen
To b^u^h, my heart has chose to place my love
And the reward; this would become thy tongue
A great deal better, Come sit down Tiberio.
What still an Infants understanding? Think
I am the man, and learn a little better,
What beauty dwells upon this hand, What softness,
How like the Snow, or Innocence it shows,
Yet fires my heart with every gentle touch.

Rosa. Dear Madam; would the King would come.

Que. This is a happiness that Kings should sue for,
And yet there are poor comforts in these Kisses;
Let hands preserve Society with hands,
And with their change of whiteness, and of Balm,
Make wealthy one another: But let what
Was meant for kisses meet, and find out pleasure
By warm exchange of souls from our soft lips.
Kisses. Madam, how like you this?

Rosa. Madam.

Que. I suppose you a Lady all this while,
And I the man, our lips must meet again,
Will this instruct thee nothing?

Ros. Gracious Madam.

Que. And yet this recreation comes short,
Dear Lady, of what love might well allow us.
Admit you are a Queen, you are not bound
To thin your Royal Blood with frost, but as
Your power, your pleasure should exceed; nay graut
You have a man (a man said I) that can
Keep love alive, and warm a yielding bosom,
Yet where from the invitement of your eye,
And amorous choice, I am become your servant,
You may be a little kinder.

Rosa. Madam, I know not
How with the safety of my self, my duty,
And your own name and power, to understand you,
(Yet this to some would need but little Comment)
Can you place such a value on a thing
That not deserves to breath your name? Or should
I hope these charms of Language you have spread
To catch my heart, which has no wings, but where
It can believe; For you transcend so much
In wonder of your love, a willing Faith
Not easily can reach it. But dear Madam,
I know all this is but to try my duty,
And you have pleased to choose me forth, to make
These silent hours more grateful, by the mirth
My weak replies may raise you,

Que. Miracle!
I but imagined thee a woman, now
I shall believe thee one indeed; this coldness
Becomes no masculine habit. Come, we'll in,
And change our Sexes; Thou shall wear my clothes,
And I will put on these, help on with thine,
And I will dress thee handsomely, and then
We'll act again.

Ros. Not for the world dear Madam. Not yet come?

Que. The world? This confirms my jealousy.
I Will search you to the soul, Adonis come,
I Will call thee so, and court thee with more charm
Than Venus did, when in the Idalian Groves
To buy a kiss, she offered the proud Boy
Her flaming Chariot, and her Doves of Snow.
It Is in thy power to make thy fate and heart
More happy by consent to meet with mine;
Tempt not the anger of a Queen despised,
Whose breath can like a whirlwind snatch thee up,
And drop thee in a Wilderness, where with sorrow
For thy neglect, thou by degrees may sigh
Thy self into a Mist, which no Sunbeam
Shall pity or take up into a Cloud.
But love me, and compose thy heart to mine,
We Will live with more delight, than fancy can
Enrich Elysium with. The soft hours shall stay
Till we allow 'em Wings, and while we kiss
And on each others Lips breath Incense thus,
We Will have ten thousand Capids for our guard,
Whose Bows shall awe the destinies, and we write
The King and Queen of Fate.

Enter Ferdinand, Leandro, Rodriguez, Ernesto, Captain, Guard. Ferd. Will this
deserve your faith?

Leand. We must believe.

Enter Violinda. Viol. We are undone, the King.

Que. False Keys?

Rosa. 'Twas time to come.

Ferd. Had I not cause, my Lords, to appear sad,
When I suspected this so great affront?
My melancholy all this while was but
A mourning for this shame: Look but my Lords
Into your ^elves, and make this suffering yours.

Viol. Madam be raised again, I have an art
To fetch you off with honor* and the youth too.
I will persuade him there can be no cure
In this extreme but to pretend himself
A woman; I will dress him in your Gown
Before they can be ware on it; they all know
This way he cannot fly, mean time put on
A confidence, and let them know you are
The Queen, not to be shaken with their power;
This will gain time.

Que. Prosper in this.

Viol. I will
Redeem my fault, or never sleep again.

Exit with Rosania. Ferd. She blushes not.
Were she not Queen, what names could we bestow
(...) modesty?
(...). It Is plain.
We came in time.

Ferd. Most happily to prevent
Some further act of shame; (...) she look on us
Without a blush?

Que. I ^ee no such attraction
In your state faces that I should desire
Much to look on 'em. Who made you King I pray?

Ferd. Your power I dare not call it love, presuming
That I wa^ fit to be your property,
Without a (...) to see, o^ have a sense
Of these dishonors; This rank hea^ of blood,
Madam, what penitence can make this clear?
Admit your thoughts were wanton, and your flame,
Too great to be suppressed, could you find none
For your adulterate embrace, but one
That was my servant? my own hound devour me?
As if your lust had not enough of shame
And mischief to me, but your malice must
Appear in it too; with what security
Can I expect to live, when she begins
So soon to poison me?

Leand. We heard her say
They two would write themselves the King and Queen.

Rod. So we did all.

Ferd. You may consider these.

Leand. It Is impious
Madam with what grief do we
Remember now that Law you made
After your Corronation to preserve
The name of your sex chaste which gave our Hearts
Hope of your blessed progress; you made it death
To stain the Marriage Bed; where shall we expect
The life of that good act, when ^ou begin
A breach of chastity by so black example?
If the King urge an Execution
Of what our vo^e (...) by yours imposed
Upon the kingdom (...) should prove your self
More innocent o^ give us cause to mourn
This fall from vir^ue

Er. Madam we g^^eve for you.

Que. So, so, have your great wisdoms said all yet?
I laugh at you (poor things) and am so far
From trembling at your thunder, that I pity you,
And first I Will let you know you selves, you are
I take it all my subjects, I will not
Exempt you Sir* since Marriage takes not off
My Interest, and Essence here* all strength
Flowing from me* and your Derivative sh^ne
Extinct, when I frown you to darkness; by
What power dare you take an account of me?
That am above your Laws, which must obey
Me, as their Soul, and Dye when I forsake 'em?
But I will reason coolely, and admit
They live in force; against whom? are you so shallow,
To think we that created, and decreed 'em
For vulgar reformation, must be squard
And Levelled by 'em, as we meant to lose
Our Character and distinction, and stoop
To the common file of subjects? this were policy!
I speak not this with sense of any guilt,
So to decline it, for I here defy you,
And bring an Innocence shall strike a blush
Upon your Souls; that sinned in my suspicion.

Aside. Ferd. Where is the Boy? Ernesto take him to
Your custody, and bid him not despair,
I have contrived the rest.

Enter Rosania (like a Woman) and Violinda. Er. He Is here.

Viol. Take it upon you, if it come to searching
We Will find a Jurie.

Capt. You are deceived my Lord, with your good pardon,
He is not here.

Er. Who is not here?

Capt. The he you do expect;
And your Officious Ladyship might well
Have spared your pains, to put on all this trim.

Ferd. What means the fellow?

Capt. It Is no news to your Sir.
I could have told the Queen before and you
My honorable Lords, this was no Boy,
Though now he would but seem of the the other sex,
I knew her name.

Ros. My name?

Capt. Are not you called Rosania?

^erd. Ha! betrayed?

Capt. Yes indeed is she, you were present Sir
In The Garden when this fine Hermophrodite
Declared what sex was hid behind the Breeches,
And this I certified the Prince before.

Que. Now it is clear.

Capt. There are some tokens too I can remember,
As kisses, and excuse for marrying with
The Queen, a Virgin still, etc.

Omnes. A Woman?

Viol. But are you a Woman indeed?

Capt. And now my Lords, if you have Hearts that are
Honest and daring* come about again,
For this is but a cunning piece of treason,
Against your Faith, and the Queens honor.

Ferd. We are both lost Rosania.

Capt. It Is truth, or take my Head off.

Que. You do believe this transformation,
And know this Lady, my good Lord, I did
Suspect before the cause of your neglects,
And meeting with some dark Intelligence
From the Prince, to perfect this discovery,
Did in my Chamber woo with aptest forms
Of Love, to try how long the sex would be
Concealed; you heard a part, and see us kiss,
And came in time with these wise Noblemen
To prevent further acts of shame.

Rodri. Is It possible?

Rosa. It was an ill contrivement to make me
Proof of the Queens dishonor.

Er. An apparent Plot
Against the life and honor of the Queen,
Since he would urge that Law maliciously
Against her, knowing this to be a Woman,
And his close strumpet.

Rodri. The same Law must be
Their trial.

Leand. What a change is here already?

Que. You must not Lords deny me Justice.

Rodri. It Is insufferable
Against a common person.

Er. Let his first
Treason, if you think good Madam, be urged
In accusation.

Leand. So, so.

Que. You did us service Captain.

Capt. I am bound to it, here is more news for the Prince.

Que. Use your pleasures.
Exit.
Rod. What need we circumstance, let him dye to morrow.

Que. Death will be mercy to so much ingratitude,
Command them both to several custodies.
The morning shall behold 'em dead --

Ros. Now more lost then ever.

Exeunt. Manent. Ferd: Ros. and Guard. Ferd. Pray lets take
Short leave of one another, it is in vain
To reason against providence, or say
We might have lived; though I must dye, and after
Be hid in my obscurest name, and shade,
I must declare whose blood they will profane
In bleeding thee; farewell, our last, last kiss.
My heart would fain come to thee, I will make it
My humble suit with my last breath it may
Be quickly sent thee.

Rosa. We shall both meet, when
This dust falls off, and our souls kiss again.

Exeunt. ACT. V.
Enter Leandro, Rodriguez, Ernesto, Servants with Lights. Er. MY Lord you tell
us wonders, it is high time
To open such a mystery.

Rodri. This change
Will exceed all, and to convincing are
The circumstances of this great discovery
They do command our faith.

Er. And you sha (...) steer us.

Leand. Then let us lose no time; oh my good Lords,
Did you but feel the torment of my bosom,
Till I discharge the duty, which so long
Has slept in his concealment you would call
For wings to fly, and think all motion tedious;
For Heavens sake lets make have* that we prevent
The morning, which will rise upon this knowledge
With cheerful beams, and put on all his glory.

Er. Most gladly we attend.

Exeunt. A Table and Taper set out. Enter Ferdinand (with a book in his Hand.)
Ferd. I have no Heart to think of any thing
But my Rosania, all devotion,
When I remember her, flies off, and leaves
My soul no contemplation but her safety;
They were too cruel to divide us, night
It self looks now more black by this dim taper;
Rosania's eyes would brighten all* but they
Weighed down with sleep, and sorrow, are perhaps
At rest, a thousand Angels watch about 'em;
And let some one who^e office is to wait
On harmless love, present me to her dreams;
O let her hear me often call upon her,
As I am led to death, and when the stroke
Divides me from my self, and from the World,
My Heart shall pay her tribute, and my blood
Do miracles, when every Crimson drop
My Body bleeds, shall not in vain be wept,
But fall into some Letter of her name,
To keep alive our story.
Enter two Servants (with Torches) Leandro, Ernesto, Rodriguez. What lights are
these?
This place sure is not wont to be thus visited.
They are spirits, ha! yet if I have a memory
Those Faces were but late familiar to me.
They Kneel. What mockery is this? if you be substances
Of things I know, go tell the Tyrant Queen
She might allow me death without this scorn,
This jeering Antimasque.

Omnes. Long live the King.

Ferd. What King?

Omnes. Long live Ferdinand King of Murcia.

Ferd. A dream, a golden dream. What fancies wait
Upon our slee^? and yet I wake, they are
Apparitions, I^l shut my eyes, and lose 'em.
They woe not vanish. Leandro, Rodriguez, Ernesto?

Omnes. All your subjects.

Leand. Collect your scatterd thoughts my Lord, and be
Assured, we now pay real duties to you,
You are our King* and must be.

Ferd. Who says so?

Leand. I, whose cold fear, and frailty,
When fate of War had made you Prisoner,
Concealed the truth, and Justice of your title,
'Twas I that saved you from your Uncles fury
And sent you to Valentia, while I cozened
The kingdom with your death, till time might ripen
Your challenge to the scepter; if you can
Find mercy to a treason, great as this,
I Will live, and study how to merit pardon.

Ferd. Rise, rise all,
And if you be Leandro, pray come nearer.

Rod. Pray Heaven this unexpected happiness
Meet with no ecstasy, all senses are
Not armed for such extremes of Joy.

Er. The Queen,
When she finds this, will fall into a Fever,
By instinct her Head must ache this very minute.

Rod. And shake too, for the Crown is tottering.

Ferd. Pardon? thou should divide the kingdom
with me.
But do all these believe it, will you not,
When I make second claim, deny me again?
Call me Impostor?

Leand. Sir forgive that first,
And I Will not ask Heaven pardon for my next
Denial, let death threaten all his stings;
And I have satisfied these Lords so well,
They are confirmed in your just claim, and person.

Rod: Er. We lay our lives and fortunes at your feet.

Ferd. I may command you then, fetch me Rosania;
I Will be no King without her; do not stay
To hear how much I love her 'bove the Crown,
And all the glories wait upon it, she
That was my Page, my fellow Prisoner, Rosania.
Exit Rodrig. It Is that name next to Heaven I bow too.
Good my Lord follow him, and if she be
Awake, oh drop it gently by degrees,
(The joy is mighty, she a sad weak Virgin)
That I shall live to make her Queen.
Exit Ernesto. Stay you, and if I play too much the wanton with
My fate, or swell with expectation,
Speak something to allay my hopes, and say
There may be crosses yet, the Queen may want
Faith or consent, or put case the people
(A dangerous torrent to oppose) like not
This Innovation, where is the King then?

Leand. Doubt not their Loves, you had their
Hearts before;
Let nothing shake you.

Enter Rosania, Ernesto, Rodriguez. Ferd. Thou Art my better Angel.
Why then if my Rosania will be Queen,
The kingdoms ours again; she comes, she comes.
Thou make too little have to be a Queen.
I am my self again, my name is found,
I shall live to, thus to embrace Rosania
Without a fear, these Lords are all thy subjects,
I am a King.

Leand. You are.

Ferd. Then what must my
Rosania be?

Ros. Happy, if this be more
Than dream, my tears and sufferings are all paid for
If this be true.

Leand. Most true.

Ros. What a strong arm
Has Heaven?

Ferd. See how the Day has made
Have to salute Rosania, and to wait
Upon thy triumph, blushes like a Maid
When she is told she is in Love, the Stars
Are gone to tell the other World, thy beauty,
Till now Eclipsed with sorrow, has thrown off
The imprisoning veil, and shines above their brightness.
But how shall we Leandro now contrive
For our Court entertainment, where the Queens
Prepared to hear our Tragedy?

Leand. Leave me
To order your appearance; but first Sir,
We must secure this Fort.

Er. The Captain is
My creature.

Ferd. Thou shall be all our direction.
Come my Rosania, time has turned a gen
Our Glass, and his keen since this comfort brings,
It cuts no scepters down but to make Kings.

Exeunt. Enter Leonario (reading a Letter,) and Soldier. Leon. So near?

Sold. We heard before of your affront
My Lord, and were prepared.

Leon. It has outstrip'd my expectation,
These Letters say
Mendoza is their General new returned
With victory from the Moors; his fame I honor,
My knowledge never reached his person.

Sold. Sir, he brings old Soldiers with him, the
Commanders
Are such, whose faith and valor in those Wars
Already tried, he durst name to the King
To be employed here in your highness cause.

Leand. We will to Horse immediately. I long
To salute the Army.

Sold. Which but wants your person
The Soul of their design; you may soon reach 'em.

Enter Captain. Leon. I will.

Capt. Your Grace.

Leon. That we had wings, away, to Horse to Horse.

Exeunt Leon. Sold. Capt. Speed, and you be so hot of the spur, my business
Is but breath, and your design it seems rides post.
Enter Lieutenant and Ancient. The Earth runs upon wheels; whom do I spy?
My extraordinaries, I Will have sport with them,
But first observe 'em.

Lieut. I see no profit in these offices
That we have brought.

Ant. Not extraordinary, as the name did promise.

Capt. The Rogues are poor, and now repent.

Ant. We were told by the cheating Captain
That we should want Men to tell our money.

Lieut. This it is to deal with Soldades.

Ant. We should command the Ladies too, and we
Were bountiful, a small Pox take their beauties,
It Is the greater curse, I have undone
My self in giving away enameld Rings
And Bracelets.

Lieut. Well, if I trust a Captain again.

Ant. Or I.

Capt. I Am glad they are paid; I wo'not leave 'em,
I feel my antipathy strong yet.

Ant. I would venture half my soul to be revenged
If I knew how.

Capt. True Rascals!

Lieut. The Ladies love him.

Ant. They all Love Men of War.

Lieu. Would his poop were a fire.

Ant. And Battles in Bed naturally.

Lieu. Well, what Ladies give him hereafter to buy new Feathers, may his body
compel him to bestow upon a Surgeon.


Ant. May Diseases undermine his Flesh like Gunpowder,
And blow all his skin up into blisters.

Lieu. May they that look for his Nose, go about for want of a ^ridge, and let
him wear no Legs but what he buys from the Carpenter.


Ant. May his face break out, and undo him in taffata, and may the patches at
the laft be so many, till his skin be invisible, and his goggle eyes look
through a Mask.


Lieu. May he live to be as much coward as we have been, and be beaten!


Ant. Abominably beaten, and may the miracle be on our side, that we may be
valiant, and be the Men to do it, oh I would have no more mercy. --


Capt. Save you Gallants, save you Courtiers.


Both. My noble Captain.


Ant. It may be he did not hear us.


Capt. Hark you, what purchase have you two made lately?


Both. Of what?


Capt. Of Lands and loggerheads, Lordships I would say, I know you are both
rich, you cannot choose, But I will borrow no more of you, faith besatisfied
and leave off in time with the wealth you have.


Lieu. Where is it Captain?


Ant. Can you tell where we may borrow as much money upon our extraordinary
places, as will set up shop again? For this Court trade wo'not do.


Capt. How?


Lieu. No indeed Captain, we have made little benefit since we came to be
extraordinaries.


Capt. Ye took not the right way then.


Ant. That may be.


Capt. Why, cannot you lie, and swear, and pawn your souls for six pence, the
Devil could not furnish the City with two more hopeful Borachios. You have a
Carrot-colourd Beard, and that never fails, and your worships face is a
prognostication of preferment

Is a Prognostication of pre^erment, where
Beside Dominicall Letters you have all the
Conjuring Characters of the Planets.
But all this is your cunning, to dissemble your estates.

Lieu. By this empty pocket, I have but one Shirt left.

Capt. You jest in faith.

Ant. And by all my no money* I have but half a one

Capt. Come, come, you took up linen lately, I heard
You did.

Ant. I, smocks.

Capt. Why they are in fashion with extraordinary
Courtiers.
But if you be in earnest, I can tell, where you
May furnish your selves richly.

Both. Where? where?

Capt. W'y in the Shops for ready money, but you would
Save charges.

Ant. I marry Captain.

Capt. Venture to rob a hedge, it is but hanging,
And what is that to men extraordinary?
But if your wants be real, be not dejected,
I Will set you up again my self, I have been
Beholding to you two for your good words
And wishes Gentlemen.

Lieu. It pleases you to say so, I begin
To smell. --

Ant. Not to us Captain, we have been beholding to you.


Capt. And it happens, as if fortune had made you miserable A purpose* to bless
you both with such a preferment, as wo'not be offered again in a Coronation.


Lieu. On good Captain, for we are extraordinary miserable.


Capt. Then observe; you are not ignorant how things go at Court, the King is
in prison.


Ant. So.


Capt. And his wench with him that walked in Breeches; The Queen resolves they
shall both dye.


Ant. Good.


Capt. This morning too; now in regard the King is a person of quality --


Lieu. I think he be.


Capt. And the the other a Lady, as some imagine, you two may do very well to
undertake now --


Both. Any thing.


Capt. To be a couple of Hangmen ^ do you mark? to dispatch the Queens enemies in
what horrid way, her counsel shall think convenient* you will do service to
the State, and have extraordinary rewards; besides the honor and reputation of
your places; what say? it is my pure love to make this first offer to you.


Ant. Do we look like a ^ouple of Hangmen?


Capt. No you have not so good a complexion; and now I think on it you sha' not
live to have that preferment come, draw you that wear your Sword like a
Bum-baly, do as I bid you* and that quickly.


Ant. It wo'not come out Sir -- Cap. No -- this shall in then -- A^t. I will
put more strength to it.


Capt. So now, do you mark -- kill one another.


Both. Kill one another?


Capt. Yes and do it religiously, with as much alacrity as you would devour an
Orphan: and do it hansomly, that you may not be ha^gd when you are dead. I Will
see it done he that is dull shall have my goad to quicken him: -- They fight.
So, good good again. well offered -- they fight by these Hilts Furiously now
could I forgive 'em-so, enough.


Lieu. This is very fine sport.


Capt Necessity has taught 'em the noble science, come, if all fail, you shall
fight challenges; there is money and broken Pates to be got that way you can make
legs, and gape like Gudg^^s for benevolence, ^ut scurvy capers, to show your
Legs are well, when your Head bleeds; farewell; stay, you want money, I had
forgot, there is twelve pence apiece for you.


Both. How Captain? I hope not.


Capt. They are not hear^y yet, they think I serve 'em with Press money agen^
no, it is my pure bounty. Go, set up again, and trust Soldiers, without
impertinent asking for your debts; they will pay you.


Ant. As you have done.


Capt. I Will hearken how you behave you selves farewell. When you are rich, I Will
visit you again, and borrow money.


Lieu. Too much is too much: humh.


Ant. Now have I a great mind to fight with your Captainship.


Lieu. So have I, now my Hands in, methinks it is nothing.


Capt. You are not desperate?


Ant. We are a little better, as good be Hanged for killing of you Captain, as
live after the rate of our disgrace. I am resolved.


Capt. Two Mas^ives at once may worry me. I am put to it. They fight. Must we
have the other 'bout.


Ant. This is enough at once we may come to it in time.


Capt. Why now I love you, love you, as well as you do Law.


Ant. Upon good terms we love you too.


Capt. Let Us sh^ke Hands, you sha' not to your vomit again. *Now you dare sight,
I Will tell you a hundred ways to get moneys, come, we will drink and divide
fortunes, Run not back into cows again.


Ant. I Will be Ancient now again.


Lieu. And I Lieutenant.


Capt. Both my own Boys.


Ant. It Is not so hard to fight I see, if a Man be but desperate, and give his
mind too'^,


Lieu. Pox a Cowards; come Captain.

Capt. Let me hug ye my b^ace of Mirmidons,
And drink a Tun of Wine to this conversion.

Exeunt. Enter Queen, Violi^da. Que. The Prince so eatly met upon the way
This morning say? and with a Soldier?

Vio. And in that have too, Madam I was told
The speed of Wings was slow, their fiery Horse
Bathing in foam, yet fled as if they meant
To leave the Wind, and Clouds behind 'em.

Que. Strange!
I could have wished him with less discont^nt
To have left us, but my stubborn fate designed it;
Having thus snatched away himself, it will
Become us to compose, and make the best
Of our State game; I sent a Messenger
With our command, to the Governor of the Fort,
He should attend the King by the Water gate
Leads to the Garden, we do purpose conference;
If Ferdinand wisely consent to break
The Magic that so chains his Heart to that
Idol Rosania, we will be reconciled,
And Peace shall marry once again our Hearts.
Enter Courtier. Me thinks our Lords are cold in their attendance,
Where be our train of Ladies? -- nay permit 'em,
A solitude becomes this sullen Day.
And our own thoughts; methinks thou do not look
With thy own face upon me.

Vio. Not I Madam?

Que. My eyes have lost their virtue, all I look on
Have not the shape and color they presented,
What whispers that? have?

Viol. Here was none Madam.

Que. I could be jealous of the Wind methinks,
And quarrel with the postures of those very
Shapes in the Arras; fie Olivia, call home thy reason.

Court. O Madam!

Que. What horror's in that voice? I see a treason
In's looks.

Court. O Madam, I beseech your pardon.

Que. Why? art a traitor?

Court Not I, but there are practices I fear
Against your royal person, the Court gates
Are shut* all is in confusion within,
And I could hear abroad loud acclamations
And triumph for the King, as he were new proclaimed.

Enter Captain. Que. Which way come thou?

Cap. Over the Wall Madam; the gates are shut,
I Will tell you news; young ^ordinand your Husband
Is in all stare attended, and proclaimed
King in his own right, he is proved to be
What he did first pretend himself, Leandro,
And all the Lords confirm't the Governor
Has given him up the Fort, the wise City
Her K^y, and every officer on's knees
Is (...) and drinking the Kings health,

QU^. Away* and let thy face be seen no more,
But when the fatal noise of fire, some blood,
Or burial calls thee forth.

Capt. This my reward
For bringing news the King's alive? take heed,
Do not talk treason in your own defense, -- hark

Enter (in state) Rodriguez, Ernesto, Leandro, Ferdinand, (who takes the
Throne) Attendants. Que. From what an expectation am I fallen!

Omnes. Long live Ferdinand King.

Ferd. We thank you; and will study to be worth
Your prayers and duty; Madam, the Chancellor
Can clear, and bring your faith to allow the wonder,
We are no Impostor now nor need we borrow
A beam from you to make us shine, yet still
You are our Cosen, fair Olivia,
Enter Ros^nia and Ladies. The Husband was a title long since due
To my Rosania, may it prosper here.
Our love and years grew up together, and
Our Souls by holy contract tied, when in
A'fonzo's House, her Father, and my Guardian
(To whose trust I was sent an Infant by Leandro)
We plighted faith; it is no blemish
To fair Olivia still to be a Virgin,
Though she have lost the Queen, she is a Princess.
And has now found a Kinsman, that shall study
What shall become his love, her blood and honor.
Upon your Lip I print this fair assurance.

Rosa. And mine shall be to do you service Madam.

Que. If this be true, you must command my duty.

Ferd. We hear Prince Leonario is depar^ed,
When he shall know the progress of our fortunes
He Will quit his Stars, that hid their golden Heads
To mock him with a small Eclipse, of purpose
To light him with more glory to his happiness.
Soft Alat^^ Ha? what clamors that? the frightfull noise increases.

Enter first Guard. Guard. Fly, and save your selves, the Fort's surprised
By the Prince of Arragon, whose troops have seized the
City, reeling with Wine, and careless of their strength,
in their joys for you Sir.

Ferd. The Prince of Arragon? the fates cannot
Be so injust, so envious of our blessing,
To snatch it from us in a minute; ha?
Help, help, quarter.

Diverse within cry. Ferd. They are in the Court already.

Leand. We are all undone,
Lets yield and ask conditions honorable.

Ferd. Dye he, that dares but think so yield? no, Ferdinand
Was here too late a P^isoner; let us sell
Our lives at glorious rates, the Evening puts
A Mask upon the horror, follow me.
Exit.
Leand. To certain death; Ladies stay you, the danger
Will meet us here to soon, and yet your persons
In honor challenge safety.

Ex. Lords. Que. Is there no end of my distractions?
Or has my folly yet deserved more vengeance?

R^s^. It cannot be Heaven will so soon destroy
The blessi^g it bestowed if thus you punish
Whom you advance, who will believe your gifts
Are more than flattery to betray our Peace?

Enter Leo^ario Alfonso, Ferdinand, (Prisoner,) Rodriguez, Ernesto, Soldiers.
Leon. This Lady is my prize.

Que. How Sir your prize?

Leon. Mistake me not, there is no dishonor meant
Your person; yet I boldly may pronounce
You are, and must be mine. I am not ignorant
You are a Virgin all but name, be wise
As you are fair, and I forget what is past,
And take this satisfaction; if I meet
Contempt, where I with honor once more Court you,
You will create a flame shall never dye
But in the Kingdoms ashes; you were mine
First by your own election* sealed above,
If I must lose what Heaven bestowed upon me
The quarrel is not mine
But virtues, whose right Hand is armed with Justice!
Enter Captain. Punish not where you owe your Heart, but let
Both our revenges meet in that Impostor;
I find your noble Soul return; Lord General
While I retire with this fair Queen* whom not
One violent accent shall affright, much less
A rude attempt, take hence that counterfeit,
And cut his Head off.

Ros. O my dearest Lord?

Leon. The rest may if they please find mercy.

Capt. I were best be of this side.

Leon. Away with him.

Ferd. Insulting Prince, thou dare not.

Leon. How Sir, dare not?

Ferd. I said it,
Thy better, being a King, in my own right,
Without her charity, proclaimed and justified,
By Birth a Prince.

Leand. All this is truth Sir.

Leon. You must not Cozen thus my faith, away;
Cut off his Head.

Alfon. Dispatch you with the Queen,
Let me alone to make his Head secure.

Leand. Nay take mine too. I Will wait on him in death,
It shall begin my service.

R^s. Cruel Prince.

Que. What fate must I obey?

Ros. My death will add some lines
Unto thy bloody Chronicle; pray let us die together.

Leon. You shall speak, her sentence Madam.

Que. She must live then.

Leon. To all we offer mercy, but to Ferdinand,
His doom is fixed; come Madam.

Que. Whither Sir?

Leon. I know the way to your Chapel, he that loves us
Make have, and bring the Priest.

Capt. That Is I, I know
Her Chaplains, they are my friends, and all good fellows.
Exit.
Ferd. Pray can you tell me, where, or what I am
Or what I must do next?

Alfon. Yes, you must dye.

Ferd. Let not that grieve you Gentlemen, it is nothing
To part with life, and if but my Rosania would not weep
Methinks I could shake off this dust, and leap
To Immortality without a guide,
And in that cheerful flight prepare the blessed
With so much praise and wonder of thy virtue,
They shall be more in love with thee, than I,
And double all their prayers to bring thee to 'em.

Ros. No we will dye together.

Al^. You shall.

Ferd. How?

Alf. Both live, and love, and bless my age the witness.
Do You know me?

Rosa. Father?

Ferd. Guardian.

Leand. Alfonso, my noble Kinsman.

Alf. How joys flow in my Heart, to see this constancy!

Ferd. How came you to be his?

Alf. I have deceived the Prince, our forces are Valentia's,
Not Arragons, which he by Letters sent for
In his revenge, but we met the Intelligence
And arrived sooner, to pretend our selves
The Army he expected; you shall know more hereafter.

Ferd. I want a knowledge where to begin my gratitude,
The joys you bring are mighty, and overcome us.
O my Ros^^ia?

Ros. This was beyond hope.

Enter Captain. Capt. So, so, it is done, he has mumbled up the ceremony;
A compendious Priest may do much in few words;
They are fast enough; the Queen was wise to take him;
You are only like to be a loser Sir; they come.

Enter Leonario, Queen. Alfon. All joys to the Prince of Arragon, and the
fair Olivia.

Leon. Why not the Queen Olivia?

Alfon. Not while this Gentleman's Head is on,
believe it.

Leon. Where is Mendoza?

Alfon. Hid within this bush --
But here is Alfonso General of the Army
Sent from Valentia to assist King Ferdinand
To his native right.

L^on. Valentia?

Alfon. My Master having faild in his first aids
To Ferdinand, intende^ not ^it down
With so much loss but raised another Army,
Which in our march consulted our security
By Interception of all passage^;
Your m^ssenger by a party was surpised,
Him, stubborn to discover what he was,
Imperfect in his answer, we Interpreted
Some spy, and searc^ing f^und your Letters fraught
With mi^chief and revenge, these sent to our King
We had command to hasten our design,
And steer our course by Sea to Carthagena,
How after we arrived, we gaind your faith
And purposes, Your highness knows.

Leon. Betrayed?

Alfon. Sir, be a Prince, and just to your own honor,
And having perfected your fair desires
With her, we hope you will account your self
Most happy that you mist a power to serve
Further revenge upon a lawful Prince.
My Soldiers will obey me now, although
To help your Marriage I appeared no friend
To Ferdinand.

Leand. Who was the Prince preserved
By me, and sent an Infant to this Lord,
My noble Kinsman.

Alfon. Him I bred, till time
And strength might arm him to return, and claim
His own.

Leon. Leandro denied this before.

Leand. To my dishonor, 'twas a coward fear
To lose my self unprofitably

Leon. I apprehend with wonder.

Ferd. If you repent not^ love and our alliance,
She shall be worth your best embrace, and we
Forgetful of your passion, entertain you
With all affection to our blood.

Leon. I meet it,
And satisfied in this story, Joy I was
Prevented; I congratulate your Stars Sir;
Nor is this treasure of less price to me
Than when her Temples were enchac'd with Empire.

Que. This love will give my soul another form.

Ferd. Our story has been full of change, but love
Has met a glorious victory, and tied
Our souls together with most firm embraces.
My Lord Leandro you shall to Valentia,
With our best thanks and greeting to the King;
His Armies charge is outs beside what else
We owe his Royal bounty. Once more welcome
Alfonso now my Father, witness I
Preserve my faith to my Rosania,
I hear the Priest call us to other rites,
His Altar does expect another pair,
Make have to light his Tapers with thine eyes
And make our hearts each others Sacrifice.

Exeunt Omnes* FINIS.
Epilogue,
Captain. Gentlemen,
I Am no Epilogue, I come to pray
You Would tell me your opinion of the Play,
Is the Plot current? may we trust the wit
Without a Say-Master to autorise it?
Are the lines Sterling? do they hold conceit?
And every piece with your allowance, weight?
That when you come abroad, you will not report
You are sorry to have given white money for it?
So, so, I know your meaning, now pray tell
How did the action please ye, was it well?
How did King Stephen do, and the other Prince?
Enough, enough, I apprehend, and since
I am at questions w'ee, tell me faith
How do you like the Captain? ha? he says,
I Will tell you, y' are my friends, none here, he knows,
I mean you of the Gentry, t'whom he ows
No money, will enter a false action,
And let the rest look to it, if there be one,
Among his City creditors, that dares,
He has vowed to press, and send him to the Wars.

FINIS.
THE IMPOSTVRE A Tragi-Comedie, AS It was Acted at the private House IN BLACK
FRIARS.

WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY.

Never Printed before.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the Three Pigeons, and Humphrey
Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Curch-yard. 1652.

TO SIR ROBERT BOLLES Baronet.
SIR,
IT has been a Complement with some, when they have treated Friends, to
profess a barrenness in that which they had prepared not without studied
charge, and Curio sitie. As I was never so insolent to magnify my own, being
best acquainted with my weak abilities: so I should deserve a just affront to
my self, and undervalue your person, to present you with any thing were first
cheap in my own opinion. Sir, this Poem, I may with modesty affirm, had a fair
reception, when ^t was personated on the stage, and may march in the first rank
of my own compositions, which directed now by my humble devotion, comes from
the press to kiss your hand, and bear your noble Name in the dedication. I
cannot have so much prejudice upon your nature, to think you will decline it,
and should I abate those other characters of honor that shine upon you, your
indulgence to Music and singular love to the worthy professors eminently, show
the harmony of your soul, and while Poetry is received a Musical part of
humane knowledge, I cannot despair of your candid entertainment. Sr. I beseech
you take it, as an earnest of my thoughts to serve you, I am assured it brings
with it, beside the acknowlegment of your late obligation upon me, ambitious
desires to preserve my interest in your favor, while I subseribe my self,

Sir,
The humblest of your Honourers, Ia: Shirley.
The Prologue.
OUr poet not full confident he says,
When Theaters free vote had crowned his plays,
Came never with more trembling to the stage,
Since that poetic S^hism possessed the age.
A Prologue must have more wit than the play,
He knows not what to write, fears what to say.
He has been stranger long to'th' English scene,
Knows not the mode, nor how with artfull pen,
To charm your airy souls; beside, he sees
The Muses have forsook their groves, the trees
That feared no thunder, and were safely worn
By Phoebus own priests, are now rudely torn
By every scurrile wit that can but say
He made a Prologue to a new -- no play.
But let 'em pass; you Gentlemen that sit
Our judges, great Commissioners of wit,
Be pleased I may one humble motion make,
It Is that you would resolve for the authors sake,
In The progress of his play not to be such
Who Will understand too little, or too much
But choose your way to Judge; to the Ladies one
Address from the Author, and the Prologue's done,
In all his Poems, you have been his care,
Nor shall you need to wrinckle now that fair
Smooth Alablaster of your brow, no fright
Shall strike chaste ears, or dye the harmlese white
Of any cheek with blushes, by this pen
No Innocence shall bleed in any scene,
If then your thoughts secured you smile, the w^se
Will lear^ to like by looking on your eyes.
Persons.
Duk of Mantua. Honorio, his Son. Flaviano, The Dukes Creature. Leonato, The
Duke of Ferrara's Son. Petronio, a noble man of Ferrara. Bertoldi, an insolent
Coward, son to Florelia. Claudio, a creatvre of Flaviano. Volternio Hortensio
Colonells. Antonio, a Gent. Friar. Pandolfo, a servant of the Tavern. Soldiers.
Servants. Abbess. Fioretta, Daughter to the Duke of Mantua. Donebella, Sister
to Leonato. Juliana, A Mistress of Flaviavo. Florelia, A noble Lady, Mother to
Bertoldi. Ladies.
THE IMPOSTURE
Enter Duke Honorio, Flaviano. (at several Doors.) Duke. NO Army yet
discovered?

Flav. None.

Duke We are lost.

Honor. Despair not sir.

Duke Away, thy confidence is folly,
Is not danger round about us,
From every part destruction staring us
In The face? this City, like a fatal Center,
Wherein the bloody lines of War, and Famine,
Prepare to meet?

Flav. And every minute we expect a Battery.

Honor. The walls are not so easily made dust,
As the besiegers would persuade our faith;
Disarm not your own hearts, my confidence
Tells me we shall not suffer, the Duke of
Ferrara may send yet to raise the siege.

Duke Fond Boy, it was thy counsel to depend
Upon his aids, and promise Fioretta,
Thy Sister, with so great a dowry to
The Dukes vainglorious Son; fame has beli'd
His valor, and we now are cheated of
Our lives and Dukedom.

Honor. Sir, with my duty safe, let me entreat you
Not stain the character of a Prince so much;
The interest we have in that great Title
Should make us wise in our belief; for when
Princes break faith, Religion must dissolve,
And nature groan with burden of the living
Beside his Son Leonato, how ever
Traduced or sullied by some Traitors envy,
Deserves a noble fame, and loves the hope
Of our alliance; I never saw his person
But, twere a sin, honor could not forgive
In us to question him.

Duke We fool our selves;
Lets think of timely Articles and yield.

Flav. Whilst there is hope of mercy.

Hon Oh! this want
Of man will make all our well meaning stars
Forfiet their kind aspects, and turn their influence to death

Flav. My Lord, I cannot be concerned in name
And honor with your person, whose least blood
Is worth ten thousand arteries of mine,
Therefore while such necessities invade us
I cannot but prefer your lives, and in
My duty counsel, you would think of what
Is offered here, rather than hazard all
By a vain expectation of an Army
From Leonato, who with all his forces
Is not yet sure to prosper in our cause.

Duke. Consider that Honorio.

Flav. Nay, should Heaven
So smile upon us, that his sword o'r come,
This to weak apprehension may promise
Our glory, but examine well the close,
There may be greater danger in his victory,
Than all our want of him can threaten.

Hono. You perplex my understanding.

Flav. He expects your Sister the reward of his great service.

Hono. Is it not Justice?

Flau. Yes, forbid it goodness,
He should not thrive in his fair hope, and promises;
But if her Highness find not in her heart
Consent, to meet the Prince with love and marriage,
Who shall defend us from his power? that must
Keep us in awe, and this earth, panting yet
With frights and sufferings of the War.

Hono. It is my wonder Lord Flaviano, your wisdom
Should weave these wild impossibilities;
My Sister not consent? nature, her birth,
Obedience, honor, common gratitude,
Beside ambition of what can be hoped for
To make her happy, will give wings to her desires.

Duke I cannot tell.

Hono. I cannot think,
Your reason sir can be so much corrupted,
To look upon my Sister with that fear,
She should not fly to meet our great preserver;
Do you believe, she now among holy Virgins,
Lead thither by her own devotion,
During this War to pray, and weep for us
(Tears, whose clear Innocence might tempt an Angel
To gather up the drops, and string for Saints
A Crystal Rosarie) can wish us safe
By his victorious arm, without a will
To be her self his own reward? her virtue
Must needs instruct her that, and we apply
No motive to her heart --

A shout within. Du. What news?

Enter Claudio. Claud. From the Watchtower we descry an Army
Marching this way; the Sun which has thus long
Muffled his face in clouds, as it delighted
In their approach, does gild their way, and shine
Upon their burgonets to dazzle the faint eyes
Of our beseigers.

Hono. ' It Is Leonato.

Claud. Our Enemies, whose Troops circle the Town,
Are making have to meet 'em, and the Foot
Quitting their trenches, now are gathering
Into a body, as it seems resolved
To give 'em battle.

Duke. We have life again.
H^norio, collect what strength we have,
And make a sally at your best advantage.
It Is good to engage 'em both ways.

Hon. How my thoughts triumph already!
Ex.
Duke. Now my Son is gone,
Who is not of our Counsel; we must think
How to behave us, if the Prince succeed,
Our daughter which we promised him in marriage,
Being already sent away, the price
Of his great Victory.

Flav. Trouble not your self,
Great Sir, your wisdom that inclined your faith
To my true Character of the Prince,
And took my counsel for her absence, shall
Applaud my future policy; he is not come
To conquest yet, however Princes are not
Obliged to keep, what their necessities
Contract, but prudently secure their states
And dear posterity; trust to my care,
Fioretta is no match for Ferraras Son,
A Prince deep read in lusts, faithless, and cruel,
So will a Turtle with a Vulture show,
Or Lamb yoked with a Tiger: she is a pledge
Destined by better fate to Crown your age
And heart with blessings Sir.

Du. Hark,
The d^ums talk louder, from the battlements,
I may behold their fight, and see which Army,
Conquest, now hovering in the air, will mark
Her glorious perch, upon whose Plumed heads
She may advance, and clap her brazen wings.
Ex.
Soft Alarm Flav. Sir I Will attend: Claudio.

Claud. My Lord.

Flav. Thou left'st the Princes Fioretta safe at Placentia?

Claud. Yes Sir.

Flav. How did she like her progress? thou did urge
It was my care of her, to take her from
The fright and noise of War.

Claud. I did my Lord.

Flav. And did she taste it well?

Claud. To my apprehension exceeding well,
And gave me strickt commands
To say she will remember, and reward
Your love and care of her.

Flav. Did she name love?

Claud. The very word she used, and I returned,
How much your study and ambition was
To merit her fair thoughts.

Flav. And did thou scatter, as I instructed
Here and there dark language, to
Dissafect her with the Prince, to whom
The Duke has rashly made a promise?

Claud. All; I had failed my duty else my Lord.

Flav. Call me thy friend, thou have deserved me, now
Attend the Duke -- so, now my next art must be,
Exit. Claud. How to come off with with Leonato, if his
Army prevail, the Duke must be instructed;
Honorio thinks his Sister still in the Nunnery;
That thought must be preserved; a thousand wheels
Move in my spacious brain, whose motions are
Directed by my ambition to possess
And call Fioretta mine, while shallow Princes
I make my State decoyes, then laugh at 'em.
Alarm, Enter Honorio lead by Claudio over the Stage wounded. The Prince
Honorio wounded; fate I bless thee.
How is it with your highness?

Hon I am shot sir.

Flav. Would it were dangerous -- be careful of him;
A curse upon that hand that mist his heart.
Ex. Hon. So, so, fortune thou shall have eyes again
If thou would smile on mischief, I will build thee
An Altar, and upon it sacrifise
Folly and all her children, from whose blood
A curled smoke shall rise, thick as the mists
That breath from Incense to perfume and hide
The sacrifising Priest; sight on,
Ye are brave Fellows, he that conquers may
Get Honor, and deep wounds, but I the day.
Exit. Alarm and Retreat. Then Enter Leonato, Volternio, Hortensio, and
Soldiers in Triumph, at one door; at the other, Enter Men with boughs of
Laurel singing before the Duke, Flaviano, Claudio. You Virgins, that did late
despair
To keep your Wealth from cruel men,
Ty up in silk your careless hair,
Soft peace is come again.
Now lovers eyes may gently shoot
A flame that wo'not kill:
The Drum was angry, but the Lute
Shall wisper what you will.
Sing Io, Io, for his sake,
Who has restored your drooping heads,
With choice of sweetest flowers make
A garden where he treads;
Whilst, we whole groves of Laurel bring,
A petty triumph to his brow,
Who is the Master of our Spring,
And all the bloom we ow.

Duk. Our hearts were open sir before the gates
To Entertain you, I see Laurells grow
About your temples, where, as in a grove
Fair Victory Enamored on your brow
Delights to sit, and cool her reeking head
And crimson tresses in your shade.

Flav. The City
In glory of this day shall build a Statue
To you their great preserver, whose tough brass
Too hard for the devouring teeth of age
Shall eat up Time, to keep your fame Eternal;
Our active youth in honor of your name
Shall bring again the old Olympic games,
And willing to forget what is past in time,
And story, count their years from this days triumph,
As if the World began but now; the wives
As if there were no legends past of love,
Shall only talk of you, and your great Valor;
And careless how man's race should be continued
Grow old in wonder of your deeds; our Virgins
Leaving the natural tremblings that attend
On timorous maids, struck pale at sight of blood,
Shall take delight to tell what wounds you gave,
Making the horror sweet to hear them sing it;
Their hands at the same time composing Garlands
Of Roses, Myrtle, and the conquering Bay,
To adorn our Temples, and the Priests, and while
The Spring contributes to their art, make in
Each garden a remonstrance of this battle,
Where flowers shall seem to Fight, and every plant
Cut into Forms of green Artillery,
And instruments of War, shall keep alive
The memory of this day, and your great Victory^
Yet all that can be studied short of you,
Our best, a rude Imperfect Monument
Of your deserved honors.

Leo. You Are too bountiful
In language sir, the service we have done
May merit your acknow^edgment, which though
The Justice of your cause directed first
To this success, was not without a hope
Of a reward you promised, and I value it
More than you can esteem all your pr^servings;
So much has fame preferred your Daughters Virtue
To every excellence.

Duke. This adds to what
We held before excess of honor to us.
I had but a part in the Universal benefit
Your Valor gave, but this affection
Falls like a happy Influence on my self
And blood, whose aged s^^r^ams you fill with blessings.
My Daughter shall be yours, in which I sum
My lives chief satisfaction. My Lord
Go to the house of Benedictine Nuns,
Among whose sweet society our Daughter,
During this War and tumult, went to offer
Her prayers for our deliveran^e.
I am in a storm, and now must stand
(aside) My desperate fate.

Horten. I hope she is not turned Nun?

Leo. I should not like it.

Vol. May not we visit the holy house? it is pity so much
Sweet flesh, should be engros'd and barrell'd up
With penitential pickle before their time,
That would keep fresh and fair, and make just work
For their Confessions. I do not like the women
Should be cabled up.

Hor. I think so.

Vol. I would this Virgin would be peevish now.

Hor. Why so?

Volt. That we might have some sport among the Leverets.
For I would so inflame the General
He were affronted, that we should have all
Commission to work into the Warren.

Le. We do want a person here, whose name is great
In The Register of honor, it would much
Enlarge our present happiness to Embrace him,
Your Son the prince Honorio. Duke. 'Twas his chance
Upon a sally, when your colors gave
Us Invitation to the Field, and spirited
Our soldiers, to receive a shot, whose cure
May excuse the want of his attendance sir,
Nor will I doubt his wounds are doubled by
The thought he cannot wait upon your person.

Le. He should have honored us, and made me proud
To know, whom so much fair desert has made
Dear in the voice and love of men: but I
Shall not despair to see him. We want
A limb of our own Army, where is Signior
Bertoldi, that came with us to see Fashions?
I hope we have not lost him.

Horten. Sir, I know not, I fear he is slain.

Volt. He wo'not die so nobly;
He Will nere give up the ghost without a Fetherbed.
He was sick last night at the report we were
But three leagues off the Enemy, and called
For a hot caudle. I that knevv his cold
Disease persuaded him to drink, which he
Did fiercely as I could vvish, in hope to see him
Valiant and walk the round, but quite against
Nature his ague shook him more, and all the Drink
Which was the full proportion of a gallon
Came out at's forehead in faint sweat; he had
Not moved ten paces, but he fell down backward
And swore he was shot with a cold bullet; how
They rould him like a Barrel back to his Tent,
For levers could not raise him to make use
Of's feet again, I know not, nor since saw him.

Hort. I hope he is still asleep.

Volt. But when he wakes,
And finds the Army marched away, He dares not,
Go home again alone, and how he will venture
O'r the dead bodies hither -- he has don't.

Enter Bertoldi. Ber. Where is the General?

Leo. Here comes our mirth.

Hort. A walking Armorie; noble Signior Bertoldi.

Bertol. If you want Pikes or Muskets there, I could
Ha brought field pieces, but I durst not venture
My chine.

Leon. Where had you these?

Bert. Ask, ask the men I killed, if they deny
A syllable I Will forswear the Wars.

Volt. He has disarmed and robbed the dead.

Hort. A coward has impudence to rob a Church.

Volt. He durst not take 'em from a man that had
But so much life in him to gasp or groan,
That noise would fright him.

Hort. I rejoice Signior, you are safe come home.

Bert. I would I were at home, and you get me
Among your Guns again -- how is it Volterino?

Enter Flaviano. Volt. This news will much exalt your Mothers heart.

Leon. He is returned but with a melancholy face.
Where is the Princess?

Du. Where is our Daughter?

Flav. Where her devotion I fear will make
This Dukedom most unhappy, if your virtue
Exceed not what is read in other Princes,
It was my fear that place, and conversation,
Would mortisie too much that active heat
Should wait on the desires of highborn Ladies.

Leon. The mystery?

Volt. Do not you find it? they have nunnified her.

Flav. Sir, your pardon;
She whom first fear and fright of War persuaded
To join her prayer and person with the Virgins
In the religious Cloister, by what art
Or holy magic won, is now resolved --

Leon. What, has she vowed?

Flau. Until a year be finished
By revolution of the days great guide,
Not to forsake the Nunnery, but spend
Her hours in thankful prayers to Heaveu for this
Great victory.

Volt. So, so, It will come to the battery I talked on.

Duke It cannot be.

Leo. It must not be

Volt. I am of that opinion my Lord,
It must not be, this is a stratagem.

Flau. She humbly prays you would interpret this
No breach of filial piety, nor your
Highness a will to wrong so great a merit
As has engaged all fortunes here, and lives
To bleed for you, but weigh in your best charity
That duties are first paid to Heaven, the spring
And preservation of what makes us happy,
And she is confident when you consider --

Leon. How much my honor suffers, to employ
The strength I have to punish this affront.

Bert. A pox upon it, we shall have more fighting now

Duke I hope you have no thought of any p^^ctice
Here to deserve that language?

Volt. You Are abused.

Leon. If you be her Father sir, I must expect
What did engage me hither, and without
Delays, or leave this City in a flame.

Bert. More Fireworks?

Leon. In whose Ashes I will bury this foul ingratitude.

Duke We are ruined all.

Bert. There is not so much danger, to be put
In Rank and File with Pye-meat in an Oven,
If a man were certain to come out again
Dow-bak'd.

Leon. Yet stay. I have considered,
I may have leave to see this Frozen Lady.

Duke We are more undone.

Flav. Your person may prevail sir,
And by some better charm, gain her consent,
Or if you please not to engage your self
Upon the trouble of a hasty visit,
The presence of her Father, and what else
We can prepare to keep your smile upon us,
Shall be enforced, to clear how much we aim
At the perfection of your wishes.

Bert. So, so. Leon. Prospen.

Flav. I have now^ courage sir to serve your will,
And am of the sudden confident.

Leon. It pleases.
Exit Leon.
Duke It is impossible.

Flav. Promise any thing
In such a strait, and not despair to effect it.
Be private men content with their poor Fathom,
Since Heaveu we limit not, why should not Kings
Next Gods, perform the second mighty things?
Your ear --
Exit.
ACT II.
Enter Flaviano and Abbess (with a Letter.) Flav. YOu will obey the Dukes
command?

Abbes. Good Princes,
Punish, not teach us sacrilege; I Will obey
A thousand sufferings ere such a rape --

Flav. A rape?

Abbess. Of honor, Honesty, Religion;
I am placed here to preserve, and not betray^
The Innocent; should I instead of prayer,
Chaste life, the holiness of vow, of discipline,
With those austerities that keep wild blood
In calm obedience, now begin to teach^
Soul-murdering liberty, the breach of all
Was promised Heaven.

Flav. Wy' Madam you mistake,
We ask no Virgin to turn Whore, we only
Desire you would persuade some pretty Nun,
In this extremity, to take upon her
The Princess Fioretta, whom Leonato
Never saw, and be his Wife in honest marriage.

Ab. Can you be thus
Unjust to him, so late preserved your lives?

Flav. Trouble you not your reverend head with that,
He shall be satisfied, and you remain
Still mother of the Maid, no more sour faces,
But turn your wit to'th' bufiness.

Ab. Never sir.

Flav. Take heed and have a care of this enclosure,
The Dukes breath makes all flat, it is yet no common;
(...) are old, and should be wise.

Ab. I would be honest.

Flav. Show it in your obedience; will you do it?

Ab. Never.

Flav. Do You hear? I sent unto this holy place,
A Damzel called Iuliana, she is in your Catalogue,
And yet but in probation, cause I see,
You make so nice a conscience, so severe,
In The rules of honesty, and would not have,
Your Virgin province touched with least defilemen^,
Pray let me speak with her, it will concern you.

Ab. Would you pervert her?

Flav. I know not what you call perverting,
But she has not too much Nuns flesh,
And it is my charity to your chaste Order
To give you timely notice.

Ab. What do I hear?

Flav. No more than you may justify in time,
If things prove right, she was a merry soul
And you have not spoild her, if you mean to be
No Midwife, let me talk with her a while.

Ab. Protect us Virgin thoughts
Exit.
Flav. So, so, this was reserved to wind up all,
It may be fortunate;
I know her spirit high, and apt to catch at
Ambitious hopes and freedom, some good counsel
May form her to my purpose, I have plunged
Too far, to hope for safety by return,
I Will trust my destiny to the stream, and reach
The point I see, or leave my self a rock
In the relentless waves; she is here, I Am armed.

Enter Iuliana and Abbess. Iul. By your own goodness, reverend Mother give
No belief to him; though he be a great man,
He has not been held guilty of much virtue,
Yet it is my wonder he should stain my Innocence;
Pray in your presence, give me leave to acquit
My Virgin honor; for the wealth of all
The World, I would not have this shame be whispered
To the stain of our profession.

Enter Nun. N. Madam, the Duke.

Ab. The Duke?

Flav. Peace to the fair Iuliana.

Exit Abbess. Iul. You Are not noble,
A most dishonord Lord, your titles cannot
Bribe my just passion, who will trust a man?
Oh sir, you are as black, nay have a soul
As leprous with ingratitude, as the Angels
Are white with Innocence; was it not enough
To rob me of my honor, the chief wealth
Of Virgins, and confine me to my tears,
Which never can wash away my guilt (should I
Live here to melt my soul into a stream
With penitence) but when I had resigned
The World with hope to pray, and find out mercy,
You must thus haunt me with new shame and brand
My forehead here, as if you meant to kill
My better essence by despair, as you
Have stained my body.

Flav. Deer Iuliana I
Confess I injured thee thou knew'st no sin
But from my charm, 'twas only I betrayed thee
To loss of thy dear honor, then of liberty,
For 'twas my practice, not thy pure devotion
Made thee a Recluse first; but let not passion
Lose what I would not only save from shipwreck,
But make as happy as thy thoughts can wish thee;
By thy wronged self it is true, nor could I choose
Another way than by discovery
Of both our shames to right thee, I am come
To make thee satisfaction in so high
And unexampled way of honor, thou
Shall say I did deserve to be more wicked,
When thou have weighed the recompense.

Iulia. You amaze me

Flav. Collect thy senses, and discreetly mind me;
Thou can not be concerned so much alive
In any other story, hear me gently
And prize the wealth of every syllable.

Enter Duke and Abbess. Ab. Had you been pleased to have left your daughter
still
My charge and svveet companion, I should
Have left no duty unessaid, to have shevvn
In what degree I honored her, but I
Must not dispute your royal pleasure, though
With some sad thoughts to separate, I resigned her
To your commands.

Duke. It was your virtue Madam, she found no
Consent to be professed, nor love the Prince,
To whom I promised her a Wife, although
Our fears keep warm his hope, in his belief
She Is here enclosed still, but without thy help,
We are all lost.

Iulia. The Prince Leonato?

Flav. There Is a preferment, this is considerable.

Iulia. If you my Lord be serious; a Princess!
The change would do well.

Flav. Be but confident to manage it.

Iulia. Has he not seen the Princess by picture?

Fla. Never.

Iulia. Strange!

Fla. 'T was a ceremony, in the necessities of our state,
The Duke never thought on, and I meant not to insert it,
As knowing Fioretta had no zeal,
To what her Father darkly had contracted;
His Highness does expect thee.

Iulia. It would be
More for my honor, if he took the pains,
To visit our Religious house, and then --

Flav. It shall be so.

Iulia. But twill be necessary,
You purge me to the Abbess, no suspicion,
Must live within her thought.

Flav. I apprehend;
Oh! you have shot a trembling through my soul,
I dare not kiss your hand, the Earth you tread on,
Would too much grace the lips have so profaned you.
Madam your pardon; sir be you the witness,
I have wronged this noble Virgins honor,
It was my anger, and revenge upon
Your goodness that so late opposed me made
Me careless, where I flung disgrace and scandal,
Thus I implore her mercy and forgiveness,
Take her white thoughts to your again, she is
As innocent from sinful act by me
As the chaste womb that gave me life.

Duke It Is piety,
Thus to restore the Innocent, I conceive not
His aim in this.

Abbess It Is satisfaction.

Iuli. When I stray from your sweet precepts --

Abbes. In, I am confirmed.

Flav. All to our expectation, she is prepared,
A Mistress for the Prince.

Duke But now I think on it
She must not marry him, it will breed ill blood.

Flav. By all means marry him, there is no other way
To send him hence, and quit us of the Army,
I Will instantly acquaint him how I prosper.
Exit.
Duke It must not be, my honor will bleed for it.
I have been too much guided by Flaviano.
Madam --

Abesse Your face is troubled.

Duke No, my heart
Which you may curc with honor, as I have
Contrived it now --

Abbess I shall study with my loss of life
To gain your bosom peace.

Duke I like this Virgin,
I know my Lord here has been practicing,
But finds her not inclined to that extent
We had proposed, she is virtuous, you shall
Counsel her only but to take the name
Of my Fioretta, but not change her life
To marry with the Prince; I do believe,
Her chaste, Oh let your goodness keep her still so,
And fortify her virtuous thoughts, I doubt not
But she with holy eloquence, and pretense
Of vow, and Virgin sanctity,
May so prevail upon him both to save her self,
Our honors, and the Kingdom from a sacrifice.
May not this be?

Ab. Such extremes I know not.

Du. If she persist a chaste, and noble Virgin,
You must dispense, we have but little time
For pause, unless this present care be found,
We all must bleed to death upon the wound.

Exeunt. Enter Bertoldi. Bert. Hum! shall I never fight? drink wo'not do it,
No nor a Whore the greater provocation;
I speak it to my shame, I never durst
Fight for my wench, yet Gentlemen commend
My confidence at paying of a reckoning,
There I can kill 'em all with courtesy,
Discharge my Pieces like a Mr. Gunner at a great supper,
Yet I am not valiant, this must be mended someway.
Enter Volterino. Volterino? a word;
It Is not unknown to you, that I am a coward.

Volt. No, not a coward, but you, are not sir,
If I were put to answer upon Oath,
So valiant altogether as Don Hercules,
That strangled a great Bull with his forefinger
And's Thumb, and killed the King of Troys great Coach horse
With a box of the car.

Ber. Pox on it, do not abuse me, I shall take it
Scurvily and you deny it.

Volt. But you wo'not beat me.

Ber. There Is the thing, I know it
As well as you can tell me, I am base,
And in plain terms a coward.

Volt. Why do not beat thy self for being one?

Bert. Then I durst fight; no, I was begotten
In a great Frost, between two shaking Agues,
I never shall be valiant, who can help it?
But when you come home again, if you will but
Svvear I am valiant --

Volt. You shall pardon me.

Bert. Come, my Mother shall make you amends; a ha,
You love her, she is a Lady and a Widow,
That has the Goldfinches, hark in your ear,
You shall have her.

Volt. Shall I have her?

Bert. A word to the wise.

Volt. Would I were sure on it.
If I have thy Mother, I will not only svvear thou art,
But make thee valiant.

Bert. Would it were possible, upon that condition
You should have my Sister too.

Vo^t. She Is dead.

B^^t. (...) she were alive I mean --

Volt. ^arewell, we will treat again, and if I live
Thou shall be Julius Caesar.
Exit.
Enter Hortensio. Bert. When I dye, thou shall be Caesa^s heir.
Noble Hortensio.

Hort. I am in have, what is the matter?

Bert. There lies your way, a hundred thousand Ducats
Will find entertainment somewhere else.

Hort. Can thou help me to 'em?

Bert. Yes, and a better business.

Hort. How? where noble Bertoldi?

Bert. Wy -- but you are in have.

Hort. No, no, where is all this money?

Bert. Safe enough in a place.

Hort. But how shall I come by it?

Bert. You know my Mother.

Hort. The rich Lady Florclia, the Court Widow,
She Is my Mistress.

Bert. You shall have her.

Hort. Shall I?

Enter Leonato, Flaviano, Volterino. Bert. Yes, and be Master of as much money
As will make you mad.
The Prince, hark in your ear.

Fla. I knew I should prevail, and I am happy,
There Is no frost now within her, if your excellence
Would grace the Monastery with a visit
And satisfy your self, your presence will
Perfect the business, and be a just excuse
To some nice ceremonies that detain
Her Person to comply with virgin modesty,
The Duke will meet you there.

Leon. I will attend him.

Flav. You will consider Sir it is a place
Not used to public treaties, though dispensed with
For this your solemn view, and conference,
Your person may be trusted there, without
A numerous train.

Leon. You shall direct me Sir.
Volterino, you shall only wait upon me.
Sir when you please.

Flav. I Am proud to be your conduct.

Exit. Leo. Flav. Volt. Bert. You shall have her
And her Estate, that is fair, she has enough
To undo the Devil if he go to law with her,
My Father's dead and has told him that already.

Hort. I Will do it.

Bert. Here Is my hand, my mother's thine.

Hort. Not my mother.

Bert. She shall be any thing I Will have her,
Do you but persuade her I am valiant,
And I Will venture to beat her, and she dare
Deny to marry any man I please
To call my Father in law.

Hort. Let Us walk and think on it.

Bert. You may swear any thing,
And you pawn your soul for me,
You know you cannot be a loser.

Ex. Nunns Discovered singing O fly my soul, what hangs upon
thy drooping wings,
and weighes them down,
With love of gaudy mortal things?
The Sun is now in the East, each shade
as he does rise,
is shorter made,
That Earth may lesson to our eyes:
Oh be not careless then, and play
until the Star of peace
Hide all his beams in dark recess;
Poor Pilgrims needs must lose their way,
When all the shadows do entrease.
Enter Duke, Leonato, Flaviano, and Volterino. Soft Music, after the Song
Enter Iuliana Abbess, and Nunns. Le. She is exceeding fair, what pity 'twere
Such beauty and perfection should be
Confined to a melancholy Cell: I approach
You Madam with the reverence of a votary,
You look so like a Saint, yet nature meant
You should not with such early have translate
Your self to heaven, till earth had been made happy
With living modells from your excellent figure.
You that become a cloud, and this dull dress
So well, whose sight does pale, and freeze the blood,
How will you shine to admiration
Of every eye, when you put on those Ornaments
That fit your name and birth? if like a statue
Cold and unglorified by art, you call
Our sense to wonder, where shall we find eyes
To stand the brightness, when you are turned a shrine,
Embellisht with the burning light of Diamonds,
And other gifts that dwell like stars about you?

Iuli. If you do fancy me an object so
Prodigious, for the safety of your eyes
And others, tender-sighted, give consent,
I may not change this poverty and place,
(More pleasing to my self, than all the pride
Can wait those Goddesses, at Court you bow to)

Leon. And yet 'twere heresy in me to say
You could receive addition or glory
By the contributary blaze of Wealth,
Or other dress, which art and curiosity
Can form; you are not by them graced, but they
By you made beautiful. Jewels near your eye,
Take soul and Luster, which but once removed
Look dull as in their quarry.

Fla. He is taken.

Leon. I now applaud my fate, and must account
My undertaking in this War to save
Your Dukedom, but the shadow of a service,
When I consider my reward. Oh! have
To make me Envied of the World, and once
Possessed of you, to undervalue all
But Heaven, of which you are the fairest copy.

Iuli. My Lord, our study here is life, not language,
And in that little time I Have had of practice,
My tongue has learned simplicity, and truth;
You are a Prince, and in your Cr^ation
But one degree from Angels, strive to rise
That one round higher, and y' are perfect; I am
By my good Fathers leave, and the sweet rules
Of this Religious order, now in the way
To meet another Bridegroom, before whom
While you stand a competitor, you fall
To Atoms; sir my love is planted here,
And I have made a vow, which your own charity
Will bid me not to violate, (your triumph
Being the spring of my imperfect duty,)
That for a year, I Will spend my time among
This happy Quire, to offer up my Prayers
And humble gratitude to Heaven, a weak
Oblation for our safeties.

Flav. Ha? how is this?

Leon. My Lord, did you not say you had prevailed?
What mockery is this?

Flav. I am undone.
What does the Gipsey mean, she will betray all.
Most excellent Madam.

Iu. Oh my Lord employ
Your counsel, to advance not Kill our Virtue,
Remember where, and what I am.

Flav. So, so.

Volt. Sir will you suffer this? a new affront.

Iulia. I am resolved
To live and pay you better tribute here
For your affection, and unequaled service.
Here no distraction will afflict my prayers,
Which trust me I will offer chastely for you,
At every hour of my devotion.
It Is you, next Heaven, that gave this blessing to us,
To meet, and in the holy Quire breath up
Our sacred Hymes, while Angels Echo to us,
And Heaven delighted with our harmony,
Opening her azure curtains will present us
A vision of all the joys we pray and hope for.

Flav. This my instructions?

Iulia. O think my Lord
To what a loss of Heaven your love invites me,
Yet let me not be thought while I pretend
The choice, and sweetness of a Recluse, I
Should in a thought accuse your worth, who are
The man of all the World I most could fancy;
If I be seen (...) blush, make it no sin,
I know it is but honorable love
Wings your desire, and that which should prefer you,
Is merit of your Sword that cut our way,
To freedom and soft peace, Religions Pillow,
The Nurse of Science, and the general blessing,
You have a title yet more strong pleads for you,
The contrac^, and the promise of a Prince
A chain with many Links of Adamant.

Duke I like not that.

Iuli. To bind and make me yours,
When I have named these several interests,
And look upon my self so short of merit,
I chide your unkind destiny, at such
Expense of honor to go off unsatisfied,
And quickly should despise my self the cause
Of your distaste, but that my vow confirms me,
And mustring up Religious thoughts prevails,
Above my other will, made to obey you,
It Is but a year my Lord, that I have bound
My self this exile.

Leon. It Is an age.

Iuli. But while Time has one minute in his Glass of that,
Nothing shall take me hence, unless you bring
An impious strength upon this holy dwelling,
And force me from my cell, but you are far
From such a sacrilege, oh think not on it,
I Will place you in my heart while you are virtuous,
But such an Act might lose those noble thoughts
Of you I wish preserved, but I offend,
And am too large in this unwelcome argument,
May wisdom guide your Princely thoughts,
Whilst I return to pray for you.

Flav. She has orethrown all.

Volt. Sir, if you love her she
Has taught you a cunning way to make her yours,
This habit is compelled, a little force,
For form will disingage her, she does love you,
And pleaded hansomely against her self.

Leon. N^more -- I Will not despair yet of your Daughter,
This is but Virgin nicety, at the next
Meeting she may incline to smile upon me,
She Is too much treasure to be won at first
Assault, Volterino.

Exit Leon. Volt. Ho^^ Duke. Flaviano.

Flav. I did expect a storm.

Duke We are not safe yet.

Flav. I wonder why Iuliana kept not promise,
The Dog-dayes thaw her chastity, I Am mad,
Oh for some stratagem to save all yet,
But you Sir (give me leave to say) are timorous,
Princes should fix in their resolves, your conscience
Should be as subject to your will, as I am.

Duke I must confess Flaviano I had
No fancy to Iulianas marriage.

Flav. That was all my hope, how could I love the man
Durst kill him now.

Duke I shudder, what noise is that?

Flav. These horrors will eternally affright us.

Enter Leon. Bert. Volterino, H^rtensio, with swords drawn. Leo. The man that
dares be guilty of least Insolence,
To any Virgin, dies.

Exeunt Leon. Volt. Horten. Ber. My hopes are nipt, I thought to have tasted,
Nuns flesh, but the General has made it fasting day.
Ex.
Flav. I hope he means to force away Iuliana --
Ha? they attempt it, prosper'em deer fate.
Blessed beyond expectation.

Duke Do think,
We shall be safe.

Enter Leonato, Iuliana in her habit, Volterino, Hortensio. Leon. Enjoy the
other benefit of my Sword
In peace, this shall be mine.

Exit Leon. Iul. Vol. Hort. Flav. The stars dote on us.

Enter Honorio and Claudio. Hon. What unexpected tumults fright the City?

Du. You are too bold upon your wound Honorio
To come abroad.

Flav. The Prince has stolen your Sister
From the Nunnery.

Hono. He dares not
Blemish his honor so, though he deserved her,
And all our lives, should she be obstinate.

Flav. It Is done.

Honor. This Act shall lose him, death upon
The Surgeon, that has dallied with my wounds,
But I Will revenge this rape.

Duke Look to the Prince.
Exit.
Flav. I could adore my destiny, the wench sure,
Meant to be ravished thus, I kiss thy policy;
This chance has made a dancing in my blood,
While sin thrives, it is too early to be good.

Exeunt. ACT III.
Enter Antonio and Fioretta. Fior. IS this Ferraras Court?

Anto Yes Madam.

Fior. I will not yet discover, I shall find,
A time Antonio to reward thy faith
And service to me.

Enter Donabella, Florelia, Ladies. Anto. Here are Ladies Madam.

Dona. I have a great desire to see this wonder,
The Princess Fioretta, so much famed
For beauty.

Flor. Comes she with his Excellence?

Do. Most certainly, so speaks the Prince Leonato's
My Brothers Letters, and that with some difficulty,
He gaind her from the Nunnery.

Flor. Who is this?

Don. She has an excellent shape, some stranger;
Prithee Florelia ask.

Anto. This Lady Madam,
Seems to make some address this way; I know not,
Upon what Jealousy my Lady left
aside. Placentia so privately, where she
Was entertained by Flavianos Mother,
Though old, a Lady of no decrepit brain.

Fior. Antonio.

Flor. A Lady, Madam, calls her self Lauriana,
Born in Placentia, but the Wars affrighting,
Both Mantua and the confines, she came hither
With confidence of safety, till the storm
At home be over.

Dona. It is not fit a person of your quality
And presence should be engaged to common persons,
And if I may entreat, you shall consent
To be my guest at Court, which will be proud
To entertain such beauty.

Fior. It must be
Too great an honor Madam.

Don. Leonato my Brother has secured your peace at home,
Which cannot be less pleasing, if you taste
The freedom I can here provide and promise you,
We expect him every minute with the Princess
Fioretta, in whose love he holds more triumph

Fior. And yet his fame was Earlier than this conquest,
For many noble Virtues, but has your grace
A confidence that he brings Fioretta with him?

Dona. Since he left Mantua we received such letters.

Enter Petronio. Pe. Madam, the Prince is come to court, and with him
The gallant Lady we expected.

Fior. I am not well of the sudden.

Dona. Virue defend!

Pe. The good old Duke your Father, will
Show comfort in his sickbed to behold
A Son and Daughter.

Fior. Are they married?

Petro. No Madam, but I am confident
So great a joy will not be long deferred,
'Twere sin such hope should wither by delay,
They both wish to be happy in your presence,
And you at first sight of this Princely sister
Will much applaud your brothers fate.

Dona. I hope so,
How is it Madam yet?

Fior. I do beseech you
Let not your graces too much care of me
Detain you from the joy your brother brings.
Another Fioretta?

Enter Leonato. Leo. Donabella?

Dona. I shall not fear a surfeit in my joys
To see you safe.

Fior. A gallant Gentleman.

Leon. What Lady's that?

Dona. A stranger, sir, with whom I have prevailed
To grace our court a while, which will be Honored
In such a guest.

Leo. And I should call it happiness
If you would please to dwell for ever with us,
I have brought home such a companion,
For both your beauties you will not repent.

Fior. The Duke of Mantuas Daughter, I congratulate
Y^^^ double victory, and if I may,
Without imputed flattery speak my thoughts,
You did deserve her, had she to her birth,
All the additions that grace a Woman.

Leon You have conferred a bounty on me Madam,
And leave me hopeless to reward the debt
Iow this fair opinion.

Fior. Sir, the venture
You made through blood, and danger, does deserve it,
And she were impious, did not think her self
Much honored to be called your valors triumph.
I shall betray my self. Censure me not,
Immodest or suspectfull of her virtue,
Whom you have made the darling of your heart.

Enter Bertoldi. Bert. Sir the Duke calls for you.

Dona. Signior Bertoldi.

Bert. Your Graces creature.

Leon. Will it please you Madam?

Fior. I humbly pray your Highness to excuse me,
I may have time and happiness to attend you,
When with more health I may present my services,
I dare not see this Lady.

Leon. Wait you upon that Lady Signior.

Bert. With all my heart; incomparable Lady --

^ior I have servants to attend me.

Bert. But not one,
More humble, or more active for your service,
You cannot choose but know my Lady Mother;
I have not seen her yet, but she shall stay,
I Will kneel to her when I have done with you.
Exit
Enter Florelia, Volterino. Flor. But is my Son so valiant, Signior?
This War has wrought a miracle upon him.

Volt. He was a coward beyond Ela, Madam,
I must acknowledge, to whom men in pity
Of his Birth, and care of your much-loved honor
Often forgave his life, but see the turn,
He that went forth (for all our conjurings
And promise of no danger) as he had
Been marching toward Aetna, nay before
The instant fight would have given all the World
To have been assured when he came home, but one
Of every thing about him --

Flo. What do you mean?

Volt. One eye, one ear, one arm, and but one leg
To have hopt home withal, strange, how in the heat
Of The Battle he grew double, and there fought
As he had two souls; oh! had you seen
When like a Magazine he marched, with pikes
With guns and Corslets, which he took from the Enemy,
With swords more than a Surgeons sign, stuck round,
And seeming like a porcupine to shoot
The Iron Quills --

Flo. But is this possible?

Volt. I never saw a Dragon do such things

Flor. This was not by instinct, but some example
He saw in you, that waked his sleeping spirit.
And he must owe all that is Valiant in him
To your brave soul, which like a burning Comet
Flew with prodigious terror to the Enemy.

Volt. You do not Jeer your servant?

Flor. And so he, by your great blaze
Saw his next way to honor;
Nor can I but acknowledge all my joys
Now in my Son do flow from you; a soldier
Was ever high in my esteem, but you
Have placed the title nearest to me, pray
Favor me often' with your visit.

Volt. The Town's my own.

Flor. No complement good Signior, your love
If placed on me, shall find an object, though,
Not equal to your favors, not ungrateful;
I wonder he absents himself so long.

Volt. My care shall be to find him out and bring him
A welcome present to your eye. She Is caught.
Exit
Flor. These Soldiers think if they but once lay siege,
We must come in by force or c^mposition.
Although a Maiden Town may not hold out,
A Widow but well vittled with the bare
Munition of her tongue, will tire an Army;
I must suspect my Son, for all this legend,
No mighty man at arms; he is here.

Enter Bertoldi, Hortensio. Hort. Your blessing.

Flor. Take it, and with it all my prayers, thou may
Grow up in honor, and deserve to be
Thy Fathers Son.

Bert. Kiss her Hortensio, do, she is thine own.

Hort. 'Twas my ambition Madam
To wait upon my Convert, and to kiss
Your white hand.

Fler. Signior Volterino was here but now, and has
Told me such stories, Son --

Bert. Of me?
He had better eat my Spaniard, then mention me
With any scruple of dishonor.

Flor. He extolls you for ^ Soldier, and tells me wonders.

Hort. If you dare believe me Madam, your Son has
Behaved him like a Gentleman.

Bert. I confess,
I was -- but that is no matter, thank this Cavalier;
can receive and give a gash, and look on it
When I have don without your cordial waters
Shall I cut you o'r the face Mother?

Flor. Sir I am poor to recompense the honor
You have done my Son, I see he is your convert,
You that infused a soul in him cannot
Enough be glorified.

Hort. It Is within your power
Madam to overpoise all my deserts.
True, I did stir those dormant seeds of nobleness
Your blood left in him, and made glow those sparks,
Into a flame, were hid in hills of Ashes;
Now he is yours, and if you Madam think
I have done any service by an Act
Or precept that could light your Son to honor,
You make me fortunate, and encourage
A Soldier to employ his whole life here.

Flo. How do you mean?

Ho Without more complement to love you, and --

Flo. What?

Ho. VVish my self with you Madam when you dream

Flr. You would be with me when I dream.

Hort. But I should wake you.

Flor. But I should be very angry to have my sleep broke.

Hort. But I would please you again,
And rock you into a trance with so much harmony,
You shall wish to dye in it. I am very plain.

Flor. Me thinks you are very rough.

Hort. A Soldiers garb,
The old but the best fashion; a Sword,
And flattery were not meant for one man's wearing;
Madam I love you, but not dote upon you,
For you are something old.

Flor. I am indeed sir.

Hort. Yet you are very handsome, and I love you;
You Are witty, fair, and honest, but a Widow,
And yet I love you; I do know you are rich,
Exceeding mighty rich.

Flo. And yet you love me*

Hort. But Madam, I am a man.

Flor. I do not mean to try you Signior,
Pray Son do you.

Hort. Now put your vote in.

Bert. What should I do Madam?

Flor. Try whether he be a man or no.

Bert. Should I?

Flor. Do You hear? they say you are grown valiant^
Upon my blessing I command you strike
This Gentleman, and do it presently.

Bert. Strike him?

Flor. Yes.

Bert. A way, away, what here?

Flor. Even here, this very minute.

Bert. Not for your house, and all the moneys in it,
Not for my Fathers Wardrob, and I were
An Adamite a top of the Alps, though you
Admire the relics, and have turned your Gallery
Into a Chapel, where his several suites
Hang up like Images for you to pray to:
Strike one taught me to fight?

Exit Flor. Hort. Is she gone? what said she?

Bert. The foolish woman --

Hort. Why what is the matter?

Bert. She shows her breeding, but do not you despair.

Enter Florelia. Flor. If I mistake not sir, you would pretend
You love me honorably.

Hort. May I perish else.

Flor. When you can make it appear in visible wounds
Upon your head' or body, that my Son
Dares fight -- you and I Will be married.

Bert. I told you Signior you should have my Mother.

Hort. The Devil shall have you both upon easier conditions;
Visible wounds upon my head or body?

Flor. And here is my hand upon the sight thereof,
I Will be your wife; and so farewell till doomsday.

Hort. But hark you Lady

Bert. My Mother's a Witch. I shallne'r be valiant
In this World, what quarrels I may have in the next,
I know not,
There are some dead threatened to cudgel me.

Hort. Is there no hope, that I may catch you in
The Noose of Matrimony, unless your Son
First break my head?

Flor. I wo' not swear.

Hort. It is not your best course, take heed of vows.

Flor. Why my dear Signior?

Hort. For your souls sake, and yet
Dispose that as you please, I Will see who dare
Carry your body from me, spite of Lucifer
I will have that, and come by it ^awfully;
And so my service; think on it.

Flor. A fine fellow.

Exeunt. Mane^ Bert. Bert. Would I had his audacity; my Mistress,
Yet knows not what I mean, but I will to her,
And kiss her Glove immediately.
Exit.
Enter Honorie. Hon. This Court is like a twilight, where I cannot
Distinguish day, or perfect night, some faces
Are c^eerfull as the morn, others again
Are dark, and wrapped like evenings in a mist
^s is instinct for my approach, that brings
A resolution to revenge the rape
Upon my Sister; grow more strong my thoughts,
And let no fear distract you. Prince I have
Con^ider'd thee in all thy pride of merit,
Allowed my Fathers Contract, and did give thee
My Sisters heart in thy own vote, but when,
She only made a pause for ceremony,
Not disaffection, since thou could forget
Thy honor of a Prince, to invade her Chastity,
And forfeit thy Religion, thus I come,
To whip thy blood, or leave my own a sacrifice.
Enter Petr^mo: Sir, may a stranger ask without offense, why
The Court like Ianus does present a double
Face, as it labored twixt the fierce extremes
Of triumph and despair*

Petro. Sir you mistake not
The mixture of our passions, the Court
Smiles in our happiness to entertain
The Prince, and his fair Mistress, but does wear,
A grief and paleness, for the Duke, whose want
Of health delays their marriage.

Honor. I apprehend;
Sir I am bold, May not a Gentleman
Engaged to visit other Courts of Italy,
Make his ambition fortunate to receive
A favor from this Prince, and kiss his hand,
Before he leave the Dukedom?

Enter Leonato. Petro. He is here Sir.

Leon. Lord Petroni^, entreat the Princess
Fioretta, and my Sister meet me in the grove --
This Gentleman --

Hono. kisses his hand. Hono. You have made me happy;
Though I want honor to be known, your fame
Speaks you a valiant Prince, and fortunate,
And I must with the World congratulate
Your victory at Mant^a, upon which,
So rich a triumph waits.

Leon. What triumph fir?

Hon. The Princess Fioretta.

Leon. I acknowledge,
That Garland is my glory, such a treasure,
Was worth more service, than my sword could merit:
But I must be a debtor to my stars,
And can release all other happiness,
Within their influence to come, so they
Confirm me Lord still of her beauties Empire.

Hono. This does become your Excellence; what error
(Receive it not profane) should Heaven and nature,
Have made, to have kept your hearts too long asunder?
And yet I may mistake, for though your Grace,
Affect her with all height your soul can fancy,
I know not how her love may answer this
Desert in you.

Leon. How sir?

Hon^. Your Highness pardon;
I am no Prophet, nor do wish to see,
Upon your spring, another wind than what
The wings of pregnant Western gales do enrich
The air withal, which gliding as you walk,
May kiss the teeming flowers, and with soft breath
Open the Buds to welcome their preserver;
I wish you might grow up two even Cedars,
Till your top-boughs kiss Heaven that made you flourish,
When stooping to behold the numerous branches
That prosper in your growth, and what refreshing
The World below receives by your cool shade,
You wave your heads in the applause and wonder.
This is the Song I bring to your chaste Hymen,
And thus would every good man pray, but that
They fear.

Leon. Fear, what?

Hono. The blessings they invoke,
With all their importunity of prayers,
Will not descend.

Leon. Icannot reach you sir
Without a perspective, but this wanders from
The doubt you made of Fiorettas love,
To answer mine, that talk was dangerous,
I must not hear't again.

Hon. You must, unless
You can be deaf, or cut the tongue of fame out.

Leon. The man has somwhere lost his senses; go back
And sind thy strangled wits, this language has
No chain of reason, I lose breath upon
A thing distracted.

Honor. It Is not come to that,
I Have no such hot vexation, but a soul
Possessed with noble anger, and with pity.
Prince, I must tell you there are dangerous symptoms
Of a State Apoplex; those aerie stilts
Of fame you walk on, will deceive your pride,
When every honest breath, angry at what
You did so late in the contempt of goodness,
Will tell the wind how it mistook your praise,
And in a sigh conclude her sad repentance.
I come not sir to flatter.

Leon. It appears so.

Honor. But tell you what has eat into your soul
Of honor, and there poisond all the worth
The World once loved you for.

Leon. You talk as if
You had consulted with my fate, and read
The leaves of my inevitable doom;
What action has so much incensed my late
Kind stars to this revolt, and threatens like
To busy tongues in my disgrace?

Honor. The noise is loud already, would there were
No truth in men, who say, you ravished Fioretta
Sweet Princess from her Prayers, and left a Monument
Of such a sacrilege committed by you,
The very stones since groan in her behalf
You ravished from the Nunnery, on this
Must needs depend her hate,
Whose person and Religious vow you have
Unlike a Prince profaned.

Leon. You Are very bold,
What confidence can that outside raise in you
To be thus saucy?

Hono. Saucy?

Leon. Impudent.
Is life a burden, that you dare my anger?
What art?

Ho. A gentleman, that have more right to honor
Than he that is a Prince, and dares degenerate.

Le. There Is something in thy face would have me think
Thou may be worth my punishment, that I
^ould uncreate thee, if thy veins do house
But Common blood, to make thee a fit Enemy
In Birth, and soul to me, that I might kill thee
Without a blush to honor, do not tempt
My Just rage, that provoked will scorn a sword,
And make thee nothing with a look; be gone,
Get hence with the same speed, thou would avoid
A falling Tower, or had new seen a Lioness
Walking upon some cliff, and gazing round
To find a prey, which she persues with eyes
That shoot contracted flame, but when her teeth
And paws arrive, they quickly leave no part
Or sign of what there was.

Ho. Just heaven, how high he talks, and counterfeits
Your noise! I have a charm against your thunder;
If thou have courage to stay, thou quickly shall repent
Heavens Justice in my arm sent to revenge
Thy sacrilege, the more to encourage thee
To fight, I am thy equal, and a Prince.
They Draw Or may thy sin o'take my blood, and set
A weight upon my soul when thou have killed me

Enter Donabella, Iuliana. Iuli. Alas my Lord?

Don. Dear Brother?
Help, what traitor's this?

Leon. Away sweet Fioretta.

Honor. Fioretta.

Iu. Ha? I am undone, alas what do you mean?
My Brother, Prince Honorio.

Leon. Thy brother?

Iuli. Oh let me hold thee safe in my Embraces.

Don. Leo. Honorio.

Hono. The same, but not her brother.

Leon. Pardon me,
Whose soul disdained in my belief thou were
An insolent stranger, to acknowledge any thing
Of satisfaction, but let thy sister
Now speak for both.

Hono. Give space to my amazement.

Iu. If changing thus soft kisses, arms and heart
You interpret violence, Fioretta, then
Thy sister has been ravished; who has thus
Abused your faith, and wronged this Princes Virtue?
Clear as the light of stars. I must confess
I seemed to wave his courtship, when he first
Beheld me veild, which modesty instructed,
And though my heart were won, I kept it secret,
To make more proof of his, who not consenting
To be deprived too long of what he loved,
He brought a force to' the Cloister: but took me
His own away without a rape, and since
All his adresses have been honorable.

Hono. Instead of satisfaction, you enlarge
My wonder, what Impostures here? the Prince
Is cosend, yet she ownes me; pardon sir,
I was made believe, you did most impiously
Compel my sister, and by force enjoyed her,
But now I find we are all abused, to what
Misfortune might this error have engaged us?

Leon. This is my sister.

Honor. You cannot want a charity
That are so fair.

Iuli. Would Leonato's Sword
Had prosper'd in his death; I must be confident;
You have not yet made glad my heart Honorio,
With our good Fathers health, I have some trembling
Within my blood, and fear all is not well.

Hono. Gypsye?

Iulia. You look not cherefully.

Hono. My Father injoyes a perfect health.

Iuli. That word has blessed me.
Sister and Leonato, you will excuse,
If I transgress with joy to see my Brother;
Were but the Duke my Father here, I summed
All my delights on earth --

Honor. She confounds me.

Iuli. Honorio and I will follow you.

Hono. You are not my Sister?

Exit Leon. Do^a. Iuli. Sir, it is very true.

Hono. Where is she?

Iuli. You shall know what will make you happy sir,
If you preserve this wisdom.

Hono. I have seen you before.

Iuli. But I am destined here, to do such service
To your Family you shall know more --

Hono. Give me breath for two minutes,
Be confident of my silence, they expect you.
Ex. Iul. So let me have some air, am I Honorio.
Enter Fioretta, Bertoldi. What prodigies are these? we are all bewitched,
Ha Sister,

Fior. Brother Honorio.

Honor. It Is she, what is he?

Fio. Not worth the interruption of one kiss.

Ber. My friend --

Hono. My fool -- Fioretta show me where
We may enjoy a shade, I Will tell thee wonders.

Exeunt, manet B^rt. Ber. Sir I shall meet with you again; a pretty fellow.
Exit.
ACT. IIII.
Enter Fioretta and Donabella. Fior. MAdam I fear this walk into the Park,
May engage your grace too far without some more
To attend you,

Do. Our own thoughts may be our guard,
I use it frequently; but to our dlscourse
Of Prince Honorio, for we cannot find
A nobler subject, I observe that he
And you have been aquainted.

Fior. It Was my happiness,
To have my breeding in the Court of Mantua,
Where I among the rest of his admirers,
Seeing his youth improved with so much honor,
Grew into admiration of his virtues,
Which now he writes man do so fully crown him,
His Fathers Dukedom holds no ornament
To stand in competition.

Dona. You speak him high,
And with a passion too, that tastes of love.

Fior. Madam, I honor him,
As may become his servant.

Dona. As his Mistress rather.

Fior. My heart is clear from such ambition,

Dona. But yet not proof against all Cupids shaf^s;
I do not think but you have been in love.

Fior. Who has not felt the wounds? but I never looked
Above my birth and fortunes; Prince Honorio,
May become your election, and great blood.

Dona. I find it here already.

Fior. Nor could you
Endear it where so much desert invites
It to be beloved.

Dona. My looks do sure betray me,
I do believe him all composed of honor,
And have received your Character from the World
So noble, all your praise can be no flattery.
I know not by what powerful charm within
His person, Madam, I confess my eyes
Take some delight to see him, but I fear --

Fior. I find your Jealousy, and dare secure you.
If in your amorous bosom, you feel, Madam,
A Golden shaft, the cure is made by cherishing
The happy wound; my destiny has placed
My thoughts of love, where they cannot concern
Your trouble or suspicion, nor indeed
My hope, for I despair ever to meet,
His clear affection whom I honor.

Dona. Would
This Court containd whom you would make so precious;
I should with as much cherefullness assist
Thy wishes, as desire thy aid to mine;
I do believe you have much credit with
His thoughts, and virtue to deserve it Madam,

Fior. If you trust me,
The favor I have with his Highness, shall not
Create your prejudice, be confident,
Your birth, your beauty, and those numerous graces
That wait upon you, must command his heart.

Dona. Madam you force a blush for my much want
Of what you are pleased to impute my ornaments,
You are acquainted with your self, and show
What I should be, if I were rich like you,
But my disparity of worth allowed,
Would you would call me Sister, and impose
Something on me, my act of confidence,
And free discovery of my soul, may
Deserve faith from you, that I shall never
Injure his name you love.

Fior. There is no hope
In my desires, and therefore I beseech,
Dear Madam, your excuse, yet thus much I
Dare borrow of my grief to say, he lives
Now in the Court, for whose sake I thus wither.

Dona. Alas I fear again, is he composed
Of gentle blood, and can to thee he cruel?

Fior. No, he is very kind, for he did promise
To be my Husband, we have been contracted.

Don. Disperse these mist^, and clear my wonder Madam.

Fior. When time and sorrow shall by death prepare
My sad release of love, you may know all;
Were the condition of my fa^e like others,
It were no grief to name him.

Dona. This does more enlarge my Jealousy.

Fior. But let us leave this subject, till time fit,
To open the maze of my unhappy fortune.

Enter Bertoldi. Bert. I heard that she was come into the Park,
They cannot far be; they are in view,
And no man with them, I Will now be valiant.

Enter Florelia and Honorio. Flor. It was her Highness charge I should direct
you,
I know her walk.

Bert. The blustering Prince again;
Who sent him hither? I think he conjures.
Now dare I with as much confidence undertake
To cure a Lion rampant, of the' Toothache,
As but go forward; and my valiant Mother --

Honor. Your Son; I must excuse my self then to him.

Ber. Now shall I be fit for a Carbonado.

Honor. I hope you will pardon sir, if I appeared,
Less smooth when I la^t saw you.

Bert. My good Lord; your Grace is too much humble,
I Am your blow-ball, your breath dissolves my being,
But to show how free my wishes are to serve you,
If you have any mind, or meaning to my Mother --

Honor. How do you mean?

Bert. In what way your Grace pleases,
She shall be yours, your Highness may do worse,
Although I say it she has those things may give
A Prince content.

Honor. Your Son is very courteous.

Flor. I should prepare you sir to look with mercy
Upon his folly. But the Princess.

Bert. Mother.

Flor. Will you be still a fool,
What said you sir to the Prince?

Bert. Will you be wise and use him tenderly.

Flor. Stain to thy Fathers blood --
I was coming Madam.

Exeunt, manet Bert. Bert. Vmh: he is my rival, would my hilts
Were in his belly; they are out of sight;
It is no rutting time, no trick?

Enter Flaviano and Claudio disg^is'd. Flav. Signior Bertoldi.

Bert. I do not know you friends, but how soever,
There is a purse of money

Flav. Sir, I want not.

Bert. That Gentleman perhaps can drink; I like not
Their goggle eyes, it was well I gave 'em money:
What do you want else? you are Soldiers;
I love a Soldier.

Flor. I am a Gentleman of Mantua sir,
That owe my life to your command, as one,
That had an interest in the preservation,
Your army brought when the Enemy besieged us.

Bert. Your mercy Signior, and how do all
Our limber friends 'it 'h Nunnery? I was one
Of The Cavaliers went with the General,
Into the Orchard of Hesperides
To fetch the golden Dragon.

Flav. Golden Apple,
You mean the Princess Fioretta Signior;
Is she married sir?

Bert. No, no, the Duke will neither dye, nor live,
To any purpose, but they will be shortly;
Have you a mind to kiss her hand?

Flav. I shall be proud --

Bert. You shall be as proud as you please sir.

Flav. You can resolve me, is Honorio
Our Duke of Mantuas Son here?

Bert. Yes, he is here,
Heaven were a fitter place for him.

Flav. Ha! look to him,
For he is come with bloody thoughts to murder
Your Prince Leonato, caution him to walk
With a strong guard, and arm himself with all
That can be proof against his Sword or Pistol,
He cannot be too safe against the treason
And horrid purpose of Honorio.

Bert. His mouth is Musket bore; but are you sure
He did resolve to kill our Prince?

Fla. Most certain.

Bert. I am very glad to hear't.

Fla. Glad sir?

Bert. Yes, I cannot wish him better then a Traitor,
Now I shall be revenged.

Flav. Has he been guilty of any affront to you?

Bert. He is my Rival.

Flav. Why do not you kill him then?

Bert. Pox on him, I cannot endure him.

Flav. He is then reserved to fall by me.

Bert. It Is too good to be true; are you married Signior?

Flav. What then?

Bert. If you be not, do this and you shall have
My mother, a Lady that has Gold enough to pave
The Streets with double Ducats, here is my hand,
Kill but this huffing Prince, my Mothers yours,
Enter Honorio. And all her movables -- it is he alone too,
There Is convenient bottom sir hard by
Exit Hon. The finest place to cut his throat, I Will not
Be seen.

Flav. I am resolved, charge home thy little Murderers,
And follow.

Cland. I warrant you my Lord.

Exit after Hono. Enter Volterino and Hortensi^. Volt. But tell me have thou
any hopes of Madam Flo^elia?

Hort. I had a lusty promise.

Volt. From her?

Hort. Ye Coxcomb her sweet Son.

Volt. Why so had I, he did contract her to me,
A flat bargain and sale of all she had,
So I would say he was valiant.

Hort. That was the price he made to me, but I,
Had hope last visit from her self.

Volt. Be plain, I Will tell thee, she gave me strong expectation,
And came on like a Cheverell.

Hort. I hear,
She has given out she will have one of us,

Enter Flor^a. Volt. She cannot love us both.

Hort. Would she had on^, and then the toy were over,
I could make shift to love her.

Volt. And to lie with her estate, one helps the the other well.

Florel. I find a change within my self, I hope,
I shall not prove in love now after all
My jeasting, and so many coy repulses,
To men of birth and honor.

Volt. It Is she.

Florel. Why do I think upon him, then? I fear,
This man of War has don't.

Horte^. I have it, we will find whether she affect
Or Juggle with us presently.

Florel. Those postures,
Would show some difference, here I can observe --

Volt. Your Mistress?

Horten. Mine if she be pleased, what interest
Can all your merit challenge above me?

Volt. You will repent this insolence, I must,
Forget to wear a sword, and hear thee name
Florelia, with that confident relation
To her fair thoughts, and not correct your pride,
I Will search your heart, and let out those proud hopes,
That thus exalt you.

Hort. You are cofend Signior,
I do not fear your probe -- she lets us fight,
Fight If we had no more wit, we might foin in ear^^st.

Florel. Ha, ha, ha, are you at that ward Gentlemen?

Volt. She laughes to see us fence of this fashion,
Lets come a little closer.

Fight. Flor. Hold, hold Gentlemen,
For your own honors, is this valor well
Employed? what cause can urge effusion,
Thus of that noble blood was given you
To serve your Country? are you mad?

Hort. We are but little better to be both in love.

Flor. What Woman,
Considered in her best is worth this difference;
She is cruel cannot ^inde a better way
To reconcile you, than by letting blood.
Do you both love one?

Volt. It does appear so Madam.

Flor. I would I knew the Lady makes you both
Unhappy, I would counsel her some way,
To set your hearts at peace.

Volt. It Is in your power.

Hort. Without more circumstance, do but look upon
Your self, and end our civil Wars; we have both
Opinion of your virtue, and both hope
An interest in your love, if you will please
To point which of us two is most concerned
In your affection, ^ou conclude our danger,
And oblige one your everlasting Servant.

Volt. This Madam is a charitable way
To know your own, and save two lives, for we
Shall fix upon your sentence, and obey
The fate you give us.

Flor. Do you fight for me?
And will it save ^ncision and preserve
Your noble veins to know whom I prefer
In my best thoughts of love? this is but reasonable,
And twill be hard to set a period
To this contention, for I love you both
So equally, observe me Cavaliers,
It Is most impossible to distinguish which
Is first in my neglect, for I love neither:
Fight or be friends, you have your choice, and I
My liberty -- I had forgot to thank you,
For your infusion of that fierce courage
Into my Son, there is great hope if he
Live till next year, he may be a Constable,
He has an excellent art to keep the peace. Farewell.

Volt. Madam, for all this I believe you love --

Hort. I believe now she is old and has no teeth,
Else she would bite at one of us -- Reverend Madam,
That word has fetched her, -- we have no other cordial,
At this dead pang for your disdain, but drink now;
If you will have your Son made a fine Gentleman,
Be sure you send him to the Tavern to us,
He knows the rendezvous, though you despair,
We may wind him up yet with spirit of Wine,
How ever we will be merry, and perhaps,
For all this, drink your health.

Volt. Buoy Madam.

Hort. If you love your Baby send him.

Exeunt. Flor. I am to blame, but I must help it some way.
Exit.
Enter Honorio, Flaviano, Claudio with Pistols. Hono. Two Engines of so small
extent to do
Such mighty execution? may I see
These instruments you say you have invented,
And so commend for service?

Flav. Yes my Lord,
Show 'em to the Prince, do they not fright already?
Your Grace may take full view, and quickly be
The proof what force they have.

Honor. I am betrayed,
Who has conspired my death

Flav. To vex you, see him --

Honor. Flaviano, what make thou here?

Flav. To put of these commodities; you are
A princely Merchant, and affect this kind
Of traffic, that you may not die in the dark,
I Will tell you a brief story, which you may
Report in the other world, I did affect
Ambitiously thy Sister Fioretta,
Abused thy Father with a false opinion
Of Leonato, for my end removed
His Mistress from the Cloister, and persuaded
A witty Nun to take her name, and cheat
The Prince, whom he suspects not yet.

Honor. Damned rascal?

Flav. For pure love to your Sister I did this.

Hono. Why having been so impious, does thy malice
Pursue me, ignorant of all thy treasons?

Flav. Would you know that? -- because I am undone
In my chief hope, the Princess whom I thought
Thus placed secure, and apt for my own visit
Is gone, is vanished, and as soon I may
Find the impression of a Ship at Sea,
And by the hollow tract in waves oretake
The winged Bark, distinguish where the Birds,
At Chase 'ith' air, do print their active flight,
As find in what part of the envious World
Fioretta is bestowed; this sad intelligence
Surpised me like a storm, nor was it safe
To look upon the Duke, who must too late
Repent his trust, and punish it. In this conflict
Of desperate thoughts, I thus resolved to see
Ferrara, and the Lady I preferred,
But find things cannot prosper, if you live?
Whose angry breath will throw down waht my policy
Wrought high, and strike my head beneath the ruins.
Are you now satisfied why you must not live?

Honor. Hear me, she is still in silence, and believed
My Sister by the Prince.

Flav. When you are dead, then
You Will be sure to tell no tales; now shoot --

Claud. In my opinion, if all this be truth,
The mischief you have done may be sufficient,
And he may live.

Flav. Villain vvilt thou betray me?

Claud. You have betrayed your self, and after this
Confession, as I take it, I may be
Your Ghostly Father, and prescribe you a Penance.

Flav. Hold.

Claud. I will but Physic you, your soul has caught
A vehement cold, and I have two hot pills
Will vvarm you at heart.

Hono. Shall my revenge be idle?

Claud. Good Prince, you are too forvvard, and you be
So hasty, I Am of this side; did you think,
I would be false? yet lest my aim be unlucky,
Trust your own hand to guide 'em.

Flav. Thou art honest,
Thus I salute thy heart Honori^ -- ha, no charge.

Claud. It Is time sir to be honest, I could serve you
In some Court sins, that are but flesh-colors,
A wickedness of the first dye, whose brightness
Will fade, and tincture change; your murder i^
Crimson in grain, I have no fancy to it.
Sir you are safe.

Hono. I see thou have preserved me.

Flav. I Am lost for ever.

Hono. It Is but a minute
Since you were found, you must be plea^'d to walk
Into the Court, the Vestall you preferred
No doubt will bid you welcome. Fate I thank thee.

Flav. False stars, I dare you now.

Clau. I shall wait on you.

Exeunt. Enter Iuliana. Iuli. I have collected all my brain, and cannot
In any counsel of my thoughts find safety;
Honorio's death wo'not secure my strength,
Or prop my languishing greatness; it is but like
A cordial when the pangs of death hang on us,
Nay to my present state no other than
Some liberal portion of a quivering stream,
Drunk to abate the scorching of my Fever,
It cooles to'th' taste, and creeps like Ice dissolved
Into my blood, but meeting with the flame,
It scalds my bosom, and augments the fire
That turns my heart to ashes; poor Iuliana,
To what a loss has thy first ^in betrayed thee*
Ambition has revenged thy breach of Honor,
And Death must cure Ambition, for I have
No prospect left, but what invites to ruin.
I am resolved not to expect my fate,
But meet it this way.

Enter Leonato. Leon. Dearest Fioretta?
Ha, what offends my Princess? there is something
That dwells like an Eclipse upon thy eyes,
They shine not as they did, a discontent,
Is like a mildew fallen upon thy cheek,
It Is pale and cold, as Winter were come back
To overrun the Spring.

Iul. My dearest Lord,
My face is but the title to a volume
Of so much misery within, as will
Tire your amazed soul to read.

Leo. Thou do
Freez up my blood already. O call back
Part of this killing language, if thou mean
To make me understand thee; the amazement
Does fall so like a deluge, I am drowned,
Ere I can think my fears; how have we lived
At distance? thou should walk upon this Earthquake
And my ground tremble not, but with this fright
I am awake, open the volume now,
I will read every circumstance.

Iul. Observe then, what first becomes my sorrow.

Leo. Do thou kneel?
That posture is for them have lost their Innocence;
We must do this to Heaven.

Iul. I must to you.

Leon. What guilt can weigh thee down so low?
Do weep too!

Iul. I should not love my eyes if they were silent,
They know this story will too soon o'rcharge
My fe^ble voice, that every tear could fall
Into some character which you might read,
That so I might disp^nse with my sad tongue,
And leave my sorrows legible; oh my Lord,
I have wronged you above hope to find your mercy.

Leo. Take heed, and think once more what thou have don
Ere thou describe such an offense, lest I
Believe a fault, will drown us both with horror;
T^ou have not broke thy vow* nor given away
Thy honor, since thy faith did seal thee mine?

Iul. Not in a thought.

Leo. I wo'not see thee kneel,
Rise, and be welcome to my arms, thou have
Done nothing can offend me Fioretta.

Iul. Alas -- I am not Fioretta.

Leo. Ha! this does confirm me, thou have all this while
But mocked my fear, and yet this weeping is
Not counterfeit, thou art too blame my love,
Is it thy jealousy, that I am cold
In my returns to answer thy affection?
Or have I less in thy esteem of merit
Than thy hopes flatterd thee? or does the time
That dully moves, and intermit the joys
We promised when the Altar had confirmed us
Sit heavy on thy thought? we will awake
From this our sullen sleep, and quit off those
Sick Feathers that did droop our wings; fly to
The holy man whose charm shall perfect us,
And chain our amorous souls.

Iul. Divide us rather;
Joy is a fugitive of late, and while
You think of Hymen, you remove your wishes.
Fioretta will forbid the Priest.

Leon. Can thou forget thy love so much?

Iuli. Alas my Lord,
You have been all this while abused, and when
I have said enough to assure your Faith, that I
Am not your Fioretta, but a Virgin,
Compelled to take her name, you will I hope
Kill me your self, and save me a despair,
That will conclude my breath else in few Minutes.

Leon. Are not you Fioretta, but a Virgin
Compelled to take her name? who durst compel thee?

Iul. The Duke of Mantua.

Leon. I dissolve in wonder.
Durst Mantua use me thus? thy name?

Iuli. Iuliana;
My blood, (excepting what does fill the veins
Of Princes) flowing from the noblest spring
Of honor.

Leon. Where was Fioretta then?

Iuli. Conveid I know not whither, ere you came
To save their lives that did betray you thus.
I was too careless of my fate, that I
Kept such a glowing secret still within me,
I had no fear to be consumed, that had
Another Fire within me, whose wide flame
Had soon devoured all my considerings.
Alas my Lord, You did appear so full
Of honor, virtue, and such Princely love,
It Was easy to forget on whom you smiled,
I had no thought to wish my self unhappy,
Or own another name to my undoing,
Yet now more tender of your birth and fame
Than my own life, I cast my self beneath
Your feet a bleeding sacrifice.

Leon. Am I awake and hear all this?

Iul I see my Lord,
In your enraged eye, what lightning is
Prepared, it is welcome; since I danot hope
To live upon your smile, I would fain dye
Betime, before the shame of my dishonor
Enforce a mutiny upon my self*
But think my Lord while I confess all this
Against my self, how free I might have been,
How happy, how near Heaven, above those glories,
Had not you forced me from the blessed Garden
Where I was planted, and grew fair, though not
Obliged by any solemn vow, 'twas you,
Your own hand ravished me from that sweet life,
Where without thought of more than should concern
Your welfare in my prayers, I might have sung,
And had converse with Angels.

Enter Petronio. Petro. Sir, I bring sad news.

Leon. I prithee speak, I am prepared for all.

Pet^. The Duke is dead.

Leon. My Father dead?

Petro. I do not like the Princess at that posture.

Leon. I have forgot your name Lady -- you may rise.

Enter Henorio, Flaviano, Claudio, and Guard. Hon. My Lord I bring you news
welcome as health
Or liberty, your soul will not be spacious
Enough to entertain what will with joys
And strong amazement fill it; how I swell,
With my own happiness to think I shall
Redeem your noble heart from a dishonor
Will weigh down death. You think you walk on Roses
And feel not to what Dragons teeth, and stings,
You were betrayed. I bring a disinchantment,
And come with happy proofs.

Leon. To tell me this is not
Your Sister Fioretta: but a Nun
Subornd to cheat me -- I know all the business,
And am resolved in my revenge. Iuliana,
Svveet suffering Maid, dry thy fair eyes, it is I
Must make thee satisfaction, I thus
By thy own name receive thee to my bosom,
But you that practiced cunning, shall ever time
Contract the age of one pale Moon, behold
The Country I preserved a heap of ruins.

Iul. Flaviano? sir --

Honor. Do you know whom you embrace?
Flaviano has confessed
Himself the Traitor, and the black contriver
Of all this mischief; Leonato hear me,
Or by thy Father newly falln to ashes,
I shall repent I had an honorable
Thought of thee. Flaviano; Madam, vvitchcraft,
My rage will strangle my discourse, my soul
Is leaping forth to be revenged upon
That Devil; Prince keep off, his very breath
Will stifle thee, and dam thy honor to
All ages* Fioretta's now in Court.

Flav. Ha! in the Court?

Leon. This is some new device.

Honor. I charge thee by thy blood throvv of these Harpies,
And do my Sister justice, whom their treason
Has made a scorn, that minute she usurps
Her name of Bride, I shall forget the Altar,
And turn my self the Priest, with all your blood
To make a purging sacrifice.

Leon. If when we
Receive our rites, thou do but frovvn, or vvhispe^
To interrupt one ceremony, I
Will make thee hold the tapers while the Priest
Performs the holy office; tell thy Sister
Here I bestovv, what you have made me forfeit.
Present her to the Nunnery, and counsel
Thy ignoble Father, when I next see Mantua
To be a sleep in's Coffin, and his vault
Deep, and thick rib'd with Marble, my noise else
Will shake his dust; thy youth finds mercy yet,
Take the next whirlwind, and remove -- our guard;
Petronio we confine him to your house.

Hono. Thou coward Prince, there is not one honest man
In all the World, our sins ascend like vapors,
And will, if Justice sleep, stupifie Heaven,
For thine own glory wake, if thou dispense
With this, proud man will cry down providence.

Exeunt. ACT. V.
Enter Volterino, Hortensio, Pandolpho (with a Towell.) A Table set out and
stools. Volt. SUch Wine as Ganimede does skink to Jove
When he invites the Gods to feast with him
On Iunos wedding day.

Pandol. Jove never drank so brisk a Nectar as I Will draw.
But does Signior Bertoldi come?

Hort. What else? my Alderman of the Cellar.

Volt. He is our Hilas; shall we not ha Music?

Hort. By all means, and the Mermaids.

Pand. You shall have any thing;
But if Signior Bertoldi come, I have
A boon to beg, I have a pretty plot
To make you laugh.

Volt. What is it?

Pand. As you are Gentlemen, do not deny me;
I have been your up-and-down-stairs-man to draw
The best blood of the Grape these ten years,
Troy held out not longer, I have a device
Shall make you merry when he comes, if you
Will give me leave to shift, and help a jest.
He is a Coward still, under the Rose?

Hort. As any lives under the Sun, be confident.

Volt. The same senseless piece of timber,
You may cut him into a Bed-staff.

Pand. I Will send you Wine, say I am valiant,
Let me alone with the Catastrophe.
Exit
Hort. What will he do?

Volt. I know not, he were best make us laugh,
I shall expound the matter else.

Enter Bertoldi, and Drawer (with Wine.) Bert. My Mother remembers her service
Gentlemen,
I left my Mistress to come to you; and how?
Shall we drink like Fishes? Toll roll lolly, etc.

Volt. Sit, sit, a health to the Lady you kissed last.

Bert. Let it come, I Will pledge it,
And it were the Gulf of Venice.

Hort. And who is your Mistress?

Bert. Faith I do not know her name, nor ever kissed any thing but her Glove in
my life.


Volt: But you have told her your mind?


Bert. Not I by this Wine -- but that's all one,
She is a Lady, well bred, and companion
To the Princess, that is enough.
Here Signior -- would we had some Wenches here.

Hort. Some bouncing bona robas, hang this dull City there is no music in it, no
silken Music.


Vol. Oh for a Wench could spit fire now, that could whizze like a Rocket, and
fall into a 100 blasing stars, such a Fire-drake would be warm company in a
close room, Signior.


Hort. And it were in a Cellar under the Alps, it would make Hercules melt in
the back.


Bert. But for all that, I do not like a sinner of such a fiery constitution.


Hort. You would not venture upon the golden Fleece then, which is but the
moral of a Maidenhead.


Bert. I never heard that before.


Hort. So say the learned, first for the difficulty to obtain it, being watched
by a Dragon, and then for the Rarity, there being but one in all the World.


Bert. But one Maidenhead?


Volt. And that some hold as doubtful as the Phoenix or Unicorn, such things
are in History, but the man's not alive that will take his Oath in what climat
they are visible. Here Is to the Swan that broke her heart with singing last.


Hort. And to the Dolphin that was in love with a Fiddlers Boy of Thebes, who
carried him cross the Seas on her bak a fishing, while he sung the ^iedge of
Troy to the Tune of Green-sleeves, and caught a Whale with an angling rod.


Bert. I Will pledge 'em both; they are very fine healths. Are these your
Mistresses names Gentlemen?


Enter Pandolfo like a Soldier. Volt. Mystical, Mystical.


Bert. I Understand they are mystical -- who is this?


Pand. Save you Gentlemen.


Volt. It Is the Drawer.


Pand. I do not like the odor of your Wine

He throws it in Bert. face.
Bert. Was it a health? let it go round Gent. I am troubled with sore eyes, and
this Signior has washed 'em for me, I hope I shall see to thank him.


Hort. Cry mercy Signior, you are like a noble Gent. I saw at Rome, you are the
very same, to whom his Holiness gave a pension, for killing 6 great Turks in
Tra^silvania, whose heads were boiled, and brought home in a Portmantua.


Pand. It was but 5 sir and a Sarasens.

Hort. You are the man?

Volt. Pray give me leave to honor you.

Bert. I desire to be your poor admirer too,
My eyes are clear to see your worth, my name
Is Bertoldi at your service.

Pand. To you Signior, a health to Julius Caesar, Prester John,
And the grand Cham of Tartaria.

Volt. You shall not pledge him.

Bert. No.

Volt. Make your exceptions, I Will justify 'em.

Hort. This Cavalier drank to you sir.

Bert. I do remember, but I cannot pledge him.

Pand. How sir?

Bert. No sir, I Will pledge my friend Prester Jack,
But for Julius Caesar and the grand Cham they are
Pagans, I have nothing to say to 'em.

Enter Servant. Serve. Here is a Gentleman, he seems of quality,
Enquiring for Signior Volterino and Hortensio.

Hort. Admit him, and he be a Gentleman.

Enter Florelia like a Gentleman. Flor. You Will pardon if a stranger that has had
A long ambition to kiss your hands,
Rather entreat for his access, than lose
The happiness of your knowledge.

Volt. Sir, you are most welcome.

Hort. If you will keep us company
You must be equally engaged.

Bert. My humble service, Signior Hortensios Mistress.

Flor. You honor me; would I were off again.

Bert. Excuse me Signior.

Flo. You Are too full of ceremony.

Pand. Sir, is there any difference between you and Julius Caesar,
You would not pledge his health?

Bert. No difference in the world.

Pand. How, no difference between you, and a Roman Emperor?

Flor. Divide'em, what is the matter?

Hort. O for some Trumpets.

Bert. Somebody hold my Sword, give me the Wine,
I Will drink it --

Pand. So, we are friends.

Flor. O shameful!

Bert. But I shall find a time --

Pand. Find twenty thousand years, there is time enough.

Volt. I Will be your stickler.

Bert. I have not pledged the Cham yet, nor I wo' not, come, I know you well
enough.


Pand. Know me, for what?


Bert. For a brave fellow, and a man may believe thee thou have done things as
well as the best on 'em, but I know not where, nor I care not, tell me of Julius
Caesar: I am a Gentleman, and have seen fighting before now, here is a Cavalier
knows it, I scorn to be baffel'd by any Transilvanian Turk-killer in
Christendom, I; thar't a


Volt. Well said, and a Sandiack.


Bert. And a Sandiack, I defy the grand Cham, and Muftie. all his Tartars,
you are a stinking obstreperons fellow to tell me of a Turd and a Fart, and I
honor you with all my heart. Hort. He called you Muftie.


Pand. What Is that?

Ho. And a Sandiack, that is son of whor in 2 languages.

Pand. How? in two languages? then my honor is
Concerned, have I in 30 battles against the Turk
Stood the dire shock, when the Grenades flew
Like Atoms in the Sun,
Have I killed 20 Bashawes, and a Musselman,
And took the Sultans Turbant Prisoner,
And shall I be affronted by a thing
Less than a Lancepresado?

Bert. Will no body hold me?

Flor. Gentlemen, this heat must needs be dangerous.

Pand. Let me but speak with him

Volt. No danger of my life, let 'em go together:
And let us mind our business.

Pand. Signior, I am your friend, and pity you
Should lose so much your honor, be advised,
I Will show a way how to repair your fame,
Pand. and Bert. talk privately. And without danger.

Hort. To Volterinos Mistress.

Flor. I receive it, I shall have my share, I now
Repent my curiosity to see
Their humors, and to hear what they would say
Of me --

Hort. Let 'em alone -- to Volterinos Mistress.

Volt. Come, to my Whore.

Flor. Your Whore Signior?

Volt. Does that offend you?

Flor. Not me -- I ha done you right.
I am well enough rewarded and they beat me.

Ber. I know not how to deserve this courtesy being a stranger^
But if you want a Wife noble sir, and will accept of my
Mother, you shall have her before any man in Italy.

Pand. I thank you sir,
But be sure you hit me full of the head.

Bert. It Is too much, a cut of the leg and please you.

Pand. No, let it be of the head.

Bert. You wo'not strike again?

Pand. Mine Is but a foil.

Hort. They measure and give back --

Pand. Oh I am slain, a Surgeon. Bertoldi strikes Pand.

Flor. I Will take my leave.

Hort. By this hand, I Will drink his Mothers health first,
There Is no danger and he were dead; a health to the Lady
Florelia, I drink it for his sake.

Volt. Away, and get a Surgeon.

Bert. Come, to my Lady Mother.
A man is not born to be a coward all his li^e.

Flor. I can no more sir.

Hort. You should have told me sir at first,
There is no remedy, it is to an honorable Lady.

Flor. You must excuse me sir.

Bert. Throw't in his eyes.

Hort. At your request.

Hor. throws the Wine. Flor. You Are most uncivil.

Hort. You Are a mushrump.

strikes Flor. Flor. So sir, you are a multitude, and in a Tavern,
I did believe you sir a Gentleman,
If you be, give me satisfaction nobly.

Hort. With all my heart.

Flor. Then thus --

Enter Servant. Serve. Signior Bertoldi fly, his wound is dangerous,
We fear he will bleed to death before the Surgeon come.

Volt. Out by the Postern.

Bert. Pox, a conspiracy, I shall kill but one, I see that;
Would I were a Mite in a Holland Cheese now.
Exit.
Hort. I wo'not fail you sir.

Serve. He desires to speak with you before he dye.

Hort. Is Bertoldi gone?

Volt. Hortensio, I guess you may be engaged:
Leave me to these things, There may be danger.

Hort. I know the private way.

Ex^unt. Enter Honori^. Hon. Virtue and honor, I allow you names,
You may give matter for dispute, and noise,
But you have lost your Essence, and that truth
We fondly have believed in human souls,
Is ceased to be, we are grown fantastic bodies,
Figures, and empty titles, and make have
To our first nothing, he that will be honest,
Must quite throw off his cold decrepit nature,
And have a new creation -- my poor Sister,
Enter Fioretta. She has heard the Dukes resolve.

Fior. Oh let me dye, upon thy bosom Brother,
I have lived
Too long; they say the Duke resolves to marry
With Iuliana, so they call her now,
Whose sorcery has won upon his soul;
I have walked too long in dark Clouds, and accuse
Too late my silence, I am quite undon,
There was some hope while he did love my name,
But that and all is banished; is it not in
The power of fancy to imagine this
A dream that has perplexed us all this while?
If it be real, I will be revenged,
It Is but forgetting what I am, and then
I am not concerned.

Honor. Rather forget the Duke,
And live to triumph in a love more happy.
He is not worth a tear.

Enter Don^bella. Dona. How Is this? my heart!

Honor. Come, I will kiss these sorrows from thy cheek,
This Garden wants no watering, preserve
This rain, it is a wealth should ransom Queens,
As thou do love me, chide thy saucie grief,
That will undo the spring here, and enforce
My heart to weep within me equal drops
Of blood for these.

Dona. Oh my abused confidence,
Lauriana now I find has but betrayed me,
Instruct me rage and jealousy.

Fior. I am resolved.

Exit Donab. Honor. Well said, take courage Fioretta,
Appear with thy own name and sufferings,
Thy sight will strike the proud Impostors from
Their Pyramids of glory.

Fior. It were more revenge to dye.

Honor. Not so deer Fioretta, something glides
Like cheerfulness of the suddrn through my blood;
Despair not to be happy: Let Us consult,
And form the aptest way for all our honor.

Exeunt. Enter Flaviano. Flav. There Is but one cloud in all our sky, were that
Removed, we were above the rage of storms:
That Claudio knows too much. I look upon
His life like a prodigions blazing Comet;
He palls my blood; if I but meet him hansomly,
I Will make him fixed as the North-star. I hear
No whisper of him yet; were but he dead,
Iuliana and her friend might revell here:
The Duke should have the name, but we would steer
The Helm of State, and govern all. I have
Gained much upon Leonato's easy faith,
Who thinks me innocent, and that only duty
Mislead my nature and my tongue to obey
The Duke of Mantua and the Prince, upon
Whose heads I have translated all my guilt,
Enter Leonato, Claudio. And framed their jealousy at home my cause
Of flight for refuge hither -- Ha, my eyes
Take in confusion! The Duke and Claudio!
It Is doomsday in my soul.

Leon. Can this be justified?

Claud. I dare confirm this truth with my last blood.

Flav. I dare not hear it. That I now could fling
My self upon the winds --
Exit.
Claud. And should be happy
Were Flaviano's life put into balance
Against my own, to make it clear by his
Confession. To my shame I must acknowledge
was the agent 'twixt 'em; he was pleased
To choose me his smock Officer, a place
Poor Gentlemen at Court are forced to serve in,
To please luxurious greatness, younger brothers,
Who cannot live by fair and honest ways,
Must not sterve sir.

Leon: Flaviano's Whore?
Where can we hope to trust our faith, when such
White brows deceive us?

Enter Iuliana. Iul I do not like
This Claudio's business here, the Duke is troubled;
My whole frame trembles.

Leon. Madam Iuliana?
My excellent white Devil, you are welcome,
Where is your Catamountain Flaviano?
You are no Serpents spawn?

Iuli. Oh hear me sir, by your own goodness.

Leon. When did thou kneel to Heaven?

Iul. I see my leprosy unveild, that sin
Which with my loss of honor first engaged
My misery, is with a Sunbeam writ
Upon my guilty forehead, but I have not
(Excepting the concealment of my shame,
Which charity might privelege) offended
^bove what I confessed, and you have pardond.

Leon. She has a tongue would almost tempt a Sai^^
To unbeleeve Divinity, she learnd
^^me accents from the first Apostate Angel
That mutin'd in Heaven; away,
^ dare not trust my frailty; where is Flaviano?

Exit. Leon. and Claud. Iul. My soul does apprehend strange shapes of horror.
Enter Fioretta. ^a -- it is the Princess Fioretta.

Fior. Can you direct me Madam, how I may
(...) with the noble Lady Iuliana?

Iuli. I can instruct you Madam where to find
A miserable woman of that name.

Fior. Where?

Iul. Here.

K^eels. Fior. Do not deceive me,
I came to visit her whom the Dukes love
And confluence of glories must create
A Duchess, to whose greatness I must pay
My adoration.

Iul. Do not mock her, Madam,
To whose undoing nothing wants but death;
Let not my sin, which cannot hope your pardon,
Make you forget your virtue; Princely natures,
As they are next to Forms Angelical,
Show the next acts of pity, not derision,
When we are fallen from Innocence.

Fior. Do you know me?

Iul. For the most injured Princess, Fioretta.

Fior. You must know more, I come to take revenge
And kill thee.

Iul. Thus I kneel to meet your wounds,
And shall account the drops my proud veins weep
Spent for my cure; oh Madam you are not cruel,
You have too soft, too merciful a look;
When you see me, your countenance should wear
Upon it all the terrors that pale men
Can apprehend from the wild face of War,
A civil War, that wo' not spare the womb
That gron'd and gave it life, this would become you,
Or fancy meager Famine when she hunts
With hollow eyes, and teeth able to grind
A rock of Adamant to dust, or what
Complexion the devouring pest should have,
Were it to take a shape, and when you put
Their horrors in your visage, look on me.

Fior. What has prepared this bold resolve?

Iul. A hope
To be your sacrifice; I was not before
Without a thought to wish my self thus laid,
And at your feet to beg you would destroy me.

Fior. Can you so easily consent to die,
And know not whither afterward this guilt
Would fling thy wandering soul?

Iul. Yes. I would pray
And ask your self, and the wronged world forgiveness.

Fior. Why did thou use me thus?

weeps. Iul. I could, if you
Durst hear me, say something perhaps would take
Your charity. Do you weep? gentle Madam?
And not one crimson drop from me, to wait
Upon those precious shewers? not to invite
Your patience upon the lost Iuliana,
But to call back your tears into their spring,
And stay the weeping stream, I can inform you,
The Duke looks on me now with eyes of anger;
I have no interest in a thought from him,
That is not armed with hate and scorn against me.

Fior. This will undo my pity, and assure me
Thou have all this while dissembled with my Justice.

Iul. I would I might as soon invest my soul
With my first purity, as clear this truth;
Or would the loss of him were all that sits
Heavy upon my heart; I cannot hope
For comfort in delays of death, and dare
Attend you to him, though it more undo me.

Fior. Rise, and obey me then.

Iul. I follow, Madam;
My use of life is only meant to serve you.

Exeunt. Enter Hortensio. Hort. This is the place within the wood he promised
To meet in, there is Saint Felices Chapel,
That Father Cyprians cell, I hope my Gamster
Will think it fit, I should not walk and wait
Too long for him, these businesses of fighting
Should be dispatched as Doctors do prescribe
Physical Pills, not to be chewd but swallowed;
Time spent in the considering deads the appetite,
If I were not to fight now, I could pray;
These terms of honor have but little grace with 'em,
Like Oisters we do open one another^
Without much preface; he that fights a duel
Like a blind man that falls but cares to keep
His staff, provides with art to save his honor,
But trusts his soul to chance, it is an ill fashion.

Enter Friar. Fri. This is the Gentleman by her description
That comes to fight, another Champion?

Enter Flaviano. Fla. Do none pursue me, what a timorous Hare
This guilty conscience is, I am not safe,
I had no time to think of a disguise,
And this can be no wilderness, the Duke
Would give his Palace for my head.

Hor. Say so?

Flav. Oh for some Pegasus to mount! a Friar?
His habit will serve rarely, seeming holiness
Is a most excellent shrovvd to cheat the world.
Good Father sanctity, I must be bold,
Or cut your throat, nay I can follovv.

Fri. Help, help.

Hort. Thou sacrilegious Villain.

Flav. I am caught already.

Hort. My good Lord Flaviano. Father
You may come back, and help to bind the Gentleman
If I did understand him well, he said
The Duke has some affairs to use his head-peece;
I would not have him out of the way, when I^
Return -- to that tree -- you were best be gentle.

Flav. I can but dye.

Flav. is tied to a Tree. Hort. Oh yes, you may be damned
All in good time, and it is very likely.

Fri. You have preserved my life Son.

Hort. It was my happiness to be so near,
When virtue was distressed.

Friar. You have not done sir,
As you are noble follow me, there is
Another ^nemy to meet, but I
Dare be your second and direct you.

Hort. What means the Friar?
I Will walk and see the worst on it.

Exeunt all but Flav. Enter Be^to^di. Bert. Oh for a Tenement under ground to
hide me*
This wood will hardly do it, if I can lurk
Here but till night; I am furnished well with ducats;
Your melancholy mole is happy now,
He fears no Officers, but walks invisible;
Would I were chamber-fellow to a worm,
The Rooks have princely lives that dwell upon
The top^ of Trees, the Owls and Bats are Gentlemen,
They fly and fear no warrants, every Hare
Out-runs the Constable, only poor man
By nature slow and full of phlegm, must stay,
And stand the cursed Law, I do not think
It Is so much Penance to be hanged indeed,
As to be thus in fear on it.

Flav. Sir, look this way.

Bert. Oh! if I had but the heart of a woman's Tailor,
I might run away now.

Flav. I am robbed and bound.

Bert. Umh, are you bound? there is the less danger in you.

Flav. For charity release me.

Bert. You are surely bound -- what is that?
I hear another whispering of that side;
Now I sweat all over, I but think
If I were naked, how Maids might gather dew
From every part about me -- It Is the wind
Among the leaves. I do not like the Trees
Should lay their heads together of this fashion.
You are my fast friend still.

Flav. Signior Bertoldi.

Bert. Does he name me?
You and the Tree shall grow together now,
I came not hither to be known; some Thief,
Or sturdy rogue; I have heard of these devices
In woods before; should I unbind him now,
He Would cut my throat, or rob me for my charity.

Flav. I am the man for your sake undertook
To kill the Prince your rival.

Bert. Did you so? I Will trust you never the sooner;
Well remembered, I Am glad you are not at leisure;
You that will kill your Prince, will make but little
Conscience to quarter me.

Flav. But he is still alive.

Bert. Is he so?
Why then I am the less beholding to you.
So, you shall cancel your own bonds your self.
Enter Hortensio, Florelia and Friar. How now, more persecution?

Hort. Here was a Duel quickly taken up,
And quaintly too, I did not think to marry
The Gentleman that challenged me to fight,
I thank your device Madam.

Flor. Thank the blow you gave me sir,
I love a man dares strike.

Hort. I Will please you better with my after striking.

Bert. My Mother and Hortensio?

Enter Volterino and Officers. Volt. Signior Bertoldi well met, lay hands on him
And bind him fast, he has a dangerous spirit

Bert. Who I? you may as well say I have skill in the
Black art, Volterino, Gentlemen, there is my Mother.

Volt. Your Son is valiant Madam now I hope,
As you can wish, he has killed his man; but I
Studious to gain your favor have procured?
His pardon from the Duke.

Hort. Is the Drawer dead?

Volt. Dead as the Wine he sometimes drew.

Hort. Farewell he; will you salute my Lady Signior
And give us joy? yon Friar married us.

Bert. Let me go, I have my pardon.

Volt. Not yet; now you shall be hanged again,
Did not you swear I should have your Mother

Bert. You shall have her yet.

Flor. If it be so,
He shall be worth your suit, and compound fairly.

Volt. No, I have thought of my revenge; because
I cannot have your Mother, do you observe,
If you expect the benefit of this pardon,
You shall marry mine.

Bert. I Will marry any living soul,

Volt. She Is somethi^g old, till the last night I see her not
These forty years, since when she is grown so ugly,
I dare not own her, and some think the reason
Of her deformity to proceed from witchcraft.

Bert. Alas good Gentlewoman.

Volt. I mean she is a Witch her self,
And has two Cats they say,
Suck her by turns, which some call her Familiars;
She has not had a tooth this thirty years;
And you must kiss her with a spung in your mouth,
She is so full of phlegm, else she will go near
To strangle you, and yet they say she has
A most devouring appetite to man's flesh,
You may have a devil of your own to attend you,
And when you are melancholy,
She Will make you Ghosts and Goblins dance before you
Bring Bears and Bandogs with an o'r grown Ape
Playing upon the Gittern.

Hort. Where is this creature? shall he not see her first?

Volt. I left her in a Sive was bound for Scotland,
This morn to see some kindred, whence she was
Determined to take Eg-shell to Skeedam.
Enter Pandolpho disguised. From thence when she has dined she promised me
To ride post hither on a Distaff.

Bert. How?

Volt. Oh here she is, what think you of a Husband
Mother? can you love this Gentleman, he is one
Will be a great comfort to you.

Pandol. I like the stripling well,
He will serve to watch my pits, and see that non^
Of my spirits boil over.

Bert. Is this your Mother
Come I Will be hanged, it is the more hansome destiny
Unless you will take composition --

Pandol. Let me talk with the Gentleman.

Hort. I am at leisure now to wait on you sir.
Unbind, and lead him to the Duke.

Volt. Flaviano? you are the Gentleman his Higness
Gave strict command should be persu'd, I shall
Be proud to wait upon you to the Court.

Fla. I wo'not lose my passion on such bloodhounds.

Bert. We are agreed, hey, here is my pardon.

Pand. Yes, I am satisfied, and can thank you Signior
In several shapes --

Hort. The Drawer.

Pand. I did want a sum like this to set me up: I was
Provided against your Sword, a pretty nightcap,
And almost Pistol proof, I shall be rich,
I thank your bounty, and so rid the Witch.
Exit.
Flor. Here Is none of the Dukes hand.

Volt. It needs not Madam.
I know not yet by what device you came together thus.

Hort. I Will tell you as we walk.

Bert. Pay for a pardon and not kill my man?
The Duke shall hear of this.

Exeu^t. Enter Leonato. Leon. No news of Flaviano yet? some furies
Have sure transported him.

Enter Petronio. Petro. A Gentleman with Letters sir from Mantua.

Enter Duke of Mantua. Leon. Ha! admit him -- leave us, the Duke himself?

Du. That comes to offer
A pledge for young Honorio, not in thought
Guilty of that unprincely entertainment
You h^d at Mantua. if my Son, as fame
Is ^^sie in Ferrara, be exposed
To your displeasure, change my fate with his,
That to my shame in part consented to
The practice of a Traitor Flaviano,
Who used my power to advance his own ambition
To your dishonor, and instead of my
Fioretta, whether now alive or dead
I know not, cheat your faith with Iuliana,
To quit the noble safety your Sword brought us,
My life is troublesome in the loss of fame,
And Fioretta.

Leon. Where is Flaviano?
Duke Fled like a guilty villain from my Justice,
May hortor overtake him; let my Son
Live by some noble deeds to expiate
His Fathers forfeit, and disgrace; I come
Without a guard, and were it not a crime
To my eternity, could sacrifice
My self without expecting your revenge,
Or nature to conclude my age.

Enter Donabella, Fioretta, Iuliana. Dona. Let me have Justice.

Fior. Give me Justice Prince.

Iul. Let me have Justice too.

Leo. Against whom Sister?

Dona. Against this Lady.
She has conspired to take away my life.

Fior. My enemy is Duke Leonato sir,
Who has conspired to take away himself,
A Treasure equal with my life.

Iul. My enemy is Iuliana sir, that has con^pir'd
To rob her self, both of her life and honor.

Du. Mant. It Is she, my aged eyes take leave of seeing,
Expect no object after this so welome.
My Daughter Fioretta.

Fior. Dearest Father.

Dona. How, Fioretta? she is then but Sister
To my Honorio, life of all my joys,
My feet have wings at this glad news.
Exit.
Leon. Were you the Suffering Lady Fioretta?
How could you live so long within the Court,
And no good Angel all this while acquaint me?

Fior. This joy is too too mighty, and I sha' not
Repent my exile to be thus rewarded.

Leon. Confirm my happiness again, no treason
Shall now divide us.

Duke Your hearts grow together.

Leon. I have received by Claudio the particular
Of Flavianos treason, he has guilt
Above your knowledge sir, Iuliana finds it,
And is confessed his strumpet.

Duke You amaze me.

Fior. I bless now my suspicion, when I was
Convaid from Mantua, which directed me
To leave Placentia secretly, and invite
My self a stranger to this Court, where now
I meet as much joy as my soul can fancy.

Iu. You have not all this while pronounced my doom,
I fear you hold intelligence with my soul,
And know what pains I feel while I am living,
You will not be so merciful to kill me.

Enter Claudio, Volterino, Hortensio, Florelia, Bertoldi, Flaviano. Claud.
Flaviano!

Hor^. I present you with a Gentleman,
I took rifling a Hermit in the Wood,
As it appears in hope to escape persute,
Hid in a Friars habit, who dispatched
After a matrimonial betwixt
This Lady and my self.

Bert. That old Gentleman should be Duke of Mantua
What think you sir?

Claud. And that his Daughter Fioretta.

Bert. She is my Mistress.

Claud. She is like to prove the Duchess of Ferrara.

Bert. His Grace will not use me so,
I will have Justice, Justice Gentle Duke.

Flor. Are you mad.

Bert. I Will be revenged of somebody.

Enter Honorio, Donabella Leon. Honorio your son, to meet your blessing.

Don. This was the life I feared to lose by her,
Whom I supposed my rival, pardon Madam.

Duke Thus circled, I must faint beneath my happiness

Leon. Forgive my passion, and receive a Brother.

Honor. That name does honor us, where is Flaviano?

Flav. Whose witty brain must sentence me? let it
Be home and hansom, I shall else despise
And scorn your coarse inventions.

Fior. Let me obtain, since providence has wrought
This happy change, you would not stain our joys
With any blood, let not their sins exceed our charity.

Leo. Let him for ever then be banished both
Our Duke-doms.

Ho. What shall become of Iuliana?

Duke She (if your grace more fit to judge, consent)
Shall to a house of converts and strict penance,
Where Flaviano, as the price of her
L^st honor, shall pay her dowry to Religion;
What does remain of his estate, shall be
Emploid toward the redeeming Christian Captives.

Iul. I cheerfully obey, and call it mercy.

Leon. It Is a most pious Justice.

Bert. Justice, that's my kue, Justice, Justice to Bertoldi
Against Signior Volterino, I am cheated.

Flor. Will you be a fool upon record?

Leon. You shall have Justice.

Volterino, we appoint you, till he learn
More wit, to be his Guardian, and at your
Discretion govern his estate, so leave us.

Volt. I shall with my best study manage both.

Bert. I am as good as begged for a fool.

Leon. And thus we chain our hearts and provinces.
Madam I wish you joys, to Fioretta
I give my self, my Sister to Honorio.
Treason is sick in her short reign, but when
Heaven sees his time, Truth takes her Throne again.

Exeunt omnes. Epilogue, by Iuliana.
NOW the play's done, I will confess to you,
And wo' not doubt but you will absolve me too.
There is a mystery, let it not go far;
For this Confession is a^ricular:
I am sent among the Nuns to fast and pray,
And suffer piteous penance, ha, ha, ha,
They could no better way please my desires,
I am no Nun -- but one of the Blackfriars.
FINIS.
THE CARDINAL, A TRAGEDY, AS It was acted at the private House IN BLACK
FRIARS, WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY.

Not Printed before.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the Thr^^ Pigeons, and Humphrey
Moseley at the Prince^^ Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

To my worthily honored Friend G. B. Esquire
SIR,
I Did suffer at the first some contention within me, and looking upon my self,
was inclined to stifle my ambitious thoughts in this Dedication; but when some
time, and a happy conversation, had preferred me to more acquaintance with you,
(which was more argument to me, than the fame I had heard of your reputation,
with the most temperate and ingenious men) I found you not only an excellent
Judge, but a good Man: at this my modesty took full encouragement, to make this
offering, which as I conceive to be the best of my flock, I knew not a better
Altar whereon to make it a sacrifice, with this protestation, that it comes
(and that is it only, which makes all devotions acceptable) from the heart, and
your candid acceptance will bind me with all my services, and remembrance, to
merit a reception with you, in the quality and honor of,

Sir, Your most humble devoted Servant, JA. SHIRLEY

Prologue.
THe Cardinal, 'cause we express no scene,
We do believe most of you Gentlemen
Are at this hour in France, and busy there,
Though you vouchsafe to lend your bodies here;
But keep your fancy active, till you know
By the progress of our Play, it is nothing so;
A Poets art is to lead on your thought
Through subtle paths and workings of a plot,
And where your expectation does not thrive,
If things fall better, yet you may forgive;
I will say nothing positive, you may
Think what you please, we call it but a Play,
Whether the comic Muse, or Ladies love,
Romance, or direful Tragedy it prove,
The Bill determines not; and would you be
Persuaded, I would have't a Comedy,
For all the purple in the name, and state
Of him that owns it; but it is left to fate;
Yet I will tell you ever you see it played,
What the Author, and he blushed too, when he said
(Comparing with his own for it had been pride
He thought, to build his wit a Pyramyde
Upon another wounded Fame,) this Play
Might rival with his best, and dared to say --
Troth I am out; he said no more; you then,
When 'ts done, may say your pleasures Gentlemen.
To the surviving Honor and Ornament of the English Scene, James Shirley.
AS Fate, which does all human matters sway,
Makes proudest things grow up into decay;
And when they are to envyed greatness grown,
She wantonly falls off, and throws them down:
So, when our English Dramma was at hight,
And shined, and ruled with Majesty and might,
A sudden whirlwind threw it from it seat,
Deflowered the Groves, and quenched the Muses heat.
Yet as in Saints, and Martyred bodies, when
They cannot call their blessed Souls again
To earth; Relics, and ashes men preserve,
And think they do, but what, blessed they deserve:
So I, by my devotion led, aspire
To keep alive your noble Vestal fire,
Honor this piece, which shows, Sir, you have been
The last supporter of the dying Scene;
And though I do not tell you, how you dress
Virtue in gloryes, and bold vice depress;
Nor celebrate your lovely Duchess fall,
Or the just ruin of your Cardinal;
Yet this I dare assert, when men have named
Johnson (the Nations Laureat,) the famed
Beaumont, and Fletcher, he, that wo'not see
Shirley, the fourth, must forfeit his best ey.
HALL.

Persons.
KIng of Navarre. Cardinal. Columbo, the Cardinals Nephew. Alvarez. Hernando, a
Colonel. Alphonso. Lords. Secretary to the Duchess. Colonels Antonelli, the
Cardinals Servant. Surgion. Guard. Attendants, etc. Duchess Rosaura* Ladies.
Valeria, Celinda,
Placentia, a Lady that waits upon the Duchess.
Scene Navarre. THE CARDINAL.
ACT I.
Enter two Lords (at one door) Secretary (at the other.) 1 Lord. WHo is that?

2 Lo. The Duchess Se^retary.

1 Lo. Signior.

Secr. Your Lordships Servant.

1 Lo. How does her Grace since she left her mourning
For the young Duke Mendoza, whose timeless death
At Sea, left her a Virgin and a Widow?

2 Lo. She Is now inclining to a second Bride,
When is the day of mighty marriage
To our great Cardinals Nephew, Don Columbo?

Secr. When they agree; they wo'not steal to Church,
I guess the ceremonies will be loud, and public.
Your Lordships will excuse me.
Exit.
1 Lo. When they agree? alas poor Lady, she
Dotes not upon Columbo, when she thinks
Of the young Count D' Alvarez, divorced from her
By the Kings power.

2 Lo. And Counsel of the Cardinal to advance
His Nephew to the Duchess bed; it is not well.

1 Lo. Take heed, the Cardinal holds intelligence
With every bird in the air.

2 Lo. Death on his purple pride,
He governs all, and yet, Columbo is
A gallant Gentleman.

1 Lo. The darling of the War, whom Victory
Has often courted; a man o^ daring
And mostexalted spirit, pride in him
Dwells like an ornament, where so much honor
Secures his praise.

2 Lo. This is no argument
He should usurp, and wear Alvarez title
To the fair Duchess, men of coarser blood
Would not so tamely give this treasure up.

1 Lo. Although Columbos name is great in war,
Whose glorious art and practice is above
The greatness of Alvarez, yet he cannot
Want soul, in whom alone survives the virtue
Of many noble Ancestors, being the last
Of his great family

2 Lo. It Is not safe, you will say, to wrestle with the King.

1 Lo. More danger if the Cardinal be displeased,
Who sits at helm of State; Count D' Alvarez
Is wiser to obey the stream, than by
Insisting on his privilege to her love,
Put both their fates upon a storm.

2 Lo. If Wisdom, not inborn Fear make him compose,
I like it; how does the Duchess bear herself?

1 Lo. She moves by the rapture of another wheel
That must be obeyed, like some sad passenger,
That looks upon the coast his wishes fly to,
But is transported by an adverse wind, sometimes
A churlish Pilot

2 Lo. She has a sweet and noble nature.

1 Lo. That commends Alvarez, Hymen cannot tie
A knot of two more equal hearts and blood.

Enter Alphonso. 2 Lo. Alphonso?

Alph. My good Lord.

1 Lo. What great affair
Has brought you from the confines?

Alp. Such as will
Be worth your counsels, when the King has read
My Letters from the Governor; the Arragonians,
Violating their confederate oath and league,
Are now in arms; they have not yet marched toward us,
But it is not safe to expect if we may timely
Prevent Invasion

2 Lo. Dare they be so insolent?

1 Lo. This storm I did foresee.

2 Lo. What have they, but the sweetness of the King,
To make a crime?

1 Lo. But how appears the Cardinal.
At this news?

Alp. Not pale, although
He knows they have no cause to think him innocent,
As by whose Counsel they were once surpised.

1 Lo. There is more
Than all our present art can fathom in
This story, and I fear I may conclude,
This flame has breath at home to cherish it;
There Is treason in some hearts, whose faces are
Smooth to the State.

Alp. My Lords, I take my leave.

2 Lo. Your friends good Captain.

Exeunt. Enter Duchess, Valeria, Celinda* Val. Sweet Madam be less
thoughtfull, this obedience
To passion, will destroy the noblest frame
Of beauty that this Kingdom ever boasted.

Cel. This sadness might become your other habit,
And ceremonious black for him that died;
The times of sorrow are expired, and all
The joys that wait upon the Court, your birth,
And a new Hymen that is coming toward you,
Invite a change.

Dut. Ladies, I thank you both,
I pray excuse a little melancholy
That is behind, my year of mourning has not
So cleared my account with sorrow, but there may
Some dark thoughts stay, with sad reflections,
Upon my heart for him I lost; even this
New dress, and smiling garment, meant to show
A peace concluded twixt my grief and me,
Is but a sad remembrance: but I resolve
To entertain more pleasing thoughts, and if
You wish me heartily to smile, you must
Not mention grief, not in advice to leave it;
Such Counsels open but afresh the wounds
Ye would close up; and keep alive the cause,
Whose bleeding you would cure; lets talk of something
That may delight; you two are read in all
The Histories of our Court; tell me Valeria,
Who has thy vote for the most handsome man?
Thus I must counterfeit a peace, when all
Within me is at mutiny.

Val. I have examined
All that are Candidates for the praise of Ladies.
But find -- may I speak boldly to your Grace?
And will you not return it in your mirth,
To make me blush?

Dut. No, no; speak freely.

Val. I wo'not rack your patience Madam* but
Were I a Princess, I should think Count D' Alvarez
Had sweetness to deserve me from the world.

Dut. Alvarez! she is a spy upon my heart.

Val. He Is young, and active, and composed most sweetly.

Dut. I have seen a face more tempting.

Val. It had then
Too much of woman in it, his eyes speak movingly
Which may excuse his voice, and lead away
All female pride his captive; His hair Black,
Which naturally falling into curl's --

Dut. Prithee no more, thou art in love with him.
The man in your esteem Celinda now?

Cel. Alvarez is (I must confess) a Gentleman
Of handsome composition, but with
His mind (the greater excellence) I think
Another may delight a Lady more,
If man be well considered, that is Columbo,
Now, Madam, voted to be yours.

Dut. My Torment!

Val. She affects him not.

Cel. He has person, and a bravery beyond
All men that I observe.

Val. He is a Soldier,
A rough-hewn man, and may show well at distance;
His talk will fright a Lady; War, and grim-
Fac'd-honor are his Mistrisses; he raves
To hear a Lute; Love meant him not his Priest.
Again your pardon Madam; we may talk,
But you have art to choose and crown affection.

Dut. What is it to be born above these Ladies
And want their freedom? they are not constrained,
Nor slav'd by their own greatness, or the Kings;
But let their free hearts look abroad, and choose
By their own eyes to love; I must repair
My poor afflicted bosom, and assume
The privilege I was born with; which now prompts me
To tell the King he has no power nor art
To steer a Lovers Soul.
Enter Secretary. What says Count D' Alvares?

Sec. Madam he will attend you.

Dut. Wait you as I directed, when he comes
Acquaint me privately.

Sec. Madam, I have news,
It Is now arrived the Court, we shall have wars.

Dut. I find an Army here of killing thoughts.

Sec. The King has chosen Don Columbo General,
Who is immediately to take his leave.

Dut. What flood is let into my heart! how far
Is he to go?

Sec. To Arragon.

Dut. That Is well
At first, he should not want a pilgrimage
To the unknown World, if my thoughts might convey him.

Sec. It Is not impossible he may go thither.

Dut. How?

Sec. To the unknown other World, he goes to fight,
That Is in his way, such stories are in nature.

Dut. Conceal this news.

Sec. He wo'not be long absent;
The affair will make him ^wift to kiss your Graces hand.

Dut. He cannot fly
With too much wing to take his leave; I must
Be admitted to your conference; ye have
Enlarged my spirits, they shall droop no more.

Cel. We are happy, if we may advance one thought
To your Graces pleasure.

Val. Your ey before was in eclipse, these smiles
Become you Madam.

Dut. I have not skill to contain my self.

Enter Placentia. Pla. The Cardinals Nephew, Madam, Don Columbo.

Dut. Already? attend him.

Ex. Plac. Val. Shall we take our leave?

Dut. He shall not know Valeria how you praised him*

Val. If He did, Madam, I should have the confidence
To tell him my free thoughts.

Enter Columbo. Dut. My Lord, while I Am in study to requi^e
The Favor you have done me, you increase
My debt to such a sum, still by a new honoring
Your servant, I despair of my own freedom.

Col. Madam, he kisseth your white hand, that must
Not surfeit in this happiness -- and Ladies,
I take your smiles for my encouragement;
I have not long to practice these Court tacticks.

Cel. He has been taught to kiss.

Dut. There Is something, Sir,
Upon your brow I did not read before.

Col. Does the Character please you Madam?

Dut. More,
Because it speaks you cheerful.

Col. It Is for such
Access of honor, as must make Columbo
Worth all your love; the King is pleased to think
Me fit to lead his Army.

Dut. How, an Army?

Col. We must not use the Priest, till I bring home
Another triumph, that now stays for me
To reap it in the purple field of glory.

Dut. But do you mean to leave me, and expose
Your self to the devouring war? no enemy
Should Divide us; the King is not so cruel.

Col. The King is honorable, and this grace
More answers my ambition, than his gift
Of thee, and all thy beauty, which I can
Love, as becomes thy Soldier, and fight
She weeps. To come again, a conqueror of thee;
Then I must chide this fondness.

Enter Secretary. Sec. Madam, the King, and my Lord Cardinal.

Enter King, Cardinal, and Lords. King. Madam, I come to call a Servant from
you,
And strengthen his excuse; the public cause
Will plead for your co^nsent; at his return
Your marriage shall receive triumphant ceremonies;
Till then you must dispense.

Card. She appears sad
To part with him, I like it fairly Nephew.

Val. Is not the General a gallant man?
What Lady would deny him a small courtesy?

Cel. Thou have converted me, and I begin
To wish it were no sin.

Val. Leave that to narrow Consciences.

Cel. You are pleasant.

Val. But he would please one better. Do such men
Lie with their Pages?

Cel. Would thou make a shift?

Val. He is going to a bloody business;
It Is pity he should dye without some heir;
That Lady were hard-hearted now that would
Not help posterity, for the mere good
Of The King and Commonwealth.

Cel. Thou art wild, we may be observed.

Dut. Your will must guide me, happiness and conquest
Be ever waiting on his sword.

Col. Farewell.

Ex. K. Col. Card* Lo. Dut. Pray give leave to examine a few thoughts;
Expect me in the Garden.
Ladies We attend.

Ex. Ladies. Dut. This is above all expectation happy;
Forgive me virtue that I have dissembled,
And witness with me, I have not a thought
To tempt or to betray him, but secure
The promise I first made to love and honor.

Enter Secretary. Sec. The Count D' Alvarez Madam.

Dut. Admit him,
And let none enterrupt us; how shall I
Behave my looks? the guilt of my neglect,
Which had no seal from hence, will call up blood
To write upon my cheeks the shame and story
In some red Letter.

Enter D' Alvarez. D' Alv. Madam, I present
One that was glad to obey your Grace, and come
To know what your commands are.

Dut. Where I once
Did promise love, a love that had the Power
And office of a Priest to chain my heart
To yours, it were injustice to command.

D' Alv. But I can look upon you Madam, as
Becomes a servant, with as much humility,
(In tenderness of your honor and great fortune,)
Give up, when you call back your bounty, all that
Was mine, as I had pride to think them favors.

Dut. Has love taught thee no more assurance in
Our mutual vows, thou can suspect it possible,
I should revoke a promise made to heaven
And thee so soon? this must arise from some
Distrust of thy own Faith.

D' Alv. Your Graces pardon
To speak with freedom, I am not so old
In cunning to betray, nor young in time
Not to see when, and where I am at loss,
And how to bear my fortune, and my wounds,
Which if I look for health must still bleed inward,
(A hard and desperate condition;)
I am not ignorant your birth and greatness,
Have placed you to grow up with the Kings grace,
And jealousy, which to remove, his power
Has chosen a fit object for your beauty
To shine upon, Columbo his great fvavorite;
I am a man, on whom but late the King
Has pleased to cast a beam, which was not meant
To make me proud, but wisely to direct,
And light me to my safety. Oh, Dear Madam!
I will not call more witness of my love
(If you will let me still give it that name)
Than this, that I dare make my self a loser,
And to your will give all my blessings up;
Preserve your greatness and forget a triflle,
That shall at best when you have drawn me up,
But hang about you like a cloud, and dim
The glories you are born to.

Dut. Misery
Of birth and state! that I could shift into
A meaner blood, or find some art to purge
That part which makes my veins unequal; yet
Those nice distinctions have no place in us,
There Is but a shadow difference, a title,
Thy stock partakes as much of noble sap
As that which feeds the root of Kings, and he
That writes a Lord, has all the essence of
Nobility.

D' Alv. It Is not a name that makes
Our separation, the Kings displeasure
Hangs a portent to fright us, and the matter
That feeds this exhalation is the Cardinals
Plot to advance his Nephew; then Columbo,
A man made up for some prodigious Act,
Is fit to be considered; in all three
There is no character you fix upon
But has a form of ruin to us both.

Dut. Then you do look on these with fear.

D' Alv. With eyes
That should think tears a duty to lament
Your least unkind fate; but my youth dares boldly
Meet all the tyranny of the stars, whose black
Malevolence but shoot my single tragedy;
You are above the value of many worlds
Peopled with such as I am.

Dut. What if Columbo
Engaged to war, in his hot thirst of honor,
Find out the Way to death?

D' Alv. It Is possible.

Dut. Or say, no matter by what art or mot^ive
He gives his title up, and leave me to
My own Election?

D' Alv. If I then be happy
To have a name within your thought, there can
Be nothing left to crown me with New blessing;
But I dream thus of heaven, and wake to find
My amorous soul a mockery; when the Priest
Shall tie you to another, and the joys
Of marriage leave no thought at leisure to
Look ba^k upon Alvarez, that must wither
For loss of you, yet then I cannot lose
So much of what I was, once in your favor,
But in a sigh pray still you may live happy.
Exit.
Dut. My Heart is in a mist, some good star smile
Upon my resolution, amd direct
Two lovers in their chaste embrace to meet;
Columbo's bed contains my winding sheet.
Exit.
ACT II.
Enter General Columbo, Hernando, two Colonels, Alphouso, two Captains, and
other Officers, As at a Council of War. Columbo. I See no face in all this
Council, that
Has one pale fear upon it though we arrived not
So timely to secure the Town, which gives
Our enemy such triumph.

1 Colo. 'Twas betrayed

Alp. The wealth of that one City
Will make the enemy glorious.

1 Colo. They dare not plunder it.

Alp. They give fair quarter yet,
They only seal up men's Estates, and keep
Possession for the Cities use, they take up
No wares without security, and he
Whose single credit will not pass, puts in
Two lean comrades, upon whose bonds it is not
Religion to deny 'em.

Colu. To repair this
With honor Gentlemen?

Her. My opinion is
To expect a while.

Colu. Your reason?

Her. Till their own
Surfeit betray 'em, for their Soldier
Bred up with coarse and common bread, will show
Such appetites on the rich ^ates they find,
They will spare our swords a victory, when their own
Riot and Luxury destroys 'em.

1 Colo. That
Will show our patience too like a fear.
With favor of his excellence I think,
The spoil of Cities takes not off the courage,
But doubles it on Soldiers; besides,
While we have tameness to expect, the noise
Of their success and plenty will increase
Their Army.

Her. It Is considerable, we do not
Exceed in Foot or Horse, our Muster not
'Bove sixteen thousand both; and the Infantry
Raw, and not disciplined to act.

Alp. Their hearts,
But with a brave thought of their Countries honor,
Will teach 'em how to fight, had they not seen
A Sword; but we decline our own too much,
The men are forward in their arms, and take
The use with Avarice of Fame.
[They rise and talk privately.
Colu. Colonel.
I do suspect you are a coward.

Her. Sir.

Colu. Or else a traitor, take your choice, no more,
I called you to a Council Sir, of war,
Yet keep your place.

Her. I have worn other names.

Colu. Deserve 'em, such
Another were enough to unsoul an Army;
Ignobly talk of patience till they drink
And reel to death? we came to fight and force 'em
To mend their pace; thou have no honor in thee,
Not enough noble blood to make a blush
For thy tame Eloquence.

Her. My Lord, I know
My duty to a General, yet there are
Some that have known me here; Sir, I desire
To quit my regiment.

Colu. You shall have license. Ink and paper --

Enter with P^per and Standish. 1 Col. The General's displeased.

2 Colo. How is it Hernando?

Her. The General has found out employment for me*
He is writing Letters back.

Al Cap. To his Mistress.

Her. Pray do not trouble me, yet prithee speak,
And flatter not thy friend, do think I dare
Not draw my sword, and use it, when cause
With honor calls to action?

Al. Colo. With the most valiant man alive*

Her. You Will do me some displeasure in your loves,
Pray to your places.

Colu. So,
Bear those Letters to the King,
It speaks my resolution before
Another Sun decline to charge the enemy.

Her. A pretty Court way
Of di missing an Officer, I obey; success
Attend your Counsels.
Exit.
Colu. If here be any dare not look on danger,
And meet it like a man with scorn of death,
I beg his absence, and a cowards fear
Con^ume him to a ghost.

1 Colo. None such here.

Colu. Or if in all your Regiments you find
One man that does not ask to bleed with honor,
Give him a double pay to leave the Army;
There Is service to be done, will call the spirits
And aid of Men.

1 Colo. You give us all new flame.

Colu. I am confirmed, and you must lose no time;
The Soldier that was took last night, to me
Discovered their whole strength, and that we have
A party in the town; the River that
Opens the City to the West unguarded;
We must this night use (...) and resolutions,
We cannot fall ingloriously.

1 Capt. That voice is every man's.

Enter Soldier, and S^cretary with a Letter. Colu. What now?

Soul. Letters.

Colu. Whence?

Soul. From the Duchess.

Colu. They are welcome;
Meet at my Tent again this evening; yet stay,
Some Wine -- The Duchess health --
See it go round.

Sec. It wo'not please his Excellence.

1 Colo. The Duchess health.

2 Cap. To me! more wine.

Sec. The Clouds are gathering, and his eyes shoot fire;
Observe what thunder follows.

2 Cap. The General has but ill news, I suspect
The Duchess sick, or else the King.

1 Cap. May be the Cardinal.

2 Cap. His soul has long been looked for.

Colu. She dares not be so insolent! it is
The Duchess hand; how am I shrunk in Fame
To be thus played withal? she writes, and counsels,
Under my hand to send her back a free
Resign of all my interest to her person,
Promise, or love; that there is no other way
With safety of my honor to revisit her.
The woman is possessed with some bold Devil,
And wants an exorcism; or I am grown
A cheap, dull, phlegmatic fool, a Post that is carved
In The common street, and holding out my forehead
To every scurrill wit to pin disgrace
And libells on it; did you bring this to me Sir?
My thanks shall warm your heart.

[D^^ws a Pistol. Sec. Hold, hold, my Lord.
I know not what provokes this tempest, but
Her Grace never showed more freedom from a storm
When I received this paper; if you have
A will to do an execution,
Your looks without that engine, Sir, may serve
I did not like the employment.

Colu. Ha, had she
No symptom in her eye, or face, or anger
When she gave this in charge?

Sec. Serene, as I
Have seen the morning rise upon the spring,
No trouble in her breath, but such a wind
As came to kiss and fan the smiling flowers.

Colu. No Poetry.

Sec. By all the truth in prose,
By honesty, and your own honor Sir,
I never saw her look more calm, and gentle.

Colu. I am too passionate, you must forgive me;
I have found it out the Duchess loves me dearly,
She expressed a trouble in her when I took
My le^ve, and chid me with a sullen ey;
It Is a device to hasten my return;
Love has a thousand arts; I Will answer it,
Beyond her expectation, and put
Her soul to a noble test; your patience Gentlemen;
The Kings health will deserve a sacrifice of Wine.

Sec. I am glad to see this change, and thank my wit
For my redemption.

1 Col. Sir* The Soldiers curse on him loves not our Master.

2 Col. And they curse loud enough to be heard.

2 Cap. Their curse has the nature of Gunpowder.

Sec. They do not pray with half the noise.

1 Col Our General is not well mixed,
He has too great a portion of fire.

2 Col. His Mistress cool him, her complexion
Carries some phlegm, when they two meet in bed?

2 Cap. A third may follow.

1 Cap. It Is much pity.
The young Duke lived not to take the virgin off.

1 Col. 'Twas the Kings act to match two Rabbet suckers.

2 Col. A common trick of State,
The little great man marries, travells then
Till both grow up; and dies when he should do
The feat; these things are still unlucky
On the male side.

Col^. This to the Duchess fair hand.

S*c. She will think
Time has no wing, till I return.

Col^. Gentlemen,
Now each man to his quarter, and encourage
The Soldier; I shall take a pride to know
Your diligence, when I visit all your
Several commands.

Omnes. We shall expect,

2 Col. And move by your directions.

Colu. You Are all noble.

Exeunt. Enter Cardinal, Duchess, Placentia. Card. I shall perform a visit
daily, Madam,
In the absence of my Nephew, and be happy
If you accept my care.

Dut. You have honored me,
And if your entertainment have not been
Worthy your Graces person, it is because
Nothing can reach it in my power; but where
There is no want of zeal, other defect
Is only a fault to exercise your mercy.

Card. You are bounteous in all; I take my leave;
My fair Niece, shortly, when Columbo has
Purchased more honors to prefer his name,
And value to your noble thoughts; mean time
Be confident you have a friend, whose Office,
And favor with the King, shall be effectual
To serve your Grace.

Dut. Your own good deeds reward you,
Till mine rise equal to deserve their benefit.
Exit Cardinal. Leave me a while.
Exit Placen. Do not I walk upon the teeth of serpents;
And, as I had a charm against their poison,
Play with their stings, the Cardinal is subtle?
Whom it is not wisdom to incense, till I
Hear to what destiny Columbo leaves me;
May be the greatness of his soul will scorn
To own what comes with murmur, If he can
Interpret me so happily; art come?

Enter Secretary with a Letter. Sec. His Excellence salutes your Grace.

Dut: Thou have
A malencholy brow; how did he take my Letter?

Sec. As he would take a blow, with so much sense
Of anger, his whole soul boild in his face,
And such prodigious flame in both his eyes
As they would been the only seat of fire; and at
Each look a Salamander leaping forth,
Not able to endure the Furnace.

Dut. Ha! thou do
Describe him with some horror.

Sec. Soon as he
Had read again, and understood your meaning,
His rage had shot me with a pistol, had not
I used some soft, and penitential language,
To charm the Bullet.

Dut. Wait at some more distance;
My soul does bath it self in a cold dew;
Imagine, I am opening of a Tomb,
Thus I throw off the Marble to discover,
What antic posture death presents in this
Pale monument to fright me --
Reads. Ha? my heart that called my blood and spirits, to
Defend it from the invasion of my fears,
Must keep a guard about it still, le^t this
Strange and too mighty joy crush it to nothing*
Antonio.

Sec. Madam.

Dut. Bid my Steward give thee
Two thousand Ducates; art sure I am awake?

Sec. I shall be able to resolve you, Madam,
When he has paid the money.

Dut. Columbo now is noble.
Exit. Dut.
Sec. This is better than I expected, if my Lady be
Not mad, and live to justify her bounty.
Exit.
Enter King, Alvarez, Hernando, Lords. King. The War is left to him. but we
must have
You reconciled, if that be all your difference.
His rage flows like a torrent, when he meets
With opposition, leave to wrestle with him,
And his hot blood retreats into a calm,
And then he chides his passion; you shall back
With letters from us.

Her. Your Commands, are not
To be disputed.

Kin. Alvarez.

1 Lo. Lose not
Your self by cool submission, he will find
His error, and the want of such a Soldier.

2 Lo. Have you seen the Cardinal?

Her. Not yet.

1 Lo. He wants no plot --

Her. The King I must obey;
But let the purple Gownman place his engines
In The dark that wounds me.

2 Lo. Be assured
Of what we can to friend you, and the King
Cannot forget your service.

Her. I am sorry
For that poor Gentleman.

A^var. I must confess, Sir,
The Duchess has been pleased to think me worthy
Her favors, and in that degree of honor,
That has obliged my life to make the best
Return of service, which is not, with bold
Affiance in her love, to interpose
Against her happiness, and your election;
I love so much her honor, I have quitted
All my desires, yet would not shrink to bleed
Out my warm stock of life, so the last drop
Might benefit her wishes.

Ki. I shall find
A compensation for this act, Alvarez,
It has much pleased us.

Enter Duchess with a Letter, GentlemanVsher. Dut. Sir, you are the King,
And in that sacred title it were sin
To doubt a justice, all that does concern
My essence in this world, and a great part
Of the other bliss, lives in your breath.

Ki. What intends the Duchess?

Dut. That will instruct you, Sir, Columbo has
Upon some better choice, or discontent,
Set my poor soul at freedom.

Ki. It Is his character --
Reads. Madam, I easily discharge all my pretensions
To your love, and person, I leave you to your
Own choice, and in what you have obliged
Your self to me, resume a power to cancel
If you please.
Columbo.
This is strange.

Dut. Now do an act to make
Your Chronicle beloved and read for ever.

Ki. Express your self.

Dut. Since by Divine infusion,
For it is no art could force the General to
This Change, second this justice and bestow
The heart you would have given from me, by
Your strict commands to love Columbo, where
'Twas meant by heaven, and let your breath return
Whom you divorced, Alvarez, mine.

Lords. This is but justice, Sir.

Ki. It was decreed above,
And since Columbo has released his interest
Which we had wrought him, not without some force
Upon your will I give you your own wishes,
Receive your own Alvarez, when you please
To celebrate your Nuptial, I invite
My self your guest.

Dut. Eternal blessings Crown you.

Omnes. And every joy your Marriage

[Exit King, who meets the Cardinal, they confer. Alvar. I know not whether I
shall wonder most
Or joy to meet this happiness.

Dut. Now the King has planted us
Methinks we grow already, and twist our loving souls
Above the wrath of thunder to divide us.

Alv. Ha? The Cardinal
Has met the King, I do not like this conference;
He looks with anger this way, I expect
A tempest.

Dut. Take no notice of his presence,
Leave me to meet, and answer it, if the King
Be firm in's Royal word, I fear no lightning;
Expect me in the Garden.

Alv. I obey,
But fear a shipwreck on the coast.
Exit.
Card. Madam.

Dut. My Lord.

Car. The King speaks of a Letter that has brought
A riddle in it.

Dut. It Is easy to interpret.

Car. From my Nephew? may I deserve the favor?

Dut. He looks as though his eyes would fire the paper.
They are a pair of Burning glasses, and
His envious blood does give 'em flame.

Car. What lethargy could thus unspirit him?
I am all wonder; do not believe Madam,
But that Columbo's love is yet more Sacred,
To honor, and your self, than thus to forfeit
What I have heard him call the glorious wreath
To all his merits, given him by the King,
From whom he took you with more pride than ever
He came from victory; his kisses hang
Yet panting on your lips, and he but now
Exchanged religious farewell to return,
But with more triumph to be yours.

Dut. My Lord,
You do believe your Nephews hand was not
Surpised or strained to this?

Car. Strange arts and windings in the world, most dark,
And subtle progresses; who brought this Letter?

Dut. I inquired not his name, I thought it not
Considerable to take such narrow knowledge.

Car. Desert, and honor urged it here, nor can
I blame you to be angry, yet his person
Obliged, you should have given a nobler pause,
Before you made your faith and change so violent
From his known worth, into the arms of one,
How ever fashioned to your amorous wish,
Not equal to his cheapest fame, with all
The gloss of blood and merit.

Dut. This comparison,
My good Lord Cardinal, I cannot think,
Flows from an even justice, it betrays
You partial where your blood runs.

Car. I fear Madam,
Your own takes two much license, and will soon,
Fall to the censure of unruly tongues;
Because Alvarez has a softer cheek,
Can like a woman trim his want on hair,
Spend half a day with looking in the glass
To find a posture to present himself,
And bring more effeminacy than man,
Or honor to your bed; must he supplant him?
Take heed, the common murmur when it catches
The sent of a lost Fame --

Dut. My Fame Lord Cardinal?
It stands upon an innocence as clear
As the devotions you pay to heaven,
I shall not urge my Lord your soft indulgence
At my next shrift.

Car. You are a fine Court Lady.

Dut. And you should be a reverend Churchman.

Car. One, that if you have not thrown off modesty.
Would counsel you to leave Alvarez.

Dut. Cause you dare do worse
Than Marriage, must not I be admitted what
The Church and Law allows me?

Car. Insolent? then you dare marry him?

Dut. Dare? Let your contracted flame and malice, with
Columbo's rage higher than that, meet us
When we approach the holy place, clasped hand
In hand, we will break through all your force and fix
Our sacred vows together there.

Car. I knew
When with as chaste a brow* you promised fair
To another; you are no dissembling Lady.

Dut. Would all your actions had no falser lights
About 'em.

Car Ha?

Dut. The people would not talk and curse so loud.

Car. I Will have you chid into a blush for this.

Dut. Begin at home great man, there is cause enough,
You turn the wrong end of the perspective
Upon your crimes, to drive them to a far,
And lesser sight, but let your eyes look right
What gaints would your pride and surfeit seem?
How gross your avarice, eating up whole families?
How vast are your corruptions and abuse
Of the Kings ear? at which you hang a pendent,
Not to adorn, but ulcerate, while the honest
Nobility, like pictures in the Arras,
Serve only for Court-Ornament; if they speak,
It Is when you set their tongues, which you wind up,
Like clocks to strike at the just hour you please;
Leave, leave, my Lord, these usurpations,
And be what you were meant a man to cure,
(...) in Agues to Religion;
Look on the Churches wounds.

Car. You dare presume
In your rude spleen to me, to abuse the Church?

Dut. Alas you give false aim, my Lord, it is your
Ambition and Scarlet Sins that tob
Her Altar of the glory, and leave wounds
Upon her brow; which fetches grief, and paleness,
Into her cheeks; Making her troubled bosom
Pant with her groans, and shroud her holy blushes
Within your reverend purples.

Car. Will you now take breath?

Dut. In hope, my Lord, you will behold your self
In a true glass, and see those injust acts
That so deform you, and by timely cure,
Prevent a shame before the short haird men
Do crowd and call for justice. I take leave.
Exit.
Car. This woman has a spirit, that may rise
To tame the Devils, there is no dealing with
Her angry tongue, it is action and revenge
Must calm her fury; were Columbo here,
I could resolve, but Letters shall be sent
To the Army which may wake him into sense
Of his rasn folly, or direct his spirit
Some way to snatch his honor from this flame,
All great men know, The soul of life is ^ame.
Exit.
ACT III.
Enter Valeria, Celinda. Valeria. I Did not think Celinda when I praised
Alvarez to the Duchess, that things thus
Would come about* what does your Ladyship
Think of Columbo now? it staggers all
The Court, he should forsake his Mistress, I
Am lost with wonder yet.

Celind. It Is very strange
Without a spel; but there is a fate in love,
I like him never the worse.

Enter two Lords. 1 Lo. Nothing but marriages, and triumph now.

Val. What new access of joy, makes you, my Lord,
So pleasant?

1 Lo. There Is a Packet come to Court
Makes the King merry, we are all concernd in it?
Columbo has given the enemy a great,
And glorious defeat, and is already
Preparing to march home.

Cel. He thrived the better for my prayers.

2 Lo. You have been his great admirer, Madam.

1 Lo. The King longs to see him.

Val. This news exalts the Cardinal.

Enter Cardinal. 1 Lo. He Is here,
He appears with discontent, the Marriage
With Count D' Alvarez has a bitter taste,
And not worn off his palate; but let us leave him.

Ladies. We Will to the Duchess.

Exeunt. manet Car. Card. He has not won so much upon the Arragon
As he has lost at home, and his neglect
Of what my studies had contrived to add
More luster to our Family by the access
Of the great Duchess fortune, cools his triumph,
And makes me wild.

Enter Hernando. Her. My good Lord Cardinal. (neral.

Car. You made complaint to the King about your General.

Her. Not a complaint my Lord, I did but satisfy
Some questions of the Kings.

Car. You see he thrives
Without your personal valor, or advice,
Most grave and learned in the wars.

Her. My Lord,
I Envy not his fortune.

Car. It Is above
Your Malice, and your noise not worth his anger,
It Is barking against the moon.

Her. More temper would
Become that habit.

Car. The Military thing would show some spleen;
I Will blow an Army of such Wasps about
The world; go look your sting you left in the Camp, Sir.

Enter King, and Lords. Her. The King.
Exit. This may be one day counted for.

K. All things conspire my Lord to make you fortunate,
Your Nephews glory --

Car. 'Twas your cause and justice
Made him victorious, had he been so valiant
At home, he had had another conquest to
Invite and bid her welcome to new wars.

K. You must be reconciled to providence, my Lord;
I heard you had a controvercy with
The Duchess, I will have you friends.

Car. I am not Angry.

K. For my sake then you shall be pleased,
And with me grace the Marriage*
A Churchman must show Charity, and shine
With first example, she is a woman.

Car. You shall prescribe in all things; Sir, you cannot
Accuse my love, if I still wish my Nephew
Had been so happy to be constant to
Your own, and my election; yet my brain
Cannot reach how this comes about; I know
My Nephew loved her with a near affection.

Enter Hernando. K. He Will give you fair account at his return.
Colonel, your Letters may be spared, the General
Has finished, and is coming home.

Her. I am glad on it, sir; my good Lord Cardinal
It Is not impossible but some man provoked,
May have a precious mind to cut your throat.

Car. You shall command me Noble Colonel;
I know you wo'not fail to be at th'wedding.

Her. It Is not Columbo that is married Sir.

Car. Go teach the postures of the Pike and Musket*
Then dril your Mi^midons into a ditch,
Where sterve, and stink in pick^e, you shall find
Me reasonable, you see the King expects me.

Her. So does the Devil; some desperate hand
May help you on your journey.

Exeunt. Enter Secretary and Servants. Sec. Here this, I this will fit your
part: you shall wear the Slashes, because you are a Soldier; here is for the
blue mute.


1 This doublet will never fit me, Pox ont', are these Breeches good enough for
a Prince too? Pedro plays but a Lord, and he has two laces more in a seam.


Sec. You must consider Pedro is a foolish Lord, he may wear what lace he
please.


2 Does my beard fit my clothes well Gentlemen?
Sec Pox o'your beard.

3 That will fright away the hair.

1 This fellow plays but a mute, and he is so troublesome, and talks.


3 Mr. Secretary might have let Jacques play the soldier, He has a black patch
already.


2 By your favor Mr. Secretary, I was asked who writ
this play for us.

Sec. For u? why art thou any more than a blew mute?


2 And by my troth, I said, I thought it was all your own.


Sec. Away you Coxcomb.


4 Do think he has no more wit then to write a Comedy? my Ladies Chaplain
made the Play, though he is content for the honor and tronble of the business,
to be seen in it.


Enter 5th. Servant. 5 Did any body see my head Gentlemen 'twas here but now? I
shall have never a head to play my part in.


Sec. Is thy head gone? it is well thy part was not in it, Look, look about, has
not Jacques it?


4 I his head? two'not come on upon my shoulders.


Sec. Make have Gentlemen I Will see whether the King has supped; Look every man to
his wardrop and his part.

Exit.
2 Is he gone? in my mind a masque had been fitter for a marriage.


4 Why mute? there was no time for it, and the scenes Are troublesome.


2 Half a score Deal tacked together in the clouds, what is that? a Throne to
come down and dance; all the properties have been paid forty times over, and
are in the Court stock, but the Secretary must have a play to show his wit.


4 Did not I tell thee it was the Chaplains? hold your tongue Mute.


1 Under the Rose and would this cloth of Silver doublet might never come off
again, if there be any more plot then you see in the back of my hand.


2 You talk of a plot, I Will not give this for the best Poets plot in the world
and if it be not well carried.


4 Well said Mnte.


3 Ha, ha; Pedro since he put on his doublet, has repeated but three lines, and
he has broke five butt ons.


2 I know not but by this false beard, and here is hair enough to hang a
reasonable honest man, I do not remember to say a strong line indeed in the
whole Comedy; but when the Chambermaid kisses the Captain.


3 Excellent mute.


Enter another Servant. 5 They have almost supped, and I cannot find my head yet.


4 play in thine own.


5 Thank you for that, so I may have it made a property, if I have not a head
found me, let Mr. Secretary play my part himself without it.


Enter Secretary. Sec. Are you all ready my Masters? the King is coming

through the Gallery, are the women dressed?


1 Rogero wants a head.


Sec. Here with a pox to you, take mine, you a player? You a puppy-dog is the
Music ready?


Enter Gentleman-usher. Gent. Gentlemen, it is my Ladies pleasure that you
expect till she call for you, there are a company of Cavaliers in gallant
Equipage newly alighted, have offered to present their Revels in honor of this
Hym^n; and it is her Graces command, that you be silent till their Entertainment
be over.


1 Gentlemen?


2 Affronted?


5 Mr. Secretary, there is your head again; a man's a man; have I broken my sleep
to study fifteen lines for an Ambassador, and after that a Constable, and is it
come to this?


Sec. Patience Gentlemen, be not so hot, it is but deferred, and the play may do
well enough cold.


4 If it be not presented, the Chaplain will have the greatest loss, he loses
his wits.


Hoboies. Sec. This Music speaks the King upon entrance; retire, retire, and
grumble not.


Exeunt. Enter King, Cardinal, Alvarez, Duchess, Celinda, Valeria, Placentia,
Lords, Hernando; (they being set) Enter Columbo, and five more in rich habits
Visarded; between every two a torch bearer: They Dance, and after beckon to
Alvarez as desirous to speak with him. Alv. With me!

[They Embrace and whisper. K. Do you know the Masquers Madam?

Dut. Not I Sir.

Car. There Is one, but that my Nephew is abroad,
And has more soul than thus to Jyg upon
Their Hymenrall night, I should suspect
'Twere he.

[The Masquers lead in Alvarez. Dut. Where Is my Lord D' Alvarez?
[Recorders.
K. Call in the Bridegroom.

Enter Columbo, four Masquers, bring in Alvarez dead, in one of their habits,
and having laid him down, Exeunt. Dut. What Mystery is this?

Car. We want the Bridegroom still.

K. Where is Alvarez
[Columbo points to the body, they unvizard, and find Alvar. bleeding.
Dut. Oh it is my Lord he is murdered.

K. Who durst commit this horrid act?

Col. I Sir.

K. Columbo? ha!

Col. Yes; Columbo that dares stay To justify that act.

Her. Most barbarous.

Dut. Oh my dearest Lord!

K. Our guard seize on them all, this sight does shake
All that is man within me; poor Alvarez
Is this thy wedding day?

Enter Guard. Dut. If you do think there is a heaven or pains,
To punish such black crimes in the other world,
Let me have swift, and such exemplar justice
As shall become this great assasinate,
You will take off our faith else, and if here
Such innocence must bleed, and you look on,
Poor men that call you Gods on earth, will doubt
To obey your Laws, nay practice to be Devils,
As fearing if such monstrous sins go on
The Saints will not be safe in Heaven.

K. You shall,
You shall have justice.

Car. Now to come off were brave.

Enter Servant. Ser. The Masquers, Sir, are fled, their horse prepared
At gate expected to receive 'em, where
They quickly mounted, coming so like friends
None could suspect their have, which is secured
By advantage of the night.

Col. I answer for '^m all, it is stake enough
For many lives, but if that poniard
Had voice, it would convince they were but all
Spectators of my act; and now if you
Will give your judgments leave, though at the first
Face of this object your cool bloods were frighted,
I can excuse this deed and call it Justice;
An act, your honors, and your office Sir,
Is bound to build a Law upon, for others
To Imitate; I have but took his life,
And punished her with mercy, who had both
Conspired to kill the soul of all my fame
Read there, -- and read an injury as deep
In my dishpnour, as the Devil knew
A Woman had capacity or malice
To execute read there, how you were cozened Sir,
Your power affronted, and my faith, her smiles
A juggling witchcraft to betray and make
My love her horse to stalk withal, and catch
Her curled Minion.

Car. Is it possible
The Duchess could dissemble so, and forfeit
Her modesty with you, and to us all?
Yet I must pity her; my Nephew has
Been too severe, though this affront would call
A dying man from prayers, and turn him Tiger,
There being nothing dearer than our fame,
Which, If a common man, whose blood has no
Ingredient of honor, labor to
Preserve, a Soldier (by his nearest tie
To glory) is above all others, bound
To vindicate; and yet it might have been less bloody:

Her. Charitable Devil!
K. Reads. I Pray, my Lord, release under your hand, what you dare challenge in
my love or person, as a just fo^feit to my self, this act will speak ^ou
honorable to my thoughts, and when you have conquered thus your self, you may
proceed to many victories, and after, with safety of your fame visit again The
lost Rosaura. To this your Answer was a free resign?

Col. Flattered with great opinion of her faith,
And my desert of her (with thought that she
Who seemed to weep and chide my easy will
To part with her, could not be guilty of
A treason, or Apostasy so soon,
But rather meant this a device to make
Me expedite the affairs of War) I sent
That paper, which her wickedness not justice,
Applied (what I meant trial) her divorce;
I loved her so, I dare call heaven to witness
I knew not whether I loved most; while ^he,
With him, whose crimson penitence I provoked,
Conspired my everlasting infamy;
Examine but the circumstance.

Car. It Is clear,
This Match was made at home before she sent
That cunning writ, in hope to take him off,
As knowing his impatient Soul would scorn
To own a blessing came on crutches to him;
It was not well to raise his expectation,
(Had you, Sir, no affront) to ruin him
With so much scandal and contempt.

K. We have
Too plentiful a circumstance to accuse
You Madam, as the cause of your own sorrows,
But not without an accessory, more
Than young Alvarez.

Car. Any other instrument?

K. Yes I am guilty, with her self, and Don
Columbo, though our acts looked several ways,
That thought a lover might so soon be ransomed;
And did exceed the office of a King
To exercise dominion over hearts,
That owe to the prerogative of heaven
Their choice, or Separation; you must therefore,
When you do kneel for Justice, and Revenge,
Madam, consider me a laterall agent
In poor Alvarez Tragedy.

1 Lo. It was your love to Don Columbo Sir.

Her. So, so; the King is charmed; do you observe,
How to acquit Columbo, he would draw
Himself into the plot; Heaven, is this Justice?

Car. Your Judgment is divine in this.

K. And yet,
Columbo cannot be secure, and we
Just in his pardon, that durst make so great,
And insolent a breach of Law and Duty.

2 Lo. Ha, Will he turn again?

K. And should we leave
This guilt of blood to Heaven, which cries, and strikes,
With loud appeals the palace of eternity,
Yet here is more to charge Columbo, than
Alvarez blood, and bids me punish it,
Or be no King.

Her. It Is come about my Lords.

K. And If I should forgive
His timeless death, I cannot the offense,
That with such boldness struck at me. Has my
Indulgence to your merits which are great
Made me so cheap, your rage could meet no time
Nor place for your revenge, but where my eyes
Must be affrighted, and affronted with
The bloody execution? This contempt
Of Majesty trar scends my power to pardon,
And you shall feel my anger Sir.

Her. ^hou shall have one short prayer more for that.

Col. Have I in the progress of my life
No actions to plead me up deserving,
Against this ceremony?

Car. Contain your self.

Col. I must be dumb then; where is honor?
And gratitude of Kings, when they forget
Whose hand secured their greatness? take my head off,
Examine then which of your silken Lords,
As I have done, will throw himself on dangers;
Like to a floting Island move in blood;
And where your great defense calls him to stand
A Bullwark, upon his bold breast to take
In death, that you may live: but Soldiers are
Your valiant fools, whom when your own securities
Are bleeding you can cherish, but when once
Your state and nerves are knit, not thinking when
To use their surgery again, you cast
Them off, and let them hang in dusty armories,
Or make it death to ask for pay.

K. No More,
We thought to have put your victory and merits
In balance with Alvarez death, which while
Our mercy was to Judge, had been your safety;
But the affront to us, made greater by
This boldness to upbraid our royal bounty,
Shall tame or make you nothing.

Lor. Excellent.

Her. The Cardinal is not pleased.

Car. Humble your self
To the King.

Col. And beg my life? let cowards do it
That dare not die, I Will rather have no head
Than owe it to his Charity.

K. To the Castle with him.
Madam, I leave you to your grief, and what
The King can recompense to your tears, or honor
Of your dead Lord, expect.

Dut. This shows like Justice.

Exeunt. ACT IV.
Enter two Lords, Hernando. 1 Lord. THis is the age of wonders.

2 Lo. Wondrous mischiefs.

Her. Among those guards which some call Tutelar Angels,
Whose office is to govern Provinces,
Is there not one will undertake Navarre?
Has heaven forsook us quite?

1 Columbo at large?

2 And graced now more than ever.

1 He was not pardoned,
That word was prejudicial to his fame.

Her. But as the murder done had been a dream
Vanished to memory, he is courted as
Preserver of his Country; with what chains
Of Magic does this Cardinal hold the King?

2 What will you say my Lord if they inchant
The Duchess now; and by some impudent art,
Advance a Marriage to Columbo yet?

Her. Say? I Will say no woman can be saved, nor is it
Fit, indeed, any should pretend to Heaven
After one such impiety in their sex,
And yet my faith has been so stager'd, since
The King restored Columbo, I Will be now
Of no Religion.

1 It Is not possible
She can forgive the murder, I observed
Her tears.

Her. Why so did I, my Lord,
And if they be not honest, it is to be
Half damned to look upon a woman weeping.
When do you think the Cardinal said his prayers?

2 I know not.

Her. Heaven forgive my want of charity
But if I were to kill him, he should have
No time to pray, his life could be no sacrifice,
Unless his soul went too.

1 That were too much.

Her. When you mean to dispatch him, you may give
Time for Confession, they have injured me
After another rate.

2 You are too passionate Cozen.

Enter Columbo, Colonels, Alfonso, Courtiers, (they pass over the Stage.) Her.
How the gay men do flutter to congratulate
His Goal delivery? there is one honest man,
What pity it is a gallant fellow should
Depend on knaves for his preferment.

1 Except this cruelty upon Alvarez,
Columbo has no mighty stain upon him;
But for his Uncle --

Her. If I had a Son
Of twelve years old, that would not fight with him,
And stake his soul against his Cardinals Cap,
I would dis-inherit him; Time has took a lease
But for three lives I hope, a fourth may see
Honesty walk without a crutch.

2 This is
But Air and Wildness.

Her. I Will see the Duchess,
You may do well to comfort her,

1 We must attend the King.

Her. your pleasures.
Exit Her.
Enter King and Card^nal. 1 A Man of a brave soul.

2 The le^s his safety;
The King and Cardinal in consult.

K. Commend us to the Duchess, and employ
What language you think fit, and powerful
To reconcile her to some peace. My Lords.

Car. Sir, I possess all for your sacred uses.

Exeunt Severally. Enter Secretary and Celinda. Sec. Madam, you are the
welcom'st Lady living.

Cel. To whom, Mr. Secretary?

Sec. If you have mercy
To pardon so much boldness, I durst say,
To me -- I am a Gentleman.

Cel. And handsome.

Sec. But my Lady has much wanted you.

Cel. Why Mr. Secretary?

Sec. You are the prettiest,

Cel. So.

Sec. The witiest,

Cel. So.

Sec. The merriest Lady in the Court.

Cel. And I was wished to make the Duchess pleasant*

Sec. She never had so deep a cause of sorrow,
Her Chamber's but a Coffin of a larger
Volume, wherein she walks so like a Ghost,
It Would make you pale to see her.

Cel. Tell her Grace I attend here.

Sec. I shall most willingly.
A spirited Lady, would I had her in my closet,
She is excellent company among the Lords,
Sure she has an admirable treble -- Madam.
Exit.
Cel. I do suspect this fellow would be nibling
Like some whose narrow fortunes will not rise
To wear things when the inventions rare, and new,
But treading on the heel of pride, they hunt
The fashion when it is crippled, like fell tyrants;
I hope I am not old yet, I had the honor
To be saluted by our Cardinals Nephew
This Morning, there is a man!

Enter Secretary. Sec. I have prevailed,
Sweet Madam use what Eloquence you can
Upon her, and if ever I be useful
To Your Ladyships service, your least breath commands me.

Enter Duchess. Dut. Madam, I come to ask you but one question,
If you were in my State, my state of grief,
I mean an exile from all happiness,
Of this world, and almost of heaven, for my
Affiction is finding out despair,
What would you think of Don Columbo?

Cel. Madam?

Dut. Whose Bloody hand wrought all this misery?
Would you not weep as I do? and wish rather
An everlasting spring of tears to drown
Your sight, than let your eyes be cursed to see
The murderer again? and glorious?
So careless of his sin, that he is made
Fit for new Parricide, even while his soul
Is purpled o'r, and reeks with innocent blood.
But do not, do not answer me, I know
You have so great a spirit (which I want,
The horror of his fact surprising all
My faculties) you would not let him live:
But I, poor I, must suffer more, there is not
One little star in Heaven will look on me,
Unless to choose me out the mark, on whom
It may shoot down some angry influence.

Enter Placenti^. Pla. Madam, here is Don Columbo says he must
Speak with your Grace.

Dut. But he must not, I charge you.
None else wait? Is this well done,
To triumph in his Tyranny? speak Madam,
Speak but your conscience.

Enter Columbo, and Secretary. Sec. Sir, you must not see her*

Col. Not see her? were she cabled up above
The search of Bullet, or of Fire, were she
Within her Grave, and that the toughest Mine
That ever nature teemed and groand withal,
I would force some way to see her; do not fear
I come to Court you Madam, you are not worth
The humblest of my kinder thoughts, I come
To show the man you have prokvo'd, and lost;
And tell you what remains of my revenge.
Live, but never presume again to marry,
I Will kill the next at the Altar, and quench all
The smiling tapers with his blood; if after
You dare provoke the Priest, and heaven so much,
To take another, in thy bed I Will cut him from
Thy warm embracc, and throw his heart to Ravens.

Cel. This will appear an unexampled cruelty.

Col. Your pardon Madam, rage, and my revenge
Not perfect, took away my eyes, you are
A noble Lady, this, not worth your ey-beam,
One of so slight a making, and so thin,
An Autumn leaf is of too great a value
To play, which shall be ^oonest lost in the Air;
Be pleased to own me by some name, in your
Assurance, I despise to be received
There, let her witness that I call
You Mistress; honor me to make these Pearls
Your carkanet.

Cel. My Lord, you are too humble in your thoughts.

Col. There Is no vexation too great to punish her.
Exit.
Enter Secretary. Sec. Now Nadam?

Cel. Away you saucy fellow; Madam, I
Must be excused, if I do think more honorably
Than you have cause of this great Lord.

Dut. Why is not
All woman kind concerned to hate what is impious?

Cel. For my part --

Dut. Antonio, is this a woman?

Sec. I know not whether she be man or woman,
I should be nimble to find out the Experiment,
She looked with less state, when Columbo came.

Dut. Let me entreat your absence, I am cozened in her,
I took you for a modest, honest Lady.

Cel. Madam, I scorn any accuser, and
Deducting the great title of a Duchess,
I shall not need one grain of your dear honor
To make me full weight, if your Grace be jealous
I can remove.
Exit.
Sec. She is gone.

Dut. Prithee remove
My fears of her return, -- she is not worth
Ex. Sec. Considering, my anger's mounted higher;
He need not put in caution ^or my next
Marriage, A^var^z, I must come to thee,
Thy Virgin, Wife, and Widow, but not till
I have paid those Tragic duties to thy Hearse,
Become my piety and love, but how?
Who shall instruct a way?

Enter Placentia. Pla. Madam, Don
Hernando much desires to speak with you.

Dut. Will not thy own discretion think I am
Unfit for visit.

Pla. Please your Grace he brings
Something he says imports your ear, and love
Of the dead Lord Alvarez.

Dut. Then admit him.

Enter Hernando: Her. I would speak, Madam, to your self.

Dut. Your absence.

Her. I know not how you Grace will censure so
Much boldness, when you know the affairs I come for.

Dut. My Servant has prepared me to receive it,
If it concern my dead Lord.

Her. Can you name
So much of your Alvarez in a breath
Without one word of your revenge? O Madam,
I come to chide you, and repent my great
Opinion of your virtue, that can walk,
And spend so many hours in naked Solitude,
As if you thought that no arrears were due
To his death, when you had paid his Funeral charges,
Made your eyes red, and wept a handkercher;
I come to tell you that I saw him bleed,
I, that can challenge nothing in his name,
And honor, saw his murdered body warm,
And panting with the labor of his spirits,
Till my amazed Soul shrunk and hid it self,
While barbarous Columbo grinning stood,
And mocked the weeping wounds; it is too much
That you should keep your heart alive, so long
After this spectacle, and not revenge it.

Dut. You do not know the business of my heart,
That censure me so rashly; yet I thank you,
And if you be Alvarez friend, dare tell
Your confidence, that I despise my life,
But know not how to use it in a service,
To speak me his revenger, this will need
No other proof, than that to you, who may
Be sent with cunning to betray me, I
Have made this bold confession, I so much
Desire to sacrifice to that hovering Ghost,
Columbo's life, that I am not ambitious
To keep my own two minutes after it.

Her. If you will call me coward, which is equal
To think I am a Traitor, I forgive it,
For this brave resolution, which time
And all the Destinies must aid, I beg
That I may kiss your hand for this, and may
The soul of angry honor guide it.

Dut. Whither?

Her. To Don Columbo's heart.

Dut. It is too weak I fear alone.

Her. Alone? are you in earnest? why? will it not
Be a dishonor to your Justice, Madam,
Another arm should interpose? but that
It were a saucy act to mingle with you,
I durst, nay I am bound in the revenge
Of him that is dead, (since the whole world has interest,
In every goodmans loss) to offer it;
Dare you command me, Madam?

Dut. Not command,
But I should more than honor such a truth
In man, that durst against so mighty odds,
Appear Alvarez friend and mine; the Cardinal --

Her. Is for the second course, Columbo must
Be first cut up, his Ghost must lead the dance.
Let him die first.

Dut. But how?

Her. How? with a Sword, and if I undertake it,
I wo'not lose so much of my own honor,
To kill him basely.

Dut. How shall I reward
This infinite service? it is not Modesty,
While now my husband groans beneath his tomb,
And calls me to his marble bed, to promise
What this great act might well deserve, my self
If you survive the Victor, but if thus
Alvarez ashes be appeased it must
Deserve an honorable memory;
And though Columbo (as he had all power,
And grasped the fates) has vowed to kill the man
That shall succeed Alvarez --

Her. Tyranny.

Dut. Yet if ever,
I entertain a thought of love hereafter,
Hernando from the world shall challenge it,
Till when, my Prayers, and fortune, shall wait on you.

Her. This is too mighty recompense.

Dut. It Is all just.

Her. If I outlive Columbo I must not
Expect security at home.

Dut. Thou can
Not fly, where all my fortunes, and my love,
Shall not attend to guard thee.

Her. If I dye --

Dut. Thy memory
Shall have a shrine, the next within my heart
To my Alvarez.

Her. Once again your hand,
Your cause is so religious you need
Not strengthen it with your prayers, trust it to me.

Enter Placentia, and Cardinal. Pla. Madam, the Cardinal.

Dut. Will you appear?

Her. And he had all the horror of the Devil
In's face, I would not balk him.

[He sta^es upon the Cardinal in his Exit. Car. What makes Hernando here? I do
not like
They should consult, I Will take no note; the King
Fairly salutes your Grace, by whose command
I am to tell you, though his will and actions
Illimited, stoop not to satisfy
The Vulgar inquisition, he is
Yet willing to retain a just opinion,
With those that are placed near him, and although
You look with Natures ey upon your self,
Which needs no perspective to reach, nor art
Of any optic to make greater, what
Your narrow sense applies an injury,
(Our selves still nearest to our selves) but there is
Another ey that looks abroad and walks
In search of reason, and the weight of things,
With which if you look on him, you will find
His pardon to ^olumbo cannot be
So much against his justice, as your erring
Faith would persuade your anger.

Dut. Good my Lord,
Your phrase has too much landschape and I cannot
Distinguish at this distance you present
The figure perfect, but indeed my eyes
May pray your Lordship find excuse, for tears
Have almost made them blind.

Car. Fair, peace restore 'em!
To bring the object nearer, the King says,
He could not be severe to Don Columbo
Without injustice to his other merits,
Which call more loud for their reward and honor,
Than you for your revenge; the Kingdom made
Happy by those; you only by the last
Uunfortunate, nor was it rational,
I speak the Kings own Language, he should die
For taking one man's breath, without whose valor
None now had been alive, without dishonor.

Dut. In my poor understanding, it is the Crown
Of virtue to proceed in its own tract,
Not deviate from honor, if you acquit
A man of murder, 'cause he has done brave
Things in the War, you will bring down his valor
To a crime, nay to a baud, if it secure
A rape, and but teach those that deserve well
To sin with greater license; but dispute
Is now too late, my Lord, it is done, and you,
By the good King, in tender of my sorrows,
Sent to persuade me, it is unreasonable
That Justice should repair me.

Car. You mistake,
For if Columbo's death could make Alvarez
Live, the King had given him up to Law
Your bleeding Sacrifice; but when his life
Was but another treasure thrown away,
To obey a clamorous Statute, it was wisdom
To himself and common safety to take off
This killing edge of Law, and keep Columbo
To recompense the crime by noble acts,
And sorrow, that in time might draw your pity.

Dut. This is a greater tyranny, than that
Columbo exercised, he killed my Lord,
And you not have the charity to let
Me think it worth a punishment,

Car. To that
In my own name, I answer; I condemn
And urge the blody guilt against my Nephew,
'Twas violent, and cruel, a black deed,
A deed whose memory does make me shuddet,
An act that did betray a tyranous nature,
Which he took up in War, the school of vengeance;
And though the Kings compassion spare him here,
Unless his heart Weep it self out in penitent tears.

Dut. This sounds
As you were now a good man.

Car. Does your Grace
Think I have conscience to allow the murder?
Although when it was done, I did obey
The stream of nature, as he was my Kinsman,
To plead he might not pay his forfeit life,
Could I do less for one so near my blood?
Consider Madam, and be charitable,
Let not this wild injustice, make me lose
The character I bear, and reverend habit.
To make you full acquainted with my innocence,
I challenge here my soul, and heaven to witnes^
If I had any thought, or knowledge with
My nephews plot, or person, when he came
Under the smooth pretense of friend to violate
Your hospitable laws, and do that act
Whose frequent mention draws this tear, a whirlwind
Snatch me to endless flames.

Dut. I must believe,
And ask your Graces pardon, I confess
I have not loved you since Alvarez death,
Though we were reconciled.

Car. I do not blame
Your Jealousy, nor any zeal you had
To prosecute revenge against me, Madam,
As I then stood suspected, nor can yet
Implore your mercy to Columbo, all
I have to say is to retain my first
Opinion and credit with your Grace,
Which you may think I urge not out of fear
Or ends upon You, (since, I thank the King,
I stand firm on the base of royal favor)
But for your own sake, and to show I have
Compassion of your sufferings.

Dut. You have cleared
A doubt my Lord, and by this fair remonstrance,
Given my sorrow so much truce, to think
That we may meet again, and yet be friends.
But be not angry, if I still remember
By whom Alvarez dyed, and weep, and wake
Another Justice with my prayers,

Car. All thoughts
That may advance a better peace, dwell with you.
Exit.
Dut. How would this cozening Statesman bribe my Faith
With flatteries to think him innocent?
No, if his Nephew die, this Cardinal must not
Be long-lived; all the prayers of a wronged Widow
Make firm Hernando's Sword, and my own hand
Shall have some glory in the next revenge;
I will pretend my brain with grief distracted,
It may gain easy credit, and beside
The taking off examination
For great ^olumbo's death, it makes what act
I do in that believed want of my reason,
Appear no crime, but my defense; look down
Soul of my Lord, from thy eternal shade,
And unto all thy blessed companions boast,
Thy Duchess busy to revenge thy Ghost.
Exit.
Enter Columbo, Hernando, Alfonso, Colonel. Col. Hernando, now I love thee, and
do half
Repent the affront my passion threw upon thee*

Her. You wo'not be too prodigal of your penitence.

Colu. This makes good thy Nobility of birth,
Thou may be worth my anger and my sword,
If thou do execute as daringly,
As thou provok'st a quarrel, I did think
Thy soul a starveling, or a sleep.

Her. You Will find it
Active enough to keep your spirit waking,
Which to exasperate, for yet I think
It is not high enough to meet my rage --
Do You smile?

Col. This noise is worth it, Gentlemen;
I Am sorry this great Soldier has engaged
Your travel, all his business is to talk.

Her. A little of your Lordships patience,
You shall have other sport, and swords that will
Be as nimble 'bout your heart, as you can wish,
It Is pity more than our two single lives*
Should be at stake.

Colon. Make that no scruple Sir.

Her. To him then that survives if fate allow
That difference, I speak that he may tell
The World, I came not hither on slight anger,
But to revenge my honor stained, and trampled on
By this proud man, when General, he commanded
My absence from the field.

Colu. I do remember,
And I Will give your Soul now a discharge.

Her. I come to meet it, if your courage be so fortunate.
But there is more than my own injury
You must account for Sir, if my sword prosper,
Whose point and every edge is made more keen
With young Alvarez blood, in which I had
A Noble interest; does not that sin benum
Thy Arteries, and turn the guilty flowings,
To trembling gelly in thy veins? can hear
Me name that murder, and thy spirits not
Struck into air, as thou were shot by some
Engine from heaven?

Col. You are the Duchess Champion;
Thou have given me a quarrel now; I grieve
It is determined all must fight, and I
Shall lose much honor in his fall.

Her. That Duchess
(Whom but to mention with thy breath, is sacrilege)
An Orphan of thy making, and condemned
By thee to eternal solitude, I come
To vindicate, and while I am killing thee,
By virtue of her prayers sent up for justice,
At the same time, in heaven I am pardoned for it.

Col. I cannot hear the Bravo.

Her. Two words more
And take your chance, before you all I must
Pronounce that noble Lady, without knowledge,
Or thought of what I undertake for her.
Poor soul, She Is now at her Devotions,
Busy with heaven, and wearing out the earth
With her stiff Knees, and bribing her good Angel
With treasures of her eyes, to tell her Lord
How much she longs to see him; my attempt
Needs no commission from her, were I
A stranger in Navarre, the inborn right
Of every Gentleman to Alvarez loss,
Is reason to engage their swords, and lives,
Against the common enemy of virtue.

Colu. Now have you finished? I have an instrument
Shall cure this noise, and fly up to thy tongue,
To murder all thy words.

Her. One little knot
Of phlegm that clogs my stomach, and I ^a' done;
You have an Uncle called a Cardinal
Would he were lurking now about thy heart,
That the same wounds might reach you both, and send
Your reeling souls together. Now have at you.

Alph. We must not Sir be idle.
[They fight, Columbo's Second ^^ain.
Her. What think you now of praying?

Colu. Time enough;
[He kills Hernando's Second. Commend me to my friend; the scales are even,
I would be merciful, and give you time,
Now to consider of the other World,
You Will find your soul benighted presently.

Her. I Will find my way in the dark.
[They fight, and close, Columbo gets both the swords, and Hernando takes up
the seconds Weapon. Colu A stumble's dangerous.
Now ask thy life -- Ha?

Her. I despise to wear it,
A gift from any but the first bestower.

Col. I scorn a base advantage -- ha.

Her. I am now
[Columbo throws away one of the swords. They fight, Hernand^ wounds Columbo.
Out of your debt.

Col. Thou Have don't, and I forgive thee.
Give me thy hand, when shall we meet again?

Her. Never, I hope.

Col. I feel life ebb apace, yet I Will look upwards,
And show my face to heaven.

Her. The matters done,
I must not stay to bury him.
Exit.
ACT V.
Enter two Lords. 1 Lord. COlumbo's death does much aflict the King.

2 Lo. I thought the Cardinal would have lost his wits
At first, for's nephew, it drownes all the talk
Of the other that were slain.

1 We are friends.
I do suspect Hernando had some interest
And knew how their wounds came.

2 His flight confirms it,
For whom the Cardinal has spread his nets.

1 He is not so weak to trust himself at home
To his Enemies gripe.

2 All strikes not me so much,
As that the Duchess, most oppressed Lady,
Should be distracted, and before Columbo
Was slain.

1 But that the Cardinal should be made
Her Guardian, is to me above that wonder.

2 So it pleased the King, and she, with that small stock
Of reason left her, is so kind, and smooth
Upon him.

1 She Is turned a child again; a madness,
That would have made her brain and blood boil high
In which distemper she might have wrought something.

2 Had been to purpose.

1 The Cardinal is cunning, and how ever
His brow does smile, he does suspect Hernando
Took fire from her, and waits a time to punish it.

2 But what a subject of disgrace, and mirth,
Has poor Celinda made herself by pride,
In her belief Columbo was her servant.
Her head has stooped much since he died, and she
Almost ridiculous at Court.

Enter Cardinal, Antonelli, Servant. 1. The Cardinal
Is come into the Garden, now --

Car. Walk off,
It troubles me the Duchess by her loss
Of brain is now beneath my great revenge,
She is not capable to feel my anger,
Which like to unregarded thunder spent
In woods, and lightning aimed at senseless trees,
Must idly fall, and hurt her not, not to
That sense her guilt deserves a fatal stroke,
Without the knowledge for what crime to fright her,
When she takes leave, and make her tug with death,
Until her soul sweat, is a Pigeons torment,
And she is sent a babe to the other World,
Columbo's death will not be satisfied,
And I but wound her with a two edged feather;
I must do more, I have all opportunity,
(She by the King now made my charge) but she is
So much a turtle I shall lose by killing her,
Perhaps do her a pleasure, and preferment;
That must not be.

Enter Celinda with a Parchment. Anto. Is not this she, that would be thought
to have been
Columbo's Mistress? Madam, his grace is private,
And would not be disturbed, you may displease him.

Cel. What will your worship wager that he shall
Be pleased again before we part.

Ant. I Will lay this Diamond Madam, against a kiss,
And trust your self to keep the stakes.

Cel. It Is done.

Ant. I have long had an appetite to this Lady,
But the Lords keep her up so high -- this toy
May bring her on.

Car. This interruption tastes not of good manners.

Cel. But where necessity my Lord compells,
The boldness may meet pardon, and when you
Have found my purpose, I may less appear
Unmannerly.

Car. To the business.

Cel. It did please
Your Nephew, Sir, before his death to credit me
With so much honorable favor, I
Am come to tender to his neer'st of blood,
Your self, what does remain a debt to him.
Not to delay your Grace with circumstance,
That deed, if you accept, makes you my heir
Of no contemptible estate -- this way
[He reads. Is only left to try up scurrile tongues,
And saucy men, that since Columbo's death
Venture to Libell on my pride, and folly;
His greatness, and this gift which I enjoy,
Still for my life, beyond which term; a Kingdom's,
Nothing, will curb the giddy spleens of men
That live on impudent rhyme, and railing at
Each wandering fame they cat^h.

Car. Madam, this bounty
Will bind my gratitude and care to serve you.

Cel. I am your Graces Servant.

Car. Antonelli,
[Whisper. And when this noble Lady visits me
Let her not wait.

Cel. What think you my Officious, Sir; his grace
Is pleased, you may conjecture? I may keep
Your Gem, the kiss was never yours.

Ant. Sweet Madam --

Cel. Talk if you dare, you know I must not wait,
And so farewell for this time.

Car. It Is in my brain already, and it forms
Apace, good, excellent revenge, and pleasant!
She Is now within my talons, it is too cheap
A satisfaction for Columbo's death,
Only to kill her by soft charm or force,
I Will rifle first her darling chastity,
'Twil be after time enough to poison her,
And she to the world be thought her own destroyer.
As I will frame the circumstance, this night
All may be finished; for the Colonel,
Her agent in my Nephews death (whom I
Disturbed at Counsel with her) I may reach him
Hereafter, and be Master of his fate.
We starve our Conscience when we thrive in State.

Exeunt. Enter Secretary, and Placentia? Sec. Placentia, We two are only left
Of my Ladies Servants, let us be true
To her, and one another, and be sure
When we are at prayers, to curse the Cardinal.

Pla. I pity my sweet Lady.

Sec. I pity her too, but am a little angry;
She might have found another time to lose
Her wits.

Pla. That I were a man?

Sec. What would thou do Placentia.

^la. I would revenge my Lady.

Sec. It Is better being a woman, thou may do
Things that may prosper better, and the fruit
Be thy own another day.

Pla. Your wit still loves
To play the wanton.

Sec. It Is a sad time Placentia,
Some pleasure would do well, the truth is, I
Am weary of my life, and I would have
One fit of mirth before I leave the world.

Pla. Do not you blush to talk thus wildly?

Sec. It Is good manners
To be a little mad after my Lady;
But I have done; who is with her now?

Pla. Madam Valeria.

Sec. Not Celinda? There Is a Lady for my humor,
A pretty book of flesh and blood, and well
Bound up, in a fair letter too; would I
Had her with all the Errata.

Pla. She has not
An honorable Fame.

Sec. Her Fame? that is nothing,
A little stain, her wealth will fe^ch again
The color, and bring honor into her cheeks
As fresh; if she were mine, and I had her
Exchequer* I know the way to make her honest,
Honest to the touch, the test, and the last trial.

Pla. How Prithee?

Sec. Why, first I would marry her, that is a verb Material;
Then I would Print her with an Ind^x
Expurgatorius, a table drawn
Of her Court Her^sies, and when she is read
Cum Privilegio, who dares call her Whore?

Pla. I Will leave you, if you talk thus.

Sec. I have done,
Placentia, thou may be better company
After another progress; and now tell me,
Did ever hear of such a patient madness
As my Lady is possessed with? she has raved
But twice; and she would fright the Cardinal,
Or at a supper if she did but poison him,
It were a phrensy I could bear withal;
She calls him her dear Governor --

Enter Hernando disguised having a Letter. Pla. Who is this?

Her. Her Secretary? Sir,
Here is a Letter if it may have so
Much happiness to kiss her Graces hand.

Sec. From whom?

Her. That Is not in your Commission Sir
To ask, or mine to satisfy, she will want
No understanding when she reads.

Sec. Alas,
Under your favor Sir, you are mistaken.
Her Grace did never more want understanding.

Her. How?

Sec. have you not heard, her scull is broken Sir
And many pieces taken out, she is mad.

Her. The sad fame of her distraction
Has two much truth it seems.

Pla. If please you Sir
To exp^ct a while, I will present the Letter.

Her. Pray do
Exit Place^. How long has she been thus Distempered Sir?

Sec. Before the Cardinal came to govern here,
Who for that reason by the King was made
Her Guardian, we are now at his devotion.

Her. A Lamb given up to a Tiger! may diseases
Soon eat him through his heart!

Sec. Your pardon Sir,
I love that voice, I know it too, a little,
Are not you? be not angry noble Sir,
I can with ease be ignorant again,
And think you are another man, but if
You be that valiant Gentleman they call --

Her. Whom? What?

Sec. That killed, I would not name him if I thought
You were not pleased to be that very Gentleman.

Her. Am I betrayed?

Sec. The Devil shall not
Betray you here, kill me, and I will take
My death you are the Noble Colonel;
We are all bound to you for the Generals death,
Valiant Hernando? when my Lady knows
You are here, I hope 'twil fetch her wits again,
But do not talk too loud, we are not all
Honest in the house, some are the Cardinals creatures.

Her. Thou were faithful to thy Lady, I am glad
It Is night, but tell me how the Churchman uses
The Duchess?

Enter Antonelli. Sec. He carries Angels in his tongue, and face, but I
Suspect his heart, this is one of his spawns.
Signior Antonelli.

Ant. Honest Antonio.

Sec. And how, and how -- a friend of mine, where is
The Cardinals Grace?

Her. That will be never answered.

Aut. He means to sup here with the Duchess.

Sec. Will be?

Ant. We Will have the charming bottles at my chamber,
Bring that Gentleman, we will be mighty merry.

Her. I may disturb your jollity.

Ant. Farewell sweet --

Sec. Dear Antonelli -- a round Pox confound you.
This is Court Retorick at the back stairs.

Enter Placentia. Pla. Do you know this Gentleman?

Sec. Not I.

Pla. My Lady presently dismissed Val^ria,
And bad me bring him to her bedchamber.

Sec. The Gentleman has an honest face.

Pla. Her words fell from her with some evenness and joy.
Her. Grace desires your presence.

Her. I Will attend her.
Exit.
Sec. I would this Soldier had the Cardinal
Upon a promontory, with what a spring
The Churchman would leap down, it were a spectacle
Most rare to see him topple from the precipice,
And souse in the salt water with a noise
To stun the fishes; and if he fell into
A net, what wonder would the simple Sea^ guls
Have, to draw up the o'rgrown Lobster,
So ready boild? he shall have my good wishes,
This Colonels coming may be lucky. I
Will be sure none shall interrupt 'em.

Enter Celinda. Cel. Is her Grace at opportunity?

Sec. No sweet Madam,
She is a sleep, her Gentlewoman says.

Cel. My business is but visit, I Will expect.

Sec. That must not be, although I like your company.

Cel. You are grown rich Mr. Secretary.

Sec. I Madam, Alas!

Cel. I hear you are upon another purchase.

Sec. I upon a purchase?

Cel. If you want any sum --

Sec. If I could purchase your sweet favor Madam?

Cel. You shall command me, and my fortune Sir.

Sec. How Is this?

Cel. I have observed you Sir a staid,
And prudent Gentleman -- and I shall want --

Sec. Not me?

Cel. A Father for some Infant; he has credit
[Aside. In The world; I am not the first cast Lady
Has married a Secretary.

Sec. Shall I wait upon you?

Cel. Whither?

Sec. Any whither.

Cel. I may chance lead you then --

Sec. I shall be honored to obey, my blood
Is up, and in this humor I Am for any thing.

Cel. Well Sir, I Will t^y your Manhood.

Sec. It Is my happiness,
You cannot please me better.

Cel. This was struck
In The opportunity.

Sec. I am made for ever.

Enter Hernando, and Duchess. Her. Dear Madam, do not weep.

Dut. You Are very welcome,
I ha done, I wo'not shed a tear more
Till I meet Alvarez, then I Will weep for joy;
He was a fine young Gentleman, and sung sweetly,
And you had heard him but the night before
We were married, you would have sworn he had been
A Swan, and sung his own ^ad Epitaph;
But we will talk of the Cardinal.

Her. Would his death
Might ransom your fair sense, he should not live
To triumph in the loss, beshrow my manhood;
But I begin to melt.

Dut. I pray Sir tell me,
For I can understand, although they say
I have lost my wits; but they are safe enough,
And I shall have'em when the Cardinal dies;
Who had a Letter from his Nephew too
Since he was slain.

Her. From whence?

Dut. I know not where he is? but in some Bower
Within a Garden he is mak^ng Chaplets,
And means to send me one, but I Will not take it,
I have flowers enough I thank him while I live.

Her. But do you love your Governor?

Dut. Yes, but I Will never marry him, I am promised
Already.

Her. To whom Madam?

Dut. Do not you
Blush when you ask me that, must not you be
My Hu^band? I know why, but that is a secret;
Indeed if you believe me, I do love
No man alive so well as you, the Cardinal
Shall never know it, he will kill us both, and yet
He says he loves me dearly, and has promised
To make me well again, but I Am afraid,
One time or other he will give me poison.

Her. Prevent him Madam, and take nothing from him.

Dut. Why, do you think 'twil hurt me?

Her. It will kill you.

Dut. I shall but dye, and meet my dear loved Lord,
Whom when I have kissed, ^'l come again, and work
A bracelet of my hair for you to carry him,
When you are going to heaven, the poesy shall
Be my own name, in little tears, that I
Will weep next winter, which congealed in the frost
Will show like feed-Pearl, you will deliver it?
I know he will love, and wear it for my sake.

Her. She is quite lost.

Dut. I pray give me Sir, your pardon,
I know I talk not wisely, but if you had
The burden of my sorrow, you would miss
Sometimes your better reason; now I Am well,
What will you do when the Cardinal comes?
He must not see you for the world.

Her. He shall not,
I Will take my leave before he come.

Dut. Nay stay,
I shall have no friend left me when you go,
He will but sup, he shall not stay to ly w^' me,
I have the picture of my Lord abed,
Three are to much this weather.

Enter Pl^centia. Pla. Madam* the Cardinal.

Her. He shall sup with the Devil.

Dut. I dare not stay,
The Red-cock will be angry, I Will come again.

Exeunt. Her. This sorrow is no fable, now I find
My curiosity is sadly satisfied;
Ha? if the Duchess in her stragled wits,
Let fall words to betray me to the Cardinal,
The Panther will not leap more fierce to meet
His prey, when a long want of food has parched
His starved maw, than he to print his rage
And tear my heart strings, every thing is fatal,
And yet she talked sometimes with chain of sense,
And said she loved me; ha, they come not yet;
I have a sword about me, and I left
My own security to visit death.
Yet I may pause a little, and consider
Which way does lead me to it most honorably;
Does not the Chamber that I walk in tremble?
What will become of her, and me, and all
The world in one small hour? I do not think
Ever to see the day again, the wings
Of night spread o'r me like a sable Herse-cloath,
The Stars are all close mourners too; but I
Must not a^one to the cold silent grave,
I must not; If thou can Alvarez open
That Ebon curtain, and behold the man,
When the worlds justice fails shall right thy ashes,
And feed their thirst with blood, thy Duchess is
Almost a Ghost already; and does wear
Her body like a useless upper garment,
The trim and fashion of it lost. Ha?

Enter Placentia. Pla. You need not doubt me, Sir, My Lady prays
You would not think it long, she in my ear,
Commanded me to tell you, that when last
She drank, she had happy wishes to your health.

Her. And did the Cardinal pledge it?

Pla. He was not
Invited to it nor must he know you are here.

Her. What do they talk of prithee?

Pla. His Grace is very pleasant
[A Lute is heard. And kind to her, but her returns are after
The sad condition of her sense, sometimes unjoynted.

Her. They have Music.

Pla. A Lute only,
His Grace prepared, they say, the best of Italy
That waits upon my Lord.

Her. He thinks the Duchess
Is stung with a Tarantula.

Pla. Your pardon.
My duty is expected.
Exit
Her. Gentle Lady. -- a voice too?

Song within. S. Come my Daphne, come away,
We do wast the Crystal day;
It Is Strephon calls. Da What says my love?

S. Come follow to the Myrtle Grove,
Where Venus shall prepare
New Chaplets for thy hair.

D. Were I shut up within a Tree,
I'drend my bark to follow thee.

S. My Shepherdess, make have,
The minutes slide too fast:

D In those cooler shades will I
Blind, as Cupid, kiss thine ey.

S. In thy bosom then I Will stay,
In such warm Snow who would not lose his way.

Chor. VVE'llaugh and leave the world behind,
And Gods themselves that see,
Shall envy thee, and m^*
But never find
Such joys, when they embrace a Deity.
If at this distance I distinguish, it is not
Church music, and the air's wanton, and no Anthem
Sung to it, but some strange Ode of love, and kisses,
What should this mean? -- ha, he is coming hither,
I am betrayed, he marches in her hand,
I Will trust a little more, mute as the Arras
My sword and I here.

[He observes* Enter Cardinal, Duchess, Antonelli* and Attendants. Car. Wait
you in the first Chamber, and let none
Presume to interrupt us.
Ex. Serve. She is pleasant; now for some art to poison all her innocence.

Dut. I do not like the Cardinals humor, he
Little suspects what guest is in my Chamber.

Car. Now Madam you are safe.

Dut. How means your Lordship?

Car. Safe in my Arms, sweet Duchess.

Dut. Do not hurt me

Car. Not for the treasures of the world, you are
My pretty charge, had I as many lives
As I have careful thoughts, to do you service,
I should think all a happy forfeit to
Delight your Grace one minute; it is a heaven
To see you smile.

Dut. What kindness call you this?

Car. It cannot want a name while you preserve
So plentiful a sweetness, it is love.

Dut. Of me? how shall I know it my Lord?

Car. By this, and this, swift Messengers to whisper
Our hearts to one another.

[Kisses. Dut. Pray do you come a wooing?

Car. Yes sweet Madam,
You cannot be so cruel to deny me.

Dut. What my Lord?

Car. Another kiss.

Dut. Can you
Dispense with this my Lord? Alas I fear
[Aside. Hernando is asleep, or vanished from me.

Car. I have mocked my blood into a flame, and what
My angry soul had formed for my revenge,
Is now the object of my amorous sense,
I have took a strong enchantment from her lips,
And fear I shall forgive Columbo's death
If She consent to my embrace; come Madam.

Dut. Whither my Lord?

Car. But to your bed or couch,
Where if you will be kind, and but allow
Your self a knowledge, love whose shape and raptures
Wise Poets have but glorified in dreams,
Shall make your chamber his eternal Palace;
And with such active and essential streams
Of new delights glide o'r your bosom, you
Shall wonder to what unknown world you are
By some blessed change translated; why do you pause?
And look so wild? will you deny your Governor?

Dut. How came you by that Cloven foot?

Car. Your fancy
Would turn a traitor to your happiness;
I am your friend, you must be kind.

Dut. Unhand me,
Or I Will cry out a rape*

Car. You wo'not sure?

Dut. I have been cozend with Hernando's shadow,
Here Is none but heaven to hear me, help, a rape.

Car. Are you so good at understanding then,
I must use other argument.

[He forces her. Her. Go to, Cardinal.

[Strikes him. Ex. Dut. Car. Hern^ndo* Murder, Treason, help.

Her. An army shall not rescue thee, your blood
Is much inflamed, I have brought a Lancet wi'me,
Shall open your hot veins, and cool your fever;
To vex thy parting Soul, it was the same
Engine that pinc'd Columbo's heart.

Car. Help, Murder.

Enter Antonelli and Servants. Aston. Some ring the bell, 'twil raise the Court,
My Lord is murdered, it is Hernando.

The bell rings. Her. I Will make you all some sport, -- So, now we are even,
Where is the Duchess, I would take my leave
Of her, and then bequeath my curse among you.

[Her. falls. Enter King, Duchess, Valeria, Lords, Guard. K. How come these
bloody objects?

Her. With a trick my sword found out, I hope he is paid.

1 Lo. I hope so to; a Surgeon for my Lord Cardinal.

K. Hernando?

Dut. Justice, Oh Justice Sir, against a ravisher.

Her. Sir I have done you service.

K. A bloody service.

Her. It Is pure Searlet.

Enter Surgeon. Car. After such care to perfect my revenge
Thus banded out of the world by a woman's plot?

Her. I have preserved the Duchess from a rape,
Goodnight to me and all the world for ever.

[Dies. K. So impious.

Dut. It Is most true, Alvarez blood
Is now revenged, I find my brain return,
And every straggling sense repairing home.

Car. I have deserved you should turn from me Sir,
My life has been prodigiously wicked,
My blood is now the Kingdoms balm; oh Sir,
I have abu^^d your ear, your trust, your people,
And my own sacred Office, my conscience
Feels now the sting, oh show your charity,
And with your pardon like a cool soft gale
Fan my poor sweating soul; that wanders through
Unhabitable climes, and parched deserts;
But I am lost, if the great World forgive me,
Unless I find your mercy for a crime
You know not Madam, yet against your life.
I must confess, more than my black intents
Upon your honor, you are already poisoned.

K. By whom?

Car. By me,
In the revenge I owed Columb^'s loss,
With your last meat was mixed a poison that
By subtle, and by sure degrees must let in death.

K. Look to the Duchess, our Physicians?

Car. Stay, I will deserve her merry, though I cannot
Call back the deed, in proof of my repentance,
If the last breath of a now dying man
May gain your charity, and belief, receive
This Ivory box in it an antidote
'Bove that they boast the great magistrall medicine,
That p^uder mixed with wine by a most rare
And quick access to the heart w^ll fortify it
Against the rage of the most nimble poison,
I am not worthy to present her with it,
Oh take it and preserve her inn^cent life.

1 Lo. Strange, he should have a good thing in such readynes^.

Car. This that which in my jealousy and state
Trusting to false predictions of my birth,
That I sh die by poison, I preserved
For my own safety, wonder not, I made,
That my companion was to be my refuge.

Enter Servant with a bowl of Wine. 1 Lo. Here Is some touch of grace.

Car. in greater proof of my pure thoughts I take
This first, and with my dying breath confirm
My penitence, it may benefit her life,
But not my wounds; oh hasten to preserve her,
And though I merit not her pardon, let not
Her fair soul be divorced

K. This is some charity, may it prosper Madam.
Valeria. How does your grace?

Dut. And must I owe my life to him whose death
Was my ambition? take this free acknowledgment,
I had intent this night with my own hand
To be Alvarez lusticer.

K. You were mad,
And thought past apprehension of revenge.

Dut. That shape I did usurp, great Sir, to give
My Art more freedom and defense, but when
Hernando came to visit me, I thought
I might defer my execution,
Which his owe rage supplied without my guilt,
And when his lust grew hight, met with his blood.

^ Lo. The Cardial smiles.

Car. Now my revenge has met
With you my nimble Duchess, I have took
A shape to give my act more freedom too,
And now I am sure she is poisoned, with that doze
I gave her last.

K. Thou Art not so horrid?

Dut. Ha! some Cordial.

Car. Alas no preservative
Has wings to overtake it, were her heart
Locked in a quarry, it would search, and kill
Before the aids can reach it; I am sure
You sha not now laugh at me.

K. How came you by that poison?

Car. I prepared it,
Resolving when I had enjoyed her, which
The Colonel prevented, by some art
To make her take it, and by death conclude
My last revenge; you have the fatal Story.

K. This is so great a wickedness, it will
Exceed belief.

Car. I knew I could not live.

Surgeon. Your wounds, Sir, were not desperate.

Car. Not mortal? ha? were they not mortal?

Surg. If I have skill in Surgery.

Car. Then I have caught my self in my own Engine.

2 Lo. It was your fate you said to die by poison.

Car. That was my own prediction to abuse
Your faith, no humane art can now resist it,
I feel it knocking at the seat of life,
It must come in, I have wrackt all my own
To try your charities, now it would be rare,
If you but waft me with a little prayer,
My wings that flag may catch the wind, but it is
In vain, the mist is risen, and there is none
To stear my wandering bark.

[Dyes. 1 Lo. He Is dead?

K. With him
Die all deceived trust.

2 Lo. This was a strange impiety.

K. When men
Of Gifts and sacred Function once decline
From virtue, their ill deeds transcend example.

Dut. The minute's come that I must take my leave too.
Your hand great Sir, and though you be a King,
We may exchange forgiveness, heaven forgive,
And all the world. I come, I come Alvarez

[Dyc^. K. D^spose their bodies for becoming funeral;
How much are Kings abused by those they take
To royal grace? whom when they cherish most
By nice indulgence, they do often arm
Against themselves: from whence this maxim springs,
None have more need of Perspectives than Kings.

Exeunt. Epilogue.
Within. Mr. Polla^d, where is Mr. Pollard for the Epilogue? He is thrust upon
the Stage, and falls. Epilogue. I Am coming to you Gentlemen, the Poet
Has helped me thus far on my way, but I Will
Be even with him; the Play is a Tragedy,
The first that ever he composed for us,
Wherein be thinks he has done pretily,
Enter Servant. And I am sensible; I prithee look
Is nothing out of joint? has he broke nothing?

Serve. No Sir, I hope.

Epi. Yes, he has broke his Epilogue all to pieces,
Can thou put it together again?

Ser. Not I Sir.

Epi. Nor I, prithee be gone, hum? M^. Poet,
I have a teeming mind to be revenged.
You may assist, and not be seen in it now.
If you please Gentlemen, for I do know
He listens to the issue of his cause,
But blister not your hands in his applause,
Your private smile, your nod, or hum, to ^^ll
My fellows, that you like the business well;
And when without a clap you go away,
I Will drink a small^bear health to his second day;
And break his heart, or make him swear, and ra^^
He Will write no more for the unhappy Stag^;
But that is too much, so we should lose; faith sh^^
And if you l^ke his play, 'ts as well, he knew it.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of the Authors Poems already Printed
Tragedies.
THe Traitor Philip Chabot Admirallo France Loves Cruelty The Maids Revenge
Dukes Mistress The Cardinal.
Comedies and Tragi-comedies.
The School of Complement The Lady of Pleasure Hide-parke The Constant Maid.
Falsely ascribed to Io. Fletcher.
The Coronation The Changes, or Love in a Maze The Grateful Servant The Patron
of Ireland The Humorous Court The Wedding The Ball, or French Dancing Master
The Gamester The Example The Bird in a cage The Royal Master The Opportunity
The Witty Fair one The Imposture The Brothers The Sisters.
A Masque of the four Honorable Innes of Court, presented before the King and
Queens Majesty at Whitehall in the Banqueting house.

Poems.

FINIS:
THE Court Secret, A TRAGI-COMEDY: Never Acted, But prepared for the Scene at
BLACKFRIARS.

WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY.

Never printed before.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the three Pigeons, and for Humphrey
Moseley at the Prince's Arms in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM EARL OF STRAFFORD, Viscount Wentworth, Baron
Wentworth of Wentworth, Woodhouse, Newmarsh, Oversley, and Raby.
My Lord,
THE Character of true Nobility is sacred, and indeleble; that Yours is such,
needs no Testimony, the World bearing witness to Your Honorable Mind, upon
which all other access of Titles wait like a fair Train of Attendance, not
Ornaments, Your own Virtue giving them luster, and enterteining them as Rewards
paid down to Your Person, and Merit.

This Principle, gave me boldness to make this approach to Your Lordship, and
not without some design in my Ambition, to renew my self to Your smile, who
have enjoyed the happiness (many years since) to kiss Your hand, and to
observe with Admiration the Beauties that shined upon Your Youth, which as they
gained upon Time, so they have grown above the prejudice of Opinion, and
improved their Maturitie by the Earliness of their Spring.

But my humble duty (my Lord) at this fortunate hour to attend You, comes not
alone, it brings a Present, such as my weak condition could reach to; a Poem,
one, that wears no Ribbands in the forehead; not so much as warranted by
Applause; for it happened to receive birth, when the Stage was interdicted, and
wanted that public Seal which other Compositions enjoyed; Though it has been
read and honored with the Allowance of some men, whose Opinion was as
acceptable to me, as the Vote of a smiling Theater.

But this is not to prescribe to your Honor, whom I have by this Application
made my Judge (should You wave the Patron) and from whom there lies no Appeal.

If your Honor, descending from your higher Contemplations, vouchsa^e to look
upon these Papers, though Your Justice should condemn them, it would be their
Reputation to fall by so Honorable a Sentence: But if they happen to obtain
Your Lordships favor, that they may live, your Name will not only be a
powerful defense to them, but a lasting Record of Honor upon the Composer,
whose heart is full of Devotions to your Lordship, and ambitious of no greater
addition, than to be known,

My Lord, Your most obliged, and humble Servant, JAMES SHIRLEY,

The Names of the Persons.
The King of Spain. Roderigh his Brother. Manuel the supposed son of Piracqu^,
but the true Carlo son to the King. Maria his Sister. Antonio Prince of
Portugal. Isabella his Sister. Mendoza a Duke. Carlo supposed Prince of Spain,
but indeed Iulio the son of Mendoza. Clara Mendoza's Daughter. Piracquo a
Nobleman. Two Lords. Pedro a Kinsman of Piracquo's, Servant to Mendoza. Celio
Page to Carlo. Ladies. Castellano. Messengers. Servants. Guard.
Scene Madrid. Plays newly printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Arms
in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THe Wild-Goose Chase, a Comedy written by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher,
Gent.

THe Widow, a Comedy written by Ben. Johnson, John Fletcher, and Thomas
Midleton, Gent.

THe Changling, written by Thomas Midleton, and William Rowley, Gent.

THE COURT SECRET.
ACT I.
Enter at one door Don Antonio leading Maria; at another two Gentlemen. 1. THe
Prince of Portugal, Don Antonio --

2. He courts our Infanta close.

1. And may deserve her.

Enter Don Manuel. Maria lets fall a Jewel from her dress, he takes it up, and
offers it to her. Man. Your Grace --

Mar. It Is none of min^, Don Manuel.
Will your Highness walk?

Ex. Ant. and Mar. 1. Observe you that?

2. The Prince seemed not well pleased.

Man. What does the Princess mean?
I saw it fall from her.

1. My eyes are witness,
Noble Don Manuel.

Man. My Lords, your servant.

2. How do you like the Spanish Court? Although
My Lord your father were a native, yet
Your birth and education were abroad;
Compelled by your father's destiny.

Man. My unhappiness!
I have heard him say, some policies prevailed
To make him leave this Kingdom, and his fortunes,
To try his fate at sea, till he found means
To plant himself in Portugal, from whence
He was but Iate reduced by the good Prince,
With promise of a pardon; and his honor
Is full security for us.

1. The Prince
Can do becoming things, and knows good acts
Are in themselves rewards; but the report
Was here, that fifteen thousand Ducats
Were offered Roderigo our Kings brother,
By your father Lord Piracquo, to assure
His reconcilement here, for trespasses
He did at sea.

2. But not accepted.
I know not which will be his more vexation,
To know the Prince's act, restore Piracquo,
Or so much money lost.

Enter Prince Carlo, and Celio his Page. 1. The Prince.

Car. Don Manuel,
You are become a man of mighty business,
Or I have lost some interest, I had
Since I left Portugal; but I Will not chide.
Where is the King?

2. In his Bed chamber, Sir,
With Duke Mendoza.

Car. I Will not intterrupt 'em.
You may redeem your error, and we both
Converse again.
Exit.
Man. You infinitely honor,
And with it bind the obedience of your creature.

1. Now he is going to his Mistress.

2. To Clara
The Duke Mendoza's Daughter.

Man. Mistress? do you forget, my Lord, the treaty,
And his own personal contract, the kiss warm
On Isabella's lip, and strengthened by the hope
And expectation of another Marriage,
Betwixt Anthonio and Maria his Sister?

1. We are used
To freedom here, with as much innocence
I may, perhaps, hereafter say, the Princess
Maria meant you honor, when she dropped
A Jewel; Sir, it cannot be much blemish
For you to own her service.

Man. 'T were an insolence
(Beyond her mercy to forgive) in me,
To think she meant it grace, or I apply it
At such a distance of my blood and fortune.
This in a whisper, but conveyed through Court,
Would forfeit me for ever: As you are honorable,
Preserve me in my humbler thoughts.

1. Be confident.

2. And pardon my expression; Sir, your servant.
Exe.
Man. I have observed the Princess scatter beams
Upon me, and talk language with her eyes
Sometime, such as I dare not apprehend
With safety, or Religion; for I find
My heart another conquest. But the Prince!
Why should he move my jealousy? I know
His amorous thoughts, already placed upon
Fair Isabella, must inhabit there,
And meet their just reward; he cannot be
So carelesless of his honor.

Enter Pedro. Ped. Can you direct me, Sir, to Don Piracquo,
Your noble father? I bring affairs concern him.

Man. You wait upon the Duke Mendoza, Sir?

Pe. I was in the first number of those attended
His Duchess, while she lived; his Grace does now
Acknowledge me a waiting movable
Within his family; my name is Pedro,
A poor kinsman of yours, if you be, Sir,
My Lord Piracquo's son, and might have been
His heir, had not you Mother been more fruitful
At sea, before she died, who left you an infant;
'Twas something to my prejudice, but your Father --

Ma. Is in the privy Garden, Sir.

Pe. Your servant.
Exit.
Ma. What means this fellow to survay me? ha! Clara!
Enter Mendoza and Clara. And her Father Duke Mendoza! I
Must wish a time without his presence, to
Confirm, how much I honor her: Loud fame
Speaks him a noble Gentleman, but of late
(By what misfortune it is not known) he has
Some garbs, that show not a clear spirit in him.
But that his Lady's dead, men would interpret
His starts proceed from jealousy: I Will leave 'em.
And wait some private opportunity.
Exit.
Cla. I must confess, Prince Carlo, Sir, has courted me,
But with a noble flame.

Me. Flame me no flame, unless you mean to turn our family
And name to ashes in the Kings displeasure.
Thou do not know the Prince, as I do, Clara.

Enter Piracquo and Pedro. Pe. Sure you have known me, Sir, I have expected
Some time, when you would own me --

Pi. Your name's Pedro --

Pe. You thought me of your blood, Sir, when you promised
I should be your heir; I did a service for it
Deserves your memory, not contempt, my Lord.

Pi. Oh, thou did well, and though as I then stood
Proscribed, I wished it otherwise, I now thank
Thy witty cozenage, and allow thy faith
Religious to thy Prince; be honest still.

Pe. Honest? you are mistaken, I have been
Honest to none but you, Sir.

Pi. Be to thy self.

Pe. I know not what you mean by witty cozenage;
But to my danger, I may say, I did
The feat as you desired; you know I did,
And it is my wonder, what we both projected
To make your own conditions for your pardon,
And safe return, afcer proscription,
Has not been worth your use so many years;
Where is the Prince?

Pi. The Prince? you are witty, Kinsman.

Pe. Nay if you slight me, Sir, and pay my service
With this neglect, I can undo my self
To make you find repentance --
[offers to go in
Pi. Come nearer --

Me. Therefore upon my blessing, if thou have
Such an ambitious thought I charge thee leave it.

Cla. Sir, you may spare these preeepts, I have not
Given away my freedom, or by promise
Of more than may become my duty, offered
The Prince an expectation; I am
Not ignorant he is designed a Bridegroom
To the fair Isabella, and it were
Saucy injustice to distract a blessing
Now hovering o'r two Kingdoms --

Me. Thou art wise;
Preserve this duty. Ha! is not that Pedro?
I do not like their whisper --

Cla. You look pale, Sir.

Pi. Can this be truth? was it Prince Carlo, then
Without imposture was delivered me?
Did thou not cousen me?

Pe. If I be mortal, Sir,
It was my Ladies art, for her own safety,
To put this trick upon the Court, which she
Kept me from my Lord, until upon her deathbed
She made him overseer of the Secret.

Men. Did he not name a Secret?

Cla. You are troubled.

Men. I? thou art deceived.

Pir. Ha! it is thy Lord Mendoza.

Ped. He may take
Some jealousy, if he observe our whisper.

Pir. Add, Pedro, but to this, thy future secrecy,
Till I mature some act, my thoughts now fix upon,
And choose thy place within my heart; meet me --

Ped. Enough, you seal the mystery again.

Men. Pedro, come hither; What did you whisper?
Enter a Gentleman.
1. Duke Roderigo, my Lord, desires
Your conference in the garden.

Pir. I Will attend him.

Exeunt. Ped. He is my Kinsman, Sir, and did salute me --

Men. I would thou were his Cosen ten removes
( Pedro) as far as the two Poles are distant.

Cla. My father need not fear Prince Carlo now;
I find another guest here, it is Don Manuel
Holds chief intelligence with my thoughts.

Men. Well Pedro,
Take heed, my life is in thy lips --

Ped. I know my duty, Sir, if you suspect,
Command me to be dumb; Sir, you must trust me.

Men. I know not how to help it, wait upon
My daughter.
Exeunt I would my Lady had lived, or died without
Bequeathing me this Legacy on her deathbed,
A Secret to consume me; this servant, whom
I dare not much displease, is all the witness
Survives, sworn with the rest to secrecy,
And though I have small argument to suspect him,
After so long a silence, yet I am
Not safe to be at his devotion:
I could soon purge him with a Fig, but that is
Not honest: Was it ever known, a man
So innocent, should have so many Agu^s
In's ^onscience? I am weary of the Court;
I must have some device --
Enter Roderigo and Piracquo. Duke Roderigo,
And Don Piracquo? they are whispering too;
This jealousy will take my brains apieces.
Exit.
To. I have said, and now expect, my Lord, your answer.

Pi. I must acknowledge from your Grace, a favor,
That you have been so clear, and free with me;
I might have thought my self secure in the dark,
And ignorant of this expectation,
Incurred your Graces jealousy.

To. I had allwaies
A firm opinion of your Lordships gratitude.

Pi. But for the sum, he fi^ty thousand Ducats,
I must acknowledge, if your Grace had mediated
My pardon then with the good King, your brother,
It had obliged my payment; but my cause
Not worth your Graces agitation,
Or breath, was like a vessel struck upon
Some shelf, without all hope ^' have sailed again,
Had not the Prince's mercy, when he came
To Portugal, relieved it with a gal^,
And set my bark afloat.

To. The Prince?
Why? does your Lordship think I had no part
In The work of your repair? the power, and office
I hold at Court, is not asleep, my Lord,
When any act of grace is done by the King.

Pi. I dare not do so much injustice to
The Prince's bounty, to divide and ow
But half the benefit to his Grace; I not
Extenuate your prevalence at Court, but
His Highne^s did compassionate my exile,
And I am returned by his commands, my Lord,
I am his creature for it, and shall sooner
Lose what he has preserved, my life and peace here,
Than doubt his honor, or dispute his power
In my behalf.

To. Sir, you are not safe yet,
There has past no seal, I take it, for your pardon.
You hang in the air, not fixed to the roof of heaven,
As when you shined a star; take heed you prove
No Comet, a prodigious thing snatched up
To blaze, and be let fall again, upon
Their eyes, that so mistook the region
Where you were placed.

Pi. I know, my Lord, your greatness,
And hold it not becoming, to contest
In language wi'ee; but I am confident --

To. Of what?

Pi. And will wager, if your Grace please,
The to 'ther fifty thousand Ducats, Sir,
That I Will not pay you a Marvedie; if I may
On other honorable terms possess
Your favor, I shall meet your just commands,
But if you set such price upon your smile^,
After the Prince's honor to secure me,
I know my self, my fortune, and upon
What strength I must depend.

To. I shall, my Lord,
Send you to sea again.

Pi. I made a shift, and may again, my Lord,
Amongst the Merchants.

To. Pirate --

Pi. It Is confessed,
I was so, but your Grace may be informed
I was not born to the trade, I had a soul
Above my fortune, and a toy I took
To lose what was beneath my birth and titles,
Or purchase an estate fit to sustain 'em;
The sea was my Exchequer; for I thrived,
I thank my watery Destinies, and commanded
Many a tall ship, won with so much horror,
As possibly would have made your Lordship (had you^
But in a cloud, or airie scaffold stood
Spectator of our fight) sweat out your soul
Like a thin vapor with the fright, and after
Drop your forsaken body on our deck,
To increase the number of the dead.

To. But we
May deal with you at land again.

Pi. With reverence to your blood as it is the Kings, withal my age,
My wounds upon me, and that innocence,
The Prince's word has new created in me,
I do not fear --

To. Whom?

Pi. The Devil.

To. I shall conjure down the spirit.

Pi. Hell has not art to keep it down.

To. So brave?

Pi. So just.

To. Thou talking fool, do think I have no stings?

Pi. I know you are a Statesman, Sir, but he
That fears with his own innocence about him,
Deserves not a protection --

[offers to go in. To. Piracquo,
Stay, I now see thou have a gallant spirit,
Let me embrace thee, and with this confirm
An honorable friendship; I have not
A thought so base to injure thee.

Pi. I have --
An easy faith my Lord --

To. Farewell --
Noble Piracquo, I have tried and found thee.

Pi. I woe 'not trust you for all this; I know
The Devill's excellent at the hug; your Servant.

Enter Manuell and Clara, at the other door Maria. Man. The Princess.

Mar. I do not like his Courtship there.

Don Manuel -- ( Manuel leaves Clara, and goes to Maria. To. So gracious with
my Niece? I Will make him curse
Those smiles --
Exit.
Cl. All is not well within me, and the Princess
Was never so unwelcome; they conferr
With much delight, or else my fears abuse me.
What has she in the greatness of her birth,
That I should be so passive? Heaven look on
Our hearts, and if my love want a degree
Of noble heat, when they are both compared,
Let what I carry be the Funeral pile,
And my own flame consume it. Ha, the Prince
Enter Carlo. I shall betray my self too soon I fear.

Car. My sweetest Clara!

Mar. Either there were no Ladies that could love
In that Court, or you could not want a Mistress.

Man. They are not born with incapacity
Of loving, where they find a worth t'invite:
The fault was in my undesert, that could
Attract no Ladies grace to own me there,
So inconsiderable a servant Madam.

Ma. There is some hope, you will not be thought here
Unworthy of a nobler Character;
I do not think but Clara has a better
Opinion of your merit.

Car. You cannot be so cruel; what could in
My absence interpose, to make your heart
Unkind to those desires at my return?

Cla. My justice, and the care of both our honors,
I have not lost; nor can Time make me forfeit,
(What Nature, and the Laws of Heaven and Earth
Command me to preserve) my duty Sir.
What is above, would taste ambitious.

Car. This was not wont.

Cla. If any of your smiles,
Or favors Sir before, have led my tongue
To unbecoming boldness, you have mercy:
Some things of error are exalted by
Our bold belief, when Princes make themselves
But merry with their servants, who are apt
To antedate their honor, and expound,
In their own flattery, the text of Princes.

Car. But is all this in earnest?

Enter Roderigo and Antonio. To. Is not that
Don Manuell with the Princess? Observe Sir.

An. They are pleasant.

To. Dare he presume?

An. Vexation!

Cla. While I have
The memory of what you are, a Prince,
And dare believe what is as true, as talked of,
Your Contract made in Portugal to the Princess
Isabella --

Car. No Contract Madam; I confess,
To please my Father, who engaged me to
The travel, I did seem to court the Princess,
And with some shadows of a promise, might
Advance her expectation; but here
I left my heart, and dare appeal to thine.

An. Madam --

Mar. Your Graces pardon but a minute.

An. Sir --

[ To Manuell. Mar. Nay then I shall repent I asked your pardon.

An I have done, and will attend your Graces pleasure.

Mar. I am now at your commands.
Exe.
To. Clara his Mistress?

Car. Possible! was not that Prince Antonio, Uncle?

To. Yes Sir, and gone displeased,
He has been affronted by that Gentleman.

Car. He dares not be so rude.

To. He dares be insolent, and court your Sister.

Car. How? my Sister? be less ambitious, Manuel.

To. Your favors have exalted him too much.

Car. But I can change my brow.

To. It does become you.

Exeunt. Man. The Prince did frown upon me, Madam, you
Are wise, as well as fair, can you resolve
The Prince's riddle?

Cla. Sir, I have no art
To decypher mysteries, but if I err not,
He named his Sister.

Ma. Ha!

Cla. With caution you should be less ambitious.

Ma. It Is so, he is jealous of my courtship there,
It can be nothing else, can it, sweet Madam?
I dare make you the judge of all my thoughts,
Unbosom every counsel, and divest
My soul of this thin garment that it wears,
To let your eye examine it; if you find
Within that great diaphanal an atome
Look black, as guilty of the Prince's anger,
Let him doom me to death, or if that be
Not punishment enough, be you more cruel,
And frown upon me too.

Cla. If I were judge,
Without such narrow, and severe dissection,
Don Manuel, of your heart, I should declare
Boldly your innocence, and rather than
A frown of mine should rob your thought of quiet,
I would deprive mine eyes of what they honor,
By a more cruel absence. Ma. But to be
Assured of so much charity I could wish
My self in some degrees a guilty person,
And stand the Prince's anger; but if I
Be cleared in your opinion, I dread not
The malice of accusers; yet if you had
Waved my integrity, I had an argument
To have convinced you, Madam, that Maria,
Though sacred in her person, was to me
No more enflaming than a piece of Alabaster,
Which some great Master's hand had shaped a Virgin;
For if you dare believe me, you have won
By your virtue here so much dominion,
There is no room to entertain a guest,
Much less a competition. Oh Madam,
I took so strange a charm in at my eyes
When first your presence made 'em happy, that
To say I only loved you, were profane,
And would detract from that religious honor,
My heart in that first minute promised you.

Cla. I know not in what language, Sir, to dress
My answer, but in that small skill I have,
Sir, of my self, I am not guilty of
Unkind rewards, where I can understand
A fair respect invite 'em; yet if you
But flatter, for it is hard to say, when men
Dissemble not at Court --

Ma. The curse of Virgins, and
What else can make a Lover miserable
Feed on my heart, that minute I betray
Your faith by any treason of my tongue:
I must not live with your suspicion on me;
Why do you obscure your face?

Cl. I do but hide
Sir an unruly blush that is stolen into
My cheek; I fear a Spy, that has discovered,
And would tell what complexion my heart has.
Pray leave me.

Ma. That command
Received but faint commission from your heart,
From whence those amorous spies your blushes came;
It had a sound like Virgins, when they teach
A way to be denied. Pardon sweet Madam,
If I presume to interpret my own happiness;
Your eyes are not so kind to obscure themselves
Behind that cloud, they may behold me kiss
He kisses her hand. Your hands with this devotion, and not
Repent to be a witness. Did you not
Feel a chaste trembling on my lip? with such
A fear do Pilgrims salute holy Shrines,
And touch the flesh of Martyrs: but this circumstance
Is but the pomp, no essence of affection.
Say, can you love me, Madam? if your tongue
Not used to such a dialect, refuse
Articulate consent, a smile will make
No noise, speak that way; I will keep this hand
Both a white pledge, and prisoner, till your eye
Or welcome accent do redeem it from me;
Or if you still be silent, I Will secure
My fate, and teach your hand without a voice
To chant a Song to Hymen.
What help of tongue need they require,
Or use of other art,
Whose hands thus speak their chaste desire,
And grasp each others heart?
Weak is that chain that is made of air,
Our tongues but chafe our breath,
When Palms thus meet, there is no despair
To make a double wreath.
Give but a sigh, a speaking look,
I care not for more noise,
Or let me kiss your hand, the Book,
And I have made my choice.
Weeping? I Will kiss those drops away.

Cla. Away --

Ma. That echo was not sweet, yet being thine --

Cla. I am too much thine.

Ma. There Is no place for fears;
Love is the purest, when it is washed in tears.

ACT. II.
Enter King and Roderigo. Ki. DAres he be so insolent already? we
Shall humble him.

To. He durst affront me Sir;
And when I urged the folly of his pride,
Tell me, he knew himself, and on what strength
He must depend; words of a dangerous consequence.

Ki. My Son has been too forward.

To. He affects him strangely.

Ki. Whose undertaking must not bind beyond
The rule of our own greatness.

To. Your Son is full
Of honorable thoughts, but being young,
May meet with subtle natures, whose oblique
And partial ends want no dissembled forms
Of duty to betray him. This Piracquo
In his experience of the world, has art,
And can from every accident extract
A cunning use of time, and dispositions;
And it is not to be doubted but the man
Practiced in storms, and rapine (by which he
Has drawn a wealth above your treasury)
May find a minute apt for his revenge
Upon your justice --
He that is a Pirate
In the first act of spoil he makes, does open
His conscience at sea, and throws the key
Into the waves.

Ki. He has acquired a mighty wealth.

To. But who can number their undoings and wet eyes
That have been robbed? how many lives and fortunes
Of your own subjects have increased the pile
Of his estate and cruelty? think of that:
And if you can bring nearer thoughts, and look
Upon your self, your present sums are lean,
Compared to what did swell your treasury;
Your customs are less numerous for his thefts,
And your great debts and charge upon your crown,
Are called upon, but drouzy with their weight,
They make no answer to the kingdoms clamor.
Some King, to whom the waves had sent a wrack
So great upon his shore, would both secure,
And call the timely benefit, a providence.

Ki. It Is not too late.

To. Wise Princes that have law and strength about 'em,
Must take all forfeits; he that is too tame
In Sovereignty, makes treason his own judge,
And gives a patent to be disobeyed.

Ki. Let him be sent for straight.

To. To hear him plead?
What Traitor did want reasons of defense?
Command him safe first, see his wealth sealed up
Against the confiscation; Kings must act,
And not dispute their maxims; I could much
Amaze you, Sir, with other argument
To prove Piracquo's insolence; his son
(And it is to be believed, in things of consequence
Their counsels often meet) Don Manuel,
Has been ambitious to court Maria,
Your daughter, Sir.

Ki. Unsufferable impudence!

To. Antonio too suspects him, and what honor
You can maintain with the Prince, and what danger
It may produce; if this resented, and
Proclaimed, beget a War upon your country --
For Treaties are the immunities of Kings,
Subjects adulterate the Prince's coin,
Not without high injustice, but he that
Does play the wanton with his royal promise,
Defaceth his own stamp, and teaches, by
His violation, others not to trust him.

Enter Antonio and Manuel fighting* Enter Lords. Ki. Treason!

Man. Be fearless, Sir, I am provoked
Beyond the sufferings of a Gentleman.

To. Where is the guard? no mischief the result
Of such a skirmish?

Ma. I was not made for servitude, nor must I
Have patience, when the greatest man is in Spain,
Whose title cannot challenge my subjection,
Throws infamy upon me.

An. Do the Kings
Of Spain allow this saucy privilege
Against a Prince.

Ki. Not we: To prison with him.
You shall be judge your self, and set the punishment
Upon his insolent act; away with him.

Man. Not hear me? this is tyranny.

To. Away, do you make a cipher of the King?

Manuel guarded off. Ki. May we
Entreat to know the circumstance?

An. I must
Acknowledge, Sir, I had suspicion
Of some attempts by him against my honor,
Which made me first provoke him.

Ki. Dare he hope
To keep a thought unpunished?

Enter Piracquo. Pi. Sir, I met
My Son by your command lead prisoner hence,
It will not unbecome your royal justice,
To let me know his crime, I am no father
To any sin he dares commit against
Your Laws, or person.

Ki. You came in good time.
Another guard for him.

Pi. A guard? for what?

Ki. You shall know that hereafter.

An. I shall beseech, my cause against Don Manuel
May not involve his innocence; my Lord
Piracquo is full of honor.

1. The Duke's gone.

2. Nay he is right, at the wrong end of a cause still*

An. If they be crimes against your state, I am not
To prescribe your Justice, Sir.

Ki. Away with him.

Enter a Gentleman with a Letter to Antonio. An. To me? I have seen this
character.

Enter Carlo, Piracquo, Guard. Car. Return him at my peril, Sir.

Lord 2. What do you think of my Lord Piracquo?

Lord 1. I think he is gone to prison; yet I think
He Is here again, if that be he; for we are
Not sure of any thing at Court. Now, my Lord --

Pi. Do any of you know, my Lords, wherefore
I am under guard?

1. Not we.

Pi. I could not satisfy the Prince's question.

2. Your sons offense was an affront to the Prince
Antonio.

Pi. That was not well; 'twas
Some high provocation made him lose his temper.

1. They were at it with their swords.

Pi. No hurt, I hope?

2. The Prince's feather discomposed, or so.

Pi. This was not my fault, Gentlemen.

Car. Proclaim to the world I Am not your son, take off
Mine and your peoples expectation,
And then it is no dishonor; for to be
Believed the Prince at the same time, and one
That dares betray a Gentleman from's Sanctuary,
To be a sacrifice at home, are things
Of inconsistent nature, and destructive.
Charge him with new committed crimes, since I
Gave him my word and honor to secure him,
And there he stands, without an Altar to
Protect him; but far be it from the King,
To make it a new treason to be rich;
It will be thought your avarice to his wealth,
And read in story to your shame for ever,
Piracquo died to pay your debts.

1. The Prince
Solicites hard; the King inclines.

Ca. I know
This does not, Sir, proceed from your own soul,
But some malignant nature, that has dropped,
And would infect your ear with wicked counsel;
'Twas some malicious enemy to me,
And to your fame (as well as Don Piracquo
His life and fortune) has conspired to make
Me less than Prince, and you unfit to be
A King, when once men catch at your inconstancy.
For I must pray you to remember, Sir,
I had your royal promise to confirm
My undertaking for his facts at sea,
And give me leave to say, Sir, this dishonorable
Retreat will stagger all your peoples faith:
A King to break his sacred word, will teach
The great men to be safe without your service;
Who will believe your smiles are snares to catch
Their fortunes; and when once the crowd takes sent
Of this, you leave your self no oath to swear by.

2. The Prince bestirs himself bravely in your cause.

Pi. I may do something to reward it, one day.
Sir, shall I speak? not in my own defense;
For since I came to Spain, I have not been
Guilty in thought of any breach of duty;
Nor for my son, if youth or ignorance
Have made him err, my humble knees beseech
My cause may take no royal beam from him,
That now is pleased to be my Advocate,
Your son; in whom there is such an active heat
Of honor, better all my blood was scattered
Than you should frown upon him. But I know
If I had paid the Duke your brother, Sir,
But fifteen thousand Ducats --

Ki. Ha? what then?

Pi. I had bought my peace, and been commended by
His Grace to your full pardon.

1. Boldly urged.

Ca. Was it his act?

Ki. We restore thee,
Piracquo, to thy self, and us; and let
Our largest pardon for all past offenses
Be ready for our signature; my brother,
I Will promise reconciled too: Carlo, thou
Have but confirmed our hope, nor did we purpose
This other than a trial of thy temper,
Thy gratitude, and jealousy of thy honor:
Preserve them still thus, Carlo, nothing wants
To fix our Kingdoms joy, but the completing
Thy marriage with the Princess Isabella,
Which shall be done by Proxy, when Antonio
Has made his courtship perfect with thy Sister.
Who saw the Duke Mendoza? send for him;
He does too much absent himself.
Exe.
Manet Carlo. Car. By Proxy?
The Duke Mendoza's counsel is too busy
To advance that, and Clara is grown cold,
Or seems so, in her cunning to provoke
My flame; but I must teach her how to meet it.
My father may be wrought to a consent
When things are done; forgive me, Isabella,
My first thoughts cannot on thy beauty wait,
I am not master of my love, or fate.
Exit.
Enter Pedro. Pe. Things are not now so desperate, whilst my Lord
Piracquo keeps possession; but if I were
Worthy to advise his Lordship, he should not lose
Much time to settle things, secrets do burn --
Enter Mendoza. His grace; now for a fit of jealousy --
I Will be here --

Men. He Is troublesome in my eye, and yet I cannot
Endure him from my sight.

Pe. That Is I.

Me. Methinks he has every day a more discovering look,
There Is Scaffolds in his face; I shall prevent him,
And send him far enough, with the next Fleet
He goes, the Sea may roar, and crack the Cabbins,
Or he may meet the Calenture; I have heard
Of Hericanoes that have torn up Mountains,
One boisterous enough would strike his Ship
Clean through, a'tother side to the Antipodes,
And that would cure me; all my Art must be
To win him to the Voyage, and not stir
His jealousy; the Knave is apprehensive.

Pe. Are you good at that?
Exit.
Me. I do not like his business with Piracquo,
It Is for no good, I Will break their correspondence;
Piracquo has been honorable, yet
I do not much confide in him -- he is here;
Enter Pedro. Come hither Pedro.

Re. Your Graces Pleasure?

Me. What consult
Have you with Don Piracquo?

Pe. Please your Grace,
He has been fishing, some or other have
Infused a scruple, I Will engage my life:
But though he be my Kinsman and a Lord
I honor, and from whom I have received
The promise of a Fortune, and a great one,
Yet, I have said little --

Me. Have said any thing?

Pe. How could I choose Sir? he did squeez me subtly,
But I was wise, and faithful to your trust,
He knows no more than I, or you --

Me. Ha?

Pe. Would wish him Sir, let me alone to be cautious.

Me. The art honest Pedro, and I have been studying
How to encourage and reward thy service,
And I have thought of a preferment for thee.

Pe. Your Grace was ever bountiful.

Me. A place
Of honor and command.

Pe. That will do well Sir;
And shall I come in as your Churchmen do?
No first fruits to be paid twice in a year,
No buying of a Jewel at the rate
Of fifteen hundred times the value Sir?

Me. Remove that care.

Pe. That care is well removed.

Me. I have considered, that to live at home
My Servant, is to dark thy abilities,
That will abroad shine, and do services
Worth Spain's acknowledgement.

Pe. Abroad? why, must I travel?

Me. By any means.

Pe. Whither, an't please your Grace?

Me. But to the Indies.

Pe. No farther? Columbus did it in 7 years,
And less.

Me. In the next Fleet thou shall have an employment
Shall speak my care of thee, and interest
^ith his Catholic Majesty; he shall deny
Me hard, but I Will prevail to make thee of
(...) Council there, and the State Secretary.

Pe. This is a mighty honor.

Me. We may hold
Correspondence still by Letters, thou art wise;
The King shall knight thee too of Calatrava;
How will it joy my heart to write to thee,
Al Signor illustrissimo Don Pedro.

Enter Gentleman. Gent. Sir, the King has sent for you?

Me. For me?

Pe. Yes, Sir, I could have told your Grace
His Majesty commanded your attendance.

Me. For what?

Pe. I know not that, but I suspect
There has been some intelligence, however
Go, Sir, it may do worse, and argue guilt,
To be commanded twice.

Me. Intelligence?
It will be worth my safety to confess.

Pe. By no means, Sir, that simplicity
Would rather become me.

Me Why? wo't thou confess?

Pe. Not, unless you begin; go Sir, an't be
But to prepare his Majesty, for me
To wear the order of the Caletrava;
You have put me, Sir, into the gang of going
This Indian voyage.

Me. Well, I must to the King.

Pe. Shall I attend you?

Me. Yes -- no -- do what thou will; yet now I think on it
'Twill be as well to go -- yet do not neither.

Pe. Be cheerful, Sir, why does your head shake so?

Me. My head?

Pe. It trembles like the Needle of a Sun-dial, do you not feel it?

Me. Ha? yes it is here; but do not breath upon me;
I feel the very wind of thy words blow it
To and again like a Weathercock; but I must go.

P^. I will prepare my self for this voyage.
Forget not the Calatrava.

Me. I would thou were shipped --

Pe. And sunk.
It shall go hard but I Will requite your Lordship.
Exe.
Enter Clara and Servant. Cla. A prisoner say?

Ser. It Is a confirmed report.

Cla. I fear Prince Carlo's jealousy is cause
Of this; poor Manuel, it will not be
Safe, or seem honorable for me to visit him:
But since I cannot suffer with him, he
Ex. Ser. Shall hear I dare confine my self to sorrow.

Enter Servant. Ser. Madam, the Princess
Maria is coming up the stairs.

Cla. I must dissemble now my grief, and meet her, yet
I may entreat her Graces mediation
To the King for his enlarge.

Enter Maria. Ma. Let us be private.
If ever thou lov'dst me, Clara, now express it.

Cla. I have an humble suit to your Highness, which
In hope to prosper, will direct my faith,
And services to what you can prescribe me.
Speak your commands.

Ma. Don Manuel stands committed by the King,
And I would have thy counsel, how I should
Best work his liberty.

Cla. That, Madam, is
All my petition to your Grace.

Ma. I know my least desire let fall to the Prince
Antonio, were enough to engage, and make him
The Orator to effect it, but in honor
I would not contrive him the means, and instrument
To advance his Rival's liberty.

Cla. Rival, Madam?

Ma. For I must tell thee, Clara, and with it
Give up the secret of my soul, I love
Don Manuel, I fear, better than my self.

Cla. You do not mock me, I hope, Madam?

Ma. No,
By all that Ladies once in love do pray for,
By him thou love, who ever he be, and this
Kiss (that I rather wish on Manuel's lip,
Would modesty and honor give it privilege
And durst entrust thy faith to carry it to him,
In my experience of thy virtue, Clara)
I speak no fable.

Cla. It becomes my truth
To answer yours, though not so cheerfully;
I should not much repent, to carry, Madam,
Your kiss to Manuel, but I fear, I should
Forget who sent it. If you have a plot
To raise mirth from my weakness, when you know
How much my heart is his, I yield my self
Your triumph, Madam, but the glories of
Your blood, and title are not price enough
To buy him from my thoughts, could you invest
My name with their possession.

Ma. Does she love him?
I have destroyed my own hope then; alas
Poor Clara, I must pity thee, and for that
Love that has been between us, I Will apply
To cure thy wound; for mine is not so desperate,
Though I bleed inwards, I confess, since he,
Whom I esteem best, suffers for Maria.

Cla. Suffer for you? pray Madam, clear this mystery.

Ma. It is poor Manuel's fortune to affect
Me with a passion great; as mine, and love,
That like a rebel forrageth our soul,
And can obey no law, but what it likes,
Impatient that Antonio loved me too,
Made him forget the Prince, and gave the affront,
For which he suffers in the Kings displeasure.

Cla. No repetition of this story, Madam,
Lest you destroy all my belief in virtue;
It cannot be, you may as soon persuade
That snow, the innocent fleece of heaven, that is born
Upon the fleet wings of some sportive wind,
Is Ethiop's wool, as call this truth.

Ma. This will be rudeness, Clara, if you do not
Convince, and with more reason, and with temper.
And it is no little wonder, that when I
Have fairly thus disclosed my thoughts of Manuel,
You should retain a murmuring thought, and dare
Pretend rivality with me.

Cla. The law
You gave to love, that stoopes to no prerogative
Of birth, or name (mine only a degree
Beneath your own) will answer your disdain,
And justify my passion; and if reason
And temper (which in vain you think are lost
In me) be assigned judges, I dare more
Than say I love, I can deserve him --

Ma. Better?
Fate bring it to a trial.

Cla. So just are my affections, I dare make
A Saint my judge.

Ma. That Judge you make, is not
A friend to so much pride.

Cla. You are but my accuser, Madam.

Ma. This affront I must
Remember, Clara, and find time to teach
You know me better.

Cla. Madam, as you are
The Princess, I can fall thus low, to kiss
Your hand, and pay all duties that become me,
Or your command; but if you think by being
Great, I must own no passion, but in what
Degree you are pleased to fix it, nor compare
My soul born with its freedom to affection,
With yours, because one shaft has wounded both,
I rise my own defender.

Ma. Thy own ruin
For this presumption.

Cla. I Will not bribe your mercy,
When you can love as I do, we may both
Deserve him equally: Oh Manuell!
Ex. Maria. Though I defend thy honor to the Princess,
Yet he has scattered seeds of jealousy
About my heart, if this ground fertile prove,
I wo'not curse his faith, but my own love.
Exit.
Manuell in Prison. Man. Why should we murmur to be circumscribed,
As if it were a new thing to wear fetters?
When the whole World was meant but to confine us;
Wherein who walks from one Clime to another,
Has but a greater freedom of the Prison;
Our Soul was the first Captive, born to inherit
But her own Chains, nor can it be discharged
Till Nature tire with its own weight, and then
We are but more undone to be at liberty.
Enter Carlo. The Prince, he brings a storm, I see it rising
As Seamen do, the wind far off.

Car. Don Manuell,

Man. You have named a suffering man, but one that holds
His life and death at such an even rate,
No matter which is first employed* with honor.
I dare submit me to your justice Sir.

Car. Your Cause would droop to trust to that, my love
Willing to justify the choice it made
In thee, has pleaded better, and prevailed
With me to bring thee counsel to redeem
Thy self becomingly.

Ma. Your goodness flows still,
'Twas not the Prince that frowned.

Ca. Submit your self to Prince Antonio.

Man. Submit my self?

Ca. Ask him forgiveness.

Man. I must be guilty first of an offense,
Ere my tongue be so base, and ask a pardon.

Ca. Then I must chide you Manuell; deny
This trivial satisfaction? your crime
Will upon second thoughts be much enlarged,
Nor will the Prince be ever thought to merit
His birth and name, unless he kill thee for it,
It Is an affront of so supreme a nature.

Man. Has it no name Sir?

Car. Do not shake to ask it?
Are you Sir a fit Rival for the Prince?
Abstract that she is my Sister, which considered,
Carries so vast a guilt against the Kings,
Mine, and Maria's honor, all thy blood
Mixed with repentance cannot purge; you are
Instructed Sir.

Man. Not yet, to know my self
Conscious of any action should contract
The Prince's brow, or yours, much less deserve
The horrid name of guilt against the Kings,
Yours, and Maria's honor.

Car. Did not you Sir court my Sister?

Man. Never Sir.

Car. Do not you love her?

Man. Heaven in that word includes all that we owe
His precept; It Is my justice, Sir, to love her;
But with a greater distance, than she is
From me removed by birth; and if her smile
Meant the reward of my attendance, Sir,
At any time have met with false observers,
Their tongues, and no audacious thought of mine,
Or application, are in fault; I have,
Beside the lesson of my birth, been taught
A piety from your favors, Sir, to know
My self their creature, and with humble thoughts
To show my gratitude, not proudly assume
(Could she descend) a Courtship to Maria,
Who by the King, and every good man's vote,
Is meant a sacred pledge to Portugal,
To chain two kingdoms.

Car. If this, Manuel,
Be truth --

Man. Without condition of my liberty,
Or dread of what Antonio shall attempt
In his revenge, my soul dare with ith an oath
Confirm it at the Altar.

Car. This does please me.
Possess thy first place in my friendship, Manuel;
Antonio shall embrace thee too, his ear
And mine have been abused.

Man. There was
A providence upon our Swords, that meant
Less fatal than his passion showed, when we
Last met, against whose weapon threatening me first,
The safety of my fame, more than my life,
Called up my just defense.

Car. I do believe thee;
To what a loss of virtue, and of blood
Credulity engages? this shall be
No more thy dwelling; Prince Antonio
Shall for thy honor make it his own act,
Who yet believes thy interest in Maria
Has made his Courtship vain, and will I fear,
Not presently admit thy innocence
Into his quiet faith, but I Will convince him.

Man. If he but knew my heart, he should not need
Much argument; no man can love with honor,
And let his thoughts divide upon two Mistrisses.
I have contracted love --

Car. With whom? may Time,
When this World fails, and Nature grows decrepit;
Present it to Eternity.

Man. This prayer opens my heart, and all the wealth within it,
Commands me draw the Curtain from her name,
That you may read my Clara,
And I shall beseech your Graces smile --

Car. Your Clara? what
The Duke Mendoza's Daughter?

Man. You have named her.

Car. No, I am in the dark still, speak again,
Or rather say, thou have mistook, it is
Some other Clara, and not the Lady
I understand.

Man. Life cannot bribe me with another wealth,
Or death with all his horrors make me desert
That name.

Car. What a strange Sea-breach has
This little storm of breath made here already?
I was taking pains to unconcern the jealousy
Of Antonio, and find him my own Rival;
Thou had been kinder to have loved Maria
My Sister, though Antonio had sworn
Thy death, and the Kings anger with my own
Had met thee like a torrent, than presumed
This interest in Clara.

Man. I see no
Such mighty danger in it.

Car. I Will tell thee, Manuel,
Thou have invaded all my joys, I love her.

Man. Honor forbid it, Sir.

Car. Honor's a dream,
And a cold everlasting sleep must chain
My soul up; for if once it wake, and know
What thou have torn from't, it will vex it self
Into a flame, and turn thee into ashes.

Ma. Never til now unhappy, with my weight
I see my self now bearing down before me,
A rotten part of some prodigious mountain
Into the sea, with which I shall soon mingle.

Ca. Collect thy self betimes, and give her back
Unsullied with thy clame, release thy own,
And with her, every thought as much a virgin
As her soul was, when first I courted her,
Or thou art lost --

Man. With greater justice, Sir,
Command to uncreate my self, as call
My faith or heart again.

Ca. How?

Man. Sir, my life,
The cement that does hold this frame together,
You have power to melt, or but command my exile,
And I may live far off, and be forgotten
By all, but Clara; bu^ to ask that back,
Which with the full consent of heaven I gave her
(And in exchange received her equal vow)
I dare not, or if I had will, to be
So false to honor, it is within my heart
So rivetted, I may with as much innocence
Commit a rape, or murder, as attempt it.

Ca. You have no doubt a valor too, that dare
Love with so fierce a resolution.

Man. When I am master of my sword, I dare
Not draw it against you; but he that lives
Beneath you, may have little time to wish
Himself unmade that would divorce us.

Car. Leave me, leave me --
Ex. Man. How many lones are shaken with one tempest?
And if one suffer, ruined all? I know
The faith he bears me, and the reverence
He gives my blood, will never be provoked
To fight against my person; but I must not
By tameness give my self a public wound;
He shall be master of his sword and freedom,
And then let fate determine; Clara must
Be mine, or make a Bridegroom of his dust.
Exit.
ACT. III.
Enter Gentlemen of Prince Antonio, preparing a Banquet.S 1. PRince Carlo's not
come yet.

2. My Lord Piracquo
And his son Manuel are expected too.

1. I wonder at this hasty reconcilement;
We did imagine it as possible
The two Poles should have met, as they together
Friends at a Banquet.

2. In my opinion, peace, and wine, and music,
Are more convenient for the natural body,
Than swords or guns.

1. And for the politic too,
If men were but so wise to like, and cherish
Their own estates: If I had all the Plate
In the Indies, I Would not give a silver spoon
To have my head cut off.

2. Why is not the great Duke Roderigo here?

1. Who, the Kings Evil Genius? he was
Invited, but excused himself.

2. Why, there is
A Statesman, that can side with every faction,
And yet most subtly can untwist himself
When he has wrought the business up to danger.
He lives within a labyrinth, some think
He deals with the devil, and he looks like one,
With a more Holiday face.

1. But he has so behaved himself,
That no man now dare much confide in him.
They are come.

Enter Antonio, Carlo, Piracquo, Manuel. An. Don Manuel, the Prince has made
me know
My error, and your worth.

Ma. He has too much honored me,
And you have reason to command for this
The service of my life.

An. You are not pleasant, Sir --
My Lord Piracquo.

Pi. Your Highness humble servant.

Car. All is not
Reconciled here, I but suppress a flame,
To give it vent more dangerous.

An. A free welcome to all;
Sit, and some wine; this Music is not
Sprightly enough: To his Majesty of Spain --

Pi. He that does pledge the Kings health with a murmur
May his next thirst inflame him to drink poison.

Car. The King has a true servant in Piracquo.

Man. He that is not, had never sense of honor;
And may he perish all but soul, that dares
Harbor a thought disloyal. To your Highness --

An. Give me another:
This wine looks cheerful as my heart, to drink
The Princess fair Maria's health.

Car. My turn
Will come, Sir, to be grateful.

An. Here my Lord.

Pi. May swift time perfect by your sacred Loves,
The happiness of both kingdoms.

Man. May that day,
That seals your glorious Hymen, Sir, be ever
Holy within our Calendar, and beget
A faith, that all things then begun, may prosper.

An. I thank thee, Manuel.

Car. Sir, you may
Believe Don Manuel's language, and his heart
Are twins, they bear one date of time, and sense.
You must now give me leave, Sir, to requite
You in part; A health to the King of Portugal;
Let it move this way, Manuel.

Ma. It shall
With humble thoughts be entertained -- you honor me.

Pi. It is but Justice Manuel; for when Spain
Would not acknowledge, nor allow us being,
Our lives were welcome there, till better stars
Sent him, to whose bounty we ow all that is left us.

Car. No more o'that my Lord, I am very confident,
In any honorable cause, you dare
Express your faith to me; and for your son,
We two have been companions, I dare say,
Our hearts are touched by one Magnetic virtue,
And such a sympathy, I cannot wish
What Is dearest to me, but he flies to embrace it.

Ma. I like not this --

Car. Manuel, begin a health:
We have had my Sisters and the Kings already,
Name your own Mistress for the next.

Ma. I should conclude her worthy of remembrance,
If one were first preferred. Will your Grace please Sir,
To let me have the honor --

An. Come, to me.

Ma. To the white hand of fairest Isabella.

An. Would she were
Present to thank you Manuel.

Car. It Is an affront, as Clara were his own
Already; ha! civilitie and honor
Prescribe me patience, dares he insult?
When this has had the ceremony, Manuel,
'T shall be my office to remember Clara;
I must have time to quit the favor, Sir,
You Have done my Mistress; in your ear; though I
Was pleased to reconcile you to the Prince,
And order your enlargement, Clara must
Be mine, or one of us be nothing; you
May think on it yet.

Ma. I have Sir, and to show
How much I can obey, and that I have not
Intruded like a thief upon your treasure,
And filcht her heart away, it is now within
Her choice again, if you prevail upon
Her kinder thoughts, I can sit down despised.

Car. Thou art my best friend now. Antonio --
Methinks we are not pleasant -- if she should
Be a little obstinate, it would become,
And speak the bravery of thy soul, and service,
To use some language for me, wo't thou Manuel?
Thou do not know the sufferings of my soul
For Clara.

Man. But I pity 'em.

Car. It Is new balsom
Into my wounds; where is the health, Piracquo?
I feel new spirits dancing in my blood,
The health begun to Clara languisheth,
Why should I want it, Gentlemen?

An. It was named
By Manuel to my Sister Isabella;
Prince Carlo, you forget.

Car. To Isabella?
Your Graces pardon, I confess my error,
I forgot her indeed, but could your wishes
Translate that Princess hither, she should be
A witness of my honorable thoughts.
Enter Isabella with Ladies. (Music.) What Magick's this? do any know that
face?

Pi. It Is very like the Princess Isabella.

Ca. I would she were a Ghost; Antonio,
Ha you got enchantments?

Is. You may stay, Sir.

Ca. I love not to converse with spirits.

Ma. Sir,
This is no shadow.

Car. It is to me, Sir.
Meet me at Clara's, or be lost to honor.
Exit.
Is. It was your Counsel brother, that reserved me
For this first entertainment. My good Lord
Piracquo, and Don Manuel, you seem not
So much affrighted, as the Prince.

Pi. A devil
In such a shape could never fright me, Madam;
But persons of your quality shift not so
Much air without a noise; the motion
Of Princes has much rumor to attend it.

Is. I chose to come so private, I arrived
The City but last evening.

Ma. You have much
Honored Madrid.

Is. Why, how now brother, are
You frighted too?

An. Yes, and do sweat at soul,
To see our selves neglected.

Is. Some are not fortified against a sudden accident;
In my desert, and innocence, I can
Interpret nothing yet in my dishonor,
Since joys have ecstasies sometimes, and with
Their rapture may transport our senses from us,
As soon as any other passion.
Besides, I heard him wish me here a witness
Of honorable thoughts, he has but now
Removed his person, to acquaint the King,
With greater preparation to receive
A Guest so unexpected.

Pi. But I like not the Prince's humor, you
Had whisperings Manuel I observed.

Man. I shall
Keep nothing Sir in Clouds from you.

An. Thou shall direct me Isabella, we will to Court
My Lord Piracquo, Manuel.

Is. How ere
I put a valiant brow on his neglect,
And seem to make a gloss in his defense,
My soul is sick with fear.

An. Come Isabella.

Pi. We both attend your grace.
Exit.
Enter Roderigo. To. My engines want success, Piracquo is
Restored to his full being, and his Son
At large, and reconciled by Carlo's act.
My Nephew had been better to have waked
A sleeping Dragon, than have crossed my aims;
He has rescued them, but drawn upon his bosom
As many wounds as policy and my
Revenge can make. I was too tame, to strike
At useless Shrubs, that hinder not my prospect;
My thoughts should have no study but a Kingdom;
It is my Heaven, and this young Cedar spread*
Betwixt my eyes, and it; I have already
Betrayed his love to Clara, and the King
That has made up an Idol to himself
Of honor, is inflamed to my own wishes;
I know the Prince will be impatient
To hear his Mistress tossed by the Kings anger,
And he may leap into some disobedience,
That may be worth my second charge to sink him;
And then Piracquo, Manuel, and the Kingdom
Shall stoop to my devotion; yet I carry
A smiling brow to all, and please the King,
To think I am reconciled.
Enter Carlo. My Nephew --

Car. Where is the King?

To. Where I left him displeased, and was now coming
To Prince Antonio's Lodgings to acquaint you.

Car. With what?

To. Have you contracted love with Duke Mendoza's
Daughter, the Lady Clara?

Car. What officious
Tongue has been bold to mention her?

To. He has
Had some intelligence, and is almost grown
Wild with the strange resentment, I not knowing
What to object against his passion, thus
Surpised, you may believe applied what lenitives
My understanding could collect of the sudden,
With confidence, when you came to give account,
The accusation would fall off, and he
Appear too credulous against your honor.

Ca. It were no treason to Castile, my Lord,
If I confessed this mighty fact.

To. It Is justice
If you d^e love her honorably, to avow it.

Ca. Isabella is no Angel.

To. Nor is Clara
Of an extraction to digrace a Prince.

Ca. Though he be my Father, he did not
Beget my Soul; who is with him?

To. I left the Duke Mendoza.

Ca. Has he made
Complaint of me? it is well; let me preserve
Good Uncle still your loving thoughts; it is
^n vain to move my Father now.

To. There is
I way, if you could but dissemble, Sir,
To set your wishes right, and Letters may
^e so contrived to Portugal.

Ca. The Princess
Is here already Uncle.

To. Isabella?

Ca. Now with Antonio, and I am lost.

To. Would thou were never to be found again.

Ca. I must do something.

To. The Princess thus
Affronted may be worth my own ambition.
Calm thoughts attend you Sir.
Exit.
Enter Mendoza. Me. I Am glad I came so well off from the King,
His anger made me tremble, I was jealous
Of more discovery, when he named the Prince:
This Treason is a kind of a quotidian,
It leaves a man no intervall; I durst
Not mention Pedro at all, for fear
The King had skill in Cabala; I Am afraid
There Is something in the very name, that may
With a small key be opened to my danger.

Ca. You are well met my Lord, do you know me?

Me. Know you Sir? yes I know you for --

Car. For what?

Me. The Prince, I hope; now I Am betrayed for certain,
Yet if he know it, he will not be so furious.

Car. Are you so much an enemy to your self,
To tell the King?

Me. I tell the King? alas
I dare not tell it to my Ghostly Father,
I have more regard to you, and my own life,
My Family's undone by it.

Car. By what Sir?

Me. Nay if you know not, I know not neither, Sir;
What do you mean?

Car. Am not I worthy in your opinion
Your Daughter Clara's love?

Me. Oh, is that all?

Car. But you must dote, and tell the King on it.

Me. I? I disclaim it, by my life and honor.

Car. I thought you had loved me Sir.

Me. He is a Traitor
That dares accuse me; now I may speak boldly;
My Blood and Fortune have a little name
In The World, to which make an addition of
My Life, my Daughter Clara too, were these
In balance against you, they would be light,
And their whole loss repaird, to see you happy:
If this be false, a Whirlwind snatch me Sir,
And let me hang in some prodigious Cloud
'Twixt Earth and Heaven.

Car. This is a bold expression.

Me. But I must tell you Sir, for your own sake,
I would not have you love my Daughter Clara,
Were she in beauty, person, and all ornaments,
Fortune and Nature could bestow, more excellent
Than Isabella.

Car. Why an't please your Wisdom?

Me. Sir in my love to you, and Isabella,
My duty to your Father, and the Kingdom,
Nay for my Daughter's sake, and all my hope
Of after-joyes, and for one other reason
Above all these, which I conceal; yet I
Complained not to the King.

Car. Excluding me,
Your Grace can be content, Don Manuel
Should have your Daughter.

Me. Rather than your Highness,
I know a reason for it.

Car. I must so too.

Me. Your Grace shall pardon me at this time.

Car. I wo'not Sir.

Me. If you will needs have it, I have made a vow
I wo'not ask my Daughter blessing Sir;
If you two meet, and marry, she may live
To be a Queen, and then I Will kneel to her,
Which is not in the Oath of my Allegiance.

Car. The old man raves.
Exit.
Enter King, Maria. Me. The King.

Car. He shall not see me
Till I know all my fate.
Exit.
Ki. How do you like the Prince Antonio?

Ma. Sir, if you allow me freedom --

Ki. You enjoy it.

Ma. His Person, Blood, and expectations, are
High as the wishes of a Queen, and I
With pious gratitude acknowledge all
My duty, and my prayers a just return
To your great care; but give me Sir your pardon,
If I prefer some thoughts that prompt me to
A better choice.

Ki. A better choice? look back
Upon that character your breath but now
Delivered in his honor.

Ma. I confirm it;
But when you hear me humbly beg I may
Perform religious duties Sir to Heaven,
You will think nature has a place beneath 'em:
If I could find any consent to marriage,
Antonio would prefer himself the first
To my election: but if you were pleased --

Ki. You would be a Nunn?

Ma. That has expressed my wishes.

Ki. So I should
Affront the Prince: how long Maria has
This fit of your Religion held you? ha!
No more, least I suspect this a pretense
To hide your love placed otherwise unfitly,
If I find where your heart is wandering --

Ma. It knows obedience better, and your name,
Than to choose any path leads not to honor.

Ki. I must direct it then to love Antonio.
My Children are turned rebel.

Ma. Sir I hope
My offer with your leave, to ded^cate
My life to prayer, and Virgin-thoughts, will merit
A better name.

Ki. Your brother Carlo too
Will find himself at loss, if he collect not
Himself, and make our Royal Promise good
To Isabella; while my studies are
To make the Kingdom firm by our alliance
With Portugal, be courts the Lady Clara.

Ma. I would she were his Bride, so I had Manuel.

Ki. And you at the same time, and height of both
The Kingdoms expectations, would take a Cloister,
Is this to pay obedience to a Father,
Whose cares have kept him wake to make you happy?

Ma. Goodness forbid, that Carlo or Maria
Should move me to just anger.

Ki. This is virtue.

Ma. He is passionate, and Love that makes all Ladies
Apt and ingenious to contrive, cannot
Inspire or help me with an heart to advance
A little hope.

Ki. It cannot be! Maria,
We are surpised, the Princess Isabella
Is privately arrived, and come to Court:
Where is our Son? all should prepare to meet her.

Exe. Enter Carlo and Clara. Car. You may believe I trifle not.

Cla. The Princess Isabella come?

Car. Now if but Clara think I honor her,
And instantly accept what I am willing
In presence of the Priest and Heaven to give her,
The Ceremony waits to make all perfect.

Enter Manuell. Cla. I dare not Sir.

Car. Say but you love, and that will teach you valor;
I bring not only proof of my own loyalty,
Which if examined must invite thy faith,
But thy security, a Release from Manuell;
His soul is on my side, and comes to render
In pity of thy wound, a balm into
Thy breath; be gentle Clara.

Cla. A Release? of what?

Ma. Of all, thy Promise has made mine;
Observe me wisely Clara, and distinguish,
As far as honor will permit, how long,
And with what bleeding thoughts the Prince affects thee;
For I have looked into his soul, and back
Upon the feeble merits of my self,
And therefore giving thy own Vows again,
I dis-engage their strength to bind thee Clara,
And to that sweetness thy first bosom had,
Remit thy quiet thoughts.

Car. Thou Art just.

Cla. Pray give
Me leave to understand this mystery,
To give me back all those assurances
Of Love my Promise made, I Will not dispute
For what unworthiness I am neglected.

Ma. I dare not be so impious.

Cla. Then here I take
My liberty again.

Ma. You have it.

Cla. Now I with safety of my honor, may
Choose where I please.

Ma. You may.

Cla. And you desire it;
You have power I must confess to give me from you
Into my own possession, but no title
Now to direct my heart, then though I meet
My own despair, here I give Clara back,
And with new Vows as strong as my Religion,
And Love can make, contract my self again
To Death, or Manuell.

Car. A Conspiracy!

Cla. I have resigned no interest in him,
And by new choice -- am not my own again.

Car. So, so, it is as possible in our destinies
We should enjoy her both, as live together,
When Clara is thy Bride.

Cla. That sound was tragical;
Oh call those fatal words again, and think
That if with safety of my faith I cannot
Meet your desires already, you will force
My soul to greater distance, by destroying
What most I love; I know you do but fright me.

Ma. If I be marked for your revenge, I dare not
Think you will stain your honor, to contrive
My death ignobly.

[They whisper. Cl. What was that he mentioned?
Sir, by your name and blood I charge you hear me,
By these (your rage compels) a Virgins tears,
I can kneel too, take your revenge on me,
It Is I that have offended, for your sake
He did return the interest I gave him,
But 'twas not in his power to revoke
Himself made mine, nor dare I quit possession.

Car. I have but tried thy virtue, Manuel
And I are friends.

Cl. That was a heavenly language.

Car. Our swords shall serve to nobler uses, Clara,
I Will not disturb the progress of your Marriage;
And since I see you're fixed so gloriously,
Proceed to your own Hymen, I Will attend you,
And witness all your holy rites.

Cl. Blessed change!
What prayers and duty can reward his goodness?

Car. I hope you will not deny for my past service,
Madam, your smile upon me, which shall be
A triumph after all my wounds received,
And boast a glory next to be your husband;
For I consider now I am unfit.
Farewell, we may salute. Remember, Manuel,
The time and place.
Exit.
Cla. What was it the Prince whispered?

Ma. Nothing, Madam,
To fright your cheek to paleness.

Cl. I do tremble.

Ma. Were all this reconcilement a disguise,
And that he meant revenge, should time and place
Fit his inteuts, and I should meet his anger,
^t this secure thy peace, his honor will
Not let him wound me basely, and when I
Lift up a sword against him, fate let me dye.

Exeunt. ACT. IV.
Enter Pedro. P^. My Lord is coming to my chamber, he
Has been with the King, I see my self already
Knight of the order of the Calatrava,
And my Commission signed for the State Secretary.
I am not the first servant of the Court
Has kept his Lord in aw; these Secrets are
An excellent curb to ride a Statesman with,
That is not come to the art of poisoning.
I know he wishes heartily I were hanged;
I tried him once for the wars; to find his pulse,
And I was listed Captain, before some
The General knew had been seven years in service
(As Ushers to right honorable Ladies)
There was his Graces commendations
To a Field-officer, that should drill me out,
The first to dye, with honor on some on-slaught;
So quitted that preferment.
Enter Mendoza. He is come; I Will take no notice.

Men. If he lived at the the other end of the world,
He might betray me in the next packet: Ha!

Pe. Item I bequeath --

Me. What art thou doing?

Pe. Only making up my Will, Sir; and my self eady for the Indies; it is a
lon^^^^age,

And therefore I would settle every thing
Before I go; if your Grace please to honor me,
I would make you my Executor.

Me. But when,
Will you dye Pedro? ha?

Pe. Sir, there be storms,
Abroad, and who does know how soon the waves
May rore, and crack the cabins?

Me. Ha!

Pe. There may be Calentures, my Lord, and twenty
Devices to be met at sea, beside
The land diseases; there be Hericanoes
Are boisterous enough to tear up mountains,
And strike a ship clean through o't'other side
To the Antipodes.

Me. He deals with the devil, and knows my thoughts.
There Is no have to make your will, I have
Considered of the business, and truth is,
I cannot find my heart willing to part with thee,
So far thou have been faithful; we will live
And dye together.

Pe. By no means, my Lord:
I am resolved I will not live in Spain
A month, for as much plate as the next Fleet
Brings home; no, I beseech your Grace excuse me.

Me. Why Pedro?

Pe. If your Grace please I shall be Knighted,
Or have the Office you have promised, do it,
And do it betime, it will be worse for both else.

Me. You do not threaten to reveal the business?

Pe. 'Lass, there be other matters, Sir, as dangerou^
And if you love your self, or honor, finish --
I cannot help it.

Me. I am all a bath!
Pedro, why do thou fright me so? if thou
Be honest, there is no mortal ean betray us.

Pe. Worse, worse than that; let me go travel, Sir,
And far enough; it is not possible
That I should stay, and you preserve your wits.

Me. The reason?

Pe. It will make you mad to hear it, Sir,
But it is my desperate fate, the stars command it;
Would I had never seen --

Me. What?

Pe. A face that I could name.

Me. If it concerns not
The other mystery, let me hear it, Pedro,
I will be armed.

Pe. Why then you will cut my throat;
You cannot hold your hand; pray let me go,
And you may save all yet.

Me. Thou do torment me.

P. And yet it is no fault of mine, directly,
We are all flesh and blood -- oh Sir.

Me. Out with it.

Pe. You Will curse me when you know it.
I would your Grace would guess, but it is impossible;
It Is working to get out, I am --

Me. Well said.

Pe. Oh Sir, I am -- I am -- in love -- now it is out.

Me. That all?

Pe. All? a Pistol to a Maravide you (...)
Your Rapier presently upon me, and
If I name but the party, will not have
The patience to foin, but tilt it at me.
Sir, do not know it; what will become of me?
It will be safer, Sir, to hoyst sayls yet,
No matter whither, So I never come
Again; for if I see one face too often,
Both you, and I, and she is undone: I have
Beaten my self already, fasted, prayed,
Been drunk, and prayed again, nothing will kill
Concupiscence -- oh Sir.

Me. Why, this is raving.

Pe. I, you may call it what you please, but here
She lies a cross that must, or do the deed,
Or make poor Pedro miserable.

Me. How he sweats?
Pedro do not despair, this fever may
Be cured, it may.

Pe. Indeed you can do much;
For to say truth, your Grace is both acquainted,
And has no small command upon the party.

Me. Nay then be confident -- who is it?

Pe. It is -- shall I name her?

Me. By my honor I will beat thee else.

Pe. Why so then;
The pretty soul, I will confess to you,
Whom, if I stay, I must --

Me. Enjoy; this such a business?

Pe. Is -- is -- Clara, your Graces one, and only daughter.

Me. Ha!

[draws. Pe. I told you this before, but do not do it, Sir, now,
I rather look for it in the next sallad,
Or in my mornings draught; there is spice in your closet;
Or we have Spanish figs.

Me. Thou most unheard of impudence! how can'^t hope
I should not cut thy head off? sirrah, rascal.

Pe. To these things humane nature has been prone;
But if you kill ^e, Sir, there is a scedule,
A Secret in a bag of writings, left
In a friends hand -- nay I did look for this,
There is an Inventory of Goods were stolen;
The Anno Domini, with Aetatis suae
Set down, the day of the month, and place remembered,
If these do not revenge my death --

Me. Why so; a pox upon thee -- yet come hither,
And let me cut thy tongue out.

Pe. I confess
I am not fit to marry, Sir, a Lady of
Her Princely birth and fortune, all considered;
Alas, I know I am a wreth -- but --

Me. Thou would have her to be thy whore, and me
Thy pander to speak for thee -- rogue, devil,
I must kill thee, there is no remedy.

Pe. Hold, you mistake me, Sir, '^is no such business.

Me. What would thou have then?

Pe. I would go beyond sea, I, to the Indies, ^ir,
Or turn a Haddack by the way; send me
To the new Islands, or Iapan.

Me. From whence you may send Letters to the King;
No sirrah, I Will not trust you.

Pe. It Is a hard case, my Lord, I have dangerous sailing
Betwixt your Graces Scylla and her Caribdis.

Me. I dare not kill him; why do I not kill my self t^en?
No, I wo'not, I will talk reason to him;
Come hither sir, my tormentor.

Pe. I Sir --

Me. If your hot blood must have a cooler, will
None serve your rogues turn, but my daughter Clara?
Say thou art mad --

Pe. I have too many senses.

Me. Or if your wantonness must be confined
Within my walls --

Pe. The more my sorrow -- but I Will try my Lord,
If you will give me leave, for your sake, Sir,
Among her Gentlewomen, what I can do
To conjure down my devil, I will take
Some physic too, Sir, every thing will help;
Would I were whipped, my Lord --

Me. Whipped with a vengeance?

Pe. But I am grieved
For your vexation, and my scurvey fortune;
But if there be a wench, a witch, a medicine
Above ground, that can give me any charm,
Your Grace shall hear no more on it -- So, your pardon.
And now my Lord, let your unworthy servant
Have leave to ask one question; does not your Grace
Suspect me monstrously? nay do you not think
I do presume too much upon your fears?
And that the knowledge of this Secret makes
Me bold and saucy, my good Lord?

Me. It Is all too true, but it is not in my brain
To helped, unless I take some course to kill thee.

Pe. How?

Me. I fear I shall be driven to it; one fit
Like this will work my impatience up: look to it.

Pe. Why, then I Will tell your Grace an easy way
To remove all your jealousy, and never
Trouble your brain with study how to kill me,
A most compendious way.

Me. I would I knew it.

Pe. It Is but my going to the Court, my Lord,
And if you be not cured within an hour
After I have told the King a story, how
Your wife the Duchess lost -- I have done --
Fear nothing.

Enter Lord. Lo. Is not Prince Carlo here?

Me. Not here, my Lord.

Lo. It Is the Kings pleasure you attend him presently,
Your daughters presence is expected too
Among the Ladies, for the entertainment
Of Princess Isabella, new arrived the Court.

Me. We humbly wait to kiss his hand.

Pe. Shall I attend?

Me. I am resolved now not to sleep without thee,
And in the day, I Will look upon thee, Pedro,
As thou were my great Seal, and I thy keep^r.

Pe. Yet I may give you a slip.

Me. We'll to Clara:
The Princess Isabella come so private, ha! Pedro?

Pe. I am here, my Lord.

Exeunt Enter Manuel. Ma. This is the place by his commands to meet in;
It has a sad and fatal invitation.
A Hermit that forsakes the world for prayer,
And solitude, would be timo^ous to live here.
There Is not a spray for birds to perch upon;
For every tree that over-looks the vale,
Carries the mark of lightning, and is blasted.
The day which smiled as I came forth, and spread
Fair beams about, has taken a deep melancholy,
That fits more omino^s in her face than night;
All darkness i^ less horrid than half light.
Never was such a scene for death presented,
And there is a ragged mountain peeping over
With many heads, seeming to crowd themselves
Spectators of some Tragedy; but I Will
Prevent 'em all; though my obedience
Instructed me to wait here, it shall not
Be bribed to draw my sword against the Prince;
And in his honor I am safe, how ever
This sense of Clara's loss transport him, it is not
Within his nature to be impious.
And if ^ gain his friendship, I return
With triumph to my Clara.

Within -- help, help. Enter Prince Carlo's Page. Pa. Oh help, Don Manuel, help
for heavens sake.

Ma. Celio the Princes page? where is the Prince?

Pa. Oh Sir, I fear he is slain.

Ma. By whom?

Pa. The Devil, or one not very much unlike him,
A More, that basely set upon him, sure
He has dispatched the Prince, he persues me,
And if he have, Death shall be welcome to me,
For I am not fit to live, and lose my Master.
He Is here, and his sword bloody.

Enter Carlo like a More. Ma. Villain! were all thy blood rivers of balm,
Or such a flood as would restore a life
To the departed World, it should be all
A sacrifice to Carlo.

(They fight.) Pa Hold, hold Don Manuell.

Ma. Can thou be merciful to the Princes Murderer

Pa. Curse on my Duty to obey so far.
My Lord, the Prince is slain, you are wounded too.

Ma. The Prince!

Car. Don Manuell, I forgive thee.

Ma. Pray Heaven this be a Dream; for if my hand
Have been so much a Traitor, it shall call
No other aid in your revenge: Are you
Prince Carlo?

Car. I was.

Ma. That voice shall be my sentence.

Car. Hold, I charge thee by thy honor, Manuell.

Ma. Why did you wear this black upon you Sir?
Or how could art of man contrive a Cloud
Which this Soul had no eyes to penetrate?

Car. I knew thou would not fight against me knowingly,
And if I fell, I meant it to secure
Thy act from punishment, when in this darkness
I took my leave of the World, only that boy,
Whom I compelled to feign me wounded, so
To make thee draw thy sword; but with my blood
I feel my spirits vanish, if I have
^ut breath enough, I send by thee a kiss
To thy own Clara now.

Ma. Oh, help good boy!
For it is no time to curse thee now, my horse
Is not far off, this scarf may stay his bleeding
Until we meet with better Surgerie.
Now Heaven reprieve my strength but to convey him
To some good place, and I resign my self
To all the justice you will call me to.
Exit.
Enter King, Mendoza, Roderigo, Antonio, Pedro, Lord. Ki. You Are all but my
tormentors; where is Piraecquo?

Enter Piracquo. To. His son is absent too.

Pir. Have comfort Sir.

An. Our neglect is lost in the General Cause,
What do you think my Lord Mendoza?

Men. This no news of the Prince is not so comfortable.

Enter 1 Lord. Ki. The news you bring?

Lo. Unless he had left the Kingdom --

Ki. Be dumb -- and he had left the World
Your cares might have persued him; if he
Return not, you have murdered him.

To. My Stars are now
At work in Heaven, their influence is powerful,
I will adore the Sun if it dissolve not
This mi^t in which the Prince is lost; I am
Content thou be a Constellation Carlo,
In any Sphere but this.

Enter a Messenger with a Letter to Piracquo. Pir. To me? it is Manuel's
character.

Lo. Unless we hear some good news of the Prince,
I fear we lose the King too.

An. It Is strange none should attend him but his Page.

To. I fear some plot is practiced against his life,
But dare not speak.

2 Lo. That Is it distracts the King,
Whose fears are helped by a sad dream he had
Last night.

To. My Lord Piracquo's son is missing too.

Pi. Comfort your self till my return,
I Will find 'em, or never see your face again.

Ki. Well said Piracquo, all my prayers go with thee.

Me. Pedro.

Exit Pir. Pe. My Lord.

Me. I know not what to say, but stand
Before, they may not see me weep.

Pe. Sir, I must confess --

Me. Ha! Confess?

Pe. You are still suspicious, have a true heart,
And let your conscience look less abroad Sir,
If he be dead, your trouble's over Sir;
We must all dye, Death has his several ways
And times to take us off, some expire humbly
In The Cradle, some dismissed upon a Scaffold --

Enter Isabella, Maria, Clara. Me. Come hither, do not name a Scaffold, I
Was innocent thou know, the plot was all
My Ladies, and not one survives the Secret,
But we two.

Pe. Keep your own counsel Sir,
This Fatherly affection may do harm,
He could not dye in better time,

Ki. Madam, can you,
Whose honor seems to suffer by this absence,
Have so much charity to comfort me?

Isa. He is not desperate, while we have hope.
My Lord Piracquo's son may wait upon him.

Enter Manuell. An. Don Manuell.

Ki. Have brought news of my Son?

Ma. I can inform you a sad story Sir.

Isa. Where is the Prince?

Ma. Not dead I hope.

Ki. Have thou a jealousy will concern that fear?
My soul has been a Prophet: what misfortune?

Ma. If you have strength to hear a truth
So sad, he has been wounded.

Ex. Ladies. Ki. By what Traitor? look to the Princess.

Ma. I had not with such boldness undertook
The Tragic Story, if I had not brought
The great Offender.

Ki. Oh, welcome Manuell -- where is the Body?

Ma. Where it does want no Surgery, but my Father
Is gone with all the wings his fear and duty
Can aid him with, at his return to acquaint you
With Carlo's life, or death.

To. Would I were his Surgeon.

Ki. Thou have not named the Villain yet, he may
Escape.

Ma. I have took order for his stay,
Until your anger and the Laws conclude him.

Ki. Thou have done us service.

Ma. And it will sink by slow degrees into
Your faith, that he, who gave him all his wounds,
Was one that loved him faithfully.

An. Loved him?

Ma. Above his own life.

To. Torments oretake the Traitor.

Ma. It Is not well said, with pardon of the King;
When I shall bring you to the weeping heart
Of this poor man, some may allow his penitence,
So great, it may invite a mercy to him;
Alas, he was betrayed to the black deed,
Both sword and soul compelled to it.

Ki. Here Is a prodigy!

To. Are you acquainted with the guilty person,
That you dare thus extenuate his fact?

Ma. I am, and dare produce him -- here he stands,
So far from wishes to outlive the Prince,
He begs to wait upon his Shade.

An. Does he not bleed?

Ki. Apprehend his person.

Ma. They are but churlish drops,
And know not their own happiness; this wound
Was made by Carlo, yet how slow it weeps
To answer his effusion? could I reach
Their orifice, I Would kiss the crimson lips,
For his dear name that made 'em.

Men. Did he kill him?
Justice Sir, Justice^ I beg for Justice
Upon this Murderer.

Pe. Now it works.

Ki. You? by what nearer interest in Carlo
Should you imagine we are slow to punish him?
'Twas a black hour when Carlo saw thee first,
Rewarded now for all his love; to prison with him,
And let him see no day.

Ex. guarded. Ma. I kiss your Sentence.

An. This circumstance is strange, I am not satisfied.

Ex. Ant. after Manuell. Enter Clara. Ki. How is the Princess?

Cl. Sir she is alive,
And would be glad to hear the Prince were so.

Ki. We cannot promise, Clara. Roderigo,
We should be satisfied where his Body is,
^or'tis without a Soul, I fear, by this time.

To. I could instruct the Surgeon a way
To make that sure.

Me. And Manuell has confessed himself the Murderer.

[ To Clara.] Pe. This change was unexpected.

Cla. Is he gone to Prison then?

Me. Go home, by that time thou
Have wept out all thy tears, I Will come, and tell thee
A little sad tale Clara, that shall make
An end, and we will break our hearts together.

Ki. Mendoza?

Me. Sir.

Ki. Why does thy grief appear
So rude to out-swell mine? he was my Son.

Me. My tears are anger Sir, as well as grief,
That he that did commit this Paricide,
Should be so impudent to say he loved him.

Ki. That amazes me.

Me. But Traitors have their Gloss,
And dare expound their disobedient acts,
A branch of their allegiance: precious juggling^
Treason would be too ugly to appear
With his own face, but Duty and Religion
Are hansome visors to abuse weak sight,
That cannot penetrate beyond the bark,
And false complexion of things; I hope
You wo'not think a single death sufficient,
If Iulio dye.

Ki. Carlo thou meanst --

Me. I, I, the Prince, I know not what I say Sir,
Things make me wild --

Pe. Take heed Sir what you say.
Enter Antonio, Roderigo at one door, and at the other door Piracquo, and a
Lord discour^ing. Piracquo is returned.

Pi. My son confess the deed, and sent to Prison? so.

Ki. Now Sir.

An. How is the Prince, my Lord?

Pi. This was an act of his last strength, as when
A short-lived Taper makes a blaze, it has
Direction to your Sister Sir, and I
His last commands I fear --

[Pir. gives Ant. a Letter. An. For the conveyance,
Trust that to me -- give this Sir to my Sister.

[To his Servant. Ki. Then he is dead, Piracquo?

Pi. Not yet Sir,
But he has such a wound will not allow
Him many minutes life, it is mortal Sir,
They say, and wo'not pain him past next dressing.

To. How things succeed to my Ambition -- Sir --

Me. I care not for my head, now let him take it,
It Is but for keeping counsel.

To. It is apparent this misfurtune grew
From both their loves to Clara.

Ki. Thy son, Piracquo, dies.

Pi. Great Sir, hear me.

An. Manuell affirms he did not know the Prince
In The habit of a More, and that his Page
By the command of Carlo told him, that
His Master had been wounded by that More,
To engage their fight.

Pi. All this the Prince acknowledged.

To. These are devices to paint Manuel's Treason.

Pi. I sooner dare believe one accent from
The Prince's breath, when his just soul was parting,
Than all your Commentaries; I am bold;
Nor can the Law, and all your anger weigh
So heavy as my curse, upon his head
That durst lift up a Sword to wound the Prince:
But let not passion take away your justice,
It Is that I kneel for.

Ki. Against whom Piracquo?

Pi. against him that is guilty of the Prince's loss,
You may incline to think poor Manuell innocent.

Ki. What riddle's this?

To. Has not your son, Piracquo,
Confessed himself the Murderer?

An. Manuel's fortune
Distracts the old man.

Pi. Pardon my love of truth, I here accuse
Mendoza, that has slept so long in Treason.

Me. Ha -- Pe -- Pedro.

Pi. If he deny, I have proof to make him blush,
And sink him with dishonor; Pedro can
Relate a Story will be worth your wonder.

Me. Nay then it is come about, I see,
I cannot Sir confess in better time.
Don Manuel has accused himself unjustly
For Carlo's death, that Prince, if I may trust
A Wife upon her deathbed --

Enter Isabella. Ki. Roderigo --
Give us account from their examination,
And guide us in this Labyrinth. Piracquo
Return toth' Prince, what Death has left of him
Command may be attended hither.

Isa. Sir, if you please, I have a great desire
To take a sad leave of the Prince, and kiss
His pale hand, ere his Body be embalmed,
And sear-cloths hide him from us.

Ki. It will but
Enlarge your grief.

An. I will attend my Sister; my Lord Piracquo
You can best direct us.

( Exe. Ant. Pir. Isa. To. Convey 'em with a strong guard.

[Men. and Ped. under guard. Pe. What think you of an Indian voyage now Sir?

To. My joys are firm at root, Don Manuel,
Sir, is not guilty of the Prince's death,
Yet stained with blood to merit execution.
He that is slain did but usurp your blessing,
And was by the art of Duke Mendoza's Lady,
Then Governess to the Prince, after the loss
Of Carlo, that was stolen away an infant,
Put in his place; the Court has been long cosen'd.

Ki. This story will want faith.

Me. The circumstance will make all clear.

Ki. Expound the riddle as we walk, there is no
Condition more exposed to care than Princes.
Private men meet the force of common stings,
But none can feel the weight of Kings, but Kings.

Exeunt. ACT. V.
Enter Mendoza, and the Castellano. Me. A Very goodly pile; a hansom prison!

Ca. It has been graced with persons of some honor,

Me. They had but little grace, as well as I,
That came to be your Tenants for all that.
Signior, where is my quondam servant?
My fellow prisoner, Pedro.

Ca. He is singing, Sir.

Me. What?

Ca. Catches.

Me. He has a fine time on it.
He need not clear his throat for a confession,
He has done that already, and I too;
That trouble's over; and yet call him hither;
But I Will not sing. Poor Iulio, thou art gone,
and with thy eyes all my delights are closed,
^y senses vanish too apace -- I was
^oo hasty when my Duchess lay a dying
^o visit her; had I but stayed one hour,
^he had been speechless, and I had been happy
without the reach of this unlucky Secret.

Enter Castellano and Pedro. Pe. Does the house fill, Sir? these are active
times,
and if all men had their deserts, the State
Must be at charge to build new tenements
^or Traitors.

Ca. The times are busy, Sir.

Pe. They are indeed,
Good for all squires of the delinquent body
And sable Twig.

Ca. You are very pleasant, Sir.

Pe. You would not smile, I think, so much, if Justice
Should take a toy and turn about, it is
Within the hand of fate to fetch a compass,
With your own rod, and whip, you know what follows.

Me. Is this a time and place convenient, Pedro,
To sing your catches?

Ex. Cast. Pe. Yes, and please your Grace.
And cause my songs are set for three parts, Sir,
If it will please your Grace to take the Tenor,
And get the Prince's Page, newly committed,
To sing the Treble, for the Base, let me alone.

Me. You can sing that part at first sight.

Pe. I can reach double ef-fa-uth: Shall the boy come?

Me. Yes, yes, why should I grieve?

Pe. Why now you are right;
Let men that have no hope to get their freedom
Be fullen, whine like whelps, and break the^r sleep,
We must be jolly, and drink sack, and sing.

Me. We? why we? is any thing in our condition
Can promise hope to be enlarged before
The rest? our state, if you consider, Pedro,
Exceeds, in being desperate, other men's,
As we out-sin them in the fact.

Pe. Why, there is your error, we are in for Treason, Sir,
That Is to our comfort.

Me. Comfort? can there be
A greater charge?

Pe. Oh our discharge the nearer;
Poor things, whose highest thoughts are pilfering,
Lie by it, and languish Sessions after Sessions,
Till they have worn away their clothes, and skins too,
And often are reprieved, when he that is sent
Hitherfor Treason, quickly comes to th'bar,
Pleads his not guilty, and is hanged compendiously.

Me. Yet some, with reverence to your observations,
Are not dispatched.

Pe. Then, doubt their causes mainly;
Your Grace, I hope, shall not complain for want
Of timely execution; I am thinking
What Speech is best to please the people at it.

Me. I shall have cause to name your treachery.

Pe. Why so, there is more argument by that
To stuff out your confession.

Me. Tell me, and tell me truly,
How long since you discovered this Court Secret
To Don Piracquo?

Pe. I was tender hearted, Sir,
And knew that I had but a weak memory,
Therefore the first time that I saw his Lordship,
After he came from Portugal, I told him
The punctual story, lest I should forget, Sir;
What should a man dissemble, and lose time for?
I did it for your good.

Me. It does appear.

Pe. It was no faul^ of mine, you came no sooner
To this preferment.

Me. It might have saved my Iulio's life indeed,
And then though I had dyed --

Pe. Yet you were against it still;
These jealousies and fears do seldom prosper;
I knew by instinct it were better, but as it is
It Is well, your death will be more pitied,
And remarkable.

Me. But what have you got by betraying me?

Pe. The credit to be hanged for treason, as
I told your Grace, besides the benefit
Of being read in Chronicles with Lords,
And men of worship, I have prepared a business,
For the present, a provision, Sir,
Will serve any turn.

Me. What Is that?

Pe. A ballad, Sir,
Before I dye, to let the people know
How I behaved my self upon the scaffold;
With other passages, that will delight
The people, when I take my leave of the world,
Made to a Pavin tune,
Will you hear it?

Enter Castle. and Clara. Me. Away you knave.

Cast. Sir, your Daughter.

Pe. She comes to condole.
I Will see you another time; your Graces servant.
Ex.
Cl. Sir, I beseech you tell me, for I dare not
Believe the busy noise, they say you have
Confessed strange things, and he that was received
These many years, Prince Carlo, and so lately
Slain, is my brother Iulio.

Me* Sad truth, Clara.

Cl. I have heard my Mother say, he dyed an infant.

Me. And I believed it too, but at her death
She told me another story, Clara, that
Prince Carlo by some Pirates had been stolen
An infant from our Castle, on which loss,
She sent me word to Court, my son dyed suddenly;
At which the King fearing some danger might
Follow to the Prince her charge, commanded him
To court, instead of whom, she sent thy brother,
Who was believed the Kingdoms heir, until
Pedro, who waited then nearest thy Mother,
And knew the imposture, brake his oath, and told
Piracquo all the Secret, by whose charge
My death and shame must make up the full Tragedy.

Cla. Manuel killed my brother then?

Me. He has don't;
And if thou have a Sister's soul, thou must
Join with thy father, to pull curses on him.

Cl. That will not call poor Iulio back again;
They say that Charity will open Heaven.

Me. Charity? will you not curse your brother's murderer?
Upon my blessing I command thee curse him.

Cl. That would but wound us more, and not reach him;
Beside, 'twere an intrenchment upon heaven,
So boldly to prescribe our own revenge,
It were a sin might draw another punishment,
Great as the loss of you.

Me. You are a baggage;
But if thou have a thought to wish him live,
Here I disclame thee; if thou were a son,
I would pronounce thee bastard, if thou did not
Kill himself thy self, but as it is, I shall not
Be satisfied, since my own hands are bound,
If thou attempt not something in his danger.

Cl. Good Sir, you speak, as you were to expect
No killing sentence from the offended Law.

Me. I Will study some revenge my self.
Exit:
Cl. He Is lost;
And in this storm like a distracted passenger,
Whose bark has struck upon some sand, I look
from the forsaken deck upon the seas,
^ find my own despair, which every wave
Swells high, and bids me die for fear of drowning.
Enter Castellan^. May I not see Don Manuel your prisoner?

Ca. Yes Madam, if you expect until
Princess Maria, who is come to visit him --

Cl. My affairs concern 'em both,
Direct me with more have.

Ca. Then this way, Madam.
Exe
Enter Manuel and Maria, (a Taper on the Table.) Ma. Madam, I ow to your
charity this light,
And yet this little Taper may be useless,
I fear the King will lose part of his sentence
When you go hence, for such a full light waits
About you, when you take away your person,
^t will be some day still, as I foresee
As you appeared some dawning of the morning.

Ma. I would I could bring comfort to thee, Manuel*

Man. What comfort can you wish me?

Ma. Life and liberty;
With these my self, if fate, and thy consent
Were to allow the gift.

Man. It is not well,
Unless you doubted, Madam, my repentance,
To afflict me with these mockeries.
When will you rather perfect what your own
Revenge must prompt you to, my death for Carlo,
Your Princely Brother, Madam? I confess
This hand robbed him of life.

Ma. Yet in my heart
I dare pronounce thy pardon, Manuel.

Man. It is not possible.
Enter Clara. Is not that Clara?
That Is come to take her leave, before I print
My everlasting farewell on her lip?
Which I shall hardly find, if this rain last,
To drown these lovely meadows; thou shall be
A Judge between the Princess and poor Manuel,
To enable thee for sentence, take upon thee
Her person, Clara; Be the Princess, wo't?
And hear me plead against my sell fand her,
Till she repent her love, and leave me to
A quiet death. I know not how to think
( Maria) you can mean this love to me,
Or that your voice, when it does chime the sweetest,
Is more than preface to my dirge; say that
You have a heart less penetrable than
The scale of Dragons, and as many stings
When they make war, and I Will give faith to you;
For such an enemy as I, must not
Be looked on, but with all your wrath upon me;
Methinks I hear your brother call you, Madam,
And hovering, as he scorned to touch the earth
Sustains his Murderer, is pointing to
The wounds I made, whose fountains are still weeping.
I feel a purple dew descend upon me,
And I am all a bloody rock already;
Are not you stiff with wonder yet? if once
You had when I appeared a man, fair thoughts
Of me; it is too much to love me now,
You must convert them into curses, Madam,
And I will call it justice.

Cla. I came not
To hear this Comment on my brother's story,
Whom you have killed.

Man. Observe her act your person,
And speak now, as if the sorrow were her own,
And she had lost a brother.

Cl. Indeed,
I have wept before, and came not now to learn
A grief for him that was so near my blood:
But I Have considered too, the ties of nature
Should have no force against the rules of Justice;
Allthough it be a sorrow, to remember
He took his great misfortune from your sword,
You did not murder him, nay you did not kill him,
You fought in his revenge, and while he came
Hid in the name and person of a Traitor,
It was your virtue made him bleed, and yet
He was my brother, Sir.

Man. Your brother? more,
He was your Prince too, Madam, think o'that,
The full blown expectation of the Kingdom,
One that redeemed my life from banishment,
And yet I killed him, can you forgive me?
You cannot, must not, Madam.

Cla. Yes, and dare
Say, I still love you.

Man. She will punish me,
For giving up my interest to Carlo,
If she encourage thus Maria, Madam,
Do you consider how few sands are left
In my poor glass of time, I cannot promise
Three minutes here, Law and the Kings de^ree
Have turned two parts of me to dust already;
I feel the third unsettle, and make fit
To be dissolved, but could fate give my life
The period to be wished (remember whom
I speak to Clara) and I need no more
Accuse my self, my heart was long since given
Away, and you as soon may reconcile
Time and Eternity to one growth, and age,
As hope my love and yours should ever meet.

Cla. Then it is time to dye.

Man. Madam, she faints,
Oh help, she has forgot her part, this was
Not meant to Clara.

Mar. Madam, Madam.

Man. Clara, so, so, she returns,
I should have quickly followed else.

Mar. I see
Your loves are sacred, and it is sin to attempt
Your separation; though I loved thee Manuel,
I can resign to Clara, whom I hoped
Her Brothers death might have provoked to leave thee.

Man. Her Brothers? let me hear Clara speak; her Brothers death?
Having so little time to stay with thee
Alive, why did thou make such have?

Cla. Did not
You Sir pronounce it was impossible
That our two loves should meet?

Man. Thou did not
Represent Clara then, thou were the Princess.

Cla. I know not, but your last profession
That our two hearts should never grow together,
Followed so close my Brother's death, I thought
The meaning looked on me.

Mar. Thy Brothers death?

Mar. You have not slain the Prince my Brother, Manuel,
But Clara's, this may yet appear a mystery.

Cla. It Is too true.

Man. But stay; and can my Clara then forgive me?
No man despair to find Mercy in Heaven,
There is so great a Charity upon Earth.
But do not leave me lost in the wonder, Madam,
Allthough it would be happiness to know
The Prince not dead, I cannot hear without
A wound next his, that I have killed thy Brother;
It cannot be, allthough thou would forgive me,
I cannot be so miserable.

Mar. How
Their Souls agree? 'twere tyranny to part 'em.
Clara, I envyed, now allow thy happiness,
And will have no more thoughts upon your loves,
But what shall be employed in hearty wishes
That Manuel may live still to reward it;
Thou have deserved him better than I have
Antonio.

Cla. If my death may speak
Addition to the love I owe thee; it is
In my resolution, at that minute
Thy Soul takes leave, my own shall wait upon it,
And take a journey through the Clouds together:
Who knows but they may fill one Star? Farewell,
Till we begin that progress.

Man. Do not make
Death horrid to me Clara, for to think,
When this unworthy Frame must fall to pieces,
Thy Soul, a fairer Tenant to this building,
Should wander in persuit of mine --

Mar. No more;
Let me advise your griefs, I have tears for both,
Divide at distance, you may kiss in heart.

Man. With such a groan souls from their bodi^ part*

The Castellano lights away the Ladies, and Manuell retires to his Prison.
Enter Roderigo and Isabella. Isa. How, an Impostor! though the Peoples tongues,
That catch at every noise, and wave their duty,
As they are prescribed by Faction, or lewd Pamphlets,
Do talk this loud --

Rod. Upon my honor, Madam.

Isa. I hope your Lordship has another knowledge,
And faith, than to disgrace your blood, the Prince --

To. I say he is no Prince, and we are sorry
A Lady of your greatness should in the height
Of such a glorious expectation, lose
What did invite your person hither.

Isa. Ha!
Then I am lost, that Letter has undone me,
Which full of love and satisfaction, made
Me hasty to destroy my self.

To. It Is yet
Within your choice to lose no honor, Madam,
And in my sense of what you else might suffer,
I come to tender reparation,
Both to your love and greatness.

Isa. It Is not possible.

To. If you can find within your heart a will
To entertain my love, I Am no Impostor,
The King will call me Brother, be kind Madam,
And what is past shall vanish like a dream.
Secure me with a smile.

Isa. My Lord, I thank you;
But there will still remain some characters
By which the world may guess at my sad story.

To. There cannot.

Isa. Yes, I find some printed here,
For I did love the person, I confess,
Of him you call the Impostor: did he know
Himself a Counterfeit?

To. Let me be just,
And quit him from that Treason.

Isa. That is something
To plead his innocence to me; I dare not
Yet ask his name, when I remember what
My tongue consented to before the Priest
So late; yet 'twill be known; if he be not
The Prince we thought, tell me his other name;
Say, is he basely born?

To. He is the Duke
Mendoza's son.

Isa. That is a comfort yet,
And in the confidence of this truth, my Lord,
I am well again, I thank you.

To. If this please you,
Do you remember Madam, he has wounds
Fatal upon him, that already may
Exclude him from the living?

Isa. 'Twould be impious,
While there is any life remaining Sir,
To make another promise; when you say
He Is dead, I may with modest freedom hear
What you too early now prepare me for.
Exit Isa.
To. You honor me enough.
I find her judgment
Already meet what I propound, he cannot,
He shall not live to cross me.
Enter Piracquo. It Is Piracquo,
He can assure me; you look sad my Lord,
As if with Iulio's giving up the ghost,
Your sons life now were forfeit.

Pir. It Is too true.

To. I Will follow, and acquaint her; yet it is safer
She take it from another.

Pir. All my hopes
Are in your Grace, the King is coming hither,
If you will bind an old man's prayers, and service,
Second my feeble breath, and mediate
His mercy to my boy, you may be satisfied
In conscience, he had no thoughts to kill him;
The Prince's death will not engage you now
To be poor Manuel's enemy; good my Lord,
Forgive what past in my rash language.

To. Does not
Your Lordship call to mind there was a sum
Of fifty thousand Ducats?

Pi. They shall be sent to your Grace's Secretary, nay
I Will make 'em fifty thousand more, and think
It cheap to save his life, now you are merciful --

To. The bargain would do well, but you are cozened,
I will not take a Maravide, not I,
If upon other honorable terms
I may possess you favor, I shall meet
Your just commands; have you forgot my Lord?
Some men do keep Records, but I am charitable,
And will not rack your patience --

Pi. You Are gracious.

To. Ten millions of Ducats shall not ransom
Your Darling from the Scaffold: you observe?
You know your self, your fortune, and upon
What strength you must depend, now I have said --

Pi. Will your Grace hear?
My son shall live then, and not lose one hair,
If you would pawn your soul to have it otherwise.
I have said too.

To. So peremptory?

Pi. Your Grace must pardon me the truth, I have
A scurvy sullen humor where I meet
A worse, and cannot hold, though I should hang for it,
And so God bu'y to your Grace, we are alone --

To. Be merry with your head on -- time may come --

Pi. I would take boldness, once more, to entreat
That the young man may live till the next Spring,
And then your Grace may purge --

To. So Sir,
I shall find ways to stay your vomiting --
The King.

Enter King and Lords. 1. Lo. Good Sir be comforted.

Ki. Good Sir give me reasons;
I had a son till now, yet long since lost him.

To. Now you may take revenge.

Ki. It Is well remembered.
Mendoza is the Traitor, he shall bleed
For Carlo's loss.

To. And he deserves, that would
Have cozened the whole Kingdom.

Ki. Send for him;
I Will ask him in what wilderness the boy
Has hid himself, command him hither presently,
And if he give me not a satisfaction,
It will be justice then to send his soul
About the world, to find him out.

1. Lo. The Prince Antonio, Sir.

Enter Antonio and Maria. An. If at a time, when sorrow
Has exercised his sting, you can admit
To hear me happy in Maria's love,
Let me begin to call you father, and
Till Carlo find your blessing, think you have
One to supply his duty.

Ki. It is some
Allay to Carlo's loss, Maria has
Not left her father.

Ma. I shall ever live
Within your precept to express a daughter
As unto him a wife.

Ki. Both to my heart!
Sit down, where is your sister Isabella?

To. She not despairs
To be a Bride to one, that may repair
My Nephews loss; and if she smile on me,
It will not draw I hope your frown upon it.

Enter Isabella, Julio, Piracquo. An. Is not that Isabella?

Isa. And this he,
Who, if you call me Sister, must be worth
Your noblest Friendship, and embrace.

To. Alive?

Iu. Your pardon Sir, they knew me innocent,
Made me usurp Prince Carlo's name for Iulio's.

To. Confusion!

Enter Manuel and Clara. Pi. I appeal Sir to your justice, and have brought
My son, to hear your breath pronounce his pardon.

Ki. Thus all meet happiness but I; receive
Him free Piracquo, only I must mourn
The loss of mine.

Enter Mendoza and Pedro. Iu. I am no Prince, Don Manuel, my fate
Has been unriddled.

Cla. My Brother living? we are all safe.

Me. Ha^ my Iulio?

Iu. Your blessing now.

Me. Take it, and with it all my tears, I scorn
To shed one other drop, my joys are mighty,
My heart is all one bonefire --

Ki. Plead no more,
Mendoza dies, the sentence is irrevocable.

Pe. There is a cooler Sir after your bonefire.

Iu. Sister, I Will kiss these sorrows off.

Cl. You cannot while my Father's doomed to death.

To. Why does Mendoza live?

Pi. Because he must not dye yet. Pedro --

Pe. My Lord.

[Pi. and Pe. whisper with the King. Men. I Will give thee Clara first, here take
her Manuel,
I see she loves thee, lose no tears for me,
My Taper has burnt dim this many years.

Ki. Antonio! Maria! Isabella!
Mendoza! witness all -- proceed Piracquo --

Pi. I was that Pirat Sir, that stole your son,
And being desperate meant by this surprise
To make my peace --

Pe. I was in the Confederacy,
And must affirm this truth.

Pi. But just when I had fitted my design,
And did expect to have brought Don Carlo home,
I heard he was at Court, no loss deplored,
For by the Duchess of Mendoza's art
Iulio supplied the Princes name, and person.

Me. And sent me word to Court my Son was dead? ha!

Pi. This made me think my Kinsman had deceived me,
And then resolved my stay in Portugal,
Where, as my own, I bred, and called him Manuel;
Till after many years your Grace redeemed us,
And I at my return confirmed in the story
By Pedro, hitherto protracted time,
With hope to serve Don Iulio for our freedom.
I have your pardon Sir for all.

Ki. Thou have.

Pe. I am included, trust me with a Secret Sir
Another time, I knew 'twould come to this
At last, and with some justice did but punish
Your fears and jealousies; is not this better
Than sending me to the Wars, or shipping me
For the other World before my time?

Me. Thou Art my best Servant.

Pi. And my heir again.

Car. Depose me from this glorious title, Sir,
Unless my Clara may divide the honor.

Ki. Providence meant her thine, both call me father.

To. There is no remedy, Nephew, welcome home,
And Niece, we shall be kindred now Mendoza,
Piracquo we are friends too, and I Will try,
How I can love you heartily.

Ki. I hear
The Altar call, make have, the triumph will
Attend too long, the clouds are chased away,
Night never was mother to so bright a day.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS.

