Youth's Comedy, OR THE SOULS TRIALS AND TRIVMPH: A Dramatick POEM, WITH Diverse
Meditations intermixed upon several Subjects. Set forth to Help and Encourage
those that are seeking a HEAVENLY COUNTRY. By The Author of YOVTH'S TRAGEDY.

Per varios casus per tot discrimina rerum
Tendimus in coelum. --
(...). Euripides. LONDON, Printed for Nath. Ponder at the Peacock in the
Poultrey near the Church. 1680.

TO THE READER, Especially The Younger Sort.
I Have writ these few Lines to encourage those who have set forth, and are
Journeying toward a Heavenly Country, that so they may make a resolved and
cheerful Progress therein, notwithstanding all the Difficulties, Oppositions,
and Conflicts that they may meet withal. I have given brief hints of the usual
Trials, Troubles, and Temptations, that are like to salley out upon those that
travel this narrow way; and have sent in what Relief I have been enabled to
afford for their Comfort, Succor and Support, with a Representation also of
the blessed Success of those that hold on, and hold out therein, even a
participation of that future Glory, which will abundantly make amends for all
their Care, Pains, and Sufferings; desiring it may be as kindly entertained as
it is friendly tendered. That I have writ such serious Matter in Verse, and cast
it into this Mould, I hope will not be without its Advantage; for this manner
of Writing may be a means to divert the Mind of Youth from such Poems and Books
as tend only to the idle expense of Time, and the Corruption of good Manners.
As also Truth in this Dress many times has a freer access to some, than in
another Mode.

A Verse may find him, who a Sermon flies,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice.
Herbert. I know that, Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata libelli, according to
the Candor, or Humor of the Reader, it will be accepted or censured. But I
had rather (as one says) hazard the Censure of some, than hinder the Good of
others; only let me say this to the Captious: Quisquis es, hoc unum mihi da,
Prodesse Juventae.

If these Endeavors of mine may be made, through the Blessing of God, any ways
profitable, it will be Matter of great Rejoicing unto

Your Well-wisher T S.

THE PREFACE.
IT is recorded in the Scripture of Truth, That we must through much
Tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God; Acts 14.22. No sooner does the Soul
set it self to seek a Heavenly Country, but it meets with Trials: sometimes
new Converts meet with Assaults from Old Companions, who are tempting them
either to return to their former Courses, or deriding them because they will
not run with them to the same Excess of Riot. Sometimes it so falls out, that
they meet with sharp Trials from Parents and near Relations. Thus it was with
that famous Italian Marquess, and so it is with several others. But though in
this case all due Honor, Service, and Respect, is to be given to them, yet so
as that it may be consistant with that Supreme Love and Obedience which we owe
to our Heavenly Father, See Luke 10.37. Sometimes they meet with Hot
Persecution from Enemies: These I have mentioned in a short Paragraph, Page 46,
47. setting forth what was suffered by the Sincere Professors of Old, upon the
defection of the Ten Tribes; amongst whom some did not only fall off from the
true Worship of God themselves, but were active to persecute those that did
adhere thereunto, as you may see, Hosea 5.1, 2. Agreeable to this is the same
Persecution carried on by the Church of Rome; who may well be compared to them
in point of Idolatrous Worship, and great rage against the truly Reformed,
loading them with opprobrious Language, as page 33, calling them Heretics, and
such as forsake the Church, and persecuting them with great Cruelty: But this
Scripture among others, may comfort those that are suffering under her Tyrany;
2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him: Speaking of Christ,
concerning whose Kingdom I have hinted page 57, etc. And of which we have
mention 2 Timothy 4.1. He shall judge both the quick and the dead, at his
appearing and his Kingdom. Of this judging work see Revel. 11.18. As to the
Destruction of his Enemies in that Scripture mentioned, see Revel. 19.11. etc.
And as to the Reward he gives his Prophets and Saints, see Revel. 20.4.
Concerning the Peace, Purity, and Largeness of this Kingdom, we read of it
abundantly in the Prophets, especially in the Prophet Isa. And for the
Restitution of all things therein, see Acts 3.11. I have for the most part
followed Scripture Expressions in the Description of it. But I must not here
enlarge concerning those other Trials the Soul meets with, from the World, from
Self, from Desertions, from Satan, with what Relief the Soul has under them,
issue out of them, reward after them, I leave to be considered as presented in
the following sheets.

VALE.
CORRIGENDA.
PAge 1. line 2. for Souls read Soul; p. 18. l. ult add all after down; p. 43.
l. 12. f. Soul r. Self; l. 13. f. Self r. Soul; p. 55. l. 14. f. God r. God's;
p. 103. f. seeks r. seek; p. 108. l. 9. f. these r. those; p. 109. f. Sat r.
State; p. 112. l. 19. r. bitter twice; p. 115 l. 5. f. comfort r. consort. As
to Humane History and things of like nature, I present them only upon the
Credit of Authors.

THE PROLOGUE.
THe great adventures of a Soul in love,
With highest Beauty that does shine above.
The Conflicts sharp, and Travels undergone,
On the behalf of this beloved one;
The joyful issue, and the crowned event,
Of all those Labors do these Scenes present.
Inviting our Spectators for to press,
With Zeal undaunted to this happiness.
The Trials, Troubles, that you here may meet,
Will make Enjoyments at the last more sweet:
And all the Opposition of your Foes,
Augment your glorious Triumph in the close.
Youths Comedy.
The Souls contemplating upon the powerful work of Effectual Calling.
The Soul. So. WHy did the Patriarch Abram pass that Flood,
Upon whose Banks, proud Babel sometimes stood?
Why did he leave his own dear Native Soil,
To seek a foreign, unknown Land, with toil?
Why left he Fathers House and Kindred dear?
The God of Glory did to him appear.
He that by powerful Word, to Darkness said,
Let there be Light, and strait way gloomy shade
Flies from his Face, and radiant Beams appear.
Filling with Brightness all the Hemisphere.
This God was he, that by his powerful Call
Wrought Faith to follow, foll'ing to leave all:
And by unsought for Grace did set him free,
From those, that to dumb Idols bowed the Knee
It Is from this Grace, my Soul, and this command
Thou now art trav'ling to the Holy Land.
Those Beams that darted from his Face are such,
As on thy Heart has left a powerful touch;
That as the trembling Needle seeks the Pole,
So follows after him my restless Soul.
What can redeemed Souls to God return?
Lebanons Cedars are too few to burn:
And all the Beasts that on it ever came,
Too mean, to cast into the hallowed flame:
What is thine own, is all that we can bring,
Through Grace accept it, whilst thy praise I sing.

The Souls Epithalamium, or Nuptial Joy.
So. EXalted be that glorious Name,
From worse than nothing that did raise
This new created Heavenly frame,
Oh bless his Grace, my Soul, always
Whose Name is far beyond all praise.
I that in Darkness once did lie,
Blacker than was Egyptian night,
Darkness in the abstract, once was I,
On whom the Sun has shined bright,
And brought me into marv'llous light.
I that in Dungeon, long had bin,
Strongly shut up, in unbelief,
Yea, dead in trespasses and sin,
Unsensible of any Grief,
Have found from quickening Grace relief.
The God of Love, which I did hate,
Through wicked works, that I had done,
By Grace has changed my sad state,
And reconciled me through his Son,
And enmity, to peace has won.
The great Ethereal Prince, that reigns
In wicked hearts, by proud commands,
Did Captive lead me in dark chains;
But he has freed me from those Bands,
Rescuing my Soul, with powerful hands.
And now my Soul, since thou art free,
Make haste away fly like the Dove,
Till Face to Face, thou come to see,
The God of Grace, the God of Love,
Whose Habitation is above.

The Nuncius, or the Interpreter of that which follows:
Nun. WHen Isreal's Seed, from Aegypts Land was brought,
And their Salvation by a strong hand wrought.
God led them through a howling Desert, wast
A way about, to what they might have past;
Yet not about to them, but nearest path,
To discipline them, and to try their faith,
So whilst, new Converts, have affections strong,
And cheerful hearts, raised with their marriage Song.
God oftentimes, with trouble does them prove
To try the kindness of their Nuptial Love;
And trains them by such trials, as are best
To fit them for their work, and for their rest.

The diffidence of the Flesh, arising from difficulties reasoned against by the
Soul.
The Soul, The Body. So. WHy is it (my dear self) I often find
Thou mov'st so slowly, lag'st so much behind.

Bo. This sandy Desert, with its scorching heat,
Makes weary steps, and dreancheth all in sweat,
I know not how to bear these parching beams,
That beat upon my head, in fiery gleams.

So. Fly unto him that promises to be
In weary Land, a shady rock to thee,
And from Celestial Flame will guard thy head,
And over it, a Cloud for covering spread.

Bo. What shall I do to quench my thirsty flesh,
No moisture does this desert land refresh.

So. He that will be a shade, in hottest gleams
In greatest drought, will be refreshing streams;
He Will make the Desert full of Pools to stand,
And Water Springs, to rise in parched land.

Bo. How shall we in this barren waste be fed,
It is a Land unsown, and void of Bread?

So. If God at present should not Bread afford,
It is that we may live upon his Word,
Either he will give thee Bread to be thy food,
Or bless unto thee what shall be as good.

Bo. But how shall we escape Arabian Bands,
That rob and spoil, this way with cruel hands?

So. Come fear them not, with courage keep thy way,
God is more glorious, than the Hills of prey.
How apt are we with Israel to transgress,
Whom God to prove, led through the Wilderness.
Sometimes its Bread they want, and then they child,
Wishing by Egypts Fleshpots they had died.
God rains down Manna, desert grounds are spread
About their Angry Tents, with Angels Bread;
Then want they Flesh, of Manna weary grow,
God heaps of Quails about their Tents does throw.
Sometimes the thirsty Tribes for Water cry,
Forgetting him that did their wants supply:
Moses does strike the Rock, it straitway rends,
And from its flinty Intrails, Water sends;
Whose gushing streams follows them where they go,
And like a River in dry Land do flow.
Then fear they Anak's Sons, and now they mourn,
Crying, to Egypt let us back return.
Thus did these Rebels tempt the Holy One,
That had such great stupendous Wonders shown.
Take heed, dear friend, too often to our grief,
We ready are, to act their unbelief.

Nuncius. Nun. AS the Empyreal Heaven does abound,
With sacred Mirth, when a lost sinners found,
And winged Seraphims, with Cherubs bright,
Fly forth to serve, and guard the Heirs of Light;
So racking Grief fills the infornal Cave,
And vengful Ire, makes rebel Angels rave
Upon his new raised Foes, through Sable Air,
Satan does like a blazing Comet glare,
And from malignant Eyes, such Rays forth sends,
As dismal War, and great Distress portends;
Being incensed with Rage, and high Disdain,
Any should break from under his proud reign.
And as he armed Sabaeans fierce of old,
And in three Troops, ranged the Caldeans bold;
Leading them forth with plundring hands to prey,
Upon Job's Cattle, and his Servants slay;
And as from Rifts of dismal Clouds he threw,
His envious fire, which Sheep, and Shepherds slew,
And from the Desert, did with storms beset,
The House wherein his feasting Children met;
With horrid blast, causing a sudden fall,
And in its ruins, overwhelmed them all.
Thus as he did this Holy Man pursue,
And Trials thick upon his Soul renew.
So on new Converts, he Temptation slings;
Swift like the Arrows, shot from Parthian Strings,
And powrs forth trouble on them, that he may
Divert them from, or stop them in their way.
But he that Wings, unto the Woman gave,
And in a place of refuge, did her save;
He that did cause the Earth to swallow down
The Floods against her by the Dragon thrown.
It Is he that will her blessed seed secure,
In all the conflicts that they here endure.
Its he that carries his on Eagles Wings,
And to the Land of promise safely brings.

The Souls preparing for Trials.
Soul. Body. So. COme (my dear self) let us gird our Armor on,
Prepare to fight, we shall be set upon,
Against Men and Devils, we must now engage,
Who will assault us with inveterate rage:
And in this expedition that we make,
Lets know right well the way we are to take,
Wise Chieftains, that great Armies do command,
And are to march them through an Enemies Land,
They have their Maps, which do direct their way,
That nothing unexpected may assay.
What Woods, where Ambuscado's may be laid,
What Hills and straits where passage may be staid.
What Rivers, with their breadth, and how they wind,
What depths they are, and where they Foords may find,
What barren Wastes, that Armies cannot relieve,
And what strong Towns, that may disturbance give,
That all things being thus in view contrived,
They may in time, fit remedies provide.
So Fellow Soldier, let us by Heavenly Art,
From Scripture Records, draw our sacred Chart.
That all things daily being supervis'd,
We may not on a sudden be surprised.
But with well guided judgment, take our course,
And passage, with resolved courage force.

Bo. How is it like that we should win the day,
From those great Rulers, that dark Regions sway.
That far surpass those fierce Caldean Bands,
That once invaded Judah's pleasant Lands,
Who with sharp Arrows, and strong bended Bow,
In mighty Troops, like roaring Seas did slow;
And as a Deluge, on the Earth did seize,
Knowing no Law, but what themselves did please.
None weary march, nor does dull Sleep surprise,
Or slumber once invade, their Wakesul Eyes:
Nor from their Loins, did strengthening Girdles loose,
Or broken Latchets, fall from off their Shoes.
Swifter than Leopards, were their Horse for Fight,
Fiercer than rav'ning Wolves, that range by Night.
Fleet as the Eagles, that do cut their way,
With Airy Plumes, to their desired prey.
All came for Violence, and where they past
They supt up all things like an Eastern blast.
They scoft at Kings, and Princes did deride,
And laughed at places strongly fortified.
By heaped up dust; they scaled with conquering hands,
And led forth Captives, like innumerous sands:
And yet these were but Flesh. This War of ours
It is with Spirits, with superior Powers,
With subtle Foes, in Wiles and Methods trained;
And Stratagems, by long experience gained.
With Sceptered Cherubs, Princes of the Air,
With Thrones of Malice raging through despair.
That undiscerned upon the Soul can press,
With an immediate and a close access:
And from above, do all advantage spy,
And to it spied, with hellish fury fly.
Swifter in motion, than Earths circling Sun,
Or Lightning, that from East to West, does run.
With these we War, that from on high do pour
In direful rage, many a deadly shour
Of winged, and sharp pointed fiery darts,
Fixing their venomed Heads, in bleeding hearts.
These signally are those unweari'd Foes,
That never rest, or tired Eyelids close.
That are more cruel to the Sons of Men,
Than Evening Beasts, that creep from Savage Den.
That overflow like to the raging foam,
And give no Quarter, where they overcome.
How shall we then 'scape, falling by the hands
Of these Ethereal Powers, and numerous bands.

So. Fear not (dear self) the day shall not be lost,
So long as strength, is in the Lord of Host.
As those that are by strongest Rocks inmur'd,
So with Almighty Power, we are secured.
Encamping Angels, round about us lie,
Like active Flames, with ever-wakeful Eye;
In knowledge, wisdom, force, and power, far
Beyond those Hostile Foes, with whom we war.
These are our Guard, that so our feet may tread
Upon the Dragon, and the Lions Head.
He that sets bounds, how far proud waves shall go,
Does likewise bound the fury of our Foe.
And in dark Chains, does so their power confine,
That without leave, they cannot enter Swine.
Be strong therefore, in that all powerful might
That will assist, to conquer in this fight.
And whilst thou conflicts, for thy comfort know,
Thou art engaging with a conquered Foe.
As famous Victors, after War was done,
They had their Triumphs for great Battles won.
In Trabean Robes, with Verdant Laurel Crowned
They rode in state, whilst captive Prisoners bound,
Trail'd at their Charet wheels, in public show,
As living Trophies, of a conquered Foe.
So our great Captain, after Victory won,
In robes of Glory, rode in Triumph home,
With Conquest crowned, ascended up on high,
And with him Captive led Captivity.
Our Mortal Foes, in Battle overthrown,
Were by him bound, and spoiled, in Triumph shown.
Put on therefore, the complete Panoply,
Provided for thee, in Gods Armory.
Advance with courage, lay aside all dread,
Thou have already conquered in thy Head:
And in thy person thou thy self at length,
Through his assisting Grace, shall tread down strength.

Temptations arising from old Companions.
Soul, Body, Companions. Comp. WHat madness is it, that you thus do quit
Your old Companions, in a sullen fit?
Will you turn Mopes, and Fools, and make your selves
Like to the Owl, that in the Desert dwells:
Wandering with anxious toil, in ways forlorn,
Daily exposed, to misery and scorn?
Come take Advice, and leave this barren Sand,
Return again, unto a fertile Land.
Withdraw your wandering steps from fruitless toil,
And dip your tired feet in fluent Oil,
Within cool shades, let weary Limbs lie down,
And with sweet Rose-buds Youthful Temples Crown.
Fulfill your hearts desire, and on your head,
Let pleasant Odours be in plenty shed.
Let Us cheer our selves, as once in former time,
With Bowls of Liquor, from the generous Vine.
And pleasant tunes, from raised spirits sing,
Unto the Harp, and Viols, rembling string.
Come and enjoy the good things of the Earth,
And with old Friends, renew your former mirth.
Why should the World at this your folly laugh,
To see you leave all for a Pilgrims Staff?

So. Will the redeemed Bond-slave choose again
To put his Feet into the Iron Chain.
Or will the ransomed Captive any more
Return to labor, at the Turkish Oar:
No more shall we return again, I trust,
To be in Bondage to our former Lust.
Those that the Motions of the Flesh fulfill,
Are Slaves to Lusts, Captives to Satan's will.
Its by the Son, that Freedom comes alone;
How many Lords have they, that have not one.
Will those that at the living Fountain fill
Their thirsty Souls, prize Puddle Water still.
Or those that are with Heavenly Manna fed,
Their Money spend, for that which is not Bread.
That in the Bosom of true Rest doly,
Weary themselves for very Vanity.
This would be Folly in the highest strain,
Therefore forbear, your Offers are in vain,
Come join with us, leave Rioting Excess,
And walk in ways of real Happiness,
So shall you with the truest Good be blessed,
And guided safe, unto Eternal Rest.

Comp. Poor Creatures, that with high conceits do swell,
And in your brainsick Fancies, love to dwell,
Have you not seen some Madmen make their Brags,
Of large Possessions, strut it in their Rags,
Thinking themselves some great Ones, and promote
Laughter in all, to see them thus to dote.
Come listen to us, leave this roving Mind,
It Is only trouble in this Path you will find.

So. It is no wonder those that judge by Sense,
Should draw so dark and false an Inference:
But does not madness in such persons reign,
As love their Dungeon, hug their Iron Chain.
Despise the Light, and think those Men unwise
That rouse from Prison straw, and freedom prise.
This is your case, that slavish Bondage choose,
And paths of Freedom, sordidly refuse.
What though we meet with trouble, yet we shall
Have that sweet inward peace, will weigh down
And those same troubles, that our way infest,
Will fill our Songs with Triumph, at our rest.
Great Conflicts, make the Conquest more renowned,
Great Victory, with great Glory, shall be crowned.
Come then and tread with us this Living Path,
You Will find true comfort, in the Life of Faith.

The Souls Improvement of Time in Meditation upon Light, the First Days Work.
Soul. So. WHen Waters once the formless Earth did steep,
And sable darkness, covered all the deep.
When this void Lump was muffled up in Night,
Then out of Darkness, God commanded Light.
Just so it was when this same little World,
By Adams sin, was into Darkness hurled.
Into dark hearts, God shined by his Grace,
To give forth Light, through blessed Emanuel's Face.
He that in Six Days did this Fabric rear,
And out of Nothing, form what does appear.
Upon the first day gilds and over-lays
This undigested Lump, with Luminous Rays.
So on the first day rose that Light, which brings
To lapsed World, Salvation in his Wings.
And on the first day, whom he new creates
With saving Light, those he illuminates.
No sooner did this great Creator say,
Let there be Light, but strait-way it was Day.
No sooner did his Word, give forth Command,
But presently his Work does perfect stand.
Admire that Power, my Soul, that by his Call,
Gives Being unto that had none at all:
And by a Word of Life, does strait-way raise
A new Creation, to sing forth his praise.
Three days the Light about the World did run
Before the great Creator made the Sun.
Thrice was the Day divided from the Night,
Before God set up this imbodied Light.
Admire that God, my Soul, that can fulfill
Without, or with, what means he please, his Will.
He that at first without Sun made a day,
Will shine himself, when these Lights are away.
Long for that time, when he himself will be
Instead of all created Light to thee.

Trials arising from Displeasure of Parents.
Soul. Body. So. ANd why so sad, dear self, come fix thy mind.
On things above, where thou shall comfort find.

Bo. Unto my grief, methinks I still do hear
The angry words of Parents in my Ear.
Will you, said they, your Fancies thus pursue,
As if none knew the way to Heaven but you.
Have all been out before, conceited Sirs,
And are you wiser than your Ancestors?
Well, if you are resolved in the case,
Then never more presume to see our Face:
And know withal, that whilst you wander thus,
You shall be friendless Mendicants for us.

So. It Is not our Fancies, but Divine Command,
That does oblige us to this work in hand.
And though we may under hard censure fall,
We must keep close, to this same Heavenly Call.
In Arts and Sciences it is taken well,
That we therein Forefathers do excel.
Why should there then, dear self, be such a strife
About our Progress in the ways of Life.
If we herein shall truly be devout,
Though Parents frown upon us, cast us out,
Our Heavenly Father will extend his Grace,
And in his Arms, his suffering ones embrace.
The Bands of this Relation will avail,
When all the Ligaments of Nature fail.

Bo. Yet bitter sadness fills my breaking heart,
From Friends and dear Relations thus to part.
How do my yearning Bowels in me role,
Whilst that, methinks, I hear them thus condole.
Children we have, and yet we Childless are,
Possessions for them, yet must have no share.
All that we have, does now but torment add,
Since they are gone, that should the same have had.
How happy are those Persons that have none,
Or having Children, call them still their own.
That Staff, which to our Age should give relief.
Proves as a Dart, to wound with piercing grief.
And those that through our Loins did draw their Breath,
Are made unto us, Instruments of Death.

So. Forbear such thoughts, if we had done amiss,
Then had we given woeful cause for this.
This way of ours, commands us to afford
To Parents, due obedience in the Lord,
But if their Wills in competition stand,
We must adhere unto Divine Command.
And seeing God or Creatures, we must leave,
Let Us follow him, in whom we all receive:
And only mourn to think, that such offense
Is taken at well-guided Innocence.
And how like burning Sparks that upward fly,
Poor woeful Man is born to misery.
Rather than want what may his Peace annoy,
He Will turn to grief, the matter of his joy.

Bo. But how (dear Soul) shall we now do to live,
Who will unto us Food and Raiment give.

So. Distrust it not, dear self, that God which knows
What things we need, will surely give us those.
He that thy Substance viewed in secret shade,
And curiously this wondrous Fabric made;
That cast upon thee a creating Look,
And entered all thy Members in his Book:
That gave thee Life, and from the lowest Earth,
Enlarged thy dwelling by a timely Birth;
That then provided Breasts, and tender Arms,
To nourish thee, and keep thee safe from harms:
That to this day has followed thee with good,
It Is he (dear self) will give both Clothes and Food.
See thou the Lillies in the open Field,
To which no Gardner helping hand does yield.
They neither spin, nor send fair Warp to twine
About the figured Woofe, to make them fine:
Nor do with anxious care themselves perplex,
To dress their lovely form, with Leaves reflex.
Yet Solomon in all his choice Array,
Was not invested with such Robes as they.
If God for fading Lillies take such care,
He Will surely Cloth such as his Children are.
Look to the Airy Fowl, that neither sow
Nor reaped Harvest, in their Barns do stow:
But what God gives, they gather up and eat,
And with an open hand are filled with Meat.
The unkind Raven that from Nest expells
Her tender Young, when shiftless for themselves,
God to their hoarse unpleasant Voice attends,
And timely Food unto those young ones sends.
If unclean Birds from Bounty thus are fed,
Such as far better are shall not want their Bread.

Bo. But yet (dear Soul) our loss it is not small,
To part with Friends, with Livelihood and all.

So. Those drils of mixed Comfort, which creep here,
Through diverse Channels, in their Springs flow clear.
There do they all collectively abound,
Which here dispersed and sparingly are found.
We lose not then those Comforts which we leave,
Whilst at the Fountain Head we all receive.
They that Relations, Friends, and Lands forsake,
To follow Christ, in this Life shall partake
Of such sweet Peace, pure Joy, and Heavenly Food,
Of such Communion with the chiefest Good;
As shall a hundredfold these things transcend,
And Life Eternal, when this Life shall end.

The Souls Evening Meditation.
Soul. So. THe Firmament decked with Celestial Flame,
The Glory of its Maker does proclaim.
If each great Spangle on that Heavenly Robe,
Transcend in bigness, this same terrene Globe;
Which is in miles by computation found
Six hundred one and twenty thousand round.
How great is that Circumference sublime,
In which so many Radiant Lamps do shine:
That could a Humane Eye be fixed there,
This World would but a minute point appear.
And yet how vastly greater is that place,
Where God gives forth full Visions of his Face.
How should we then with reverential dread,
Admire that Power, that did these Heavens spread.
Adore that God, so infinitely great,
As does this Earth, and all these Heavens replete?
Whose all-containing Immence Being, can
Mete out these vast Dimensions with a span.
And if these Earth exceeding Globes do show
But like small Balls of Flame to us below:
And if sev'n Orbs, beneath this Roof are hurled
With rapid Motion, round this lower World,
In which seav'n Planets variously do steer,
Most of them greater than this globous Sphere;
How many thousand miles, yea, millions high,
Has God above us, stretched the starry Sky?
And yet how far beyond in Altitude,
Is that thir'd Heaven, which does these Orbs include?
Which does his Greatness and his Grace declare,
Whose Mercies far above the Heavens are.
And who in height does highest Heavens excel,
And uncontained in himself does dwell.
And if so vast and high these Bodies be;
What Tongue can tell their great celerity?
What motion can set forth how swift they role
In their diurnal course, about their Pole?
How blessed then may those be truly said,
Upon which Heavens, God rides for their aid.
And who like Jes'runs God in excellence,
That rides on the Sky for their defense.
And if these Globes so swift, by fixed Decree,
Still wheel about in Even Harmony.
If Constellations, keep their distance due,
And wandering Planets, wander always true;
And keep by Ord'nance, given to them all,
Their Revolutions periodical:
And orderly do run their bounded way,
In lucent paths, from which they never stray.
But move exactly in their Heavenly Sphere,
To give the various seasons of the year.
And this by virtue of a Covenant past,
Which must endure so long as time shall last.
How firm is then the Covenant of Grace,
Which he has freely made to Israel's Race?
Heavens Ordinances shall be sooner broke,
Than any Promise that the Lord has spoke.
And how stupendous is that Power above,
Which such swift Bodies, does so ev'nly move.
Oh what is Man or his Posterity,
That God should spread so rich a Canopy?
And garnish forth this great Celestial Roof,
With such refulgent Lights on his behoof.
He that for all Men has this Structure reared,
What Glory for his own has he prepared?

Upon the Moon.
OBserve the Moon, that monthly makes her way,
Through the twelve Signs, and over Night bears sway.
One of the greater Lights, for so in show,
As seated next to us that live below.
The nearer in Approaches she does come
Unto the luminous Body of the Sun.
The brighter does she cast her Rays above,
And darker shows to those that here do move.
So do those Souls to Heavenly Eyes shine bright,
That hold Communion with the God of Light.
Whilst the dark World no Glory can espy,
Because it is hidden from a Carnal Eye.
And as the Moon, with borrowed Light displays
Reflected Beams, sent from the Suns bright Rays
So from the Sun of Righteousness Divine,
The Saints with perfect Comeliness do shine.
Again, observe her in her oblique Sphere,
Where Days and Nights, much vary in the year.
In Winter time, when the declining Sun,
His shortest Arch does in the Heavens run.
And quickly posteth from our Hemisphere,
Whilst dusky Night, long Sable Robes do wear.
Then does the Moon opposed in her sign,
Mounted on high, in largest Circle shine.
Supplying comfort to the tedious Night,
By long continuance of her chearing Light.
Whereas in Summer, when there is less need,
She from us to the Antipodes does speed.
And there lifts up her silver beaming Head,
Where the moist shades of Night are longest spread.
You that search out his Works, Oh praise the Lord,
Who when most need, does then most Light afford.
The Moon, though glorious, has opacous veins,
And from her Full, does hasten to her Wains.
With various Phaces, moving through the Sky,
And constant always in unconstancy.
So are all sublunary Comforts here,
With Spots they shine, then change and disappear.
Oh happy Souls, that by true Grace are led,
Upon these mixed and fading things to tread.
Trials arising from cruel Mockings.
Soul. Body. Bo. THeir troubles (my dear Soul) what words can tell,
That meet with those, whose Tongues are fired from Hell.
From which, as from a cruel Bow that is bent,
Are bitter words, like poisoned Arrows sent.
How do the Ishmaels of the World us flout?
The Rabshakes, their Railing thus cast out:
These are the holy Seed, that must possess
The promised Land; we in the Wilderness
Must be cast forth, as those in Bondage born,
Wandering in Desert Ways, with Steps forlorn:
These are the Gifted Brethren, that can preach:
And dress their Nonsense in affected Speech,
That pray Tautologies with moving Groans,
And take the simple, with affected Tones.
These are the nice precisions, not content,
With that old path, in which their Fathers went,
But must have new: These from the Church do stray,
And yet pretend to Heaven the nearest Way,
To be the only Ones, that walk aright;
Such as do still attain unto New Light.
Meteors of Flame and Zeal, from whence does fall
Direful Effects, where they are Vertical.
Disturbers of the Peace in every Town,
Turning the World in Faction, upside down.

So. That Troubles and Commotions do arise,
It is from those that do the Truth despise:
This is declared in the Sacred Word,
The Prince of Peace did come to send a Sword;
Which accidental proves, from the fierce Rage
Of those that do against his Ways engage:
As Torrents stopped, swell high to overflow,
So Lust opposed, does more outrageous grow:
Besides the Devil with his own does join,
That so no Light may in his Kingdom shine;
And those that do against his power contest,
Are cried down as the Men that do molest.
As for Reproach, fear not a taunting Word,
The Servant is not greater than his Lord:
Black Mouths against him belched forth Obloquy,
Both whilst he lived, and when he came to die;
Who when reviled, reviled not his Foes,
But like the silent Lamb, to Slaughter goes.
If that the Head endured such Contempt,
The Members must not think to be exempt:
If he drunk deep of this same bitter Cup,
Let not his Servants then think much to sup.
If he for us a Crown of Thorns did wear,
Let Us follow him, and his Reproaches bear.

Bo. It is but just and equal, what you say,
But yet it is a sad and dismal Way.

So. The Way faring Man, that carefully does mind
Those given Marks, whereby his Way to find;
As when he has crossed o'r a pleasant Plain,
He then must pass a deep and dirty Lane;
Then by a Wood, where Savage Beasts frequent;
Then climb a craggy and a high Ascent,
When as instructed, he does thither come,
Out of a longing Mind to be at home;
Though at the way he takes no delight,
Yet joys in this, to see himself in the right,
So though Afflictions grievous are to Sense,
Yet may they yield a joyful Evidence.
For in this Way the Saints to Heaven went,
Against whose Names reproachful Tongues were bent:
Thus Patient Job, whose Record was on high,
Under hard words of Friendless Friends did lie;
Besides young Boys this worthy Soul did mock,
Whose Fathers were too mean to tend his Flock.
Such as to Desert, Want and Famine drive
To dig up Roots, to keep themselves alive:
Chased by Man from their Society,
Followed like Flying Thieves with Hue and Cry,
Hidden in Holes, concealed in gaping Rifts,
Dwelling as Men forlorn, in Rocky Clifs:
Children of Fools, and such as had no name;
Viler than was the Earth from whence they came.
To these was Job a byword, these vile Wretches
Made him the Subject of their gibing Catches.
Such as the Abjects of the People were,
With bitter Scoffs, did David's good name tear;
With Hypocrites, in their Voluptuous Feasts,
They nasht their Teeth, and flung forth Taunting Jests.
The sordid Drunkard, with defaming Tongue,
Made him the matter of his jeering Song.
The great Apostles filled with Gifts divine,
Derided were as drunken with new Wine,
And many more, with cruel Mockings tried,
That trod this Path, and now are glorified.

Bo. It is enough (dear Soul) come let us go on,
This is the Way I see the Saints have gone.
Moses the Meek, this Thorny Path did tread,
Leaving the Court, where he was Princely bred
The fruitful Plains, that fatning Nile o'r-run:
The high-rais'd Title of a Princes Son,
The great Preferments of a Potent King,
The Wealth and Pleasures, Peace and Plenty bring;
With a despised People to partake
Of Sharp Reproaches, for his Saviors sake:
And these as greater Riches by him chose,
Then all the Treasures Egypt did enclose.

The Souls Speech to Revilers.
Soul. So. YOu are arrived to the Scorners Chair,
Learnt how to mock, and we must learn to bear.
Is it not Folly in a high degree,
For Persons drawing to the Fatal Tree,
Upon their way to jeer all else beside,
That will not so to Execution ride.
Vain Sons of Earth, who fling about your Wit,
As Madmen Firebrarnds, care not whom you hit;
And make it but your sport, for to blaspheme
Those that in Heaven dwell, and Heaven in them:
Yea in your Drolling Language think it fine,
To cast forth Scoffs against the Spirit Divine.
Poor daring Moths, that make it but your Game
To sport and play about the burning Flame;
Will nothing serve the turn, but you must try
How through the Light your Wanton Wings can fly?
No wonder then if this be your repast,
With scorched Wings you tumble down at last
Come, be advised to leave your Slandrous Tongue,
You do your selves, not us, the greatest wrong.
And are exposed to those Curses dire,
Sounded by trembling String, on Hebrew Lire,
Against that Man, who fired by Envious Flames
With open Mouth and lying Tongue, defames
My God, my glory leave not in distress, Mr. Sandys his Paraphrase on the 109th
Psalm.

Nor let prevailing Fraud the Truth oppress;
They who delight in subtilties and wrongs,
Afflict me with the poison of their Tongues,
With Slander and Detraction, gird me round,
And would without a cause my life confound,
Good turns, with evil, proudly recompense,
And Love with Hate, my Merit with Offense:
But I in these Extremes to thee repair,
And pour out my perplexed soul in prayer;
Subject him to a Tyrants stern command,
Subverting Satan place at his right hand:
Found guilty, when arraigned in that feared time,
Let his rejected Prayers augment his crime:
May he by Violence untimely die,
And let another his Command supply.
Let his distressed Widow weep in vain,
His wretched Orphans to deaf Ears complain.
Let them the wandering paths of Exile tread,
And in unpeopled Deserts seek their Bread.
Let griping Usurers divide his Spoil,
And Strangers reap the Harvest of his toil.
In his long Misery may he find no Friend,
None to his Race so much as pity lend.
Let his Posterity be overthrown,
Their Names to the succeeding Age unknown.
Let not the Lord his Fathers sins forget,
His Mothers infamy before him set.
Oh let them be the object of his Eye,
Till he out-root their hated memory.

Nuncius. Nun. AS mighty Billows swelled with stormy wind,
Come trooping on, and where repulse they find,
There in tumultuous Waves their power stretch.
And fiercely charge, to gain an entering Breach.
So the proud Tempter put unto retreat,
Rallies again, in hope for to defeat
His conquering Foes, whom in disdain he views,
And with fresh fury his Assaults renews.
But like a Rock, that makes its standing good,
Against the rushing of the roaring Flood:
So stand all those are strengthened by the might
Of him that helps to conquer in the Fight.

The Complaints and Fears of the Flesh removed by the Soul, particularly
concerning Persecutors.
Soul. Body. Bo. HOw far (dear Soul) how far, have we now gone,


So. Mind not (dear self) what is past, but let us press on.


Bo. What thorny rugged way have we past o'r,


So. Forget it all, and reach to things before.


Bo. How much remains of this same tedious way,


So. (Dear self) it shortens on us every day.


Bo, Let Us rest a while from this same weary race,


So. Depart (dear self) it is not thy resting place,


Bo. (Dear Soul) I Am feeble, let us a little stay,


So. The way for strength, is to keep on our way,


Bo. I fear I shall not persevere, or stand,


So. Look up to him that holds with his right hand,


Bo. Troubles (dear Soul) upon us daily grow.


So. Support and Comfort, likewise daily flow.


Bo. With doubtful mind we often perplexed are.


So. But yet upheld and kept from sad despair.


Bo. On every side Afflictions on us waits.


So. Yet are we not distressed in all our straits.


Bo. We meet with Persecution day by day.


So. Yet are we not forsaken in our way.


Bo. With castings down we often are annoi'd.


So. But yet preserved (dear self) and not destroyed.


Bo. Must we (dear Soul) pass on this dangerous way.
How shall we escape those Troops that lurk for prey?
See how their Scouts already do appear.
Let Us fly (dear Soul) before they do come near.

So. Not so (dear Self) let us not our duty quit;
Here lies our way, and therefore keep to it.
We need not fear though Men and Devils rave,
We have a Guard sufficient for to save.
See how the Mountains shine with glittering Spears,
And all the Hills how filled with Curiassiers,
And fiery Charets, that like Lightning run,
And with swift motion, like the Whirlwind turn.
See thou that gallant File on the right wing,
Whose dazzling Targets back the Sun Beams fling.
Those bound the mighty Babilonian King,
That from Jerusalem the Spoils did bring
That lofty Tree, that unto Heaven grew,
Whosespreading Branches all the World did view.
Under whose cooling shade the Beasts did rest,
And in whose Boughs, the Fowls did build their nest:
Upon whose Twigs, fair Leaves themselves did spread,
And by whose Fruit all Flesh was nourished.
These hewed him down, these did his Branches cut,
Shak'd off his Leaves, and scattered all his Fruit.
From Palace cast him, drove him out from men,
To range the Woods, and lodge in Savage Den.
His Limbs bedewed, he from cold Earth does raise,
And with Wild Asses runs about to graise.
With Beastial Heart, upon the Shrubs and Boughs,
How does this Royal Bruit delight to browse,
Until this Heavenly Lamp, the days bright Sun,
Had seav'n times through the Golden Zodiac run.
And this illustrious Beast did come to know
The most High ruled in Kingdoms here below.
He next in Front, that on the left does ride,
Smote persecuting Herod in his Pride.
No sooner did his Leader give the word
For to destroy, but out he drew his Sword.
And swifter than the Wind his Fiery Steed,
Does to the Court of Proud Agrippa speed:
Breaks through his Forces, and that wicked rout
That deifi'd him with blasphemous shout:
And in their sight, from Regal Throne he turns
This glistring Prince, to be devoured by Worms.
Mind that commanded Troop in the next Field,
And in it him that lifts up his Shield.
That, that, was singly he, whose mortal Steel
The proud Assyrian Host did sharply feel.
Almost two hundred thousand Corpse were found
By him laid dead, upon Judaean ground.
The rest amazed, from Sions Siege do fly,
Justly rewarded for their blasphemy.
Like unto those, are all the rest who stand
Ready to execute the least Command
Of him, that makes his Ministers a Flame,
Timely to fuccour those that fear his Name.

Gamaliel's Speech to Persecutors.
Persecutors. Gamaliel. Perse. UPon the Hill of Mispah let us set
Our Snares, and on Mount Tabor spread our Net.
It Is Dan, and Bethel, that the Law does name
To be the places for our hallowed Flame.
Why then should any from our Altars run,
And not before our Calves sweet incense burn.
These, these, are they that do disturb the Land,
That break the Law, and will not obey command.
Some we have taken, they shall dearly pay
Forthosewhich escape through this forbidden way.
Let Us teach them now with Thorns, the Tribes agree,
At Dan and Bethel we should bow the Knee.
Let Us make no Conscience for to ruin them,
That leave our Altars for Jerusalem.
It is but fit that we correct their Pride,
Who would be wiser than all else beside.

Ga. You are upon a great attempt no doubt,
But want Advice in what you go about.
Tell me, I pray you, was it ever found,
The way of Violence has gained ground.
Come, come, dismiss the Men that you have caught,
The way they take, if wrong, will come to naught:
But if the course they steer prove to be right,
Then know against the mighty God you fight.
Will you in Battle set the Thorn and Bryer,
Shall withered Stubble charge consuming Fire?
How will his dreadful Wrath burn up the same,
When he shall march through in devouring Flame.
Dire Instruments of Death do by him lie,
Prepared for Vengeance on the Enemy.
Against the Persecutors, he ordains
His Arrows, and in vital Blood them stains.
Upon his Head his Mischief shall return,
His Root and Branch, the Wrath of God will burn.
Phar'oh against the Seed of Jacob's bent,
Ten sharpened Arrows God upon him spent.
This will not do, the proud King will pursue
The Ransomed Tribes, which to the Red Sea, drew.
When Israel comes, the Sea lifts up its head,
Sees Israel's God, and seeing trembling fled.
The Waters are afraid, the troubled Deeps
With rushing noise, make haste to run on heaps
The frightened Floods do leave their Channel dry
And in congealed heaps on both sides lie.
The Eastern Wind sweepeth the Watery Floor,
The ransomed of the Lord safely pass o'r.
Phar'oh and all his Armed Host still raves,
And follows Israel through divided Waves:
I Will overtake, I will the Spoil divide,
I Will glut my Lusts, I will destroy, they cried.
God from the Cloud and fiery Pillar views
The daring Troops, that Israel thus pursues.
There Charr'ots on a sudden lose their Wheels,
The Horse and Horsman in an instant reels.
The troubled Host amazed now do cry,
God fights for them, from their Face lets fly.
Unto retired Streams the Lord does call,
They strait return, the Watery heaps do fall.
Dried Channels now with Waves are overflown,
Charro'ts and Horsemen in the Deeps are thrown.
Thus in the Sea the Lord does them confound,
That in the River Isreal's Seed had drowned.
Haman their offspring does design to kill,
And with their Blood the Persian Empire fill.
This Agagite does scorn so mean a prey,
As single unfaluting Mordecay:
But all his People must a Victim be,
To expiate for one unbowing knee.
There is a People, to the King he cried,
Diff ring in Laws from all your Realm beside;
Dispersed and scattered up and down they ly,
And such as will not with your Laws comply.
It is not for your profit they should live,
Therefore Ten thousand Talents I will give
Unto your Royal use to be employed,
That all those Sectaries may be destroyed.
Forthwith the hasty misinformed King,
Remits the Money, and gives forth his Ring
To sign the cruel Edict Posts now fly,
To all parts, to promote this Villainy.
The day's designed for this bloody Deed,
And Haman waits to root out Isreal's Seed.
But this returns upon him and his Race,
Being carri d to be hanged with covered Face.
Read more in Sacred Writ the end of them,
That dare to fight against Jerusalem.
Within their holes consumed is their Eye,
Within their Mouth, their wasted Tongue does lie.
Pining Consumptions do their Bodies vex,
From God a Tumult does their minds perplex.
Horror and Fear, their Spirits do surprise,
Each hand against their Neighbors hand does rise.
A cup of Poison, and of trembling Wine,
She Is made to those that round her draw their line.
They that to lift this heavy Stone do try,
Do underneath it crushed in pieces lie.
Arrows like Lightning fly from bended Bow,
Scattering her Foes with deadly overthrow.
Then from these Men refrain, least to your cost,
You chance to fight against the Lord of Host.
Those Men must needs be woefully undone,
That on the Bosses of his Buckler run.

Nuncius. Nu. THough Pilgrims in their Passage may be stayed,
By cruel hands in stinking Prisons laid;
Which may at present grievous be to sense,
Yet has, through Grace, a blessed influence.
And though both Men and Devils seek by force,
To stop their Progress in this Heavenly Course,
It proves but vain, a higher hand bears sway,
And helps them still to prosecute their way.

The Soul administering Cordials to the Outward Man, to prevent Faintings under
Sufferings.
Soul. Body. So. COme (my dear Self) let not sad thoughts deject,
This is no more than what we must expect.
The way to Heaven through Tribulation lies,
We by the Cross, must unto Glory rise.
Were we of this World, it would love its own,
But we are Strangers to the World unknown.
Remember those brave Worthies that through Faith,
Wandered in Deserts void of beaten Path;
That in Beasts Skins did Airy Mountains tread,
And in damp Caves and Dens did lodge their Head.
Who unto Men and Angels often were
By Tyrants made a gazing Theater.
Whose tender Limbs on torturing Racks were strained,
And with whose Blood the cruel Sword was stained.
Who under cutting Saws did breath their last,
And through a shower of Stones to Glory past.
These choice ones were like Filth, and Rubbish hurled,
By various Deaths out of this wicked World.
Who by their Faith a good report obtained,
And through rich Grace a Throne in Heaven gained.

Bo. I do confess these truly were renowned,
As also those in sacred Record found.
Who armed with victorious Fortitude,
Opposing Kingdoms round about subdud:
That walked in holy Ways with great success,
And in a righteous Path wrought Righteousness.
That by their Faith great Promises obtained,
And Conquest over roaring Lions gained.
That did the force of raging Fire turn
Against its Nature, that it could not burn.
That waxed Valiant in prevailing Fight,
And Armies of the Aliens put to flight.
These were indeed for Grace and Courage famed,
But what are we, not worthy to be named.

So. But unto whom (dear Self) does power belong,
Who out of Weakness made those Worthies strong?
Was it not God that girt their Loins with might,
Infused Courage, taught their hands to fight?
Did not he strengthen them to undergo
The Difficulties that he called them to?
And has not this rich Fountain of all Grace,
Promised assistance to us in like case?
Let us in Faith then keep his righteous way,
It Is God work for to help, ours to obey.
Yea, let us rejoice and bless that glorious Name,
That counts us worthy thus to suffer shame:
Yea, be exceeding glad and sing with those
At whose strong Prayer a mighty Earthquake rose,
Shook off their Bands, the Prison Doors unbarr'd,
At which springs in the trembling Jailer skar'd.
And he that thought to fall upon his Sword,
Fell down converted at their powerful Word.

Bo. It Is true indeed this is a blessed Frame,
To glory in our Sufferings for his Name.
But how shall I attain this Heavenly Art,
That chiefly am exposed to the smart.

So. I do confess it is above our reach,
But God has promised pow'rfully to teach:
He to this end will Tribulation bless,
That thou in patience may thy Soul possess.
It Is he that causes that same bitter Root,
To bring forth in thee this same pleasant Fruit.
It Is he that can our frowardness remove,
By making of the cause its cure to prove.
And where the Grace of Patience does abound,
With large experience shall that Soul be crowned.
With sweet refreshing Comforts from his Face,
With great reviving Succors from his Grace.
And as experience does from Patienee flow,
So lively hope does on Experiencc grow:
For we by what is found and felt are led,
To hope for all the mercy promised.
And being sure of Heaven in the end,
We glory in those means that thither tend.

The Soul solacing her self in those Apprehensions she has of the future
peaceable Kingdom of Jesus Christ.
Soul. So. WHen that choice Branch of David's Royal Stem,
Comes for to wear the Worlds bright Diadem.
And in the Clouds (it is likely) will display,
His Glory in the Morning of that day.
Myriads of Angels on his Throne attend,
Millions of glorious raised Saints ascend
Unto their King, from all parts round about,
Waiting upon him with triumphant shout.
The Sun in Darkness vails his drooping head,
The Moon and Stars forbear their Light to shed.
The Pillars of the reeling World do shake,
And trembling Mountains like Mount Sinai quake.
The Kings and Captains, with the mighty Men,
To hide themselves run to the silent Den.
The great ones to the Rocks and Mountains call
For shelter by their overwhelming fall,
From that same Face which comes with dreadful ire,
To render Vengeance in bright flames of Fire.
Then those great Armies by his proud Foes led,
Like a black Cloud over Judaea spread.
Threatening with dismal storm the pleasant Land,
Shall be destroyed by his powerful hand.
Upon their Heads he showers down burning Coals,
Over their Necks his flaming Charr'ot roles.
Fire, Sword and Hail, their routed Troops confound,
And fill with bleeding Corpse the purple Ground.
Invited Fowls to Royal Flesh make speed,
And ravenous Beasts upon slain Nobles feed.
The numerous Guests from this Feast go away,
Drunken with Blood and glutted with the Prey.
Those two great Leaders that seduced the World
Beast and false Prophet, both alive are hurled,
By that same conquering hand which does them take,
Into the ever-burning fiery Lake.
The mettl'd Kingdom no more place does find,
But flies like Chaff, dispersed with chasing Wind.
And that same Stone that smote it on the Toes,
Fills the whole Earth and a great Mountain grows.
An Ensign now is lifted up on high,
The Gentiles like the Clouds unto it fly.
The Seed of Jacob that were made a Prey,
And scattered in the dark and cloudy day:
Those exile People that by Willows mourn,
With Harps untuned do now again return.
The mighty Waters, as of old do fly,
And for a Passage leave their Channels dry.
In a strait way they from Dispersion come,
With joy and singing to their longed for home.
And now united Tribes their Land possess,
Under one head the King of Righteousness;
Whose Regal Throne exalted is on high,
Among his Ancient People gloriously.
All Nation, Tongues, and Languages obey
The Royal Scepter that this King does sway.
His large Dominions are established
Over all places where the Heavens spread.
Judgment and Justice from his Throne come down,
Like the sweet Showers upon the Grass new mow'n.
Now Truth and Mercy both together meet,
And Righteousness with kiss firm Peace does greet.
The Just now flourish, and the Saints obtain
Seats on his Throne, Shares in his blessed Reign.
The Creatures all in mutual Concord live,
None unto others do disturbance give.
The Wolf, with tender Lamb, shall gently rest,
The Lion on the Bullock's Straw shall feast.
The Fatling by him shall in peace abide,
The Kid lie safely by the Leopard's side.
The Heifer then shall feed without all fear,
Within fat Pastures by the friendly Bear.
The Asp no more with mortal bite shall slay,
But at their holes a Child shall safely play.
The Panther with sweet Breath no more shall draw,
Deluded Beasts into his tearing Paw.
The Basilisk no longer Darts forth Death,
By strong malignant Beams, or pois'ning Breath.
The Hawk no more with Airy Plumes shall move,
In fierce pursuit, after the trembling Dove.
The Hound no more shall chase the flying Deer,
Nor Crocodile shall shed dissembling tear.
No Salean Moore, nor cruel Algerine,
Shall cruise for Prey upon the Midland Brine.
No barbarous Pyrate shall false Colors show,
Nor robbing Galleys on salt Billows row.
No Canibal his greedy mouth shall stain
With Humane Blood, squeezed from the Flesh new slain.
Arabian Thieves no more shall hunt for prey,
Nor fierce Bandities rob in trav'ling way.
No warlike Banner in the Field shall wave,
Nor cruel Battle feed the hungry Grave.
No Nation more the glittering Sword shall rear,
Or charge each other with the hostile Spear.
The Art of War shall then neglected lie,
So long as Stars emboss the Sable Sky.
In ruined places goodly Structures are,
To wasted Cities, flocks of Men repair.
Under the Branches of the climing Vine,
Which over-head with clasping Tendrels twine.
The Owner rests secure, none makes afraid,
Or gives disturbance to his peaceful shade.
Swords beat in Plow-shares dig the fertile Earth,
Spears turned to Cickles, reap its fruitful Birth.
Like Eden's Garden does the barren Field,
Great heaps of Plenty to the Dresser yield.
The Deserts now with streams of Water flow,
The stately Pine and Fir Tree in it grow.
The Myrtle Box and Oil-tree here abides,
And lofty Cedars raise their Pyramides,
The Wilderness with fruitful Crop is spread,
Like Sharon where King David's Cattle fed.
The Forest and the solitary Land,
Clothed with Carmel's Glory, joyful stand.
The Hill of Zion, with exalted head,
On top of Mountains stands established.
No Thorn or Brier in her Path does grow,
All Nations to her Worship freely flow.
The ransomed of the Lord that her surround,
With Wreaths of everlasting Joy are crowned,
Sorrow and sighing now shall fly away,
And Songs of Triumph celebrate this day.
God with Defense will all her Glory bless,
The Man of this World shall no more oppress:
The Earth with knowledge of the Lord is spread,
Like the great Sea with Waters covered.
Now Holiness extends her glorious Rays,
And Grace fills up the Duties of these days.
The Sons of Zion shine with Sanctity,
Filled by the Spirit poured from on high.
The Restitution of all things is come,
The trav'ling pains of the Creations done:
Now Saints enjoy their glorious Liberty,
And groaning Creatures are from Bondage free.
The Heavens and Earth, new Robes of Glory wear,
The Creatures all in Eden's dress appeer,
And Righteousness throughout the World will Reign,
So long as Sun shall shine or Moon shall wain.

Nuncius. Nun. SAtan enraged by his overthrows,
With new Attemps assaults his conquering Foes.
And now by flattering Wiles he does pursue,
That which he saw by frowns he could not do.
His deadly Hook under gilt Baits now lies,
As that most likely to obtain his Prize.
Just like the Panther, that his Prey would win,
Conceals his Head, and shows his spotted Skin;
That whilst his Gaudy Colors do invite,
His grisly Visage may not put to flight.
So Satan hopes, by offers large, he may
To hidden jaws of Death allure his Prey.
But all in vain, by Wisdom from on high,
They see where ruin lurks and from it fly.

A Brief account of the intermixture of Providence in our Pilgrimage.
Soul. Body. Bo. COme (my dear Soul) Aurora hangs the Skies,
With Arras bright against the Sun does rise.
The Eastern Hills with welcome day are spread,
Phoebus makes haste to raise his Orient head.
Dark Clouds are fled and left the Heavens fair,
Our way is pleasant, and the perfumed Air.
With various sweets breathed from the flowery Spring,
Does gently fan with Odoriferous Wing.
The cheerful Birds upon green Branches raise
Melodious Notes, and warble forth sweet Lays.
Like the alternate seasons of the year,
So is our Life and Way whilst Pilgrims here.
We have our Winter and our gloomy Days,
And then our Summer with bright chearing Rays,
Sometimes strong Flaws, at other times sweet Gales,
Sometimes dark Clouds, then lucid intervales.
It Is good it should be thus, that so we may
Not faint whilst here, nor yet delight to stay.
Winds purge the Air, dark Clouds are not in vain,
But spend themselves in fructifying rain.
Sharp Frosts do mellow and prepare the ground
To bear that Fruit with which the year is crowned.
The Spring brings forth what Winters Bosom kept,
And Summer ripens what in Autumn's reapt.
Our changes here, if rightly understood,
Are ord'red forth in Wisdom for our good.

So. I Am glad (dear Self) you have so true a sense,
Of that which God in Wisdom does dispense.
Let Us then improve our time, the Winter's gone,
The Spring is come, let us cheerfully go on.
Fair Days and pleasant Ways should mend our Pace,
And quicken forward in our Heavenly Race.

Bo. But who are these (dear Soul) whose nimble Feet,
Make toward us, as if they would us greet.

Temptations arising from Pleasure, Honor, Riches.
Soul. Body. Pleasure. Honor. Riches. Plea. A Merry day we wish you, why so
fast,
Come join with us and take your sweet repast,
The Season, and the flow'ry-mantled Earth,
Invite to take some recreative Mirth.

So. We wish you well, but must improve our day,
Our Pleasure lies in keeping on our way.
We Pilgrims are, in waste we must not spend
That time should help us to our Journeys end.

Plea. What mean you thus to take this course severe,
And tie your selves unto such rules austere.
In curious Gardens stored with choicest Flowers
Go take your Walks, and rest in shady Bowers.
Of Jessemine and Honey-suckle sweet,
Where Philomel the youthful Spring does greet:
There hear the feathered Minstrels caroling,
With chanting Notes teaching their Young to sing;
In heat of day, procure refreshing sleep,
In flowery shades where purling drils do creep;
Go take what pleasure either Streams or Field,
Mountains or Dales, Meadows or Heaths do yield
With pleasing Objects feast your careful Eyes,
Your weary limbs refresh with exercise.
Look how the silver Swan in all her Pride,
With arched Neck through Crystal Streams does slide.
And to the Ozier'd Island flotes in State,
To hatch her Young and to relieve her Mate.
See how the wary Trout that deep did lie,
Springs up to catch the Artificial Fly.
The greedy Pike darts to the trouling Bait,
And being struck, flies when it is too late.
The nimble Hawk no sooner spies his Prey,
But to the Clouds does take his towering way.
And with high Airy Plumes hastens to fling,
The trembling Fowl down from his mounted Wing.
Twice does the doubling Hare trace the same Grounds,
Thrice leaps, to cast off the pursuing Hounds.
The eager Dogs the lost Sent having found,
Open, and make the neighboring Woods resound.
But if these rural Pleasures don't invite,
Repair unto the City for delight,
With Masks and Plays, and Triumphs please your Eyes,
From Feasts and flowing Cups, let Mirth arise.
With Musick's sweetest Airs your Paces measure,
And gratify all Senses with full pleasure.

So. Forbear vain trifl'ing Youth, that only feels
Delight in that which sensual pleasure yields.
Poor empty Joys, that in such ways are had,
Mouths filled with Laughter, whilst the Heart is sad.
Vain Mirth, where Sadness, fained smiles does bring,
And Sorrow's forced against her will to sing.
Not only vain, but vexing such as first
Makes shows to quench, but yet increases thirst
Like the Seawater that at present wets,
Whilst drinking down, but then inflames and frets.
Poor bitter Sweets, Pleasure that with it brings,
A little Honey armed with many Stings.
Short at the best, as by experience found
How many chant unto the pleasant sound:
Of Harp and Organ, and sweet Lessons sing
Unto the well-tuned Viols quav'ring string.
Who in slight Mirth their flying days do spend,
And in a moment down to Hell descend.
Should the condemned Man, whose time is short,
To get his Pardon, spend that time in sport.
Yet many such poor cheated Souls there be,
That play away their opportunity.
Or should those Souls that are with Manna fed,
To feed on Ashes, leave their Heavenly Bread.
No, no, your choicest Sweets are bitterness,
Compared with those Delights their Souls possess.
We have not lost our Pleasures, only chose
Those Fountain Comforts, that through Virtue flows:
It is a pleasure to us to deny,
That which you count your pleasure to enjoy.
And if it is sweet to bid false joys adieu,
What pleasure is it to enjoy the true.
Such as arise from reflect Acts of Grace,
From open Visions of Gods glorious Face;
From precious Promises brought home with power,
From hidden Manna which the Heavens do shower.
From that choice Joy the Comforter does bring,
And that true Peace that does upon it spring.
From that white Stone, engraved with that new Name,
Which none does know but those that have the same
From that sweet witness given tot he Soul,
It Is Name is written in the Heavenly Role.
From hence true pleasure flows, and where possessed,
Is better felt, than by the Tongue expressed.
And if such Pleasure be in a fore-taste,
What will there be when we sit down to feast.
If God to them that seek him will be kind,
How good is he to those that do him find.
If Drops afford such Comfort, then what will
Those Rivers yield, where we shall drink our fill.

Hon. I see your raised thoughts mind higher things,
Come then and soar aloft on Glories Wings:
Go seek the Princes Favor, and reflect
Illustrious Beams, from his benign Aspect.
Leave Paths obscure, mount the Tribunal Chair,
With those Grandees that Tyrian Purple wear.
With Senators assemble in the Gate,
Join Counsels in the great Affairs of State.
Whilst Lanes of bowed Knees your passage grace,
And Heads uncovered press to see your face.
Creep not below, but climb the mount of Fame,
Let high Atchievments blazon forth your Name;
By acts of Prowess raise immortal Glory,
And let your Conquests fill some future Story.
In Triumph ride, through Acclamations loud,
Of Joy and Praise sent from the numerous Crowd.

So. Go try the Bramble, there you need not court,
But find acceptance with a high transport.
You must not think the Olive to seduce,
With trifling things to leave his Fat'ning Juice;
The Fig Tree quit his Sweetness, or the Vine
For gaudy trouble leave his Cheering Wine.
No, these have better things, and so have those
That for their portion Heavenly things have chose:
They know the worth of what they do enjoy,
And will not be cheated with a shining toy;
A glorious nothing, gilded emptiness,
A painted Crown, a dream of Happiness.
Poor transcient Glory, that a smile, a frown,
Quickens and kills, raises and casts down.
That fetches being from that fading breath,
That cannot preserve it self from stroke of death.
But could it last, it is better to sit still,
Then for to rise, and serve another will.
Unstable Honor, whose high Seats expose
Unto the malice of inviduous Foes.
The raging Storms upon the Mountains fly,
Whilst the low Valleys under shelterly.
Mean Shrubs secured are from those fierce strokes,
That rends and fells the lofty spreading Oaks.
Those gallant Colors, waved on highest Masts,
Are often blown away with angry blasts.
Happy's that Man that is not perplex't at all
With care to climb, nor yet with fear to fall.
What Is more uncertain than the Peoples Praise,
That like a flame of crackling Thorns does blaze?
Which on a sudden with great noise does rise,
But strait-way falls, and in dead Ashes lies.
Or which is worse, their fickle Breath does cry,
Hosannah one day, next day Crucify.
What Honor is it Countries to o'rcome,
And lie inslaved to our Lusts at home.
To lead forth Captives from the ensanguin'd Field,
Whilst Captives unto sin our selves we yield.
And armed against us suddenly do bring,
The King of Terrors, with envenomed sting.
True Glory springs from Gods Eternal favor,
The Righteous is more ex'llent than his Neighbor.
It Is those that honor God shall honored live,
He will unto them lasting Honor give.
So as to Saints and Angels, they shall shine
With that same Glory, that survives all time.

Rich. Poor Creatures, fond of Meanness, come be wise,
And learn to value what you now despise.
Join wealth to these, or these by wealth obtain,
The way to Honor and Delight is Gain.
Heap up abundance, and therein content,
Why should your days in strait'ning wants be spent.
By this you shall against all fear provide,
As in a City strongly fortified.
Come tread the Path of Plenty, take your way
To that will shelter in a stormy day.

So. We are not fond of Meanness, for this Path
Is trod by those are truly rich in Faith.
Heirs of a Kingdom which they do pursue,
And leave false Riches to enjoy the true.
They are the mean ones that do meanly choose,
That can for Paris Paradise refuse.
It Is not true Honor that with Money's bought,
Honor should seek out us and not be sought.
Preferments are debased when given forth
Upon account of Wealth and not of Worth.
And when obtained, how with a trifle crossed:
The comfort of it spoiled, it self soon lost.
Whilst Mordecay a bended Knee denies,
Haman's not pleased with all his Dignities.
That Face that smiled upon him, strait does frown,
That Hand which raised him, quickly threw him down.
Nor can he pleasure take, whose troubled Breast
To get and keep, will give his mind no rest.
It Is not in worldly things content is found,
Who farther off, then those that most abound.
Poor Naboth's longed for Vineyard does destroy,
The comfort of what Ahab did enjoy.
True Wealth is not without, but in the mind:
He that has least, may most Contentment find.
The greedy Worldling has no cause to boast,
He that desires little, he has most.
He that has much, and grieves he has no more,
For all his Wealth may be accounted poor.
He is not rich, that greedily aspires,
But he is rich, that boundeth his desires.
Nor is there shelter in this gilded Path,
Riches avail not in a day of Wrath,
They cannot secure us under failing breath,
It Is Righteousness that must preserve from Death.
In vain we trust that in an evil day,
Which makes wings to it self and flies away.
Tyrus, that heaped up Silver as the dust,
In Sea environed Walls, and put her trust
In Gold accumulated as the Mire;
Was left unguarded to the wasting Fire.
Why should we therefore set our hearts upon
That which is not, because so quickly gone.
Why should we load our selves with that thick clay,
Will turn us from, or tire us in our way.
With sorrow pierce our hearts great store to have,
Of that which will not pass beyond the Grave.
We smile, that Pagans send their dead from hence,
With Money in their hands for their expense.
We have no need to heap up so much Dust,
We soon may serve our Wants, never our Lust.
It Is Food and Raiment, with Contentment blessed,
That will suffice to bring us to our rest.
What Is used we do enjoy, the rest lies by,
And only serves to please a careful Eye.
He has enough that has enough to spend,
On what is needful to his Journeys end.

Rich. Come be not so morose for to deny
What we invite you to, before you try.

So. We need not try, for trial has been made;
By one more able, hear what he has said, Sandys his Paraphrase on
Ecclesiastes 2.

Great Works I finished, sumptuous Houses built,
My Caedar Roofs with Gold of Ophir gilt.
Choice Vineyards planted, Paradices made,
Stored with all sort of Fruits, with Trees of shade.
And watered with cool Rivolets that drilled
Along the Borders, these my Fish-pools filled.
For Service and Delight, I purchased
Both Men and Maids; more in my House were bred.
My Flocks and Herds abundantly increast,
So great as never King before possessed.
Silver and Gold, the Treasures of the Seas,
Of Kings and Provinces, foment my ease.
Sweet Voices, Music of all sorts invite
My curious Ears, and feast with their delight.
In greater Fluency no Mortal Reigned,
In height of all my Wisdom I retained.
I had the Beauties which my Eyes admired,
Gave to my heart whatever it desired.
In my own Works rejoiced, the recompense
Of all my Labors was derived from thence.
Then I survay'd all that my Hand had done,
My troublesome Delight beneath the Sun.
What solid Good can Man's Endeavors find,
All is but Vanity and grief of Mind.

Rich. Come let us leave these Hermites to pursue,
Their melancholy Fancies, So adieu.

The Exceptions of the Flesh, as to Self-denial, in reference to the Things of
the World, answered.
Soul. Body. Bo. MY dearest Friend, are we not too precise,
Should we condemn all lawful exercise.
And from black Choler take our scanty measure,
Rejecting all exhilerating pleasure.
Should Honor be so slighted, when we know
It is a Gift, which God's Hand does bestow.
His Hand for Joseph high Preferment wrought,
And from a Prison to a Palace brought.
Where the Egyptian King reserved the Throne,
But left the Rule to Joseph's care alone.
He must in Phar'oh's second Charr'ot ride,
Whilst Bow the Knee, before him, Egypt cried.
Of Jesse's Seed, the youngest Son by Birth,
God raised above the Princes of the Earth.
He from a Sheep-hook to a Scepter goes,
And from a Sheepfold to a Kingdom rose.
God seated Daniel at the Median Helm,
To Rule the Victor's great enlarged Realm.
In casting down, he made him yet more great,
In casting out, preserved him in his Seat.
And after him renowned Mordecay,
Was raised by God to bear the chiefest sway,
Within the Persian Empire next the King,
His Fame throughout the Provinces did ring.
And as for Riches, is it not expressed,
That Abram was with Gold and Silver blessed.
And did not Job for Flocks and Herds excel,
All that upon the Eastern Earth did dwell.
And many more good Men, of whom we read
In Wealth and Honor greatly to exceed.

So. Forbear (dear Self) what is good in these I prise,
We may, yea, sometimes must use exercise.
It Is that which in its season's very good,
As needful as our Physic or our Food.
That tired Mind and Limbs repaired thereby,
May better to their proper work apply.
But herein most in Pleasures do offend,
They love them for themselves, not for their end.
Or which is worse, they take contentment in
Those which are sinful, or prove baits to sin.
Honor's a Blessing, and should be employed
For public good, by those it is enjoyed.
Like raised Clouds they should sweet Showr's dispense,
And fill the Vales with suitful influence.
But many like the Clove-tree drain the Ground,
And leave the place they stand on barren round.
Thus did not Mordecay, of whom we read
He sought the Wealth and Peace of all his Seed.
And Nehemiah, that in high Place stood,
Denied himself, and sought the public good.
Riches are good, when justly got, and when
We rich are toward God and unto Men.
When hungry Bowels are with Food made glad,
And naked Loins are with warm Garments clad,
When Fatherless of our free Bounty share,
And Widows to our Table welcome are.
But few there be that rightly thus employ,
Or justly get the Wealth they do enjoy
How many hoord it up and let it rust,
Or use it but as Fuel to their Lust.
Be not deceived, the Devil often flings
His Hook before us, hid in lawful things;
That by such Artifice he subt'ly may,
Gain to himself his much desired Prey.
Those that of old the Marriage Feast refused,
Sought all by lawful things to be excused.
The Devil did allure by what was good,
From the rich Banquet of Soul-saving Food.
It Is not the Things themselves I do despise,
But that same Mortal Hook that hidden lies.

The Soul encount'ring with various Errors.
Soul. Errors. Error. 1. IF unto Can'an you are journ'ing, stay,
What need you tread such flinty tiresom way.
Here li'th a Path in which you will find more ease,
Keep but your Heart for God, you Men may please.

Soul. It Is better in rough ways to gall our Feet,
Then in smoothed Paths a galled Conscience meet.
Your Latitude does contradict the Word,
Those that seek Men to please, cannot serve the Lord.

Er. 2. Obey your Guids, and if they lead not true,
It Is they shall suffer for it, and not you.

Soul. As well blind Follow'rs, as blind Leaders shall,
Within the miry Ditch together fall.

Er. 3. Here li'th a cleaner Path, a way wherein,
You may be perfect now and free from sin.

Soul. This is soon said, but still has been denied,
By those that took the Scripture for their Guide.
This Paul disowned whilst here, who did excel
Most Saints that do on this side Heaven dwell.
John, the Asserters of it, does condemn,
As self-deceiv'd, having no truth in them.

Err. 4. In this same upper Road your way does lie,
Leave Ordinances, live immediately
On God himself, go not about I pray,
When as to Heaven you have a nearer way.

Soul. Till all the Nations in the World are taught,
Till all the Saints are to perfection brought.
Till Christ himself from Heaven does come again,
The Word of Truth holds forth, these shall remain.
And in the use thereof such Saints were found,
As did for Gifts and Graces most abound.

Err. 5. Come turn this way and take the safest Path,
Would you be justified, mix Works with Faith.
Or lay by Faith, and Feav'n by Works possess,
Why dream you of another's Righteousness.

Soul. And why not lay by Mercy, lay by Grace,
For so it is, where Works do thus take place.
Then Flesh may Glory, and to boasting fall,
If Works instead of Christ, are all in all.

Err. 6. Let Humane Reason guide, a Beam Divine
Of that same Wisdom which in God does shine.
In all your Actions by her Compass steer,
Believe no more than what is in her Sphere.

Soul. Mere Humane Reason, as it cannot perceive,
So neither will it Spiritual Things receive.
Unto the Work of Renovation blind,
Not many Wise, or Learned, do Heaven find.
And those of them that find their way aright,
Are only such, as in Gods Light see Light.

Err. 7. Dispute no farther, for the Church has said,
Here li'th your way, and ought to be obeyed.

Soul. Prove this a true Church first by Scripture Light,
Many pretend thereto that have no right.
Next that she cannot err, in what she says,
Or else I know not how to fix my Faith.

Err. 8. If that same Spirit does in thee abide,
That Scripture wrote, you want no other Guide.
Follow his Dictates, and his Voice obey,
What need you Scripture to direct your way,

Soul. The teachings which the Spirit does afford.
Are for to open and apply the Word.
It is by Scripture Light that he does Guide,
And by that Light is willing to be tried.
He that to Heaven the ready way would find,
Must in the Word the Spirit's teaching mind.

The Souls Morning Meditation upon the Rising of the Sun.
Soul. So. SEe how the Sun in Beauty does appear,
Raising his Head within our Hemisphere:
Like to a Bridegroom in his best Array,
Or as a Prince on his Cor'nation day:
Or the High Priest, whom Silver Trump does call,
To celebrate some solemn Festival:
So with bright Splendour does this Lamp abound,
In Robes of Glory circumvested round.
If it be sweet and pleasant to the sight,
For to behold this great illustrious Light;
How far transcendent will our Pleasure be,
When we the Son of Righteousness shall see.
And by our sight to Glory be transformed,
Like unto that with which he is adorned?
How swiftly does this Golden Lamp ascend,
And his bright Rays throughout the World extend.
Although this Terrene Globe be very great,
Reck'ned in Breadth Seven thousand miles complete?
Yet does this Lamp in largeness far exceed,
From whence we may collect his flying speed.
For in few Minutes from his first access,
To our Horizon, does he forward press.
His vast Diameter, until he rear
The whole thereof within our Hemisphere.
And so runs forward with Gigantick pace,
(Like one refresht with Wine) his joyful Race,
That God who strengthens this unwearied Sun,
Will help his Saints their Heavenly Course to run.
And they that love the Lord with hearts upright,
Shall go forth as the Sun in all his might.
How fleet a thing is Time, when this swift Race,
Is made the measure of its winged pace.
Posting from Morning to Meridian height,
Then flies with trebble shade to call up Night.
So is our Life, our Youthful Morning Sun,
Speeds to the Achme of its full aged Noon.
Then down the Hill to dusky night it hasts
And as it goes, long shades of weakness casts.
Is Time so swift and short, yea shorter yet,
Because our Sun before it is Noon may set.
Then let us reckon up our Time as fast,
And every Moment count it as our last.
And so accounting, see our Work be done,
Before the setting of our posting Sun.
This Prince of Planets largely does dispense,
Throughout the World vivifick influence
To Fruits and Plants, and all things that here grow,
Yea, penetrates unseen to things below:
Producing of those rich Metallic Veins,
Which the dark Intrails of the Earth contains.
Gifts for Delight and Use, his potent Rays,
In plenty through the Universe displays.
If God by this created Light does give
Such Gifts unto his Foes that here do live:
What good and perfect Gifts shall the upright
Receive from God the Father of all Light?
Again, observe when this same luminous Globe,
Retireth from us in his oblique road;
Then frigid Blasts from gloomy Skies prevail,
And nipping Cold with frequent Storms assail.
And when this golden Lamp with-draws his Light,
Dark Clouds invest the long umbrageous Night.
Whilst couchant Beasts rouse from their Savage Cave,
And with fierce steps after their Prey do rave.
So when the Fountain of all Light and Grace
With-draws and hides the Visions of his Face,
Then is it Winter with the troubled Soul,
And pensive thoughts, like Clouds of Darkness role.
Then does the cruel Lion, couched before
In secret Den, with dire Temptations roar.
But as the Sun with cheerful Light does thaw
The frozen Earth, and near unto us draw;
The heart of Man with vernal Joy is glad,
And fragrant Meads with flowery Mantles clad.
Pastures are clothed with Flocks, with Corn the Vales,
And shouting Joy breaks from the Hills and Dales.
So when the Son of Righteousness imparts
His near approaching Beams to drooping Hearts,
Then does sweet Joy their troubled Spirits raise,
And pleasant Fruit crown their reviving days.

The Souls Trials arising from Desertion.
The Soul and her Friend. So. HOw pleasant as an Angel is thy Face,
Like dawning day that sable Night does chase?
I know your Learned Tongue can time a word,
Which may to weary Souls true rest afford.

Friend. To meet you thus far on your way I Am glad,
But troubled at your Looks, to see you sad.
Dear Friend, unbosome to me now your heart,
What help I can, I freely shall impart.

So. I know you will, and therefore shall declare
With open heart, my Troubles what they are.
Once in smooth Seas I spread my well-fill'd Sail,
Running my Course before a pleasant gale.
The Sky was azur'd with the glist'ring Rays
Of Heavens bright Lamp, gilding my peaceful days.
The Stars from Orient Heads did beam forth Light,
Yielding delightful Steerage in the Night.
Then with calm mind could I directions give,
With words in season, weary Souls relieve.
With meekness lapsed ones restore through Grace,
And dislocated Bones set in their place.
The feeble Knees with strength I fortified,
And wandering steps in Paths of Light did guide.
And from my Lips the sad perplexed mind,
By their resolved doubts did comfort find.
Like the ascending Sun I joyful rose,
And with the strong to run my Race I chose.
At Night lay down in Peace with silent Breast,
My closed Eyelids gave refreshing rest.
Then full Assurance yielded this support,
I should with gladness make a happy Port.
But whilst my cheerful Vessel thus did ride
Before the Wind, upon the streaming Tide,
Black Clouds and racking Seas my Joys invade,
Wrapping my weary Soul in Deaths dark shade,
By mighty Tempests drove with leaking knocks,
Threatening to split me on the surly Rocks:
By raging Billows in black Darkness tossed,
My fears begin to give up all for lost.
In short (dear Friend) this is my woeful case,
Those quickening Rays which beamed from that bright Face:
That Glory gives to Heaven, and Heaven here,
Are all withdrawn and wholly disappear.
That Lamp of God that shined upon my Head,
And round about my Path bright Glory shed;
Now cease to afford its chearing Light,
Leaving my mournful Soul in dismal Night.
Unready in her Trials to believe
Those Truths by which she others did relieve.

Fri. Dear Friend, let not desponding thoughts thus move,
Though God may change his Way, yet not his Love.
Nay, out of Mercy he may think it best,
Thy Soul should not on such choice Viands feast.
He sees how aptwe are to grow secure,
To think our Mount unmoved shall endure;
And hence it is he brings in changes here,
To keep our Souls in reverential fear.
He sees how ready now we are to set,
A higher value on our selves than's fit.
How apt we are under bright Beams to slight
Those tempted Souls which want that blessed Sight.
And therefore hides his Face, and thereby shows
That we should friendly sympathize with those
It may be those sweet Joys by Vision brought,
Thou do not truly rate them as they ought.
And now the Price hereof he will inhance,
And teach thee how to value every glance.
It may be God is pleased to try thy Grace,
And therefore for a time with-draws his Face;
To see if Faith and hope will follow on
In Paths of Life, when Sense and Feeling's gone.
And whether thou, when Comforts are away,
Wilt out of Love unto himself obey.
But were it only from his Sovereign Will,
What cause is there in Silence to sit still?
Those Joys in Heaven he will give thee at the last,
Will make amends for all thy Sorrow past.
But yet (dear Soul) remember every Word
That may support unto thy Faith afford.
Consider Light is for the Righteous sown,
Joy for the upright is in furrows thrown.
And though it buried lies there for a Night,
Yet will it spring up by the Morning Light.
Keep then thy Feet and Faith in Wisdom's ways,
And give not up thy Hopes in cloudy days.
But wait on him that sometimes hides his Face
From the beloved Seed of Jacob's Race.

So. Dear Friend, I will consider what you say,
Your solid Words in serious Balance weigh.

Nuncius. Nun. THe wakeful Tempter always on his watch.
Thinks this a likely time his Prey to catch.
And as assaulting Forces, where they spy
The weakest place, there plant their Battery.
So Satan swelled with hope, and filled with rage,
Against the Soul, where weakest, does engage.
But still supporting Grace defeats his power,
And yields assistance in a needful hour.

The Soul Conflicting with the Assaults of Satan.
Satan. Soul. Sat. POor weary Soul, lay by thy laboring Oar,
And run thy Vessel on the quiet shore.
Go take thy Rest upon this pleasant Coast,
Thou do but toil in vain thy Labors lost.

So. It would be lost if I should take up short,
(As thou would have) of my desired Port.
No, here I am resolved my Course to steer,
And if I perish I will perish here.

Sat. In vain thou hop'st this Tempest to outride,
And make thy way both against Wind and Tide.
See thou how sin and suff rings on thee role,
Like mighty Waves ready to sink thy Soul.
How one great Deep, does to another call,
Whilst Water Spouts, with dreadful Noise do fall.

So. It Is no vain hope, for he that does command
To follow him, will help with his right hand.
That Sins too many are, too strong, it is true,
But not for Grace to pardon, or subdue.
And though it be a black and stormy day,
I Will wait on him whom Winds and Seas obey.

Sat. And will thou still to him for help repair,
That hides his Face and shuts out thy Prayer.
Who over Heaven gloomy Clouds has spread,
That neither Sun or Stars may Brightness shed.
Who in his Anger cruel Bow has bent,
And poisoned Arrows in thy Bosom sent.
And on thy-Neck has bound thy sinful Yoke,
And all thy Bones in the place of Dragons broke.
Will Men for Shelter to a Lion fly,
Or wait for Mercy from an Enemy?

So. Thou art that roaring Lion, that do watch,
With hungry Jaws, the simple Soul to catch.
The Enemy of God and all Mankind,
Taking unwearied Steps thy Prey to find.
And having sound, and drawn into thy power,
Make it thy greatest pleasure to devour.
But with the Lord Compassions do abound,
The poor and needy this have always found.
Embarked Jonah from Gods Presence fled,
A dreadful Storm from God strait followed.
In vain the Seamen toil with laboring hand,
To bring their beaten Vessel to the Land.
All that they do can no relief afford,
Until their guilty Fare's cast overboard.
A Whale does strait-way seize him for her Prey,
And to the Roots of Mountains roles away.
Great Deeps his Soul do round about enclose,
Incensed Floods and Waves upon him flows.
In sighs his fainting Soul deep sorrow breathed,
Whilst Reeds about his mournful Head are wreathd.
Three days imbar'd in Jaws of Death he lies,
Yet unto God he looks, for favor cries.
God hears and pities, gives the Fish command,
The Whale makes haste to set him on dry Land.
Thus God is ready to extend his Grace,
Unto poor Souls that seeks his blessed Face.
And when he does his own rebuke for sin,
It Is that he may their Souls to Mercy win.
To pensive ones that do confess their Error,
He Will be a Tower, though now he seems a Terror
That hand that wounds his own, that strikes so hard,
That hand will bind them up, that hand will guard;
And self-abasing Souls shall quickly know
He Will be their Friend, that seems to be their Foe.
If not in God, then where can help be found?
That hand can only cure, that did me wound.
Unto those Arms of Mercy I will haste,
And on free Grace my Soul for ever cast.

Sat. How God deals sometimes with his own, what is this
To the Presumptuous Soul, thou art none of his.
Nor is he thine, do not thy self deceive,
His Arms will not the Hypocrite receive.

So. Should it be so, proud Tempter, it is high time
To hasten to him, that he may be mine.
To cry to God (who ready is to hear)
To make my Heart upright, my Soul sincere.
To drive me to him, God has sent his Rod,
It Is good for me then to draw near to God.

Contemplations suited to the Soul that has found Morning Comforts, after a
Night of sad Desertion and sore Troubles.
Soul. So. FRom the dark Vale where Death enthroned does sit,
From the great Deep, and from the dreadful Pit,
From Caves, that lodge the free among the dead,
From lowest Dungeon, where no Light is shed.
From wandering Maze, where the umbrageous Wood
Is ranged by hungry Lions for their Food.
My Soul is brought, preserved from threatening harm,
To sing the Praises of his glorious Arm.
When on my Soul the mighty Waters pressed,
When breaking Clouds, with thunderclaps distressed,
When overwhelming Terrors on me rolled,
And Pains of Hell upon my Soul took hold;
He from deep Floods my trembling Soul did catch,
From yielding Mud my sinking Feet did snatch.
From Thunder Spouts my struggling Head did shield,
And from Hells Terrors timely help did yield.
His quickening Favor did revive, and save
My fainting Soul from the devouring Grave.
And he whose Mercies always do endure,
Upon a high Rock did my Feet secure.
It Is he that Ashes into Beauty turns,
Anoints with Oil of Joy the Soul that mourns.
That does the Needy from the Dunghill raise,
And Clothes the Pensive with the Robes of Praise.
He with White Garments does the sad adorn,
And turns the shades of Death into the Morn.
Let weary Souls to him address their Cry,
On tender Mercies still by Faith rely.
To them that trust him, shall be Mercy shown,
Although in Deeps at present they are thrown.
For he attends unto the humble Prayer
Of those that to the Throne of Grace repair.
And though amazing Terrors may invade,
They shall be sure to meet with timely Aid.
And he that thinks it fit they should be tried,
When done, their Feet in Paths of Joy will guide.
That so with Songs of Praise, they may advance
His Name, that shines with helping Countenance.
And have thou now my Soul true Comfort found,
And with Salvations are thy Temples crowned?
Improve the Peace thou have obtained at length,
The Joy of God is sent to be thy Strength,
That thou may lively walk unto his praise,
Who does revive thy Soul with quickening Rays.

The outward Man under Weariness and Fears of not holding out, relieved by the
Soul.
Soul, Body. Bo. WHat need is there (dear Soul) of so much haste,
Let Us take more time, I cannot move so fast.

So. Our Christian Life's a Race, and must be run
With active speed, until the Prize be won.

Bo. Is there no smoother Path that may be found,
Then this same rough uneven stony Ground;
That so our laboring Feet relieved may,
With greater ease, run the remaining way?

So. No, no, my dear associate, Wisdom has
Set this before us as our fittest Path,
It Is only they which lawfully do strive,
That shall with Conquest at the Goal arrive.
Then let us with Patience run, and vigorous force
Press forward, till we finish up our course.
These Agonists that strove in Grecian Games,
Once celebrated on Olympic Plains.
That from Elaean Judges sought Applause,
How strictly kept they to Her culean Laws.
The Runners with their nimble Feet did hold
The bounded Tract to the appointed Goal.
With strained Limbs how did they forward thrust
Unto the longed for Mark in Clouds of dust.
And with contending Strife did agonize
To crown their Brows with the desired Prize.
Which being won, the Cities with Renown
Received their Victors through their Walls thrown down.
As if it were inferior to their Sat,
To make the Entrance at the common Gate.
If they with strech'd out Limbs did strive to come,
Encircled with a fading Garland home.
And thought it worth their pains, for sading Breath,
To trumpet forth their Glory here on Earth,
How strictly then should we with flying pace
Press forward daily in our Christian Race,
Where Saints and, Angels our Spectators are,
And the great Judge sits in Tribunal Chair
For to reward the Victors in this Strife,
With an immortal glorious Crown of Life.
Who in the Records of Eternal Fame,
Shall always have an everlasting Name.

Bo. Those Souls are blessed indeed that win the Prize,
Whose Conquest Saints and Angels solemnize.
That enter Heaven with triumphant shout:
But as for me I fear I shall not hold out.

So. Fear not but view that great encircling Cloud
Of Worthies, that with Acclamations loud,
And veiled Crowns, ascribe unto free Grace
Their strength to run and conquer in this Race.
But above all, behold with fixed Eye,
Our great Forerunner Throned and Crowned on high.
Who to the Faint gives power to hold on,
Increases Strength to them whose Might is gone.
It Is he by whom the Work of Faith's begun,
It Is he upholds it, till the Race be run.
Come then, press on, thy Feet are drawing nigh
Unto the Borders of Eternity.
Put forth thy utmost Might, stretch out thy hand,
The Goal's in sight, the Crown does ready stand.

The Souls Meditation upon Eternity.
Soul. So. LOng Age of Ages, how long to demand,
Makes posed Arithmetic, in silence stand.
To reckon up its date, she is not able,
Wants places in her Numeration Table.
Could we together in one sum amass
The Stars of Heaven, and the Piles of Grass.
The numerous Sands that on the Seashore lie,
The Minute Atoms, in the World that fly;
The Drops of Rain and Fleeces of the Snow,
The Grains of Corn that ever yet did grow,
The Leaves that Autumn from the Trees has cast,
The thoughts that through the Heart of Man have past.
This would not make a Measure for to stretch,
Unto its end, or yet its middle retch.
Duration, not divided, by what is past,
Or yet to come, but still the same does last.
Eternal NOW, that always does remain
Wheeling about to the same point again.
A Circle without Radius, that does run
Into it self, beginning not begun.
Immensurable, by the longest Line,
That can be stretched out by aged Time.
Could we a Line of Figures lengthen out,
Enough to gird the highest Sphere about.
And the last number to be reck'ned there,
Stood for the Unites place of Plato's year:
Yet all those Millions would not rise to be
The smallest Fraction in Eternity.
Oh number numberless, unto whose store,
Addition is not able to add more.
Oh endless ever, where we must confess,
Subtraction cannot make it one jot less.
Oh bitter Sin, Oh dear bought Lust,
For which the Soul Eternally is thrust.
From the Supreme and Universal Good,
Into the Torrent of the Sulphurous Flood.
Depart from me, a Sentence full as Dire,
As go you Cursed into Eternal Fire.
If when the Body with the Soul does part,
Such Mortal Pangs and Gripes do seize the Heart?
Who can conceive the Souls convulsive Strife,
In its seclusion from the Spring of Life?
A loss that does in one all Loss express,
Full Separation from all Happiness.
Besides this Loss, cast into burning Deeps,
Where Terror reigns and Sorrow never sleeps.
That without ease or respit, undergo
The constant Rackings of eternal Woe.
Vessels of dreadful Wrath, prepared wide
To hold full measure, swallowed up beside.
Plunged in Gulphs of Sulphurous Whirl-pools bound,
Sinking in Horror, where no Bottom's found.
Perpetually with bitter Anguish tossed,
For misspent Time and golden Seasons lost.
Whose Songs are turned to Scritches, and their Mirth
Into the Pangs of everlasting Death.
Where damned Souls can neither fain or fear
Greater or worser Torments than they bear.
Oh wretched Souls, that in dire Flames must dwell,
Longer than Words can utter, Numbers tell.
That every moment, whilst in liquid Fire,
They burning are, think this must never expire.
That do fetch in, unto each moments pain,
That EVER which in it they must remain:
And add unto their present Misery,
The endless Torments of Eternity.
Oh blessed be those Souls, that through rich Grace,
Are ransomed from this ever dreadful place.
In whom Eternal Life is here begun,
Running through this into the World to come.
Death changes not our State, but the Degree,
Grace here begun, in Heaven shall perfect be.
Where weary Saints enjoy their longed for rest,
And hungry Souls on choicest Dainties feast.
Where Shields and Swords are turned to Harps and Palms,
And Sighs and Sobs to blessed Hyms and Psalms.
Where Saints, with Angels, in sweet comfort sing,
With well tuned Lyres, the Praises of their King.
And there behold that Beatifick Sight,
That fills their Souls with unconceiv'd Delight.
Viewing the highest Object ever praised,
With highest Acts of Understanding raised.
With such clear Views, as infinitely will,
The Soul with perfect Satisfaction fill.
And by the Visions of that Light Divine,
Transform and make them with his Glory shine.
For through the enlivening influence of his Face,
He perfects and draws forth their quick'ned Grace.
Here all imparted Glory that is made known,
They view it so, as that which is their own.
And all the good that from Effects do flow,
They in the first and chiefest Good, do know.
And know it so, as to enjoy the same,
At the Spring Head, from whence all Goodness came.
No Good shall blessed Souls desire, or will,
But at this Fountain shall receive their fill.
United always, to that Good supreme,
Which evermore into their Souls shall stream.
For Saints shall have with him a perfect Union,
And so all Good from him in full Communion.
Oh happy State, where no dark shade does fall,
For Glory here is always vertical.
No sable Cloud shall once obscure their Sun,
No Night or Sleep shall hinder Joys begun.
No long continuance shall abate Delight,
Nor full Enjoyment dull our Appetite.
But still Desires as large, Delights as fresh,
As the first moment we did them possess.
No Sorrow shall those blessed Souls annoy,
That enter once into their Masters Joy.
Not only that same Joy their Master gives,
But that same Joy in which their Master lives.
Not only filled with their Masters Bliss,
But swallowed up in that same Joy of his.
Oh blessed Ever, where all Joys remain
Full and unchanged, Eternally the same.
The Comforts that we do enjoy below,
Successive are, and ebb as soon as flow.
In those are past, we have no interest,
Of what is to come we are not yet possessed.
Only the present's ours, if that we may
Call that our own, which fleets so soon away.
But in Eternity it is not so,
Our Comforts there, no alteration know.
Thou shall not then desire more than thou have,
Nor can thou wish for any Comfort past.
But all together shall enjoyed be,
And that unchanged unto Eternity.

Glad and welcome Tidings to the Soul.
Soul. Angels. So. WHat is it these swift Messengers do bring,
Cutting the Plyant Air with golden Wing?
Whose Faces as the flaming Lightning show,
And Garments wear, white as the bleached Snow.
Their dazzling Brightness fills with trembling fears,
Though in their cheerful Looks good News appears.

Ang. Fear not, for we your Guardian Angels are,
And have from Heaven glad Tidings to declare.
Victorious Soul, successful Sword lay down,
And now put on, the Star-enchased Crown.
Come set thy Feet in this triumphant Close,
Upon the Neck of all thy conquered Foes.
Thy Warfar's finished, and thy Race is run,
The day's thy own, the glorious Prize is won.
The flaming Sword that guardeth all the ways
Unto the Tree of Life, with fiery blaze
Is ready to give way to thee, choice Soul,
As having right to eat without control.
Make haste, ascend with us, and take thy share,
With Crowned Saints that Verdant Palms do bear.
Drink of those Streams of Bliss which he bestows,
At whose right hand Rivers of Pleasure flows.
Inherit all things in that good Supreme,
From whose bright Face all Happiness does beam.

So. Oh welcome News, more welcome unto me,
Than Trumpet sounding to a Jubilee.
But what am I, that Heavenly Powers should come
For to convey me, to my longed for home.
I Am ready blessed Guard, only I find
Disturbing thoughts to leave my Friend behind.
We long have lived together, and have fared
Alike in Joy, alike in Sorrow shared.
We hand in hand waded the Vale of Tears,
And jointly fought and wrastled through our Fears.
Have been but one, and must we severed be?

Ang. Yes for a while, its by Divine Decree:
And but a while, yea soon shall meet again,
And never part but always one remain.
And one invested in that happiness,
Which thou before art going to possess.
Go take thy leave, with Comfort cheer thy Friend,
On Cherubs Wings to Glory then ascend,
Unto that House of Bliss not made with hand,
Which in the Heavens Eternally does stand.
Into whose gladsom Windows shine always
The joyful Beams of everlasting day.

The Soul and Bodies mutual Valediction to each other.
Soul, Body. So. Farewell, dear Body, now for ever blessed,
From weary Labor take thy lasting rest.
Fear not within this shade to lodge thy Head,
Thy blessed Sav'our has perfumed thy Bed;
And in the Morn will raise thee with his Voice,
That we united may in him rejoice.
Corruption shall in Incorruption rise,
Stripped from the Rags of all Infir mities.
No Pain, no Sickness, shall this State invade,
Nor meager Death, threaten with gloomy shade:
But Mortal, puts on Immortality,
And conquered Grave yields up the Victory.
No Tears from henceforth shall bedew thine Eyes,
Nor shall sad thoughts within thy Breast arise.
Dishonor shall be rasi'd in Glory bright,
With radiant Beauty in meridian height.
Each part proportioned in right Symetry,
And all things tempered in sweet Harmony.
Frail Weakness shall in mighty power appear,
That so it may a weight of Glory bear;
And with unwearied Strength his Praise resound'
That gave forth Grace, and Grace with Glory crowned.
This Natural Body shall from Dust arise,
A Spiritual Body, as to Properties.
Enabled in an instant for to fly,
Beyond the Unequal of the spangled Sky.
And with the Soul in highest Acts Divine,
With cheerfulness for ever fully join.
Rest then in hope, thy weary Eyelids close,
Lie down in Peace, and take thy sweet repose.
In Jesus sleep, thy Union still does hold,
Though thou return'st again to thy first mold,
Each Atome of thy Dust he will safely keep,
Till he shall raise thee from this silent Sleep.
And by his Power, this Clod of Earth calcine,
That it may like the Sun in Splendour shine.
And this vile Body in Corruption sown,
Change like that glorious Body of his own.
That as the Earthly Image thou did bear,
So in the Heavenly thou may then appear.

Bo. Farewell, dear Soul, Oh blessed be that Name,
That did infuse thee in this Terrene Frame.
Praised be the great Creator, that informed
This Body with thee, thee with Grace adorned.
Whereby my wandering Feet were guided right,
From dark Maeanders into Paths of Light.
And though to Dust I must again return,
Yet I shall rise in Glory from my Vrn.
If Chemist can that Gold extract again,
They mixed with other Metals, to a Grain.
And if opacous heaps of Dust and Sand,
May be transmuted by a skilful hand,
Into such Bodies which transparent shine;
As does appear in Glasses Christaline.
Why then should foolish Atheists think it strange,
That God should gathered Dust to Glory change.

So. Once more farewell, until we meet aagain,
We that together suffered then shall reign.
As thou dear Friend, with me the Cross did bear.
So thou with me the Crown of Life shall wear.
We that together here in Tears have sown,
Shall reap those Joys to Mortals yet unknown.
Oh blessed State for worthless ones prepared,
Where God himself becomes their great Reward:
As causally he gives all Good to his,
So formally himself will be their Bliss,
The Great, Supreme, and Fountain Good, will be
Immediately our full Felicity.

Bo. Again farewell, I shall no longer be,
As I have been, a hindrance unto thee.
When next we meet, I shall be tuned to sing,
The high raised Praises of our Heavenly King.
No Darkness, Dullness, shall this Heart arrest,
No straitning Hardness any more molest.
But then unwearied I, for ever shall,
With thee dear Soul and Powers Angelical,
Be exercised in Services Divine,
As freely as the cheerful Sun does shine.

THE EPILOGUE.
THe Soul, by Angels guarded, swiftly flies,
Beyond the reach of all her Enemies;
To take Possession of that Mansion bright,
Which is the Portion of a Saint in Light.
And after short and light Affliction bears
Triumphant Palm, and Crown of Glory wears.
On peaceful Throne, from weary Labor rests,
On Beatifick Vision always feasts.
Encircled round with all the Bliss above,
Lodged in the Bosom of Eternal Love.
The Happiness whereof who can declare,
If thou would farther know it, get a share.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS POEM.
THe Soul Contemplating upon the powerful Work of Effectual Vocation, page 1.
The Souls Epithalamium, or Nuptial Joy, page 2. The Nuncius, or Interpreter of
the Scenes, page 4. 8. 41. 52. 64. The Diffidence of the Flesh, arising from
Difficulties reasoned against by the Soul, page 5. The Soul preparing for
Trials, page 10. Temptations arising from Old Companions, page 15. She Souls
improvement of time in Meditation, upon Light, the first days Work, page 19.
Trials arising from Displeasure of Parents, page 21. The Souls Evening
Meditation, page 26. Meditations upon the Moon, page 30. Trials arising from
cruel Mockings, page 32. The Souls Specch to Revilers, page 38. The Complaints
and Fears of the Flesh removed, particularly concerning Persecutors, page 42.
Gamaliel's Specch to Persecutors, page 46. The Soul administering Cordials to
the outward Man, to prevent Faintings under Sufferings, page 53. The Soul so
lacing her self in those Apprehensions she has of the future Peaceable Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, page 57. A brief Account of the intermixture of Providence in
our Pilgrimage, page 65. Temptations arising from Pleasure, Honor, Riches,
page 66. The Exceptions of the Flesh, as to Self-denial, in reference to the
Things of the World, answered, page 82. The Soul encountering with various
Errors, page 86. The Souls Morning Meditation upon the rising of the Sun. page
90. The Souls Trials, arising from Desertion, page 94. The Soul Conflicting
with the Assaults of Satan, page 100. Contemplations suited to the Soul that
has found Morning Comfort, after a Night of sad Desertion. page 104. The
outward Man under Weariness and Fears of not holding out, relieved, page 107.
The Souls Meditation upon Eternity, page 111. Glad and welcome Tidings to the
Soul, page 118. The Soul and Bodies mutual Valediction to each other, page 121.
FINIS.

