NARCISSUS, OR, The Self-Lover.

By JAMES SHIRLEY.

Haec olim --

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Sign of the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXLVI.

NARCISSUS OR, The Selfe-lover.
1.
Fair Echo rise, sick-thoughted Nymph awake,
Leave thy green Couch and Canopie of Trees,
Long since the quiristers oth' wood did shake
Their wings, and sing to the bright Suns uprise:
Cay has wept over thy Couch, and progressed,
Blusheth to see fair Echo still in bed.
2.
If not the Birds, who 'bout the Coverts fly,
And with their warbles charm the neighboring air,
If not the Sun, whose new Embroiderie,
Makes rich the leaves that in thy Arbors are,
Can make thee rise; yet Lovesick Nymph away,
Thy young Narcissus is abroad to day.
3.
See not far off Cephisus son appears,
No Nymph so fair in all Diana's train,
When like a huntresse she for chase prepares;
His Bugle-horne, tied in a silken chain,
And mounted on a comely Steed, which knows
What weight he carries, and more proudly goes.
4.
Pursue him timorous Maid, he moves apace,
Favonius waits to play with thy loose hair,
And help thy flight; see how the drooping grass
Courts thy soft tread, thou child of Sound and Air,
Attempt and over-take him, though he be,
Coy to all other Nymphs, he will stoop to thee.
5.
If thy face move not, let thy eyes express,
Some Rhetoric of thy tears to make him stay;
He must be a Rock, that will not melt at these,
Dropping these native Diamonds in his way:
Mistaken he may stoop at them, and this
(Who knows how soon?) may help thee to a kiss.
6.
If neither love, thy beauty, nor thy tear
Invent some other way to make him know,
He need not hunt, that can have such a Dear.
The Queen of Love did once Adonis woe.
But hard of soul, with no persuasions won,
He felt the curse of his disdain too soon.
7.
In vain I counsel her to put on wing,
Echo has left her solitary Grove,
And in a Vale, the Palace of the spring,
Sits silently attending for her love;
But round about to catch his voice with care,
In every shade and Tree, she hid a snare.
8.
Now do the Hunts-men fill the air with noise,
And their shrill horns chafe her delighted care
Which with loud accents give the wood a voice,
Proclaiming Parley to the fearful Dear:
She hears the jolly tunes, but every strain,
As high and musical, she returns again.
9.
Roused is the game, pursuit does put on wings,
The Sun does shine, and guild them out their way:
The Dear into an o're-growne Thicket springs,
Through which he quaintly steals his shine away.
The Hunters scatter; but the Boy o're-throwne
In a dark part of the wood complains alone.
10
Him, Echo lead by her affection found,
Joy'd (you may guess) to reach him with her eye;
But more, to see him rise without a wound,
Who yet obscures her self behind some Tree:
He vexed exclaimes, and asking, where am I?
The unseen Virgin answers, here am I.
11.
Some guide from hence; will no man hear, he cries?
She answers in her passion: O man hear.
I dye, I dye, say both; and thus she tries
With frequent answers to entice his ear
And person to her Court, more fit for love,
He tracts the sound, and finds her odorous Grove.
12.
The way he trod was paved with Violets,
Whose azure leaves do warm their naked stalks,
In their white double Ruffes the Dazies jet,
And Primroses are scattered in the walks:
Whose pretty mixture in the ground declares
Another Galaxie embossed with stars.
13.
Two rows of Elmes ran with proportioned grace,
Like natures Arras to adorn the sides,
The friendly Vines their loved Barks embrace,
While folding tops the checkerd groundwork hides
Here often the tired Sun himself would rest,
Riding his glorious Circuit to the West.
14.
From hence delight, conveyes him unawares
Into a spacious green, whose either side
A Hill did guard, whilst with his Trees like hairs.
The Clouds were busy binding up his head:
The flowrs here smile upon him as he treads,
And but when he looks up, hang down their heads*
15.
Not far from hence, near an harmonious Brook,
Within an Arbor of conspiring Trees,
Whose wilder Boughs into the stream did look,
A place more suitable to her distress.
Echo suspecting that her love was gone,
Her self had in a careful posture thrown.
16.
But Time upon his wings had brought the Boy
To see this lodging of the aerie Queen,
Whom the dejected Nymph espyes with joy,
Through a small Window of Eglantine;
And that she might be worthy his embrace,
Forgets not to new dress her blubbered face.
17.
With confidence she sometimes would go out,
And boldly meet Narcissus in the way:
But then her fears present her with new doubt,
And chide her over-rash resolve away.
Her heart with over-charge of love must break,
Great Juno will not let poor Echo speak.
19.
Ungentle Queen of heaven, why was thy curse
So heavy on this Virgin? Jove comprest
Not her, and must her Destiny be worse
Then theirs that met her flame? thy angry breast
Holds not in all the list a blacker doom,
Better transform the maid, then make her dumb.
20.
Thy jealousy was sin, above what she
Was guilty of: But she is wife to Jove;
For that in heaven must there no Justice be?
Or did thou find this cruelty, for her love
To this coy Lad, whom in the Book of Fate
Thou did foresee thy self should love too late?
21.
Thou tedious to thy self, not being fair,
To whom thy wakefull jealousy succeeds
A greater curse; when mortals jealous are,
They Are cured to know their faith abused, what seeds
For some act worse than hers, grow up in thee,
At once to doubt, and know Joves perjurie?
22.
But still this Nymph was innocent, reverse
Thy rash decree, repentance is no sin
In heavenly natures; but I vain rehearse
Thy story of thy hate: it is not in
Poor Eccho's power to Court the Boy, with more
Than smiles or tears, and his last breath restore.
23.
Narcissus now collects his scattered sense,
He finds himself at loss, drawn thither by
Imagined answers to his grief, from whence
That he may find some surer guide, he will try
His Bugle-horne, whose found was understood,
But drew no great compassion from the wood.
24.
Only, so soon as he dispateh'd the air,
At her own Bower Echo received the noice;
Every thing helped to bring the message near,
And the wind proud to wait upon the voice;
When she returned a cheerful answer, knew
The way again, and with loud music flew.
25.
Narcissus glad that such return was made,
And flattred by his over-busie ear,
Was soon directed to the Virgins shade,
Without a thought to find a fair Nymph there:
Nor did he see the maid, for she, so soon
As he appeared, found passage to be gone.
26.
The Boy inquisitive looks round with fear,
But could see none to make addresses to,
Nor observes any print of foot-step there,
The flowers unprest his modest forehead view,
And court his stay; the trees and every thing
Give him a silent welcome to the spring.
27.
Amazed what this solitude should mean,
And wondering at the sound that did invite him
So late, to that fair desert, a new scene,
With a most curious Arbor does delight him,
Who now to please his late surprised eyes;
Whilst they do gaze, down on a bank he lies.
28.
And now does every object show what spell
It has upon his senses, too much sight
Deprives him of his eyes, a mist does dwell
About 'em, and by soft degrees invite
The Boy to slumber, which glad Echo spies,
And while he dreams, keeps centry with her eyes.
29.
In silence she approaches where he lay,
With his arms chained cross upon his breast;
His silken Bonnet slilding, did betray
A face, which all the Nymphs did call the best.
A Bank his Pillow was, the flowers his sheet,
His Blanket air, the trees his Coverlet.
30.
Sometimes the wind befriends a tender bough,
Part of his leavie Canopie, which hides
The subject of all wonder, his white brow,
And helps it nearer to obtain a kiss:
Which once enjoyed, away the twig does skip,
Not daring to be taken at his lip.
31.
While taller boughs hover about his head,
And justle one another for their view;
The humble branches are enamoured,
And have their short carresses with him too.
Thus all conspire, him several ways to woe,
For whose love only they delight to grow.
32.
Echo at every look feels new desires,
And wishes that he were Endymion,
For whom in her most glorious star attires,
Often in her Nightgown came the Lovesick Moon,
To Latmos sacred Hill, when for his sake,
Whilst he did sleep, she would ever wish to wake.
33.
But this she soon revokes, her love will bear
No rival thoughts, no competition.
The Queen of heaven must have no interest here;
This Beauties Empire must be all her own:
Thus while she all embraces, her desires
Conspire but to enlarge her Funeral fires.
34.
Her eye takes in more flame now, than before,
Gazing improves her loves perfection,
Whose every part rises a silent woer,
And the most taking presence does put on;
Sweetly enticing her delighted sense,
To lose her self in every excellence.
35.
One while she thinks all but a cozening dream,
And him but some fantastic mockery:
It Is too much happiness if he be the same,
And she the Nymph that she was wont to be:
If she sleep not, who blessed more than she:
Yet if she dream, awake she would never be.
36.
How could his hair, so many finest threads
Of gold, but make a net to catch her sight?
How could she trace his brow? or see those lids,
Whose either Ivorie box shut up a light
To travelers, more cheerful, than the star
That ushers in the day, but brighter far?
37.
She with her danger does these parts admire,
But loves 'em more: another flame and art
May praise, her love belongs to her own fire,
And is the office proper to her heart.
But Echo has not done, for she pursues
Dangers, above what she at distance views.
38.
She Has yet but exercised her wondering eye
Upon his wealthy cheek, his brow, his hair,
Another sense the Nymph will satisfy;
She thinks his heavenly lips forgotten are:
Which now she boldly tastes, and at first kiss,
Concludes, there is no other heaven but this.
39.
The lips that will not open to praise his,
She wishes may be closed eternally
These freely touched, are able to entice
The Soul to lose its immortality.
The Gods may boast Ambrosia alone,
But she feeds on a dew above their own.
40.
Often does she kiss, as often does she see,
A fresher blush dye over his Coral gate,
Whose close enjayles his tongue, and seems to be
Ashamed, the maid is so insatiate.
But speak he cannot, though she do him wrong,
Her door, and his do double bar his tongue.
41.
But stay rash Echo, see what thou have done;
His lips, that kissed themselves like two Rose-leaves,
Grow pale oth' sudden, thy impression,
Them of their blushing modesty bereaves.
His blood will be required of you, I fear;
And see some drops upon your lip appear.
42.
And will thou still (forgetful Nymph) pursue
Thy wanton touches? all the blood is gone:
What of his cheek will thou be murderer too?
Thinking the others Sanguine thither run?
Alas, there is but of its own, apart,
Fear has sent back the rest unto his heart.
43.
Leave shameless Echo, leave a little here,
Another time to enrich thy lip withal;
For thy own sake this cruelty forbear,
Do think the guilt of such a blood is small?
But it is the last she fears, and cannot tell
Better, than with a kiss to take farewell.
44.
But use thy freedom, I Will not blame thee now,
Thou know his stubborn dispostion,
Hasten thy kisses then, and take enough
To serve thee for an age, ere thou have done:
And when thou have took all but one, foresee
Thou be a taking that, eternally.
45.
But Echo needs no counsel to proceed,
Fearing too soon Narcissus should awake.
She plies his lips, as if to make them bleed,
Were to restore the color she did take.
But mark what follows this offense? his eyes
Open by degrees, and she thence guilty flies,
46.
It was a cowardice to steal away,
Not daring to avouch what she had done;
Fugitive Lover, thou had better stay,
The Boy's alone, and put fresh beauty on;
Nor do thou wisely maid pursue thy choice:
For Echo seldom goes without a noisr.
47.
But she is gone, and the fair youth is risse,
Suspicious that he felt some person there;
Then busily he looks about the trees,
Whose boughs would guide him on the way to her;
Directed by the wind, at last he found,
The beauteous Nymph laid careless on the ground.
48.
Amazed, that such a presence should remain
In such an unfrequented place, as this:
He takes the wisest-counsell of his brain,
In supposition she some goddess is:
And when he had devote submission paid
To her, this with a trembling voice he said.
49.
Celestial dweller, sure thou art no less,
Such brightness never knew mortality:
Or if thou be'st a mortal, I may guess
There are no gods, nor heaven, if gods there be,
Thou do excel; and if a heaven, it is clear,
That here it is, because thou art not there.
50.
Yet here it cannot be, for I am here
Conscious, that I am wretched, and alone:
If this be heaven, I wish my self elsewhere;
All joys inhabit heaven, but here are none;
For if true joy exceed the name of things,
We must deduce them from the higher springs.
51.
Where am I then? alas I cannot tell,
Whether in earth, or hell; if earth it be,
Then it is both; yet can it not be hell,
For that cannot be capable of thee.
Beside, if Sages do not hell belly,
In hell, I sure should have more company.
52.
But I do walk this Labyrinth alone,
And this adds to the languish of my heart,
That in this sad consinements, I have none
Will join his misery, and take a part.
I never yet provoked the high heavens so,
That they should mark me out alone to woe.
53.
With many more, as late I hunting was
In this unlucky wood, I know not where
I lost my train, ill fortune, and the place,
Conspiring with my horse to leave me there.
Since when endeavoring my self to find,
I might as well o're-take, and stay the wind.
54.
Fair goddess, then inform me, where I am,
And with thy kind and safe direction,
Convey a lost man thither, whence he came:
Or if not thither, to a place more known:
Nay into any other wilderness,
There is a path from any place, but this.
55.
Then shall the Nymphs, for they affect my name,
Build thee a glorious Temple for this deed,
Wherein they shall a stately Altar frame,
Which shall not with the tender first-lings bleed;
They shall present fresh Chaplets, which their love
Shall set on fire, and their sighs Incense prove.
56.
Echo who all the while attentive sat,
And heard the music of his passion,
But held first pity due to her own fate,
Yet knew not with what art is should be done,
Rallies her wiser thoughts, and while he stays
Expecting answer, to her self she says;
57.
What shall poor Echo do? I want a voice
To tell him what I am, how I have loved;
Juno, thy curse was an unhappy choice,
Some other punishment thou might have proved.
Revoke this cruel doom, a power restore
To my chained tongue, I Will never ask thee more.
58.
Mean time, like a pale prisoner at the Bar,
Oppressed more with fear, than his own chains,
(These of the feet, those the head troubles are)
Suspecting much her silence, he complains
In smothered sighs, and 'cause they not prevail,
Look, and you will see a tear is breaking jaile.
59.
The Nymph in pity of his grief, put on
Her stock of smiles, and love in either eye,
Courts him to shine, the Majesty is gone
That frighted him; and now a frestier dye,
Dawnes in his cheek, and his own eye so near,
New burnisht drew up the complaining tear.
60.
Echo now thinking she had won the prize,
Seeing all clouds clear up, and in his brow
The milkie path of heaven again, his eyes
Sparkling out heavenly fire, which even now
Peep't through the brine of sorrow, came once more,
Boldly to kisle her convert Paramour.
61.
But Echo mist her aim, for he went back,
And with his hand checked her unruly one,
As such addresses did good manners lack,
She else perhaps might an embrace have stolen:
Angry he was, a second knowledge now
Appears too plain upon his rugged brow.
62.
Look how some infant by the Parent beat,
For having played the wanton with her breast,
Afraid to cry looks pale, some pearly wet,
Swelling to peep out of her watery nest,
Shrinking his pretty lip, hangs down the head,
His red to pale, his pale converts to red.
63.
So fared poor Echo in this ecstasy,
Whose trembling blood although it had forsook
Her cheek, was ignorant yet where to be,
Fear had detrowr'd the beauty of each look,
And had not some divine relief been sent,
She had settled there her own pale mounment.
64.
But unexpectedly her tongue releast,
By Juno's own compassion to the maid,
whose sufferings in love her wrath appeared,
Gave Echo a new life, who thought to have said
Within her heart; proud boy, thou have done thy worst;
But found her voice, a clear one, as at first.
65.
Then wisely fearing to have called him proud,
Could be no argument to make him kind,
She thought to cure him with a Palinode,
Saying her heart was of another mind:
And thought him gentle, yet some spirits gained;
Unto the boy, thus she at last complained.
66.
Mankind, from henceforth must not nature call,
An equal mother, fondly to bestow
Upon thee one, her beauties stock, her all,
And others by her empty hand undo.
For though not eldest, she has made thee heir,
And thou, above thy numerous brethren, fair.
67.
But too much sweetness is ill placed upon
A stubborn heart: A Panther and a Dove;
Cruel and fair, were never meant for one:
Resign thy beauty, or else put on love.
Thou were unkind Narcissus, to deny,
Thy self the office of a courtesy.
68.
What was a kiss? the rape of such a Treasure
What Tyrant were he Judge, would call a sin?
Thou can not loose thy lip, but find a pleasure:
Come let us now, though late, loves war begin;
And meet me boldly, for one kiss of thine
I Will give a thousand: Lov's Exchequers mine.
69.
If thou be scrupulous, I will not pay,
Thou shall have half in earnest, if thou please:
Or if not so, I ask no longer day
To number the whole sum, before I cease:
And at the total, if thy lip repine,
I Will trebble all, to have one more of thine.
70.
But whither does suspicion draw thy eye?
Thou may commit thy self to silent Groves,
The listening Trees grooms of my chamber be,
This Air close Secretary to our loves.
Be not too coy then to receive a kiss,
Thou might have kissed me twenty times'ere this.
71.
Come sit thee down upon this bank a while,
And let us sport, as other lovers do.
The heaven in gold, the earth in green does smile,
My heaven on earth, prithee do thou so too.
Unwreath thy arms, and with an amorous twine.
Girdle my waste, whilst I in circle shine.
72.
My shady Province, walled about with trees,
The wealthy currents that devide the Land,
Shall give up all their treasure to thy eyes:
Pleasure it self shall spread at thy command,
Her most desired soul, and thou as free
As air, shall move, and share all bliss with me.
73.
If thou will hunt, the Lion and the Pard
Shall Every morn nnto the Chase invite thee.
The Boar and Panther when thou art prepared,
Shall play before thy Spear, and never fright thee:
Bleed any Beast, hunt what thou likest most,
All wild shall tame before thee as thou go.
74.
See how the trees bow their exalted heads,
And not a shrub but sign of gladness bears,
Which else would shrink into their Earthy beds,
Or through their Bark break out in gummy tears;
And for thy absence weep out all their Rind,
Proud if they have for thee their soul resigned.
75.
The Wind, thy Herald flies about the Groves,
Aloud proclaiming thee the wood-Nymphs King,
Snatching up odours as be whistling roves,
At thy hand to unlade them from his wing.
The Silvans friske about, while Nymphs prepare
A Rosy Garland to o're-top thy hair.
76.
Shepherds shall all the day new pastimes spring.
A Mask of Satyrs shall beguile the night:
The choicest Birds shall to the Anticks sing,
The slarres grow brighter to behold the sight:
Yet these but shadows of the mirth, we will prove,
If thou will stay, and be thy Eccho's love.
77.
I have a Cloister over-looks the Sea,
Where every morning we secure from fear,
Will see the Porpise and the Dolphins play,
And all the wonders that in habit there,
Where many a bark into the Clouds does leap,
While Surges caper round about the Ship.
78.
Lovely Narcissus prithee stay with me,
If thou do thirst, from every Spring shall rise
Divinest Nectar, and thy food shall be
The glorious Apples of Hesperides:
A Nymph shall be thy Hebe, of thou need
Shall have another for thy Ganimede.
79.
Feel how my Pulses beat, my breasts swell high:
Come, come be not so modest pretty one;
Why do thou turn that beavenly cheek from me;
Who but thy self would such a blessing shun?
Those frowns will discompose thy beauty quite,
My lips do blush in daring thee to fight.
80.
Prethes unlock thy words sweet treasury,
And rape me with the music of thy tongue,
But let no accent touch upon Deny,
This will thy beauty, and my passions wrong.
I Will rather praile thy silence, it may prove
What Lovers use to expound, consent to love
81.
The Boy seems pleased, and here begins to break
Into a language, extasied the maid,
By her own hearts dictamen he did speak:
And if she asked him love, he loved he said,
She darts a glance, and he returns a smile,
She sees, and surfets on his lips the while.
82.
But soon these Sunbeams vanished, all his smiles
Were feigned, to get some knowledge how to quit
The wood when she not moved with those wiles,
Told him all information was unfit
Against her self; at this swift as the wind,
Away he flies, but leaves his frown behind.
83.
Echo laments his absence, and in vain
Calls him again unto her amorous wars,
She has too sure a proof of his disdain:
She sighs and curses her malignant stars;
And while she chides the Fate that gave her birth,
Her eyes make poor themselves, to enrich the earth.
84.
Oh that I never had seen his face (quoth she)
That ignorant of the sweetness, I mignt rest
In supposition, what the blisle might be:
My knowledge has betrayed me to the best;
And by acquaintance with so much delight,
I find a new flame in my appetite.
85.
Justice, thou dreadful Queen Ramnusia,
Punish with sorrow my contemners pride,
And by some strange and most prodigious way,
Let him the weight of thy reverige abide.
And since to me, his heart a Rock has proved,
Let him so love at last, and dye unlov'd.
86.
Echo has spent her sting, Narcissus now
Has got the top of an aspiring hill,
Whose site commands the Country round to view
Some tract, to lead him from the place, but still
In vain he does employ his searching eyes,
Through thick embracing woods, no path he spies.
87.
Wounded with objects that no comfort bring,
He might conclude his fortune at the worst,
Had he not seen hard by a goodly spring,
And thither he descends to quench his thirst.
O do not taste ( Narcissus) hence will flow,
What will thee more, thou thy past fate undo.
88.
Thy eyes betray thee, and are sorrows spies,
Contain thy feet, thy danger is beneath,
Run not quick-sighted to a Precepice,
A blind man cannot miss his way to death.
Thy liberty was all thou lost before,
The Nymphs too soon may thus thy death deplore.
89.
Choose any other fountain: hark and fear,
The Birds are singing Dirges to thy death;
Does not a sooty Raven strike thine ear
From an high Oak tuning her fatal breath?
A mighty cloud obscures the Suns bright eye,
Not willing to behold thy Tragedy.
90.
And yet these move thee not, then reach the stream,
And meet thy blacker Destiny, the Sun
Is bright again, wrath burns in every beam,
And guilds the Scene of thy destruction:
Each sullen wind is in his prison penned,
Least with their murmr it the Spring offend.
91.
No portion of a Birds forsaken nest,
Fell from the Bows to interrupt the clame,
No withered leaf did in his fall molest
The stilnesle of it, smooth as settled balm;
But Crystal less transparent. Such a mirror,
So formed could only show disdain his error.
92.
And now Narcissus humbled on the grass,
And leaning with his breast upon the brinke,
Looks into the water, where he spies a face,
And as he did incline his head to drink;
As fair as countenance seemed to meet with his,
Offering to entertain him with a kiss.
93.
Giving a little back, he does admire
The beauty of the face presented to him,
Thinking at first some water-Nymph was there,
And rising from her silver Couch to woe him:
Yet Court she cannot whom she did surprise,
Never from water did such flames arise.
94.
His heart glowes in him. Punishment fulfills:
Love leaps into full age, at the first hour,
New wonders like the waves, with rouling hills
Follow his gazes; all that loved before,
Have flung their gathered flames into his breast,
Fit him for Love, a Sacrisice and Priest.
95.
But stricken with his own, his burning eyes
Are only thirsty now; he drinks apace
Into his soul the shadow that he sees,
And dotes on every wonder of the face.
He stoops to kiss it, when the lips half way
Meet, he retreats, and the other steals away.
96.
He, moved at the unkindnesse which he took
By his own teaching, bows himself again,
The other meets him in the silent brook,
They spy again, but he cannot refrain
To Court whom he desires, and at his talk,
The lips within the water seem to walk.
97.
And every smile does send his own again,
This cheeres him, but he cannot hear a sound
Break from the watrie prison, and he then
Complains a fresh, that his unhappy wound
Admits no cure, and as he beats his breast,
The Conflict under water is expressed.
98.
What e're thou art, come forth, and meet me here
He cries; why do deceive me with a look?
What means that that imitution? come near,
Leap from the depth of thy imprisoning brook,
Fold not thy arms like mine, or smile on me,
Unless I may enjoy thy company.
99.
But whether is my wiser reason fled?
It is the shadow of my self, I see,
And I am cursed to be enamoured,
Where did I lose my soul? or where am I?
What god shall pardon me this sin, if here,
I must become my own I dolater?
100.
Thou fatal Looking-glass, that do present
My self to me, (my own incendiarie.)
Oh let my eyes in love with their lament,
-- Weep themselves out, and prove a part of thee:
This I shall gain, either my shade may fleet,
Or if it stay, I may want eyes to see it.
101.
Under this burden of my love I faint,
And find I am with too much plenty poor:
Wealthy I am in nothing but my want;
I have, and yet (O gods) want nothing more:
Mysteriously divided thus I stand,
Half in the water, half upon the land.
102.
But sure it cannot be my self I love;
How with my self despair I to agree?
By one example both must gentle prove,
If I Narcissus love, can he hate me?
It is no shade then does my fancy slatter,
But something that is divine does bless the water.
103.
Essence, of all that is fair, ascend to me;
To thy acceptance I present my heart:
Let not these elements our prisons be,
I in a fire, and thou in water art;
O let a friendly kiss as we two meet,
From thy cool water rise t'allay my heat.
104.
This said, Narcissus does his hold secure,
And with intention to receive a kiss,
His lip descends to meet the other there,
But hence his expectation cousned is;
For touching but the superficies,
He did too soon the frighted Image leese.
105.
The offended water into Circles ran.
And with their motion so disturbed the place,
The Lover could not see himself again:
Then does he call aloud unto this face;
Thou bright-beam'd star, oh whither art thou gone?
But newly shown thy head, and set so soon?
106.
Or if a Comet, thou had spent thy light,
(The matter gone, should feed thy flaming hair,)
Thou art mistaken; thy unnatural flight
Is heaven: all Meteors to the earth repair,
Where I now mourn thy absence; But I fear,
I have some way profaned the waters here.
107.
What God soever does this Fountaie owe,
Forgive me, and you Naiades that l^ve
Your tresses here, trust me I did not know
What sacred power, or President you have.
My mother was a Nymph, Lyriope,
Oh for her (...) some kind one pity me.
108.
Forgive disturbed water my rude touch,
'Twas not to rob thee of the smallest drop,
In penitential tears I Will pay as much
As there can hang upon my lips cold top:
O calm thy brow then, let thy frowns declare
Themselves at once finite, and Circular.
109.
In thy smooth bosom once more let me pray,
A sight of that sweet figure I adore,
Unlesle to heaven returned some other way;
And if it be, it is not so far before;
But I can dye, and off this flesh Robe burl'd,
I Will overtake it in the other world.
110.
Now does each swelling Circle gently haste
To be dissolved, and spread themselves to air;
No polished Marble seemed more smooth, and fast;
The Boy takes this a fruit of his own prayer,
Yet 'ere he thanked the gods, he thought it fit,
To see his love, and seen, forgot them quite.
111.
Fearing to be deprived again, he woes,
As every syllable (...) a life,
A sigh, at every clamorous period goes,
With greater noise then it, but no relief.
His air of tongue, and breast, thus spent a look
Presents their (...), doubled in the brook.
112.
But all in vain, the face, he saw before,
Is in the same il'-shewing silence dressed,
Changed to more sad, but not oneaccent more,
Deaf as the stream, and now he beats his breast,
Condemned again to his more hapless thought,
He had but all this while his shadow sought.
113.
This multiplies his griese into despair,
Since his own Image does procure the fire,
And nothing left in nature to repair
His vexed affections, that now grow higher;
That face, his own, or whose so e're, was that,
Which took him first, to unlove is too late.
114.
He beckens to the figure, that replies,
Taught by his postute how to call him thither;
To lift him from the water then he tries,
But when their white hands should have met together,
A new distraction fell upon the stream,
And his (because alone) thenes weeping came.
115.
When he to bear that company, lets fall
More tears than would have made another spring
Till grief had not another drop to call,
Though to have cured his eyes, but will this bring
The loved shade again? No; every tear
Was both his own, and to others murderer.
116.
But more then this must be ( Narcissus) borne,
As a revenge for many Nymphs that loved,
And died upon the torture of thy scorn;
And see his eyes that once so charming moved
Do loose their beams, and hasten to be dead
In their own hollowes, borne and buried.
117.
See what a dotage on himself has sent,
That brow that challenged late the snow, for white
Veins that were made to shame the Firmament,
The cheek that so much wonder drew to it,
The voice, when tuned to love, might gods entice
To change for earth their immortalities.
118.
All, all is vanished Nemesis have yet
Some pity, let him live, he faints, he dies,
'Twere safer for the Boy himself to hate,
Then if he love, to pay so dear a price.
He did but love himself, and if he die,
That loves, propose the haters destiny.
119.
But Nemesis irrevocable doom,
Must be obeyed though Echo late repent,
Who with a murmuring pace unseen was come
To mourn for his, and her own punishment.
His groans had thrild her soul, and at his death
She comes to catch his farewell taking breath.
120.
And as a glimmering Taper almost spent,
Gasping for moisture to maintain its fire,
After some dark cont^^^^^s, does present
A short-lived blaze, and presently expires:
So he, collecting ebbing Nature, cries,
Oh youth, beloved in vain, farewell and dies.
121.
Farewell poor Echo did repeat; and fled
With what wings sorrow sent, t'embalme the boy;
But looking carefully to find the dead,
She missed the shadow of her livelesse joy:
His body, vanished; by what mystery
Conveyed, not found by her inquiring eye.
122.
But in the place where he did disappeare,
Out of the ground a lovely flower betrays
His whiter leaves, and visibly did rear
His tufted head, with Saffron-colour'd rays:
Upon a smooth stem all this beauty grows;
This change to heaven the lost Narcissus owes.
123.
Echo with wonder turns a Statue now,
Yet not an idle figure; for her eyes
From her dark swelling springs do overflow,
Having no power to check them as they rise:
She thus presents a fountain, as she were
Meant to refresh the newborn Tulip there.
124.
To which, after some truce with tears, she says,
Art thou a pledge for the sweet Boy I loved?
Oh, take a voice, tell by what aerie ways,
The choicest flower of nature is removed.
If in the blessed shades? I can make room,
Through death to meet him in Elysium.
125.
Assume the wings of love, Echo, away
Unto the Stigian Lake, go, follow him,
There thou may find him on a bank of Clay,
Eying himself upon the waters brim:
The sooty gods enamoured on him are,
And round about him on his beauty stare.
126.
But since he was unkind alive to me,
I must despair to meet his love in death,
And this remaining flower, another He,
Shall be preserved with my best use of breath.
And though the obstinate deserved to dye,
I will be just, and love his memory.
127.
But since his curse, though just upon his pride,
Has made him this example for his sin:
Never shall dream ease my distracted head,
Sleep shall forget his office, and within
Darkes shades, shut up from all society,
In Rocks or Caves I Will undiscovered lie.
128.
And to redeem the shame my folly had
Contracted, by preposterous woing man;
Whose bolder nature was in order made
To Court our Sex: Juno take back again
Thy gift; from henceforth Echo will return,
But their own words sent back again in scorn
129.
This said, she walks to the fountains side,
Where she no sooner did the stream survey,
But her own shadow in the glass she spied,
And cried, some other witchcraft did betray
That heavenly boy; o, perish in some wave!
Be drowned for ever, since thou would not save.
130.
It is not thee I seek, open thou stream,
And show me where that fairer Strumpet is;
That, from whose sight the Boys infection came,
And from poor Echo did her soul entice.
Will no charm call it back? poor Echo then,
Here cease to be the scorn of Gods and men.
131.
With that impatient, she threw her weight
Into the tempting stream, where now we leave her;
Whom the proud waters did imprison strait,
Yet of her voice they did not quite bereave her,
For when I asked aloud, is she not dead?
Not dead distinctly, the Nymph answered,
Of Echo now no more remains to tell,
But that I her, and she bid me farewell.
FINIS.

