April 30.

Joyful and happy News from the West of Ireland, sent in three Letters from
persons of note: Some of the particulars are as follows.

1 The marching of the Lord of Inchequid and Captain Iephton into the great
Rebels the Lord Roches country, and their releeving of Rathgogan Castle
belonging to Master Meade. 2 Captain Iephtons great overthrow given to three
Companies of Rebels. 3 Another great overthrow given the Arch-Rebell, the Lord
Muskry, and his wh(...) Army by the Lord of Inchequid and Colonel Vavasor, who
took their Te(...) and great store of treasure, and much other provision and
pillage. 4 The siege of Kinsale, and how it was releeved, and a great overthrow
given to (...) Rebels by the Garrison of this Town, and some Troops of
Bandonbridge. 5 The flight of a great Army of the Rebels from their Camp near
Kinsale, and (...) great store of provision behind them. 6 The taking of two
other Castles, firing one, and carrying away above two hundred horse-load of
corn: and diverse other particulars worthy observation are like(...) expressed.


Read in the Honorable House of Commons the 25 of April, and ordered to be
printed.

H. Elsinge Cler. Parl. Com.





LONDON, Printed for Francis Cowles, and Thomas Bates. MDCXLII.

True and happy News from Ireland.
Right Honorable, my very good Lord:
SInce my last by my Lord of Dungarvan, mine own indisposition and
imbecillitie has been such, as in mine own person I have not been able to
attempt any thing, but have by my sickness been confined to my chamber; but
the forward earnestness and zeal to the service in my Lord of Inchequid,
Colonel Vavasor, Captain Ieph(...), and the rest of the Officers of the small
Army here, has accomplished some exploits, whereof you may please to receive
the ensuing relation.

I being besieged on the North side of the City, by my Lord Muskry, M. Carty
(...)ath, and all the rest of the western forces, and having notice that my
Lord (...), my Lord of Ikarne Donbay, the Baron of Log(...)may, M. Richard
Butler, and all the Tipperary Forces were drawing up to beleaguer me on the
South, I dispatched away the two Troops then newly landed, under the command of
my Lord Inchequid, and Captain Iephton into the Lord Roches country, in
expe(...)nce to divert him from his intended course hitherwards, which sorted
to so (...)od suppose, as that I since understand the Tipperary Forces have
forsaken (...)m, and that he remains himself upon his keeping in his own
Country. During the stay of these Troops there, they were desired to the
relief of a castle called Rathgogan, by one M. Meade, which M. Iephton having
performed with (...)quadron of each Troop, and 80 Musketeers drawn out of his
house and mine. (...)his retreat he was encountered by two or three companies
from Mimeallock, (...)whom he with a Horse, and another Officer with a Foot
charged in several (...)ces, and routed them, slaying about 150. beside 50
slain in releeving the ca(...)e. On the thirteenth of this instant my Lord of
Muskry (who has kept this (...)mp a long time at Rochforts town, three miles
from this city) caused a part this Army to chase home our scouts to the very
suburbs, where in a bravado they made a stand, whereat my Lord Inchequid,
Colonel Vavasor, and the rest (...) the Officers being much incensed, obtained
my leave to issue forth immediately with 300 Musketeers, and two Troops of
Horse: upon the sallying out they found the enemy retreated, and pursued him to
his quarters, where the (...) body consisting of 36 colors, as they were
numbered, forthwith appeared, and after several parties sent from the maine
body to skirmish with our (...)n, had been beaten back, they began to pickup
their baggage, and forsook their camp, after whom our men made all the speed
they might: and having chased them two or three miles, charged upon the Rear,
routed the whole Army, which betook it self to flight over a bog, unpasseable
for our Horse, and to all their carriage and luggage, whereof the Lord of
Muskries own armou(...) Tent, and Trunks were a part, slew about two hundred
of their men that took firm ground, and retired without loss of a man.
Whereby it is very easy observe with what facility the enemy might now be
dealt with all before he can recollect himself a new, or receive foreign
supplies, which they daily a(...) hourly expect, and being once come to their
hands, it will not then be (...) the charge and expense both of blood and
treasure, that will suppress the(...) which now would reduce them to a very
great straight.

And therefore I do most humbly beseech your Lordship, that speedy supplies of
men, moneys, arms, munition, and artillery, with all necessaries depending
thereon, as Conducters, Pioners, Mattrosses, Carriages, Tackle, Horses and Oxen
for draught, and all other appurtenances may either be sent over, o(...)
Commission and means to raise and maintain them here, here being but one
Canoneere, and one Clerk of the store in this Province: without these your
Lordship knows that it is to no boot to march into the field, where if the
enemy be not too hard for us, he will certainly retire to his holds, and so
secure himself against our forces.

Your Lordships most humble servant, W. St. Ledger.

From Kinsale, April 21. 1642. Brother Benjamin,
THe Rebels have persisted in their cruel and tyrannical ways blocked us up
round about, and have taken from us whatsoever we had lying without the Gate,
what was not useful for them, they despitefully burnt; and whomsoever they
took of our Nation, whether man, woman, or child, have cruelly and inhumanely
hanged and murdered: and for this three weeks space we have not been able to
send a Letter to the Lord President, but by water, and that with a great deal
of difficulty. But praised be God, about seven or eight days since the Lord
President upon our bleeding importunity, appointed the Lord Baltinglas his
half company, to come hither by sea to help us, which consisted of 44 or 45
men, who arrived here the 15. and brought with them eight barrels of powder,
and an hundred skeanes of match, whereof six barrels, and fifty skeanes were
allotted for Bandonbridge, the other fifty skeanes and two barrels do remain
here for the defense of the town, which did favor well with us, because it
was the first that ever we received. The 16. the Troops of Bandonbridge came
hither to renew, and carry away the said provisions, and for their better
convoy, we sent with them our troop, which consisted of about forty Horse and
forty Foot, which went with them about four miles, and drew up all our forces
we could make, to make good the retreat, if occasion had been; our Forces no
sooner parted from our friends, but those of Bandon fell into an Ambuscado,
which was laid purposely for them, consisting of about 300 men, who fired each
upon other; such was the great work of God Almighty, that ours consisting of
about 80 Horse, went through in despite of them, slew or killed about 80 of
them, without the loss of a man; they wanted four, which they imagined had
been slain, but they remained here playing the ill husbands, and went not with
their friends; our people in their retreat pillaged, and burned all the houses
they could espy; and being come all together, we marched in a body toward a
multitude of them, which appeared upon a mountain toward Belgoly, and lay in
ambush on the further side of the mountain; the hills round about us were
covered with them, we marched within Musket Shot of the maine body of them,
and made a stand, every man desirous to march up to them, but night was at
hand, and they had very much advantage of the ground; while we stood in sight
of them, they made many hideous shouts, calling us English Rebels, and
traiterous villains, and threatened, that before Monday following; to burn
and ransack our town; but these were but flourishes, for that night they
retreating to their accustomed place Belgoly, where their camp lay, many of
their people run away, and it seems their Sabbath-Sacrifice wrought little
effect; for the chief of them, which was Barry Oage and Jeremy Long, commanded
the armed men to march toward my Lord of Muskrie his camp, and the rest they
advised to shift for themselves: we are informed that many of the armed men did
not march far, but run every man his way; this I conceive could not be in any
policy, but merely the finger of God, that struck their hearts with such fear
and terror, as they could not stay any longer.

On monday morning we marched thither, where we found good store of provision,
some we brought away, the rest we burned with the houses, and all the Country
thereabouts, so they cannot in haste in camp themselves there again with any
commodity: some few straglers were found there, which were killed, only two or
three, which we brought home prisoners, which I believe we shall hang this day;
some things they have discovered, but to no great purpose, that it was merely
fear that drove them away, thinking those easternly wind which then blew, had
brought us great store of men out of England.

On Tuesday we went forth again, and took possession of a Castle called
Arcloyne, where we have left a guard of 12. Musketeers, it lies a mile from
the Town toward Bandonbridge, which was good service; for by that means we
have gained a Mill which lies under command of the Castle, and hope we shall
keep it; we had not the use of any Mill this three weeks till now, which
caused us (though we have store of Corn) to want bread.

We have certain advice, that about seven days since, the Lord Presidents
forces, about 600. foot, and 200. Horse, sallyed out of Cork, and set upon my
Lord of Muskrie, and Lord General Barries great Camp, which consisted of about
8000. The Rebels stood a while, but at last as many as could did fly, only one
Company led by Mac Finins, Brother of Glon^rogh, which was known by a
nickname, Captain S^gone, who fought very valiantly, and received 7. or 8.
shot into his body before he fell to the ground, his head and his hands are
brought in, and set upon the gates of the City. There were slain of the Rebels
no man knows how many, our men brought in 620. Muskets and Pikes which lay
amongst the dead, they brought in abundance of provisions, my Lord of Muskries
Plate, and apparel, and many other good things. So I hope they will not be
able to recover in haste such a head again: their Bogs and woods must be
their chiefest forts.

A passage or two more, though I be something tedious, I will relate; In my
former Letters, I related the great loss sustained at a Farm, which I had
called Eneskonnis, it yielded me 92 pound per annum, and the stock was my own
the Tenant was to make it good at each years end, only I had great store of
corn which I could not get threshed, to bring it away; for after this
Rebellion began none of the villains would labor: I had of wheat the growth
of 35. Acres and as good as any in the Country, beside Barley and Oats, my
Landlord Patrik Rach of Polelonge, taking it for his own, as he formerly had
done with m(...) Castle, and all things else, got two or three hundred with
their colors to come thither to thresh, and carry it away, half for himself,
and the other half for those that did labor, and stand by to guard him, but
whiles they were about it the Troops of Bandon, and a few Musketeers fell in
among them, killed near 100 of them, put the rest to flight, and carried with
them a great part of the Corn, which was made ready at their hands; and in this
service they lost not a man: A while after the Rebels attempted to steal away
some Cowes near Bandon, and took two or three small children that were keeping
of the said Cowes, which they killed most barbarously, took them by the Legs
and Arms and tore them asunder, one of the children they found stabbed with a
Skean in a dozen places at the least, which inhumanity did so much inrage them,
that the next day they made another salley upon the Rebels, and afterward
(...) upon a Castle called Dondoniell Castle, where some time the Iron works
stood; it was so full of men and provisions, that they had made Linnies without
side, against the walls of the Castle, which they filled with hutches of corn
and household stuff, which they had taken from the English: Our men placed
Musketeers round about them, in such manner, that none of them within durst
appear upon the battailment, nor peep out their nose at the loop-holes; sent in
five or six men that were skillful in mining under the said Linnies, who
labored so lustily, that in three or four hours they had made a hole through
the wall; where they put in furze and straw, which did set the lower rooms of
the Castle on fire, so that the Rebels and the provisions that were within,
were burnt together: of what was in the Linnies they saved but two hundred
horse load, and carried it by degrees to the Town of Bandon. Had we but three
or four hundred men more, we should soon be able to clear the river of
Bandon, upon which are three Castles very well fortified, Kilgobane, Polelonge,
and Corgenas. The landlord of Polelonge P^t. Roch fitz Richard was a
Parliament Man, and has been a long time in Rebellion, and his eldest son
is made a Captain amongst them. Had I men in place, I would be content to
maintain them with victuals and pay at my own charge, until I had taken the
said Castle of Polelonge, so that I might enjoy the said Castle, and Land
thereunto belonging, which is (...)ine plow-lands and a half, and so of the
rest of the Castles. I pray, if you have any friends amongst that honorable
assembly petition for some thing that might do us good: For my part, I have
lost all, and for merchandising there will be so little hopes while I live in
this Kingdom; so that unless it please God to (...)bove their hearts to
support me in some good way, I must be enforced to steer such a course, as
after so much loss will not well suit with my age.

The Irish inhabitants of this town, Cork, and Youghall are no better than
those that are abroad in action; they did generally give intelligence of all
that passed, and kept all things from us; I have discovered that many of the
chiefest of the town did go daily to Belgolie Camp; and if friends to them,
they must needs be enemies unto us: I have laid hold of some of them, I will
advise my Lord President of their proceedings.

Had not God Almighty dealt thus mercifully with us, that the hearts of those
miscreants should thus fail them, to fly when none pursues them, that in our
encounters with them we lose not one for 100. and seeing that all these late
Ea(...)rly winds have brought no supply for us out of England, we should have
been in despair, and clean cut off; but it does plainly teach us, That it is
his mighty hand and stretched-out arm, and not an arm of flesh that does
protect us.

At the beginning of these troubles our watches were mixed Irish and English
together, but since we have divided our selves, the English have all retired to
the water side, and the Irish keep the upper old town; so that if they profess
any (...)chery, the Fort and our ship Charles will presently beat down their
houses (...)out their ears, and do us no harm. My Lord President and
Colonel Banester did very well approve of their doings: now a little of
business I take notice what you write of the Ship Charles, I have thereupon
thought it the best course to persuade Mr. John Brooks to go over to inform
that Honorable House what manner of ship she is, and what she has and will
stand us in to set her forth completely to Sea, she will stand us upward of
five thousand pound. I shall desire you to be an assistant to the bearer Master
I. Brooks, to petition to the Parliament to have satisfaction for the time we
have spent in Harbor from the 12 day of Januarie, for the defense of the Fort
Town and Harbor, which under God, was the chief preservation of them all;
for till of late, the Fort was very weak, and ill-manned; and together to be
employed in the Kings service, and to allow us the rates which other ships
have, three pound 16. shill. per Month each man; she is already in place, and
doubtless may do as good service as any ship that is employed; she will carry
and has Ports for thirty pieces of Ordnance; we have already 24 Barrels of
powder, five cables, and double Sails: but for this I refer you to the
Relation of the bearer, praying you to assist him effectually; he is a very
able deserving man; he carries a Letter from Captain Dowrick, a part owner to
a kinseman of his, one Mr. Norkot; a good friend to Mr. Pimme and Master
Stroud; the said Master Stroud is a very able deserving Gentleman, I knew him
when my Brother Nich. Glanfield lived in Tanestock, but I believe he does not
remember me. I pray God direct their hearts, that we may have some aid come
over in time, to keep them from reaping what they have sown, and before they
have powder and Arms from other parts, lest they should take head again. 10000
men in Munster would in my opinion, in a very short time do the business, and
fetch back our cattle and Horses, which they have driven into Musgrow woods.
If I had but two hundred men at present, to what we have, I am very confident I
should do some service to Gods glory in the defense of my Religion and Nation;
and thus much believe of my conceited opinion, That if these Rebels be
pardoned, this Kingdom will never be secure; the abuses are so inhumane, and
so devilish, that if it become pardonable, none will care what offense he
commits: and the hatred between the Nations is so great, that it is
impossible that ever it can be forgotten. Let us have leave to fight it out to
the last man: or if not, and that they must live here, let us have leave to
depart, and seek some other place for our habitation.

We have at present abundance of corn, by reason of two or three prizes,
Frenchmen laden with Wheat and Rye, brought in by our men of war. It is a
great oversight, that in all this time we have not more Ships, one or two to
ride constantly in each Port, to hinder the coming of provision and Ammunition
to the Rebels, which cannot be so securely done by keeping a few ships at sea:
The sure way is, as I have said, to have a ship or two to ride constantly in
each port, and half a doeen of nimble ships to keep at Sea upon the head
lands. I pray you be vigilant that we may have satisfaction for our losses, and
some reward for our honest endeavor. I have furnished his Mejesties Fort of
this place, Cork, Kings ship, and otherwise in his Majesty's service, to the
value of 400 pounds in Deal hoords, Iron, Pitch, Tar, Train, Ammunitions, and
moneys and know not yet when, or by whom I shall be satisfied for the same; and
whatsoever I have yet remaining, I will willingly part with in the said
service, and am reapy to seal this my intent to the last drop of my blood.
There have been a great many of our Nation who are very able both in person
and estate to serve in this cause, that have stolen away, and carried their
estates moneys, and provision wish them; it were good in my opinion that
enquiry were made after them in in England, and compelled not only to return
in their own persons, but to bring over others at their own charge, it would
be but an easy punishment for their cowardly baseness. I shall pesire you to
be mindful of us in your prayers to God Almighty; In whom I rest.

Your loving Brother Tristram Whitcombe.

A Letter sent from Yoghal in Ireland to his friend resident in London, this
present April. 1642.
Master Col^s,
I Have sent you by this Breviate of the last news for certain of the late
passages in Ireland, which is brought by a ship call the Abraham from Yoghall.
This last week the Lord President of Munster, Viscount Dungarvan, Viscount
Kinnalmuhy the Lord Broghill, and Sir Charles Vavasor Colonel: The Lord
President having some few days before wasted all Condons country with fire
and sword, joined their Forces together between Cappoquin and Tallow, slew
there a great number of the Rebels, leaving their carcasses in the open
streets; so that to prevent the contagion might otherwise arise from their
stinking bodies, they haled them to the sea, then marched to Dungarvan,
recovered the castle there, and slew some 350, with the loss of no more than
five or six of our English men's forces at most, and so go on still
prosperously and valiantly. About this time they attempted to take Mallowe with
2000 men, but were repulst by the forces of Captain Iepson within the Castle.

Yours Edw. Ford.


