Andromana: OR THE MERCHANT'S WIFE.

THE SCAENE, IBERIA.

By J. S.

LONDON. Printed for John Bellinger, and are to be sold at his shop in
Cliffords-Inn-lane in Fleetstreet, 1660.

Names of the Actors.
EPhorbas, King of Iberia. Plangus, his Son. Eubulus, Three Lords, and
Counselors to the King. Anamedes Three Lords, and Counselors to the King.
Rinatus Three Lords, and Counselors to the King. Inophilus, Son to Rinatus,
and friend to the Prince. Zopiro, Captains. Nicetes, Captains. Aramnes,
Captains. Artesio, an informing Courtier. Andromana, a Merchant's wife.
Libacer, her servant. Messenger. Captains, and Soldiers.
THE TRAGEDY OF ANDROMANA. Or, The fatal and deserved End of Disloyalty and
Ambition.
Actus I.
Scaena I.
Enter Nicetes. Aramnes. Nic. I Have observed it too, but the cause is
As unknown to me as actions done in Countries
Not found out yet.

Ara. Some Wench, my life to a brass Farthing.

Nic. As like as may be:
We Soldiers are all given that way; especially
When our blood boils high, and pulses beat
Alarums to Cupid's Battles; We Are apter
To sally on a young flaming Girl,
Then on an Enemy that braves it before our Trenches.

Ara. I ask it not to know his privacies;
For if his freedom does not acquaint me with them,
Let them be secret still -- yet I could wish
An opportunity to tell him, a little circumspection
Would be handsome, and set a gloss upon all.
Times might be chosen of less public notice:
It looks so poorly in a Prince to be thus careless
Of his own affairs: men do so talk on it --
Here comes Inophilus; if any body knows,
It must be he. Enter Inophilus.

Ino. Your servant, Captains; saw you the Prince to day?

Nic. Not we: we hoped to hear of him from you.

Ino. It Is strange a man adorned with so much
Wisdom, should on the sudden fall off from the
Care of his own fame! I am his Friend, and so
I know are you; but to speak plainly to you,
He Is grown my wonder now, as much as other men's.
I that have found a sweetness in his company
Beyond what ever Lovers dream of in a Mistress,
That as he spoke, methought have smelt the air perfumed; nor could have wished
a joy greater then living with him, next those of Heaven, and those preferred
the more, because I knew Plangus would be there.

I say, even I of late am grown out of love with any thing that is Mortal* since
I have found Plangus so far beneath, (I will not say my expectations) but the
assurances all good men had of future gallantry. He Is melancholy now, and
has thrown off the spirit which so well became him, and all that sweetness
which bewitched men's hearts is grown so rugged, so incompos'd to all commerce,
men fear he will shortly quarrel with himself. Nay more, he does not answer the
fondness of his Father's love with half that Joy he used to do.


Ara. It Is now about a Week I have observed this alteration; it shakes him like
an Ague once in two days; but holds him longer then a fit oth' Gout: They
whisper about the Court as if the King had chid him for it, and now at length
found his thaunts.


Ino. A poor discovery! Who might not find 'em out that would be so uncivil: I
was about to follow him, but thought it an ignoble way, beneath the Name of
Friendship, and so desisted. About four days ago, meeting him in the long
Gallery, I ask't him how he did; taking me by the hand, he wrung it, and after
a sigh or two, told me, Not very well -- But he had business, and so we parted.
I saw him not again in twenty hours after; and then I asked him where he had been
so long: He told me (as if he was ashamed to deny me such a poor request) I
must not know; and when I told him, his often absence was observed. Is it,
says he? I cannot help it; but it shall no more be so; and at the last he
stole away: Since when I saw him not.


Nic. O this wicked Peace: Inophilus!
Is there no hopes of War?
To lie at home to see our Armours rust;
We could keep the Prince sober and merry too,
If he would but exchange his Court for a Camp.

Ino. The King is old, and dotes upon his Son.
Is loath to venture him to danger:
Yet at this time there is occasion.
The Argives have refused to pay their tribute, and are for certain preparing
for Invasion: Some say they have got into Iberia already.


Ara, Nay then there is hopes:
If we could but find the Prince with a buff Coat again, I should be once more
merry. Exeunt.


SCAEN. II.
Enter Ephorbas the King, Rinatus, Eubulus, Anamedes, three LORDS. Ephesians. See the
Ambassadors entertained
With such an evenness, as should be used to men
We neither fear nor love; let neither
Too much obsequiousness teach them insolency,
Nor any ill usage brand us with incivility:
Stay you Rinatus. he sighs. Exeunt Eub. Anam.
-- Open thy bosom and receive torrents of sorrow,
That lie like rocks of lead upon my soul;
Honest Rinatus; experience bids me trust thee
With a mighty secret. Thou can not choose
But know, my son of late is much retired.
I do not like that youth should be thus melancholy:
Let them enjoy themselves, for age will come,
Whose impotency will deny all pleasures.
I do believe he loves me. Hah!

Rin. Yes, doubtless, better then sickmen health,
Or those who are penned up in darkness
Love the Sun.

Ephesians. I speak not as if I thought he did not;
For thou know I humor him, afford him
Liberty enough; I never chide him, nor express
The least dislike of any action. Am not I a gentle father?
Me thinks were I a son again, to such a father,
I should not think he lived too long Should thou, Rinatus?

Rin. No more does he, upon my soul:
One command of yours would make him venture upon
Lightning, nay almost make him act a sin,
A thing he fears to name,

Ephesians. I do believe thee:
But yet, me thinks, should he be grown so impious,
There might be found excuses.
A Crown is a temptation; especially so near one:
It Is not with Princes as with other Sons; and I am old too;
Has not my hand the palsy? Does a Crown become gray hairs?
To be a King might make some men forswear all conscience.
But I know Plangus has far nobler thoughts;
And yet an Empire might excuse a Parricide.

Rin Sir! sure you are a stranger to your son;
For give me leave to say, your fears are vain:
So great a virtue as the Princes,
Cannot anticipate his hopes by any sin:
Honor and duty have been acquainted with him now too long
To be divorct. Some Sycophants there are
(Such creatures still will haunt the Court) I know
Love not the Prince, because he loves not them.
Sir, shut your ears to them, they will betray you to your ruin.
Jealousy's a disease should be below a King,
As that which seizes on the basest spirits;
Oh shut it from your soul,
One may read in story
What dire effects the fury has brought forth:
Kings make away their only sons, and Princes their fathers,
And when they have done, they may despair at leisure.

Ephesians. I do not think Plangus has plots, or on my Crown,
Or me; he was virtuous always, and is still, I hope:
But why is he so much from Court then, and alone too?
I do but ask the question.

Rin. It can be no design, believe me, Sir;
For Crowns are won by other courses.
Aspirers must grow popular, be hedged about
With their Confederates; then would he flatter you,
Be jolly still, as if no melancholy thought were in him.
A guilty conscience would then teach him policy,
And he would seek to take suspicion from all his carriages;
Innocence makes him careless now.

Ephesians. Thou have almost resolved me;
The tempest in my soul is almost laid,
And wants but time to calm it.
Youth has its whimsies, nor are we
To examine all their paths too strictly.
We went awry our selves when we were young.

Rin. Sir!

Ephesians. Thou may be gone, Rinatus,

Exit. Rinat. SCAEN. III.
EPHORBAS, SOLUS. -- The blessing of an honest servant!
This Rinatus is truer unto me:
He loves the King as well as I Ephorbas;
And may I live but to reward him;
For he is too honest for a Court! Enter Artesio.
How now Artesio? thy looks speak strong amazement;
I am with child to hear the news: Prithee be quick in the delivery.

Art. The Prince an't please your Majesty --

Ephesians. What of him Artesio?

Art. I have observed is much retired of late.

Ephesians. So have I too; this is no News.

Art. And I can whisper in your ear the cause.
'Twas Chance, no Policy of mine, betrayed his privacies:
Ill Offices are not the Engines I desire to rise by;
Only love to the young Prince makes me reveal them.

Ephesians. Nay, nay, without apology;
If it were Treason, it should not go down the sooner
For all the gilded preparation.
Nor am I of so Feminine a humor, as
To mistrust affection delivered bluntly:
Plain meaning, should be plainly told;
Bad Wares may have false lights; good can abide the day.

Art. But I know
The nature of my Office;
Though Kings still hug suspicion in their bosoms,
They hate the causers; Love to hear secrets too,
Yet the Revealers still fare the worse,
Being either thought guilty of ends or weakness.
And so esteemed by those they tell them to*
Either unfit or dangerous to be trusted,
Perhaps, Sir, when the Prince and you are friends again,
You Will tell me, That had my love been real,
I should have whispered the Princes errors to himself --

Ephesians. Without a syllable of Prologue more --
Or I shall verify your fears.

Art. In this brave City (take it as brief as may be)
There lives a Beauty fit to command
Them that command the World,
And might be Alexanders Mistress, were he yet alive,
And had added Empires as large as his desires:
She Is but a private Merchant's Wife;
Yet the Prince is so far gravel'd in her affection,
I fear. --

Ephesians. Then there is hopes I may recall him:
Love is a childish evil, though the effects are dangerous;
A Princes Errors
Grown public, will be scandalous.
Poor boy! perhaps the jealous Husband may commit a murder,
I would not have him cut off so young:
Love should be Princes recreation, not their business.
What Physic must we give him for his cure?

Art. I dare not counsel you;
But in my poor judgment
Some gentle Fatherly persuasions will work upon
So good a nature.

Ephesians. Could thou but possibly effect
How I might take him napping?

Art, That is beyond my skill:
But I can show you the House, and time
He walks from hence in, which will be
About an hour hence; for then her Husband
Comes home from the Ryalto.

Ephesians. Time will not tarry for a King; let us go.

Exeunt. SCAEN. IV.
INOPHILUS. Ino. What is become of this young Prince? Or where
Does he bestow himself? Does he walk invisible?
Where have I been to look him?
The Horses are in the Stables.
His Page and I at home too, that used to be as inseparable Companions.

Enter Nicetus, Aramnes. Ram. Well met Gentlemen, where is the Hermit Plangus?

Nic. We cannot tell, nor have we been to seek him.
If at the Court, we should hear presently; if not,
We might be too officious in his search,
And our enquiry might make his absence but so much the more
Notorious; and I Am confident he is well:
His virtue guards him still from all Mischances.

Ino. Though his company's the dearest thing I love*
Yet for his good I could digest his absence,
But that I doubt a mighty mischief might spring
From this small Grain of indiscretion
The King is old, and there are Knaves about the Court
That (if he knew it not) would tell him so:
And men conscious to themselves of a defiancy*
Are still most jealous of a growing worth*
Perhaps a thinking Father (for plodding is old age's sickness)
May take notice of his Son's retirement, and misconstrue it so:
Nothing is impossible --
Heaven send it otherwise.

Ara. This care becomes you Sir; but I dare swear it is needless: The King is
but an ill dissembler; and had he but the least thought of such a thing, he would
hide it less then the Sun conceals his brightness: Besides, a man as great
Euphorbus is, whose rule of living has been directed by the Line of Virtue,
cannot mistrust that Vice in his own Son, of which himself was never guilty:
Had's younger years been tainted with inordinate desires, or had his Crown been
the effect of some audacious crime, perhaps his guilty Conscience might have
mistrusted; but it is impossible where there is no guilt, to fear a punishment.


Ino. You speak my hopes:
But this for certain, Gentlemen,
The King who was admired for his matchless sleeping,
Whose night no noise disturbed, and it was difficult
To wake before his hour, sleeps but unquietly of late,
Will start at Midnight, and cry Plangus:
Is greedy after News, and walks unevenly,
And sometimes on the sudden looks behind him; and when
One speaks to him, scarcely marks one syllable.
Surely the mind of some distemper shakes
His soul into this looseness.

Enter Messenger. Mess. My Lord, the Prince desires
To meet you half an hour hence in the Gallery.

Ino. Me?

Mess. Yes my Lord.

Ino. I shall. Your Servant, Captains.

All. Yours, my Lord. [Exeunt at several Doors.]

SCAEN. V.
PLANGUS, ANDROMANA. Pl. It cannot be so late.

An. Believed, the Sun is set, my Dear;
And Candles have usurped the Office of the day.

Pl. Indeed methinks a certain mist
Like darkness, hangs on my eyelids.
But too great luster may undo the sight:
A man may stare so long upon the Sun, that he
May look his eyes out; and certainly it is so with me;
I have so greedily swallowd thy light,
That I have spoiled my own.

An. Why should thou tempt me to my ruin thus*
As if thy presence were less welcome to me,
Then d^y to one, who (it is so long ago
(...) the Sun has forgot what light is*
(...) of thy presen^^ makes me wish this absence,
(...) himself must suffer an Eclips,
(...) are still ^oyles to the brightest splendour:
Some short departure will (like a river stopped)
Make the current of our pleasures run
The higher at our next Meeting

Pl. Alas my Dearest!
Tell those so, that know not what it is to part from Blessing;
Bid not him surfeit to taste health's sweetness,
That knows what it is to groan under a Disease.

An. Then let us stand and outface danger,
(...) you will have it so; despise report,
And contemn scandals into nothing,
Which vanish with the breath that utters 'um;
Love is above these vanities.
Should the innocent thing my Husband take thee here,
He could not spite me but by growing jealous;
And Jealousies black effect would be a cloister
Perhaps to kill me too: But that is impossible,
I cannot dye so long as Plangus loves me:
Yet say this piece of Earth should play the Coward,
And fall at some unlucky stroke,
Love would transport my better half
To its Center, Plangus heart, and I should live in him.
But Sir, you have a Fame to loose, which should be
A Princes only care and darling,
Which should have an eternity beyond his life:
If he should take that from you, I should be killed indeed*

Pl. Why do thou use these Arguments to bid me go,
Yet chain me to thy tongue, while the Angel-like
Music of thy voice entering my thirsty ears,
Charms up my fears to immobility.
It Is more impossible for me to leave thee,
Then for this carcass to quait away its gravestone,
When it lies destitute of a soul to inform it.
Mariners might with far greater ease
Hear whole sholes of Sirens singing,
And not leap out to their destruction;
Then I forsake so dangerous a sweetness.

Andr. I will be dumb then.

Pla. I will be deaf first. I Have thought a way now,
I Will run from hence and leave my soul behind me:
It shall be so: and yet it shall not neither;
What shall a husband banish a Prince his house for fear?
A husband? it is but an aerie title,
I will command there shall be no such thing,
And then Andromana is mine, or his, or any man's
She will her self. These Ceremonies
Fetter the world, and I was born to free it.
Shall man, that noble creature, be afraid of words,
Things himself made?
Shall sounds, a thing of seven small letters, give
Check to a Princes will?

An. Did you not promise me, dear Sir?
Have you not sworn too, you would not stay beyond the time?
Have Oaths no more validity with Princes?
Let me not think so.

Pla. Come, I will go, thou shall not ask in vain.
But let us kiss at parting, it may be our last perhaps.
-- I cannot now move one foot, though all the Furies
Should whip me forward with their snakes.
Woman thou stol'st my heart, just now thou stol'st it.
A cannon bullet might have kiss't my lips
And left me as much life. The King having listened comes in softly.
-- Are we betrayed?
What art, Speak, or resolve to dye.

K. A well-wisher of the Prince.

Pl. The King? -- It cannot be! He starts.

K. Though thou have thrown all nature off,
I cannot what is my duty.
Ungratious boy, had been the offspring of a sinfull-bed,
Thou might have claym'd Adultery as inheritance;
Lust would have been thy kinsman, and what enormity
Thy looser life could have been guilty of,
Had found excuse in an unnatural conception.
Prithee hereafter seek another father:
Ephorbas cannot call him son that makes lust his diety.
Had I but known. -- (but we are hoodwink't still
To all mischances) I should have had a son,
That would make it his study, to embrace corruption,
And take delight in unlawful sheets,
I would have hugged a Monster in mine arms
Before thy mother -- good O heavens!
What will this world come to at last!
When Princes that should be the patterns of all virtue
Lead up the dance to vice.
What shall we call our own, when our own wives
Banish their faith, and prove false to us.
Have I with so much care promis,d my self
So pleasing a Spring of comfort? and are all
Those blossoms impt, and buds burnt up by the fire
Of lust and sin! --
Have I thus long labored against
The billows, that did oppose my growing hopes?
And must I perish in the havens mouth?
No gulf but this to bedevour'd in?
Could not you th's inclination, find out
Another rock to split it self upon?
Had thou hugged drunkenness, the wit or mirth
Of company might have evcus'd it.
Prodigality had been a sin
A Prince might have been proud in, compared to this.
Or had thy greener years incited the to treason
And atteempt a doubting father's crown
It had been a noble vece.
Ambition runs through the veins of princes.
It brings forth acts great as themselves and it.
Spurs on to honor, and resolves great things.
But this, this Leachery is such a thing
Sin is to brave a name for'^,
A prince; I might say my son
(But let that pass) and dare to show
Himself to naught but darkness, and black chambers
Whose motions like some planet
Are all excentrick, not two hours together
In his own sphere, the court.
But I am tame to talk thus; Be gone with as much speed
As a coward would avoid his death.
And never more presume to look upon this woman, this whore.
Thou losest both thy eyes and me else. Plangus is going out, but comes again.

Pl. Sir, the reverence that I ow my father,
And the injury I have done this Gentlewoman
Had charmed me up to silence but I must
Speak something for her honor:
When I have done, command me to the Altar,
Whilst (I confess) you tainted me with sin,
I did applaud you and condemn my self;
It looked like a fathers care. -- But when
You used that term of whore to her that stands there,
I would have given ten thousand Kingdoms
You had had no more relation to me,
Then has the Northern to the Southern pole.
I should have flown to my revenge swifter then lightning,
But I forbear, and pray imagine not what I had done.

K. Upon my life she is very handsome. aside.

Pl. To be a whore is more unknown to her
Then what is done in the Antipodes;
She is so pure she cannot think a sin
Nor ever heard the Name to understand it.

K. No doubt these private meetings
Were to read her moral lectures, and teach her
Chastity.

Pl. Nay, give me leave Sir,
I Do not say my addresses have been all so virtuous;
For whatsoever base desires a flaming beauty
Could kindle in a heart, were all alive in me;
And prompted me to seek some case by quenching:
Burnings hotter then Aetna.
Imagine but a man that had drunk Mercury,
And had a fire within his Bones;
Whose blood was hotter then the melted Ore,
If he should wish for drink, nay steal it too
Could you condemn him?

Ep. Married do they say? aside.

Pl. I Did endure a heat
S^ as could not cool. It would have killed a Salamander.
Then taught both impudence and wit:
I singled out my foe, used all the arts
That love could think upon, and in the end
Found a most absolute repulse.

K Well, Plangus, youth excuses, the first fault,
But a relapse exceeds all pardon.

Ex. King. Pl. SCAENA. VI.
Manet ANDROMANA. An. Cursed be old age, and he that first numbered fourscore:
What Devil has betrayed us both to a doting fool?
Did I but now promise my self what hopes
Ambitious thoughts could reach; and shall I sink
Down to my first foundation without the pleasure of
A Tasted greatness. Death and disgrace,
I Dare provoke the utmost of your malice.
After the sweetness of some sharp revenge.

Libacer. Madam, my Master. Enter servant in haste.

An. You may both hang together.

Lib. Why this it is, if a man should kill his father
For you, be should be thus rewarded as soon as
Your turns served, I may be hanged that did it.

An. Since he is dead; How was it done?

Lib. Why nothing; only as he was taking water at the Ryalto, his foot slipped
a little, and he came tumbling in the Sea; whence he was taken up, but not
alive.


An. Heaven prospers not these courses,
I see it plainly, let them be acted with as much closeness,
Or to what end soever, they never thrive. Libacer,
We are undone, undone; the King has found
His Son here, and I have lost him to eternity.

Lib. You women are the shallowest creatures;
You never look beyond the present*
Rome was not built in one day, Madam;
Greatness is never sweet that comes too easily.
Should Plangus be a Fool now, and obey his Father:
'Pox of this virtue, it spoils most men living.
We have hopes yet; Revenge is something,
And if my old Trade fail not,
Princes are mortal as well as other men;
Yet my soul inspires me with half a confidence
That Leon has not died in vain.
I use to see as far into a mischief as another:
I Will go to him, and if I bring him not within this half hour,
As hot and eager on the scent as e're he was,
Take me and hang me at my coming home.

Lib. Madam, here is As he is going out he meets Artesio.
a Messenger from Court.

An. If from thence, I may be bold to ask,
How Plangus the noblest Prince alive does?

Art. Madam, as well as Soldiers can
That are sick for honor, I suppose by this time
H'ath left the Court, and is gone in quest for glory,
Which he intends to ravish from young Argoe's brow,
The valiant Leader of the Argive's Army.

An. I Am confident then Sir, your business is not to me,
If any body else has sent you; Sir, be pleased to spare the message,
And tell them, I neither have learnt the trick
Oth' Court, nor yet intend it; I want no new Gowns,
And have heard men forswear themselves
In better language, and to better purpose
Then gaining of a Lady's honor.

Art. Madam, My business is from the King,
Who does entreat you would be pleased to bless the Court,
This afternoon with your fair presence,
And bring an answer, I must not stay for one. Exit Art.

An. Now we do see an end of all our mischiefs;
The Prince is gone from Court, and the King has sent for us;
Does not the name strike terror to thy curdling blood.

Lib. No by my troth not at all, as far as I see
You're better then you were. I Will lay my life the old man
Would turn Gamester:
Take my counsel, play deep
Or not at all: Not an Ace under a Kingdom.
Your Grace I hope will remember your poor friends.

An. If I do find any such thing,
Let me alone to melt his Ice,
Go get me mourning with all have. Exit Lib.
Let froward Fortune do her worst, I shall
Create my greatness, or attempting fall:
And when I fall I will deserve my ruin. Exit.

ACT II.
SCAENA 1.
Plangus, Nicetes, Aramnes. Ni. WHat Sir, And are you Melancholy
When fate has showered a happiness so unexpected on us?
This ugly sneaking peace is the Soldiers rock,
He splits his fortunes on. Bawdry's a virtue to it.
P -- of these Beaver-hats they make ones head ache
Worse then a Cap of steel, and bear not off a knock
The tenth part so well.

Pl. You're mad for fighting, Gentlemen,
And we shall have enough of it.
The Argives fifty thousand strong,
Have like a whirlwind born down all before 'um;
And I with 13000. that remain
Yet undisbanded of the last expedition,
Have command to fight that multitude
Of old tough Soldiers: while ours
In a month or two will not have picked up that valor
That in this idle time has slipped from 'um;
They have forgot what noise a Musket makes,
And start if they but hear a Drum;
Are these fellows either enough or fit,
On whom a Kingdome's safety should be built:
Indeed were they to encounter some Mistress,
Or storm a Brothel-house, perhaps they would venture;
But for my part, I yield; nor will I oppose my Father:
If he sees good we perish, I am already sacrifiz'd*
Yet our enemies shall dearly purchase
Their Victory.
Pray look to your charge, Nicetes, and you
Aramnes with all care and speed* and when you come
Into the field; then let me see this countenance,
That frowning smile, and I shall like it.
I love a man runs laughing upon death;
But we lose time in talk. Ex. Nic. Aram. Enter Inophilus.

SCAENA 2.
Ino. Your servant Captains. Sir, pray a word with you.

Pl. Prithee be short, Inophilus, thou know my business:

Ino. Sir, I am mad to see your tameness:
A man bound up by Magic is not so still as you,
Nothing was ever precipitated thus,
And yet refused to see its ruin.

Pl Thou art tedious, I shall not tarry.

Ino. You are made General.

Pl. I know it:

Ino. Against the Argives.

Pl. So.

Ino. With 13000 men, no more Sir.

Pl. I am glad on it, the honor is the greater:

Ino. The danger is the greater; You will be killed sir,
And lose your Army.

Pl. Is this all, I care not.

Ino. But so do I, and so do all your friends.
I smell a Rat sir, there is juggling in this business,
I am as confident of it as I am alive.
The King might within this twenty four hours
Have had peace on fair conditions.

(Pl. But dishonorable)

In. And would not. On a sudden uses the Ambassadors scurvily
And provokes the Argives, yet himself in no posture
Of defense.

Pl. But --

Ino. Pray give me leave sir,
After this you are on a sudden created General,
And packt away with a crowd of unhewn fellows,
Whose courage hangs as loose about them
As a sluts petticoats. Sir, he had other spirits
In the Court created for such perils;
Excuse me, I know you fear not to meet destruction,
But where men are sure to perish,
'^ were well the persons were of less concernment.
He might have let you stayed till you had gathered
An Army fit for your Command, and sent
Some petty things upon this expedition,
Whose loss would have been nothing, and of whom
It might have been recorded in our story
As an honor, that they dyed Monuments
Of the Kings folly. But let that pass;
You Will say perhaps, you only have a spirit
Fit for such undertakings -- I wish you had not,
Your want then would not be half so grievous.
But here is the prodigy, you must fight them presently.
Come, it is a project put into the Kings head
By some who have a plot on you and him.

Pl. It may be so, Imphilus, and I believe
All this is true you tell me, and it might startle
A man were less resolvd then I.
But danger and I have been too long acquainted
To shun a meeting now; I am engaged,
And cannot any ways come off with reputation.
Had told me this before, perhaps I might have thought on it:
And yet I should not neither.
If the King thinks I am grown dangerous,
It Is all one to me which way he takes me from his fears,
He could not do it handsomer then thus;
It makes less noise now. --
But come, I must not fear such things, Inophilus:
The King has more virtue and honor then
To do these actions, fit only for guilty souls;
Nor must I fear when my Inophilus sights by me.

Ino. Troth Sir, for all your complement,
If you have no valor but what ows it self to my company,
Your'e like to make cold breakfast of your enemies:
I have other business then to throw away
My life, when there is so much odds against it:
I Will stay at home, and pray for you, that is all Sir.

Pl. How! wilt not go then, Inophilus?

Ino. The time has been
I thought it better sport
To bustle through a bristly grove of Pikes.
When I have courted rugged danger with
Hotter desires then handsome faces,
And thought no women half so beautiful
As bloody gaping wounds:
But sir, to go and cast away my self now,
Would not be gallant, nor an action worth my envy:
It Is weakness to make those that seek
My ruin, laugh at my folly with jaws stretched wider
Then the Gulf that swallows us.
I know when honor calls me, and when treason
Counterfeits her voice.

Pl. Well, stay at home and freeze,
And lose all sense of glory in a Mistress arms.
Go perish tamely, drunk with sin and peace,
And may thou, since thou dare not dye with them,
Outlive thy noble friends.

Ino. I thank you Sir, but I cannot be angry.

SCAENA 3.
Nicetes, Aramnes, with some Captains and Soldiers. Ni. Yonder Is the bones
oth' Army rallied up together,
But they look'^ rather as if they came home
From being soundly beaten.
Methinks such tattered Rogues should never conquer,
Victory would look so scurvily among 'um,
They Would so be-dawb her if she wore clean linen.

Cap. Sir, We wear as sound hearts in these torn breeches
As ere a Courtier of them all.
We are not afraid of spoiling our hands for want
Of gloves, nor need we Almond butter when we go to bed.
And though my Lieutenant is pleased to be a little merry,
You shall see us dye as handsomely in these old clothes
As those wear better, and become our wounds as well,
And perhaps smell as sweet when we are rotten.

Pl. We hope it, Captains and Fellow soldiers,
We are proud of this occasion to try your valors,
You shall go no farther then your Prince does,
I Will be no bringer up of Rears.
Let not the number of the Foe affright you,
The more they are, the more will the honor be.
The Lion scorns to prey upon a Hare,
Nor is the blinking Taper fit to try Eagles eyes;
The weight of glory makes our danger light,
When victory comes easily it is half a shame Soldiers shout, and exeunt.
To conquer.

Ino. I Will stay at home and grieve, that so many
Daring souls should dye on such advantage. Ino. exit.

SCAENA 4.
King Solus. Her husband's dead too: Fates let me dye,
I am too happy to remain long thus
Without a ruin great as the height I fell from*
Plangus was my only obstacle, but him I have
Removed:
But love commanded,
His presence would have countermanded all attempts,
I need not fear his Magic at this distance.
His looks and actions were one entire enchantment, and
Powerful over a Lady's heart.
I sent for her, but she is not come yet.
Who waits without? Enter Artesio.
There Is a mourning Lady sir
Would speak with the King.
K. Admit her, and be gone. Enter to him Andromana in mourning, with a hood
over her face, which she throws up when she sees the King.

SCAENA 5.
K. So rises Phoebus from the gloomy night,
(While pale-fac't Dian makes have to hide
Her borrowed glory in some neighboring cloud,
Envying the beauty of the new born day)
When darkness crowds into the other world.
Madam, Why kneel you? She kneels.
You, at whose name Monarchs themselves might tremble,
And mortals bow with reverence great as they pay to Altars:
Scepters should break in pieces and adore you;
At whose sight the Sun and Moon should blush themselves
To blood and darkness, and falling from their sphere
Brush the audacious world to Atoms, for daring
To behold a luster so much greater then their own.

An. Sir, give me leave to wonder
What sin I have committed which calling
Down the vengeance of the gods,
Has made me author of all this blasphemy.
Sir, I beseech your Majesty if you are angry with your creature,
Speak some cruel word and blast me.
Scorn me not into the other world,
Where I have sins enough of my own to blush for,
And shall not need to dye his cheeks for other men's offenses.

K. Lady, though Parthian darts are not so sharp
As are those killing words, yet that breath which
Utters them, is sweeter then the morning dew.
I Will be dumb, for praises cannot add, but rather
Diminish Andromana's worth.

An. I wonder now no longer at this language,
It Is such as Kings are bred in;
But I beseech you Sir, if there be ought
You will command your servant; if Andromana
Must do or suffer any thing for great Euphorbas,
Lay by your self a minute, and remember
A Merchant's wife must hear you*

K. Your husband Leon's dead, I hear Lady. She weeps.
Nay spare those Pearls, Madam, cast not away
Such treasure upon the memory of one
Who, if the best of men, deserves them not.
Come, come, forget these sorrows Lady,
And wear not mourning weeds before the world's destruction;
Hide not those fair eyes, whose splendour would enrich
Our Court:
Madam, though none there be in Court
Can merit such a beauty, yet I my self
Have taken pains to search a husband for you;
What think you of my self?

An. Great Sir, your care is like your self, all noble,
But suits with me no better
Then Phoebus horses did with Phaeton,
Ruined the world and him: first, Sir,
You do debase you self to honor her, whose worth
Is less considerable then Lovers oaths:
My husband's ashes are scarce cold yet,
And would your Majesty have me forsake my honor,
And his memory so soon?
I have not paid oblations due to his ashes yet.

K. You complement away the worth we know you have Andromana,
What say you to the Prince?

An. I say he is the the Prince, and great Ephorbas son,
He Is Plangus, and if you think there yet remains
A title that can be either better or greater,
I think him worthy of it.

K. But do think him worthy Andromana?

An. O heavens! Is Jove worth heaven,
Or does the Sun deserve to be a light
To all the world, can virtue deserve honor?
Or labor, riches: Can Gods merit Altars?
It might have been a puzling question
To them whose ears have not been blessed with Plangus worth.
But this it is so below him.

K. But say he loves thee*

An. I dare not say so:
For when I think a Prince pretends to such poor things
As I am, I feel an Ice run through my veins,
And my blood curdles into flakes of snow,
And bids me fear him, not with an awe or reverence
But as a spotted sinful thing which is the worse
For being great. It Is such a fear as I
Should conceive against an armed ravisher.

K. These things may be expected Lady, I confess
From blood that boyls in flames hot as the Sun
In scorching Libra, or sturdy Hercules
When he unmayden'd fifty in one night;
But from a man whose years have tamed those vices.
Whose love is dotage, and not lust,
Who does adore a handsome virtue, and pays
His vows to it, you should have other hopes.
Plangus is young, a Soldier, and by consequence
Something which youth excuses. But Ephorbas
Has left those toys behind him when he shook off his youth.

And. Sir, Now my fears are out.
O virtue! are there just powers which men adore,
And throw away their prayers upon,
That lend their eyes to humane actions, or was the name
Of heaven invented to still petty sinners?
Sir, sure I am mistaken
You are not great Ephorbas Sir, whose virtue
Is a Theme of wonder to all neighbor Nations;
Pray help me to him, I would see that Angel;
The Kingdom's honor, and good men's Sanctuary.
But if you are the man, whom I have prayed for
Oftener then I have slept; pray Sir, belie not
A virtue which I have hitherto admired.

K. I see you are a stranger, Lady (give me leave to say so)
To Ephorbas;
But if a Lady of thy melting years
Can love this grayness, I vow my Scepter,
Throne, Kingdom, and my self are thine;
Tha'rt fit to be a Queen. She starts back.

An. A Queen! Sir, have your subjects angered you?
Have they rebell*d, or done some sin that wants a name?
He cleave to the pavement till I have begged a vengeance
Great as their crime; but this you mention
Is a punishment, which your subjects must
Study years to curse you for; No sin deserves it.
You would blind my eyes with throwing gold befor'um,
Or set me up so high on the steep pinnacle
Of honor's Temple, that you would have me not be able
To look down on my own simplicity.
You can create me great, I know Sir, but good you cannot;
You might compel, entice me too perhaps to sin;
But can you allay a gnawing conscience,
Or bind up bleeding reputation:
I did never hear that physic could afford
A remedy for a wounded honor.

Ep. Thou Art a Fool, Andromana*
You must be mine,
Consider on it.

An. Sir, you may command your vassail,

K: That Is kindly said.

And. But -- I humbly take my leave,
Goodness protect you.

SCAENA 6.
Enter to him, Rinatus, Eubulus, and Aramedes. Ephesians. Wait on that Lady forth.

Rin. Would there were not a woman in the world
So we had our Prince again.
Sir, are you mad? or have forgot you are a father?
You have undone us all.

Ephesians. Why what is the matter?

Rin. O Sir, the Prince.

Ephesians. He is not dead, Rinatus, is he?

Rin. Sir, If he be, it is you have murd'red him:
Was it for this you were so jealous the other day?
May my Inophilus never pretend to virtue,
I Will teach him a more thriving art.
Come to the window a little Sir, and hear
How the good people curse you; as cold weather
As it is, some are so hard at it they sweat again.

Ephesians. Prithee unriddle; have thou drunk Hemlock
Since I saw thee last?

Rin. I would not be in my wits for any thing in the world,
My grief would kill me if I were;
He Is mad that will speak sense or reason,
Now you have thrown away our Prince thus,
Whose innocence was clearer then his own eyes:
Can you think how you have murdered so much virtue,
And not blush your self to death?

Ephesians. I think indeed I sent him General against the Argives,
But 'twas his own desire.

Rin. 'Twas not his own desire Sir, to have but 13000 men,
Sir was it? Was that Army fit to oppose great Argo?
There came a Messenger just now, that saw the Prince
Not sixteen miles from hence (for thither is the Foe marched)
Draw up his men to engage the enemy.

Ephesians. For heaven's sake Rinatus, post him back again,
Bid him retreat; command my son from me,
Not to go on till greater forces follovv him,
If it be possible redeem the error;
I Would give my Kingdom, life, or any thing
It were to do again.

Rin. I Am glad to see this now, heaven send it ben't too late.

Ephesians. Nay stand not prating. A horn within.

Rin. It Is from the Army Sir, O heaven I fear; Enter Mess.

Ephesians. If from the Army, prithee put on better looks.

Mess. Your son, nay more, your dying son,
Commanded me to bring you word,
He died true to his honor, King, and Countrymen,
Nor let me stay to see the brightest lamp go out
That ever graced this orb. The King faints.

Rin. O heaven, the King! why this is worse Sir
Then the other, let not us lose you both.

Ephesians. Let me but hear how it was he made his Exit,
And then my glass is run, I will not live
One minute longer.

Mess. Sir, thus it was --
It Is scarce three hours ago since the brave
Plangus marched from ^axa with an Army,
Whose souls were richer then their clothes by far,
Though their valor had put on all the bravery
That Soldiers ever wore. The Prince whose presence
Breathed new fire into these flaming spirits,
Resolved to meet the enemy with his handful,
And with a vvinged speed, fell down to the Elean Straights,
Determining there to try it with him.
His Soldiers also true sons of War,
Conteming so great odds, when victory and their Country
Was to crown the Conquerors, whetted
Their eager valors with impatient expectation
of the enemy, who trusting to his multitude came on
Winged both with scorn and anger, to see that paucity
Should dare dispute victory against their odds.
Plangus who though he saw, yet could not fear
Destruction, and scorned to avoid it
When the King commanded him to meet it,
Marshaled his Army to the best advantage,
And having given Zopiro the left wing,
The body to Evarness, himself chose out the right,
Because he would be opposite to Argo.
And keeping a reserve as great as could be hoped for
From so small a company not above five hundred men,
He gave the command of them to Zenon,
Who with his fellows took it ill they should be so long idle,
And had not the honor to be thought worthy
To dye with the most forward, and would no question have
Refused the charge; but that the smiling Prince
Promised them they should have time to dye.
Words here were needless nor had he time to use them.

Rin. What was Inophilus idle all this while?

Mess. I only heard the Prince wish just as
He spurred his horse against the valiant Argo,
He had had fewer by a thousand men
So he had Inophilus.

Rin. O traiterous boy!

Mess. The Prince and Argo met; and like two mighty Tides
Encountered.
Here death put on her sable Livery,
And the two Gallants whose valor animated each Army,
Bandyed a long time with equal force,
'Till at last great Argo fell; and on a sudden
Multitudes of men accompanied him, so that
The wing went presently to rout and execution.
Zopiro also, and Evarnes having slain
Their opposite leaders, breath death and destruction
To their reeling Foes.
Thus flusht with victory, and blood the Iberians,
Revel'd through the flying field 'till there came on
The enemies reserve of twenty thousand men,
Who fresh and lusty, grinded their teeth for anger
At their fellows overthrow, and pouring on
Our weary Soldiers, turned the stream of victory.
But the Princes valor, and good fortune soon
Overcame this opposition, and having rallied his broken
Troops, went to relieve his friends who had fared worse*
When presently he saw Evarness who had pil'd up enemies
About him, as an Obelisk of his own death and victory,
Fall bleeding at his foot, and having kiss't it
With his dying lips, entreated him to save
Himself for a more happy day, and dyed.
'Twas not long after the gallant Zenon
(Who had performed that day deeds of eternal fame,
And with his few spite of opposition, thrice charged
And routed some thousands of the enemy)
Expired, which when the Prince beheld,
Weeping for anger, he flew among'st his enemies,
Sustained only by the greatness of his courage,
For blood and strength had both forsook him;
He spent that spark of life was left in him,
In slaughter and revenge, when leaning on his weapons point
That dropped with blood as fast as he,
He then conjured me with all speed only to tell the King.
I saw him dye worthy of his father, and himself. A horn without,

Ephesians. O heaven! what means these acclamations? A shout,
What do the Iberians welcome their bloody A shout again
Conqueror* with so much joy.

SCAENA. 7.
Enter to them Plangus, Inophilus, Zopiro, Captains. Ephesians. Oh! Oh! He faints.

Rin. O cowardly boy, for that base word includes
All baseness; does not shame kill thee,
Or fear chill thy dastard blood to an ice,
At sight of that most noble injur*d ghost?
It Is well, dear Plangus (if thy Divinity deserve not
A more lasting name) that thou art come
To take revenge on that most traitorous son,
In's Father's presence, who detests his baseness
More then thy self can do. --

Pl. Excuse us dear Renatus,
That wonder froze us to such a silence,
If when we expected such a welcome
As had that Roman son whose mother
Died for joy to see him, we found so cold
An entertainment, something made us looked upon
So ike an inconvenience, that we could not
But put on some small amazement.

Ephesians. And do I hear thee speak again,
And see thee, or only dream a happiness,
Whose reality stars, and my Genius deny me?
Or art thou Plangus Angel come to rowse
Me from despair.

Pl. Sir, Pray believe it; and be not backward
In th'entertainment of these Soldiers, if
You esteem it a happiness;
In a word, you are a Conqueror:
And the audacious Argive have paid their
Lives as sacrifices to your offended sword.

Ephesians. A messenger of comfort to a despairing Lover
Is a less acceptable thing, then this thy presence,
If what you fellow told me were untruth,
Thy welcome sight has amply made amends
For those tormenting fears he put me to*
But if it were not, let me know what chance redeemed you.

Pl. If you have heard how things then went
When I sent away that Messenger. --

Ephesians. Yes, I have heard it:

Pl. Then know when death and our own fates
Had sworn our ruin, and we like some strong wall that
Long resists the iron vomits of the flaming Cannon,
At last shakes it self into a dreadful ruin
To those who throw it down; so had the Iberians
With valor great as the cause they fought for
Strove with a noble envy; who should at first
Out-go his fellow in slaughtering the Argives;
At last oppressed with multitude and toil,
We sunk under the unequal burden;
Then was our emulation changed, and who before
Strove to outdo each other, now eagerly contended
To run the race of death first.
Sir, there it was I (and many other braver Captains) fell,
Being one wound from head to foot.
O then it was Inophilus came in
With about twenty other Gallants, and with what speed
The nimble lightning flies from East to West
Redeemed this bleeding trunk, which
The insulting Argive had encompas't
Blown up with victory and pride;
He with a gallantry like none but great Inophilus,
Being bravely backed by his own Soldiers,
Whose actions spoke them more then men,
Had not Inophilus been by, redeemed the honor
Of a bleeding day. And thus were our troops
As little now as their valor great
Enriched with victory, blood, and Jewels, of which
The opposite Army wanted no store,
Returned with the renown of an achievement
As full of glory and honor to the Conquerors
As ruin to the Argives,

Ino. My Liege --
Had this action, and my merit been so great
As our Prince would make it, I then might
Own it, and expect reward. --
But it was so small, so much below my duty,
That I must upon my knees beg pardon
That I came no sooner.

Ephesians. This is a prodigy beyond what ever yet
Was wrote in story.
Inophilus, we have been too backward
In cherishing thy growing virtue, we will
Hereafter mend it
And, dear Rinatus, be proud of thy brave son,
And let the people honor the remaining Army,
We shall esteem it as a favor done to us;
We have a largess for your valors Captains,
You have not fought in vain.
This day let our Court put on its greatest jollity,
And let none wear a discontented brow*
For where a frown is writ, we will think it reason
To say, that face has Characters of treason.

Exeunt. ACT. III.
SCAENA 1.
Enter Plangus and Inophilus talking to him. Ino. BUt Sir, when you consider
she is a woman --

Pl. O dear Inophilus!
Let earth and heaven forget, there are such things;
Or if they ever name them, let it be with a curse
Heavy as are the ills they act; a Mandrakes note
Would ring a better peal of Music
In my ears, then those two syllables pronounced again*

Ino. Pray Sir, put off this humor,
This peevish Pet, and reason tamely; Sir, you
Have lost a Wench, and will you therefore lose
Your self too? Hear me but patiently a word or two.

Pl. Prithee go teach the Gally-slaves that word,
Things that dare own no thought beyond their chains,
And stand in fear of whipping, and wanting bread:
Bid them be tame and patient that fry in Sulphur,
It Is a word I have forsworn to know the meaning of,
Or if I must, it is but to shun it, and hate it more.
Oh! were thy wrongs as great as mine, Inophilus,
Or did thou love me half so well as thou do Plangus,
Thou would instill into me the poison of revenge,
And puff me up with thought of vengeance,
Till I did burst, and like a breaking cloud
Spread a contagion on those have injured me.

Ino. Why this were handsome in some Country-fellow,
Whose soul is dirty
As the thing he is mad for;
'Twere pretty in a Lady that had lost her Dog,
But --

Pl. I know what thou would say,
But for Plangus: Oh it is for none but him to be so.
Those that have injured me are persons
I once held dearer then my eyes, But how much
Greater was my love, so much the more is the offense;
Wounds from our friends are deepest.
Had any but my father -- And yet me thinks
That name should have protected me.
Or was it made only to secure offenders?
My life was his, he gave it me, my honor too
I could have parted with; but alas my love
Was none of mine, no more then vows made to a Deity,
And not performd -- And for that creature,
Who must be lost for ills through which
I must make way to my revenge,
Had she betrayed my honor to any thing
But him that gave me being,
She had made me half amends, in that my way
To vengeance had been open; Now I am spurred
Forward to revenge by fury, and yet
Held in by the rein of a foolish piety,
That does no man good but them that use it not:
It Is like the Misers Idol, it yielded him no gold
Till he had broke the head off.
Nay, Inophilus, one secret more,
And the horror of it blow thee from earth to heaven,
Where there are no such things as women,
Twill turn thy soul the inside outside outward.
I cannot get it out. Prithee what is it Inophilus?

Ino. Alas! I know not, Sir.

Pl Do but imagine the worst of ills
Earth ever groaned under; a sin nothing but woman,
Nay such a woman as Andromana durst think on;
And it is that.

Ino. How revenge transports you!
Princes have lost their Mistresses before,
Nay, and to those have not such right to them
As has Ephorbas to what Plangus has;
Who could command her, if not Ephorbas.

Pl. But I have -- Oh Inophilus -- I burst --
Yet it will out -- do thou not see it here Unbuttons his doubles.
Oh I have known Andromana as
Ephorbas did last night. --

Ino. Why Sir, the sin done by your Father is not yours
If you could not help it. --

Pl. Why there it is:
It Is that which gnaws me here;
But I swore
By all the gods that she was as innocent
From my unclean embraces, as is
The new fallen Snow, or Ermines that will meet
Ten deaths before one spot: I made my father think
The thoughts of Angels were less innocent then she.
No it was I betrayed him; his virtue was too great,
Not to have suspected it.
How do I look Inophilus.

In. Like some blessed man that grieved for other sins,
And could out of a good nature part with half
His own whiteness to purge the others stains.

Pl. Now thou sooth'st, and like some flattering glass
Presents me to advantage. I am in short,
One born to make Iberia unhappy.
Had I as black a face as is my soul,
You Would find in respect of it Egyptians were snow white.
Me thinks I hear heaven tell me I am slow,
And it is time I had begun revenge.
Ephorbas has done him wrong who loved him
More then heaven or his happiness, and would
Have run out of the world to have left him free,
What ever he would lay claim to but Andromana;
Nay she also had been his, so't could have been without a sin,
But she knew the sin she acted, and yet did it,
And lives free from the stroke of thunder.
Is there such such a thing as heaven, or such a one
As Justice dwells there? and can I ask the question?
O the tameness of a conscience loaded with sin!
Which reasons and talks when it should do.
But I will be revenged, and thus I begin, Inophilus, He draws.
Be sure when I am dead to meet my ghost,
And do as that instructs thee; 'twill tell all the particulars
Of my revenge, who must dye first, who last, and
What way too; I have my lesson perfect. He leans the pummel on the ground to
fall on it. Inoph. kicks it by with his foot.

Ino. Is this the revenge befits great Plangus?

Pl. Had this been done two days ago --
Thou durst as well have met the lightning
Naked, as have opposed my will thus.

Ino. Hear me. He draws.
Ask me no questions, nor answer me, -- or if you do,
By heaven I Will never speak more.
It is revenge you would have, and it is a great one, a very noble one
To kill your self*
Be confident your greatest foes wish nothing more
When after ages come to hear your story,
What will they say? Just as they did of Cato,
He durst not look great Caesar in the face;
So Plangus was afraid and dyed:
A very pretty story, and much to a man's credit;
For shame, dear Plangus (let friendship use that title)
Show your great soul the world believes you're the Master of
(And I dare swear you are) in this action.
Nay rally up your self, and fight it stoutly,
Shake from your mind revenge, and having laid
That passion by, put on that virtue
The world admires in you, it is now the time to show it:
The Sun broke from a cloud doubles his light,
And fire the more resisted flames more bright.
Andromana has injured you scorn her therefore,
And show she had done nothing; I Would not do her the favor
To have one thought for her, or could be troubled
At that she did, -- As for your father, Sir,
Besides the tie of nature, he knows not he has wronged you:
Or if he does, it is love that caused him; a word that once
Made an excuse with Plangus for what offense soever.

Pl. Thou have wrought upon me,
And I am resolved to live a day or two more:
But if I like it not --
Well, I will go to try to sleep a little -- perhaps that may --
I Am strangely Melancholy -- prithee lie down by me
Inophilus, I Am safe while in thy company.

Exeunt. SCAENA 2.
Enter Plangus as from sleep. Pl. Lord! how this spirit of revenge still haunts
me,
And tempts me with such promised opportunity,
And magnifies my injuries*
Sometimes it calls me Coward, and tells me,
Conscience in Princes who are injured like my self,
Is but an excuse they find for that is in truth
Poorness of spirit; or something baser;
It tells me it is a sin to be good when all the world is bad.
It makes me look upon my self, whilst wearing
This garb of virtue, like some old Antiquary,
In clothes that are out of fashion in Iberia.
But I will not yield to it, I know it is a greater glory
to a man's self (and he that courts opinion,
Is of a vulgar spirit) to disobey then satisfy
An appetite which I know is sinful.
Good heaven guard me, how am I tempted. Enter Androm.
To put on my former temper, but thus
I fling it from me. Throws away his sword.

SCAENA 3.
And. Why how now Prince?
If you part with your darling so easily,
There is small hopes but you have thrown all love behind you.

Pl. Heaven, how she is altered!
I that once swore, Jove from the well-tuned sphere
Never heard such harmony as I did, when she spoke;
Me thinks I can now in comparison of her voice
Count Scritch-owls music, or the croaking Toad.

And. Who is it you speak of Sir?

Pl. Tempt me not, Madam, with another word, for by heaven
You know I Am apt being incenst --
Wake not those wrongs that bellow louder in my soul
Then wretches in the brazen Bull, or Jove
Who speaks in thunder; those wrongs my goodness
Had half lay*d aside. Or if you do,
I have a soul dare what you dare tempt me to.

And. Sir, I must speak though Jove forbad me
With a flash of lightning.
You think perhaps Sir, I have forgot my Plangus.
But Sir, I have infinitely in ur'd you,
And could not satisfy my conscience,
(If I should say my love too, I should not lie)
Till I had ask't your pardon.

Pl. Madam, the fault's forgiven and forgotten,
Without you move me to remember^t with a worse Apology.
Live and enjoy your sins, and the angry gods:
Nay the severest plague I wish you, is,
That you may dye without one cross (for afflictions commonly
Teach virtues to them that know them not while prosperous)
Secure without one thought or sense of a repentance.

And. Me thinks you have a steely temper on, to that
Which the other day you wore, when you were
More soft then down of Bees;
But Sir if you but knew the reason why I have done
The action, which you perhaps call treason to our loves,
You would forbear such language.

Pl. Reason! no doubt the man that robs a Church,
Or prophanes Altars, has reason for what he does;
To satisfy your lust, you have that reason Madam.

And. That I have loved you once,
I call heav^n, my own heart, and you to witness;
Now by that love, by all those vows have passed
Betwixt us, hear me.

Pl. O heaven! is that a conjuration! things you have broke
With as much ease as Politicians do Maxims of Religion.
But I will hear to know you, and to hate you more.
Speak on.

And. You know whilst Leon lived, whose due they were,
I out of love resigned my love and honor unto you.

Pl. Lust, Madam.

And. I know not Sir:
Your eloquence gave it that title then.
How many dangers walked I fearless through
To falsify your pleasures? your very will.
Nay more your word, nay if I thought by sympathy
A thought of yours, that I imagined you
Might blush to speak, I made it straight my own,
And waked and studied as much to put it into act,
As does a Gamester upon loss to compass money.
At last we were betrayed Sir, to your Father's spies,
Who denied us afterward those opportunities
We stole before, be friended by my husband's ignorance.
Now was I brought to that which is the vvorst of ills,
A seeing, but not en^oying of that which I held dearest.
To see you daily, and to live without you,
Was a death many degrees beyond my own.
I knevv the love was great, so great I durst not own it.
Nay more I knevv it was noble too, so noble
I knevv my husband being dead you would not stick
To ask your fathers leave for public Marriage.

Pl. Heaven and the gods can vvitness I intended it.

And. Nay farther yet, I knevv your fathers love,
Which would not have denyd you any thing,
Would also have granted that.

Pl. Madam, you riddle strangely.

And. When I had forecast these easy possibilities,
lyet foresavv one thing that crossed our designs,
That was a sense of honor I had in me.
Me thoughts in honor I could not condescend, you
Should debase your self so low.
It pleased me better to be your Mistress, then your Queen.
And stolen embraces without the scandal
Of a public eye, were sweeter then those
Which might bring upon me for rising greatness
Is still envied) the rancour of the people, and
Consequently distasts against their Prince.
Sir now we may act safely what might have been
Less secure. Your fathers name gives a protection*
Or if that startle you, we will call him husband.

Pl. Are you in earnest?

And. As serious as love can be.

Pl. Then I want words to tell you how I hate you:
I would sooner meet Megaera 'tween a pair of sheets.
And can you think I should have so small piety,
As to be false unto my fathers bed?
That I loved you once, I confess with shame, and that I should
Have done so still, had you preserved those flames
I think with horror, but for those sins, and
Whatsoever else I must repent, I shall no doubt
Have great occasion, when I shall see the Kingdom
Enveloped in those swarms of plagues your sins call down,
And feel a share of them my self.
For heaven's sake, Madam! for my father's sake,
Nay for my own too, if that have any interest,
Learn now at last a virtue, that may make us
As happy as much as hitherto unfortunate,
And render your story to posterity so burnisht
With your shining goodness, that their eyes may not
Perceive the error of your former years.
Perhaps I then shall have a reverence for you,
As great as any son has for a fathers wife.
You wonder, Lady, to see me talk thus different
From what you saw me half an hour ago.
I looked upon my self as one that had lost a blessing --
But heaven has been happier to me, for I am now
So far from thinking you one, that I look upon you
As a pla^^e, no sin of good Ephorbas could deserve,
But love to you --

And. Sir, --

Pl. Answer me not in words, but deeds;
I know you always talked unhappily.
And if your heart dare do what is ill,
I know it can well teach your tongue excuses.

Exit Plangus. SCAENA 4.
Manet Andromana. And. And is my love then scornd?
The Chaos of that eternal night possess my breast,
That it may not see to startle at any
Undertakings, though they would make
Medusa's Snakes curle into rings for fear.
If greatness have inspird me with thoughts
Of a more brave revenge* they shall be acted.
A husbands murder was such a puny sin,
I blush to speak it; but it was great enough
For a Merchants wife: a Queen must be more
Daring in her revenge, nor must her wrath
Be pacified under a whole Kingdoms ruin.

Enter Libacer. SCAENA 5.
And. My better Genius thou art welcome, as
A draught of water to a thirsty man,
I never had need of thee till now.
Muster those devils dwell within thy breast;
And let them counsel me to a revenge, as great
As is my will to act it.

Lib. Madam, leave words.
The rest you take in breathing makes your anger cool.
Out with it, and if I do it not, if I startle
At any ill to do you service, though it be to kill my mother,
Let me be troubled with the plague of a tender conscience;
And lie sick of repentance a half year after.

And. What need I tell thee more? Plangus must dye,
And after him Ephorbas, because he is his father.

Lib. Madam, he shall. But give me leave to ask you,
How he, for whom alone of all the world you had a passion,
Is now become an object of the hatred, so great,
As others must dye because they have relation to him.

And. The air is hot yet with those words
I profferd him in satisfaction.
And he refused it, what need I speak?
Is It safe that he should live knows so much by us?

Lib. He had been happy had he never known what virtue meant.
I wonder that paltry thing is not banished earth,
It near did any good yet. Beggeries a blessing to it;
Who ere grew rich by virtue?
Madam, we are not troubled with it. But to our business,
I have thought a way. You know his father loves him,
It Is he shall ruin him, and lets alone for him.

And. Pish, pish, that cannot be.

Lib. These women are always with their Cannots,
What cannot be? have you but read the Sophy?
You will find that Haly (Oh how I hug that fellow's name)
Ruined great Mirza by his father, and his father by his son.
The great Politician while all the Court
Flamed round about him, sat secure and laughed,
Like those throw fireworks among the waving people,
That have nothing but fire and smoke about them,
And yet not sindg one hair. Indeed he fell at last;
It Is true, but he was shallow in that part oth'plot.
What have we his example but to learn by it?
Praise Plangus to Ephorbas then so far,
That first he may fear for his Kingdom,
And if you do proceed till he grow jealous of his bed,
'Twill do the better.
The King coming, I must be gone, Exit Lib. Manet And.

SCAENA 6.
Enter Ephorbas to her. Ephesians. How fares Andromana?
I Am glad this greatness sits so well about thee;
My Court was blessed that hour I knew thee first.
We Will live and still grow happy; we shall flourish
Like some spreading tree that shall n're cease,
Till its proud height over look the skies,
I hope I bad fair for a boy to night.
How happy should I count my self, could I but leave
My Kingdom something that had thy image in it.

And. Sir, never think Iberia can be happy in another son,
When such a Prince as Plangus lives the heir.
Who is the subject of all men's prayers, nay
The deserver too. There Is not a man or woman
In the Kingdom has one good wish within their breast,
But they strait bestow it upon Plangus, a Prince
Whom mothers show their little children, as something
They should learn betime to worship and admire.

Ephesians. I know, Andromana, but --

And. Sir, virtues perfection
Is at the height in him. What ever after ages bear
I give the name of worth to, must if compared to him
Be but as foyles to set his glory off the brighter.
Nor are the men only thus taken with him.
There Is not a Lady in the land but sighs with passion for him,
And dreams on him anights.
Husbands grow jealous of him, yet with joy
That they are Plangus Rivals.

Ephesians. All this is nothing. Men talked as loud of
Me when I was young.

And. Yea but they say Sir,
You were not half so mincing in your carriage,
Nor so majestic. Besides --

Ephesians. I hope they do not make comparisons. Starts. And.

And. Sir, I thought we could not have discourst on a more
Welcome theme then what is full of Plangus.

Ep. No more you cannot.
Let him as a less star enjoy his splendour,
But '^must not be so great to darken me.
But prithee do they compare us then?

An. You're discomposed Sir, I have done.

Ephesians. Nay nothing but the remembrance of a foolish dream.
What say they?

An. Why Sir, some went so far,
To say, they wondered a Lady of my years
Could marry the father, though a King,
When I might have had Plangus himself.

Ep. They did not --

An. Then I confess I blushed, and had been out
Of temper, but that I thought it might be
The Court fashion to talk boldly.

Ep. This story jump't just with my dream to night;
Me thought I saw him threatening to kill me,
'Cause thou had married me;
But the young saucy boy shall know, I hold
My Scepter strong enough to crush him into Atoms
Did they not name Inophilus?

An. I think they did.
He had some share of praises too, but it was so,
As gleanings to a lading cart,
They sometimes fell beside.

Ep. Then I am satisfied, it is an aspiring youth.
It Is something that unites Plangus and him so.
I must be speedy in resolves. Exit Ephesians.

SCAENA 7.
Manet Andromana. An. Who waits without there? Enter Libacer.
Oh art thou come? stay, let me breathe, or else,

Lib Nay spare your pains; I know it all,
I saw him drink it with as great greediness,
As usurers do unthrift, lands, or jealous husbands
Confirm their Cuckold-ships by ocular testimony.

An: It took most rarely,
Beyond our hopes. I Will leave the rest to thee,
Thou art so fortunate in all designs.
Go on and prosper.

Lib. And I Will attend for an opportunity to meet
With Plangus, and betray him to ruin
As great as unavoydable.

Exeunt. ACT. IV.
SCAENA 1.
Ephorbas solus. Ephesians. FOr ought I know my bed may be the next,
Men are not bad by halves, nor does
One mischief stop a man in his carreir of sin.
There Is as much reason ith'one, as the other.
Does he affect my Kingdom 'cause, ^^me old?
No, that is not it; he knows I must dye shortly.
It Is not a desire of rule and glory of their bending knees,
Makes him forget his duty --
He may as well covet Andromana 'cause she is handsome,
He satisfies a lust alike in both; well let him be
My Rival in the Kingdom, it is but what
He was born to, and I must leave it him;
But for my wife he must excuse me,
Nay he shall -- he pawseth.
Yet now I think on it better, the grounds are slender,
And my suspicions slight; no evidence against him
But the peoples love, and that is no fault of his
Unless deserving be a crime. Who Is without there?
Go call in Plangus, and bid him stay, Enter Libacer.
For I must speak with him. Exit King.

SCENA 2.
Manet Libacer. Lib. Nay then all is dashed, if once it comes to parley.
I must not have them talk.
But here he is. Enter Plangus.

SCAENA 3.
All health and happiness attend the Prince.
Pl. Pray tell me if you saw the King;
Be short, for I am very melancholy.

Lib. He parted hence just now, but
With such a fury revelling in his looks,
There had been less danger in a Basillsk.

Pl. Went he this way.

Lib. Yes Sir, He is going out but turns short.

Pl. But thou do not know what moved him?

Lib. I heard some such words as these.
My Rival in the Kingdom -- There Is evidence against him --
The people's love -- deserving is a crime --
And somewhat else my fear made me forget.

Pl. Who was there with him lately?

Lib. I cannot tell, but about a quarter of an hour ago
He asked for you, and every time he named you, he seemed angry

Pl. Named me? thou art mistaken.

Lib. I had almost forgot Sir,
I have message to you from Andromana.

Pl. I will not hear one syllable.

Lib. No, so she told me, but she charged me speak it, or dye,
For it concerned your life, which she held dearer
Then her own.

Pl. I value it not, but speak the mystery.

Lib. When first her lips began to move, a blush
Oreflow'd her face, as if her heart had sent
Her tainted blood to seek a passage out.
Then with a shower of tears she told me, how
Inordinate desires had made her but this morning,
Tempt you to the acting of a sin she would not name;
And that your virtue had so wrought upon her
She had not left one thought unchanged.
She loves you still, but with affection
That carries honor, and converted thoughts;
And next she bad me whisper in your ear,
(For time was short) that if you loved her,
Or your self, or did intend to cherish
The peoples growing hopes, you should not come
When the King sent for you.
For something had incenst him so highly
Against you, that there was mighty danger in it.
She bad me have, for time would not permit her to say more.
I was scarce out oth' chamber, when
Your father came and asked for you,
And bad me seek you out with speed
Sir, I should be most proud to serve you.

Pl. I thank thee friend, but prithee tell thy Mistress,
Innocence knows no fear: It Is for guilty souls
To doubt their safety. If she would have me safe,
My only way is by present appearance to clear my self,
For I believe my false accusers wish nothing more,
Then that I should be absent.

Lib. The Devil's in him sure, he guesseth so right. Aside.
She told me so Sir, and would have wished you to it,
But that there was a way to serve you better by.
She says Ephorbas told her a few minutes hence,
He Would call a council, where they would consult about you.
The place is hanged so that behind the wall Sir,
You may stand secure, and hear what passes,
And according to what they determine, you may
Provide for your safety, only for more security
She wishes you would arm your self --
Sir, pray resolve, she will pacify the King,
That you appear not presently,

Pl. Well, I will be persuaded:
Tell her, I Am resolved, I will not come.

Lib. Happiness attend you, half an hour hence, Exit Lib.
I Will wait upon you.

Pl. We shall reward thee.

SCAENA 4.
Manet Plangus. Pl. Whence should this kindness come? and on a sudden too?
A strange alteration. She who a day ago
Forgot the vows her soul was fettered in,
And but this morning tempted me to a sin,
I can scarce think on without fear, should on
An instant be careful for my safety,
And that from a principle of virtue too.

SCENA 5.
Enter to him Inophilus. Ino. Who was that with you Sir just now?

Pl. An honest fellow certainly; but one I know not.

Ino. An honest fellow call you him.
If he have not Rogue writ in great letters i^'s face,
I have no physnomy. Pray Sir, what was his business to you?

Pl. A message from Andromana,
Who out of love desires me not to go to my father,
Because something has put him in a fume against me.

Ino. Did the King send for you?

Pl. He did so.

Ino. But upon her entreaty you forbore to go?

Pl. What then.

Ino. Then you are mad Sir,
And tacitly conspire to your own ruin.
Do, take an enemies advice, and dye the object
Both of their joy and scorn.
Where are your senses Sir? or pray whence springs
This friendship of Andromana's? Alas you should not
Measure her malice by the smalness of your own.
She has injured you, she knows it Sir.
And though at present she enjoyes her treachery,
She may soon fall beside it;
Ephorbas's not immortal, nor can she promise to her self
Security when you have power to call her ills in question.
Were It nothing else, her safety would make her
To plot your death. I hinder you in talking,
But pray be gone, and when you see your father,
Speak boldly to him, or you are gone for ever.

Pl. I tell thee once again Inophilus,
Since I have said I would not go, both heaven and thee
Shall want a motive to make me stir one foot,
Were danger just there before me, running
With open jaws upon me, and had my word been given
To remain here, I would be forced from life,
Before my place.

Ino. Here is a bravery now would make a man
For swear all Gallantry, to fool away your life thus
In a humor -- I met the Court just now Sir,
As full of whispers, every man's eyes spoke strong amazeme^
My father's sent for with two other Lords,
Eubulus and Anamedes; and the Court Gates are locked.
Resolve Sir, and command me something, wherein
I may have an occasion to serve you.

Pl. Then I resolve to do as I am cautioned;
Walk, in I Will tell thee more.

SCAENA 6.
Ephorbas, Libacer. Ephesians. What was his answer then?

Lib. Tell him, I am resolved I will not come. Those were
The very words Sir.

Ephesians. '^was very pretty resolute methinks.
If he be grown so stubborn already,
The next we must expect is action.

Lib. But yet he bid me if you asked why he came not,
To find some excuse or other.

Ephesians. He could find none himself then:
Call in the Lords, we must be sudden in our execution:
But prithee one thing more, who was there with him?

Lib. No body, but I met going to him young Inophilus.
And heard one servant tell another in great haste
Their Lord would speak with some oth'Captains of the Army.

Exit. SCAENA 7.
Enter to the King, Rinatus, Eubulus, Anamedes. Ephesians. Sit down my Lords; we have
a business with you,
Requires your hands and hearts, both speed and counsel;
Our danger's such, that I could wished had flown
Upon us without warning, for so cross the Fates are,
Our safety must be bought at such a price,
That we must lose what is as dear to us
Almost as it. It Is Plangus death or mine
Must secure the others life; nay startle not.
If I am grown as wearisome to you
As to him, your calling is in vain, my Lords;
Nor shall I labor longer to preserve
A life denied me by the gods and you.
But if there is any here who has a son
Brought to these years with so much care and love
As mine has been; think what a grief it is
To lose him, and shed one tear with me.
But for that son to plume kimself with feathers
Plucked from his fathers wings, would melt ones eye balls.
Yet Plangus who has vizarded his ends
With virtue, finding it useless now, has thrown
It from him, and openly attempts my crown and life.
When mischiefs wheel once runs, how fast it speeds,
Headlong to put in act the blackest deeds!
Were my crown his, had he my life to give,
Though he would let me I would scorn to live.

Eub. Sir, we are cal^'d upon a great affair,
And if it be true, the speed of our resolves
Shall be as great as it.
Your Majesty has reigned so happily, and long,
We will not think a time beyond it.
And such, so great your virtue still has been,
Strangers have been enamoured and admired it.
Our enemies that could have wished it less,
Have yet sat down with envy, not attempted
Ought against you, knowing (I Am codfident)
By such injustice the gods would be their foes.
Me thinks it is therefore much less likely
That Plangus, who has hitherto been found
A miracle of filial piety,
And one that we may say was born the heir
To all your virtues, all your goodness,
As well as Kingdom; who counts it glory
As much to be an honest man, as a great Prince.
I say for him, whom as he is your son,
And as we hitherto have found him full
Of worth and honor, we cannot but behold
As him in whom the spreading hopes of all
Iberia grow, and promise to themselves
A still green happiness, that never shall know
What Autumn, or a naked Winter means.
For him that has scarce yet put off
Those clothes which still wear the badges
Of the great danger he was in, not for
Himself, my Liege, but you and us; for had
He wished the ruin of his father and his Country,
The Argives would have done that for him,
And he not have been called in question.
But when we must remember with what wings
He flew to meet the Torrent, both against
The counsel of his friends, and his own hopes;
How love to you and us spurred him on forward
To those impossibilities, which nothing
But love and valor durst have attempted.
Why then methinks it is strange, yea very strange
Thus in a moment to have flung all nature off,
And all Religion; and that Sir against you,
Whom we all know and think with fear
(But our sading hopes spring fresh from Plangus)
Must shortly pay your tribute to the grave.
Not that we doubt your Majesty has cause
To apprehend a danger, only it is wished
Those who informed you were examined strictly,
And Plangus sent for to answer for himself.
Slanders like Mists still vanish at the sight
Of Innocents, who bring their lies to light.

Ephesians. If an Oration could have made him clear,
No doubt my fears are vain, and we shall lie
Still sleeping in security, as great
And lasting as Plangus, and his Accomplices
Can wish upon us, nor wake till we are bound
In the securest chains, death's fetters.
That I am old is true, and Plangus knows it,
He would have caught a Cannon bullet sooner else,
Between his naked hands; then have provok'^
My fury; but age has froze me
To an icy numness, yet shall he know
My veins have fire as well as his, and when
Incen^^, my eyes shoot as much poison too.
What you allege about his battle against the Argive
As an excuse, it is a proof against him,
Though thieves rob others, yet they ^ight themselves,
For those that rob when strangers set on them,
And all unite against a common enemy.
Had Plangus private interests not held
Him to us, no doubt had left us naked
Of all defense; but an intestine fury,
To see the Argives bear away the fruits
Of all his labors, all his treasons,
Shot him into despair, and made him play
A game was almost lost, rather then give all over.
Besides, that action has endeared him to the people;
Gained him the Soldiers hearts with so great ease,
The danger's nothing in respect oth' rise
He takes from thence to climb up to his ends.
And for the virtue that has gulled us all,
I Would blush to speak it, that a son of mine
Should ever be so base to seek a cloak
For what he does, but that I have disclaimed
All my relations to him, and would adopt
A Cannibal sooner for son then he
The evidence we have is what we wish were less,
Then might I hug my Plangus and he me,
But since the Fates and his own ills deny
That intercourse; what can remain,
But that we should proceed to sentence
Speedy as themselves, and stop the ill, which may
Strike when it is night, or while it is called to day.
He knows his guilt too well, and has denied
To come, that so he might be justified.
Once disobeyed as father, the next thing
Will be Rebellion to me as his King.

SCAENA 8.
Enter to them Liba^er. Rin. As sure as death
This is one of the Rogues that has his Roguery to act,
And comes in like something that brought news
In the latter end of a play. Now shall we have
Some strange discovery -- How the Rogue stares.

Lib. No sooner had we shut the gates, my Liege.
Then an uncertain rumor spread among the people
That Plangus was in danger;
When if your ever saw a Hive of Bees.
How if you stir but one, the whole swarm moves,
And testify their anger; so strait whole crowds
Of people, the greatest half not knowing what they came for, swarmed to the
gates, and with confused cries, hindered themselves from being understoood; till
some having diverse times cried Plangus, some their Prince, all with one note
made up a common voice, and so continued till some Captains with one or two
selected Troops made up to them, and having promised them they would secure the
Prince, desired them to withdraw. And when they came so nigh as to be heard,
they did in earnest what the other had attempted with so much noise and failed
in; ^or they told the Porter in plain Soldiers language, they would either see
Plangus safe, or force the gates upon him. He in this exigent has sent to know
your pleasure.


Ephesians. How say you now my Lords,
Where is the innocence, the love to you and us?
For my part I will meet the danger;
Tame expectation is beneath a King,
Only let me entreat you to see my Queen safe.
It Is pity she should smart who has no sin
To answer for, but calling me husband.
Plangus -- Iberia shall be thine -- But He goes to stab himself, Rin. stays
him.
With the curses of the angry gods, and a kind
Injured dying father.

Rin. Heaven bless you Sir, what a despair is this?
Because you hate a hangman, you will be
Your executioner your self. Believe me,
That which presents so great danger to you
I look upon with joy: There is no subject
That loves you or the Prince, but must be glad
To see the zeal Iberians bear to a true virtue,
When bending under an unjust oppression.
No doubt their love had been as great to you,
Had you been in like danger. -- Besides, my Lord,
You are not sure it is with the Prince's consent
The Soldiers do this. My life for yours
You will be safe, let the worst come --
Let us go meet your fears. They begin to rise when at the instant.

SCAENA 9.
Andromana enters undrest, and in a fright. An. Happy am I my Lord, She weeps.
This sudden fright has rescued me from being made
The subject of some villains lust, who
With his sword drawn just now was forcing me
To lewd embraces, if you command to search the Court,
He cannot be far hence, for he ran that way.

Rin. O impudence! Plangus stirs behind the hangings. Rinatus draws and runs
at him.
That durst attempt a sin (darkness and woods
Have too many eyes for) in the open Court.
I shall be with you -- the Devil has
Armor on --

Ephesians. Drag him to torture -- They fetch him out.
My son! why have I lived to see this!
Away with him to death, the air will grow infectious,
Why stay you?

SCAENA 10*
Enter Zopiro, Inophilus, with Soldiers. Soul. Unhand the Prince, or else by
heaven he treads
Into his grave that moves a foot to touch him.

Ino. Madam, though Plangus noble self was blind,
And could not see the deep black darkness of your
Hellish actions; his friends had eyes about them.
Was this your love? this your repentance?
This your advice, your counsel? I must confess had I,
And these his noble friends here, been rul^d by him,
E're this he would been a sacrifice to your revenge and you.
Why stand you mute Sir? want you a tongue to justify
Your innocence, our svvords and we maintain.
And now, my Liege, we turn to you,
Whom we have served as truly
As ever subjects did any Prince alive,
And whilst you're worthy, we will do so still,
But we will be no man's slaves alive,
Much less be his that is another's, while this base Witch,
For so she is, constrains you to do actions
Children would blush at, and wise men laugh at,
Which will after leave you both to repentance and despair.
This beggar, whom to there day you took up as some lost thing,
Gave your honor to, and in that our safety,
That knew less to be good then Devils do, and has
Ills lodged in her, that would make a hell beyond that
The Furies dwell in. Banish her hence,
Send her to some place, where murders, rapines,
Or sins yet unheard of, do inhabit,
And where she can do us no mischief.
Do you betake your self
To your former virtue, and restore the Prince
To those affections you once had for him,
We then perhaps may live to see Iberia happy.

Ephesians Why am I forced thus to declare his shame,
Which at the bound strikes me, and is made my own.
You know not how well Plangus can dissemble,
He is an hypocrite, I need not tell you more,
Those three syllables comprehend all ill.
My Queen just now escaped from his base attempt
Wherein he would have forced her to have damned
Herself and him, and dishonored me.
What meant that Armor on, and why so guarded?
Where was a danger threat'ned him?
Or does he think his conscience could not
Sting him through it?
I wish that he might live, my Lords, but as nature
That as he is my son bids me preserve him;
So honor which pleads to the King stronger
Then nature can* tells, me for that very reason,
I can less pardon him then something born
A stranger to my blood. -- But I deserve
To dye as well as he; if he be grown
A burden to the earth, I am so too,
That gave the Monster being.
Wherefore let me be drawn to execution too,
For fathers are guilty of their childrens ills.

Ino. Would Plangus then have forc'^ Andromana;
Yes, so would Daphne have ravished Phoebus,
I Will undertake Goats are less salt then she --
But for his Armor -- can any man that breathes
One common air with her not need an Armor?
Brass walls cannot be security enough.
Why speak you not Sir? are you dumb too?

Pl. It is for them to speak are sure to be believed,
And not for him that is condemned as guilty;
Words can excuse slight faults.
If mine are esteemed such, that all my actions,
A speaking duty of one and twenty years
Speak not enough to clear me, silence shall.
I have no more to say therefore,
But to bid you do your duty to the King,
And ask him pardon for the intemperate zeal,
Heaven knows I wished it not, nor would I buy
My safety at one of my father's angry thoughts
Much less his fears,
For those I fall by.
Obey my father, and if ye love me, Gentlemen,
Shed not one tear for Plangus:
For I am timely taken from those plagues
This woman's crying sins must bring
Upon Iberia, and make you wish
That you had died as soon and innocent as I.

An. That I was nothing I confess, that what I am
I owe to Ephorbas; nay, that the greatness
I am now in, tells me it is too high
To be secure, my fears bear witness.
I wish my life would excuse Plangus his,
At least my blood wash off the blackness of his guilt,
Heaven knows it should not be one minute
Ere he should be restord to his former virtues,
But since it cannot be, I Will in and weep,
Not for my self but him. Exit.

Ino. Millions of plagues go with thee
Sir, you shall along with us, we will not
Trust you, or to the King, or her.

Exeunt. ACT. V.
SCAENA 1.
Liba^er Solus. Lib. WHat Politician was there ever yet
Who swimming through a sea of plots and treasons,
Sunk not at last in the very havens mouth?
And shall I do so too? No, my thoughts prompt me,
I shall be told in story as the first
That stood secure upon the dreadful ruins
He had thrown down beneath him. Yet I am nigh
The precipice I strive to shun with so much care.
I have betrayed Plangus it is true, and still
Have found a growing fortune, but so long
As jealousy binds up Ephorbas thoughts
From searching deeper deeper; It Is not well
That Plangus lives at all, though he be disgraced
H'has friends enough about the King, and they will find
A time to pacify him, which will be my undoing,
He must not therefore live. Andromana
Is of that mind too; but how to compass it --
Or when perhaps I have, what will become of me?
Nothing more usual then for those folks
Who have by sinister means reached to the top
Oth' mountain of their hopes, but they throw down
And forget the power that raised them;
Indeed necessity enforces them, lest others climb
By the same steps they did, and ruin them.
I must not therefore trust her woman-ship,
Who though I know she cannot stand without me now,
Yet when she is Queen alone
Fortune may alter her, and make her look upon me
As one whose life whispers unto her own guilt;
It is not safe to be the object of a Princes fear.
Then she will find others will be as apt
To keep her up, as I to raise her;
I will prevent her first.
Time is not ripe yet, but when it is
(For I must walk on with her a little farther)
I will unravel all this Labyinth
E'ne to the King himself. Then let her accuse me,
Though she should damn her self to hell,
I know she will be believed no more, then
Plangus has been hitherto.
Thus shall I still grow great, though all the world
Be to a dreadful ruin madly hurld. Exit.

SCAENA 2.
Plangus Solus. Pl. I can no longer hold, it is not in the power
Of fate to make me less; bid me out-stare
The Sun, outrun a falling star,
Feed upon flames, or pocket up the clouds,
And so burn up a land with plagues, the son
Of flaming heat, for want of rain
To cool the yawning chaps of the dry earth;
Or if there be a task mad Juno's hate
Could not invent to plague poor Hercules,
Impose it upon me, I Will do it without a grudge:
Condemn me to a Gally, load me with chains,
Whose weight may so keep me down, I can scarce swell
Under my burden to let out a sigh. I would overcome all
Were there a Deity that men adore
And throw their prayers upon, that would lend
Just ears to humane wishes,
I would grow great by being punished, and be
A plague my self, so that when people cursed
Beyond invention, to their prodigious Rhetoric
This Epiphonema should be added,
Become as miserable as wretched Plangus.
I have been jaded, basely jaded, by those tame fools
Honor and piety, and now am wake't into revenge,
Breathing forth ruin to those first spread
This drowsiness upon my soul.
A woman! O heaven! had I been gulled
By any thing had born the name of man!
But this will look so sordidly in story*
I shall be grown, discourse for Grooms and Foot-boyes,
Be ballated, and sung to filthy tunes.
But do I talk still? well I must leave
This patience: And now Ephorbas
Since thou have wrought me to this temper,
I Will be revenged with as much skill as thou
Have injured me. I^e to these presently,
For my hourglass shall not return ten minutes longer,
And having killed my self before thee,
I Will pluck my heart out, tell thee all
My innocence, and leave thee hemmed in with
A despair thicker then Egyptian darkness.
I know thou can not choose but dye for grief,
But here he is.

SCAENA 3.
Ephorbas Solus. Ephesians. Riddle upon riddle: I have dreamt this night
Plangus was cloathd like innocence, all white;
And Andromana then methoughts was grown
So black, nothing but all one guilt was shown.
What shall I do? Shall I believe a dream?
Which is a vapor born along the stream
Of fancy, and sprung up from the gross sumes
Of a full stomach, sent to the upper rooms
Oth' brain by our ill Genius to spoil our sight,
And cloud our judgments like a misty night.
Why do I doubt? it is ominous to stay
Demurring when the way is plain: Is day
Or night best to judge colors? shall I stand
Trying the waters soundness, when the land
Pre^^nts firm footing? Truth by day appears,
And (...) ^apers hope to find my fears
(...) And yet ^e thinks it is very strange
(...) should suddenly thus change,
(...) his nature off, I did not so
(...) young I am res^lvd to know
(...) ^ear this mist from fore my eyes,
I^ (...) be done by care, by gold, or spies* Exit.

SCAENA 4.
Andromana Sola. Andr. So Badgers dig the holes
And Foxes live in them: Of all Factors
State-factors are the worst, and yet least to themselves
Of a^l their labor. This Libacer is wading
To the throat in blood to do me service,
And i will reward him with a halter.
Tame fool, can he imagine I remove
A husband and a son, to suffer him
To live still and upbraid my ills.

Lib. It is resolved. Enter Libacer*
But here she is, I must speak fairly for a while:

An. How does it succeed now, my darling?
Shall we be great? great alone?

Lib. As great as pride and fullness of revenge
Can swell us. Hark in your ear, Madam,
I Will tell you all our plot, but softly,
For perhaps the jealous walls may echo
Back the treason* They whisper.

SCAENA 5.
Enter Plangus with his Sword drawn. Pl. I bore whilst I could, but no it is grown
Too great to be contained in humane breast,
And it shall out, though hoopt with walls of brass.
Are they at it? I stood once a listening at their entreaty,
This time at my own I Will stand and hearken. Steps aside.

An. It is impossible.

Lib. I tell you no, I Will aggravate the injuries,
And tell him how basely poorly it was
For a father to betray his son so.

An. His piety will never --

Lib. But his fury shall, I Will stab the King my self, and bring
Those witnesses shall swear 'twas Plangus.

Pl. Nay then it is time to strike;
There, carry thy intents to hell. He stabs Libacer.

An. Help, Murder, Murder, a Rape, a Rape.

Ep. What dismal note was that?

An. Sir, there you see your Martyr,
Whose force being too vveak to save my honor,
His fidelity was greater, and died a loyal sacrifice
Offered by the impious hand of that vile man.

Ephesians. O heaven! does not the earth yet gape and swallow thee.
Thy life shall be my crime no longer; I gave it thee
And thus resume it with a thousand curses. He stabs Plangus.

Pl. Sir, I at length am happy
To the height of all my vvishes.
I am a going suddenly -- from all Faints.
My troubles all your fears --
But I will tell my story first --
How you have vvrong'd, and been vvrong'd your self.
This woman -- to be short --
Has tvvin'd like Ivy with my naked limbs
Before she marryd you --
-- And would -- Oh -- in spite of death
I will go on -- have tempted me to bed her since
-- Upon refusal she turned her love to hate,
And plots my ruin -- And --
Next your death -- I can no more --
I killed the instrument -- farevvel --
-- Forgive me -- Dies.

Ep. Can this be true Andromana.

An. Do you believe it?

Ep. I vvish I had not cause --

An. Sir every syllable was true he told you;
Whose words I thus confirm She takes Plang. Dagger, flings it at Ephorbas,
and kills him.

Ep. I Am slain, mercy heaven,

An. You should have come a little sooner. Enter Inoph.

In. Do I see well? or is the Prince here slain?

An. He is, and cause you love him,
Carry that token of Stabs Ino.
My love to him, I know he will take it kindly that you take
So long a journey only to see him.

In. It was the Devil struck sure,
A woman could not do it -- Plangus Oh -- Dies.

SCAENA 6.
Enter to them Rinatus, Eubulus, Anamedes. Rin. Heaven defend us! what a sight
is here?
The King, the Prince both slain? what and my son too?
Only this woman living? speak out
Scritch-ovvl, Witch, how came they by their deaths:

An. By me, how else?

Rin. Lets torture her.

An. I can prevent you, I would not live a minute longer,
Unless to act my ills again, for all Iberia. She stabs herself.
I have lived long enough to boast an act,
After which no mischief shall be new -- Dies.

Rin. Lets in, and vveep our weary lives away;
When this is told, let after ages say,
But Andromana none could have begun it,
And none but Andromana could have done it.

Exeunt. FINIS.

