HENRY THE THIRD OF FRANCE, Stabbed by a FRIAR.

WITH THE Fall of the GUISE.

A TRAGEDY.

Acted at the THEATER ROYAL.

By THOMAS SHIPMAN Esquire.

Licensed, October. 16. 1678.

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

-- Rege incolumi Men's omnibus una.

Virg. Georg.

LONDON, Printed by B. G. for Sam. Heyrick at Grayes-Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1678.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY Lord Marquess of Dorchester, Earl of Kingstone,
Viscount Newark, Lord Pierrepont and Manvers, and one of the Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, etc.
My Lord,
Wisdom is attained by an exact disquisition after Truth: which seemed once so
difficult an attempt, that in Greece (the then knowing part of the World) seven
only were accounted to deserve the name of Wise. Such commendable researches
gained 'em that prae-eminence; and this made them prescribe to the rest of
Mankind. They declared Truth (like precious Oar) buried in a Pit, not to be got
thence, but by a long deduction of Reason; nor this Reason perfected without
Study and Learning. Now Learning is only the cultivating of Parts and Wit,
'till we arrive at a thorough improvement of thoughts upon things and Men.

My Lord, all this being considered, who can lay a juster claim to this Jewel,
than your Lordship? Whose mind, being animated by generous spirits, always
addresses it self unto noble ends? Your inward sight (sharper than that of
Eagles) can gaze upon the splendeur where Truth'sits throned, and discern all
the finesses of Policy and Prudence. Ablessing not to be attained without a
sagacity able to pierce into the deepest resorts of Nature, and to extricate
hidden forms from the Wombs of their Causes. But these Perfections (like the
Elixir of the Philosophers) are impossible, or very difficult to be obtained,
without such a prosperous success as your Lordships, that has run through the
round of all Sciences, with a perspicacity even to admiration. You, my Lord,
(like the Eye of the World) have not only visited, but inlighten'd each Orb in
the Heaven of Learning. And those who hence forward shall pretend to knowledge
must owe it to your Influence. Wherever you past, you left such tracks of
light, as may direct the inquisitive World into the most private recesses of
knowledge.

Besides, it is as wonderful how your Lordship could arrive to this height, to
these miraculous improvements! How could you break through those intangling
blandishments of Fortune? Those cumbersome employments of Honor and State?
Those tediousnesses of Address, that wait on and add to the tumults of
Grandeur? For Greatmen (as the incomparable Verulam observes) have little
freedom either in their times, their actions, or themselves. Insomuch, as
prae-eminence would afford no Aitraits, nor any pretenses authorize the
thirstings after Greatness, unless a power to do good. By such revelations of
your merits and virtue, you have added luster to your Coronet, and ennobled
even Nobility it self. Vulgar Fame applauds Majesty in such choices and that
commonstream runs here into the Fountain of Honor.

If our Age had been unfortunate in wanting you, as that of the Romans had been
happy in enjoying you, Cicero might have spared his expectation (as he smartly
worded it to Caesar) Quae miremur habemus, quae laudemus expectamus. In our
late Deluge of Ignorance and Rebellion, you stood up like one of Seth's
Pillars, and preserved Letters and Loyalty to this happy Age. You were tossed
indeed, but not discomposed with the humrous successes of Fortune. You steered
your Resolutions, and kept a steady soul amidst those storms that shipwrackt
three Kingdoms. In that fatal 41th. when those false Representatives of our
Liberties (like Robbers) pretended to direct us into the right way, and then
intrapt us into streights, to cut our Purses and our Throats: when by a horrid
Conspiracy (like that of Corah) they rebelled both against Moses and Aaron;
when (like the ungrateful Hebrews) they wanten'd after impure Loves, and
worshipped false Gods of their own making; Then you, my Lord, endeavored with
all your might to rescue us from inhumanity and rapine, and divert Judgments
from the People, like Cicero in the Conspiracy of Catiline; (and with equal
Eloquence) you labored to save both Capitol and Commonwealth from ruin. In
testimony whereof, those two incomparable Speeches of your Lordships, to the
House of Peers, in Defense of the Hierarchy, will be recorded in the Temple of
Fame, till Time shall be no more.

Nor is this all, for tho these great Truths must eternize your Name, and
advantage the next Age with glorious examples; yet to come nearer home, my
Lord, the present time is as much obliged. Your Hospitality and way of living
is such, as may instruct those of your Lordships rank to restore and uphold
their ancient interest and grandeur, too much and too long neglected. Here is
Plenty without Luxury and Intemperance, Greatness without Noise and Disorder:
Entertainments are here be stowed both upon Mind and Body, and it is doubtful to
which our Repasts are most obliged.

But I Am fallen upon a Panegyric, where I intended a Dedication; and in both
alike presumptuous; yet it may be the more excusable in that I have sacrificed
to Duty and Truth, in acknowledging your Lordships favors and my great
obligations, and in yielding a Testimony to the merits of so eminent a Person.
And after my Reader is confirmed of all these great qualities, and hears how
your Lordships pleased to countenance this Tragaedy; I need not fear his
acceptance. You, my Lord, alone are a sufficient Theater, and your single
praise more to be valued than the loudest Plaudite. I humbly beg, that your
Lordship will vouchsafe to pardon all its falours, and accept of that devotion,
wherewith I offer it, which will be an infinite honor to,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and most Devoted Servant. August 30th.
1678. Tho. Shipman.

TO ROGER L'ESTRANGE, Esquire
SIR,
Since this Tragedy has gained your approbation; I ought to show the care I
took in it. I altered not the Story, nor made the Guises speak, or act worse
than really they did. I branded not that damned League with such characters as
I might have done, and they deserved. I fited the Parts to the Persons, and
kept'em as like themselves as the Story would let me. I made both the Kings
Amorous, Generous and Valiant, and so indeed they were; and endeavored they
should not suffer upon a particular Stage, when they had triumphed upon that of
the World. If Grillon seemed overbold and rough sometimes in some places, I do
but keep my self to that character which Mounsieur Girard, and D'Avila (with
others) have bestowed upon him. Nay his frequent Oath of Death was not my
Espernon's Life, Book 4. p. 190.
fancy neither; For there is a Story in the Life of Espernon, enough to justify
me, and fright our Gallants from that profane humor. As for the rest, it was
my aim they should not speak above themselves, and I suited (as well as I
could) their Parts to their Callings. Yet after all this, I am not ignorant
that I lie open to the Critick's in transferring the main Scene from Blois to
St. Clou. But had I confined the Story to either of those Places alone, the
death of the King or Guise might have been left out contrary to my original
design. After all this, Sir, I crave leave to reflect a little, upon the very
Rhyme it self.

All Subjects of weight, or such as most interest the Passions, ought (as I
take it) to be expressed with a gravity and in few words. Thus the Greek and
Latin Tragedians, nay and Philosophers too, accustomed themselves to short
Periods. But their Measures necessarily being inconstant, therefore to make 'em
suitable to several occasions, AEschilus, and next after him Sophocles, when
they brought the Stage to represent the Story more naturally, by introducing
Actors and Scenes, they bethought themselves of a reformation, and disposed
their Speeches into lines of more certain Measures to make them more grateful
to the Audience. Let any man suppose a representation of some considerable
length, to be performed in short sentences, and of unequal cadences, one cannot
fancy any thing to be more wearisome. But when it runs in equal Measures,
neither so at length to stretch the sinews of Discourse and Fancy, as upon a
Rack, nor so short as to cramp 'em; but sizable both to the speaker and hearer,
it must needs advance the satisfaction of both Parties, together with the
reputation of the Poet. The Greek then and the Latin Tragedians (for I have
nothing to say to those of France and Italy) mostly wrote in measured Verse.
For Rhyme never reached them, 'till in a barbarous Monkish Age, which became
soon weary of it, as unnatural to the Ideom, and destructive of their native
Elegance. But, from the earli'st dawnings of knowledge, our Bards and Druids
had their Genealogies and Songs of Victory in Rhyme, as not only natural, but
quickening the spirit of their Language; and we have continued it with competent
success. For I refer it to any ingenious rational person, that can write or
Judge, what briskness is infused into any fit Subject by a well ordered and an
unforced Rhyme. It is true, that one man's Prose exceeds another man's Verse; but
suppose both those Talents to be equal in one and the same person, I dare say
his Verse, as to sweetness and charms, will be much more agreeable than his
Prose. I speak all this as to the content of the Ear and Fancy upon the Stage.
I am not to answer here for bald Rhimes, that serve only to make bad sense
worse, I speak of easy smooth Rhyme in Verse, such as exalts Sense and makes
it Rapture, nay I Am persuaded Oratory as well as Poetry, has a greater force
upon our affections, when the periods contain a certain Measure, or at least
when two or three of the closes have some affinity of sound. I never had it
tried (but may be it is worth the while to do it) whether those Orators that
most please, make it not their Care to come off with a grateful Harmony in the
Close. These are the Charms like those of natural Magic, that work unknown
either to the Speaker or Hearer, yet gain far more attention to one man than to
another. This is only to offer at some proof that a Paper of verses in Rhyme,
where the Conceit is new, the humor Surprising, and the Penning Elegant, must
needs take more in the repetition then any studied Prose. And a Speech on the
Stage (be its Concerns what it will) must be far more harmonious and pleasing
in Rhyme, and more congenial to the Soul, Miltons Paradise is a work noble,
strong and fanciful, but had his humor of contradiction softened it into his
own sweet Rhyme, what a Poem had it been! but I dare not venture further upon
this Subject, since that learned and facetious Gentleman, Mr. Rymer, has
promised the undertaking, Tragedies of this Age, page 143.
from whose curious and able hand I expect it with the impatience of a longing
Woman, and indeed I Am abundantly pleased to find my persuasions strengthened by
so Potent an Ally.

And the more, when I hear some are Fugitives to their own persuasions, but
inconstancy being the Running gout of the Soul, and natural to some persons
both in their thinking and writing, I shall not say more of 'em, but that it is
torment enough to groan out their remaining years in a helpless distemper. And
now, Sir, I intend your ease in dismissing this Subject, which I assure you was
imposed on me first in discourse, and then I was desired to set it down at a
venture: what ever it be I shall rather leave it to your better judgment, than
pretend to dispute it, although without all controversy, I am

SIR, Your very humble Servant. Thomas Shipman.

THE PROLOGUE Intended, and Part spoken by Mr. Heart.
YOu're not t'expect to day the modists sport,
Affronting either City, or the Court.
Our Poet's mannerly and cautious too,
And neither will abuse himself or you.
Faith both are needless; since they are done each day,
By you who judge, and he who writes a Play.
The sacred thirst for Bays and Fame is gone,
And Poetry now turns Extortion.
Nay worse, Stage-Poetry seduces more
Than Wine, or Women ever did before.
Gained by its Charms, hither the Wits resort;
The Stage robs both the Pulpit and the Court.
The other Sex too are stark rhiming mad,
Even from the Lady to the Chamber Maid.
Nor do these Charms in the North Country fail,
But took our Poet both from Hounds and Ale.
His Scenes, such as they are, in France are laid;
Where you may see the ancient English Trade;
Either in beating France, or giving aid.
Such virtue reigned then in our Smiles or frowns,
Those did defend, as these could conquer Crowns.
These Miracles were in Eliza's reign
Whose left hand France and Holland did sustain,
And whose right hand both baffled Rome and Spain.
Whilst England only could the World subdue;
Nay found a new one out, and reigned there too;
Judge then what now Great Britanny may do!
Since now her Helm a greater Prince does guide;
Who has the advantage of his Sex beside.
Tho here our Poet rather would make known
His country's reputation, than his own:
Yet he may chance by Critics to be hist,
As he intrencht upon the Casuist.
But he no Controversies sets on foot;
And thinks't were better if none else would do it.
Nor tells you which Religion he is on;
May be (like some of you) he is of none.
If this prove true -- He must the Statesman move:
Then for the Ladies he has Scenes of Love.
And here, Gallants are fighting Scenes for you:
Nay here is Huffing for you Hectors too.
What the Pox, Gentlemen, would you have more?
You Are cloyed sure with the Atheist and the Whore.
ERRATA.
IN page.2. line 33. read bosom. p. 10. l. 6. that belongs. p. 11. l. 32. dele
our. p. 17. l. 8. Sir. l. 15. respects. l.23. let us. l. 26. Spirits. p. 23. l.
14. he. p. 24. l. 34. dele to. p. 28. l. 16. you will love. p. 30. l. 29. speak.
p. 36. l. 30. do more. p. 38. l. 13. make. p. 48. l. 7. in this. p. 49. l. 24.
can fix a. l. 25. inflam d Gellies. p. 50. l. 9. disease. p. 55. l. 4. has. p.
60. l. 28. r. public act. p. 66. l. 15. two. p. 68. l. 6. nor ever. p. 69. l.
24. descants, l. 34. by th'Guards. p. 65. l. 2. Thousands of Souls. Epilog. l.
4. dele own.

The Persons Re-presented.
HEnry the Third King of France, Loves Chateauneuf and Gab. Henry King of
Navar, Loves Gabriel. Henry Duke of of Guise, Loves Gabriel. Francis Cardinal
of Guise. Grillon, Colonel of the Guards, Loves Gabriel. Guessle Proctor
General. Revol Secretary of State. Plessis Secretary to Navar. Pericart
Secretary to Guise. Larchant Captain of the Guards. Commolet a Jesuit. Friar a
Conjurer. Burgoin Prior of the Iacobines. James Clement a Iacobine Novice.
Commanders, Soldiers, Spirits, Attendants, Guards, etc.
Gabriel de Estree, Mistress to Henry the fourth. Chateauneuf, Mistress to
Henry the Third. Armida Friend to Gabriel. Bonneval Friend to Chateauneuf.
Attendants, etc.
The Scene, Blois, removed at th'Fourth Act to the Camp at St. Clou, before
Paris.

TO THE Most Illustrious Prince JAMES Duke of Monmouth and Buckleugh and
General of His Majesty's Armies, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
and One of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, etc.
WHen Wars were rumored, or great Dangers near,
Mars then was sought, his Temples crowded were.
From You, great Sir, and from your Flaming Blade,
Our Eden boasts her Glory and her Aid;
Not Eden only with your beams you gild;
But like the Sunshine upon every Field.
It Is duty then our Laurels we should bring
As Off^rings to the Power that makes them spring.
They 'mplore, great Sir, your influence and your aid;
Laurels themselves! of Thunder not afraid!
Were Muses mortal, Halters might 'em fright
From speaking truth, as some from acting right.
It Is vain to fear the effects of Jesuits rage,
If You, great Sir, vouchsafe your Patronage.
What General ever began with more renown,
At once to guard the Myter and the Crown;
Charles is our Jove, in's Conduct blessed we are;
And Monmouth is his Thunderbolt of War.
Witness the French at Mastricht, who, with shame,
Kindled their Valors at his generous Flame.
You were the ruling Genius of the Field;
Their empty veins your Spirits only filled.
You taught 'em how to Conquer, raised their Name,
'Twas You advanced their Trophies, lent 'em Fame;
Which on a brave Design you did bestow;
That is, to make them fit to be your Foe.
Raised by your Acts at higher things they aim;
To follow Monmouth is the Road to Fame.
Europe, at their successful Arms, amazed
Looked pale, and all its trembling Princes gazed.
On Brittain's mighty Monarch fixed their Eyes,
Whose greater puissance did 'em more surprise.
For English Conquests swiftly'r might advance;
Since England more than once had Conquered France.
But then rememb'ring Charles as Just, as Great,
His Help, as their last refuge, they entreat.
Mons is besieged and ready to be ta'n!
Monmouth being absent other hopes were vain.
At your approach the Gallic flame expires:
Thus does the Sun put out the weaker Fires.
Your very Name did wearied Mons release,
Made the French fly, and truckle to a Peace;
Swift as the Lightning, and as piercing too!
Jove thus on's Eagle at the Giants flew.
The Ancient Romans did some fear betray
To pinion Victory, and force her stay:
She like their Conquering Eagle courts your Hand,
And will kill surer by your Conduct manned.
What ever she ^^ies at must your Quarry be;
Who can resi^^ Monmouth and Victory?
The fiery Mars is powerful in his Sphere,
Yet loses Virtue when concerned elsewhere;
Our Mars a general influence can afford;
There is his Sphere, where ever he draws his Sword.
In such exploits Caesar was never skilled,
First to teach France to Conquer, then to Yield.
Thus AEolus, with his impetuous Bands,
Charging the Lybian Deserts, drives the Sands
Into a Mountain, which his Trophy stands.
'Till changing sides, He rallies in the Air
His Troops, and then Commands to sound to War:
The lofty Pageant tumbles to the ground,
And's Trophy now is in it is ruins found.
By your Graces most humble and most Devoted Servant. November. 1678. Thomas
Shipman.

Henry the Third OF FRANCE.
ACT. I. SCENE I. The Court at Blois.
Enter Guise, Cardinal, Pericart. Guise WHat! shall the Providence of our Fate
be vain,
In being sprung fro' the blood of Charlemain?
Shall those rich streams (like Iordan's silver flood)
Be lost in the dull Sea of Hugh Capets blood?
Shall the Name of Valois flourish o'r Lorrain?
Our Golden Lillies wither with disdain?
No! tho in azure Field so long they stood,
I Will drown their splendors first in fields of blood.

Car. This resolution's brave, and nobly flies
Unto a pitch, worthy the Name of Guise.
Nor does our Princely House derive its fame
(As this was all) from Charlemains great name:
No, we have other boasts as just and fair;
Since from great Clovis we descended are.
Clovis! the first of all our ancient Kings,
Who made the Roman Eagles droop their wings.
He, who the Monarchy of Gaul did found,
And with the sacred Cross the Lillies crowned.

Per. Eleven of 'em, Kings from Charlemain;
Of whom five did the Western Empire gain.
Charles of Lorrain; the last of that great Race,
Outed by Capet, who usurpt the place.

Car. Yet Heaven revenged our wrongs: as witness bear
The English Lions; who so often did tear
Our Lillies from their stems; and did advance
Their Ensigns on our Walls, and conquered France.

Guise. Look but how judgment prosecutes them still!
What England once has done, again she will.
That British Harpy, who robs all the gain,
And watches o'r the golden Mines of Spain;
Whose Canvas wings about the World have flown,
As by that charm she would circle in her own.
A Virgin! Who her neighboring Kings outbraves,
Scorning to match with her intended Slaves.
This Heretic, this Woman, dares combine
Against our League, and with Navar does join.
She flatters him; and fools the King to advance
Her swelling hopes, in captivating France.

Car. Yet see how Heaven our great designments mind
In this rare Providence, just now designed.
The invincible Armada for us waits,
And domineers now in the British Streights.
To conquer that small Island will be more,
Than the new World the Spaniard gained before.

Guise. And conquered it must be. -- This Navy vast.
Seven days ago near unto Calais past.
When it was first presented to my eyes,
As up the briny Unequal it did rise;
Methought it seemed just as the World did peep,
When first it rose fro' the bottom of the Deep.
The Waves o'r burdened with the Ships they bore,
Fled from the weight, and panted on the shore.

Car. When this Elizabeth's no more a Queen;
Navar has not one hope to step between
Him and his ruin: for when Heaven's so just
To make the Valois fall, (as fall he must)
The Hollander dares only for him stand;
And Porpoises can little do by land.

Per. Since Orange died their baffled Spirits retreat;
Whose blood did only that crude Body heat.
Those phlegmatic dull States can never own
A sanguine temper, now his brave One's gone.
But, Sir, his sudden death may caution you
TO avoid delays; since you are mortal too.

Guise. I know it well.

Car. Then, Sir, I needs must fear,
Since here our Brother Mayn writes how Navar [shews a Letter.
Will be within three leagues of Blois to night.

Guise. Let him; so Mayn but keep him in his sight.
Were he but here, he were as good as taken
'Twixt Paris and the Army of Du Mayn.
When opportunities are fitted so,
Neither in vain to frown, nor make a blow,
I Will charge through lightning to attaque my Foe.
Has Pericart yet humored my desire,
In making trial of the conj'ring Fry'r.

Per. Yes, Sir, and him above reports did find.

Car. Reports to Lies and Miracles are kind.

Guise. Desist; for you Philosophers are all
In your opinions too pragmatical.
How did you find him?

Per. Sir, above the rate
Of Mortals; like the Favorite of Fate.
For how can he be less? who can control
The numerous Spirits, that swarm 'twixt either Pole?
None of 'em but will come at his command
More swift than Faulcons to a wonted hand.
Leaving the Crystal Regions of the Sky,
Like shooting Stars, to his desires they fly.
He, more to gain my credit, did prepare
To show he could command the Prince of the Air.
He from the Earth thick Vapors made to rise,
Which by his Art turned Nitre in the Skies;
Then ram'd into a Cloud, he stretched his hand,
Making a Lynstock of his Magic wand.
The aerie Cannon flamed at his desire,
Disgorging both its thunder and its fire.

Guise. It Is very strange!

Card. So strange it is, that I --
Think Pericart is one that scorns to lie,
Yet must be satisfied from my own Eye.

Per. That he has promised, Sir. Within a Wood,
A league from Blois, where once a Temple stood
Of mighty Oaks, roof'd o'r with woven boughs,
Where Druids formerly did pay their vows,
He has a Cave: wherein he does relate
His Oracles, and future hints of fate.
This Evening is appointed for the Scene.

Guise. Told he what those Nativities did mean?

Per. He Will do his best, and if in that he fail,
By ways more sacred he will your fates reveal.
He Will wait for you before an hour be past.

Car. Then will I meet you there. [ Exit. Card.

Par. Now, Sir, at last;
You Will hear some words about your proper fate.

Guise. Let Us talk of Love -- we have talked enough of State.
Now Pericart, what news from Orleans?

Per. My way was shortened by a happy chance.
Sir, at the Friars, I Madam Gabriel met.

Guise. How, Madam Gabriel, thrice happy fate!

Per. And with her one of my acquaintance too,
Armida named.

Guise. How! Meet your Mistress too?
I hope this good portends.

Per. And so hoped I.
Then did I soon my self to them apply;
And told 'em there was none or little choice
Of Lodgings, since the great resort to Blois.
But mine they might command; Gabriel replied,
It was a favor not to be denied.

Guise. Dear Pericart! Although before possessed,
Thou have a greater share now in my breast.
As great as that Usurper Love will spare;
And yet for greater room thou struglest there.

Per. My Services cannot deserve that boast,
Since in my Duty they are all ingrost.
The Fry'r, Sir, her Nativity just cast;
The fate she is born to, he declares is vast.

[Gives a Paper to Guise, who reads it. Your Beauty shall gain much renown.
In being destined for a Crown.
Yet He that shall your State advance,
Is not, but must be King of France.
Guise. If our Designments now successful be,
This Fry'r (for ought I know) may point at me.
Our greatest diligence this needs must move,
Concerned in Glory now, as well as Love.
Whilst we are with the Fry'r, direct thy care
To bring her to my Lodgings, when we are there
A farther secret I Will to thee impart,
And thou shall share my glory and my heart. [Exeunt.

SCENE. II. Chamber of Presence.
Enter Revol, Guesile, Plessis, Grillon. Rev. MY Lords, the King will instantly
be here.

Gues. It Is strange the Guises will not yet appear.

Ples. It Is like their Acts. All must attend their State.

Gril. May be they will make the King himself to wait. [To 'em King, Larchant, and
Guards.

King. Larchant, attend without. How are you all?

Rev. We want the Duke, Sir, and the Cardinal.

King. They drove me from the Lovure the other day,
And now keep others and themselves away.

Enter Guise, Cardinal. King. Your sleeps are long, or else your motions slow.

Guise. We both our duty and neglect, Sir, know.

Car. A settled mind, that no vain thoughts o'rcome,
Can sleep without the aids of Opium.

King. A plain and honest heart, without disguise,
Is more serene than are Egyptian skies;
Where neither clouds of discontent --
Nor storms of passion rise.

Guise. For my own part, I publicly declare, --
Passion and Interest both secluded are
From my desires; which altogether join
TO establish firm the Laws and Church divine.

Car. There needs not this. It is already done
By the late League agre'd on at Peron.

Ples. It Is odd, methinks, into extremes to fly
Gain'st others, 'cause they think not so as I.
I full as justly may my hate declare
To those that differ in their clothes and hair.

King. The League made at Peron is too severe;
The Paris Edicts too indulgent are.
I Will choose the mean, and 'twixt both these will run,
Endeavoring (as I can) an Union.
But to the fairest means I Will have recourse
And if those will not do, I Will then use force.

Guise. For sometime to this trial we may yield,
But let no Heretic upon it build.

Rev. Tho to the Romish faith I must agree,
Yet I would also a true Frenchman be.
Let Us lay by all effects of violence,
Let Churchmen only Consciences convince:
They may persuade, whom we cannot constrain;
As Lions may be stroak'd into a Chain.

Guise. Who are those Lions? I will make them fall,
Or bring a Bull from Rome to outroar 'em all.
If you would make 'em truckle to your Laws,
Or knock their teeth out, Sir, or break their claws,
Then let 'em grin their worst. --

Gril. The Duke of Guise,
As is his spirit, so is his advice,
Noble and fierce. But, Sir, the time's not fit
For War, nor is there cause to manage it.

Gues. We know Navar to be a Soldier born,
Whose conduct at Coutras we yet do mourn.

Guise. I soon cried quit at the Battle of Arnean;
Where I the German Army did o'rthrow.

Rev. It Is very true, that Action was most brave:
But strong Confederates Navar must have.

Ples. Sir, he is certain of the English Queen,
The King of Scotland, and the Palatine,
Wirtenberg, Saxony, Pomerania, Hess,
The Holland forces and the warlike Swise.

Guise. Well let 'em, let 'em all their forces bring,
Those Dukes, that English Queen, and Scottish King.
Tho other Frenchmen ^o such lowness fall,
And suffer it, I will confront 'em all.
I Will not degenerate from the House of Guise!
My Father sell Religion's sacrifice;
And tho I dye, a double Crown will come,
Laurels for War, Roses for Martyrdom.

Car. These Hugonot's presumptions are forgot;
Our Father, Sir, was murdered by Pultrot;
The endangered both your Brothers Life and Crown;
Favoring 'em, seems as we their Crimes did own.
What the Admiral then suffered by your vow,
Others there are, as much deserve it now.

Guise. We ventured then on Men as brave, and great
As France has any now. If some forget
What they escaped, and what they promised then,
When it comes to it, they shall not 'scape again.

Gril. Who would believe that murder and sur prize
Could be reminded by the Duke of Guise?
Let not an Act encouraged be by you,
Which Grillon thinks below himself to do.

Guise. Am I to be controlled by you, Sir? Know,
It has not been the wont, nor shall be so.

Gril. Death! What a huffing's here? were I allowed
The liberty you take -- I Would --

Guise. You are proud
In your command; and happy these are by.

Gril. More happy far, if only you and I.

King. Hold, Grillon, I command, or go.

Gril. I go
But first would have these Lorrainers to know,
One word from you
Does more than they, and all Lorrain can do. [ Exit Grillon.

King. His boisterous Soul to every one is known.

Car. May be e're long it will be calmer grown.

Guise. Sir, to be plain, such Fellows as these are,
Favored by you, almost proclaim a War.
They rob the greatest treasure you can have;
I mean the hearts of all men great and brave,

King. Let us leave trifles, and the main advance;
We Are here assembled for the good of France.

Car. It Is true; and, Sir, your Royal word is gone,
No Heretic should sit upon the Throne.
Judge but what contradictions it would bring,
An Heretic, and the Most Christian King!
And since illustrious Anjou hence is gone,
Navar is one step nearer to the Throne.
For we in Herauldry are so well read,
To know the House of Bourbon must succeed,
If you die without Heirs, which Heaven forbid

Ples. It Is odd discourse, a King to entertain,
Young and in health, with whom must after reign.
It is but little less than to degrade
The very power of Heaven it does invade.

Guise. I wonder whence this boldness is derived.

Ples. Fro'th'King my Master: when I here arrived,
I my Credentials gave.

King. You welcome are.
Speak his Commands.

Car. Commands, Sir, from Navar?

King. I, Sir, has not a King a Title good?
And is not he besides first Prince of the Blood?
Deliver up your Message.

Ples. Sir, I bring --
In the first place defiance from my King
To any one in France, that dares relate
He Is in the least, a Troubler of the State.
He only arms against rebellious foes,
Wh'attempt your Crown under religious shows.
He then defies --
And challenges by me the Duke of Guise.

Guise. I answer not the challenge rash and vain;
It Is known I Have fought, and I dare fight again.
If he turn Catholic it is not fit;
And if he do not, tell him we shall meet.
I Will reach his Head tho it were ten times higher,
And meet him! Tho, as Powder meets with fire.

Ples. From that Persuasion whereto he was bred
He faithfully ingages to recede --
When by a lawful Council he is shown
A better faith, then what he yet has known.

Car. We ask but his conversion; that is our aim;
France then may keep her safety and her fame.
Since this is promised; Sir, we beg of you --
That You the Oath of Union would renew.

King. Withdraw and soon assemble all the States
To sign the Edict. I at any rates
Would purchase Peace, the greatest blessing given,
Or that ever can expected be from Heaven. [Exeunt.
King and Grillon returns. Grillon, my Brother of Navar writes here [Shews a
Letter.
His Army and Du Mayn's are very near,
And watch each other with a jealous fear.

Gril. Yet, Sir, my Scouts now bring me word last night
Some Horse of Mayns, about the parting light,
Marched this way from their Camp; doubtless to make
Discov'ries from such Prisoners they can take;
And knowing, Sir, your weakness ('till Navar
Ioyn with you) will presume to venture far.
But if you please I will a Party head,
And them into the neighboring Wood will lead;
So the surprizers selves may be surpised.

King. Grillon, perform what you have well advised.
But first I Would have you to declare the proof
Of your address, to beauteous Chateneuf.

Gril. It little did avail; Tho I did try
All means; but you can better do it than I.
In any business belongs that to War,
I could far stronger Arguments prepare.
She said, she could not Love as you required;
Neither would you, Sir, Love as she desired.

King. I understand her not.

Gril. Her meaning is --
She Would have a Husband, and you would have a Miss.

King. Grillon, too often we Kings in Passions prove
Like common men, and are enslaved in Love.
But then in Marri'ges we are confined --
And must our State consult and interest mind.

Gril. That Is very much! Love, State and Interest too!
I Am only bound to Love (that is kiss and woo)
And one of these is full enough to do.

To'em Chateaneuf, Bonneval. King. Here Is Bonneval, and now you may make proof.

Gril. So, Sir, may you, for here is Chateauneuf.

Chat. Pardon, Sir, our Intrusion; we are rude.

King. Fair Chateauneuf can never here intrude.

Chat. We may disturb you tho.

King. Not in the least:
I no disturbance find but in my breast:
And, Madam, there you take but little care. Bonnev. and Grillon aside.

Chat. I must presume to say unjust you are:
For if I could, Sir, your disturbance free,
You need not long expect a remedy.

King. O Chateauneuf no happiness I want,
If what you promise you will vouchsafe to grant.
But such unkind distinctions find you will,
Just in their birth my struggling hopes you kill.

Chat. Sir, your Prerogative in words is known;
Your words and my thoughts too are both our own.

King. But, Madam, why can no persuasions move.
That all I speak are pure effects of Love?

Chat. Love should find equal objects, Worth and State;
Which are (you know) denied to me by fate.

King. I can bring State, and You can merit bring;
Be you the Queen of Love I Will be the King.

Chat. O, Sir, suppress this too injurious flame,
Least what you mean my honor, turn your shame!
Let me my self in my own shadow hide,
And never tempt me with so vain a pride.

King. Such Rhetoric as this you vainly move,
Which seems mere slightings of the God of Love.
And tho I grant most powerful you be,
There Is no contesting with that Deity.

Chat. If, Sir, his power be such, he scorns a slight,
To save his credit let him show his might.
And when I find my Honor has a share
With your desires, and both united are;
There needs no argument my heart to move
And without Cupid's power I then may Love.

King. A faint content like unto theirs who lie
Languishing without hopes, but must not dye.
But Time and Truth may remedies reveal.
And what has wounded now, at last may heal.
Grillon about your charge. [ Exeunt. King and Chateauneuf.

Gril. I cannot stay, [To Bonneval staying him.
And this discourse requires a Summers day.

Bon. This you indiff'rency enough does prove;
We Are seldom weary of the things we Love.

Gril. It Is true, when one has nothing else to do;
But who can manage Love and business too?

Bon. Love claims the present hour; the next you may
Bestow on our business,

Gril. Death! Another day
I Will tire you out with Love, and making moan
Even from the rising to the setting Sun,
Nay if you please, we will talk down the Moon.

Bon. Grillon, on this condition you are free. [ Exit. Bon.

Gril. O Heaven! The blessed delight of liberty. [ Exit. Grillon.

Explicit Act. I.
ACT. II. SCENE. I. The Wood near Blois.
Enter Gabriel, Armida. Arm. I Now find true what I have often read,
A Crown brings trouble to the owners Head,
For Since you only were for one designed,
Your sleeps have been as restless as your mind.

Gab. Armida, yet thou know not Gabriel right,
Content I value, and a Crown can slight.
I Am only fearful least such dreams advance
Ambitious Guise to seek the Crown of France.
Fierce are the working Passions of his mind,
His Soul's, tho to Ambition most inclined.
Venus, without a Crown, he would disdain,
And love, or hate, or any thing, to reign.

Arm. This should not you disturb. He must succeed
In his desires, if by the Stars decreed.

Gab. Yet if I now should to his Love incline,
His Treason and Ambition would be mine.
And if a Crown should chance to be my lot
By Love-designs it only shall be got.

Arm. Well, Madam, we shall make a better choice
Of observations, when we come to Blois.

Gab. Your Pericart by promise comes to day,
And from the Fry'rs will thither us convey.
Under the shady Trees let us walk a while
Both Time and expectation to beguile. [Exeunt.

Enter Captain, Soldiers, going out. Capt. Into our Ambush some must fall. Ly
close; To Soldiers going.
All ways are lawful to entrap our Foes.

Enter a Soldier. Sold. Upon the Hill 'twixt this and Orleans,
Right Hand the Road, I 'spy some Horse advance.

Capt. How many may they be?

Sold. Some three, or four.

Capt. Why did you stir, unless they had been more?

Sold. Methought they more and more begant' appear.

Capt. Some dreadful Troop of Thistles!

Sold. Gad! I swear,
I saw 'em move.

Capt. Some Troop of horned Beasts,
Or Trees with waving Plumes upon their Crests.
Do think they were not Clouds.

Sold. I know not well;
I Will try once more and then may surely tell. [Exit.

Enter first Soldier. Sold. Two Ladies, Sir, are fallen into our snare.

Capt. Do think I came with Women to make War.

Sold. When seen, you will think it much the safer choice
To charge the strongest Regiment in Blois.

Capt. Are they so beautiful?

Sold. Gad! Captain, more
Than you, or all the World ever saw before.

Capt. Go, bring 'em in. Sure they can do no harm. [ Exit. Sold.
I Am cold, and they may serve to make me warm.
Enter second Soldier with Ladies. Gad, beautiful! Fair Lady, I Am for you;
The other you may share betwixt you two They hand her, Arm. runs out.

Arm. Heaven lend me Wings!

I Sold. There after thee I Will fly,
Rather than miss my Quarry. [Exit.

2 Sold. So will I. [Exit.

Capt. Come, Madam, Come. [ Hands Gabriel.

Gab. What do you mean to do?

Capt. I am in Love.

Gab. It Is now no time to woo.
Bless me! Your looks are strange.

Capt. I mean to prove
All ways, to quench my raging flames of Love.

Gab. I Will dye first. [Strives with her.

Capt. How! Deny me such a bliss.
Which when I have obtaind, you cannot miss.

Gab. Not miss mine Honor?

Capt. No, it is very right,
No more then miss your shadow in the night.
I am resolved. [Forces her out.

Gab. Just Heaven vouchsafe your aid, Cries loudly as she is dragged forth.
Unto a Virgin treacherously betrayed. [Exeunt.

Enter Scouting, Soldier. Sold. How gone! I was afraid to come again
'Till Trees, and Beasts, and Thistles turn to men. [Flies out.

Enter Navar armed with Soldiers. Nav. This way I heard the cry. He pursues,
after clashing Swords brings in Gabriel.

Gab. Upon my knee --
I pay my thanks, thou true Divinity!
Thou can be nothing less; since thou have shown
Both help and pity, when all hopes were gone.

Nav. You Guardian-Angels! I must tax your care
For suffering this: to what end shine you there?
That one as fair as you, and as divine,
Should need, alas, a mortals help like mine?

Gab. O, Sir, disparage not those heavenly powers!
Their vigilance is far more quick than ours.
By what is past we only guide our sense,
Then rule our actions by the consequence.
But they foresee what never yet was done,
And so prevent a fate that is hurrying on;
As by your blessed assistance here was shown.
Those Guardian-Angels, do not then condemn;
They brought you here, or you are one of them.

Nav. My inclinations yield unto the charms
Of The God of War, and I was born to Arms;
But never knew before a Cause so just,
I Have resku'd Chastity and routed Lust.
The Grecian Hero did the World subdue;
I Have gained more glory in protecting you.

Gab. I hope the action, Sir, is your reward,
At least if these my Virgins prayers be heard.
May all the blessings that attend the prayers
Of Virgin Saints, when they are fre'd from tears;
May all the Crowns and glorious recompense
Of Martyrs, Chastity, and Innocence
Be your reward, I cannot you requite.

Nav. Madam, you have more than done it by your sight.

Gab. Your favor vies with Heaven's; for Heaven but gave
My sense of Honor; My Honor you did save.

Enter a Soldier. 1. Sold. To horse, to horse, fresh Squadrons, Sir, are nigh.

Nav. Madam, I Will make your safety good or die.

A Second Soldier. 2 Sold. Fresh Parties rise from all parts of the Wood,
As Cadmus it with Dragons teeth had sowed.

Nav. Vouchsafe your hand. By this blessed touch inspired,
My Courage and my Resolution's fired.
Thus, Madam, will I charge, and all must fly. draws his sword with her in the
other hand.
By my sword conquered, or your brighter Eye.
Let 'em be never so strong and brave, they shall,
Or by my Thunder, or your Lightning fall. [Exeunt.

Enter Captain and Soldiers. Cap. Command the Ambush all to rise with haste:
Charge with such fury to redeem what is past. [Exeunt.

Enter Gabrel. Gab. Whilst there is a Providence, I need not fear;
His worth and virtue have obliged Heaven's care.
The Guards He set o'r me are killed, and I
Exposed again, and know not where to fly. [Exit.

Enter Grillon and Soldiers. Gril. Death! I am come too short! 'T was briskly
fought,
But will make large amends, when I come to it.

Enter Captain and Soldiers. Capt. Let Us beat this party out; they will quickly
run,
And then the Plunder and the Fields our own,
Yield, or you die. [ to Grillon.

Gril. Dog! see thou in my face --
The least point of a line that looks so base?
Were It thou now Jove himself in that disguise,
In thy Arms Thunder, Lightning in thy Eyes,
Thus would I charge, and to thy ruin prove:
Grillon would die, or trample upon Jove. [All fight.

Cap. How Grillon! Then we are lost. [Offers to fly.

Gril. Fool! Will thou fly? [Stays him.
And lose the fame by Grillon's hands to die?
I Will be more kind, and here the favour's shown,
Consulting thus thy glory and my own. Kills him and beats his Party off.

Enter Navar and Soldiers. Gril. Ha! Who art thou that looks so like a Man?
A thing I met not here, since I began.
Thou art worthy of my Sword. [Offers to fight.

Sold. Hold, It Is Navar.

Gril. Death, Sir, what made you venture out so far?
Your Valor's great, and great should be your care.

Nav. This Party of Du Mayns, I have pursued,
Until I lodged them here within the Wood.
Being resolved to see the Coast was clear
Before I marched; and I shall soon be here. [Enter a Soldier.
What makes thy haste? The news?

Soul. Your Scoutes, Sir, 'spy
Two Squadrons of Du Mayn's that hover nigh.

Nav. To horse.

Soul. To horse.

Nav. My service to the King: [ to Grillon.
My Arms and duty to his aid I Will bring
Grillon farewell, be watchful. [ Exit Navar cum suis.

Gril. When y're gone,
I shall too many be although alone.
Command 'em sound to horse. [Exeunt Milites.

Enter a Soldier. Soul. The King is near,
Hearing the fight.

Gril. I shall attend him here.
Command some in to carry off the Dead. [Exit Soldier.

Enter Soldiers with Gabriel. Soul. This Woman, Sir, we took; she swiftly fled.
Her fear speaks guilt.

Gril. Ha! What art thou I see?
Sure, thou art either Fame or Victory,
I could not love thee else! Whate'r thou art,
Thou art the first ever conquered Grillons heart.

Gab. Talk not of conquering, Sir, I beg your aid,
Although I see my Enemy there dead. [Points to the Captain.

Gril. Were all the World thy Foes, let Grillon be
Thy Champion, they should be as dead as he.

Soldiers leading in Armida. Soul. We found this other, Sir, in the same case.

Gab. O my Armida let me thee embrace: [Imbrace.
Art thou in safety, Dear Armida tell?

Armid. O dearest Madam, that you were as well.

Gab. Blessed be our fate. [Imbrace again.

Gril. Let me as happy be. [Offers also; she puts him by.
Death, Madam! know I love you more than she.

Gab. Let your requests then, Sir, declare that love.

Gril. How! Daunted! I can neither speak or move. Stands amazed.

Armi. The place of our abode is very near.

Gab. Our wishes and good Fortune wait you here. [Exeunt Gabriel and Armida.

Grillon walking confused and arms cross. Enter King, Revol, Larchant, Guesile,
and Guards. King. What Apparition's that, that walks there?

Revol. It Is Grillon or his Ghost, Sir.

King. Lets hear. [Listens. Grillon not seeing them.

Gril. Who would believe, a Woman could obtain
A Conquest here, never purchased yet by Man?
My Spirit's flat, their former vigours cease;
Trumpets sound harsh, and now no longer please:
My humour's changed, I can no more delight.
To whet my Sword, or keep my Armor bright.

King. who ever robbed Grillon of his former mind Discovering himself.
Was much to me, but more to France unkind
Who is the Thief?

Gril. A Woman, Sir. I lie!
An Angel! Some Court Lady of the Sky.
O, Sir, Your Grillon's lost, your Grillon's gone;
Never more expect to see his Armor on.
Perfumed and curled in Silks, he will dance all day,
All night his limbs on downy Quilts he will lay,
And sing his threats, and smile his frowns away.

King. Whence is this change?

Gril. Beauty, Sir, is the cause;
Beauty! that conquers Kings, and tramples Laws.

King. Consult thy glory.

Gril. Farewell War and Fame.
My breast must cherish now another flame.

King. What is this Beauty! she even makes thee mad.

Gril. O, Sir, she is something more than can be said.
Fancy a Sword drawn at a trembling Foe,
Brighter than mine, brighter than Cherubs know,
Her Beauty shines at once, and conquers so.
Her Brows are ready bent, like English Bows,
And can as easily conquer France, as those.
Her Eyes two bullets shot with swifter flame,
Than ever yet from murdering engine came.

King. How he describes her in his Martial phrase,
And acts a Soldier in a Ladies praise?
Where is she Grillon?

Gril. Sir, I know not well.

King. Who is she Man?

Gril. Death, Sir, I cannot tell,

King. Thy Juno must not be to us allowed,
And thou art jealous, tho she is in a cloud.

Gril. Had I the power to reach the Sun (that Eye
Of Heaven it self) I Would pluck it from the Sky,
Least it should look and love as much as I.

Revol. There are not Arguments enough to prove
Grillon's high Soul can stoop so low as Love.
Cupid but vainly aims his slender dart
Against the breast plate of a vigorous heart.
To that weak Passion only they are inclined,
Who have the deep Consumption of the mind.

King. You cannot blame him, if the Lady be
But half so fair, as he described to me.

Gril. Remember how I praised her, Sir, to you:
'Twas very much, and yet far less than true.
Gather those praises all into one Store,
Add thousands, and she merits thousands more.

King. Well here is some comfort left, although she is fled,
We have the Soldier, tho we have lost the Maid.

Gril. No prize at all! you had as good have none;
For what is a Soldier when his heart is gone?

King. To bring thee succor I did hither move;
Expecting War, but am surpised with Love.

Gril. What War! 'Sdeath, Sir, what had I more to do?
When Cowards fly, let other men pursue.
Grillon below himself can never move.
I conquered first, and then had time to love.
The King, Sir, of Navar was here and fought;
To Blois his Army will be quickly brought.

King. The stubborn Leaguers then confront we shall,
And make them either yield to us, or fall.
Order our march to Blois.

Gril. Pray leave me here.
She said the place of her abode was near.

King. In thy attempts may thou successful prove;
And as in War, so triumph now in Love. [Exeunt omnes praeter Grillon

Gril. Tho from their trouble I my self have saved,
I Am Prisoner still, to my own thoughts enslaved,
There Is no confinement like that of the mind;
All other Bondage may releasements find.
Those eyes that fettered me, must set me free;
No other help for my captivity.
With what despair my strongest hopes are crossed?
Since both my Iailor and the Keys are lost! [Exit.

Enter Guise meeting Pericart. Per. Sir, she is within and did but lately 'scape
From some rude Soldiers a most horrid Rape,
Which makes her far more earnest to be gone.

Guise. Thou must away my Quality's not known?

Per. No, Sir, for there I followed your advice.
Your Brother's there already in disguise.

Guise. When at my Lodgings, as thou have designed,
Let her have all respects, yet be confined. [Exeunt.

SCENE. II. The Cave in the Wood.
Enter Cardinal, Fry'r, Guise to'em. Guise. NOw, Friend, art thou that
Confident of Fate,
Who can her deepest mysteries relate?

Friar. Son, I am one, who can as much impart
As any other, by the help of art.
By Art, I say, not by a horrid spell;
Like those, who bloody compacts make with Hell.
Poor gloomy Souls! O'r whom the Fiend presumes,
Fudling their brains with melancholic fumes,
Old Dotards, silly Hags! Whose wants, or hate
Contrive with him some feigned Scenes of fate.

Card. May we presume, tho to enquire of you,
How you perform what Devils cannot do?

Friar. There is a Magic which has hapt to some,
And lawful as Traditions are to Rome.
What those Magicians found (tho known to few)
I Am by the second hand impow'r'd to do.
Whilst I still practice them, and thus proceed
By Nature's rules, must do as those men did.
When Passives are disposed that Actives may
Fitly conjoyn, we then have found the way.

Guise. Believe it, Father, you may show your skill
To Persons, that will not requite you ill.
These three Nativities have you yet cast,
And brought their figures?

Friar. Son; the thing's too vast,
And their Concern's too great, for me to frame,
Or circumscribe in the limits of a Scheme.
Far greater mysteries must that impart;
Their fates exceed the vulgar rules of art.
Those I have thoroughly tried, but tried in vain.
Unless the Planets selves I can obtain,
Your aim and my indeavour's lost.

Card. How will
Our friends be satisfied?

Friar. I Have one way still.
Thrice fifty years ago, one Gyles-de-Raiz.
( Marshal of France) my great Grandfather was.
'T was he who first, with Necromantick art,
Taught Joan of Orleans to act her Part.
Whose powerful charms made the English quit the Field;
No mortal force else could have made 'em yield.
'T was he (as by my bloody Roll appears)
Who hired two Spirits for two Hundred years.
One is an Astral Spirit mild and fair,
Imbody'd in our shape with thickened air.
His vesture cut out of a morning Cloud,
When with the peeping Sunbeams first it glowed.
He only good foretells, and prosperous things,
The fate of Heroes and renowned Kings.
The other Earthy, and resides below,
Deep in the Center; yet my call does know;
Then rises like a Damp, till the Air it meet.
Which to a gloomy form condenses it.
This only blood foretells, and wicked things,
The fate of Rebels and unprosp'rous Kings.
But what I can do, You shall quickly try
-- What ever you espy --
Stir not, nor speak, nor fear, whilst I am by.
He muses and mutters. Last night I did my thoughts intentive keep
'Till midnight; when Heavens Eyes were all asleep.
The World was hushed in slumbers: In deep Caves
No breath of Winds, nor murmur from the Waves.
Just then when Ghosts their dismal haunt pursue,
And Oberon invites his Fairy Crew,
(Like Cleopatra) to sip Pearls in Dew.
I at that time Music aloft did hear,
Which made me know my Astral Spirit near.
It in few minutes at my Call appeared;
And soon as my Commands were heard --
Of The Errand swiftly flies, --
-- And sooner reached the skies, --
Then Prayers of Saints, or darts shot from the Eyes.
My earthy Spirit too (moregiv'n to sloth)
-- By Nature dull and heavy, both --
Roused at my Call, and my Commands to keep --
Shot down to search the Caverns of the Deep.
And now -- if Heaven or Hell these secrets hide,
Within few minutes they shall be descried. [Exit. Friar.
A Table brought, a Censor of burning Coals, a Cabinet, etc. He returns, a Cap
on, a Wand, and book in's hands; taking out of the Cabinet a piece of Chalk.
This Piece of Chalk a sacred Cave did own;
Long since dug in the Mountains of the Moon;
Where often she met her, loved Endymion.
This Powder mixed well with a certain Flower, Scrapes it, and mixes it.
That shaded both the Lovers in the Bower,
And crittically got in the happy hour.
With three thin shavings of her waxing horn --
Steeped in five dew drops of a Maydays morn, [Shows 'em.
Just then when April died, and May was born.
Three leaves of Moonshade dried, and after put
To a grain of Powder of a Dormouse Gut; [Shows 'em.
With three small pieces of a Mandrake root.
These seven Ingredients mixed make a Perfume Burns and strews.
Whose vapors mount and Ashes strew the Room;
Each a fit Charm to make my Spirits come. [Table taken in. He Circles 'em in
with his Wand.
Within this Circle you are secure,
As brazen Walls did you immure:
Security is not more sure.
Reads and waves his Wand. Descend! Descend! Descend! Thou from the Skies!
Thou from the Earth, Arise! Arise! Arise.
Come quickly from the Cloud, and say
How thou did my Commands obey.
Music far off. Spirit descending leasurely. Sings this, viz. SPIRIT SINGS.
AFter I had your Orders last night,
I met with a path all paved with light,
And yet with my passing I made it more bright.
Then through the lowest Region I flew,
Sousing through falling Bogs of Dew,
By the Moon's Orb then swiftly I past,
No lightening nor thought made ever such haste;
Nor did I stay, till Venus I found
All covered with Roses, and with Mirtles Crowned.
Each Rose did in native Scarlet appear;
Yet every Rose was outblush'd by her,
Because I found Mars in the midst of her Sphere.
Your Summons she read, and obeyed with a Nod,
I had never gained else that stubborn God.
Then I flew to an Orb, that was much more than bright;
With Diamonds studded and roof'd o'r with light.
I knew't could be none
But Jupiter's Throne;
My Summons he read, and obeyed with a frown.
And now all the three are there coming down.
No fate never so dark escape can their sense,
Since each of 'em is an intelligence.
Look, Sir, they hover, all three hover there, [Spirit descends.
Wave but your Wand, and all three will appear. [Waves his Wand.

Friar. That Voice which strikes the World with awful fear,
Loudly proclaims the Thunderer is near. [It Thunders.
As may be known by that shril Trumpets sound, [A Trumpet.
The God of War approaches mortal ground.
Those charming strains that sweetly strike the Ear,
Persuade the Goddess of delight is there [Soft Music.

The Planets descend with Music, the Astral Spirit crosses the Stage, followed
by the Apparitions of Henry the Third crowned, holding a Cypress branch: Navar
Crowned holding a Laurel one. Guise a Ducal Crown, a Sword drawn. Soon as they
have past the Stage, the Spears ascend with Music. Astral Spirit. Let me my
Furlo now obtain
All Is done, an Astral Spirit can.

Friar. Thou have thy liberty; be gone

Spirit. I fly --
Who'd stay on Earth, when he may mount the Shy? [Ascends.

Friar. This from above is all we know,
Let us now try our power below.
The Fry'r Waves his Wand. Reads, then Loud Music, the Earthy Spirit ascends
with this SONG. I Come from the Deeps below,
Where Coral branches bud.
From where the Rubies grow
From the Rocks richest blood.
Although in the Deeps, little darkness we know;
The Diamond's our Sun,
The Pearl is our Moon,
And the rest of our Jewels are stars there below.

The Earthy Spirit then clear rises, with Rebellion and Murder on each side,
three Spirits on one side of the stage, and three on the other. They dance.
Then the Earthy Spirit beckens, and there cross the stage these apparitions, 1.
Henry the Third pale, a bloody Dagger in's hand. 2. Navar Crowned with Laurels,
a bloody Dagger in's hands. 3. Guise holding a Sword drawn, when half o'r the
stage, he returns -- the Spirits dance again and descend, as th'Earthy Spirit
is descending-(stops at the Fryar's words) and Murder and Rebel. Friar. Stay
Spirit stay -- [He stays.
-- What Is he who does behind remain?

Spir. One of the Princes of Lorrain.

Guise. Say, Spirit, must he wear the Crown?

Spirit. That unknown Voice has knocked us down. [The three Spirits, Rebel and
Murder descend.

Guise. This Gold I give to thee, Friar.

Card. And this give I.
Now for Lorrain!

Guise. Lorrain and Liberty. [Exeunt.

Explicit Act. II.
ACT. III. SCENE. I. Guises Apartment.
Enter Guise, Pericart. Per. HAve you not softened yet her stubborn mind?

Guise, In her each day I stranger humour's find:
Peevish as Children waked, or Matrons crazed;
Scornful as Upstarts, that are newly raised.

Per. The thought, Sir, of her fate sure does you wrong.

Guise. If so, I will remove the cause ever long.
Then your Armida hinders too my Love.

Per. I can with ease that obstacle remove;
For she has begged, and partly gained to be
Conveyed to one, she thinks no friend to me;
But is deceived, For I Am by him assured,
During my will, she shall be there secured.

Guise. I like it well, and now resolve to try,
If talk of Crowns, can dazzle Gabriel's Eye.
And if I find those Arguments will move,
I Will be a King only to gain her Love, [Exeunt.

Enter Gabriel, Armida. Gab. I Am glad thy speed and fortune were so good,
Faster to fly those Rogues, than be pursued.
But the chief Villain soon had me betrayed,
If Heaven had not been pleased to send me aid.
Just in my need, an Hero set me free;
His Sword at once revenged and aided me.
I kneeled him thanks. He scarce three words had spoke,
When clashing Swords our conversation broke.
Yet as he fought, he still looked back at me;
Which for some time delayed his victory.

Arm. That Hero, Madam, if a blush speak true,
At once both fre'd and captivated you.

Gab. I must confess, he looked me to the heart;
And tho my Life lay on it; I could not part.
Rather then my Deliv'rer should be slain,
I wished my self in danger once again.
Each man that fell my fear and grief did move;
I thought it fear, but oh! I find it love.

Armi. But, Dearest Madam, what of him became?

Gab. He fought and vanished like the Thunderer's flame;
When Fates (as my late wounds they would requite)
Did bring me to the gallant Grillons sight.
He proffered love! had not my heart been lost,
He Would been a prize becoming Queens to boast.
But all in vain I am betrayed to Guise;
Lost where I love, and loved where I despise!

Armi. I promise freedom if you will take advice.

Gab. My dear Armida, I Will be ruled by you;
Blessed with your love, and with my freedom too. [Enter Serve.

Serve. Madam, the Duke of Guise has sent to know,
If you will vouchsafe him to attend on you?

Gab. He need not ask what he has power to do. [Exit Serve.
What shall I do Armida?

Armi. Seem but Kind;
It will advance the Plot I have designed.

Enter Guise, Pericart. Guise. Still, fairest Lady, you create your pain. Armida
and Peric. go aside,
Your Brow frowns clouds, or else your eyes weep rain.
It Is against Nature Storms should have a place
In the highest Region of that heavenly face.
O, Madam, imitate the Heavens above,
Where only is serenity and love!

Gab. Your words are good, your actions are not so;
Like Trees that only fruitless blossoms show.
If my small Beauty's heavenly, as you say.
You like a Lucifer, would it betray.
By his sad fate you may your own proclaim;
For you both lose your glory and your aim.

Guise. My sufferings you a Prophetess declare?
I Am scorched with flames, and damned into despair.

Gab. You 've time, Sir, to repent of your offense,
And to regain your pristine Innocence.
Give me my freedom and you leave your crime,
And we may both be happy at one time.

Guise. Make your words good, oblige your self and me;
And at one time too, we may both be free.

Gab. The first attemp, Sir, unto you belong;
Since you are only he that offers wrong:
Or, if in honor, you will not yield to me,
I Will lead the way, and here I set you free.

Guise. Madam, if you will make your promise true,
You must both make me free, and happy too.

Gab. Your happiness and freedom both belong
Unto your self, and I have all the wrong.
For with what justice can you keep me here?
Or what is your pow 'r o'r me?

Guise. Ah! None I fear.
Justice and Power, with all things you can move,
Must yield to the pleasing violence of Love.
My mind is bent your motions to fulfill,
But something stronger contradicts my will,
My Soul (above constraint) does oversway
All those desires, and makes me disobey.

Gab. Remember, Sir, It is a glorious boast
To wheel about and gain a Field that is lost.
Relieve your self before you be o'rcome;
Knock at your breast; may be you're not at home.

Guise. You prophecy again: my Heart is gone;
Here is the Aerie, but the Falkons flown.
The Haggard Sous'd, soon as it 'spy'd its Prey,
But Cupid had laid Lime-twigs in the way.

Gab. Sir, to be plain, your Passions strangely move;
You practice force, and yet pretend to Love.
Love by restriction does its virtue want:
As happiness was lost first by Restraint.
Consult but sense, It should not be confined;
Love is the Freeborn Subject of the mind;
And when that privilege it cannot have,
It turns a Rebel, or is made a slave.

Gab. To all your Argument I Am not inclined;
My heart was free, but now, alas, confined!
Its Birth-right's lost, yet never will rebel.

Gab. I Am glad you know your duty, Sir, so well.
This doctrine fitter for the League may be,
And you may do more good on it, than me.

Guise. It is below you to upbraid me so;
For I to you will only duty owe.

Gab. The King claims share,

Guise. And he shall have his due.
It seems by this you're most to Kings inclined,
Because your Stars have one for you designed.
But if such charms the very name does bring,
Think what is the honor then to make a King.

Gab. I Am now a Slave such thoughts become not me.

Guise. If you will love a King you shall be free.

Gab. I love none else, and that is but his due.

Guise. You love a King then?

Gab. Yes, tho it be you.

Guise. Vouchsafe your hand: Upon your Iuror look. [takes it.
By this fair hand; and thus I kiss the Book. [kisses it.
Next day by this time I will set you free;
But one Oath more -- [Again.
And once again for more security. [Exeunt Guise and Pericart.

Gab. Thy help Armida; for the storm grows high.

Armid. I heard him, and my counter Plots will try.
I have gained Pericart, and am to go
This hour unto a Friend, whose faith I know.
We must shift clothes, and you depart in mine;
And so you may escape his bad design.

Gab. You have all thanks, that gratitude can give,
And to requite you I must only live.
But when the Duke returns, and misses me,
Armida, what will then become of thee?

Armid. I know his Spirits fierce, but brave and true,
And he will respect me for regarding you.
I Will no excuses frame, as for a crime;
Since in his need, I Would do as much for him.

Gab. But, dearest Friend, why should thy love for me
Be more adventurous, than my love for thee?

Armid. Madam, his Passion's like a furious wind;
And Love's the raging tempest of the mind:
If a fair stately Cedar stand in the way,
Scorning the Winds rough courtship to obey;
Its blustering rage will more and more abound,
In hopes to lay the Cedar on the ground.
But if, when he returns, the Cedar's gone,
And he no object have to blow upon;
He Will rage a while, but soon his fury lay,
And he himself will blow his Storm away.

Gab. Thy wit has Empire in it; I Will not contest,
I hope thy Genius guides thee for the best. [Exeunt.

SCENE. II. The Court.
Enter Chateauneuf, Bonneval. Chaten. Although my Fortune's bad, it is not strange,
Since the Kings heart is so inclined to change.
His thoughts can never be fixed; you may as soon
Cut out and fit a Vesture for the Moon.
Inconstant winds to fewer points will vere;
Than he to Ladies if he think 'em fair.

Bon. You have too tender and too quick a sense,
Which catches at the shadows of offense.
And yet this jealousy does plainly prove,
You claim no small share in great Henry's love.

Chat. I Will either have no share, or I Will have all,
They who love right can never lower fall.
True Lovers all, like greatest Gamesters set,
And will not let Bystanders have a Bet.

Bon. Like Men both great and rich, you have such store,
Scarce with convenience you can manage more;
Yet still like them you are so greedy found,
Envying the poor to look but on your Ground.

Chat. Desist my Friend; it would even patience vex;
Custom and Nature both against our Sex!
Nature's a Bungler not to make us strong,
As the other Sex to vindicate a wrong.
To seek amends for any great abuse
In them is Honor, impudence in us.

Enter King, Grillon. He and Bonneval aside. King. Madam, I Am told by Grillon,
you're severe
In your discourse, as I inconstant were
Of what you tax me, you may guilty prove,
And injure Truth that Confident of Love.

Chat. Whereshall we seek for Truth, (that injured Maid)
Despised on Earth is to Astraea fled.
In Cottages despised she may remain,
For I, alas, have searched the Court in vain.

King. You wrong your self, such doubtings to pursue;
Why should not I persist in loving you?

Chat. Believe it, Sir, I now can plainly see,
You share not any part of love with me.
Else you would the causes of my doubts perceive,
As well as I the causes you do give.
With what content and pride, your love I Would own?
But I have lost it, and for one unknown.

King. That Jealousy is rash, I daily see it;
But never before knew it so indiscreet.
Can you believe I should my love withdraw
From your fair eyes, for those I never saw?
As I should leave the Sun and its known light,
To search for greater in the womb of night.

Chat. Yet Fancy most inclines to what is new;
And knowledge cannot please as hopes can do.
When Grillon's frantic praises speaks his Prize,
O Heavens! what joy, what love shoots from your eyes!
Your loose Imaginations are surpised,
And I forfond Chymera's am despised.

King. There is no hope to alter such a doubt,
When I have made my Love so fairly out.
Has not my Kingdom taxt me of the Crime
Of slighting other Beauties of the Time.
Great Criminals justly condemned to death,
Begged a new life, and gained it in your breath.
Honor and Riches (which the World beguile
From Heaven it self) were purchased with your smile.
What then can more be said, My Love to advance?
You, Madam, govern him, who governs France.

Chat. To what we wish how easily we incline?
My doubts disperse, and joys begin to shine.
I am content; so you will a Promise make --
You Will not my Love, for this Unknown, forsake.
And when she is found (tho you must her prefer)
Yet you will look on me as much as her.
And tho you cannot Love me half so well,
I Will not believe it, so you do not tell. --
I Would rather have you Murder me this Night,
Then let me live to morrow for a slight.

King. Thy merit and thy beauty thou may trust,
Whilst I am wise, or generous, or just: [ Exit. Chat.
Grillon about your charge, but first command [Turning to him.
Larchant to wait me here.

Gril. I Am now unchain'd. Gets from Bonneval. She follows and said.

Bon. You vowed to talk a day with me.

Gril. It Is right;
And so I will, but now it is almost night. [ Ext. Gril. and Bon.

Enter Larchant. King. Larchant how have thou sped!

Larch. As I desired:
No sooner come; for Grillon she inquired;
My proffered service took, and thankt me for it;
By which pretense I got her to the Court.

King. How is her Beauty?

Larch. O, Sir, so refind
It dazles the Eye and strikes the ravished mind.
All o'r warm Crystal, Sir, with Sun beams lined
Struggling for ease the imprisoned splendour lies,
And breaks the Iayl through the Windows of her Eyes.

King. I long to see this Wonder. Now hold proof,
Distracted Heart, and hold fast Chateauneuf. [Exeunt.

SCENE. III. Guises Lodgings.
Enter Guise, Cardinal, Pericart. Guise. THis divelish Fry'r with his strange
Scenes of fate
Has much confused my thoughts and present State.
Of Blood and Honor, who would hazard run,
To do what must now in few days be done?
Let us lie close upon our Guard and wait
The timely ripening of approaching fate.
I know I Am not by Heaven designed to do it,
Since here is something that disswades me fro't. [Points to's breast.

Card. Rather it is your ill Genius, makes you shun
That glory, which by others may be won.
As some brave Man that stands upon the Shore,
By Crowns and Honor doubly tempted o'r,
Leaps boldly in; not fearful in the least,
And cuts the Billows with exalted breast;
Should he turn back and his attempt give o'r,
When he had almost reached the wisht-for Shore,
He Would sink unpitti'd. --

Guise. The King's late promises to us are great.

Card. But to stop now, is worse then to retreat.
Why came you hither, if you meant to stay?
The Crown's at the end, not in the midst of the way.
When Subjects once by Kings suspected are,
There is not any thing but they may fear.
What Pepin (our great Ancestor) did do
To Chilperick, do you to Harry so.
Who'd not observe a President so fair,
To shave his Head, both of his Crown and Hair?
Delay not. --

Guise. Why? Delays pull on their fate;
Navar by Rome is excommunicate;
All his Estates are to the Conqu'rour given
By the Pope, whose power (they say) is derived from Heaven.

Card. If so, or no; let us leave it to the Schools.
Or to the tender Consciences of Fools.
Derive it whence he will, it has my Vote,
If it the ends of our designs promote

Per. Now you are made, Sir, General of France.
And Duke de Mayn, your Brother, can advance
That Army, which for Dauphin was designed;
And Paris with your interest is combined,
Sixteen Great Cities more your Party own;
And you, Sir, Legate of Avignion:
Whilst thus secured, what need you doubt or fear?

Guise. I am resolved the Assembly now to dare,
And make 'em utterly exclude Navar.

Car. Yield not in your demands, nor reason show?
For any thing, but that you will have it so.
Show now your strength, and carry such a hand,
That tho you be not King, you may command.

Guise. I have enough, were I to rest inclined;
Great is my fortune, greater is my mind.
My place in France, nay in the World is great,
Yet despicable in my own conceit.
To rise still higher seems but as a fall,
'Till I be gazed on, at the Top of all.
There could I sit with a contented brow,
And nod down life and death to all below.

Car. All but the Minions and Court-party signed
Our League as soon as offered.

Per. I Have inclined
Most of the Guards.

Car. This very night let us seize upon the Court,
And then as things appear, our selves deport.
We Will take the King as easily from hence
To Paris, as of late we drove him thence.

Guise. The Pope this flaming Sword to me has given;
The Second flaming Sword ever sent from Heaven! [Draws it.
The Ghost of Heresy before it flies,
As shadows vanish at the morning's rise;
With this I Will guard the Gallic Paradise. [Exeunt.

SCENE IV. The Court.
Enter King, Guessle, Revol, Larchant, Grillon. Gues. In the Broad-Street, that
on the Northside lies
Of the Great Church, I met the Duke of Guise.
He looked upon me with a fierce disdain,
His Guards were numerous, numerous his Train.
I thought he had gone to Church, but he past by;
It seems his business does not that way lie.

Rev. Most part of th'night until the rising Sun,
The Cardinal from house to house has gone;
The leading persons they have made their own.

King. You look on Kings, as Gods, who can bestow
Happiness on themselves, and others too.
Cares and suspicions but disturb our breast,
We Are unacquainted with the sweets of rest.
It Is true we shine in glory, and dispense
Too often to unthankful men our influence;
Who like ungrateful Fogs infest those Skies,
And cloud that Sun to whom they owe their rise.

Gril. Dispel those Fogs, and you will find all fair;
But thunder, Sir, and it will clear the air.

King. Jove in his hottest fury never throws
His Thunderbolts at once amongst his Foes.
He stays his time, but then he lays on load:
Rage, to no purpose, ill beseems a God.
When Men are fit for judgment then is the time;
And Punishment is best when it meets the crime.

Revol. Letters from Paris say they idolize,
As Demy-Gods, all of the House of Guise.
The Pulpits are State-Beacons, wherein Flame
No other Boutefeus, than Guise's name.

Gues. France, like a Feverish body, may be said,
Wasting with heats, which in it self are bred.

King. It Is sent me here the Guises still prepare
Pernicious Plots, which now in hatching are.
The Actors and contrivance are set down,
Their aim is high, both at my Life and Crown.

Lar. Twenty of the Guards last night corrupted were
To sieze, Sir, you, and all your Servants here.

King. Is it then so? we must prevention try;
All the means left for our security.
I have been slow and staid so long a time,
To see if they would repent 'em of their Crime.
And may be had staid longer yet to try,
If France was not concerned as much as I:
But France and I must fall, or they must die.

Gues. All generous Frenchmen must conclude the same,
Who either love their Country, or their fame.
The Members, by the rule of Nature led,
Fence every blow, that is offered at the Head.

Rev. Sick States, like sickly Bodies, must be freed
From those ill humors which Distempers breed.
Purging and blooding must be used, it is best
To bleed some ounces, to preserve the rest.

Gril. What a strange change now in my self I find.
My raging storm is laid, calm is my mind.
-- Before --
Whilst Guise's greatness did so dreadful seem,
O Heavens! How did I long to cope with him.
But now that he must fall, I Have changed my heart,
And would give Millions I could take his part.
His ru'nous fate (although most just) does move
Me unto pity, almost unto Love.
O! that a Man so brave, so nobly born,
should now become the Vulgar prate and scorn!
I at his punishment cannot repine;
-- But that his foul design
Should doom him to another sword than mine.

King. Grillon, thou art deceived, his Head's too high
To stoop t'a Block: we have no time to try
The forms of Justice: Death is in delay;
Grillon, thy King or Guise must die to day.
Mine and thy Countries fafety's in thy hand;
Thy Faith and Courage needs no more command.

Gril. May that blunt honesty to which I Am born
Hope pardon?

King. Grillon, I.

Gril. Then, Sir, I scorn
To do but what a Man of Honor should:
In Battles I have lost and drawn some blood;
But that was for my Countries honor done;
And then in Duels I consult my own.
But here, Sir, to be plain, I scorn, I hate
To be an Executioner of State:
For whilst I kill a Man condemned to die,
I obey, but am a Hangman by the by.

King. Is this obedience?

Gril, Sir, if I obey
My Kings Commands in an ignoble way,
I am a Traitor to his Fame.

King. It Is true;
But who is the Judge of Honor, I or you?

Gril. You are its Fountain, Sir, it is confessed,
But the true Judge is every Brave man's breast.
Let me give warning and denounce the War,
Midst all his Guards, I Will mine own Challenge bear;
And when that is done, I Will fight, I Will kill him there.

King. Well I shall find some help; or Heaven will own,
My Quarrel, and send aids of Thunder down.
My Brother of Navar by this does know
From Plessis, what is fit for him to do.
My Scoutes have brought me word he is in view;
Were he but here, I had no need of you.

Gril. You have no Subject dares to more than I,
In Courage, Honor, or in Loyalty:
But yet of Virtue I have such a sense,
In baseness he may have pre-eminence.
And yet, I think, his soul is so sublime,
That he would scorn the shadow of a crime;
And if he scorned not this, I should scorn him.
But when your Grillon, Sir, for you or France,
Dares not as far as Man did ever advance.
When on Command, Sir, he denies to run
And clap his breast against a teeming Gun.
Or in your service, when he does decline
To venture boldly on a springing Mine:
Then think his Honor mastered by his fear,
And call him Coward in the bus' ness here.

King. Thou have a boisterous, but a gallant Soul,
Which neither fear nor flattery can control.
Go, head the Guards till I new Orders send.
Larchant, see you prepare what I intend. [Exeunt omnes praet. Gril.

As Grillon is going, Guise and Cardinal meet him. Guise. Grillon, in honor
thou can not deny
My fair request; Art thou my Enemy?
I hear there is against my life a combined Vow.

Gril. I was your Enemy, but am not now.
I scorn advantage, and a weaker Foe
Cannot be safer, than because he is so.

Guise. I must believe it and thy Friendship prize;
Thou 'rt brave and honest.

Gril. Take then my advice:
If you have any crime own it betimes;
Great Men need fear no Enemies but Crimes.

Guise. From any Crimes, that have offended Heaven,
I need its Mercy to have them forgiven.
But as for any unto others done,
I scorn all Pardons. [Exeunt severally.
Scene changes to the Guard Chamber; Larchant and the Guard, Guise and Cardinal
to 'em. My Lords, where is the King?

Gues. Within, Sir, there.

Guise. Larchant, make way.

Larch. You must not enter here.

Guise. Must not?

Larch. No, Sir, not till the King have done
Sending dispatches, which he will have soon.

Card. Most brave! When Heretics and Minions may
Enter the Cabinet and we two stay.

Enter Revol. Rev. The King, Sir, did not your attendance know,
Please to walk in.

Larch. Here, Sir, you must not go. [Stops him.

Car. Not go?

Lar. Not this way, Sir, but that you may;
These Lords will wait on you.

Car. Then lead the way. [Exeunt omnes.

Clashing of weapons within: Then enter Guise and six armed Guards, fighting.
Guise. Perfidious Dogs! my Courage tho assures,
Guise cannot fall by such base hands as yours.
Two Rascal lives makes not the purchase good Two fall. Guise bleeds.
For one small drop of Charlemain's rich blood.
These Cowards, like the Hydra's Heads increase; Enter more and fight Gu. he
bleeds
And I Stand yet the Gallic Hercules.
Stand whilst I geet some breath, ye Murderers stand,
Observe! I do not beg it, I command. [Gives them a point.
That Crowned Assassin tell, who set you on,
This Act has but performed what I'dhave done;
It has unking'd him, and the Crime's his own.
I conquer dying; murdered, not o'rcome: [Leans on's Sword.
Laurels not Cypress must o'r spread my Tomb,
Ten of his armed Guards were not enough;
Had I been armed, you all had been too few.
Although I murdered am the way's not mean; [Faints.
A King my Murderer, and his Court the Scene.
Bid Valois boast the acts of all his Race,
To whet his Courage; yet to his disgrace
He durst not look me dying in the face. [Fals and dies.

Larch. Those angry groans, he at his farewell sends,
Are like fierce blasts just when a Tempest ends,
His blood his restless Spirits now has laid;
As blustering Storms by falling Showers are laid:
So Lyon's when their raging fury's gone,
Fly to the darkest shades and there lie down.
Convey this Body hence. [ Enter Revol.

Rev. Which are the two. [Two of them steps out. He shows the Order.
Here is your Order what you are to do:
All else be gone. The Cardinal of Guise
Instead of begging Pardon, does despise.
Speaks dangerous words against both King and State,
Which hastens and deserves this timeless fate. [Exeunt.

Guards bring in the Cardinal and leave him. The other two Enter with Swords
drawn, He Eyes 'em seriously, and steps toward 'em. Card. I do not like their
looks! Their words I Will try. [Aside.
What come you for?

1 Sold. To tell you, you must dye.

Card. And so must you. Nay (what is more) be damned,
If you perform what you have taken in hand.

2 Sold. It is not our Profession to dispute:
The King commands us, Sir, and we must do it.

Card. What power has he o'r me? Or whence does't come?
We Are free from Kings when we depend on Rome.
When Kings presume to do what is not fit,
Popes Subjects can from their Allegiance quit.
Should he command, you should your faith deny?
Or bid you spit defiance at the sky,
Would you obey?
Lucifer struck at Heaven, your Crime's the same;
And you will be damned to full as hot a flame.

1 Sold. I will not do it. --

Card. A gracious pardon, thou shall have from Rome,
For all offenses past, and all to come. [ Exit. I Soldier.
Friend, what say thou?

2 Sold. Troth, Sir, I Would lend an Ear,
If for your self, you could find Pardon here.
But such fantastic hopes I dare not try;
Besides I Am hyr'd to do it. --

Card. Then I must dye --
A mercinary Soul is fit to do
All crimes the Devil ever tempted to.
It Is known that Power which Heaven and Earth obey,
A-slave (like thee) did for a bribe betray. [Souldier kills him.

[Scene closes. Explicit Act. III.
ACT.IV. SCENE.I. Camp at St. Clou before Paris.
Enter King, Guesile, Revol, Larchant, Commanders, Guards. King. HEre at St.
Clou we will streiten so the Town,
'T will either famisht be, or yielded soon.
Our forces joined, we will not wait the time,
But let our fury loose to meet their crime.

Rev. Sir, I was much amazed, and well might be,
To hear their insolence and treachery.

Gues. There Is nothing can more stubbornness reveal
Than foul Rebellion, varnisht o'r with zeal.

Larch. Who'd think that Paris should be thus suborned
By Traitors, with your Trophies so adorned?

Rev. Perhaps they will obedient prove and wise,
And take the favor, Sir, of your advice.

King. To hope a Remedy must needs be vain,
Whilst her ill humors are kept up by Mayn.
Seditions, like great Torrents, rise and fall
According to the Brooks, they are fed withal
Enter a Commander hastily. What news with thee? What brings thee from thy Post?

I Com. We Are beaten from it, Sir, and all is lost.
I kept the Guard against Saint Michel's gate,
The most suspicious place to sally at:
When soon Aumale made that suspicion good,
And sallied briskly which whilst we withstood,
Du Mayns whole Army fell into our Rear,
Routs us and now puts all the Camp in fear.

Rev. We are betrayed! The Scouts else had not failed.

King. Kings should assail, but never be assailed. [Draws his Sword.

All draw, as going out met with Officers. 2 Com. Fresh Squadrons compass us,
and we are lost

3 Com. A chosen Troop comes to attack this Post.

Gues. Then we are dead!

King. But we will bravely dye.
O that I had an equal Enemy!
My Sword then would not blush in such base Stains,
But boast the Scarlet of a Duke of Mayns.

All marching out. Grillon meets 'em with Guards. Gril. All dangers past. The
Enemy is beat:
Who into Paris tho made his retreat.

King. Success attends thy Sword, and all must fly
When Grillon fights.

Gril. Death, Sir, It was not I!
O'r pow'r'd by Numbers, which I scorned to shun,
I vainly strove, when by a hand unknown
They routed were, and Grillon quite outdone.
I would have sooner died, nay rather fled,
Then once have seemed, as tho I stood in need.

Enter Navar with Mayns Banner and Soldiers. Nav. This Signal of my Service,
as my due
To Majesty, I here, Sir, offer you,

King. Brave Conqu'rour! I embrace thee; Come more nigh. [Imbraces,
I owe my Life to thee.

Gril. And so do I.
I would not say it, but Grillon cannot lie.

King. Put up thy Cask, and let thy self appear. [Puts it up.
Blessed fate! It is my Brother of Navar. [Embraces him.
You and my joys at once from me were torn,
As now with you, I hope, they will return.
When they first gained that mast'ry by their art,
They banished you the Court, themselves my Heart.

Nav. These gracious words, Sir, all my deeds outdo,
Although I can perform as much as you.
For their own sakes, I wish they had been free
From those offenses, they imposed on me.

King. You heard their Plots then?

Ples. Sir, I all declared
Both what I had in charge, and what I heard.

Nav. I heard it all, Sir, and in doubts am lost.
Which was your danger, or your patience most.
So long to stay, seemed Heaven to tempt, or dare;
And yet if you had sooner been severe,
That had seemed cruelty, which was but care.
But tho the Guise's fall secure the State;
I yet regret their loss and mourn their fate.
For had they grateful been, as Heaven was kind,
And not depraved the indowments of the mind;
They had deserved whatever they desired,
Although their haughty Souls to Crowns aspired.

King, Sir, their Ambition, on a false pretense,
Deluded both their reason, and their sense.
As often we see Heaven's self is pleased to blind
Their judgments, who to ruin are designed.
Like Conjurers deceived, they stood amazed,
And perished by that storm themselves had raised.

Rev. Those Comets, tho they blazed away their flame,
Left Plagues t'infest the place from whence they came.

Gues. Their Treason like Infection flies about,
And where an object's fit, soon finds it out.

King. Grillon is sad.

Gril. And must be, till I give
A greater favor, than I did receive.
I have a Courage, that disdains to be
Conquered, although it be with Courtesy.

Nav. Do thou my Duty and success disdain?

King. Thy humor is ungrateful now, as vain.

Gril. No greater joy can e're possess my mind,
Then to see you, Sir, and my Master joined.
France now like ancient Rome may boast her fate,
Since Fabius and Marcellus guard her State.

King. Slow are the English aids that we expect.

Nav. Necessity's the cause, and not neglect.

Gues. The invincible Armada makes 'em slow.

Nav. Farewell the Navy, and the Title too.

King. Speak what you heard.

Nav. The very night before
I marched, this Captain from the Governor [Points to him,
of Calais, brought account of all was done.

King. I long to hear't.

Nav. Speak what to you is known. [T'th' Captain.

Cap. The Navy Neptunes shoulders did oppress,
As much too bulky for those narrow Seas.
This monster vast (with hundred wings supplied,
Whose stretcht-out Horns were more than two leagues wide.)
Sailed to the English with a motion slow,
For its great weight oppressed Old AEclus so,
He and his winds had scarcely breath to blow.
When the English (valianter perchance than wise)
Bravely defied 'em scorning a surprise.
But a Defiance that their rage became;
Whose words were Bullets, and whose breath was flame.
Sev'n days thus bravely they the Spaniard dared;
Nothing but Lightning seen, and Thunder heard.
It seemed the end of the World, for all was fire;
And in that faith the Spaniard did expire.

King. The brav'ry of these English are so great,
It is no shame that us so often they beat.
The Gallic brav'ry and Spanish pride
Being conquered, they may conquer all beside.

Nav. That British Heroine, without control,
Asserts the truth, no Sex is in the soul.
Valiant and wise as Pallas does appear;
A Goddess armed with beauty and a Spear.

King. Declare the last fate of the Spanish Fleet.

Cap. Near to your Calais, Sir, it made retreat;
But 'scap'd not so, just in the dead of night
The Spaniards saw a strange and dreadful sight:
Eight moving Fires upon the sea did glide,
And came upon 'em both with wind and Tide.
Some thought 'em Fire-Drakes, for one Drake they knew,
And by him guest what eight such Drakes might do.
Others supposed the Fates, to attend their fall,
Had lighted Torches for their Funeral.
Tumult and fear in each ship did begin;
Great danger! Whilst the Tempest was within.
Each ship endeavoring not to stay behind,
Fled on the Wings of fear and of the Wind.
The shattered Fleet like moulting Eagles fled,
And lost some Feathers at each flight she made.
France, Scotland, Ireland, Flanders, Holland boasts
The several Ships surpised upon their Coasts.
The British Lions glutted, took their rests,
Vouchsasing Offals to the lesser Beasts.

Nav. Thus in a word the effects of seven years cost,
By English valor in seven days were lost.

King. The World shall never, nor has ever seen
A braver Nation, or a braver Queen.
Her Neighbors justly may receive her Law.
Since she rules those who keep the World in awe.
But let us leave the noise of these Alarms;
It Is fit even sometimes to repose from Arms.
Within the Walks we may releasements find.

Nav. But where, O where, Sir, for a Captived mind?

King. If Beauty can avail, Il show you those
Shall do it.

Nav. But they may prove more dangerous foes.
Yet guided, Sir, by you; I Venus dare,
Tho in her threatening Beauties she appear,
Nay tho she bring along the God of War. [Exeuni.

SCENE. II. A Garden, with Arbors and Walks.
Enter Chateauneuf, Bonneval. Bon. ALl mankind's false; there is none can keep a
vow.
The King is full as false as Grillon now:
I am unwilling to disturb your rest --
But, Madam, he is unworthy of your breast.

Chat. That Is no news Bonneval. But whence this change?

Bon. Dear Chateauneuf his Soul is still so strange,
He does --
Like wanton Boys after vain shadows range.

Chat. His empty hopes of shadows will not last;
When he pursues 'em, they will fly as fast.

Bon. But first the substance may create a fear,
And she this very hour is to be here.
Her by some chance the Duke of Guise did gain;
Wh' escaped that fatal day, when he was slain.
Betrayed to Larchant, he the King possessed
With such vain thoughts, that kept him since from rest.
This is the Beauty, that has wronged us so.

Chat. Bonneval, from these walks we will not go;
Lets stay and make Discov'ries of the Foe. [Exeunt.

Enter King, Larchant. King. Now, Larchant, now my thoughts have room to move:
Streiten'd with business, now I turn to Love.
Have thou with thy great beauty so prevailed
To come from Blois?

Lar. I could not do it. But, Sir,
I have presumed to send a Guard for her.

King. Thou have done well.

Lar. But what does most surprise;
That Pericart (late Secretary to Guise)
Tells me the Lady, sent for now by me,
Is that rare Beauty Gabriel de Estree:
Ten times more beautiful than this we have;
And how it is her that Grillon did enslave.

King. More beautiful than her thou praised to me.

Lar. She Is more than any Angel, if she be.

King. Her I Will see first. Wait 'til she do appear.

Lar. Sir, by this time I know she is very near. [Exit.

Enter Grillon. King. Grillon, thy Clouds yet on thy Brows do dwell.

Gril. I want my Sun that else would them dispel.
I wish a tempest do not threaten France,
Since clouds appear in every countenance;
Mistrustful whispers and suspicious Eyes:
So storms often follow hushed and gloomy skys.

King. I knew a time when court and Courtiers vy'd
With pleasant May in all her checkered, pride.
An universal joy then filled each place,
And blessed content did smile in every face.
Each bosom then like Crystal did appear,
And all our very thoughts transparent were.
Friendship and love enjoyed a happy reign;
Friends banished doubts, as Ladies did disdain.

Gril. But now, as they some battle would decide,
They into Parties severally divide:
A certain sign of Faction and of hate,
Those growing Cankers of a falling State.
But better things, I hope, Sir, from your fate.

King. Let State alone, and let us talk of Love.

Gril. I cannot Sir,

King. Thy constancy I Will prove.
Thy Mistress, Grillon, was to Guise betrayed,
And ever since at his apartment staid.
Larchant is sent for her.

Gril. Your pardon, Sir.
Death, I will kill him if he look at her.
She is not safe with him, nor fit to be
Under his Guard.

King. And yet he serves for me.

Gril. True, Sir, for Kings are armed with sacred awe;
Besides they are guarded by that Giant Law.
And tho you all keep Guards, yet Wisemen grant
You have 'em more for Pomp than any want.

King. Well Grillon, go, you're in Commission joined;
Conduct her whither Larchant was assigned. [ Exit Grillon.
He waits without. How Chateauneuf!

Enter Chateauneuf, Bonneval. Chat. Your heart
Would be no Present if you give but part.
That little share I had, I here resign,
But ah, no part of it was ever mine!

King. Say not so, Chateneuf, it is all thine,

Chat. It may be so till Larchant brings his Prize,
But then it soon, Sir, to another flies,
Like wanton Children taken with new toys,
You have left certain for uncertain joys.

Enter Larchant and Armida. The King to her. King. If I was bold because for
you I sent;
Madam, I hope, you will pardon the intent:
I was uneasy til I set you free.

Armi. I must esteem, Sir, my Captivity,
Which has obtained the glory of your aid.

King. Kings may be proud to serve so fair a Maid.
Did you meet Grillon, Larchant?

Lar. Sir not we,
I wonder what is the cause he seeks for me.
H' inquires of every one that passes by,
Hast's in his steps, and fury in his Eye.

Enter Grillon speaking. Gril. What e're I seek of late I cannot find.
I or my Fortune, one of the two is blind.
Death was there no man to affront but I? [ to Larchant.
I will not kill thee tho, whilst he is by. [Points at the King.
How like you, Sir, my choice? you will take my Word to the King
Henceforth about a Face, as 'bout a Sword.

King. Grillon, she looks as tho she knew you not.

Gril. Pray mind, Madam, is Grillon then forgot? [ to Armida.

Armi. What mean you Sir?

Gril. Death, Madam, who are you?
You are a Stranger.

Armi. So are you, Sir, too.
You Are all mistaken in the Duke of Guise;
I was not aimed at 'twas a Nobler Prize.
Sir, if you please, the Secret I Will impart, To the King. They aside.
And tell you where that Duke bestowed his heart.

Bon. Madam, the clouds from both our hearts are cleared

Chat. The Foe's not half so dreadful as we feared.

Bon. You need no more be jealous, than the Sun
When some pert Star intrudes its self at Noon.

King leaves Armida and sends Larchant to her they discourse. King. Madam I
neither have, nor will give proof Here Gril. also and Bon. aside. he soon
leaves.
Of jealousy to Beauteous Chateauneus.

Chat. Great beauties only Jealousy should raise,
Such beauties as our very Sex must praise.
But when false Lovers to inferiors fly;
Disdain's more proper far than Jealousy.

Gril. Larchant thy hand again, thou have my heart.
'T was a mistake made my resentments tart. [they shake hands.
With the revengeful World in this I Am even,
I seldom Pardons ask, as they are given.

King. Grillon since this Lady you declare
You Have no concern at all, Pray leave us here.
Larchant with speed let me my mind obtain. Exeunt Grillon and Larchant.
For I Will stay here, until you come again.
Madam, this Lady merits her advance Shows Chateauneuf to Armida.
To my esteem as unto those of France.

Armid. She both deserves.

Chat. Madam, if that be true,
There more justly own them as your due.

Ling. Dear Chateneuf, may I a Song obtain.
It is a favor that I beg to gain.

Chat. You may command, and best of all can tell,
That I sing true, although I sing not well.
SONG.
WIth amourous wiles and perjured eyes
False Damon did me move,
Like Charming Winds his kindling sighs
First fanned me into Love.
Mythriving Passion he did feed,
Whilst it was young and slight,
But ah! when there was greatest need,
Alas he starves it quite!
Was ever more injustice known,
O Damon, prithee say;
To fit my heart for thee alone,
And cast it now away.
Henceforth my Passion I shall hate.
'Cause it gained none for me;
Yet love it too (such is my fate)
Because it was for thee.
Thy Heart I never will upbraid,
Although it mine did kill,
Ah! Think upon an injured Maid
That Is forced to Love thee still.
But Justice may the Tables turn
In vindicating me;
And thou with equal torments burn
For one who Loves net Thee.



Enter Larchant handing in Gabriel. Larch. Behold, Sir, more than all your
France can boast.

King. A Beauty wherein Nature spared no cost.
No Mortal sure!

Gab. Sir, your poor subject born.

King. Fair, sweet and fresher than a Summers morn. [Salutes her.
Has France such treasures in it? Let haughty Spain
Never boast her Quarries, nor her Mines again.

Gab. Great Princes, Sir, sometimes low subjects raise;
As you are pleased to lift me up with praise.
It speaks your power, and humors your great mind,
To show what you can do, when you're inclined.

King. Let not my sudden Love make it seem less,
Because the greatest things have their increase.
Perfection, Madam (and that is only you)
Can free a heart at first, and keep it true.

Gab. Loves at first sight, like inflamed follies are;
Seem like to Stars in the Sky, but fix not there.

King. If in this cruelty you still proceed,
You Will make my Love a Meteor then indeed:
They threaten misery to all beneath,
And seldom blaze, but against a Prince's death.
O Chateauneuf, thy goodness I must try;
I either must inconstant prove, or die.

Chat. Your change instead of blame has my applause,
Since now inconstant for so good a Cause.
Your pardon, Sir, I am inconstant too,
And now will change my Love, as well as you.
Heaven is my choice, who would for Lovers care,
When Kings inconstant, or else mortal are?
Come, Bonneval, associate of my Vow.

Bon. Madam, I never thought of this 'till now.
I Will wait upon you tho, till I be fit;
When that will be, Heaven knows, but it is not yet.

Chat. Come, Bonneval, let us from the Court retire,
Where satisfaction never meets desire;
Where raging Passions all our Souls distress,
Searching for pleasures that can never please;
Where one of those great Torments always move,
Either to be beloved, or else to Love. [ Exeunt. Chat. and Bon.

Gab. Your pardon, Sir, have I my freedom here?

King. Free as your thoughts.

Gab. Then, Sir, I must declare --
My Love is tender conscienc'd, as I am,
And never will enter on another claim.
Whilst there are Free-Estates enough to buy,
I Will never a controverted Title try;
Nor build on others ruins.

King. yet it is known, --
Rome (that the Empire of the World did own)
From others less Estates its own did raise.

Gab. But must success legitimate our praise?
Then Caesar, Sir, may be accounted just,
Wh' enslaved that Rome to Tyranny and Lust.

King. Madam, that way my Love shall never proceed:
Rather than raise your blush, my heart shall bleed.

Gab. I see my safety through your virtue shine;
Your honor is security for mine.

King. Madam, to gain the honor of your Love,
By services and Prayers I Will only move:
And those obtain all blessings from above. [ Exeunt. King, Larchant.

Gab. My better half! I have not thee embraced. [Imbraces.

Arm. Our miseries, I hope, are well near passed.
Thoughts of your fate (methinks) a doubt does bring,
Whether your Stars or beauty gained the King.

Gab. You have forgot. He must my State advance,
Who is not now, but shall be King of France.
But this crowned Man, or that shall never move
My faithful Passion, from my unknown Love.
He has left one here so lawfully possessed,
Will grant admittance to no other Guest.
I Am all inflamed and scorched so with desire,
I have not fuel for another fire.

Arm. Madam, some happy turn you now must have;
For when Heaven did you from that Ruin save,
It vouched a future blessing: Thus when night
Is past, we may expect the morning light.

Gab. Come, let us walk, and some close Arbor find
And thou shall hear some workings of my mind;
A Song I made, for my sad fate designed. [Exeunt.

Enter Navar. Nav. Thy Conquest, Love, how far will thou pursue?
What will thou triumph o'r my ruins too;
Is It not enough to stormand take the Town,
Nay plunder too, but thou will burn it down?
Cupid before never showed such powerful charms,
To fix his Trophies in the midst of Arms.
Courage and Glory claimed in me a part,
Yet He out-rival'd both and won my heart.
'Midst Swords and Death he at his Prey did fly,
And seized on it in the face of Victory.
But tho I may be of my Conqu'rour proud,
Yet I, Ixion like, still court a Cloud.
Enter Grillon, Navar not seeing him. I Love I know not whom; my Love is blind,
And seeks about for one it cannot find.

Gril. We Are both betwitch'd then, for it is my fate too;
And I am, Sir, as much to seek as you.

Nav. In The Wood at Blois, where thou did take my part,
I got the Victory, but lost my heart

Gril. Death, Sir, and so did I.

Nav. Her I adore
Deserved all admiration.

Gril. Mine did more.

Nav. Her beauty did above all others shine;
She was some Angel.

Gril. So I doubt was mine.
For she is flown from Earth.

Nav. So is mine too. --
Let Us make strict search. --

Gril. Sir, I will wait on you.
'T would be a plaguey Spite tho, when all is known,
If both these beauties, Sir, should prove but one.
They hear the tuning of a voice, and Essays at a Tune. Navar steals out
toward the Arbor. Gril. steps and lissens to this -- SONG by Gabril unseen.
LOve shot himself into my breast like flame;
And soon as ever there he came,
My heart was all in fire:
Nothing so scorching as Desire!
Yet in those flames I fry:
And tho I every minute try,
I cannot, cannot, oh! I cannot die!
Like Love I Am blind, stark blind, although I see;
No object fits my Eyes but He.
I had him once in view;
When like departing breath he flew.
Each night I wishing lie,
Wasting my soul in every Sigh;
Yet cannot, cannot, oh! I cannot die!
My Soul can never from my Body part,
'Til I find him who has my heart.
When I that blessing spy,
O I betwixt his Arms could die!
But 'till I be possessed
Of joys that now are only guest,
I cannot, cannot, oh! I cannot rest!

Gril. My Ears are now bewitched as were my Eyes;
And I must love that beauty, and this voice.
Suppose they should be parted! I Would be loath
To have but one of them; Faith, I Will have both. [Exit.

Enter Gabriel and Armida. Navar follows and stops Gabriel. Nav. O! Madam, I
upon my knees implore,
That you would let me look a little more;
I never to any purpose looked before

Enter Grillon. Gab. Your Eyes were ill employed then.

Gril. Death, it is true;
This is the Voice, and this the Beauty too.
Where have those Eyes been hid, or where have mi^^
That all this time I could not see 'em shine?

Armi. You love her voice, you loved her Eyes before.

Gril. I love her voice, her Eyes, I love all o'r.
Was not my Judgment right, Sir, this is she!

Nav. I, Grillon, nay the world must rival thee.
Madam I Have seen you.

Gab. Bless me! who are you. She fairts in Armid. `sa ms.
I am not well -- Methinks I Have seen you too.

Nav. O for some Cordials! Grillon, run, nay fly.

Gril. You're younger, Sir, and nimbler far than I:
I Am slow; and ever I come, Sir, she may die.

Nav. Madam look up, a King upon his knee
Begs you would live. Kneels on one side of her.

Gril. But Madam live for me. [He on the other.

Gab. Your Pardon, Sir, this Posture does surprise. comes to her self.

Nav. Are you well Madam?

Gab. Yes, Sir, if you rise [She takes him up, he holds her hand.

Gril. Your pardon, Sir: tho I did freedom give
Whilst she was dead, I must not if she live. [he takes the other.

Nav. Forfeit not my respects; for, Grillon, know
There is some difference 'twixt me and you.

Gril. Although I want a Crown that glittering thing,
Yet I can love as much as can a King.

Gab. A King! I am amazed at what I hear!
Who are you, Sir?

Nav. Madam, I am Navar.

Gab. Both you and I should greater reverence bring. [ to Gril.

Gril. Death! it is not my fault that I am no King.

Nav. But it is your fault that one no more you know.

Gab. And, Grillon, one that may be King o'r you.

Gril. When that time comes, I Will give him what is due.
I Will keep up mine, and yet respect his height;
And not be baffled tho I must not fight.

Nav. There are enough your Valor, Sir, to try:
Du Mayn's a fitter match for you, than I.
Honor and duty should your Actions move;
Your duty is to fight, but not to love.

Gril. How Interest differs? yours does this way move,
Grillon must fight, but Grillon must not love;
For ought you know now, mine may differ quite;
If Grillon may not love, he will not fight.
Yet greater powers than Kings, do both allow;
Venus and Mars (they say) have joined ever now.
I Will humor then my courage and inspite
Of King I Will love, and spite of love I Will fight.

Enter Revol. Rev. The King, Sir, wants you, your Instructions stay.
You must to Paris.

Gril. I Will not stir to day.

Rev. Your Equipage is fit; and you must go

Gril. -- Must. --
Thrice happy those who no obedience know!

Gab. Displease not, Sir, the King with your delay;
Unless you could please others with your stay.

Gril. How! slighted, Woman! would thou have me go? [Offers it.
I will forsake thee and avenge me so.
Thou have lost more, than e're thy Sex yet gained;
My self I value, now I am disdained.
I leave thee first, doing my Spirit right,
Which makes me scorn, where e're I find a slight. [Exit. Gril. and Rev.

Nav. His bossom with a stubborn heart is filled,
Which neither can to love, or beauty yield.
Your Pardon for this question I implore,
Madam, did you never see Navar before?

Gab. Yes, in the Wood. To you my life I owe.

Nav. O be so kind now, to requite me so.
Welcome blessed hour! for which so long I prayed;
And for which only, here my Soul had staid.
Blessed minute! How I needed thy relief?
My soul was shrunk, and I was aged with grief.
O, Madam! Since you vanished from my Eyes,
I Have breathed away my soul in amorous sighs.
E're Since your fair Idaea, like a Ghost,
Haunted my sleeps, my dreams it haunted most.
Madam, in Dreams I Have seen and spoke to you;
And oh! Sometimes methought I kissed you too! [Smiles.

Gab. But Lovers dreams you know are seldom true.

Nav. Nothing, ah, nothing can my joys secure,
Unless you say my happiness is sure.

Gab. If, Sir, I could of such a thing admit;
Our young Acquaintance is not ripe for it yet.
Love (I have heard) like Wisdom is conveyed;
And by long trials of successions made.

Nav. O Madam, leave such Arguments as these;
That cannot be true Love, which can increase.
Love like perfection's always at a stay;
For that which can increase, must needs decay.

Gab. Love Preaching is like other Preaching grown;
Managed by art, more than Devotion.

Nav. Preaching I know helps little our affairs;
We rather should betake us to our prayers.
And if you cannot think I Will faithful be,
A King begs your belief upon his knee. [Kneels.

Gab. Rise, Sir, oh rise! Confound me not with shame. [Takes him up.

Nav. O that your blush sprung from an inward flame!

Gab. A grateful flame Heaven kindles in my breast;
Which shines quite through my Cheeks --
Sir, I can speak no more, I Will blush the rest.

Nav. I never can merit this, nor dare beg more;
Only this thing, Dear Madam, I implore:
Before you give me trust, be pleased to try
My Services, and tempt my Constancy.
Then when my Crown of Truth does brighter shine
Than that of Gold, I beg you would be mine. [Exeunt.

SCENE III. The Royal Bedchamber.
The Scene opens and shows the King asleep on's Couch; Murder (personated)
rises from the stage, with three Furies on one side and three Fiends on the
other, all of 'em menacing him: at last Murder steps toward him and speaks.
Mur. I was in fashion once, and bore more sway
In The Reigns of Nero and Caligula.
As the Christian Faith increased, I took my flight;
My blood-shot Eyes being dazzled at it is light.
In the old World I little had to do,
Until kind Spain employed me in the New.
There did I triumph over millions slain;
Murder was then the Catholic Sovereign!
I for sometime there made my Empire good,
'Till almost famisht thence for want of blood.
In France I then did new employment gain;
A brave employment in thy Brother's Reign!
When forty thousand in one night were slain.
Fooled by Repentance now thou layest me by!
-- But know --
Furies and Fiends will not be fooled, as I.

Then the Furies and Fiends dance about the King in menacing postures; but
suddenly show a fear at the appearance of his Guardian-Angel, that flies down
with a flaming Sword, and interposes 'twixt the King and them. Angel. I come
fro'th' Fountain of Eternal light,
Whose gloomy'st ray is something more than bright.
Ordered by Fate (which is the will of Heaven)
This Royal-charge here, to my care is given [Points at the King.
I am his Sentinel; yet truly boast
My self a Leader in the Starry Host.
For willingly we leave our blessed abodes,
To yield attendance on these earthly Gods.
Avaunt you Sons of Night! Down to your Hell, [They descend.
Where only fit Companions for you dwell,
Such aerie Phantoms, that possess with fear
The souls of common dreamers, come not here.
Those thin Inhabitants of the brain must fly
Before the peircing virtue of mine Eye.
Thus will I guard him from all kinds of fear -- [Waving his Sword o'r him.
Yet tremble now my self at what comes there

Vengeance (personated) descends in a bright Cloud; his Arm stripped, holding a
bloody Sword. Looking fiercely, about his Lip bloody, steps to the King and
interposes his Sword, the Angel offers defense.. Veng. In vain thou striv'st to
hinder my design;
For my Commission is more large than thine.
To that great Power I my obedience owe,
At whose command Stars fall and Angels bow.
Thy Guard was helpful once, but now too late: [Puts the Angel by.
In vain! in vain! There is no fence for fate
Legions of Angels cannot bring him aid;
My Name is Vengeance and I must be paid. [Strikes the King with his Sword.

The Angel first flies up, then Vengeance ascends in the Chariot, and the Scene
closes. Explicit Act. IV.
ACT. V. SCENE. I. The Camp.
Enter King, Grillon, Guards. King. Is Paris yet so stubborn not to yield?

Gril. As stiff as Iron with Rebellion steeled.
If you would make her bend to your desire,
Nothing must make her ductile, Sir, but fire.

King. What Is thy advice?

Gril. To storm this waspish Town,
And with your Cannon beat her bulworks down;
Then burn 'em in their nests; till they expire
Such flaming breaths, as may augment the fire.

King. But may not we yet force her to repent?

Gril. Not whilst this Love is made in every Tent.
Great hopes! When two great Kings cannot subdue
One Woman!

King. Why? She also worsted you.

Gril. She did my Soul surprise, but not defeat;
But Soldier like, I made good my retreat.
I Loved as hotly as did he, or you;
Nay, faith, as much as both of you could do.
Yet I maintained my spirit at its hieght,
And cast her by, when I perceived a slight.

King. A slight, a favor is to what I try!
I see a Rival, more beloved than I:
But she shall now Love me, or cast him by.
Wait her in Grillon.

Gril. Sir, I am not inclined
There to pay service, where no Love I find;
But I Will send Larchant in, whose mean Soul moves
So low, as to help all men in-their Loves. [ Exit. Grillon.

King. Has all my Love and Courtship then proved vain?
If any thing, this may my Love restrain.
It Is just, her scorns with scornings to requite,
And answer all her slightings with a slight.
And yet for all her scorns, I yet would Love,
Would she as scornful unto others prove.
But to be triumphed o'r is such a thing,
That common Lovers scorn, much more a King.

Enter Larchant, Gabriel, Armida, Revol. Gab. Whilst you are justly fighting
for your Crown,
Such mean acquests as I, you should not own.
You even should blush; and then that blush should be
Ashamed it self, that it did blush for me.

King. Let fortune, as she please, dispose of Crowns,
I Am more concerned in Madam Gabriels frowns.
Madam, no time, no nor Resolves can ease,
Or calmmy thoughts, which rage like winter Seas.
Love's Pinnace in this Voyage needs must fail,
'T will be o'rborn soon with too large a sail.
Hope sometimes fills a thought, like a swelled wave,
Which breaks, and soon is to its self a Grave.

Gab. You have before with storms of Love been tossed;
Yet both the danger, and the thoughts are lost.

King. My former Love was like a kindly heat,
Which healthful Bodies do by Nature get;
And tho sometimes unto a blaze it came,
Yet as Love fed, it also quenched the flame,
But this is wildfire in my breast, I fear,
'T will always burn, I feel it flaming here.
Yet this my greatest torment needs must prove,
Navar shares deepest in your thoughts and Love.

Enter Navar, Plessis. Nav. This is not fair! Kings should such arts decline.
I Will deal more plainly tho; this Lady's mine. [Hands her.

King. Is she your Queen?

Nav. Nor is she Queen to you.

King. But she is my Subject, and so are you too.

Nav. Talk not of Subject, Sir; I am a King;
And that great Name does such resentments bring,
If I affronted be --

King. What will you do?

Nav. I Will stake the Lillies betwixt me and you.

King. You venture boldly.

Navar. Sir, I have a share;
You thought so too, when you sent for me here.

King. Upbraid me not, Sir, with your aid, be gone:
I scorn your help, and can be King alone.

Nav. Well, Sir, I go, but I will have mine own.
Who Will stop me? [Hands his Sword.

Larch. That must all. [Steps in with his Guards.

Ples. Pray, Sir, forbear; [ To Navar.
Your life's in danger else, his Guards are here.

Gab. Dare not you me, Sir, with my self entrust?
You cannot sure believe I Will be unjust. [ To Navar.
O, Sir, if that you will not force forbear;
I Will end this Quarrel with my Dagger here. [To the King.

Nav. Sir, I have Guards too, and can show you sport:
You will not murder me too in your Court?

King. It Is in your choice. But, Sir, she shall not go.
I Am King; and will not be controlled by you.

Nav. Take notice, Sir, I leave her to your trust;
I can be friendly, if you can be just. [ Exit. Navar, Plessis.

Rev. Think of the ruin that may fall to France,
If any difference 'twixt you two should chance.
Tho she be never so fair, she cannot prove
Worthy your anger, tho she may you love.

King. Experienced Judges only should condemn;
And none but Lovers should consult this Theme.
Your Merits, Madam, you should not confine; She offering to go.
Since Saints at their Adorers never repine:
The greater number cellebrates the shrine.
Please then his services and mine to prove,
And Crown his hopes who shows the greatest Love. [ Exit. Gabriel and Armida.
Larchant, attend her to the Town with care;
Wait on her humbly, strictly guard her there;
Mayn and the League less than Navar I fear. [Exeunt.

SCENE. II. A Covent of Iacobines.
Enter Commolet, Burgoin. Burg. THe Sorbon with grave Judgment and Advice,
Have by a Pollick Art asserted this:
Since Valois does with Heretics agree,
Abets and sides with 'em, all Frenchmen be
Fro'th' Oath of Fealty and Allegiance free.

Com. Are all hands crampt? and all Souls palsi'd to;
Past sense of what we suffer? Surely no.
Can the dull Dutchmen make an Orange bleed?
And the fiery French tremble at such a deed?
In vain we from their Armies seek supply;
Rather than fail we will our Covents try.

Burg. One of my Covent (but yet taught by me
What glorious Crowns are their rewards, that free
Their Country and the Church from tyranny;)
A glorious Project did to me reveal,
Inspired (no doubt) with a fierce heavenly zeal.

Com. Have you confirmed his thoughts?

Bur. His zeal's so bold
That all those Mountains, that go big with gold,
Could not his resolution now seduce.

Com. Yet for all that let us keep him to the use:
Young men, we know, their Passions fall and rise,
As the object is presented to their Eyes.
Those two grand Seenes of horror and of bliss,
(Which help to mould the souls of Novices)
Let us present unto his wondering view.

Bur. They both are ready here and painted new.
Enter Jacob Clement. Welcome my Son.

Clem. I wait here with intent
To beg your blessings and encouragement.

Bur. My Son! that blessing freely claim thy own,
Which Father Isaac gave his youngest son.
Thou shall escape; trust son, to my presage;
And Prophesies it is known have bleft my age.
Ha! son! what say thou to the glorious Fact?

Clem. But shall I merit Heaven by the Act?

Burg. Thou know a Doctrine I have often spoke,
How curious Pictures give a smarter stroke
Upon our fancies, then dull Doctrines can;
These touch the outward, those the inward man,
Behold, my Son, (what thou have often heard)
An Antipast of joys and of reward.

Shows a Scene of Paradise. Clem. Who would not hazards tempt and torture dare,
To merit but the least of glories there?

Com. What heavenly flames his rosy Cheeks reveal?
Flusht in the face with inward heat of zeal!
I see thou art resolved! I plainly see it;
Thy Stature's taller, and thy Mein more great.
Thus when the Deities did Priests inspire,
They both exalted Soul and Body high'r.
If thou this glorious attempt survive,
(And Heaven will sure make its own business thrive)
Abbots and Bishops at thy feet must fall,
As is but due unto a Cardinal.
But if thou dy'st, no Cherubim can come
Near to that Throne, designed for Martyrdom.
Roses and Laurels then must twist in one
T'adorn thy brow; both glories thou may own
Of Militant and of Triumphant Crown.

Clem. O let me go, each tedious minute's stay
Robs me of glory, just in Heavens highway!

Com. Thy soul is fervent now, my hopeful Son!
Red-hot with zeal, fit for impression:
But if it cool, 'twill get a stubborn frame,
Not fit for any Furnace but Hells flame.

Clem. The terror of those flames cannot prevail,
Where all those bright alluring glories fail.

Burg. I Will soon convince thee, and will now disclose
Here to thy sight a horrid Scene of Woes.

Scene of Hell. Clem. Cold drops of sweat condensed by my sad fears,
Like Isicles, hang on my brows and hairs!

Com. O! Son imagine but a Bed of Fire;
The Curtains flames; the Bed-cords burning Wire;
If thou were bound unto this Bed all day,
And Fiends with red-hot Pinchers pluck away
Thy nervous parts; yet to renew thy pain,
With boiling Sulphur, glue 'em on again;
Thou Wilt say this is intolerable! But oh!
What horror to Eternities of woe?

Clem. O, Sir, forbear! My soul away does faint!
Your sad description has out done the paint.
Rather then hazard an eternal pain,
I will my purpose in short time obtain;
-- Tho for a thonsand thousand years
I live in torments and cannot be slain.

SCENE. III. The Camp.
King, Revol, Cuessle, Grillon, an Officer bringing at another door Chateauneuf
and Bonneval. Offic. These Ladies, Sir, were flying to the Town.

King. It seems then, Madam, you the League will own.

Chat. The motion, Sir, to Nature did belong;
For all things are inclined to fly from wrong.
Beside 'twas reason did my flight procure
For hopeful good, from Ills that were too sure.

King. Where Nature, and where Reason is so known,
You should the force of stronger workings own.
For what can Nature, what can Reason move
( Gown'd-Councelours!) against that Tyrant Love?
Who like Usurpers, in their new-got throne,
Despise all other Laws, beside their own.
Then Chateneuf thou merciful should be;
Your last Song proves too true a Prophecy,
And I love one, alas, who loves not me.

Chat. Without help pity, Sir, does little good;
Kind words to famisht men are slender food.
It like repining looks, at Heavens decree;
For her just scorns have vindicated me.
And justice now has equal Passion moved;
You love where hated, and you hate where loved.

Enter an Officer. 1 Offi. To arms! to arms! the vigilence of Mayn
By our disorders did advantage gain,
And has our late disserted trenches ta'n.

Enter another. 2 Offic. O Sir!

Gues. What is the news?

2 Offi. O, Sir, Navar.
Has some intentions that may cause your fear.

King. Against us he never will his Arms advance;
His veins hold too much of the blood of France.
Grillen! I leave this business to thy care;
Tho not in love, yet thou have skill in War.

Enter a third Officer. 3 Offi. The Camp they have entered, and our Guards now
force:
All Is in confusion!

Gril. I Will to the Guards of Horse;
And at the head of them will swiftly fly,
Disorder all their ranks, or bravely die. [ Exit Grillon.

Enter another. 4 Offi. Navar has quit his Post, and now stands still,
Drawn in Battalia on the neighboring Hill,
In view of all our Camp. His glittering Arms
That once assisted us, now threaten harms.
So Clouds, that promised once a fruitful birth,
O'r heated, send down Lightning to the Earth.

Enter Larchant. King. Larchant, what news?

Lar. O, Sir, we are all undone!

King. Where Is Gabriel?

Lar. Alas, Sir, she is gone!

King. Coward! Thy life to keep, and charge to lose.

Lar. What could I do against a thousand foes?

King. Had Grillon been but there, he would routed all.

Lar. O, Sir! Brave Grillon's lost, I saw him fall.

Rev. Have patience Sir. [King much afflicted.

King. O! 'Twould an Angel vex,
To loose at once the gloryes of each Sex.

A charge. Soldiers flying, and cry Arm, arm, arm. Kings Guards beat, himself
just overcome; Enter Navar and interposes 'twixt the King and their Weapons,
and beats 'em off. Then turns to the King. Nav. However you deal with me, Sir,
you are free:
If still you can, you may unmindful be. [Pursues 'em.

King. I in his generous favor well might boast,
If Grillon and my Gabriel were not lost.
Since two such blessings are to me denied,
He had been kinder to have let me died.
Grillon and Galriel in one hour oppressed,
Whose worth two several Ages might have blessed.
Afflictions press upon my soul too far;
I never can hope more from Love, or War.
The Court is broke -- It has no more to boast.
Since all its beauty, all its Valor's lost. [A shout within.
What shouts are those? what joys can now arrive.
Since they are dead?

Enter Grillon bloody, leading Gabriel. Gril. Death! Sir, we are both alive.
Both of us in our gallantries appear,
I in the richest Skarlets Soldiers wear.
She in those blushes far more brave than I.
Whose Skarlets are of a more lasting dye.

King. What miracle has brought you here again?
Whoever it be that sent you, tho Du Mayn;
I Will grant him any thing he can pretend,
And from this minute be his faithful friend.

Gab. We take you at you word, Sir.

King. Let us hear,
Who is this generous Hero.

Gril. It Is Navar.
Buried amongst Enemies I had o'rcome,
(For of their Carcasses I Would made a Tomb)
He like an Angel did their Troops invade,
And cut his passage with a shining Blade.
Like Ghosts the Enemy before him flies,
And he made Grillon from the dead to rise.

Gab. He fre'd me too; else I had not been here,

King. How! could Navar be your Deliverer,
And send you back to me?

Gab. He said his trust
Was firm in you, cause generous and just:
That your great soul would all its powers unite,
To quit just scores and services requite.

King. Brave man! thou art too great to be expressed;
Thy soul's too mighty for a mortal breast.
None, none, but such a Hero could bestow
His Love on's Rival, and a life on's Foe.
He in one day so generous did prove,
Freely to give my Life, my Friend, my Love.
My boistrous Passions ought now to retreat,
And I, by his example, must be great.

Enter Navar putting up his Sword, and Plessis, and Guards. Nav. Sir, here I
come humbly to beg of you
T'accept those services which were your due,
And tho with that great honor they are graced,
They Will but atone for my offenses passed,

King. Sir, I was passionate as well as you.

Gril. Death, who can tell the faultiest of the too?

Nav. Nature in all our souls sows precious seeds.
Virtues are flowers, and Vices are the Weeds.

Gril. Your souls (those curious Gardens) are not free;
But you your passions have, as well as we.

King. We were not men else: Sir, to let you know
That I can be as generous as you:
Of your three Presents here I thus dispose,
My life and Grillon I will only choose.
This third so rich a recompense will be, Points to Gab. and gives her.
That with one favor here, I pay for three.

Nav. This royal gift contains so vast a sum,
It pays for all my services to come.

King. Dear Chateneuf! thou formerly we'rt given
To acts of mercy; imitate then Heaven.
Forgiveness (without crimes) had never been;
As Sunbeams, after Clouds, more cheerful seen.
My roving Heart, neglectful of its rest,
Forsook the lovely Palace of your breast.
Then Idly for another ranged about,
And found one there, but justly was shut out. [Points at Gab.
The afflicted Prodigal does home retire,
Stripped from all vanities of loose desire,
Half-starv'd it begs refreshment at your fire.

Chat. It Is only Pity now that can me move.

King. Let me gain Pity, and I Will merit Love.
Nor can you doubt my Passion to be true;
Since I leave Gabriel and return to you.

Gril. In all my Love designs yet I am crossed. [ To Bonneval.

Bon. I scorn a Gamster that to all has lost.

Gril. My Title's forfeit then to womankind!
Yet I a nobler Mistress hope to find.
It Is Madam, Honor: she delights in War;
She is a Mistress worth contending for.
This Leaguer-Lady (for in Camps she is bred)
Does all the Beauties of the Court exceed.
She asks no Riches, but those gained in Wars;
Wounds, for her Ioynter; for her Jewels, Scars.
Victory and Fame she does for Portion yield;
At last, her Marriage bed, some well fought Field.
And then to prove her Virgin virtue good,
Her Mayden-head is always got in Blood.

Nav. Such a description and so drawn to the Life,
Plainly declares the have gained her to thy Wife.
Now I Have more hopes than e're I had before;
Since, Grillon, thou will rival me no more.

Gril. Not, Sir, in Love: troth, it is not worth the while;
Love's favors are but like an April smile,
Clouded each day, or wept away in showers.

King. But, Sir, you better know to use your hours. [ To Navar.
It is a maxim amongst Lovers known,
All time is lost, but when they are alone. [Takes out Chateauneus.
[Exeunt omnes praeter Navar and Gabriel.
Nav. It Is a great truth of which we make small use.
Why should we such a precious treasure lose?
We are not yet alone.

Gab. Here Is no one by.

Nav. Too many, Madam; since there is you and I.

Gab. I Will then withdraw and leave you here alone.

Nav. You Will leave but half of me, when you are gone.

Gab. I understand you not.

Nav. Ah! this does prove
You are unknowing in the rules of Love.
We talk, we look, we touch, yet still are poor,
And 'midst of such enjoyments, long for more.
There is a thing (we know not) called delight,
Nor never shall, until our Souls unite.
Love is in Union placed: And whilst we are two,
We Love not, we, alas, but only woo!

Gab. I know not then how Lover's souls can join,
Unless when mine is yours, and yours is mine.

Nav. How can we at this distance gain such blisses,
Unless we breath 'em mutually in chaste kisses?
Madam, when Heaven does Soul and Body join,
O! that is Love! And that Love is divine.

Gab. But whilst our souls alternately rejoice,
And rest contented in their purer choice?
Why should our Bodies, with their sensu'l weight
Retard our Souls in their more active flight?

Nav. Madam, it is true; our glorious souls praeside
Our Bodies, and our greatest actions guide:
No Love within the Body can begin
Without assistance from that God within.
Yet both must act whilst they on Earth reside;
Their faculties are vainly else employed.

Gab. My Love (as lasting as my soul) receive;
For I no mortal thing to you would give.
You more obliged me than the World can do;
And by that rule I would be thankful too.

Nav. You in your nice distinctions cruel prove,
To keep the Body and bestow your Love:
Like those who rich Estates and Jewels give,
Yet will not yield possession whilst they live.

Gab. To the most precious gist I was inclined;
Because 'till Death, Love cannot be refined.

Nav. That credit Love has lost, let us restore,
A d by our Loves show what it was before.
Love and the World together did begin,
-- And did outshine the Sun --
-- Before it clouded was with sin.
Such pure, such unmixt joys our souls shall swell,
As Virgins guess and Saints can only tell. [Exeunt.

SCENE. IV. The Presence Chamber.
Enter King, Revol, Grillon, Larchant, Guards. Gril. WHat makes you sad, Sir?

King. O! A dream last night;
Methought the Room was silvered o'r with Light.
But such a light as darted gentle beams;
As clear and cool as those that glide o'r streams.
The Roof seemed open and so seemed the sky;
From whence a shining light did more than fly.
It hovered o'r my Head; when soon there came
This Apparition through a door of flame.
The Chariot was less bright than his Attire;
His Lips were bloody, and his Eyes like fire.
He in his right hand held a flaming Blade;
Threatening me thus, he thundered out and said
My name is Vengeance, and I must be paid.

Rev. To look for truth from Dreams is full as vain,
As to hope counsel from a crazy brain.
Sleep is the Stage, and Fancy makes the Play;
The thoughts at night; act what they conn'd by day.
A Dream's a Play, Sir, and a Play's a dream;
Both aerie Descents of an idle Theme.

King. What e're this Vision may to thee appear,
I Am sure it makes a Deep impression here.
The threats of Vengeance most to those belong,
Who use that power Heaven gave 'em to do wrong.
One I committed, which wounds deeply here; [Points to's breast.
I mean the business of the Massacre.
'T was in this Room, where we did it conclude,
I well remember in this place I stood;
I hate it since; methinks it smells of blood. [ Enter Guesile.

Gues. A youth, Sir, seized by Guards, I now have brought,
But his chief business, I have vainly sought.
I took him for a spy and all means tried
To trap him, but he all things well applied.
He has Instructions, which he will tell to none,
Unless unto your Majesty alone.

King. Bring him in, Larchant. [ Exit. Larchant.

Gues. Sir, he says, he is sent
By diverse Friends, and the first President.
Who, if your Majesty appoint a day,
Thorough a Port your Forces will convey.

Enter Larchant, Clement pressing to the King. Larch. Stay, Fellow, where you
are, why do you thrust?

Gues. Speak out; here is none, but whom the King will trust.

Clem. Pardon me, Sir, my business is more great,
Than either he, or you imagine yet.

King. Let him come near. [He comes to the King.

Gril. I know not what, I doubt.

King. Now thy chief business speak; but speak more out.

Clem. This is my business, Sir. As the King leans to him, he stabs him.

King. O! I am slain! Takes the Knife out of his wound, and stabs him.
Take thy Knife, Villain, thus and thus again.

Rev. Run for the Surgeons soon.

Gril. Damned Rogue! Take that. [Runs him through, he falls.

Gues. How, killed?

Rev. O! You have done you know not what.
We never shall know the Abettors of the Plot.

Clem. Your hands have sealed the bargain now; and given
Me just possession of my purchased Heaven. [Dies.

Gril. How feel you, Sir, your self. Is the danger past?

Gues. Where are these Surgeons? They make little have.

King. I feel no pain, but hold it least it bleed.

Rev. O more than hellish, execrable deed! [Exeunt.
Confused running over the Stage, by Chirurgions, etc. and Guards marching
after Grillon.
Enter Guesile, Plessis. Gues. All will be well, I hope, if he get rest;
The Surgeons say all danger then is past.
They have great hopes it is a slanting stroke
-- Then his small pain
Makes 'em to hope, his Bowels are not broke.

Ples. May Heaven confirm it. Whilst we here attend,
Methinks the time we cannot better spend,
Than to observe what I did lately hear.

Gues. What was it about?

Ples. About the Massacre. Viz.
King Charles and's Mother (for 'twas in their Reign)
The Cardinal of Guise and of Lorrain,
The Duke of Anjou (who is now our King)
Whom Guise into the horrid Plot did bring;
Those six consulted and pronounced the doom;
And, pray observe it, in this very Room.
Vengeance is terrible; but it is divine:
You know by whom it is said, Vengeance is mine.
First, Charles began, cut off in's very prime,
And by a judgment suited to the crime:
He died in blood, who living shed such store;
And then was plunged, nay drowned in his own Gore.
The fire of Vengeance (which none can restrain)
Did melt the Glue that cimented each vain;
Those little Channels quickly made their way
To th'Brooks, those to the River, those to the Sea;
Which overflowed like an impetuous Tide,
And did through the sluices of his Body glide.

Gues. Then followed next the old Priest of Lorrain,
Who Christians had for Sacrifices slain.

Ples. His punishment was also in his blood;
Not by an overflowing of the flood;
But heated by some mistick fire within,
It boiled away in the Caldron of his skin.
Pale Ghosts before his dying Eyes did swim,
They first accused and then distracted him.
He raging died! --
His last breath like a storm fro's breast did fly,
And met a greater tempest in the sky.

Gues. Then for the Duke and Cardinal of Guise
We lately saw their bloody Tragedies.

Ples. The old Queen's soul most servilly did wait,
First on the Guise's crime, then on their fate.
And tho one punishment they could not have,
They had one guilt, and might have had one Grave.
Her shrivel'd veins, for such crimes could not quit,
But in her childrens blood she paid for it.

Gues. There Is none alive now, but our wounded Prince,
Whom doubtless Heaven has pardoned long time since,
And who, I hope, has many years to live.

Ples. Yet future Ages will this judgment give --
'T was just, that in the place, where once he stood
Condemning Innocents, he lost his blood.

Gues. Great were the Judgments!

Ples. But more great the crime!
I think, he was in Poland at that time.

Gues. True, Plessis, and I waited on him there.

Ples. Strange, that no Ghosts of the murdered did appear,
And with loud shriekings strike his tingling Ear!
O! 'T was a dismal night!

Gues. Which to declare
Will shortenth' time of our attendance here.

Ples. I need not aggravate the crime, nor tell
The murderous design, it is known too well.
Marg'ret of Valois married to Navar;
That sacred tie of Love they made their snare.
Thus Marriage is their Sacrament! they Sign
Their horrid Plot; and then (instead of Wine)
They quench their thirst's with blood, like Catiline.
No State, no Sex, 'scap'd their unmanly rage;
They neither pitty'd Youth, nor rev'renc'd Age.
The Cross, which Heaven gave as a glorious sign
Of Victory, to the great Constantine;
This Ensign first displayed in the Starry-Field,
-- To which --
The Persian Sun and Turkish Moon did yield.
-- Nay which --
The Blood of God himself did more than guild.
This sacred Badge's function they invade,
The Cross they upon every hat displaid,
Ten thousand Souls were forced that fatal night
From Bodies pale to take an untim'd flight.
Lovers in midst of soft embraces die;
Their Souls t'each other in their last breaths fly,
Then join in the vapors of a dying sigh.
Babes nuzling on stabbed Mothers breasts awake,
And gushing blood, alas, for milk they take.
Thin Ghosts (those airy Chariots of our Souls)
Hovered all o'r the Town in numerous Shoals,
Attending Guides, that might their ways prepare
Thorough the pathless Regions of the Air.
Now cries of dying Persons 'wake the Sun:
As Indians with loud clamours call the Moon.
Now horrid Scenes were offered to our Eyes;
The ground was paved with Carcasses; the Skies
Were hid with Clouds, which from spilt blood did rise.

Gues. Loud is the cry of blood! it is louder far
Than peals of Thunder when they rend the Air.
Their dying groans echoed to Poland soon,
Where we with scorn and hate were looked upon.
The very Tartars, who their Children fill
With blood of slaves, whom purposely they kill;
Whose Bodies are first kneaded up with blood,
Which is as much their substance as their food:
They even did those Murd'rers condemn
Of such a crime, as never was known to them.

Enter a Chyrurgion. Chyr. The King inquires for you.

Gues. Are all things well?

Chyr. 'Till th'wound is opened, Sir, we cannot tell.

SCENA ultima. The Royal Bedchamber.
The King on 's Couch Navar, seated by him, Grillon, Revol, Larchant, Gabriel,
Chateauneuf, and Chyrurgions. Guessle, Plessis at the other door. Attendants.
King. Grieve not my Friends; I feel but little pain;
A sign (they say) I may be well again.
Strange was my dream and the event too soon!

Gril. But, Sir, the work of Vengeance is not done.
He hovers there, Sir, or if gone he be,
H' has his Commission left, and Sword with me.

Nav. Grillon, thy vengeance shall have its desire;
We Will purge that treacherous Town with sword and fire.

Gril. May I but kindle 't, tho in the midst I fry,
Then like the Phoenix, I Will triumphant die.

King. My thanks, Sir, for your love and care I give;
And shall requite you, if I die or live.

Nav. More certain favors to your life I owe,
Than the World, nay than my hopes can ever bestow.
Talk not of dying, Sir; It nums the sense,
And deads the very thoughts of recompense.

King. The League is not so tender, Sir, as you;
I wear their Mark, but my revenge is due, Shows sense of pain.
Both from my Honor, and my Justice too.

Chyr. How are you, Sir?

King. The pains I now endure.
Denounce my Sentence; I am past your cure. [Chyrurgions view the wound, and
look distractedly.

Gril. What say thou Man?

Chyr. His Bowels, ah! are pierced!

King. My doom is past, and cannot be reversed. [Here all this time the
Chyrurgions are busy.

Gril. Thy tongue's as fatal as the Villains knife!
O! that with mine, I could redeem his life.
I soon would like the balsome tree be found,
Distilling drops of blood to cure his wound.
So both of us might add to honor's score;
I finish mine and he might purchase more.

King. Ladies forbear! My wound has wept enough; Ladies weep.
My Soul, against stabs, but not against tears is proof.

Gab. If, Sir, my Tears could do you any good,
I Would open the floodgates, and the streams let loose;
Nay gladly weep my self into a Flood.
The natural Balsam Virgins do produce.

Chat. Poor, hopeless Maid! I have received a wound
More deep, than that the Villain gave to you.
That you, when too unkind, I only found,
And now must lose you when both kind and true.

King. May you more happy in all fortunes prove,
And for your kind grief now, gain joys in Love.
My End hastes on, my last breath does declare
(And you all know it) my brother of Navar
Is next in blood, and my immediate Heir.
Forgive my Enemies for Heaven will be
So just both to avenge it self and me.
And for Religion I only pray --
Heaven would direct you in the safest way.
To turn you, Sir, to mine is vain to try;
Since, oh! this wound speaks louder far than I.

Nav. Grief has distracted me and tied my tongue;
And robbed me of all sense, but of your wrong.

King. My soul from every faculty now flies,
And hovers at the Windows of my Eyes:
'T will take it is flight just at my next fetched groan.
My dearest friends, farewell! Oh! [Groans and dies.

Rev. Now, it is flown!

Chat. Heaven was my choice before; and now shall be!
Farewell all Loves, dear soul, unless for thee [Weeps.

Nav. In death it was his duty to forgive,
As to do justice is our parts that live.
Let us endeavor then with all our might,
Both to revenge his wrong and gain my right.
I am your King; and will point out the way
To Honor, and oblige you to obey.

Ples. Let Us now to Rheims, Sir, make a quick advance,
And with that sacred Oil, anoint your Head,
Which was by Heaven sent purposely to France.
To raise a new King, when the old on's dead.

Rev. The King's last Will, Sir, makes your Title good.
You are his Heir by Will, as well as Blood

Gril. I Will Love and serve you for no other thing.
But that you're very valiant and my King.

Nav. I thank you all. You all shall largely share
Both in my Royal favors and my care.
Madam, you knew so much of me before [ To Gabriel.
It is a needless thing, now to say more.
Only some difference by this change is grown,
I can present you with a double Crown. [Then turns to the Men.
Love shall not die, tho for a time it cease;
We Will first try War, then the delights of Peace. [The Curtain falls.

FINIS.
THE EPILOGUE. Intended to be spoken by a Woman.
It Is very hard, whilst Fortune was our Foe,
You should dissert us for her being so.
We were your Favorites; and none before
Lost that preferment, by their own being poor.
Small cause, that you should with that Whore conspire,
To send us Famine, 'cause she sent us Fire.
The Scenes, composed of Oil and porous Firr,
Added to the ruin of the Theater.
And 'twas a judgment in the Poets Phrase,
That Plays and Playhouse perished by a blaze
Caused by those gaudy Scenes, that spoil good Plays.
But why for this should we forsaken be?
It was our House, alas, was burnt; not we.
And yet from hence might some suspicion come,
Since it first kindled in our lowest Room;
The Fire did seize on all both Brick and Wood;
But we more lucky were in Flesh and Blood.
If we be poor, what then! We Are honest tho;
And that is the thing, we fear, that loses you.
It Is not our faults, if our Estates be low,
But 'twill be yours, if we continue so.
-- Faith, let us both amend --

