THE GREAT TREATY OF PEACE: OR A Serious Exhortation upon a sad occasion to
double Diligence about making Peace with God. Part whereof was preached at the
Funeral of Mrs. ANNE KYRL, April 6. 1677.

To which is Annexed, The Character of that Worthy Gentlewoman.

By H. S. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for John Hancock, at the Sign of the Three Bibles in Popes
Head Alley in Cornhil. 1677.

To the Relations OF Mrs. ANNE KYRL Lately Deceased, H. S.

Wishes the Multiplication of Grace and Peace, through the Knowledge of God,
and of Jesus our Lord.

THE GREAT TREATY OF PEACE.
BY a sad Providence you are brought together into this place, yea by a long
series of Providence the Governor of the World has brought it to pass, That I
must be your Orator for a while, and you my Auditors.

To bespeak your attention and seriousness, being met upon such a sad occasion,
one would think should be needless.

I hope you are persuaded that you are all here before God to whom all things
are naked, and opened, and to whom you must, another day, give account of your
being here this day.

I hope also that you are fully persuaded that preaching the Gospel, what ever
the World accounts it, is the power of God, Romans 1. 16. and that whereby it
pleases him to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 18, 21. and that Faith comes
by hearing it, Romans 10. 17. and that it is a means ordained of God to open
peoples eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, etc. Acts 26. 17, 18.

I would hope also, that you are come with an expectation to hear what God, by
Man, will say unto you, and with a resolution to do what shall be commanded you
of the Lord, as Peter's Hearers, Acts 10. 33. when he was sent to them to tell
them words whereby they might be saved, Acts 11. 14.

My hearts desire and prayer to God is, that I may so speak, and you may so
hear, that our Souls may be, when we go hence, where that Blessed Soul is,
whose Corpse we are met here to inter.

It is written, 2 Pet. 3. 14. thus, Wherefore (Beloved) seeing that ye look for
such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot and
blameless.

The day of the Lord will come, v. 10. whatever Mockers (v. 3, 4.) say to the
contrary. Therefore the Apostle exhorts to holiness, v. 11. and in this v. 14.
repeats his Exhortation.

The Exhortation is enforced by Arguments.

1. One v. 12. from their hope and expectation of Christ's coming.

2. Another from the new and better estate they expected at his coming
according to promise, v. 13. which promise you have, Isa. 65. 17. and 66. 22.
Behold, I create new Heavens and a new Earth, that is, a new estate of the
Church, which was to have, 1. Its inchoation and beginning. 2. Its consummation
and perfecting.


1. Its inchoation at the first coming of Christ in Gospel times, which estate
of the Church is called, 1. A new Creation by the Prophet Isaiah. 2. The World
to come by S. Paul, Heb. 2. 5. 3. The Kingdom of Heaven by John Baptist, Mat.
3. 2.


2. Its consummation and perfecting at the second coming of Christ at the last
day, which is that here spoken of v. 13. and Rev. 21. 5.

Now it follows, Wherefore seeing we look for such things, be diligent that ye
may be found of him in peace, etc.

Beloved, beloved of God, Christ, Angels, and Men; seeing ye look for, expect,
hope for, such things, such a new and happy estate, viz. Eternal blessedness,
Eternal life, when this Life shall have an end; be diligent, industriously
diligent, sedulous, studious, sollicitous: that ye may be found of him, that
is, of the Lord Jesus Christ, when he shall come to judgment, to the judgment
either of all in general, or of each one in particular.

1. In Peace, In peace with God, reconciled to him by Jesus Christ, Col. 1. 20.
Romans 5. 10.

2. In peace with our selves, having peace of Conscience, and no trouble or
terror in our spirits at his coming, as they Rev. 6. 15, 16. who could not
endure to see the face of him that sat on the Throne.

3. In peace with others, especially the Saints, holding fellowship and
communion with them.

Without spot, having the unspoted righteousness of Christ imputed to them as
their own.

And blameless in their conversation.

Three things upon this occasion I intend to speak to.

1. That Christ will come to judgment.

2. At his coming Believers expect a blessed estate.

3. They that do expect this blessed estate must be diligent, that they may be
found of Christ in peace at his coming, in a reconciled estate with God.

Of the two former briefly, of the last more largely.

1. That Christ will come to judgment, is an Article of our Faith: We say we
believe that Jesus Christ the Son of God shall come from his right hand to
judge the quick and the dead.

1. Christ himself has told us so, Joh. 14. 3. 2. Enoch prophesied of it, Jude
14. 15. 3. Paul assures us of it, Acts 17. 31. 1 These. 4. 16. 2 These. 1. 7, 8.
2 Timothy 4. 1. 4. Peter likewise, 1 Pet. 4. 5. 5. And John, Rev. 1. 7. 6. Yea
Angels, Acts 1. 11.
This day is diversely called with respect to good and bad.

1. To the good: so it is called,

1. The day of refreshing, Acts 3. 19. Repent and be converted, that your sins
may be blotted out when the times of refreshing shall come.

2. The day of redemption; Lift up your heads, for your redemption draws
nigh, Luke 21. 28.

2. To the bad: so it is called,

1. A day of wrath and revelation of Gods righteous judgment, Romans 2. 5. 1 Cor.
4. 5. 2. A day of perdition, 2 Pet. 3. 7.
Use. Seeing Christ will come to judgment, I have a fourfold request to make
unto you.

1. That you would settle this Truth in your hearts by believing it: Do not
only say you believe it, viz. That Christ shall come to judge the quick and the
dead, but do so indeed, believe it with all your heart. My hearts desire and
prayer to God for you is, that you may be established, strengthened, and settled
in the belief of this Article of the Christian Faith.

2. That you would be mindful of it, let it be always in your thoughts, Christ
will come to Judgment, he will reckon for this another day. Say this often to
your selves; The coming of the Lord draws nigh, he is even at the door, Jam.
5. 8, 9.

3. That you would repent: Because for certain God has appointed a day wherein
he will judge the world by Jesus Christ, Acts 17. 31.

4. That you would see to it, that your conversations be holy and godly. Seeing
Christ will come to judgment, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy
conversation and godliness? 2 Pet. 3. 11.

Doct. 2. Believers at the coming of Christ expect a blessed estate.

When Christ who is their life shall appear, then do they expect to appear with
him in glory, Col. 3. 4.

Our conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile bodies, and make them like to his own
glorious Body, Phil 3. 20.

According to promise we look for new Heavens and new Earth, says St. Peter 2
Pet. 3. 13.

And Paul is confident of rest, when the Lord Jesus should be revealed with his
mighty Angels, 2 These. 1. 7.

Use Approve your selves Believers, by looking for this blessed estate, and
hastening unto it. See 2 Pet. 3. 12.

Doct. 3. They that do expect this blessed estate must be diligent, that they
may be found of Christ in peace, or a reconciled estate with God, at his coming.

Here I shall show you, 1. What this Peace and Reconciliation with God is. 2.
How it was effected, how brought to pass, seeing we were in an estate of
variance and enmity. 3. That it is our duty to be diligent to be found in peace
in this estate. 4. What this diligence is. 5. To what this diligence in
Scripture is applied, and to what required. 6. Why. 7. The Use.


1. What this Peace and Reconciliation with God is?

Answ. It Is the restoring that ancient friendship betwixt God and Man which sin
had dissolved. Or,

The reuniting of God and Man which were at odds.

The healing and making up of the breach between God and Man, which sin had
made.

Rightly to understand this, know,

1. God and Man were once good Friends; Man in his estate of innocence was in
an estate of unity and amity with God, God was well pleased with Man, and Man
well pleased with God, Genesis 1. 31.

2. By man's transgression this friendly estate between God and Man was lost,
and all mankind plunged into an estate of alienation and aversation from God,
and enmity against God.

3. This alienation and difference is mutual, on both sides.

1. On Man's. Col. 1. 21. You that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your
mind by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled.

So Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, and is not subject to the
Law of God, neither indeed can be.

2. On Gods. God owns him not, will have no fellowship with him, Mat. 7. 23.
Luke 13. 17..

God is so alienated from fallen Man,

1. That he abominates his Person and Services.

1. His Person. Ps. 5. 5. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate
all workers of iniquity, says David. God is angry with the wicked every day,
Ps. 7. 11. His Soul hates the wicked, Ps. 11. 5.

2. His Services. He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his
Prayer shall be abomination, Prove. 28. 9. The Sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15. 8. So Isa. 1. 13. Incense is an abomination
to me, your appointed Feasts my Soul hates. v. 14. They are a trouble to me, I
am weary to bear them.

2. God is so alienated from man, that he leaves him under the power of Satan,
to whom he had yielded himself, Ephesians. 2. 2.

3. And in bondage unto death under which he had brought himself, Heb. 2. 14.

4. God is so alienated from him, that he leaves him under the power of sin
which he had embraced, Romans 6. 16, 17.

5. Under the guilt of sin which he had contracted, Romans 3. 19.

6. Under the curse of the Law which he had transgressed, Gal. 3. 10, 13.

7. Under the wrath of God which he had deserved, Ephesians. 2. 3. Romans 1. 18. and
5. 9.

4. No man can reconcile himself to God, or reingratiate himself with God, nor
can any creature do it for him. Acts 4. 12. Neither salvation, nor
reconciliation in any other but in Christ; for there is none other name under
Heaven among men, whereby we must be saved or reconciled.

5. Jesus Christ (a mighty Person) undertook the Office of a Mediator, and has
made peace for many, and will make peace for all the Father has given him.

This may be illustrated by the making up of the breach between David and
Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.

1. David and Absalom were good friends at first.

2. Absalom kills Amnon, and thereby offends David.

3. This offense makes a difference between David and Absalom. David is wroth,
Absalom slees, and dares not come near his Father.

4. Joab uses means, and seeks to take up the difference.

5. By Joabs means the breach is made up, and David and Absalom become good
Friends again.

Even so,

1. God and Man were good Friends at first, whiles he retained Gods Image.

2. Man offends by eating forbidden fruit.

3. This offense makes a difference between God and Man.

4. Jesus Christ undertakes to make up the difference.

5. By means of Jesus Christ God and Man become good Friends again.

2. How this peace and reconciliation with God was effected, how 'twas brought
about.

Answ. Much after that manner, and by that means, that David and Absalom were
reconciled.

1. David's heart was toward offending Absalom, 2 Samuel 14. 1. David's Soul
longed to go forth unto Absalom: but for shame he could have gone himself, or
sent others to fetch him home. O the Ocean of Love that is in a Fathers heart!
2 Samuel 13. 39.

Even so was Gods heart toward transgressing offending fallen Man. His Soul
longed to go forth unto fallen man. His kindness and love toward man appeared
Tit. 3. 4. which Ephesians. 2. 7. is called the exceeding riches of his grace, in his
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. This he showed. God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that we might live through him.
Read Joh. 3. 16. 1 John 4. 9.

2. Joab perceives it, 2 Samuel 14. 1. So Christ knew the Fathers love to Man,
being in his bosom, Joh. 1. 18. The only begotten Son which is in the bosom of
the Father, he has declared him. None knows the Father but the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11. 27.

3. Joab intercedes for Absaloms return and reception into favor, and
instructs the Woman of Tekoa to say to David among other things, The iniquity
be upon me, 1 Samuel 14. 9.

So says Christ, Man has sinned, let his iniquity be upon me.

As once Abigail said to David when her Husband had offended, Upon me, upon me
let this iniquity be, 1 Samuel 25. 24.

And as Rebecca said to Jacob, when he feared he should bring a Curse on him,
by seeking a blessing in a wrong way, Upon me be thy curse, Genesis 27. 13.

So said Christ to his Father, Upon me be the curse of the Law which Man has
transgressed.

And as Paul to Philemon concerning Onesimus, Phil. 18. If he has wronged
thee, or owes thee ought, put that upon my account.

So said Christ to his Father, What the sinner owes thee put that upon my
account. Lo, I come (says Christ) to do thy will, Ps. 40. 7. Heb. 10. 7, 9.

4. David hearkens to Joabs motion, grants his request, 2 Samuel 14. 21.

So God accepts of his Sons offer, and lays man's iniquities upon him, Isa. 53.
6. and v. 5. The chastisement of our peace was upon him.

5. Joab goes to Geshur to seek and fetch Absalom back again, 2 Samuel 14. 23.

So Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. to seek and save
lost man, Luke 19. 10. Which that he might do, more was required of him then
was of Joab in order to Absaloms return.

Two things Joab did not which Christ did, and without the doing of which Man
could not have been received into favor again with God.

1. Joab did not die at Geshur or Jerusalem for Absalom, to satisfy for the
blood of Amnon, he only went to Geshur; but Christ when he came into the world
to save sinners, he died and suffered in the room and stead of sinners, to
satisfy the Justice of God offended by sinners. He died for the ungodly, Romans
5. 6. While we were yet sinners Christ died for us, v. 8. When we were enemies,
we were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, v. 10. The just suffered
for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3. 18. See also Col. 1. 20. Ephesians. 2. 16. Heb. 2. 17.

2. Joab did not undertake for Absaloms good behavior for the future; but
Jesus Christ did undertake for sinners, that they should be have themselves
better for the future, and by his death merited Faith, Repentance, New
Obedience, and Good Behavior, for them for whom he died. Therefore, says he
Joh. 6. 37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me: and tells his
Hearers, Joh. 12. 32. If he be lifted up from the earth, he will draw all men
unto him, that is, all given to him.

This God stood upon with Christ, when he undertook for sinners. He must and
will have his justice satisfied, which could not be done without dying for, and
suffering in the room and stead of sinners.

And sinners must turn from sin, and lead a better course of life, else it
would not stand with Gods Holiness to receive them into favor and fellowship
with him.

To illustrate this by a similitude.

Suppose one mediating to a Prince for a Thief, that had greatly wronged
another in his Estate: Upon two conditions, says the Prince, I will pardon him;

1. That the wrong done be satisfied for, and the loss sustained be repaired.

2. That he leave off his thieving and former course of life, else in justice
and wisdom, says the Prince, I cannot but refuse your suit.

Now Christ does both.

1. The former by dying for Sinners, and thereby satisfying justice for the
wrong done to it.

2. The later, by meriting grace for Sinners, viz. Faith and Holiness, and by
sending his Spirit to work it in them; therefore is the Spirit called,

The Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4. 13. The Spirit of Holiness, Romans 1. 4.
6. Joab brings Absalom to Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 14. 23.

Christ by his care brings Sinners to the Church, to the means of Grace, or the
means of Grace to them, as he did to the Jailer, Acts 16. 29, 30, 31, 32.
Christ, as the good Samaritan, brings them to an Inn, and Host, and gives
charge concerning them, Luke 10. 34, 35. See also Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17. 2 Timothy
4. 1, 2.

7. Absalom at Jerusalem is troubled that he was not admitted to see the Kings
Face, 2 Samuel 14. 32. For v. 24. David had said, Let him not see my Face: And
this David did, to humble him the more for his sin, and to keep him in awe that
he might do no more so wickedly.

So Sinners by the means of grace being brought to a sight and sense of sin and
misery, as Peter's Hearers were, being pricked at heart, and troubled as the
Jailer was, Acts 16. 29. do long for a sight of the pleased Face of their
Heavenly Father, which for their farther humiliation he thinks fit to deny at
present.

8. Absalom sends for Joab, but he comes not, 2 Samuel 14. 29.

So the Sinner by prayer sends to Christ about Gods hiding his Face, but he
comes not.

9. Absalom sends a second time, and sets Joabs Corn on fire, 2 Samuel 14. 29,
30. and then Joab comes.

So the Sinner prays and sends again to Christ, and then Christ comes.

Thus Paul prays, and then Annanias was sent to him, Acts 9. 11.

So Cornelius prayed, and Peter was sent to him, Acts 10. 2, -- 20.

10. Joab being come Absalom imploys him, and sends him to the King, 2 Samuel 14.
32.

So poor penitent sinners employ Christ by faith, to make peace for them with
their offended Father.

11. Joab comes to the King, and represents to him Absaloms trouble, because he
could not see his Fathers Face, I Sam. 14. 33.

So Jesus comes to God, and represents as an Advocate the troubled sinners case
to his Father, 1 John 2. 1. Heb. 9. 24.

12. Now Davia calls for Absalom, 2 Samuel 14. 33.

So does God, upon Christ's appearing for the penitent sinner, call for him,
Mat. 11. 28. Come to me poor, laboring, heavy-laden sinner, and I will give
thee rest. So Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that is athirst, come. And Joh. 7. 37.
If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink.

13. Now Absalom comes and prostrates himself before the King, 2 Samuel 14. 33.

So does the penitent sinner prostrate himself before his heavenly father, as
the Prodigal did before his Father, judging himself, Luke 15. 21. saying, I
have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be
called thy son.

14. Now David kisses Absalom, and receives him into favor, 2 Samuel 14. 33.

So God as the Father of the Prodigal, falls upon the necks of penitent
sinners, and kisses them, receiving them into favor, as if they had never
offended, Luke 15. 20.

3. The Proof of the Doctrine.

That they who expect a blessed estate at the coming of Christ, must be
diligent to be found of him in peace, or in a reconciled estate with God, at
his coming.

Eliphaz counsels Job to acquaint himself with God, and to be at peace, and
tells him that thereby good shall come unto him, Job 22. 21. both here and
hereafter.

Gods face and favor is to be sought evermore, Ps. 105. 4.

Let him take hold of my strength, says God, that he may make peace with me,
Isa. 27. 5.

Nay, God beseeches us to be reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ his stead be ye reconciled to God.

We must be ready for the coming of the Son of Man, Mat. 24. 44. And ready sure
we cannot be, until we have made our peace with God. We are beseeched to
present our bodies a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which sure
cannot be whiles we are up in arms against him, Romans 12. 1.

4. What this diligence is?

Diligence is the continual and earnest applying our selves to a thing.

The giving, setting, bending the mind to a thing.

It Is to be instant in season, and out of season about any thing, 2 Timothy 4. 2.

It Is in the morning to sow ones seed, and in the evening not to withhold his
hand, Eccles. 11. 6.

It Is to do what one does, with all ones might, Eccles. 9. 10. and power, Genesis
31. 6.

It Is to abide at ones work, as the Levites were required, Lev. 8. 35.

It Is to be at it early and late, night and day, as Paul was, Acts 20. 31.

It Is to take heed to fulfill our work, as Archippus is required, Col. 4. 17.

Further,

It Is to arise and be doing, 1 Chronicles. 22. 16.

It Is to rise up betimes about a thing, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15.

It Is to enquire early after a thing, Ps. 78. 34.

It Is to take heed that we fail not to do a thing, Ezra 4. 22.

It Is to bestir ones self, 2 Samuel 5. 24.

It Is to be industrious about a thing, 1 Kings 11. 28.

It Is to wait on a business, Pro. 27. 18.

It Is to stand continually at it, Isa. 21. 8.

It Is to give ones self no rest, Lam. 2. 18.

It Is to seek as for Silver, and to search as for hid treasure, Pro. 2. 4.

It Is to offer violence, Mat. 11. 12.

It Is to press into, Luke 16. 16.

It Is to work out with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12.

So then, to be diligent to be found of Christ in peace, or a reconciled estate
with God, it is,

To be instant in season and out of season about it.

To be at this work of making peace with God in the morning and in the evening,
not to withhold our hand.

To endeavor it with all our might and power.

To be at this work of making peace with God early and late, night and day.

To abide at it; and,

To take heed that we fulfill it, and not fail to do it.

To wait on it till it be effected.

To give our selves no rest till it be done.

To seek this peace with God as one would seek for Silver, or as one would
search for hid Treasure.

To offer violence to all that oppose our doing it, etc.

5. The Fifth thing I promised to show you was,

To what this Diligence in Scripture is applied, and to what required.

1. To what applied.

It Is applied,

1. To seeking Good, Heb. 11. 6. He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him.

2. To seeking God, Prove. 11. 27. He that diligently seeks God procures
favor.

3. To searching for Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 10. After which the Prophets searched
diligently.

4. To learning the ways of Gods people, Jer. 12. 16. If they will diligently
learn the ways of my people, they shall be built.

5. To looking left any fail of the grace of God, Heb. 12. 15. Looking
diligently lest any fail of the grace of God.

2. It Is required,

1. To the keeping of the Soul, Deuteronomy. 4. 9. and Heart, Pro. 4. 23. Keep thy
Soul diligently. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the
issues of life.

2. To keeping Gods commands of loving him, walking in his ways, and cleaving
to him, Deuteronomy. 11. 22. Ye shall diligently keep all these commandments, which I
command you to do them; to love the Lord your God, to walk in all his ways, and
to cleave unto him.

3. To the delivering of our selves from an Adversary, Luke 12. 58. When thou
go with thine adversary to the magistrate, as thou art in the way give
diligence, that thou may be delivered from him, lest, etc.

4. To adding to our stock of grace, 2 Pet. 1. 5. Giving all diligence, add to
your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to
temperance patience, and to patience, godliness, and to godliness brotherly
kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity.

5. To attaining the full assurance of hope, Heb. 6. 11. We desire that every
one of you do show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope to the end.

6. To the making of our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give
diligence to make your calling and election sure.

7. And here in my Text, To our being found of Christ in peace at his coming.

6. The Reasons why we must give diligence to be at peace, and in a reconled
estate with God, that so we may be found of Christ in it at his coming, are
these:

Reason 1. Because God having done so much in order thereunto, (viz. in order
toward making peace between God and Man) our negligence in not doing our part
in order thereunto, will be a slighting of the love and kindness of God, which
is said to be great, Ephesians. 2. 4. and exceeding rich toward us through Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 7.

It will be horrible ingratitude, which will cause God to cry out and say as
Isa. 1. 2. Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, for I have out of my love, and
by my wisdom, found out a way for fallen offending Man to be at peace with me,
and he will not accept of it, will not be diligent in the use of means to
obtain it.

Now here it may be inquired,

Q. What has God done toward making peace between Man offending and himself
offended?

A. 1. He took counsel about it; both Father and Son took counsel together
about it, Zech. 6. 13.

The counsel of Peacemaking between God and Man was between them both, not I
think between the two Offices of Christ, Kingly and Priestly, but between the
two persons spoken of before, viz. the Lord Jehovah, and he who was to be the
Branch. God takes this counsel with him, as he was his Eternal Wisdom, with
respect to his future Incarnation, for in that respect he was to be the Branch.
Hence it may be he is called Counselor, Isa. 9. 6.

The consultation was how to satissie Justice offended, that so the Offender
might be received into favor, how Man an enemy to God might be reconciled unto
God, and God to him.

The way thought upon was, the Incarnation of the second person in the Holy
Trinity, in order to his suffering death in the room and stead of the Offender,
thereby to satisfy the Justice of God offended.

2. He entered into a Covenant and Agreement with his eternally begotten Son
about it.

In order to Peacemaking between God and Man,

1. God demands, requires of his Son, such and such things to be done and
suffered, viz. that he be made under the Law, and that his Soul be made an
Offering for sin, Isa. 53. 10. The transgression of the Law of God made the
difference between God and Man, and he will not be satisfied and reconciled,
unless this Law be fulfilled. Satisfy the Law and I am satisfied, says God.

2. The Son accepts and engages to satisfy his Fathers demands, viz. to
fulfill the Law, to perform the duty and pay the penalty of it; to do what the
Law enjoynes, and to suffer what the Law threatens.

Therefore when he came into the World, he was made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4.
and says, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God, Heb. 10. 5. and Ps. 40. 8. I
delight to do thy Will, O God, yea thy Law is within my heart.

It becomes us, says he to John Baptist, to fulfill all righteousness, Mat.
3. 15. I am not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, Mat. 5. 17. And
this he did, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Romans
8. 4.

How often does he say his Father had sent him, and that he came to do the Will
of him that sent him? Joh. 6. 38, 39, 40. and Joh. 9. 4. I must work the works
of him that sent me, and in his prayer, Joh. 17. 4. He tells his Father that he
had finished the work he had given him to do.

3. He takes delight in these transactions between him and his Son about this
peace making for Man, Prove. 8. 30, 31. The counsel and contrivance of the work
of our redemption and salvation was the mutual delight of the Father and Son.

God forseeing how these transactions between him and his Son about man's
reconciliation with God would issue in his own eternal glory, is delighted and
pleased therewith. The Father and Son foreseeing how by this means the Law
would be fulfilled, Gods justice would be satisfied, Gods glory would be
repaired, Satan would be trodden under foot, and his works destroyed, and poor
captives would be delivered, and sinners reconciled, are greatly delighted. The
Father rejoices in the Sons undertaking this work; the Son rejoices in the
Fathers undertaking for his protection, and assistance, and success in the
work. See how it is expressed, Isa. 42. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Behold my servant
whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my soul delights, in whom my soul is well
pleased. Mat. 12. 18. My beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Mat. 17. 5. and
Mat. 3. 17. I have put my spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the
Gentiles. He shall not cry nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the
streets: A bruised Reed shall he not break, and the smoking Flax shall he not
quench: He shall bring forth judgment unto truth: He shall not fail nor be
discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth, and the Isles shall wait
for his Law. Thus says the Lord, he that created the Heavens, etc. I the Lord
have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep
thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the People, for a light of the Gentiles,
to open the blind eyes, and to bring out the Prisoners out of the Prison, and
them that sit in darkness, out of the Prisonhouse. The foresight of these
things was their delight.

4. He has been at great cost and expense, even the expense of blood, precious
blood, 1 Pet. 1. 19. yea God-blood, Acts 20. 28. to have this peace with
himself purchased and procured for us.

It pleased the Father (Christ having made peace through the blood of his
Cross) by him to reconcile all things to himself, etc. And youth at were
sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled, in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and
unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight. See Col. 1. 19, 20, 21, 22. See
also Ephesians. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. When we were enemies we were reconciled to God
by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10.

5. He has provided and taken care, that this purchased peace should be
preached and proffered unto us: Christ himself came and preached it, Ephesians. 2.
17. and has commissionated others to do so too, Mar. 16. 15. Go preach the
Gospel, the Gospel of Peace, Romans 10. 15. to every Creature.

God sent to the Children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, Acts 10.
36. He has given to us the ministry of reconciliation, to wit, That God was in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them, and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19.
This grace is given to Ministers, that they might preach the unsearchable
Riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8.

When Christ sent forth the 70 Disciples, he commissioned them to say to every
house where they came, Luke 10. 5. Peace be to this house.

After Christ was risen he appears to his Disciples, John 20. 21. saying, Peace
be unto you, as my Father has sent me, so send I you to preach the Gospel,
even the Gospel of Peace.

6. He has given us a charge to accept of proffered peace, to believe on his
Son for peace and reconciliation. 1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment that we
should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ: and Isa. 27. 5. Let him
take hold of my strength that he may make peace with me.

7. He has expressed and manisested his great desire of our making peace with
him

1. By Writing. Christ writes to the Church of Ephesus to repent and make her
peace, lest he come against her, Rev. 2. 1. with 5.

2. By sending. Ministers are Messengers sent to us, Job. 33. 23.

Ambassadors sent to treat with us about peace and reconciliation with God, 2
Cor. 5. 20.

The Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers, because he had
compassion on them, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. As my Father sent me, says Christ, John
20. 21. so send I you: In the same Errand that I was sent, I send you; my
Errand was to make peace, and that is yours. Luke 10. 5. Say, Peace be to this
house.

3. By praying and beseeching. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

4. By expostulating and reasoning the case: Turnye, turnye, for why will ye
dye? Ezekiel. 33. 11.

5. By Wishing. O that thou had hearkened unto my Commandments, then had thy
peace been as a River, Isa. 48 18. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and
Israel had walked in my ways! I should soon have subdued their Enemies, and
turned my hand against their Adversaries. O if thou had known in this thy day
the things belonging to thy peace! Luke 19. 42.

O that there were such a heart in them! Deuteronomy. 5. 29.

6. By waiting for our coming in and making peace with him. The Lord waits that
he may be gracious, Isa. 30. 18. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any
man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him,
and he with me, Rev. 3. 20.

7. By Swearing. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death
of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live, Ezekiel. 33. 11.
So, but that he lay down his weapons and be at peace with me, that so he may
live.

Reason 2. Why we must give diligence to be at peace, and in a reconciled
estate with God, that so we may be found of Christ in it at his coming.

Because peace with God is so desirable. All peace is desirable, whether in a
Family, or Neighborhood, or Nation; but this peace with God is transcendent,
an incomparable blessing.

1. It passes all understanding, all created understanding, Phil. 4. 7.

2. It is safeguarding, Phil. 4. 7.

3. It Is part of the Kingdom of God, Romans 14. 17.

4. It Is everlasting, Isa. 54. 10.

Reason 3. Because to be negligent herein, not to be diligent in seeking peace
with God, is so dangerous. For are we able to meet God when he shall come
against us? See Luke 14. 31, 32. Are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10. 22. Can
thy heart endure, or can thy hands be strong, in the day when God shall deal
with thee? Ezekiel. 22. 14.

If you rebel, and make not your peace with him, he will be your enemy, and
fight against you, Isa. 63. 10. and, Who ever hardened himself against God, and
prospered? Job 9. 4. If you shall not be found of Christ in peace at his
coming, he will at his coming take vengeance upon you, 2 These. 1. 8.

The Use.

Must we be diligent in seeking peace with God, that so we may be found of
Christ in peace at his coming?

Use 1. Examine.

Have we done our duty herein? have we been diligent in making our peace with
God? and have we made our peace? what faith Conscience? is there peace between
God and you? deal truly with your own Souls.

1. They that are at peace with God, are at war with sin. Know ye not the
friendship of the world is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a
friend of the world, is the enemy of God, Jam. 4. 4. Now all that is in the
world is, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1 John 2. 16. and whosoever is a friend of these, is an enemy of God. If any man
love these, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15. These lusts do
war against God and the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. and they that are at peace with
God, and in his favor, and have any love to him and their souls, cannot be at
peace with these, with an unlawful immoderate desire after the Profits,
Pleasures, and Honors of this world. What say you, are you at war with these?
If you be at peace with these, you are not at peace with God.

2. They that are at peace with God, are in mourning for their former enmity
against God; when they look on him whom they have pierced they mourn, Z^ch. 12.
10.

Now do you do so? Do you mourn for your former sinning against God, and
offending him, as one mourns for his only Son? what, and are you in
bitterness for it, as one that is in bitterness for his first born?

3. They that are at peace with God, are in care to please God, and in fear to
offend him for the future.

Care and Fear are the fruits of godly sorrow for offending God, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
They that are at peace with God say as Joseph when tempted to sin, Genesis 39. 9.
Behold, now I have peace with God, how then can I do this great wickedness, and
sin against God, and so break my peace with him? Is it thus with you? is there
this care and fear in you?

4. They that are at peace with God are in pain and heaviness till others,
especially near Relations, be also at peace with God, as Paul was Rom 9. 1, 2.
He had great heaviness and continual sorrow in his heart for his brethren and
kinsmen according to the flesh, because they sought not peace with God by Jesus
Christ; because they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, had not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3.

You have Children and other Relations, are you in pain and heaviness till they
have made their peace with God? is it a grief of heart to you, that any of
yours should be at war with your God, with whom you now are at peace?

5. They that are at peace with God, are at peace with those that are at peace
with God: their delight is in them: Ps. 16. 3. but they are grieved with those
that rise up against God. Ps. 139. 21. they count Gods enemies their enemies,
v. 22. and Gods friends their friends. Is it thus with you?

6. They that are at peace with God cannot but wonder, and say to God as once
Ruth said to Boaz, Ruth 2. 10. Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou
should take knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger? So faith the person
that is at peace with God, that has found favor in his eyes, why have I found
this favor, who was sometimes alienated, and an enemy in my mind by wicked
works? Is it thus with you?

7. They that are at peace with God are joyful in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom they have received the atonement, Romans 5. 11. They rejoice in
Jesus Christ, and have no considence in the flesh. Phil. 3. 3. They say, not
unto us, not unto us, but unto God in Christ be all the glory and praise of our
being at peace with God: They thank God through Jesus Christ for their being at
peace with God. They say as Paul, Gal. 6. 14. God forbid that we should glory
in any thing, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which our
peace was made, Col. 1. 20. Now are you thus joyful in God through our Lord
Jesus Christ?

8. They that are at peace with God, do highly esteem those that have been
instrumental in making their peace with God: The feet of those that preach the
Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things, are beautiful to them,
Romans 10 15. How are they accounted of by you?

Use 2. Reproof.

This reproves those that neglect their duty herein; that give no diligence to
make their peace with God, but go on in their enmity and hostility against God:
As did the old World, Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, and Herod, when God spoke unto
them by Noah, Moses, Daniel, and John Raptist.

But what got they by standing out against God? Had it not been better for the
old World to have hearkened unto Noah, and for Pharaoh to have hearkened unto
Moses, and for Nebuchadnezzar to have hearkened to Daniel, and for Herod to
have hearkened to John, and so to have prevented that destruction and misery
which came upon them?

Did they do ill in standing out against God? and is it not ill in you to do
the same? can you condemn them and not your selves? Sirs, you have the offers
of peace with God made unto you, if you accept not of the offers, if you
hearken not to the counsel God gives you, and shall continue not to hearken,
it is a sure sign that God will slay you. See what was said, 1 Samuel 2, 25.
concerning Elie's Sons, They hearkened not to the voice of their Father
admonishing and reproving them, because the Lord would slay them. Dreadful was
that word of the Prophet to Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. I know that God has
determined to destroy thee, because thou have not hearkened to my counsel.
Great wrath from the Lord of Hosts may they expect to feel that refuse to
hearken to Gods counsel, Zech. 7. 11, 12, 13. Pray take your Bible and read
this Scripture.

Assure your selves if you continue in a state of enmity against God, not
minding reconciliation, God will find you out. Ps. 21. 8, etc. Thine hand shall
find out all thine enemies; thine right hand shall find out those that hate
thee; thou shall make them as a fiery Oven in the time of thine anger; the Lord
shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them. And Ps. 68.
21. God shall wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one
as goes on still in his trespasses: Yea he will make his Enemies his
footstool, Ps 110. 1. and render vengeance to them, Deuteronomy. 32. 41. and reward
them that hate him.

What else can you expect if you continue in a state of enmity against God,
seeing he has done so much, and said so much toward peacemaking between him
and you: What more could be done or said, than he has done and said?

You have heard that he took counsel about it, and contrived a way that there
might be Peace between him and you.

He entered into a Covenantand Agreement with his Son about it, and that he
undertook the work of making peace and bringing sinners into an estate of
reconciliation with God, if they would be ruled by him.

He took great delight in those transactions between him and his Son about this
peacemaking for man.

He has been at a great deal of cost and expense of precious blood to obtain
it.

He has taken care that this purchased peace might be preached and proffered to
you, and so it has been again, and again, and again.

He has charged and commanded you to accept of it.

He has written to you about it, and sent to you about it, and prayed and
beseeched you to be at peace with him, and expostulated and reasoned the case
with you, and wished your acceptance of proffered peace, and waited for it, and
what more could he have done? and now after all this, what cloak, what excuse
can you have? See Joh. 15. 22. If I had not come and spoken to them, they had
not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin. If God had not done all
this in order to peacemaking between him and you, you might have had some plea
for your selves; but now if you shall continue in a state of enmity against
God, neglecting the means ordained and appointed to be used for the obtaining
of peace with God, if you shall be dealt with as enemies thank your selves.

Use 3. Exhortation.

Be diligent in making your peace with God, that so you may be found of Christ
in peace at his coming. Continually and earnestly apply your selves to this
work: give, set, and bend your minds to it.

Be instant in season and out of season about it. Be at this work of making
peace with God in the morning, and in the evening withhold not your hand.
Endeavor it with all the might and power, etc. as before in Answer to the 4th.
Quest.

Q. What is to be done that we may make peace with God?

Directions.
A. 1. Satisfy your selves in what estate you are, whether in an estate of
peace and reconciliation with God or not.

Examine your selves, say to thine own soul, Am I at peace with God? Time was
when I was at enmity with God, how came I to be in an estate of amity? May not
I be mistaken, and think I am in an estate of peace and friendship with God,
when in truth it is no such matter? May I not think my self to be something
when I am nothing? Gal. 6. 3. and to be rich, when indeed and in truth I am
poor, naked, etc. Rev. 3. 17.

Call to mind the former characters of a reconciled estate, and say,

1. Am I at war with sin? with the lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh, the
pride of life, all which do war against my soul? Am I at war with all these
lusts, or one or none? What is the sin, the lust that I am at war with? is it
Pride, or Worldiness, or Wantonness, or what is it?

How long have I been at war with it?

What success have I had?

What conquests have I gotten?

What aids and assistances have I had?

What weapons have I made use of?

What sword, what word of God, what precept, what promise, what threatening is
it, that I have either defended my self with, or offended my sin with?

2. Say to thy self in secret, and in good earnest, Have I mourned for my
former enmity against God? When? where? how long? how much? what sin was it
that I mourned for? what was its name? Have I been in bitterness for it, as one
that is in bitterness for his first born?

3. Say again, Am I in care now to please God, and in fear of offending him?
had I rather offend all the world than offend him? or can I venture to
displease him, rather than to displease others?

4. Say also, Is it a grief of heart to me that any of mine should be found
fighters against God?

5. Am I best pleased with those that are at peace with God?

6. Have I at any time wondered at such a wretch, such a rebel as I should be
received into the favor of God?

7. What thanks did I ever render to God for it? what rejoicing in Christ the
Purchaser of it have I ever had?

8. What are Ministers, and what is their Ministry unto me? are they, or is
their Ministry much set by, by me?

By such questioning with your selves you may satisfy your selves in what
estate you are, whether in a reconciled, or unreconciled estate. This is the
first Direction.

Direction.
2. Satisfy your selves, that getting into a reconciled estate with God, is
your greatest concern in the world.

1. The greatest counsel was taken about it that ever was.

2. The greatest persons employed about the bringing of people into it that
ever was.

3. The greatest price was paid that it might be obtained that ever was.

4. The greatest love was manifested about it that ever was, 1 John 49, 10.

5. The greatest good thereby, by being brought into a reconciled estate with
God, will come to us, that heart can wish or desire.

6. The greatest hurt, by remaining in an unreconciled estate with God, will
come unto us that can be.

And is not then the getting into a reconciled estate with God, our greatest
concern in the World?

Review the first Reason, and consider well what God has done toward making
peace between man offending and himself offended, and you will understand the
better, of how great concern a reconciled estate with God is to you.

Direction.
3. Understand well the way of making peace with God, viz. by Jesus Christ who
is our Peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. and by whom there is peace on Earth, Luke 2. 14. and
peace in Heaven, Luke 19. 38. having made peace through the blood of his Cross,
Col. 1. 20.

When Herod was highly displeased with them of Tire and Sidon, they came with
one accord to him, and having made Blastas the Kings Chamberlain their Friend,
desired peace (it being their great concern) because their Country was
nourished by the Kings Country, Acts 12. 20.

In like manner God being highly displeased with sinners, they must make Jesus
Christ Gods beloved Son, in whom his Soul is well pleased, Mat. 12. 18. their
Friend, to make peace for them: And if Sinners desire this of him, he will not
say them nay, John 6. 37.

Direction.
4. Know also and labor with thy self to be fully persuaded that peace with
God, and a reconciled estate with him, is a real thing, a real blessing and
privilege.

Sure, that about which

Such a Consultation was held,

Such a Contract was made between the Father and the Son,

And such Articles were performed by both Father and Son, must needs be a real
thing.

And that for the accomplishment of which so much real work was finished, and
so great a price was paid, must needs be a real thing.

Direction.
5. Well understand the terms upon which this peace and reconciliation with
God, is really tendered in the Gospel and Ministry thereof.

The Terms are,

1. Laying down our Arms in a penitent way. Wash ye, make you clean, put away
the evil of your doings from before mine eyes: cease to do evil, learn to do
well. Come now and let us reason together and be friends, says the Lord;
though your sins be as scarlet they shall be as white as snow, though they be
red like crimson they shall be as wool. Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18.

2. Resigning up our selves to the government of Christ in a believing way.
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, said Paul and Silas
to the trembling Jailer, Acts 16. 31.

And that it is really tendered in the Gospel and Ministry thereof, who can
doubt that well considers that one Scripture? 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. where the
Gospel is called by the Holy Ghost, the word of reconciliation, and the
Ministry of it the ministry of reconciliation; and where we are beseeched and
prayed in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God.

Direction.
6. Make it your business to get into this reconciled estate:

Lest you should deceive your selves, and think you make it your business. when
you do not. Know that when a man makes any thing his business,

1. He thinks of it seriously, much and often: his first and last and middle
thoughts are of it; he thinks of it when he is eating, drinking, sleeping,
working, journying.

2. He talks of it perpetually, and puts questions about it to any one he
thinks can better inform him.

3. He does cast and contrive this way and that way how to effect it.

4. He takes all opportunities offered that may further it.

5. He removes all hindrances of it, and is glad when they are removed, and sad
while they lie in the way.

6. He allows time for it, yea redeems time for it.

7. He sequesters himself from all company that may disturb him in it.

8. He puts out his strength in the use of all means to effect it.

Thus in this way make it your business to get into a reconciled estate with
God.

1. Think seriously of it, as the Prodigal did, Luke 15. 17. and Peter, Mark
14. 72.

2. Talk perpetually of it, and put questions about it, as Peter's Hearers, Acts
2. 37. and the Jailer Acts 16. 30. Be talking of it when thou sit in thine
house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up.

3. Contrive how to effect it. Sit down and consult what is to be done, Luke
14. 31, 32.

4. Watch and take all opportunities that may further it. For Watching see Luke
21. 34, 36. 1 Cor. 16. 13. 1 Pet. 5. 8.

5. Remove all hindrances of it. If iniquity be in thy hand put it far away,
Job 11. 14.

Do as they Ezra 10. 3. covenanted to do, and did v. 11.

6. Allow time for the doing of it. Redeem time from meals and sleep, rather
then want it for this work, Ephesians. 5. 16.

7. Sequester your selves; go into your Closets, shut the door against all
Disturbers, Mat. 6. 6.

8. Put out your strength in the use of of all means to effect it. Set about it
with all your might, Eccles. 9. 10.

Q. In the use of what means?

A. In the use of all means:

Reading, Hearing, Studying, Meditating, Praying, Watching, Fasting, Searching,
Trying, Examining your selves, Keeping your hearts, Flying temptations and
occasions of sin, neglecting no opportunities of acquainting your selves with
God.

Among other means use these with diligence, preparation, and prayer, as in the
sight and presence of the great God.

1. Attend upon the Word and Ministry of Reconciliation, so called 2 Cor. 5.
18, 19. because it is a great means of reconciliation.

This blessing of peace comes out of Zion, Ps. 128. 5.

It Is the fruit of the lips that must be instrumental to make peace with God,
Isa. 57. 19.

If there be a Messenger with him, that is, a Minister of the Gospel and
Interpreter, one of a thousand to show unto Man his uprightness, then he that
is God is gracious to him and says, Deliver him from going down to the pit, I
have found a ransom, Job 33. 23, 24.

2. Join with confession of sin, whereby God has been offended, Contrition and
Conversion.

1. Confess sin. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, said David, Ps. 32. 5. and
mine iniquity have I not hid. I said I will confess my transgressions unto the
Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

If we confess our sins, says S. John, 1 John 1. 9. God is faithful and just
to forgive us our sins. See Jer. 3. 13.

2. Mourn for sin and turn from it unto God. Rend your hearts, and turn unto
the Lord, Joel 2. 13. for he is gracious.

Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God for he
will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55. 7.

3. Make your supplication to the God of peace in the name of Christ, who is
our Peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. and the Prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6.

Give your selves to prayer, Ps. 109. 4.

Pray as David did, Ps. 60. 1. O God, thou have been displeased, O turn thy
self to us again. Cause thy face to shine, Ps. 80. 3. and as Daniel, chapter 9. 17.
Cause thy face to shine upon me for the Lords sake, v. 19. O Lord hear, O Lord
gorgive, O Lord hearken and do, and defer not for thine own sake. And as
Jeremiah, chapter 14. 7. O Lord, though mine iniquities testify against me, do
thou it for thy name sake, for my backslidings are many; I have sinned against
thee. And again, v. 21. Do not abhor me for thy name sake.

4. Get some Abraham, Moses, or Samuel, some Noah, Daniel, or Job, to pray and
make intercession for you: The prayers of such are prevailing, Genesis 20. 7. He
is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live. Accordingly v.
17. Abraham prayed and God heard.

So Job 42. 8. My Servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept.

Gods wrath was kindled against Eliphaz and his two Friends, Job 42. 7. And Job
is to be employed as Gods special Favorite, to offer up Sacrifice, and to pray
for them, and so to make reconciliation between God and them.

The prayer of a Man of God may do much. 1 Kings 13. 6. Jeroboam put out his
hand against the Prophet, and God dried it up, so that he could not pull it in
again to him. And the Man of God besought the Lord, and the Kings hand was
restored again.

5. Set Faith awork in the satisfaction and mediation of Christ; He is our High
Priest, whose Office it is to make atonement, Numb. 16. 47. Christ was in all
things made like to his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and a faithful
Highpriest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of
the People, Heb. 2. 17.

It Is by his death that we are reconciled to God, Romans 5. 10. and v. 11. We joy
in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
Atonement.

Let him take hold of my strength, says God, Isa. 27. 5. that he may make
peace with me. By strength some understand the mercy of God in Christ; Let him
take hold of this by Faith, and he shall make peace with me.

6. To all this add a day of humiliation and soul-affliction, which is called a
day of Atonement, Lev. 23. 27. Christ told his Disciples, that some Devils
went not out but by prayer and fasting, Mat. 17. 21. and Mar. 9. 29. He said
unto them, this kind can come forth by nothing but by prayer and fasting. Now
it may be God may be so greatly displeased, that he will not be at peace with
us until we have greatly humbled our selves. Set apart a day therefore and set
about this work; sure Peace and Reconciliation with God is well worth a day,
yea days of Humiliation.

Thus do, and do it with speed without further delay.

1. The present day is the day of Salvation. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Now is the day of
Salvation; and Heb. 3. 15. 7. The Holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his
voice.

2. Good purposes are often lost if not presently put in execution; as Felix's
were, Acts 24. 25. Go thy way, says he to Paul, for this time, when I have a
convenient season I will call for thee; but that season was long a coming.

It Is just with God to deny thee a future day, that acceptest not the present?

4. Time is short, and the very next day very uncertain: We are apt to promise
our selves a long time to come, whereas we know not what shall be on the
morrow, Jam. 4. 14.

And therefore do as Moses bade Aaron do, Numb. 16. 46. Go quickly and make an
atonement.

And as Solomon advised a surety for another to do, Prove. 6. 3, 4, 5. Give no
sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, till thou have made thy
peace with God.

And as our Savior advises to do, when a Brother is offended, Mat. 5. 25.
Agree with thine Adversary quickly: So let us do.

Speedily, quickly apply your selves to the use of the forementioned means, to
obtain peace and reconciliation with God.

Think it not enough to read or hear these Directions, or to talk of them,
unless you practice them. I am sure, you think it not enough to read or hear
directions for the health of your Bodies, unless you practice them.

Give me leave therefore to ask you, Will you practice these directions or not?

Motives to follow the Directions given, and to use the means prescribed for
the obtaining of Peace and Reconciliation with God.
1. THE Happiness of a Reconciled Estate. 2. The Misery of an Unreconciled
Estate.
1. The happiness of a reconciled estate, which will appear to be very great,
if you shall well consider;

1. That God will be a friend to such as are in a reconciled estate; whoever be
enemies to them, God will be their friend; God will be for them whoever be
against them. And if God be on their side and take their part, they need not
fear. Ps. 118. 6, 7. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear, what can man do
unto me?

2. That to whom once he is a Friend, to them he will be a friend for ever. The
mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace, or my covenant of
peace, as Ezekiel. 37. 26. be removed, Isa. 54. 10.

Although sight, hearing, speech, depart from me, said one, yet Gods loving
kindness shall never depart: Somewhat like that of David, Ps 73. 26. My flesh
and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart and my portion for
ever.

God may visit his Friends and such as are at peace with him with the Rod,
nevertheless his loving kindness he will not utterly take from them, nor suffer
his faithfulness to fail, Ps. 89 33.

Whom he loves, he loves to the end, Joh. 13. 1.

3. That he will be a friend with all that he

Is,

Has,

Can do and procure, if for their good.

He will be a friend to those that be at peace with him.

1. With all that he is; and he is all: I am, is his Name. He is a Sun and a
Shield, Ps. 84. 11.

He is a Rock, a Fortress, a Deliver, a Buckler, a Rock, a High Tower, Ps. 18.
2.

2. With all that he has: Now he has Strength, Prove. 8. 14. Counsel and
Understanding, Job. 12. 13.

3. With all that he can do: Now he can do whatsoever pleases him, Ps. 135. 6.
Eccles. 8. 3. He can furnish a Table in the Wilderness, he can give bread and
provide flesh, Ps. 78. 19, 20.

4. That God takes pleasure and delight in such, rejoices over them as a
Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, Isa. 62. 5. Rejoicing over them with joy,
with singing, Zeph. 3 17. See Cant. 4. 7, 9, 10. and 7. 6, 10.

O how well-pleased was the Father of the Prodigal with his returning Son! He
falls upon his neck and kisses him, Luke 15. 20.

In truth, reconciled persons are the travel of Christ's Soul, Isa. 53. 11. And
you see how Mothers delight in those Children they have had hardest travel with.

5. That God will not deny them any request that is for their good. They may
ask what they will, and it shall be done for them if it be good for them, Joh.
15. 7. And this they may be confident of, 1 John 5. 14.

If they call, God will answer, Ps. 91. 15, 16. and be favorable to them, they
shall see his face with joy, Job 33. 26.

Yea, sometimes before they call he will answer them, and whilst they are yet
speaking he will hear, Isa. 65. 24.

6. That all shall work together for their good, Romans 8. 28.

Their wants shall make them pray the more.

Their sins shall humble them the more.

Their sorrows and sufferings shall make them slight the world the more.

Their temptations shall make them exercise grace the more.

Their spiritual desertions shall set them a longing to be with Christ the more.

All shall be for their advantage, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the
World, or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come, all shall be
theirs, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. See Jer. 24. 5, 6.

7. That the Creatures shall be at peace with them, Job 5. 23.

Yea their enemies too if it shall be for their good, Pro. 16. 7.

So that they may sleep securely, Job 11. 19.

And not be afraid of evil tidings, Ps. 112. 7.

When thou lie down thou shall not afraid, yea thou shall lie down, and thy
sleep shall be sweet unto thee, for the Lord, with whom thou art now at peace,
shall be thy confidence. Read Pro. 3. 23, 24, 25, 26.

8. That they shall have confidence at the appearing of Christ, and shall not
be ashamed before him at his coming, 1 John 2. 28.

Reader, shall I reason with thee?

1. Are these things so? is this the happiness of a reconciled estate?

Will God be a friend to such?

A friend for ever?

With all that he is, has, can do or procure?

Does God take delight and pleasure in such? do you believe it? nay, but do you
believe it?

Will not God deny them any request that is for their good?

Shall all work together for their good?

And shall even enemies be at peace with them if for their good? I say, are
these things so? do you indeed believe them to be so?

2. Say then, is not a reconciled estate a happy estate?

3. Is not such a happy estate desirable?

4. Art thou yet in a reconciled estate? Can sind in thy self the Characters
of a reconciled person?

Look back to the Use of Trial, and put again and again the questions to thy
self, that there are put to thee, and allow some time for it: deal truly, can
time be better spent?

5. If thou can not yet satisfy thy self, that thou art in a reconciled
estate, how art thou affected? art in trouble about it, in care and fear about
it?

6. If so, would thou be in a reconciled estate? may one believe thee?

Is it a comfort to you to think that God is reconcilable through Christ? and
that he makes the motion to you, and will be at peace with you, if you will be
at peace with him.

And are they welcome to you, that come in Gods Name to make peace between him
and you?

And do you like the terms, and cordially accept of peace with him upon these
terms?

7. Can you be in a reconciled estate without the use of means?

8. What are your thoughts of the means prescribed, are they good?

9. Why then will you not use them?

Motive 2.
The misery of an unreconciled estate, which will appear to be great if you
consider that unreconciled persons are, 1. Enemies to God. 2. And God is an
enemy to them.


1. If you be an unreconciled person, thou art an enemy to God; and, which
aggravates thy misery,

1. Thou art a weak enemy, unable to resist or defend thy self. Can thy heart
endure, or can thy hands be strong in the day when God shall deal with thee?
Ezekiel. 22. 14.

2. A poor Enemy, that have nothing to ransom thy self if taken, though thou
have Silver and Gold never so much, for Neither Silver nor Gold shall be able
to deliver in the day of the Lords wrath, Zeph. 1. 18.

3. A secure Enemy, that fear no danger, and therefore thy case the more
dangerous. When any man shall hear the words of the Curse, and yet shall bless
himself in his heart, and say, I shall have peace, though he walk in the
imagination of his heart: the Lord will not spare him; but then the anger of
the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses
that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out
his name from under heaven, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.

4. A provoking Enemy, that provokest God to his face, Isa. 65. 3.

5. An Enemy that have refused proffers of peace, Pro. 1. 24.

6. And it may be an Enemy that have abused those that have been sent to treat
with thee about peace with God, such as you read of 2 Chr. 36. 16.

And if so, may not God justly refuse now to be reconciled to thee?

Because I have called, says God, and ye have refused, I have stretched out my
hand and no man regarded, but have set at naught all ^y counsel, and would none
of my reproof, I also will laugh at their calamity, and mock when your fear
comes, Pro. 1. 24, 25, 26. Take your Bible and read on to v. 31. And dreadful
is that word Ezekiel. 24. 13, 14. In thy filthiness is lewdness. Because I have
purged thee and thou wast not purged, thou shall not bepurged from thy
filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. I the Lord
have spoken it; it shall come to pass: And I will do it, I will not go back,
neither will I spare, neither will I repent, according to thy ways and
according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, says the Lord God.

Poor Soul, what if this Scripture should be fulfilled in thee?

And what if God should give Satan a commission to fetch away thy unreconciled
Soul this night?

2. If you be an unreconciled person, God is an enemy to thee: And he is,

1. A potent enemy, Nah. 1. 2, 3, 6. God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth,
the Lord revengeth and is furious; the Lord will take vengeance of his
Adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his Enemies. The Lord is slow to anger,
and great in power, and will not at all acquit the wicked. Who can stand before
his indignation, and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is
poured out like fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him.

2. A sworn resolved enemy, Deuteronomy. 32. 40, 41, 42. For I lift up my hand to
Heaven, and say, I live for ever. If I whet my glittering Sword, and my hand
take hold on judgment, I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and I will
reward them that hate me.

3. An unavoidable enemy, Ps. 139. 7, etc. Whither shall I flee from thy
presence?

4. An immortal enemy; not like a Man that shall dye, or the Son of Man that
shall be made as grass, Isa. 51. 12.

And whilst he is an enemy to thee,

1. All his actings toward thee are in a hostile way, Isa. 63. 10. They
rebelled and vexed his Holy Spirit, therefore he was turned to be their enemy,
and he fought against them.

2. He will not grant your requests, Isa. 1. 15. When you spread forth your
hands I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when you make many prayers, I will
not hear.

3. His Creatures are in Arms against you, and wait but for a word of command,
and then will fall upon you as once they did upon Pharaoh.

4. You may fear therefore continually day and night, and can have no assurance
of your life, Deuteronomy. 28. 66.

And now poor unreconciled Soul, shall I once more reason with thee?

Are these things so? art thou an enemy to God, and is God an enemy unto thee?
And art thou not only a poor, weak enemy, no way able to prevent falling into
the hands of the living God, nor to deliver thy self out of his hands when
fallen into it; but a secure enemy, also a fearless enemy, unapprehensive of
danger, yea a provoking enemy, that have time after time refused proffered
peace? And is God an enemy unto thee? a potent, sworn, resolved, provoked,
unavoidable, immortal enemy to thee? And are all his Actings against thee in a
Hostile way? And will he grant none of thy requests, nor have any fellowship
with thee? And are the Creatures waiting for a command from their great General
to fall upon thee? And can thou have no assurance of thy life, no not for an
hour, no not for a minute? Is this thy case poor unreconciled Soul, what
think thou? Is this thy case? is this thy case? will thou not be at the
pains to think a little? Lord what ails thee, that thou art not startled,
affrighted, sinking into a swoun at the thoughts thereof? What, to be an enemy
to God, and to have God to be an enemy unto thee? Is this nothing? a thing to
be laid to thy heels and not to your heart?

1. Is it nothing to reject proffered peace and reconciliation with God? will
it not bring upon thee double condemnation? Reader, I beseech thee take thy
Bible, and before thou read a line more in the Book thou have in thy hand, read
Mat. 10. 12, 13, 14, 15. Luke 10. 5, 6, 10, 11, 12.

And now, Reader, what say thou, is it nothing to be under this threatening?
It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than
for thee.

2. Is it nothing by thy standing out and refusing proffered peace with God, to
grieve God, Christ, the Holy Spirit, Angels, and near and dear Relations, a
Mother it may be that bare thee, brought thee forth into the World, and nursed
thee up, who is in travel again till thou be at peace with God, is this
nothing? Once more I beg of thee to take thy Bible and read Mat. 23. 37. Mar.
3. 5. Mar. 8. 12. Luke 19. 41 to the end. Zech. 7. 11, 12.

What more shall I say unto thee poor unreconciled Soul, that refusest
proffered peace?

1. Is it not thy Savior, thy Savior for all that thou know, that thou
stand out against?

2. Art thou without reason, natural affection, and self love, that thou
stand out against a Savior, that thou runest from peace, and pardon, and
life?

3. What harm will pardon, peace, reconciliation do thee?

4. Wilt not wish first or last that thou had accepted of proffered peace
with God? Reader, take thy Bible, read Luke 13. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Good
Reader, say me not nay,; read what is written for thy good, for thy admonition.

5. Would it not be a day of gladness to God, Christ, Saints, Angels, and thy
Relations and Acquaintants that fear God, if thou would be persuaded to come
in and be reconciled to God? for certain it would. Read Luke 15. 6, 7, 9. Luke
10. 21. Cant. 3. 11. Ps. 87. 5, 6, 7.

You will do very little for your souls, if you will not be at the pains to
read and consider these few Scriptures, for their good.

Come, come, Reader,

6. Is it without a Providence that this Book was put into thy hands, and that
thou have had a heart to read it? sure not, I would hope that God intends thee
good by it.

Good Reader, be willing to be saved,

To come to Christ,

To endeavor thy peace with God,

To set about the use of the means before prescribed,

To try what thou can do to be at peace with God.

Come, will thou try, and use the means in good earnest? I will promise thee if
thou will, thou shall not want help; God Christ, his Spirit, good Ministers and
People will help thee. See Isa. 41. 10, 13, 14. Romans 8. 26. Ps. 89. 19. Ps. 72.
15. Ps. 118. 25, 26.

Come, Reader, do I entreat thee to thy loss or hurt?

Is it not for thy good? Hear it, I beseech thee, and know it for thy good, Job
5. 27.

Is it not great rich grace and favor that god does offer to be at peace with
thee?

And will thou receive the Grace of God in vain? God forbid.

In Memory of that very Religious Gentlewoman, Mrs. Anne Kyrl, the Relict of
Colonel Robert Kyrl of Waford, and Daughter of William Sellwin of Matson near
Gloucester, Esquire.
Who having lived about 46 Years, did sweetly fall asleep in Christ March 30,
was decently interred April 6. 1677. and is at blessed rest till Christ's second
appearing, to awaken, raise, and glorify her with himself for evermore.
Concerning our dear Friend departed, an Exemplar worthy imitation, I think I
have warrant enough to say something to her praise.

She was a Woman that feared the Lord, and shall she not be praised? Solomon
says she should, Pro. 31. 30.

She was a Dorcas, why should not the Coats and Garments she made be showed?
Acts 9. 39.

Christ commended the Faith of the Centurion, Mat. 8. 10.

And of the Syrophoenician Woman, Mar. 7. and Mat. 15. 28.

And the love and repentance of the Woman that stood at his feet behind him
weeping, Luke 7. 44, etc.

And what Mary the Sister of Lazarus (Joh. 12. 3.) had done in pouring Ointment
on his head, he said should be spoken of throughout the world for a memorial of
her, Mar. 14 9.

And for a Memorial of our Friend now sweetly sleeping in Jesus, who had (as
Demetrius) a good report of all, 3 John 12. I may safely and boldly say,

1. That she according to Gods promise looked for new Heavens and a new Earth.
She looked to things not seen, and things that are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. She
looked for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2. 15.

Yea she looked for and hastened unto the coming of the day of God.

2. Her looking for such things made her diligent, industriously diligent, that
she might be found of Christ in peace, without spot and blameless* in a
reconciled* justified and sanctified estate.

She gave her mind, she set her self to be found in this estate.

She was instant in season and out of season about this.

In the morning she sowed her seed, and in the evening she withheld not her
hand, Eccles. 11. 6.

She gave all diligence to add to her faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge,
etc.

She gave diligence to make her calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 10.

She was not slothful, but showed diligence to the full assurance of hope, Heb.
6. 11, 12.

And whatsoever she apprehended was commanded by the God of Heaven, she would
diligently do it, Ezra 7. 23.

What more shall I say?

Her eyes were turned away from beholding vanity, Ps. 119. 37.

Her ears were swift to hear, Jam. 1. 19.

In her tongue was the Law of kindness, Prove. 31. 26.

Her hands were stretched out to the poor and needy, Prove. 31. 20.

Her feet were shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, Ephesians. 6. 15.

Her knees were bowed unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 14.

Her face was Zion-ward, Jer. 50. 5.

Her clothing was humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

Her ornaments a meek and a quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 4.

Her girdle sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 14.

Her speech was savoury, seasoned Salt, Col. 4. 6.

Corrupt communication proceeded not out of her mouth, but such as might
minister Grace to the hearers, Ephesians. 4. 29.

Her conversation was upright, Ps. 37. 14.

Ordered aright, Ps. 50. 23.

As became the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27.

Without covetousness, Heb. 13. 5.

Chaste coupled with fear, 1 Pet. 3. 2.

Honest, 1 Pet. 2. 12.

Holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15.

Heavenly, Phil. 3. 20.

All her springs whence slowed these streams were in God, Ps. 87. 7.

Her confidence was not in the slesh.

Her rejoicing was in Christ, Phil. 3. 3.

Christ was her All, Col. 3. 11.

Her wisdom to direct her, righteousness to justify her, sanctification to
cleanse her, redemption to set her at liberty, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

When she was hungry his flesh was her meat.

When thirsty his blood was her drink, John 6. 55.

When she fainted he was her cordial, Luke 2. 25.

When she fought with her spiritual adversaries, he was her victory and
triumph, 1 John 5. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 15. 57. Romans 8. 37.

When she failed, Christ was her Advocate with the Father, John 2. 1, 2.

In life he was her hope, 1 Timothy 1. 1.

In death he is her gain, Phil. 1. 21.

In the grave he will be her life and resurrection John 11. 25.

I think I may say of her as Hezekiah of himself, Isa. 38. 3. That she walked
before God in truth and with a perfect heart, and did that which was good in
his sight.

And as Christ of Nathanael, John 1. 47. Behold an Israelite indeed in whom is
no guile.

Her dying words expressed much of a Christian indeed. To instance:

They expressed,

1. Her expectation of a change: I do not hope to live long.

2. Her weannedness from the world and sense of the badness of it: For, said
she, being fit to dye, it is the best time to dye in, and the worst age to live
in.

3. Her lamenting after God; for she complained of unprofitableness under the
means she enjoyed, and of the want of former refreshments.

4. Her confidence in God: For, said she, though I am a great sinner, yet I
believe I am a pardoned sinner, and so have rest and quiet.

One saying to her, There is need of the Lords help: Yea, said she, and God
has laid help upon one that is mighty, and by his stripes I am healed.

One repeating that Scripture, Ps. 116. 6. The Lord preserves the simple, I
was brought low, and he helped me. Yea, said she, the Lord will remember me in
my low estate.

Her thankfulness. Blessed be God, said she, I have refreshing though not rest.

At other times she would say: O the consolations of the Lord are not small
things.

6. Her prayerfulness. In her last fit she said: Lord ease, Lord help; Pray,
pray, pray. And so whiles we were praying for her, she fell asleep.

Thus she has given you an Example, as Christ did his Disciples, John 13. 15.

I will not call you to lamentation, but to imitation I must.

Not to lamentation,

Though some of you have lost a dear Sister.

And some of you a tender Aunt.

And some a faithful Friend.

And some a helper of their faith and joy.

And some an encourager in the ways of God.

The poor have lost a visitor and liberal benefactor.

And this Congregation a worthy member.

And she her self has lost something too; she has lost her Asthma, or
difficulty of breathing.

Her pains, sighs, and groans.

Her cold sweats and fainting fits.

Her sorrows and sufferings.

Her troubles and temptations.

Her sins and corruptions.

But what are her gains?

No tongue can express, nor heart can conceive, what they are.

She has gained Heaven.

What eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, nor has it entered into the heart
of man, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

A Kingdom Everlasting, Luke 12. 32. 2 Pet. 1. 11.

A Crown of righteousness and life, 2 Timothy 4. 8. James 1. 12.

An Inheritance rich and glorious, Ephesians. 1. 18.

Incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1. 4.

She has gained fullness of joy in the presence of God, and pleasures for ever
more at his right hand, Ps. 16. 11.

An exceeding exceeding eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

The Beatifical Vision, Mat. 5. 8.

The immediate and full fruition of God and Christ.

An eternal life with God, and Christ, and Saints, and Angels.

And therefore I must not call you to lamentation.

But, as I said, to imitation I must.

Follow her as she followed Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1.

Let her Virtues live in you, so shall she in some sense still live with you.

1. Look for such things as she did.

Look for new Heavens and new Earth.

Look to things not seen, and things that are eternal.

Look for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of, etc.

Look for and hasten unto the coming of the day of God.

2. Let the expectation of such things make you diligent in the use of means to
be found of Christ at his coming in peace without spot, etc. in a reconciled,
justified, and sanctified estate.

Give your minds, set your selves to be found in this estate.

Be instant in season and out of season about it.

In the morning sow your seed, and in the evening withhold not your hand,
Eccles. 11. 6.

Give all diligence, add to your faith virtue, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5.

Give diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

Be not slothful, but show diligence to the full assurance of hope, Heb. 6. 11,
12.

And whatsoever shall be commanded you by the God of Heaven diligently do it,
Ezra 7. 23.

Turn away your eyes from beholding vanity, Ps. 119. 37.

With your ears be swift to hear counsel and receive instruction, James 1. 19.

In your tongues let the Law of kindness be, Pro. 31. 26.

Let your hands be stretched out to the poor and needy, Pro. 31. 20.

Let your seet be shod with, etc. Ephesians. 6. 15.

Let your knees be bowed to your Father, etc. Ephesians. 3. 14.

Let your faces be Zionward, Jer. 50. 5.

Cloth your selves with humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

Adorn your selves with meekness and a quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 4.

Gird your selves with sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 14.

Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, etc. Ephesians. 4. 29.

Order your conversations aright, Ps. 50. 23.

Let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27.

Without covetousness, Heb. 13. 5.

Chaste, coupled with fear, 1 Pet. 3. 2.

Honest, 1 Pet. 2. 12.

Holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15.

Heavenly, Phil. 3. 20.

That it may be such,

Let all your springs be in God, Ps. 81. 7.

Have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3. 3.

Rejoice in Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 3.

Let Christ be your All, Col. 3. 11.

Your Wisdom to direct you, your Righteousness to justify you, your
Sanctification to cleanse you, and your Redemption to set you at liberty, 1 Co.
1. 30.

When your Souls are hungry, let Christ's flesh be your meat.

When thirsty, let his blood be your drink, John 6. 55.

When you faint in a day of adversity, let Christ be your cordial, Luke 2. 25.

When you fight with your spiritual adversaries, look to Jesus for victory and
triumph, 1 John 5. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 15. 57. Romans 8. 37.

When you fail, look to Christ your Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2. 1, 2.

In life let Christ be your hope, 1 Timothy 1. 1.

In death be confident he will be your gain, Phil. 1. 21.

And in the grave your life and resurrection, John 11. 25.

Thus pace after this blessed soul departed, your near and dear Relation, tread
in her steps, and then ere long where she is you shall be also.

Where Is that? I doubt not to say in Paradise, Luke 23 43. In Abraham's bosom,
Luke 16. 22. In Heaven with Saints and Angels, Heb. 12. 22, 23. With God in
Christ Jesus, which is best of all, Phil. 1. 23.

AN APPENDIX TO THE Foregoing Discourse BY WAY OF Caution and Exhortation.

1. BY way of Caution.
Take heed lest Christ at his coming find you,

1. With nothing but leaves on you, as that Figtree, Mar. 11. 13. was, lest you
be cursed, and it be said unto you as Mat. 25. 41. Depart, etc.

2. Without fruit, as that Tree was, Luke 13. 7. lest you be cut down and cast
into the fire.

3. Without Oil in your Vessels, as the foolish Virgins were, Mat. 25. 3. lest
the door be shut against you, v. 10.

4. With works not perfect before God, Rev. 3. 2.

5. Smighting your fellow servants, as he, Mat. 24. 49. lest you be cut
asunder, and have your portion appointed you with Hypocrites.

6. Eating and drinking with the drunken, Mat. 24. 49, 50, 51.

7. Idle, slothful, and not improving your Talents, Mat. 25. 25, 26. lest you
be cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, v.
30.

Take heed therefore, lest Christ's coming suddenly, as Mar. 13. 36. find you
thus, viz.

With nothing but leaves, Without fruit, Without Oil, With works not perfect,
Smiting your fellows, Eating and drinking with the drunken, Idle, drunken, not
improving your Talents. Do not make slight of this Caution I beseech you.
2. By way of Exhortation.
Be diligent, that you may be found of Christ at his coming.

1. Watching. For blessed are trhose Sevants whom the Lord when he comes shall
sind watching, whether he come in the second watch, or in the third watch, and
sind them so, blessed are those Servants, Luke 12. 37, 38.

2. In Christ, not having your own righteousness, which was Paul's desire, Phil.
3. 9. That I may be found in Christ, not having mine own righteousness which is
of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith.

3. Written in the Lambs Book of Life: For whosoever shall not be found written
in the Book of Lise, shall be cast into the Lake of Fire, Rev. 20. 15.

4. Established, unblameable in Holiness before God. This was part of Paul's
prayer for the Thessalonians, That their hearts might be established
unblameable in holiness before God even our Father, at the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ with all his Saints, 1 These. 3. 13.

5. Sanctified wholly in Spirit, Soul, and Body. So also prays the Apostle for
the Thessalonians, The very God of Peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God
your whole Spirit, Soul, and Body, may be preserved blameless unto the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5. 23.

6. Patient. To this S. James exhorts, Be patient, Brethren, unto the coming of
the Lord, which draws nigh, James 5. 7, 8.

7. Waiting for his coming, which was the commendation of the Corinthians, They
waited for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 7.

8. Looking for and hasting to it, according to the counsel of S. Peter, 2 Pet.
3. 12.

9. In peace without spot and blameless, as in the Text.

Be diligent thus to be found at the coming of Christ, so shall you be blessed,
Luke 12. 37, 38.

And so shall you have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming,
1 John 2. 28.

FINIS.

