THE Charitable Pestmaster, OR, The cure of the PLAGUE, Containing a few short
and necessary instructions how to preserve the body from infection of the
PLAGVE, as also to cure those that are Infected.

Together with a little treatise concerning the cure of the Small Pox.

Published for the benefit of the poor of this City and not unmeet for the
Rich, By THOMAS SHERVVOOD Practitioner in PHYSIC.

2 Kings 20. 7. And ISAIAH said, take a lump of Figs, and they took, and laid
it upon the boil, and he recovered. LONDON

Printed by A. N. for John Francklin, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Lothbury, near the Windmill. 1641.

To the Worshipful Alexander Read, Doctor of Physic and Surgery, one of
the Society of the College of Physicians for the City of London.
SIr, having finished this treatise, I considered what entertainment it might
find in the world; and fearing that it would be envied, for the good that it
offers unto this Kingdom, as I the Author have been for my practice, I
bethought my self that it might safely hover under your wings, whereupon I am
bold to thrust it into your protection, that it may the better be defended from
the calumnies of these times. The Subject of it is, that which I have practiced
and proved by Experience, so that if there be occasion, I believe I shall be
able to render sufficient reasons to prove it, from the most Authentic rules
in Physic. And if there be any errors escaped in it, I shall rather desire
that they may be corrected by the discretion of you or any of the College of
Physicians, then disputed upon by new beginners in the practice of Physic, who
have but small experience. As for those Medicines published at the latter end
of this book, I shall not desire your protection for them, because I never
made you, nor any man acquainted with them, For I intended that they should be
Protectors for themselves: but however I hope that my endeavors in this small
treatise will not be unpleasant, but acceptable to you, for the good which I
believe it will do in the World; and so for this time I rest in some measure of
assurance of your worships favor.

Your Servant, THO: SHERVVOOD.

To the friendly Reader.
HAving considered with my self in these dangerous times the great distresses
of the poor of this City, by reason of the contagious disease of the
pestilence, now reigning amongst them; and seeing them to be altogether
ignorant, in the use of those means that are convenient for their cure, as
purging, vomiting, bleeding, sweating, and the like: Therefore considering what
good these few rules (experimented by my self) may do unto many, I was thereby
moved to print them, for the benefit of such who want the help of the skillful
and faithful Physician. For the understanding and memory of those that shall
have occasion to use them, I have divided them into three Chapters, with
contents. As for the medicines prescribed, they are sold by Apothecaries, who
may afford them reasonably to the poor: The others adjoined I shall give to
the poor for Gods sake, and the rich shall have them for competent
satisfaction; but I shall esteem it my greatest reward, if any shall receive
good and benefit by my small labors and endeavors.

Thine T. S.

CHAP. 1.
1. What are the causes of the Pestilence. 2. How they are avoided. 3. Means
to preserve the body from Infection.

THere are diverse causes of this disease. The first is sin, which ought to be
repented of. The second an infected and corrupted air, which should be avoided.
The third an evil diet, which should be amended. The fourth are evil humors
heaped together in the body, being apt to putrify, and beget a Fever, which
must be taken away by convenient medicines.

Therefore whosoever would preserve their bodies from infection, let them first
make their peace with God, in whose hand is the power of life and death. Then
let them use the means, and shun all those things that are able to beget this
disease, as all infected and corrupted air, all fogges and mists that do arise
from the earth or water, and all stinking smells that do arise from dunghills,
sinks, graves, carrion, snuffs of candles, or rotten fruits, or any thing else
that does putrify and stink. Abstain from all meats and drinks that beget
rottenness and filthiness in the body (and so consequently a Fever or the
Plague) as excessive eating of fruits, especially those that are unripe. Also
forbear all sorts of fish that have neither scales nor shells, as Eels,
Lampreys, and the like. Lastly, take heed of over-charging the stomach with
meats, or drinks, or hot Wines; but especially your unripe medium Wines.

If any shall find themselves oppressed with gross and corrupt humors, so that
they are in danger of this disease they shall be cleansed, by taking one ounce
and half, or two ounces, of the infusion Crocus metallorum, (which is to be
bought at every Apothecaries) and put to it Oximel half an ounce, this shall
give them five or six vomits, and almost as many stools. And after every
vomit, let them drink some warm posset drink; so let them keep themselves
warm that day: one hour after it has done working let them eat a mess of
warm broth made with a neck of Mutton, or with such fresh meat as the sick are
best able to buy; of which meat let them eat sparingly for the present. Those
that are so tender or weakly that they cannot brook this vomit, they may be
very well purged from corrupt humors, by taking one or two drams of pilulae
Pestilentiales: But the poorer sort that cannot go to this charge, may take
instead thereof Aloes one dram in the pap of an Apple, stewed Prunes, or else
in a little Ale or Beer. This pill, and this Aloes, are excellent remedies for
women and children, and they are so safe that women with child may take them.
After the body is purged, it shall be necessary to draw six or eight ounces of
blood from the liver or middle vein of the arm, if the party be able to
sustain the loss of it.

Such as have lived temperatly and sparingly, and so consequently are not
oppressed with corrupted humors, such shall not need any the asoresaid
evacuations or purgations; but let them shun, as much as they can, all
infectious and corrupted air: But seeing it is a thing almost impossible in
the City of London; therefore they that are timorous and fearful may carry
about them the roots of Enula campana, and Angelica, dried or candied, of which
they may bite now and then. Also the waters of Scabies, Angelica, or
Pimpernell, are great preservations for children against the Plague, if two
spoonfuls thereof be taken in a morning fasting.

CHAP. 2.
1 By what signs you may know whether the sick be infected with the
Pestilence. 2 How those signs do increase or decrease every day; 3 Whether
life or death be likely to ensue; 4 A caveat not to tamper with those that
begin to amend of themselves.

THose that are infected with the Pestilence, in the beginning or first day
thereof, are taken with an extraordinary cold outwardly, and a burning heat
inwardly, a great pain and girding about the stomach, a sluggishnesse and
drowsiness of the whole body, a loss of appetite, a bitterness in the
throat, with a desire to vomit, and sometimes they do vomit.

The disease continuing unto the second and third day, the heat breaks
outwardly, stronger, and stronger, so that there follows a great pain in the
head, and a difficulty of breathing, superfluous sleeps, and sometimes
superfluous watchings, they grow frantike and lightheaded, and they look very
staringly: And if there does any swelling appear under the ears, arms,
cheeks, or groines, and that these signs aforenamed do begin to cease, Then
shall the sick recover immediately without any medicine, only give him a
plaster or pultesse to ripen the tumor, which must be applied the next day
after the swelling appears; but give him nothing inwardly, except it be a
warm Caudle, or Ale-brue, or Broth; for for if you give him a vomit or purge,
you shall strike the swelling into the noble parts, and the sick shall be in
danger of his life: and if you let him blood, you shall draw the venomous
humor from the Soar into the veins, and disperse it with the blood through
the whole body, and thereby destroy the health of the patient, and shorten his
life; as it came to pass with a good friend of mine. Also if you give him any
medicine to provoke sweat, you shall restore the Fever again, and so the sick
shall die without redemption; yea, and more miserably, then those that never
amended, unless God be more merciful unto him; whereof I have had a
sorrowful experience.

Therefore be careful that you do not tamper with those that do begin to
amend: for those very Medicines that are excellently available against any
Fevers in the beginning or increase of them, being given in the declination or
recovery, will bring the patient into a Relapse, which is worse then the former
disease, and which shall greatly endanger life. For how many have died by the
unseasonable taking of Treacle, Mithridate, and other good Medicines? Wherefore
I have often said, that a skillful Physician by watching his time shall do
more with a cup of warm drink in the cure of the Plague, or any Fever, then
the ignorant shall do with all the excellent Medicines that are in the
Apothecaries Shop.

Now if the rising do appear, and that the symptoms or signs aforenamed do
not begin to cease, but rather increase, Then shortly after there will appear
some blains or spots, and so death ensues, unless you draw ten or twelve
ounces of blood (according to the strength of the sick) from the liver or
middle vein of the arm, on that side where the rising is.

But if so be that the sickness continues unto the third and fourth day, and
the symptoms remain in their full vigor, then shortly will the spots come
forth; and then I know no medicine that can deliver from death, except God be
more merciful to the sick: But only on the third day before the spots appear
it shall be greatly available to give him one of the cordial sweats prescribed
in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. 3.
1 Here are prescribed certain approved remedies for the cure of the
Pestilence, 2 The order and manner how to use them.

WHosoever shall perceive their bodies infected with the Plague, let them take
on the first day of the sickness the vomit, in that order and manner as it is
laid down in the first Chapter. And after it has done working with them, they
shall find themselves as well as ever they were in their lives: for it cleanses
the stomach and bowels from al corrupt humors, which is one of the chiefest
causes of the sickness. But if the sick be weak and cannot bear a vomit, it
shall be good to give him one dram of the foresaid pillulae pestilentiales, or
instead thereof one dram of Aloes, you may give it either in pill or in potion,
according as the sick can best take it, and in the workking of it let him drink
some warm broth.

But if it be so, that this course has been neglected the first day, or beyond
the time of 24 hours, it will be in vain to use it the second day: Yea, it
will be dangerous, seeing that the infection is dispersed by the blood
throughout all the Veins of the body. Therefore on the second day of
Visitation it shall be good to draw from the Median Vein of the arm so much
blood as the patient can endure to bleed: and if the sick has not gone to the
stool during the time of his sickness, you shall give him either before or
after bleeding this Clyster. Take of Beets, Violet leaves, Burrage, Buglosse,
Scabios, of each one handful, French barley one ounce; boil all these in a
sufficient quantity of water until it be half consumed, then strain it, and
take three quarters of a pint of the decoction, and put to it of the Electuary
of Hierapicra five or six drams, oil of Rue one dram, red Sugar one ounce,
the yolk of an egg, and a little salt; so make you a Clyster thereof, and
administer it blood warm. Also you may administer to the sick this Clyster.
Boil an handful of Rue, in a pint of posset drink, and put to it a piece of
sweet butter, a little honey, the yolke of an egg, and a thimble full of salt;
make a clyster and administer it blood warm.

But if that the sick amend not upon this course taken the second day, or that
this means has not been used, but that he continues sick until the third
and fourth day, so that the infection has taken hold of the vital spirits,
Then keeping him warm in his bed, you shall use this Cordial to sweat with
all. Take of the water of Scabios, Burrage, Buglosse, and Angelica, of each
half an ounce, the Electuary of eggs two scruples, or one dram, of Bole
Armoniak one scruple, Syrrup of Roses half an ounce, make it into a potion,
and let the sick drink it up at once or twice: two or three spoonfuls hereof is
sufficient for a child. Or the poorer sort may take two peny-worth of Treacle
or Mithridate, in a quarter of a pint of Dragon water. With either of these
Medicines you may sweat the sick, until some tumor does appear, or that he
comes to know himself amended. For this is the last medicinal refuge we
have in the cure of the Plague. If you can, keep the sick from drinking and
sleeping for the space of three hours until the medicine has done workking.
But if you cannot, let the patient drink a little Limon posset, made with some
Marigold flowers, and Hearts horn.

And if signs of amendment do appear, do not take him out of his bed, or
let him cool suddenly: But let him sweat on gently of his own accord, for it
is natures sweat following the medicine, which will do him more good than a
Kingdom. In this last sweat you may give him some Caudle or Alebrue: and when
the sweats begin to cease of themselves, and his skin grows dry and warm, then
let him sit up by a good fire; Air his clothes, and so let him give God
thanks for his life.

Add, if any tumor appear you may ripen it with this Emplaster. Take six
figs, raisins of the Sun stoned half an ounce, salt two drams, honey one ounce,
beat them all together, and heat it well with some oil of Camomill upon the
fire, so spread it upon some cloth, and lay it warm to the tumor, shifting it
every twelve hours until it look with a white head: and when it is ripe, if
it be difficult to break, lay to it some Goose dung made warm with some sweet
butter or sallet oil; also the root of a white Lilly roasted, with some
sorrel, to which put a piece of sweet butter, and apply it very warm to the
soar, But if it will not break with this means, then you must open it with a
penknife or lancet; else the corruption will rot the flesh, even to the very
bone, and when you have opened it, squeeze out the corruption with your hands,
and put into the soar, a tent made with unguentum basilicon, or Aegyptiacum,
and mel rosarum, and lay upon the tent a plaster made with Diachilon: Continue
your tents until all the corruption be drawn out, then the plaster of
Diachilon will cure it perfectly.

If any that are ancient or weak shall be infected with the Pestilence, it
shall not be necessary to give them any purge, vomit, or sweat, or to let them
blood; because they cannot bear the loss of so many spirits as are spent by
such evacuations. Therefore you may lay upon the pit of the stomach of the
sick a young live puppy, and if the sick can but sleep the space of three or
four hours, they shall recover presently, and the dog shall die of the
Plague. This I have known approved; and I do believe that it will be a cure for
all lean, spare, and weak bodies both young and old: provided, that the dog be
younger then the sick.

Certain Instructions for the cure of the Small Pox.
THe nature of the Small Pox dispersed this year throughout many parts of this
Kingdom, I have found to be more malignant, then any that have reigned in my
remembrance; so that many of all ages and sexes, but especially children have
miserably died of them: because for the most part, the pestilence is joined
with them, as it does plainly appear by those spots, blains, and risings, that
follow them. I have likewise observed that those medicines, as Mithridate,
Treacle, Safforn and the like, that formerly have cured the small Pox, now
avail nothing: yea, they are dangerous, if inwardly taken (especially if the
Patient has been long sick) but if they be outwardly applied, as I shall show
eft-soons, they will prove good remedies at this time. But how many a tender
hearted mother have I seen that, out of an unhappie care of her sick child,
has by rash counsel and the unseasonable giving to it hot cordial medicines,
increased the Fever, multiplied the matter of the small pox, and inflamed the
Spirits, so that the Pestilence has many times followed? But howsoever the
child harh been uncurable, which otherwise if nothing at all, or else some
small thing of little strength, had been administered, might have recovered;
whereupon I observed the sundry ways and means practiced by Physicians, women,
and my self, and seeing the diverse events of them, I labored to find out a
certain and secure way for the cure of this disease; which having found by
experience I have (together with this treatise of the Plague) sent it to the
Press, hoping that no man will either hate me, or envy me, for doing good,
and that those that find benefit by it will thank me for it.

The Primitive or external causes of the Small Pox are all one with those
which are of the Plague, as an evil and corrupted air, a disorderly diet,
that begets surfets; as also for the antecedent causes which are corrupt
humors heaped together in the body: therefore those means that I have
prescribed in the first Chapter to preserve the body from the infection of the
Plague, they will also be a means to preserve from the Small Pox. Those that
are taken sick this year with the Small Pox are affected after the same manner
as those that are infected with the pestilence, and in the beginning it can
scarcely be discerned by an expert Physician from it, But only by these signs.

Those that are infected by the small Pox are not so violently affected with
heat and cold, nor pains in the stomach and head, as those that are sick with
the Pestilence,

Moreover, those that will have the small Pox their skin is puffed up, and blown
like a bladder, so that their face and eyes do shine: they have a great
itching in many parts of their bodies, but chiefly about their Nose; they yawn
much, also they find a great pain and heaviness in their back bone.

Now if you shall perceive by these signs, that the sick will have the small
Pox, keep him warm, but not too hot; neither let him take cold; but give him
breathing room enough, as he lies in his bed: Then lay a plaster of Mithridate
or Treacle to the pit of his stomach, and if he be at man's estate, let him
drink up all this Cordial by two or three spoonfuls at a time every hour;
but if it be a child, the one half will be sufficient. Take of the waters of
Roses, Burrage, Buglosse, and Treacle-water, of each an ounce and half, of the
syrrup of Limons, and Clove-gilly-flowers of each one ounce, mix them together,
and make thereof a potion: Also the poorer sort may take Roses, Burrage,
Carduus, Marigold Flowers, and Hearts horn, of each a like quantity, and boil
them in posset drink, turned with a Limon, or white wine: for one above twenty
years of age let him drink three quarters of a pint at several times, sweetened
with Sugar; and for a child half the quantity will suffice. Let the sick
sweat gently with either of these Medicines so long as he can well endure it:
for the longer the better; seeing the Medicines of themselves are no violent
sweats; and during the sweat you may give him now and then to quench his thirst
a very little Limon posset drink by it self. If he can you may let him sleep
whilst he sweateth. And if he lie quiet during the sweat, by Gods blessing,
within the space of eight or ten hours at the most, he shall find himself
finely recovered of his sickness. Then give him no more of his Cordial or
sweating posset drink, but only of his Limo^-posset drink, if he be thirsty;
but let him lie warm in his bed til his skin grow dry, then shortly after the
Pox will begin to show themselves. But they will not be many although every
one of them will be far greater then the small Pox do use to be; yet none of
them will pit except they be much tampered withal, or picked with the nails.
But if so be that those which have white heads do burn and rage extremely, you
may prick their heads with a Needle and let out the corruption: there is
nothing else to be done with those upon whom they are come out, and the Fever
abated but that they keep themselves warm, sit still and be quiet.

But if that the sick has not gone to stool in a long time: before you give
him this Cordial to sweat, you shall cause him to go to stool by a clyster,
or else which is better by a Suppositor made with Honey and Salt, or a Violet
Comfit. And if the sick be young, strong, and full of blood, you shall without
danger do very well, if you draw from him eight or ten ounces of blood before
you lay him to sweat; for then the Cordial will have more power, room, and
liberty, to play upon the disease, and will the sooner and better drive out the
Pox. If the quintessentia vitae be given in the waters of Roses, Burrage, or
Buglosse, it will drive out the small Pox without sweating, and cure the sick
immediately.

But if the small Pox be come forth, and that the Fever continue in his full
vigor still, so that the sick does not amend, but grow worse and worse, then
you shall not give them any hot Medicines inwardly, nor any thing that does
provoke sweat; for now hot cordial Medicines will increase the Fever (and in
the beginning they would have quenched the Fever) and turn all the humors of
the body into the matter of the small Pox; so that there is nothing but a
miserable death likely to follow, oftentimes accompanied with the Pestilence.

This evil is much practiced by those women that pretend they will drive the
small Pox further out, when they are come out already. Wherefore they do but
beget the Fever again, and where there are but ten they will make a thousand.
Therefore be careful in this case, what you do, and give to the sick every
hour nothing else but two or three spoonefulls of Rose water, sweetened with a
little sugar. This will cool the body, quench the Fever, cause rest, and then
a stool, and thereby the sick shall recover presently. By these means I have
cured many very suddenly that have been dangerously sick in all men's sight even
to Death, as many in the City can bear me witness.

As I have warned you not to give many hot things when the small Pox are come
forth, so I would have you beware of giving those that are very cold, as the
waters of Plantane, Letice, Purslane, Poppy, and the like; which (as I have
Known) have relieved many for the present, and wrought an admirable cure in
the sight of the common people; but by their cold qualities, they have so
congealed and settled the humors in the body, that the sick will never be
healthful all the days of their lives, as I could instance in many.

THose that desire further information concerning any particulars not expressed
at larg in this brief Treatise, they shall be fully satisfied, if they repair
to the Author living in Hony-suckle Court in Grubstreet* where he has by
Chimicall Art prepared six Catholicall Medicines, with which he cures the
Pestilence, small Pox, and most curable diseases whatsoever.

1 Vomitivum Benedictum.
This Medicine being taken from five grains to eight, in some convenient
distilled water or wine, or else with some Conserve or Pill, does safely purge
upwards and downwards, so that it may be given to a Child, of three or four
years of age: it cures all diseases that arise from the foulness of the
stomach, and is good in the beginning of the Pestilence, small Pox, or any
Fever, or Ague.

2 Catharticum Catholicum.
The dose of it is from ten grains to twenty, it purges gently by stool, and
cleanses the lower belly from all offensive humors, and cures the French Pox,
Scurvy, Jaundis, and Dropsy, also it freeth children from Worms.

3 Diureticum Aperitivum.
This opens all obstructions of the body, but chiefly of the Liver, Spleen,
Reins, and Bladder, it cures the Jaundis and the Rickets in children, also it
helps those that cannot make water.

4 Diaphoreticum Cordiale.
This being given in a small dose does gently provoke sweat, expels all
venomous humors from the heart outwardly, and drives out the small Pox,
thrusts out the tumors in the Pestilence, and some it cures without
bringing forth a Rising.

5 Quinta Essentia vitae.
This reviveth the vital spirits, and has an admirable virtue in fortifying
the heart against all infectious, and venomous vapors; so that it is good for
those that have occasion to visit sick people. If ten or twelve drops thereof
be taken in a mornings draught it preserves the body from infection, and if
twenty or thirty drops of it be given to the sick of the Pestilence, within
the space of six hours after they are infected, they shall be cured in one
hour, as I have often proved: it drives out the small Pox, and cures the sick
without sweating.

6 Iulapium Restaurativum.
By the virtue this Medicine has in resisting the putrefaction of humors, it
does cure all sorts of Fevers and Agues, it may be given in any time of the
disease, but especially in the latter end of the sickness, when no other
Medicine can be administered without danger. With it I have cured the Hectic
Fever, and those that have fallen into the Relapse of the small Pox, and such as
have been nigh unto death, by reason of violent Fevers.

Any of the aforesaid Medicines, the Author administreth both outwardly and
inwardly in many several ways and manners, according to the age, temperature,
complexion, and disposition, of the body; and according to the nature,
degrees, and time of the disease.

Artis Apollineae vis sola est numen Olympi, Quo sine languenti Pharmaca
frustra dabis.
If that our art from God receive not strength,
In vain we seek man's life for to prolength.

FINIS.

