THE SECOND PART OF THE Birth and Burning OF THE IMAGE CALLED St. MICHAEL: OR A
New Letter to Mr. Jonathan Saunders Lecturer of All-Saints-Barking.
BEING The Answer of Mr. Edmund Sherman Late Churchwarden, to a Sham Libel
(without any Authors Name) called, The Sham-Indictment Quasht; which begins
with this Text, Romans 4.15. Where no Law is, there is no Transgression; And
ends with this Text, Zeph. 4.5. The Unjust knows no Shame.
My Answer to this Dark Lanthorn Nameless Author shall begin with this Text;
Men Love Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are evil, Joh. 3.19.
and conclude with another Text, as the Lecturer does.
Mr. Jonathan Saunders,
SIR, Meeting with another vagrant Brat, Christened the Sham Indictment Quasht,
and you having already appeared in Print, to be the Father of two Brats
Christened (as supposed by my last, without Canonical Gossips) by the frightfull
Names called Apparitions; both then treating upon the same Subject, wherein you
have Learnedly wrote in defense of St. Michael's Image: Taking then for Text,
Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege: I have reason to Charge
you with a Suspicion at least of being Father of this By-blow also; which you
Intend to Nurse up with such Milk as can be drawn from the Breasts of those
proper Texts.

I confess it is somewhat an unequal Match for me that am but a Layman to
grapple with a Clergyman; who are both a Country Viccar and a City Lecturer;
For I have somewhere that Saint Pope Gregory (whose Books I doubt not but you
(...) may be acquainted with) Interpreting that place of Job; The Oxen Plowed,
and the Asses fed by them: He opens the Text thus; that by Oxen were
Allegorically meant the Clergy, and by Asses the Laity.

And Asses indeed Jonathan you would make of us, more particularly me: If I
must do Penance in three lewd Sheets successively in print, for meddling with
your Images, without daring to reply: However, there was once an Ass that
luckily Reproved the Madness of a pretended Prophet, and therefore I shall run
the venture, and tell you my mind freely, as I am wont to talk in such
homespun Language as may be expected from such a sorry Quondam Churchwarden
as you have exposed me to be.

This last Pamphlet, called The Sham-Indictment Quasht, is a kind of Triumph
for your Victry, because forsooth the Indictment (but why the Sham-Indictment)
as to the Doctor and your self was quasht; but what I pray was the true Reason?

Why; When a Parish that has been Indicted for letting some offensive and
abominable stinking Carrion, or other Rubbish, lie in the Kings Highway, shall
come and plead by Learned Council, and the Doctor of the Parish vouching the
truth, that the Nuisance for which the Indictment was brought, is Removed,
Buried or Burnt, is it not easy and of course to get the Indictment quasht? So
in this Case, where for the standing and being of a great Carved, Gilded
Image, Called St. Michael, upon the Commandments of God, and in a Protestant
Church; the Churchwardens, Doctor, and Lecturer, having been all Indicted for
it, and the same being in it self Scandalous and an offense, and so Indictable
at Common Law (as some in Court told the Doctor;) But yet upon the Doctors
speaking, (and whatever he says is Verbum Sacerdotis,) and pleading by Learned
Council also that the Image for which the Indictment was brought, is taken down
and Burnt, and so the offense ceased, there was with the less trouble obtained
a Quash to the Indictment against the Doctor and Lecturers part, though it cost
them a Traverse and two Sessions Charges to get off by way of Defense of an
Image; whereas the Churchwardens by submitting got off with less Charge and
trouble at first Sessions; and I am still of opinion that my Burning was much
more commendable than your defending the Image. And therefore very filly is
this great boasting in print, of a brave Conquest the Doctor and Lecturer have
obtained in quashing the Indictment, and yet are ashamed to publish your Name
to vouch the Print.

You say the Prosecutor (which was Mr. Whitaker) did not appear: No I warrant
you, for the stinking Carrion being gone and Burnt, and so the Offense and
Scandal taken away, he was wiser than to spend a penny of Money more to
prosecute you, which makes men think the Man had no Malice.

But still this Pamphlet shows that you make as much use as you can of your old
Plea, viz. That it had not the shape of St. Michael, nor was ever Reputed the
Image of that or any other Saint: Well, what then? yet it was an Image, and
such an Image as did give great Offense and Scandal, especially standing in
such a place; and have not all true Protestants Reason to be angry with you,
for choosing such a Text as this upon the Victory, viz. Where there is no Law,
there is no Transgression? Let all true protestants Blush, to see one who bore
the Name of a protestant Lecturer, Trump up such a Text on so laudable occasion
as in defense of an Image, and at such a Critical minute when we so much fear
Popery; which if that Religion should enter, all the Jesuits and Priests of St.
Michael and other Images, would set up St. Michael, St. Coleman, and your
Friend Whitebreads Image, and plead the same Text, Where there is no Law, there
is no Transgression, and quote and thank our Lecturer for starting such a plea.

And at the same rate any Ministers that shall be popishly affected, may take a
great string of Beads, and Crucifixes and tumble them over openly in the
Church, and use many such foolish trinkets as may suspiciously tend to
introduce Popery, and (if Indicted) plead, Where is no Law, etc.

If you shall dare to say in verbo Sacerdotis, that no Clergyman belonging to
this Parish of All Saints Barkin, had any hand in this Sham Pamphlet or the
other two Apparitions, or saw or heard of them or either of them, before they
were Printed, I have such proofs as shall make you Blush, except you fly to
your other Text, viz. That the Unjust knows no shame. Your very Texts may
convince any Man, that this Pamphlet came from the same hand, from which the
other Pamphlet came which had this Text, viz. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do
thou commit Sacrilege? which was a fit Text for our Lecturer to apply, and
call the Burning of the Image Sacrilege, though the Image was never more
consecrated than any old Broom belonging to the Church. Thus much in answer to
your own Texts.

You have not quoted all the Statute of Edward the Sixth. Particularly, you
have wilfully omitted the Proviso, which only provides for the standing and
remaining of only such Pictures or Images as are on Toombs and Monuments. It is
a pretty Plea, fit for Papists to say, That Law was only for abolishing all
such Mass-Books and Images as were then standing and being: Yea, but we may set
them up against we new make the Images, and bring in the same Mass-Books if we
new print them, and so plead these are not the same that were then standing and
being; for this Image was made Anno 59. without order of Vestry, but by the
mear Fancy of Mr. Ben. Edwards when he was Churchwarden: So then you would
make the Fancy of Edwards the Churchwarden to have outwitted the Law of Edward
the King. Ben. is a true Churchman, and I am sure a great Enemy to Papists,
therefore they will never Saint him for the Contrivance, because Ben's Fancy
reached only to put him on the Steeple; it was not he, no I warrant you, that
Removed him and placed him as an Ornament to the Commandments, by standing on
the top of them, as ready to kick the Second Commandment out of doors, as soon
as ever Popery should enter.

But then page 3. you seem very skilful in the knowledge of Images and their
Names for you tell the World in print, that the top of the Church of Barkin is
set about with Gilded figures called Seraphims, and in the first Pamphlet page
2. you tell us the Names of others in our Church, viz. Saturn, Mars, and other
Pagan Idols: A man would think you had been at the Christning, if not as
Lecturer, yet as Clark to say Amen, out of spite to the poor Clark, to hinder
him of Fees and Gloves: Or else perhaps you stood Godfather; else how should
thou come so intimate with these lofty things?

As for these things you call Seraphims on the very Roof of our Church; they
are nothing but mere Faces, with Wings on each side of their Chops; and yet
can presently tell us who they are by their very Grinning or Gritting; nay
you tell us their very qualities, for thou faiest they are the highest Order of
Angels. O the Depth of this Wisdom! it is learnedly said; because they stand on
the top of the Church, Ergo they are highest: This is most Lectorical Logic;
ever Boy of Sandon knows as much, that he that is on the top of the Steeple is
the highest Lad in the Parish.

But why do thou take things thus by Tradition? Thou art a man of great
Faith, for no Man will believe thou ever saw Angel or Seraphim but in
Apparition; but I will not grapple with you in this dispute, nor where they
commenced when they took such high Degrees, whether at Oxford or at St.
Andrews. I have no skill in any Saint, till they be grown as big as our Lubber
St. Michael; nor do I think I should know St. Michael if I meet him in
Apparition, now his Carving and Guilding is all singed off.

And as for those Superior things that have only Faces and no Bodies, I call
them only by your General Title of Pamphlets, Apparitions, or Shams, or
Lecturers Brats, and leave you to Christen them with what Name you please.

And they being nothing else but Face, you have a fair Mark to Sprinkle at; and
they will cry no more at your Christning, than St. Michael did when I burnt
him; if you shall say I profane the Order or Service of the holy Sacrament of
Baptism, so did you, when you called St. Michael my God-son, Lectoris ad
Exemplum; O let not the Devil rebuke sin; and let who will vouch for you, that
those are Seraphims, as you call them, for I will never be Godfather again,
seeing you have so vainly and profanely defiled the name by applying it to an
Image: for though its true I have heard that Papists do Christen their Images,
yet I never heard they had Godfathers before Mr. Saunders printed it. Thus I
only lay open the substance of the Matter, let other Men enlarge upon your
Texts, and your Brats, and your Images, and your defense at Sessions and in
print, and your Bowings, and your way of performing Ceremonies, and the timing
of them, not beginning them till the Plot was Discovering, and until you had
got up St. Michael, Organs, and Whitebread's Carpet, etc. exposed to view in
the Front instead of our white Linen, which the Act of Uniformity Injoyns. For
sure it will be necessary for some of our Reverend Clergy in this juncture, to
oppose that Doctrine of Images, which you so strenuously advance; (for your
whole quarrel is because I pulled down an Image:) Let not Papists on one hand
be encouraged, and hardened in their Idolatries, and Phanaticks on the other
hand pretend some ground for their Clamours, that the Church of England, or at
least some of her Seraphim or Topp-heavy Sons are warping toward Popery,
though it is in truth only a Lecturer, and a few more; scarce one of nine
thousand of the Churches in England use such Ceremonies as we do (Cathedral,
etc. excepteds.)

But toward the end of your Anonimous Pamphlet I met this dreadful Charge,
fol. 3. That there is one of these Faces set up at the East end of the Church,
plum over the Communion Table, toward which the late upper Churchwarden, as
many of the Parish will testify, has frequently Bowed without any scruple of
Conscience while the figure called St. Michael stood thereupon.

Truly all this I can deny as stiff as ever any Priest of St. Michael, or any
Jesuit did at Tyburn, that I had no hand in this Plot, I am as clear of it as
the Child unborn.

Pray Name your Witnesses and Time, when and where, to prove that ever I Bowed
to any thing set up at the East end of the Church; but your Pamphlet having no
Bodies Name to it, I cannot tell who to go to but to you, our Apparition
Lecturer; and if you cannot bring Real Corporeal Witnesses, then bring some
Apparition to prove it, for I believe thou have more Apparitions in thy Budget,
Jonathan.

And now to conclude all this Tragedy, I find at the Rump of this nameless
Authors Pamphlet, there comes out a flash like the blaze at the tail of a
Comet, with a thundering Sentence or Bull of Condemnation of the Book called,
The Birth and Burning, etc. Intending, I suppose to blast the Credit thereof,
by the scribble of one that dares not put his Name to what he prints: But
People do the rather run on and buy that Book the more, so that it requires a
second Impression; because they see the Lecturer inclines to Stifle it, but
none to Answer it: For instead of Answering any one particular of the
Ceremonies charged upon him, to have never except on Communion days been
performed by him till St. Michael was set upon the Commandments; this Lecturer
does as that Ignorant Author did, who thought the World would believe he had
fully Confuted the Learned Roman Cardinal, by only saying, Bellarmine, thou
Lie.

So our sine Nomine Pamphleteer, alias Lecturer, or Will in the wisp, or dark
Lanthorn man, or I know not who to call him (because he is ashamed to print his
Name) acts much at the same rate, and says it was some bodies Opinion, that it
was a rude, scurrilous, insolent Paper, many falsities therein; but is this all
the Answer you can give? this is still but Bellarmine thou lie: I tell thee
Johnathan, it is as true as any thing thou ever said or wrote in thy Life of
thy own making.

But who is this Reporter, this Illustrious unkown, upon whose veracity all
this story depends? In Nomine omnium sanctorum, what art thou, that thus
Invisibly and sine Nomine prints Pamphlets against a late Churchwarden of
All-saints-Barking? Sure thou art some ubiquitarian, some Supernumerary
Reformado, or some hanger on.

Sir, By your Priesthood tell me who you are.

Apparition. I am a thing they call Lecturer, and have got my self in among
you, though the Law knows me not, and in former time I have heard the very Name
of Lecturer was Branded by some high-flying Church men as a tool of Sedition, I
mean in 41. But I hope to bring the Name and use of Lecturer into Church again
with great Benefit, by my great Zeal for Images and Ceremonies, showed in my
learned Pamphlets against Mr. Sherman, for pulling down St. Michael, though the
times will not yet bare putting my Name to my prints: Pray let me stay with
this Parish till the times may favor Images and Ceremonies more, and give me
what you please I Will be content.

Hark! Hark! Hark!
A Voice I hear, but nothing can I see;
Speak, speak, thou grisly Ghost what e're thou be.

Aparition. I am a shade, and though no Name I tell,
Yet you shall know I loved St. Michael well.
Bring back St. Michael to the Altar; then
I and you will drink and once be Friends agaen;
Else with Apparitions you shall ever Frighted be,
And in your very sleep St. Michaels Ghost shall see.

I must Conjure down this Spectrum, and though I am not so much a Candidate of
Clergyship as to be an Exorcist or Devil driver; yet I Will try what can be done.

By the virtue of a late upper Churchwarden of Omnium Sanctorum, and in the
Name of Sancta Clara, Sancta Winifred, Sanctus Antonius, Vanish; but more
particularly by the all powerful Name of our great Champion St. Michael, I
command you down to your shades.

This said, away the frightful Mormo flew,
And Lecturer alone was left in view.
O! was it you, Mr. Apparition Lecturer, that thus frighted me? well, don't
print no more Apparitions, and I will serve you; do but try me once more, if
you can but get me to accept of the Office again, then to please you, I Will pull
that Fa-La-Soll-Clark out of the Desk by the ears, that is such an eyesore to
thee; I will make him a Desk just before you, where he shall say Amen as it
were under your feet, that so you may Crow over him, and so pull down his Pride
as I did St. Michael; but you must not Burn him, least you be Prosecuted for
Burning Church Ornaments. For to give the Clark his due, that stands at your
right hand, he is as good an Ornament as the Lecturer or St. Michael, for he
keeps us all in tune, (except the Lecturer.) The man sings well, and does nick
a Psalm as suitably to the Sermon, as the Lecturer does his Sermon to the
occasion: And pray good Mr. Apparition Lecturer be pacified; and pray present
my Service to that Divine that Preached at our Church on Sunday the (...) June,
in the Afternoon, who I will not name, because I pay him respect: Tell him, I took
notice that he made occasion to inveigh against such as Lampoon Ministers and
their Ceremonies, etc. And tell him I went home and applied it to my own self
as he meant it, and it might have done some good upon me; but looking into the
Clergy men's three printed multiplying-Glasses, particularly that called a fiery
Apparition, etc. I saw there a Clergyman doing the same thing; Lampooning not
only me, but also the very Expressions used in the Service and Ceremonies of
the holy Sacrament of Baptism, which the Church has so solemnly enjoined; and
with vil'e impudence put it in print, vainly and profanely giving the
Appellation of Godfather to a wooden Image, and Printing, as speaking of the
Image St. Michael, calls it Mr. Shermans God-son: And remembering your
Suspectedly Superstitious bowing at the other Sacrament also: Nay then, quoth I
to my self, these are but vain and suspectedly superstitious, Ridiculing,
Lampooning Parsons, and they would have a Bull or Grant to Lampoon and Ridicule
others in Print, and in the Pulpits too; and merely upon occasion of a rotten
Image, but they would not be Lampoon'd or Ridiculed themselves; which made me
early the next Monday morning take my pen in hand, and draw all this in as much
Ridicule and Lampoon fashion as the Guts of a Superannuated Churchwarden could
Invent, and therefore you were as good spare the Press, and spare the Pulpits
for better uses, than to Lampoon or Ridicule the Laity; especially me, else
I Will Lampoon you again and again: Say you are glad I don't Bamboo you; for
truly, truly, if Divines do these rascally tricks, we Laymen cannot stand
still and let you spit in our Faces your venomous Malice from the Pulpit, and
not wipe it off with a printed Paper, and let the World know that whatever you
print or Preach against me, it is all but only upon occasion, because I did not
defend an Image, and so you do but publish your selves to the world to be
Advocates for Images.

Let me alone, and mind your own business of teaching Folks the way to Heaven,
without those side-winds of Reflection out of the Pulpit, which makes the
people remember to repeat nothing of the Sermom to one another but this: I
think the Parson paid off Mr. Sherman to day, for Lampooning of Ministers and
their Ceremonies. But truly another replies, they give Mr. Sherman just Cause,
and he will certainly do it the more, because Ministers print Apparitions; and
I Will warrant you he will pay them all off in print again, for he is taught by the
Parson to say, Where there is no Law, there is no Transgression.

Thus you give the people heavenly matter to talk on, Lampooning of Ministers
and their Ceremonies; and so you vent private Spleen in that Holy place where
you should deliver the Oracles of God: Don't tell me any more of Ludere cum
Sanctis; for I will answer, the Devil rebukes sin. I Will believe Benefit by the
Church-prayers; bur none by Sermons of such Preachers, till they leave of their
Railing.

If my Book, called The Birth and Burning, etc. be False and Libellous on the
Parish, as you would have the World believe, why does not some Body prosecute
me for it: as you have hinted in your first Pamphlet, that it should not
preclude the Vestry from further proceeding against me; and your last says it
should be taken into further consideration: Threatened Folks live long: I only
here add to what I said in my last about this Head of prosecuting me, I laugh
at all those that talk of prosecuting for a vile abominable Image, which you
call your Ornament to the Ten Commandments: O rare Ornament, a great Carved,
Gilded Image, described fully in all its Demensions by my last Book; a silly
Tool of Superstition; it had one end of a Lath tack't to its Bumfidle, and the
other end to the Window, for its better preservation from falling, least the
Cats scampering over it in the heat of their Woeing, Should have made it a
Tumble-down- Dick,
Instead of a Gilded and Carved St. Mick:


O Rara-show, a most beautiful Bit for the Parson to rail in Print and Pulpit,
against him that saved the Parish a Score of Billets, by burning it in Vestry,
instead of Billet and Charcole; as to your last Aspersion in your
Sham-Indictment, brought in there as an Advertisement, I do positively deny,
that the Printed Book called Birth and Burning of this image, etc. was ever
read in Vestry when I was present; or that ever there has been any Vestry
since the Book was Printed and Published, which was but about the Twenty-sixth
of May last: it is true, that when my Narrative was in Manuscript, about Four
Weeks before it was printed, it was read in Vestry, and some would needs cavil
at it, and asked if I would own it? I told them I would, and said it was true,
and asked, What one Material thing was false? I would justify it to be true;
no Body gave Instances of any Particulars that were false: pray name any
Material one, if you can; and will the Pamphlet say, I c^^ld make little or no
Reply? Is Truth a little thing? I do tell thee, Johnathan, that the substance
of that Book, Birth and Burning, etc. is as true, as any thing thou ever said
or wrote of thy own making. There might he false Spellings, false Latin, and
some Words misplaced in the written Narrative; But what does that concern the
World? The World knows nothing, but what is published in Print, and the Title
is not called A Copy of a Narrative, But the substance of a Narrative, lately
given in to the Vestry, etc. So that all that the World is to take notice of,
is First, Whether this Book since in was printed, was read in Vestry: Secondly,
Whether this Book be answerable to its Title, viz. The substance of the
aforesaid Narrative. Thirdly and Lastly, whether the substance of that Book be
true or false.

And now not to enumerate all over again; I will only Repeat the most Material
Heads, or Substance; Which take thus:

1. In 1675. we set up Organs: And we set this Image upon our Altar: which was
made in 1659. by Mr. Edwards, who set it on the Steeple; till about 1675. or
1676. and then it was removed to the Altar by Mr. Clements.

2. That this Image was made and removed without any Order of Vestry,
particularly directing the making or removing his Image.

3. That 1677. we beautified our Organs: As it stands written thereon, Made
1675. Beautified 1677.

4. That Mr. Tho. Whitebread gave us in 1677. a rich Carpet, etc. with such an
Imbroyder'd Glory, etc. with a Cross, and this Inscription, as in the Margent.

5. That this Gist stands Registered in a Table in our Vestry, in the same Words
as I mention in my said Book, Page 8.

6. That our Linen Cloth used to hang down to the Ground (or very near it) in
our front, till we had this Carpet.

7. That since we had this Carpet, we expose that to view; and Fold upon the
forepart of the Table our Linen.

8. That by the Act of Uniformity it may be allowable enough for our Communion
Table to stand further off, yea in the middle of the Church, and so it would
not look so like an Altar, as now it does standing close to the Commandments,
with Ends North and South:

Thus much for the Furniture of the Church and Altar.

Now for your Ceremonies.

9. That until about 1678. we had all our Services said in the Desk, and no
where else.

10. That until about 1678. our Sermon did conclude in the Pulpit, with some
Prayer or other, and the Benediction was until then ever given in the Pulpit.

11. That since 1677. you have begun and continued to read Second Service at
the Altar, and at your approach to the Altar, you make a reverend low Bow
toward the Altar, or Image, or Carpet.

12. That since 1677. you conclude the Sermon without Prayer and Blessing; and
the Organ strikes up a Tune to divert the People till you go into Vestry, to
put on the Surplice, and then you come out so habited, mount the steps, enter
the Rails, make a low bow toward the middle of the Altar, then you turn to the
North end, kneel and say some Prayers there, then pronounce the Blessing at the
Altar, which ever till about 1678. was pronounced in the Pulpit.

13. That you, nor no Minister before you did ever in our Church, bow at the
Altar before St. Michael was set there, (except when the Bread and Wine was
there on Sacrament Days) for I will allow that, That you and Doctor Lafield
did Bow on Sacrament Days at the Altar: but that was (because or) when there
was Bread and Wine there, and this you did, and Doctor Lafield too, before any
St. Michael was set there: (But it was only on Sacrament Days.)

14. That you are charged to be the first Man that bowed there after St.
Michael was up (when there was no Communion) and the first Man that went and
Offered up Prayers and Benedictions under St. Michael's Nose at the Altar,
where in some parts of the Church, People cannot hear, nor see the Parson; and
so Prayers in Latin, or an unknown Tongue, may do as much good as Prayers which
we cannot hear.

15. That you were the promoter of the beginning of these Ceremonies, though
Doctor Lafield did persuade against i^^ whereas a Lecturer ought to have
followed rather than led in any New performances.

16. That the suspicion of Superstition, and the ground of all this Noise, did
arise from your beginning these Ceremonies but just about the time the Papists
Lords were sending to the Tower.

17. That you account Mr. Whitebread's glorious Carpet a better Ornament than
the Linen which the Act of Uniformity enjoins, for if it be not better, you
are fools for using it; for, if we do not use the very best of every thing,
other Parishes may be more serious and regularly Devout than this of
All-Saints-Barking, if we have nothing else to boast of, but that we have a
better Carpet, and more Ceremonies, and a more Ceremonious Lecturer than other
Parishes.

And now Mr. Saunders, not to give you too great a Task at once, though there
are many more observable Matters in my Book called Birth and Burning, etc.
which are true also; yet, I have singled you out these seventeen Heads, as part
of the Matter charged to be the occasion of this Indictment: it lies on your
part, to name those twenty Men, that dare say to my Face, that these Heads are
rude, scurrilous, and insolent, or dare Assert, there are many Falsities and
Prevarications in them; and that these highly tend to the dishonor of the
established Protestant Religion; and that it is a Libel upon the whole Parish:
Except you don't mean on my part, but your own part: Nay, have you confidence
enough your self, In verbo sacerdotis, to say, the substance of these Matters
are false: If you dare not print, that all these seventeen Heads (in verbo
sacerdotis) are false; then let the World believe them all to be true.

Nay, Mr. Saunders, since you have printed such a scandalous Report of my Book,
called Birth and Burning, etc. you must give me a Reply: My Book called Birth
and Burning, etc. has my own Name to it, Folio 14. and I own it all even to
the End; and I put my Name to this, and own it also; therefore I will not take
any Answer from any Body but you; and signed with your hand, that you will own;
and if you Answer short, I will call upon you for positive, not evasive Answer:
The World will judge by my Print and your Answer, who Writes clearest to the
Matter: I will not accept of any Answer of Nath. Thomson, that is his Answer to
the other Mercury; let them squabble one with the other, till they can agree,
one in staring the Questions right, the other in Answering:

I respect Mr. Thomson, because he Prints the Loyal Intelligence; and the good
Loyal Man, thinking the Church is concerned, takes her part; he means well in
that: He tells you the Indictment was Quasht, for Insufficiency of the
Indictment; he don't say, it was Quasht for insufficiency of the Law of Edward
the Sixth: Are not many Men Nonsuited, though they have the Law on their side;
yea, sometimes upon a very Bond, merely for the insufficiency of a Declaration:
and don't the very Words he quotes signify as much, quassitur per curam pro
insufficientia inde etc. And he, that Loyal Man quotes Mr. Westcoat, and Mr.
Clements for Proofs of what I don't deny, nor Object: He says it was the
Common practice of Doctor Lafield and Mr. Saunders also, to bow toward the
Communion Table, when they had occasion to go up unto it; yea, but they never
had or did take any occasion to go up to read Service on Sundays, but on
Communion-dayes; and so I say now again in this Book also, that they never did
Bow there before St. Michael was set there (but on Communion-dayes,) and so my
usual Charge runs throughout my Book (except on Communion-dayes;) and if the
exception be any where omitted, I hereby declare it ought so to be understood:
But this Loyal Man does not offer a Word of Proof, that this Carved Image, was
any Ornament to the Commandments, or that the Commandments, especially the
Second Commandment is a Farthing the worse, or the Parish a Farthing the poorer
for my burning it; nor does any Body take occasion of bawling for loss of it,
so much as a Lecturer; but it is true, that the Parish is two or three Pounds
the worse by Mr. Ben. Edwards. expending so much Money out of the Poors Stock,
for making this useless Image; for the Parish has no Stock, but what is
intended by the Benefactors for the Poor: or some useful things for the Church;
I hope future Churchwardens will employ Peoples Benevolence to Feed and Cloth
the Poor; and not to buy Carved Images, which will not be useful in Churches,
till Popery come in, which God prevent; I do my part to prevent it, by Writing
against Images; I have drawn my Pen, and I will throw away the Scabbord. But I
will not say any more to Mr. Thomson, my business is with you, and it will lessen
the esteem of your own Learning, to set a Hackney (though never so Loyal) to
Answer me; you must take a little more pains than a sheet of Paper, to Answer
the great Labor and pains I have taken in my First, and Second Part of my
Book, called The Birth and Burning of St. Michael: I have given you a great
deal of time already, since you first knew the Substance charged on you; and I
hear you are going to consult your Oracle, that right Loyal Gentleman, Mr.
A^^^^, etc. I am content you should consult many more: lay your Heads close,
and lets see the product of that Cabal, come out in your Name; bravely fixed to
it, as you did to your beloved Book, called Fiery Apparition; and then if it be
good and fully satisfactory to the World; it shall satisfy me, and every other
part of both my Books, as well as any of these Articles which you leave
unanswered ought to be understood by the World, as true, if you do not Answer
them: For a bare saying, the Rubric directs, will not do, except you name the Act
of Uniformity, and except you do name the place therein where it directs it so;
and that it does as much direct, in Manner, Time, and Place, every part of your
practice, as absolutely and as well in all parochial Churches, as in Cathedrals
and Chapels; not only on Communion-dayes, or Holy Days, but every Sunday,
though there be no Communion; and this you are to Answer under my first Quaere,
which you will find tendered to you by and by.

If you do not Answer particularly to each Head, whether those seventeen
particulars be true, every ones Tongue will be calling on you, and I crave the
World to credit me till you Answer fairly and sully with your own hand. If
these seventeen Heads be false, then my Book Birth and Burning, etc. is false:
But if these seventeen Heads, being the considerable and most material part of
my said Book, are true in substance, then now false is that Nameless Author of
that Libel called The Sham-Indictment Quasht? and who will believe him in Print
or Pulpit, that would by a Pamphlet, with a Sham Title, and no Authors Name,
call that false which in it self is true in substance.

Mr. Saunders, I expect Answer under your own hand, not generally, except you
own them all, but particular, which you confess, and which you deny, and show
me the Error if you can find it.

And then you must Answer these four Queries.

1. Whether the Act of Uniformity does as much and as positively command the
use of all those Ceremonies, (in the same manner and place and times as you
practice) as it does all other Services therein enjoined, and prove it by
quoting of places; else if it be indifferent, why did you Press it, especially
at such a juncture of time as 78. when the Popish Plot was discovering; O the
Time, the Time the critical minite.

And have a care your Answer do not reflect upon above a hundred Parishes in
and about London, yea, upon our own Lord Bishop of London's Parish of
Aldersgate, and upon about eight thousand other Parishes in England, where it
is not so used: For if you be in the right, then Aldersgate as well as the rest
are all in the wrong, and consequently Aldersgate as well as the Eight Thousand
must all go up to the Altar, and there say the proper Prayer; We have all erred
and strayed from thy ways like lost Sheep; and then it they be Civil, they
must all turn about to you, and say, We are all taught of thee, Our most
cringingly devout, and unseriously Ceremonious, Brother Johnathan: which I dare
say, thou will not live to see all England learn the Law at thy Mouth:

If thy Ceremonious practices be not all absolutely so enjoined, why do thou
defend them, and daily snarl at them that will not take thy Word for it, rather
than an Act of Parliament? Tell me not of Canons, except such as are allowed by
Acts of Parliament; for I know no Cannons but the great Guns on Tower Hill;
(and they are almost all worn off or gone too) except they have passed the
Tripple Scrutiny of England, and so become Laws.

For my part I am clearly of and for the Religion of the Church of England, as
it is now established by Law; (and O, would to God we could all be of that one
uniform Opinion and Practice that is thereby established.) The Cerrificates
which I annually make upon Record (of my taking the Sacrament) on account of
the Office I hold in this Honorable City, may satisfy the Inquisitors in that
point; but I further say, our Religion as now established, is the best in the
World; I write not only my Judgment, but my own Experience of the Lutheran, and
Calvin, as well as of the Papists Religion; the Practice and Doctrine of all
which I have Personally seen, known, and understood, in Denmark, Swedeland,
Sprutia, Germany, Polonia and Flanders, and other parts: I value my Experiences
in Religion more than my Reading; and on that Assurance and Satisfaction, I
declare our established Religion of the Church of England, to be the best of the
World.

But as there is danger on one Hand, from those that fall short of the Church
of England, that it may tend to Confusion, so there is danger also on the other
Hand from those that go beyond; for such Winged Seraphim-sons of the Church as
fly higher in their Ceremonies than his Majesty's Act of Uniformity directs,
when those Soarers are once upon the Wing of disguise or design of preferment,
and have got beyond or above the Kings Law, they may fly as high as the Church
of Rome, nay, to Rome it self, and there Rant, and Roar, and Sing, and Curse
and Damn, and Drink, and Drink, and Drink on, till they spew and reel, and
thrust their Thumb under their Girdle, and loll their Head to the Larboard, and
strut and stare, and stagger and swagger, and so vent, and gulp up their words
stutteringly and stammeringly, calling all Phanaticks (perhaps Heretics too)
that don't (because they ought not) or perhaps can not fly as high as such
lofty Sons of the Church do, until at last near Eight Thousand honest sober
Clergymen, right bred-Sons of the Church, more Piously exemplary, and Zealous
and Serious, and more regularly devout, shall be all spewed upon by such Mounta
Seigniora's; from home, Libera nos Domine.

Now seeing it is certainly true that there are about Eight Thousand parochial
Churches in England, where the Ministers don't say second Service at
Communion Table, nor don't say any part of the Communion Service at
Communion Table, at any time but only on Communion-dayes, or some perhaps upon
High Holy Days, nor those Eight Thousand don't quit their Pulpits without
Prayer or Blessing, to perform their after Sermon-Prayer and Benediction at the
Altar; ought we not therefore to be so charitable as to believe that the Eight
Thousand understand their Duty and Conscience, and that they practice as much
as they believe to be their Duty? And now that I may apply my Answer to your
last Sham Pamphlet fully and home to you, I will invert your last Paragraph
therein, and send it packing again home to you, to be embraced in your own
bosom; and so I say in your own words or sense, viz. I leave it to all
Impartial Men to determine whether the practice of above Eight Thousand sober
and pious Clergymen, all of unbroken, yea and Vndrunken Reputation too, are to
be believed and imitated, or the Assertion and Practice of one single Mr.
Saunders.

Now Mr. Johnathan Confute and Convert these 8000. Et eris mihi Magnus Appollo;
or else hang your Harp upon the Willows; for there are Eight Thousand sober
Men, will not Dance after your Pipe; don't obstinately run Counter to Eight
Thousand of your own Fraternity; but either leave off your foolish conceited
singularity; or else write Learnedly, so as may confute them all by proofs,
which you must quote out of the Act of Conformity; but I will vouch there is
not one word therein, nor in the Old or New Testament, that directs the faying
Service at 2 Barking Church differing from Eight Thousand other Parishes in the
same Land.

I say you must do it by Proofs, for else of all men no body will believe you,
when you only say in verbo Sacerdotis (without better proof) for you are in
print for Printing an untruth against a Record it self. Therefore pray quote
all the places that you have for your proofs in Vindication of your Ceremonies
which you use: If you have Authority, show it, what place or page it is in, and
in what Book; that so you may Receive Answer from some Learned hand, when the
Quondam Churchwarden can answer you no further. But seeing you have first
brought me upon the Stage, and first began with me by two Pamphlets,
Challenging and charging me for not defending a vile Image no better; and upon
those two Challenges when my Vindication came forth in a Book called Birth and
Burning, etc. then by a late Libel entitled The Sham-Indictment Quasht; you
seem to challenge me again, and being once more met by you upon the Stage in
print, now I do here challenge and charge you, that you have been the Beginner
of such Ceremonies as have been the occasion of all this pother and noise about
this Image; you smelt it would come home to your door at last, and therefore
you first skreamed out; But what is the matter now? have you caught a Tartar?
O! Now I have got you here, I will keep you on the Stage until you Answer me,
and give an account of your Faith in those Ceremonies, that have made this
embroyl; and I challenge and require you to answer me in Print with your own
hand; not with a Nameless print, or some Sham or feigned Apparitions any more;
for I will not lay down the Cudgells, but Bang you on the Stage in print till
you have Answered a Quondam Churchwarden in Matters of your own Element: let
the World see how you can defend your self at your own Weapon by fair play (not
by Railing, for all Clergymen will yield the buckles to thee, that thou art
better at that than any of them all;) come fairly, confess or deny Article by
Article; for all your railing will but make the World say, O! this is because
Mr. Sherman pulled down an Image that Mr. Saunders thus vents his Sham
Pamphleted Spleen one after the other.

I am not inquiring what are the Ceremonies that are to be used in performance
of Divine Service at Cathedrals and Chapels, but what ought to be the use in
Parochial Churches, where are eight thousand Clergymen (a rank higher than
Lecturers) and yet we find a Lecturer as it were, saying, I am more holy than
all you eight thousand are: For in his Pamphlet titled, Fiery Apparition seen
on several days about Tower Hill, etc. page 3. he vauntingly boasts in these
very words; Every sober man will allow the Liberty of saying this, when he may
know that there is not a more serious and regularly devout Parish in the City
pf London, than this of Alhallowes Barking is.

It is a pretty kind of a side-wind Reflection upon all the other Parishes in
London; and may you not receive a Reply thus: That all sober men will allow the
Liberty of saying this, that there is not a more Ceremonious and unferious
Lecturer in all London, than this Mr. Saunders, that Ridicules the Name of
Godfather, and Prints so many Pamphlets in defense of a vile Image set upon the
Commandments of God.

Will you be so saucy as to use Cathedral Service in the Parishes of Barking
and Sandon, which are pitiful sucking Parishes in comparison of Mother
Cathedrals. If you have a mind to be a Cathedral fellow, must you make every
poor man of Sandon a Cathedral fellow too: Nay then Cathedrals and Parochial
Churches shall be hail fellow well met, and Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Doctors,
Parsons and Lecturers too: No, keep your distance, you are a great way off from
Lawn Sleeves; for though we can all Huzza together, both Parson, Lecturer and
Parishioners, yet you Mr. Lecturer must not climb up to the top of a Cathedral
presently.

2. My second Quaere demands Answer for your own suspitiously Superstitious
Bowing at the Altar, when there is no Communion, no Bread and Wine there; who
you then bow unto? because it is by some suspected a Superstitious bowing to
that Image; upon this Ground, because you never went up to bow at the Altar, or
say second Service, etc. before St. Michael was set there (except on
Sacrament-dayes:) you must tell the World Learnedly who you bow unto, when
there is no Communion, and a Reason why our present Vicar never Bows at all;
sure you will not allege Doctor Lafield's bowing (before St. Michael was set
there) though only at Sacrament Days, as a sufficient Argument for your doing
it, because an Old Man did so, whose Reasons for bowing are dead with him; and
seeing our living Vicar don't bow; it has given the Prints occasion to say,
that Men of least Learning are for most Ceremonies. If you cannot, or don't tell
the World in Print why you bow, and who you bow unto, then instead of saying
(as you ought) We know what we Worship, the words of our Blessed Savior, will
be turned upon you; Ye Worship ye know not what, Joh. 4.22.

O give no occasion for People to say to the Lecturer of Barking, as St. Paul
did to the Men of Athens, I perceive that in all things you are too
Superstitious; and least by your bowing in an ignorant and unknown Devotion to
the Altar at Barking, men be tempted to think that you ignorantly worship an
Altar, like that at Athens, which had an Inscription, To the unknown God, Acts
17.22, 23.

3. My third Quaere demands Answer for your Bowing even on Communion-dayes;
what can you say in defense of your bowing at the Altar, on Sacrament days?
and under this third Quaere, I shall not use the present Vicar Doctor Hicks,
his not bowing for an Argument against you; I hope you will not pretend the
same Reason that Papists give for their bowing; there is no Corporal Presence
(as they falsely allege) to pay our Adoration unto, but only the Altar, the
Elements, Bread and Wine; which being bowed unto, is a more ridiculous Foppery,
than at most the very Papists themselves are guilty of.

4. My fourth Quaere demands that in further Answer to my first Quaere, you
should subjoyn this, and say whether the Act of Uuniformity does also
positively command, direct or enjoin the Ministers quitting the Pulpit without
Prayer or Blessing, and so stop that part of the Service of God; and diverting
the People with a Tune of the Organ, till you can go into Vestry, and Accouter
your self, to say after Sermon, Service or Prayers and Benedictions at the
Altar, whereby many loose the benefit of the Benediction; because when the
Minister comes out of the Pulpit, they go out of the Church, believing all is
done, not being accustomed to it elsewhere: For those that do talk of reading
Communion Service at the Altar after Sermon, understand it only on Communion
days, and to Communicants only; whereas your practice is direct contrary; for
you go every Sunday (except Communion-dayes) out of the Pulpit to read part of
the Commmunion Service to all the Congregation that remain, though there is no
Communion at all: Nay, when it is Communion day, then you do dismiss the
Congregation with Prayer and Ble^sing in the Pulpit; and afterward read
Communion Service at the Altar to the Communicants only; there are some hold
these after Sermon Services should be said in the Desk; if you fall out among
your selves, don't blame Dissenters till you can all agree.

I do grant, that when Two Ministers are at Church, then as soon as one has
done Sermon, the other goes to the Altar, to say Prayers and Benedictions,
which also is such a kind of changing of hands, and of saying our Services, as
we were never used to until the damnable Hellish Popish Plot was breaking out:
And thus the Time, the Time, the nicking and timing of it so luckily, does make
some suspicion stick.

I did not think of these things so Much before, as now I do, when I see you
bawling at me thus in print for Burning one filthy Image; and to find you skulk
under disguised Titles of Apparitions and Shams, as one that would fain keep
Images; but Times, thanks be to God, are not so far gone toward Popery, as to
give you confidence enough to put your Name to all your Prints; though you did
begin with your own Name in The Fiery Apparition, which I lay up in pia
M^moria, for my Quondam Friend Johnathan; and write upon it, This is the
Champion for Images, with all your Books and Texts Repeated in this Book, so
laudably suitable to the occasion; O why have you made this pother and noise?
are you not ashamed to call it a poor innocent Figure; and in another place St.
Michael; and in Thomson, to call it a Simbole? And thus this Tool, -- Is
Christened by every Fool. O ye sounding Brass and tinckling Cimbals, 1 Cor. 13.
and v. 1.

Does not your many Pamphlets make you like him in Judges 18. and 24. who
bellowing for his Idols, being asked what ailed him, cried out; You have taken
away my gods; and do you ask, what ails me; don't imitate this Man's foolish
Idolatrous zeal any longer, but rather go cool your self at Sandon; and then
come calmly as a Minister should do, and admonish me in private, for not
defending your Images no better.

Johnathan, I cannot leave Retorting not only your own Texts, but a Sentence of
your own upon you, taken out of your own dear Book Tituled, A New Narrative of
a Fiery Apparitition, seen on several Days about Tower Hill, etc. Your words
are these:

I know how unhandsom it is to interrupt Men of Business, with little
particular concerns of our own, etc.

But because you confess it unhandsom, I shall not chide you so much as I would,
having whipped you so much already for the fault, that I am afraid you will cry,
O Sir, I will never disturb Men of business more: be sure you don't then, no
otherwise than barely Answer all my seventeen Heads, and other four Quaeries;
and ply that work, and do it quickly, and put your Name to it; and then I Will
say, thou art my Good Son of the Church: have a care, and do your work well,
for I have the better side; you are to maintain the Doctrine of Images well,
which the Papists hold; else you will lose as much ground on their side, as you
have done in some sober Men's Judgment on the Church of England's side.

Men will not like Images, because those Dark innocent Creatures will put us to
the charge of Candles first; and when the Candles have stood so long unlighted,
as St. Michael did on the Altar, we shall have some Body Preach on this Text,
The Blind lead the Blind, etc. and so tell us from thence, it is time to light
our Candles at the Altar, that the Eyes of our Images being so enlightened, by
such blinking Candlelight pretended zeal, may see to do good to the blind
Folks that set one up on the Steeple; and that removed it up to the Altar, and
that Print it up in some Pamphlets that they are ashamed to own; and that
Preach it up in Pulpits by a New Lectorian way of reflecting upon a
Churchwarden that pulled it down; rendering it to Vulgar understandings
Sacrilege.

After we have once got Images and Candles, we may then be persuaded by some
unserious Lecturer to begin a suspected Superstitious Adoration, upon a
pretense that the Image has wrought a Miracle in making him Conscientious of
his duty; and in opening the eyes of his understanding, enabling him to know
the Rubric, and execute the Act of Conformity better than he had done for many
Years since his Majesty's happy Restoration, whom God long preserve; which
this Lecturer never could so understand to be his Duty, as to practice it,
before the Altar was Adorned with this Image, and the glorious Carpet of Mr.
Whitebread, nor ever could bring his lofty Heart to Bow there, before this
great Carved, Gilded Image of the all powerful and victoriously Thiumphant St.
Michael was set there (except on Sacrament days when Bread and Wine was there.)

If you will consult Holy Writ, you shall find who they were that were some of
the first that thought Images fit companions for the Ark or Church of God; why,
it was a parcel of lewd Philistian Priests and Diviners and Conjurers, as you
may read the Story at large in the first Book of Sam. c. 6. v. 2. And the
Philistians called for the Priests and the Diviners, saying, What shall we do
to the Ark of the Lord, etc. And v. 3. They said, etc. Send it not empty, etc.
And v. 5. Ye shall make Images of your Emrods, and Images of your Mice, etc.
And v. 11. These were laid in the Cart with the Ark.

These were Philistian Priests and Diviners, that begun but with small Mice,
but now we are called Priests and Divines, we must have them a Size bigger, a
lusty Fellow as big as our St. Michael; yea, and he must stand fifteen or
sixten Years seasoning on the Steeple, for fear he should stink, before he be
thought sweet enough to stand on our Altar; perhaps you may say, though the
Philistines thought to stop the God of Isreal's Mouth in those days with an
Image as big as a Mouse, yet the same God now must have one as big as a Man. I
further observe, that these Images being sent away with the Ark in a Cart,
drawn by Two Milchkine that were tied to the Cart, yet these senseless Beasts
did not prize (because they knew not) the worth of what they had in Possession
( viz. the Ark of God) but went on lowing as they went, Verse. 12. merely for
the want of their Calves, which were shut up at home, Verse. 10.

Well, what if these Two Philistin Cowes did so, must we have two Milch-kine at
Barking do so too? though they have the Ark of God (the Church) in their
possession; nay, though they are tied to it as it were with a Girdle, by their
Order of Priesthood; yea, though the Ark of God (the Church of England) be
(thanks be to God) tied to them also by an established Law of the Land; yet O
Heavens bless us, what ail ye, that some Body lately went on lowing as they
went in their Preaching (if reading can be so called) for the loss of one silly
Bulkin; as if the Ark of God were taken from you! who is about to do it? I know
no dainger the Church of England is in (nor the Government thereof, as it is
now established by Law) by burning a great Carved, Gilded Image.

You have the Ark still, or rather the Ark has you; for you are much about the
middle of it (as near as the Pulpit can stand) when you are going on lowing
thus for the loss of a Calf: What means the bleating of these Cattle; O ye
foolish and unwise, to go on lowing at such a silly rate, murmurring in obscure
Expressions at him that shut up your Calf at home, and wrapped it up so warm in
the Vestry Chimny: pray mind your business, take care of the Ark, the Church of
God, that you are tied to; carry that to its place; For our Church as now
established by Law, needs no Images for her Companions, whatever Papist Priests,
and Philistin Diviners may think.

Men will but make sport, and sit and laugh at you, as I do; if you go on
lowing at such a rate, and cry, Hark, Hark, How one of these Milch-kine go on
lowing for a Calf; thanks be to God, these cursed Cowes or Bulls, have short
Horns, else I should be in great pain and peril of Bull-goring; as for such Men
as talk in the Pulpit of a Woe to them by whom offenses come, and Sacrelidge,
etc. who do they apply it to, in this case? I ask them soberly, whether my
placing this Image for an Ornament in our Vestry Chimny, were greater
Sacreledge than his Act, that took it from the Steeple to adorn the
Commandments therewith? I ask whether the Chimny were not the warmest place,
and more proper than the Commandments, which do so forbid Images, that Images
are an obomination?

The Chimny as well as the Commandments, were both places contrary to the
design of its first creator or maker, viz. Ben. Edwards, who made it and placed
it on the Dial, for a Tom Tell Clock: And yet I believe honest Ben. may like
the Burner better than the Remover, or Pulpit Bawler, or Apparition
Pamphleteer; because my Burning had ended all the Noise, if the Publiteer had
not been a Pamphleteer, and spread it in Print: Leave off for shame those
Glosses in the Pulpit about Sacrilege, for every one thinks it too much, being
on no other occasion but a vile Image: If you don't, it will shortly be said by
Folks, Come let us go to Barking Church, to hear the Parson rail against the
Churchwarden that burnt St. Michael; and every Country Parson that comes to
Preach at Barking, will not think he have made a Sermon suitable to the place, if
he has not talked of Sacrilege, or reflected upon him that pulled down St.
Michael, till at last Men will come and look in at Door, and turn again,
saying, O are you there with your Sacrilege about a rotten Image.

Like him that Preached so often upon the Text, about the two She-Bears, 2
Kings 2. v. 24. in every Church he came at; one passing by, looked in, and
hearing him, said, O are you there with your Bears? and so went out of the
Church again. It would become Lecturers much better to lead such sober lives,
as might convince the World that they are Examples of Temperance; but I will
not come too near the Ark, lest I should touch it; for if I do, I must expect
Vzzah's fate, as far as is in a Lecturers power, though I believe I may prove
it Lawful for Vzzah being a Levite to touch the Ark: But I answer, it is as
Lawful for me to Answer your Prints, as it was for you to begin to print
against me; whether it were Lawful or nor for Vzzah to touch the Ark, is not my
business now to treat upon; else I could say something to it, for he being an
Officer of the Ark, as a Levite might think himself concerned to support the
Ark when he perceived it in danger.

So in our present case, when an Image had given such offense and scandal by
standing in such a place, and your going up to read Service at the place where
it stood, which you never did before the Image was set there (except on
Sacrament days when Bread and Wine was there;) And also an Indictment being
brought against the Churchwardens for letting it continue; sure then it was
lawful enough for such an Officer as a Churchwarden to pull it down and Burn
it; especially at such a juncture of time as when the Ark, the Church of God
was, and is, in so great danger of falling into the hands of the (Philistians)
Papists: and Images are such inseparable Badges of that Religion, that there is
no Papists Church that I ever saw (and I have seen many) without them.

And who ever blames me in Print or Pulpit for Burning this abominable Badge of
Superstition, they cannot distinguish themselves from being pleaders for
Images; and they that plead for Images in Churches, are as near akin to
Superstition, as Supersttion it self is of kin to Popery; and whoever Bows to
an Image, or Fathers such Texts, as are in the First and Last of the Three
Pamphlets upon the occasion, can never quit themselves from a Suspicious
leaning toward Superstition; and he that Bows to mere Bread and Wine, that
just came out of a saucy Clarks hands before the Minister has laid his
Consecrating hands, and pronounced the Words of Consecration; must needs give
Papists themselves occasion to Reproach those that do so, more than we can
Reproach them for Bowing after Consecration.

I confess I cannot write of such practices without emotion; for I love not to
treat starcht nonsensical Folly with too much Gravity; there is no Man has a
more due Respect to pious and serious Clergymen, than my self; but to see
Ministers that should employ themselves in Instructing us from Gods sacred
word, spend their time in scribbling Libels in defense of odious Images, who can
behold these things without Indignation?

I am verily persuaded, that I do upon this occasion discharge my Duty to the
Church of England; to detect all Image loving, and cringingly Ceremonious and
unserious Lecturers; especially if all this may tend to drive this one
out-lving Dear home to his Park at Sandon, to take care of his Flock in the
hands of a Hireling; for how should that Flock yield Milk that have neither
Pastor nor Pasture; for, when you are so often and so long near them, at
Chelmsford, you give them scarce above one or two Sermons in twelve Months last
past: Sure the Lord Bishop, as well as Barking Parish will take notice that you
harbor and loyter at Chelmsford, and not at Sandon, though you pretend to go
to Sandon, when you leave London; but when the People of Sandon see themselves
thus slighted, at last they will Sue you for Non-Residence; why do we complain
of Dissenters, when Non-Residence is a kind of Nonconformity to the Law in the
Clergy, an a great cause of it in the Laity? For Sheep will go astray where
there is no Shepherd:

Now for this, thou art inexcusable, O Man, so much to neglect thy Duty and
Conscience at Sandon, and yet, in the mean time to keep such a Noise here at
Barking, about reading Second Service at Communion Table; and leaving our
Pulpit without Prayer or Blessing; and in Loyal Nath. Themson's Loya*
Intelligence, Numb. 27. do cause to be Printed as a Reason for you reading
Second Service, Thus The Lecturer indeed was Conscientiously desirous to
observe the Rubric which commands the same.

But to come closer to you: if you would have the World believe that the
Rubric directs it, and you are so Conscientiously desirous to observe it, why
then do you not cause your own Curat to observe and do the same every Sunday?
As you have brought that way up here, why do you not Conscientiously take care
it be so done at Sandon, where you are so far absolute, that it is in your own
power? And if out Curate will not do it, you may get another, if you can, that
will: Therefore no Body will believe you Act Conscientiously in the matter at
Barking, when you do not cause the same to be done at Sandon every Sunday as
you have brought it up to be done here at London: For your Curat reads Second
Service at Saydon in the D^^k, though you read Second Service your self as the
Altar at Sandon, whose few times you preach there.

But for your after Sermon Service of going up to the Altar and giving the
Benediction there, though you practice it at Barking, yet when you are your
self at Sandon, you your self do not do so there; it seems you have Two sorts
of Service for God Almighty, a City Service, and a Country Service; as if our
God were a God of the Hills, but not of the Valleys, for this way of
after-Sermon-Service, neither you nor your Curate do practice at Sandon; for at
Saydon, not only the Curate constantly, but you your self also when you Preach
there, do dismiss the people with Prayer and Benediction from the Pulpit,
without going up to the Altar after Sermon: perhaps it is because you have no
Organs to Dance you up to the Altar, nor Carved Image, nor no such rich Carpet
at Sandon, and therefore in your Conscience you ought not to say all such rich
Service there as you do at London: But you must give the World a better Reason
than your Conscience, which in twenty five Miles varies as much as the Compass
does in some Latitudes, or as the Sun in some parts of the World is hotter than
in other parts.

But that Learned worthy Man you Curate has a very good Character, for Life as
well as Doctrine and knows his duty as well as you; and I hear he never bows at
the Altar at Sandon, it may be he is Conscientious in not bowing, nor doing the
Altar Services, to avoid offense, because it seems there has been great bustle
and opposition to these Altar-services there, the rather because they were
enforced by you at Sandon also, but about 78. or about the time of the Popish
Plot, though you had been in that Living some Years before.

One would think you might easily read a few more Sermons to your own Parish,
since it is so easily done to read a Book in the Pulpit; it is no such doughty
accomplishment, for seven, or eight Years Study at the University, to come and
read a Sermon; and it is strange, that such Readers should get Living upon
Living, only because they can read a Business: Though it is true many a Man
saves his Life by Reading, when the Ordinary reports Legit ut Clerious, or if
you will, He Reads like a Clegy-man; is it not a shame while other Arts, are
every Day so much improved, to see Doctors, Parsons, and Lecturers stand still,
or rather dwindle back to Readers? which is very unlike the practice of our
Blessed Lord and his Apostles, who never Read either their own or other Men's
Works, but their Heads and Hearts were full of the Matter, Doctrine, and
Instruction that they had to say.

Indeed our Blessed Redeemer himself, in one place, and at one time, called for
a Book, but as soon as he had read the Text, closed the Book again, and gave it
to the Mininster, or a kind of Deacon among the Jews, and then went on
Preaching.

But where a Preacher shall study and premeditate how to vent his Spleen
handsomely against his Parishioners, and then read it out of a Book, wherein it
was written with a Pen dipped in Gaul, instead of common Ink, will any Body think
he (that does so) speaks by the Spirit of God? or is this becoming the Gravity
of so Sacred a Profession, for Doctors, Parsons, and Lecturers to become
Readers, Readers?

Ecclesastical History tells us, that the Emperor Julian the Apostate was once
a Reader in the Church, no great honor for him or the Church to have such a
Reader; and I read in later History that in great praise of one of the Henrys,
was styled Bean-Clerk, because he could Write and Read.

It seems that in Julians days a Scholar was Rara avis; but in these days
when Learning is so common and so much advanced, is it not a said sight to fee
Doctors, Parsons, and Lecturers to be but Readers in the Pulpit, and to have
their Heads and Hearts so little affected with what they have to say? that if
they chance to turn over two or three Leaves too much, they are at a great
loss, and with a world of Hums and Haes before they can get in again, which
looks like A, B, C; nay, take away their Books and Notes, and they can say
nothing at all; or no better than some such plain Men as Cobblers of some other
Trade: Which brings to mind the Answer of a Reading Preacher (if it be not
Contradictio in adjectio) an honest and unfurnisht Head, one that haunted
Taverns more than Study; who having read a Sermon of excellent Composure, and
being asked how he got so good a Sermon with so little Study; replied it was all
his own, for he bought it for Six Pence in Paul's Churchyard, and it was Six
Pence the best laid out of any thing he ever did in his life, (and he was a
Lecturer too) for he had Twenty Shillings for every Lecture Sermon, and at a
several Church it was as good as at first, fresh and new; and he read it every
time better than other; these are your brave Pulpit reading DONS of the BOOK.

Is it not somewhat strange, that in the Pulpit the same Man would be called a
Preacher, because he reads out of a Book! and in the Desk the same Man is said
to be a Reader, because he reads out of a Book, I would not have touched so much
in the Press upon Reading Ministers, if they did not some of them aim at me
(merely upon an occasion of my Burning an Image) in touching so much in the
Pulpit and Press upon Sacrilege; a word you must not use this Six Months in
our Pulpit, lest People think the Burning of this Image broyl's in the Parsons
Stomach still; and the more Reflections Men make (either from Press or Pulpit)
on a defacer of Images, will but render such Men suspectedly Superstitious,
Lovers of Images, therefore leave off your Scribbling in defense of an Image,
and come to the grand Matter, and write Learndedly in Answer to my seventeen
Heads, and four Queries.

I don't see, Jonathan, how thou can Answer my Queries, and assert the
Direction of the Rubric, so as clearly to make it out that there is any Law
that absolutely and positively enjoins every part of thy practice at
Altar-Services; Nay, thou can not tamper and endeavor to do it to any
purpose, but thou must seem to Act the part of him that is called an Accuser of
the Brethren; thou must reflect, if not directly accuse about Eight Thousand of
thy Brethren, yea and thy R. R. F. also; which will stick in their Stomachs,
and they will all Print against you; and it will be such a scandal for ever
upon thee, as a thing that even Father Whitebread, Cum mult is aliis. of that
Crucian black Crew chose rather to Truss than to accuse their unholy Father, or
any of their Brethen, and if you rightly consider their courageous Example,
thou were better do just so too, (Truss) rather than beray thy own Nest;
consider the unseasonableness of urging Doctrines of Ceremonies, upon so
Laudable occasion as an Image; and at such a juncture, when we fear the
prevailing of a Religion, that is composed of Ceremonies and Superstitions.

And Consider the rather with your self who first put you upon running into
these Ceremonies; I have good ground to believe the Report of some of the
People in and about Sandon, that it was a Lay Gentleman, who in some former
Years had been himself or some of his Relations of the Romish Religion; and
therefore consider and think it no wonder, if that Gentleman press hard upon
you for a strict Observation and a due Performance of a Multitude of
Ceremonies; because he may perhaps think that God's worship in the Church of
England consists as much in Ceremonies, as it did so in the Romish Church; but
I hope you have not so learned Christ: And then you will be able to reply to
that Gentleman this other Text, viz. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him
Must worship him in Spirit and in Truth, Joh. 4.24. And pray Study, Preach and
Practice this your own self, and begin, nor continue no new Ceremonies (at
least let your betters go before you,) I mean see it done at Aldersgate before
you Print up the Legality of it at Barking or Sandon.

Thus it seems you have made Divisions at Sandon also, and a Noise about the
Country, as well as die City; merely by your singularity, and Ceremonious
practices, to the wonder of some Neighboring Learned Clergymen about Sandon.
What will you disturb City and Country, and with the heat of your pretended
Conscientious zeal boil all the goodness out of the Meat (Religion) into the
Broth of Ceremonies? Nay, if the marrow and goodness of Religion, and
quintessence of it be gone into the broth, and the All of it lies there; then
it is no wonder you contend so much for the Broth that Religion is boiled in; I
mean the Broth of uninjoyn'd Ceremonies: for I would not be thought to Ridicule
any Ceremonies that are enjoined by the Law: it is you Mr. Lecturer that
imbroyl London and Sandon, and by your bowing, etc. occasioned an Indictment at
London, and then that occasioned three Pamphlets at London; and this my Second
Vindication also, it was those Lecturers, Lecturers, that in Pulpit and Press
did turn the World up-side down in 41. in 41. and for a Lecturer now in these
times to Print up more Ceremonies and Bowings than the Law has enjoined, tends
to turn us quite topsie turvy, because it may tend to bringing in a Religion
that is Composed of and upheld by Ceremonies, from such Religion, good Lord
deliver us.

When I read what the Samaritan Woman said, Our Fathers worshipped in this
Mountain, and ye say, that at Jerusalem is the place where Men ought to
worship, John 4.20.

So may I say, we had all our Morning Services, both First and Second Services
all said in the Desk at Barking, ever since the Creation of the Kings Act of
Conformity till about 78. and now you Johnathan say that the Altar is the place
where the Men of Barking ought to worship the same God, by saying second
Service there.

So I also may say, that ever since the Creation of the said Act, our Sermons
did end with some Prayer and Benedictions in the Pulpit until about 78.

But now you Johnathan say that the Men of Barking ought to receive the benefit
of your after Sermon-prayers and Benedictions at the Altar (after you have
bowed to it) and not from the Pulpit.

It will be now expected that you, that have thus exposed your self not only in
Loyal Mr. Thomson, but in your own Three single Sheets, and have exposed me
also to the World, when you had no just occasion (except in defense of an
Image.)

I say it will now be expected that you should give the World a Learned and
Good Account in Print of the whole Matter particularly, why your Conscience is
streighter Laced at London, than it is at Sandon, or else (Life, Doctrine,
Print, Pulpit Reading, Ceremonious Bowing, Critical time, lucky Minit, and all
Circumstances considered) you will come on, and go off the Printed State under
a Charactor and in the wildest Notion of the largest sized Latitudinarian of
any Clergyman in England.

In your Book of Fiery Apparition, etc. Page 4. you have these words, I could
have wished with all my Heart, that the thing had made no Noise abroad; I
believe by this time you do wish so with all your Heart, and Head, and Soul
also; thou wishest it had made no Noise, and yet you begin the Noise your self
with Two Pamphlets, before ever I Printed one word.

I find in the second Book, Page 4. more of your own Words being thus, And I
very well understand that Liberty of Conscience, and Liberty of the Press, are
things that have an unhappy Influence upon the whole Nation; and therefore as I
am no Friend (in the present wild Notion) to the one, so I should hardly have
been guilty of using the other, had there not been this Too just occasion for
it.

Just so I invert this Sentance of your own. If Clergymen will take Liberty of
Conscience in the Pulpit and Press to inveigh against me; why then I cannot
forbear being Guilty of using the Press, to tell the World how you Ring of
Sacrelidge about one vile Image: And I should never have Printed, had there not
been this too just occasion for it, which are also your own words. Pray God the
Protestant Religion and Church as it is now established by Law, never receive a
greater Bow in England, than my Burning an Image: God Almighty, who equally
hates Superstition and Sedition, blast the designs of all those on either hand
that tend to seek the Destruction of this true Protestant Church of England (as
it is now established by Law) especially those of her own Household, for I am an
enemy to all that go beyond (as well as to those that come short) of the Church
of England: For every step beyond, if it be a Superstitious step, it may
soonest of all be a Popish step, the rather because at this day, Romes Agents
are so ready to take Men by the Hand and Dance them into Romes Fopperies, with
the pleasant Song of welcome John Sanderson, welcome, welcome.

And then I will say, farwell John Sanderson, farwell, farewell.

I kept these Two Astonishments till at last in hopes I should have seen you
rectifying your mistakes in Print, one is your Text, Where no Law is, there is
no Transgression: Must you be taught by a Churchwarden that there is a Law,
(except you are agreed with some Papist who leave that Commandment out of their
Deacalogue?) you will one day find it in Exodus 20.3, 4. in these words, Thou
shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that
is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or the Waters under the Earth,
thou shall not Bow down to them, nor worship them, etc. Though you evade this
Image, by calling it a Figure, or Symbol, yet you may one Day be told this was
the likeness of something in Heaven, etc. Thus you bring down upon your own
Head, the Thunder of the Holy Penman in these Words, Her Prophets are light
and treacherous Persons: her Priests have polluted the Sanctuary, THEY HAVE
DONE VIOLENCE TO THE LAW, Zeph. 3.4. This might strike you Dead and Dumb, but
that you have quoted a Text for your shelter in the end of the next Verse, THE
UNJUST KNOWS NO SHAME.

But I wonder the less at you, seeing you are grown so dairingly Impudent, as
to add one Chapter more to God's Book than ever God made, which is my second
Astonishment, viz. in your Sham Indictment quasht, you end with a Text which
you say is in Zeph. 4.5. whereas there is but Three Chapters in Zeph. that ever
any Protestant Minister could find, however the words you may treasure up to
your own self, which are these, The unjust knows no shame; being suitably
proper to you that of mere Malice, and without any Provocation by me given you,
or without ever before or since speaking one word friendly to me about it, or
inquiring whether things were so or no, yet you have premeditatedly and falsely
represented the Matter of first Sessions, as I have laid open in my first Book,
which the Reader must peruse as well as this Second Part, else the whole Matter
will not be understood; thus when Lecturers venture to Print things they hear
in a Tavern, or Alchouse, or Coffe-house, how do they sham themselves? and how
great a Fire does a little spark kindle, when a Lecturer has the kindling? O
these Seditious Lecturers made the Fire blaze devilishly, when they had the
blowing of it in 41.

Now I have waded through a Two Years troublesome Office, it must stir up heat
in a Stone, to see an unserious Lecturer concern himself to reflect upon me in
Print: but what I have said might make this READINGDON OF THE BOOK blush if he
had any shame.

But what new fangled Company do thou keep, that has taught thee to stretch
and hale and pull Gods Book out a whole Chapter longer than it was made, a ^an
may perceive thou art one will not shrink, but rather run out in the wetting: for
no Body will think thou kept's such a dry Gizzard long, as to believe thou
were dry at Heart when you wrote it: But it may prove at last of good use, and
serve for the best Answer you can think of; for though you cannot plead Non est
factum (at least a privity to all Three Pamphlets) yet you may plead, Non
compos Mantis, or some such other Plea as may bring you within benefit of the
Clergy; and for you (...) so much as* remember what Room, or what Company, no,
nor so much as what Tavern you were in when any of those Three Pamphlets were
wrote; and so drop the Cudgels, and let the Liquor run through the Stage one
way, and the Lecturer off another way: and so for this time end all our
grumbling with this merry Jig, while You and I sing the Tune thus, UNTIL YOU
ANSWER IN PRINT.

This Dance it will no farther go,
Pray good Sir, why say you so?
Because the Parson will not come too;
He must come too, and he shall come too, whether he will or no.
Else all, all the World will point at you, and sing, Farewell John Sanderson,
farewell, farwell. And you will be hissed at by every Porter of London, and pist
at by every Boy of Sandon; they will say there goes the silence Minister; not
silenced by his Bishop, but by his Quoudam Churchwarden.

You must excuse me from running so much upon Ridicule, for if I did not do so
(upon occasion of an Image) all that know me, would not think it my own. But
let the Reader Observe, I did not begin with the Lecturer, but he with me; I do
but defend my self from being Pope Gregorv's Ass: and which is worse from being
Priest-ridden: nor I don't, condemn Pope Gregory's Opinion, that by Oxen were
meant the Clergy: so let it be with his Popish Clergy; I only Comment upon his
Unholiness's Opinion: and say that Oxen are Creatures not of Gods making; for
God made only (Male and Female) Cowes and Bulls, but Oxen are only the
Manufacture of some cunning Sow-Gelder: But Lecturers sure must have been some
busy Factious Canundrum invention, ab Origin, because they were thought so
Seditious in 41.41. And may not we say of them, Parsons we know, and Vicars we
know, but who are ye? Perhaps you will answer, as in Matthew. 23.23. We are those
that tithe Mint, Annise, and Cummin; (which give me leave to call uninjoin'd
Ceremonies) and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law:

I pray the Reader further to observe, that I intend not to Ridicule any thing
that the Law directs; for I really press Comformity to the Law, but when I find
Pulpits as well as Prints vent Vanity and Froth; I cannot forbear giving you a
Trantrum or two.

Preach no more against them that scoff at thy Ministers; for I scoff at none
but those that Print false Pamphlets, and rail in the Pulpit, only upon
occasion of a silly Image: And it cannot be thought a suitable Answer to you,
if I do not blow off your Froth with a little blustering and seeming vanity of
my own; and so I add this one pania Brochia more: Why, talk now no more of
Ludere cum Sanctis,
Nor Bow to no Saint, but the goodly St. Francis;
Then Disciples you will have to dance to your Lure;
But I Bulkin at Barking who can endure?


Now according to our Lectorian new up-start way of writing Pamphlets, to begin
with one Text and end with another, which I am afraid is an Old trick Revived
from 41.41. but to show I am an apt Scholar, I Will give you two for one.

YE WORSHIP YE KNOW NOT WHAT, John 4. 22. AND IF THE BLIND LEAD THE BLIND, BOTH
SHALL FALL INTO THE DITCH, Matthew. 15.14.
And so once more you are bid farewell, farewell, by him whom you have Thrice
Pamphleted EDMUND SHERMAN.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Have Penned my Matter as it occurred to my Memory, I hope the honest Reader
will excuse some Tautologies, and not having made every Paragraph hang so
suitably together as I might have done: Confider I am but a Layman; I declare
again, that none of the Drolling part is intended against any thing enjoined by
Law, but only to Droll at the Singularity of a Lecturers new Practices of
Ceremonies, not used by himself for about Sixteen Years after the Act of
Uniformly was made, and now enlightened by a pretended Conscience at London, and
yet contradicted by his own practice at Sandon; therefore let my Drolling part
shift for it self; and it will be Commendably done if the Lecturer can without
Drolling or Railing answer more Learnedly and fully Satisfactory to the World:
which he can never do, except he

1. First gathers up the Stress of every thing I have urged and charged upon
him as well in my first Book, as in this Second Part also, relating to the
Altar Services both before and after Sermon; and his Bowing just at the Altar
and no place else in the Church: And he must prove our Communion Table stands
as it ought by Law to do; and, whether we can hear or not, yet he is bound to
say those Services just there where it is.

2. He must give a Reason why he never said these Second Services, and after
Sermon-Services at the Altar, before St. Michael was set there; and prove this
Image an Ornament to the Commandments, and my Burning it Sacrilege: else why
is all this Noise?

3. He cannot answer any thing to the purpose until he has reconciled the
Practice of the Lecturer of Barking, to the practice of the Parson of Sandon,
that the World may know which of them is the Schismatic, or Nonconformist: At
him Johnathan of London, too him Saunders of Barking, and when you two have
agreed, then too him all ye Eight Thousand, at them (stoutly) single Mr.
Saunders.

4. Though Prayers may be better heard from the Desk or Body of the Church, yet
you must affirm, that they cannot be legally performed except at the Altar; but
have a care your Assertions don't contradict the Act of Uniformity, and your
Practice thwart both.

The Reader may Observe that I do positively limit the Beginning of these Altar
Services to about An. 78. though not so exactly to the very Day the Lords went
to the Tower; I would have no Reflections cast on the Parish of Barking, nor on
Clergymen in general, but particularly such as come to our Pulpit and Reflect
about this Image: Mr. Saunders has singled me out, and now I single out Mr.
Saunders: I will justify my Burning this Image, let him justify his Printing
against me for Burning it; and his Altar-Services and Bowings which occasioned
the Indictment and Noise: I desire the World to leave us a free Stage, and that
no Body would intermeddle, but let us Two Print out the Matter, with our own
Names Subscribed.

Now seeing Mr. Saunders does Bow, and so differs from Eight Thousand
Clergymen in England, by his Bowings, etc. it will be well for him, if he gets
himself to be one of the Number of the Seven Thousand that had not Bowed to the
Image of Baal, which I read of in Romans 11.4. But then he must tell the World in
Print, who he Bows unto, and why he Bows at all, and in that Place only; ^else
Men will turn upon him the Texts before quoted, Ye worship ye know not what. I
perceive that in all things, you are too Superstitions.



FINIS.
London, Printed the 10. of June, 1681. for Mr. Sherman the Author:

And Published by Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster row.


