Licensed and Published by Authority, September. 28. 1663.

THE INFALLIBILITY OF THE Holy Scripture ASSERTED, And the Pretended
INFALLIBILITY OF The Church of ROME REFUTED: In Answer to TWO PAPERS and TWO
TREATISES OF Father JOHNSON a ROMANIST, about the GROUND thereof.

By JOHN SHERMAN, D. D.

WHERETO ARE PREFIXED A Commendatory Epistle from the late Bishop of NORWICH:
AND, A Letter of Approbation from Dr. Tho. Pierce, wherein is given a Specimen
of Mr. Cressy's Misadventures against his SERMON.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Henry Eversden, at the Greyhound in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1664.

To his Worthy Friend, Mr. Samuel Tofte, entrusted with the publication of the
following Work; which the Author lived to Print, but not to Publish.
SIR,
HAving received, with your Letter, the learned Book you sent with it, I hasten
to pay you my thanks for both; and in answer to the former, have done to the
latter what you desired. You (I doubt not) will commend me for complying so
soon with so great a Stranger; But I have need of saying something to excuse my
Easiness to my self. And the All I have to say, is entirely this: That
notwithstanding you are a Gentleman I never yet saw, nor till your Letter came
to me, had ever heard of; yet Dr. Sherman was a person, whom having never seen,
I had heard of often. I often heard he had been one, who suffered many things
and well, for his King and Country; one in whom Learning and Religion had for
many years met, and had equal shares. To which I add, that he was one of those
Cambridge-men, of whom (before I was admitted into that University) I should
for many years together have had a very great Envy, (...), etc. Diod. Sic. lib.
1. (...). Thucyd. l 5.
but for my Reverence, and my Love, which were extremely much greater. For
methinks I stand affected toward Oxford and Cambridge as Thucydides did to
Athens and Poloponnesus, whereof the first was an unkind Mother, and the second
a loving Nurse. Thence was he fitted (more than others) for an Impartial
Historian of the War between both, because his Gratitude to the one, was as
prevalent with him, as his natural Affection unto the other.

Growing thus kind to Dr. Sherman, and somewhat yet the kinder to him (at least
the apter to express it this way) because he is not here in Being to thank me
for it, I read as much of his Discourses in Confutation of Father Johnson, as
would consist with my greater, though less acceptable, Employments. Perhaps I
read what I could read with as much eagerness and delight since I saw it
printed, as the most excellent Bishop Hall by a written Copy. And I am heartily
glad to see that extant in 63. which such an exemplary Prelate so much
commended to the public in 54. He has commended it indeed to so good a
purpose, and the work it self will so deservedly commend it self to All
Readers, (All I ^an who have the skill to compare and grasp it, as well as the
patience to read it through,) that should I say, how much I think it to be an
acute and a solid piece, I should consider my self too much, and the Book too
little.

Nothing pleases me more than the Condition of the Subject, on which the
Challenge of the Jesuit drew forth his Answer. For the point of Infallibility
must needs be one of the two Pillars, (whereof the Pope's pretended Headship or
Universal Pastorship is the other,) wherewith the Trumperies superstructed must
stand or fall. That as it was skilfully contrived by Father Johnson, to spend his
strength in securing that saving Error, [The Church of Rome cannot err,] as
giving excellent security to whatsoever other Errors his Church can own; and
under which, as an Asylum, the grossest Follies they can get by do live in
safety; so 'twas as happily resolved by Dr. Sherman (upon so good an Occasion
given) to show the Feebleness and defects even of that which does hold up the
Papal Grandeur; and cannot choose but be acknowledged even by men of both
sides, to be their first or their second most Helpful Engine.

This does bring into my mind, what I was told some years ago by Mr. Patrick
Carew (when newly come out of Italy, wherein from his childhood he had been
bred,) That having first been convinced by the little Treatise, which had been
penned on that point by his brother Falkland, That his belov^ Roman Church was
not unerrable; He could not hinder his own Discovery, how very grievously she
had erred. Nor by consequence could he hinder his own Conversion from a Church
still pretending to a privilege of not being able to be deceived, as soon as
he found 'twas even That, that had most deceived him. And truly, had I been
blessed but with a little of that leisure which some enjoy, whereby to have
written some Reply to Serenus Cress^, who pretending to confute, has escaped my
Sermon, and only fought like a Parthian, by certain dexterous Tergiversations,
though unlike a Parthian in point of mischief; neither denying, nor disproving,
but still evading my Citations, and taking very great care to obscure his own;
as well by making both the Greek and the Latin Fathers to hold their peace in
Greek and Latin, and only speak in such English as He affords them, as by
concealing both the Pages and the Editions of his Authors, for fear a
Protestant should have leisure and patience too, whereby to bring them to a
strict and a speedy Trial: I say, had I time to Refute his Book, which until
the other day I had not time enough to Read, (nor then quite through,) I should
not enlarge on any point with greater contentment to my Self, or greater hope
of convincing both Him and His, than That on which he hopes most to guard his
obstinacy by.

For (that I may touch on that Subject which the Reverend Dr. Sherman has
largely handled, so as to add to his Thoughts what I find uppermost in mine
own,) when the Romanists contend for the Church of Rome's being Infallible,
they mean by the Roman, the whole Church Catholic; and by the whole Church
Catholic, they Father Johason, p. 350.
mean as many as own the Pope for their Sovereign Pastor. This is called (by a
plainer phrase,) Father Cressy, p. 95.
The present Visible Church, to which (for all the General Councils) the last
Recourse is to be had. But why rather to the present than to the Primitive
Church? or why to the present Church Visible, rather than to the four first
General Councils? Even because (says Ibid.
Mr. Cressy) Universal Experience does demonstrate it impossible, that any
Writing can end a Debate between multitudes of persons interessed, and
therefore not impartial or indifferent. Thus still there is something, not only
fallible, but false, whereby a Romanist is to judge where to find
Infallibility; (for wheresoever That is, the last Recourse is to be made;)
Because an Experience as universal as that whereof Mr. Cressy speaks, does also
demonstrate it as impossible, That any present Church Visible (much less that
His) should put an end to a Debate between multitudes of persons, whose
Interest and Byasse is multifariously divided as well as They. Men must equally
agree (which they never will) first what is to be meant by the present Visible
Church; and after That, that she is Infallible; before she can possibly put an
end to all their Dissensions in their Debates.

But what does he mean by the present Church Visible? Does he mean all the
Churches that do submit unto the Pope as their Sovereign Pastor, either IN or
OUT of a General. Council? If the first, he must mean either a written or
speaking Council. If the former, Then he should not have distinguished it from
the present Church Visible, as here he does. Then there needed no more then
One, but That (by all means) must be a standing General Council, from the
beginning of the Church till the Day of Judgment. And then the Church was
never able to make her Members the better for her Infallibility, or to prove
she had such a privilege, by being able to put an End to a Debate between
Multitudes of different Interest and Judgment in several Nations, either
before the Nicaene Council, which was the first that was General; or since the
Council held at Trent, which they avow to be the last. But if he means only a
speaking Council, then he confesses that at present there is no such present
Visible Church, as can Infallibly put an end to the Debate above mentioned;
even because there is no such General Council. Which being so; where is the
boasted Infallibility? How shall we find or comprehend it? or how is any
Creature the wiser for it? And if he means (what was said in the second Branch
of my first Dilemma,) All the Churches that own the Pope as their Sovereign
Pastor, not in, but OUT of a General Council, Then the Pope in his Conclave, or
College of Cardinals, (which, by the way, is a Conventicle, though not a
Council, not Concilium, but Conciliabulum,) must be the sole, proper speaking
Judge, who can end such a Debate as before we spoke of; so that in Him, as in
her Head the present Visible Church does entirely lodge; at least in respect of
her Infallible Judgment; which none but the Pope (out of a Council) can have
or utter. But thus the Romanists Absurdities will be more shameful than
before. For the Pope may be an Heretic, if not an Heathen. Pope Marcellinus
was the first, and Pope Liberius the second. And there is no better arguing
than to the Aptitude from the Act. Nay, in some of the 30 Schisms which Onuphr.
in Chro. p. 50.
Onuphrius reckons up in the Church of Rome, (before the word Protestant was
ever heard of,) when two or three Popes did sit at once, 'twas even impossible
to determine, which Pope was the true, and which the false. The Councils of
Council. Constantiense praecipue congregatum extinguendi schismatis Causa, quis
esset verus Pontifex, vix agnoscebat. v. Hist. Council. a Paulo V. Edit. To. 4.
p. 127.
Constance and Statim illud in Controversiam venit, Number Synodus Pisana in Illos
potuerit animadvertere, cum eorum alteruter verus esset Pontifex, sed uter is
esset non constaret. ibid. p. Seqq.
Pisa (whereof the former, by the way, was a General Council, in the Catalogue
set forth by Pope Paulus Quintus,) were utterly at a Loss in their Debates of
this matter. From whence it follows unavoidably, that Mr. Cressy must not dare
to avow this last notion of The present Visible Church; as well because it is
not That, to which he dares say the last Recourse is to be had, as because she
can too easily declare her sense in another way, than as she was ever
represented by her Pastors out of all Nations, that is to say, by a General
Council, which yet the present visible Church can never do, says Mr. Cressy,
chap. 9. p. 95. But when I say, he must not dare to avow this last notion of
the present visible Church, to which he gives the last Recourse, and to which
he ascribes Infallibility: I mean, he must not for the future, not but that for
the present he dares to do it; Because he tells us expressly, p. 97. (and as
dogmatically too, as without al proof,) That the present Superiors living and
speaking must conclude all Controversies, their Interpretation of Scripture and
Fathers, their Testimony of Tradition, must more then put to silence all
contradiction of particular persons, or Churches; it must also subdue their
minds to an Assent, and this under the penalty of an Anathema, or cutting off
from the body of Christ.

This is said by Mr. Cressy concerning the living and speaking Judges of his
Church, Judges for the time being in every Age. Quite forgetting what he had
said not long before, ( p. 95.) That Reason, Inspiration, and Examples of
Primitive Fathers, must jointly make up the only Guide, which He affirms to be
Infallible. For, unless they all concur (as he had said before that, p. 93.)
together with the present visible Governors (to whom he there gives a judging
determining power) That which we take to be Reason, and Inspiration, and the
sense of the Primitive Church, may deceive and misguide us. Now besides that
this saying destroys the former, where no less was ascribed to the present
visible Superiors living and speaking, than here is attributed to all four
Requisites in conjunction; we know that Reason may be deceived, Inspiration be
counterfeit by some unclean spirit, (which fallible Reason must be the Judge
of) primitive Fathers subject to Error, and present Superiors much more than
Primitive: And, many fallible Guides can never make up one Infallible, any more
than many Planets can make one Sun, or many Acts of finite knowledge one true
omniscience. For as Mr. Cressy does confess, that Infallibility and
Omniscience, are incommunicable Attributes of God Himself, (p. 98.) so he
imply's a contradiction, when he says they are communicable to any creature,
such as is his present visible Church. And another Contradiction as bad, or
worse, when he says that a man, although of much Ignorance, may in a sort be
Omniscient within his sphere, (p. 99.) which is as if he should have said, That
a man may be able to have a knowledge of all things, because he may so know
them All, as to be Ignorant of some. But then, with the help of that (...), the
meanest man is as omniscient, as is his Roman Catholic Church; because (within
his determinate sphere) he must needs have a knowledge of All he knows; and of
more than she knows the Roman Church has no knowledge. So again when he would
show how a creature may be Infallible, though he had said that God Himself is
incommunicably such, (p. 98.) he has no better a (...), than an implicit
explication of an Affirmative by a Negative. The immutable God can preserve
mutable creatures from actual mutation; [ibid.] thereby implying, that the
Immutable cannot communicate his incommunicable Attribute of Immutability to
any creature, even because he cannot possibly perfect a creature into Himself.
But from actual mutation he can preserve any Creature, as well an Ignorant
single man, as a whole Church Catholic. Thus by endeavoring to uphold, Mr.
Cressy does thoroughly destroy his Doctrine: All he says coming to this, That
however God only is undeceivable, yet he is able to preserve his deceivable
creatures from being actually deceived. Sed quid hoc ad Iphicli Boves? The
Question is not, Whether God can preserve a Church from being actually in
error, (for so he can, and often does, particular Members of his Church,) But
whether de facto he has granted an Inerrability, or an Impossibility of
erring, unto that which they call the Roman Catholic Church. Not whether the
Church can be actually false in her opinions, but whether or no she is
Infallible, or exempted by God from the passive power of giving false Judgment
in points of Faith. Will Mr. Cressy so confound an Adjective in Bilis, with a
participle derived from the passive preterperfect Tense, as either to argue a
non actu ad non potentiam, or else to pass over from the one unto the other?
Will he argue that Adam before his fall was Impeccable, because he yet was
preserved from actual sin? or, that the Church was Infallible in the Apostles
own Times, because she was not erroneous until she was? He cannot sure be so
destitute either of Logic or Grammar skill. I think it rather his skill to
dissemble both; as finding no other way to dispute a whole Chapter for such a
Doctrine, unless he either begg's or forsakes the Question.

But now to give him more Advantage than he is mindful to give himself, when
he allows so great a privilege to the present Governors of the Church in every
Age, whom he will have to be the living and speaking Judges, to whom (without
contradiction) all particular Churches as well as persons, Ubi supra. p. 97.
must meekly yield up their Assent; Let us allow it to be his meaning, not that
These are undeceivable, but that God does still preserve them from being
actually deceived. Was not Pope Hildebrand himself the supreme speaking Judge,
when yet the Imperial. Statut. apud Goldast. Tom. 1. p. 74.
Council at Worms did set him out as a Brand of Hell? Conc. Constantien. A. D.
1414. Seff. 11. Edit. Bin. To. 7. 1036. Notorie criminosus de homicidio,
veneficio, pertin^x Haereticus, Simoniacus, contra Articulum de Resurrectione
mortuorum dogmatizavit. -- Et paulo superius, -- cum Uxore fratris sui and cum
sanctis moniatibus Incestum commisit p. 1035.
Was not John the 23. the supreme speaking Judge of Mr Cressy's then present
visible Church, when yet he openly denied the Immortality of the soul, and for
That (with other crimes) was condemned by the Council then held at Constance?
Were not John the 22. and Anastasius the 2. the supreme speaking Judges in
their several Times, who yet were both stigmatized for the Crime of Heresy?
Let Mr Cressy now speak like an honest man, Were such superiors as these, then
living and speaking, to conclude all controversies, to Interpret Scripture and
the Fathers, to put to silence all particular Churches, to subdue men's minds
to an Assent, and this under the penalty of their being cut off from the body
of Christ? Let him read his own dictates, p. 97. It will but little mend the
matter, to say, The Pope is but one, and that He spoke of All Superiors:
Because, besides that they may All have their Byasses and Errors as well as He,
in case they are all consulted with, (as they never are) It Is very evident that
the Pope (like the Sun among the Stars) is more than All in all Cases. The
greatest part of those Councils which they are pleased to call General, have
been indeed little better than the mere properties of their Popes: which that I
may not seem to say as one that loves to speak sharply, but rather as compelled
by their own Accounts of them, I shall here give an Instance in one or two.

In the last Lateran Council under Julius the 2. A brief Account of the last
Lateran Council.
and Leo the 10. The Holy Scriptures (at the first Session) are humbly laid
down at his Holinesses Feet; And, an Oath being administered, are formally
touched by the Officials. The Pope (in that Session) is called The Prince of all
the world; and (in the next) The Priest and King to be adored by all the
People, as being most like to God Himself. Accordingly (in the 3d) The Kingdom
of France by Pope Julius is subjected to an Interdict, and the Mart held at
Lions transferred to Geneva. The pragmatick Sanction is rescinded in the
fourth, for the improving of the Trade of Ecclesiastical Hucksters, the buying
and selling of Church-preferments. The Pope is asserted as Gods Lieutenant upon
Earth, though not of equal merits. (A very signal Condescension! and to be kept
in everlasting Remembrance! God is meekly acknowledged to be superior to the
Pope.) In the fifth Session, Julius dies, Ne sleveris Fi^ia Sion (ut Ep sco^^us
M^d usiensis affatur Papam, q^ia Ecce ve^^t Leo de Tribu Juda, Radix David.
^cce Tibi suscitavit Deus Salvatorem etc. Te, Leo B^atissime, Salvatorem
expectamus, Te Liberatorem v^nturum speravimus. Council. Lateran. ult. Sess. 6.
Bin. To. 9 p. 74.
(another great Condescension!) And Leo his Successor is saluted, as no less
than the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David, the Savior and
Deliverer that was to come. (A pretty clinch, but a blasphemous complement, and
unworthy a Bishop's mouth.) In the eighth and ninth Sessions, This Lion Roars;
first against them that shall violate his Decrees in the present Council, to
whom he threatens such a Sentence of Excommunication, as none but Himself could
absolve them from. Next against the Emperor, Kings, and Princes, whom he
charge not to hinder such as were coming to the Council under the penalty of
incurring God's Displeasure and his own In the last of those two Sessions,
Divinae Maj statis tuae conspectus, vutilanti cujus fulgore imbecilles oculi
mei caligant, etc. Et paulo post, In Te uno legitimo Christi and Dei Vicario,
p^opheticum illud debuerit ^u^sus impleri, Adorabunt cum omnes Reges Terrae,
omnes Gentes servient ci. Ibid. Sess. 9. p. 114, 116.
Antonius Puccius tells Leo, how his Eyes are darkened by the rutilant
Brightness of his Divine Majesty. -- in him alone as the Vicar of God and of
Christ, That saying of the Prophet ought again to have its completion, All the
Kings of the Earth shall come and worship, All the Nations under Heaven shall
do him service. In a word, throughout the whole Council, nothing is carried by
counsel or consultation of Assessors, (for Assistants I cannot call them,)
nothing by suffrages or votes from them that make it wear, the name of a
General Council; But, the supreme present Judge (to use the phrase of Mr.
Cressy) as an Infallible Dictator, ordained All. This is constantly the Preface
to each Decree in That Council, Leo Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, ad
perpetuam rei memoriam, approbante Concilio, etc.

So again in their last and best beloved General Council, Of the Council at
Trent.
All the Fathers do but prepare convenient matter for Decrees, whereunto the
Pope's Fiat does give the life. Their two and twenty years contrivances do end
at last in Humiliter petimus nomine dicti Concilii oecumenici Tridemini, ut
Sanctitas vestra dignetur confirmare omnia and singula, etc. Edit. Bin. Tom. 9.
p. 442.
meek Petition, That his Holiness will vouchsafe to confirm what they had done;
that is, to inform the lifeless matters they had prepared; which could not have
the nature and force of Articles or Decrees, until the Pope had breathed on
them the Breath of Life. So a little before That, Si in his recipiendis aliqua
Difficult as ariatur, aut aliqua incideri^t quae Declarationem aut Finitionem
postulent, -- confidit sancta Synodu^ Pon ificem curaturum -- etc. viderit
expedire -- etc. Si necessarium judicaverit, etc. Si ei visum fuerit, etc.
Ibid. p. 434.
The General Council does humbly hope, That if any Difficulty arise in the
receiving of the Canons, or if any things Doubtful shall require a Definition,
or Declaration, His Holiness will provide for the Necessities of the Provinces,
for the Glory of God, and the Tranquillity of the Church, either by calling a
General Council, if He shall judge it to be needful, or by committing the
Business to such as He shall think fit to do it, or by what way soever He shall
judge more commodious. All, upon the matter, both is, and must be, as He
pleases; and when the Council is dissolved, He is himself Tantamount to a
General Council. Indeed much more. For the Council did but propose, But He
Apostolica Auctoritate declaramus and definimus p. 444.
declares and define's by Apostolical Authority. He Fidem sine ulla Dubitatione
haberi mandamus atque decernimus p. 443.
command's and decree's by somewhat more than Apostolical, That Faith without
any Doubting be had by all to his Creed; and all under the penalty of being cut
off from the Body of Christ; notwithstanding some part of his Creed is. Vide
Council. Trident. Edit. Bin. excus. Genev. A. D. 1612. Tom. 9. Sess. 4. p. 354.
This, That Apocryphal writings and mere Traditions concerning Faith as well as
Manners are by all to be received with as much Reverence and affection, as
things proceeding from God the Holy Ghost, or from the mouth of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Now if a Council (as the Lateran) does only Read a Decree in Fieri, And a Pope
(as the Tenth Leo) by saying Placet, does make it one in Facto esse; If a
Council cannot be current, unless it be called by the Pope, and by the Pope
praesided in; yea if nothing done in it, can pass for current, until the Pope
has approved of it, or until he has made it become Authentic by an Act of
his Will, or by a word of his Mouth; Mr. Cressy and Father Johnson who do so
earnestly contend for a subcoelestial Infallibility, cannot choose but believe
(if at all they believe as well as plead it) That its real Inhaerence is in the
Pope, and only said to be in the Council, because it does more become the
Error, and set it off to the People with better Grace. The Reason of what I
say, is very cogent in it self; and that it may be so to others, I thus
endeavor to make it plain. They say that Councils are not good or current,
unless approved of by the Pope. Nor does he give his Approbation until the
Council is at an end. His Approbation is after; and not before it. From whence
it is natural to Infer, That he approve's not of the Council, because
Infallibly good, and therefore current; (it would not then need his
Approbation:) But the Council is good and current, because He approve's it. And
why should That be said, unless because He is Infallible with them that say it?
Thus (I say) it is to Them, not Thus in it self. For then there would follow
this other Absurdity, That if The Council has erred, it is because the Pope
has not approved it. For let him but approve, and It has not erred, because
it has every thing required to its Infallibility. If not, let them speak; for
I argue only ad homines, and (out of very great charity) try to make them
ashamed with their own Devices.

Now (to speak a gross Truth,) The Approbation of a Council, when a Council
has done with its Consultations, cannot possibly have the virtue to effect
that such a Council shall not have erred. For if it has erred, it is
erroneous, though He approve's it. If not, it is orthodox, though He reject's
it. The Emperors who called the first and truest General Councils, did either
not care for, or not expect his Approbation. Yet Those were the Councils,
either not erring at all, or at least the least erring of any other.

But let us yield Mr. Cressy yet more Advantage, and suppose him only to mean,
what once he says, (for he says so many things, that he seems to have many,
and those contradictory, meanings,) Chapter 9. p. 95. Sect. 7.
A Church represented by her Pastors out of All Nations, which Pastors out of
All Nations make a Concilia Generalia dicuntur ea, quibus interesse possunt and
debent Episcopi totius Orbis, (nisi legitime impediantur) and quibus nemo recte
praesidet nisi Summus Pontifex, aut alius ejus nomine. Inde enim dicuntur
Oecumenica, id est, Orbis Totius Terrae Concilia. Bellarm. Controv. Tom. 1. l.
1. de Council. c. 4. p. 1096.
General Council; And that This only is the Church, to which he ascribes
Infallibility. To which I answer, by two Degrees. First, by observing that he
takes for granted what is false. For there was never such a Council, as to
which All Nations did send their Pastors, and by consequence The Church was
never so Represented; and by consequence never Infallible, if She can only be
Infallible when so Represented, to wit, by the Pastors of All Nations that have
Christian Churches in them. For, the first four General Councils were not such
in that sense; And only were called Ecumenical, not for Bellarmine's Reason,
but because they consisted of all the Pastors who were sent from Those Nations
which made up all the Roman Empire, (...). Council. Chalced. Act. 1. Bin. To. 3.
p. 50.
whose Emperors by a figure were called the Masters of the world. Beyond the
limits of the Empire, None of those, or after- Councils, did ever reach. None
went thither out of Persia, India, the Inmost Arabia, and Aethiopia, wherein
the Churches were never subject to the Roman Empire; Nor yet out of Britain,
France, and Spain, when being parted from the Empire, They became the Peculiar
of other Princes. And as the Empire grew scanty, so the Councils in proportion
did grow less General. Whose Greatness is to be measured not by the number of
the Bishops, but by the multitude of the Churches, and by the Greatness of the
Regions from which they come. But since the Bishops of Rome, with other Rights
of the Roman Empire, have invaded This also, of calling and praesiding in
General Councils, they have been only called General, for being a Confluence of
Pastors out of all the Papal Empire. And therefore, according to Mr Cressy,
They could not possibly be Infallible, because not such, as to which All
Nations did send their Pastors.

Next I answer by observing, that the learned Romanists cannot agree about
the Nature or Number of General Councils. For, first as to the Nature, The
General Councils of the Romanists are Quaedam sunt ab Apostolica sede app
obata, atque ab Eccl^sia universa recepta, quaedam omni^o reprobata quaedam
partim reprobata partim approbata, quaedam nec approbata, nec reprobata.
Bellarm. ubi supra. p. 1097.
thus divided by themselves! Some (say they) are approved by the Sea
Apostolical and received by the Catholic Church. 2 Some are absolutely
reprobated. 3 Some are reprobated in part, and in part approved. 4 Some are
neither reprobated, nor approved, Now since each of these sorts is said by
Romanists to be General, and General Councils in the general are also said by
the same to be Infallible; What do they but say in effect and substance, The
Church represented in General Councils is either absolutely Infallible, as in
the first species of Geral Councils) or altogether fallible, (as in the
second;) or partly Infallible, and partly fallible, (as in the third); or
neither fallible, nor infallible, (as in the fourth.) If General Councils
cannot err, Why do they reprobate, or doubt any of them? If they have
sufficient reason both to reprobate some, and to doubt of others, Why do they
call p. 1105, 1107, 1109. Et inde constat, locutum esse Bellarminum ex
sententia sua, quia sic claudit Partitionem. Quod membrum postremum in
Conciliis particularibus potissimum locum habet. p. 1097. Ergo membra priora in
Generalibus, ut and postremum aliquatenus, etiamsi non potissia um.
General Councils? or, if General Councils can be doubted of at all, and that
by Them, by what Infallible Token shall they know, either that the Councils are
truly General and Genuine; or at least, that being such, they are Infallible?
Of Bellarmine's 18 General Councils, which are his first and best species, he
proves the Approvedness and validity by the Pope's praesiding in, or approving
of them. His General proof is but this, [They are approved of by the Pope, and
received by Papists.] And what is this but to beg the Question? The first 8
Councils he proves to be such, by the Did. 16. Can. sancta octo. apud Gratian.
p. 60, 61.
Decree of the Pope. The Nine that follow he proves to be approved, Because the
Pope praesided in them. And the last was confirmed by Plus Quartus. So that a
Council's (...) is derived from the Pope, and depend's upon his Pleasure. But
now of those 18. there is a very great difference. For the first four only were
received and revered by Gregory the Great, as were the four Gratian. Decret.
par. 1. Did. 5. Hac spectat Epist. Vigilii Papae ad Eu^ychium, apud Council.
Edit. Bin. To. 8. p. 593.
Gospels of Jesus Christ. Which Reverence would have been due to the other
fourteen, had they been of as great Authority; as they needs must have been,
had all been aequally Infallible, in their opinion who own them All. And yet
the later Councils had been more valid than the former, if it is not A^sque
Romani Pontificis Authoritate Synodum aliquibus congregare non licet. Ibid.
Did. 17.
lawful to call a Council, without the Authority of the Pope, as Marcellus his
Decretal affirm's it is not. Secondly for the number of their approved General
Councils, I see not how it can be agreed. For besides that the Council. Florent.
Sess. 5, and 6.
Greeks receive no more than the first seven, The Magdeburg. Cent. 8. c. 9. and
Cent. 9. c. 9.
Lutherans but six, The Eutychians in Africa no more than three, The Nestorians
in the East no more than two, and the Polonian Trinitarians no more than one,
(which Difference is acknowledged by Bellarmine Himself,): I say, besides This,
I wonder when Bellarmine will be ever agreed with Pope Paul the fifth. The
former rejecting the Council at Constance from the number of the Approved,
which yet the V. Council. Genesis a Paulo V. Edit. Tom. 4.
Later does admit of with equal Reverence. It was reprobated indeed by a worse
than it self, to wit the Council at Florence next following after; But for
decreeing that a Council was above the Pope, for which it ought to have been
approved. And abating those things which consist not with the Haughtiness (but
the just Dignity) of the Popes, It is as generally received as any other. Yet
we need no better Argument to prove such a Council above a Pope, and the gross
fallibility of both together, than an Historical Account of That one Council,
as we find it set down by Pope Paul the fifth. The Third at Constantinople,
which is commonly reckoned the sixth General Council, was by the 14th at
Toledo, Can. 7. esteemed the Fifth. Implying the former under Vigilius, not to
have been one of the General Councils, which yet with other Councils does pass
for such without Question. And so much for the number of general Councils.

Last of all, let Mr. Cressy be allowed to mean at the most Advantage, That his
General Councils are said to be Infallible, not because they cannot, but do not
err; for so he most improperly, but yet most kindly help's out himself, Socrat.
Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 8. Sozomen. l. 1. c. 23. Niceph. l. 8. c. 19.
chap. 9. p. 98. But does he not think it was an Error in the first Council of
Nice, (as in the third of Constantinople) to assent to Paphnutius his (...) and
patronizing the marriage of Priests, as both Socrates, and Sozomen, and the
Roman Did. 32. Can. Nicen. V. Council. Constantin. III. Can. 13. Council. Elib.
can. 36.
Decree do alike affirm? At least the Council of Eliberis (which was
contemporary with That) Mr. Cressy will say was in an Error, for declaring it
unlawful, to paint in the windows or walls of Churches, Council. Nicen. 2. Act
4. Council. Constant. quartum decrevit cundem Imaginum cultum Edit. Bin. Tom. 7.
p. 1046.
what is the object of Adoration. And so much the rather will he believe it to
be an Error, because the second Nicene general Council, decreed that Images are
to be worshiped, and denounced an Anathema to all that doubt the Truth of it.
Does he not think it was an Error in the Council of Chalcedon, Council. Chalced.
Act. 15. Can 28. Qui Canon genuinus est, non obstante B^nii subterfugio Pudendo.
to Decree unto the Bishop of Constantinople, even in Causes Ecclesiastical, an
aequality of privileges with the Bishop of Rome? Or does he not think it was an
Error in the Council. Constantinop III. Act. 13. Vide Notas in vitam Honor. Edit
Bin. Tom. 4 p. 572.
sixth General Council, to condemn Pope Honorius as a Monothelite, and to
decree that his Name should be razed out of the Church's Diptychs; (...) etc.
Council. Florent. Definit. Edit. Bin. To. 8. p. 854.
seeing another General Council, since held at Florence, has defined the Pope
to be the High Priest over all the world, the Successor of St. Peter, Christ's
Lieutenant, The Head of the Church, The Father and Teacher of all Christians,
and one to whom in St. Peter our Lord Jesus Christ did deliver a full Power, as
well to GOVERN, as to feed the Universal Church? And did accordingly
exauctorate the Council at Constance, for seating a Council above a Pope? Or is
it not thought by Mr Cressy, that This Florentine Council was in an Error, in
Granting the Roman Church a Power of adding to the Creed, which the General
Council of Chalcedon had forbidden to be done under the Penalty of a Curse? as
was ibid. Sess. 5. p. 593.
observed and urged by Pope Vigilius Himself, to Eutychius the Patriarch of
Constantinople? Let Mr. Cressy but compare the sixth General Council (whose
famous Canons were made in Trullo,) with the Tridentine Canons, and the General
practice of his Church. And sure I am, He will acknowledge that the one or the
other has foully erred. It was decreed in the sixth, (...), etc. Conc.
Constant. III. Can. 13. To. 5. p. 326. Edit. Bin. To. 5. p. 326.
That married men without scruple should be admitted into the Priesthood, and
this without any condition of abstaining thence-forwards from cohabitation,
lest men should seem to offer Contumely unto God's holy Institution Yea (which
is most to be observed) This was a Canon made professedly (...), etc. -- (...),
etc. ibid. p. 325, 326.
against the Canon of the Church of Rome, whereunto is confronted the ancient
Canon, which is there said to be of Apostolical Perfection. Here the Doctrine
and Practice of the Church of Rome is condemned by a Council, which is owned to
be General by the same Church of Rome. The Church of Rome is also condemned by
the same Ibid. p. 338.
General Council (in its 55 Canon,) and commanded to conform to the 65 Canon of
the Apostles (from which they had scandalously departed) under two great
Poenalties therein expressed. To all which if I shall add, How the 8th General
Council made a peremptory Decree, (...). Council. Constant. IV. Act. 9. Can. 3
Edit. Bin. Tom. 7. p. 977.
That the Image of Christ is to be worshiped as the Gospel of God, That
whosoever adore's it not, shall never see his Face at his second coming, (never
at least by their Goodwill,) That the Pictures of Angels and all the Saints are
in like manner to be adored, And that all who think otherwise are to be
Anathematized; I hope Mr. Cressy and Father Johnson are not such Lovers of
Idolatry and Contradiction, as not to know and to acknowledge the Fallibility
of their Church in a general Council. And as, on the one side, Their steadfast
Belief That She cannot err, is enough to confirm them in all their Errors; So,
to convince them on the other side of that one Error, will make them ready both
to see, and renounce the Rest. That it may seem to be a vain, or a needless
Thing, for any man to be lavish of Time, or Labor, in a particular Ventilation
of other controverted Points, whilst This of Infallibility remain's untouched,
or undecided. For if we show them the Absurdities of Bread and Wine being
transmuted into the Body and Blood of Christ; or of being so transmuted into
Human Flesh and Blood, as to retain both the Color, Touch and Taste, and all
other Adjuncts of Bread and Wine; or of its so beginning now to be (in the Act
of Consecration) the numerical Body of a crucified Jesus, as to have been the
very same under Pontius Pilate, as well as in the Virgin's Womb; or of its
beginning to be as often, and of as many several Ages, as the Priests at their
Altars shall please to make it; or of its being the same Body, whether eaten by
a Christian, or by a Dog: They will defend themselves with This, That though
it is absurd and impossible, yet it is necessarily true, because it is taught by
That Church which cannot deceive or be deceived. Whereas, if once we can
convince them that she is able to be deceived, who had taught them to believe
she is undeceivable, (and that in matters of greatest moment,) They cannot
choose but disapprove and forsake her too, as the greatest Deceiver in all the
world.

Thus I have done what you desired, if not as amply, or as well, yet at least
as my Time (or my want of Time rather) would give me leave. Had I the Tithe of
that Leisure I once enjoyed, I might have long ago replied to Mr. Cressy's
whole Book, which I can hardly now say I have wholly read. Nor indeed do I
intend to consider more of it then here I have; partly because I am informed
that the whole is undertaken by other men; partly, becaule I am prohibited both
by mine Enemies and my Friends, (though in several senses, and to several
ends); but chiefly, because I am forbidden by less-dispensable Employments. For
although I must confess, I think the Task very easy, and such as has nothing
in it of difficult, besides the length, which Mr. Cressy's Misadventures would
make unavoidable, upon so many and ample subjects, (so as his strength does
chiefly lie in the number and nature of his Infirmities, which nakedly to
observe, were to write a Just Volume) yet supposing a Camel already loaded with
the maximum quod sic that his back will bear, the Addition of a Feather may
serve to break it. Some may think me Insufficient, others Indulgent to my Ease,
(and I am as careless, as they unkind.) But I have Witnesses to my Comfort,
both within, and without me, And God above is my Witness too, That I have
little or no Time either to read or write Books, but what I rob Nature of, even
by stealing it from my Sleep. Which being as needful as the Oil whereby the
Lamp is kept burning, my Light of Life cannot choose but be very Dim, and by
many such Night-works would be extinguish't I know, there are who would teach
me, how to live without sleeping, (as Hierocles his Scholar taught his Horse a
Thing like it;) But they must pardon mye Refusal to put such a Trick into
frequent practice, the very learning of which is enough to kill me. Yet Sir,
you see I was resolved to watch a Night in His Service, in whom The vigilant D^
Sherman is fallen asleep. And now it would be high Time to bid you heartily Good
Night, but that I see it begin's to be Bright Morning. And the same Gallicinium
which calls up others to their Labor, does more significantly bid me make
haste to rest

Your Real Servant and Fellow Servants in our one great Master JESUS CHRIST,
Tho. Pierce.
M. C. Sept. 7. 1663.
To the Reader.
READER,
WHo can do that for us as to tell us what every Scholar should do? It is easy
to know what they should do Morally; they should mind the good of the Church,
not dicendo pluraliter: but the question or quest is, what they should do in
way of Scholastical employment, as such.

It is true, in Nature, Vnumquodque est propter suam operationem, Every thing
is for its proper Operation; but what then shall they do who are good for
nothing? Shall they do nothing? No. It is yet, it may be, good for them to do
Optimum quod sic. Only engage in Controversies they should not.

Neither did I ever intend to dip a pen in that ink, which is for those who
can dip their pen (...), in understanding, as he said; such as have for it a
body, books, an head, an heart too: I think I can do the less, because I think
so, -- possunt quia posse videntur.

The Case therefore is thus,

A paper was brought by a Roman Catholic to a Lady then in Norwich, for an
Answer; She sent for me then there, wished me to Peruse it and Answer it; I
shrunk my shoulders; she urged; I took it or undertook it, returned soon a
short Answer; He replied, I rejoyned: He then sent me a Treatise; I sent an
Answer to it; He sent another Treatise; I began an answer to that: but before I
had done, He had done in the Poets phrase, (...).

This the Narrative.

And now have I more work, to satisfy some Demands. And the first is, Why I
was somewhat long in answering the second Treatise?

To this I can say, First, that it might have been longer ere I had Answered
the first, because a Treatise; Then length is answerable to length. And also I
do freely Confess that as I have too much of this (...), which unfits me for
Speech; so have I too little of that (...), which should fit me for Expedition:
Neither could I ever closely apply my self to this vast and voluminous Learning
which others pretend to; but have been a rambler (if not at my Book yet) from
my Book, upon the saddle, the seat of Health as he called it. And besides, I
have had other work in the Church. Moreover, though others upon the 5. of
November did preach, yet I was a good while in durance for preaching upon the
5. of November.

A second demand is this, why I should publish the papers? To this may I say
with St. Basil, (...) but it seemed, an Answer was looked for; the party from
whom it came, dead; the cause public; the first paper an Interpretative
Challenge; some of his party have vaunted of a Conquest; some have wished the
Papers abroad; I had power over my own papers, which could not go out without
his; It is somewhat ingenuous to give some account of our time out of the
College, though those who took our places should also in reason have taken
these pains. And lastly, advised I was hereunto by two Bishops of Famous
memory, who saw part of the papers. One of them the late Bishop of Norwich;
whose Life indeed was not so short as his Style: But since his Style was so
smooth and sweet that he might be said to have written his own Life in it, What
use might he have been of now, if God had pleased? The other the late Bishop of
Exeter, who was: (...); who wanted nothing to make us happy now, but life; who
was (...). And the former of these gave me his Letter for my Encouragement.

A third Question then, why so long ere they came out. To this may be Answered,
that though they might have come out sooner, they were, it seems, reserved for
better times. Sunt haec Trajani tempora, in Tacitus's sense. A Discourse of
Faith, keeps now some time with the Defender of the Faith. And very good time
it is for others who have been true to their King, to show that they have not
been false to Religion; and that they have not leered, as some have suspected
them, toward the Vatican. And yet also this is not very probable, Ex natura
rei: for if Kings would think upon it, there might be no Popes; since if Popes
could well help it, there should be no Kings.

But this also can I affirm, that the Tract of years, since it was done, has
not altered or swelled the Book by one word in the body of it; though somewhat
might have been mended and somewhat might have been added.

And if yet great exception be taken at the Book, because it is so great; I
must say, that I know who could have prevented this: For if my Adversary would
have spared the Debate about the Faith of the Canon, he needed not to have
blotted so much paper about the Question in Effect, such as this, whether the
Objectum quod might be the Objectum quo, or the Medium of its own Knowledge.
And yet it may be, he has gotten nothing by it; since the Church without
Scripture, signifies little.

Me thinks if the understanding in its assent were a natural Subject to the
will, it would not be improper for me to say, that I would believe much for
Peace, in reverence to that of Saint Basil, (...) but since the understanding
looks for Divine Conviction in this Act, we must have it, as to Faith Divine
from God, either in the Proposition, or in the Conclusion.

And therefore I desire to study Truth impartially, neither rejecting all that
is said, lest I reject that which is true; nor receiving all that is said, lest
I receive that which is false; and I should be Disposed rather to like the
matter for truth, than truth for the matter of it: Because otherwise, we love
truth but (...), and not upon its own account, as such.

So that if this their Infallibility (pretended) were either proved or quitted,
we might rejoice in more hope of Peace to Christendom. If it were sufficiently
proved, we should presently yield; if it were quitted, they might possibly
yield. And I would the Pope would turn Patriarch again but until it be Proved,
and thank God for the Nicene (...), and no more.

To my Adversary, if I have showed my self at all uncivil, I am very sorry for
it: and what unhandsome Reflections there are made by him (if any) upon me, I
put up upon good account. If the pen at any time makes a disorderly sally out
unto a perstriction of the person, it is a Liberty which I had rather give than
take. And his Papers are as well, and as whole printed as mine, and I am glad
that they are printed in the same character, which is not usual.

And if I have made in mine any blots (as very likely I have) about Isidor
Clarius, or any other Author, or Matter, I am very ready to acknowledge it; it
being not in my way to pretend to infallibility; nor my mind to affect the
Reputation of him that was denominated (...).

It is enough to me to have given any hints to others for better use. If I have
found any smooth stone out of the Brook of Scripture, Let some able Pastor of
the Church throw it at that Roman Goliath; and let it sink into his Head; and
let Saint Jerome's Sword cut off not his Head, but his Headship. My inability
yet will do me this good, that it does strongly prove their Infallibility not
to be good; which such a Punie of the Church can go near to discompose and
ruffle.

Toward an Epistle this sufficient; since I think my self not worthy to give
any advice. Only by my experience I may remind thee, that it is time for us to
knit the vein again of the Spouse of Christ, in the breach whereof our
Adversaries do so much triumph. This Ulysses would have, believe it thou can
not serve God more, nor the Roman better.

-- Scissura domestica turbat
Rem populi, titubatque foris quod dissidet intus.
And I wish that by the light of this conflict thou might see that the Roman
and the Sectarie are both upon the Extremes; and that the Church of England, as
to Religion and Government, goes, (...)

So then, Reader, since my Adversary has also appealed unto thee, unto thee
let him go. As he in his Rhetoriques. l. 1. (...)

Thy servant in Christ, our good Master Sh.

A Letter to his friend.
WORTHY SIR,
I Have with much eagerness and delight run over your solemical discourse, in
answer to an interpretative kind of Challenge made by a confident, but close
adversary; whose wit I cannot but commend, as in hiding his name, so in picking
out so fit a time for the scattering of his insinuating papers; when our so
lamentable distractions yield him so favorable an advantage; So have we known
ill neighbors take opportunity of their pilfring, when the house is on fire:
So did the crafty Amalekite fall upon the hind most of Israel, when they were
faint, feeble, and tired with their travel. Although herein he has made a good
amends, and merited our thanks, in that his bold intimations have drawn you
forth into the light, and fetched from you this your abundantly satisfactory
Answer for his full Conviction, and the settling of unstable minds in this
busy Controversy. Certainly, there is not a greater Imposture in all Rome,
then in the name and plea of the Church; as our Learned Bishop Morton has long
since laid it out, or that wins more of weak and injudicious souls: For what a
short cut is here of all controversies in Religion? what a sure-seeming refuge
for the soul? what a present and sensible Eviction of all gainsayers? The
Catholic Church cannot err; The Roman Church is the Catholic; The Dictates
of that Church are as evident as infallible; The Scriptures are ambiguous; The
Church is clear and conspicuous; we know where Rome stands; In the communion of
that only is salvation; Out of that Ark we drown; within it is perfect safety:
May this be made good, Who would trouble his heart or his head with any further
disquisition of truth? Who need to care for any other spiritual privilege,
then to be free of Rome? O easy security of our Faith! O cheap charter of
assured Salvation! Whiles these plausible impostors go thus about to flatter
their ignorant, and credulous Clients into a dangerous, if not deadly,
misbelief, putting this broken reed into their hands; you have thus seasonably
discovered, and checked their fraud, and clearly shown to these simple and
mis-taught souls, how unsafe it is for them to trust to so crazie and perilous
a supportation, which must needs in stead of easing, wound them. I shall
therefore hereupon expect much good issue from this your well bestowed labor:
Why should not this your so convictive discourse work effectually upon an
ingenuous adversary, to win him to the acknowledgement of so well-manifested a
truth? and settle those wavering minds, which seemed to be a little shaken with
so strongly-confident suggestions, and prevent the danger of seducement in
those poor souls, whose simplicity exposes them to the subtle temptations of
misguidance into error. Such blessing of success I wish to your learned, and
charitable work, and to your self, (who have ever approved your self so well
deserving and pious a son of the Church of England) some better encouragement
then these times have yet afforded either to you, or to

Higham, April 8. 1654. Your unfainedly devoted friend, and fellow laborer in
the work of the Lord, JOS. HALL, B. N.

POSITION.
IT is not sufficient (to make one a Catholic in point of faith) that he
believe the same things which the Catholic Church believes, unless the
Catholic Church be also the Ground of his belief: for whosoever does believe
any point upon no other Ground, but only because it seems to his private
Judgment to be contained in Scripture, or to be in it self true, yea though he
should believe in this manner every thing which the Church believes, yet he
would not be a Catholic, and so may be damned for want of faith.

And the Reason is, because seeing that faith is, to believe a thing because
God reveals it, and that there is no infallible way (without a Miracle)
whereby God his Revelation comes to us, but only by the Churches Proposition;
it follows, that we cannot believe any thing certainly upon the Motive of God
his Revelation, unless our belief be likewise grounded upon the Churches
Proposition.

Wherefore the faith of a Catholic must consist in submitting his
understanding, and adhering to the Church, and in believing every thing because
she proposes it: for all other persuasions of our own discourse are resolved
at last into our particular Judgments, or else into the Judgments of other
particular Men; and so cannot breed in us Catholic and divine faith; but only
Opinion, or humane belief.

ANSWER.
THe Paper may be resolved into a Supposition, and a Reason, and a Conclusion.
To these in order.

It is not sufficient to make one a Catholic, that he believe the same things
that a Catholic does believe, unless the Catholic Church be the Ground also
of his belief, etc. (as in the Amplification of it.)

This Supposition is indeed the main Position of the Pontificians, and that
which is formally Constitutive of them in that Denomination; so that the Answer
to it is not made as to a private Opinion, or the Opinion of a private Man, but
as to the General Tenet of their Church, in the matter of it.

In the Terms, the word Catholic is to be distinguished: for if they mean
thereby such an one as they account a Catholic, viz. one subject to the Church
of Rome upon its own Authority, It is very true, that None is such a Catholic;
but he that shall render his belief to them in all things upon this their
Proposal; and so whatsoever is the Material Object of their faith, yet the
Formal Object is the Definition of the Church of Rome. But if there be a true
Sense, upon ancient Account also, of a Catholic who does not believe Articles
of faith upon the Proposal of the Church; then there may be (in a true sense) a
Catholic now, who does not make the Church the last Resolutive of faith: For
where the Scripture was acknowledged the Rule of Faith and Manners also, there
the Authority of the Church was not the Determinative thereof: And that it was,
will be made good, if it be desired, by several Testimonies.

Roman will not gain his purpose thereby, unless we would grant this
Supposition also, That the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church, which indeed
is meant in the Paper, though wisely not expressed. But this supposition (that
the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church) is not to be yielded, neither in
regard of Comprehension, for that makes a contradiction; nor in regard of
Dominion neither, for other Churches have not submitted themselves to their
Authority: this needs no disproof from us, till it has a proof from them.

And thirdly, If we should stand up to all that their

The Reason has in it somewhat true, somewhat false: True, that faith is, to
believe a thing because God reveals it: False, that there is no Infallible
way (without a Miracle) of his Revelation coming to us, but by their Church
(which they suppose to be the Church) its Proposition. For if the question be
This, how shall we come to know whether the Church of Rome be the right Church,
upon the Authority whereof we must ground our faith? Wherein shall we terminate
our belief hereof? In the Authority of the Church of Rome, or not? We are to
believe that (they say) which God has revealed; but the Cause of our belief
must be, because the Church proposes it. So then, we must believe the Church
of Rome upon her own testimony; and we must resolve all into this, that the
Church of Rome is the right Church, although it be neither a Revelation, nor a
natural Principle, such as this, that The Whole is greater then the Part; which
indeed gave the Occasion of that Check which was given to Rome, Greater is the
Authority of the world, then of a City, Orbis, quam Urbis. [S. Jerome. in Ep. ad
Evagrium.] Wherefore, if the faith of a Catholic must consist in submitting
his understanding, and adhering to the Church, and in believing every thing
because she proposes it, (as is said in the Conclusion) yet it is not
necessary that this Church should be the Church of Rome: For this (in
proportion) would be to resolve our Persuasions into the Judgment of particular
Men, because a Particular Church; which (according to the Paper) makes no
Catholic faith, but an Opinion, or humane belief.

REPLY.
IN the Paper received, the Position which I gave, It is not sufficient, etc.
is disliked, because it makes the Catholic Church the Ground of our belief;
but in truth I find no reason given for such dislike, or any thing said against
it, but what to me seems very strange, and is this: If there be a true sense,
upon ancient account also, of a Catholic, who does not believe Articles of
faith upon the Proposal of the Church, etc.

To which I answer, that I would fain know, what Catholic upon ancient
Account, did not believe Articles of faith upon the Proposal of the Church; or
indeed, how can I account him a Catholic (without a palpable Contradiction)
that does not believe the Catholic Church?

S. Iren. ( l. 3. c. 4.) says, We ought not to seek among others the truth
which we may easily take and receive from the Church, seeing that the Apostles
have most fully laid up in her (as into a rich Treasure-house, or place where
the Depositum of the Church is kept) all things which are of truth; that every
man that will, may take out of her the drink of life. For this is the Entrance
of life, but all the rest are Thieves and Robbers: for which cause they are
verily to be avoided. But those things which are of the Church, are with great
diligence to be loved, and the tradition of truth is to be received.

And the said Iren. ( l. 1. c. 3.) tells us, that the Church keeps with
most sincere diligence the Apostles faith, and that which they preached.

S. Cypr. (Ep. ad Cornel.) avoucheth, that the Church always holds that
which she first knew. See also his Ep. 69. ad Florentium.

And S. Aug. had so great an Estimation of the Church, that he sticked not to
say (cont. Ep. Manich. quam vocant Fundamentum, c. 5.) I would not believe the
Gospel, except the Authority of the Church did move me thereunto. Moreover,
disputing against Cresconius concerning the baptism of Heretics (l. 1. cont.
Cresc.) he uses this discourse, Although of this (that the baptism of
Heretics is true baptism) there be no certain Example brought forth out of the
Canonical Scriptures, yet also in this we keep the truth of the said
Scriptures, when as we do that which now has pleased the whole Church, which
the Authority of the Scriptures themselves does commend: That because the
Scripture can not deceive, whosoever does fear lest that he be deceived through
the Obscurity of this question, may ask Counsel touching it of the Church, whom
without any doubt the Scripture it self does show.

The same S. Aug. ( l. 4. de Trin. c. 6.) says, No lover of peace will be
against the Church.

And (Ep. 118. c. 5.) he plainly terms it, Most insolent madness, to dispute
against that which the whole Church holds.

I will insist no longer upon the Testimony of the Fathers (of which I might
pour a whole shower against you) lest I receive the ordinary Answer, that this
their Opinion was one of their Navi, Spots, or Blemishes, and therefore shall
be rejected; but will ^^ge your own Authors and Protestants, to whom perhaps
you will give more Credit.

Calvin ( upon Esaias) expounding the words of the 59 Chap. My Spirit which is in
thee, and my words which I have put in thy Mouth, shall not depart from thy
Mouth, and from the Mouth of thy Seed and of thy Seeds Seed, says our Lord,
from henceforward and for ever, says, He promises that the Church shall never
be deprived of this inestimable good, but that it shall always be governed by
the holy Ghost, and supported with heavenly doctrine.

Again soon after, The Promise is such, that the Lord will so assist the Church
and have such care of her, that he will never suffer her to be deprived of true
doctrine.

And his Scholar Beza ( de haeret. a Civili Magistratu puniendis p. 69.)
confesses, that the Promise of our Savior of the Assistance of the holy
Ghost, was not made only to the Apostles, but rather to the whole Church.

D. Saravia ( in defens. tract. de div. Ministr. gradib. p. 8.) says, The holy
Spirit which bears rule in the Church, is the true Interpreter of Scriptures:
from him therefore is to be fetched the true Interpretation: and since he
cannot be contrary to himself, who ruled the Primitive Church, and governed the
same by Bishops, those now to reject, is not, certes consonant to Verity.

Our Lutheran Adversaries of Wittenberg ( Harm. of Confess. Sect. 10. p. 332,
333. Confess. Witten. Art. 30. not only confess the Church, to have Authority
to bear witness of the holy Scripture, and to interpret the same; but also
affirm, that She has received from her husband Christ a certain Rule (to wit,
the Prophetical and Apostolical preaching) confirmed by Miracles from heaven,
according unto the which she is bound to interpret those places of Scripture
which seem to be obscure, and to judge of doctrines.

Field also (l. 4. c. 19, and 20. Sect. The Second) acknowledges in the Church
a Rule of faith descending by tradition from the Apostles, according unto which
he will have the Scriptures expounded.

And we cannot doubt, but that she has followed this Rule, having such
Assistance from Gods holy Spirit.

Furthermore, the same Dr. Field (in the Epistle to his Treatise of the Church)
professes thus, Seeing the controversies of Religion are grown in number so
many and in Nature so Intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength
of understanding to examine them; What remains for Men desirous of
Satisfaction in things of such Consequence, but diligently to search out, which
among all the Societies of Men in the World, is that blessed Company of holy
Ones, that household of faith, that Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living
God, which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, that so they may embrace her
Communion, follow her directions, and rest in her Judgment?

For brevity, I will omit many other of our Adversaries, who are of the same
Mind, and will now press harder upon you.

Surely, if we believe the Creed, the Church is holy; if the Scripture, She is
the Spouse of our Savior without spot or wrinkle: which Eulogies, and, indeed,
glorious titles would nothing well become her, if she can teach us that which
is false.

This Scripture also gives us these known doctrines and directions, That the
Church is the Pillar and Ground of Truth (1 Timothy 3. v. 15, etc.) That the
Church is built upon a Rock, and the Gates of hell shall not prevail against
her ( Matthew. 16. v. 18.) He that will not hear the Church, let him be to thee
as the Heathen and the Publican ( Matthew. 18. v. 17.) He that hears you,
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me ( Luke 10. v. 16.) Lo, I
am with you even to the Consummation of the World ( Matthew. 28. v. 20.) I will
ask the father, and he will give you another Paraclete, that he may abide with
you, the Spirit of truth ( Jo. 14. v. 16.) And again, yet many things I have to
say unto you, but you cannot bear them now: but when the Spirit of truth
comes, he shall teach you all truth ( Jo. 16. v. 12, 13.) (to omit many other
the like passages is Scripture.)

Now this Church, whose Authority is thus warranted, did praecede the
Scripture, which for a great part thereof was written but upon Emergent
Occasions (as Field, Hook. Covel, and other our Adversaries have confessed)
which Occasions had they not been, perhaps we never had known this Scripture.

Suppose then we had lived in those times, when there had been no such
Scripture; (as many did, some part thereof being not written above sixty years
after our Saviors Ascension) Ought we not then to have believed the Churches
tradition and preached word? This Church was called the Pillar and Ground of
Truth, before the words were seen in writing: and the like I might say by the
other places before cited, which are now in the Scripture, but were delivered
by word of mouth to the Church, before ever they were written; by all which
places the Authority of the Church is commended to us, and we referred to the
said Church, as a Guide in all our doubts: And all these words of God were no
less to be believed and obeyed before they were written then since.

Even the Scripture it self is believed upon the Tradition and Authority of the
Church (being part of the Credenda it proposes) nor could we at this day have
known which books were true (now Canonical) which Spurious, but by the Churches
decision and Proposal (as the said learned Mr. Hooker, and other our
Adversaries do acknowledge.)

Again, who does not ground his belief upon the Church, upon what does he
ground it, but upon his own fancy, or private Interpretation of Scripture, the
true Sourse and Nurce of all Heresy? And such as these may indeed be found upon
ancient Account, as Helvidius, Vigilantius, and the rest of Heretics, as the
Catholic Church did then account them.

Now to that which is insinuated, That the Scripture was sometime acknowledged
the Rule of Faith and Manners, it is answered, that it is so now; but this does
no way hinder the Churches being the Ground of our Belief: for the Church is
both the Ground of our believing the Scripture, and also the Interpreter of
Scripture (as is above confessed by our Adversaries) and not private Spirit,
which I can esteem no better then a fantastical, if not a fanatical Opinion;
and is Diametrically opposite to the words of the second of St. Peter, (1.20.)
No prophecy of Scripture is made by private interpretation.

And all this spoken here, and in the Position, etc. of the Church, is meant of
such a Church, as does truly deserve the name of Catholic; and so it will
appear, that all the discourse in this paper I received of the Roman Church,
considered as a Particular Church, or any other Particular Church, is but
Impertinent and Extravagant.

Now also I must assure the Answerer, that the Pontificians do not make the
Church of Rome the formal Object of their Faith (as he does impose upon them)
for they acknowledge that to be the Revelation of God, or the authority of God
revealing, which causes their Belief to the Supernatural and Divine, and not
(only) Natural and Humane; as is the Belief that there is such a City as Rome,
or that there is a William the Conqueror, etc. which kind of faith is All that
Heretics have, and All such as do not ground their Belief upon the Authority
of the Church.

I cannot also but observe in the received paper, that it is improperly enough
called Excess of faith (as it is there opposed to want of faith) to believe
more then Necessary: for the Number of things believed does not alter the
Nature of faith it self.

And lastly, I must tax him of false alleging the words in the Reason, thus,
there is no infallible way (without a Miracle) of his (Gods) Revelation coming
to us, but by their Church, whereas in the Paper delivered, it is the Church
(abstracting from all Particular Churches, and meaning the true Church, which
soever it is.)

And this is done, but to make way for that needless Excursion which there
follows.

THE REJOINDER.
SIR,
THere is no great reason for me to rejoyn:

First, because you wave the Application of your Discourse, as to the Roman
Church; which is not ordinary for those of your Profession when they speak
highly of the Catholic Church.

Secondly, Because I may let you alone to answer the first paper with your
second, as to the main of it.

Thirdly, Because the greatest part of it has one fault, not to conclude
contradictorily.

Yet in Christian respects to Truth and You, I shall endeavor meekly some
return to your Reply, and (to differ as little as may be from you) I shall
mostly follow your own Order.

In the beginning you dislike my dislike of the ground of Faith without giving
you any Reason.

Answer, I intended my answer as near as I could guess to the design of your
paper for the Roman Church; by Obedience to the Bishop whereof Bellarmine in
his Catechism Englished, p. 65. 6, 7. does describe the Catholic Church. You
will excuse me then if I took the course to make my answer compendiously
sufficient to that drift, if you will hold with Papists herein. And if you
would confess, you meant the Roman Church by the Catholic, then I have given
you such a Reason against your Position as you will say nothing to. And you may
consider that you directed your paper as to a Protestant, who is not
contradistinguished to a Catholic, but to a Papist; if you be a Papist why
do you dissemble it to me? If you be not, why do we dispute? And this Apology
may be enough also to refute all your Objections against me, of impertinencies,
and excursions, and untrue Allegations, if you will take notice also of my
Parenthesis.

And now my Reason intimated in a promise shall be made good in performance.
And since you will in the question about the Catholic Church abstract from
the Roman and all other particulars, I shall give some account of Catholics,
who did not make the authority of the Catholic Church the ground and cause of
their Belief, whereby only God his Revelation comes to us infallibly (as you
express your self in your first paper,) but this Prerogative they ascribed to
the Holy Scripture to be it, wherein and whereby we are infallibly assured of
Gods Will, as to what we should believe and do in order to salvation. That the
authority of the Catholic Church is of use toward Faith, we deny not; but
the cause and ground of Faith, and that whereby we are infallibly ascertaind of
the mind of God, is not the Proposition of the Church, but the Word of God. And
such being the state of the question betwixt us, I shall, for your shower of
authorities you say you could power out against me, give you or show you a
cloud of witnesses (as the Apostle speaks Hebr. 12.1.) against you. Your shower
could not wet me through, but this cloud may direct you home.

This Doctrine of the Church of England concerning the Church and Scriptures
(as you may see by the 8.19, 20, 21. Articles, and therefore it is not my
Opinion) will appear not to be new, but agreeable to ancient Catholics, in
your own esteem.

The first shall be Saint Irenaeus. Have you appealed to Saint Irenaeus? unto
Saint Irenaeus shall you go. He in his third book first chapter; first words
thus; We have not known the disposing of our salvation by any other then those
by whom the Gospel came to us, which then indeed they preached, afterward
delivered it to us in the Scriptures, by the Will of God, to be the foundation
and pillar of our Faith. So he. Now that which is delivered in Scripture by the
Will of God to be the foundation and pillar of Faith, is the ground and cause
of our Faith. And such is the Gospel, according to this Testimony.

The next for us is Clemens Alexandrinus, in the seventh of his Stromata,
toward the end, in the 757. p. of the Greek and Latin Edition. He which is to
be believed by himself, reasonably is worthy to be believed by the Lords
Scripture and Voice, working by the Lord, inwardly to the benefit of men. So
he. Then according to him, the Holy Scripture is not worthy to be believed by
men, but men are worthy of belief by it. And therefore that must ground our
Faith, because it is it whereby we believe others. And therefore he says in
the following words, Surely we use it as the Criterium for finding out of
things. And therefore points are to be decided and determined by authority of
it; which is his chief discourse against Heretics even to the end of that
book. And if you please to peruse and consider it, you shall find there that in
his judgment the Catholic Church (which he also there commends) does not
conserve it self in that denomination by its own authority, but by the Rule of
Scripture. Now that which rules the whole rules the parts; the Scripture rules
the whole, then us.

So Origin upon Saint Matthew, Hom. 25. We ought not therefore for confirmation
of Doctrine to swear our own apprehensions, and to bring into witness those
which every one of us does understand and think to be according to Truth,
unless he shall show them to be holy out of that which is contained in the
Divine Scriptures, as in the certain Temples of God; what can be more to our
purpose? Then the Scripture is the Ground of Doctrines: then of Faith.

As for Athanasius, we need not his words, knowing his practice of holding the
equality of the Divine Nature, in the second Person, the Son of God, against
all the World. Yet he speaks, as he did, if you will look upon him about the
Incarnation of the Word, at the latter end: But then having taken occasion by
these, if thou will read the Divine Books, and wilt apply thy mind to them,
shall learn out of them more plainly and more perfectly, the truth of what we
have said. So he. Now where the Truth is learned more plainly and perfectly,
there is the ground of Truth. In the Divine writings is the truth of those
things more plainly and more perfectly learned.

After the same manner does Tertullian bring in his suffrage in his Book of
Praescriptions, a little after the beginning of it, thus, Do we prove the Faith
by the Persons, or prove the Persons by the Faith? And again, Faith consists in
the rule. You have the Law, and Salvation, by the observation of it. And soon
after, To know nothing against the rule, is to know all things. And again, That
which we are, the Scriptures were from the beginning, we are of them before it
was otherwise, before they were corrupted by you. So he, besides other passages
wherein he witnesses for us.

Saint Ambrose gives us also his voice, in his first Book to Gratian, chap. 4.
in the beginning, thus, But I will not that you believe an Argument, O holy
Emperor, and our disputation; let us ask the Scripture, let us ask the
Apostles, let us ask the Prophets. Then we are to be determined in our Belief
by the Scriptures.

Saint Cyprian also, (who for order of time should have been put before) gives
his verdict for us, in the beginning of his sixth Sermon, concerning the Lords
Prayer, thus, The Evangelical Precepts, most beloved Brethren, are nothing else
but the Divine Magisteries, the foundations of building, our Hope, the
firmaments of corroborating our Faith, the nutriments of chearing our heart,
the Gubernacles of directing our journey, the safegards of obtaining Salvation,
which, while they do instruct, the Docile minds of Believers upon Earth, bring
them to the Kingdom of Heaven. So the Father. Where you see the Scriptures are
asserted immediately to be the Ground and Firmanent of Faith.

Yea, neither does Saint Austin seem to speak only for your cause. In the
seventh Tome, in the third Chapter of the Unity of the Church, against the
Epistle of Petilianus, in the beginning he has these words, But as I began to
say, let us not hear these things I say, these things thou say, but let us
hear these things the Lord says. There are certainly the Books of the Lord,
whose authority we both consent unto, we both believe, we both are obedient to;
there let us seek our Church, there let us discuss our cause. And soon after,
Let those things be taken out of your way, which against one another we recite
not out of the Divine Canonical books, but otherwise. And soon after, Some may
ask why I would have these things taken out of the way, since if they brought
forth, your Communion is invincible; (he answers) because I would not have the
Church demonstrated by Humane Documents, but by Divine Oracles: and so to the
end of the Chapter, which he concludes thus; therefore let us seek it (the
Church) in the Holy Canonical Scriptures.

I have now made good my words, to give you Catholic Testimonies on our side.
Amongst which Saint Austins authority gives advantage to plant Arguments upon:
thus:

If in businesses of dispute we must hear what the Lord says, not what man
says, then the Scripture is the ground, not humane authority.

But let us not hear what I say or thou say (says the Father) but what the
Lord says. Again, Where we must seek the Church, there we must resolve our
Faith. But we must seek the Church in the Scriptures, as the Father says. If
the Church is to be proved by the Scriptures, then the Scriptures are the
ground of Faith, because they are the ground of the Church: there is no
resolution of Faith but in that which is indemonstrable; therefore not in the
Church, because that is demonstrated by the Scriptures, as he says. Again,
Divine Oracles are the ground of Faith: the Scriptures are the Divine Oracles,
as he says, as the Scripture says, as Saint Ignatius says, in his Epistle to
the Church of S^^yrna. Indeed the proper object of Faith Catholic is the Word
of God, not the Word of Man. And proportionable the cause of this Faith, must
be divine authority, not any authority of Man. As demonstrative reason makes
Science, so humane authority make Opinion: but Faith is an assent to that which
is spoken by God as true, because he speaks it: therefore the authority of
the Church is not a mean apt to beget Faith, because it is of another kind,
and cannot exceed the nature of humane authority, although it be the highest in
the kind, if it be represented in a lawful General Council. Yet even General
Councils have erred, and therefore they cannot he the Ground of Faith. This is
the prerogative of the Canonical books, as the Father and all Antiquity calls
them: but never did we hear of a Canonical Church. The Scripture is the Canon,
is the rule, not the Church. The Church witnesses Truth. The Church keeps
Truth. The Church defends Truth. The Church Representative in a Council,
determines Controversies authoritatively, not infallibly, and therefore binds
not unto Faith, but to Peace: not to Faith in the Conscience, but to Peace in
the Church; not affirmatively, that we should say it is true, because they say
it; but negatively, that we should not rashly oppose it, as false, because they
define it as true. Hitherto we go for the honor of the Church Catholic, not
Roman. And now I have given you some reason of our Faith.

It follows now in your Reply; or indeed how can I account him a Catholic
(without a palpable contradiction) that does not believe the Catholic Curch.

Answ. I say so too. But what from thence? To profess a belief that there is a
Catholic Church (whereof part is triumphant in Heaven, part on Earth
expectant) and to profess my self to belong to the Catholic Church, is not
inclusive of your sense, that the Catholic Church is the ground of our
belief. We believe the Catholic Church grounded in the Scripture, or built
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief Corner Stone, as Saint Paul speaks, Ephesians. 2.20.

Secondly, This is not to your purpose, because the Catholic Church, as it is
an object of Belief, must be considered as invisible; whereas you intend the
Church as visible, whose proposals we must receive and submit our understanding
unto. For the Invisible Church, or Church as Invisible, cannot order us in our
Belief, because, as such, it is not known to us.

I come now to your Testimonies.

And your first witness is Saint Irenaeus.

Answ. We yield all to Saint Irenaus, nothing to you. We say, we ought not to
seek amongst others the truth, which we may easily take and receive from the
Church, etc. Yes, because the Church is serviceable to the truth, by way of
Ministry to deliver the Word of Truth, to keep the Word of Truth, to uphold
the Word of Truth. And so we acknowledge the Church to be a sufficient Treasury
of Truth, because we have therein the Scriptures. But the Treasury does not
make the Money true nor current: for it is possible that there may be false
Money in the Treasury. Therefore we must not take it to be lawful, because it
comes out from thence: and so the Scripture is not made true to us, or the
sense of it evidently credible to us, because it is in the Church. But we must
look whose Image and Superscription the Doctrine has, and whether it be right
coin or not; and it may seem to be of the right stamp and yet not. Therefore
says Origin in his 34. Hom. upon Matthew. All Money, 1. Every word that has the
Royal stamp of God, and the Image of his Word upon it, is lawful. Therefore we
must bring it to the Word for trial. We confess we may take out of her the
drink of Life; yes, but as out of a cistern, such water as comes from the
Fountain, the Scripture: and we drink out of the Scripture the Water of Life,
as Tertullian in his Prescriptions. We deny not this to be the entrance of
Life, because we have here the means of grace administered.

And all without the Church we say are thieves and robbers, and they ought to
be avoided. Yes, All without the bosom of the Catholic Church, which would
break her Peace, and rob her Treasury, are as thieves and robbers, and ought to
be avoided. We grant that those things which are of the Church, as being true
from Scripture, in points of faith; or not repugnant to Scripture in things of
Discipline, are with great diligence to be loved. And we allow it, that the
tradition of Truth is to be received. Yes, thus, the tradition of Scripture,
the word of Truth, or the Truth delivered in writing; for so Tradition not
seldom signifies. Or tradition of Truth, which is according to Scripture, as
the Apostles Creed. Not that whatsoever is delivered should be Truth, (as you
would have it) but whatsoever Truth is delivered, should be received. This is
all that place as seems to me will afford.

Your second Testimony from the same Father, may it self answer the Objection
of the former, and may confirm my answer. Only let me add that he speaks of
the Church then purer then now. If you will have more said to this, you may
find it in Saint Cyprians authority, which you produce next.

The Church (Catholic) always holds, (not makes) that which she first
knew. Where? in Scripture. Where else? And where the Church holds that which it
thus knew, we hold with it, and are beholden to the Church for holding it forth
to us. The Church may inform us of it; but it does not certify it to us:
therefore does not infallibly conveigh it (the Truth) to us: therefore is not
the ground of Faith. The Office of the Church is as a Candlestick to hold the
Light of the Word of Truth. And moreover, though is did always hold that which
it knew, might it not also hold somewhat which she did not know? Though it did
hold that which was true, might it not hold that which was false in other
things? As the Church of Rome holds many things which are true (wherein we
differ not) and also many things false, wherein she exceeds the Catholic
Faith, as in regard of Object. Now put case therefore that that ancient Church
near the Apostles times did not hold any point false, but did hold Every point
true: yet even from hence nothing will be inferred sufficiently to your
purpose, unless you can prove that it was appointed by God to be the ground of
Faith by an impossibility of error in any particular. Such is to be the ground
of our Faith: which is wanting in the Church, not privatively, as if it had
been ever promised; but Negatively, because not promised to the Church after
the Apostles times. If it were possible that the Church might not err, yet
this would not make us rest our Faith in it. Faith has no sure footing in such
contingencies of Truth; unless you prove a non-possibility of erring, you do
nothing.

But we come now to the signal testimony of this kind, that of Saint Austin, I
would not believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the Church did move me.

To which I answer, First, if the testimonies of the other Fathers be defective
in clearness or fullness as to this matter, the testimony of one single Father
(though excellent) will not amount to the Verdict of the whole Church: and you
have no Fathers yet for you, for any thing I see.

Secondly, Take this passage by it self, and it seems to speak high, but
consider it with the tenor of his discourse in the whole chapter, and it is
like you will begin to think that it comes out from him in some heat of spirit
to overcome his adversary.

Thirdly, you will be pleased to give me leave to use a Criticisme, which
admitted according to the reasonableness of it, will somewhat change the
property of this suffrage. It appears by compare of places in African
writers, that (as is observed) their manner was to express the tense more then
past by the imperfect; and also that he in other places must so be understood.
And if so here, then it must refer to him as when he was a Manichee; he was
moved then, as such, by the authority of the Church to the embracing of the
Gospel. And so we grant that the authority of the Church does move to believe
the Scriptures. But this comes not to the case in hand, which is intended for
particular points of faith, whether we should ground our faith of them in the
Scripture, and not in the proposal of the Church. Neither is this an universal
way (as is pretended) of coming to the belief of the Scriptures by the
commendation of the Church: for some have been added to the Church immediately
from the word, as in the second of the Acts, at the preaching of Saint Peter;
as is noted.

And yet fourthly, mark the terms. It is not said I would not believe the
Gospel unless the authority of the Church did cause me, but unless the
authority of the Church did move me. And thus this Testimony does very well
agree with our Opinion. The authority of the Church might move him, although he
did ground his Faith in the Gospel. And this is illustrated by the Samaritanes
believing Christ through the testimony of the woman; but when they came to
Christ and saw him, They said unto the woman, we believe no more for thy
saying, for we have heard and seen that he indeed is the Savior of the world,
the Christ, John 4.42. So Saint Austin might be moved by the voice of the
Church to give an ear to the Truth of the Gospel and yet was settled in the
Belief of it from its self by the Spirit of God. When he did believe the
immediate cause of his Divine Faith was from the Gospel by the Spirit of God;
although before he did believe, he was moved to think well of the Gospel by the
authority of the Church; So he did not belive the Gospel by the authority of
the Church, as a Theological principle, but as an outward mean and help
thereunto. For the authority of the Church could not by its testimony of the
Gospel make it properly credible, because the testimony of the Church is to be
made true by it. And if it be not true in it self, then the testimony is false.
So that before we know whether the Gospel be true, we know not whether the
testimony of the Church be true. As also we cannot tell how to believe that the
Church should always give a true testimony (as you suppose) in every point,
but by the Scripture. And therefore there is no ground or rest for Faith, but
in the Scripture. Since, if we believe the Church because the Scripture gives
testimony of it, and then the Scripture because the Church gives testimony
thereof, we must first believe the Scripture before we believe the Church.
Therefore we must terminate our Faith in the Scripture, and if we do believe
it, believe it for it self; it being the first credible.

Fifthly, Look to the end of that chapter, and there, after he had disputed
subtly, he does conclude soberly, But God forbid that I should not believe
the Gospel, and then concludes against his Adversary from thence, (as the rule
of the difference betwixt them) for, Believing that (says he) I do not find
how to believe you, etc. And that the Scripture is the Rule he went by, you may
see in his 32. chapter against Cresconius, whether let me if you please refer
you for brevitie. None can overcome S. Austin, but S. Austin.

And therefore I need not say any thing to the second testimony, which is taken
out of him against Cresconius. Yet observe, Although of this there is no
example certainly brought forth out of the canonical Scriptures, yet also we
keep the Truth of the Holy Scriptures, in this when we do that which has
pleased the whole Church, says he, Namely in that which is not a ruled case in
Scripture, as the question was about the Truth of the Baptism of Heretics; It
seems then, if it had been determined in Scripture there had been an end of it,
that because the Holy Scripture cannot deceive, says he: And this property
absolute belongs to it, not to humanity. Whosoever does fear to be deceived by
the obscurity of the Question, may ask counsel touching it of the Church, whom
without doubt the Scripture it self, does show, says he. First here is an
obscure question about practice: so are not all points. Some are clear in
Scripture, and yet the Propsition is universal, that we must believe every
thing by the proposal of the Church, as if we must believe nothing but what the
Church defines: and whatsoever it does define, that we must believe.

Secondly, We should ask counsel only, which does not suppose an absolute
determination.

Thirdly, (which Church) the Scripture does without doubt show; then the Church
is to be proved by Scripture again. And without doubt does show, but does not
show to be always without doubt, and infallible.

Fourthly, he afterward goes about to prove it against him by testimonies out
of Scripture.

But, behold, yet again in a third Testimony of Saint Austin, No peaceable man
will be against the Church.

Answer, Saint Austin is again welcome, I say so too, and shall anon end with
the whole Sentence.

And yet once more in a fourth Testimony, Saint Austin. It is of most insolent
madness to dispute against that which the whole Church holds.

We answer, We say so too, in things of indifferency, which every particular
Church has power in for it self, and the Catholic Church for all. And yet
all Catholic practices are not now observed by the Church of Rome; as for one,
Infant Communion. But according to the Father, if the Authority of the
Scripture does prescribe, which of these is to be done, it is not to be doubted
that we should do so as we read. In such things then which are defined by
Scripture, we know what we should do intuitively to Scripture, without asking
counsel of the Church. As certainly I may believe that Jesus is the Christ,
that he that believes shall be saved, immediately out of Scripture, and not
upon the Churches proposal.

And now I have delivered you from your fear of my rejecting the Fathers.
Surely we should love the Fathers though they were our Enemies, and we have no
reason to fear them when they are our Friends. Therefore, if you please to give
me leave so far, let me say as Nilus the Archbishop of Thessalonica (as the
Book bears title) said, (in his first Book about the Primacy of the Pope, or
the difference between the Greek and Latin Churches) It is very unreasonable
that you who have not the Fathers for your examples, should of your selves
understand that which is better, and we who have the Fathers should not.

Afterward, in your Reply, you come to upbraid me with Devotion to modern men.
But this Belief of yours concerning me is not well grounded: we delight not our
selves in being Servants to Men in matters of Faith. What is true we like in
any, what is not true, we do not like in any. In Divine writings we take all,
for there we consider not so much what is said, as who says: in Humane
Writings we pick, for we consider not who speaks, but what is said agreeable
to the Scriptures. Therefore with them we deal, as Saint Austin with Saint
Cyprians authority, in the forenamed chapter against Cresc. What we find in
them which is agreeable to the Canonical Scripture, we receive with
commendation, what does not, with their leaves we leave.

But to make as short work with them as I can, I answer, first, as many
testimonies and more clear might be found in them against you, I hope if those
testimonies be for you, let one be set against the other. And if you say I
should be moved by them, because they are ours I answer. Secondly, If they
agree with the sense of the Fathers, you cannot condemn them: if they do not
agree, we do. Thirdly, It is possible to be Even with you in the same kind, by
a retaliation of Pontificians against you: But Fourthly, I could find in my
heart not to say a word to them, that you might see I do not give them that
respect, as to the Fathers. And yet, take the strength of all their authorities
together, and make of them an accumulative argument (as we may speak) yet they
do not conclude your cause. Calvin and his Scholar, in their sayings, affirm
no more then that which we acknowledge (not from them) that the Church shall by
the assistance of the Spirit, be sufficiently furnished with necessary Doctrine
unto Salvation, but those of the Church invisible may be saved, though the
Church visible be not Infallible, and by consequence not the ground of Faith.

As for Doctor Saravia's passage, I answer, it does not come up close to your
purpose. The H. G. which bears rule in the Church (objectively) is the true
Interpreter of Scripture: and thus it is not for you. And if you understand the
Church (objectively) yet first the matter he seems to speak to, is of
Discipline about Government of the Church, depending upon Primitive Example:
but we are upon points of Faith. Secondly, He cannot be contrary to himself,
when he acts as he did formerly in the time of the Apostles: but whether he
does so act now is a question, yea no question. Thirdly, If you will with him,
and from him, draw the Government of the Church to be proportionably Episcopal,
with all my heart. I reject them that reject it.

And your Adversaries of Wittenberg confess nothing for you. The rule (they
speak of) namely Prophetical, and Apostolical preaching, etc. it is the Word of
God written, according to which she is bound to interpret those places which
are obscure, and to judge of Doctrines, according to the rule which she has
received, so as her Interpretations are to be agreeable to the analogy of
Faith, and her judgments of Doctrines to be made according to the Law of the
Word: namely, harder places are to be expounded by those which are more plain,
and Controversies to be decided by that rule. And all this makes nothing for
you. For thus the Scripture is the Rule ruling, and the Church is but the Rule
ruled. And thus we follow the Church as the Church follows the rule, as Saint
Paul says, Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ, in the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, c. 11. v. 1.

Or if those Lutherans mean by a certain rule any rule distinguished from
Scripture; it is to be understood of some general heads of Christian Doctrine,
in proportion whereunto, doubtful places and Doctrines were to be judged. But
those heads were to be gathered out of Scripture. And so all is resolved
toward belief in Scripture, but I think no man can see how they should say
such a rule, which was not Scripture, was confirmed by miracles. So for them.

And for Doctor Field, if you will go through the twentieth chapter of the
fourth Book, you shall find nothing in him contrary to this Doctrine. For he
says plainly, that though the Canonical Books are received by way of
Tradition, yet the Scriptures have not their authority from the approbation of
the Church, but they win credit of themselves, and yield satisfaction to all
men of their Divine Truth: whence we judge that the Church which receives them
is led by the Spirit of God. Observe, not because the Church is led by the
Spirit of God, therefore does he say she receives them, but because she
receives them, therefore we judge she is led by the Spirit of God. And as for
his Rule of Faith descending by Tradition from the Apostles, what is he like to
mean but the Apostles Creed, which he says there, was delivered in the Church
as a Rule of her Faith? But even this binds not by authority of the Church, or
upon Virtue of Tradition, but by proportion to Scripture, where it is found in
particulars of matter, though not in form of a Creed. We confess also that we
should search out the true Church, as the same Doctor says. We confess that
the Catholic Church is the Household of Faith, the Spouse of Christ, the Church
of the Living God; and that we should embrace her Communion, and rest in her
judgment. Yes, but how? Not ultimately, not absolutely, not in what so ever
she says, because she says it: but in what so ever she says from the Lord.
For although she does go by an infallible Rule, yet are we not sure she goes
by it infallibly. Therefore, though we rest in her judgments as to Peace, yet
can we not rest in her judgments as to Truth: because our understandings are
not free to assent to what man will; as being bound to assent to that only
which is grounded in the Word of God in matters of Faith.

And now might I Vie with you in number of Pontificians against you. See Durand
in his Prologue upon the Sentences, where he has more to our purpose then is
necessary to be Transcribed. Read him your self: Gerson also in his Sermon
concerning Errors against Faith and Manners about the Precept, Thou shall not
kill; says thus, More freely, more purely, more truly, more speedily is Truth
found out, and Error reproved, if the Divine Law alone be constituted as
Judge; according to the consideration of Aristotle; He which makes the Law the
Judge, makes God: but he that adds Man, adds a Beast. Panormitanus also upon
the 5. of the Decret. concerning alms in chap. qualiter and quando, The saying
of any Saint established with the Authorities of the New or Old Testament is
preferred before a Papal Constitution, even in decision of Causes. Also Ferus
upon the 1 Epistle of Saint John, 2. chapter in the 52.3. page of the Antuerpe
Edition, thus; The Holy Ghost does teach it is by the means of the Holy Scripture
and Word. Again, The Holy Scripture is given to us as a certain sure Rule of
Christian Doctrine. And again in the same page, For if having the Holy
Scripture as a most certain Rule of Christian Doctrine set before our Eyes, we
notwithstanding, teach things so unlike, what would be done, if the Scriptures
were taken away? And if you say now that there is added to those places
Tradition, in the Roman Edition after the Trent Council, as is noted; You will
get nothing by that, but shame to the Pontificians.

And now, I think, I am not much behind hand with you in Testimonies about the
Question.

But then afterward you press harder upon me. So you say; but I do not yet
feel the weight of any thing you say. I believe the Creed, and that the Church
is Holy. And I do not believe, but know that from hence nothing is coming to
your cause. The Catholic Church makes not it self the ground of Faith, but is
grounded in it as before. And how were the first Members of the Catholic
Church made Christians, but by the Word of God? And from the Holiness of it
does not follow infallibility by the Roman distinction which says that the
Pope may err, as to his own person, but not in matters of Faith as to the
Church.

I believe that the Church is the Spouse of Christ, and that she is without
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, as to that part which is in Heaven, and
that the other part of the Church as invisible which is not yet in Heaven shall
be without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, when it comes up to Heaven. But
I do not believe that that Text is meant of the Church visible. For all here
glorious, or none: not all glorious here, therefore none. For you find it in
the Text, that it is to be presented as a glorious Church, namely as in the
whole. But you will not say, that every Member of the visible Church is here
glorious without spot, without wrinkle or any such thing.

If you do say so, you contradict Bellarmin in his third Book of the Militant
Church, the second chapter, who there includes in his Definition of the Church
visible, even Reprobates wicked and ungodly men; and requires there no internal
virtue for the constitution of a Member of the Church, but only an external
profession of Faith, and communion of Sacraments. And besides you know glory,
which is a perfection of Grace, does not belong to the way, but the Country in
Heaven. And besides, if you will not believe me in such an Exposition, believe
your Estius, who with In his Retractations, p. 9. Ed. Frob. but this Quotation
not added in my copy to him.
Saint Austin, understands it, upon good Reason of the Church invisible; as you
may see in Estius Comment upon the place. And here by the way we have another
Testimony of your own against you, if you account your Argument from this Text
sufficient to your cause. And we have St. Austins authority to boot, as Estius
quotes him. And moreover Holiness is no formal principle of our direction,
especially in points of Faith. It is Holy because it follows, and as it follows
the Rule, and so should we in faith and manners. And therefore if it were to be
understood of the Visible Church (as it is not) yet you conclude nothing for
your turn upon this consideration.

To hasten, the next Text is formerly urged, the Church the Pillar and Ground
of Truth. Yet squeeze it, and press it, and make the best use of it you can,
it will not afford your inference you would make from it.

For first, some, and also very reasonably, will refer this Expression not to
the Church, but to the Mystery of Godliness which follows; and so they make it
as an Hebrew form of setting out some high point and grand Doctrine; and then
it goes thus: A Pillar and Ground of Truth, and without Controversy, a great
Mystery of Godliness is this, (namely) God manifested in the flesh, etc. If so,
your interesse in it is sunk, and indeed the copulative, [And] (and without
Controversy) does not seem so well and so close to knit else. But it being
given, not granted, that that Criticisme is not sufficient, what of all that?
For Saint Irenaeus, as before, gives this Eulogy to the Scripture. The
Scripture gives it to the Church. Now to which does this property belong first
and absolutely? To the Scripture or to the Church? Not to the Church, for the
Church has it from the Scripture. Now that which has it first, has its
absolutely, and independently upon that which follows: therefore the Scripture
is the absolute Pillar and ground of Truth. Then there Faith has sure footing;
there it sits down, there it rests; on that Ground, upon that Pillar. The
Church then has this Title but subordinately; and what it says cannot bind,
but conditionately to that which is the absolute Ground and Pillar of Truth For
the Truth is the Pillar and Ground of the Church, as Saint Chysostome says
upon the place.

Take it then of the Catholic Church (not Roman) The Text does more set out
the Office of the Church, then the authority. It does hold, it does propose, it
does uphold the Truth; but this does not convince or evince, that whatsoever
the Church does hold, we should also hold, and upon that account also; as if
God had appointed the Church infallibly to conveigh to us whatsoever Truth; and
nothing but Truth. And therefore may we and ought we to search the Scriptures,
as our Sav^our speaks, John 5.39. and by them examine whatsoever the Church
says, as those of Beraea did, that which was said by Saint Paul, and they
commended for it.

And therefore we cannot believe the Definitions of the Church upon its own
word. Nay, can we also say, that God does now give unto the Church such
assistance, as then, which was noted before? and therefore we distinguish
times, not thinking there should be as much said of the Church now, as when it
included the Apostles; and therefore supposing that the Church then did hold
all that was true, and nothing contrary: yet we cannot say it of the Church
now, and therefore is not the cause of Faith, under whose authority it must
also pass, beside the Divine Revelation to make it Catholic. For the Church
is conserved by the Truth, as Estius also upon the place, then thus; where the
ground of the Catholic Church is, there is the ground of Catholic Faith:
The Scripture is the ground of the Catholic Church, unless it be conserved
by some other principle then by which it is constituted. And it is conserved by
the Truth, says he, and thy word is Truth, says our Savior, John 17.17. And
whereas he says, that the Truth sustaineth the Church, and the Church
sustaineth the Truth, and so one is the cause of the other; we answer, this is
not availeable for you. For in the same kind of cause it cannot be, for then
we are in a circle, but the Truth sustains the Church, so as to continue it in
its principles: the Church sustains the Truth but by way of ministry, which
does not make it to be a principle of Faith, no not to us.

Neither do the other Texts speak for you as you would have them. If the gates
of Hell shall not prevail against the Church, it does not follow that then
Catholic Faith must be built upon the proposalls of the Church. Nothing shall
prevail to the Condemnation of those, who belong to the Church of God, as
invisible, and nothing shall prevail, not the Gates of Hell, against the Church
visible, so as somewhere or other there shall not be some who shall profess
the Christian Doctrine and Worship sufficiently to salvation.

The next Text speaks toward Excommunication, which comes little into the
question: for the authority of the Church may proceed to Censure, although we
be not bound, upon peril of want of Faith to submit our understandings to the
definitions of the Church. As to the authority we may submit, so as to endure
the censure, though we do not submit our judgments, as to believe the
definitions.

As to the next place of Scripture, Luke 10.16. We say first, this seems not to
be rightly applied to the business we are about, for this was directed not to
the Governors of the Church, but to the seventy Disciples or Elders, which were
sent by Christ to preach the Word. Secondly, If you do extend it to the
Representative Church, yet does it not command subjection of judgment always,
to whatsoever is said; but not to despise them, as is intimated by what
follows, and he that despises you, despises me. We may differ without
despising. And Thirdly, If you will from hence argue, that whatsoever was
determined in a Council, was also determined by Christ, then Honorius was by
Christ determined an Heretic, as you may see in the practicks of the sixth
Ecumenical Synod, as Nilus in his second Book. And if you say that the Church
cannot err in a General Council, then resolve Nilus the reason why the Pope
does not hear a General Council; for if that General Council did not err, (as
by your argument it must not) then the Pope did err. As for the other places
of Holy Scripture, which you produce, of Christ's being with his Church to the
end of the world, and of his promise of leading his Church into all truth: We
answer together.

First, Though the promise be extendible to the end of the world, yet it is not
necessary to understand it, so, as that there shall always be equality of
assistance to the times of the Apostles, which is hard to affirm, since we
cannot say that there is such necessity for such assistance, or such
dispositions in the Governors of the Church to receive such assistance.

Secondly, The Promise is made good by a sufficient direction of the Church to
their end of happiness, although not without possibility of error. For every
simple error does not deprive the Church of Salvation, and then it may also
recover it self from error, by more perusal of the Scriptures. But if it may
at all err, it has not the property of a ground of Faith, nor a just capacity
of an Infallible communication of all things which are to be believed.

You go on. Now this Church, whose Authority is thus warranted, did precede the
Scriptures.

Answ. Warranted, as a Church, but not as so, not as Infallible.

Did precede the Scriptures, which for a great part were written upon emergent
occasions, as you say.

Answ. As for the writing of Scriptures, and the emergent occasions, you may be
further referred to Doctor Field, whom you made use of against me. Whatsoever
the occasion was, the end was to make what was written a sufficient rule of
Faith and Manners. And as for your objection and inference upon it: We answer
with a distinction; the Scripture is considerable two ways, either in respect
to the substance of Doctrine; or secondarily in respect to the manner of
delivery by writing: in the first regard the Scripture did precede the Church;
for the Church was begotten by it, which to them was as certain as the written
to us. And if you could make your Traditions, of proper name, equally certain,
you would say somewhat. And as for Scripture, that which is written does bind,
though it does not properly bind, as written.

You say that the Church was called the Pillar and ground of Truth before it
was written, and so you say might be said of other passages.

We answer, As that place expressed it does not appear to us that it was so
called, since first we find it in terms, in Saint Paul's Epistle. But if so, or
other like were used before; the answer before will serve.

By all which places the authority of the Church is commended to us, and we are
referred to the Church as a Guide in all our Doubts. So you say, and so we say,
Where is the Adversary? How does this conclude contradictorily? We confess
that the Authority of the Church is commended to us in Scripture; but not
directly in every place you name; nor in any is it so commended to us as to
ground our Faith. We confess we are referred to the Ministers for Direction;
and to the Governors for jurisdiction, yet are not the Latter Masters of our
Faith, unto whom we should be bound in a blind Obedience of Universal assent or
practice. We take their advice, but we are not by them determined in our Faith.
We may believe what they say, but not because they say it. As it is drawn from
Scripture, so it draws us. If they make it probable that it is so, because
they say it: yet it has not the certainty of Faith without the Word of God. I
should be very tender of incompliance with the judgment of the whole Church:
but yet I must have for my warrant of Faith, the Lord says, And although there
be no appeal from a General Council, yet have they no infallible judgment. You
proceed, even the Scripture it self is believed upon the Tradition and
authority of the Church.

Answer, This was touched before in the case of Saint Austin, and it is in
effect answered, as before, by Doctor Field.

Indeed we take the Canonical Books by Tradition from the Church: but we do
not take them to be Canonical by Tradition from the Church. The authority of
the Church moves me as to the Negative not to dissent: but assent is settled to
them as such in the way of Faith, because they are such. In thy Light we shall
see Light, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm 36.9. or by thy Light; so by Scripture
we see Scripture.

Next follows the Expostulation, which may be put into this discourse; Either
we ground our belief upon the Church, or upon our own fancy and private
Interpretation of Scripture, etc.

Answer, We deny your disjunction. We ground our belief, neither upon the
authority of the Church as you; nor upon fancy, neither as some have done who
have been better friends to Romans, then they have been to us, as Doctor
Whitaker told Campian upon a like imputation of Anabaptastical fancies.

We differ from you, because we allow to private Christians a judgment of
discretion, or discerning, which sure is commended in that precept, Prove all
things, in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians 5.21. We differ from those
who magnify their private interpretations, because we say they should be
directed by their Ministers, and ordered by the Bishops, the Pastors of the
Church, chiefly, when they are assembled in a General Council, wherein is the
highest power of Oyer and Terminer as we may speak, of hearing and ending
differences in the Church; yet we cannot say that we are absolutely bound unto
their Canons, we having the judgment of private discretion, and they not the
judgment of Infallibility. And if you cannot say that they are absolutely
without any doubt, but true; without doubt we can say that we should not
absolutely believe them. Every possible defect of certainty in the Object
excludes Faith; the certainty whereof admits no falsity. Therefore can we not
presently yield or assent to whatsoever is by them defined, because they may
err. As it was said of the Milesians, they were not fools, but they could do
foolish things: So though they be learned men, though great Divines, yet may
they possibly propose that which is not so. They reason points by the
Scripture: which was wont as is noted) to be laid in the middle, (when they
were in Council,) but since they go to discourse from Scripture in things
doubtful, and do not see all Conclusions in principles of Scripture by way of
Intelligence; it is possible for them not rightly to apply some principles of
Scripture to some particular cases. Therefore since they have not a power not
to err, we have a power to suspend our Faith; nay we cannot give it without
evidence of Truth. Yet since they have a power to order us, we have a Duty not.
to oppose or disturb. And thus this Doctrine makes way for Faith, not for
Heresy; since we may differ from the Opinions of the Church, even defined, and
yet not be Heretics; because the formality of the Heretic has it self in the
will, and wilful blindness is more apt to make Heretics then a sober
disquisition, which would know what it does believe. For Belief is not divided
against Knowledge, but Science.

Whereas you say afterward in your Reply, that the Scripture is the Rule of
Faith and Manners, and the Church the ground of our belief nevertheless;

I answer, I am very glad you confess that the Scripture is the Rule of Faith
and Manners. But this confession will destroy your Position, that the Church is
the ground of our belief, in your sense. For if that be our Rule Ruling, then
our belief is to be ruled by that. For as Clemens Alexandrinus in the 7. of his
Stromata, says in this matter, That Principle which needs another Principle,
is not a Principle: so that Rule which needs another Rule, how is it a Rule? Is
it an adaequate Rule or not? If so, then where are your Traditions? If not, how
a Rule of Faith and Manners? Is it sufficient or not? If sufficient, then what
necessity of your Proposal of the Church, especially for things necessary which
are plain? If not sufficient: then how a Rule of Faith and Manners? And if both
the Scripture and the Church be both Grounds of belief, then either coordinate
or subordinate. Not coordinate, for then the voice of the Church must be equal
to the Word of God, without the Word of God: and who then will be guilty of
the phanatical Spirit? If subordinate, then the principal ground makes the rest
of Faith. And when I know Gods Revelation in Scripture, what need I go to the
Church for authority or Interpretation? And besides where there is need of
Interpretation, although it does belong to the Church to interpret, yet cannot
we ground a belief in that interpretation, unless it did appear that the
Church does interpret infallibly: But this is not yet proved; and therefore your
reason is not valid. And if you say the Church cannot err, because it goes by
the expositions of the ancient Fathers, do but consider how hardly we can
settle and fix belief therein. For who has read them all? yea, how few know
them all? and who knows whether he that does know them and has read them all,
does give us a right account of them? who can exactly distinguish betwixt those
which are true, and those which are false? who can accurately discern of the
true Fathers, which pieces are true, which are foisted in? who can perfectly
judge all their idioms of speech? who can reconcile the differences betwixt one
and another? yea, who can compose the differences betwixt themselves?

And that Text which you produce of Saint Peter, will do you no good, for we do
not magnify private interpretations. We say private men should advise with the
Church: but are we sure that she has hit the right sense?

But as for the Text, it is impertinently produced, if it be rightly
interpreted, No Prophecy of Scripture is of private Declaration; and to this
effect the Syriack: No Prophetical solution is of private writing, was not
written by a private spirit, for so it best agrees with that which follows in
the last verse: for Prophecy was not brought to us at any time by the will of
Man, etc. And after the same manner does Cajetan comment upon the place; he
touches the difference between Sciences written, and Prophecies written, in
this regard, that a Learned Man teaches and writes according to his own
Interpretation, those things which do appear in the light of his Agent
intellect; but the Prophet does say and write those things which appear under
the light of Divine Revelation, not according to the interpretation of his own
judgment. So he. So then the Text relates to those who wrote Scripture, not to
those who should interpret it, being written. And besides, when private Mendo
interpret Scripture for themselves, they are not to interpret it by private
means, but by it self, comparing place with place, and discerning the sense of
that which is obscure, by that which is more plain. And if it be a passage that
is very obscure, and there be no other passage more clear to illustrate it; it
is not like to be a point, without the belief whereof there is no Salvation:
Well said the Greek Nilus, to accuse the Scripture is all one, as if one should
accuse God, but God is without blame.

It follows in your Reply, and all this spoken here, and in the position, etc.
of the Church, is meant of such a Church as does truly deserve the name of
Catholic.

Answ. This I said enough to at the beginning. But you seem to be very loath to
own the Church of Rome, and to avouch her, and yet you would seem to manage the
point, which they make much of, as they: as if you had some mind to be a true
Catholic abstractedly from Rome, and so indeed you may be in the ancient
sense, as they used it for those who were Orthodoxal. Yet for what Church you
reserve those great titles, and what Church, in your esteem, does deserve the
name of Catholic, I know not. You are very close in this. But let me now at
least conclude, that if the Catholic Church be not the ground of Faith in
your sense, surely the Roman is not.

And now all that I have to do, is to justify two expressions of mine, which
you are pleased to carp at.

The one is, that I said the Pontificians do hold the proposal of the Church of
Rome to be the formal object of their faith. You say that you must assure the
answerer that the Pontificians do not make the Church of Rome (in its proposal)
to be the formal object of their Faith (as he does impose upon them) for that
they acknowledge to be the Revelation of God, or the authority of God
revealing, which causes their Belief to be supernatural or Divine, etc.

Answ, I am glad my expression gave you occasion thus to express your self.
See how you now differ from your self. Before, the ground of Believing was the
authority of the Church: now the authority of God revealing the cause of their
belief. Before, you concluded, Faith consisted in submitting the understanding,
and adhering to the Church, and in believing every thing, because she proposes
it: now it is the authority of God revealing, which causes their faith to be
Divine. As for the term, thus; the formal object is such, under which, and in
respect whereunto, any thing proceeds; if then Gods Revelation comes not to
us under the Proposal of the Church, or as proposed by the Church, then the
cause is lost; if it does, then grant me my term, and affirm with me that the
Pontificians hold so. If not, they are better then you. And what means else
their implicit faith, unless we are to believe every thing as the Church
believes it (and because the Church proposes it as you said) and if we be to
believe every thing as the Church believe it, then is the Church the formal
object of their faith; since they are also bound not to doubt, but simply to
obey, as Bellarmine tells us in his fourth Book of the Roman Bishop, 5. chap.

The other term you find fault with is, excess of faith, You tax it as
improperly spoken: But surely it will pass without any Grain of Salt or of
allowance, if we consider that Faith may be compared as to a particular object,
and so there is not an Excess of Faith as to that: but then it may be compared
as to many objects, and so, though we do not more believe one thing then we
should, if we should indeed believe it, yet may we believe more then we should
If we believe those things which are not at all to be believed. And thus, if we
should believe whatsoever the Church of Rome proposes, we might be destroyed
for excess of Faith. The Church of Rome is peccant in excess of Faith by
believing more points then it should believe, and this is the reason why our
Divinity is in negatives, as to differences with them, because their Divinity
in differences to us, is in additions.

SIR, If you will excuse me for being so long, I shall now conclude with the
whole conclusion of Saint Austin, whereof you gave me but part. Against Reason
no Sober Man will go, against Scriptures no Christian, (then Christians should
go by Scriptures) against the Church no Peacemaker.

The Roman Catholick's first Treatise. How in these times in which there be so
many Religious, the true Religion may certainly be found out.
The Preface.
THE Roman Catholics have often foretold, that by permitting freely to all
sorts of people whatsoever, the reading of the Scriptures in their Mother
Tongue, multitudes of New Sects and Heresies would not fail to grow up in
numberless Number; and as for the Peoples Manners, they would daily grow worse
and worse. How true this is, let the world judge. That then which now mainly
imports, is to distinguish the true Religion from so many false ones. This is
my Aim. To effect this, I did write a short Paper, showing the Catholic Church
so to teach the infallible way to Salvation (which is to be obtained only in
the true faith) that we cannot have as things stand, any other Assurance to
ground our faith upon securely. I did never deny, that when by the Infallible
Authority of the Church we are secured that the Scriptures be the word of God
we cannot believe such things as are clearly contained in the Scripture: for so
I should deny that I could not believe that to be infallibly true, which upon
an Infallible ground I believed to be Gods own word. But I did, and still do
maintain, that no man can have Infallible ground to believe the Scriptures now,
but he who first believes that which the Church teaches to be infallibly
true: Whence it will follow, that his faith must needs now at the first be
grounded upon the Revelation of Gods truth, made by God to us by his Church,
and not by his written word.

The Papers I did write to this Effect have been answered That the Infallible
Authority of the Catholic Church is the Ground of our faith. And also going on
with this Demonstration, I will leave nothing of Concernment unanswered in the
Reply made; and thus I will conclude contradictorily to the said Reply, which
(a little after the beginning) denies, The Authority of the Catholic Church
to be the Ground of faith, and that whereby we are infallibly ascertained of
the mind of God. I answer not the Reply just in the Order that my Answer was
returned; for so I should be overlong. I use this way of a little Treatise to
prove my Title; for thus all will be more clear and less tedious. In the
Conclusion I show all the parts of the Reply to have been fully answered in
this Discourse.

The Proof of the Title.
Anselme has a very fit Similitude to express how much a Contentious Spirit in
disputing does blind the understanding from seeing the Manifest Truth. He
says, that a little before Sunrising two men in the fields did fall into a
hot debate concerning that place of the Heavens in which the Sun was that day
to rise, the one pointing out one part of the Heavens, the other another. They
passed so far in their Contention, that falling together by the Ears, they both
pulled out one another Eyes, and so when the Sun by and by after did rise,
neither of them both could see a thing so clear as was the place of the Sun
rising. To our purpose; Because Zeal in Religion is accounted laudable, and
also because prejudice, caused by Education in such or such a Religion, is a
thing exceedingly swaying us to our own side, we are commonly apt to grow into
so hot a debate in disputations about Religion, that I may freely say, This
Passion hinders many thousands from seeing that clear Sunshine of Truth,
which men of mean Capacity would clearly behold, if setting all passion and
prejudice aside, they did with a Calm and humble Mind beg of God to give them
this grace of seeking Truth with all sincerity: for then he who should seek,
should find.

Esaias (c. 35.) Say to the faint-hearted, Take courage and fear not, behold God
himself will come and save you: then shall the Eyes of the blind be opened, and
the Ears of the deaf shall be opened, and there shall be a Path and a way, and
it shall be called the Holy way, and this shall be unto you a direct way, so
that fools cannot err by it. By this place it is evidently proved, that the
way which our Savior at his coming would teach us, should be not only in it
self, but (as the Prophet says) should be to us a direct way, so that fools
cannot err by it. Let there arise never so many Controversies in Religion, let
there spring up never so many Sects, yet the Promise of God will stand, that
our Savior at his coming should show us A holy way, which should be unto us so
direct a way that fools cannot err by it. What Holy way is this? I say, It is
the Holy Catholic Church, which even by this place is proved Infallible, A way
so direct unto us, that fools cannot err by it. But even wise men might err
by it, and by following it most faithfully, if this way could be fallible, and
lead Men into Errors, and those damnable.

To our Purpose then; All Christians of whatsoever exteriorly to temporal
Judges, is sufficient, they being able and only to judge of the Exterior Man.
But God who searches the Reins and the Heart, and who looks most upon the
Mind (which is the Seat of True or false belief) does chiefly (exact, that
those of his Church, be of One faith Inte^iourly, or else they be not of One
faith, for faith essentially consists in the Interior Judgment. He has all
reason to exact they be of One faith, for he could not seriously desire their
Salvation, without he required of them to do that, which is so wholly Necessary
to Salvation, that without it no man is saved: For without faith it is
Impossible to please God (Heb. 11.6.) that is, It is impossible to please him
without true faith; for he is not pleased with false faith. But without we
please God, it is impossible to be saved; therefore without true faith (which
consists in the Interior Judgment) it is Impossible to be saved. And St.
Paul (Ephesians. 4.5.) teaches us, that there is but one faith, one baptism, and
one God. There being but One faith, and it being impossible to please God
without this One faith, and all things necessary to please God being under
Precept and of most strict Obligation, it follows, that it is a Precept and a
strict Obligation to have this faith, which chiefly and Essentially consists
in the Interior Judgment. This I press so hard, because my Adversary has a
doctrine which I take to be exceedingly pernicious: for he says, (Page 26.
Answ. 5.) We say, They should be directed by their Ministers, and ordered by
Bishops, the Pastors of the Church, chiefly when they are assembled in a
General Council, wherein is the highest power of hearing and ending differences
in the Church. Yet we cannot say, that we are absolutely bound to their Canons,
we having the Judgment of private discretion, and they not the Judgment of
Infallibility; and therefore since they have not a power not to err, we have a
power to suspend our faith, etc. By these and many other words used to this
Effect, you see here this Judgment of Private discretion left free in the
Interior, to hold what a Private person thinks fit after perusal of the
Scripture, although a whole General Council thinks, and most unanimously
defines the Contrary, even after they have heard and most diligently weighed
and pondered the same places of Scripture. Good God! Is that thy Promise of a
Holy way, that shall be to us a direct way, that fools cannot err by it? Yea,
is not the wisest Man in the world most likely to err in this way, by which he
may in his Interior Judgment go quite Contrary to all Christendom? I know
indeed that All who are not Roman Catholics must say this: for if the Church
in a General Council be fallible, then we cannot ground one (...) upon that
Councels definition. But even by this desperate Consequence, it is evident that
God would give his Church a^ Infallible assistance, so to make good his Promise
of leaving to them a Holy way, which should be unto them a direct way, so that
fools cannot err by it. For any Man of mean Capacity cannot err, if he will
submit his judgment to the Catholic Church; whereas any Man of never so great
a Judgment, cannot but be highly suspected of Error, and deeply guilty of
exposing himself to manifest hazard of Erring in that faith (without which it
is Impossible to please God) when he does not submit his Interior Judgment to
the known unanimous Judgment of the whole Church. St. Cyprian was a Prime
Doctor of the Church, and yet grounding himself upon that which he judged to be
Scripture (as appears by his first Book Ep. 6. and other places) he did err
grossly about the necessity of Rebaptizing those who had been baptized by
Heretics. But says St. Austin, l. 2. de Bapt. (c. 4.) If he had lived to see
the determination of a Plenary Council, he would for his great Humility and
Charity straightway have yielded, and preferred the General Council before his
own Judgment. Thus speaks S. Austin of S. Cyprian, though he knew his private
Judgment of discretion to be far less exposed in this Case to hazard of Erring,
then is the private Judgment of discretion of most private Men in the world;
especially when they go point blank against a whole General Council in points
of higher Concernment then was this point, in which S. Cyprian was presently
ready to submit his Judgment. If then we will not be guilty of so intolerable a
pride in overvaluing our own private Judgment of Discretion, with so manifest
hazard of missing that without which we cannot please God, or be ^^^ed, then
will it highly concern us to enquire carefulnesses that Holy way, which will be
unto us a direct way, so that fools cannot err by it. For such a way our God
has promised us: Let us search carefully after it.

Interior Judgment (in which only faith consists) what should seem to him to
be grounded in Scripture; And so as the private Judgment of discretion in one
Man is directly Opposite and Contrary to another Man's private Judgment of
discretion, the faith of the One would be directly contrary to the faith of the
Other: And yet there is but one faith True, without which One true faith it is
Impossible to please God, and consequently to be saved. How then should God
have provided sufficiently for Men's Salvation, if after their most Careful
reading and Conferring the Scriptures, No One Man among those Thousand Men, who
even then differ in Religion, No One Man, I say, but that One Man who holds
the Truth (which is but One) should Interiourly follow that faith, without
which it is Impossible to be saved? It must needs then be a most damnable Sin
to commit that highest treason against Gods Judge, which is committed by not
submitting our Interior Judgment unto him; being that in this our proceeding we
go a way, in which all unity in Interior faith (which is in the first place to
be regarded) is wholly Impossible to be kept.

Let us then see (as a thing which concerns us both

And here comes in that most Important question, Who

All Protestants do say, that the Scripture, and only due unto the Scriptures,
as unto the Infallible word of God, insomuch, that we are ready to give our
lives in defense of any thing which is affirmed in Scripture. I add that we and
only we do truly believe the Scriptures; for he only truly believes any thing
with divine faith, who groundeth his Assent upon divine Revelation: But the
^ssent of Roman Catholics only with which they believe the Scriptures to be
Gods undoubted word) is grounded on divine Revelation, manifested to them by
his Church, which (as I will show) is Infallible. The Assent, by which others
believe the Scriptures to be Gods undoubted word, is not grounded on this
Revelation manifested by his Church, as they all confess, neither is it
grounded upon any other divine Revelation, as I will now prove. For if there be
any such Revelation manifested to them, it is manifested to them in the
Scriptures, as they say: But there is no such Revelation manifested to them in
the Scriptures; for it is written no where in the Scriptures, that such and
such books of Scripture be Canonical, and the undoubted word of God; therefore
this cannot be believed for any Revelation made manifest to us in Scripture.
They believe therefore this without any revelation made by God, and so their
Belief is not Divine, but a humane belief, just such an one as we have, that
such and such a book is Virgil's, such a book is Cicero's, etc. And if they
tell me, that they by reading Canonical Scriptures, do see a light clearly
manifesting them to be Gods word, I answer, that the sight by this light is no
certain divine revelation, but a humane persuasion subject to falsity, and that
far more then the light, by which whole General Councels have seen the quite
Contrary, as I clearly will prove, Numb. 13. A second convincing Argument to
prove, that only we truly believe the Scriptures, is, that all others who
understand not Hebrew and Greek in which the Scriptures were written, cannot
know by any divine faith the undoubted word of God, but they all take upon
trust of Men fallible the Translations, which they call Gods word, which
Translations are full of many and gross corruptions, as concerning our English
Bible in particular many have showed. Now then there is not one amongst ten
thousand, who perfectly understand Greek and Hebrew; Therefore all the rest
have only a humane persuasion, that their Scriptures be Gods uncorrupted word.
For I am sure it is no where revealed, that these Translations be Gods
uncorrupted word. The Roman Catholic has still the Authority of a Church
Infallible, to assure him which is, which is not Gods uncorrupted word. This
Authority I will prove to be Divine and warranted by God. But yet we hold it
Impossible, that the book of the Scripture should be the Judge appointed by
Christ to end all Controversies, or that it should be that Holy way, that shall
be unto us a direct way, that fools cannot err by it. For we see with our eyes
whole Thousands of Men very wise and Learned, whilst they follow the Scriptures
with all sincerity (as they most solemnly protest from their heart) to follow a
world of quite contrary ways in matter of highest Importance to Salvation, and
consequently all these Multitudes of wise men, but those who go one only of
these ways, must needs go astray. Now if wise Men in so great Multitudes do so
strangely stray, whilst in all sincerity (as they protest) they follow this
way, how is it true, that fools cannot err by it? Does not St. Austin, and all
the greatest Doctors that ever the Church had, profess themselves unable to
understand the Scriptures, and this after many years study in them? and how
then can men of such ordinary Capacities, and of so mean study and knowledge of
those tongues in which the Scriptures were written, and so great variety of
Opinions about the true Canon of Scriptures, and a far greater variety about
the true Interpretation of so many most Important places of the true Canon of
Scripture, come to know the truth, the Infallible and undoubted truth, and this
so assuredly, that they may with a safe Conscience upon their private Judgment
of discretion settle their faith unmoveably in points which they know to be so
mightily called into doubt by the greater Part of the world, yea that whole
General Councels have unanimously defined the Contrary, and believed those
places of Scripture not to say that to be so, which, for those places of
Scripture, they still say and firmly believe to be so? Is not such a belief
mainly to be suspected, even in the wisest and learned Men? And will you then
say still, that this is A direct way unto us, so that fools cannot err by it?
The contrary will yet appear far more clearly, when you shall have pondered the
ensuing reasons: yet take this for one strong reason, why the Scriptures cannot
be that Judge of Controversies who is to direct us, by a way so direct unto us,
that fools, cannot err by it.

Saturdayes and Sundays. How will this Controversy be decided by the
Scriptures? All the old Scriptures command strictly the not working upon
Saturdayes, and no One single word of the New Scripture does assure us, that
this Command was ever by Lawful Authority taken away; or that there is the
least unlawfulness in working upon the Sunday. We know indeed, that there was
such a day as the Lords day, called by that name, because Saint John had a
vision upon that day, as he had also upon many other days. We know St. Paul
preached upon the first day of the week, and so he did upon many other days,
and most upon the Saturday or Sabbath; For He disputed in the Synagogue every
Sabbath, and the exhorted the Jews and the Greeks. (Act. 18.) We know the first
day of the week was at one time appointed for the gathering of Alms for poor
Christians: But how does this or any of the former Places prove the
Commandment of not working on the Saturday to be taken quite away, and that
undoubtedly? Or how do any of these places impose upon All Christians, a
manifest and unquestionable Obligation of not working on Sundays? And yet this
is All that can be said out of the Scriptures for the undoubted abolishing of a
certain Commandment of God, and the undoubted bringing into the place of it a
New Commandment, without perhaps the Rising only of our Savior on the Sunday
be sufficient to prove both these things undoubtedly. Yet how can this be? For
the day of his Ascension into Heaven was the final period of all he did in the
world, and that day was Thursday. The Resurrection indeed might be a Ground for
such a Change, but it is nowhere in Scripture that such a Change was made on
that Ground. Yea if we stand even to the New Scriptures, our Adversaries the
Jews will be too hard for us. For they will tell us, that according to our
Scriptures, when our Savior was asked ( Mat. 19.) What good shall I do, that I
may have life Everlasting? our Savior said, If thou will enter into life, keep
the Commandments. And when that Man replied, to know what Commandment he did
understand, he clearly told him, that he understood the Commandments of the
Decalogue, Those very Commandments which that Man knew well enough, (as it is
said clearly also in St. Mark 10. Luke 18.) You see here (will a Jew, or some
new Sectary say unto us) that even in our new Law, our own Lawmakers with his
own mouth commands, as a thing necessary to enter into life Everlasting, the
keeping of the Commandments of the Decalogue, which that Man did know.
Therefore he in the New Law commanded that Commandment of keeping the Saturday
to be observed, as well as the rest. And St. Paul (1 Cor. 7.19.) Circumcision
is nothing, and Prepuce is nothing, but the Observation of the Commandments of
God. See here St. Paul, even after Circumcision was declared nothing, to
declare the Commandments of God to stand in force; and yet among these
Commandments, a chief one is, the keeping of the Saturday, or seventh day, on
which God rested: which reason also holds still, for still it is true, that
God rested on the seventh Day, and he blessed the seventh Day, and sanctified
it, for the foresaid Reason. How came this Sanctification and Blessing to be
lost, the reason of it being still as good as ever? And why then (will this Jew
or Sectarist say) should we prefer the keeping of any other day before this,
which has so good a Reason, that you cannot give a better, at least
undoubtedly better, and which has so manifest Authority of the Old and of the
New Scriptures, even Three of the four Evangelists, and also in St. Paul;
whereas for the taking away of this Commandment, or for the not working on the
Sunday, there is not one single Place in all the Bible, much less such a place
as manifestly convinces? This Argument is unanswerable to those who make the
Scriptures the sole Judge of Controversies.

Act. 15.) It has seemed good to the holy Ghost and us (Apostles of the New
Law) to lay no further burden upon you, then these necessary things, that you
abstain from the things immolated to Idols, and blood, and that which is
strangled. See here, among Necessary things, one is, to abstain from blood
(which Christians do not, nor think not to be done; for they freely eat black
Puddings) and also to abstain from things strangled, as when we strangle
Chickens and eat them freely. If you tell me, that Scripture only is Judge of
Controversies, I will tell you that by the Judgment of this Judge (following
no other as infallible) woe be to the Opinion of all Catholics and
Protestants, who hold it lawful to work upon Saturdayes, unlawful on Sundays;
lawful to eat Blood and Strangled things, unlawful to abstain from them, as
still forbidden: woe I say to our Opinion; for it not only will not be judged
as undoubtedly true by Scripture, but also it will, and that undoubtedly, be
judged false by the Places now cited. I pray tell me here, how Men of mean
capacity, yea how Men of the greatest capacity in the World, shall be able to
find by the judgment of Scripture only, what is Infallibly to be believed in
these points, in which so many hundred Thousands of Jews damnably differ from
us.

Did not all this Kingdom of England grounded upon

For another example, what Controversy can more import, Macchabees, whether
they be the certain Word of God or no. I pray tell me, how shall this grand
Controversy be decided, and decided Infallibly by the judgment of Scripture?
Luther denies the Apocalypse to be true Scripture: we all in England stand out
against him. I pray tell me what Scripture we have against him that is
Infallible, without begging the question which is called into Controversy.

Matthew, not only to be the true Gospel of Christ and his Word, but also to
be the Gospel of St. Matthew, as also the Gospel of St. Mark to be written by
St. Mark. If any Man should deny this, what place of Scripture could we cite
against him? or what Infallible ground have we of this our belief? The
Marcionists, the Cerdonists, the Manichaeans do absolutely deny St. Matthews
Gospel to be Gods Word. This Controversy, you say, and all other Controversies
of Faith, is to be ended by the Scripture: I ask what place of Scripture will
end this Controversy, and all other Controversies about all other books of
Scripture, which have almost all been denied to be Gods Word, by some Heretics
or other. And as for St. Matthew, you must know that all Ancient Writers, no
one excepted, do say, that he did write in Hebrew; and yet neither his Hebrew
Gospel, nor any one certain Copy of it is extant in the World. Tell me then,
upon what undoubted Ground you believe any thing that is in St. Matthews Gospel
only. The Greek Translation which we have, was made by God knows whom: for we
know not. He might be a faithful or unfaithful Translator, he might use a false
uncorrect Copy, he might mistake in many places by Ignorance, in many by
Negligence or Malice. Upon what Infallible ground shall a converted Manichaean
(as St. Austin for example) believe this Greek Gospel which we have? By what
Scripture will you press him to it? yea, upon what Scripture do you your
selves believe this Gospel (this Greek Translation of S. Matthew?) If you tell
me Saint Matthew did write in Greek, I must tell you, that all Antiquity (no
one ancient Author excepted) say the contrary. How will you then ground
Infallible belief, upon your so new and so uncertain Opinion? When this
question was moved, whether any Book was to be received as the Infallible Word
of God or no, The Holy Fathers could never find any more undoubted ground,
then that the Church did allow or not allow of such Books to be held for Gods
undoubted Word. Upon this ground St. Athanasius (in fine Synopsis) receives
the Gospel of St. Matthew, and the other Three Gospels, and rejected the Gospel
of St. Thomas. Upon this Ground Tertullian, St. Hierome, St. Austin, and St.
Leo, profess themselves to admit such, and to deny other Books to be
Canonical. Upon this ground it is, that Eusebius (Hist. Eccles. l. 3.19.)
says, such Scriptures are held for true, genuine, and manifestly allowed by
the opinion of all, because they are so According to the Tradition of the
Church, and that by this Evident Note or Mark, they are distinguished from
others. Behold the most perspicuous mark, by which Scriptures could be
Infallibly known to be, or not be Gods undoubted Word, is the Tradition of the
Church. Whence St. Austin, giving a reason to the Manichaeans (who believed
some part of the Gospel) why he cited the Acts of the Apostles (which they
believed not) says thus, Which Book (of the Acts) it is necessary for me to
believe, if I believe the Gospel, being the Catholic Authority in like manner
commends both these Scriptures to me. So he, contra Ep. Fund. c. 4.

By this the Author of the Reply may see how Insufficient page 25.) is, when he
says, Indeed we take the Canonical Books by Tradition from the Church, but we
do not take them to be Canonical upon her Tradition; but assent is settled in
them as Canonical, in the way of Faith, because they are such: In thy light we
shall see light; so by Scripture we shall see Scripture. So he, but not so any
one of the Fathers, who were most often pressed to give a reason why they
believed such Books to be Canonical, why not. None of these professed
themselves to be so sharp sighted, that by seeing only Canonical Scriptures,
they could see them to be Canonical Scriptures, and that so manifestly, as to
ground their Faith upon it. You by the Apocalypse see it to be Canonical; your
most illuminated Luther could not see it to be so by that light. By all the
light he had, he Judged St. James his Epistle to be made of Straw, yet you see
in it a light, showing undoubtedly it to be Gods Word. You cannot see the two
first Books of Macchabees to be Canonical, yet St. Austin believed them to be
so, for that the Council of Carthage (Can. 47.) received them for such; as also
the books of Wisdom, of which St. Austin says, That it was received of all
Christian Bishops, and others, even to the last of the Laity, with veneration
of Divine Authority (l. de Praedest. Sanct. Sanctorum 14.) What more clear? And
yet you see, that all you of the Church of England, deny all veneration of
Divine Authority to this Book. By what Scripture shall we end this and the like
Controversies of other Books, for which we have as strong proofs as these now
cited; and you have only so weak a proof, as is a light so peculiar to your
selves. And upon the certainty given you, only by this sight, you firmly
believe all the Scripture that you believe, that is; all the Faith you have,
all the Belief you have depends upon this; That you can see so evidently such
and such a Book to be Canonical, that this your Sight, by light received from
those Book, showing them to be assuredly Canonical, is the only Infallible
Assurance you have, that such and such Books are Canonical; and consequently,
this your peculiar sight is the only Infallible Ground you have to rely upon
these books, as upon the undoubted Word of God. This is your Doctrine, this is
your Holy Way, a way so direct, that fools cannot err by it, though you
profess so many wise Men in this point have erred, even whole General
Councels, as also so many great Doctors, before whose eyes this same light
stood as clear as before yours: for they Judged very many to be Canonical
Scriptures which you deny; so weak a ground are you all forced to rely upon,
even in the main Point of Eternal Salvation, whilst you refuse to rely on the
Infallible Authority of Christ's Church. Neither does this our relying on the
Churches Authority derogate to the Scriptures: for we do not say, that the
Church makes them true Scriptures, but it makes us to have an Infallible
Ground to hold them for true Scriptures as they are in themselves, and this,
not because the Church makes them held to be so, but because they are true in
themselves, as being the Word of God; yet not known by themselves to be so by
any Infallible knowledge, without this the testimony of the Church; as Christ
was the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the World, but the Infallible
testimony of St. John Baptist, made many know, that he was so. And thus Christ
was made known to the world by the Infallible testimony of his Apostles; upon
whose testimony many Thousands believed before the Scriptures were written.
Therefore for the Scriptures to be believed what they are of themselves, for
the Infallible Testimony of the Church, does no more derogate to their honor,
or make the Church Superior to them, then it derogateth to the honor of the
Son of God to be believed to be what he is, upon the Infallible testimony of
his Apostles; which testimony had it not been Infallible, those who grounded
their Faith upon it had had no Infallible ground to believe our Savior to be
him, who he is. In like manner, if the Authority of the Church, testifying such
and such books to be Gods Word, were not Infallible, we should have no
Infallible ground to know them to be such, though they truly be such of
themselves: but of this Infallibility I will say no more.

Now I will go on, and show yet further, that the Scriptures God did well know
that this would happen, and therefore he must needs know that he should give
the world a very unprofitable Judge, in order to the keeping of Unity, and
deciding of Controversies, if he should only leave them a Book, about the true
meaning of which Book he well knew more Controversies and Disunions in Religion
would arise, then about any other matter; so that the greatest Wits here, being
at greatest dissension, this cannot be That holy way, a way so direct to us,
that fools cannot err by it. No Lawmakers of any Commonwealth did ever
provide so simply for the Unity of it, as to leave them only a Book of Laws
to be the sole Judge of all their Controversies, as I showed before. And surely
if Christ had intended to leave us a Book to be our sole Judge in all
Controversies, then undoubtedly he would in some part of this Book have clearly
told us so, this importing so exceedingly as it does, and yet he has not done
so. Secondly, if he would have given us a Book for Judge he would never have
given us for our Judge, such a Book as the Scripture is, which very often
speaks, sometimes so Prophetically, that most would think it spoke of the
present time, when it speaks of the time to come; that it spoke of one
person, for example, of David, when it speaks of Christ; sometime it speaks
by a Figure, by a Metaphor, by a Parable, it has Tropological, Allegorical,
Anagogical, and Mystical senses. It uses the Imperative Mood, as well for
Councels as Commands. In no place it so much goes about to set down a
Catalogue of any particular points necessary, and only necessary to be
believed, which any wise Lawmakers would do, if he intended by his writings to
end all Controversies in Faith: yea, the Scripture seems often to say
evidently that, which according to your Doctrine is false. You hold for
Superstitious, the Annoynting of sick Persons, with certain Prayers, and yet
Saint James says (cap. 5. ver. 14.) Is any sick among you? let him call for
the Priests of the Church, and let them pray over him, annoynting him with Oil,
and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Is not this
Controversy clearly by this place of Scripture decided against you? or, have
you any one place half so clear to the contrary? Again, about those other most
clear words spoken in the Institution of another great Sacrament, in which any
wise Man would speak clearly, This is my Body, the late Adversaries of the
Roman Church have found out above two hundred several Interpretations. They
will needs have the sense to be figurative, although never any Man in any
figurative speech was heard to speak thus: For example, to take a Vine, a Lamb,
a Door in his hand, and say, this Vine, this Lamb, this Door is Christ; This is
no kind of figurative speech, though it be a clear figure to say, Christ is a
Vine, a Lamb, a Door, yea he is Bread: But to take Bread into a Man's hand, as
Christ did, and then say, This Bread is my Body; to take a Cup of Wine into his
hand, and to say, This is the Cup of my Blood, which shall be shed for you,
does not so much as sound like a figurative speech; and yet our Adversaries
think it so certainly to be so, that they venture their Souls upon that their
conceived certainty. Thus you see, when the Scripture in four several places
delivers these four words, This is my Body; Men will hold it to be clear,
that so clear words be not clear, and will venture their Salvation upon this
their Imagination. In this and many other points, we say, the Scripture is
clear for us: The Lutherans say, it is clear for them: The Calvinists say, it
is clear for them. We have conferred Place with Place, we have looked in the
Originals; and after all this, the Scripture does not decide this Controversy;
but when all is done, we are as far from Agreeing, and being brought to the
undoubted knowledge of the most important truth, as we were at the beginning.

Another very strong Argument, to declare that the points of Faith necessary to
Salvation, is this; That there be many points, the believing of which is
necessary to Salvation, which points are no where set down clearly in
Scripture. For first, you make it the chief point of all points, to believe the
Scripture to be the Judge of all Controversies, and by it self sufficient to
end them all. I ask, where is this point of points which you make the ground of
your belief? where is it, I say, set down in Scriptures, and that so clearly,
that no prudent doubt can be made, but that such words clearly say what you
say? Does not Saint Athanasius in his Creed put down as an undoubted Article of
Catholic Faith, (which Faith (as he says) without a Man hold it entirely and
inviolably, without all doubt he shall perish eternally) does he not put down
there, that we must believe; That God the Father is not begotten, that God the
Son is not made, but begotten by his Father only; that the holy Ghost is
neither made, nor begotten, but does proceed, and that both from the Father and
the Son; And that he, who will be saved, must believe thus? And yet how far are
these most hard points from being clearly delivered in the Scripture: So also,
that God the Son is Consubstantial to his Father, and of the same Substance, is
a certain Article of Faith, and yet no where clearly delivered in Scripture,
but was believed by All upon the sole Authority of the Church, which
consequently was believed Infallible.

their salvation is a prime point of Belief, and yet you cannot believe this
prime point upon any clear place of Scripture (for there is no such place) but
you must all say with the great Saint Austin, That though nothing for certain
can be alleged out of Canonical Scriptures in this point, yet in this point,
the truth of Scriptures, (and consequently a sufficient ground for Faith) is
kept by us, when we do that which seemed good to the Catholic Church, which
Church the Authority of the same Scriptures does commend. (Contra Crescon. l
1.13.) And this following the Tradition of the Church, he calls The most true
and inviolable Rule of Truth. He holds therefore Tradition of the Church so
Infallible, that it may be a ground for Faith. He was taught so by Saint Paul,
(2 These. 2.) Hold the Traditions which you have received either by word of
Mouth, or by Epistle. Upon which place, Saint Chrysostom having taught that
the Apostles delivered many things by word of Mouth, not set down any where in
writing; he says, that these (unwritten Traditions) are worthy of the same
belief which those deserve which are written: It is a Tradition (of the
Catholic Church) Seek no further. So he. But you say, I must seek further to
find this in Scripture, yet Saint Chrysostom tells me, that being a Tradition
of the Church, it is Gods Word, and upon this account as worthy to be believed
as if it were his written Word: for it is the being his Word, and not the being
of his written Word, which makes it Infallibly true.

Well then, It having been made clear by all these reasons Holy way, a way so
direct unto us, that fools cannot err by it; Let us see where this way is to
be found, and who is to be judge to define all Controversies with Infallible
authority, so that all are bound to submit their Interior judgment (in which
all faith consists) to this Authority, it being high Treason against Christ,
not to submit to an Authority instituted by him purposely to oblige all to this
submission. I say this Judge is the Catholic Church. This I will prove first,
and this being proved, I will show briefly that no Church but the Roman can
prudently be held to be this Catholic Church. In proof of the Catholic
Church her being Judge of all Controversies; I allege first those words, (
Matthew. 16. v. 18. I say unto thee, (that is to St. Peter by name) Thou art
Peter, (that is, Thou art a Rock;) and upon this Rock I will build my Church,
and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; that is, those Gates of
Hell out of which so many damnable Errors shall issue, shall never prevail by
inducing any damnable Error into that Church, which I will build upon thee, O
Peter, and thy Successors; which I add, because this Church was not to be
built upon the Person of St. Peter only; for then this fair building had
fallen to the ground when St. Peter had died. They who do say, that the Church
may fall into damnable Errors, do say, that the Church may fall to the ground,
and that the Gates of Hell may prevail against it: for what greater fall can it
have, then by damnable Errors to make its Members all fall into Hell? and in
what manner can the Gates of Hell more prevail against it? And yet we are sure
by Gods Word, that shall never happen. Wherefore in this Church we embrace most
groundedly all things proposed by it to be believed. Here you see our Judge,
Christ's Church, has Gods warrant to warrant Her from bringing in any damnable
Error by her Judgment: All may therefore securely obey, But that none can
securely disobey her Judgment; Christ also does warrant us, in the next
Chapter but one: (for Matthew. 18. v. 17.) he says, Tell the Church, and if he
will not hear the Church, Let him be unto thee as a Heathen and Publican. Here
you see all Causes of greater Importance are to be brought to this Judge: for
if even private complaints are to be brought into her Tribunal, and if for
disobedience after her Judgment given of them, a man be to be hold for a
Publican or Heathen, much more are enormiously hurtful crimes, such as are the
crimes of Heresy, to be carried to her Tribunal, and those, who in so much
more Importing matters disobey, are also much more to be held for Publicans and
Heathens. And that no man may think, that after this his condemnation he may
stand well in his Interior, persisting still in the same judgment, and doing
so, stand right in the sight of God, it follows, Amen I say unto you
(Prelates of my Church) Whatsoever ye shall bind upon Earth, shall also be
bound in Heaven. You see I have found a Judge so securely to be followed in his
Judgment, and so unsafely to be disobeyed, that his Sentence given upon Earth,
is sure to be ratified in Heaven. This also could not be true, if this Judge
were fallible in such prime causes, as most concern the Church, and all such
causes are those which may bring in damnable Errors.

Conformably to this doctrine of the Church, her being Austin (de Civit. l.
20.9.) expounds to our purpose those words of the Apocalypse or Revelation,
(cap. 20. ver. 4.) I saw Seats, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was
given them. It is not to be expounded of the last Judgment, but of the Seats
of Prelates, and the Prelates themselves, by which the Church is now governed,
are to be understood. All this which I have said out of the New Testament, you
will the less wonder at, if you Note, that even in the Old Law it is said, The
lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and they shall require the Law from
his Mouth, because he is the Angel of the Lord God of Hosts, (Mal 2.) Note here
a gross corruption of the English Bible, which reads these words, The
Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth,
whereas the Originals speak clearly in the future Tense. Here by the way, I
must tell you, that, though the Scripture were to be Judge, yet your most
corruptd English Scriptures cannot be allowed for Judge. Whence it follows,
that those who do understand only English, can judge of nothing by their
Scripture: And so they must trust their Ministers to the full as much, even in
this highest point, as we do our Priests in any point.

a way so direct, that fools cannot err by it: for any man may ask the Priests
of the Church, what is the known Doctrine of the Church, and then let him rest
securely, when he knows that. Secondly, you see I have found such a Judge, as
all true believers had for all their Controversies for more then two thousand
years together, before Moses did write the first Books of Scripture; all which
time you must needs make the Tradition of the Church the infallible Rule of
Faith: for here was no written Word of God, upon which their Faith could be
built, and yet Saint Paul, (2 Cor. 4.) speaking of those who lived in those
Ages before all Scripture, says, They had the same Spirit of Faith. And the
reason is clear: for the Word of God is the same, whether it be revealed by the
Pen, or by the Tongue, written or not written. And what (says St. Irenaus, l.
3. c. 4.) if the Apostles had not left us the Scriptures? Must we not have
followed that order of Tradition, which they delivered to those, to whose
Charges they left the Churches to be governed? To this order (of Tradition by
the unwritten word) many of those barbarous Nations do assent, who have
believed in Christ, without any writing or Ink, having Salvation written in
their hearts by the Holy Ghost, and keeping diligently the ancient Traditions.
So St. Irenaeus, who you see holds manifestly unwritten Traditions of the
Church to be a sufficient Ground of Faith. It is most manifestly true, which he
says, that upon this ground the Faith of whole Nations have relied. This
ground therefore is infallible, all Nations Faith relying on this, even two
Thousand years and more before the first Scriptures were written, and the Faith
of many other Nations, who since their writing have believed, and do believe
the true Faith. For how many of them never did see the Scriptures at all, or
never did see them in a Language, which they could understand? Neither did the
Apostles, or their Successors take any care to have the Scripture communicated
to all Nations in such languages, as they could all, or the greater part
understand. They thought the Tradition of the Church a sufficient Rule of Faith
for all, which they could not do, if this Rule were fallible: We must therefore
confess it to be Infallible.

Thirdly, I have not only found a Judge, so clearly Church does so clearly and
so manifestly, that they themselves cannot deny themselves to be condemned by
the Church, together with their Doctrine; but all they can do, is, to rail
against their Judge, which the damned shall do against Christ their Judge.

David, though he was an Adulterer: he gave it to Solomon, who proved not only
a most vicious Man in Life, but who for his own person in point of Faith, came
to fall into Worshipping of Idols. This you will not have thought strange, but
you will hold it Incredible, that he should give this Infallibility, not to one
Man, but the whole Church, represented in a General Council.

Let us pass on further yet, and see how firmly this Holy way, a way so direct
unto us, that fools cannot err by it. See here the third Number. In the eight
Number I have showed, that we cannot ground that Faith, by which we believe the
Sabbath to be changed to the Sunday, upon Scripture; but we must ground it upon
the Tradition of the Church, which if it be not Infallible, we have no
Infallible Ground at all for this point. And in the ninth Number, I have showed
the self-same to be about eating Blood, or Chickens, or any thing that is
strangled. In the 11, 12, and 13. Number, I have demonstrated, that by the
Scripture we cannot know which is true Scripture, which is false; which Books
be Infallibly the Word of God, which not; for the Scripture has not one Text
in which it tells us this: and therefore for this Important point of Faith,
we can find no other sure Ground, then the Tradition of an Infallible Church:
for a fallible Tradition may deceive us. In the 14. Number I have showed, that
when Controversies arise (as most, and most Important Controversies do arise)
about the true meaning of the Scripture, even after we have conferred all
places together, and looked upon the Original Languages, the the Controversies
still remain undecided, and no Infallible way can be found to decide them by
Scripture. There is therefore no Infallible way to decide them; if the decision
and definition of the whole Church in a General Council be not Infallible. This
is so clear, that (to the wonder of the world) Luther himself, in his Book of
the Power of the Pope, writes thus. We are not certain, of any private Man,
that he has the Revelation of the Father. The Church alone it is, of which it
is not lawful to doubt. So he. In the 15. Number I have showed, that there be
many points necessarily to be believed under pain of damnation, which points
are not at all set down in any clear Scripture. For these points it is
manifest, that we can have no other ground then the Authority of the Church. If
this be not Infallible, then we have only fallible ground, which cannot be a
ground of Faith. In the 16. Number I have confirmed the same Doctrine by the
Authority of Saint Austin and Saint Chrysostom. In the 17. Number I have
proved this Doctrine clearly out of Gods Promise, that he would build this his
Church upon a Rock, and that the Gates of Hell should not prevail against it,
which the Gates of Hell might easily do, if the Church could come to teach
damnable errors, carrying her and her Children into the Gates of Hell it self.
The same in the same place I have proved by Gods commanding us to Tell the
Church, and commanding us to hold all those who will not hear the Church, as
Publicans and Heathens; and by making good in Heaven the Sentence of the Church
given upon Earth, which he would not do, if the Church should have at any time
failed in her definition, and that in points damnably erroneous. In the 18.
Number I have alleged other Texts, still proving the same. In the 19. Number I
have showed, that for two Thousand years together, before the Scriptures were
written, the true believers had no other sure ground of their Faith, but the
Authority of the Church, which if it had been fallible, the very ground of
their Faith had been groundless, and none at all. The first Believers also,
and many whole Nations, had no other ground, then the said Authority of the
Church, as there I have showed out of Saint Irenaeus, and it is clear of it
self; for they did not build their Faith on any Scriptures. Thus far I have
gone already in the proof of the Infallibility of the Church. Now I go on with
those words of Saint Paul (1 Timothy 3. v. 15.) where the Church of the living
God, is called, The Pillar and Ground of Truth. May not Men rely securely upon
the Pillar of Truth? May they not ground themselves assuredly on the ground of
Truth? No ground being surer ground, and more infallible then the ground of
Truth it self. Yea, my Adversary having found a place in St. Irenaeus, calling
the Scripture the Foundation and Pillar of Faith, does infer that if it be so,
then it is the ground and cause of our faith. If this consequence be strong
(which I deny not) then is it yet a stronger, that the Truth is no where surer
grounded, then upon the Pillar and Foundation of Truth. But my Adversary would
take this place of St. Paul from me, because he says, This expression may very
reasonably be referred (not to the Church, but to the mystery of Godlyness) and
so be an Hebrew form, etc. Surely he forgot that this Epistle was not written
in Hebrew, but in Greek; and then again, No Hebrew form in the world can make
the sense he intends. What can be clearer then this, if I say, such a thing was
done by Cicero the Father of his Country, and Caesar did such another thing?
What I say more clear, then that in this speech I call Cicero The Father of his
Country and not Caesar, of whom as yet I had not so much as spoken? So the
Apostle had not so much as spoken of any Mystery, when he spoke these words,
which lie thus in your own Bible, That thou may know how to behave thy self
in the House of God, which is the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and
Ground of the Truth; and without Controversy great is the Mystery of
Godliness, etc. Do you not see, that he had not so much as spoken of this
Mystery, when he said the former words, which in all kind of Construction per
Appositionem, clearly relate to the Church. O, but my Adversary tells me, that
this title of being The Pillar and Foundation of Truth agrees in the first
place to the Scripture. I answer, it agrees equally to any thing, that is the
True Word of God; and therefore it agrees to the Scripture, because God
speaks by it and in it; but God also speaks by his Church, and in his
Church, giving as much infallible assistance to the Church in a Council, as he
gave to him who did deliver his Word in Scripture; for example, as he gave to
Solomon, who in his own person came to play the Idolater. It is objected also,
that in these words rather the Office of the Church is set forth then her
Authority. To which my Answer is clear, that her Authority cannot possibly in
short words be more set out, then by saying; that she is The Pillar and ground
of Truth: for what Authority can rely more safely, then that which relyeth on
the Pillar of Truth? What Authority can be better founded and grounded, then
that which is founded and grounded upon the Ground and Foundation of Truth? So
that nothing can be more clear against Scripture, then to say, it does not set
out the Authority of the Church in this place, No Text being clearer for any
thing. Hence when the Church had defined, that God the Son was Consubstantial
to his Father, (that is, of one and the same substance) which is no where
clearly said in Scripture, St. Athanasius calls this Definition of the Church
the Word of God, saying, that ever hereafter this Definition of the Nicen
Council, That Word of God by the Nicen Council does remain for ever and ever
(Ep. ad African. Episc.) Behold here the Definition of the Council, called The
Word of God remaining for ever and ever. Is not this to acknowledge the Church
Infallible in her Definition?

Matthew proves strongly the Churches infallibility. Christ there bids his
Apostles to teach and Baptize all Nations, adding, And behold, I am with you
all days, even to the consummation of the world. My Adversary says, It is not
necessary to extend this Promise to Christ his being with the Church to the end
of the world; which is all one, as to say, It is not necessary that Christ his
Promise should be true. For surely he cannot promise more clearly to be with
his Church to the end of the world. If he should say, I will be with you for a
Thousand years, he should not perform his promise unless he were with it a
thousand years: wherefore promising to be with it even to the consummation of
the world, to make his promise true he must be with them so long. Now the
Apostles were not so long as the end of the world baptizing and preaching, but
their successors are with them, therefore Christ must be to the consummation of
the world. And though these successors of the Apostles be not so worthy of
Infallible Assistance as the Apostles were, yet Christ giving the gift of
infallible assistance, not for the worth of the person to whom it is given, but
for the secure direction of so many millions as were to be of the Church after
Christ his time, there is as much, yea far more reason why he should leave the
like secure direction for them; because the further we go from Christ's time,
the more we are subject to uncertainties about his Doctrine. See Numb. 21. It
being then proved, that Christ will be with his Church until the consummation
of the world, and it being manifest that he is not with those, who live in
damnable Errors, we must of necessity say that Christ's Church in all ages lived
secured from damnable Errors, or else there was some Age in which he was not
with it, and in which he performed not his promise. And the same is to be said
of that place of St. John (14.) And I will ask the Father, and he will give
you another Paraclete that may abide with you for ever, the Spirit of Truth.
This abiding of the spirit of Truth for ever, secures us for ever from all
damnable Errors. Admirably St. Austin. (l de utilit. cred. c. 6) If the
Providence of God does not preside in humane affairs, in vain would solicitude
be about Religion; but if God be thus present with us, truly we are not to
despair that there is some Authority appointed by the same God, on which
Authority we relying, as on an assured step may be lifted up to God. So he. But
if this step be fallible, It is no assured step: Gods providence therefore has
left an Infallible Authority in his Church, such an Authority as the first
Church had for 2000. years before any Scripture was written.

The Pillar and Ground of Truth. Has God in the Texts alleged given no more
to the Church, then to the Devils? And how is this answer to the purpose,
seeing that for two Thousand years before Scripture, no man could know what was
conformable to Scripture; yea, nothing was then conformable to any Scripture,
there being no Scripture at all? And the Church then had not Gods Promise,
which in all the Texts, Authorities and Reasons above alleged, is, that the
Church shall at no time teach any thing that in any damnable matter shall be
against Scripture; so that when we know this is her Doctrine, we are sure that
this is conformable to the Scriptures rightly understood. And thus clearly is
fulfilled those notable words in the Prophet Daniel, (cap. 2. v. 44.) In the
days of those Kingdoms, the God of Heaven will raise up a Kingdom which
shall not be dissipated, and his Kingdom shall not be delivered to another
people, and it shall break in pieces, and consume all these (Idolatrous)
Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. Now, of no Kingdom in the world, but
of the Kingdom of Christ's Church, this can be understood. This Church
therefore shall stand for ever. And consequently at no time it shall fall into
damnable errors: for then it is true, to say, It does not stand, but is fallen
most damnably. Again, in Isaiah 29. God does clearly declare his Covenant with
his Church, according to the Interpretation of Saint Paul himself. (Romans
11.26.) This is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my Spirit which is upon
thee, and the words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. But how could the Word of
the Lord more depart from the Mouth of the Church, then if she should with her
mouth teach damnable errors? From this therefore he secureth his Church for
ever and ever. Hence Saint Austin says, ( l. de Unitat. Eccl. cap. 6, 7, 12,
and 13.) (See him also, l. 20. de Civit. cap. 8. in Psalm. 85. and de Utilit.
Credendi, c. 8.) Whosoever affirms the Church to have been overthrown (as it
were, if at any time it should teach any damnable error) does rob Christ of his
glory and Inheritance, bought with his precious Blood; yea, Saint Hierom (cont.
Lucifer. c. 6.) goes farther, and averreth, that He that so says, does make
God subject to the Devil, and a poor miserable Christ. The reason is, because
this Assertion does (after a sort) bereave the whole Incarnation, Life and
Passion of our Savior, of their Effect and End, which was principally to found
a Church and Kingdom in this world, which should endure to the day of
Judgment, and direct Men in all Truth to Salvation. Wherefore, whosoever
affirms the Church to have perished, takes away this effect and Prerogative
from his Incarnation, Life, and Passion; and avoucheth, that at some times Man
had no means left to attain to everlasting bliss; which is also repugnant to
the Mercy and goodness of God. He also makes God subject to the Devil, in
making the Devil stronger then Christ, and affirming him to have overthrown
Christ's Church and Kingdom, which our Lord promised should never be conquered.

That the Holy Fathers did believe the Church of Christ Athanasius, Saint
Hierome, Saint Austin, Tertullian, and Eusebius, to have received such Books
for Gods Word, and to have not received others, and to have received such with
veneration of Divine Authority, as St. Austin spoke; And upon this infallible
Authority they all believed God the Father not to be begotten, God the Son to
be begotten by his Father only, and to be Consubstantiall to him; and God the
Holy Ghost not to be begotten, but to proceed from both Father and Son. Upon
this infallible Authority they all held children to be baptized, though nothing
for certain could be alleged out of the Canonical Scriptures in this point,
but only the Catholic Church taught this to be done, as in the 16th. Numb.
have showed out of St. Austin, who there calls this relying on the Churches
Authority, The most true and inviolable Rule of Faith. And S. Chrysostom there
also says, that these unwritten Traditions of the Church (infallible only in
her Authority) are as worthy of faith and credit, as that which is written in
Scripture. And in the 19th. Numb. I have showed out of St. Irenaeus, That we
should have bin as much obliged to believe although no Scriptures had been
written, as we are now, and that the faith of whole Nations is grounded not in
Scripture, but consequently on the infallible Authority of the Church, whose
word he calls the Word of God, as I showed in the end of the 22th. Number. I
sum up all these Authorities, that my Adversary may not say (as he did) that
the authority of St. Austin was single, when he believed the Gospel to be Gods
Word upon the infallible authority of the Church: for if her authority be by so
many Fathers acknowledged infallible, then St. Austin is not single in his
opinion in this point.

Austin speaks home, and because my Adversary says, That if we take this
passage by it self, it seems to speak high, but says he, if we consider the
tenor of Saint Austins discourse in the whole chapter, It is like we will
begin to think that it came from him in some heat of spirit to overcome his
Adversary. For these causes (I say) I will consider the tenor of St. Austins
Discourse in this whole Chapter, and I will show manifestly, that this his
Doctrine was so far from coming out from him in some heat of Spirit to overcome
his adversary, that he makes it the very prime Ground of his discourse; and
without he will stand to that Ground, he there must needs seem to say nothing
against his Adversary. This Chapter is the fourth Chapter, Cont. Ep. Manichaei.
The whole substance of it is this; The Epistle of Manichaeus begins thus,
Manichaeus the Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the Providence of God the Father. I
ask therefore, says Saint Austin who this Manichaeus is? You will answer, the
Apostle of Christ. I do not believe it. Perhaps you will read the Gospel unto
me, endeavoring thence to prove it. And what if you did fall upon one who did
not as yet believe the Gospel, what would you do then, if such an one said I do
not believe you? This is his first Argument, to show that his Adversary by
citing Texts out of the Gospel to prove Manichaeus a true Apostle, could prove
nothing against those, who as yet have not believed the Gospel: then he goes
on; But because I am not one, who have not yet believed the Gospel, and so this
Answer cannot serve me, notwithstanding, I must tell you, that I am such an
one, that I would not believe the Gospel, without the Authority of the
Catholic Church did move me. This being the ground of his Answer, you shall
see how he builds upon this, and only this Ground. It follows then thus; I
having therefore obeyed those (Catholic Pastors) saying, Believe the Gospel
(the most Important point of Points) Why should I not obey them saying to me,
do not believe Manichaeus? Then upon this ground he presses home, saying,
Choose which you will; if you say believe the Catholics, then I must not
believe you, for they teach me not to give Faith to you: wherefore believing
them (as I do) I cannot believe you. Now, if you say, do not believe the
Catholics, then you do not go consequently to force me by the Gospel to give
Faith to Manichaeus. Why so? Mark if his ground be not as I told you, Because
(says he) I have believed the Gospel it self upon the preaching of the
Catholics. Can he more clearly ground upon the Infallible Authority of their
teaching, then upon this, to believe the Gospel it self? He goes on thus:
Again, If you hold to the Gospel, my hold shall still be on the Authority of
that Church, upon whose Authority I believed the Gospel. I (says he) will hold
my self to those, by whose teaching I have believed the Gospel, and these
commanding me, I will not believe thee. And Saint Austin goes so far upon this
Ground, as a Ground Infallible, that he says, If perhaps you Manichaeans can
find me any clear place in the Gospel to prove that Apostleship of Manichaeus,
that then indeed they shall weaken the Authority of the Catholics. But what
do you think will follow? I pray note it well. Their Authority being weakened
(and showed once fallible) now neither can I so much as believe the Gospel. And
why so? Because upon the Authority of these Catholics, I had believed the
Gospel. The ground of his belief in the Gospel, was their Infallible authority,
as not only these, but also the next words show manifestly. Wherefore (says
he) if in the Gospel, there be found nothing, that is evident to prove the
Apostleship of Manichaeus, then I will believe the Catholics rather then You.
But if You shall read me out of the Gospel something that is evident to prove
Manichaeus an Apostle, then I will neither believe the Catholics nor thee.
Why so? I will not believe the Catholics, because they (whose Doctrine I
thought Infallible) have lied to me concerning your Manichaeans: But I will not
believe thee even when thou citest clear Scripture (for of this case he
speaks) and why so? Because thou do cite me that ^cripture, to which
Scripture I had now believed upon their Authority who have lied unto me. Thus
he. Could he more clearly say, that if once in one single Lie, he should find
the Churches Authority to be fallible, he should then have left unto him, no
Infallible Ground at all, upon which he were to believe Scripture. To deliver a
Doctrine thus inculcated over and over again, and thus still relying on this
one Ground, is far, and very far from letting a word slip in heat of
disputation. And therefore (to speak plainly) my Adversary could not deal
sincerely, when he said, If we considered the whole Chapter we should be of his
mind: for nothing can make us less of his mind, then to consider the whole
Chapter, as I have faithfully done, excepting one little parcel in the end,
which most strongly confirms all I have said; for it follows, but God forbid
I should not believe the Gospel (having so Infallible Authority for it, as the
Church is) yet believing this Gospel, I do not see, how I can believe thee
(teaching me Manichaeus to be an Apostle:) for we know which Apostle it was,
who was chosen in the place of Judas the Traitor; This we have read in the Acts
of the Apostles. And because the Manichaeans did not believe the Acts of the
Apostles, he adds, which Book (of the Acts) I must necessarily believe, if I
believe the Gospel. And why? Because the Catholic Authority does in like
manner commend both these Scriptures to me. See here again most evidently he
says, the Ground upon which he believes the Acts of the Apostles, as well as
he believed the other Scriptures to be the self-same Catholic Authority,
which in one and the same manner commends both Scriptures to us to be
believed. Had he said, that he believed this or any other Scripture for the
Light he received by the reading of it, by which he discovered it to be
Canonical, then the Manichaeans might as easily have said, that by the like
Light we clearly discover the Gospel of Manichaeus to be Canonical. Thus I have
given a large and most faithful account of this Chapter, setting most of it
down word for word. And this last place, as also many other, quite overthrow
what my Adversary says, that he spoke here of himself, as now a Manichaean:
for you see he speaks of himself, as one believing the Acts of the Apostles,
and believing it by a necessary consequence, because he has already believed
the other Canonical Books upon the same Authority of the Church. And if upon
this Authority I may with St. Austin believe the whole Scripture to be Gods
Word from the beginning to the ending, though it contains so many strange
Stories, and such a world of several points, why may I not upon the same
Infallible Authority believe Prayers to Saints, Prayer for the dead and other
like points? Neither can it be said, that St. Austin (as my Adversary says)
was settled in the belief of the Scripture for the authority of Scripture it
self, for I have given you his plain words to the contrary, saying, that the
Authority (of the Church) being weakened, he cannot now so much as believe the
Gospel, which he might still do if he believed it for it self, and not merely
for the Infallible Authority of the Church: yea, ( l. de Utilit. Cred. cap.
14.) he says, that his belief in Christ was grounded upon that Authority,
which certainly he must then needs hold for Infallible. If he did thus and was
never noted for singularity in his faith for doing thus, why may not I
prudently do what he did? Yea, how can I poor simple creature, not do
imprudently, if I refuse to do, what he did, who understood the Scriptures as
well as any man the Church had?

(as they profess) their own fallibility, and that they are not Judges in
Controversies, being infallibly fallible, and so incapable of these
Privileges, as is Evident. And even this might serve to exclude all other
Churches, but the Roman. She only claims (as she is bound to do) her due
right to be Judge in all Controversies, and her infallible authority to decide
them with truth. All other Churches of all other Religions do say indeed, that
they are themselves the only true Churches, but none of them say themselves to
be either the Judges of Controversies, or to be infallible. Wherefore they
cannot be either judges, or infallible; for if they be true Judges, then they
judge truly against themselves, when they judge it to be as certain as
Scripture, that there is no Judge but Scripture; And if they be truly
infallible in defining them, they truly and by infallible authority define
themselves to be fallible, whilst they define it to be Scripture, that the
true Church is fallable. Wherefore infallibly they are fallible, and
consequently infallibly they are not the true Church, which we have
demonstrated to be infallible, and all those Texts, authorities and Reasons
must needs prove all Churches false that be fallible, whilst they prove the
true Church necessarily to be infallible: But all Churches besides the Roman,
by their own faith are according to infallible Scripture, fallible. None of
them therefore is the true Church. If then the Roman Church be not the true
Church, then Christ has no true Church left on Earth, nor has not had these
many Ages.

Hence you may gather, why I never was sollicitous to prove all that was said
of the Church by the Scriptures and Fathers to be said of the Roman Church: for
whilst I did show them to be said of such a Church as might be of an Authority
infallibile and sufficient to ground Faith; It followed manifestly, that all
was said of the Roman, no other being Infallible, and so Christ should have no
true Church, if this be not a true one: For I have demonstrated, that no other
can be Infallible. This being a Demonstration, until this Argument be answered,
I hold my self bound to say no more, yet I must needs tell you in brief a small
part of that, which I can and will say, if this point be again pressed: I will
show how unanimously the Fathers acknowledge this, St. Cyprian (Ep. 3. l. 1.)
says, that false Faith cannot have Access to the Roman Church. St. Hierome (in
1. ad Tim.) calls Damasus the Pope of Rome, The Rector of the House of God,
which St. Paul calls the Pillar and Foundation of truth. And in his Epistle
to the same Pope, he says, To your Holiness, that is, to the Chair of Peter, I
am joined in communion: Upon this Rock I know the Church to be built. He that
gathers not with thee, scatters. So the Fathers in the Council of Chalcedon, at
the voice of St. Leo Pope of Rome, said, Peter has spoken by the mouth of Leo.
And many such other places I will allege, for which now I remit you to
Stapleton and Bellarmine, who both show most diligently how all other Churches
have gone to Rome to receive judgment in their chief Causes. See this done in
all Ages, in Bell. 3. De Verbo Dei, e. 6. I will show also how all Churches of
all Ages, which were not confessed Heretical or Schismatical Churches, have
been ever joined in communion to the Roman until St. Gregory the greats time,
and then ever since; and how in his time England received the same Roman Faith,
which now all Roman Catholics profess, and all Protestants deny. And I will
show that this faith then brought into England from Rome, did not in any point
of Faith controverted between the Roman Catholics and the Protestants, differ
from that undoubted true Apostolical Faith, which our old Britains received
from Rome, in the second age of the Church in the days of Eleutherius; and
from hence the present Roman Churches communion in Doctrine with the Ancient
Apostolical Church will appear. I will show that perpetual visibility agrees
only to the Roman Church, and consequently, that in her only that Prophecy
concerning Christ was fulfilled, That he should reign in the House of Jacob
for ever, and of his reign there shall be no end. We can show how he has
reigned here by known and manifest Pastors of the Church, who have in all ages
appeared in Councils to govern his Church. I pray set us but know the name of
one of your Pastors, Doctors or Preachers in those last thousand ages, which
preceded Luther. All are bound to be of the true Church, but to be of an
invisible Church, having only Invisible Pastors administering Sacraments in an
invisible manner, no man can be bound to be of. I will show that all
conversions of Nations from Idolatry (so often promised to be made by the true
Church) were all and every one of them made by such, as did communicate with
the Roman Church; and no one Nation ever converted from Paganism by those who
professed Protestant Religion, or held these points in which Protestants differ
from us. I will add also, that all who have been eminent for sanctity of Life,
or glory of Miracles, have all been joined in communion to the Roman Church;
and you cannot name any one famous in either of these respects, whom you can
prove to have been a Protestant, a most evident sign of the Truth of the Roman
Church. Compare any other Church to it in all these points here mentioned, and
you shall see all incomparably more verified in the Roman Church, then in any
other differing from her, or agreeing with you, yea verified in none but her.

I have then I hope performed my Promise to show a This is that holy and direct
way, so direct unto us, that fools cannot err by it, and wise men must err,
if they walk not by it.

The Conclusion, Showing the Reply to my Papers to have been fully answered in
the former Discourse.
This Reply consists of Eight Answers, with a word or two at the end, and at
the beginning of these Answers.
To all these in Order.
FIrst at the beginning, you say there is little reason for you to rejoyn,
because I wave the Application of my discourse, as to the Roman Church. I
answer, That my Position was, that the Church is the Ground of Faith: Of the
Roman Church, it was to no end to speak, until I had been first granted that
some Church or other was the Ground of Faith. A man must first prove to a Jew,
that the Messiah is come, and then he must prove that Christ was this Messiah.
Again, all my Proofs proved an infallible Church to be the ground of Faith, of
which no fallible Church could be a sure Ground, as is manifest: But all
Churches but the Roman Church, do profess according to Scripture themselves to
be fallible; whence it follows, that all Churches (but the Roman) must needs
be fallible. For if they or any of them be infallible, then they teach the
infallible Truth, when they teach themselves to be fallible. No Church
therefore can be Infallible, but she who teaches her self to be Infallible.
Consequently, when I proved the Infallible Churches Authority to be the ground
of Faith, I proved the Authority of the Roman Church to be so. See this fully
answered, Numb. 27.28.

Secondly, You say you might still have left me to answer your first Paper with
the second Paper. I reply, that this is only to stand to what you have said,
as I also do. Let the Reader judge with indifferency.

Thirdly, You say, I conclude not contradictorily. I reply, that I always
conclude the Churches Authority to be a sufficient ground of Faith, you say, it
is an insufficient ground. Reader, judge whether these two be not
Contradictions, sufficient and insufficient.

Now to your Eight Answers in Order.
In your first Answer, you spent seven pages to prove the Scripture to be a
sufficient ground of Faith. This, This it is, not to conclude contradictorily.
You should conclude, that the Church cannot be a sufficient ground of Faith;
which still may be, and is true, though it also be most true, that the
Scripture is a most sufficient ground of Faith, when it is once known by an
infallible Authority to be Gods Word, and also when we evidently know, that
such and such is the undoubted sense of the Scripture. But I have proved at
large, that we cannot know upon infallible Authority, which books be or be not
Gods Word, but by the Authority of an infallible Church. See Numb. 11, and 12.
And consequently, if the Churches Authority be not a sufficient ground for
Faith, then we can have no Faith to believe, which books be Gods Word, which
not, See Numb. 26. The Churches authority is hence proved to be a sufficient
ground for Faith, and to be our first ground: for we must first upon the
authority of the Church believe such and such Books to be Gods Word; and then
assured by this our belief that they be Gods Word, we may ground our Faith upon
the authority of that Word of God, which in this sense I hold to be a most
sufficient ground for all Faith, extended to all points clearly contained in
Scripture. This and only this all your Authorities prove. Take for an Example,
your first Authority of St. Irenaeus, out of which you neither do nor can infer
any more, then, that the Scripture (once believed to be Gods Word) is to us a
sufficient ground of Faith, because in it self it is The Pillar and Foundation
of Truth: but by the Authority of Saint Paul (which is a stronger Authority
then that of Saint Irenaeus) The Church is the Pillar and Foundation of Truth:
Therefore her Authority is a sufficient ground of Faith, even according to this
your strong Argument. This I showed, Numb. 22. Yea, Saint Irenaeus expressly
teaches, that though there were no Scripture at all, yet we should all be
bound to believe what we now believe, as I have showed Numb. the. 19. And yet
then we should have no other Authority, then that of the Church. Again, the
Scriptures can then only ground Faith when they contain the Matter about which
we are bound to have Faith; but very often they do not contain this Matter, as
I have showed, Numb. 9.10.11, 12. and chiefly Numb. 15. and 16. These points
not being contained in Scripture, how can I believe them for the Scripture?
Lastly, the Authority of Scripture only can ground Faith in those points,
which are known undoubtedly to be delivered in such clear Texts, as a man
cannot prudently doubt of the sense; but a number of things are to be believed,
which be not thus set down in Scripture, as has been showed in the places
cited. See also Numb. 14. In other Cases I never deny the Scripture to be the
ground of Faith, but I say, that as God spoke by the pens of those who writ
Scripture, so he speaks by the Tongue of his Church in a General Council; and
therefore these his words are also to be believed, as I fully showed, Numb.
21.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. The Scripture in the Cases I here specified, is a
sufficient ground of Faith, as your authorities well prove, and so is the
authority of the Church, as I have fully proved in the places cited.

In your second Answer, all you say is, that the Church cannot ground our
Faith, but I have fully showed the contrary in the places cited.

In your third Answer, you come to answer the Testimonies I brought out of Holy
Fathers and Scriptures, and this takes you up unto your 27. Page My Reply is,
that in this Paper I have made good Authorities and Testimonies sufficiently
abundant to convince what I undertook, and I have fully refuted the chief
things you said against the chief places, as may appear fully out of the Numb.
17, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25, and 26. where at large I have showed your less sincere
proceeding about the prime authority of S. Austin, whose authority in the
precedent Number I showed not to be single.

In the fourth Answer, you say you take not Canonical Books to be Canonical for
the authority of the Church. I Reply, that if you do not take them to be so on
this authority, yet the holy Fathers did, as I have showed Numb. 12.25, 26. And
if you believe them to be Canonical only upon the Light given in them to you
to see this verity, your ground is far more fallible then the authority of a
General Council, as I have demonstrated Numb. 13.

In the fifth Answer, you endeavor to show, that you ground not your Faith on
your own private judgment of discretion, but I have showed fully the contrary,
Nu. 3, 4, 7.

In the sixth Answer, you rejoice to see me confess the Scripture to be the
Rule of Faith and Manners, as if I had at any time denied this. Neither does
this Confession destroy my Position, that the Church is the Ground of our
Belief. Can I not ground my Faith upon what St. Peter says, because I can
ground it upon that which Saint Paul says? Why is the Scripture the Rule of
Faith? Because it delivers to me Gods Written Word. But the Church delivers
to me Gods Word written and unwritten, I may therefore also rule my self by
that. The most right Rule of Scripture is often so crookedly applied, that he
is blind who sees not that we need to have better security of Interpretation,
then our own private discretion of Judgment can afford, as I have fully proved
Number. 4.14. Of the Infallibility of the Church in Interpreting, I have fully
proved our Doctrine, Numb. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.

In the seventh Answer, you tax me with being loath to own the Roman Church.
Why I did not speak of the Roman Church, I told you here in the beginning, it
was because you would conclude as there you do, The Catholic Church is not
the Ground of Faith, therefore the Roman is not. I have fully showed the
contrary, and proved the Catholic Church to be the ground of our Faith; and
out of superabundance I have showed this Church to be the Roman Church. See
Numb. 27, 28.

In the eighth Answer, you charge me in differing from my self, because before
I taught the ground of Believing to be the Authority of the Church, and now I
say, it is the Authority of God Revealing. My Reply is exceeding easy. The
Ground of our Faith is God Revealing, and God Revealing by his Church: as he
first causes our first Belief, when he tells us by his Church such and such
Books are Infallibly his Word. God Revealing is always the formal object of
Faith, but sometimes God Reveals his mind by Scriptures, and sometimes by
the Church, as he did for two Thousand years and more, before the Scriptures
were written. The Prophets before they did write, did say, This says the Lord,
to wit, this he said by their Mouths: So say I, This and this says our Lord by
the Mouth of his Church; as I have showed Numb. 22. Saint Athanasius to speak,
and I have showed, Numb. 28. The General Council of Chalcedon to have said
Peter has spoken by the mouth of Leo Pope of Rome. And thus Gods Revelation
comes to us by the Church: She and only She teaches us these and these
Scriptures to be Gods Word. We must first believe her, before we can come to
have Infallible Ground to believe Scriptures, as I have fully showed. After we
have believed Scripture, we cannot by Scripture only know the undoubted sense
of many necessary places in Scripture, as has been showed. Again, all things
necessary to be believed, be not set down in Scripture, as has also been
showed fully. The Revelation of God coming to us in all these cases by the
Church, you by your own words, in this place, must grant her Authority to be
our ordinary cause of Faith.

At the end of these your Answers, you would fain seem to have spoken properly
in accusing us of Excess of Faith: But your distinction does no way salve the
Impropriety of the Speech, for there is still a difference in more believing
Objects, and believing more Objects: but granting that it may be improperly
spoken, yet even in that Sense it is not truly said, because there can be no
Excess of Faith in believing what God says; for believing upon an Infallible
Authority all that we believe, we cannot believe more then we should, if we
believe no more things, then be grounded upon that Infallible Authority (as we
do not:) And consequently we do no more; then believe such things as have for
their Warrant, This faith the Lord.

Having now answered your Paper from the beginning to the end, I am most
willing to take your own close out of Saint Austin, Against Reason, no sober
Man will go, against Scriptures no Christian, against the Church no
Peacemaker; adding his other words ( Tr. 32. in Joan.) Let us believe my
Brethren, so much as a Man loves the Church, just so much he has of the Holy
Ghost.

SIR,
I Cannot answer it to God, nor to his Church with us, if I let you seem to
your self, or to others of your persuasion, that you have the Victory, until
you have overcome your Error; therefore you will excuse me if I still follow
you.

To your Preface then. If the Roman Catholics have often foretold, that by
permitting freely to all sorts of people the reading of the Scriptures in their
Mother Tongue, multitudes of new Sects and Heresies would not fail to grow up
in numberless number; and as for the peoples Manners, they would grow worse
and worse (as you say in the beginning) then are your Roman Catholics, in
this, false Prophets; because they seem (by you) to make that the cause of
Heresies and bad Manners. This is plainly fallacia non causa, or the fallacy of
accident. And secondly, it is contrary to that of our Savior Christ, Saint
Mark the 12.24. Do you not therefore err, not knowing the Scriptures, and the
power of God? By our Savior, the knowledge of the Scriptures is not the cause
of erring, but the not knowing of the Scriptures is the cause of erring: You do
therefore err not knowing the Scriptures, which are able to make us wise unto
Salvation; as Saint Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15. And thirdly, You confess in
this Paper, that when we are by the Church assured that the Scripture is the
Word of God, we may Ground our Faith in it, for those things which are plainly
delivered. And fourthly, How comes it to pass then, that some of those, in
whom Infallibility (as you think) is vested, have been Heretics and lewd: the
former of which indeed you do much deny, but is exemplified in Liberius's
subscribing against Athanasius, as you may see fully proved by our Reinolds
against your Heart. And surely was that also an action of bad Manners. Therefore
if your Church were the true Church, yet does it not (you see) teach the way of
Salvation infallibly, and therefore can we not by it infallibly discern the
true Religion from the false. Indeed the Catholic Church has taught the
infallible way of Salvation: but that was the Scripture, as I proved by many
Testimonies; and this was a teaching the infallible way by consequence, because
it did teach the Scripture, which is the infallible way: yet has it not in
particular points, taught the infallible way infallibly. Neither are we by the
Church infallibly resolved, that the Scripture is the Word of God, although the
authority of the true Church be a motive herein, yet is it not that wherein
ultimately we ground our Faith of the Scriptures, as I have showed.

Whereas then you say that we cannot have, as things stand, any other assurance
to ground our Faith upon securely (namely then the Church) you do still but
fortiter supponere, for we cannot ground our assurance securely upon the
Church. And secondly, Whereas you say, that as things stand, we have no other
assurance, etc. you do not well consider what you say, or I do not understand
what you mean: for hereby you do intimate that the Church is not the ground of
our Faith, (...), but that which is indeed the ground of our Faith, must be so
absolutely and universally, as far as is necessary: the Church security is
but the best of the kind, amongst those which are humane; but we must have a
Divine indefectible ground for our Divine Faith, in which there cannot be
falsity. Neither thirdly, Is the Church the first ground, because by it we
believe the Scripture to be the Word of God; because, if we did by it believe
the Scripture, then we are not first to believe it by the Scripture. And if
whatsoever credence we do give to it, we do give by authority of the Scripture,
then are we first to believe the Scripture, and then that is the first ground.
Fourthly, In that you say you did never deny; that when we are by the
Infallible authority of the Church assured of the Scripture to be the Word of
God, we may believe such things as are clearly contained in Scripture, etc. you
say that which concludes against the practice of the Church, not to permit the
use of Scripture unto the People; and also you do abate of the Universal
Proposition in the first Paper, that Divine Faith in all things is caused by
the proposal of the Church; and therefore if you would hold you to this, the
Controversy would be lessened betwixt us: for dato non concesso, that we are
bound to believe the Scripture to be the Word of God by the authority of the
Church, yet when we do thus believe it, then the immediate ground of our Faith
in those things clearly set down, is the written Word of God, and not the
authority of the Church. So then your first Number is indeed in no Number, for
you cannot mean thus, that we cannot believe any thing proposed plainly in
Scripture, unless we believe the authority of the Church in that particular.
And therefore when you have proved the authority of the Church to be that which
causes and determines our Faith of Scripture to be the Word of God, you will
say less then formerly, and until you do prove it, you say nothing.

As touching the expressions you make, in the second Number, of him who
answered the Papers, give him leave, if not to be the adversary herein, yet to
differ from you, and to think himself to be one of the most slender Sons of the
Church of England. Neither did you intend by courteous and respective words to
draw him to your opinion. Soft words alone will not do it, but soft words with
hard arguments may do more. When we see a clear demonstration of truth, it is
no courtesy to yield assent, for the Understanding cannot refuse Truth when it
does show it self; But whether the Reply (as you speak) be as clear a
demonstration as any wise man can hope for in this matter, let me have the
liberty and the civility (if in these businesses it has any place) not to
determine. Only it is very hard to say, who does optimum quod sic, as they
speak, the best of the kind. Yet also wise men may think, that if there can be
nothing more expected toward ths defense of your first position, the cause is
wanting to it. And certainly such a wise man and ingenuous (as you be) will not
content himself with any ascertainment, but that which is absolute, and
incapable of Error. Therefore not to deceive you by your own commendations, put
it to issue, bring it to the test, try the debate betwixt us by this rule of
Wisdom and Conscience also, Tene quod certum est, relinque quod incertum. It
is certain that the Scripture is Infallible, and you confess it; it is not
certain that the Church is Infallible, and I deny it. Which then should you
take to be the Rule and Ground and Cause of Faith?

As for the good design you mention here, and in your Title, to guide Souls
redeemed by Christ to the happy Eternity; I congratulate to you that desire,
but I am sorry that such a zeal is better then the way you lead them in.
Assuredly those Souls redeemed by the Blood of Christ, may and shall come to
happiness, without any Infallible Judge of Controversies on Earth. For first,
those things which are necessary to Salvation are plain in Scripture; matters
of question we are in no such danger by the ignorance of, reserving a purpose
not to contradict what we shall be convinced in on either part. Secondly, We
may be directed in these points by Judges, though not Infallible, as unto the
quiet of the Church. Thirdly, Until your Infallible Judge appears to be truly
such, it is the best way not to be bound intuitively to his dictates: for then
we might be in possibility of being bound to believe an error which is
repugnant to the understanding, Ex natura rei. So that until you make good the
Title of an infallible Judge, whom (as you say) we are obliged under pain of
damnation not to disbelieve, I shall hold up my hand only in admiration of
your confidence.

And whilst you do demonstrate this, (that we are bound under pain of
damnation not to disbelieve this Judge of yours;) You say you do demonstrate
your former Position that the infallible Authority of the Catholic Church is
the ground of our Faith. So you, yes, because you say that the Catholic
Church is the infallible Judge: To this, thus. Is it the infallible Judge
whereunto we are bound to submit our understandings in all things, or not? if
in all things, then we cannot believe what the Scripture says in plain points
without the proposal of the Church; which now seems contrary to your mind, if
not in all things, but only whether the Scripture be the Word of God, or in
cases of Controversy; then do you now go less then in your former paper, and
against the nature of implicit Faith:

Secondly, that the authority of the Church is not it upon which we resolvedly
rest our Faith of the Scripture; or the determination of Controversies, we
shall see when you come to it.

Thirdly, what do you mean by the Church? do you understand it formally of the
people, or representatively in an Assembly of the Pastors, if you mean it of
the people also; how is infallibility vested in them? Are we bound to stand to
their judgment? and they are to be in obedience to their Pastors. Well then;
it must be understood of their Pastors. What? of all? or most? or one? If of
all, when did they all Vote? if of most, when did most Vote? If of one ordinary
Pastor, with, or in a General Council; then remember whenever in your sense
you name a Church, it be so taken of the Pope and his Council General, which
yet you will not evince to be infallible by their authority. If they were
infallible, they must be infallible by the Word of God, as to us; and then that
again is the first ground of Faith: and also secondly, you will find that many
privileges which you have spoken of as to the Church, do not belong to the
Church Representative strictly, but to all the people of the Church as
invisible; which, as such comes not into this Controversy. If then you come
again in any discourse, keep you within, and to the bounds of the question; and
speak of the authority of the Church in the same sense, as to be the ground of
Faith Divine in all points, or in the same particulars. For if you proceed from
the Churches being the ground of faith as toward the Scripture to be the Word
of God: To conclude, that therefore it is the ground of faith indefinitely or
universally, you commit the fallacy a dicto secundum quid; as also, if you
proceed from its being the ground of Faith in points of Controversy to the
being the ground of Faith in all things, the discourse has the same fault. And
yet you say, that in your progress you leave nothing of concernment in my
reply unanswered; and also that you conclude contradictorily to me.

Sir, Let me here use my Liberty for your good. If you had a mind to leave
nothing in my reply of moment unanswered, you would have followed me as a
disputant, (...); you would have opposed distinction to some incident
arguments, (for professedly the answerer is not to dispute.) You would have
given me answer to answer, interpretation to testimonies, with showing either
their impertinency or invaliditie. And that excuse of yours, lest you should be
too long, is surely too short to cover you. That is not long whereof nothing
can be abated as he said, and that is my excuse. And surely your Treatise is
too long, not only by your many repetitions which swell your paper; but would
have been too long, had it been less, it is too long by it self. Who ever
answered a rejoinder with a Treatise? Shall I say, that by your form of a
Treatise, it may seem that you have more mind to treat then to fight, I am
loath to be so bold; neither does it become my spirit to tell you that you do
not stand your ground; but you do not neither conclude contradictorily, if your
Treatise did prove that the authority of your Church is the ground of Faith in
the Divinity of the Scripture, and in case of Controversy: For your first
paper spoke universally, my Answer denied it, and now you would prove it if you
could particularly. If you would conclude contradictorily to me, you should
have concluded in the same quantity affirmatively to my negative. This you
here seem not to intend, yet in other parts of your Treatise you would contend
it.

And in the end you would arm your Treatise against me, as if there were no
difference betwixt Positive and Oppositive Divinity. And this you do by
references, but you should not have put the suit to reference without my
consent.


So much for the Preface. After the Preface you come to the Proof of the Title.
You mean the Title of this Paper, which surely needs not to be proved, because
it is not delivered by way of Affirmation, but of Disquisition.
ANd as for the Similitude (you say) of St. Anselme, we like it very well. For,
if the Tables be turned, it does very aptly belong to you; who if you have not
with a Roman contention for Masterie pulled out the Eyes of Men, yet have put
out the Light, not allowing them the use of the Scripture: you shut up the
people in Darkness and will not let them see the Sun of Righteousness in his
own Orb of Scripture, for fear it may be he should not seem now to rise, but to
go down in Rome: and instead hereof you leave Men to walk by the Light of the
Pope; whom one compared to the Sun, as the Emperor to the Moon. Christ says,
Search the Scriptures, you say not, yea, you take away the use of all humble
seeking of God for the knowledge of Truth; because you have said that we must
all submit our assents to the determinations of the Church: So you see how your
Opinion is practically impious, and is disagreeable to your own directions: For
you say, if they should seek (of God) they should find. Only you say, we
should set all passions and prejudice aside, and with a calm humble mind beg of
God to give us this grace of seeking truth.

Surely, this Qualification of our address to God for the finding of Truth is
very good, and I would it were as well practiced as delivered: but let the
world judge who is like to be most wanting in this Devotion, and to exceed in
passion and prejudice; He who affirms all to be delivered infallibly by the
Church, or he that searches in Scripture particular Truths. Infallibility
pretended easily makes any man passionate against difference, unless indeed he
could make it good. And he that is infallible is in right capacity sure to
have a necessary prejudice against different Opinions. Neither since the times
of the Apostles has humility been usually seen to ^^^p company with
infallibility; not that he who is most humble is not most likely not to err;
but that he who says he cannot err is most likely not to be humble; but as
for prejudice by Education, which you speak of also, may I not as well retort
it upon you: I think in some respects it is not so applicable to me. Indeed we
do not inherit Religion as Lands: but if, when we come to ability of
discerning (which your Religion in its Principles will never let you come to)
we see good cause for our Religion: Surely we have no reason to leave it,
because it was our Fathers, although we do not embrace it, because it was our
Fathers. The relation it has to our Ancestors has no more moment in it then
the Church may have upon you, namely to be a considerable motive, not to be
your ultimate resolution, thus for the first number of your proof, (...) that
it is (...) to (...) even with you for the similitude by a saying of Tertullian
in his Apologet at the end of the 9. chapter, Caeti^^s d^ species facile
concurrunt, ut, qua non vident qua sunt, and videre viatantur quae non ^^nt.
So, while you do not see what exceptions there are against you, you see more
see what are not exceptions against us, and our way of Faith.

But therefore in your second Number you will prove your way by Scripture. We
now come to it. And your Text is, Esaias the 35. from the fourth Verse to the
ninth, by parcels, Say to the faint-hearted, Take courage, and fear not;
behold, God himself will come and save you: then shall the eyes of the Blind
be lightened, and the ears of the Deaf be opened, and there shall be a path,
and a way, and it shall be called an Holy way, and this shall be unto you a
direct way, so that fools cannot err by it. Thus you order the Testimony.

To this we say; 1. Whether it be intended by the Holy Ghost to respect the
Primitive Church, Christian mystically, through the Jewish, we cannot be
certain: but sure we may be, that in the Letter it does respect the Jewish
Church, after their redemption from captivity. And therefore it may be, you,
^earing that this should be taken notice of, do wisely leave out those
passages, which may seem to incline the Text to that sense, and you take only
that which you think is for your turn. So you know who would have deceived
Christ, by omitting that part of Scripture which was against him; although you
will not allow to the people the Liberty of Scripture, yet let us have all for
our life in the dispute. And it there be a mystical sense here, yet you know
the rule of Divines, which is also not denied by yours, that mystical Divinity
is not argumentative, unless namely the mystical sense be expressed in
Scripture, which you are here to demonstrate.

2. If it be understood of the Primitive Church, through the Jewish (as Saint
Hierome indeed does comment upon it) yet will it not (...) your (...), unless
you can prove, that whatsoever privileges were promised to the first Church in
the times of the Apostles, should in full dimensions be always extended to
your Church, and your Church only.

Therefore your Isidor Clarius does apply this Text to the time of our Savior,
when he did make the Blind to See, the Lame to Walk, as he sent word to John
the Baptist. And therefore since it was signally accomplished then, we cannot
urge the performance of it in that equality in a sense spiritual, which also
seems to be acknowledged by Saint Hierome upon the place; where the opening of
the Ears of the Deaf, he does apply to the Scripture Preached, and the way he
says to be God. Now then, as we cannot solidly argue from the promise of
pouring out the gifts of the Holy Spirit, which was solemnly and subf^^a
visibile, made good upon the Apostles (as ^o^h^ Peter declared) that there
shall be the like effusion of immediate gifts upon the Church in the following
ages, which some Sectaries would plead: so neither can we rationally conclude
from this promise, which was as that excellent manner, and in the Letter
perfected by our Savior Christ, that it shall be continued to any Church i^
that measure of a spiritual kind. If we cannot evince the same perfection in
the same kind, surely can we not by our accommodation of sense, evince the
same perfection in another kind, upon the former consideration, because it is
mystical, and that not argumentative.

3. This path, and this way, and this holy way, so that fools cannot err, is
(upon supposition) promised to the Church. Is it not? Well then, if it be
promised to the Church, then the Church is not that way, for that way is
promised to the Church; so that the Church is not absolutely that way, but so
far as it goes that way, which is as much as was said before (and is not yet
answered) that the Church is regula regulata, not regulans. Take then the
matter thus; that way which the Church goes we must go^^ The Church goes by the
way of Gods-Word revealed, and so must we, therefore we are not bound to follow
the Church with blind obedience, which excludes Faith, because that includes
Knowledge, although it be contradistinguished to Science.

Fourthly, If the promise did belong to the Church in all times, yet not to any
Church of one denomination; therefore until you can prove that your Church is
all, this makes nothing for you. Particular Churches have not those properties
which belong to the Universal Church as such.

And if you make a proof of the Church to be the holy way, because the Church
is holy, how easily is that undone, because there is more reason that the
Scripture should be the holy way, for that is perfectly holy: or the Holy Ghost
is the Judge, because he is essentially holy, but neither is the Church
perfectly holy here, nor essentially holy not in Heaven: And besides, secondly,
the Holy Church (if you understand it with relation to the Creed, as in your
former Paper) it is to be taken of the Church invisible, which as such is on
way. And thus I have slighted your strong hold, as it seems to you, for
hitherto you do fly very often.

In your third Number you come to an assertion of the necessity of an
Infallible Judge.

You say that all Christians of whatsoever Religion do agree in this, that
there must be one Judge of all Controversies and Doubts, which either be, or
can be in Religion. So you.

You speak very largely of your supposition, as if it were agreed to by all
Christians, but you do not consider that you do leave out that which makes the
(...), the state of the question; whether there must be an Infallible Judge on
Earth, for that is not consented to on all hands, by all Religions, indeed by
none but yours.

That God either essentially taken, or personally the Holy Ghost, is the
Supreme, Universal, Infallible Judge, and only in whose Authority we rest, and
whose word is the Ground of Faith, we hold. Under him subordinate Judges there
are, but not Infallible: neither is it by your reason sufficiently confirmed,
that there should be on Earth any Infallible Judge. For the defect of such a
Judge on Earth does not leave us free without any fault to follow our own
private judgment, in holding what we will. For first, it is impossible for us
to hold what we will, in our judgments. We may possibly, though not morally,
profess what we will, although contrary to our judgments, as many do: but we
cannot assent to what we will, because our Understanding is not free to take
which part of the opposition it pleases by way of Will, for it embraces.
Truth naturally, as it sees it, and it cannot give a rational assent without a
due conviction, and therefore your implicit Faith is false and null.

Secondly, We do not say that we should follow our own judgment of discretion,
without means of regulating our judgment: but yet after we have perused the
Definitions of Councils, and Sentences of the Fathers, we cannot resign up our
Assents to their Dictates upon their account, but do examine them, (as the
Beraeans did that which Saint Paul said) until we can find them resolved into
the Infallible rule of Holy Scripture. For let me ask a Papist, according to
the renour of your first Paper, What does he believe? he answers, that which
the Church believes: and why does he believe it? because the Church believes
it: and why does the Church believe it? because it received it from the first
Church, through the Sentences of the Fathers, or the Determinations of
Councils. Well, but how shall the People know, whether this Tradition of
Doctrine is truly discerned, and faithfully delivered? but if so, why is he
bound to believe the first Church? because either they were the Apostles, o^
had it from the Apostles. And why does he believe the Apostles? Because they
were inspired by the Holy Ghost. Well, in what they wro^e, or in what they
spoke, or both: In both. Well, but how do we know what they spoke* We know what
they wrote bears witness of it self, so does not to us what they spoke: so
that, although they were inspired in wha^ they spoke, yet we know not what they
spoke. Neither can we be assured by a Divine Faith, that what of them was not
written is certainly derived. And therefore all of Faith must be terminated,
and determined in that which is written.

And as toward Controversies, we say thirdly, that Christ has sufficiently
provided for the Salvation of Man, in regard of means of knowledge, without an
Infallible Judge on Earth of their Controversies: because things necessary are
plainly set down in Scripture; and for matters of question, we are not in any
such danger, if we do our endeavor according to our condition, to find out
Truth, and do dispose our selves to Belief, as we shall see credibility to
arise. The Scripture does with competent clearness furnish us against
damnative error, and the Church does no more, as you give us to understand at
the end of this your Treatise: and why then should we leave the Scripture
(which is acknowledged Infallible) to go to the Church? and what need then of
an Infallible Judge? what for Peace and Unity?

Then fourthly, we say that the Decisions of the Church though unprovided of
infallibility, do yet oblige unto Peace. Though their judgment cannot engage
undisputed assent: yet their power they have from Christ, does require
reverence and undisturbance in the difference. It requires subscription, if we
see no cause of dissenting: and if we do, subjection to the censure. All the
authority of the world can go no further with us; unless we might be
hypocrites in differing by an outward act from our inward act of belief. And
yet wherein have we divided out accords from the former General Councils? And
therefore why are we charged with this Indictment, as if we were opposite to
the authority of the truly Catholic Church? yet if we did differ without
Opposition, we keep the peace of the Church without question. And that we must
differ until we see God speaking, believe his reason that said, Omnis creata
veritas, etc. All created verity is defectible, unless as it is rectified by
the increased verity: Wherefore the assent neither to the Testimony of Men or
Angels does infallibly lead into Truth, save only so far as they see the
Testimony of God speaking in them. So then the assent of Faith is only under
obedience to him speaking. And if you say that God does speak in General
Councils, as he does speak in his Word written, prove it. Yea, how then will
you avoid blasphemy? For does God speak Contradictions? For so one Council
has contradicted another. And to use your own argument, we are bound to submit
our judgment only to those who can judge of the inward act; for so you
distinguish betwixt temporal Judges and others; but God only can judge of our
internal acts, therefore we must submit our assents only to him: and therefore
to others, no further then they speak according to him. So that we cannot
absolutely adhere to whatsoever is said in Councils, which have erred, Jewish
and Christian too. Now then you may think I spoke reason in my respects to
General Councils without your unlimited subjection of Faith.

And therefore your admiration in the beginning of the 5th. page of this Paper,
which is grounded upon your interpretation of tha^ of Esaias, is as unnecessarie.
And that absurdity which you would infer upon my Opinion (that the wisest men
in the world are most likely to err this way by which he may in his interior
judgment go quite contrary to all Christendom) has little in it out noise.
For first you suppose hereupon an infallible Judge upon earth; which is the
Question. Secondly the wisest man is not most likely to err if it be lawful to
dissent from Universal councils, because as such he is most apt to discern what
is defined according to Truth, what not. Thirdly, what think you of Saint
Athanasius who differed in his judgment and profession too, from most of
Christendom then about the Divinity of the Son. Fourthly, the Rule of
Scripture is equally infallible, and those who are wise if they prepare
themselves for the search of Truth, they are likely not to err, (for if they
go by the Rule, they cannot err, because it is infallible: But those who go
by the Church may err, because for ought is yet proved, it is not infallible)
and those who are fools may by Scripture be made wise unto salvation. And to
this purpose the Scripture, which is very sublime and heavenly in the matter;
yet is simple and plain and low in the manner of deliverie, that those who are
of meaner capacity might hereby he sufficiently directed to life and
salvation: Therefore do not tell me but prove to me that the Church is
infallible, and that you are the only Church, or else you do nothing but with
fools, whom you find or make to go your way.

In your next lines you do discharge me of singularity in my Opinion: For it
appears by you, that all but Roman Catholics are of the same persuasion.

All but Roman Catholics, you say. As if none were Catholics but either of
your Nation, or of your Religion. The first is a contradiction, and the second
is a falsitie; for there were many Catholics which were not of your Religion
in those Points wherein we differ. By the Fathers of the Church, those were
accounted Catholics which withstood the plea of Faustinus the Popes Legate in
the Carthaginian Council, when he falsified the Nicene Canon of subjection to
the Roman Bishop; whereof no such copy could be found. They were Catholics
who determined against Appeals to Rome, who determined equal privileges of
other Churches to the Bishop of Rome. They were Catholics who held not
Transubstantiation, nor Purgatory, nor your use of Images, nor your Sacrament
under one kind, nor your other Sacraments, as of proper Name, nor Indulgencies.
And they were Catholics, who held that which you do not hold, as the
Millenarie Opinion, and Infant Communion.

And therefore (to follow you) the desperate consequence which you charge us
with, if we do not come over to your way, flows not from your premises,
unless you can make out an infallible assistance of your See, and that this is
by God appointed for our necessary passage to salvation, and the way promised
in the Prophet Esaias. Nay, if the people should be left, for their guidance to
the unanimous consent of the whole Church in points of Faith, here would be a
desperate consequence; for I hope they were more like to find the Articles of
Faith in the leaves of Scripture (which as to these is plain) then in the
perusal and collection of all the judgments of all the Fathers of all ages
every where, according to the rule of Lyrinensis; or if we take the depositions
of the Fathers in those properties, which he describes such whereby we are to
be ruled, that they must be holy Men, wise Men, they must hold the Catholic
Faith and Communion, they must persist in their Doctrine, they must persist in
it unto Death in the same sense, as in the 39. Chapter against Heresies. If you
do not take the consent of the Church, according to these circumstances you
differ from him: If you do, how shall the poor people through all those
labyrinths, see the right way of wholesome Doctrine, when who knows how many of
them did not write at all? How many of those who wrote were not such? How many
works of those who were such are to us perished? How many bastard pieces are
fathered on them? How many of their writings corrupted? How many or how few
have touched upon our differences, having not occasion by adversaries? How many
have differed from one another? How many have differed from themselves? Is then
this the way that fools cannot err? If wise men go this way, surely this is
their first error, that they go this way; wherein nothing is found but
perplexities and unsatisfiednesse. Neither can they soberly raise the credit of
their Doctrine by prime descent without interruption from the Apostolic age,
if all be well considered. Such a confidence let me give a check to by
application of a story.

A Christian Prince was much seduced by a kind of men, who professed a vast Art
of giving a certain account of many Ages before; and a trifling Courtier
perceiving his humor, made him believe that his Pedigree in ancient race of
Royal Blood, might be fetched from Noah's Ark: wherewith he being greatly
delighted, forthwith laid aside all business, and gave himself to the search
of the thing so earnestly, that he suffered none to interrupt him whosoever; no
not Ambassadors, which were sent to him about most weighty affairs. Many
marvelled hereat, but none durst speak their mind; till at length his Cook,
whom he used sometimes as his Fool, told him that the thing he went about was
nothing for his honor; for now says he, I worship your Majesty as a God; but
if we go once to Noah's Arc, we must there your self and I both be akinne.

This the Story; which is so long, that it reaches you from top to toe: for
you would by a very long series derive your authority as it were from Noah's
Arc, which you think represents your Church, out of which there is no
salvation. You would run it up from very many successions to the times of the
Apostles, and nothing will content you but this ancient Original. You lay aside
all other proofs in comparison of this succession; (not so much of Doctrine
indeed, as of Church) Ambassadors that are sent to you with Scripture you will
not hear, unless your Church may have the power of Interpretation infallibly
in your own cause. But let some of the Popes servants whom he makes his Fools,
inform him that that which he goes about is little for his Honor; for now they
worship him as a God, but if they come to the times of the Apostles, there will
be found no such distance betwixt him and others; and consanguinitie of
Doctrine (as it is expressed) will be able to disinherit your points of
difference formerly named, with invocation of Saints (...); Where do we find
them? Where may we read them? Therefore urge not Antiquity, unless Truth goes
along with it on your side, and do not any more strain the consent of ages for
Doctrines, which (as we may speak) will be out of breath long before they come
to that mighty height of the Apostolic time.

As for your instance of Saint Cyprian erring by persuasion of that which he
held to be Scripture, and St. Austins Crisis of his error; I Answer,

First, You see here Saint Cyprian, a Prime Doctor of the Church did then
ground his Opinion upon Scripture without recourse to Tradition. And this makes
for us, that he thought it no injury to the Church to vary from what was held
or practiced upon respect to Scripture. He undertook to think and do otherwise
then Christendom then, in the point of Rebaptization; and yet was not accused
as an Heretic.

Secondly, He erred groslie, and yet not dangerously, because he held his
Opinion without malignance to the Church: and so may we without peril of
salvation. And if you say the case is different betwixt him and us, because
that point wherein he went not with the Church, was not then defined by a
Council: We answer, what shall we say then of the times in the Church, before
there was any Council, and therefore in those times the Rule of Faith and
Action was without a Council; and therefore this answer does not satisfy; or
they were ruled only by Scripture, which may satisfy you.

Thirdly, He erred not in the substance of the Act when he pleaded Scripture;
but in the misapplication of Scripture to that case: and therefore this
Argument comes to the fallacy of accident, and this makes no prejudice against
Scripture; which in it self is contrary to error, without defectibilitie; and
therefore he that indeed follows Scripture cannot err, because it is
Infallible. So cannot we say of the Church, for ought yet we see by your
Discourse.

Fourthly, This makes no more disadvantage to the prerogative of Scripture,
then that the Pelagians for their Opinions urged the Testimonies of the
Fathers: which caused Saint Austin to make an Apology for them, Vobis
Pelagianis; when you Pelagians were not yet born, the Fathers spoke more
securely; namely of the power of nature. Nay surely it makes a great deal
less; for the Father, if in this he had followed the Fathers, whom the
Bitagians quoted, had erred not by his Interpretation of them, but, it seems,
by their inconfideratenesse: But we cannot charge Scripture with any such
fault; and therefore Saint Cyprian erred by misinterpretation. And here also by
the way we see how fallible a rule is the consent of the Fathers: since if
Saint Austin had ordered his belief thereby he had been overtaken with
Pelagianisme.

Now as for Saint Austins crisis concerning this of Saint Cyprian, that if he
had lived to see the Determination of a plenary Council, he would for his great
humility and charity straightway have yielded, and preferred the General
Council before his judgment; to this (besides what we now said about the
undefinednesse of it by a Council) we say, It is like he would have yielded,
and this yet accrews not unto your cause much.

For first, Saint Austin says for his great humility and charity he would
have yielded. And this manner of Expression you may perceive does abstract from
a necessity of duty. Under bond of Duty these virtues have no freedom. He was
so humble of mind that he would have thought better of them: he was so
charitable, that for this he would have offended none in this case: but does
this infer that he was bound in conscience to sink his Opinion in the
authority of their Definition? No, no. Humility and Charity have in them no
formalitie influxive unto Faith (for this is seated in the understanding) but
to peace. Therefore this yielding of his, (supposed upon the Case) would have
only concerned his person, as not to have opposed here; not his judgment, as
if this should necessarily have been overcome by their Authority. For the
person may be bound when the Conscience cannot be bound: so may the person
yield as to the omission of opposite acts, when the understanding yet keeps its
former due apprehension.

Secondly, this business of Saint Cyprian is such as is a matter of practice
not clearly decided by Scripture: but this avails not to an universal
conclusion of ruling our faith by the Church; which although you at the
beginning did seem to wave, yet here would in your discourse insinuate and wind
in. The sum of this is, We do not dispute a reverence to Councils: but we
cannot grant an undisputed reception of whatsoever is delivered by them. In
such determination we break not the peace; but keep Faith for Gods Word. So
then your fourth Number in your sixth page might have been spared, until you had
upheld your supposition of construing that of Esaias to be meant of the Church.
All you build thereupon must be ruinous. Debile fundamentum fallit opus. And
besides what is there but repetitions? Only you observe therein another
inconvenience in our Cause; in that we do not hold one Infallible Judge on
earth, which yet in effect you have had before. But to view the moment thereof
the better, let me put what you would have into some form with all ingenuitie;
thus, where there is not one Judge there will not be one Faith: but there is
one Faith; therefore there is but one Judge.

Now if you will accept this: Syllogism for year, I shall answer to it by
distinguishing; if you mean in the proposition an Infallible Judge on Earth,
and such a Faith as is to be understood in the assumption according to the
Text, Ephesians. 4.5, then we deny the proposition; for Faith there, is not to be
understood of Faith subjectively, but Faith objectively; and Faith, in regard
of the objects thereof may be entire, and one, though every one does not hold
them, for the unity of Faith there depends not upon men's profession, but upon
coherence with it self, and the exclusion of any other, as toward appointment
unto Salvation. If you mean Faith otherwise, we deny your assumption to be true
to the sense of the Text.

Whereas you say then, that otherwise God had not well provided for the
Salvation of men generally, if but one of ten thousands (without an Infallible
Judge) might hit the right sense of Scripture: We Answer, First, you see here
how your opinion does miserably betray you to hard thoughts of Scripture, and
consequently of God in it. Is not Scripture able to make us wise unto
Salvation? Is it not given by inspiration? Is it not profitable for Doctrine,
for Conviction, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness; that the man
of God might be absolute, being made perfect unto every good work? as Saint
Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. what can we desire more of Scripture in
regard of sufficiency to its end, then that it should be able to make us wise
unto Salvation? what can we want in it, as in regard of the matter of it
toward that end, when as it is profitable as to those purposes? and if there
be not all so clear, as that every one of the people may discern the mind of
God as toward a particular sense; yet the Man of God, the Minister of the
Gospel by the Study and Learning he has, may be able to be thereby furnished
to every good work, that he may instruct others. Now I think you will not think
that Saint Paul by the Man of God here intended the Pope, or any one Infallible
Judge, and therefore your postu^gre or an Infallible Judge is unreasonable. Any
Minister of the Gospel, by his abilities, is able competently, through the
Scripture, to direct the people unto their happiness; and the Scripture was
inspired to this purpose, as it appears. And what need then of an Infallible
Judge? It is true, every Minister is not able to explicate all difficulties of
Scripture, no nor all your Popes and Councels neither, but in things necessary
their knowledge may be sufficient; in points of debate, there is no necessity
of certain knowledge, as unto Salvation. And this you afterward come to, when
you take care to save the credit of the Church by a distinction, that it cannot
teach any damnative error, so then it may err, but not teach damnative error.
The Scripture teaches all things necessary; cannot err at all; why then do we
not rest here? Therefore take you no more this way of reckoning, we have an
Infallible Judge therefore we must absolutely hear him. But first, prove the
necessity of a Judge indefinitly, and then who it is demonstratively, and then
we have done. In the mean time, you are in the peril of Treason, not against
Gods Judge, but against God the Judge, in setting up another Judge, in the
Consciences of men. And if the subordinate Judge, who is not Infallible, goes
without a Commission and makes Laws himself, is not this Treason? So then,
the subordinate Judge determines by Scripture or not; if not, then he makes a
new Law: if he does determine by Scripture, then does his determination bind by
Authority of Scripture, where of he is but a Minister. And is not the Word by
the Spirit of God Judicative? What else is said, Heb. 4.12. Consider well that
Text, and see if it may not answer all your objections against Scripture? If
you say the Word of God is a Dead Letter, it cannot speak; it is here denied,
it is Living: if you say that it cannot act; it is denied, it is active, (...)
if you say that cannot decide Controversies; what is said here? It is sharper
then any two edged Sword. It decides all Controversies of Faith, and those
points of Faith (pretended) which are not, here it does cut off. If you say
that cannot reach the Conscience, what then can? it is piercing, even to the
dividing of Soul and Spirit, Joints and Marrow. If you say it cannot judge, it
is here (...), Critical, exactly Judicative of the thoughts and notions of the
heart; and this is more then any Judge on Earth can do. All that Judges on
Earth can do, in our question, is but to declare and apply the decisions of
Scripture against Error or Evil practice: if they go higher, they go above
their Sphere. And since they may (for ought appears by you to the contrary)
miss of the right determination, we use them but as Consuls, not as dictators:
We consult them, and then look to the Rule. What then it is to submit your
interior Judgment (as you speak) to any one on Earth, I leave it to you to
judge; since he, whosoever he is, can oblige assent no otherwise now then by
light of Scripture, which is the standing and only rule we have to go by unto
happiness. And if we go any other way to settle our assent of truth (which is
to be preferred before unity) we shall come no way to faith. So you see what is
the cause of the chasm betwixt us; you cannot come to us, because you are bound
and captivated by your Infallibility, which while you hold, it holds you in
incapacity of being better advised: and we cannot come to you, because you hold
it. It is hard to say which has destroyed more Souls, uncertainty of that
Religion which we have in Scripture, or Infallibility besides it; and yet not
so hard, for Uncertainty may be helped, but Infallibility has no remedy.

And now, forasmuch as you have not upon firm ground established the
necessarinesse of an Infallible Judge, I need go no further, till this be made
sure. I need not have any thing to do with your assumption; indeed, (if I may
be so free) a presumption. Yet, lest you should take it amiss or ill, if I
should say nothing to it by it self, I shall not let it pass without some
notice of it.

But what you say at first here, that if we find out this Judge, we can never
remain in any doubt; for without all doubt, we must stand to the judgment of
this Judge, what reasons soever our private judgment or discretion may
suggest: So you; this spoils all, and this is an argument against you: that
which you say is little else then Contradictio in adjecto, as they speak. If we
must submit our judgments to an Infallible Judge (pretended) whatsoever
reasons (of Scripture I mean) we have to the contrary, then there is no such
Judge; for it is impossible for us in our judgments to assent to that, for
which we see reasons of Scripture to the contrary. Take Reason simply, and so
in matters of Faith it must quiescere (as the School phrase is) as a principle,
because the doctrine of Faith is supernatural, in the judgment of Aquinat, at
the beginning of his Sums: but take Reason as an Instrument for the finding
out of the sense of Scripture; and so, what moments we find in Scripture for
any opinion, we cannot sink in any determinations on Earth. As far as the
understanding sees appearance of Truth, it does necessarily leap and run to it,
and will not leave it for any Authority under Heaven: and therefore, while the
reason of Authority is not so clearly drawn from the Word of God, as the reason
of his Opinion in his own judgment, it cannot give up its assent. And if we
are by duty to go your way of absolute credence to the dictates of your Judge,
we must then, if he says Vices are Virtues, say so too, as your Cardinal
Bellarmin determins, in his 4. Book, de Romans Pontif. cap. 5. And thus you again
see whither your blind obedience will lead you, even from darkness to
darkness.

In the seventh Number you lay to our charge an agreement with all Heretics
that have risen up against the Church, because we (as all Protestants) do hold
that the Scripture is the only Judge, by which all doubts and differences and
Controversies of Religion, are to be determined with Infallible Authority. To
this Saint Austin answers, l. de Trinit. cap. 38.

We also answer to this charge, first, as before, that Heretics have urged
Authority too, and therefore by your argument, you must quit your way of the
Authority of the Church, or else grant us our way of Scripture notwithstanding.
Secondly, does it follow rationally, that because the Heretics have misapplyed
Scripture, therefore we should not rightly apply it? If the Standard be made
use of to ill purpose, of measuring stolen commodities, therefore shall not
other measures be ruled hereby? It is accidental to Scripture to be thus
abused: shall it therefore loose its proper privilege? because, as Saint Peter
says, some who are unlearned and unsettled wrest Scriptures to their
destruction; therefore those who are learned and settled may not improve it to
their Salvation: because Robbers make use of the light of the Sun, for actions
unrighteous and wicked; therefore honest men may not use the Light for their
lawful employments. Is this good reasoning? You had surely raised your
discourse to the height, if you had told us that we must not urge Scripture,
because the Devil did urge it unto our Savior Christ. So one indeed concludes:
as if the Devil did not apprehend what kind of argument our Savior would own,
and what reject, therefore did he not set upon him with Tradition of the
Church, as is noted. Neither did Christ reply upon him with Tradition, but with
Scripture, which is a better Argument, that this is to be our Rule which we
should be be ordered by. Thirdly, The Heretics did not press that which was
true Scripture, but either corrupted it, as Tertullian observes in his
praescriptions; or took only so much as was for their use, or perverted the
sense of it; so that if Scripture does consist in the sense, they did not bring
Scripture for their proof, but that which is not Scripture. Fourthly, Why does
Bellarmine and others of your Writers so frequently endeavor to uphold their
Doctrines by Scripture, if because the Heretics use it, we must not? Neither
do they plead Scripture by the Traditional sense of the Church, but by their
own Interpretations. When Scripture seems to them to speak for them, then they
produce Scripture; but when they are oppressed with clear testimonies against
them, then little respect is given thereunto. Fifthly, If Controversies are not
to be ended by Scripture, which the Heretics plead, then how are they to be
ended by the judgment of the Church? Yes, you will say, but how shall
Heretics know, if they doubt what or which is the true Church? it must be by
the Scripture, so that our last recourse must be to Scripture. Again, if
Heretics must be persuaded by the Church, then are they led, if not by their
private judgments, yet by private judgments of others. For besides that the
Church consists of private Men, the consent of the whole, if they could be
certain of it, being compared to Scripture, in way of contradistinction, has
it self by manner of private judgment: All the public power it has, it has
by God and Scripture: then here again we must end. Again, how shall Heretics
know that all Controversies are to be ended by the Church? they must know it
either by their own judgments of discretion, which you deny to us, or by the
Church. What in its own cause? or by Scripture? so we must resolve our selves
in Scripture, analytically we must bottom there, synthetically we must begin
there. Sixthly, This practice of Heretics, if it has reason to make us
forsake Scripture, has it not reason also to make you retract your expressions
of your self as toward Scripture, that you do profess all reverence and all
credit to be due to Scripture, as the Infallible word of God, insomuch that you
are ready to give your lives in defense of any thing contained herein? Will you
stand to your words? If you will, then must you believe, that whatsoever is
necessary is declared therein sufficiently, For what says the Scripture by
Saint Paul, Gal. 1.8. If I, or an Angel from Heaven preach to you any other.
Doctrine besides what you have received, let him be Anathema. And what then
becomes of your unwritten word, on behalf whereof you wisely cry up the
infallibility of the Church, in points of Religion? For as for the distinction
of your men hereupon, that the Text is to be understood of that which is
against it, not of that which is beside it, is invalid, for it is in the Text
beside, (...), and besides, that which is beside it as a Rule, is against it:
For if any thing be a Rule besides it, then is that not a Rule. For a Rule or
Canon, as it excludes defect, so does it exclude excess, and therefore, in
necessaries to faith and salvation nothing is to be added; as in the 22. of the
Apocalypse the 18. If any man shall add hereunto, God shall add unto him the
Plagues that are written in this Book. After the consignation of the Canon,
nothing is to be added as he said.

And your glorious asserting (which follows in your Treatise) that you only do
truly believe the Scripture, because you only believe it to be the Word of God
upon Divine Revelation manifested by Gods Church, which (as you will show) is
infallible, is certainly not very sound: Because first, this is not yet put out
of question that the Church is infallible. This you would beg and have to be
granted unto you: therefore you pass the proof of it here, and skip from this
to the denial of true faith to the Protestants. For this Demonstration we must
wait your leisure. Secondly, we deny unto you any reason of this your glory in
the belief of Scripture, upon this consideration; that the Faith of Protestants
is more grounded then yours is: for whatsoever authority the Church has
toward this persuasion we also make use of as a motive to this Faith: and then
we do resolve and settle and determine our Faith hereof by the autopistie of
the word of God, which you say is the infallible Word of God. If it be
infallible, it cannot deceive us. Neither can be it be said that we cannot be
assured of its infallibility by its self; because we cannot be assured of the
Authority of the Church, but by the Word of God. Yea, this is the ratio
formalis of Divine Faith, to believe what he says to be true, because he says
it: Therefore must we believe that the Scripture is the Word of God, because he
says it. And suppose the Church were Infallible, yet must we ground and
terminate our Faith hereof in Scripture, unless it did otherwise appear
Infallibly to be so, or else we are in everlasting motion to and fro: as, Why
do I believe the Scripture to be the Word of God? because the Church says it.
Why do I believe the Church? because the Scripture bears witness of it. How
do I know the Scripture says it? because, again the Church says so. You must
then come to us and our principles, if you will have any grounded constitution
of Divine Faith: we fluctuate, and hover up and down like the Dove, until we
come to set a sure foot on the ground of Scripture. The prime and
indemonstrable principle of all Divinity, amongst principles complexe, must be
this, that the Scripture is the Word of God.

And hereupon, that which you say in your eighth page, That it is no where
written in Scripture, that such and such Books of Scripture be Canonical, and
the undoubted Word of God, etc. makes no prejudice against us (and yet that
which is quoted in Scripture from any other book, under such a name, is upon
this consideration Canonical) for they are worthy to be believed for
themselves. As we assent unto prime principles, in the habit of intelligence,
by their own light: so do we assent unto Scripture, to be the Word of God;
through the help of the Spirit of God, do we see the Scripture to be the Word
of God, as by its own light. Therefore has Faith more proportion to
Intelligence, then to Science, since we see no reason to believe, but by the
credibility of the object which has upon it impressed the Authority of God.
And this in effect, even Aristotle did see in his Rhetoricks, when he speaks of
that which is (...), which is either by Humane Testimony or by Divine; in the
latter whereof, that which makes the Faith, is the Testimony of God. And that
testimony of Saint Austin, which your Bellarmin produces against those who
were for private Revelations, beside Scripture, in his first Book, De verbo
Dei, cap. 2. (and he takes it out of the 12 of his De Civit. cap. 9.) infers as
much in these words, Scripturae fides mirabilem autoritatem non immerito habet,
etc. The Faith of the Scripture, has not undeservedly an admirable Authority
in the Christian World, and in all Nations, which, amongst other things that
it spoke, it did by a true Divinity foretell would believe it. It has an
admirable Authority, not undeservedly; mark that, not from the Christian world,
but in the Christian world, and in all Nations which it did foretell would
believe it; not the Church, for they that were the Church were to believe it
first: it did foretell by a true Divinity: if then we would use a scientifical
argument, and intrinsecal from the Scripture, it, should be this, that what it
has foretold, is come certainly to pass; and what is come to pass, in the
belief of it it did foretell. The humane Faith then, such as that whereby we
believe Cicero's or Virgils books, is indeed yours; for you are they who have
no other then humane grounds, and consequently an humane Faith, if your Faith
does rest upon the authority of Man. What you have more to say to this, out of
the virtue of General Councils, you refer me to in the 19 Number; but all the
light they give comes from the Sanctuary of Scripture, and therefore what Light
you have, must be more then Man's.

In the middle of your eighth page, you say you have a second convincing
Argument: it is easily denied to be a second convincing Argument, for it cannot
be a second convincing Argument, until the first proves so.

But the sum of this Argument is drawn from our uncertainty of the knowledge
of the Scripture to be the Word of God by our translations, since the
Scriptures were written in Ebrew and Greek, which one of ten thousand does not
perfectly understand. But do you not consider that this Argument will rebound
with more force against you, for you have nothing at all for your belief, but
the Authority of the Church in your Translation Latin. Yea, the people must
have no knowledge at all by any Translation which they understand, therefore
their Faith upon this account is less Divine, because they have no
understanding of Scripture by any Interpretation. Secondly, The Translations
are the Word of God not absolutely, but so far as they agree with the
Originals, and therefore by them we do not ground our Faith as such: but we
ground our Faith upon that which is translated to be the Word of God, because
God by his Spirit persuades us of it, therefore the Fallibility of Translation
does not destroy our Faith, for we do not build it upon a Translation; but this
you do, you rely upon your Latin Translation, Session the 4. as Bell. in the 30.
B. De verbo Dei, c. 9.
which by the Trent Council was Christened Authentic before it was born. You
make that to be the Scripture, by which you must decide Controversies; (then
you decide Controversies by Scripture.) And has that no faults in it? Is it
every word Infallibly done? If Infallibly done at first, why did Clement the
eighth vary from Sixtus quintus? and why does Isidor Clarius vary from him in
thousands of places? And do you any where find in Scripture, that this
Interpretation is made Canonical? And are there none that find great fault with
this Latin one? If you will look into your Bellarmine in his third Book, De
verbo Dei, 10. Chapter you may find the contrary; and although it goes under
the account of an ancient Edition and Hieronis, yet in the Chapter before, you
may see he finds adversary objections, and you may find by his confession that
all is not his. What need then Sixtus Quintus have made it up? And is not your
Rhemish Testament very faulty? Will you, undertake to make it all good against
Fulk? And if you say that you may be certain of your Latin by the Church which
you will prove to be infallible; until you do prove it, you do again commit
the fallacy (...). This should have been made irrefragably sure at first by
Achillean invincible arguments, and then we should have fallen down before you.
But again you tell us you will do it, and presently fly at us for our Opinion.
Is there not one of yours who is prettily, in his Opposition against Bishop
Andrews about the Popes temporal power, compared to the pulex, Qui cessim
fugit and fugit recessim,
Et subsultibus hinc and hinc citatis
Vibrat cruscula;
And is there no more do so?


In some lines following of your Treatise we have nothing but petitions or
repetitions, and we answer no more till you prove more, then this, no man ever
erred by following Scripture sincerely which you grant to be the infallible
Word of God: If they erred, they erred from Scripture, not by it. But fools may
be made wise by Scripture, and wise men may err by your Church, until you make
it infallible. Nullibi pronior fidei lapsus quam ubi rei falsae gravis author
extitit, as he said. If they may teach that which is false, wise men may also
be deceived; if they be not infallible, they may teach that which is false.

But in the eighth line of the ninth page you oppose to me Saint Austins
authority, and of all the greatest Doctors which ever the Church had, that
they professed themselves unable to understand the Scriptures, and that after
many years study, and how then, etc.

We easily answer, Saint Austin does not say that the Scripture is absolutely
and universally, in all places so difficult, that we may not get out from
thence that which will direct us to Heaven, for then he should contradict
himself. Does he not say in his 4th. chapter of the 2. Book De Doct. Christ.
That there are some things indeed difficult; but the obscurity is profitable to
tame our pride by labor, and to bring back our understanding from loathing,
cui facile investigata plerumque vilescum, as he says. And fully again in in
his 10th. Tome, De verbis Apostoli, Sermon. the 13th. Verbi Dei altitudo, etc.
The sublimitie of the Word of God does exercise our study, does not deny to be
understood. If all were shut up, there would be nothing whereby that which is
obscure would be revealed. Again, if all were covered, there would not be from
whence the soul should receive nourishment, and might have strength to knock at
that which is shut. Therefore your fallacy is a dicto secundum quid, if from
hence, you would conclude all to be difficult: yea so, you would contradict
Saint Peter, who says of Saint Paul's Epistles, that somethings of them are
hard to be understood, not all; Exceptio in non exceptis firmat regulam, as the
Rule is. Yea, you would contradict your self, who say more then once, that
those things which are plain in Scripture, you believe by the authority of
Scripture. But if from the asserting of some things difficult, you would only
conclude that this cannot be the judge in Controversies, as you seem to intend
in your conclusion; we say plainly, this difficulty in some things of Scripture
does not infer the necessity of an infallible Judge on earth, your premises
do not conclude this, and we allow unto you the use of Judges on earth,
although they be not infallible. As Judges in civil Causes may and do sometimes
err, yet is there use of them; so also is there of Ecclesiastical Judges,
though not incapable of error: and again, there is no peril of damnation on
either side soberly held in points of Question; and therefore the Scripture yet
may be the way so direct that fools cannot err in matters of necessary faith
and practice. And fourthly, a General Council is the highest you can go in
humane Authority, and yet this does not bind unto Faith, because it is not
free from error. To which purpose believe Saint Austin, if you will stand to
his judgment, in his third book against Maximinus Bish of the Arrians, the
fourteenth chapter, Sed nunc nac ego Nicenum, etc. But now neither ought I
produce the Nicene Council, nor you that of Ariminum, as boasting thereof:
neither am. I held under the authority of this, nor you of the other. Let
matter with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason, be debated by
Authorities of Scriptures, not proper witnesses to any, but common to both. So
he. Where you see he prefers the authorities of Scripture before Councils;
which are proved not infallible even here, because one was for the Arrians.
Here is Council against Council, as there has been Pope against Pope. In this
case what will you do? which must you submit to? Is one infallible contrary to
another infallible? If you must submit to both, you submit to error, if to
one, why not to the other if that be infallible. And this also will include
uncertainty of all humane definitions about the Canon of Scripture, which has
been spoken to before.

We come now to your second Reason in your eighth Number.

That you say comes into this Enthymene. Many Controversies there are, and may
be yet very many more most nearly concerning the necessary means to salvation
which can never be ended, and undoubtedly decided by judgment and sentence of
the Scriptures; therefore the Scripture is not the Judge.

We answer to the Antecedent, in those terms I deny it in both the branches,
if you mean, by those things nearly concerning the necessary means to
salvation, such things as are indeed necessary to salvation; otherwise you go
upon a false supposition that there is a necessity of a Judge on earth,
undoubtedly to decide that which is not necessary: Therefore choose you which
you will hold to; if you mean those following instances to be of the
necessaries, I deny the antecedent in both branches; if not, I deny your
supposition. Taking you in the former sense, I say that there are not now many
Controversies necessary to be determined unto salvation, which may not
undoubtedly be decided by Scripture: and also I say there may not be yet many
more. The first branch I deny, because though many things which are res
questionis, are not decided by Scripture, yet many controversies in things
necessary cannot be said not to be undoubtedly decided by Scripture, because in
things necessary there are not many Controversies. And the second branch I
deny, because we cannot expect any new necessaries, and a new Tradition is a
certain contradiction.

Now to answer to your particulars for the proof of the antecedent.
Controversy may be moved (you say) concerning the lawfulness of working and
not working of Saturdayes and Sundays. How will this Controversy be decided
by the Scripture, etc. So you.

To which we return you this answer, that there is enough in Scripture to
ground the practice of the Church for the observing of the Lords day. First by
the proportion to the Equity of keeping one day in seven, which we have in the
fourth Commandment. There is in the Commandment morale naturae, that there
should be a time set a part for public worship; and this by the Light of
Nature the Heathens did see; as Tully, Non ut Consilii sic Sacrificii, etc.
There is not a day appointed of Counsel, as of sacrifice; then there is a
positive determination to the Jew of the seventh day, to be the day in the week
of their solemn service; and to this is agreeable by good analogle, that
Christians should keep one day in seven as well as the Jews. Now the moments in
Scripture for the Translation of the day are several, the appellation of the
Lords day, most likely of the day we keep, the meeting of the Disciples and
breaking of bread on the first day of the week; the order for the provision for
the poor by Saint Paul to the Corinthians. To these we add the Syriack
Interpretation, which in the first Epistle to the Corinthians the 11. Chapter
and the 20. Verse, expresses it thus; when therefore you meet, you do not, as
it is just on the Lords Day, eating and drinking, which is to be understood of
the Communion, according to the scope of the place. And therefore may we think
that this point of practice was so competently set out in Scripture, as that we
cannot suspend the usage upon the Authority of the Church, since we may
conceive that the Church was bound by the former Considerations to celebrate
the Day of Christ's Resurrection, which is the Hope of the new Creature. The
seventh Day to the Jew was Positive and Ceremonial; and therefore upon that
account, under capacity of being altered: and the Equity of one day in the week
is now under practice upon the former intimations. Secondly, If the Jewish day
cease not in the Obligation to Christians, then the time when Christians
should keep, is under the Divine Commandment, and is none of those things
wherein the Church has power; because as you will confess, it has no
authority to rescinde a Divine precept. So then, if by necessity of mean it is
necessary to keep the Lords day, it is lawfully done and upon duty; if it be
not necessary by necessity of mean, then is this Example of yours impertinent.
And so this argument (unanswerable, as you esteem it) is without much labor
answered by those who make the Scripture, in which God speaks, by him the sole
Infallible Judge; not excluding subordinate Judges; which are to regulate their
decisions by the rule of the word, unto which the Scripture is not silent: and
in other things no need to be sure of such a Judge as you would have.

And this second Answer to your first instance, may be available for your
satisfaction in your second instance from the 15. of the Acts. For if those
precepts of the (...) in that Council, do bind all always, then is We matter
determined by Scripture: if they do not, then are we at our Christian liberty
from them, without a formal discharge thereof from the Church. And secondly,
that we are not held under obedience to those Laws, appears by the intention
of their imposition for that time: since, they were imposed upon occasion of
scandal to the weak Jew; the reason whereof now cease, and therefore the
Laws; ubi ratio cessat lex cessat, as the rule is. Only as the Ceremonial Laws
bind, yet qu^ad genus as they speak, that there should be a decent public
worship in the Church of God, not quoad speciem, that we should continue the
use of the same Ceremonies: so even these precepts which were in their nature
Ceremonial, do yet bind so far improportion of kind, that in things of
indifferency we should have respect to our weak Brother. Thirdly, Neither can
you say, that either he that does abstain from those things forbidden, or he
that does not abstain, is upon that account in danger of damnation. And
therefore as quoad hoc, we distinguish of your term Necessary; if you take this
matter Necessary as absolutely so by the morality of it, or perpetual by
appointment, then we deny it to be necessary so, and why do not you keep, them?
if only necessary as to present practice; then does it not come up to our
question: for it is none of those things necessary to Salvation, which are
determinable by the Church, and not by Scripture.

In your tenth Number you give us another case not umpired by Scripture,
whether the King is Head of the Church. And this, you say, we thought once to
be determined by Scripture affirmatively: now not; so you in effect: this point
is now no longer ascertained us by infallible judgment of Scripture, so you in
terms. We answer. First, What is infallibly decided in Scripture, will ever be
so, although we do not always find it; but we cannot find any thing
infallibly decided by the Church. Secondly, We do not say that every point is
Infallibly decided in Scripture, because it is not at all decided, therefore if
you mean us so, you mistake us. And now, premising these considerations; we
answer, that we do hold our principle still, if you will understand as
according to our mind. Head of the Church as you hold the Pope to be Head of
the Church, so as that we are bound in Conscience, as upon his Infallibility,
to be ruled by his dictates, in matters of Religion, we never held the King to
be: but to be Head of the Church, so as to be the chief Governor thereof, as
being appointed by God to be the Keeper of both Tables, so we hold him to be
still. This distinction makes an end, as it may seem, of your objection; and
yet secondly, we do not pretend the King to be head of the Universal Church, as
you pretend the Pope to be head of the Universal Church: and therefore are they
not compared ad idem. Thirdly, Is it determined in Scripture, whether the Pope
be Head of the Church or not. You say it is, for if you say it is not, you are
all lost. Well, if it be determined by Scripture, then consequently it is
determined in Scripture that the King is not: and so this your Controversy is
one of those, which is decided and concluded negatively, in or by Scripture. So
this exception against us does not thrive.

Another point of this kind you make, in your eleventh Number, about the Canon
of Scripture, your Argument seems to be thus, that we should know the Canon is
necessary: we do not know it by Scripture, therefore by the Church. Is it not
thus? you cannot make your matter shorter without any detriment to you. And
therefore we answer; first, as at first (which you give us the occasion to put
you in mind of) that if the Church were Infallible Judge of all Canonical
books, yet would it not follow from hence, that it should be Infallible Judge
in all points of Faith, and Manners (which you would fain have, as very ^seful
for you) unless ca^^ally, for we might suppose more assistance to the Church
in this particular, then in other cases: since also, when that is made sure,
that there are the books of Scripture, we should look for no other directions
for Life and Salvation but this. Therefore, if you argue, that because it is
Judge Infallible of Canonical books, it is Judge of all matters, you do not
rightly proceed from a particular. You are in that which is called, (...), and
therefore you do not conclude in your first Universality. Secondly, We are not
to be assured by Divine Faith, that there are Canonical books, from the
authority of the Church, and therefore is not the Church the Infallible Judge
herein. We must believe them to be Canonical by their own Authority, otherwise
we shall never believe them to be so: so that you see, we deny the Assumption,
and we say we may know the Canonical books by Scripture, we have no other
Divine Authority to know them by. They bear witness of themselves, they carry
their own light, which we may see them by, as we see the Sun by its own light.
For, let me put you to this Dilemma, either the Scripture is to be believed for
it self, or the Church is to be believed for it self. If the Scripture be to be
believed for it self, then have we our cause; if the Church be to be believed
for it self, then must we know this by a Revelation beside Scripture, which
your Bellarmine disputes against, in the beginning of his Controversies, and
whether that Revelation be not Anabaptistical, and more uncertain then the word
of God; judge you. And I pray is it not more fi^ that the Scripture should be
believed in its own cause, then the Church? but if you say that the Authority
of the Church is evidenced by Scripture concerning it; then that is to be
believed for itself as toward the Church, and why not then other parts of it?
Thirdly, If the Church be the Judge Infallible of Canonical books, how came
Saint Hierome to be repugnant to the Church in the debate about Books
Apocryphal, as you know and may see by your Bellarmin in his second Book, De
verbo Dei, cap. 9. amongst which Apocryphal books the Maccabees are numbered to
be by him accounted such, and therefore Saint Jerome did not in his Latin
Edition translate them; and then let S. Jerome's authority justify L^ther upon
your principles: for you account the Maccabees to be as well Canonical, as you
and we do the Apocalypse. That the Scripture is silent of its own Canon* and
that we cannot prove a book to be infallibly Canonical by it self without
begging the question, has little of iudiciousness in it; for how do we see
light? how do we prove first and indemonstrable principles? how do we prove
that, which we apprehend by natural light? after this manner is the
understanding irradiated to see the authority of Scripture in it and by it,
well, and how do we prove the Church to be infallible by it, without begging
the question? therefore you must come about to Scripture. And again, if you
prove the Church to be infallible Judge herein, because the Scripture is not,
you beg the question who are to dispute; not I, who am to answer.

Your twelfth number goes upon a false supposition* at least in part of it;
namely, that we are bound to believe that the Gospel of Saint Matthew was
written by him, as also the Gospel of St. Mark to be written by St. Mark. We
deny it. We are bound indeed to believe that the Gospel of St. Matthew, and St.
Mark, as we distinguish them, are the word of God; but we are not bound to
believe that they were written by them. It is no part or duty of my faith to
believe the Penman of any part of Scripture, save only so far as it is
declared in the body of Scripture, for it is not Scripture because Saint
Matthew wrote it: but Saint Matthew wrote it, as being inspired that it was the
word of God, in the matter of it. If then your discourse goes upon the matter
of it, it was answered before: if upon the title, it is not allowed to be de
fide or any point of faith, that such was writer of any piece of Scripture. And
whereas you urge that some have denied this Gospel, and some or other have
denied other books to be Canonical, how then shall we end this Controversy or
others about the Canon by Scripture; I answer. And do not Heretics deny your
Church to be infallible? will you therefore quit your opinion? So then either
this argument is not good against us, or it is also good against you. Secondly,
If Heretics reject some books, we may be disposed by the authority of the
Catholic Church to our faith of them by their own authority. And this seems to
be as much as Saint Austin would have us to attribute to the Church in this
particular, as we have his advice in his second Book de Doctrina Christiana
cap. 8. where he says, in Canonicis autem Scripturis Ecclesiarum Catholicarum
quam-plurimum sequatur authoritatem, In Canonical Scriptures let him very much
follow the authority of the Catholic Churches; amonst which surely these are
they which merited (if you will construe it so) to have Apostolic seats, and
to receive (Apostolic) Epistles. Observe that he says, let him follow the
authority very much, which does not conclude that we should wholly rely upon
it, and of the Catholic Churches in the plural; not one only. Then there are
more Catholic Churches in his judgment, and such are they which merited to
have Apostolic Seas, and Epistles; then your Church only is not to be called
the Apostolic Sea. And whereas afterward in this Church he does reckon
Apocryphal Books, yet is it to be noted, that herein he followed the
authority of the Churches; Notwithstanding which, Saint Jerome, as before, did
not receive them; which makes a sufficient reason to hold that the authority of
the Churches is not a sufficient ground of faith in the belief of Canonical
Books, or else St. Jerome (who in this may be compared with St. Austin for his
judgment) is in the same condemnation with us.

Afterward you plead, that since the Gospel of S. Matthew was written in
Hebrew, whereof there is not extant any one Copy in the world, and it is not
certain who or how faithfully he did translate it, we cannot be certain by the
Scripture that this is the word of God; therefore by the Church. This I think
is the sum of your plea. We answer.

First, Again we do not disclaim the use of the Catholic Churches in the
credence of the Word of God: but this does not certify us. Secondly, You
Catholics (as you would be called) speak largely, that not one of the
Ancients conceived it to be written in Greek; surely all the Ancients did not
write: surely all that did write are not now had. But take it of all that did
write and are now extant, and put it to be so that all were of Saint Jeromes
Opinion in his Preface upon Saint Matthew, yet all that you say is not
certainly true, that there is not a Copy of the Hebrew Gospel extant in all the
world. For, (not to speak of the Hebrew Gospels set out by Munster and Mercer,
which Ludovicus de Dieu takes notice of in the Preface to his Notes upon the
Gospels) if you will give any heed to your Isidor Clarius, he will tell you I
suppose otherwise; when he says (in a little Preface which is a Testimony out
of Saint Jerome in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastic writers) that St. Jerome
there affirms, ipsum Hebraicum habetur usque hodie in Casariensi Bibliotheca,
which Pamphilus the Martyr, studiosissime confecit, and that he had the liberty
by the Nazaraeans, who in Beroea: City of Syria, do use this volume, to
describe it. So he. Now it may be that remains there, and therefore you cannot
be certain of what you say. And this is more then an ordinary Authority of the
Church in an interpretation.

Again how come your Latin interpretation of this Gospel to be authentic if
it was not taken out of an authentic copy: for the Church can do no more
then declare that which is authentic, then must it be authentic, otherwise
they make Scripture.

Again let me give you one intimation, that possibly so might yet at first be
written in Greek, my reason is this, in the first of Saint Matthew, 23. verse,
it is said of Christ, they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being
interpreted is; God with us. If it were written in Ebrew, what need of any
interpretation in the same Language, since the Letters of the Word put
together, without any variation, do make that signification?

Again, if the Church has made the Greek Translation authentic, why is your
Latin made authentic? Is there two authentiques? If it be not authentic by
the Church, what would you infer?

Again, the harmony of it with other Gospels, has more in it to persuade
Faith, then the credit of the Church.

Again, if it be an Interpretation, yet unless you do evince it, that we do
build our Faith upon the Interpretation, you do nothing. Now then as your
people do fix their Faith upon that which is interpreted, not upupon the
interpretation: so may we build our belief upon this Gospel to be the Word of
God by the illumination of the Spirit of God, and yet not upon the Translation.
The Translation does but conveigh unto our knowledge the words, but it is the
Spirit of God that does work in us belief thereof that it is the Word of God.
The Translation attends the Notification of the object, what that is which is
to be believed: but it is the Divine persuasion which attends the act, and is
the cause why it is believed: the Interpretation is but the Instrument of
Faith, the ground of it is the persuasion of God, that it is the Truth and
Word of God: and therefore your argumentation goes upon a wrong supposition,
as if we resolved our Faith in the Translation as such.

And what you except afterward against the certainty of our Faith, upon the
account of the Greek Translation, does also return easily upon you; for the
same possibility of error, is urged against your Latin, either by ignorance, or
negligence, or on purpose for the upholding of your new opinions. And let me
ask you, why you account your Latin to be Authentic? you will say, because
the Church of Rome was infallibly assisted in it. Was it then Infallibly
assisted, when it renders the Ebrew in Genesis ipsa for ipsum, that it might be
for the honor of the Virgin? Well, but give it that the Latin was infallibly
made by the Church, why not the Greek also infallibly made by the Church? and
more confirmed by the Church then your Latin one? you get nothing then by this
exception And this may satisfy you, how a Manichaan might believe the Gospel
of Saint Matthew, which you put to the question. An opinion thereof he may have
by the judgment of the Church, some knowledge of it to be the Word of God he
may gather by the agreement with the other Gospels: but the Faith of it to be
such, is to be wrought by the Spirit of God, whereby those who heard the
Apostles, were caused to believe that which they preached to be the Word of God
without persuasion of the Church, which was not then in a body, when some first
believed.

As for the Fathers holding Books to be Canonical by the Church, we have spoken
to already in this paper, and we shall meet with it again. You speak indeed of
them as in general, upon design, ad faciendum populum: but you do not name the
places* only Saint Athanasius, you are pleased to quote. We answer, if you
mean that he received the Gospels, and rejected the Gospel of St. Thomas upon
the Authority of the Church, as the cause of his Faith of them, you do not
prove it by what he says: If you mean that he was induced to think well of
them by the reception of the Church, and to refuse the other by their refusal,
this does not come home to the question. And suppose the Church its refusal of
the Gospel of Saint Thomas, was sufficient for him to refuse it too, yet does
it not follow, that because the Church did receive the other Gospels, he
received them no otherwise, then because they did; for this makes the reception
of the ChurCh to be but as a necessary condition, not the formal cause of his
Faith. As for Tertullians and Saint Jeroms and St. Austins authorities in this
case, we shall find an answer, when you quote the places.

The Testimony of Eusebius, which you produce as out of the third Book, chap.
19. is not there, according to that of Robert Steven in Greek, which came out
Lutetiae Parisiorum cum Privilegio Regis.

In the ninth Chapter indeed of the same Book, there is somewhat of Josephus,
that he gives the number of the Books of the Old Testament, and which are
uncontradicted by the Ebrews, in the same words by them teaching as out of
ancient Tradition. But here we have but Josephus his opinion. Secondly, This is
but for the Old Testament, not the whole Scripture. Thirdly, This is but as out
of Tradition. Fourthly, You will not find in the next chapter, all your
Apocryphal books. The Number he makes to be 22. in which Number Cyril of
Jerusalem (in his fourth Cat.) excludes all but Baruch. Fifthly, After so much
time which is past, he says, no man durst add or take away, or change any of
them. And that which he speaks at the end of the chapter that he followed
Tradition, and therefore did not err; if you mean that, it is not pertinent,
for he does not there speak of Scripture. Your flourish then as hereupon, must
yet vanish. And besides, all signs are not able to make a certainty, the
Tradition of the Church is not an evident sign: it is not (...), for the
Church received some things and held them too, which you will not hold, as
Infant Communion, and the Millenary Opinion; therefore can we not be assured in
way of Faith (wherein there is no falsity) by the Church.

That of Saint Austin will be included in the disquisition of the main
Testimony of that Epistle.

And to your question which of the Fathers, when they were asked, did answer,
that they did believe the Canonical Books upon our ground; that which was said
in the former paper of Saint Origin and Saint Athanasius, remains good until
it be answered.

In your thirteenth Number you object Luthers not seeing the Apocalypse, and the
Epistle of Saint James, to be Canonical by their own light. We answer,

First, A negative argument from one is easily denied to be cogent, when we
cannot yield it to the Church; because he did not see them, therefore they
could not be seen, is no argument. Secondly, You see then hereby that we do not
follow him in all things blindely, as you do the Church in whatsoever it
proposes.

Secondly, The Apocalypse was doubted of by others also, as you know by
Ecclesiastical history, although now it is universally received. So also might
Luther afterward come to the sight of them to be Canonical.

And Thirdly, also other books have been scrupled, notwithstanding the
authority of the Church, and therefore how is that a ground of their Faith?

Saint Austin you make use of afterward for the Canonicalnesse of the
Macchabees, upon the credit of the Council of Carthage, and also the book of
Wisdom. To this we need say no more then has been said, save only we may
hence observe, how uncertain we are of a ground of Faith, in the authority of
the Fathers, when one says that which is contrary to the other. Answer you
Saint Jerome upon the point, as before. And Saint Jerome, I hope, yet was a
Catholic, and was not damned because he did not embrace the opinion of the
Church in this. If the Church be Infallible to Saint Austin, why not to Saint
Jerome? or one may see that which is Infallible, and the other not, then is
your former objection thereby taken away. And you will hold Saint Austin no
otherwise to have held the Macchabees to be Canonical, then he held the book of
Wisdom to be Canonical, and you will hold that the Council of Carthage held
the book of Maccabees to be Canonical, as Saint Austin held the book of
Wisdom to be Canonical. This I suppose you will agree to without dispute.
Well then, be pleased to take notice of what abatements and deductings may be
found in Saint Austin upon the place, in regard of Equality of Respect which
you think he gave to this book of Wisdom and to Canonical Scripture. First,
it seems there was exception taken at the authority of that book, even in their
Opinion of St. Austins judgment thereupon; and therefore he says, Quasi and
excepta, etc. As if, if this attestation were excepted, the thing it self were
not clear, which we will have from hence to be taught, namely this; he was
taken away, that wickedness might not alter his understanding, which Saint
Cyprian, he says, had taken out of the book of Wisdom. And when he had
discoursed the Truth of the sentence, he inferrs; which things being so, this
sentence of the Book of Wisdom ought not to be rejected, which has merited
to be read of those who are of the degree of Readers of the Church by so long
antiquity; and then follow your words. Only you may excuse me, if secondly I
be a little critical; for it is not said there that it was received of all, but
it was heard of all, with veneration of Divine Authority. If there be no
difference, why do ye not use the word? if you do falsify, then it seems
there is some difference, and outwardly they might give respect to it as
Canonical, although whether in their apprehensions they did esteem it as such
may be a question. But thirdly, you see it here to be somewhat distinguished
from Books Canonical and to depend upon prescription; as if it were not so from
the beginning. Fourthly, those who were Tractatours next to the time of the
Apostles did prefer this book before themselves, which using this as a witness
did believe that they brought no other then a Divine Testimony. So the Father,
whereby is intimated that this was as deutero Canonical (as it is expressed)
and not of proper name, Canonical; and also herein is signified that it was not
so used in the Apostles times. And again, this Book had merited to be read by
so great a numerositie of years, and afterward he calls this sentence
anciently Christian. So upon the whole matter you see some difference made
betwixt this book and others by themselves Canonical. De Predestinatione Sancto
rum, cap. 14.
Peruse then the whole chapter, and you will see how little advantage you can
make thereof. Indeed there is in the chapter a word which I know not whether I
have rendered according to your mind; it is mereri, and yet I think I have
interpreted it discreetly by meriting, that so it might be capable of the same
Latitude; but I put you to your choice: How the Fathers use the word you know
for obtaining. But if you will have it here to be construed by plain deserving,
then we have an Argument against you: For if the book deserved to be read in
the Church, then was it not accounted as Divine and Canonical, because it was
received by the Church; but it was received by the Church, because it did
deserve it by the matter. If you will not understand it here of plain
deserving, then here is one place, where the Father uses the words not in the
Roman sense; which may be made use of to another pupose about your opinion of
merit; and also, if you will not mean it here of deserving, this makes some
diminution of respect to the book: and some advantage more I shall make of this
chapter in its place.

Many lines in your fourteenth page you have afterward, wherein we have
nothing but vaunts or repetitions: I will not trouble you with the latter, nor
my self with the former: But toward the end of that page you would order the
matter so as to hold your own, and yet to give Scripture its due respects. And
you seem to bring it to this determination, that when there is an
acknowledgement made that the Scriptures are in themselves the Word of God, it
does not derogate from Scripture to hold that yet they are not known to us by
an infallible ground, that they are the Word of God, but by the testimony of
the Church, which in shorter terms is expressed by others of your Church, that
the authority of the Scripture does depend upon the Church. But this will not
serve, the covering is too short.

For first, this distinction is too narrow to extend to the difference betwixt
us in particular points of faith. Therefore if you will yield that points of
Religion are to be examined and ended infallibly by Scripture, when we know it
to be the Word of God, then we will only stick to this Question: But if you
will still maintain the infallibility of the Church in all her definitions,
then your composition will not be sufficient, although it could satisfy as to
that particular. But secondly, It will not satisfy, because you do not
sufficiently provide for the honor of the Scriptures authority, and therefore
you derogate from Scripture in this, although you did take away no honor from
Scripture as in regard of its truth.

Do you lay it to heart, that the many questions betwixt us is about the
authority of the Scripture; the formal Reason of credibilitie is the
authority. That which makes me to believe it to be the Truth of God, as being
his Word, is the Authority. For if the credibilitie does rise from the truth
of it in it self, you destroy your own cause; for that you confess the
Scripture to be the infallible Word of God: then betwixt us simply about the
Truth of the Scripture there is no contest. And do not you affirm that the
authority of the Church is the Ground of Faith, because you think that the
Church by its authority is worthy to be believed since it is infallible? But
why then do you not grant this authority to the Scripture, since you confess it
to be infallible? If the reason of believing the Church be the infallibility of
it, according to you; why is not the infallibility of the Scripture the reason
of believing it, since it is confessed infallible? And if you say you do
believe it to be so by the authority of the Church, then the formal reason of
believing it is not the infallibility of the Scripture, but of the Church; and
yet the infallibility of the Church shall be the formal reason of believing it.
But you say, you must know the Scripture to be infallible, that I cannot do but
by the Church. Well, but do not you then see that you prefer the authority of
the Church before the authority of Scripture: for the Church with you, is to be
believed for it self: for so it must be; or else the Scripture must be believed
for it self, or else we shall have in Divinity no principium primo primum,
wherein to rest. Now if the Scripture be to be believed for it self, then we
have ended the business. If the Church be to be believed for it self, then we
prefer the Authority of the Church before the authority of Scripture, then you
derogate from the authority of Scripture. Thirdly, the Church has authority or
not. It has you say, then of it self or not, what will you say? If of it self,
what has a company of Christians more to say for themselves then others. If
you say the authority comes from succession; others also have had a constant
succession. And it must come to one first society: Well, where had that society
its authority, of it self or not? If of it self, what by revelation beside
Scripture or not? If beside, then the charge of Anabaptisticalness is fallen
upon you. What then? From Scripture. Well then the Scripture in regard of those
Texts which concern the Church is to be believed for it self, and then why not
in others? Fourthly, The Word of God in the substance and matter of it was
before the Church therefore, because the Church was begotten by it: and
therefore it must be known before the Church. Yea, reconcile your Opinion with
that of Bellarmine in his first Book De Verbo Dei, cap. 20. The Rule of
Catholic Faith must be certain and known; for if it be not known, then it
will not be a Rule to us: If it be not certain, it cannot be a Rule. If it be a
known Rule against Anabaptists, why not also a known Rule against Papists; and
therefore that it must be made manifest by the Church is not necessary, for how
was it made manifest to the first Church to be the rule?

As for the instance of yours, that Christ was made manifest to many by the
Testimony of the Baptist and of the Apostles before the Scriptures were
written, and yet this derogate? not from Scripture; We answer soon. First, It
is yet to be proved whether the Church has that inspiration as John Baptist
and the Apostles had for the first planting of the Church; until that be made
good, your Argumentation is not. Secondly, Although the New Testament was not
written, the Old was, and John the Baptist and the Apostles preached no other
Doctrine then was contained in the Old. So our Savior, If ye had believed
Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me in the 5. of Saint John
the 46. verse. Thirdly, If John the Baptist and the Apostles were believed by a
Divine Faith without the authority of the Church (as the first Disciples did)
why may not the Scriptures be believed by a Divine Faith without the authority
of the Church? If the Apostles were believed immediately without the Church in
what they said: why may they not be believed also in what they wrote?

And surely, to go a little more close and deep, if we speak properly, there
is not so much a ground of Faith, as a cause; if with the Schoolmen we grant
(as we may) that Faith is a supernatural habit, infused by God, which disposes
the understanding to assert that which is said by God is true, because he says
it, not because the Church says it. And if you say that the Scripture and the
Church are not opposite; true, when the Church rules it self by Scripture. But
if the Question be, which proposal is first, that of the Scripture, or that of
the Church; here the Church is opposite to Scripture if it pretend to be first,
for both cannot be first. Therefore the first Axiom in Divinity, and
consequently of Divine Faith, must be that the Scripture is the Word of God:
and then this Scripture is subtracted as the ground of all particulars to be
necessaririly believed; and therefore if we should have no other Faith of
Scripture, then by the credibility of the Church, for ought is yet proved we
should have no Divine Faith.

In your 14. Number, you go about to prove that the Scripture is not the
appointed Judge in all Controversies: For many things (you say) are so set down
in Scripture, that almost all the Controversies which are in the Church, do
arise about the true interpretation of the Scripture. We Answer,

First, here we see that you would have more to be the question then that,
Whether the Church be the judge of the Books Canonical, and that the Scripture
is the Word of God. Therefore we follow you, and do say, Secondly, That it
seems then the Question is only who should be the infallible Judge to discuss
and decide the debates which do arise about the sense of Scripture. So then
again, those things which are plainly set down in Scripture (as the many
necessary things are) are allowed to be believed without the voice of the
Church: and therefore all points of Faith you cannot, it seems, include within
the compass of necessary submission to the Church therein. Thirdly, your
discourse proceeds not effectually to your conclusion, unless you can prove
that the uncertainty of the sense of some passages in Scripture does convince
the necessity of an infallible Judge herein. Secondly, That we are infallibly
certain thereof. And Thirdly, That the Church of Rome is it. These particulars
are yet depending, and without their affirmation we may affirm that God has
well enough provided for the salvation of men in the Scripture, which is more
easy to be understood, then the universal consent of all the Fathers; whose
Opinions also must be held true as they are agreeable to the Rule. And also
has he provided wisely for us, in that he has not left us to the Lesbian Rule
of humane authority: and also has provided for the peace of the Church, in
that he has given us direction of the Pastors; whom although we cannot
absolutely believe, yet do not impudently oppose.

Yet you will say, if Christ had intended this book for our sole Judge
(infallible you mean, otherwise you do not contradict me) in all
controversies, he would undoubtedly in some part of this book have told us so
clearly, this importing so exceedingly as it does; and yet he has not done so.
We answer, Christ has disertly declared his will to oblige us unto Scripture,
in that he binds us to search the Scriptures; in that he says, ye err not
knowing the Scriptures, as before: In that he said by Saint Paul that all
Scripture is given by Inspiration and is profitable, etc. and that it is able
to make the man of God wise unto salvation, as before; And by Saint Peter, 2.
Ep. 1. cap. 19. we have a more sure word of Prophecy, to which you do well
giving heed, as to a Light that shines in a dark place until the Day dawn,
and the Day Star arise in your hearts. And as for Pastors of the Church, again
and again we say, we deny them not a lawful use, or to them a lawful respect in
things of God: but they do but carry the Lantern in the dark. So that by this
Light of Scripture are we directed unto salvation. Secondly, We turn the mouth
of your Argument against you, if Christ had intended that the Church should
have been the infallible Judge, it importing so exceedingly, he would have told
us so clearly, and infallibly, which he has not done. He tells us all
Scripture is given by inspiration; and this Proposition if we rightly believe,
we believe upon its own authority, because it was given by inspiration: but it
is not as clearly said, that the Church judges by inspiration. And if it does,
why does it not determine all Controversies in the Church; and therefore is it
either wanting in ability, or peccant in duty. Or if there may be Controversies
in your Church without definition of the Church, why may not there be
Controversies amongst us, without actual decision of Scripture.

And now, Sirs, let me have leave to speak affectionately to you, do you not
see what dis-respects of Scripture (if not Blasphemies) your Opinion does
miserably betray you to, if you follow it? Would any sober man let fall such
words? as if God had intended the Scripture for our Judge, such a book as the
Scripture is. So you. Why? which often times speaks so prophetically, that
most would think he speaks of the time present, when he speaks of the time to
come. So you.

First, how are these words put together, so Prophetically, that, etc. would it
seem to be more Prophetical to speak under the formality of futurition? but if
it be Prophetical, to speak of that which is to come, as in verbis de praesens,
then what can you blame in that part of Scripture which is Prophetical? Or do
you think that it was not meet that in the Old Testament there should be
somewhat Prophetical? Or will you think that God made that part of Scripture on
purpose obscure, that there might be need of your Infallible Judge? Secondly,
The Prophecies are not expressed in the Present Tense, which in proper the
Jews have not, but in the time past, to signify the certainty of their
accomplishment, and also, because as with God they are already done, since he
looks upon all differences of time with one single act of intuition: and as for
those Prophecies which respect Christ, they are so expressed, that thereby may
be signified, that the merit of Christ did extend to some, even before the
times wherein those particular promises were made, and therefore the manner of
Prophetical expressions, is upon good reason easily discerned, if not by the
people, yet by the Ministers of the Church, without an Infallible Judge.

And what then, if it speaks of Christ under the Type of David, when not only
the Letter signifies a thing, but the thing another thing, and one person
represents another* Is not this for the excellency of Scripture, without such
obscurity, when we believe David was a Prophet, and those which spoke of him
were Prophets, and when we are in Scripture directed to such an use of Types.
And if any thing be spoken obscurely, yet if it be a matter necessary, there
are other Texts more easy to compare it with, and to expound it by, as your
Aquinas in his first Page. 1. q. 9, 10. Articles. And therefore this exception
is not able to argue the necessity of your Infallible Judge, no more then
diversity, as you say of senses of Scripture; wherein it is to be understood;
whereas there is but one sense of Scripture principally intended, which is
expressed sometimes properly, sometimes improperly. As for the mystical
Divinity, you know it is not argumentative, but where it is declared in
Scripture. And as for the setting out of things Spiritual in way of Translation
from things Temporal; you may consider it is necessary, if you will believe
your Angelical Doctor, because, (since our Knowledge comes here by sense) we
cannot for this state understand them, but by compare to things of sense: so
that there must upon this account be Metaphors; and what are Allegories, but
Metaphors continued? And as for the Tropological sense, which respects
institution of life, that is not difficultly found in more clear precepts.
Again, if by impropriety of speech, we should conclude an absolute need of an
Infallible Judge, then how should we Infallibly be guided by the opinion of the
Fathers, since so many of them, especially Clemens Alexandrinus, and Origin
(who were of the antientest of them) are so full of this obscurity?

And as for your Objection, that both Precepts and Councils are delivered in
the Mood Imperative; you cannot reasonably conceive that we should be so
ignorant and credulous, as to think that we should swallow down, without
chewing, this your supposition, that there are Counsels of Perfection, above
things of Command, for when we have done all, we must say that we are
unprofitable Servants; we have done what we ought to do, St. Luke the 17. and
10. Unprofitable, not only to God, (as your men distinguish) but also
unprofitable to our selves, because we have done but our duty, if we did as
much as we could, which none does, and yet if we did as much as we could, we
should not do so much as we should, since the Commands of God are given to us,
according to the tenor of our ability in Adam; which we lost by our own fault.
Our obedience therefore, by it self, cannot be profitable.

Another default you will find or make in Scripture, that it does no where set
down a Catalogue of Fundamentals. But do you think in earnest that this is a
cogent argument for your cause? The Scripture does not set down a Catalogue of
Fundamentals, therefore it is not to be the Judge of Controversies.

To your Antecedent we say, that the Scripture does give us every particular
point which is necessary to be believed, although it does not give out the
Number thereof formal and material, how many and which they are.

Secondly, It does not only afford that which is simply necessary, but does
furnish us with many other particulars, so that it is an abundant directory for
our use. And therefore is there no defect of Wisdom in this Lawmakers, when he
gives us such a Law that Infallibly contains all necessaries and more, and when
those necessaries are not only plainly delivered, but also what is not plainly
delivered, is thereby signified not to be necessary.

Thirdly, Again, we admit humane dijudications of doubts emergent in some
points, and they have their use with us, without Infallibility.

Fourthly, Either the Scripture yet, notwithstanding this, is it whereby we
must be determined in points of Religion, or else the Church; but the Church by
the same argument, is not the Judge, because it does not define whatsoever may
be necessary to be held by a full Catholic in your sense. Whether the Pope
has Temporal power or not, is not this necessary to be determined? if it be
determined, how came your Heart to deny it? then whether he has power Temporal
directly, as the Canonists, or indirectly as others, is this determined? then
how came Bellarmin to go against his Conscience on one side or other? for he
varied herein, as your Widdrington speaks of him. And Widdrington he is another
against his power, in his Apology for the right and Sovereignty of temporal
Princes.

And why is not the question decided, whether the Pope be Superior to a
Council in things Ecclesiastical, which the Sorbonists deny? Are not there
high points which are of weight to move an Infallible Conclusion? Not to speak
of Gods predetermination, or whether the Virgin Mary was Conceived without
Original sin. How is then the Church the Infallible Judge of Controversies? If
you say that the Church determines as much as is necessary; well then, and so
has the Scripture, which you acknowledge is Infallible: but are not the former
points necessary? what can you instance in which is more necessary, and not
determined in Scripture? If our Salvation, as you hold, be in jeopardy for not
submitting to the Infallible Judge, what can be of more concernment then to
know Infallibly who he is, and what power he has, which yet your prudent
Religion will never make a determination of?

After this you tax our Doctrine to be contrary to Scripture, and first in the
matter of Extreme Unction by Saint James. We say (if you say right, that it is
clear against us by Scripture) then the Scripture has decided this question,
then the Scripture can judge and end Controversies. And yet at the beginning
hereof, you speak very warily and discreetly it seems. If by this term you
would have us believe, that it is not evidently declared against us in
Scripture, then we need say no more as to this case. If it be manifest by
Scripture against us, and you mean your word (seems) as Aristotle and others
use it, in way of Elegance, or of course, then it does not abate the tenure of
the affirmative; and then what need we any other Judge? so are you held by this
Dilemma. Secondly, That command of Saint James imports no Sacrament as you
would have it; but does relate to the gift of Healing in those times.

Another example of our difference from Scripture, you press the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper to be in our sense. We answer first, You say the words of
Institution are clear in this Sacrament, in which any wise Man would speak
clearly; and yet afterward you say this Controversy the Scripture does not
decide. How far are these from a contradiction? if clear, then either is
decided or needs none, but it is for your turn that it should be clear and not
decided, clear against us: not decided for you. Well here again you incur the
former inconvenience, which I will let pass. Secondly, The words indeed are
clear for the nature of a Sacrament, which under a visible sign represents a
spiritual thing; and so therefore for the condition of a Sacrament, any wise
man could not speak more conveniently then in a figurative sense, because it is
symbolical to the Sacrament. For if the real presence as you mean, be corporal,
then is the property of the Sacrament destroyed, because the sign is turned
into that which is signified. And you are in more capacity to yield a
figurative sense here, because elsewhere you do object too much of it, and here
too little. Indeed if Scripture had no other handling but yours, it would after
it, more need an Infallible Judge. Is there no more likelihood of a figurative
sense in the words, then there is of the being of an Accident without the
Subject; or of the Body of Christ, to be in Heaven and on Earth, and in
thousands of places at once?

But you contend the improbability of this sense, because he took the Bread and
the Cup in his hand, and said this is my Body, and this is my Blood. Surely
this makes no prejudice against us; for this was necessary toward the
consecrating of that Bread and that Wine, otherwise there would have been a
Consecration of Bread and Wine in Communi, and therefore he spoke
demonstratively, and this demonstration makes the Subject no less capable of a
figure then the Praedicate; and what difference? Behold the Lamb of God, or
this is the Lamb of God. So in the 9. to the Hebrews and the 20. verse, Moses
having taken the Blood of Calves and Goats said, This is the Blood of the
Testament. Was that Blood transubstantiated into the Blood of Christ? or when
one takes his Testament, may he not say this is my Will, although it be but
the sign of his Will.

You take notice also, of the different opinions there are about the sense of
the words of Institution. We have no cause to take it to our selves, who have
not such variety of conceits therein. Neither can you, I am sure, justify your
Infallibility by your accord herein, since some question whether it be
transubstantiated, and therefore have they a proviso of a conditionate
adoration, Adoro te si tu es Christus, and so many amongst you differ about the
manner of the change; whether by production, which supposes (as is noted) the
Body not to praeexiste, and this is false; or by adduction, which supposes
against Transubstantiation, or by a kind of Conservative Conversion, which is
little else then a Contradiction in adjecto, therefore answer your self. How is
it more clearly defined by the Church, which was scarce in debate till the time
of Berengarius? Did the Church all that while want necessaries to Salvation?
But lastly, you should not have pleaded Scripture for this point on your side,
if you will believe Scotus, and your Cardinal Bellarmine; who says, that
Scotus held Transubstantiation could not be clearly proved by any Text of
Scripture and he himself thinks it not improbable. Therefore herein you cannot,
in their judgment, convince us by Scripture, and therefore till the Church be
Infallible, it is no doctrine of Faith; as it was not before the Lateran
Council, as Scotus affirmed by Bellarmins Confession, in the 23. chapter of the
third Book, De Sacramento Eucharistia* but if Transubstantiation be not
declared in Scripture, then our opinion negative to you is more secure, and is
not concluded not to be in Scripture, though you or others will not profess it.

In the former part of your 15. Number, you go over a former argument again, to
which the former answer may serve. As for the other part of your Paragraph
concerning all the points of Saint Athanasius's Creed, which are not clearly
delivered in Scripture, and yet he that will be saved must think thus. I
answer, Although the matter of them be not in terminis, found in Scripture, yet
the sense of them according to aequivalence may, as well as Transubstantiation,
when you will endeavor to make it out by Scripture. Secondly, Although we
believe what is said in his Creed, yet therefore are we not bound to believe it
by the Authority of the Church, since he would have held it, although the
Church had not, as he did sometimes differ from the common profession of the
Church, in the Consubstantiality of the Son of God.

In the beginning of the 16. Paragraph, you say somewhat which you had said
before, to it we say nothing, but you raise a new opposition. Baptism of
Children to be necessary to their Salvation, is a prime point of Belief, and
yet you cannot believe this prime point of Belief by any clear place of
Scripture, therefore you mean all necessary points are not clearly believed by
Scripture, therefore by the Church; this must be your dissertation, and your
minor proposition you confirm by the Testimony of Saint Austin. We Answer,
first to your Major, by distinguishing a necessity of Baptism in general, it
is necessary by necessity of precept, but it is not necessary by necessity of
mean to the child, so as that if it be not baptized, it is undoubtedly damned;
the former respects the Parents, that they should take care of it for their
children, but if they do not, or the child be taken away as many are before it
can be done by a lawful Minister, we cannot conclude it or them absolutely
perished; since it is not so necessary to them that were of age at the
Primitive Institution, Saint Mark the 16.16. Whosoever believes and is
Baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not, shall be damned; not also,
and is not Baptized: For many there were, and cases might be put, that there
might be more which could not have Baptism before they died: as appears by
your Vicarium Baptisma, which the Fathers speaks of. Then, though we may well
assure our selves, that if Infants rightly Baptized die such, they are
certainly saved: yet can we not as reasonably pass the Verdict of Damnation
upon those which are not Baptized.

As to your assumption, we also distinguish, if you mean we cannot believe this
Poedobaptisme by any clear place of Scripture, namely, in terminis
terminantibus, as they speak expressly, we grant it: but this is not enough for
your purpose. And if you mean it cannot be clearly believed, because by
consequence it cannot be proved, or because it cannot be clearly believed since
it is believed by consequence; then we deny your assumption in both regards.
For whatsoever is necessarily inferred from Scripture is binding in the virtue
of the principle, and therefore clearly we may believe it. Now the institution
of Baptism in general by Christ; the substitution of it to circumcision (since
there is the same Covenant in substance to both Testaments) is a sufficient
Principle to infer the necessity of Baptism of Infants, besides what may be
supposed by baptizing whole Families. And therefore this is none of those
things which are not grounded in Scripture, and therefore no Object of the
Church Tradition. And therefore Saint Austins Testimony will come to no more
then this, that though they had nothing for certain alleged out of the
Canonical Books in this point, yet the truth of Scripture is kept when they do
that which seemed good to the Catholic Church; namely, so far as the
Catholic Church keeps the Truth in clearing that which is not plain in
Scripture. Which Church the Scripture does commend, as he. But is it commended
for infallibility? If not, this Testimony and all your Testimonies and all your
instances which you have of things not determined in Scripture, but determined
by the Church, will do you no good, for you must prove that they were and
ought to be infallibly determined by the Church upon necessity of salvation;
because you would conclude your postulate of the necessity of an infallible
Judge. Now then if those things were not infallibly determined, the instances
thereof are of no use to you. And you may consider that we may in things of
practice (which in their nature are of free Observation, as being neither
commanded or forbidden by the Scripture) and should follow the Church therefore
to bring it to an issue: Either this Poedobaptisme was Infallibly followed by
the Church or not, if infallibly, it was so by the moments of Paedobaptisme in
Scripture, although not perspicuous. If not infallibly, yet might they follow
the Church, and should in this Case; because if it had been free to them to
have done so or not in regard of the thing, yet should they have gone in the
way of the Church, when there was nothing to the contrary; much more should
they conform in this which had that reason in the Analogy of Scripture; and
therefore this Testimony of the Father need not move us, wheresoever we find
it; for I cannot find it by your direction. Give me some better direction to
find the following of the Tradition of the Church to be the most true and
inviolable Rule of Truth reduplicatively namely, upon its own account, and in
things necessary; then I shall say more or yield.

He holds therefore (you say) the Tradition of the Church so infallible that
it may be a ground of Faith. Here are two things to be said. First, that he
holds so of Tradition, which by other Testimonies is to be proved. Since,
Secondly, he does not hold it therefore of Tradition; since these words of
Saint Austin do not draw after them the nature of Tradition in your sense;
which does not depend upon the written Word, as this does for the reason of it.

And you believe Saint Paul taught him so in his second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, 2.15. Hold the Traditions which you have been taught, whether by
word or by our Epistle. To this we answer, premising the state of the Question;
whether Doctrine of Faith not depending upon the word written do oblige Faith
equally to Scripture. Now we say, that these Traditions might respect Order and
Ceremony, or History, and so comes not within compass of the Question, in
regard of the matter. Secondly, Though it will not please Estius upon the
place, yet nothing hinders but that it might be meant of the same matter, which
was first preached, then written; and then should hold it or them, as first
preached, then written; and this is a second answer, in the place does come
into our question in respect of the matter; for the Syriack renders it,
Mandats, Commandments, which do not signify formally matters of Faith.
Thirdly, The Thessalonians might be sure that what they had from him by word,
was such as they should believe equally to what was written: but so cannot we
be of your Doctrines of Faith which you say are handed from Generation to
Generation. Make us as sure of them in regard of Divine Inspiration and
communication to us, then urge our Obedience equal. And this will give you an
account of Saint Chrysostom upon the place, who means no otherwise, then
that which they had from God by him, whether in word or writing they should
hold, which they could believe; we can not for such Traditions, having not that
certainty of them. Read the whole of him upon that Text; and also do not pass
by the Observation of this modesty herein: we may think it worthy of belief,
namely the Tradition of the Church, which whether he means it of things of
Discipline and order (wherein we deny not conformity to the Church) we are not
sure of; but there come not up to our Question: for they are not of Faith, and
do not equally oblige.

And hitherto now you have gone about to assure Christians of a necessity of an
infallible Judge; now in your 17. Paragr. you will assume that the Catholic
Church, is the Judge. Then the Roman to be the Catholic prudently.

The text you name for the Catholic Church is that of Saint Matthew in his 16
Chap. the 18 Verse, I say unto thee thou art Peter (that is to S. Peter by
name) thou art Peter (that is thou art a rock) and upon this rock will I build
my Church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, etc. And now
surely you are at your strong hold, which you think cannot be undermined or
stormed, true, if your application of it were as sure as it.

But we are not careful to answer you in this assault. First, we deny your
interpretation of the name of Peter, you interpret the Greek, that is a rock;
it is denied, the Greek word does not ordinarily, and not here signify a rock.
And if you will not believe me, take this argument, Cephas signifies a stone:
(...) (Petrus) signifies as Cephas, therefore a stone. Both propositions you
have proved, as you may see, in S. John, 1.42, 43. as in the Syriack, Thou
shall be called Cephas, that is a stone; (...), as in the Greek; which is
interpreted (...), a stone. And because Cephas is known in Siriack to signify
a stone, therefore the Syriack does not add these words [which is interpreted]
and that Petrus signifies as Cephas you have there; for Cephas is interpreted
by Petrus, therefore your interpretation is not right.

Secondly, If you say, as you did before, that the Hebrew was the Original of
Saint Matthew's Gospel; then are you not nearly obliged to the Syriack which is
but a dialect thereof? nay likely the very Dialect of Hebrew, wherein it was
first written, if not in Greek, and then not only can you not interpret (...)
A Rock, but (...) neither; and then you cannot render the following words as
you do, And upon this Rock, etc. For the words in the Syriack are letter for
letter the same; both the name of the Apostles; and the word which you render a
Rock, are the same, (...) both, and therefore if you will stand to the Syriack,
it will come to this, Thou art a stone, and upon this stone will I build my
Church. And this will have fair Correspondence with that of Saint Paul in the
same Metaphor, Ephesians. 2.20. Built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. So that the
privilege of Saint Peter here was only this, to lay as it were the first
stone, in this Foundation. Nay thirdly, (...) in the New Testament more then
once signifies a stone, Romans 9. last. it is synonymically joined there with
(...) where (...) is joined also to the same Metaphor, in that it is said
(...); for this must signify a stone of offense; for whoever stumbled at a
Rock? and therefore a scandal in the Church is by Aquinas defined by that which
gives to others an occasion of falling. So also in the very same manner are
they put together by Saint Peter himself in his 1. Ep. 2. Verse 8. And we have
reason to think that Saint Peter did understand the sense of Christ's words to
him, and the reason of his name.

And thus for your Interpretation of this Text.

As for the application of it, we say first, whereas you refer this to the
Person of Saint Peter, you may know that you differ from the Ancients, who did
refer it to the Confession of Saint Peter, and not to his act of his
Confession, as his; but as to the Object, which was confessed, which your
Isidor Clarius may be thought to aim at, when he Expounds, super hanc Petram,
super hanc fidel soliditatem. For Piscator notes well that this rock cannot be
meant of Saint Peter; because S. Peter is one of the believers which were built
upon this rock. And therefore one has a conceit that Christ spoke [this rock]
(...) pointing at himself; as where he says destroy this Temple, pointting at
his body, and so the copulative may be understood by way of Ebraisme; and upon
this rock, but upon this rock. Secondly, as Saint Peter spoke here for the rest
of the Apostles; where that which is granted is common to him with the rest of
the Apostles, as that which follows, and I will give thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven: unless you can Evince it that that which is here promised
or given to Saint Peter, ^ really different from that which is given to all the
Apostles in the 20. of Saint John, the 22, 23. verse, and then shall you do
more then you Heart in his Colloquie with Rainolds. There is the same power and
authority under the same Metaphor; For what difference will you make betwixt
binding and retaining, and loosing or remitting* so then let me ask you this
question: was the primacy of authority given to Saint Peter here at that time,
or after the Resurrection given, here promised? If given here, then after this
privileges of Infallibility, Saint Peter denied his Master; therefore somebody
of yours, and Bellarmin, as I remember, wittily imagines, that this authority
was given to Saint Peter after his Resurection, that so the successors of Saint
Peter might not have the possibility of denying Christ entailed upon them: If
promised there, given then, where will you find any Text more symbolical then
that of the 20. of Saint John forenamed? and that was given to the Apostles
communiter. Therefore if [I will give] respects the future, and after the
Resurrection of Christ, as Isidor Glorius does note; then confess it to be
accomplished here, or name any Text, which has better allusion thereunto. And
if the Superiority of Saint Peter was neither given nor promised here, where
then? and why is this Text made to bear false witness by you for you.

Thirdly, This Superiority of Saint Peter in jurisdiction, as to be Prince of
the Apostles, as your men speak, is flatly contrary to our Saviors own Order
in the 20. of Saint Matthew, the 26. verse; for when James and John the sons of
Zebedee, were petitioned for by their mother for preheminency; Our Savior
said, Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and
those that are great exercise authority upon them; but it shall not be so
amongst you. Then here is the Controversy determined by our Savior in
Scripture. St. Peter then was not to have any authority over the rest. Not that
from hence can be argued, that there should be no one Superior to Presbyters,
as Sectaries would urge it; but none of all the Apostles to be superior, to
have dominion, to exercise authority over the other of the Apostles. Here is a
plain Text for the paritie of the Apostles, which destroys the foundation of
the Roman Church, which now you speak for.

Fourthly. Put case Saint Peter had been constituted Prince of the Apostles,
and of the Church consequently, yet have you another infinite labor to make
good the succession of these privileges to the Bishop of Rome by Divine Right.
Why not rather to Antioch and Jerusalem; since also by a Divine Faith we cannot
be ascertained, that Saint Peter was ever at Rome. We do not deny it, but yet
by you it is not made out to be an object of Divine Faith, that he was there.
And to name no other prejudices against you in this, you are put to very hard
shifts for the pr^^ ^hereof, when you are compelled to interpret Babylon ^^ the
1 Ep. 5. c. and 13. v. of St. Peter to be Rome. Certainly had your men any
other Text for it, they would not have given us this occasion and example to
interpret Babylon in another place to be Rome. And yet also Isidor is somewhat
tender in this Exposition, it is not very likely, says he, that it should be
understood of that Babylon, of the Assyrians, or that in Egypt, but it is
admodum credibile, very credible that it is meant of Rome.

And Estius upon the place cites the first Author for this Interpretation of it
to be Rome, to be the same who was the Father of the Milinary Opinion, namely
Papias. But fifthly, The former Text of Saint Matthew is not to be meant of any
Church of one Denomination, and if so, it had been meant of one not of Rome.
For then the promise had not been made good of not falling into damnable
errors, for so the gates of Hell should prevail against it. The gates of Hell
have prevailed against the Church of Rome, Head and Members; as you may see
more at large in the Discourse of Raynolds with Heart. What say you to Liberius
his subscribing to the censure of Athanasius, and did not he subscribe to the
error then which Athanasius withstood? And were not the Members included in
the Head? And ought not they to do so as he under peril of damnation? But
sixthly, whereas you say that by Christ the Church is secured from any damnable
error, we have enough against you by this intimation; if you mean it
distinctively, as methinks you do. For you insinuate here that Christ does not
intend her exemption from all error, for then you are in greater danger of not
being the Church unto which that Favor is granted: but he does here free it
from damnable error, because else the gates of Hell should prevail against it:
So then again it is not necessary to salvation to be free from all error. Well
then upon these two concessions that the Church of Christ may be obnoxious to
error, though not damna^^^ because again, every error does not damn, we
exclu^^ the infallibility of the Church, for it may err it seems: and also we
exclude the necessity of such an infallibility, for we may be saved
notwithstanding some errors, and what need then of an infallible Judge since
in points of question simple error is not damnative? and where indeed shall we
have an infallible Judge, if there be fallibility in any particular; If the
Spirit of God speaks in the Church by infallible assistance, cannot the Spirit
of God infallibly determine all points? or if it assists infallibly only to
material Articles which are necessary, then do you give us a list of your
Fundamentals. And also for Fundamentals we need not such a Judge, having them
with sufficient plainness in Scripture which is Infallible. Upon the whole
matter then, there is a possibility of their erring, without Infallibility, and
of our erring without damnation: So that your first error is an Infallibility
of a Judge; the second, the necessity of such a Judge; and a third is this,
that no Church can prudently be held to be the Catholic Church, but the Roman.

But ought we not to disturb your delight, you take in holding a Religion
prudently? prudently as if we were to choose a Religion by interesse, which
prudence does rather direct to, not by sapience of the highest speculative
principles, which direct the understanding: but to let that pass. We only
note hereby your pronouncing this main Text, for the Authority of the Church,
that what Authority it has, must be resolved into Scripture, then is that the
first and highest principle. That the center of Truth, wherein we must rest,
and the further we go from that, the further from Truth. And the greater
circumference we draw, the lines are the remoter from that, wherein we must
acquiesce, as being the Word of God.

Yet you say here we see the Judge, which Christ has warranted from bringing
in any damnable error, therefore may we securely obey. So you. But where is
your connection in this argumentation? Either you distinguish damnative error
against that which is not damnative, or not. If not, then in your opinion all
error is damnative; then take you heed of this, for this is one. Or if you do
distinguish it against error damnative, yet may we not securely obey this
Judge, because then we may be bound to obey him in an (...) and so should the
understanding be obliged to assent to error, which is impossible, and he must
act against his Conscience, even in his assent, which is a contradiction.

And that none may disobey this judge securely, the Text you bring Matthew.
18.17. will not evince to your p^^pose. For first, it concerns matters of
Trespass betwixt Brother and Brother, not matters of Faith, and thus it is
Eccentrical to your ^esigne. Secondly, It concerns refractorinesse of the
person, not unbelief of the Understanding; and so the Authority of the Church
may bind against the former, though not against the latter. Thirdly It
respects Excommunication by censure, not determination of a point by
Infallibility, and so also is not proper to your cause. And fourthly, It may
err in the Censure, and therefore Excommunication, eo ipso, does not damn, as
Unbelief may. Neither am I bound to believe the Censure is just, unless it
appears to be so. Fifthly, This power belongs to every particular Church; and
to the several Prelates thereof (as you speak also in the number of multitude)
and therefore is not appropriated to your Church. Sixthly, It does not follow,
a fortieri, as you would have it, nor yet at all, that because the Church is to
judge of private complaints, therefore it can judge infallibly in causes of
greater importance: by its authority it does the former, without Infallibility
it does not the latter. The former of them does not conclude against me, and
the latter cannot be from hence collected. As for that which follows,
Whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, as far as it
regards Excommunication, must be also taken specificatively, and clave non
errante, as they speak. And this touches the person unto the submission, not
the Conscience; as to renounce that which it apprehends as true: for then
should Athanasius have been bound in Conscience by the Censure of the Church to
have been an Arrian.

Then from the peril of disobedience to this judge, you gather that this must
supposse the judge not to be fall^ble in such prime causes, as must concern the
Church; and all such causes are those which may bring (...) damnable errors. So
you in the and of that Number.

But your premises being destroyed, your Conclusion is ruinous, and yet also
you do not conclude punctually, according to an Ele^ch; for you conclude it not
fallible in prime causes of main importance, but you should in your proof
conclude it not fallible in any thing: for if it be fallible in any thing
wherein the error is not damnative, then you do not conclude it infallible.
Yea, though it should not err actually in any decision, ye follows not from
hence, that it is infallible. For Infallibility excludes all error in
whatsoever i^ does propose or decree, and also the possibility of error.
Therefore prove it thus, and then an infallibility of our knowledge of it, and
infallibly what is the subject of this Infallibility, and then I shall stand up
to your Creed. And if you would go the right way in this dispute, you should
use another method: for whereas you would argue the Church to be the judge,
which we cannot safely disobey; if you could make this sure (which yet is not
done) yet you should rather go this way synthetically, the Church is
infallible in whatsoever it does define, therefore it is the Judge which we
ought to obey in all things whatsoever it (...) out* but your discourse from
uncertain decisions and inconveniences does not bespeak any credence of your
infallibility, much less of our knowledge thereof.

Now we follow you into your eighteenth paragraph. And here we meet with St
Austins suffrage in his 20. de ^in. cap. 9. where he comments upon these words
of Rev. ^^.4. I fan^ thro^^, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given
them. So the testimony. And what from hence? Because the Praeposits judge on
earth, therefore infallibly, then every Church which has Praeposits, should be
Infallible. Does this follow* we deny not their Judicature, but their
Infallibility. Conclude thus, or you agree with us.

Then you ^^y to the Old Testament, Mal. 2.7. For the Priests lips shall keep
knowledge, and they shall require the law from his mouth. So you. And you note,
besides a great corruption in our English, which renders the words, the
Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law. We need not
answer that this Text has nothing for you: Is it meant of the Priests at Rome?
If not, how belongs it to you? but to the Priests of the Church ^ what an
general? what then do you get by this? Secondly They keep Knowledge
sufficiently for the people. Do they keep it Infallibly* If not we are agreed.
If infallibly, how are the Priests taxed in the following words for not doing
so? And if the formality of speech does import a promise in the future, not a
duty in the Subjunctive: yet the promise does not include an impossibility of
error; no more then the promise made to your Church, as you suppose, does
exclude all error, but that which is destructive. Thirdly, The future in the
Hebrew, does not contradict a subjunctive in the interpretation, when the scope
bears it, since the Hebrews, as you may know, have no proper Subjunctive. And
it is proper to the scope to understand it as of duty, they should keep
knowledge, whereupon ^^ey are charged for breach of duty, therefore our
Interpretation in this, is more sound then your dispute upon it.

And therefore that which you say in your 19. Number, that any man may ask the
Priests of the Church, what is the Known Doctrine of the Church, and then let
him rest securely; when he knows that, that is unreasonable because the
Priests are not Infallible. May he not rest more securely in Scripture? for the
Church in all things is not as before infallible, the Scripture is, in all
which it proposes: but the Church you say, is not in danger of taking in any
damnative error. Well, but the Scriptures sets out none at all; but all things
are not determined in Scripture. Well, but all things are not determined in the
Church; but all things necessary are taught in the Church, which may keep us
from damnative error. Well, and are not all things necessary taught in the
Scripture? why then not to the Law and Testimony? why to the Cistern, when we
may have it at the Fountain? why not to the Scripture particularly, when what
Authority the Church has, it has from the Scripture in general? and why does
your Church take away from the people the use of Scripture? and why may not we
be informed as sufficiently by our Priests, as you by yours, notwithstanding
this Text? especially since we go by Scripture, you by Tradition, or humane
definition. And if the Priests of yours were Infallible, can you say Infallibly
that they will not deceive you? How miserably then do you provide for the poor
people? when you would have them require at their mouth, not the Law of God,
but the Doctrine of the Church.

That which comes on in the same Number about Tradition before Scripture, was
answered before it was written. The Word, in the Substance of it, was before
the Church which was begotten by it, and when there is now as much need, and as
great certainty of Tradition as formerly, then urge it.

And I thank you for Saint Irenaeus's Testimony, I do not lie at catch; but the
most convincing dispute, is by our Adversaries principles; not the Fathers but
yours, as you apply them, for we can make very good use of his words. If the
Scripture had not been left to us, we should have had Tradition more certainly
conveyed to us, as the Gospel was before it was written, and this confirms for
me what was said before: but now I assume, the Scripture is now left to us,
therefore is there no need of certain conveyance of Tradition to us. Surely you
have a mind to help us for your own good.

Neither can we believe that those barbarous Nations you speak of, did rely
only upon Tradition, they might be commended to the doctrine of the Gospel by
Tradition, and then not believe it for the sake of Tradition, for this is the
state of the question: Tradition in matters of Faith unwritten, is of equal
authority to Scripture. Secondly, If you say Salvation was written in their
hearts by the Holy Ghost, this may be meant to be done not only beside
Scripture, but besides Tradition, and thus was it done extraordinarily. But
why? Thirdly, Might not the Holy Spirit infuse Faith of the Gospel into those
Nations, by some of those who were Apostles, or sent from them to Preach it;
and then the Tradition you speak of is the matter of the Gospel which is
written, and so it does not appertain to the question of Traditions of proper
name, which you say are beside that which is written, though not against it;
and then your discourse is fallacious from that which is the object of the
Gospel delivered, to that which is beside it delivered, which ambiguity of the
word Tradition if it does deceive you, yet does it not consequently deceive me:
but if you mean Tradition here, only of the manner of communicating the matter
of Scripture without writing, then the former answer may satisfy you, that
Tradition was then more certain, and they were more assured of it by the Spirit
of God then we are now. And also it might be to them, as the Star to the Wise
Men for leading them to Christ. By the light of the Star they were guided to
Christ, but when they came to him, they saw him not by the light of the Star,
but by the light of the Day: so some might be directed to the Gospel by
Tradition before they had the Scripture, and then believed it by the light of
Scripture.

You add also, neither did the Apostles or their Successors take any care to
have the Scripture communicated to all Nations in such Languages, as they could
all, or the greater part understand. So you.

This is readily denied: for God did take care that the New Testament should
for the most part of it at least be first written in Greek. And the Greek you
know in the notion of the New Testament, is contradistinguished to the Jew,
because so many of the world, besides the Jews, were Greeks; and the Greeks
Language was the most common then, and therefore says Tully in his Oration for
the Poet Archias, Graeca per totum orbem leguntur. And God by his gracious
Providence, has taken care that the Scripture should be translated into diverse
languages, as you may know, that so several Nations might have it familiar to
them in their own Tongue; which must condemn your Church, for not permitting of
it ordinarily to the people in their own dialect; and also does conclude, that
Tradition is no Infallible provision for a rule of Faith, for how shall the
people undoubtedly know that the Traditions were clearly discerned, true from
them which were false; and also that they were faithfully handed through so
many Centuries to the present time. And yet if so, this would not be sufficient
for your use, unless you or others could find these two points more, one how
to evade a Circle, by proving the Traditions by the Church, and the Church by
the Traditions: and the second this, that those Traditions have Infallibly
decided the differences betwixt us, which the Ancients did not professedly
handle, as having not provocations thereunto. If any thing be touched by the
by, you may know the rule, Aliud agentis parva autoritas.

In your 20. Number, you make a recapitulation of what you think you have done,
and I think you have undone, until you come to

Sixthly, I have found a lawful Judge, who can be informed of all Controversies
arising from time to time, and who can hear Me and You, and be heard by Me and
You: that neither I nor you can doubt of the true meaning of this Church, or if
we doubt, we can propose our doubt, and she will tell us clearly her meaning,
whereas the Bible, etc. cannot do so.

This has in it somewhat new: your discourse in brief, may be under this
form. That which can hear you and me, and be heard by you and me, and resolve
doubts of its meaning, is the Judge; the Church can do thus, the Scripture not,
therefore the Church is the Judge, and not the Scripture.

We easily answer, If you understand the proposition of a formal Judge, so we
grant it, and do not say the Scripture is the Judge, but if you mean it so that
nothing can be in any Kind a Judge, but that which does so, we deny it and your
assumption too; for the Law is in its kind the Judge; and so may the Scripture
be, as I have showed before in this paper. And unless the Ecclesiastic Judges
(whereof we do not reject a lawful and good use) do rightly declare Scripture
in the application of it to particular Causes, (wherein the authority of the
Church, as some of your men will sometimes say, does consist) I cannot possibly
hold my self bound in Conscience to yield my judgment thereunto. So then
secondly, unless you put into the premises, that that which hears you and
me, and is heard by you and me, is the infallible Judge, and then that the
Church does so, your discourse is peccant in the ignorance of the Elench, for
so we grant all as to the Church, for this may stand with our cause, but if you
do put in infallibility, we deny both the one and the other Preposition.
Thirdly, by this Argument you exclude Tradition from being the Judge: for does
that hear you and me? Is that heard by you and me? but you say the Church does
determine hereby, then may it determine by Scripture more securely, and more
universally. Fourthly, is not the Heretic Saint Paul speaks of in his third
chapter to Titus the 10.11. verses, (...), condemned by himself, or of himself?
how that? not by principles of natural Knowledge: for Theology is
supernatural, and therefore needed a Revelation of it from God, you know not by
a Revelation immediate Extra Scripturam: for then how should he be condemned of
himself? Not by any definition of the Church, which was not then sufficiently
formed thereunto: no nor yet by Titus; because then as before, he had not been
condemned by himself; then he was condemned by himself, because he had in him
the Principles of the Word of God, which he gainsaid by his contrary Error: So
that it remains he was condemned by the Law of God. And therefore that can
judge you and me; not externally, and by voice: but internally by virtue of
Conscience; which can and does and should apply the truths of God to the
censure and condemning of Errors in us; so that this Scripture it is, or the
Word of God which passes Sentence in the interior judgment, as you speak,
and this absolves some who in the outward Courts are condemned; and condemns
some who in the outward Court are not condemned. And therefore it is not only
lawful, but necessary for us sometimes to dissent in our judgment, because
they may err in their dijudication.

And as much your own reason suggests in your 21. Number; wherein you
acknowledge it to be necessary that there should be infallibility in the Judge
of faith; And then you would state or estate this infallibility of the Church
of Christ thus, that a Pope defining with a Lawful General Council cannot
err. For it is no necessary article of faith to believe that the Pope or Head
of the Church cannot Err when he defines without a General Council. So you.

Alas, Sir what Cautions do you stand in need of in this grand and capital and
Comprehensive Controversy; which affords me Liberty to think, that that is not
the ground of Catholic Faith, which is intricated with so many windings; and
guarded with such accurateness of Cautions, that render it very suspicious; and
therefore not to be plain and a direct way so that fools cannot err: for who
can be certain by a Divine Faith of the Lawfullness and regularitie of your
Pope in his Creation, and when there was Pope against Pope, who of the people
could distinguish the right? And this is now possible because then in facto.
And who then could decide the question: for the infallible judge you say is
your Pope with a Council. Which of them could then determine it and in his own
cause? Or could your Council determine it without a Pope? but I hope your
infallible determination could not be without the Head of the Church; And who
according to your Doctrine, should call the Council? for you say that power is
vested in the Pope; Well, suppose no doubt of the legalitie of the Pope; how
shall we by a Divine faith come to be assured of the lawfulness and Generality
of a Council? for you know Ecclesiastical History is full of instances of
Councils, which were called by the Emperors and not by Popes, to whom you say
it does of due belong to call Councils; else they are not lawful. And how shall
we know whether every one of the Council has a free Election to it, and a free
decisive vote in it? How much of faction may be looked for in a Council, when
there is so much in the Election of a Pope; such exclusions, such bandyings?
What Council was ever called by a Pope wherein Religion was not made to serve
his interest? Is not he who has power of preferring like to domineer in such
Consultations? And how shall ignorant souls be divinely persuaded that the
Council i^ General? If it be easy to discern it, then had your Tren^ Council
great infelicity to be so contradicted by the French Catholics. And how many
Bishops in the Trent Council furnished with a Title to overpower them with
Votes on the Popes behalf. So that he answered well who said about the question
which is superior, a Pope or a Council; a Pope was like to have the more
voices, because he could confer Bishoprics, a Council not. What clue can a
collier have infallibly to guide him through all those Labyrinths?

Secondly, If the infallible Judge of Faith be the Pope with a lawful General
Council, how was the Church provided for? when for so many years there was
neither Pope in your sense, nor any Council?

Thirdly, If the Pope and the Council do differ about a Question, what shall be
done in that case? yet if the Question be which is superior to the other, the
Pope or the Council, what shall be jointly agreed? and is not this a main
question between the Sorbonists and others?

Fourthly, If the Pope with a lawful General Council be the infallible Judge,
then how will this be reconciled to the Pontificians, who assert the Government
of the Church to be Monarchical by Christ's Institution: for if part of the
authority be in the General Council, then is it not all in one, the Pope. Or if
the Council be called only ad Consilium, and they have no Votes decisive, how
does this agree to all the former Councils, wherein they had authority of Vote;
and he may determine without them as to advise, since he determins without them
in the authority; and suppose they advise him to let them have power of Vote;
he can yet determine against them.

Fifthly, How many Councils have been opposite to one another. In which or with
which did not the Pope err? The Nicene and that of Ariminum as before decreed,
contrarily; one for the Arrians, the former against them, which did not err,
and yet if neither had, did ever any of the ancient Councils determine of their
own infallibility?

And what think you of Nazianzens Opinion about Councils, in his Epistle, to
Procopius, the 42. Shall I tell you it? I have no mind to derogate from General
Councils, but if you would have me tell you his judgment, it is in such words,
(...), etc. I am thus affected, as to shun all meetings of Bishops (if I must
speak the truth) for I never saw any Good end of a Synod, nor that had an end
of the Evils more then an addition. Nay, did not the Bishop of Bit^nto break
out into these words in the face of the Council at Trent; I would that with one
consent, we had not altogether declined from Religion, to superstition, from
Faith unto infidelity from Christ unto Antichrist, from God to Epicurus. Did
he not say so?

And this may serve for your Answer to all the rest of this your Paragraph. We
cannot think it strange that the definition of a General Council should be
fallible, until you bring forth your strong reasons to induce my assent, that
such assistance was ever promised to a General Council, as the Apostles and
Prophets had; or that any General Council had such assistance; or that there
was the same reason of such assistance.

And to say no more of this point, measure the infallibility of the Trent
Council by the determinations thereof in things of Religion, and see how they
agree with Scripture; which you say is a rule of Faith: and by this Argument be
you judge of the infallible Judge. Let us not see your Opinions by
infallibility which you pretend: but do you see your infallibility by the
determinations it did put forth; namely such wherein we differ, and therefore I
need not name them.

In the 22. Paragraph we have recapitulation, and a passage of Luther, which
you use as an Argument ad hominem.

We Answer, you do then hereby give us occasion to show our ingenuity to truth,
that as we follow him and any other with it, so we will not follow others or
him without it. But secondly, If this book was written after his recession from
the Church of Rome, it is not meant of the Roman Church, but of the Catholic
Church; which yet he does not here compare with the Scripture, but with a
private man; which seems to be spoken against Enthusiasts. Neither does he say
that it is not lawful to doubt of the Church that whatsoever it says is true;
but that it has the Revelation of the Father; to wit because it has the
revealed Word of God with it. Or that the undoubtednesse of it does not belong
to it per se, but per aliud, because it has for its privilege the Revelation
of Scripture; And thus it makes not for you.

Now this brings on your forecited passage of Saint Paul to Tim. 1.3.15. Where
the Church of God is called the Pillar and Ground of Truth.

And you ask, May not men rely securely upon the pillar of Truth? May they not
ground themselves assuredly on the ground of Truth? no ground being surer
ground and more infallible then the ground of Truth it self? So you;

Supposing the words read according to this way, we answer; There is a double
Pillar, and a double ground; one Principal, the Scripture; the other less
principal and subordinate, the Church; now as this pillar and this ground is
subordinate to the main pillar and ground, we may rely and ground our selves:
but then the principal reliance and grounding must be upon that which is
principal, the Scripture. For let me ask you likewise, what is the Pillar and
Ground of the Church? Is it not the Scripture? then the Church is but the
pillar and ground by accident, because that does rely and is grounded upon the
Scripture. And therefore the Scripture is the more sure and infallible ground:
because what truth the Church has it has by participation, and it is possible
for it to hold forth and to have hung upon it somwehat which is false,
according to your own confession (as I conceive you) although not damnative.
And this does well corroborate my inference from Saint Irenaeus words of the
Scriptures being called the Pillar and Ground of Truth; that therefore it is
the Ground of Faith, yes very rationally, because it is the prime and supreme
pillar and ground of Truth. Yet you will raise a consequence upon mine for your
cause, thus. If this consequence be strong (which I deny not) there is yet a
stronger, that the Truth is no where surer grounded then upon the pillar and
foundation of Truth. So you.

Sir, What do you mean? Do you make any difference betwixt the ground and
foundation? Do you mean that the Scripture is the ground of Faith, but the
Church is the Foundation? This is your sense I suppose, otherwise how a
stronger Consequence? For there is no comparative, but where there is some
difference. And if this be what you would have, then I think I may say, I have
what I would have, and yet we are not agreed. For then you confess what I have
hitherto held, that the Scripture is the ground of Faith. You said at first
that the authority of the Church was the ground of Faith: I said the Scripture
was the ground of Faith; and now you say as I say, that the Scripture is the
ground of Faith, and so your contradiction is come into my affirmation. But yet
we are not agreed in that which you now superadd, that the Church is the
Foundation of Truth; the Scripture is the Ground, the Church the Foundation. Is
it so? then have you changed the Question. And why had we not the right state
of it at first? And was it not enough that the Church should be the ground of
Scripture, but must it be the Foundation in a more excellent sense? I must not
let this pass for your sake.

First, what gives you occasion from the Text to assert the Church to be the
Foundation, signanter, I do not see. For the word in the Greek (...) does not
signify a Foundation, but that which does uphold, support against falling; and
therefore, Isidor Clarius and Estius do interpret it by firmamentum, not
fundamentum. So the Church holds forth, and holds up the Truth. Therefore your
meaning of Foundation above ground, has neither Foundation nor ground.

Secondly, can you conceive and say, that the Church is a Foundation of Truth
comparatively to Scripture? Is not the Scripture the Foundation of the Church:
The Scripture in the substance of the Word, was before the Church, because the
Church was built upon it; then the Scripture in the substance of it, was the
Foundation, and is now, being written. And that which is the first Principle of
all must be the Foundation of the rest; and the further we go from it, the
less security we have, because we go more into discourse which is uncertain.
Now, the first Principle is Scripture, not the Church; because the Church is
proved by Scripture, and you proved even now, or would have done, the authority
of it by Scripture. The Church may give Testimony of the Scripture: but the
Scripture does not only give Testimony of the Church, but does ground it, and
constitute it, and distinguish it, and upon it, it is built, then this is the
Foundation. The Church is built upon the Scripture, not the Scripture upon the
Church. As the Law has it self to Justice, so has the Scripture it self to
Faith. Now the Law is the Foundation of Justice, not the Judge: so is the
Scripture the Foundation of Faith, not the Church, which you say is the Judge.
For as the Judge is built upon the Law, so is the Church upon Scripture. And as
the Judge is to go by the Law in his proceeding and sentence, otherwise he
erres; so is the Church to go by the Law of Scripture, otherwise it does err.
And as the Law is not to be proved, it being the first Principle in Justice, so
is not the Scripture to be proved; for it is the first principle in Faith. But
as the sentence of the Judge may be examined by Law, so may the determinations
of the Church be examined by Scripture, since the Judge may err, and so may
the Church. But first prove that it has not erred, and then you will have
another work to do to prove it cannot: For the Faith of a Christian immediately
is resolved into that which cannot deceive him. And prove that it cannot err,
and therefore is the infallible Judge; or if you can, prove it the back way; it
is the infallible judge, therefore cannot err.

Nextly, You make some perstriction of my Criticisme (if it may be so called)
and yet not mine neither, but of others also; whereby the terms, the Pillar
and Ground of Truth, is referred to the commendation of the Mystery of
Godliness, after the Hebrew fashion, to give these Praefaces of respect to so
grand and sublime doctrines.

Here you are pleased to smile, as if I had forgotten that this Epistle was
written in Greek, not in Hebrew, and also you say no Hebrew form in the world
can make that sense he intends.

Sir, Will you please to give me leave to be even with you in a smile: but no,
I have no mind to rejoice in any man's imperfections. Soberly I reply, that I
do well remember in what Language it was written, and therefore I make it to be
an Ebraisme, in our use of the word, which speaks a following of the Hebrew
form in some other Language. And he that does not understand that there is many
of these Ebraismes in the Greek of the New Testament, does not understand so
much as I would desire. And therefore, that which you say, that no Hebrew form
can make my sense, is not to be answered. And to follow you, although the
Apostle had not spoken yet of Godlilinesse, or the mystery of it, might he not
put this form of commendation in the front of the Doctrine of Godliness? as as
also in the first Epistle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ etc.

Neither have you any cause to object the reading of the words in our English,
since the distinction of Verses is not Canonical, nor yet our English so
accounted by us; notwithstanding we have as much reason for it, to make it as
good as your Latin.

But your Adversary says, you say, that this Title of being the Pillar and
ground of Truth, agrees in the first place to Scripture. Yes, and so I do
still, and have showed it so: but you say it belongs equally to any thing
that is the true Word of God, and therefore agrees to the Scriptures, because
God speaks in it; and by it. Right, hold you there. Rest your self here. Set
up your staff here, for you can go no further, unless you will go up to
Heaven, and the Church Triumphant.

But God also speaks by his Church, and in his Church; yes, unto Authority,
not Infallibility, and therefore that which follows, remains to be proved by
you; that he does give as much Infallible assistance to the Church in a Council
(where is the Pope? have you a mind to the opinion of the French Catholics?)
as he gave to him who did deliver his Word in Scripture. It is utterly denied.
And you may see plainly hereby how the Roman Tyranny over your Conscience (as
they would persuade you) draws you necessarily into this peril of Blasphemy:
for herein it appears, that now there is no need of Scripture, since God speaks
as Infallibly by his Church, as in his Word. And this some Pontificians do lean
toward. And then those by you should be called Enthusiasts, not who oppose a
private Revelation to Scripture, but to the Church; if God speaks as infallibly
by his Church, then speak no more against Enthusiasmes, or if you do, we shall
tell you the story, that one was accused to Alexander for being a Pirate; so
then said he that was accused to Alexander, I am a Pirate with one Fly-boat,
and you are not, because you have a Navy. So the private men are by you
accounted Enthusiasts, because they have but their own singularities for their
bottom: but the Church of Rome is not to be charged therewith, because they
have so many with them. And yet it may be, if Infallibility were to be
determined by Votes, whether it did belong to the Words of God only, or also
to the Word of the Church, you would go near to lose it; for all Churches hold
the Scripture Infallible, and you too: but no Church but the Roman holds the
Church to be Infallible, and then also you must assume that you are the Church,
otherwise you would not hold it Infallible.

You say again, it is objected, that in these words, rather the office of the
Church is set forth then her Authority. To which you say, your answer is clear,
that her Authority cannot possibly in short words be more set out, then by
saying that she is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, etc.

But the question is, whether these words be intended to that purpose, since
also the words do in short fully represent the office of the Church: the
intention of the passage must be gathered by the scope, according to the rule
of the Schoolman, Intelligentia dicti colligitur ex scopo loquendi. Now the
drift of Saint Paul, was to instruct him how he should carry himself in the
Church. Was it reasonable then he should have account of the Church in the
privileges of it, or in the duty thereof; which is to hold forth, and uphold
truth? For if the Infallibility of the Church were here affirmed, then needed
he not to have such instructions to take care how he behaved himself in the
Church. Since Infallible assistance is immediate, and that which is immediate,
includes no time for the inspiration, nor means of instruction: therefore had
your Roman Church been real in the asserting of Infallibility, it had not
needed eighteen years for the sitting of the Trent Council, with Intermissions,
nor more for the consultation whether there should be any.

As for that which comes next of Athanasius, it was in part answered before:
the Argument is this, the Consubstantiality of the Son is by Athanasius, after
the determination of the Nicene Council, called that Word of God, by the Nicene
Council, which remains for ever and ever. And this is no where clearly said
in Scripture, therefore somewhat which is not clearly said in Scripture, may by
a Council be determined to be the Word of God. To this we answer, we may grant
you all of the Syllogism, and yet nothing accrews to you, if the words by the
Nicene Council be understood ministerially to Scripture, which they were bound
to declare the sense of, as to that point, and so it did not bind with
relation to their Authority, but by Authority of Scripture, which they declared
the mind of in that case. And therefore though so we grant the Argument, yet do
we deny your Consequence which you would make of it in your sense, that the
Church is infallible in the definitions of it, since that which was defined was
indeed Infallible, and yet was not Infallibly defined: for though the Council
did not err in that definition, yet it might have erred: and if it did not
err in that, yet it might err in other definitions: and therefore can we not
without suspense, intuitively receive what they propose as the Word of God,
which is by you yet to be proved. For secondly, That which they have the
Principles and Grounds of Scripture for, it is more easy for them rightly to
define, in the Application of those principles unto particular cases, as they
had for that question about the Consubstantiality of the Son, as Saint John the
10.30. I and my Father are one; not (...) but (...), not one Person, but one in
Nature: but as for those questions, whereof the solution is not so principled
in Scripture, as being not so necessary to be held on either part; we cannot
expect so likely a determination, and yet if probable, we cannot from thence
urge it as an object of Faith. That which is in Scripture, according to
equivalence of sense (as that point is) we may better credit upon account of
Scripture, then that which the ignorance of does not damn, since the Scripture
gives us no moments of knowledge how to order our assent affirmatively or
negatively in that.

But thirdly Saint Athanasius did not ground his Faith in the affirmative of
that question upon the authority of the Nicene Council, because he held it
before the Council had determined it, and therefore the cause of his Faith
herein, was not the authority of the Council. And if that Council of Nice was
to be believed for it self, without respect to the matter, as depending upon
Scripture, why not the Council of Ariminum to the contrary; and therefore Saint
S. Austin would refer it to Scripture betwixt him and Maximinus a Bishop of the
Arrians, since the Councils was contrary. And if any exception could have been
made against the Council of Ariminum, as toward the denial of such authority
of it as is due to other Councils, had it not been easy for the Father to have
held the Doctrine upon the Authority of the Council of Nice, though the other
had been rejected?

In your 23. Number, you do not fairly render my Answer. I did not say that
Christ would not be at all with his Church to the end of the world: but it is
not necessarily there meant, that he would be with them unto the end of the
world, as he was with the Apostles by Infallible assistance, so he did not
promise he would be with the Successors of the Apostles. And therefore if this
be a simple mistake, it is a fallacy a dicto secundum quid: if you intended a
slander, it is worse. Infallible assistance is not there promised, and
therefore the promise may be made good without it. Neither was there such need
of Infallible assistance (whatsoever you say) because the rule of Faith and
Manners was to be determined in the Scripture, which is the Infallible Word of
God. So that although they who followed the Apostles in the governance of the
Church, had been so disposed for Infallible assistance, as the Apostles, yet
had there not been that use of the assistance Infallible; but having not that
disposition thereunto, they wanted a condition and qualification for such
assistance. And God did not give an Infallible assistance to the Apostles,
because they were disposed for that gift of Infallibility, but rather gave them
that disposition, that so they might be fitted for that Infallibility. And so
if he had intended such a measure of the Spirit to the Successors of the
Apostles, as to them, he could have made them as capable thereof.

As for your Reason which you mention of leaving as secure direction for them
(who followed) because the further we go from Christ's time, the more we are
subject to uncertainty about his Doctrine; therefore there is as much yea far
more reason (of this secure direction.) I answer, You do not well consider what
you say. For if we be more subject to uncertainties, the further we go from
Christ his time, then cannot you urge the credit of those Traditions now
equally to the certainty of them then: supposing that there were any of Faith
not written. Secondly, this Reason would be none, if men would be guided by
Scripture, which has now the same certainty as ever. This is a Rule which will
with equal infallibility hold at all times; and unto which we are all equally
obliged.

Again, you would argue that the Church is secure from damnable error, because
Christ promised to be with it to the end of the world, and he is not with those
who live in damnable error.

But what is this to me? you may conclude thus, and yet not against me, if you
speak of damnable error specificatively: for if you mean it reduplicatively,
that all error is damnable, Ut sic, quatenus errer, it is false. All simple
error is not damnative to the person. And therefore Christ may be with some
who live in some error indeed otherwise with whom is he? For who is there that
lives not in some error, though he knows it not? If you mean then damnable
error distinctively, I grant you all; and yet you have nothing thereby for
your cause. For this does not prove infallibility to your Church. Security from
damnable error (distinctively taken) does not infer absolute infallibility.
The former is promised, as also in that of Saint John. 14.16. (which you would
reinforce here;) but absolute infallibility is not intended. And this you must
have, or else you are utterly lost. For if the Church be not infallible in all
that is proposed by it, how shall I be assured of any particular thing which it
proposes? If I be not assured of this particular, how am I bound to believe
it? If I be not bound to believe it upon its proposal, how is it the ground of
Faith Divine? If it be not the ground of Faith Divine, then you are gone. And
besides those promises in Saint Matthew and Saint John you may know were made
as to the Apostles equally, and therefore to their successors equally; and to
the Church universal equally, by consequent; and therefore cannot you
appropriate it to your Bishop and to your Church.

Saint Austins authority in a passage of his, wherein you say he speaks
admirably in this De utilitate credendi, cap 6. you had better have omitted. It
strengthens your cause nothing, if you quote it as you should. First it is
misquoted for the chapter, for it is not in the 6. chapter, but in the 16.
Secondly, you may see in the beginning of the chapter, that the scope of it is
to show how authority may first move to Faith. And Thirdly, this scope may
discover your corrupting of his Text; for it is not as you give it, a certain
step, but contrary, an uncertain step, velut gradu incerto innitentes; as in
the Froben Edition, ^N. M. D. lxix. Whereby you may perceive how little reason
we have to credit your infallibility. And then Fourthly, part of his authority
in that chapter, is by miracles of Christ which he did himself on earth.

The sum of your fourth Number is this, to persuade not only that the
Churches authority is infallible if it judge conformably to Scripture; for so
even the Devil himself is infallible so long as he teaches conformably to
Scriptures: but that the Church shall at no time teach any thing that in any
damnable error shall be against Scripture: So that when we know this is her
Doctrine, we are sure that this is conformable to the Scriptures rightly
understood. And this you would prove by two Testimonies of Scripture.

We answer distinctly, and First to that you say about the Devil. First, we are
not commanded but forbidden to consult with the Devil: but we are enjoined to
consult with the Church of God. Secondly, we have cause always to suspect the
Devil, because either he does not give us all the Scripture unto a particular,
or does pervert it; or does speak the truth with an intention of deceiving the
more: but we have more charity toward the Church, we have none toward the
Devil. Thirdly, Yet though we do not believe the Devil in point of truth, upon
his authority; nevertheless can we not believe the Church in whatsoever it
says to be true upon its authority: neither does it follow, that the Devil
should hereupon be the pillar and ground of Truth, when he said that which is
conformable to Scripture, as well as the Church, because the Church does hold
and uphold Truth: so does not the Devil, but when he uses it, he does it to
destroy it: and again we are moved to think that which is proposed by the
Church to be true, so are we not moved by the Devil to conceive it to be true
upon his saying so. And therefore if I do believe that, which the Devil says
conformable to Scripture, to be true; and do not believe that every thing which
is said by the Church to be conformable to Scripture; I do not make the same
account of what is said by one and by the other. For that which is true I do
believe because it is se^, though the Devil says it: I do believe it in
respect to the matter without any respect to the Author; and that which is not
true according to Scripture, I cannot believe though the Church says it; yet
am I moved by the authority of the Church to consider the point more, because
it is proposed by them: and what is by them proposed according to Scripture I
am moved to believe of, with respect of the Author of the proposal: but cannot
be resolved in my Faith of, but by the authority of Scripture. And therefore I
cannot believe that whatsoever is said by the Church is agreeable to Scripture,
because the Church faith it: for this proposition, for ought as yet proved, is
not agreeable to Scripture rightly understood. And if you say that your Church
must judge the sense, let it first judge whether it does not beg the principle.

Neither have your Texts alleged any thing for you. Not that of Daniel, the 2.
chapter, the 44. verse. It respects indeed the Kingdom of Christ in general,
and therefore is not proper to any Church of his signa^ter, for any thing can
be showed by the Text. Secondly, The Kingdom of Christ principally respects
the Church invisible, which as such is not our guide. Thirdly, it may certainly
come to its everlasting reign in Heaven, notwithstanding some error on earth
by the Church visible. Fourthly, whereas you say it shall destroy all
Idolatrous kingdoms, you do very well add in your Parenthesis [Idolatrous
Kingdomes] to save your selves from suspicion. But it all Idolatrous Kingdoms,
then have you reason to make your infallibility more strongly infallible;
otherwise you will be included in this distraction.

So also that of Esaias 59.21. profits you nothing, some of the former answers
may serve; it principally is intended for the Church invisible, which by the
Church visible may sufficiently be directed through the means of grace to
salvation infallibly, without infallibility of the Church. As the Word of God
was certain before it was written, and the Church then was by it directed,
because it was then in substance of it though not written (as we have said
before, but you compel us to repeat) so by the Word written infallibly, though
not infallibly expounded and applied by the Pastors of the Church, shall the
Church be brought to Life. For if every evil action does not destroy the state
of salvation, as you will confess: then surely every simple error cannot,
because it is not voluntary. And this is fully able to answer your Appendix to
this Number at the end of your paper. Those Testimonies (if they be rightly
cited) yet in those terms affirm no more then that the invisible Church shall
not perish, which is true, although the visible Church be under a possibility
to err, since every error is not destructive of salvation.

In the 25. Number, you tell me what you have said before, but that you have
given me some additional Testimonies in the supplement of the last, which have
their answer, without repetition. Only you no where I think find that Saint
Jerome did receive all those books which you receive for Canonical; and for
those Authors which held the Consubstantiality of the Son, and those several
properties of the Holy Trinity, you will give me leave with judicious men to
suspect Eusebius. Believe your Cardinal herein, Bellarmin in his De
Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, p. 94.5, 6. where he brings the attestation of
Saint Athanasius and Saint Jerome to the same purpose; and Saint Jerome calls
him not only an Arrian, but the Prince of the Arrians sometimes; sometimes the
Ensign-bearer. Yea the 7. Synod, he says, and the Apostolical Legates rejected
his authority, as being an Arrian Heretic as he says. And as for Austins
expression, that the relying on the Church's authority is the most true and
inviolable Rule of Faith you refer it to your 16. Number, and there refer me
to the 13. chapter of the first book Contra Cresconium, which I cannot see
there. If it should be so disertly, yet this must be understood respectively to
those cases wherein the Scripture does not clearly pass the Verdict; in which
the authority of the Church, is the best rule we can then have as toward
practice. But this in his Opinion does not absolutely leave us to follow
Tradition of the Church in points of Faith, unless he contradicts himself, as
you shall see at the end. But you are afraid of want of Number to make noise,
because you say, I said you had no other Testimony but Saint Austins. I did not
say that you had none but his, absolutely, but you had none but his that I
could see of those you produced. Neither him indeed if you please to tell us
what you see.

Therefore we shall look over your reinforcing his, and the main testimony for
your cause; in my answer whereunto, I see yet no place for amendments or
abatement. I said, if you consider the whole ten^^r of the chapter, you may be
inclined to think that it came from him in some heat of dispute, and methinks I
may think so still. Your men are wont to answer evidences of the Fathers which
are against them, when they please, that such passages came from them, not
(...) but (...) and surely we may have that liberty, when there is such
occasion given for us to interpret them, as here; if we consider how he was
displeased with himself for a former respect to that Epistle, and also if we
take notice of his short returns of discourse in this Epistle; and also if we
mark his check and correcting, and taking up himself toward the end of the
chapter, with an absit. Sed absit ut ego Evangelio non credam.

And if this answer does not weigh with you, then I gave you another, that this
might be spoken of himself, not in sensu composito, as then, but in sensu
diviso, as in order to that time when he was a Manichee himself. To which
purpose I told you, it was familiar to him and other writers of that part of
the world to express a tense more then past by the imperfect: and the sense
is, that when he was a Manichee he would not have believed the Gospel, but that
the authority of the Church had moved him to it. One place of this usage I
found to be in a chapter you quoted in his De Predestinatione Sanct. lib. 2.
cap. 1. s. 14. Qui igitur opus est, ut eorum ferutemur opuscula, qui priusquam
ista haresis ^riretur, non habuerunt necessitatem in hac difficili ad solvendum
quastione versari; quod procul dubio facerem, si respondere talibus cogerentur;
where you have the Imperfect Tense, for the Tense more past; facerent for
fecissent, and so the other. So in his first Book of Retract. cap. 51. Profecto
non dixissem, si jam ^uns essem literis Sucris ita eruditus ut recolerem: where
you have essem for fuissem, and so the other. And also by the way let me
observe somewhat from those two places toward the main question, besides the
use of them in the way of Criticisme. For by the former you have the reason why
the Tradition of the Church in Doctrines received, will not make an end of our
differences, since the questions were not then started: and also by the second
you may observe, that we cannot swallow all that was said by Saint Austin
without chewing, since he says himself, that had he been so well instructed,
he would not have said this and that. And indeed his books of Retractations are
books against you; and do conclude wholly, that we are not to take whatsoever
the Fathers wrote to be as true as Gospel. Yea, some such books of
Retractations all of them might have made, as some think Origin did, although
they are perished as to us.

But the answers which I gave you to that passage of Saint Austin will not
content you. Therefore you endeavor to show at large that they will not serve.
You say unless he will stand to that ground, he must needs seem to say nothing
against his Adversary. What ground do you mean? What that he was moved by the
Churches Infallible Authority, as you would conclude at every turn. No,
supposing him not to speak in aestu Sermonis, yet what he said against his
Adversary was reasonable, without urging the Infallible authority. For the
consent of the Church might be considered by him as a condition toward the
reception of any doctrine; and yet not to be that which he built his Faith
upon, as upon an Infallible ground. You may know the Causa sine qua non, is not
a cause; although such a thing be not without it, yet is not this the cause
thereof. And therefore make what you can of the place, it will not afford you a
firm foundation, if his authority could do it. You say that this is his first
argument, to show that his Adversary, by citing Texts out of the Gospel to
prove Manichaeus a true Apostle, could prove nothing against those, who as yet
have not believed the Gospel. So you.

(...); and what then? Because the Adversary can prove nothing by Scripture to
those that deny it, therefore Saint Austin must infer, that the authority of
the Church is infallible, and he must believe the Gospel upon no other ground.
What consequence is this? as if because Saint Austins adversary cared not for
the judgment of the Church, therefore we must be guilty of that which is
called (...), which has so much wronged the Church, as nothing more. This is
(...).

You go on in your Paraphrastical discourse. But because I am not one who have
not yet believed the Gospel, and so this answer cannot serve me;
notwithstanding I must tell you that I am such an one, that I would not believe
the Gospel without the authority of the Catholic Church did move me. So you.
Out of which words of your own, you may learn how to understand the sense and
tense of the Father in the place: But because I am not one who have not yet
believed the Gospel; then he had believed the Gospel before, and was not to
believe it now, and therefore his words must be referred in the African
idiotism, unto the time more then imperfect, otherwise what he had believed, he
was to believe now, which cannot stand with your Infallibility. And yet you say
afterward, mark if his ground be not so as I told you; because (says he) I
have believed the Gospel it self upon the preaching of the Catholics;
therefore if his Adversary should say, do not believe the Catholics, he does
not go consequently to force him by the Gospel to any Faith to Manichaeus. And
hereupon you break out in these words, Can he more clearly ground upon the
Infallible Authority of their Teaching, then upon this to believe the Gospel it
self?

Answ* Again these words do not include a Divine Faith of the Infallibility of
the Church, which you must have, or else your cause is starved. Because those
words, I would not believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the Catholic
Church did move me which must be the principal ground, do not include his Faith
of the Infallibility of the Church. He might be moved by the authority of the
Church, though not resolved in his Faith by the Infallibility pretended, and
according to this proportion must all his discourse be understood, which
proceeds from his belief of the Gospel by them, to his being persuaded by them
to Manichaeism, if any thing should be found in the Gospel toward it, or else
proceeds to his not believing of Manichaeus, upon his belief of the Catholics,
who bad him believe the Gospel and not Manichaus. These must be the hinges upon
which the whole disputation must turn, and therefore if those words be not
understood of an ultimate determination of his Faith by the authority of the
Church, but of an instrumental moving, nothing will be concluded sufficient and
sufficiently for you. But this answer you give not me any return to. Ponder it
very well, for its importance in this debate. For if the whole chapter was
soberly spoken; and if that he did not speak of himself, as when he was a
Manichaeu, yet if he here intends to signify no more then only the authority
of the Church was an impulsive to the belief of the Gospel, you will evince no
more then what you need not contend for, because we do not contend against it,
as being not the state of the question.

Therefore it remains for you to prove your supposition, or your proofs of an
Infallible authority of the Church, which indeed you would put in, in your
conclusions, but is wanting in the premises. And if it did belong to me to
dispute, it were not difficult to show the contrary. And since they may come in
upon account of the reason of my denial, they shall be there two moments from
the chapter.

First, Because he says he did believe the Gospel per illos, not propter. Now
what we do properly believe any one in, we must believe for him, not by him;
for him as a cause, not by him as an instrument; and therefore we believe what
God says to be true, not by him, but for him. And if the Apostles, as he
says* were not (...) of their Faith, 2 Cor. 1^.14. then were not those
Catholics he speaks of such, as he ought, for themselves to believe.

Secondly, Because in several places of the chapter, he does signify, that if
any reason could be given, or any thing whereby it might be manifestly known,
that his Adversary were in the right* he would leave his Catholics. Now this
is not spoken consistently to the nature of Faith, upon Infallible authority:
for what we do believe in way of Faith, we do so believe, as there cannot be a
falsity in it, as Aquinas does confess, and I suppose you too (for you would
conclude, no falsity or error can be in any thing, which the Church does
define, because it is infallible) and therefore all the Reason, and all the
Science in the world, are not able to shake Faith, whereunto the contrary is
intimated in the Father. Nay, if there be no arguing to the principles of
Faith, from other principles, but from the principles of Scripture, there is
arguing to Divine conclusions; then assuredly Faith in principles of Theology
(as this is one, the verity of the Gospel) is not obnoxious to any decay by any
reasons. And it seems his Faith then in the Gospel, was not Divine, upon the
consideration of their authority, since Reason may be valid against Humane
authority, but not Divine: so that had he meant, he built his Faith of the
Gospel, upon the authority infallible of the Church, there had been no place
for Reason to have any power of assent on the behalf of the Manichees.

Again, if you hold to the Gospel, my hold shall still be to the authority of
the Church, upon whose authority I believed the Gospel. I (says he) will hold
my self to those, by whose teaching, I have believed the Gospel, and there
commanding me, I will not believe thee. So you think that this is also
available for you: surely nothing less: for besides that, you omit much of his
connection that makes for my former argument, and also that ^^^kes against your
rash and blind believing: besides that you may understand that here he does not
compare the authority of the Church, with the autopisty of Scripture (which is
the (...) of the controversy) but he does compare the authority of the
Catholics, as toward the belief of the Gospel, with the authority of the
Manichees, as to believe their false Gospel of Manichaeus. Indeed the authority
of the Church is more urged, and is more useful to prevail abo^^e, or against
the authority of private opposites; but w^^ that it has the moment of
credibility above, or equally to the authority of Scripture it self, is that
which is an question, and is not here determined for you.

But you go on. And Saint Austin goes on so far upon this ground as a ground
Infallible. What, of Faith* it is again denied, not only simply but it is
denied to be held so by him in this discourse. If you may have your
suppositions, we must needs soon have done.

Well, go on. That he says, if perhaps you Manicha^us can find me any clear
place in the Gospel to prove the Apostleship of Manichaeus, that then indeed
they shall weaken the authority of the Catholics. So he ^aith. And what can
you make of this for your use* Take it by it self and it will come to this,
that a clear place in the Gospel would persuade him to lessen his opinion of
the authority of the Catholics: then he would hold clear Scripture above, or
against the authority of the Church, then their authority is not in his
judgment Infallible: or else Infallible authority of the Church may be
opposite to Infallible authority of the Scripture; and one in his opinion of
them, (the Scripture) is more Infallible then the other (the Church) which is
incongruous; for in Infallibility there is no degree, no more then in Truth.
And if you say that the Scripture yet may be more Infallible to him; this
spoils all your cause, for you say you go to Faith by the Church, because that
way is more plain etc manifest^

Therefore you hasten me from this passage to show me what will follow. But
what do you think will follow? I pray note it well their authority being
weakened (and showed once fallible) now neither can I so much as believe the
Gospel. And why so? because upon the authority of these Catholics I had
believed the Gospel. So you.

But do you see how you interpose your gloss in your Parenthesis, thus; their
authority being once weakened, and showed once fallible. Do you imagine that we
can neglect or overlook this your glossall inference or opposition, and showed
once fallible: as if there were no authority but that which is Infallible, and
there were no weakening of authority, but to make it fallible. Authority may
stand with Fallibility, for we grant Authority to the Church, distinguishing it
from Infallibility. And if you had done so, you had saved many a wound, which
your Church has got by that unfortunate word, Infallibility, as one of your
own men happily confessed. Neither therefore does it follow, that the authority
of the Catholics being weakened and showed once fallible, he could not at all
believe the Gospel, because by the authority of the Catholics, he had believed
the Gospel; but he could not then believe the Gospel by that inductive and
motive of the authority of the Church: for the first, Christians believed the
Apostles severally, without the authority of the Church. Yea, if upon that
consideration he could not have believed the Gospel, their authority, by whom
he did believe it being weakened, yet does it not from hence flow necessarily,
that when he did believe the Gospel, he did believe it upon an Infallible
authority; because, although he could not believe the Gospel without it, yet
might he account it as toward belief, but a condition, not a cause of his
Faith. And this you must have, or else you do not contradict. Whatsoever is
necessary to an effect, is not the cause of it; although whatsoever is a cause
thereof is necessary to it.

Therefore that is not so, which again you say that the ground of his belief in
the Gospel was their infallible authority; as not only these, but also the
next words show manifestly. When will you by your proof put the infallible
proposal of the Church out of question? when shall we have any more then
supposals of it?

Let us see your next words. Wherefore if in the Gospel there be nothing found
that is evident to prove the Apostleship of Manichaeus, then I will believe the
Catholics rather then you: but if you shall read me out of the Gospel
something that is evident to prove Manichaeus an Apostle; then neither will I
believe the Catholics nor thee. Why so? I will not believe the Catholics,
because they (whose Doctrine I thought infallible) have lied to me concerning
the Manichaeaus. But I will not believe thee, even when thou citest clear
Scripture (for of this case he speaks) and why so? because thou do cite me
that Scripture to which Scripture I had now believed upon their authority who
have lied to me. So you.

And what now from hence can you gather more then from the former passage of
the same nature, unless you did make good another Parenthetical supposition,
whose Doctrine, I thought infallible? This is not in Saint Austin, but comes
from your own private Spirit. And therefore if you will not be ruled by our
Spirit because of the former exception to the contrary: surely we have no cause
to be overperswaded by your judgment without any reason for it.

Secondly, May you not from hence take notice that what I said of Saint ^ustin,
that in the Testimony here, he might speak as in some heat of Dispute? For can
we think that Saint Austin had such a soul as to say soberly and categorically
that he would not believe clear Scripture which was cited by any one, because
Catholics had told him otherwise? Did Saint Austin in your conceit differ in
judgment from your Aquinas? or did your Aquinas differ from Saint Austin?
Consider then what your Aquinas says in his Sums, the first Part, the first
question, and the eight Art. Innititur enim fides nostra revelationi Apostolis
and Prophetis facta qui Canonicos libros scripserunt; for our Faith does rely
upon the revelation made to the Apostles and Prophets who wrote the Canonical
Books, but not upon the revelation, if any other was made to other Doctors:
Nay, he confirms it by Saint Austin out of his 19. Epist. a little after the
beginning, Solis enim Scripturarum libris, etc. For I have learned to give this
honor only to the Books of Scripture, which are called Canonical, as to
believe most firmly, that none of the Authors thereof did err in writing any
thing: but others I so read, that whatsoever holiness or learning they are
excellent in, I do not think true therefore because they thought so or wrote so.
Compare then this passage with the other, or the other with this; and then
judge whether either he did not differ from himself in his Principles, or did
not speak the former as a disputant.

Thirdly, Let me note, whereas you do rightly translate Saint Austin, as
speaking of his belief by the Catholics in the tense more then past; you give
your self occasion to think that he meant the main passage (non crederem) not
of himself then, but as before a Manichee. And your argument which you produce
a little after against this last answer, because he speaks here of believing
the Acts of the Apostles, and believing it by a necessary consequence (because
he has already believed the other Canonical books upon the same authority of
the Church) does not overthrow my answer; because you say your self that this
book of the Acts he did believe by consequence: by the authority of the Church
he was at first moved to believe the other books; and therefore by consequence
he did believe the book of the Acts, because the Catholic authority did in
like manner commend both Scriptures. The speaking here in the present does not
derogate from my answer, because the believing by consequence, supposes an act
of believing antecedent.

Also Fourthly, note that here he said the Catholic authority does commend,
both which may be done without infallibility. For the commendation does not
engage the judgment in assent necessary: but the authority may engage the mind
to have a good opinion thereof, and so may move dispositively to Faith.

Fifthly, Perpende it well, that it is said by St. Austin, that he was moved by
the Catholic Church its authority, and that the Catholic authority does
commend both; not the Roman authority which now is included or to be included.
And therefore if you could prove that Saint Austin intended as much as you
would have, and also that his authority, were sufficient to carry the cause for
the Catholic Church; Yet you can have from hence no more then your part comes
to of a particular Catholic Church; if indeed you were such. And therefore
have you upon your shoulders such a labor as all discerning Catholics would
detract or retract, namely to make good that whatsoever is said of the
Catholic Church, in the respects of it, should be singularly appropriated to
the Roman. But of this in your 27 number.

Whereas you seem to vaunt upon your paraphrase, could he more clearly say,
that if once in one single lie he should find the Churches authority to be
fallible, he should then have left unto him no infallible ground at all upon
which he were to believe Scripture. So you. First I deny your consequence; this
does not follow from what you have urged that Saint Austin drives this
discourse that if he should find them in a lie he could have no infallible
ground to believe Scripture. It follows well that he could not believe
Scripture by their authority, because they had led unto him. But though they
did not lie to him they might be fallible; for they might purpose that which
they thought to be true for error: and therefore for their not lying can we
not infer their infallibility. And for ought I see he does not here any way
give us to understand that he did think they could not lie to him; and
therefore he could not conceive them upon this impossibility to be infallible.

As for that which you think an Argument against me, that he could not speak
any thing in heat or by slip which he so much inculcates. This is nothing
effectual, for how often do we with fervor endevor to maintain that which once
has by incogitance or passion gone from us. Yea, it may seem more likely
because he does so much inculcate it; because we are so eager to cover our
imperfections; and especially when we are like to make good use of it against
an adversary. Secondly, what does he inculcate that which you would have? But
this is (...) as they say, this is under question, and therefore his
inculcation is nothing to you, if he speak it assertively, until you fortify
your supposition.

But one Marginal note of yours more at the sign of the cross I find, and that
is this. Had he said, that he believed this or any other Scripture for the
Light he received by the reading of it, by which he discovered it to be
Canonical, then the Manichaeans might as easily have said, that by the like
Light we clearly discover the Gospel of Manichaeus to be Canonical. So you.

This is no way moving, much less cogent. For first, it proceeds from a
Negative; which in the kind of it unless from Scripture (which is the adaequate
rule) is of no validity. Because he did not say so, therefore he did not hold
so? No connection.

Secondly, by the same reason I may say, he did not hold the authority of the
Church to be infallible, for then he would have told them so plainly, he would
have made an end of the dispute, without any need of using Scripture.

Thirdly, they were not prepared for this Theological Argument, because they
did not own the Church.

And now all things being duly considered, I think you have no cause to say
that I have not sincerely and fully answered what you have had to say for your
self out of that supreme Testimony of Saint Austin. And if you compare that
chapter with the chapter you mention in the same Number below, namely the
fifth, against the Epistle of the Manichee, with the 14. De util. Cred. against
the Manichees too; you will not or cannot heartily dislike my Answers, and
therefore need I not distinctly to answer this last: since here also he does
not compare the authority of the Church with the authority of the Scripture,
which is our main question; but he compares with the authority of those few,
those turbulent, those new men, as he speaks, (who were not like to bring forth
any thing, which any without doubt might not think not worthy of authority)
the authority of the Church, as to the believing of Christ; where also he said
that he was moved by the authority of the Catholics; -- Quorum autoritate
commotus Christum aliquid utile praecepisse jam credidi. Whereby you shall if
you will, see the reasonableness of the former criticism; because here he
said, jam credidi; so that it must refer to to him as a Manichee.

And therefore can you not with Saint Austin believe the whole Scripture to be
the Word of God from the beginning to the ending, as upon infallible authority
of the Church; because if he did, yet cannot you do it which is not to be done:
and if it be to be done, because he did it, then it is not to be done, because
he did it not. And I hope those strange stories, and those several points
(which you speak to be in Scripture) may be more like to be believed upon the
authority of the Scripture, then upon the authority of the Church; since the
Church has no authority but from Scripture, not as a Church. And therefore if
you have no other infallible ground for prayers to Saints, and prayer for the
dead (in your sense) and other like points, then you have proved he went upon,
as toward the believing of Scripture, you have none. Nay, you have not so good
authority for those and such like points, as he had for the belief of the
Scripture: for besides the difference of the matter, he had Catholic authority
for his belief, though the authority was not Infallible: but you have not
Catholic authority for your points, though fallible. But I observe your
wisdom. You would justify your points here by Infallibility, which you think
may be more likely, then to justify your Infallibility by your points of
difference.

Therefore your conditional postulate might have been spared, until the
condition be proved. If Saint Austin had done so as you suppose, then you or
your Church would have been more excused from singularity, because you had
followed him. As for you, you need not fear singularity. You provide against
that in your opinion, or your Masters for you; for you must follow the Church,
without examination of what they say. Their word must be taken: but yet your
Church may be accused of singularity, because it does not follow the
Catholic. If then you will do prudently (as you speak) go with Saint Austin
no further, then he would have you follow him, namely in the way of Scripture,
which he understood well, and at the latter time of his life: but whether he
understood it as much as any the Church had (which you say) may be yet under
debate (with all respect to Saint Austin) since it appears not that he had any
skill in Hebrew, and (if I remember well) confesses that he learned Greek but
late. So then, if in some cases, your own Men confess that we must have
recourse to the Original Languages, how could he understand them so well?

And now come we to your grand assumption, that what has been said of the
Catholic Church (that it is by Christ appointed to be the Judge of all
Controversies, and that the definition of this Judge is Infallible, and
consequently a sufficient ground of Faith) all the Doctrine must be applied to
the Roman Church, and cannot be applied to the Protestant Church.

And now then you are pleased at the latter end to discover your self, that
you did intend at first the Roman Church, but dealt more cunningly then the
rest of the Pontificians, who do include in the nature of the one and true
Church, subjection to the Bishop of Rome. Methinks this plot of yours might be
somewhat resembled by him who had that Fantasy, that whatsoever Ship came to
Port was his, so now every Church must be yours or none; as if the Roman Sea
were the Ocean: or, you would have all the Honors that might be conferred by
God upon that Church, he would please to own signally, and to make his;
conceiving that this Church can be none but your own. And thus would you have
led me on with some ingenuity, to be liberal in my respects and devoirs to the
Catholic Church, that so you might without contradiction sweep all for the
Roman Catholic.

But prove that those privileges, you speak of, belong to the Roman Church,
and cannot be applied to the Protestant Church. You prove it thus:

First, This Protestant Church does not so much as lay claim to those
privileges, and so by her own Doctrine, she cannot be Judge or Infallible, nor
any other Church but the Roman, upon the same reason, because they profess
themselves by evident and Infallible Scriptures their own Fallibility, as you
prove the consequence to be to the end of your Page of the 27. Number; and
therefore the Roman Church is the true Church, unless Christ has no true
Chrch, nor has had these many ages. This is your argument, which proceeds by
way of a negative induction, not the Protestant Church, nor this other Church,
nor that, nor any other Church does claim the privilege of being Infallible
Judge, only the Roman; therefore, otherwise Christ has had no true Church
these many Ages.

Sir, Which will you give us leave to do, to smile or weep, that men not to be
contemned for their Learning and Reading should be abused, and should endeavor
to abuse others by such ratiosinations, which are made useful only (...).

We and all other Churches do of their own accord yield unto you that they are
Fallible. We save you the labor of the eviction. True Churches they say they
are, and say they are not Infallible; and they say also that you only do lay
claim to this Infallibility: but what then? therefore you have Infallibility?
what, because you only claim it? Suppose that the Roman Church does lay claim
to Utopia, or to the Terra incognita, no other Church does, not the Protestant,
not any other, therefore it is due to them. Yes, but where is this Utopia?
where is this Terra incognita? what be the Privileges and Dominions thereof
they are yet to seek for them, who lay claim to them. First, then make it out
that there is such an Infallibility to be had before you challenge it, and do
not prove the being of it by your challenging it, lest your Roman Eagle be
said to catch at flies: but prove solidly the being of it by the grounds
thereof: and then secondly, prove a just claim; for suppose that others did not
lay claim to it, what right can yet you have by a claim? Is this also given
primo occupanti? If you have no other tenure for your Infallibility, you have
none, and it does bespeak fallibility to say the title is good.

If I might be so bold (and surely I may in the cause of the truth of God) it
is more likely to fall out thus; no Church but the Roman does pretend to
Infalliblity, therefore is it highly presumptuous, and is only in this not an
Usurper, because there is no such thing as belonging to any Church. We have no
such tradition, nor the Churches of God: and yet also is it an insolent
Usurpation of that Prerogative, which belongs only to God and Scripture.

This is enough to undo your argumentation and you: but whereas you say that
all other Churches of other Religions do say indeed that they themselves are
the only true Churches; it is not true, they do not speak of themselves
exclusively, as you do. Particular true Churches, they may be under the truly
Catholic Church, and therefore they can contesserate one with another, with
respective acknowledgements; but you are they who exclude all from the
condition of being true Churches, which will not reconcile themselves to you by
absolute subjection.

And since you say that all other Churches but yours disclaim Infallibility,
you see that we alone do not stand aloof from obedience to your Roman Tyranny.
So you are not Catholics in dominion neither.

Yet you would seem to have some reason for your discourse, that one Church
must be Infallible, otherwise Christ has not, nor has had, any true Church
these many ages. This is inconsequential, unless there be some Church
Infallible, Christ has no true Church. It is a false proposition, as we have
answered you, from the first to the last, that a true Church is Infallible, and
it is now all the question. Though it be not true in every point, yet may it be
a true Church. Every error does not destroy the being of the Church, and you
have very great cause not to press this, lest it be retorted against your
Church, as it might be to be Even with you; that Church which holds it self
Infallible, and yet has erred, is Fallible, and therefore by your Doctrine no
true Church; the Church of Rome holds it self Infallible, and yet has erred,
then this is no true Church. And might not the assumption here be proved by
your own Doctrine? for if the Tradition of the Church be the Rule of Faith,
then you have erred in rejecting the Millenary opinion, which was a tradition
of the Church.

So then your design you speak of in the 28. Number, of not expressing the
Roman Church in your dispute, you see is destroyed: for what you say of the
Catholic Church, is not sufficiently pleaded for the Roman, and also
Infallibility is not yet asserted to the Catholic. And therefore your
demonstration you talk of, is but a flourish, and your Argument you think
unanswerable, is not to be answered, any more, because that strength which it
had is taken away. And I have no more to say until you have any more to say,
upon this point or any you mean, in difference betwixt us.

But yet you have not done, but like a Parthian who fights flying; so you
dispute still ending. You say you will show how unanimously the Fathers
acknowledge this, Saint Cyprian Ep. 3. l. 1. says, That false Faith cannot
have access to the Roman Church. And when you please to press this, I shall
show you what little ground you are like to get in that Epistle; since though
he names the Roman Church as the principal Church, as the chair of Peter, yet
he there defends his own jurisdiction against those who would ramble to Rome to
have their cause heard and judged there. Neither will you get any credit by
those whom he speaks of, and in those words you quote, there is an intimation,
that the Romans then, when he did write, were not such as those were in the
Apostles times, Apostolo praedicante; and I shall tell you why it was called
the principal Church, for a principle of Unity; so he, from whence the
Sacerdotal Unity began; and also by reflection from the Imperial Seat.

And if you will object Saint Jerome's authority in his Comment upon the first
to Timothy, that he calls Damasus the Pope of Rome, the Rectour of the House
of God, which you say Saint Paul calls the Pillar and Foundation of Truth. I
shall return you answer, that this is not very much; for other Bishops were
called in ancient times Papae too, and that he calls him the Rectour of the
House of God, that is not much neither, since every Bishop is so; The Rectour
of the Church in that place where he lives. And this will appear to be less
considerable, if you will take notice that in his Comment upon the first Ep. to
Tim. the third chapter upon these words, A Bishop must be irreprehensible;
where he speaks of a Bishop in communi, he says, Aut Ecclesiae Princeps non
erit; so a Bishop in general with him is a Prince of the Church, and also you
know what opinion he had betwixt Bishops and Presbyters, Read to this purpose
his Epistle to Evagrius. If you come upon me again with Saint Jerome to Damasus
in an Epistle, you may tell me what Epistle, for he wrote more then one, and
his Title in some is, as is set down plainly Hieronimus Damaso. Surely Popes
then had not that state, or else Saint Jerome had little reverence toward him.
And you may see also how the Pope writes to him to resolve questions: And is
this any sign of the Popes Infallibility? Well, but you say in that Epistle
you will tell me of, to Damasus, he says, To your Holiness, that is, To the
Chair of Peter I am joined in Communion: Upon this Rock I know the Church to be
built, he that gathers not with thee, scatters. So you.

And shall I give you answer to this now? then I may tell you that this does
but magnify the honor of his own Commuion, and yet not much neither, if you
will observe what he says in his Comment upon Amos the 6. chapter, Petra
Christus est qui donavit Apostolis suis, ut ipsi quoque Petrae vocentur, Tu es
Petrus, etc. Then Peter is not in his Opinion the only Rock, you see.
Moreover, so the Fathers you say, in the Council of Chalcedon at the voice of
St. Leo Pope of Rome said, Peter has spoken by the mouth of Leo.

And what can you ever make of this that they did say so? No more then thus
much, that the Successor of St. Peter spoke. Does this signify that all the
Personal pripriviledges which Saint Peter had, Pope Leo had? then there needed
but him to determine all the Controversies. Yea, according to Saint Jerome
before, if he had had all those privileges which Saint Peter had, yet the
Church should not be built upon him only; for the other Apostles were Rocks
too. Yea, and is he Christ's Successor also? If he be not, then that which you
would fain arrogate to him, belongs only to Christ to be Head of the Universal
Church.

To cut short, you remit me to Statleton and Bellarmin, who both show most
diligently how all other Churches have gone to Rome to receive judgment in
their chief causes. The places you say you will allege, though for the present
you refer me to them.

What do you mean Sir, to put me off to those adversaries, or in the interim to
satisfy me until you have ranged them into another discourse? I need not send
you to our men who have withstood those Champions foot to foot -- Junctusque
Viro Vir. Saint Cyprian in the place before makes an exception against this
supreme Tribunal for Appeals, and the African Churches.

After this, you seem to threaten me with further Demonstrations of particulars
material to your cause. Until which time it becomes me in civilitie to wait,
and not to take the word out of your mouth, or your work out of your hand. I
shall let you rise that you may have more strength for the next assault. I
could leave here, but that our late Feast may hint you to think of the contest
betwixt the Roman and other Churches about the observavation of Easter. And
were those Heretics or Schismatics that would not stand to the Roman
determination herein?

And as for your earnest demand, to know but the name of one of the Pastors
Doctors, or Preachers in those last thousand Ages (Years) which preceeded
Luther; I may conceive my self obliged then to give you some account hereof,
when you shall tell me whoever of all the Bishops of Rome, in a vast insolency
took upon him the Empire of the whole Church, under the Title of Universal
Bishop, before Boniface the Third took it from Phocas his Donation. Until
Gregorie's time inclusively there was no such Usurpation: and you know what
Gregory said of John of Constantinople for his pretending to it, that
whosoever did, made himself the forerunner of Antichrist.

But if I would answer, the answer would be easy; and it is ready, you have it
already in a Testimony out of Tertullian in his Prescriptions, it may be you
took no notice of it then, nor did I urge it to this purpose by way of
Application to our Church, thus, That which we are, the Scriptures were from
the beginning, we are of them before it was otherwise, before they were
corrupted by you* Then we are as ancient as may be for our Doctrine and
Sacraments, they are found in the Records of Scripture. And if Campian says,
All the Fathers were his and yours; we may say, the Apostles are ours. Nay, the
Fathers are not yet proved to be yours in the main difference betwixt us; nor I
think can you prove them to be yours without corruption of the Text, or of the
sense by you in any other point of importance, betwixt us. Nay, how many of
your Roman Communion have given Testimony to us in Substance of Doctrine,
besides ^erus, whom you have abused (as I told you) therefore, to make him
after death speak false to Truth and himself. Nay, we are, what the Roman
Church was, before the Roman Church was what it should not be, and what it was
not in the purest Primitiveness: and therefore your additional Doctrines
(which, and your universal Jurisdiction pretended, have made the breach, and
discontinued our Communion) we could not have from Rome then when it had them
not. And therefore it is not proper for us to be Opponents; for we are upon the
Negative. Do you show that a flourishing visibilitie is necessary to the
Church, and how it is like to be in your Church in the time of Antichrist,
according to your Doctrine, and how it held in the time of the Arrian
persecution. Do you show that you have had in your Communion all the Holy men
and none other, and then you will do a miracle. And let us hear of it no more
until it be done. As he said, Landari non potest nisi peractum. Go on with your
design, and let it be a real defense of your cause, by a solid and substantial
maintenance of the points you hold, and we deny, but do not offer to deceive
us with old shoes and clouted, and mouldie bread, and old rags and and old
bottles, as if you came from a far Country, that you might be of a League
together, as the Gibeonites couzned the Israelites. If you do, we shall
endeavor to discover it. Therefore rather think of that of our Savior, Saint
Matt. 9.16. No man puts a piece of new cloth to an old garment: for that
which fills up takes from the Garment, and the rent, (...), is made worse.

And now methinks I should end; but for the conclusion, showing (as you say) my
Reply to your papers to be fully answered in your former discourse.

Sir, this is very odd that you will not answer particucularly my premises,
and yet I must combat with your conclusion. And yet if I have answered your
premises, in the Laws of Disputation, I have nothing to do with your
conclusion. And therefore whatsoever part of your discourse you refer me to, in
this your conclusion, for my answer to the first Reply, since it is punctually
answered by me in the matter of it, needs not to be showed by me to be
insufficient for my answer. For besides that you leave me to find my own
condemnation in your paper, where I can, which is a mighty labor and it may
be impossible, (whereas you will urge a particular formal Judge to hear and
determine,) besides this; you may understand, that that which is not true in it
self (as I have showed as well as you the contrary) cannot answer me, for it
cannot answer for it self, being false: and therefore the product of it, were
it rightly applied in the form, would be null.

Yet have I a fancy, that since somewhat in it is not said before by you, and
somewhat you do charge me with; if I should give no Reply thereunto, you would
think that the cause were wanting, or I to it: I shall therefore where there is
need briefly run it through.

First you say, that I said there was little reason for me to rejoyn, because
in your paper you wave the Application of it to the Roman Church. You make your
apology that it was to no end, until I had granted that some Church was the
ground of Faith. A man must first prove to a Jew, that the Messiah is come, and
then he must prove that Christ was this Messiah. So you.

I Answer, That I think I gave you the true Reason of your not including the
Roman Church in your prosecution of the Catholic Church, before. But in that
you say, that first a man must prove the Messiah to be come before that he
proves Christ to be the Messiah, you speak not congruouslie, for Christ and
Messiah are all one, in different Languages; you mean that Jesus is the
Messiah. For the Jews acknowledged Jesus, but not Christ. But let that pass.
According to your Doctors you could not abstract the Catholic Church from the
Roman Church, as I have told you; since they include the Pope as Head, in the
definition of the Catholic Church, and that which belongs to the nature of a
thing you cannot abstract from it; for then you should make a falsitie in your
abstraction, for then you should conceive the nature of it without that which
is necessary to the nature. And that which follows, as you say, by consequent
from the Catholic to the Roman, is formerly denied.

Secondly, you say that I say that I might still have left you to answer your
first paper with your second. And so I say still. You Reply that this is only
to stand to what I have said, as you also do; Let the Reader judge with
indifferency. And I say, let the Reader or the world judge with indifferency
which of us does most stand to his supposition without reason, or who is most
likely to do so; I, or you, who are so captivated to and by your
infallibility, which you must stand out in by it self, which is the Question:
and if you offer to prove it by Scripture, you come upon our ground.

Thirdly, you say I say you do not conclude contradictorilie; and I say so
still. You Reply, that you always conclude the Churches authority to be a
sufficient ground ground of Faith, and I say it is an insufficient ground.

Answer But you do not consider that your Arguments or Testimonies do not
conclude the Church a sufficient ground: and therefore whether you as a
Disputant do conclude contradictorilie, let the Reader judge.

Nextlie, you come to my Eight answers, as you divide my last paper. And in my
first answer, you say, I spent seven pages to prove the Scripture to be a
sufficient ground of Faith. So then I have made by your confession my word good
that I would give you a proof by Testimonies, that the Scripture is a
sufficient ground of Faith, which I have done with Reasons also thereupon. But
you triumph, this this it is not to conclude contradictorilie. And why so? You
say, that I should have concluded that the Church cannot be a sufficient ground
of Faith; which may be and is true, though it also be most true that the
Scripture is a most sufficient ground of Faith, when it is once known by an
infallible authority to be the Word of God; and also when we evidentlie know
that such and such is the undoubted sense of Scripture. Thus you.

But first, are there two sufficient grounds of Faith or not, as to the same
Objects? if one be sufficient, why the other? if both be necessary, then
either is not sufficient. So then, if the Scripture be the most sufficient
ground of Faith, when it be known to be the Word of God, and the sense of it,
then I have contradicted you, and you have contradicted your self.

For I say as you say, that it is most true that the Scripture is the most
sufficient ground of Faith. And two sufficients there are not in the same kind.
Yes, you say, but first the Scripture must be known by infallible authority to
be the Word of God. Well, but we both believe that the Scripture is the Word of
God; and by infallible authority we do believe the Scripture to be the Word of
God, because we do believe it by the authority of it self, which you say is
infallible. And if you believe it by infallible authority of the Church, as
you think you must go to Scripture for this authority: then is not the Church
a sufficient ground, because it needs the Scripture to prove the Church, and
confirm its authority. And therefore my concluding was contradictorie, since
your supposition of two sufficient grounds is false. Well, and how shall we
know evidentlie whether this is the sense of Scripture? By the authority of
the Church, you say. And why then do they not by their authority evidentlie
deliver unto us the sense of Scripture in every difficulty? If it cannot, it
is insufficient; if it will not, it is uncharitable; and besides you fall into
the same danger again. For where has it this authority? by the Scripture;
then the Scripture is the sufficient ground again, and this not. And when the
Church in a Council does decide a controversy best, it does so by principles
of Scripture, applying them to particular cases, and the determinations of the
Church have themselves to the Scripture, but as conclusions; and the Scripture
has it self to those conclusions, as the principle. And therefore properly
the principles are believed, and the conclusions are credible, not by
themselves, but by participation from the Principles. So that as the prime
Principles are the ground of all Science, so are the Principles of Scripture
the ground of all Faith. And the first Principle in Theology must be this,
that the Scripture is the Word of God, and so the ground of Faith. And if the
Church be not subordinate; it is opposite to Scripture, as the first Principle;
and so stands by it self, and must fall to the ground. And if you say it is not
necessary to umpire all doubts, then you say as we say; and why then an
infallible Judge? And forasmuch as we do believe the Scripture to be the Word
of God, why do you contend? because we do not believe it as you believe it? but
if you intend your Treatise in charity you might have spared your labor. For
we are in a surer condition then you can be upon your Principles: You believe
the Scripture by the authority of the Church, and we believe it by that by
which the Church has its authority. So that the Scripture is not only the
first ground in regard of Order, but also of Causalitie, because the Church
has no ground but by Scripture. Therefore we like your intention better then
your judgment. Neither do we deny the moment of the authority of the
Catholic Church toward Faith, so that we have all the authority of Heaven
and Earth for our belief. And if there were a doubt, and in us a possibility
of error by apprehension that we cannot be assured of the Scripture to be the
Word of God by the Church; yet our error would not be so dangerous, (because
we should err in honor of Scripture) as yours is or would be, who err in
honor of the Church.

Also must I observe your ingenuitie again here that you do profess it as most
true, that the Scripture is the most sufficient ground of Faith, when we know
by infallible authority that it is the Word of God, and that such and such is
the sense thereof. If there be degrees of Truth and sufficiency then are we
more secure: if degrees of Truth and sufficiency to us; then are we yet more
right. And also this does deduct from your universalitie of faith in your first
paper by the proposal of the Church in all things.

For my second, third and fourth, and fifth answer, the Paragraphs of your
Discourse or Treatise have in them nothing whith has any potential
contrariety to them; which I have not fully, as I think taken away.

In your Application you make to or against my sixth answer, you seem to take
another argument to persuade me that the Scripture and the Church may both be
grounds of Faith. It is by way of interrogation. Can I not, say you, ground my
Faith upon what Saint Peter says, because I can ground it upon that which
Saint Paul says? We answer, your question is out of question, but your
consequence from thence is unsolid and unjudicious, because they were both
inspired in their Doctrine: but it is yet again in question, whether the Church
be infalliblie inspired, and we can be infalliblie assured thereof, the reason
being not the same; your reasoning sinks. Yet you insist further. Why is the
Scripture the rule of Faith? Because it delivers to me Gods written Word,
but the Church delivers to me Gods Word written and unwritten. I may
therefore rule my self by that. So you. I answer, This argument has no
strength to weaken that which I laid down before, that there are not two
sufficicient grounds of Faith; because the Church is but a Ministerial rule,
and subordinate to Scripture, and so subordinately a rule; as to that Word of
God which is written: and therefore can it not ground or order my Faith by its
own Virtue, but only by proportion to Scripture: and so is not a rule equal to
Scripture intensively. And if you conceive your argument should have any force,
because the Church does exceed the Scripture extensively, in that it delivers
the Word written and unwritten; Surely you are much mistaken by your
supposition, that there is a Word of God not written in points of Faith
equally credible to that which is written. It is to be proved, not supposed.
Your reasoning rather has force against your self; The Church is not a rule
infallible; because it delivers to us a Word of God not written, for herein
it mainly erres. The Scripture is not only a necessary rule, but also
sufficient, most sufficient. And therefore they bring in tradition by way of
supplement: you say it is a sufficient rule in that you say it is a
sufficicient ground of Faith, therefore must you expunge tradition.

This rule of Scripture you say is often so crookedly applied, that we had need
of better security of interpretation then our own judgment of discretion. So
you.

First, this is accidental to the rule, and therefore it does not infringe its
prerogative.

Secondly, by this Argument, if you drive it to the not being a rule upon this
account, the traditions and the testimonies of the Fathers cannot be a rule,
because they have been abused.

Thirdly, We do not intend the use of the judgment of discretion to rest in
that upon an interpretation; nor do we oppose it to the authority of the
Church: but we say this must be satisfied in Articles and matters of Faith
(notwithstanding the decisions of the Church) by consonance thereof to
Scripture, otherwise it cannot give the assent of Divine Faith. Every one must
be persuaded in his own mind, although he does not make his own sense. This
private judgment should neither be blind nor heady, it respects authority;
but joyneth only with appearance of the Word of God.

That which you say to the seventh answer was examined before. That which you
say to the eighth answer will not serve to save you from differing from your
self, which indeed if it were in way of retractation, would not be
reprehensible; as Saint Austin speaks in the Preface of his Retractations,
Neque enim nisi imprudens, etc. for neither will any but an unwise man
reprehend me, because I reprehend my errors.

But if you have a mind to see the difference betwixt you and you, you may,
thus. Before, you said that the ground of believing is the authority of the
Church; since you have said, in your second paper that it is the authority of
God revealing. If there be no difference, why do you not keep your terms, as a
Disputant should do? But you say your reply is exceeding easy; the ground of
our faith is God revealing, and God revealing by his Church, as he first
causes our first belief, when he tells us by his Church such and such books
are infallibly his word. So you.

Now then, if you make the authority of God revealing to be the ground and
cause of faith, then it is not the authority of the Church, because although
God does reveal by his Church, yet is not the authority of the Church the
ground of faith, but Gods authority; for the Church is but as a Messenger or
Ambassador, which we do not believe for himself, but for his Letters of
Credence from his Master: and so is it the authority of Gods revealing, which
is the ground of faith. And this is made out by that you say, to compound your
variance: You say, the ground of our faith is God revealing, and Gods revealing
by his Church, as he first causes our first belief, when he tells us by his
Church such and such books are infallibly his word: then the authority is his,
whereby we believe, and not the authority of the Church, which is but
Mini^terial. And by your own argument are you undone; for if the Church be the
ground of faith and not the Scripture, because by the Church we believe such
and such books to be Canonical (as you have said before, and also here below in
this Reply to my eight Answer) then also the Authority of the Church is not
the ground of faith, because we must first believe Gods authority revealing it
to his Church, before we believe the Church. But also, to take notice of that
Argument of yours here, it is false. For we must first believe the authority
of Scripture, before we can believe any authority of the Church. For the
Church as such, has all from Scripture, as I have showed. And therefore by
your own argument are you undone again: for if that be the ground of faith,
which is first, then the Scripture, not the Church: and therefore the Church
may be disputed; not the Scripture, which we do understand by way of
Intelligence through a supernatural light; and cannot demonstrate, as we may,
the Church by principles of Scripture.

Again, you seem to differ from your self, because now you hold that the Church
is the ground of our faith in all particulars, causally, because by it we
believe the Scripture: but before, the faith of a Catholic (which you mean
generally) must consist in submitting his understanding, and adhering to the
Church, and in believing every thing, because she proposes it; so your first
paper in terminis terminantibus. But now when we believe the Scripture by the
Church, we may believe that which is plain in it by it self, because it says
it, not because the Church says it. Do not you now somewhat yield, not to me,
but to truth? Truth will be too hard for any one that has not committed the
sin against the Holy Ghost: and yet also will it be too hard for him, though he
denies it. Consider then what you have said, and what you think; and judge how
the Masters of your Church will answer it at Gods Tribunal for that everlasting
cheating of simple souls with the mystery of implicit faith.

And that also which you so much repeat, that we must receive Canonical books
by the Infallible authority of the Church, is not yet grown beyond the height
of a postulate. It has been often denied you upon necessity; and it did not
obtain, it seems, universally in the practice of the Church, or else some of
your Apocriphal books were not accounted Canonical; for Cyrill of Jerusalem in
his fourth Catechese, where he speaks in part of the Scriptures, he accounts
not in the number the Maccabees you spoke of, nor some others.

Yea, for the reception of books Canonical, Saint Jerome, gives another reason
of embracing but four Gospels, (in his Preface upon the Comment upon Saint
Matthew) not because the Church owned no more, as you would have Saint Austin
to be understood: but he does prove that there are but four, by compare of that
of Ezekiel with that of the Apocalypse, about the four beasts, which do
represent, as he interprets their meaning, the four Evangelists.

You go on, and say, God revealing is always the formal Object of faith.
Before every thing was to be believed as proposed by the Church, because she
proposes it: so that the formal Object of things to be believed, was as
proposed by the Church, under that consideration. But sometimes God reveals
his mind by Scripture, sometimes by the Church, as he did two thousand years
and more before the Scriptures were written. So you. Well then, now he reveals
himself by Scripture contradistinctly to the Church, as well as by the Church
contradistinctly to Scripture, which you put in one behalf of your unwritten
word. So then, we may believe him immediately by Scripture: but whether we can
believe him immediately by tradition without Scripture, wants conviction.

Neither do you exhibit a reason of this Opinion by that which follows, that
for two thousand years and upwards before the Scriptures were written, he
revealed himself by the Church. This as before is not enough to sustain
traditional Doctrine, because the Scripture in the substance of it, was before
it was written: but you cannot evince that the word not written is as certain
to us, as the word before it was written was unto them. And the Reason may be
taken from Gods wise Dispensations to his Church, then when there was no Word
written, he would provide, that that whereby the Church should be ruled, should
be extraordinarily conveyed and preserved: but now, when there is a Word
written, which is a most sufficient ground of Faith, (as you confess) there is
no such cause of any word beside it. If the Scripture be a Rule of faith, as
you do liberally grant, then this is now a rule not only inclusively, but
exclusively: for otherwise it is not as large as that which is to be ruled; and
then they will not agree in the nature of Relatives; and so it will not be a
Rule of faith and manners. For indeed the property of a Rule does not only
exclude less, but also more. It speaks against adding to it as a Rule of faith
and manners necessary in themselves, as well as against the negative of not
ordering them by it. But then again, your former reasoning is inconcludent;
because God revealed himself to his Church severally, before he revealed
himself by his Church. And therefore this was not the way universally holding,
namely by the Church, even before the Scripture was written. And therefore much
less does it now bind when the Word of God is written. Show the like
inspirations to the Church, as the Prophets had, by some infallible way, and
then we shall say, that thus says the Lord absolutely, undisputedly, without
possibility of contradiction, by the mouth of the Church in whatsoever it
pleases to assert for the truth of God, to be believed equally to Scripture;
and then a Council is to be believed without Scripture, as the Nicene, you
mean, was not believed or to be believed without; for it did determine by it,
and by that Text I named, [I and my Father are one;] which Saint Athanasius
does apply to that question four times in that Epistle you named. And if you
can prove that Saint Peter's successors (as you imagine) had that transient
gift of immediate Revelation as Saint Peter had, then ye might say, Peter spoke
by the mouth of Leo, as infallibly as God spoke by his. Then the Arrians had as
good a plea for their opinion, as Athanasius had; for they urged the Council of
Ariminum and more Councils, as Athanasius mentions in the same Epistle: if what
is said by the Church must be true, then Athanasius must have changed his
Opinion. Or if you will have always the Pope to be put into the authority of
the Church for an infallible definition binding the consciences of all
Christians to believe it as Gospel; then must we believe that what he defines
is Infallibly true. What? because he cannot err? No more then those forty
Popes which Bellarmin speaks of in his fourth Book De Romans Pontif. from, the 8.
chapter, to the 15. who have been, as he said accused of error; and some
whereof none can say that all the distinctions and provisions which have been
devised for this purpose, can possibly justify.

Pope Zephyrine, a Montanist, then he erred; if not a Montanist, then
Tertullian is not to be believed. Liberius as before an Arrian; so Athanasius,
so Jerome, so Damasus of him; and Damasus could not err as you hold, yet an
Arrian is surely in error? is he not? Honorius was erroneous too; and he
spoken of in a former paper, he a Monothelite, as Melchior Canus says some
Catholics hold; and he proves it by Synods, the sixth, the seventh, the
eighth, and he proves it by Epistles of Popes; if all there be deceived, how
shall we believe authority of man? As for Gregory the Third, Bellarmin in the
12. chapter of that book does openly say, Vel certe Pontificem ex ignorantia
lapsum esse, quod posse Pontificibus accidere non negamus. So he. Then do you
reconcile error by ignorance with Infallibility. How is he like to be
Infallible in all his definitions, when he was ignorant in the Gospel, and
therefore gave a Dispensation to a man to take another wife, if the former had
a disease that made her not able for the conjugal debt? And Alphonsus de Castro
in his 1. book 4. chapter, has this passage, Omnis enim Homo errare potest in
fide etiam si Papa sit. Nam de Liberio a Papa constat fuisse Arrianum. Et
Anasterium Papam fuvisse Nestorianis, qui Historias legerit non dubitat; and a
little after, Nam cum constet plures eorum adeo illiteratos esse ut Grammaticam
penitus ignorent, qui fit ut sacras Literas interpretari possent. And how then
shall we by your Head of the Church, or any other severally or together know
the undoubted sense of Scripture infallibly? But many necessary places of
Scripture, do not, (as you imagine) need a Judge, or not infallible.

All things also necessary to be believed, are set down in Scripture, and the
contrary you have not showed, and therefore is there no need of an infallible
Judge for the former; or tradition for the latter, as I have showed.
Nevertheless, you proceed thus; The Revelation of God coming to us in all
these cases by the Church, you by your own words in this place must grant her
authority to be our ordinary cause of Faith. So you.

Answer. As you suppose much for your advantage, without color of reason; so
you confound much without distinction. First, the term Revelation has two
respects, one to the Agent, and so it refers to the act and manner thereof;
another to the matter of that which is revealed, that is the object. The
Revelation of God taking it passively, for the object, the matter which is
revealed, comes to us by the Church, because the Word written ordinarily comes
to us by the Church: But taking Revelation of God actively, with respect to the
manner, to bear your sense, that God does reveal himself infallibly by the
Church, either in the case of Canonical books or of doubts about the sense of
Scripture; so it does not come by the Church; and therefore is it not the
ordinary cause of Faith, which must rely upon infallible verity, as Aquinas
speaks in his first part, first question, eight answer, and therefore as
before, does rely upon the Revelation made to the Apostles and Prophets, which
wrote the Canonical books; and not then upon the Church, who was bound to
receive these Books, and to communicate them. So that the Church is concluded
to be as an instrument only, or a motive of this faith; an instrument by its
office, and a motive by its authority. And as for declaring undoubtedly the
sense of Scripture; So is there not any necessity of a Judge infallible, which
you would have the Church to be. Secondly, you suppose that which is not to be
supposed, that by my words, since in those cases the revelation of God comes to
us by the Church, I must grant her authority to be the ordinary cause of faith:
and you say also that by my words in this place I must grant so. Surely you
here do commit Crimen falsi, for I do not see upon the place any half Syllables
out of which you may draw any such interpretative Confession. I have often upon
your occasion, said the contrary, that the authority of the Church cannot be
the cause of faith. And therefore whether you have any faith of the Articles of
Religion, or of Scripture, in all your Church, is more easy to be found then
said. And assuredly though we talk of faith in the world, the greatest part of
it is but opinion, which takes religion upon the credit of man and not of
Scripture. And as for us; we have also the authority of the Church Catholic to
move our judgment; and Scripture to settle our faith. And we are more related
to the four General Councils in consanguinitie of Doctrine, as he said, then
your Church now.

And now at the end of all, you do fairly rebate the edge of your censure of
my Expression, namely, Excess of Faith.

But you say, my distinction does no way salve the improprietie of my Speech.
For there is still a difference in more believing Objects, and believing more
Objects. But granting that it may be improperly spoken, yet even in that sense
it is not truly said, because there can be no Excess of Faith, in believing
that which God has said.

So then by my Distinctions which is your School of Fides Subjectiva, and fides
Objectiva; fides Qua, and fides Quae; there may be an Excess of Faith, in the
Object, if we believe more then God has said; supposing we can believe what
God has not said; although there be not an excess of faith in the Subject; for
we cannot have too much faith in that which is to be believed. But the quarrel
against the speech was not becacause it was not proper enough and congruous in
this Discourse, but because of the Application of it to you; as it now appears;
and therefore here would you vindicate the Church in this upon the same ground
of infallibility; and therefore for your Faith in whatsoever you believe, you
have this Warrant, Thus says the Lord. But since, this infallibility of yours
you cannot have without begging of the question even to the last, nor shall
have it surely by begging, you are yet to find out some Expedience of Means or
Arguments how to preserve your selves from that just charge of Excess of
Faith: and the chief of that kind is that you speak of your infallibility; for
which you have not, Thus says the Lord. How then do you prove it? by
Tradition? And how do you prove Tradition, by the infallibility of the Church?
Therefore go not to Faith about by a circumference. If you have a desire to
rest your judgment, and your soul in certain infallibility, by your own word;
then center in Scripture, from which all Lines of Truth are drawn, and dismiss
Tradition (as your men state it) for which this infallibility was devised; and
yet cannot be maintained; for it cannot maintain it self.

You close with a passage of Saint Austin. If so the words, you intend it to
set out your Charity to the Church of Christ, not to persuade my Faith in its
infallibility. I may love the Church without infallibility, because though I
do not love Error, yet must I love the Church when it is in Error. And this
gives you occasion to think well of this respective and full answer to your
last Paper. Excuse me that it was so long ere it came (and yet not much above
the space of yours) and also so long now it is come.

Only let me leave you with a Father or two, in whose company you are
delighted; Tertullian in his Prescript, cap. 8. We have no need of Curiosity
after Christ, nor further Inquisition after the Gospel. When we believe we
desire to believe nothing beyond. For this we first believe that there is not
any thing beyond which we ought to believe. Again against Hermog. cap. 22. I
adore the plenitude of Scripture. And a little after, Scriptum esse doceat
Hermogenis Officina; If it be not written, let him fear that woe appointed for
those who add or take away.

And Saint Austin, in his 2. book De Doc. Christiana cap. 9. In iis enim quae
aperte in Scriptura posita sunt: Amongst those things which are plainly laid
down in Scripture, are found all those things which contain Faith and Manners
of Living; to wit, Hope and Charity.

For the excellent modification of Scripture, in the 6. chapter, Magnifice
igitur and salubriter Sp. Sanctus ita Scripturas Sanitas modificavit, ut locis
apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus autem fastidia detergeret. Nihil
enim fere de illis obscuritatibus eruitur, quod non planissime dictum alibi
reperiatur. And the same in the 7. chapter, for the second Degree or step to
Wisdom, He says, Deinde opus est mitescere Pietate, neque Contradicere
Divinae Scripturae, sive intellectae si aliqua vitia nostra percutit; sive non
intellectae, quasi nos melius sapere meliusque percipere possimus: sed cogitare
potius and credere id esse melius and verius quod ibi scriptum est, etiamsi
lateat, quam id quod nos per nos met-ipsos sapere possumus.

And again, Saint Austin contra Literas, Petit. Lib. 3. cap. 6. Proinde sive de
Christo, sive de ejus Ecclesia, sive de quacunque alia re, quae pertinet ad
fidem vitamque nostram, non dicam nos, nequaquam comparandi ei qui dixit, Licet
si nos, sed omnino quod secutus adjecit, Si Angelus de Coelo vobis
annuntiaverit praeterquam quod in Scripturis legalibus and Evangelicis
accepistis, Anathema sit.

Consider what is said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

To the Reader. How in these times in which there be so many Religions, the
true Religion may certainly be found out.
1. A Satisfactory Answer to this Title will alone put an end to the endless
controversies of these days. This made me think my labor well bestowed in
treating this point somewhat largely. And because that Treatise has received a
very large answer, the examining of this answer will make the Truth yet more
apparent. That this may be done more clearly, I will briefly tell you the Order
I intend to observe in the examination of the said answer. And because this
answer directly follows the same Order which I observed in treating the
question prefixed in my Title; Therefore when I have showed you the Order of
that Treatise, you will clearly see that I shall most orderly answer the Reply
against it.

2. That Treatise had a short Preface to tell the intent of it. My first
Chapter must then be the Examination of what is said against this Preface.
Again, that Treatise did show five things.

First, it did show the necessity of a Judge, to whom all are bound to submit.

Secondly, That Scripture alone did not suffice to decide all necessary
Controversies without a living Judge (to the 17. Numb.)

Thirdly, that this Judge could be no other then the true Church (to the 21.
Numb)

Fourthly, that the true Church is infallible in her judging points of Faith,
(to the 17. Numb.)

Fifthly, That this true Church which is our infallible Judge, is the Roman
Church, (to 29 and last Numb.)

Lastly, followed the Conclusion. My answer therefore must have five more
chapters to show the Reply made against that Treatise to be unsatisfactory in
every particular argument opposed against me in all these five points.

3. There might have been added another chapter to examine what my adversary
says concerning the Conclusion of my Treatise. But as he himself (Page 112.)
observes very well, he might have spared his Reply against my Conclusion,
because it contains no new thing appertaining to the main Controversy, but
it was made only to show that in the handling of the main Controversy, I had
answered all his paper, which I did there run over in order. And therefore in
his answers to all I had said about the main Controversy, he had given up his
answers to all that which is only run over again in the conclusion. Neither
know I any reason that I gave him to fancy (as he says he does) that I should
either think a good cause wanting to him, or him wanting to a good cause,
unless he had answered my Conclusion apart, though something were in it not
said before by me and some few things in which I charge him. But Sir, that
which I stand upon is the main question and the proof or disproof of it. Nor
will I judge so hardly of you as to think you will conceive either my cause
worse, or me a worse defender of it, because I tire not my self and my Reader
with our personal debates, when they concern not the main question, in which
both of us have been so large. And so as you thought you might have ended when
you came to that conclusion, so I think I may well end when I have answered
those hundred Pages, and more, which I met with before I come thither, though
there still remained something which concerned our private debates. For if that
which has been said before does not satisfy, no great satisfaction will be
added by going on a little further in the same strain in matters less to the
matter.

The first CHAPTER. The Answer to my Preface Confuted.
1. YOur first words intimate that you fear least your silence should make me
seem to my self or others to have got the Victory. Sir, your Reply is most
welcome in this respect that it does more help me then your silence could, not
to seem to have got, but really to get that Victory which I desire not to my
self, but to truth. For the examination of your Reply will serve for a
Touchstone to my Arguments. I will follow you as you desire step after step,
and (...).

2. To show the necessity of treating the matter I had undertaken, I said that
such a manner of reading the Scripture as is permitted by you to all sorts of
people, with so unlimited a License, to interpret them according to their own
private judgment of discretion, as a thing most apt to cause a numberless
number of Sects and Heresies. A priori this is proved thus. You permit any
Artificer, who can read, to take the Bible into his hand, and to take it for
his sole, and only Judge of all necessary Controversies. And though all the
force and efficacy of the words of Scripture consist in the true sense and
sincere Interpretation of it, yet when all comes to all you leave this
Interpretation to be made by every Reader, though never so unskilful with so
great Latitude, that though a General Council of the greatest Doctors which
could be gathered together, should have defined such and such a point for
undoubted true Doctrine, and to be held so according to Scripture, yet you
permit any Cobbler to make a Review of this Decree, and if he hearing all that
can be said on the one side and on the other, judges at last that the whole
Council has erred in interpreting Scripture, you leave him free to hold
himself so strongly to his own interpretation, as if it were the true sense of
Gods Word; neither will you hear of any Obligation which he has interiorly to
submit his judgment (which is the seat of true faith or error) to any other
Judge upon earth. For surely if he be left by your Principles so free in the
choice of his interpretation of Scripture, as not to be obliged to submit
interiorly to a whole General Council, he has far greater freedom in not being
obliged to submit to any other private Doctors. Is not this to leave men in a
mighty hazard of misunderstanding Gods Word, and falling into Heresy?

Secondly, the same is proved a posteriori in those places where the sacred
Scriptures are thus prostituted not only to the bare reading, but also to the
interpretation of every profane and ignorant fellow (I still mean when he shall
have heard or seen what can be alleged on all sides) there and only there,
Sects have multiplied, and do multiply beyond measure.

3. Neither do any of your arguments prove this not to be the true cause of
Heresies, and bad life which follows Heresy. First it is so far from being
contrary to that Text, You err not, knowing the Scripture, that it is most
agreeable to it. For a most fit way to err against the knowledge of Scripture,
is to permit such, and a great number of such men to interpret Scriptures, as
are most fit to err in the interpretation of them especially being licensed to
cross all Antiquity, and all the Authority of the Church if these stand in
their way. And I wonder why you call this your manner of proceeding, The
knowledge of Scripture. If the works of these famous Physicians Galen and
Hipocrates, were thrust into all Trades-mens hands, and every one of them were
licensed to interpret, as they sincerely thought best, would you call this The
knowledge of Physic, especially if every one might be permitted to hold his
interpretation against a General Assembly of most learned Physicians? Secondly,
you in vain object that of Saint Paul, That the Scriptures are able to make us
wise unto salvation. Far was it from the intention of Saint Paul, to speak of
the Scriptures interpreted by every giddy fancy; for thus they may be the
occasion of our damnation. Saint Paul said they were able to make Timothy wise
to salvation, because he was a man who did continue in the things which he
learned and had been assured of (to wit, by the Oral tradition of the Doctors
of the Church) A man knowing of whom he had learned these things, and these
traditions. Let such men read Scriptures, and let them with such
interpretations understand them, and they will make them wise to salvation, and
to continue still assured of the Doctrine of the Church, and never to
contradict that. Thirdly, you say, I confess that when we are by the Church
assured that the Scripture is the Word of God we may ground our faith in it for
those things which are plainly delivered: Yes, but I also say, that all things
necessary to salvation are not plainly delivered in Scripture. And Saint Peter
says, That many to their perdition did misunderstand some hard places of Saint
Paul. So that misinterpretation of hard places may be the cause of perdition.
Fourthly you object Heresy and lewd life to some in whom you say we invested
infallibity. If I should grant all, what prove you from hence, but that there
be other ways to Heresy, and bad life, besides giving all scope to interpret
the Scriptures as we judge fit; So there be other ways to Hell besides
Drunkenness, but what does this hinder drunkenness from being the high way to
Hell. Again, had not David, who was a murderer and adulterer; had not Solomon,
who was an Idolater, the infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost in writing
several parts of the Holy Scripture? But to prevent this, and all that else
where you do, or can say against the Pope, I (in my 21. Number) desired you,
and all to take notice of that which here you quite forget. I said, I would
have every one to know that the Roman Church does oblige to no more, then to
believe that the Pope defining with a lawful Council cannot err, How then
does the belief or faith of our Church (I speak not of private men's private
opinions) invest infallibility in a person heretical or lewd? Those Doctors who
are of that opinion that the Pope can not err in defining out of a general
Council, have other Answers to your Objection. But that which you say is
nothing against our faith, which no man (though never so little a Frenchman)
will say obliges us to hold the Pope infallible in defining, out of a general
Council. So much for this.

Whereas I said that we cannot have, as things stand, any other assurance to
ground our faith upon then the Church, you tell me, I suppose the question.
Sir, I did not suppose, but only propose, what presently I meant to prove. And
where as you say, that I do not well consider what I say, when I say, that as
things stand we have no other assurance. I answer, That though God might have
ordained otherwise, yet as things stand the Church is the ground of our faith
in all points, speaking of the last ground on which we must stand, not a
Humane, but a Divine ground, The pillar and ground of Truth; and it is the
first, because by it we believe the Scripture to be the Word of God as I shall
show, Numb. 20. chapter, 3. Neither do we first believe the Church for the
Scripture as I shall show, chapter 3. Numb. 31.32. though against those who
have first admitted the Scriptures for Gods Word, we do prove by the Scriptures
the authority of the Church. That I have said nothing against the practice of
our Church, appears by what I said just now, showing how the people deprave
the hard places of Scripture to their own perdition.

5. You charge me with abating from my first Proposition in which I said,
Divine Faith in all things was caused by the proposal of the Church, because
now I say that when by the infallible authority of the Church we are assured
that the Scripture is the Word of God, we may believe such things as are
clearly contained in Scripture. Good Sir, Do you not see, that if I be asked
why I believe (in this case) such a thing, my first answer will be because God
has said it in the Scripture? but if I be pressed further; and why do you
believe the Scripture to be Gods undoubted Word? my last answer must be for the
infallible authority of the Church by which God teaches this Verity. Surely
the main question that serves for the knowledge of the ground work of all our
faith, is to examine upon what authority at last all our faith does rely, when
all comes to all. Take then the belief of what particular points you please,
and examine upon what authority it comes at last to rely, and you shall ever
find it to be the authority of God revealing by the Church.

6. Now whether my adversary be indeed, as he says, one of the most slender
Sons of the Church of England, or whether he has showed that Treatise of mine
to be no Demonstration; Let the indifferent Reader, after due pondering the
force of all Arguments determine. Sure I am that this is no Demonstration which
you add; The Scripture is infallible, but the Church is not, therefore I must
take for the ground of my Faith the Scripture. For first, The Scripture cannot
be proved to be Gods Word without the Church be infallible, as I shall show,
chap. 3. Numb. 20. Hence follows secondly that the Church must have
infallibility sufficient to support this most weighty Article of our faith,
That all the Scripture is the Word of God, and therefore though upon her
authority I believe Scripture to be most infallible, yet because I ground this
belief on her authority, her authority is the last ground of Faith.

7. And whereas in your next Number, you promise such souls as have forsaken an
infallible Church, a happy eternity upon this ground, that those things which
are necessary to salvation are plain in Scripture, I pray God their souls come
not to be required at your hands. For this ground is most groundless in two
respects. First, because no soul can have infallible assurance of the
Scriptures being the true Word of God, if the Church be not infallible, and you
refusing to stand on this ground make the last ground of all your faith to be I
know not what kind of Light, Visible to certain eyes, such as yours are,
discovering unto them infallibly, that such and such books be the infallible
Word of God. The vanity of which Opinion I shall show chap. 1. Numb. 20.21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Secondly, It is most manifestly false, That all things
necessary to salvation are plainly set down in Scripture, as I show chapter 3.

8. In your next Paragraph, I find nothing which I have not here answered,
only you still force me to say, I would have every one to know that the Roman
Church does oblige to no more then to believe, that the Pope defining with a
lawful Council cannot err. What proceeds from this authority we profess to
proceed from the authority of the Church. When the Church diffused admits
these definitions her consent is yet more apparent.

9. As for your complaint that your paper is not fully answered; I suppose that
if any thing of importance was left unanswered you will tell me of it here,
that I may here answer it. Concerning my manner in answering of you, I must
tell you that St. Thomas, and the chief School Divines, for clarity and
brevity, use to proceed thus. Having first proposed the question they put down
the reasons which seem to make against the truth. This was done to my hand in
your first paper. Then they set down the Truth and the Reasons of it, and this
Saint Thomas in his Quaestionibus fasius disputatis does sometimes very
largely; (and this I did to your hand in my last paper.) Lastly, they solve the
former Objections against truth, by reference to such Reasons as they (in their
Proofs) did show the truth to be grounded upon. And this in my conclusion I
showed my self to have performed; or, if any little thing were wanting I did
supply it; Wherefore, though I had not your consent to proceed thus with your
paper, yet I content my self with having the consent of the best Schoolmen. My
intention in rejoyning by a Treatise was to have this most important matter
distinctly, orderly, and fully put down. And by having done so I find this
great commodity, that your answer becomes more Methodical, and my Reply to
your Answer more clear and perspicuous. And the Reader sees still how orderly
the combat is.

The Second CHAPTER. The necessity of a Judge in all Controversies to whom all
are bound to submit.
1. IN the beginning of your Answer, Of my first Number.
to what I said concerning this point, you go about to persuade us, that we
Recusants (who upon this account are liable to loose two parts of our Estates,
and what else you are, or shall be pleased to take from us, be it goods,
liberty or life) that we I say are most likely to take up our Religion by
prejudice. Doubtless you must think us first to be very noble contemners of the
world, whose greatest commodities do not hinder us, from looking upon even with
prejudice, a Religion so manifestly prejudicial to us; and so your own
Tertullians saying fitly checks you, for being one who cannot see so manifest
Verities as be in our Religion, you persuade your self to see certain
Falsities, which so manifestly be not in it, let us come to the matter.

Of my second Number.
2. God having made man to a supernatural end to be attained by supernatural
means, (among which the first is true faith) it is clear that he must according
to his merciful Providence, provide us some way to this faith, so easy, that
all (if they pleased) might be brought to the knowledge of it. And because the
far greater part of men were ignorant, it beseemed his goodness (who is the
Lover of Souls) to provide us such a way as these ignorant men should not be
able (unless by wilfully carelessness) to err by it, according to that of the
Prophet Esaias 35. promising at the coming of the Messiah, A Path and a way which
shall be so direct to us that fools cannot err by it. To elude this Text; You
say, sure may we be that the Letter does respect the Jewish Church after their
Redemption from Captivity. I answer, if this be sure, then sure it is, That God
directs the Jewish Church by a way so direct that fools could not err by it.
And if he did this to the Jewish Church, there can be no good reason why he
should be less careful to direct the ignorant of the Church of Christ. Whence
you see I had no reason to have feared this Interpretation. Yet I think it is
sure that this is not the true interpretation, for when did the blind see, deaf
hear, when did then God himself come and save us? And if you will have our
Savior himself to be this way, as he said, I am the Truth and the Way, this
self same Savior said, I (who am this way) am with you until the consummation
of the world, to wit, directing my Church the right way to salvation, of which
direction the Church has no less need now, then then. And as we could not
securely have put a limitation to these words of Joel, if Saint Peter had not
secured us of the true sense, so cannot you here limit these words, not having
the like warrant for it. And as for the first part of Miracles, it is manifest
by our Savior his own words, Those who believed in him should do greater then
he had done. If then this Text was Verified after our Saviors time, you cannot
say it is only spoke of his time, and that he did take away a way so necessary
for us, His gifts being without Repentance. And it is strange that you
thinking this gift Literally conferred to the Jewish Church, should with the
same breath plead so hard that it is a gift, which should not in full
dimension be always extended to the Church. I cannot believe that you trust
your other argument. If this way be promised to the Church, Ergo the Church is
not this way. Suppose God had promised the Kingdom of France a Monarchy, Ergo
the Kingdom of France (say you) is not this Monarchy. The true consequence is,
Ergo, The Kingdom of France is this Monarchy. The Church is this way which
God promised it should be. And it is so by the sure guidance of him who is the
way, and is with his Church ruling it until the continuation of the world. And
so Christ is Regula regulans, and the Church Regula regulata. But being ruled
by him there is not the least danger that it will swerve from the Word of God,
and you may well follow such a Guide with blind obedidience. And still I must
mind you that I speak of the Universal Church represented in a General Council
confirmed by the Supreme Pastor. This Church guiding by her infallible doctrine
is this way, the Church Diffusive (guided now by this Doctrine) was promised
this Direct way: such a way we were promised, a way so direct represented that
fools cannot err by it. The Scripture as some may conceive (for you dare not
defend it) is not this way, for we see with our eyes, not only fools, but also
most learned men to err grossly, and to follow most contradictory opinions,
whilst they profess from their hearts to follow Scripture as near as they
can; the Scripture therefore is not this way, yet such a way we must find to
make Gods promise good. Nothing then with any probability can be said to be
this way, but the Visible Church of Christ. For the Church Invisible as such,
is no way according to your Confession. The visible Church then is this Judge;
by submission to her judgment we in all things are secured.

Of my third Number.
3. Whence what you say against my third Number is easily answered. For all
Religions agreeing that there must be one Judge of all Controversies which
either be, or may be in Religion, they must all give infallibility to their
Judge as you your selves do, affirming Gods written Word to have plainly set
down all things necessary to salvation, so that no necessary controversy can
spring up but this Judge as you say does decide it, which how false it is I
shall fully show chap. 3. All other Sectaries agreeing with you in this point,
I understand not how you could say, that none but we held a Judge infallible.
And indeed without an infallible guide every man might proceed as if your faith
were fallible, and so give an infallible assent to nothing; I did never say
that without such a judge we should be free to follow (without any fault) our
private judgment in holding what we will, as you insinuate: but I said,
otherwise every man might be free to believe what he judged best, and so we
should have as many Religions as there be private and different judgments. Had
you put these my words, you had not had a word to say. But you thought good to
put such words as you knew how to answer, and to leave out my true words, and
to say nothing to the argument by which I proved them. And so that argument
still standing in force, all that you say against your own saying is from the
purpose.

4. You add that you do not say we should follow our own judgment of
discretion without means of regulating our judgments. But mark how in the next
words you take away all means (for to take away all infallible means is to take
away all means able to produce an infallible assent to faith) to have us surely
guided in matters of faith, for you say, yet after we have perused the
Definitions of Councils, we cannot resign up our assents to their Dictates upon
their account, but do examine (as the Bereans did) which Saint Paul said,
until we can find them resolved into the infallible Rule of Holy Scripture: So
you far from the spirit of that great Saint Gregory, who said, (Li. 1. Ep. 24.)
I do profess my self to reverence the first four Councils as I reverence the
four Books of the Gospel. And in like manner I do receive the fifth Council;
whosoever is of another mind, let him be an Anatheme. Thus he received all the
lawful General Councils, which had been before him, for there were but five.
But whereas you will not resign up your assent to the Definitions of Councils,
until you first can find them resolved into the infallible Rule of Scripture; I
must tell you first, that you will still be strongly pressed, to show upon what
infallible principle you take Scripture by an infallible assent to be the
undoubted Word of God, and then you shall see how the whole Machin of your
religion topleth and tumbleth to the ground; for there cannot be a more
groundles ground, See of this chap. 3. Numb. 20.
then that ground upon which you (by rejecting the infallible authority of the
Church) are forced to build your whole religion, to wit, that you by the mere
reading of the Scripture can by its Light (as you discover the Sun by its
Light) discover it so manifestly to be the undoubted Word of God, that this
discovery suffices to ground your infallible assent to this verity. And it
must be a far surer discovery then that by which we discover the Sun by his
Light; for this discovery can only ground a natural certainty, the other
discovery must ground a supernatural, not certainly, but infallibly. Secondly,
I must tell you, that these your proceedings to a private review, after you
have perused the Definitions of the Councils to examine them until you find
them resolved into the infallible Rule of Scripture, (of which resolution you
make your private judgments the Judge to open awide gap to Heresy, as I have
showed in the last chapter, Numb. 2. And for the importance of the matter I
will here again further declare in an example which hereafter also will stand
me in much use. Let us take an Arrian Cobbler; to this man, this your Doctrine
gives the final review of the Council of Nice, and you give him leave after he
has perused the definitions of this Council, (defining God the Son to be of
the self same individual substance with his Father) to examine them, until he
find them resolved into the infallible rule of Scripture. He does examine them,
and chiefly how they agree with that text, I and my Father are one, on which
Text you Chap. 4. Number 57.
afterward confess the infallibility of this definition to be chiefly
grounded, and therefore St. Athanasius did press it thrice. Now in the
examining of the conformity of this definition with this text, the Arrian
Cobbler by his poor understanding is easily able to see (that which a wiser man
would yet see sooner) that he is put upon a necessity to inquire how God the
Son, and his Father are one, whether it be by affection only as Arrians hold,
or One in the self same individual substance as the Council defines, and
inquiring this, he calls to his mind that other text, Jo. 17. v. 21. where
Christ prays, That all his Disciples may be one thing, as thou Father in me,
and I in thee. Here will this Cobbler say, (because he has often been
instructed by his own Doctors) Christ, who said, I and my Father are one thing,
demands that his Disciples may be one thing, as he and his Father are one
thing. But he does not demand that his Disciples may be all one thing, in the
self same individual substance; Therefore (he concludes) Christ is not one
thing in the self same individual substance with his Father, but one thing in
affection only as his Disciples might come to be one thing. False therefore
(would he say) is this definition of the Council which cannot be resolved into
the infallible Word of God, in which all things necessary to salvation (as this
point is) are plainly set down, as this point is not, for this, is the plainest
place, and yet conferring it with the other, I find it not evidently agreeing
with the Definition of the Council, but rather evidently against it; by which I
conclude in this my Review, the Definition of the Council to be false. Most
learned Sir, either convince this Cobbler by some clearer Text of Scripture,
which I am sure (if this Text fail) is impossible, or else to the eternal good
of misled souls, confess, that if once you give private men leave to make a
Review of the Definitions of Councils, you can find no means upon earth to put
an end unto our endless controversies; the Scriptures alone not sufficing for
this end, as I shall show in the next chap. without you take the Scriptures as
they send us to the Church bidding us hear her, under pain of being accounted
Publicans and Heathens.

5. Thirdly, Learned Sir, I must tell you that this your Doctrine makes the
Definition of true Councils, and their final determinations to be indeed no
Definitions nor final Determinations at all. For you make all those great
Fathers of the Church to assemble themselves, from so remote parts of the
world, only to talk and discourse about such and such points in controversy,
and to leave the controversies themselves undefined, and undermined, to be
finally defined and determined only by those places of Scripture; which places
as they could not before the meeting of the Councils, so they cannot after the
meeting of the Council fully define, determine, and decide these controversies.
Now surely it is clear by these Acts of the first four Councils (which Councils
your English Church holds for lawful) that the Fathers of these Councils never
so much as doubted, but that they had all plenitude of power and authority from
God to define, and finally to determine those controversies still arising. And
they had grievously wronged the world by Excommunicating all such as should
gainsay what they had defined and determined, if Error and Falsity, and
Contradiction to Scripture could have been found in their Definitions and
Determinations. What you touch concerning the Bereans, I answer fully, chap. 3.
Numb. 14.

6. Whereas you add fourthly, That the decisions of the Church, though
unprovided of infallibility, do yet oblige unto peace, though their judgment
cannot claim an undisputed assent, yet the power they have from Christ does
require an undisturbance in the difference; you teach by words, what the deeds
of your glorious Reformers have notoriously gainsaid. Secondly, seeing that a
general Council (as you in your first paper confess) is the highest Court on
Earth, to hear and determine Controversies, if her determinations may be
erroneous, and these erroneous determinations be to be accepted peaceably,
reverently, and without disturbance; in what a pitiful case should Gods whole
Church be, which having no higher Court, from which relief might be hoped, is
bound to conform and subscribe to erroneous definitions; and all preachers are
silenced and obliged not to open their mouth against these errors. Did it
beseem the wisdom of Christ to appoint such a Government in his Church, which
should leave open so wide a gap to errors, which being by command from the
highest authority on earth, preached by so many, and not so much as
contradicted by one, must needs increase to a wonderful height. Would any wise
Lawmakers proceed thus, if they could help it as well as Christ could, by
continuing in his Church that infallibility which you will confess it had
those two thousand years before Scripture was written, and which this Church of
Christ had before all the whole Canon of the New Testament was finished, which
was for the first forty years of the Church.

7. Vain is your fear that we should become Hypocrites in differing by one
outward Act from our inward act of belief, for any wise man may inwardly
persuade himself, although I by my force of wit, cannot see how such a point
defined by a whole general Council should be true; yet if I have wit, I cannot
but persuade my self even according to humane wisdom, that so grave a
judgment of a whole Council is far more likely to see the truth then my
private judgment; and therefore rather to be interiorly embraced. Again, I may
discourse thus. All the places alleadgeable against the Definitions of
Councils, or of Scriptures, be places clear or not clear; if not clear, then
clearly I am imprudent and impudent to oppose, in a point not clear, my private
judgment of discretion against the public judgment of all Christendom, far
more likely in a point not clear to hit upon the truth then I am. Now if these
places alledgable against the Definitions of Councils be clear and evident, it
is an evident and clear folly in me, to think that so wise an Assembly should
have so universal a blindness, as that none of them should be able to discover
that which is clear and evident even in my short sight: See chap. 4. Numb. 51.
Again I may and ought to know that the Holy Ghost has promised an assistance
to his Church sufficient to secure it from bringing in any error as I shall
show, chapter 4 Numb. 28.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. And this Principle will
beat down to the ground all Opposition which an humble soul can make, who will
captivate her understanding in this case unto the obedience of faith as the
Apostle speaks.

8. And when you ask me, wherein you oppose general Councils? I answer, First
that you oppose them even in that most fundamental ground, upon which all
Councils hitherto have still supposed themselves to set as Judges, with full
Commission to determine securely all controversies, obliging all Christians to
conform to their Definitions by such Censures as were still held to be ratified
in Heaven. Others will tell you diverse other Oppositions you have with
Councils, and even in this place you tell all how little you credit Councils
when you charge them with speaking contradictions. But when you come to speak
your mind more largely, you do your uttermost endeavors to make the world
think that they have not sufficient assurance that any Council was as yet a
Lawful General Council. I need no further proof of these your endeavors then
all those manifold Objections which you put, and I answer in my 4. chapter
Numb. 20.21.

9. And when you ask again why you are charged as if you were opposite to the
true Catholic Church? I answer, Christ had in all ages since his time, a true
Catholic Church, and consequently he had such a Church upon earth when your
Reformation (as you call it) began. But at this your Reformation you did oppose
in very many, and very important points of doctrine, not only the Roman, but
all other Churches upon earth: Therefore without doubt you opposed the truly
Catholic Church in many, and very important points. And in plain English I
tell you, this argument (which is in lawful form) is unanswerable. And when you
say, that when you differ without opposition you keep the peace of the Church
without question. I answer, That your Reformers did apparently in many and most
important points differ from all Churches Christ had then upon the Earth, in
opinion of public Doctrine; censuring such and such Points as they all held,
to be Erroneous, Superstitious, opposite to the Word of God; and in this
opposition you continue still, though in this whole age you have not been able
to name one age in this last thousand years, in which Christ had a truly
Catholic Church upon Earth, agreeing with you in those many and most important
points in which your Reformers taxed us to have opposed the Scriptures. And as
for exterior division you cannot name the Church upon earth from which you did
not divide your selves at your Reformation. And I challenge you to tell me if
you can, to what Church on Earth then visible you did join your selves, or who
acknowledged you to be of their communion?

10. To prove yet further that we are not bound to submit our judgments to the
Church, you use (as you say) my own argument, That we are bound to submit our
judgment only to those who can judge of the inward act. But Sir, I never said
any such thing, for how know we whether the Scripture Writers, or the Apostles
themselves did know (without which knowledge they could not judge) of the
interior Acts of all men, from their time to the end of the world? and yet all
these men, upon due Proposition of their Doctrine, are obliged to submit their
interior acts to their Doctrine. But I said that which you had rather a mind to
mistake, then answer. For I said, That Christ should have left a very miserable
Church, and should have gathered a most heart-dis-united sort of people, if
after the reading of Scriptures (after which they wrangle so fiercely) He had
left them no other Judge but their own private judgments subject to such
variety in understanding the Scriptures; what Lawmakers (said I) was ever so
inconsiderate as to leave only a Book of Laws to his Commonwealth without any
living Judge, to whom all were to submit; Then I added, True it is, that to
submit exteriorly to Temporal Judges suffices, they being able only to judge
of the exterior man. Did I say this of general Councils? No, did I not, as it
were to prevent your Objection, expressly add, But God (in whose name the
Church teaches, and commands all which she teaches and commands)
searches the heart and the reins and looks upon the mind (which is the
seat of true or false belief;) This God, I say, chiefly exacteth that those of
his Church be of one faith interiorly, or else they be not of one faith; for
faith essentially consists in the interior judgment. He has all reason to
exact that interiorly they be all of one faith. For he could not seriously have
desired their salvation, without he required of them (by way of most rigorous
obligation) to do that which is so wholly necessary to salvation, that without
it no man is saved. For without true faith it is impossible to please God. This
and much more to this effect, I press there hotly, and yet I am not so much as
answered coldly.

11. But you skip to my admiration at your doctrine which indeed gives a very
admirable license to any Cobbler to peruse the Decrees of general Councils, and
to reject them too, if in his review of them he does not find them Resolved
into the infallible text of clear Scripture. Of which Doctrine I have already
spoken fully (Number. 4.) And I think I had reason to say that the wisest man in
the world is then most likely to err, when, in his interior judgment he
goes quite contrary to all Christendom. Of this I have given a very clear
Reason here in my 7. Number, which will stop your mouth from calling every
where, to have me prove the Churches infallibility until you come to my 4
chapter; or if it does not, I must desire you in this place to turn unto it.
And in the very next chapter I shall show, that (though the Scripture be most
infallible) yet it is not sufficient by it self alone unless you take it as it
sends us to the Church) to decide all controversies. As for Saint Athanasius,
did ever he oppose his judgment against the Definition of a lawful general
Council? Nay, did it not appear by the Council of Nice, standing for his
Doctrine, that he might well know the true Church lawfully assembled under the
lawful Pastor confirming their Acts would teach as he taught. And because he
knew this authority (relying on the assistance of the Holy Ghost) to be more
then humane, he might well oppose a greater human authority.

By the way it is strange you should carp at us for calling our selves Roman
Catholics, as if say you, no others were Catholics, whereas to avoid this very
strife impertinent now to our purpose, I used that very name by which no others
are excluded. And in this impertinent strife you say many things of which you
prove not one.

12. I pass to that which is pertinent to the purpose, that it is a very
desperate consequence flowing from the premises of your Doctrine, permitting
any private person so to peruse the Definitions of Councils, that he might
freely reject them in his private judgment (which is the seat of all Faith) if
he judged them not to be resolved into the infallible authority of Scripture,
upon this ground, that we have nothing infallible but the Texts of Scripture,
For these Texts being not able to decide all necessary controversies (I still
add unless you take them as they send us to the Church by themselves, as I
shall fully show in the next Chapter, it is clear that we shall remain
disputing without end, or possibility of end, unless God has given an
infallible assistance to the Church; wherefore not to grant such an absurdity,
we are necessitated to expound those Scriptures, promising that Christ will be
with his Church unto the end of the world, That he will send them the Spirit of
Truth to abide with them to teach them all Truth, that the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against her. That we must hear her under pain of being accounted
Publicans and Heathens, That she is the Pillar and ground of Truth, and diverse
others of which I speak, chapter 4. to be extended to an infallible assistance,
for an assistance joined with fallibilitie will still leave us jarring, as
appears by our own Doctrine.

13. Being loath to stand too long to such a consequence, you make a long
impertinent discourse about the perusal of the collection of all the judgments
of all the Fathers, of all Ages, every where. Good Sir, tell me what connection
has the perusal of every judgment, of every Father, of every Age, every
where, with that Obligation which I put of following these Cannons of Councils
which make to the decisions of those most known controversies about which we
contend? Is the judgment of every Father of every Age, the judgment of a
general Council? Why then do you run your self out of breath in inpugning that
which is nothing to our purpose, and which I never spoke of, rather then in
holding close to the matter. But since you first bring the authority of
Councils to a little more then nothing, and here again the authority of the
Fathers, to a little less then nothing, in order to the ending of
controversies; this your violence against any provocation, to Antiquity, and
consent of Fathers, Will give me leave to make this Treatise much shorter then
at the beginning appeared possible. For it is evident out of your own words
that it is to no end to deal with you out of Fathers, and I am resolved to deal
with no body but to some end. I will therefore humor you in this, and I will
lay aside all that might hereafter be said concerning the Opinion of Fathers.
But do not think that I do this, as if that what you here said against the
authority of Fathers, found any credit with me, or as if what you say were in
the least degree hard to be answered. For you your self cannot be ignorant that
we allege plenty of such Holy Fathers against you, as are confessed by your
selves to have been the prime Doctors of the Primitive Church. And we find
sufficient of their works which have not perished, never taxed by any (but
confessed Heretics) to be erroneous in these points in which they hold with
us, whereas their small errors used presently to be discovered, and cried
down. We find also sufficient plenty of such works as never were suspected to
be bastard pieces, or to have been corrupted; And it would make a learned man
amazed to ask, as you do, How few of them have touched upon our differences?
Are you ignorant that our learned Coccius has filled a great, and a very great
double ^ome only with the words of Holy Fathers opposite to your Doctrine in
those points in which we differ. Gualterus did single out twelve points (in
which our chief differences do consist.) And he shows (in his Chronicle at
the end of every age from Christ's time to this,) sufficient plenty of Holy
Fathers, to Demonstrate, what the prime Pastors of the Church (followed by the
people,) did believe in every one of those Ages, concerning these very prime
points, in which we differ from you. The Author of the Progeny of Catholics
and Protestants, handling a part all our main differences, does in all these
points, give you the very words, of your own chief Doctors, clearly
acknowledging a great number of Holy Fathers, directly opposite unto them in
each one of those points. Do but please to look at the end of this Author upon
his Table of Books and Chapters, and you may find that which I have said
verified, in what point or points you please. Groundless then is the whole
Discourse against arguing out of Holy Fathers. And indeed your Doctors would
fain dispute out of Scriptures only, because they find it to be true that the
Scriptures alone cannot decide many Controversies, but by some Interpretation
or other they think themselves able to elude the force of arguments drawn from
Scriptures only: the sayings which are not in Scripture, are in no case
receivable by them, whereas indeed, there is no good got by disputing of Texts
of Scriptures, but either to make men sick or mad, as our adversaries may daily
see by their fruitless Scripture combats with the Anabaptists, the
Sabatharians, and other upstart Sectaries. But the Church of God is the Kings
high way, by which a man is sure to travail to truth. There ought therefore to
be no appealing to Scriptures, nor disputing out of them only, since by that
means, either neither side will be victorious, or it is a hazard whether. These
things you might have learned from the ancient Fathers if you had regarded
their Doctrine, yet since their authority has so low a place in your esteem in
order to finding out the truth, to humor you, I will lay aside all that might
be said out of the Fathers.

I cut then off (by your own consent) all you say concerning S. Cyprian, and
the Crisis of S. Austin concerning S. Cyprian; yet have I a great mind to tell
you that S. Austin expressed exceeding well that Humility and Charity be those
two virtues which made S. Cyprian (and ought to make us) submit to general
Councils, as a prime part of our bounded duty; humility, wheresoever it is
found is the Actus imperans of a most submissive Obedience to the Orders of
those, whom under pain of damnation we are to obey. Because the Devils had not
this Humility in submitting themselves to God, and the obedience due to him,
their Rebellion is ascribed to pride, which for the same reason is styled, The
Mother of Heresy. Now as Humility brings with her this necessary submission
in the interior, so Charity is the Virtue which will be sure to see that peace
and Unity be kept exteriorly in the Church. Grant this submission to all
Councils and we have done.

Of my fourth and fifth Number.
15. God on his part has given us an excellent means to be surely guided in our
interior (in which faith consists) by following the Church the Kings high way
surely leading to Truth; take away this means (recommended so often for this
end by Scripture) and you shall see how pitifully we are left unprovided in
order to exterior Unity. But you press to have my discourse to this effect
drawn into a syllogism, which you do for me. But I hope to do it yet more
clearly for my self in this manner. Under pain of damnation all are bound to
agree in this; that every one interiorly gives an infallible assent to all
such points as are necessary to be believed for salvation. But all can never be
brought to agree in giving interiourly this infallible Assent to all such
points, without they submit their Assent to some living Judge endued with
infallibility: Therefore all can never be brought to agree in that, in which
they are bound to agree under pain of damnation, without they all submit their
interior assent to some living Judge endued with infallibility. The first
Proposition is clear; because all are obliged to please God, and to have that
faith, without which it is impossible to please God. The second Proposition is
proved thus. An infallible assent cannot be built but upon submission to an
infallible authority, and no other infallible authority sufficient to breed
this agreement in their interior assent to all points necessary, can be
assigned but the authority of the Church. The Authority of the Scripture,
though infallible does not give us clear Texts to ground our infallible assent
upon them in all points necessary to salvation, as I shall show in the next
chapter. And we see with our eyes those who submit to this authority of
Scripture as infallible, to disagree mainly in these very points; for one
thinks in his conscience these Scriptures to be understood one way, another
thinks in his conscience they are to be understood one other way, and this
other is licensed by you to differ from the former, for you license such a man
to differ even from the greatest authority upon Earth, to wit, a general
Council, much more easy must you be to license him to differ from an other
private man: and that other private man has as good ground to differ from the
other. What possible means is here of Union in the interior man in which faith
only does consist. What you add of God his sufficiently providing for his
Church by Scripture only, is in this sense true, that in Scripture we read
that we are to hear the Church, not that Scripture alone by her self ends all
our controversies as partly has been proved, but shall now more copiously be
performed in my next chapter, in which you shall find all that you add in this
place presently answered, after I have fully set down the state of the question.

The third CHAPTER. That seeing Scripture alone does not decide all things
necessary to salvation, there must be a living Judge.
1. YOu deliver your Opinion in your answer to my third Number page 12. As
toward controversies we say that Christ has sufficiently provided for the
salvation of man in regard of means of Knowledge without an infallible Judge on
Earth, because things necessary are plainly set down in Scripture. And in
another place you say, what is not plainly delivered in Scripture is thereby
signified not to be necessary. Of this your opinion no proof was given by you
until you come unto this present place. Here then I will begin to discuss
this Question: And first I will take leave to state this Question a little more
fully, and distinctly.

2. Your Assertion then is, That all things necessary to salvation are plainly
set down in Scripture. In this Assertion there be 2 things which need a full
and distinct declaration. The first is to declare these words, Necessary to
salvation. The second to declare those other words, Plainly set down in
Scripture. And first concerning those words Necessary to salvation, they must
of necessity be understood so, that all things are plainly set down in
Scripture, which are necessary. First, to the Universal Church as it is a
community. Secondly, all things which are necessary to all States, and Degrees
that must needs be in this community. Thirdly, all things necessary to every
single person bound to be of this community. As for the first, the Church being
intended to be a community diffused through the whole World, and intended for a
Perpetuity, must, by infallible authority be plainly told in what manner she is
in all times and places to be provided of lawful Pastors, and that with
perpetual Succession; and what power these Pastors have either in respect of
one another, or in respect to their particular flocks, and what Laws they may
make, either single in regard of their flocks, or assembled in regard of the
whole community; and how many, to this effect must be assembled; who must call
their assembly, who perside in it, when it is to be accounted lawful when an
unlawful assembly. Whether the Precepts of this assembly oblige under pain of
damnation, to the keeping (for Example) of any Feast, as Christmasse,
Ascension, or any Fast, as the Fast of Lent, of Christmasse Eve, and to this
community it is also necessary to know what public service may and ought to be
imposed upon all, and when all are bound to be present at it. What Sacraments
are to be administered, by whom, when the people are bound to use them, and how
often, and in what manner and form they must be Administered. All these things
are necessary to the Chuch as a community, and yet there is not one of all
these things plainly set down in Scripture, whence very many and very important
differences be amongst Christians, all undecidable by Scripture. Some of you
contend according to Scripture that there must be Bishops with such and such
Power and Authority, and that without them you can have no true Priests or
Deacons, and without these no true Sacraments, things so necessary to the
salvation of all men. Others answer in the words of your own doctrine, What is
not plainly delivered in Scripture, is thereby signified not to be necessary.
But it is not plainly delivered in Scripture that the Church should be governed
by Bishops with such and such authority. That Priests should be Ordained with
such and such a Form, that none but Priests should have Power to bless the
Bread, administer the Sacraments; That this Bread must be Wheat-bread or
Barley, or Oaten or Pease-bread. Therefore all these things are signified not
to be necessary. The same Argument might be made of other such like
Controversies, which certainly be no less necessary then the former to be
decided; Though according to their Doctrine none of them should be necessary;
Or, if necessary, they should be decidable by plain Scripture, and then your
Doctors could not jarre about them, as they do. Some of you will have no
words at all necessary to the Administration of Baptism, some will have such
kind of words, and others, words very different from them in substance.

Secondly, to speak now of such things as are of strict necessity to certain
men, of certain states and degrees in the Church. Your Bishops must know how to
ordain Priests, and with what form of words or actions. Where shall they find
this plainly set down in Scripture? They must also know whether they can
lawfully permit women to baptize at all, or baptize in necessity only, and
not out of it? Whether they may permit women or laymen to bless the bread,
and distribute the Sacrament, seeing that Christ said, Do this all; not plainly
expressing how far these his words extended themselves. Priests must know what
kind of Ordination is necessary for their Function, what commssion is necessary
for their lawful Missions, and whether it can be granted by Laymen, or no? as
also their power to make and administer Sacraments, and yet none of these are
plainly set down in Scripture, and endless controversies there be about them.

4. Thirdly, diverse of the former things not set down plainly in Scripture, are
necessary to be known by all men all being obliged to serve God in a true
Church, having a lawful succession of true Pastors truly ordained themselves,
and truly ordaining their Priests, who must be known to Administer true
Sacraments in their true matter and form, preaching also the Word of God by
lawful Mission. It is necessary to the salvation of every man to believe and
do somethings, and not to do some other things not plainly set down in
Scripture. Every one is to believe some things distinctly. Now which these
things be, or how many, Scriptures express not. Every one is bound not to work
upon the Sunday. Every one is bound not to have two wives at one time, not also
to marry within such and such a degree of consanguinity. Where be all these
things plainly set down in Scripture? Of diverse other things we shall yet say
more. Yet even hence appears how many endless difficulties these words of
yours Necessary to salvation bring with them.

5. Other endless difficulties be superadded by those other words Plainly set
down in Scripture. First, to prove a point plainly set down in Scripture, so
that I infallibly know the undoubted true sense of it, I must first know such a
book to be the true, and undoubted Word of God, which (as I shall show, Numb,
20.) cannot be known by Scripture, at least by those who can truly swear that
they are no more able, by the reading of the book of Numbers for example, to
discover in it any Divine Light, showing it to be true Scripture, more then
they discover in the books of Judith or Toby showing them to be true Scripture.
Secondly, they must infallibly show that this very Verse, in which I find this
point is not thrust in among other true parts of Scripture, or some word
changing the sense, either thrust in, or left out in this Verse; and this they
must know infallibly. Thirdly, after all this they must yet further know, and
that infallibly, whether these true and uncorrupted words of Scripture be taken
in this place in their common sense, or taken Figuratively, or spoken
mystically of some other thing. Now how is it possible by Scripture only to
come to have an infallible knowledge of this, for it depends merely on the
secret free will of God to use these words here either Mystically or
Figuratively, or in their plain vulgar sense. To know, and that infallibly,
This secret free will of God, I must have a Revelation, and such a one as no
doubt can be made of it. Where find I this Revelation in Scripture? Fourthly,
your learned Sanctius, De Sacra Scriptura, (Col. 409.) having said, That Holy
Scripture in these things which are necessary to salvation is clear; he assigns
no fewer then nineteen Rules necessary to the true knowledge thereof; besides
the having the Spirit of God, and the reading the Scripture attentively, and
the understanding the words and places thereof. And Scharpius in Cursu
Theologico de Scriptoribus controvers. 8. P. 44. assigns twenty Rules for the
understanding the Scripture, which unless they be kept we cannot but err. But
surely it is very easy to keep them. No such matter; For he exacts to know
Original Languages to discuss the words, Phrases, and Hebraisms, to confer the
places which are like, and unlike to one another, etc. Tell me now, do all
these, and the former Rules, show a plain, easy way to infallibility;
especially, we having no sure knowledge that all these fallible Rules, will at
last produce infallibility. Good God! Is this the way promised to be so direct
unto us that fools cannot err by it. Fifthly, I must add a saying of your so
much esteemed Chillingworth, who (in his Praeface Numb. 30.) says, No more
certain Sign that a point is not evident, then when honest, and understanding,
and indifferent men, and such as give themselves Liberty of Judgment, after
mature consideration of the matter, do differ about it. About how many points
do you, and your Brothers differ? which I have in this Chapter showed to be
points mainly necessary to Salvation, which according to this Rule of knowing
what is evident, what not, are evidently not set down plainly in Scripture: And
to speak the plain truth, this ground upon which you, and yours are still
forced to stand, so to withstand the necessity of one Infallible living Judge,
seems a plain Paradox.

6. In one sense (as I have often noted) we still grant all things necessary to
Salvation to be set down in Scripture, to wit, in these Texts in which the
Scripture bids us Hear the Church, and that under pain of being accounted (by a
sentence ratified in Heaven) Publicans and Heathens, and that the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against Her; by any false Doctrine, that She is Pillar and
Ground of Truth; That the Holy Ghost abides with her for ever teaching her all
Truth, That Gods Spirit shall not depart from the Mouth of her seed, nor her
seeds seed. And such like places which I shall in due place (Chap. 4. Number. 58.
to 64.) show, most forcibly to prove this verity. And the very reading of them,
shows them to be no less plain, and clear to this purpose, then those places,
which you cry out to be evident for the proof of every point which is necessary
to salvation. And I am sure you can bring no such evident Texts for all, yea,
for any of these points, which I have already said in this chapter not to be
evidently set down in Scripture, though they be of prime necessity, as others
also which I shall by and by add. The Scripture alone by it self, (in which
sense you speak) does not (as these places will demonstrate) set down all
things necessary to salvation, yet she sets down (and that first more
clearly then she does set down many such necessary points) a Command to go to
the Church for our full instruction. So Saint Paul was taught all things
necessary for his knowledge by those few words, ( Act 9.6.) Go into the City,
and it shall be told what thou must do. That all might see this City of the
Church, he placed it on a Mountain, whence all necessary points are delivered
from a living Oracle, speaking so distinctly, that no doubt can remain of the
true sense, or if there be made any doubt of any thing of importance, this
doubt will presently be cleared by some new Declaration, authentically notified
unto us by our Pastors and Doctors which God gave us (as the Scripture says)
That we should not be Children wavering and carried about with the wind of
false doctrine with circumvention of error.

7. But to go on with your Assertion, all things necessary to salvation (say
you) are plainly set down in Scripture. This is your main foundation of Faith,
making you not only to take Scriptures, but to take Scriptures only, and
nothing but Scriptures for the ground of your Faith, this ground I say must
needs, be plainly set down in Scripture, otherwise according to your own words,
What is not plainly delivered in Scripture is thereby signified not to be
necessary. Again, if this be not plainly set down in Scripture, it will remain
uncertain to us, whether God did intended to have all such necessary things
taught us by the Scripture taken by it self alone; or whether God intended the
Scripture for diverse other ends, provinding sufficiently for this end by
sending us to the Church for our further instruction. That then which I call
for again, and again, is to have plainly set down to me in Scripture, that God
intended by the Scriptures taken by themselves all alone, to teach us with
infallibility all things necessary to salvation: show me the Texes.

8. You go about to show me them. And first you press the second time that of
Saint Paul to Timothy, 2.15, 16. Take for my first answer that which I gave you
when you first alleged this place, chap. 1. Numb. 3. And you must pardon me if
I say that place speaks of Scriptures interpreted by the Church, to whom I
think it is fitter to give this Office, then to let every Cobbler usurp it as I
have showed you do, chap. 1. Numb. 2. and chap. 2. Numb. 4. the Scriptures thus
profaned, and by such interpretations truly discanoned (as I may say) are
rather subject to that effect which Saint Paul his Epistles, (according to St.
Peter) had with some men, that is, they are subject to be depraved by them to
the perdition of their Interpreters: where (by the way) you are again to take
notice, that St. Peter says, Interpreters depraved those places of Saint Paul
to their damnation, though these places were hard, as Saint Peter says, and
consequently these places, did not (according to you doctrine) contain points
necessary to salvation. Whence you see that your proceedings in allowing much
liberty of Interpretations even in hard points may easily prove damnable. It
was then true which I told you in another place. That though the Scripture be a
most right Rule, yet it is very commonly so crookedly applied, that we stand in
need of a better security of the interpretation of it (in which the very carnel
of the Letter does consist) then we have of the interpretation (finally stood
unto) made by the private judgment of our own discretion. I know your Answer
is that it is accidental to this Rule to be misapplied, and that this cannot
infringe the authority of Scripture. It does not indeed infringe the Authority
of Scripture used as God would have it used, with due submission to the public
interpretation of his Church. Otherwise, not for want of infallibility in
Scripture, but by the abundance of fallibility in our private judgments of
discretion, it follows, that we poor creatures, shall be subject to be misled
most pitifully, without God does provide us of an infallible interpreter.
Neither is this to speak more irreverently of Scriptute then Saint Peter spoke
of Saint Paul's Epistles. Nothing more clear then that the words of Scripture
are capable of several senses, and when the senses be several, it must needs
depend upon the inward and most secret intention of God to have had an
intention to use these words to such or such a sense only, or to both if he
pleased. How shall we infallibly know Gods secret intention but by an
interpreter, having infallible assistance from the same Holy Spirit, who
assisted those who did write the Scripture. Wherefore we cannot but wonder to
see, how much scope you give to such poor creatures as ignorant men are, by
thrusting the whole Bible into every man's hands, and investing him with so
ample a faculty to interpret it, without any interior submission to the Church
(although the interior judgment be the very seat of damnable error, or saving
Truth) that he may follow in his judgment what he shall sincerely judge to be
truest. In so much, that he may in his own interpretation, stand out in his
judgment, against the interpretations of whole General Councils. And yet this
very self same man is wisely by you sent to the Minister. And any Minister of
the Gospel say you (but I must not say, (Any General Council) is able
competently, through the Scripture to direct the People to their happiness. And
the Scripture was inspired to this purpose. Happy Ministers! Happy people led
so securely! Only unhappy misled people are we, who had rather say, The
Scripture was inspired, that through it General Councils might securely direct
the people to their happiness, then say with my good adversary, any Minister of
the Gospel is able competently through the Scripture to direct the people to
their happiness, And the Scriptures were inspired to this purpose. Do but
allow me this to the Church, that it can competently through the Scripture
direct the people their happiness, and we will not contend with you whether
this competent direction to happiness shall be called an infallible direction
or no: though we think it most certain, that no fallible direction can
competently direct the people to happiness. Now because by the way, I did say
our Church could not err in damnative errors, you conceive me to grant that it
may err in points not damnative. No Sir, when I said these words, I did only
take, and subsume that, which you your selves most commonly grant unto the
Church, that it cannot err in damnative matters. This alone gives her a main
advantage over any Minister or any private Interpreter. This alone gives a
demonstrable reason, why we should not follow our own interpretations, which
may be damnative; as those interpretations were which some men made of Saint
Paul's Epistles to their own perdition, as Saint Peter says. And surely such
Interpretations are then likely to be damnative when they are flatly contrary
to the Interpretations of the Church. What Commission the Church had for her
infallibility I shall show in due place.

And to show it more fully I will press again your Text and give a second
answer unto it by answering the words following, which are. All Scripture is
given by Inspiration of God, and it is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Correction (so your Bible reads) for instruction in righteousness. Is it
given by Inspiration? yes. What prove you from hence, but that you and yours
have a notable Talent in not concluding contradictorily. You should conclude
thus. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God. But all Doctrine given by
Inspiration from God contains plainly all things necessary to salvation.
Therefore all Scripture contains plainly all things necessary to salvation, and
it does this taking the word, Necessary, and the word plainly as I have showed
they must be taken in the beginning of this chapter. Well but you will hit of
it by and by, after three or four Consequences of no Consequence. For you go
thus on, Is not all Scripture profitable for Doctrine? Yes, in a high Degree it
teaches most eminent Virtues, and among other Virtues it teaches most
wholesome submission, and obedience to the Church, and by her all things
necessary for salvation. And thus the Scripture by her self alone is very
profitable. But Sir, I expected a Contradictory Conclusion. Deduce me from
these words, this Consequence Ergo, God intended by the Scriptures alone to
teach us with infallibility all things necessary to salvation, or all things
necessary to salvation are plainly set down in Scripture still understanding
these words as I in the beginning showed they must be understood. Go on. Is it
not profitable for reproof? Yes Sir. But where is the contradictorie Conclusion
I expected? Is it not profitable for correction? Yes. But I want still this
Contradictorie Conclusion. Is it not profitable for instruction in
Righteousness? Yes. And now all your Powder is spent, and you have not hit the
mark, for I have not yet the Contradictorie Conclusion I so long expected.
Hear now a true Contradictorie Conclusion against your self out of this Text.
That which in this Text is said only to be profitable for these ends, is not
thereby said to be sufficient even to these ends, and yet much less sufficient
to end all Controversies necessary to Salvation by it self alone. But the
Scripture in this Text, is only said to be profitable to these ends here
expressed. Therefore it is not hereby said to be sufficient and that by it self
alone even to these ends, and much less by it self alone sufficient to end all
Controversies necessary to salvation, plainly setting down what is to be held
in all things necessary to Salvation. Again (for a third answer.) You cannot
say St. Paul spoke these words of the New Testament, which for some forty
years, after Saint Paul spoke these words was not finished. Therefore Saint
Paul in this Text does not so much as speak of the whole Canon of Scripture,
whence he is most weakly cited to prove from hence that the whole Canon
contains clearly all things necessary to salvation. Again when this is
proved, it is manifest, that part of the whole Canon is lost. How then know you
that some necessary points, not delivered in other parts of Scripture, were not
delivered in these parts of Scripture which have perished, and so are come not
to be extant in writing? I desire your Answer to this Question.

Your second Text to prove this is Hebrews. 4, 12. The Word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword, pierceing even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit, and it is a discoverer of the thoughts and the
intents of the heart. Here is the Text, but where is the contradictory
conclusion inferring, and that evidently, That it is plainly set down in
Scripture, that the Scripture by it self alone is sufficient to decide all
necessary Controversies? You argue thus. If you say the Word of God is a dead
Letter it cannot speak, it is denied. If you say the Word of God cannot act, it
is denied it is active (...). But Sir, What if I say the Word of God speaks and
speaks clearly many most profitable things, and that it sets down many most
rare examples of Virtue, with excellent Principles, and Documents, and
incitements to the same in a manner most forceable to strike fire out of a
flinty heart; do I not, when I say this, say all that you have said? And when I
have said all this, where is that evident consequence directly concluding, That
all controversies necessary to salvation are plainly decided by Scripture
alone? But to come at last to this Consequence you tell me, If you say it
cannot decide Controversies what is said here? It is sharper then any two edged
sword. But good Sir, I pray, to what use is the Word of God said to be sharper
then any two edged sword? can you show me any one clear, and evident syllable
in this Text, telling me plainly, that this sharpness is in order, not only
to decide Controversies, but also all necessary Controversies, and to do this
by it self alone. Where is then your contradictory Conclusion? But I will from
hence directly conclude, that according to your own doctrine Saint Paul could
not say in this Text, that the Word of God, is by it self alone sufficient to
decide all necessary controversies, which I prove. The Word of God according to
your own doctrine was not sufficient to decide all necessary controversies
before the whole Canon of the Scripture was completely finished. But Saint Paul
said this of the Word of God before the Canon of the Scripture was completely
finished; Therefore Saint Paul said this of the Word of God before the Word of
God, was of it self alone sufficient to decide all necessary controversies.
Therefore, then it had been false to say the Word of God had been sufficient to
this end. Therefore St. Paul did not then say so. Again those words spoke not
of the Word of God blunted with those interpretations which your opinion
licenseth, but of the Word of God applied according to the Divinely-spirited
interpretation of the Church, in whose hands, hands guided by the Holy Ghost,
this Word of God is so managed for the decision of controversies, that it is
sharper then any two edged sword. For her declarations of Scripture be not
fallible, but proceed from the same Spirit by which the Scripture was made as I
shall show. And so here is no fear of missing the right interpretation. You may
securely submit your interior assent to the guidance of the Holy Ghost. Where
this guidance is neglected, there we see with our eyes controversies in most
main points daily multiplied, and yet the Bible daily consulted, and not one of
those Controversies so much as lessened, but still increased more and more. In
these days he must put out his eyes who will not see this.

11. I have now answered the Texts you alleged in this place, but to the end
that all the Texts, which you thought fittest to allege to prove the most
important Verity, may here be mustered up together, and their whole force
appear to the full, I will set down here all the Texts which you allege to
this purpose. You then (page 52. in your answer to my 14. Numb.) urge, that
Christ bids us scarch the Scriptures. But Sir, first you are to prove that
these words clearly and evidently must of necessity be taken in the Imperative
Mood, for without you do this, you can never prove evidently from hence that
they contain a Command, and to prove this, especially evidently, is impossible.
Because both the Greek and the Latin word is as truly and properly, and
vulgarly the Indicative Mood as the Imperative, and our English Translatour
might, if he had pleased, most faithfully have translated these words thus you
do search the Scriptures. And Saint Cyril holds this to be the true sense L.
3. in Jo. C. 4. and your own great Dr. Beza holds the same. Secondly, suppose
your Translator has hit upon the right sense, and that Christ did indeed bid
them search the Scriptures, because they clearly testify that one point when
he was the Messiah, yet all this will help you to make no better consequence
then you made before. And what a pretty conclusion is this. Christ bids us
search the Scriptures because they testify clearly that one point of which he
spoke; Therefore the Scriptures testify clearly all that is necessary to be
believed in any point of Controversy necessary to salvation. And no better is
this consequence, Christ bids us search the Scriptures, therefore we are to
attend them alone, we are not to attend to the Voice of John, nor the Voice
from Heaven biding all to hear him, not to his own preaching, and miracles. Is
not this also a good consequence? Saint Paul says, if Women will learn any
thing let them ask their Husbands at home, 1 Cor. 14.35. Ergo, women are not to
learn of the Ministers of the Church.

12. Your fourth Text is, You err not knowing the Scriptures. Good Sir, give
me now a Contradictory Conclusion. Shall it be this, Therefore all things
necessary to salvation are plainly set down in Scripture; or rather this;
Therefore all things necessary to salvation are not plainly set down in
Scripture; For this is the far stronger consequence from these words. For had
all things been plainly set down, they should not have erred; But they erred,
Therefore all things were not plainly set down. Again, they might err in the
knowledge of the Scriptures, because in the reading of them they did follow
their own private Interpretations, which is the most ready way to error,
especially when men oppose the public Interpretation of the Church, as I
showed chap. 1. Numb. 3. last words says the Bereans.

13. Your first Text, is 2 Pet 1. v. 19. We have also a more sure word of
Prophecy, whereunto you do well that you take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place until the day dawn and the Day Star arise in your
souls. Your proof from this Text is just as weak, as the proof from the last
Text but one; for just as that Text, so also this says that, that one point,
of Jesus his being the true Son of God, and the Messiah, might clearly be found
in the Scripture. How will you infer? Ergo All things necessary to salvation
are plainly set down in Scripture, because one thing is plainly set down. Every
Verity set down in Scripture is a most sure infallible Verity. But, whence
have you that every Verity necessary to salvation is set down in the Scripture?
And yet again, where have you that all things necessary to Salvation were then
set down plainly in Scripture when Saint Peter spoke these words, which he
spoke many years before the whole Canon of Scripture was finished? But before
the whole Canon was finished it was false to say, All things necessary to
salvation were clearly set down in Scripture; Therefore if Saint Peter had said
this in this Text, he had said that which was false, Therefore, It is false
that Saint Peter said in this Text, that all things necessary to salvation were
plainly set down in Scripture.

14. Your next and last Text is Act. 17. where it is said of the Bere^^s, They
received the Word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures
daily, whether those things were so. Good Sir, whilst this text is now fresh
in our minds, show me here any one evident clear syllable which says, the
Bereans did search the Scriptures before they believed Saint Paul. Nay is it
not first said, They received the Word with all readiness of mind, to wit,
they received the Word as many other thousands did (whose proceedings you can
never prove less laudable then the Bereans) upon those Motives which Saint Paul
proposed unto them, before they searched the Scriptures, and being by these
motives and instructions well illightned to understand the Scriptures, they for
their further comfort and confirmation searched the Scriptures daily to see
whether they testified the same point: and this one point of our Saviors
coming, being clearly in Scripture, perhaps Saint Paul might bid them search in
such and such texts for it. Neither hence is it made evident that the Old
Testament was thrust into every man's hand of the Bereans, but that they deputed
their chief Doctors to make this search, and that for this one point only.
Whence (as I said before) your consequence from hence is very weak; That all
points necessary to salvation are plainly set down in Scripture, because this
one point was so. Yea, when the Bereans did search the Scriptures, no part of
the New Testament was written, how strangely then do you prove from their
search of the Old Scripture to find one point set down clearly, that all points
necessary to be found are set down plainly, now the new Scripture is written.

15. Having now examined all the Texts upon which you did ground that main
point, that all things necessary to decide all controversies are plainly set
down in Scripture, and having found this point no where plainly set down, I
from hence plainly conclude, that the belief of this point is not plainly
necessary; And I conclude this by your own words, That what is not plainly set
down in Scripture is thereby signified not to be necessary; We are not
therefore obliged to take the Scripture for our only Judge of controversies,
for where is this Obligation plainly set down in Scripture? And for ought we
can yet see there may be many prime controversies no where plainly decided, yea
or so much as lightly insinuated in Scripture. And yet the Scripture wants
not that glory of being sufficient to decide all imaginable controversies,
because she teaches us that Christ has erected a Church, built upon a Rock
the pillar and ground of truth, having the Spirit of truth abiding with her to
teach her all truths? Frivolous is that Objection which says, If it be a point
necessary to salvation to believe that the Church is to decide with infallible
authority all our controversies we should find this plainly set down in
Scripture. Because as we have proved all this while, all points necessary to
salvation be not plainly set down in Scripture, even such points as might
import the ending of all controversies: to wit this your grand point, All
things necessary to salvation are plainly set down in Scripture; Yea the Texts
which I bring chap. 4. are a hundred times more clear to prove that the Church
is to decide all our controversies, then that the Scripture by it self alone is
to decide them, as any man may see by the attentive reading of these my Texts
there and your Texts here. See there Numb. 58. 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65.

16. Though it might evidently serve to prove against you, That all things
necessary to Salvation be not plainly set down in Scripture, that this very
prime point is not plainly set down in Scripture, yet I have already in the
beginning of this Chapter brought many other strong proofs to which according
to good order I should here add those many more which I am yet to bring. But
you interpose so many things by the way, that I am forced to defer those other
arguments. Yet that my Reader may know briefly what they are, and how many (and
so read them here if he please,) I thought good to tell him that I prove yet
further many necessary points to Salvation not to be plainly set down in
Scripture. For we find not there set down evidently. First, Whether it be
damnable to work upon the Sunday? see Numb. 39. Secondly, Whether the King be
the head of the Church? see Number. 41. Thirdly, Which books be the undoubted true
Canonical Scriptures? see Numb. 42. And particularly, Whether St. Matthews
Gospel be the undoubted word of God? Numb. 42.46. Fourthly, Whether it be clear
in your opinion that Christ did not institute the Sacrament of Extreme unction?
see Numb. 58. Fifthly, Whether also it be clear that Christ does not give us his
true body in the Sacrament? Numb. 59. Sixthly, I show diverse points necessary
to Salvation, for which you cannot show evident Scripture. As, That God the
Father is not begotten, God the Son is begotten and not made: And that he is
Consubstantial to his Father; That God the Holy Ghost is neither made nor
begotten, but does proceed, and that both from the Father and from the Son: see
Numb. 60. Seventhly, I press for an evident Text for Baptizing Infants, or
bringing them to be baptized when Parents can, which you hold necessary for all
Parents. Numb. 61. I might have added that great Question, Whether it be
necessary to rebaptize those who be baptized by Heretics. For as Saint Austin
says De Unitate Eccle. c. 22. This is neither openly nor evidently read (in
Scripture) Neither by you nor by me. Yet if there were any wise man, of whom
our Savior had given testimony, and that he should be consulted in this
Question, we should make no doubt (Mark this thou impugner of the
infallibility of the Church) We should make no doubt to perform what he should
say; Lest we should seem, not so much to gain say him, as to gainsay Christ, by
whose testimony he was recommended? Now Christ bears witness to his Church
And a little after: Whosoever refuses to follow the practice of the Church
does resist our Savior himself, who by his testimony commands the Church. I
allege these words for their convincing reason, and not for the authority of
Saint Austin, with whom you are so little satisfied.

17. Of my 6. Number.
But now I must satisfy such questions as you are still interposing against,
what I said; I said then, that, being Scriptures cannot be showed for the
decision of all necessary Controversies, we must see further what Judge God
has appointed us to follow in the decision of them, and appointed us with an
Obligation to submit to him; because we gainsaying him, should seem not so much
to gainsay him as to gainsay Christ by whom this Judge was appointed to be
heard by us, just as Saint Austin discoursed now. But this our Discourse
pleases not you. You say, This spoils all, contradicts all. Because you
suppose that such a Judge may contradict Scripture. Very likely! A Judge given
by God, with a Commission to direct all to salvation, and to that end assisted
by his Spirit never departing from his mouth, but abiding with him for ever, to
teach him all truth, that he should contradict the truth it self. Is not this
called contradiction, to say, that God can testify of such an one that he
shall always teach truth, the Spirit of truth never departing from his mouth,
and yet to say that he shall contradict Scriptures. Vain therefore is your fear
that there should be solid reasons grounded in Scripture, against the doctrine
of such a Judge, who himself is the pillar and ground of truth, and whose
tongue is directed by the same Spirit who directed the Pens of those who writ
the Scripture.

18. This Spirit of truth did not direct that pen which in your paper did write
that foul calumny, which you utter in these words. We must then if he, (the
Pope) says Vices are Virtues, say so too, as your Bellarmine determins in his
fourth Book De Romano Pontifice C. 5. Good Sir, read this place again, and see
if you can hold blushing. If I should discourse thus with a child, and say,
know (dear child) that in no possible case it is lawful to call Vice Virtue.
And this child should childishly say, Sir, How if God the Father should say,
such a thing is a Virtue, and Christ should preach that such a thing were a
Vice, were not I bound in this case to say that such a Virtue is a Vice. Dear
child would I say, this cannot happen. But if the child should still more
childishly press me, Sir. But what if this should happen? then I must say so,
must I not? Yes (child) when, that shall grow to be possible, which is wholly
impossible, Then say, Vices are Virtues. Would not this child be the veriest
child that ever escaped the name of a fool, if he should say, that I taught a
case to be possible in which Vices might be called Virtues. Bellarmin says in
plain words It is impossible the Pope should err (especially with a Council)
commanding any Vice. And when he had proved this by other arguments he adds
also this proof, That (if he could command any Vice) he then should necessarily
err against faith (which before he had proved he could not do) seeing that
Faith teaches all Virtue to be good, all Vice to be bad. Then to those, who
will childishly know, what the people must do when the Pope, who (with a
Council at least) cannot err against faith, should err against Faith, he
answers, that when this impossible thing happens, the Church should be
bound to believe Vices to be good, and Virtues evil, unless she would sin
against her conscience. Even so Sir, when Christ or Saint Paul, shall be found
teaching that to be Vice, which God, had before in the old Scripture revealed
to be Virtue, you shall be bound to hold it a Virtue, because God has revealed
it in the old Scripture; and also that it is Vice, because, Christ (truth it
self) taught it so in the New Testament. But you shall not be bound to this,
until that happen which cannot happen. And so said Bellarmine of the other
Case; God forgive these wilful or exceeding careless slanders.

19. Let us at last go on to see who must be our Judge in all Controversies,
All Protestants do say, (as I noted) that the Scripture, and only the
Scripture, is left us by Christ our Judge to end all Controversies. And in this
their Tenet they agree with all Heretics who have risen up against the Church
of Christ. Here you fall upon me as if I spoke against the use of Scripture in
Controversies. But Sir it is one thing to use Scripture for the proof of some
points, and another thing to say Scripture, and only Scripture must be the
Judge for all Controversies. To what end then is all you say against me as
against one misliking the use of Scripture? The force of my argument in effect
is this. All Offenders against the Law will never be so much their own
condemners, as to choose, on their own accord, a Judge by whom they know they
shall clearly be condemned. Therefore when we see all Offenders against Gods
Law in point of Heresy, choose on their own accord, to be judged by Scripture,
it is a manifest sign that they know, they shall never be condemned clearly by
Scripture, whom they took, for their Judge, because (before they broached their
errors) they knew all that this Judge would say against them. And they knew
also by what glosses and interpretations they could escape the being clearly
condemned, by any thing which their Judge could say, Is not this true? And is
it not also true, that you give so ample scope to these kind of glosses and
interpretations, that, if you in particular be persuaded that whole General
Councils, one after another, have interpreted such Texts in a false sense, you
may firmly believe your own particular interpretation. I think it would pose
you, to find any Heretics living before these days, who were so presumtious
as to uphold any opinion which they held condemned before in a lawful general
Council. No Catholic I am sure did ever do it.

20. Now, by reason our Adversaries are still detracting from us, as if we
detracted from Scripture, because we hold that God did not intend by it alone
(otherwise then by sending us to the Church) to decide all Controversies, I did
show that we only did truly believe Scripture. For he only truly believes a
thing with Divine faith, who groundeth his assent upon Divine Revelation. Our
Adversaries do not do this. We only do it. I will show both these things to
be true, though I be forced to be somewhat large, for I can no where more
profitably enlarge my self then in these things which touch the ground of
Faith, about which our main Controversy is. I say then that our Adversaries do
not by Divine Faith believe the Scriptures to be Gods Word. For no body can
believe this, with Divine Faith, who does not ground his assent to this truth
upon Divine Revelation. But our adversaries do not ground their assent to this
truth upon Divine Revelation, for they can show no where the Revelation upon
which they believe such and such Books to be Gods Word. Show me for example
where God has revealed that St. Matthewes Gospel is the Word of God; show me
also the Revelation for which you believe other Books. What say you to this?
You say That the Canonical Books are worthy to be believed (and so is the Book
of Toby and Judith as well as these) for themselves, as we assent unto prime
Principles in the habit of Intelligence by their own Light so we do assent to
Scripture to be the Word of God through the help of the Spirit of God as by its
own Light. And again, afterward, The Canonical Books (why not Toby and
Judith,) bear witnesses of themselves. They carry their own light which we may
see them by, as we see the Sun by its own light. Good Sir, Have you brought all
the infallibility of christian Religion unto this last ground, and here left it
on the ground to be trampled by Socinians? Do you exspect that rational men
should believe you when you say in plain English, that, as the first Principals
are so evident of themselves, that they need no proof, for example, That the
whole is greater then any part of the whole, that if this be equal to that, it
is equal to whatsoever is equal to that; so it is a thing, of it self evident,
that such a book; (for example, Saint Matthewes Gospel) is the true and
infallible Word, and that this is so clear that it needs no other proof, but
the reading of it to make it manifestly infallible; even as the Sun needs no
other evidence then his own light to be manifestly known. All that you believe,
you ground upon the Scripture, as upon the true Word of God; and when you are
further pressed to know upon what ground you believe the books of Scripture to
be the infallible Word of God, you confess in plain terms, that the only
infallible ground of this is, that this is evident of its own self, needing no
further proof for the requiring an infallible assent unto it. Indeed you have
brought your whole Religion to as pitiful a case as your Adversaries could wish
it.

21. First, this ground is accounted a plain foolish ground by your renowned
Chillingworth, whose book the most learned of both Universities have owned and
magnified, notwithstanding his scornful Language of this ground of your whole
Religion. Chillingworth then (P. 69. N. 49.) answering these words of his
Adversary, That the Divinity of a writing cannot be known by it self alone,
but by some extrinsecal authority, Replieth thus. This you need not prove for
no wise man denies it. And Doctor Covel in his defense, Art. 4. P. 31. It is
not the Word of God which does or possible can assure us that we do well to
think it the Word of God. And Master Hooker writes thus. Of things necessary
the very chief is to know what Books we are to esteem Holy, which point is
confessed impossible for the Scripture it self to teach. So he Eccl. Pol. L. 1.
S. 14. P. 86. That which this man whom some call, the most learned Protestant
amongst the English who put pen to paper, that which this man and Dr. Covet
holds as an impossibility, and consequently for a mere Chymera, you hold not
only possible, but evident, and not only evident but as evident as the Suns
being seen by his own light, and not only so evident, but evident with a
sufficient certainty to ground on infallible assent, which is a far higher
degree than the certainty we have of our seeing the Sun by his Light, which
depends upon our fallible sense; but this must be an infallible ground, or else
your faith of this cannot be infallible. Yea, your own self, when you least
thought of it (when in another place I urged the necessity of a Church to judge
all Controversies) acknowledge a greater necessity of such a Church to declare,
by infallible authority, which Books be the true Word of God, which not; then
to declare any other point; where as, if it had been true, that this point
might as well be seen infallibly, by the only reading of such Books, as the
Sun is seen by his light, there should have been less necessity of such an
infallible Declaration; for of all unnecessary things no thing would be more
unnecessary then another light, by which we might see the Sun more clearly.

22. Secondly, there be many millions, who cannot truly and sincerely protest
before God, and take it upon their salvations, that they are wholly unable, by
the reading these books, to come to an infallible assurance that these be Gods
Word, or to any such assurance as comes near infallibility. Now Sir, I pray
tell me, what means has God provided to bring these men to this infallible
assurance, which they are obliged under pain of damnation to have? For he shall
be damned who does not infallibly believe the Scripture; If you tell me it is
impossible that after fervent prayer to God they should still have no
infallible knowledge, assuring them such and such books are Gods Word, I must
needs tell you it is impossible for me, and (as I think) for any wise man to
believe you.

23. Thirdly, if your opinion of knowing true Scripture, by the reading of
them, were true, then let but a Heathen, Turk, or Jew, read the Gospel, he
must, by reading of it, see it as clearly to be Gods Word, as he must see the
Sun by his light. And again, because all things necessary to salvation be
plainly set down in the Word of God (as you teach) the same Heathen should
plainly see all things necessary to salvation warranted him by the undoubted
Word of God. If this were true, it is impossible that thousands should not be
yearly converted by this means. How comes it then to pass that the reading of
Scriptures alone, did never find that concurrence of Gods grace to convert any
single man (that we could hear of) whereas the Preachers of the Church of God
have found this concurrence of Gods grace to the conversion of millions.

24. Fourthly, nothing being to be believed (as you teach) but Scripture, it
follows that the faith (by which we believe Scripture to be Gods Word) must
be the very first ground of all faith upon which all is built, and the greatest
light of Christian Verity; how incredible a thing then is it, that this should
be true, and that the prime Doctors of the Church, in none of their so many
writings concerning our faith, should never mention this? and that no small
glimpse of this light should be observable in the writings of all Antiquity?
In which the most observing eyes cannot espy the least glimpse of it. Reply, I
think if the Doctors of the Primitive Church had told the Heathens that they
had no better assurance for all the points of their (then new) faith then the
Word of God written, and no greater assurance that such and such writings were
his undoubted Word, then the very reading of those books did give them, by a
light as evident as the Sun, the Heathens would have scoffed at them for saying
that which they protested to be so visible, and yet none could see it but those
who first believe it upon this evidence to them wholly invisible.

25. Fifthly, I argue thus. Take a book, which you hold not to be Gods
undoubted word; The book of Toby (for example) or Judith, and read these books
over. And then take another book, which you hold to be Gods undoubted Word, for
example, the book of Numbers, and read that over, or rather to end the sooner
(read over only as many Chapters as be in the book of Toby, that is 16. and
then I challenge you to tell me if you can (as surely you can if it be as
clear (as Sun shine) in what Chapter, Verse, or Word, any divine rays (and
such rays as are sufficiently observable to produce an infallible assent, that
such a book is Gods undoubted word) which rays be not to the very full as
observable in the same chapter and verse or equivolent word, of the book of
Toby: What would you have us do with our eyes to keep us from seeing how
clearly this is impossible for you to do, which notwithstanding should be most
easy, if your opinion were true or the truth.

26. Sixthly, if any one verse yea or any one small word, (especially this
little word Not be left out in any Chapter either through ignorance, malice or
carelesnes of those writers, whose Copies our printed books have followed, whom
will you be able to make believe that you are so sharp-sighted, as to see this
omssion by a light, sufficient for an infallible belief of it only by the
reading these Scriptures.

27. Seventhly, To prove that true general Councels be fallible you use often
to allege this argument, that one true general Council directly gainsaith
another, which if you could prove) you should indeed prove that the Councils
are fallible. But I can prove unto you that one who reads the same book as
well as you, and has the true Spirit of God as well as you (if not in a larger
measure) shall flatly say that Book not to be Gods Word, which you without all
doubt affirm to be Gods infallible Word. This ground then of knowing which is,
which is not Gods Word, grounding contradictory opinions must needs be false,
as I prove thus, Luther a ^an acknowledged by your common consent to have had
Gods Spirit, did read over the Epistle of Saint James, and held it to be an
Epistle of straw. He did read over the Book of the Apocalips or Revelations and
held it not to have been written by an Apostolical Spirit. You read over these
books, and protest so seriously, that by the light of them you infalliblely
know them, to be Gods true Word. Your two opinions are flat contradictory, and
yet they are both grounded upon this ground of reading these books with the
Spirit of God.

Therefore this ground is fallible, and consequently cannot ground an
infallible faith of this point. But you have no other infallible faith of this
point, but what is grounded on this fallible ground, Ergo the faith you have of
this point is not an infallible, and divine faith, but a mere humane
persuasion, such as we have to believe the works, Virgils to have been written
by Virgil. But if any desire to have this case put in two Men, whom most of the
world will more assuredly believe to have had the true Spirit of God, and to
have had also as cleere-sighted eyes, as most men we know in all mankind, I
will put the case in the two prime Doctors of the Latin Church, Saint
Hierome, and Saint Austin. Saint Hierome read over the books of the Machabees,
and could not by the reading of them see them infallibly to be Gods Word. St.
Austin read these books, and held them infallibly to be Gods Word. How came
these two most sharp-sighted men to see quite contrary to one another by the
self same most clear Light, as you must say. But we deny that either of them
did see this Light, and that by it only they did see which were true, which
false Scriptures. But we say they both followed in this point the proposition
of the Church, which Church in Saint Hieromes time had not clearly proposed the
book of Machabees to be Gods word. But the third Council of Garthage (at which
Austin was present) declared these Books to be Gods Word, and so Saint Austin
held th^^ Books infallibly to be Gods Word, grounding this his belief upon the
Declaration of the Council at Carthage, which Council says ( Canon 47.) that
it did set down these books for Scripture, because we have received from our
Fathers that those are to be read in the Church. Saint Hierome had not seen
this Council of Carthage; and because he was used to ground his faith, by which
he believed such books to be, or not be Gods Word upon the Declaration of the
Church, therefore until he did see that Declaration, he could not hold this as
infallible, which Saint Austin afterward held infallible because he had seen
afterward that Declaration of the Church. This is an excellent proof of our
Opinions, and disproof of yours, which cannot give any kind of reason for their
disagreeing in a thing so clear as you say this point is.

28. Hence you will see that this Evidence upon which you ground your
infallible assent to believe Scripture, to be Gods Word (and then all the rest
for Gods Word believed so ungroundedly) is not improperly by you compared to
that Evidence, by which the first Principles, show themselves to be evidently
true, as this Principle does, It is impossible that any thing should be so, and
yet not be so in all the selfsame circumstances. For who ever did differ about
such a Principle as this is. All men see the Evidence of these Principles. But
none but a few of your sect, see the Evidence of what you say. Yea they
evidently see there is no such evidence to be seen. And if you say that we must
have a special spirit (that is, new eyes) to see it, Then you, who have this
spirit, are all Prophets discovering by private Revelations made to your
selves, that which all mankind besides could not and cannot discover. But now,
when I see all, and every one of your belief, laying claim to the Sprit,
assisting them even as far as infallibility to the hardest of all points, I
hope no prudent man will think that Gods Church may not lay claim (with a
thousand times far greater reason) to the Spirit of the Holy Ghost assisting
her even to infallibility in points of as much consequence, the Church having
far more proof of his assistance, then every private Protestant. Perhaps
because our Divines often call the Scripture, An undoubted Principle, the first
Principle; you think they hold this Principle like the first Principle in
Sciences, which are therefore indemonstrable, because they are of themselves as
evident, as any reason you can bring to make them more evident. But the
Scripture is only said to be an unquestionable Principle, because it is
already granted to be Gods Word by all parties. But why all grant it, all must
give the reason, for the Scripture of it self cannot show it self to be
infallibly Gods Word as I have proved.

29. Eighthly and lastly, if you intend for the solution of any of the former
Arguments (though you cannot escape most of them by that shift) to fly to the
private assistance of the spirit, helping you to see that, which this light of
the Scriptures alone cannot help them unto, then you must come infallibly to
know you have this help from the spirit of truth: for it you know this only
fallibly, that will not help you to an infallible assent. Now how can you know
this infallibility but by a Revelation secure from all illusion? Tell me how
you came by this Revelation? Did you try the Spirit whether it were of God or
no? If no, how are you then secured? If you did, by what infallible means did
you try it? If you can by Scripture, we must needs laugh, because we speak of
the first act of belief by which you, or any other first began to believe the
Scripture to be infallibly Gods Word. Before you believed the Scripture to be
Gods infallible Word you could not by it (as by a means infallible to your
judgment) try your spirit, and know it to be infallibly the Spirit of truth.
Again, you could not know it to be the Spirit of ruth, until you had first an
infallible assurance that the Scripture (by which you did try it) was
infallibly Gods true word. And yet again you could not have an infallible
assurance that such books of Scripture were Gods infallible word, but by this
infallible assurance you had, that this Spirit helping you to see this, was the
Spirit of Truth: so that you could not be infallibly assured of your Spirit
until you had infallible assurance that the Scripture was Gods Word; and you
could not have infallible assurance that the Scripture was Gods Word until you
were infallibly assured of your Spirit; Is not this clearly to walk in a Circle
with the wicked?

30. Having now showed that you (who reject the infallibility of the Church)
have left your selves no infallible ground, upon which you can believe that
most Fundamental Article of belief, to wit, that such and such Books be
infallibly Gods true Word; I am pressed to show what infallible belief we have
of this point, and how we avoid all Circle. I Answer that we ground the belief
of this point upon the authority of the Church, as being Infallible in
proposing the Verities she has received from God. This infallibility I do not
suppose, but prove at large, Chapter 4. If you have not patience to stay, turn
now to that place. You falsely say that Whatsoever authority the Church has
toward this persuasion you also make use of as a motive to this faith. She
has an infallible authority, which you count a fancy, and make no other use of
it, but to scoff at it; and yet this infallibility alone must be that which
groundeth, not this persuasion, but this infallible assent. Take the Church as
a most grave assembly of pious learned men, without any infallible assistance
of the Holy Ghost, and their authority is but humane, and so all the help you
can have from them will not ground an infallible assent, which we must have in
our belief, to hold Scripture infallible to be Gods Word. The Scriptures (as I
have showed) have no where revealed which books be Scripture, which not; and
so we have no other infallible ground left us but the authority of this Church,
as assisted infalliblie by the Holy Ghost. Some thing even in this place, I
shall add of this infallability so to satisfy your present longing.

31. But for the present you are endeavoring to include me in a Circle as I did
you in the last objection why (say you) do I believe the Scripture to be Gods
word. Because the Church says it. Very Well. Why do I believe the Church?
Because the Scripture bears witness of it. No Sir. You never heard me give
this reason unless it were when I spoke to one, who independently of the
Church, did profess him self to believe the Scripture so be Gods Word, as you
do, who profess to believe this upon an infallible assurance received (as you
say) from Gods Word by the very reading of it. Against those who upon another
account (different from the infallible authority of the Church, receive Gods
Word!) I prove, that according to that word of God, the Church is to be heard
and believed, as the pillar and ground of truth. And for this point I produce
as clear Texts as you do for most of those points which you hold necessary for
Salvation. But if you be a Scholar you know that all our Divines in their
Treatises of faith, put this very question which you here put Why do you
believe the church? and not one of them answers as you here make us answer;
that so you might the better impugn us with the applause of the deceived
multitude. Sir, when we deal with those who have not admitted the Scriptures as
infallible, we do not prove them to be so by the Authority of the Church,
without first proving to them this Authority of the Church (and that
independently of Scripture) to be infallible. Now if you ask me how I do
this? then indeed you speak to the purpose, though not to your purpose which
was to shut me up in a Circle into which you see, I never set foot.

32. Now, if you will still be earnest to know why I do believe this Church to
be infallible; I answer, that to give full satisfaction against all that a
caviller can say, requires a Treatise longer then this whole Treatise. What I
have said is sufficient to avoid all Circle, when withal I shall have told you
that we proceed as securely and groundedly in the reasons for which we believe,
the Church to have received from God, Commission to teach us those
infalfallible Verities, which she has received from God, with infallible
certainty, as many millions have proceeded in their embracing the true Faith,
whose proceedings no man can condemn. I pray, why did the Jews believe their
Prophets to have had Commission from God to deliver his Word infallibly to them
by word of mouth, and by writing? Surely as they most prudently believed what
the Prophets taught them by word of mouth to be infallibly true, because spoken
by those, whom God gave Commission to say what they said; so they most
prudently believed what the same men did deliver to them by their writings as
Gods Word, because written by those, whom God gave Commission unto to write
what they writ. The credit and belief given as well to their writings, as to
their words unwritten, was at last found prudently accepted upon the Motives,
upon which they accepted their Commissions as given by God for their infallible
instruction. All were moved prudently to accept of this their Commission,
because God did own it for his by several Miracles, or other most apparent
proofs, testifying to the people the infallible Commission which those
Prophets, and Scripture writers had, to teach them by words, or writing, or
both. Their wits then were induced to accept of this their Commission as truly
given by God, moved thereunto by such prudent Motives, that it had been a high
act of imprudence (which in point of salvation is damnable) to have disbelieved
them; for example, they did either see such apparent Miracles, or such
notorious force of Doctrine, working visibly so strange changes of manners, and
in so many before so vicious, to a life very Virtuous, and sometimes virtuous
in a stupidious degree. The writers of the New Testament had these divine
attentions yet more abundantly (though the others cannot be denied sufficient)
whence as from their only words not yet written many thousands received their
faith, because they first prudently were induced by these Motives to
acknowledge them to have had a true Commission from God, to say to us in his
Name all that they said, and then because they acknowledged this Commission to
be from God, they believed infallibly all what they said, because they said it
with Commission from God to say it. So by their words now written by them in
the Scriptures, which they delivered unto them, many thousands received their
Faith, because first prudently they were induced by these Motives to
acknowledge these writers to have had a true Commission from God to write what
they did write in his Name, and then because they acknowledged this Commission
to have been from God they did believe infallibly all that they did write,
because they did write it with Commission from God. Thus you see upon what
assurance, those who first received the Scriptures did receive them for Gods
Word. The Apostles gave their writings to the prime Prelates and Pastors of
the Church, assuring them in Gods Name that these writings were Gods Word.
These Pastors and Prelates preached to the people that they should admit of
these writings as Gods true Word. What they preached was believed with an
infallible assent upon the authority of the prime Pastors of the Church. They
were prudently induced to give an infallible assent to their authority by these
strong Motives by which they had demonstrated themselves to have Commission
from God to teach his Doctrine, both by word and writing. Thus was the first
Age assured of Gods Word by the Oral Tradition of the first Pastors of the
Church, assuring them also that the Spirit of truth would abide with the
Church, teaching her all truth, and that they were to hear the Church under
pain of being accounted Publicans and Heathens and that she should be unto them
as the pillar and ground of truth: for as they did write, so doubtless they did
teach these things. These first Christians then received this doctrine with an
assent as infallible as they received the Scriptures. And so all then believed
and all taught their Successors to believe the Church to have such infallible
assistance of the Holy Ghost, that in all doubts arising about faith they were
to submit unto her, as to one having Commission from God to declare all such
matters. The second Age by so universal, so full, so manifest a tradition, was
most prudently induced to acknowledge the church to have such a Commission from
God, and so they believe the Church for this divine authority given her. Now
there is nothing which can make any thing more prudently credible then
universal tradition; A miracle to confirm that there is such a City as London,
though in it self it were a surer motive, would not work so undoubted a belief
in the minds of those who never did see London, as universal tradition works.
And yet this tradition is but one of the motives which induces us to
acknowledge the Church to have received Commission to declare with infallible
authority the Verities received from the Apostles, and consequently her
declarations to be admitted with infallible assent for her authority. But I
must needs note that this motive of tradition alone, did serve to make all for
the first 2000 years and more, give an infallible assent to their Church see
Chapter 4. Number 11. yet here I entreat you to mark how they resolved their faith
then. Why did they believe then that the Soul was immortal. Because God said so
by his Church. having Commission to teach us all we are to believe. Why
believed they that this Church had Commission to teach them as Authorized with
due infallibility? Because the same Church told them so. Why did they believe
this? Because they would do so, And they would do so because, it had been mere
folly not to accept of this Churches Commission to teach them infallibly all
truths, which Commission they knew by tradition to have been ever accepted as
divine by all good people; so we etc. I will add one Motive more.

33. Miracles are called a Testimony greater then John the Baptist. Christ
himself said, If you will not believe me, believe my Works? By this great
testimony of Miracles God has often owned the doctrine of the Roman Church,
even as it is in this our days. For he knows but little of the world, who
does not know the vast extent of those Provinces and Kingdoms which in this
last Age the Preachers of the Roman Faith have added to their Faith by this
Testimony of God, by Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles, Hebrews 2.4. And
here most Visibly, Our Lord ever working withal, and confirming their words by
Signs and Miracles. It appears also by the History of Bid and the plain
confession of your learned Magdeburgians, that the faith brought into our
England by St. Austin, was the same faith which you abolished by your
Reformation, as you call it. And yet again it appears by Bid and St. Gregory
his Epistles, that wonderful were the miracles which St. Austin wrought in
Confirmation of the faith preached, in so much that St. Gregory thought it
necessary to admonish him of containing himself in humility, lest the working
of so many miracles should puff him up. These Preachers preached the Doctrine
of our Church. God confirmed their Doctrine by miracles. Therefore the doctrine
of our Church was confirmed by miracles. And it may for this motive be embraced
with as infallible an assent as the doctrine of the Prophets and Apost. Yea,
there have bin many miracles wrought to testify many and very many of those
points in particular in which we differ from you. As you may see showed by
Brierly only by looking in his Index. 5. miracles, but see him particularly, T.
2. C. 3 Tr. S. 7. Subdivis, And Tr. 1. S. 5. There you shall see how solidly
grounded these Miracles are, against which you can object nothing which is not
objected with equal probability by Heathens against the Miracles of the
Prophets, and by Jews against those of the Apostles. Tell me then if these two
motives (though there be yet many others) be not as powerful inducements to
move us to acknowledge that God has given his Church infallible authority to
teach us faithfully which she received from him, as were those motives for
which the Jews did prudently believe that the Scripture given them by David,
by Solomon, by Nahum, by Amos and others, were written with infallible
authority by them, having Commission from God to write what they did write. We
then believe the Church to have such a Commission with as good security as they
acknowledged this Commission in those Scripture writers. Whereas the ground
upon which you believe Scripture is thought to be foolish and Chimerical by
some of your best Writers.

34. Yet to show further how unsecurely the greater part of your Religion did
ground their faith, I did add this argument that the true Original Scriptures
were written in languages not known to one among ten thousand, if we speak of
a perfect knowledge. Others must trust the Translations of private men, and
believe them rather then the Translations used by the Church in general
Councils Is it not clear that the Authority of such Translations is far
greater, and far more to be judged to agree with the true Original, then any of
your private Men's Translations? You your self confess that Translations are
only so far Gods word as they agree with the originals, whence I infer that no
body in your opinion can believe any point upon the authority of any
Translations, until he be assured that such a point agrees with the true
Hebrew or true Greek Original; How disappointed then be most of your Religion,
especially your women, who so fiercely fly upon us for believing the Church,
whilst they themselves must either believe nothing (for they cannot believe
any thing upon the credit of the English Translation, until they know how
exactly it agrees with the true Greek, or true Hebrew Original, which is wholly
impossible for them) or else they must merely take upon trust the most fallible
Translations for the infallible Original, and trust rather in this most
important point the learning, and fair dealing of those private Ministers
(deeply interessed in this cause) then trust the gratest authority upon earth,
which is a general Council having so strong promise of the assistance of the
Holy Ghost. I entreat you here to see Chapter 4. Numb. 9.

35. Again, I pray tell me how you learned Ministers who have so full knowledge
of these languages as to Translate, and upon your own knowledge to judge of
true Translations made by others, of you it is that I ask how you come to know
(and know so sufficiently as to ground an infallible assent in your selves and
others) when your Translations agree with the true Original? For you have now
confessed that Translations are only so far Gods word as they agree with the
Originals. And you must mean the true Originals or else you say nothing, for
agreeing with false or doubtful Originals will not make them Gods undoubted
Word. Tell me, (I say it again, and again) how do you know which be the true,
and undoubtedly true Originals? and upon what secure ground do you know it? The
true Originals be either Hebrew or Greek; As for the Hebrew, all must know that
the ancient Hebrew Copies were all written without points, that is, in full
substance without Vowels. Now they be the Vowels which make or mar the word
and sense; for a Vowell adds the soul and the sound to the consonants, and
makes them signify most different things. For example, for a Ball write only b
ll to which consonants if you add an (a) it is Ball, add an (e) it is Bell,
add an (u) and it is a Bull, So that, great confusion must needs follow if the
true points, that is the true Vowells were not put to the same Consonants. Well
now again, all must know that a good while after the time of Christ and his
Apostles, the Jewish Rabbis, under pretense of avoiding the mistakes which
might happen in the less skillful in the Hebrew tongue (which then was almost
worn out) did take the old Hebrew Testament, and put the points, that is the
Vowels unto it, so that the old Testament we now use came from these Jewish
hands. Tell me then how know you infallibly whither these perfidious Jews had
skill, and honesty enough to deliver to us their Copies with the true points
and Vowells; and yet all depends on this. The consonants alone will not assure
us in these unskilful, and so remote ages. For the least change in appoint
makes most contrary things to be all one, for no Man can tell (especially
infallibly) whether these words an Angel had a b ll in his hand should be read
thus, an Angel had a Ball, in his hand or a Bell, or a Bill, or a Bull. Put a
false Vowel and it is all one. To taste cheese and to tossed cheese, all one; to
be fatt and to be fit, to increase in Grace and to increase in Greece, all one;
to eat a bitter fig and to eat a better fig. A pot full of butter, and a Pit full
of Batter, will be the same. Hence you see the small infallibility you have of
the possessing the true undoubted Original Hebrew old Testament. As for the
new testament. Saint Mathewes Gospel was Originally written in Hebrew, and that
Original is quite lost. Now the other Greek Originalls which we have, have a
stupendous Variety, He who found the word Infallible so unfortunate to him
(which you object to me) tells of his own knowledge a story most unfortunate
to you and yours (which I have also h eapd by an other way,) His words are
these. In my hearing Bishop Usher, professed, that whereas he had of many
years before a desire to publish the Testament in Greek with Various Lections
and Annotations, and for that purpose had used great diligence and spent much
money to furnish himself with Manuscripts, yet in conclusion he was forced to
desist utterly least, if he should ingenuously have noted all the several
differences of readings which himself had collected, the incredible multitude
of them almost in every verse, should rather have made Men Atheistical then
satisfy them in the true reading of any particular passage. An evident sign
that the Governors of the Church did not only rely upon what was in writing.
So Cressy Exomol. C. 8. N. 3. Now if another in Spain, another at
Constantinople or other in some remote part from these had bestowed the like or
greater expenses, and industries in procuring Varieties of Manuscripts, it is
most probable they might have in these places found in every one of them, as
great variety of lections, which multitude of Lections Usher alone found to be
incredible almost in every verse. The Manuscripts which were before all printing
being so exceeding different, what assurance have those who did first print
such, or such a Manuscript, rather then a hundred Manuscripts (different from
that which they printed) that the Manuscript, which was the true undoubted Copy
of the true undoubted Original was printed by them, and published to the
world, which now contents it self with printed Copies only, and not one among
twenty thousand has recourse to any old written Manuscripts; or if they have
recourse to any such Manuscript, or Manuscripts, yet they are so wonderful
far from having any full assurance, that such Manuscripts be the true
undoubted Copies, of the true undoubted Original; that they approach not one
inch nearer the Assurance of the Truth, by having Recourse to such Manuscripts.
And here it is that I may far fitter use these your own words (used in
another place against me;) Alas Sir, At what a loss are you and yours in this
grand and capital and comprehensive controversy, which affords me liberty to
think, that which is intricated with so many unspeakable difficulties and most
manifest uncertainties, is not that manifest ground of certainty, and
infallible certainty, by which fools cannot err; for what else can a Collier
have infallibly to guide him through all these Labyrinths, whose windings are
made more unextricable by lying so far from the least glimpse of any Light: For
as you say Translations are only so far Gods Word as they agree with the
Originals, that is with such Originals as are the true and undoubted Copies of
the true and undoubted Original. But (say I) it is impossible for any man
living (who accounts the judgment of the Church to be fallible) to know
infallibly, which Translation agree with the true undoubted Originals, and
which not, because it is impossible for him to know which be the true undoubted
Originals, and which not. Therefore it is impossible for any man living (who
accounts the judgment of the Church to be fallible) to know which
Translations be the word of God and which not. You then have neither infallible
assurance of translation, nor of Original, and consequently you have no
assurance of any part of Scripture to be God assured Word. And yet all the
assurance of your faith is built upon this, of which you have no assurance at
all. For you have no assurance of either Translation or Original or
Interpretation of any one book or how many or which books make up the whole
Canon.

36. As for our assurance of the Word of God it depends not upon these
inextricable uncertainties. If those who received the first true Original Copy
did upon good ground receive it, relying upon the authority of those who did
give it unto them, as an authority infallible; we upon no less good ground
receive (as authentical and secure from error, both in faith and manners) our
Vulgar Translation, which we receive upon the infallible authority of the
Church, An infalliblity as well grounded as theirs who received first the true
Original Scriptures, as I proved Numbers 32.33. But of this infallibility I am
to treat at large Chapter 4. If Isidor Clarins in any one title importing faith
or manners, differs from what we receive, upon this infallible authority, we
have nothing to do with him; what you object against us for the different
editions of Sixtus and Clement has bin answered by many, and very fully by
that famous book called Charity Maintained, written against Potter, see it
Part. 2. Cap. 6. Numb. 3. Where, by authentical Testimonies of persons beyond
all exceptions, is showed that the decree of Sixtus about his edition, was
never promulgated, and that he himself, had declared diverse things to have
crept in which needed a second review, and that the whole work should be
re-examined though he could never do it, being prevented by death. The very
self same is told you distinctly in the Preface to our Vulgar Edition: but I
cited the former book, because of his several proofs, and because
Chillingworth (who with so much applause of many) answered this book, does not
return one word to disprove his Adversaries most satisfactory answer. All your
other arguments end in the biting of a flea.

37. Next you object two places of S. Austin. But Sir you have given me leave
to have no more to do with the Fathers Authority. Councils you also labor to
discredit in the highest degree, for you make them like false witnesses, in
matters concerning the salvation of infinite people, to betray their own
falsity, in affirming things directly contradictory. You must not say, but
prove by S. Austin, and other good Authors, that two lawful Councils, lawfully
approved, have taught contrary opinions in matter of Faith, otherwise you only
deceive the people, which knows not which Councils were lawful, which not.
Would you make us believe S. Austin thought the Council of Ariminum a lawful
Council? Do you your self hold it so? Did not he know it was not so? as well as
you. After all then you cannot show which is your prime Principle. That, take
away the infallibility of the Church, you can find infallible means by
Scripture only to decide all Controversies; for by Scripture only it is a plain
impossibility to decide which Scriptures be the true word of God, which not, As
also which be corrupted which be not, and which be the true original Copies of
the true Books, which be not, This is a true convincing argument.

38. Another argument is, that there be many Controversies (and may be yet many
more) the decision of which is necessary to Salvation, and yet they cannot be
decided by Scripture only, and consequently some other infallible Judge (to wit
the Church) is necessary for the infallible decision of these points. Your
second answer still is, that the decisions of all such Controversies are
plainly set down in Scripture, which I have at large showed in the beginning of
this Chapter, to be false, and now I go to show it further by specifying diverse
of these Controversies in particular.

Of my 8th. Number.
39. The first of these Controversies is about the necessity of not working upon
the Sunday. You dare not say that he shall be saved who does weekly work, and
resolves to work upon the Sunday, without any necessity. You must then affirm,
that to abstain from working upon that day, is a point necessary to Salvation.
Now I ask where this necessary point is plainly set down in Scripture? And I
press you to give me, as clear Texts to prove this, as I cited at large to
prove that we must not now work on Saturdayes. You are to show Texts in which
this point is plainly set down, for these Texts I called. In place of these
Texts you bring your own discourses. Now according to your own opinion that
Councils, though general, in their discourses out of Scripture, may be forsaken
by him who judges such discourses nothing so well grounded in the Text, as the
discourses for the contrary opinion are grounded in other Texts. Hence you must
needs give the Sabbatharians, leave to reject these your discourses with far
greater reason then you reject the discourses of Councils. Whence then shall we
have an infallible decision of this Controversy. Your own Doctor Tailor in his
defense of Episcopacy. Page 100. writes thus, For that (keeping of the Sunday)
in the New Testament we have no precept and nothing but the example of the
primitive Disciples. At Geneva they were once upon changing Sundays Feast into
Thursday, to have shown their Christian Liberty. If this were plainly set down
in Scripture would not these your illuminated Brethren see it as well as you.
And you so often called upon for a plain Text, instead of bringing infallible
Texts, bring nothing but a discourse of your own, very fallible, and proving
nothing but a possibility of such a change, To the far stronger Text, for still
keeping the Sabbath, you say not a word. My argument then as yet has nothing
like a satisfactory answer returned unto it.

40. Of my 9th. Number.
The second Controversy which I said could not clearly be decided by Scripture
is about our lawful eating or not eating of that which is strangled, clearly
forbidden Act. 15. But because there may be some reasons alleged why this
precept now obliges no longer (though I might insist that we seek for Texts
and not for reasons) I press this argument no further, having so great plenty
of far more pressing arguments.

41. Of my 10th. Number.
A third Controversy not clearly decided for you by Scripture, I briefly
touched concerning the holding the King, Head of the Church, whom you according
to plain Scripture. determine to be still the Head of the Church, though others
hold it very far from being plain Scripture. This Controversy must needs
highly import, that all the Members may have an assured knowledge of the Head,
by whom they are to be governed. This point was before evident Scripture, now
it is no longer evident Scripture. Your answer is first. What is infallibly
decided by Scripture, will ever be so, although we do not always find it. Sir,
if you mean what is infallibly decided by evident Scripture, is not always to
be found, it is manifestly false. This being against the very Nature of that
which is evident when it is supposed to stand laid wide open before our eyes in
the same words which made it before evident Scripture. You add, Secondly, That
you do not say every point is Infallibly decided by Scripture, because it is
not at all decided? Sir, Is not this a necessary point, and be not these your
own words? All things necessary to salvation are plainly set down in Scripture,
and again, What is not plainly set down in Scripture is hereby understood not
to be necessary. Grant these Principles false and the cause is mine. If they be
true, this point being necessary, must also be plainly decided by clear
Scripture. And when you ask me whether it be determined in Scripture that the
Pope is head of the Church? You forget that we do not teach (as you do) that
all points necessary are plainly set down in Scripture, but we teach the quite
contrary. You that hold that on the one side the King is head of the Church,
and on the other side that all points necessary to Salvation be plainly set
down in Scripture, you (I say) must show me plain Scripture for what you say in
a point so necessary, as it is for so many millions to know so capital a point
as their head is. If for such a point as this (to which so many were obliged to
swear) you have no plain Text of Scripture, I pray tell us no more hereafter,
that all necessary points are plainly set down in Scripture. I add that either
you must be far from having any evident Text for this point in Scripture, or
your most illuminated Calvin could not see that which was evident, for he
writing on the 7th of Amos, says of our English Church. They were blasphemous
when they called him (Henry the Eighth) chief Head of the Church under Christ.

Of my 11th. and 12th. Numb.
42. A fourth Controversy not decidable by any clear Text of Scripture is,
which be the true Books of Scripture, which not, about which we still differ
mainly. And it is evident no Text can decide this Controversy: Of this in
general I have spoken fully. That for which I repeated it over again is to
press particularly the impossibility that there is to prove by Scripture
(against the Manicheans) that St. Matthew his Gospel is the true uncorrupted
Word of God. That it is impossible to know it to be Saint Mathewes Gospel you
your self confess, holding it in plain terms a point of no necessity to
believe this; yet sure I am that your learned Brethren in their conference at
Ratisbone, dared not to deny that it was an Article of faith to believe Saint
Matthewes Gospel to have be^n written by Saint Matthew. And I believe your own
Brethren will be scandalized at this your Opinion. But before you can go
forward, to show it impossible to prove by Scripture that Saint Matthewes
Gospel is the same uncorrupted Word of God, I am necessitated to Answer what ye
Object by the way.

43. You say then first, That if the Church were infallible Judge of all
Canonical Books, yet would it not follow from hence, that it should be
infallible Judge in all points of Faith, unless causally, for we might suppose
more assurance to the Church in this particular then in other cases. Is it so
good Sir? Can you suppose a point, upon which all depends, to be held by all as
infallibly true, without showing such a point to be clearly contained in
Scripture? Why this spoils all. Your only shift, to avoid the necessity of an
infallible Church, is still to say, that all necessary points are plainly set
down in Scripture, and that if any point be not plainly set down in Scripture,
it hereby appears not to be necessary. And will you now suppose this most
necessary point of all points, which is not clearly set down in Scripture, to
be admitted with infallible assent upon the only authority of the Church? That
we are universally to hear the Church has many pregnant places in Scripture,
as I shall show at large, C 4. But that we are to learn this one point, and
none but this only, from the infallible authority of the Church, has no
color nor shadow of Scripture, or any thing like Scripture. You must therefore
ground this your answer not upon Scripture, but upon Reason. Now the Reason
upon which you reject the Church from being an infallible Judge of
Controversies, is because there is no necessity of such a Judge, since the
whole Canon of the Scripture was finished. And for this only Reason (without
any Text) you put the Churches infallibility to expire and give up the Ghost at
the finishing the Canon of the Scripture. Now if the reason for which you
discard the Churches infallibility, in other points, be this, that other points
are cleared sufficiently by Scripture: Then there can be no other prudent
reason for which you in this one point may more assuredly suppose the Church to
be infallible, but that this one point cannot be sufficiently cleared by
Scripture; and that therefore only there is a greater necessity to have
recourse to the infallible authority of a Church, undoubtedly infallible in
this prime point, which point causally brings forth all others. This discourse
being evidently deduced out of your own prime principles, I pray mark two
things which I am going to say. The first is, that this your answer
overthrows utterly that main ground of yours, That all points necessary are
plainly set down in Scripture, For no point is more necessary then this without
which there is no coming to the belief of any thing in Scripture, and yet this
point is neither plainly nor obscurely set down in Scripture, unles it be where
we are Universally sent to the Church for learning other points as well as this.

44. The Second thing I would have marked is, that you utterly overthrow that
principle which is the groundwork of your faith. For if there be a greater
necessity to acknowledge the infallibility of a Church, for as much as concerns
this one point in particular, because this one point in particular is less
clear in Scripture then any other necessary point; that grand principle of
yours evidently appears false (though you speak it for your second answer so
close after the other) That the Canonical Books bear witness of themselves,
they carry their own light, which we may see them by this as we see the Sun
by his own Light. How is it possible that there should be a greater necessity
on the one side to have recourse to the Churches Authority as infallible in
this particular point, because it can less be cleared by Scripture then other
points, and yet on the other side, this point of all other points, has this
particular privilege to be so manifest, That it bears witness of its own
self, that it carries its own Light with it, and such a conspicuous Light,
that we may see this Verity by it, as we see the Sun by its own Light. But how
vain this Ground is, upon which all must be supported, I have showed largely
from the 26. Number unto the 30th. As for your Dilemma, I have broken the Horns
of it, Numb. 31.32, 33. And what you further say about Saint Hierom is
answered, Numb. 27. And as for Bellarmine, if you had cited him in the very
self same Treatise in that place where he speaks of the Machabees in
particular, (to wit, Lib. 1. Cap. 1. fine) He would have answered your Argument
just as I answer it in that place. And note I pray by the way what you find, to
wit, That the Fathers of the Council of Carthage acknowledged the Machabees for
true Scripture. Now if these Fathers were of your Religion, then you must make
them agree with you in your prime Principles upon which you receive all
Scriptures as Gods infallible Word, because by their own light every Book is
seen to be Canonical, as we see the Sun by its own light; Therefore according
to you, these Fathers, did, by this light se these books of the Macha. to be
canonical, by a light sufficient to an infallibility. This must therefore be
infallibly true, and yet your Church denies it; nay you must say you cannot se
this light you say is so clear.

45. And I pray now ask me (as you do) How I see Light? I Answer, with such
eyes as other men have, Who can see it as well as I. It has little
judiciousnesse in it, (pardon your own words) to say that a thing is as
visible as Light, and as apparent as the first principles, and yet even at the
very self same time to say the most irradiated understandings of Saint Austin,
of the whole Council of Carthage, of Saint Hierom, of Luther, of their own
selves; see by this Light, and by this prime Principle quite opposite Verities.
But of this see yet more in my 27. Number. As for the infallibility of the
Church, I do not prove it first by Scripture, but as I have told you Numb.
30.31, 32, 33. About believing Saint Matthewes Gospel to have been written by
him; I have said enough, Numb. 42.

46. At last I have forced a passage to my intended argument about Saint
Matthews Gospel, which I boldly say cannot possibly, by your principles, ever
come to be believed, with an infallible assent to be Gods true uncorrupted
Word. The Marcionists, the Cerdonists, the Manicheans, do deny (and others may
come to deny) the Gospel of Saint Matthew to be Gods true Word. This
Controversy (as all others) according to you must be ended by Scripture only.
But that is impossible, for the Scripture, does not so much as touch in one
word this Controversy. Therefore it is false that the Scripture does plainly
set down all necessary points, without you will say it is not necessary to
believe Saint Matthewes Gospel. Here you cannot fly to a Light as clear as the
Sun showing this Verity, for your own doctrine is that Translations are only
so far Gods Word as they agree with the Originals, as we have seen, Numb.
34.35. But we have only Translations of Saint Matthews Gospel, and no Original
copy at all; Therefore it is impossible for us (in your Principles) to know how
far Saint Mattthews Gospel is Gods Word, because it is impossible to know how
far it agrees with the Originals. Perhaps whole Chapters are left out, perhaps
diverse things here and there put in, or altered, for it is uncertain who the
Translator was, and of what skill, or honesty. The Church you confess (in your
first answer) does not certify us; Ergo, this Answer is no Answer. For yet,
you do not show, how we are certified of this truth, That this is the true
uncorrupted Gospel of Saint Matthew. Secondly, you would tax us for saying that
no one of the Ancients conceived this Gospel to be written in Greek. You might
easily understand our meaning to be that no one of them can be produced as a
witness, so much as weakly moving us to believe this. For their Testimony (who
did not write at all, or whose writings have perished) is no kind of Testimony,
no more then if there never had been such men. You add that it is not
certainly true that there is not a copy of the Hebrew Gospel extant in all the
world. Good Sir, in what year of our Lord, was it that I did say, that this was
certainly true^ Did not I say so this very last year, which was above twelve
hundred years since Saint Jeroms time. If there were one Hebrew copy then, what
is that to our purpose now? Can we go and confer our Translations of Saint
Matthew, and see how far they agree with that Original copy which St. Jerome in
his days did see in one only place of the world? Show me so much as one Hebrew
copy now extant in the whole world of sufficient credit to ground an infallible
assent. If after more then a thousand years loss of all Original copies,
Munster, or any other private man, obtrude us an Hebrew Original, which has
lain all this while, God knows where; by what Evidence will that appear Gods
infallible and uncorrupted Word: All your shifts will not here help you.

48. You would shift first by asking how the Latin Interpretation came to be
Authentic. I Answer, Because it was accepted for authentic, and thus
declared to be so by the Church, which Church when she admitted it, was fully
satisfied that it agreed with the Original. And this she knew by Tradition from
the Church of former Ages. This Tradition does not certify you because you
hold it fallible. And therefore most certainly I certify you that you will
never believe Saint Matthewes Gospel with an infallible assent until you
believe the Church infallible in her traditions. Your second shift is, this
Gospel might possibly at the first be written in Greek. Good Sir, tell me
whether only possibilities grounded upon conjectures be sufficient to ground
an infallible assent. And here give me leave by the way to show you once more
the evident unevidence which is in that light by which you see Saint Lukes
Gospel (for example) to be Gods true word, and so of all other Scriptures. The
Greek Copy of Saint Luke, you see as evidently as the Sun to be Gods true Word
by reading of it, and yet this great Evidence is so little different from that
Evident inevidence, (which you call a Possibility) that Saint Matthews Greek
Copy is Gods true and uncorrupted Word, that you cannot see (with your
irradiated understanding) whether this inevidence be not to the full as good as
that Evidence, and that it may not as well ground an infallible assent as that.
Again, how come you to hold it a mere Possibility that Saint Matthews Gospel
was written in Greek; for if the Greek Text of Saint Matthew be as truly
Original as that of Saint Luke, your irradiated understanding must needs by its
Light, see it to be Gods Word, as well as you see the Sun by its Light; why
then do you venture no further then to esteem it a possibility. Is it a mere
possibility that St. Lukes Gospel is Gods uncorrupted word? Now let us see how
slender your Conjecture is (though I confess it to be better in my judgment,
then the light manifesting to you infallibly the truth of Saint Lukes Gospel:)
Let us see, I say how slender your Conjecture is to prove that possibly Saint
Matthews Gospel might be written first in Greek, because the Greek Copy
interprets the Hebrew word, Emmanuel; which if it were written in Hebrew,
needed not any interpretation. A pitiful weak Conjecture. And this Dart is no
sooner raised above your head with weak hand, but it falls with a strong hand,
upon your head again. The Greek Copy translateth Hebrew words, therefore (say
you) it is no Translation, but it is an Original. Sir, it is manifest that
Translations of Scripture usually tell us the Hebrew words first, and then the
Translation of it. So Genesis 31.48. Galaad, id est, tumulus testis. Galaad,
that is, the witness heap. And Genesis 35.18. Benoni, id est, filius doloris mei.
Benjamin, id filius dextrae. And Exodus 12. Phase, id est, transitus. And Exodus
26. Manhu, quod significat quid est hoe. By these and diverse such places you
see how familiarly Translatours tell you the Hebrew word, and then the
Interpretation of it. No profane mean authority would upon so slight a
conjecture as this is, be rejected and contradicted. Much less if he made
himself an eyewitness of what he said. Yet you reject Saint Jerome, though he
says he did see a copy of the Hebrew Original with his own eyes, and you
reject him though all the Fathers writings extant stand on his side, and this
upon a most slender conjecture of your own, which would have made another man
more wisely conjecture the quite contrary, and say, this copy Translateth,
Ergo, it is a Translation. Whence it evidently appears how little you care
either for the single, or for the unanimous consent of Eminent Fathers. But
this being a point only to be tried by the Testimony of Antiquity, your
Cause is lost without some good Authors can be found for you. Your third shift
is in place of giving a Solution to make an Objection, asking, Why our Latin
Translation was made Authentic, if the Church had made the Greek Authentic?

I Answer, that I know of no body who told you, That the Greek Translation was
made Authentic by the Church. Neither Greek nor Latin can be Authentic
but by the Church, because the Hebrew Original being lost, we cannot know how
far either Greek or Latin Translation agrees with the Original, but by the
infallible Tradition of the Church, you, who reject this, cannot know possibly
how far translations be Gods uncorrupted word, for (as you say) they are only
so far Gods uncorrupted Word as they agree with the Original; But you know not
how far they agree with the Original. Ergo you know not how far they be Gods
word. Your fourth shift is to pretend to this knowledge by the Harmony with the
other Gospels. Sir If any man intended to make a supposititious Gospel; do you
not think he would take care, not to contradict the others. But what harmony
can there be found in these many things related by Saint Matthew, and not
related at all by any others? Yea, one of the greatest difficulties against
Saint Matthews Gospel is to show that it exactly agrees with other Scriptures
from the beginning to the ending. And to be the briefer I will only instance
in some places of the beginning and ending omitting all the rest. In the very
first Chapter Saint Matthew tells us that Ioram did beget Ozias; And yet out of
the fourth Book of Kings (which your Bible is pleased to call the Second Book)
it is manifest that Ioram begat Ochozias C. 8. And that Ochozias did beget
Ioas, C. 11. And that Ioas begat Amasias, C. 12. and this Amasias begat Azarias
C. 14. who is called here in Saint Matthew, Ozias. I ask then how comes Saint
Matthew to say Ioas begat Ozias, who was born three Generations after him. And
being that these three Generations happened between the time of David, and the
Captivity of Babylon, they being added to the other 14 Generations do make
them to be seaventeen. How then is it true which Saint Matthew says verse 17.
that all Generations from David until the carrying away into Babylon are
fourteen. For all these Generations were Seventeen. Again he says, there were
fourteen Generations from Abraham to David, and (besides the fourteen now
mentioned) that there were fourteen more Generations from the carrying away
into Babylon until Christ. Count now thrice fourteen Generations, and they in
all will make forty two. But I pray now take your fingers, and count all the
Generations specified in Saint Matthew, and you shall find them to be only
forty one. A wonderful exceeding great difficulty. And this for the beginning.
Now toward the end of Saint Matthew see the Twenty seven Chapter v. 9. Then
was fulfilled that which was said by the Prophet Jeremy; Read all the Prophet
Jeremy and he has no such matter in him. What Harmony appears here? Indeed
in the Prophet Zachary (C. 11.) there is in substance what Saint Matthew said
in his former Chapter about the denial of Christ by Saint Peter, how much do
Interpreters sweat to reconcile what Saint Matthew says with that which other
Evangilists say, which seem to differ in very many circumstances. No less, yea
far greater difficulty is it, to make all that Saint Matthew says in his last
Chapter concerning some Circumstances of the Resurrection of Christ, as the
attentive Reader may easily see. Now I pray tell me if it be not a plain
Paradox to say that the agreeing of Saint Matthew with other Scriptures is so
apparent, that even from hence a man may know his Gospel to be infallibly Gods
word, whereas the apparent disagreeing brings most vast difficulties, as I
have showed. Your fifth and last shift is, That all the people do fix their
faith upon that which is interpreted and not upon the Interpretation. If you do
so, then for any thing you know, you may fix your faith upon a Lie: for how
know you whether the thing delivered you by the Interpreter be Gods Word, or
the Interpreters own word? Especially when we know not who this Interpreter
was, how skilful, how faithful, how true a Copy he used? How know you that this
translator does not convey his own phansies in place of Gods Word? Do you know
it because your fancy also tells you that this is Gods Word, then thus we may
have a double fantastical assurance, and nothing else. This you are forced to
hold sufficient, yet how does this agree with your own words, Translations are
only so far Gods Words as they agree with the Originals, you cannot resolve
your faith into the Original never proposed unto you, into the Translation you
say you do not resolve it, yet you resolve it into the written word. What
written word is that, which is neither Translation nor Original? This I ask and
this you are bound to tell me, being your very main Position is that all you
believe is resolved in to the written words. If the Illumination of the Spirit
can tell you Gods word without any certain assured conveighing means, you must
needs be a prophet, you must needs have far more then you will allow to the
Church. You must needs know which of those so many Greek Copies, is the only
true one. And by the like illumination of the Spirit any clown neither
understanding Latin, Greek or Hebrew, will be able infallibly to know which
English Translation is Gods true Word. And if you say he cannot because he
cannot confer it with the Original, he will truly tell you that he can confer
it with the Original, as much as you can confer any Translation of S. Matthew
with the Original, which not being Extant in the whole World can no more be
looked upon by you who know Hebrew, then by him. To other Translations you give
but humane credit, such as he gives to the English Translation.

Now after you have given to every one of your own any Illumination of Spirit
sufficient to know infallibly Gods Word without having any better conveyance,
then a humane Translation, you (very judiciously) deny any such Illumination to
the Church, because she erred in Translating Ipsa for ipsum. It is clear some
Hebrew copies may most exactly be Translated Ipsum, how know you the Church
followed the false Hebrew Copy? How many most grave and most ancient Fathers
have also read Ipsa. And it was a loud lie of Kemnitius to say the contrary.
See the D^way Annotations Genesis 3. V. 15. And Bellarm. l. 2. de verbo Dei, Cap.
12. And if you ask why the Greek was not made infallible by the Church as well
as the Latin? I answer, we have her declaration that the Latin Vulgar is
Authentic, and not deficient in any point concerning faith or manners; when
the Church shall declare as much of the Greek, that may then be believed
Authentic; if both be Authentic upon the Churches Declaration, yet you, who
believe her Declarations to be fallible, will still have a only fallible
ground for that assent which you give to Saint Matthews Gospel. So that all
your shifts fail you in this important point of Faith toward a whole Gospel.
All that you prove concerning other points debated between us out of Holy
Fathers, since they find so little credit with you) after their Authority is
demonstrated to stand for such or such a point) are not to be insisted upon
until you esteem them more.

49. I come then to what you say to my 13. Number, Of my 13th. Number.
where I Object Luthers not seeing the Apocalypse and the Epistle of Saint James
to be Canonical by their own light. Your first answer is, That a Negative
Argument from one is not cogent, for it follows not he did not see, therefore
he could not see it? Sir, in our case a Negative Argument is a strong proof,
and as strong an one as this. I do not see (endeavoring to see, and having
good eyes wide open) a light as visible by its light, as the Sun by his light:
Ergo, there is no such light standing before me. You will grant Luthers Eyes as
good as your own, his Understanding as Irradiated as your own; the Apocalypse
stood before his eyes as clearly as yours, what should hinder him from seeing
it, and make you see it? The light is the same, the Proposition of it the same,
your eyes or understanding no better, nor more assisted. Secondly, you answer
that hence we see you do not follow him in all things blindly. Sir, the
Question is here, who is blind, and truly blind. For you say that a light, no
less visible by it self then the Sun^ is, stands before both your eyes in the
reading of the Apocal. and yet the one believes as truly as he believes any
thing that he sees this light, the other will venture his salvation that he
sees it not, for, in the same book of Apocalypse last Chap. verse 1. it is
said. If any man shall take away from the words of this Prophecy, God shall
take away his part out of the Book of Life. Luther took all the book away; you
hold it all Scripture, and yet him a Saint. You go on, and add that the
Apocalypse and other Books also have been doubted of. But do you not mark the
more doubt there has been of them, the more evident it is that they most
ungroundedly be affirmed by you to carry their own light by which they may be
seen, as we see the Sun by his own light. Again, being you neither agree with
us in the Canon of the Scripture, nor with your own Brethren, what reason have
you to obtrude a Canon of your own coining to us for Judge of all
Controversies, you not agreeing nor knowing how many books make up the true
Canon, and all agreeing that diverse books of the true Canon be quite lost?
Where shall we find this our Judge? Among us (after the Church Delaration was
notified concerning the receiving of any book for Canonical) you will never
find it doubted of by any true Catholics. You are mistaken, if you think
Saint Jerome held the Macchabees not to be Canonical after the definition of the
Council of Carthage. It was before that Council that he writ what he writ.
Concerning the rest you add out of Saint Austin, I would say more if you
esteemed the Fathers more, what you add after that, has already been answered.

(...) 14th. (...)
50. In my 14. Number. for a further proof that the Scripture alone cannot decide
all controversies, I did and do still insist upon this argument, that almost
all Controversies do arise about the true sense of such or such a Text in
Scripture. The sense is the kernel, the life, the Soul of the text; miss in
this, miss in all. And yet about this sense greatest wits vastly differ in
many points necessary to Salvation, and consequently many miss the true sense
to their eternal damnation. This book of the Scripture, by it self alone could
never yet end these differences; Therefore if God had left us no other means to
end our differences, but this Book, about the true understanding of which all
our differences arise, he should have no better provided for our unity (even in
points necessary to Salvation) then that Lawmakers, who should leave his
Commonwealth a Book of Laws to end all their Controversies in Law, about the
meaning of which Book, he knew all the chiefest Controversies would still
arise. This is indeed a repetition of what I said, but it is a repetition of
what you have not yet answered. For against your first answer it is apparent
that there is not only a necessity of a judge different from Scripture, to
declare unto us, which books be the true and uncorrupted word of God; but there
is also a main necessity of such a judge to know the undoubted meaning of Gods
undoubted Word, about which there be far more controversies in points necessary
to Salvation. And though, in your second answer, you tell us, that all points
necessary to Salvation are plainly set down in Scripture, yet I have plainly
proved the contrary Chap. 3 Number. 200. And my discourse (Contrary to your 3.
Answer) is affectual, for in points necessary to Salvation, to be believed with
divine faith, we must have an infallible authority to rely on, for that faith,
which relieth upon a fallible authority, cannot be an infallible assent. And
again if we have not full security of this infallible authority, we cannot
assent unto it with an assent infallible, to which we being obliged by God, God
also must have furnished us of full security to know this authority to be
infallible, as I have showed him to do. And yet again, that this infallible
authority, so well secured is invested in the Church appears sufficiently by
this, that the Scriptures not assisting us in the infallible knowledge of their
own true sense, in points necessary to be believed with infallible faith, we
must be assisted to this infallible knowledge by some other infallible means
(for fallible will not do the deed.) No other infallible means can, with any
shadow of probability, be said given unto us, but the infallible authority of
the Church* Therefore her authority must be infallible, as shall at large be
proved in the next Chapter, and then (in the next after that) I will show that
this infallible Church is the Roman, and none but the Roman.

51. Again, I said, that if Christ had intended the Book of Scriptures for the
judge of all Controversies, the knowledge of this point being so primely
necessary, must needs be according to your principles evidently set down in
Scripture, in w^ all points necessary to salvation are (as you say) evidently
set down. You pretend here this point to be clear in Scripture, but I have
largely showed the contrary and answered your objection. And I retort it thus,
that if God would have us in all controversies guided by the Scripture only he
would clearly have said so in these Scripture yea he would have told us the
true undoubted Canon of Scripture. This is now unknown to you: And we are sure
diverse parts of this Canon are lost, what Scripture tells us we must be judged
by only part of Scripture? I pray answer this.

Of my 14th. Number.
52. Moreover I added that if God would have given us a Book for our Judge, he
would never have given us for our Judge such a Book as the Scripture is, which
very often speaks obscurely, sometime so prophetically, that most would think
it spoke of the present time, when it speaks of the time to come, that it
speaks of one person, for example of David, when it speaks of another, for
example of Christ; and much more I added to this effect, that I might be
rightly understood when I said that God would never have given us such a book
for our Judge. My adversary to avoid this Argument, so mangleth the sense,
that he may make my words sound of a blasphemous disrespect by reporting them
as if I should have said, If God had intended Scripture for our Judge, he would
not have given us such a Book as Scriture. Which words taken without those
particles, for our Judge, seem to sound such an imperfect book as Scripture,
but taken with those particles (which purposely were added, to make the sense
of the writer appear) the sense can offend no man capable of sense. For what
man of understanding would affectionately cry out of disrespect, if not of
blasphemy against Scripture, if he should hear one say, if God had intended
still the Scripture for sole Judge in all Law Controversies, he would never
have given us such a Book as the Scripture is for our Judge. Would any sober
man let fall such a censure upon such an occasion? Is it not manifest that the
Scripture may be a Book as perfect as can be for the intent for which God made
it, and yet not be fit to decide all Controversies by it self alone, it never
being intended for that end. It is sufficient that this Book provides an
infallible means to judge them, by sending us to the Church for our Judge. They
truly disgrace the Scripture, who will first make men believe that all
necessary Controversies are plainly decided by Scripture alone, and that God
intended the Scripture for the plain decision of them, and then, when it comes
to the trial, are not able to show any Text of Scripture, deciding many and
most important Controversies: for, this is in effect to say, God performed very
unsufficiently what he intended to do, by Scripture. If what I said gave you
any advantage, show it by disproving what I said.

53. First, you ask how these words are put together, so Prophetically, that
most would think that the Scripture speaks of the time present, when it
speaks of the time to come? I answer, that it was fit the old Testament
should be Prophetical, and I intended nothing less then to blame Scripture.
And yet I say, that when the Scripture uses such words as signify to us a
verity present, as well as a verity future, we (who have nothing but these
words to direct us) cannot tell infallibly whether God intended by them to
speak only of what was present, or of what was to come. And so Gods meaning in
all these places is obscure unto us. And if you can help us to any assured
means of knowing infallibly the hidden sense of God, uttered in this manner,
you shall do more then any of your Doctors ever did. Secondly, whereas you
think it little to the purpose of him, who is to show in how doubtful terms the
Scriptures sometimes express themselves, when they spoke so, that you cannot
tell whether David speaks of himself or of Christ, your judgment is very
different from Candaris, that wise judicious man, who had charge of all the
Treasure of the Queen of Aethiopia, (Acts 8.27.) He read Isaias, the clearest
of all the Prophets concerning Christ, and he read a place as clearly speaking
of Christ, as most places you can turn unto with all your skill, and yet when
Philip said to him, Understandest thou what thou read? He, who was so
prudent, and so sincere a searcher of the Truth answered, How can I except some
man should guide me? And then he asked of his guide, that, of which he most
doubted; I pray thee of whom speaks the Prophet this? of himself or of some
other man? Had you been there you would have told him he had blamed Scripture
as you tell me for the like cause. Who doubts but Prophets should speak
prophetically. And yet again, who doubts but that this their speaking so,
makes them to need a Guide and an Interpreter.

54. I do not think that among your own Clergy or Laity, you are as much
esteemed as he who spoke as fully of this point as I did: I mean Doctor Jeremy
Tailor in his Discourse of the Liberty of Prophesying, Sect. 3. where he
proves the uncertaintie of Arguments from Scripture, By the many senses of
Scripture, when the Grammatical sense is found out: for there is in very many
Scriptures a double sense, a Literal and a Spiritual, and both these Senses are
subdivided. For the Literal sense is either Natural or Figurative, and the
Spiritual sometimes Allegorical, sometimes Anagogical, sometimes there are
diverse literal Senses in the same place; so he. Now it depends upon the secret
intention of the Holy Ghost to have used these words in some one only, or two,
or more of these senses. Is there no difficulty think you in finding out so
great a secret, and that infalliblie as we must do in points necessary to
salvation? And if you say the sense is always cleared out of some Text or
other in such points, you say more then you can prove. Take for an example
these four words: This is my Body, you must say they are spoken in a Figurative
sense, and not in their Natural sense: show this in a Figurative sense to be
infallibly the true sense by any other clear Text, or else you show not what
you say. Two hundred several Interpretations have been given of these four
words. Is this a sign that true sense is easily known, and known infallibly? Is
not this about a point necessary to salvation?

55. To show further the difficulty there was to know the undoubted meaning of
Scripture even in precepts, (which being precepts are damnably broken) I used
this argument: the Scripture uses the Imperative Mood as well when it counsels
as when it commands. What infallible means then have we to know what is
recommended only to us as a Counsel or Command, as a precept to be kept under
pain of damnation; Instead of teaching me this means you say you cannot swallow
this without chewing, because I suppose that there are Counsels of perfection
above things of Command; whilst you chew this, do not you see that your teeth
bite Saint Paul; who expressly supposes with me, that there be counsels of
perfections above things of Command. For (1 Cor. 7.25.) he says. Concerning
Virgins I have no Commandment of our Lord, yet I give Counsel. And Verse 38.
He that gives his daughter in marriage does well, but he that gives her not
in marriage does better. How does this agree with your strange Divinity,
according to which we have done but our duty, and what we are obliged to do
under a damnable sin, when we have done as much as we could. Is this true?
Might not this man have given his daughter in marriage who does not give her?
He might have done so, and done well according to Saint Paul. According to you
he is bound to do all that he could do. But he could have done better in not
giving her to marriage, therefore according to you he was bound not to give her
under pain of damnation. Here I must entreat you to mark the words of the Text
you allege against me, Luke 17. So likewise when you have done all those
things which are commanded you; (he says not which are only commended by way
of Council) say we are unprofitable servants, we have done what we ought to do,
to wit, by an express Precept obliging under damnation. In one sense this man
who has not married his daughter, may truly say, I have done what I ought to
do, not out of strict Obligation, binding under pain of Hellfire; (for I might
have done well in doing the contrary,) but what I ought to do, out of more
perfect charity. To swallow this Apostolical Doctrine is far easier then to
admit into ones mouth those words of yours. The Commandments of God are given
to us according to the tenor of our ability in Adam. What evident Text
teaches this? I am sure Saint John says, Hereby we do know that we know him
if we keep his Commandments. He that says I know him and keeps not his
Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him, John 2. Therefore since
Adams days God enabled us to keep his Commandments.

56. You go on as if I found fault with Scripture. I only find fault with those
who affirm Scripture to have been intended by God for an end, to which I show
it never was intended. Because if it had been intended by God to teach us
clearly all things necessary to salvation (otherwise then by sending us to the
Church, and by bidding us keep our received Traditions) it would have set the
things down clearly and distinctly, and not have left these points to be picked
out, one out of one book, another out of another, no man knows directly
where; yea diverse books contained not so much as one of these points, which you
hold necessary to salvation, especially in plain and clear terms. And those
books which do contain such points do intermingle so many other less
necessary points, or points of doubtful necessity, with those which are
wholly necessary (without ever telling us of this less or greater necessity)
that all the whole Bible must be very carefully, and very attentively read over
(which is impossible, because diverse whole Books of the Bible are lost) before
a man can come to the infallible knowledge of such points as you will say are
necessary, which points you say are but few, and the Books of Scripture are
many, and diverse more have been written and quite lost; and how can we tell
whether all these we have now, contain all points necessary? For the most you
pretend is, that in the whole Canon all points necessary were delivered; we
have not the whole Canon, but diverse books of it have perished; Therefore we
have no assurance that the Scripture we have contains all things necessary.
The Scriptures we have, make a book so big, that the far greater part of the
world (taken up with so many necessary affairs) cannot in a very long space of
time read over this Book with any part of that exactness, which according to
your own Principles, must be required to find out, which points be necessary
to salvation. For to do this, they must first read over the whole Canon, and
yet diverse books of it are lost, and not to be had, how shall they read them?
Secondly, to have assurance that they have read over the whole Canon, they must
read over such books as we hold to be part of the true Canon, to see whether
they be so or no, and use such diligences as are necessary for an infallible
assurance. They must also note most accurately all places which may perhaps
clearly deliver a necessary point, when they shall have been conferred with
other places, which perhaps be at the other end of the Bible, or may occur to
me when I less observe any kind of connection with what I read before. Besides
this, for fear Translations (which are only so far Gods Word as they agree
with the Original) should be taken by me for Gods true Word; I must consult
with the Original, and with the true Original, of which I cannot get an
undoubted copy infallibly secured from corruption, Is it likely that God, who
has promised us a Way so direct unto us that fools cannot err by it, would
intend to lead us by a way having so many passages open to error. These
difficulties show that God did not intend this Book to be our only guide. His
wisdom directs him to the best means to compass his intention. Even our
ordinary wisdom (if we had an intention to set forth a writing to end all
necessary Controversies) would direct us to set down plainly and clearly in
one place all those (few as you say) points necessary to be believed. When God
determined to set down all the Jewish Ceremonies, you see how fully,
particularly, and clearly he sets them down in Leviticus. Points of faith
necessary to salvation import incomparably more then points of mere Ceremony.
If then God had intended a Book, by which only he was resolved to deliver unto
us all points necessary to salvation, these points (as you say) being but few,
he would in some one part of these books have clearly set down these few
points, a thousand times more importing then the points of Ceremonies. Many
hold that the Epistles of Saint John were written after his Apocalypse, and so
(by order of time) that they were the very last part of the Canon. And yet in
the very last part (of this my last part) of the Canon, Saint John says, I had
many things to write, but I will not with ink and pen write them. But I trust
we shall see thee shortly, and we shall speak face to to face. No man can say
that these many things which St. John had to write, were things unnecessarie;
wherefore many necessary things may not be set down in the Canon. And yet the
Canon is very complete in order to its true end, and also in order to the
ending of all Controversies by sending us to the Church for full instruction,
as I have showed. And it is apparently false which you say, that the Scripture
does give us every particular point which is necessary to be believed, as I
have showed in this Chapter. And whereas you add secondly, That the Scripture
gives also many points not necessary, you mark not that the vast number of
those points among which, here, and there (we are not assured where) the
necessary points are intermingled from the beginning of the Bible to the end,
is a thing which would make any man far from being fully assured, that Gods
intention was by this Book alone to decide all Controversies about points only
necessary, which might far more easily for our capacity, have been done in
some one Chapter of some one of these Books.

57. After this you urge that our Church has not decided all necessary
Controversies. Sir, Our Doctrine is that the Church can decide any point
formerly revealed when any necessity shall require it or the declaration of
this point concern our Salvation. Salvation has very securely been had without
the decision of those points you speak of. If circumstances happen that
Salvation cannot be had without their decision, they will then be decided. If
you acknowledge a real necessity to be at all times of the infallible knowledge
of those points then by your own principles you are bound to say that they are
plainly set down in Scripture. And I am sure our Church has determined that we
are obliged to believe all Scripture with an undoubtful belief, either you
must say these points are not necessary, and then all your arguments fall of
themselves, or else you must say these be plainly set down in Scripture, and
then we are by our Church obliged to believe them with divine faith. I add
that our whole Church teaches the definitions of Councils confirmed, to be
infallible. Submit to this Judge appointed by God, who did bid us hear the
Church, and you shall find her definitions not to leave you ignorant of what is
necessary for you to know. To cavil at her, you will pretend that to be
necessary which you will say the next moment is unnecessary.

58. But to show you further that the Scripture is not clear in all points
necessary to Salvation, with such claritie as is necessary to put an end
effectually to all controversies, I take a point or two set down with full as
great clarity as diverse other points can be showed to be set down; which other
points, you do affirm both to be necessary to Salvation, and also to be set
down clear enough, to decide the Controversy for you; though they be set down
with no greater claritie then those points which I will specify; and which you
will say be not set down clear enough to decide the Controversy for us: whence
the inconsequence of your proceedings will be made evident, whilst all shall
see, that you will pretend such a degree of clarity in the Texts which you use
to allege for such points, to be sufficient to decide them for you, and by and
by they shall see again a higher degree of clarity rejected by you as
unsufficient to decide a point against you. To prove this the first point I
specify is of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. The text in your own Bible
speaks thus, James 5.14. Is any sick among you, let him call for the Elders
(Priests) of the Church. And let them pray over him anointing him with oil in
the name of our Lord. And the prayer of the faithful shall save the sick; And
the Lord shall raise him up. And if he has committed sins they shall be
forgiven him. What imports a dying man more then to have that applied to him in
due manner by which he may be secured (upon the word of a God) that, if he has
committed sins they shall be forgiven him? And yet you cry superstition,
superstition. If a Priest be called for to pray over a sick man, and to anoint
him with oil, which is that Visible Act to which invisible grace, justifiing
from sin, is promised in those words, And if he has committed sins, they
shall be forgiven him. How clear this place is, appears by the very letter, in
which we have all we desire to make a Sacrament. A Visible sign of invisible
grace. You will say, this clarity is not in a degree sufficient to make a man
believe with divine faith, that this Unction of anointing is a Sacrament, or a
Visible sign of invisible Grace. And (so soon as I shall ask) you will tell me
that your grand fundamental and Capital point, All things necessary to
Salvation are clearly set down in Scripture, is a point delivered in Scripture
by Texts, having a sufficient degree of clarity to make it an Article to be
believed with a divine faith; I call for those Texts, and you do give them as
well as you can, (as I suppose) I examine them all in this Chapter (from my
eighth Number to my fifteenth) and I dare Venture my life that no wise
conscionable man will say that any one of those texts, or all put together, do
with as great a degree of claritie affirm All things necessary to Salvation to
be plainly set down in Scripture alone, as this text I alleged affirms this
Sacrament of Anointing. But this, you say, is not affirmed with a degree of
Clarity sufficient to decide the Controversy for us, and to ground an
infallible belief of this point, Therefore that degree of Clarity is not
sufficient to decide in your behalf that capital Controversy, and to ground an
infallible belief of it. And yet for many other points (which I specified in
the beginning of this Chapter) you have not so much Scripture as you have for
this prime point, though I did choose this for my instance, because I had
examined all your texts. You give two answers to this Objection. The first is,
that, if the Scripture has decided this point for us, then the Scripture can
judge and end Controversies. But Sir, does it hence follow that it can end all
necessary Controversies, because it can end this one Controversy? Again, is
this Controversy by this Text ended? Do not you still stand out in the
contrary opinion? This Text indeed might (as I said) seem in the impartial
judgment of a prudent man, to say evidently that this anointing is a
Sacrament, and sure I am that it says it clearer then any Scripture you can
bring for many points which you say are clearly decided by Scripture; yet we
see by the experience which we have of you, and yours, that even this great
degree of claritie in this Text will not serve to convince your judgments,
whence it is manifestly inferred that a less degree of claritie (which
notwithstanding is the highest, which can be found in many Texts that be the
clearest alledgeable for many points necessary to salvation) will not
effectually end the controversies about those points. And therefore there must
be some other means to end them. Your Second Answer is flatly against the Text,
for you say these words do only relate to the gift of healing in those days:
and the Scripture says they have also a relation to the healing of the Soul.
If he has committed sins they shall be forgiven him. I pray what Scripture
have you to prove that the Elders in those days did commonly cure all sick
anointing them with oil? I am sure you can allege nothing but some uncertain
conjecture. I asked you also if you had one place of Scripture half as clear
against this Sacrament of anointing, as the Text I brought was clear for it?
But you neither did nor could give me any.

59. The second point which I did choose to prove that such Texts of Scripture,
as are clearer then those Texts, which you can allege for many necessary
points; for example clearer then any Text for the Sunday, or baptizing
children, is (notwithstanding this greater degree of claritie) rejected by you,
as not sufficient to decide the controversy against you. Therefore I say, you
most inconsequently proceed when you affirm far less clearer Texts sufficient
to decide all Controversies. The Text brought by me, and rejected thus by you,
was, This is my Body. Words expressed by four several Writers of the Scripture
without any intimation of their being spoken Figuratively. And if you confer
this place with the sixth of Saint John, he has these words, The bread that I
will give is my flesh, and then (as it were purposely to show he spoke not
Figuratively) he added, My Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed.
Notwithstanding these so clear Texts you hold that the Scripture decideth this
point against us with a decision sufficient to end the controversy, And yet
for the contrary all the Texts you can bring have not that degree of claritie
which these Texts have against you. But you deny that these Texts decide
against you. Therefore (to speak with tolerable consequence) you should
acknowledge that less clear Texts cannot decide against us; yet being, by your
own main principle, bound to show that all points necessary be clearly
determined according to truth in Scripture, you are put upon a necessity to
say that less clear Texts suffice to determine this controversy for you,
though you stiffly maintain that more clear Texts are not able to determine
against you. By which it is apparent how false that Principle is which forces
you to utter these inconsequent consequences. By this also you may see that the
Contradiction you would find in my words for saying on the one side these Texts
are clear, and on the other side that this Controversy the Scripture does not
decide, does arise out of my speaking according to your principles. For you on
the one side say that other Texts (which are manifestly less clear) are clear
enough to end the controversies; therefore these which are clearer, must needs be
clear enough for that end. And again you say on the other side, by these our
Texts (clearer then yours) this Controversy is not clearlie decided. Therefore
I must consequently say, that according to you This Controversy the Scripture
does not decide. It is according to your Principles that these Texts must be
clear, because they be clearer then those which you are forced to affirm
clear; and again you must say they be not clear, for fear you should confess
them to decide against you. Now if these two places be denied to be clear, with
a clarity sufficient to put an end to the Controversy, then according to my
principles scarce any Controversy will ever be decided by any Text. And this
is most for my turn to show the necessity of a living Judge: whereas afterward
you take occasion to dispute of this Sacrament, you do not do it as it should
here have been done to the present purpose, to wit, by alleging more clear
Texts to prove that Christ's true body is not really in the Sacrament, then I
allege to prove that it was really in it. For these Texts I do call, These
Texts I require. Without you give me these more clear Texts, you will never
give me a satisfactorie answer. All other things I wave of until I have these
clearer Texts. The difference of these two hundred interpretations about these
four words This is my Body, though they be not owned by you, yet they make
strongly against you in this respect, that they show the Text of Scripture not
to have ended, but to have occasioned these endless differences. And
consequently they show this point not to be clear out of Scripture. You in vain
are busy about other things which are not to the purpose, so to entertain your
Reader that he may not mark your omitting the main point, which was to show
this great Controversy to be clearly decided on your side by Scripture only.

Of my 15th. Number.
60. I go on still pressing other points, the belief of which points your self
hold necessary to salvation, and yet you cannot show them evidently taught in
Scripture. For you cannot produce an evident Text, teaching that God the Father
is not begotten, God the Son is not made, but begotten by his Father only,
that the Holy Ghost is neither made nor begotten but proceeds, and that both
from the Father and the Son. And that God the Son is Consubstantial to his
Father. Your answer to this is most highly unsatisfactorie. You say that
although the matter of these points be not found in terminis in Scripture, yet
the sense of them, according to equivalence, may as well as Transubstantiation?
To be as clearly set down as Transubstantiation in Scripture, is (according to
your own principles) not to be clearly set down at all. In your answer you were
to show that these points were clearly set down in Scripture, and you answer
that they are as clearly set down as a point which is not clearly set down. Is
this any way satisfactorie? Neither is it more satisfactorie if you mean to
argue out of our own principles, for according to us, all points necessary
(and this point in particular) are not clearly set down in Scripture. And to
prove this I have labored all this Chapter. So that you neither satisfy
according to your own nor our Principles. Your second answer is destroyed by
your former, for whilst in that you profess to hold these Articles, and not
hold them upon the authority of the Church, you leave your self no other
authority, upon which you can hold them but only such Texts of Scripture as
are not clear, and no more sufficient to ground faith, then other places are to
ground a belief of Transubstantiation. Be such places sufficient?

61. For another necessary point not plainly set down in Scripture, I urge
Baptism of children, Of my 16th. Number.
which is by no evident Text of Scripture taught us. You answer that it is not
necessary for the salvation of the children to be baptized. And to prove this
pernicious doctrine, you bring a Text which clearly speaks only of men old
enough to believe and desire Baptism. For your Text is, He that believes (he
is then old enough to believe) and is baptized shall be saved, but he that
believes not (and consequently would positively not be baptized) shall be
damned. This Text you see, speaks nothing of children, and whilst it damneth
those who would not so much as believe, it shows it self to speak of those
who would not be baptized, and these it damneth. How does it then intimate that
those who are children, and could have only baptism, in re, and not in voto,
should be saved without Baptism, for which point you bring it, and yet of this
point it speaks not at all; much less does it speak as clearly as another
text speaks the quite contrary, to wit, Except a man be born of water and the
spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Jo. 3. v. 5. Hear your own
Doctor Tailor in his defense of Episcopacy, Sect. 19. P. 100. Baptism of
Infants is of ordinary necessity to all that ever cried, and yet the Church
has founded this Rite Rule upon the Tradition of the Apostles: And wise men
(of whom I hope you are one) do easily observe that the Anabaptists can by the
same probability of Scripture enforce a necessity of communicating Infants
upon us, as we do of baptizing Infants upon them; Therefore a great Master of
Geneva in a Book he writ against the Anabaptists was forced to fly to
Apostolical traditional Ordination. They that deny this (Ordinary necessity
of baptizing Infants) are by the just Anathema of the Catholic Church,
confidently condemned for Heretics: so he. This ordinary necessity of
Baptism to all that ever cried, You deny; Therefore by the just Anathema of
the Catholic Church, you are condemned for an Heretic: yea you go further
then the Pelagian Heresy, for they were counted Heretics (See Saint Aust.
Heresi. 88.) for saying, Although Infants be not baptized, they shall possess
an eternal and blessed life; though it be out of the Kingdom of God: You will
admit them into the possession thereof even unto the Kingdom of God. Whereas
your own Musculus (in Locis, Tit. de Baptismo) says; The Fathers denied
salvation to the Children who died without Baptism, though their Parents were
faithful. And by reason of this necessity of Baptism to the salvation of
Infants, held so generally, Calvin himself says, It was usual many Ages since,
even almost from the beginning of the Church, that in danger of death
Lay People might baptize, Institut. (Lib. 4. Cap. 15. Numb. 20.) And to say the
contrary were to cross all Antiquity, as your Bilson confesses in his
Conference at Hampton Court. Hooker says no less in his 5. book of
Ecclesiast. Policy 62. A number of other learned Protestants are against your
Opinion. But I say less of this point, for your own Opinion gives me
advantage enough to prove what I intend, that is, a point to be necessary, and
yet not plainly set down in Scripture; if you grant that there is a Precept
necessary to be fulfilled by Parents that they procure their Children to be
baptized. But why God should command this, the Children being as well saved
without it (according to you) as with it, still remains to be proved. I stand
upon your grant of this Precept as necessarily to be fulfilled by the Parents.
This Precept is necessary to be fulfilled. This Precept is not plainly set down
in Scripture. Therefore all necessary points are not plainly set down in
Scripture. Your answer will not here help you out, you say, Whatsoever is
necessarily inferred from Scripture is binding in the Virtue of the Principle.
But you cannot show that this precept, given to the Parents, is necessarily
inferred out of Scripture. Not out of the Institution of our Savior, for he
also instituted the Eucharist not necessary for Infants not out of the
substitution to Circumcision, for so it should not be necessary to women, no
nor to any but those of the Jewish Nation to whom only Circumcision was given
as necessary. Is this a necessary Consequence? Circumcision was necessary
for the male children, Ergo Baptism is necessary for male and female. You see
it is not half true. Neither is that a necessary Consequence which is drawn
from the baptising of whole families: for first, as we read whole families were
baptized, so we read that whole families believed. So John. 4. verse 53.
Himself believed and his whole family. Will you hence evidently infer that the
little Children under years of discretion also believed, as you infer that
they are to be baptized by a necessary precept. Again this illation is far
from being evident, for it is not evident that there be little ones in every
family alive, and those also under the age of discretion. In many families all
the little ones that be alive are above seven years old. There be many
families of people newly married who have not yet any Children; There be many
families of people who never had Children as those who are barren, Others have
lost all they had by death. It is then no evident consequence, He baptized the
whole family, therefore he baptized little Infants, I insist not upon the
Authorities I alleged out of Saint Austin. St Chrysostom. because I deal with
one who little regards authority confessed to be the Fathers.

62. Now Sir, to conclude this long Chapter, I will show that I conclude this
point (and so I do all the former) just as you say I must conclude. For you
say to me you must prove that those points were and ought to be determined by
the Church upon necessity of Salvation. This I prove by this argument. This
point and all the former are necessary to be believed with an infallible
assent. But we cannot believe any point with an infallible assent, unless it
be determined by an infallible authority; therefore we must find out an
infallible authority which has determined these points. The authority of the
Scripture (as I have proved) has not determined these points. We must
therefore find out some other infallible authority upon whose determination we
may be able to do, that which to be saved we must do, to wit, upon which we may
be able to believe these points with an infallible assent: No such infallible
Authority can be found on Earth, if we deny the Authority of the Church to be
infallible. I conclude then that her Authority must needs be infallible.

The Fourth CHAPTER. The Church is this Judge. Her Authority Infallible.
NO better beginning can I give to this Chapter, Of my 17th. Number.
then the very last Number of the last Chapter, which I must entreat my reader
to note most carefully, so to observe the forcible deduction by which I prove
the necessity of a judge, different from Scripture, who must be infallible for
the reason there assigned, and who can be no other then the Church. This proof
alone might serve the turn, yet I add.

2. First those words Matthew 12.19 spoken to Saint Peter; upon this Rock I
will build my Church and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; these
words allow the Church a security from ever admitting any doctrine so
pernicious that the gates of Hell may prevail against her. And this promise
made to the Church is that which mainly makes to my purpose; Whether the church
be built upon Saint Peter, and his Successors, or upon the faith of Saint
Peter, is not the thing I chiefly here aim at. My aim is to find a Church built
on a Rock so strong that no error shall ever overthrow it. And so I have
nothing to do with your long disputation about Saint Peter. I am now secured
the Church shall never be a Nest of Errors, Idolatrous, superstitious, wickedly
assuming the authority of an infallible tribunal without sufficient warrant.
All or any of these things would bring her to the gates of Hell, they being all
damnable impieties. That, what is said of this infallibility of the Church,
only concerns the Roman Church, I will show in the next Chapter. Have patience
until then or read that first; You being to say nothing against me until you
begin to say sixthly, That you have enough against me for saying the Church is
secured from all damnable errors by this promise. For this makes you think my
meaning to be, that Christ does not intend here to exempt the Church from all
error but only damnable. But Sir my meaning in specifying her exemption from
damnable error was only that time to take for granted, that, which most of
yours use to grant, and even thence to press, your further, you grant the
Church free from damnable error, whence I have at least thus much that no body
shall be damned for following the guidance of the Church. And I have also that
the whole Church, being thus by divine assistance secured from erring damnably,
is secured from ever being destroyed by any damnable error, she is therefore
always to have such a visible existence as is necessary to afford a guidance
secured from erring damnable by it. Now by what Logic do you infer that
because the Church is secured from all damnable error, therefore according to
my doctrine she is not secured from other errors? All you build, upon this
consequence, falls to the ground. Going on I find you by the way quarelling
with one of the Cardinal virtues, even Prudence her self, which you intimate
then only to have place, when Religion is chosen by interest. I pray do you
think in earnest that men cannot proceed prudently in the choice of their
Religion? Then you conclude that all the force my former argument has it has
from Scripture. Is not my argument the better for this against you, who
profess to believe Scripture to be Gods undoubted word, independently of the
authority of the Church, because it is clearly manifested to you, to be so by
its light, as the Sun by his light. Is it not a convincing argument which is
strengthened with an authority acknowledged so firm? Against a Heathen
(until I had proved Scripture to him) I would not use this argument.

4. Presently I find you again stumbling at the sense in which I took the word
damnable, as if I should allow the following of the Church in other errors. No
Sir, you cannot follow her in other errors, because she cannot go before you in
any error; not in any damnable error, as your own selves teach, no nor in any
other error as in this very next argument is proved, if you mark the force of
it.

5. The force then of my next Argument is this, God commands us to obey the
Church and hear her; in obeying her and hearing her, we follow Gods Command.
But no kind of error, little, or great, can be incurred, by following Gods
Command, therefore we can be lead into no kind of error by following the
Church. Again you your selves say it is impossible to be obliged to assent to
an error, though it be not a damnable error. Wherefore if I can prove that we
are obliged to follow the Church, I shall prove also that she cannot guide us
into any kind of error. This I prove by that text Matthew 18. verse 18. If he
will not hear the Church let him be unto thee as a publican or a Heathen,
Therefore merely, and purely, for not hearing the Church, a man is to be held
and truly, according to Gods judgment, deserving to be held, a publican or
Heathen: but all we are obliged not to deserve to be held by Gods judgment,
Publicans or heathens, Therefore all are obliged to hear the Church, being that
merely and purely for not hearing her, they are to be held, and deservingly
held, according to Gods judgment, Publicans and Heathens, as is also further
insinuated in the next verse, where it is said, this sentence shall be ratified
in Heaven. Now if any man reply that we are to hear the Church so long as she
swerveth not from Gods word; my answer is, that, to swerve from Gods word is to
err; but this text proves she cannot err. Ergo, it proves that she cannot
swerve from Gods word, and indeed, if she could, the merely not hearing her,
could not deserve, that a man should deserve to be accounted, according to Gods
judgment, a Publican or Heathen. But you tell me this text is to be
understood, not of matters of faith or unbelief, but of matters of trespass
between brother and brother, and refractoriness in the person. And that it
respects excommunication by censure, in which also it may err. Neither is a
man bound to believe the censure is just, unless it appears to be so. This last
assertion of yours is very extravagant doctrine, for the unanimous opinion of
learned men is, That a man is bound to hold his superiors censure or command
to be just, unless the contrary appears evident. See your own Doctors,
Chillingworth, P. 308, N. 108. Hooker, P. 310, 311. N. 110. Laud, P. 226. And
indeed you bring all to this, that, when all comes to all, you are the last
judge, to whose sentence finally all comes to be referred, and not to the
sentence of the Church, for you reserve to your self the last judgment of her
sentence, to see whether it be just or no in your own private opinion. Sir, if
the contrary be not evident, the Church (who is Superior) is to be followed,
and obeyed. If the contrary be evident it is impossible such a superior as the
Church is, assembled in a general Council should not mark that evidence,
without we will call that evident, or not evident, which is for our present
turn to call evident or not evident. That which is truly evident will of it
self appear to be so at least to the most judicious, upright, and best
instructed Prelates of the Church. And this is to be said according to human
Reason, although they had no infallible promise of a more then humane
assistance, from the Holy Ghost. Moreover Sir, let us if you please, not pass
so far as the Censure, but let us make a stay in the mere consideration only
of the cause, for which the censure is given: that the cause is not hearing the
Church; for this, and merely for this only cause, according to the text, this
man is (according to Gods judgment) deservedly to be held as a Publican or
Heathen; and therefore, if for this act of not hearing the Church, the censure
comes to be after wards pronounced against him, that censure will be made good
in Heaven, as the next verse clearly says; Wherefore it is impossible that
this Censure should be unjust, if he truly be guilty of not hearing the Church.
It is true that a man may by false information, or some such way be judged to
be guilty of not hearing the Church, when really he is not guilty, and so there
may be an error in the mistake of the fact, and thus Clave errante in matter of
fact, the sentence will not be ratified in Heaven. But this is nothing to the
purpose, for still he, who is truly guilty of not hearing the Church, is for
that only fact, and merely for that cause, to be held deservedly, according to
Gods judgment, as a publican or Heathen. And so the Church cannot error in
denouncing Excommunication against such a person. And hence you see how truly
miserable such a person is, and how it must needs be damnable unto him not to
hear the Church, which not to hear, makes a man to be held as a Publican or
Heathen most deservedly, and according to Gods own judgment. To hold himself
not to deserve this punishment, is to hold against Scripture. You highly wrong
Saint Athanasius, to say he heard not the Church, See my 9. Number.

These my Premises being made good, it follows clearly, that no man is
secure in conscience who will not obey the Church. And hence again it follows
that this Church cannot err, at least damnably, for else a Man might in
Conscience be bound to follow a damnable error. No, she cannot err in an
error not damnable, because also it very true which you lately said, that so
men should be bound to assent unto an error which is impossible. Hence that
common doctrine of Antiquity That it is not possible to have a just cause to
separate from the Church. And it cannot be said that any man separates himself
not from the Church, but her errors; being she is secured from all error; as
appears manifestly by our obligation to hear her; you tell me that this text,
obliging to hear the Church, is meant only of trespasses betwixt Brother, and
Brother, which trespasses are also to be told to every particular Church and to
Several Prelates, and therefore this place, say you, makes nothing for the
authoritty of the Universal Church. Sir, I grant particular trespasses are to
be referred to particular Prelates, and that the Church is not to be called to a
general Counsel, for every private man's trespasses; singular private men are to
be condemned by the particular Prelates of their particular Churches,
proceeding according to the known Decrees and Orders of the Universal Church.
If he clearly disobeyeth them thus proceeding, he disobeyeth the Universal
Church. And for this act merely deserves, according to Gods own judgment, to
be accounted as a Publican and Heathen. So he who disobeyeth the particular
Judge, judging according to the known Laws of the Commonwealth, disobeyes the
Commonwealth. And it is this not obeying the Church, and the not hearing her,
which exaggerates the crime, whence you see the not hearing the particular
Prelates, in so well ordered a Community as the Church is, may come to be
commonly the self same crime with the not hearing of the Church. And because
all such Prelates (when the contrary is not apparently manifest) are supposed
to do their duty in giving sentence according to the known Decrees, Orders and
Canons of the Universal Church, as we usually say, those who disobey the Judges
disobey the Commonwealth: so generally speaking, those who disobey the Prelates
of the particular Church, disobey the Universal Church, commanding them to
proceed according to her Decrees, Definitions, and Canons. So that at last this
disobedience is against Christ, and God himself, according to that which God
said to Samuel, Lib. 1. Cap. 8. They have not rejected thee, but they have
rejected me. And Christ to his Disciples (the first Prelates of the Church.) He
that despises you, despises ^^. And therefore Christ commanded the lawful
Successors of Moses to be followed in what they delivered by public
authority, although they were wicked in their private lives, and many of them
publicly did teach Errors though not by public authority, or authorized by
any Definition of that Seat, which private Errors Christ called the Leaven of
the Pharisees, bidding his Apostles take heed of it; But concerning what that
Seat did by public Definition, Christ was so far from bidding people to take
heed of it, that he in as general terms, as men speak when they would speak
without any exception, Said to the whole promiscuous multitude, and also to his
disciples; upon the Chair of Moses have setten the Scribes and Pharieses. All
therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; Mark these
most ample words. All therefore whatsoever. O! will you say, what if they bid
us do against the Scriptures; Why, this very saying of Christ shows they were
secured from ever doing against the Scripture when they proceeded by way of
defining with Public authority. If you object, that they condemned our Savior
by public authority, you have your Answer Number 9. Say I we must hear the
Church, and because we must Universally hear her (for she doubtless has to the
full as much reason to be heard as the old Jewish Church then had) she must be
confessed to have full assurance never to gainsay the Scripture. And as the
Synagogues Authortity was not limited so as to be obeyed and heard only in
point of trespass betwixt Brother and Brother, but was to be extended to All
whatsoever they should order: So you can not (with out depressing the Authority
of Christ's Church who had a better Covenant established upon better promises
Hebrews 8.6.) hinder her power from being extended to All whatsoever she shall
Order. It must not therefore be confined only to trespass betwixt Brother and
Brother; But we must of necessity, for the reason now expressed, argue thus,
That being she is to be heard, even in Controversies concerning trespasses
betwixt Brother and Brother, much more is she to be heard in such trespasses as
are committed by one Brother against all his Brothers and their dearest Mother
the Church. Then or never he is to be complained of, And if this obstinacy in
persevering in trespasses betwixt Brother and Brother deserves that a Man
should be held as a Publican and a Heathen, he incomparably more deserves to
be held so, who being commanded by the Church to desist from such pernicious
opinions as ruin the Souls of his Brothers, and tear asunder the bowels of
his Mother, still persists in his impious doctrine, and in that most
infectious, and Soulmurthring crime of heresy the most heinous trespass
against all our Brothers. Either such a crime or no crime is to be told the
Church. Yea Saint Thomas calls Schism (of which Heresy is always guilty)
the highest sin against the whole Comunity of our brother hood. Now this crime
is to be told first to the particular Prelates as soon as it is perceivd to be
beginning to creep like a canker, as the Scripture says Heresy does. If by
this judgment of particular Prelates this crime be clearly found to be indeed
Heresy, or a doctrine opposite to the known former definitions of the Church
Universal, they are to excommunicate him who is pertinacious in this
soul-murthering Crime, and this sentence is sure to be ratified in Heaven;
because he who has opposed in Doctrine the known Definitions of the Church,
has not heard nor obeyed her, for which only fact (according to the clear
sentence of Scripture) he deservedly is to be accounted as a Publican or
Heathen. Now if the Crime be not clearly against the known doctrine of the
Universal Church, or not so evident against it, but many hold the contrary, the
particular Prelates are bound to acquaint the head of the Church therewith.
This supreme Prelate of the Church is bound to use the fullness of his
authority to supresse the arising Heresy. He may forbid (if he fears danger
in the doctrine) that no such doctrine be published until the Church shall
think it fit. And then all must do as Saint Paul says, Hebr. 13. v. 27. Obey
their Prelates. Thus far the power of the supreme Prelates is extended by the
consent of the whole Church. He therefore that in this case obeys not, is
guilty of not bearing the Church, which single crime makes a man deservedly
accounted as a Publican or Heathen. Now though the Supreme head of the Church
be as infallible as Saint Peter was, yet if he sees this newly vented doctrine
fit to be declared Heresy, if it be so; or to be embraced, if it be fitting,
and proposed to all Christendom, then is the true time of calling a general
Council, and not to let the people contend by allegations of Scripture. So
though the Apostles were all infallible in their Doctrine yet they would not
determine that grave question Acts 15. without calling a Council To consider of
this word, in which there was made a great disputation; for this is necessary
for the fuller conviction of Heretics, fuller satisfaction of the weaker sort,
and further comfort of the whole Church, to see truth to triumph, upheld by the
shoulders of all Christendom; what proceeding could be more sweet or more
orderly; what exposition more agreeable to this Text, Tell the Church, which
denuntiation is to proceed by degrees from lower to higher Judges, as is there
expressed. And Consequently when the sentence of the Highest tribunal of all is
rejected, then or never, a man is deservedly to be accounted a Publican or a
Heathen for not hearing the Church universal. She therefore under so great a
penalty being always to be heard, is secured from all kind of error what
soever, in matters of faith belonging to her tribunal, and so we must grant
her to be infallible. I have then already found out such a judge, as I sought
for, a judge in matters of faith, a living judge, and infallible (as you would
have him) wih an infallibility excluding all error in what soever he proposes
or decrees, or all possibility of error. For if it were possible for this
judge to impose an error, Christ could not possibly have declared it to be so
heinous a crime not, to hear the Church being that it might have been no crime
at all. He obliged all to obey and hear her, she therefore cannot lead us into
an error. For as you truly say To be bound to assent to an error is
impossible. Our infallibility of knowledge concerning this point is as great as
it is of those points, which are delivered by Scripture. And therefore you may
stand up to my Creed, and that far more securely then stand out against such a
Church; the not hearing of which is so great a crime. This Church is infallible
and by manifest consequence only the Roman Church, as I shall demonstrate the
next Chapter, Number 2.

7. Here by the way you tell me, That If I would go the right way in this
Dispute, I should use another method, for whereas I would argue the Church to
be this Judge, which we cannot safely disobey, I should rather show a priori,
That the Church is infallible in whatsoever it does define, and therefore ought
to be obeyed in all things whatsoever. But Sir, when I come to use this very
method, I do foresee that it will so gald you, that you will cry out to have
this burdensome, heavy argument cast upon the other shoulder, from which you
now would have it shifted, to avoid the present trouble it causes you, you
shall see if it fall not out as I said, And that in this Chapter Numb. 52.

Of my 18th. Number.
8. As for St. Austins Authority, I must here lay it aside as well as every
where else, for fear I should lose my labor even after I have proved what I
should.

9. You fly upon me for flying to that Text of Malachy 2.7. The Priests Lips
shall keep Knowledge, and they shall require the Law from his Mouth, because he
is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts. Concerning the translation of which Text, I
truly charge your Bible of corruption for reading thus, The Priests Lips should
keep the Law, and they should seek the Law at his Mouth, Whereas all Originals
speak clearly in the future tense, as the Hebrew does, and also the Greek and
Latin, which two Languages want not a subjunctive Mood; you ask, Is this Text
meant of the Priests of Rome? I told you it was not. And I did say expressly
that I added this Text to take away from you all wondering at us, for allowing
that to be practiced toward the Priests of the new Law (whose authority
doubtless excells those of the old Law) which was practiced toward the
Priests of the old Law, in which those who searched for the true knowledge of
the Law, were not directed to seek that knowledge by their own reading the
Scriptures, but they were to search it by having recourse to the Priests, who
never (universally) should fail at any time (mark that I speak by universal
consent) to deliver false doctrine. As for private Priests they be like Private
translations of the word of God; If what they deliver agree with the doctrine
of the Church, their doctrine is infallible; not for their private delivery of
it, but for the authority of their Church, as Translators are not to be
believed for their authority but for their agreeing with the word of God. But
there is a vast difference in this that the agreeing of the Translation with
the Original is wonderful hard to know, especially when the Original it self
cannot be known (by those who admit of an infallible Church) by any infallible
knowledge. The argument of the Priests with the Public Doctrine of the Church,
is easily known, because her doctrine is so carefully published amongst all
understanding men. And as it is easy to know that Homo does truly signify a
man, for though one ignorant or malicious Fellow should say it signified a
beast, yet the consent of all others would manifest that man's perversity. If a
question were proposed in a matter of doubt in which their opinions varied,
then men are to proceed as I just now declared Number. 9. And then when the cause
should be decided by the High Priests he who would not not hear him was
deservedly put to death Deutronomy. 17. I know you told me in another place
that the Jewish Church erred. I did deny it, why? Did not they err in
condemning our Savior. Yes, but then the Jewish Church erred not. The true
high Priest (without whom there is no true Representative Church) erred not
Caiphas, was not the true High Priest for another was lawfully declared to be
so. This other true High Priest was Christ, who before his condemnation had
sufficiently for a legal declaration proclaimed himself to be the true
Messiah, the true Anointed of our Lord. This true high Priest erred not: The
true head of the Church not erring the Church cannot be said to err. The true
head of the Church defined not with the Council of Ariminumt Saint Athanasius
was bound to follow the Church defining, which defined not in that Council, for
the Head of the Church not defining with the body, the whole body, or Church,
defined not. Therefore I say again you err when you say, He should have been
bound in Conscience by the censure of the Church to have been an Arrian. The
Church, is the High Priest defining with a lawful general Council. The High
Priest defining in a general Council erred not. I wonder you go about also to
justify the Translators proceedings, because who think the scope of the sacred
writer does bear it. Is not this to give Translators leave, together with their
Translation to obtrude their gloss, and what they imagine the scope should be?
Is this a sound Translation? Master Broughton one of the best skilled in Hebrew
and Greek of your Church, did according to his great skill, give a truer
censure of your Translation in his advertisement of corruption to your Bishops
saying, That their public Translation of Scriptures into English is such as it
perverteth the Text of the old Testament in Eight hundred forty eight places.
And that it causes Millions of Millions to reject the new Testament and to run
to eternal flames. In what case then are they who take all that this Bible
says, for the undoubted word of God. When Tindal in the beginning of your
Reformation* Translated Gods Word into English, he did reform it so like one of
your great Reformers, that Bishop Tonstall noted no less then two thousand
Corruptions in the New Testament only, Is not this good dealing in so short a
volume; Is reading of these Translations called by you the Knowledge of
Scripture; Chap. 1. Number. 3.

10. But to go on with my former discourse I did say, Of my 19th. Number.
let any man ask the Priests of our Church what is the known doctrine of the
Church and let him rest securely when he knows that. This you say is
unreasonable, because the Priests are not infallible. But Sir, do you not mark
that I ground their faith not upon the Priest but upon the Church Universal.
Just as you say, you ground your faith not upon your Translations which only
conveigh (as the Priests do) the word of God to the searcher of it; yet we
have incomparable more assurance of the agreement of what the Priests say to be
the known doctrine of the Church, with the true doctrine of the Church; then you
have of the agreement of your most corrupted (as we now showed) Translations,
with the true Word of God, which I explicated more largely in the beginning of
the last Number: whence you will see, that when by fallible men we know that
this word Homo a man signifies a man and not a beast, that when I find in
Scripture tha^ God became Homo a man, I am infallibly assured he became a true
man and not a beast Or a seaman; so when by fallible men we know assuredly
enough to make it evidently credible that this is the doctrine of the Church,
we are assured by the Church that is true. For the Church is infallible as I am
here proving, and secured from all error which the Scripture (to those who
rejects the Church) are not neither in their Translations as I have here
showed, nor in their Original, as I showed in the last chap Numb. 35. And again
although you were secured of the true Scripture: yet you are not secured of the
true sense of it, as I showed there Number. 50. And yet again a great many
necessary Controversies are not contained in Scripture, as I showed in the
beginning and ending of that Chapter, which whosoever shall read will wonder
with what confidence you ask, well, and are not all things necessary taught in
the Scripture? I have also showed you it is false, that what Authority the
Church has it has from the Scripture. see Chap. 3. N. 30. 31. 32. yea
immediately before those places, I did (by eight arguments) show that you have
no infallible assurance of true Scripture if you deny the Churches
infallibility. And whosoever shall but consider what I said in the last Number
will have a ready answer to your question here Why does your Church take away
from the people the use of Scripture. Sir why does your English Church in place
of Scripture give them such damnably corrupted Scriptures? These Corruptions
take indeed from them the use of Scripture, it being impossible for them to
know what is uncorrupted, in such a Chaos of corruptions. How miserably do you
provide for the poor people? In our manner of requiring that law from the
Priests (which your own Translation says the people should do) there is no
more danger then in your taking the signification of a word in Scripture from
the Public consent of all men. Again, we permit the use of Scripture in such
languages as a general council can judge of, because they be sufficiently
understood by the Church Universal. Vulgar translations are incomparably more
easily corrupted and their Corruptions unknown unto her. The Latin language is
known to most well bred men in learning, To such others as are sober, stayed,
and peaceable spirits the Church denies not the use of such Translations as
their lawful local Prelates hold secure. Farther use of Scripture is an abuse
and we both see and fell the sad effects of it. You, who so carpt at going to
the Priests of the Church for Knowledge of the law. You I say, if you mark it,
send all your people to your own Priests, as you call them, neither rightly
ordained, nor Canonically licensed to preach. For to bid them go to the English
Bible, is to bid them go to translations most corrupted and authorized only by
your Ministers. To confer these Translations with the Originals they cannot do,
no nor you neither. For you know not infallibly the true Originals. It is your
own doctrine, Translations are only known to be Gods word as far as they are
known to agree with the Originals: how far this is, you (not knowing the true
Original) cannot tell. Of this you and all yours (who deny the Church
infallible) are ignorant. And upon your word, who (how learned so ever) are
ignorant of this, which only concerns them, they all in this highest matter
must rely. I put this so fully with great reflection, because that Noble party
(whose Champion you are) gave occasion to all our combating by carping at our
blind obeying our Priest, and believing them, whereas all those of your
Religion could go to the fountain. But alas! when that fountain, which they
conceive themselves to drink to their eternal health is so poisened (as I
showed in the last Number) that millions of millions (as your own Broughto^
says) run to Hell flames by occasion of this corruption; And I may most
truly say far more perish by misunderstanding (whilst they follow their
Ministers, and their own private judgment of discretion) that which is truly
Translated, then Perish by the corruption of that which is falsely Translated.
Thus they perish for not hearing that Church, which their own Scripture bids
them hear, whereas in doing that, which God bids, there can be no danger of
error, great or little. And you slander us when you say we bid the people
require from the Priests mouth not the law of God but the doctrine of the
Church. Sir, the doctrine of the Church is Gods law. And private Priests are
far more likely to teach them Gods law by teaching them what the Universal
Church holds to be Gods Law, then by teaching them what they themselves
conceive to be Gods Law as you would have them do.

11 Now to prove further the Church to be a competent judge guiding us no less
securely then those many millions were guided who had an infallible faith, and
the same Spirit of faith with us as S. Paul said, though their faith were
grounded on the authority of no Scripture, but wholly and entirely on the
tradition of their infallible Church: I urged that in those two thousand years
and more, before Moses did write the very first book of Scripture, the true
faith of all the true believers of those Ages depended in its infallibility,
upon their Churches being infallible in proposing the traditions she had
received; shall we allow infallibility to that Church, and deny it to Christ's
Church? shall we be worse provided for in so main a point in the law of grace,
then they were in the law of Nature? what text of Scripture is there for this?
Then it was not written. Hear the Church, then it was not written that the
gates of Hell should not prevail against her. Nor that she was the Pillar and
ground of truth, that the spirit of truth abided with her then, teaching her
then all truth. All this and far more then this (as I shall show in this
chapter) is written now of Christ's Church. And yet you will say we are not
sufficiently certified of her infalliblity. I pray tell me how then were they
certified (and infallibly certified of the infallibility of their Church?) How
did Men then infallibly know that they were bound under pain of damnation to
believe the tradition of that Church? show me then what you demanded of me
lastly to show, that is show the ground they had then to hold their Church
infallible, and the infallibility of the knowledge of it, and infallibly what
was the subject of this infallibility. If you cannot show that they could not
then do it better then we now, then refuse not to stand up to our Creed. Your
answer to so convincing an argument is most unsatisfactory, and it would make a
man think your intent were to plead against your self. You say this was
answered before it was written, what was that answer? It was that the word in
substance of it was before the Church, which was begotten by it; to this you
add that when there is now as much need, and as great certainty of tradition as
formerly, then I may urge this argument? so when you speak of the word of God,
which you say was before all writing, and which begot the Church, you must
speak of the unwritten word. This unwritten word is that very thing which we
call tradition, and indeed when you speak of such a word as must be sufficient
for an exterior, and an infallible direction for so many millions, as were by
it only to be directed in the way of Salvation before any Scripture was
written, you must of necessity put this word outwardly expressed somewhere, and
expressed in such a manner as may be able to produce this effect of guiding
whole millions in the way of Salvation by an infallible belief of what God
has said by that word. Now I pray find me out any word of God any where
existent before Scripture, but in the Orall Tradition of the Church of those
times. You say, Gods word revealed is the ground of all faith. They then had
faith, therefore they then had Gods word revealed, and revealed in a sufficient
manner to ground divine faith, But they only had Gods word revealed by
Tradition, Therefore Gods word revealed by tradition is a sufficient ground to
ground divine faith. By this unwritten word, that is by this Tradition of the
Church, she from a small Church (consisting of those very few, to whom God by
his own mouth did first of all speak, or by his Angels) grew to be a multitude
of true believers. And so the Church was begotten by Tradition, upon which only
this multitude (that is the Church) did judge most prudently that to be the
true word of God which was by so powerful a motive persuaded to be so. That
hence you may see, that, this very motive alone, is a very sufficient
inducement to receive the Verities recommended by it, and to receive them with
an infallible assent. For this was the only inducement which we know the true
believers to have had for those 2000. years and more, which were before Moses
did write the first book of Scripture. And those Scriptures which were written
from the law of Moses, to the time of Christ, were only kept among the Jews,
and this time lasted two thousand years more, during which long time many
among the Gentiles, as apeareth by Job and his friends, had true divine faith
with out any knowledge of the Scripture wholly unknown unto them, this faith of
theirs could have no other ground but Gods unwritten Word, delivered to them by
Tradition; Therefore Gods unwritten Word, delivered by Tradition only, is a
sufficient ground for infallible faith.

12 And whereas you add, That when there is as much need and as great certainty
of Traditions as formerly, then I may urge this argument, I answer, that the
need or necessity of Traditions, which you conceive to have been greater then
now, does not make the Traditions more credible. Those who have read very much
in very many credible books of France; have no need at all of any unwritten and
orall tradition to make them believe there is such a country as France, yet
these men (whom we will suppose to live at Dover) do as certainly know by
unwritten or Orall Tradition of men daily coming from France, bringing French
passengers, French commodities, and as to those who never read one word
concerning France, not being able to read at all. And those who are not able to
read at all, are not less assured by unwritten tradition, that there is such a
Kingdom as France, because there be many books written of France, and the
French wars with the English: So though we have now the Scriptures written
concerning most points of faith; we are not less helped by tradition because
there be such books extant. And good Sir, consider how great our necessities
are of both these helps; for even now when we have Scriptures and Traditions,
we have ever had with them a perpetual succession of horrible divisions
opening still wider and wider; All commonly caused by the misinterpretation of
the Scripture, to which inconvenience they were not subject before all
Scripture was written. And therefore, in this respect there is now after the
writing of the Scripture, a greater necessity then ever of Tradition, both to
assure us which books be the word of God, which not, which be the true which
the false Copies of these books? Where they be secure, where corrupted? And
lastly which is the true sense of them and which not? For the sense even in
necessary matters, as I have showed in the last Chapter, is far from being
evident. Again Tradition does of its own self naturally continue in its full
force and vigor, after the same things are wrirten as well as it did before,
as appears by what I just now said of the unwritten traditions by which many
men only know France or Spain, yea rather, the increasing of it (by being
divulged in writing by most credible and manifold Authors) does very much
strengthen this former tradition, so far is it from taking any thing from it:
wherefore God must purposely by a miracle have infringed the course of Nature
(which no man can say he did) if the former Traditions of the Church (which
before the writing of any Scripture did fully suffice alone to ground an
infallible faith of such and such points, should grow then to lose their
sufficiency in order to the same effect, when they were strengthened by so great
an authority as that of the Sacred Writers was. Hence is confuted the opinion
of Protestants, teaching the Authority of Traditions to have expired when the
whole Canon of the Scripture was finished, though not before: For which they
have no Scripture at all. And if they go by reason, they are to say Tradition
was rather more strengthened, yea if they will not say this, yet consequently
they should say that Tradition revived again (at least in part) when some part
of the Canon was lost, yet you ought not to say that Tradition expired at the
finishing of the Canon, without it can be showed that God did express this
unto the Church so to undeceive those many thousands who had then reason to
think that they might securely build their belief upon that, upon which for
about four thousand years, so many had until that day built their faith.
When Saint Paul, or any other Canonical writer preached first that doctrine,
which afterward he did write, did the belief of those thousands which was at
first sufficiently grounded upon his preaching, come to lose its certainty, or
rather to gain a new degree of certainty, when Saint Paul came afterward to
write that they must hold the Traditions he had delivered to them, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
1 Gal. 2.
and that though an Angel should come and teach them contrary to what they had
received (by his Orall Tradition) they should account him Anathema. And again,
Have thou a form of sound words which thou have heard of me 1. Tim. chap. 1.
And again chap. 2. the things which thou have heard (he says not, read) of me
by many witnesses, these commend to faithful men which shall be fit to teach
others also. Would the writing of such Scriptures make them think any force
taken from Traditions, or rather make them conceive that Traditions are to be
stood upon now more then ever before. Again, what wise man would put out one
light, costing him nothing, because it will be shining of its own nature
(unless you will needs have it hidden) because he has now another light, but
so that even with both these lights, many of his household will still remain
in darkness. But if you say that if Scripture had not been given us we should
have had a more certain Tradition given unto us, I would know of you upon what
account the Tradition of so Noble a Church as Christ's Church is, should be of
less credit or certainty, then the Tradition of that far less Noble Church
which was in the Law of Nature. What means had they then given by God to
secure their Tradition for the space of 4000. years, which we want for the
having secured our Traditions for these last 1654. years? This means you can
by no means assign, and therefore, by all means, you must grant the Traditions
of this Nobler Church to have been as securely preserved from Corruption for
these fewer years, as those Traditions of a far less Noble Church, were
preserved without corruption for above 4000 years. Again the Tradition of
Christ's primitive Church before the Scriptures were written, and sufficiently
promulged (which Tradition did by an infallible authority recommend all things)
was to be believed upon her sole authority, and so was the Tradition of the
first Church before there was any Scripture, and therefore by good consequence
she in the first place reco^mended herauthority to be believed as divine and
infallible, and all the true believers believed it to be so, which they could
not have done without God had said so; for all divine belief rests upon the
saying of God. God therefore said (by that his Church) that her Traditions were
infallible for her authority. Now if God said this, shall we upon your fallible
discourse come to say the Church's Traditions are now no longer infallible
though God said they were so, and never yet expressed the ceasing of their
infallibility. By this you will see whether my Answer has helped you, or your
reply helped me concerning what will follow out of St. Irenaeus.

13. For this serves for making good what I said out of St. Irenaeus so far
as he is a witness (which a profane author might have been) of what happened so
near his times. For as for his authority, as he is a most grave Father of the
Church and a most believing that to be true which he commended to writing as
most true, I do not press it against you. Yet because here you thank St.
Irenaeus for his testimony, and make a show as if it were for you (though you
cannot invent the means by which Tradition should have been conveyed more
certainly supposing there had been no Scripture), I could not but observe how
so soon as you have hugged him, you cast him off again with small respect, when
you say Neither can we believe that those barbarous Nations did rely only upon
Tradition, They might be commended to the doctrine of the Gospel by Tradition
and then not believe it for the sake of Tradition. How flatly be these your
words against St. Irenaeus who clearly declares all himself to tell us upon
what ground we must have been obliged to believe, though the Apostles had never
written any Scriptures at all: What (says he) if the Apostles had not left us
the Scriptures, must we not have followed that order of Tradition which they
delivered to those, to whose Charges they left the Church to be governed? To
this order of tradition by the unwritten word many barbarous Nations do assent,
who have believed in Christ without any writings, keeping diligently the
ancient Traditions. What brings he this example of these Barbarous Nations
for, but to show that we might with divine faith believe upon the sole account
of that very tradition which the Apostles de facto left to those to whom they
left the Churches government, although the Apostles had never written at all at
any time? He therefore was none of those who would say with you neither can we
believe that those barbarous Nations did rely only upon traditions; For if they
had relied upon any things else in their belief, their example had bin nothing
to his purpose to show what we should have done when we had only Tradition to
rely upon.

14. As for arguing about Tradition I went no Further then to show, that the
Tradition of the Church testifying her own infallibility (in proposing for Gods
word that which she delivers us (for Gods Word) as worthy of an infallible
assent in this point. And the examples I bring, prove this. Now if this point
be once assented unto with an infallible assent, it draws by unevitable
Consequence the like assent to all other points, which by the same authority
are testified to be likewise delivered as Gods Word; Or else you must be forced
to say that it is in our power to assent to this authority as divine in all
things it delivers as Gods Word, and yet to deny it in some things which it
delivers as Gods word, which is a plain contradiction. Well then if upon this
presupposed authority as infallible, I believe the Church delivering such and
such points by her doctors and teachers, which be points never written; then it
is manifest I believe her in other points then those which were then written;
and so I may with as good reason believe her now upon her own authority,
testifying other points then those which are written. Whence you see all I say
holds good even in Traditions of proper name which we say are besides that
which is written. I cannot conclude more opposite to you then with your own
words here P. 73. Tradition in matters of faith unwritten is of equal
authority to scripture. The Traditions we stand upon be matters of faith truly
once revealed by our Savior or his Apostles, though this revelation were not
written by them; Therefore this is of equal authority to Scripture even
according to your own words.

15 I going on to prove yet further that Christ intended to guide us not by the
Scripture only, but chiefly by his Church, used this argument Neither the
Apostles nor their Successors took any care to have the Scripture communicated
to all Nations in such languages as all, or the greater part of them could
understand. You answer; they did take care that the new Testament should be
written in Greek. Then you being still to prove that Greek was understood by
all, or the greater part of the world, your only proof of this is only out of
Tully; saying, Graeca per totum Orbem leguntur, Greek is read though the whole
World, and so is Virgil in latin. But neither the one nor the other is to be
understood in a sense making to our purpose; for both these sayings are only
true thus, that the more learned sort of men every where read Greek, and
Virgil. And these words of Tully being delivered in on Encomiasticall Oration
(pro Archia) may truly be said to be spoken by way of a Notable amplification.
And either this must be confessed, or Scripture denied. For it is evident out
of Scripture. That the Vulgar language of diverse Nations situated, even
between that place we call Constantinople, and the City of Antioch, in which a
man would suppose the Greek language far more common, then in the more
Western or any Northern, or Southern places, yet I say even between those two
Cities of Antioch (where the same Tully says, Archias was born and studied)
and Constantinople, the Greek tongue was not the Vulgar language of Pontus,
Cappadocia, Asia minor, Phrygia, Pamphilia, all which Nations the Scripture (
Act. 2.) testifies to have had different languages. Within that compass is
also Galatia which Saint Hierome testifies to have had a language somewhat
like those of Trevers. If nations so near Greece had not the Vulgar use of
that language, but that tongue had so small a compass even in Asia, and some
few Eastern parts of Europe, all other parts of Europe and whole Africa using
Vulgarly other Tongues, how short do you fall of proving that Greek was
understood by the greater part of the World? And if this cannot be proved, then
I said truly that though the Apostles writ the new Testament in Greek, yet they
did not take any care to have it communicated to all Nations in such Languages,
as they could all, or the greater part understand. For all, or the greater part
could not understand Greek; call here to mind how loud you use to cry out
against us for using our Common prayer in Lattin, though Lattin be so common
among all well bred people. And yet our Common prayer is a thing only offered
to God by the Priests (who understand what they say) for the people. But the
New Testament contains (as you say) the only necessary ground of faith, faith
necessary to salvation. But the falsity of this your saying is convinced by the
Apostles taking no care (neither read we of any care taken for many years
after their times) to communicate the whole Canon of Scripture to the several
converted Nations in their several tongues; I pray name me the time when the
Scripture can be first showed to have bin thus communicated to the people of so
several languages? You will sweat for some hundred years before you can find
this either done or effectually desired to be done. They know the tongue could
sufficiently deliver Gods Word to the people, and that Orall Tradition joined
to daily profession, practice would abundantly suffice for the infallible
delivery of Gods Word.

16. You move the question how the people should clearly know the true
tradition from the false? I answer first they could know this better then know
true Scripture from false, for they could not do that, but by knowing first the
true Tradition recommending the true Scriptures from the Tradition recommending
false. Again, after Christ they could do this as well (and better) then their
forefathers for many hundreds of years, yea for two thousand, yea for twice two
thousand years together. Reflect a little upon the efficacy of Tradition,
joined with perpetual profession, and answerable practice daily occurring. For
example. The Apostles by only unwriting Tradition did clearly, undeniably
teach the baptizing of Children, prayer for the faithful departed. This
Tradition from hence came to be Professed as true doctrine by all the first
Christians, and conformably hereunto, they in all places baptized their
Children, in all places they prayed for the faithful departed. Nothing more
common then being born: every one that is born dies: whence daily was the
practice of baptizing infants and yet more daily the practice of praying for
the dead, because they baptize infants but once, but they pray often for the
same man who is dead. Will we suppose these two traditions are called in
question concerning the truth of them. And let us suppose this to be done (as
it was done) in the last age. Learned men looking in Records of their own and
all other Countries, will find every where Christnings, and every where prayers
for the dead, all inscriptions of graves, all wills and testaments, all
foundations of pious places will testify this custom far more strongly then
that of Baptism, yea in no one country nor in any one age since Christ
(until this last following age) did ever any one man deny praying for the
dead, except Aerius counted for this his opinion an Heretic by St. Austin and
by St. Epiphanius as you know very well. Hence it is made evidently credible to
any learned man that this Tradition of baptizing Infants, and much more the
Tradition of praying for the dead, came to us from the Apostles, it not being
possible for all true believers, in so many several countries, and so many
several ages, to agree in the profession and daily practice of this truth,
without they had received these two things jointly with their first faith, else
the novelty and the authors of such a novelty, would in some time or some
place, have been made known to posterity, for no one man's work was it, no, nor
no one hundred men's work, to bring all men, every where, to any such novelty
with so unanimous, and no where contradicted consent. The Ignorant people will
have the truth of these Traditions also made evidently credible unto them by
the public, unanimous and universal consent of all ancient men and all Ancient
Monuments and also the like unanimous affirmation of all learned men of any
standing, who will all and every where profess themselves assured of it, by
their Learning and certain knowledge of those Traditions proved in the manner I
now said. This makes the matter evidently credible to the ignorant. Wherefore
they should do most imprudently not to believe that these points came from the
Apostles, and then supposing that they came from them, they should do a
damnable sin not to believe them. Can any rational man desire a more rational
proceeding? How many true believers commended in Scripture, cannot give so
prudent a reason for what they believed? How we proceeding thus escape clearly
all Circle I told you the last Chapter. Numb. 31.32. Now as you must grant that
our Church (submitted unto as infallible) presently by her authority decides
all controversies; so her Traditions once acknowledged as infallible, will
decide the points questioned. The Scripture never so clear can never decide any
one controversy until it be first acknowledged. Thus you see the two things
which you here desired to see.

17. After this I passed to another quality which the Church has, and the
Bible has not, though it be a quality primely necessary to decide all
controversies, whence it appears that God intended not the Bible but the
Church to be our judge. This quality is, that the Church is a living judge who
can be informed of all Controversies arising from time to time, and who can
hear me and you, and be heard by me and you so manifestly, that neither I nor
you can doubt of the true meaning of this Church, or if we do doubt we can
propose our doubts and she will explicate, her meaning. Such a living judge as
this we must have to put effectually an End to all Controversies that can
arise. And as for the Bible I have showed that it does not decide all points
necessary to Salvation, the Bible hears not new Controversies arising, as I
prove by this clear example. An Arrian* sta^^eth up (as really he did) and
says that these words of the Scripture, These three are one are words added by
us to the true Scripture. This Controversy and a thousand such like the Bible
hears not, the Bible judges not, for there is not a word of it in all the
Bible. And though you say you can see true Scripture by its light, you shall
never get any man to believe that you your self do really believe that you see
every verse in Scripture, by its light. No light appears so dimm as these
words appear to man. Three are one. Yet besides this light you (who reject
Church Tradition as fallible) you I say, have left you no other infallible
ground, nor any infallible means to convince the Arrian, until you hold the
Church infallible. All other use which you say you make of the (Church)
suffices not to ground an infallible assent, for when all comes to all, you
make any private man, and consequently every Arrian Cobbler (as I showed) the
last Court of Judicature in giving the final sentence, on which all depends.
For he must be the last judge, who after the Churches judgment, must give
sentence that she has, or has not judged against Scripture. That you may see
my argument is not peccant; I will frame both the Premises and the Conclusion
thus. Faith being an infallible assent, Controversies concerning faith cannot
be determined so as to end then effectually, but by an infallible living judge
who can hear you and me, and be heard by you and me. But no other then the
Church, can (with any ground) be held to be this living judge; Therefore She
must be held to be this judge. I do not without Reason put in my Premises the
term of infallible, for faith being an infallible assent, must needs require
an infallible authority to rest upon. This Authority she must find in all
points to which she is bound to give this assent. But she is bound to give this
assent to diverse points not proposed clearly in Scripture as I showed the last
Chapter. Therefore she is bound to give this assent to diverse of those points
only, because they are proposed by the Church, to which she could not possibly
be bound to give an infallible assent, without due assurance of her
infallibility.

48 You object that the Church Traditions cannot hear you and me. I answer that
it is the Church who proposes these Traditions, and not the Traditions which
are our judge; you ask me whither an Heretic be not condemned by himself as
Saint Paul says, and you interpret his saying, so that he must needs be
condemned by himself, for no other reason, but because he had in him the
principles of the word of God, which he gainsaid by his contrary error, and so
he was condemned thereby, and therefore that can Judge. Sir he is not an
Heretic but an infidel who is told by his own Conscience, that he gain-saith
the Scripture. All christians are readier to die then to disbelieve any one
saying of the Scripture. When St. Paul writ those words, the whole Canon of the
Scripture was not written, and until the whole Canon was written your own
Doctors grant the Church to have been the infallible judge of Controversies. And
I wonder you should say, the Church at the writing of this by St. Paul was not
sufficiently formed, which the same St. Paul testifies to have been formed
before his conversion, accusing himself for having above measure persecuted
the Church of God. And before his conversion, the Number of the disciples was
multiplied, Act. 6. yea Act. 8. Simon Magus was turned Heretic before St. Paul
was turned Christian, or any word of the new Scripture was written. The meaning
of St. Paul is that an Heretic might, if he would, clearly see his private
doctrine to be opposite to the known public Doctrine of the Church, which
Church then shined with the glory of infinite Miracles, stupendous
conversions, and most eminent Sanctity, and was then formed most completely
with all things necessary to infallible direction to the true faith. Yea you
will say she was then more completely furnished to that end then ever she was
since that time.

49. Now because your chief exception against the Churches being our judge, is
that you hold her not infallible, besides all the proofs I have already brought
of her infallibility, I shall now add diverse more. But in the first place I
must a little more fully tell you what we understand by the name of the Church:
He who is a seeker of his Religion must first believe the Universal Church
diffused to be furnished by God with true infallible means to direct us
securely in all doubts of faith, wherefore he most prudently judges himself
bound to join himself to her in faith, being convinced that she directed most
securely in faith. Being thus also a seeker resolved to join to these true
believers. When he proceeds further to take a particular account in whom this
infallible means (given to the Church Universal) of directing all securely in
matters of faith does consist, he will readily find that it does not consist in
all the members of the Universal Church, for Children and women be of the
Church, and yet their Vote (in no man's opinion) is required to the deciding any
controversy in faith, the Laiety also has no decisive Voice in those points,
nor every inferior Clergy man, but only such as are Prelates, Overseers and
Governors over the rest. So that in fine this infallible direction is
Unanimously affirmed by us all, to be undoubtedly settled upon the authority of
the prime Pastors and Prelates of the Church assembled together in a lawful
general Council, with their chief Pastor and Head the Bishop of Rome:
Against a thing so easily to be understood you cry out aloud of strange
intricatenesse and inextricable proceedings. And yet I think most clowns of
this Land did easily understand what was meant by a decree of the Kingdom, to
the which the consent of King and Kingdom assembled in Parliament (as the
custom was for many years together) was required. Now what more difficulty is
there to know what we mean by a decree, or Definition of the Church; The
kingdom representative was the king and the Parliament, The Church
representative is the chief Bishop with the full Assembly of the other Bishops
in a lawful Council; the Decrees, and definitions of which assembly be the
decrees and definition of the Church. In a thing so clear you labor your
uttermost to raise a thick mist.

50. First you object who can be certain by a divine faith of the lawfulnes and
Regularity of a Pope in his first creation. I answer that when I speak of a
Pope defining in a lawful Council (as I do now speak) I speak of such a Pope
to whom the Church submitted in calling the Council, and whom the Church
admits as her lawful head to preside in the Council, These very acts supply
all defects in his election and do make it evidently credible that he is the
true head who thus admitted defined with the Council as their acknowledged
head. Secondly you ask when there was Pope against Pope, who of the people
could distinguish the right Pope. I answer, that he shall ever be esteemed the
right Pope to whom the Prelates of the Church shall unanimously obey, when he
calls them to meet in a general Council, and in this Council to preside over
them. To to have two such Popes, as these are, at one time is impossible. And
this is the only time in which a Pope defines with a lawful Council. What you
say of Popes not defining in such a Council is not our Case put me a Pope
defining with a lawful Council and then prove him fallible if you can. Whether
the Popes definitions out of a Council be fallible or infallible makes nothing
to this purpose. Only this is evident if they be infallible out of a Council,
they be infallible in a Council. Thirdly you think that no Controversies can
(in our opinion) be decided when there is a doubt who is true Pope. And you ask
who is then to call a Council. And when the Council is called you think us to
think that this Council can define nothing without a Pope. I doubt not Sir but
you have found a clear answer to all this in Bellarm lib. 2. de Concilis Chap.
19. that although a Council without a Pope cannot define any article of faith,
yet in time of schism it can judge which is true Pope, and provide the Church
of a true Pastor if she had none, who thus provided by the Councels authority,
may dissolve the Council if he pleases or if he please to have them remain
assembled, they remain so now by his authority, and can define as well as
other Councels called by the Pope. In that meeting in which the Pope was to be
chosen, or declared the undoubted Pope, the Prelates of the Church might and
ought to meet upon their own authority, and assemble themselves. Fourthly you
ask how we can by divine faith come to be assured of the lawfulnes and
generality of Councels, for Councels have been called by Emperors not by
Popes; Sir your Church which never had, nor shall have general Council, is to
seek in all things belonging to them. Our Church almost in every age since
Constantine has been visibly assembled in general Councels, and by perpetual
practice has been sufficiently informed to deliver (by the assistance of the
Holy Ghost) all that she has received from her ancestors to be essential to a
true Council, and to deliver this point infallibly. To your objection in order
I answer, first, That it is out of Scripture evident that there is no divine
institution by which either Emperors be assured to be still found in the
world, or that, when they have that dignity, they be by divine institution
invested with a power to call Councels. We seek for this divine Institution.
This we will not admit until it can be showed in Scripture or Tradition, the
fact of calling, shows not divine Institution. Secondly as for the Prelates
of the Church we can show divine Institution, Act. 20.28. Bishops placed by the
Holy Ghost over all the flock to feed or govern the Church of God. And 4. Epho.
Not lay Magistrates but only Ecclesiastical are said to be given us by Christ,
for the work of the Ministry for the edifying of the body of Christ, that
henceforth we may not be carried about with every wind of doctrine etc.
Thirdly, The Emperor, is not by divine Institution Lord of the Christian
world. No nor of any considerable part of it. Wherefore seeing that a motive
power is no motive power any further then it can, or ought to be able to
motive, the Imperial power, which cannot move further then it reigns, nor
ought not to move further, cannot consequently command any further then his
territory at the uttermost. The power of the chief Pastor of the Universal
Church is coextended to the Universal Church. All Bishops of the Universal
being to be moved, must be moved by such a power as this is. If Emperors
called councils it was not by an Ecclesiastical calling, such an one as the
Pope called them by at the very self same time, but the Emperors calling was
only political, proceeding from a temporal power, subserving to the
Ecclesiastical, and not able to force them by censure in case of refusing to
come, as the Ecclesiastical power could, which power implored the Imperial
assistance to concur with her, only for the more effectual excution. Perhaps
sometimes Emperors might venture to call, dependently of the ratification of
the supreme Pastor which they presumed would be assuredly obtained in so just
necessities as there seemed to press for a speedy meeting. If Emperors were
present in Councels it was only by their presence and good countenance to
honor, encourage, and further the proceedings of the Council, and to pass
their Vote in points of belief. You add something else now but it comes again
presently. Fifthly you object, How shall we know that every one of the Council
has a free election to it, and a free decisive Vote in it? I answer the
freedom of every man's calling is made evidently credible by the public
su^mons sent through the whole Christian world obeyed by the same without any
pertinatious opposition, and the answerable public apperance from all parts of
the world every one exhibiting the publickely authenticated testimony of his
election, and confirmation. If any man be excluded he may (without he will
renounce his right) be heard in the Council, which being a public hearing, the
matter cannot but be known. Many yet never were, nor can be thus injured
without making their injury notorious by publik protestations and such lik
remedies always used against unjust exclusion, or hinderance of liberty in
Voting. If the Council be known notoriously to use such procedings we are not
to acknowledge it for a lawful Council. Again as private men's proceedings are
not to be judgeed bad unless they can be proved to be so, much less ought the
proceedings of the Church representative to be judged bad without sufficient
proof of the contrary. And when such evident and notorious ill proceedings are
not apparent, nothing can be solidly objected against the lawfulness of the
Council. And therefore it being to be admitted as a lawful Council, it
belongs to the Holy Ghost to provide that their difinitions be not
prejudicial to the Church put under his protection, and direction. You only
look what the inward nature of humane malice might act, but you should also
look to the extrinsical overruling providence promised by God against humane
malice, and weakness. This is that which makes all these factions, and
bandings, and domineering self interest never to be effectually destructive of
that secure direction promised by God to his Church. Though hell gates should
be set wide open they should not prevail against her. Sixthly you ask how
shall ignorant people be divinely persuaded that the Council is general? I
answer, the public Summons to the Council sent through the Christian world,
The Public appearance of Prelates made upon these summons from all parts of the
world, Their public sitting, public subscribing, public divulging their
decrees and definitions, acknowledged truly to be theirs by all present, denied
by no man to be theirs with the least show of probability, no more then such an
Act is denied to be the Act of such a Parliament. All these motives, I say,
makes it evidently credible to the ignorant and to the learned that this is
the true definition of the Church. Now this being evidently credible to be her
definition, and I believing by divine faith, all her definitions to be true. I
also believe this definition amongst the rest to be true. It is a great sign
you are ill furnished with strong arguments, when you would persuade us that in
things so easy to be known there be such insuperable difficulties. The Council
of Trents definitions concerning faith were never opposed by France, though
some things ordained for practice seemed less suitable to the particular state
of that Kingdom, yet this difficulty was at last removed. Seventhly you ask
how many Bishops in the Trent Council were furnished with a title to overpower
the rest for the Popes ends. I pray Sir, tell me how many. But tell me by
credible witnesses (such as are their own subscriptions) who can assure me of
this truth; And when you have told me this, give me leave to ask what one of
them was as much as suspected to be of a faith different from the rest. If they
differed not in faith from the rest, how then can the Pope be suspected to have
acted against faith by making such Bishops. Again does the making of such
Bishops make the holy Ghost unable to order things so in the council that
nothing shall happen destructive of the secure direction undertaken to be
afforded for ever by him. Saul shall sooner turn a Prophet, and Caiphas shall
prophecy not knowing what he does, before the spirit of truth, sent to teach
the Church all truth, shall fail in his duty. Eighthly you ask how the Church
was provided for when for so many years there was no Pope defining with a
Council? This time you mean was the first three hundred years after Christ,
when for persecution no Council could be gathered. All this time the known
doctrine of the Apostles remained so fresh, and so notorious by the Tradition
of the Church diffused, and there remained also so Universal a respect and
obedience to the chief Bishop of the Church notoriously known to be the
upholder of true doctrine, that the Church wanted not means to decide
Controversies as far as the necessity of those times required: whence the
Quartodecimani although they opposed nothing set down clearly in Scripture,
were Judged Heretics for opposing the doctrine of the first Church made
evidently known by fresh Tradition. Now as the Church could want Councils for
so many years, so it could want Councils for the short space of schism. For the
necessity of new declarations it not so frequent at least in any high degree of
necessity, calling for instant remedy, and a reme-of this nature only,
Scripture alone, you say will remedy this necessity. We besides scripture have
always at hand, the many definitions of former Councils, and the known
Traditions of the Church, which alone served Gods Church in those two thousand
years before Scripture, and for two thousand years more served the faithful
amongst the Gentiles who had not the Scriptures, which remained almost solely
and alone to the Jews. Ninthly you ask if the Pope and Council do differ at
any time about some question, what shall be defined? I answer nothing shall be
defined because this essential hinderance manifests no definition of such a
particular question, to it at that time necessary for the preservation of the
Church; for if this depended upon such a present definition, the Holy Ghost
(whom you still forget) would not forget to inspire the parties requisite to do
their duties. Tenthly you ask how my opinion stands with theirs who affirm the
government of the Church to be Monarchical by Christ's institution. I answer
our government in England was Monarchical this last five hundred years, and yet
our Monarchs could not do all things without a Parliament. Again those who make
the Pope sufficiently assisted to define all alone, cannot possibly deny what I
say, to wit, that he is sufficiently assisted when he defines with a Council.
Eleventhly, you ask, How many (general) Counsels have been opposite to one
another. I answer. Not so much as one. You ask again, in which or with which
did he not err. I answer, he neither erred in or with any. In the Nicene he
erred not, as you will grant, nor in the three next General Councels, as your
Church of England grants. He subscribed not in the Council of Ariminum, how
then did he err in it? yea because he subscribed not, that Council is never
accounted lawful by any but Arrians; or if your English Church accounted that a
lawful Council, they must admit that, whilst they admit the first four
Councels. So that I am amazed to see a learned man four or five times object
the contrariety of the Council of Ariminum to the Council of Nice, to prove
from thence that two lawful general Councels can be opposite to one another,
you knowing well that this Council of Ariminum was no lawful Council, the chief
Bishop and head of the Church not subscribing in it. Tell me I pray, if by all
your great reading, you can find one single Holy Father who did ever censure
any one general Council of doctrine, in any one point either false, or opposite
to any former lawful general Council. In what age then live we, which licenseth
every Mechanical fellow, freely to tax the Councels of all ages of errors
against Scripture. This is the fruit of crying out in what Council or with what
Council did not the Pope err. Twelfthly, you ask me (I pray see my 12. Number
above, fine) did ever any of the ancient councels determine of their own
infallibility. I answer the ancientest council of all said, Visum est Spiritui
Sancto and nobis, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us. Could any thing
fallible seem good to the Holy Ghost? Or to a council lawfully assembled in the
holy Ghost, as all lawful councils were ever supposed by themselves to be? and
upon this ground they ever assumed an authority sufficient not only to be
securely followed by the whole Church in their definitions, but denounced an
Anathema to the rejectors of their definitions; which had been wickedly done if
there might have been errors in faith. The most bloody persecution of tyrants
could not have been half so pernicious to the Church, as it was thus to be
taught, and compelled by the unanimous authority of Christendom, to embrace
that as Catholic doctrine, which is an error in faith. And surely a practice
so Universal, so frequent, and yet so pernicious, would have been cried out
upon over and over again, by the most zealous and learned ancient Fathers, who
notwithstanding never opened their mouths against this proceeding of councils
which could not be justifiable. For this proceeding of settling a court of so
great authority, and an everlasting Court to be called in matters of greatest
moment until the end of the world, so to teach the world in all ages the
Catholic truth, in greatest points, if in place of this truth, errors against
faith could have been perpetually obtruded even to the whole world, and that
with the greatest authority in the world; and this under pain of being cut off
from the body of Christ; imagine if you can a thing more pernicious then this.
And yet this was the proceeding of all antiquity if the Church were fallible as
you say. Thirtenthly you ask me what I think of Nazianzens opinion about
councels in his Ep. to Procopius the 12 as you say, but I find it in the 42.
Sir I think if what you have said, against the proof of any point out of the
General consent of Fathers, be true; no single proof, brought from some one of
them, can have any force out of your mouth, what force soever it might have had
out of a Mouth used to speak otherwise of them. But you are pressing and
asking, shall I tell you, yes Sir tell me. Yet let me tell you that what he
says will be nothing to the purpose unles he can be showed to speak of a
lawful free General Council called, and directed by the chief Pastor of the
Church presiding in it: now Sir tell me, does he speak of such a council? His
words are, I am thus affected as to shun all meetings of Bishops, (if I must
speak the truth) for I never saw any good end of a Synod, nor that had an end
of evils more then an addition. Sir you much wrong this grave Father if you
think he speaks of such councils as I now mentioned. Before his speaking
these words there had been but one such council, to wit, that of Nice. Let us
hear from himself his opinion of this one council out of those Treatises which
go just before his Epistles, which you might have read as well as them. In the
first of these Treatises being asked the most certain doctrine of faith; He
answers that it is that which was promulgated by the Holy Fathers at Nice,
and that he never did prefer nor was able to prefer any thing before it, so He
Tract. 50. And in his next Treatise he explicates this faith at large. And in
the end he says he does embrace the treatise of this council to the uttermost
power of his mind, knowing it opposed with invincible verity against all
Heretics, and in his Orations to Saint Athanasius he says, The Fathers of
this council were gathered by the Holy Ghost. Saint Gregory then, who speaks
thus, had the same spirit that the other Saint Gregory (the great) who said, I
do profess my self to reverence the first four councils as I reverence the
four books of the Gospel. And in this manner do I reverence the fifth council.
Whosoever is of another mind let him be an Anathema, l. 1 Epistol. Ep. prope
finem. He then who thus reverenced lawful general councils, did not doubtless
speak the former words concerning them. But did he perhaps speak them of lawful
particular Councils? No, how then? It was hard fortune to live in a time, in
which the Arrians had so great power that they disturbed the lawful proceedings
of several particular councils. Hence the councils of Seleucum, Tirus,
Ariminu^, Millan, Smyrna, came to unfortunate conclusions, rather increasing
then lessening the former evils. Neither were the times so altered that there
appeared any great likelihood that in those parts, any better conclusion could
be expected of that council to which he was called, when he writ that Epistle.
So also Saint Basil (his bosom friend) writing at that time to Saint Athanasius
Ep. 52. said He thought it impossible for a General Council to be assembled in
those times. Clear then it is that Saint Gregory spoke only of such councils as
had lately been held and could be held in those days, in which the Arrians
would be sure to cross all that might be good and to make those particular
meetings patronize their cause. What you further speak of a private Bishop of
Bitonto telling the Fathers of the council of Trent to their face, of their
falling with one consent from Religion to superstition, from Faith unto
infidelity, from Christ unto Antichrist, from God to Epicurus, is a thing I
never yet did read in any credible Historian; And I dare say never any credible
Historian, from Christ's time until that time, ever could find such a saucy
speech to relate in History, used as yet by any modest, or immodest Catholic
to the face of a Council. And can you put on a forehead to countenance such a
speech, not having any one example from Christ's time to this day as I said? So
it is. The Catholics and only the Roman Catholics have been the men who were
still employed in upholding the authority of councils of Fathers, and you
cannot (I say it again and again) find an example from Christ's time unto this
age, of any who were not known Heretics, who were carping at the authority of
councils or Fathers. You spoke full enough before of the Fathers. I think you
have not wanted much of doing your worst against councels, although you said in
another place, In what do we oppose Councels? and you would seem to acknowledge
them the highest Tribunal on earth, though so much be said, for their
vilification. And when you have cried down the authority of Fathers and
patronized the reprochful language of this private Man against a whole council,
of what authority do you think this one private man's saying could be?

21. Hence you see how little all this serves for an answer of what yet is to
be answered in the 21 Number of my former paper, specially when I shall have
added the other proofs which I have of the assistance of the Holy Ghost
promised to his Church. Of this by and by. Now you invite me to re-examin the
Determinations of the council of Trent. It appears by what I said Chap. 2.
Number. 4.5.6.7. That it is fine doctrine that determinations of councils should
be examined by such as I and you are. Have we such assistance of the Holy Ghost
as councils have? Have we half the authority, or any thing like one quarter of
even the wit and learning which they have? Sir, Let us two set down and examine
how true this is which I shall now say. Either the dete^minations of General
Councils be such as are evidently against clear Scripture, or the Texts which
we think they gainsay be not evident to the contrary, which if they be not, it
would be a wonderful imprudence in me, and you, to think we should surer hit
right upon the meaning of obscure places in Scripture then the whole council
has done. But now if the places alledgeable against the councils be evidently
clear Texts, do you think to persuade any pious and prudent Man, that so very
many (and many of them so very eminent for piety and for prudence) as are known
to have subscribed to so many General Councils, not to have been able to see
that which has been evidently set down before all their Eyes in clear
Scripture? God give us Humility. God give us charity. God have mercy upon us in
the bitter day of his Judgment, if we pass so bitter a Judgment against the
whole Church representative. And yet if you pass not this bitter Judgment, you
will never pass this objection without being posed.

22. Good Sir, what mean you here to bid me say no more of this point
(concerning the Holy Ghost giving to his Church an assistance reaching to
infallibility,) but you would have me now measure the infallibility of our
councils or Churches by their determinations, and to see how they agree with
Scripture. Let us not (say you) see your opinions by infallibility but your
infallibility by your determinations set forth by your Church. Remember Sir,
what you find in the 7 Number of this chapter where you undertake to instruct
me in the right way of disputing, according to which I should not stand showing
the Churches determinations to be such as should be obeyed, but I should show a
priori (as they say) that she is infallible and that therefore her definitions
are to be admitted. Now when I come to do what you would have me to do, you cry
out, say no more of this point, but go now the other way, cast the weight of
this argument upon the other shoulder. It galleth me upon this. Sir, by your
good leave I must dwell upon this argument yet a great while. The more it
presses the better it is.

23. This I will do by passing to my 22. Number, Of my 22th. Number.
where first you stumble, and then tread upon Luther. Let him ly where you
will. He is no better then his Fathers. I step over him: and so prove this
infallibility of the Church. I cite Saint Paul, Tim. 3.15. calling the Church
of the living God the pillar and ground of Faith. May not all securely in their
faith, rely upon the pillar of Truth? May they not most groundedly ground
themselves upon the ground of Truth it self? You answer, There is a double
pillar, and a double ground, one principal, the Scripture, the other less
principal and subordinate, the Church. But this double dealing in
distinguishing helps you not. The Church must still be a true pillar, and a
true ground of Truth. The people believed God and Moses, says the Scripture.
Moses was infinitely under God, yet this hindered not his being truly such a
pillar of Truth as was to be relied upon securely in matters of Faith. I apply
all to Moses in respect of God, what you apply to the Scripture in respect of
the Church. And yet after all this as they might rely upon Moses as a pillar of
Truth, so we upon the Church. All true believers for two thousand years before
the writing of Scripture had no other ground to stand upon but this Church, the
ground of Truth. And therefore a ground sure enough, and yet not sure enough if
fallible. Yea, the true believers to whom Saint Paul did write these words. The
Church is the pillar and ground of Truth, had not the whole Canon of the
Scripture, which collectively taken makes your other ground of Christian
belief to stand upon; therefore Saint Paul's words were spoken of the Church as
of such a pillar of truth, and such a ground of truth, as might then be
securely relied upon in all matters of faith; and confessedly as then the true
believers had not the Scriptures sufficiently completed to be their adaequate
Rule of Faith. Now after the writings of these, Scripture recommending the
Church as the pillar and ground of Truth, this ground was so far from growing
weaker, that the confirmation of Scripture added new force to it. I have now
showed you the Text, in which without any subordination to Scripture (as then
not written) the Church was by Saint Paul called the pillar and ground of
Truth. Now show me your Text in which there must be a subordination, and such a
subordination as may make the Church not to be truly such a pillar and such a
ground of Truth, as all men may not now rely on it any longer as they did
before all Scripture was written. I call for your Text, not for your reason,
against which other Reasons will soon be found. And as for that saying of Saint
Irenaus, the Scripture is the pillar and ground of Truth; it has not upon his
saying greater authority, then the terming of the Church the pillar and ground
of truth has upon the authority of St. Paul. My proof, as grounded on S.
Paul, is stronger then yours as grounded on St. Irenaeus: yet I make not St.
Irenaeus contrary to St. Paul, what he says of the Scripture I yield for true,
yield me what St. Paul says that I may ground my faith upon the Church. This I
cannot do unless God speaks by his Church. If God speaks by his Church I
pray believe what he speaks. He tells me by his Church, that I am to admit
of the Scriptures as his undoubted word, upon this his telling me so, I ground
that faith by which I believe the Scriptures, so that I believe the Scriptures
for the Church, which faith of mine is as surely grounded as was the faith of
the true believers, who at that very time, in which St. Paul did write these
words, did ground their faith in all points upon the Church as you cannot deny.
And thus in repect of us, the Church is first believed independently of
Scripture, to which we are most prudently moved by such motives as I have
specified, and the Scripture in order to us, comes to be acknowledged as Gods
word upon the authority of the Church, there being no other assured stay
(speaking of the whole and undoubted Canon) to know the true Scripture from
false. The Scripture is not the first Principle, but upon supposition, that
every one among christians admit of it for Gods Word, and so we argue out of it
against one another. But speaking of him, who is to begin to be a christian (as
where all once began) he cannot admit of Scripture as men admit of the first
Principles of Sciences, which of themselves appear so clearly true, that all
you can bring to prove their truth will appear less true then those Principles
appear by themselves. The Scripture is not the first Principle in this sense
appearing evidently by its own light to be Gods Word, as I have showed at
large. And this answers all you say until you come to make good your new
interpretation of St. Paul's words, an interpretation unheard of to all
antiquity, and to all men until this age. Necessity now forced men to their
shifts to put off Scripture when it made against them. These words must now be
necessarily referred to that which is said in the verse following concerning
the mystery of the Incarnation, and so (though St. Paul) did write this Epistle
in Greek, he must needs be said to have used here an Ebraisme. And why must he
needs be said to have done so here in this particular place because sometimes
such Ebraisms be used in the new Testament. Whether this reason will justify so
new an interpretation of words (even for a thousand and five hundred years
applied to the Church, never applied to the Mystery of the Incarnation) shall
be determined even by the Principles of one of your greatest Divines now living
I mean Dr. Jeremy Tailor in his Discourse of the Liberty of prophesying Sect.
4. An other great pretense (for justifying new interpretations) is the
conference of places (which you would use here by conferring this place to some
few places in which such Ebraismes be used in Greek) A thing of such indefinite
capacity that if there be ambiguity of words, variety of sense, alteration of
circumstances or difference of style amongst Divine writers, there is nothing
which may be more abused by wilful people, or may more easily deceive the
unwary or that may amuse the most intelligent observours. This he proves by
several examples, and then he truly says, This is a fallacy a Posse ad esse.
It is possible a thing sometimes may be so, therefore undoubtedly here it is
so. There be such Ebraismes some where, therefore they must needs be here,
where for a thousand and five hundred years no man observed any such thing,
Most truly says the same Doctor, This is the great way of answering all the
Arguments which can be brought against any thing that any man has a mind to
defend. Sir you who make the Scripture judge of all Controversies should not
(of all men) justify such liberty of new interpretation as this your
proceeding would bring in. Or if you do you will soon see (and may already see
it) that your judge will be made to speak what each party pleases. And thus
will be unable to decide any thing. But to proceed, The Church, truly being
(before the Canon was written) the pillar and ground of truth in it self
without any subordinatio^, so that the believers looked no further then that
God taught them such and such things by the Church, I have from the text all I
desire to prove, that Gods assistance promised to the Church should reach as
far as infallibility. Whether this infallibility be equal to that of the
Apostles or no makes not to the purpose, so long as it is granted that our
faith relying upon her authority does rely as securely as that which relies
upon the Pillar and ground of truth. Here you come in with a parenthesis noting
me for a French Catholic, for allowing infallibility to the Pope defining
with a council. Sir, you are no Scholar if you know not that all Roman
Catholics allow infallibility to the Pope defining with a council.

24 But because I say also that God speaks by his Church proposing infallibly
his truth by her mouth, you tell me that I hence may plainly see how the Roman
tyranny draws me necessarily into peril of blasphemy. A deep charge, needing
a strong proof. And yet all your proof is because now there is no need of
Scripture since God speaks as infallibly by his Church as by his word Sir, I
pray why is it more blasphemy to say that God speaks by Christ's Church, who
spoke infallibly by the Church of the law of Nature for two thousand years
(see here Numb. 32.) And when he then began to speak by Moses and the Scripture
to the Jews, he still by his Church spoke to the faithful among the Gentiles)
and the Jews might have grounded their faith on that voice) for two thousand
years more. And when the writers of the former parts of the new Testament did
write what they writ, and when St. Paul did write what he writ, God did
infallibly teach all by the Church; and yet these writers thought Scriptures
necessary, but not necessary for all the ends for which you may think them
necessary. Again, what a slender proof is this to ground a charge of blasphemy
upon so vast a multitude, as adhere to the Roman Church? There is no need of
Scripture if God speaks by his Church to infallibility. Did not God speak to
infallibility by the Scriptures teaching that Jesus was the Messiah? Was it
therefore mere blasphemy to account St. John Baptist sent by God to teach the
same with infallible assurance? Was it therefore near blasphemy to think that
voice was infallible by which God the Father testified the same from Heaven?
Was it therefore near blasphemy, to account the testimony of miracles (ordained
to testify the same thing) infallible, though Christ calls it testimonium
majus Joanne. Joan. 5? Or rather is it not near blasphemy to say all these
testimonies besides Scripture are needless? Do you not see that after all the
testimonies of God by the Scripture, and by the Church, that still millions do
not believe? Why is then one of these testimonies superfluous? The Church is
not more Enthusiastical now then she was for 4. thousand years before she had
all the promises which Christ made her of assistance, which should be at least
as special and full, as she ever had before. Before she delivered only what
she had received by Tradition. Now she delivers what she received by
Tradition and by Scripture, in interpreting of which (according to that sense
truly intended by the Holy Ghost) the same Holy Ghost does assist her; so that
here is no new Revelation claimed to be made to her, but an infallible
assistance to propose faithfully what was formerly revealed. If others claimful
assurance by the Spirit in any point, let them show as good promises made to
them in particular, as are made to the Church, and we shall never account these
false Enthusiasts. This infallible assistance being promised to the Church by
God cannot be voted from her by the multitude of mis-believers who oppose her,
tho you set the^ all loos to vote against her.

25 After all, you will have St. Paul call the Church the Pillar and ground of
truth with an intention only to set forth the office, and not with an intention
to set forth the authority of the Church. Sir, how can you know St. Paul
intention but by his words? And sure I am that no word could in brief more
fully set forth her infallible authority, then by declaring her to be the
pillar it self, and the ground of truth. When he uses such words as declare
this as sufficiently as need to be, how know you that he intended not to
declare this sufficiently? I ask also in any man's apprehension, what office of
the Church is signified by calling her the ground of truths? In which words an
assuredly grounded authority will presently appear to be signified. O but you
know his intention was to signify the office only of the Church, and not her
Authority, because he meant here to instruct Timothy how to carry himself in
the Church of God, and to this purpose it had been impertinent to speak of her
Authority, as you think. I think it was very pertinent to speak of it even to
this purpose. For is it not fit that in a Church, which is to be held for the
public Oracle of the world, the chief Pastors of this Church (especially those
who were to be first of all made chief Pastors) should behave themselves so,
as not to make men believe it improbable that God should assist infallibly such
a Church? How much do, not your multitude only, but your greatest Doctors think
themselves to say against the infallibility promised to such a Church as ours
is, in which they see sometimes scandalous Popes, scandalous Cardinals,
scandalous Bishops, etc. Which though it be a pitiful argument, because
scandalous men, and Solomon the Idolater have been assisted with an
infallibility to be Writers of Scripture it self, yet it is an argument which
troubles weak souls. And therefore to take away such scandals, it is very
convenient that Bishops, especially those who were first of all preferred to
that office, should be blameless, continent, vigilant, sober, of good
behavior; and that they should have a good report even from the enemies of the
Church. Also, that the Deacons should be grave, not double tongued, not given
to much Wine or covetous. These and such like precepts as these were much to
the purpose, and as so were here given by St. Paul, to maintain the credit of
such a Church as might seem to all fit to be accounted the Oracle of the World.
The Pillar and ground of Truth.

59 Let us hear how you argue here. If the infallibility of the Church were
here affirmed, then Timothy needed not such instructions to take care how he
behaved himself in the Church, since infallible assistance is immediate, and
that which is immediate includes no time for the inspiration, nor means of
instruction, so you. A strange Consequence. The Church is infallible in
defining points in a general Council, Ergo, no man needs instructions for his
private good behavior. Was it so for the first two thousand years before the
Scripture was written? Or do we perhaps teach this infallible assistance to be
communicated to every one immediately? And how is it true that the assistance
which is immediate to the Church assembled in a full Council, includes no time
for the inspiration, nor no means for the instruction? Do you think that as
soon as all are assembled they are presently all, or the greater part, to
define all things as fast as they are proposed; was it so when the Apostles and
the Elders of the Church were assembled together in the first Council? though
this issued forth their decree with this preface. It seemed Good to the Holy
Ghost and us. Was there no time required for this short Decree. No means used
before it was made? Read those words. The Apostles and the Elders coming
together to consider of the matter And when there had been much disputing,
Peter rose up and said. There follows his speech. Then St. James made an
other speech, To what purpose all these speeches, and these made after former
much disputing, if your doctrine be true, that neither time nor use of any be
to proceed the immediate assistance of the holy Ghost which they had
undoubtedly. And here as if you had proved some thing you have a fling at the
Council of Trent for sitting so long; a thing as little derogatory to that
Councils infallibility, as that much disputing, and making several speeches was
derogatory to the infallibility of the council of the Apostles, in which only
one short Decree was made. Look on the many Canons, and Decrees for
Reformation, in matters subject to great Disputes, Oppositions of secular power
(which crossed not the Apostles first Council) Look on the multitude of
Heresies condemned, after a full hearing of all that could be said by all
parties, and it must needs be rather a point of satisfaction to all, then a
scandal unto any, to see so mature consideration used. But both a slow and a
hasty, and a mean delivery of any ones condemnation, will be distasteful to
the condemned person.

27. As for the Authority of St. Athanasius calling the definition of the
council of Nice, by which the Consubstantiality of God the Son with his Father,
The Word of God, it shows clearly, that this prime Doctor held that God
delivered his Word unto us by the council. Your Answer is that the councils
Definition did not bind with Relation to the Authority of the Council, but by
the authothority of Scripture Ministerially proposed by the council. Sir, I
have already showed, Chap. 2. Numb. 4. that the clearest Text which the council
had to cite, even that text, I and my Father are one, can be so expounded by an
Arrian, that it does no more then probably declare the consubsta^tiality. But
(as you say here) If the text be but probable we cannot from thence urge this
probable sense of it as an object of faith. But S. Athanasius urges
Co^substantialitie (after the Nicene council) as Gods Word, and an Object of
Faith, which he cannot do with a Relation to a Text only probable in
Scripture; Therefore he does it with Relation to the infallibility of the
councils Authority, which council if it had only Authority to propose, like a
Minister, such and such Texts, as may be severally taken (and consequently
mistaken) by an Interpreter, who is only fallible, could not be said in its
Interpretations to propose the undoubted Word of God. And though Saint
Athanasius held that as truth before the council in order to himself who was
convinced, that his interpretation was conformable to the ancient Doctrine of
the Church, yet in order to those, who were not before the council, convinced
by that Verily, he could nor boldly denounce this as an infallible meaning of
Gods Word obliging all. O! This Declaration of Gods Word by the council, he
boldly said, The Word of God, by the Council of Nice remained for ever. After
this, you come in again with the council of Ariminum, contending that council
as well to be believed for it self as the council of Nice. And you think if
more exceptions could have been made against the authority of the council of
Ariminum, Saint Austin, against his Arrian adversary might easily, have
Prevailed, by insisting only upon the authority of the council of Nice, which
he waveth, and goes to arguments out of Scripture. Sir, A man of reading
cannot but know that the council of Ariminum is never by the Fathers (no nor by
your Church of England) numbered among the first four councils, which four by
addition of this council (had it been a lawful council) should have been made
Five. And you might as well think, that I might prevail against you by only
citing the council of Trent, which I never cited yet, but stood wholly on other
arguments. For I know as we in vain dispute with Heathens out of Scripture, or
out of Saint Matthewes Gospel against Manich^ans, or out of the Machabees
against you; so Saint A^st^^ in vain had insisted upon the Nicene Council
against one who scoffed at it, as you do at that of Trent. He being well
furnished with other arguments out of Scriptures admitted by him, intended by
them only at that time to overthrow him, and not to meddle with a long
contention (fit to fill a book alone) about the validity of the council of
Nice, and invalidity of that of Ariminum, as we two for the like reason do not
stand only contesting about the authority of the council of Trent. I am now
for a long time to contest with you about the Scripture only, as Saint A^stin
did with him.

28. But before I enter further upon this contestation about this controversy
of the Infallibility of the Church, I must put you in mind of your own
doctrines which teaches that all necessary controversies are clearly decided
according to the truth by plain Scripture. This controversy then being one of
the most necessary must clearly according to your doctrine be decided for you
against me by plain Scripture. If then I can but show that it is not thus
clearly decided against me, I clearly show that I hold no error in this point.
For all error in such a necessary point as this is, can be demonstrated to be
against plain Scripture. What I hold (to wi^t, that the Church is Infallible)
cannot be demonstrated by plain Scripture to be so. Therefore what I hold is no
error. Now I must prove that what I hold of the infallibility of the Church
cannot by clear Scripture be demonstrated to be an error. This I prove thus.
The Scripture is not so clear against this as it is for this. Therefore this
cannot by clear Scripture be demonstrated to be an error. My first proposition
must be showed by citing as clear texts for what I hold of this point, as you
can bring against it. Well then, for this point I have alleged in the
beginning of this chapter, the text, promising, That the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against this Church; and that text which tells us we must hear the
Church under pain of being by Gods judgment accounted as Publicans and
Heathens, and that the Church is the Pillar and ground of truth.

29. In my 23. Numb. of my former Treatise I add a fourth Text; Behold I am
with you all dai^s, Of my 23th. Number.
even to the consummation of the world. Out of this and such like promises made
to the Apostles, we prove their infallibility in teaching, in writing, etc. But
these words are to be verified unto the consummation of the world, therefore
they must not only contain a promise made of being with the Apostles, who died
a thousand and 6 hundred years ago, but of being with the Prelates of the
Church their successors, who shall be to the consummation of the world. Your
answer to this Text shall be rendered in your own words that you may not
complain of foul play. Your words were, Although the promise be extendible to
the end of the world, yet it is not necessary to understand it so, as that
there shall always be equality of assistance to the times of the Apostles,
which is hard to affirm since we cannot see that there is any such necessity
for such assistance. And by those words such assistance. Your last reply
shows that you mean assistance extended to Infallibility. Sir, stand to
Scripture and show out of the Text that he promises to be with them, securing
them from all error in the first age, and he promises not so much for the
second or third age. Against your reasons we have our reasons, bring against my
illimited text another text, teaching clearly that my Text ought to be limited
to a smaller assistance in other ages then was here promised for the first. As
for the necessity of the people (which was the prime reason why Christ gave
this infallibility) it was greater in ages remoter from Christ, you ask why
then be our traditions now equally infallible to those of these times. I answer
that as it is harder to prove now that Christ did such miracles, was crucified,
did rise again, then it was presently after these things happened, yet all
these things be as infallibily true now, as they were then, and as
infallilible; so I say of Traditions, which for all this do not lose a
sufficient measure of infallible certainty. But to go on. What if there be no
such necessity of such assistance for other ages; what Text have you to prove
that God must needs give no more then is necessary, and cannot promise more,
and give what he promises? I know you will say this infallibility in ages
after the Scripture was not necessary, because the Scriptures alone would serve
to decide all controversies. Sir, did not the Church alone serve to decide all
Controversies before the Scripture was written. Yes, Why then was Scripture
thought necessary by you even for this end, for which the Church was well
provided before? Again, the old Scripture, did it not testify, as much as was
necessary, that Jesus Christ was the true Messiah? Yes. To what end then was
Saint John Baptist sent to testify this? To what end a voice sent from Heaven
to testify this? To what end so many Miracles wrought to testify this? To
what end did Christ and his Apostles still further testify this? Mark here how
false your judgment is in thinking God will promise just what is necessary,
and no more. Sir, in Ages after the first when the Church should grow from a
Grain of Mustard Seed, to be a Tree of vast extent, in such a vast compass,
and in progress of many Ages a world of doubts would rise, which Books were
Scripture, which not? Which corrupted Scripture, which not? Which was the
undoubted sense of the uncorrupted Scripture, which not? Why might not Christ
(for any thing you know by Scripture) think this a sufficient Reason to promise
an assistance extended to infallibility for other Ages of the Church as well as
for the first age. Will an authority so assisted to testify all this
infallibly be less necessary then so many Authorities to Testify that Jesus
Christ was the true Messiah, after it was infallibly Testified by true
Scripture? And all these Testimonies were given to the Jews, as ill as they
were disposed. How then can you say of the Church of Christ, that she, for want
of this Disposition, was deprived of this Assistance in all Ages but the first?
What you add of Traditions, has been already Answered: See also Number
Twelve. But what you add of Scripture having still the same certainty is
apparently false, speaking (as you speak) in Order to assure us. For you your
self confess, that diverse Books of Scripture (as the Apocalypse etc.) are now
held certain, which were not held so before. Again, many, and a good many,
books of Scripture are quite lost. How know you by Scripture only, that no
necessary point for practice or belief (contained in those books only) did
not perish with the books themselves. And as for the books we have, you see
how uncertain we remain about the true sense of them in highest points. Then
they had the Apostles themselves, or the known Disciples of the Apostles, to
tell them the meaning of these words, This is my Body, is this so really, or
figuratively only; These words, Baptize all Nations, do or do not, include
Infants. To be a Priest, or a Bishop, was to have power to sacrifice, to
absolve, or was it not? Now times make these held for uncertainties; whereas by
and by you admit that by this promise of Christ, the Church is secure from
damnable error, though not from all simple errors, for then no body should be
left for God to be withal; you admit that which will destroy quite what you
said before. For before you said, Heresy consisted in opposition to clear
Scripture: whence all those must needs be Heretics who opposed clear
Scripture. Therefore all those who held these prime points in which you and we
differ, with us against you, were Heretics; for they held these points, which
(as you say) are against clear Scripture; But by your own confession Christ had
no visible Church baptizing, teaching all Nations, etc. but those who held
these prime points in which we and you differ; wherefore we must confess that
Christ was with these Opposers of evident Scripture, or else you cannot show
with what Members of the Church he was for all these last ages preceding the
Reformation. Let us go on.

30. What kind of assistance Christ promised, may be gathered (behold a fifth
Text) out of several words in the 14. chapter of Saint John, there (verse 15.)
he says, I will pray the Father, and he shall give another Comforter, that he
may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot
receive. And verse 27. The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost whom the Father
will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things and suggest unto you all
things whatsoever I shall say unto you. And chap. 16. ver. 12. I have yet many
things to say unto you; How be it when the spirit of Truth is come he will
guide you into all Truth. I ask now according to these Texts, How long is this
spirit of Truth to abide with them in their successors? For ever; says the
Text. Shall he also secure those, with whom he for ever abides, from all
error? He will guide you into all Truth, says the Text. Give me then leave,
less to regard what you say to the contrary. Where there is all Truth, there
is no error. If you answer there is no Fundamental error. I Reply, that all
Truth excludes all error, either in points Fundamental, or not Fundamental.
And being you cannot assuredly tell me which points be Fundamental, which not;
which destructive of salvation, which not; which be curable, which are not; you
must grant me that she is to be believed in all points. And fear not to believe
her, She will guide you into all Truth. Therefore you may securely follow her in
all herwaies. This promise of Christ made equally to the Apostles, and to their
successors, the visible Teachers and Guides of the Church which were to guide
people into all Truth for ever, must needs have been verified all this last
thousand years before your Reformation. All this time, all the visible Guides
or Prelates of the Church were led, and did lead into opinions contrary to the
Tenets of your Church. But all this time the spirit of Truth did abide with
them, guiding them into all Truth. Therefore the opinions contrary to your
Tenets were true, and not errors. If he should be with your Prelates beginning
this last age to hold contrary to the Prelates of the last thousand years) he
should be with those who teach contradictions in points of belief, opposite to
the former belief. Behold a clear reason why I appropriate this promise to our
Bishops and Church, and not to yours, the Holy Ghost could not teach those
guides of the Church forever, who for a vast long time of many ages were not in
the World. Show me a succession in all Ages of the guides or lawful Pastors of
any Church houlding your Texts in points differing from ours, and then I must
labor to find a reason why I say the Holy Ghost, ever since Christ's time,
guided the lawful Pastors of our Church into all truth, rather then the lawful
Pastors of your Church, which Pastors had no being in the Church or world and
consequently no capacity to be guided into all truth.

31 A Sixth Text to prove this assistance to be extended to infallibility is 4
Ephesians. whence appears that the end and intention of Christ in giving us (who
were visible in all ages) Doctors and Pastors for all ages was such an end, and
such an intention, as could not be compassed by such Doctors and Pastors as
might lead us into circumvention of error, even then when they where assembled
together to deliver the truth from their highest tribunal in a General Council
How pitifully would the Saints be consummated by such Doctors? How pitifully
would the work of the Ministry be performed, how pitifully would the Body of
Christ be edified by such Doctors and Pastors. Lastly how impossible would it
be for us by the having of such doctors, and Pastors that we now (provided of
such guides) be not children wavering and carried about with the wind of
doctrine in the wickedness of men, in craftiness, in circumvention of error.
You see St. Paul affirms the Doctors and Pastors which are given unto us, to be
given for this end (and consequently sufficiently assisted to the same) that we
may securely rest in their doctrine, which we may not do in any erroneous
doctrine, be the error little or great. For it were a ridiculous thing to say,
we were to rest circumvented in error, least we should fall into circumvention
of error. The assistance therefore is such as preserves from all error, and
such an assistance was proportionable to Gods intention of Securing us from
having reason to waver or to be changing, and changing, so to cure some curable
errors, with which we feared to be circumvented, whereas by the unanimous
doctrine of these Doctors and Pastors, God intended to preserve us sufficiently
from ever falling into circumvention of error.

32. A seventh Text to prove the assistance of the Holy Ghost given to the
Church, to be extended to infallibility is taken from Esaias chap. 56. verse 20.
and 21. where God speaks of the Church of Christ, to which after his coming
many of the Jews were to unite themselves (according to the interpretation of
Saint Paul 18. Romans verse 26. Thus God by Esaias, The redeemer shall come to
Sion and unto them who by uniting themselves to Christ's Church) shall turn
from transgression in Jacob, says the Lord. Note here that the words which our
Lord is going to say are spoken to the visible Church, to wit, that Church to
which the Jews did unite themselves being baptized in it, instructed in it,
governed by it, etc. Now our Lord to this Church visibly Baptizing,
instructing, governing, etc. says, As for me, this is my Covenant with them
says the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee, and my words, (free from error in
all points great and little) which I have put in thy mouth, (that mouth by
which thou visibly do teach all Nations) shall not depart out of (this) thy
mouth. Nor out of the mouth of thy seed, Nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. Behold, here the Spirit of
Truth entailed upon the Church for all Ages, never departing from her mouth,
Nor the mouth of her seeds seed, which not departing from the mouth (by which
visibly she teaches, instructs, and governs,) shows this Spirit entayled
upon the Church as Visible and not as Invisible as you would have it. And this
not departing of his Spirit from her Mouth, is a no less clear, then eloquent
expression of her infallibility in her doctrine, for Gods Spirit or Word is not
in a Mouth teaching error. Aga^n, a promise of not departing from her mouth
from thenceforth and for ever, makes it evident that this last thousand years
there was some visible Church, whose Prelates and Pastors did show their Heads,
and open their Mouths, in teaching truth. And yet what was visibly taught all
this while, was (in all points debated between you and us) opposite to you. By
the way note how unjustly you not long since taxed those of coming near
blasphemy, who said that God did speak to us and teach us by his Church. What
mean these words, My Words shall not depart out of thy Mouth, Nor out of the
Mouth of thy seed, nor of thy seeds seed?

33 Hence (for an Eight Text) I may well allege what this Prophet infers from
hence in the Next Chapter, where he triumphs in the Church thus teaching all
Nations, and there he adds, For the nation and Kingdom that shall not serve
thee shall perish, verse 12. Because if this Church should ever at any time
fall to teach error, Nations should do well, and should further their salvation
by forsaking her erring, as the Protestants say, they did. And note how these
words clearly show that the Scripture speaks of the Church visible, which
Nations and Kingdoms may find out, and serve and must perish, like publicans
and Heathens, if they do not serve, and obey: she is therefore secured from
error. Hence verse 20. Thy sun shall no more go down, Neither shall the Moon
withdraw it self, For the Lord shall be thine everlasting light and the days
of thy Mourning shall be ended. And in the next chapter to the Sons of this
Church he promises, That everlasting Joy shall be unto them verse 7. And in
the next chapter last verse. Thou shall be called, sought out a City not
forsaken. Had this Church been forsaken and left in such errors as are imputed
to the Roman Church, Christ had not been an Everlasting light to here whom he
had left in such darkness for a thousand years, and the days of her mourning
had been these full thousand years, short of the end of her mourning. And
there had been no reason why in such gross errors she should (to Gods
comfort) be sought for and a City not forsaken. These words I am sure are spoke
of a visible Church, sought for, and found out, because inhabited and not
forsaken, your invisiible Church was so desolate, that no body can tell where
it was. And in this sense it is a City still sought for, but never to be found
for a thousand years. Or else tell me where?

34 For a ninth Text (letting all these last Texts of Esaias pass as for one) I
alleged that of Daniel 2.44. In the days of those Kingdoms the God of Heaven
shall raise up a Kingdom, which shall not be dispersed, and his Kingdom shall
not be delivered to another people. And that we might know that he speaks
here of the kingdom of Christ, which should be visible to us all, there is
added a circumstance which must needs make it most visible, to wit. And it
shall break in pieces and consume all those (Idolatrous) Kingdoms and it shall
stand for ever. Now if this true Church of Christ, which so visibly has broken
in pieces and quite abolished all Idolatrous Kingdoms, be so visibly to stand
for ever, then this visible Church cannot be said, for this last 2000. year to
have been fallen; As it must needs be said of all visible Churches, which have
bin these last thousand years for besides the Roman Church you will not find
one visible Church which has not fallen this time into confessed heresy;
therefore to verify these words, you must say that the Roman Church did not
fall, that so you may find Christ a visible Church which did stand for ever.
And thus also we shall literally expound what the Angel Gabriel said of Christ,
And he shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever Luke 1.33. This Roman Church
then is the Church which has stood ever since Christ's time. Whence it is
manifest that it did not fall either into idolatry (as you intimate hereafter
when you reply to this place of Daniel, nor when it proclaimed it self to have
an infallible tribunal, by which all Controversies are to be truly decided, for
erecting which tribunal you Page 22. say she is in peril of treason against
God the judge, in setting up another judge in the consciences of men. And
again Pa. 106. That for pretending to infallibility she is highly presumptious
and in this more then an usurper committing an insolent usurpation of the
prerogative which belongs only to God and Scripture. And P. 23. you hold this
Infallibility as destructive to souls as uncertainty of true Religion, Nay
(say you) uncertainty may be helped but infallibility has no remedy. Surely if
the Church should have universally fallen into uncertainty of true belief, it
should no longer have been the standing Kingdom of Christ which shall stand for
ever. But it had been a multitude fallen into the want of that faith, the want of
which had put it in a state in which it had been impossible to please God. For
uncertainty in faith is wholly inconsistent with an infallible assent, but all
divine faith consists in an infallible Assent. Therefore where there is
uncertainty, there is no divine faith at all without which it is impossible to
please God, as St. Paul says you put the Roman Church fallen (even by this one
fall) into a worse condition. Can a Church in this condition be that Church
raised in Christ and spread over the world destroying all Idolatrous Kingdoms
by her visible preachers and teachers, succeeding with a visible succession one
to another, administering visible sacraments, and by her visible decrees and
such like visible Acts, destroying all Idolatrous Kingdoms and reigning in
their place visibly, and thus in the light of the world verifying Daniels
prophecy by standing for ever in quality of a kingdom. Yet if the Roman Church
be not this Church, find me out (if you can) a visible Church, (for so many
visible Acts convince that the Church verifying these words must be visible)
distinct from the Roman, and agreeing with yours in the points debated between
us, what you hereafter add concerning this place of Daniel, and my first place
out of Esaias, I shall answer in its place. Here I thought good to put all these
nine Texts of Scripture together that their force might the better appear.

35 This being done I must again put you in mind that according to your
doctrine, Scripture alone is able by clear Texts to decide all Controversies
according to truth, This Controversy of the fallibility, or infallibility of
the Church erected by Christ, is one of the most important Controversies that
can be raised in the Church. Now you (who pretend this Controversy to be
decided for you against me by clear Texts of Scripture) are obliged by clearer
Texts, then all these are put together, to prove that Christ's visible Church is
fallible, I say Christ's visible Church, for all my Texts speak of that, and not
of the Synagogue, and therefore the Texts you bring must be concerning Christ's
Church. And you must bring Texts and not discourses, or else you decide not the
Controversy by the sentence of the judge to which only you appeal. Observe
these few things and give me these Texts, and I here give you free leave to
proclaim me quite vanquished, and driven out of the field. And by this you will
see that we adhere not therefore to the defense of the Churches Tribunal,
because we fear to be tried by Scripture, but because upon trial made by
Scripture, her Tribunal is proved infallible and in all things to be obeyed by
us.

36. What occurreth next is, to justify my self from the false slander with
which you charge me of corrupting the Text in St. Austin Lib. de Utilitate
credendi Cap. 19. Sir if I should do as you did, that is, if I should only
regard that Edition of St. Austin which I have, I should not only justify my
self but condemn you of corrupting this place. Now I only charge the Edition
which you used, of corruption, yea of such corruption that a man could not but
suspect it who would read the context with his perfect senses about him. For
St. Austin in his 14. Chapter, having said that he first believed, moved by the
authority of the Catholic Church, which there he shows to have been done by
him upon good reason; he comes in the 51 Chapter to press his adversaries to
the easiest way of freeing themselves from error by yiedling to the authority
of the same Church. And then in his Sixteenth Chapter he urges the
wholesomnesse of following this authority. Here come in those words which I
cited, to wit, for if the divine providence of God does not preside in humane
affairs, in vain would Solicitude be about Religion. But if both the very
beauty of all things and our inward conscience does both publickely and
privately exhort us to seek out and serve God, we are not to despair that there
is some authority appointed by the same God, on which authority we relying as
on an assured step may be lifted up to God. My adversary will needs read these
last words thus. On which authority we relying as on an assured step may be
lifted up to God. Velut gradu incerto innitentes attolluram ad Deum. As if an
unassured or an uncertain step could help to lift us up to God, and were a
thing to be relied upon to this end, and given us as a help by God to this end,
that we may rely upon it, and we being so well provided of uncertainty in the
authority appointed by God for us, ought nor to despair of coming by this
authority to the certain truth. Is not this perfect and complete nonsense. And
can you think in earnest that here you have reason to tell me that the scope of
St. Austins discourse may discover my corrupting his Text? Does it not
evidently discover the corruption of your Frobenia^ Edition, An. 1569. which
would needs read, Gradu incerto innitentes attellamur ad Deum, whereas other
Editions read gradu certo innitentes even the Edition of Erasmus, whose
judgment yours use to esteem most accurate. Yea, he in the beginning of his
Edition professes to put down such a Note as this is [] when he varieth from
the Frobenian Edition, and yet here he puts no such note in his Paris
Edition, Anno 1555. which Edition of Erasmus, is ancienter then yours. So that
your Frobenian Edition corruptedly differs in this place from that ancienter
Frobenian Edition, of which Erasmus made mention a dozen years before yours was
printed. Neither can you make any thing like sense of S. Austins words by
reading them as you cited them; that by the authority appointed by God we
should as by an uncertain step be lifted up to God. So that here you may easily
perceive how little reason you had to carp at infallibility. And again, you had
as little reason to put me in mind that one part of that authority of which St.
Austin here speaks is drawn from the miracles which Christ did. Sir, do these
miracles make this authority to be relied upon, as upon an unassured step, or
as upon an assured step to lift us up to God. Now Sir, how shall you ever be
able to secure me that you can know, and infallibly know, corrupted Scripture
from uncorrupted, when I see this your talent in knowing corruptions so
deficient, as I have here showed it to be, even when you are so confident of it
that you charge your adversary of corruption, which had you not done, he had
now made no use of this place so clear to his purpose. But he must needs now
expect a better answer from you to this place.

37. In my 24. I entreat you not to explicate the places which I had above
alleged for the Churches infallibility, Of my 24. ^h. Number.
as if they were to be understood so as only to be true when the Church
judges conformably to Scripture; for even in that sense the devil himself
(father of Lies) is infallible, so long as he teaches conformable to
Scripture, and the gates of hell cannot by error prevail against the devil of
Hell. Yea, as long as he does this, he will be the pillar and ground of Truth,
that is subordinately as you speak of the Church, to wit, so far as either of
them rely on the written word. You answer first, that we are not commanded but
forbidden to consult with the Devil, but we are enjoined to consult with the
Church of God. I answer, that this hinders not his being infallible as long as
he speaks conformably to Scripture. And I am glad to see you acknowledge a
command to consult with the Church, for sure I am that this must be understood
of consulting with a visible Church and visible in all Ages. For people were in
all ages to obey this command of consulting with her. But it is impossible in
any age to consult with an invisible Church. Therefore there was in all ages a
true visible Church. Secondly, you say we have always cause to suspect the
Devil. I answer this hinders not his being truly infallible so long as he
teaches conformably to Scripture. In your third answer you seem to make the
devil and the Church agree, for you neither believe the devil in point of truth
upon his authority, nor the Church to speak truth upon her authority, wherefore
for all you have said as yet, the devil may as well be the pillar and ground of
truth as the Church, though I confess freely, it is not his office to be so.

Again though you be not moved to think that the devil says to be true, yet
this hinders not his speaking as true as the Church does, as long as he
speaks conformable to Scripture. And though I grant that you may in some
respect make more account of what the Church says for her authority, then of
what the devil says upon his authority; yet standing still in our case, which
supposes the devil de facto to deliver what is conformable to Scripture, you
(who refuse to give an infallible assent to what the Church says at all times
but when you see that which she says to be conformable to Scripture) you I
say, must never build this assent as infallible more upon the Church then upon
the devil, to whose saying you would give an infallible assent when you see
that which he says to be conformable to Scripture. But whilst you are so busy
in giving so many answers to what I said about the devil, you smother up that
which clearly overthrows the reply of you and yours, who say we must follow
the Church only so far as we see her follow Scripture. For I showed that those
who could not see at all how far the Church followed Scripture, were bound to
follow that Church for the first two thousand years of the world, which were
before all Scripture, or before what was known to be the Scripture in
substance, or before it were known whether there should be any Scripture or no.
So how could those many barbarous Nations, who never having seen the Scripture
did truly believe, (as S. Ireneus testifies) what was taught them by the
Church, though they could not possibly see how far that which was taught them,
and that which they believed, did agree with the Scripture which they had never
seen.

38. Your two next paragraphs contend to take from me two of my former texts
cited for the infallibility of the Church, by expounding those texts not to
speak of the visible Church. But I have showed the contrary concerning them
both. Concerning that out of Daniel I did show this even now Number. 34.
Concerning that out of Esaias I showed it Number. 32. And 33. As for all additional
testimonies out of Fathers you know why I resolve to pass them. Of my 25th.
and 26th. Number.
And so together with them I must let pass even that maine and convincing
place of St. Austin: this supposed, I have ended all which belongs to this
Chapter.

The fifth Chapter. The Church which is our Judge, and Infallible, is the Roman
Church.
ALL that I am to prove here is, Of my 27th. Numb.
that upon Supposition that it is now made good that the Church is our judge in
all Controversies and also that it is made good that she is infallible, that
all this can be verified of no other Church then the Roman. Whence it
follows, that whosoever will say any thing against that which I did undertake
to prove in this part of my discourse, must argue against me not by denying
some Church to be judge of Controversies and infallible, but admitting that for
truth, he must prove that I without reason claim this right of judicature, and
this infallibility for the Roman Church, and only for the Roman, still
understanding by the Roman Church, all Churches which submit themselves to the
Bishop of Rome as to their supreme Pastor.

2 That then which remains here to be proved I did prove and still do prove
thus, the Protestant Church and all other Churches different from the Roman, do
judge themselves, acknowledge themselves, declare and profess themselves, to
be fallible, and that according to infallible Scripture. If then any of these
Churches be infallible (in what they judge, and declare for truth grounded in
Scripture) they are infallible in this their judging and delaring themselves to
be fallible. Therefore infallibly they are fallible. Therefore, upon
supposition that it has been formerly proved that some Church is judge of
Controversies, and Infallible, and it being by the former argument
demonstratively proved that neither the Protestant Church, nor any Church
different from the Roman can be judge of Controversies and infallible, it
evidently follows that only the Roman Church is this judge and is infallible
as she teaches her self to be. Here you exclaim at my abusing others by
ratiocinations, which notwithstanding, I confidently say you could not, nor
cannot solve. Therefore prehaps you are pleased to wonder and then gibe at my
argument, as if I only argued thus. The Roman Church claims infallibility,
therefore by claiming of it she has right to it. This argument you may freely
scoff at, it is nothing like mine. And yet in undoing this fond argument you
only busy your self and say nothing, to that which I pressed and still press,
that the Church which is appointed by God for infallible judge of Controversies,
cannot possible be any of those Churches which teach themselves not to be this
infallible judge. It had bin very easy to have understood this right and not
to make me say, that only laying claim to infallibility is a sufficient proof
of infallibility. It is a very different thing to say, He that must be a
Minister must be a Man and not a Woman, and to say, such an one must needs be a
Minister because he is a man and not a Woman. So it is one thing to say, the
Church which is the infallible judge must be a Church, judging and teaching her
self to be infallible and cannot be a Church which judges and teaches her
self fallible; And another thing to say, that that Church is infallibly judge
which teaches her self to be so. This I said not, but I said, that Church
that must be infallible must not want this condition, and therefore no Church
teaching her self (even according to Scripture) to be fallible, can truly be
this infallible judge. Against my argument truly related, you have not one
word, without you think you have answered me by saying, that no Church of
Christ is infallible, and therefore not the Roman. But Sir did not you always
hitherto still importunely call upon me to prove that even upon supposition,
that the Church was our judge and Infallible, that these great prerogatives
belonged to the Church of Rome. You bid me still prove this even standing upon
the supposition, that some Church was judge and infallible. Is it then any
thing like a Scholar like answer to return no other answer to my argument but
by now saying the supposition is not true, the truth of which, though allowed,
you contended to be nothing to my purpose. If you will grant me that, if any
Church be judge of Controversies and infallible, this is our Church I have
done. Neither intend I any thing else in this chapter.

3 You bring an argument to prove our Church fallible because either it erred
in admitting, or in rejecting the Millenary opinion before admitted. Sir I call
upon you to prove that ever our infallible Judge (that is the supreme Pastor of
the Church defining with the Church assembled in a Council) did admit of the
Millinary opinion. If this be not done you prove not our Judge to be fallible
and this I am sure can never be proved. Yea it cannot be proved that the Church
diffused or Universal, did at any one age unanimously admit of this doctrine
for a point of faith. For when this opinion began to get much ground, diverse of
the Fathers did oppose it. Even S. Justin (Dialogo cum Triphone circa medium)
whom yours use so commonly to allege for this opinion, in plain words tells
you, Multos, qui purae piaeque sunt Christianorum sententia hoc non agnoscere.
That many (note the word many) who are of a pure and pious Christian opinion do
not acknowledge this. And your own learned Doctor Ha in bis view of etc. Page
87. 88, 89. does prove the weakness of that place in St. Justin not to conclude
any thing against Catholic Tradition. Nicephorus will tell you L. 3. C. 21.
that Papias Bishop of Hierapolis was the first author of this opinion. The
traditions of the Church have no first authors but the Apostles.

Of my 28th. Number.
Wherefore by all you have hitherto said, my Argument remains unanswered and
is really unanswerable the supposition being admitted upon which it is spoken.
For tell me whether any Church, which teaches her self to be fallible can be
truly infallible. If any such Church can be infallible, and all Churches be
such but the Roman, then Christ can have no Church upon Earth to be our
infallible Judge but the Roman. Wherefore no tolerable Answer being yet given
to this argument, I will be as good as my word when I said in this Number, That
this being a demonstration I should hold my self bound to say no more until
this argument were answered. Here then I end: yet when you shall have solved
this argument, I shall be ready to make good my promise concerning what I said I
could and would show of the Roman Church to soon as I should see this argument
answered.

Petrae durities nulli magis, quam ferienti notae.
FINIS.
An Answer to your last Paper.
TItulus Libri saepe legendus est, as the Rule is, the Title of a Book is often
to be read; as if it were not to be censured: yet in point of controversy, it
may be considered. And surely your Title [How in these times, in which there be
so many Religions, the true Religion may certainly be found out] might be found
peccant: For, first it supposes that which is false; that every difference
makes a new Religion. 2. It does not suppose that which is true; that there are
many differences amongst your selves. And thirdly, it does, in a sort, infer
that which is true and false together, and so a contradiction; that there are
many Religions, and yet but one. And so we need say no more of it; for thus it
should destroy it self.

As for the dedication of the Paper to the Reader, what do you mean? would you
have me only a Reader of it, as if I could not, or would not, make any return
to it? Or do you, as I may conceive, intend it for public use? We are agreed;
let the world have it and judge.

In your first and second Paragraphs of your Preface to the last, you give a
repetitional account of your former Treatise, and of the order of it, which you
substrate to the order of your Answer to my Answer of that Treatise, and to the
Application of it. Your order simply affirms nothing: therefore we say nothing
to it.

In the third Par. You excuse your not making a sixth chapter to answer my
answer to your Conclusion, and to some personal debates which concern not the
maine cause. The Excuse shall pass with me; who, in regard of personal
quarrels, am as ready to neglect my self, as he would have me. And surely if we
did not seek our selves in the search of truth, we should less lose our selves
and find truth sooner.

So then all I have to do is to answer your five chapters, wherein you say you
answer my reply to your Treatise.

And in the first chap. you include the defense of your preface to the former
Treatise.

My first words did intimate, you say; that I did fear lest my silence should
make you seem to your self or others to have got the victory, you return; your
reply is most welcome in this respect, that it does more help me than your
silence could. Not to seem to have got but really to get that victory which I
desire not to my self but to truth. For the examination of your reply will
serve for a touchstone to my Arguments. As to this answer of yours I have no
mind to oppose much. Only I am well assured that you make the best advantage
you can of your adversaries silence. And if you can make better advantage of
any thing I have written to confirm you then by my silence, my words are in
your power unto all reasonable use; let them have their natural liberty to
speak no more than they are willing to. Do not strain or wrest them for your
turn. For so you will alter the property of them and make them yours.

At male dum recitas incipit esse tuus. But whereas you say, the examination of
your Reply will serve for a touchstone to my arguments, you will give me leave
to make use also of the words, and I shall be of that opinion in this sense of
mine, that, if you consider it well, it will indeed be a touchstone to prove
your argument, not to be solid and true metal. All is not gold that glisters.

You say I will follow you as you desire step after step and (...). Ans. If you
do, this is the first time you have done so. Your first did not. Your second
did not. If this does, you will be more punctual in the dispute than your party
is wont to be. And whether so or not we shall see in the conclusion. And also
then you wrong your self in calling this paper also a Treatise.

Par. 2. To show the necessity of treating the matter I had undertaken I said,
that such a manner of reading the Scripture as is permitted by you to all sorts
of people with so unlimited a license to interpret them according to their own
private judgment of discretion is a thing most apt to cause a numberless
number of sects and heresies.

Ans. Consider with your self whether you deal honestly with us in reporting
our opinion in this matter. Do I, or any of us, give such unlimited license to
interpret them according to their own private judgment or discretion?

But this was necessary for your turn, that so you might make your argument
better: and therefore, when you saw by my answer that your reading of the
Scripture freely permitted to the people is not of it self guilty of those
effects, you now add that which is false, that we give such unlimited license
to all sorts of people to interpret the Scripture according* to their private
judgment of discretion. Now choose you which you will stand to; that in your
Treatise, or this in the answer, and then put it into form of discourse; and we
answer you. If you say, as in the Treatise, that if there were a free
permitting of the use of the Bible to all sorts of people in their mother
tongue, it would not fail, but multitudes of new sects and heresies would grow
up; and as for the peoples manners, they would daily grow worse and worse: then
we deny your proposition, as before, understanding it in way of cause, or if
you will hold it of us in this answer, that we do freely permit to all sorts of
people to interpret the Scripture accor-to their private judgment of
discretion, we deny your assumption, for though we allow the judgment of
private discretion negatively, that nothing should be obtruded upon us for
point of faith which we see not in our judgment of discretion to be agreeable
to Scripture: yet do we not give any license to any positively to interpret
according to the judgment of private discretion, but according to the analogy
of faith, and also we commend to them the perusal of the judgment of others,
Fathers and Doctors, in points of difficulty, private judgment herein makes not
the interpretation; but is to make consent to it.

2. we can distinguish of your predicate here [is a thing most apt to cause a
numberless number of sects and heresies] There is a double aptitude either in
the nature of the thing, or by accident of our corruption. The former is denied
in the case, the latter makes no prejudice. For so Scholars should not read the
Bible neither, because it gives occasion of differences and the Gospel should
be taken away for fear of bad accidents. Sapiens non curat de accidentalibus.

But you prove your supposition and first a priori thus you permit any
Artificer who can reach to take the Bible into his hand and to take it for his
sole and only Judge of all necessary controversies, etc. along unto these words
falling into heresy, inclusively. Ans. If this your discourse a priori? To it
we might say much: first, there is somewhat in the premises which we do not in
their propriety affirm, as namely, that they are to take the Scripture for the
sole and only Judge in all necessary controversies: we say properly and
formally, Scripture is not the judge, but as the Law and rule by which
judgment is to be given in controversies necessary.

2. We do not allow him to make a review of what is decreed in a General
Council as in order to any other but only for himself. He has no
autoritative judgment respecting others; but a rational judgment respecting
himself. So you say that of us which we do not say. And then again, you will
not say of us that which we do say, which should spoil the Argumentation: for
though we say he may not (for he cannot) submit his judgment to a General
Council, unless he sees what is determined thereby to be true, yet may he
submit his person unto censure, and so not oppose the Church Representative.
Again 3. In this your Argument you do not conclude home; for you conclude, this
is but to leave men in a mighty hazard of misunderstanding the word of God and
falling into heresy. So then, upon the whole matter, this argumentation of
yours is not good; because somewhat in it, nay, much is denied; and somewhat
not by you allowed, as it should be: and then it concludes but accidentally; if
probably, not necessarily; if necessarily, not demonstratively; if
demonstratively, not a priori; for it does not, by way of a certain efficient
cause, induce the conclusion of heresy; nor is heresy the final cause of our
intending this liberty to the people. Therefore be not so forward in high terms
of your ratiocination. Yea, if this allowance to the people did certainly, and
by way of Emanation, produce heresy, it would not of it self produce any more
than material heresy in points of necessary faith which need not be brought
into question) not heresy formal, which imports opposition to the Church. And
this respect of heresy you do surely bend the bow against. Indeed every
opposition does import descent: but every descent (which is more general) does
not actually import an opposition.

So your long sillogisme a priori is but lanke, nor does your reasoning a
posteriori thrive: thus, In those places where the sacred Scriptures are thus
prostituted, not only to the bare reading, but also to the interpretation of
every profane and ignorant fellow (I still mean when he shall have heard or
seen what can be alleged on all sides) these and only these sects have
multiplied, and do multiply, beyond measure. Ans. If the Scripture be allowed
to every ones use for the knowledge of things necessary to salvation, it is no
prostitution of it. Bellarmin, as before in his 1. b. c. 1. de Verbo Dei,
affirms it to be our rule, then a rule to all; then it is necessary by
necessity of precept, and by necessity of mean too, upon the account of a rule:
if you speak of a prostitution of it to every ones interpretation according to
his own fansy. This is not intended by us. But what power has the Church to
hinder them of their right? If they abuse their liberty, it is upon their own
peril. They wrest the Scripture to their own destruction, as St. Peter said of
some, that they wrested some things in St. Paul's Epistles which are hard to be
understood. And as Dominion Civil is not grounded in grace special: so
neither is the religious right of Scripture grounded in special knowledge. And
if they be more ignorant, they have more need of it.

2. The parenthesis you add to strengthen your argument or to qualify the
state of your question, makes nothing for you. For if you understand the words
[I still mean when he shall have heard or seen what can be alleged on all
sides] as to strengthen your Argument, it surely weakens it. For if they hear
or see what is alleged on all sides, they are not like to follow their own
conceit, but what appears to be more reasonable. For your argument supposes
that after they have heard or seen all that can be said on all sides, yet they
have liberty from us to interpret according to their own pleasure; which is
more unlikely they would do, though they had our allowance after they had heard
or seen all that could be alleged on all sides. If you intend those words to
qualify the state of the question, then it seems before they do hear or see
what is alleged on all sides they may not pass any judgment of the point
for themselves: and if they must first hear or see all that can be alleged
on all sides before they take that sense that is agreeable to plain places of
Scripture, then surely they must be blind as to this point; for, when shall
they be able probably to know whether they have heard or seen all that can be
alleged on all sides in such a matter? This is such a yoke which the
Pharisees (if we may say so) lay upon us which neither they nor their Fathers
were able to bear. But, 3. Whereas you say these and only these sects have
multiplied and do multiply beyond measure, it is false on both parts; (not
these always which you must mean) for why then did the ancient Fathers exhort
the people so much to the study of the Scripture, as Cyrill of Jerusalem, and
S. Chrysostom, the former in his Catechism, the later in his Comments, and also
in homilies? And then not only there; for then you might propose a convenient
way to take away all the differences amongst the Jesuits and Dominicans and
those that divide from the court of Rome, namely, by taking away all use of
Scripture. You see, not only by ignorant and profane men, there are bred
differences where the Bible is in liberty; but amongst the learned men also. So
that not always these, nor only these, these are sects. But 4. The multiplying
of sects, and beyond measure, is not, as has been said, the effect of the use
thereof; because not necessary. And does not your argument follow by
consequence only? then not by necessity of consequent. And therefore is not
this a demonstration a posteriori?

Thus you have argued (...) let us now see how happy you are (...), in
refutation of my answers.

This we have in the third par. Neither do any of your arguments prove this not
to be the true cause of heresy and bad life, which follows heresy. Ans.
Here we see you intended a full demonstration from the cause. But whereas you
say none of my arguments do prove the contrary; you may remember that I had no
arguments but in way of answer. It is not my office to dispute but answer.
Whereas you say b^d life follows heresy; that you mean inseparably, do you
not? If you do not, it is inconsequent; if you do, it is false. How many
Heretics have been more strict in their lives then orthodox Christians, that
they might gain more credit to their error* by holiness of life as Socinus
and others.

You come then to refute my arguments. First it is so far from being contrary
from that text, you err, not knowing the Scriptures, that it is most agreeable
to it. For a most fit way to err against the knowledge of the Scripture is to
permit such and a great number of such men to interpret Scriptures, as are most
fit to err in the interpretation of them. And is this a good refutation? And
therefore the meaning of our Savior must be according to your use, they erred
because they have the knowledge of the Scriptures, which they mis-interpreted
Shift you how you will you cannot evade, was the knowledge of the Scriptures
the cause of their error? no: that is contrary to our Savior, who said, you
err, not knowing the Scriptures: was it necessary that those who did know the
Scriptures should mis-interpret them? no; for then that will, by a
recideration, come into the same inconvenience; for then the knowledge will be
a certain mean (at least in a large sense) of this mis-interpretation. And so
it would be our best way to know nothing of Scripture, that so we may not err.
3. Can we imagine that our Savior Christ discoursed as you do, that because by
our fault the Scriptures are an occasion of mis-interpretation, therefore the
people should not commonly use them? is this symbolicall to the sense of our
Savior's words, you err, not knowing the Scriptures? 4. Our Savior then by
you rebukes their mis-interpretation: then he would have them know the
Scriptures better, not have the people deprived of them. 5. There is a double
knowledge as to this purpose. 1. An habitual Knowledge, which is chiefly of
the Principles in Scripture; this they had in their mind. Then there is an
actual Knowledge, which consists in an application of those Principles to
particular Conclusions of belief and practice. They were wanting it seems in
the later; in that they did not so as they should consider that text in Moses,
which our Savior makes use of for the Resurrection. They might have inferred
the Resurrection from that text, and so not have erred. Therefore had they more
need to look over the Scriptures again and consider them better. The saying of
the Jew is good. He that reads a book an hundred times is not like him that
reads it an hundred times and one. The oftener we read it, especially the
Bible, the more we see in it.

But you bring a corroboration of your answer, specially being licensed to
cross all Antiquity and all the Authority of the Church if they stand in their
way. Sir, this will not do. 1. We license them not to cross all Antiquity, and
we need not give them such a direction, and surely if they should you would
have no cause to blame them. We have liberty to use that of the Philosopher in
his Rhet. (...). Do you look to that who contradict God and Fathers and
Doctors. 2. They cannot intend surely the crossing of all Antiquity; for
certainly they do not know all Antiquity; yea, if you speak all Antiquity with
a full universality, there are few of your own learned men that know it. And
therefore if any of their interpretations does cross antiquity, it does but
(...) it is but by accident. And in things necessary they are not so like to do
so. 3. Who is there of all your men that have proved this proposition, that the
Consent of the Fathers (supposed) makes an argument of Divine Faith, therefore
though we love their company, yet we desire to see our way. But object to us
nothing but that which is proper. How shall your men know that what they hold
does not cross all Antiquity? The Authority of the Church gives them neither
faith of it nor Knowledge. Yea some of yours say, omnes Patres sic, ego autem
non sic.

You go on. And I wonder why you call this your manner of proceeding the
knowledge of the Scripture, etc. unto secondly. Ans. You make your self sport
with the Ambiguity of the word Knowledge. You mean it by way of a Science, as
Physic: we do not say that Tradesmen make any knowledge of Divinity so, as to
give an account of the principles of Divinity in the body of it: no, but they
may have a knowledge of Scripture sufficient for their use, although they do
not teach others. As if there were plain principles of Physic in our language;
we might make use them for our selves, as Tiberius said, after thirty years of
age he would laugh at those who did need a Physician, you are deceived then, or
would deceive in the fallacy of consequent, though all Science be knowledge,
all knowledge is not Science; for knowledge is more general and therefore
surely of it self does not infer the most perfect species.

You say, secondly, you in vain object that of St. Paul that the Scriptures
are able to make us wise unto Salvation, etc. unto thirdly; wherein you allow
the truth of the text with your gloss; namely, not as they are interpreted by
every giddy fancy, but by Tim. who did continue in the things which he learned
and had been assured of by orall tradition.

Ans. (...); what will you get by this answer? If you understand by orall
tradition such doctrines of the Gospel which were first preached, afterward
written, we grant you the use of such orall traditions: but this boots you not;
for you must have traditions in point of faith, besides what is written: and
such we deny unto you that Timothy had. And I prove my denial by your own
words. For how could Timothy understand Scripture by what was beside Scripture?
you speak of his understanding the Scripture by tradition: tradition, of
proper name, is that which is beside Scripture in the matter of it: and how can
he, by that which is different in matter, understand the Scripture? If you mean
by orall Traditions, some traditive interpretations (as learned men call them)
of the more difficult passages of Scripture, this indeed were more reasonable
in the hypothesis as to Timothy: but this is nothing to us, unless you can
tell us certainly how many and what they are. If there were such, and lost,
then your Church is lost. 2. Again, we allow no giddy fancy to define the
sense of Scripture; but in things necessary and plain their own knowledge may
be sufficient, and their private judgment may be as safely exercised in the
sense thereof as in the choice of your Religion.

But thirdly by your own words, I will conclude against you a fortiori; for if
the Scriptures were able to make Timothy wise, who was a Teacher, much more
others: since, as Mr. Cressy and you afterward affirm, there is more requisite
to a Minister to be believed than others. If then they be able to make a
Minister wise unto salvation, then one of the People much more, who, according
to you, is not bound to so much. Fourthly, whereas you say, They (so) will make
him wise unto salvation, and to continue still assured of the doctrine of the
Church, and never to contradict that. Do not you see that you add to Paul in
the Predicate: for S. Paul says, they are able to make him wise unto
salvation: and you say, [so] they are able to make him wise to salvation, and
to continue still assured of the Doctrine of the Church, and not to contradict
the Church: who is it that wrests Scripture now? Do not you draw it to your own
use? no, you will say; it is all one to make us wise unto salvation, and to
make us continue still assured of the Doctrine of the Church, and not to
contradict the Church. Is it? then all who have not contradicted the Church are
saved: and none that have contradicted the Church are saved. The former you
will not say: the later you cannot prove. Pope Vigilius contradicted the Church
in the 5. Genesis Council, about the three Chapters; was he damned? Fifthly, you
say, the Scriptures so understood, would make him wise unto salvation, and to
continue in the doctrine of the Church. How do you understand it, copulatively,
or disjunctively? Copulatively, that the Scriptures and the orall traditions
would make him wise unto salvation, and to continue in the doctrine of the
Church? or disjunctively, that the Scriptures would make him wise unto
salvation, and the traditions to continue in the doctrine of the Church? If
disjunctively, then we may be wise unto salvation, and yet not continue in the
doctrine of the Church; to wit, by the Scriptures. If we cannot have salvation
without continuing in the Church, then prove your Church to be as infalible to
us, as the Doctors of the Church were to Timothy, until that time you will be
thought to beg the question. So, to end this answer, we note here, that you
take special care of the Church. It seems by your stickling about the Church,
that what S. Austin said, in his de Civitate Dei, concerning Rome-Heathen, is
also true by you of Rome-Christian, Et major cura unius Romae quam totius
Coeli: And there is more care had of one Rome than all Heaven. You go on.
Thirdly, you say; You confess that when we are by the Church assured that the
Scripture is the Word of God, we may ground our faith in it for those things
which are plainly delivered. You say yes, but I also say, that all things
necessary to salvation are not plainly delivered in Scripture.

So then, it seems you come down from your former universality, that
whatsoever we do believe, we must believe upon the proposals of the Church, as
the formal cause and motive thereof; and why then do you not allow the people
the use of the Bible, as in order to those things which are plainly delivered?
So that by this concession you open the way to contradict your own practice.

But you would shut it again, by saying, that all things necessary to salvation
are not plainly delivered in it. Be sure you take heed of this, that you do not
grant this: for why then should all fly to the Church for infalible directions
in way of supply? well. Are they not delivered, or not plainly? which? speak
your mind. If not delivered, then surely not plainly; for of that which is not
there are no affections, as the Rule is; but they may be delivered, and yet not
plainly. Come out of the clouds, and do not make a noise, but lighten us. If
not delivered, think upon the Argument you know well, If many things not
necessary are plainly delivered in Scripture, then much rather all things
necessary. If delivered and not plainly, then plainly not delivered; for if
they be delivered, they are delivered for our use, as a Rule of faith and
action: and how are they a Rule, if they be not sufficiently plain? for then we
must have another Rule for the understanding of this Rule. And also think upon
the former Argument, which proceeds upon your own distinction, that the
Scriptures were able to make Timothy wise unto salvation, but not every one. If
Timothy, then much more others, because more is required, as you say, to a
Minister, in point of belief, than to others.

But you would prove what you say S. Peter says, that many, to their
perdition, did misunderstand some hard places of S. Paul; so that
mis-interpretation of hard places may be the cause of perdition. Ans. First you
will excuse us if we note that the danger they were in, was not by
misunderstanding, but by wresting of those places. You know the Greek is, as
before was said, (...) And the Syriack renders it, perverting, depraving: and
so also your Translation of Rhemes, depraving. This is not so much an
intellectual error, as a moral fault, and the danger is by the later. Secondly,
Here Is but some things hard to be understood in S. Paul's Epistles, not all;
not many: and from hence you cannot argue, that all things therefore in S.
Paul's Epistles, and much less in the whole Scripture, are hard to be
understood. If you syllogize so, you proceed a particulari, and a dicto
secundum quid. Thirdly, the perverting and depraving does more immediately
depend upon their being unstable than ignorant. Therefore cannot you impute
that to simple ignorance, which, at least partly belongs to another cause.
Fourthly, how prove you that those things which were hard to be understood,
were of those things which are necessary to salvation? If you say so, it lies
upon you to prove it; if they were not such, then this text is not pertinent.
Fifthly, it is to their own destruction, (...). So then it seems hereby they
had the liberty to read those Epistles: and why should you therefore hinder the
people from the use of Scripture, since they run the danger of their own
destruction by wresting them? And peruse your own Estius upon the place, who
does ingenuously note, that it is not said (...), as referring to the Epistle
(as some copies he said would have it) but (...), referring to (...), which
respects the time of Christ's coming; although afterward Estius would extend
them to the point of justification by faith.

Fourthly, you object heresy and lewd life to some in whom you say we invested
infallibility. If I should grant all, what prove you from hence, but that there
be other ways to heresy and bad life besides giving all scope to interpret the
Scriptures as we judge fit? etc. unto but to prevent.

Ans. But do you remember what occasion I had to object this to you by way of
recrimination? you charged us by the judgment of your learned Divines that the
free use of the Scripture would be it upon which the peoples manners would grow
worse and worse. And to this I said, how comes it then to pass that some in
whom you vested infallibility were guilty of heresy and bad manners? and I
instanced in Liberius subscribing against Athanasius. So that the way your
Church has does not free you from these crimes: and therefore you do
unreasonably urge against your Adversary inconveniences of his principles,
which are common to yours. And yet you will now complain of me because I am
even with you.

The debate betwixt us upon this point lies thus; you faulted our permission of
the use of Scripture to the people as the cause, or the cause without which
heresy and bad manners do not arise. I answered in defense of Scripture, this
not the cause nor the causa sine quae non of them, since heresy and bad
manners have been in those of your Church in whom your infalibility is placed,
and therefore have you no cause to take it so ill that I answered you so home.
All the causality you can pretend of heresy and bad manners by a free use of
the Scriptures, is through mis-interpretation of them; is it not? yea? is it
so? then how come those who are infalible to be heretics and bad? You had best
take away Scripture from all, that so there may be no heresy.

Well, it seems you now begin to bethink your self that heresy and bad life
are not the properties of a free use of Scripture, as we understand them quarto
modo; but as consequents, or inseparable accidents which are in a larger sense as
properties, namely, as omni sed non soli; so I construe your last words [if I
should grant all, what prove you from hence but that there be other ways to
heresy and bad life] etc. you must then allow us to tell you, that you are
somewhat disposed to go hence, and to deduct and refute the overboiling
expressions of the danger of Scripture, as to the people at least as if all the
heresies and bad life were to be grounded or charged upon the common liberty of
reading Scripture. And let me come up a little more closely to you; I demand of
you Whether you will or dare to say, that all those who have had the free use
of Scripture have interpreted it [in difficult places] as they judged fit, and
therefore were of bad life: if not then, is it not proprium omni? And so for,
heresy, you cannot say, that every one who has freely used Scripture has
interpreted or mis-interpreted it unto heresy, for how then could he of your
Church say, si fides in doctos solos caderet, nihil esset, occuperius Deo? Or
did they believe without the use of Scripture by an implicit faith in the
Church? Did they? But this implicit faith implies a contradiction in adjecto,
for faith supposes knowledge of what we believe in the object, though not in
the reason: but implicit is divided against knowledge: and if you say, that it
knows the Church which it does believe, it will come to this, that all the
faith of the people shall be shrunk into one Article of the Church; and no
matter whether they explicitly believe God or Christ or any thing else, will
this prove good Divinity? Or will good Divinity prove this? And besides, it is
not implicit faith which believes the Church, but explicit; for they must
actually believe the Roman Church to be it unto which salvation is obliged.
Then reading of the Scriptures is not a cause to all, though not all the cause
of heresy; for some have got salvation by it; and therefore were no heretics,
unless you will say, they might have salvation and be heretics too. If you
will say it, then why would you persuade our people that there is no salvation
for us heretics? Then subjection to the Roman Church is not necessary to
salvation; for although all Christians but you, according to your Principles,
are heretics, yet they may be saved because heretics may be saved. However we
may have faith by reading of Scripture; and if faith, then we are not
heretics, by Knots argumentation; because he would have heresy destroy all
faith. But you have reason to say that other ways of heresy there may be
besides being conversant in Scripture: for you know that heretics have pleaded
Antiquity, therefore by your Logic, you should not plead it for use and
settlement of faith.

Whereas you say, Again, had not David who was a Murderer and an Adulterer;
had not Solomon who was an Idolater the infalible assistance of the Holy Ghost,
in writing several parts of the holy Scripture?

Sir, I thank you for helping your weak Adversary; for this makes for me, and
proves for me what I said on behalf of Scripture, that heresy and badnesse
were accidental at most to the use of Scripture, because those whom you
account infallible were guilty thereof. You prove now, by other examples, the
possibility thereof. The sense of the discourse, as to badnesse of life, is
this. If bad manners be competible to those who are accounted infallible, then
the mis-interpretation of Scripture, by the ignorance of the people, is not the
cause of bad manners, but verum prius; and now you, not denying it to be true of
your Pope, would confirm it by certain examples in Scripture. But I hope you
mean to reflect this toward the proof of infalibility to be consistent with a
lewd life. And therefore I answer to you that I deny not the distinction of
infalibility in rebus fidei, and not in point of action. I deny not the
distinction in the notion of it, but I deny it in the application of it to the
Pope. I do acknowledge him in one part of it, falible, in the latter; but you
must prove him infalible in the former, as David and Solomon was: and we have
done. We are agreed in the Thesis, that there may be infalibility of faith
where there is lewdness of life, but we differ in the Hypothesis, as you intend
it; not that the Pope may not be naught in life: but that he is not infalible
in defining points of faith or manners.

But you would avoid the danger of my former answer; therefore you say, But to
prevent this and all that elsewhere you can say against the Pope: I (in my
twenty first number) desired you and all to take notice of that which you here
quite forget. I said I would have every one to know that the Roman Church does
oblige us no more than to believe that the Pope, defining with a lawful
Council, cannot err. How then does the belief or faith of a Church (I speak
not of private men's private opinions) invest infalibility in a person
heretical or bad?

So then let my answer be put into this form. Liberius the Pope was guilty of
heresy and bad manners. Liberius was (according to you) infalible; therefore
the Subject of infalibility may be an heretic, and guilty of bad manners, and
consequently heresy and bad life are not to be imputed to the
mis-interpretation of Scripture. Before you granted me the Conclusion, that
heresy and bad life may come in otherwise; and therefore we cannot fasten them
upon the mis-interpretation of Scripture: and now you deny to me the
Assumption, and you say the Church does not invest infalibility in the Pope,
but as defining with a lawful Council, general you mean.

Well then, Liberius is not defended in the point of subscription as neither
you nor Bellarmin can defend him: but yet you defend the Roman infalibility in
faith; because, as you say, he was not the Subject of it. Rather than
infalibilitie should be disparaged, the Pope shall be degraded from his
infalibilitie.

This you say here occasionally, to deny unto me the use of this instance: but
this is not the seat of the matter; therefore we shall say here no more than is
necessary. And first you had no great cause here to except against the
assumption, since you grant the consequence of the Conclusion. 2. You should
consider what you say, that the Pope of himself is not the Subject of
infalibilitie, for by this you raise a war against you of your Roman
Catholics, which did think they knew the sense of the Roman faith, as well as
you; for sure you are not more than a private Doctor. All the Canonists you
know are against you, and the Jesuits are against you, particularly Bellarmin
in his 2 b. de Council. Author 15. Chapter Where he maintains this position, that
the Pope is the Head of the whole Church. Where he has this argument. Ecclesia
universalis est unum corpus visibile, ergo habere debet unum Caput visibile.
The universal Church is one visible Body; therefore it must have one visible
Head, otherwise it will seem a Monster. But we cannot imagine any other but the
Pope. Therefore the Pope is the Head of the whole Church simul together; so he,
and that is of a Council. And so it was determined in the Lateran Council.
Now where shall be the infalibilitie of the Church placed then but in the head
of a council? You are all wont to say, that the Church is infalible and a
Council infallible, and that the Pope is infalible. Now how will you
com-promise the truth of these, but by saying the Church is infallible by the
Council and the Council by the Pope. Then the Pope is the (...) of this
infalibilitie. The Church formally taken is the multitude of the Faithful; the
Church representatively is the Council, the Church virtually is the Pope. If
the first subject receptive of Authority be the people, then do you lay the
ground of the Independents: if the Council, then the Pope has his power from
them, and so he is not the immediate Vicar of Christ, as Bell. in the former b.
and chapter the 15.

And then also what will become of the condition of the primitive Church
wherein there was so long a time before any General Council? And then also in
reason there should be a General standing Council, if infalibility primarily
flows from them. And have the Council a coordinate power, or subordinate? Which
will you say? If coordinate, then to be sure the Pope is not Head of the
Church, which you will be loath to say. If subordinate, then he is Head, and
therefore infalibility must be subjected in him as Prince of the Church, unless
you will divide infalibilitie from Authority. And if so, what Authority will
there be of this infalibilitie?

But to go on. You tell me that those Doctors who are of that opinion that the
Pope cannot err in defining out of a general Council, have other answers to
your objections. So you put me to seek for their answers. You will not tell me
who they are, nor what they are, nor where they are to be found. So then as to
them my objections are proper; and their opinions may be as probable or more
than yours, and it may seem more and therefore you will not condemn your own
opinion by comparing with their answers: for if their Answers be solid, then
your opinion is naught.

And then you are pleased to put me off thus, but that which you say is nothing
against our faith, which no man (though never so little a Frenchman) will say
obliges us to hold the Pope infallible in defining out of a General Council.

Ans. But that which you say is nothing against the faith of others which no
man (though never so little a Courtier at Rome) will say obliges them to hold
the Pope not infalible in defining out of a general Council. But why do you say
our faith? Is your faith the same with the faith of the Roman Court? If not,
then you divide from them. If so, then you must hold that none are true
Catholics (in your sense) but those who hold themselves such by Subjection to
the Bishop of Rome; not as in a Council, but simply to him. Yea, do you not
think that you must necessarily be subject to the Laterean Council which had
the Popes consent: and that determined the thing expressissime, as Bell. in his
second b. de Council. cap. 13. Namely, that the Pope is above the Council in a
sense opposite to the Counsel of Constance and Basil who defined a General
Council above the Pope, and could infalibly determine without him. And if you
say that Belarmin said, there some did doubt whether the Laterean Council was
a general Council, yet you must tell us your opinion what you hold of this
Council; yea, in his seventeenth chapter he defends it for a general Council and
holds the point to be a decree concerning faith, but says it is a doubt that
the Council did not decree it proprie ut decretum fide Catholicae tenendum;
and therefore they that think otherwise are not properly heretics, yet cannot
be excused from great temeritie. However I hope that Council was more
considerable with you than the judgment of private Doctors: yea also, than the
French Catholics. Yea, if you will be a right Frenchman in this opinion, you
should hold that the Council may be infalible reclamante Papa, (and this comes
up to the stresse of the question) and therefore you do not speak determinately
your opinion concerning the right state of the question: but you do latere post
principia, in saying, that no Frenchman will say, you are obliged to hold the
Pope infalible in defining out a General Council. If you be a Frenchman in
this, speak out and tell us your opinion, not conjunctively, but disjunctively,
whether the Council may be infalible without the Pope. But I commend your
wisdom that you hold the safest way. For this Bellar. and all will say, that
the Pope defining with a Council cannot err. But Bellarmin will also hold
infalibilitie to be in the Pope, who is the head of the whole Church, even
congregated, and that all Authority is in him, as the Monarch of the Church;
but in this you are an Ephectick. So certainly you do agree amongst your selves
about the Capital point of the Roman infalibilitie. As one said in another case
of action: so may I say of you in this dispute: you have first said you knew
not what: and now you know not what to say. Tell us where the original of
infalibilitie lies. (...); surely it does not become infalibilitie to be so
reserved.

To pass this, you tell me in your fourth Par. that I lay to your charge the
supposing of the question. And I am still of that mind. For if you say, that
as things stand, we have no other assurance to ground our faith upon but the
Church; you do plainly suppose that which is mainly in question; and so must do
until you prove it. And I still say unto you, as I did, that you do not well
consider what you say in saying, as things stand, as if the rule of faith were
a Lisbian rule, and might alter upon occasions; and as if the Scripture must be
accommodated to the use of the Church. Yes, intellectus currit cum praxi. And
the Scripture is to follow the Church, and not the Church the Scripture, would
you have it so? So it seems by what follows, for so you answer, that, though
God might have ordained otherwise, yet as things stand, the Church is the
ground of our faith in all points, speaking of the last ground on which we must
stand; to wit, not an humane but Divine ground, the pillar and ground of truth.
And what do you say here more than you said before; or more than we can say,
mutatis mutandis? Though God could have ordained otherwise that there should
have been a standing Council, or a singular person successively infalible, to
have proposed and determined all things infalibly: yet, as things stand, the
Scripture is the ground of our faith in all points necessary, speaking of the
last ground on which we must stand, not a humane, but a Divine ground. Wherein
are we inferior to you, but that we do not put in all points? But we put in
all points necessary. And what need more? And the Church is not yet proved to
determine any thing infalibly: the Scripture proposes all things necessary
infalibly. And me thinks you should, if you please, think the Scripture a
divine ground rather than the Church.

To take then your own principle.

The ground of faith must be Divine.

The Church is not a ground Divine.

Therefore no ground.

The Major is your own. The assumption is proved thus.

The Testimony of men is Humane.

The Testimony of the Church is the Testimony of men. Therefore,

The first proposition, in the ordinary capacity of men is plain. For no
effect can exceed the cause. And the second proposition is as plain, if the
men that are of the Church are considered as private men, by your own grounds.
But these men you say, being in the capacity of a Church, are inspired by the
Holy Ghost so as they cannot err in any point. True, if they be assisted with
the Holy Ghost. Well, but how shall I know what a Church is, and whether such
men be of the Church; and whether such men be assisted with the Holy Ghost?
Yea, whether there be an Holy Ghost? All these particulars I must be satisfied
in before that I can believe by a Divine faith, that what the Church proposes
definitively, is true. A Church cannot be, in the nature of it, expressed
without a profession of that Religion which directs man to his supernatural
end. Now this Religion requires a supernatural revelation, as Aquinas disputes
it in the beginning of his Sums. Then this Religion must be revealed, being not
naturally intelligible either by principles or works of nature. Where, and how
is this Religion revealed? you cannot say by the Church, for the question is of
the Church. And so consequently how is it revealed that such are of the Church,
and assisted by the Holy Ghost, or that there is an Holy Ghost? Expedite these
questions. And again, consider, that S. Austin, and other Fathers have spoken
freely of discerning the Church by Scripture; when in I am informed what
Religion is, what a Church, which the true Church, and that there is a Holy
Ghost. Again, I must believe, by a divine faith, that the Church is the pillar
and ground of truth, as you say. Well, but how shall I come by this divine
faith? God infuseth it, you will say; well, but does he infuse it immediately,
as in respect of Scripture? So you must say; well then, cannot you think that
he can infuse faith of the Scripture immediately in respect of the Church?
Answer me, is this faith wrought in me by the credibility of the Church, or
not? if not, how? If so, then the Church is naturally (...), or the testimony
of the Church must be resolved into the testimony of men, extra rationem
Ecclesiae, then is it of itself but humane. Therefore must you come to this,
that the Testimony of the Church is infallible by Athoritie of Scripture. Well
then, if so, then the Church is not the last ground on which we must stand. Nor
yet is it the first ground, as we take it for a Divine ground, which you mean;
for it is not Divine but by the word of God: yea, if the Church be the last
ground on which we must stand, then why do you prove the Authority of the Church
by the Authority of Scripture? And if you say, that you also prove the
Scripture to be the word of God by the Church; yet not as the last ground, but
the Church is resolved into the Authority of Scripture as the last ground: for
if the Church has no being as such, but by Scripture in the substance of it,
then the Church must be ultimately grounded in Scripture; for that which is
primum in generatione is ultimum in resolutione. So a primo ad ultimum the
Scripture is the ground of faith.

And so this will be contrary to what follows in your last, that we do not
first believe the Church for the Scripture. If you speak of a general motive
to believe the Scripture; so we may begin with the Church, upon the account of
credible men as toward humane faith: but if you speak of belief as Divine, so
we cannot first begin with the Church; because we must first be assured of the
Church by the word of God, under the formalitie of Divine faith; the word of
God must be first in genere credibilium, unless there were a resultance of a
Church out of natural principles; which is not to be said.

And in your following words you intimate as much, as if we might first admit
the Scripture to be the word of God, and then prove by the Scriptures the
authority of the Church. If we may admit the Scriptures for Gods word first,
then first the Scriptures may be believed to be the word of God without the
authority of the Church, which is contrary to what you have said formerly. Then
secondly, the Scripture must be the last ground of faith, because, as before,
that which is first in generation, is last in resolution. And then thirdly. Why
do you dispute with us, concerning the Authority of Scriptures by the Church,
since we have admitted the Scriptures for the word of God? And therefore should
you not urge us to the acknowledgement of Scriptures by the Authority of the
Church; but wholly to the acknowledgement of the Church by the Authority of the
Scriptures.

Paragr. 5.
In the fifth Par. you say, you charge me with abating from my first
proposition, in which I said, Divine faith in all things was caused by the
proposal of the Church, because now I say, that when by the infalible
Authority of the Church, we are assured that the Scripture is the word of God,
we may believe such things as are clearly contained in Scripture.

Ans. And I cannot yet bate you an ace of my charge. For your terms are of a
believing (indefinitely) upon proposal of the Church; as if 'twere the
immediate, formal cause of all faith: and so several of your Arguments would
prove, that the Scripture is not at all our rule, but the Church. And this your
first paper made to be the (...). and therefore if you had clearly intended the
dispute of this point, whether we are to believe the Scripture to be the word
of God, by the Authority of the Church; and so consequently, or causally, all
to be believed for the Church, you should have made this the state of the main
question.

But, now you say, when by the infalible Authority of the Church we are
assured that the Scripture is the word of God, we may believe such things as
are clearly contained in Scripture. And do you not go less now? Do but compare
the quantities of your assertions, before all things to be believed upon, and
for the proposal of the Church: now, some things may be believed for the
Scripture, which are plainly contained in it. And the Church and the Scripture
are in our case opposed: so then, if first all is to be believed by the
Authority of the Church, and now, some things clearly contained may be
believed upon Scripture, then do you not only abate but contradict your self
in effect; for, it will come to this, all is to be believed upon the proposal
of the Church; and somewhat may be believed not upon the proposal of the Church,
but of Scripture. For, when we are assured, you say, that the Scripture is the
word of God, we may believe such things as are plainly contained in Scripture;
then we are to believe it upon the account of the word of God. And your Church
can have no higher Authority surely than God's word for it. Therefore, if you
say we are to believe what is plainly contained in Scripture (when we are
assured by the Church, that it is the word of God) for the authority of the
Church, then I pray tell me why we should believe the Church, if not for the
word of God?

Again, to consider these words of yours; if we must be assured by infalible
Authority of the Church that the Scripture is the word of God, before we can
believe what is plainly contained therein, then either one of us must yield
upon the case of the infalibilitie of the Church, or else nothing plainly
contained in Scripture can be, by your opinion, believed. But you think that
some things are plainly set down in Scripture (though elsewhere, you would
conclude as if all things in Scripture were obscure; and so you now also abate
in this) and herein we both agree: and we think the Church's Authority is not
infalible: wherein we differ from you. Now which think you in reason should
yield, you, or we? One would think you should yield rather: since we can prove,
that whatsoever is contained in Scripture is to be believed without the
Authority of the Church, and you cannot prove the Authority of the Church to
be plainly contained in Scripture; yea, must yet believe, upon your principles,
the infalible Authority of the Church, before you can believe it, though
plainly contained in Scripture; because, you must first be assured by the
infalible Authority of the Church, that the Scripture is the word of God,
before you do believe, what is contained in Scripture.

And again, thirdly, we are assured that the Scripture is the word of God; why
may not we then have leave to believe things plainly contained in Scripture?
Certa sunt in paucis, as Tertullian says. We say, certain necessary truths are
not so many. Why are not we then well grounded in Religion? surely in your
account, because we do not go to divine faith, by your infalible Church. Even
as the death of Remus, it was ordained by Romulus, that whosoever went over the
trench at the building of Rome, any other than the ordinary way, should be put
to death: so, Z^n. 2. An.
because we do not go the ordinary Roman way to the building of us in our most
holy faith, we must die for ever. As if our faith were not true Divine faith,
because it is not implicit by the Church. Which is as much as to say, the
obedience of faith is not good, because it is not blind. And this is as much as
to say, we do not see, because we do not see.

And therefore, fourthly, since, as has been showed, the authority of the
Church is resolved into Scripture; and since you have confessed, that we may
admit the Scriptures to be the word of God, and yet may need to be assured of
the Authority of the Church, your apology for your self, in this paragraph,
must needs be insufficient.

In the sixth Par. You begin with taking notice of my character of my self to
be one of the slender sons of the Church of England, whether so, or whether he
has showed that Treatise of mine to be no demonstration, Let the indefferent
reader, after the due pondering the force of all Arguments, determine.

Sir, I dare not alter my small opinion of my self. And therefore the
consideration of such matters should have dropped from a judicious head into a
learned pen. And if your demonstration, as you call it, be indeed such as does
merit the term, you have proved me to be no better than my word. And if I
prove it to be no demonstration, I do not yet falsify what I said of my self.
For I shall impute the cause of it to our cause, the weakest hand may defend
our cause: the strongest cannot defend yours.

To pass this, you go on. Sure I am that this is no Demonstration which you
add, the Scripture is infalible, but the Church is not; therefore I must take
for my ground the Scripture.

Ans. But you leave out the scope of this Argumentation, and the formalitie of
the conclusion. You spoke of as clear a Demonstration as any wise man can hope
for in this matter. I told you it was hard to say, who does, optimum quod sic.
Well, but then I wished you to put it to the test; and to try the debate of it
by this rule of wisdom and conscience, tene quod certum est, relinque quod
incertum, hold that which is certain, leave that which is uncertain; it is
certain, that the Scripture is infalible, and you confess it: it is not
certain, that the Church is infalible, and I deny it. Which then, should you
take to be the rule and ground and cause of faith? So I in my last. But you
leave out all notice of my disputing this with you, in point of wisdom, and
cut off your own confession; and would have me to make this a Demonstration,
absolutely in point of truth. You do wisely to shuffle it off, since you cannot
well bear the dint of it in the way of discourse, ad hominem. And yet also is
it necessarily certain, that if our grounds be more certain, then yours are
not, because they are contradictorie.

But you making it to be in my account, an absolute Demonstration: answer,
first, the Scripture connot be proved to be the word of God, without the Church
be infalible, as I shall show chapter 8. But this was not now the particular
question. I disputed upon your own concession. And therefore this is nothing to
my Argument. Apply your answers to my proceeding with you upon your account of
prudence. And then, secondly. Though it be not a Demonstration, that [the
Scripture is infalible, the Church not, therefore, I must take for my ground
the Scripture] yet, it concludes upon advantage: for, though the Church were
infalible, in the testimony of the Scripture, to be the word of God, yet the
Scripture were to be the immediate ground of all necessary points. Thirdly.
Neither does it contradict my assertions, that the Church is not the rule and
cause of faith, though it were infalible in this Testimony; for, if it were
infalible in this, yet would it not follow, it should be infalible in all; as I
have told you, and you have not answered me yet. And then Fourthly. The
Scripture may appear to be the word of God, though the Church be not
infalible, as will be showed in answer to you.

And therefore all you say upon this; hence follows, secondly, that the
Church must have infalibilitie sufficient to support this most weighty Article
of our faith, that all the Scripture is the word of God: and therefore, upon
her Authority I believe the Scripture to be most infalible; yet, because I
ground this belief upon her Authority, her Authority is yet the last ground
of faith. I say, all this has no sound discourse, and will come (...), even
into nothing, upon the two last answers: first because, if from hence I believe
the Scriptures to be the word of God; yet, am I not therefore, ex vi
consequentiae, bound to hold the Church the last ground of faith in all things;
for, it plainly concludes, a dicto secundum quid. We can hold, that the
General Council may be infalible in points necessary, though not in all
points whatsoever, although you must hold infalibilitie in all or none; because
you say, all is delivered by the Church, upon her Authority equally, without
respect to the matter. And then secondly, upon the last answer, which was the
fourth, we shall cashiere all that is said here; for, that it will appear, that
the Scripture is the word of God without the Churches Authority for the
corroboration of the Title. And so there needs not the infalibilitie sufficient
to support this most weighty Article of faith, that all the Scripture is the
word of God.

^um. 7.
And whereas in your next number, you promise such souls as have forsaken an
infalible Church, an happy eternity, upon this ground, that those things which
are necessary to Salvation are plain in Scripture; I pray God, their Souls
come not to be required at your hands.

Ans. I am beholding to my Adversary for his good wishes, that, I may not
answer for other men's souls. But, if he takes here forsaken formally, and an
infalible Church really so, (not accounted only to be so by him) I deny it,
that we have so forsaken such a Church, for neither is it infalible (...) and
besides, they have rather forsaken us, and the whole Church, in pretending
infalibilitie to themselves, and Domination over all that will be true
Christians. No particular Church can be bound to another, more than as it does
comply with the Catholic Church: now, then if any do leave the Catholic (as
the Roman has done) we cannot join with them, wherein they leave the
Catholic, either in point of faith or discipline. If we are to give respect to
a particular Church, as an actual part of the whole, then, where it separates,
we must follow the whole. A turpis est omnis pars universo suo non congruens.
And yet, they first made the actual Schism, when the Popes Bull prohibited
communion with us.

So then, take forsaken rightly, and an infalible Church really, we deny the
charge. Take them otherwise, we deny the consequence of danger.

But, my Adversary would prove our ground to be groundless, first, because no
Soul can have infalible assurance of the Scriptures being the true word of God,
if the Church be not infalible, etc. Whereof you promise more. Number. 20. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Ans. This we have had so often without proof, that it is to no purpose, to say
any thing to words, for Arguments. Scaurus negat; as, Alphonsus de Castro
opposes his adversary. Yea, also you refer me here for proof in the third chapter
Your conclusion is here: your proof there; so far is your conclusion from
proof. Premises were wont to be before the Conclusion, but your opinion is
already showed vain, as touching the ground of your certainty: and your vanity
of my opinion I shall refute when you show it.

And so you serve me for the second respect, wherein you say, my ground is
groundless; for, you say, it is manifestly false, that all things necessary to
salvation are plainly set down in Scripture, as you show, chapter 3.

Your conclusion here, that it is manifestly salse, etc. I believe will be too
large for your Arguments, as it is now too soon. We follow your order, as
having nothing to do, until you begin.

In your eighth Par. You say, I find nothing in the next Par. which I have not
here answered. Only, you still force me to say again, I would have every one
to know, that the Roman Church does oblige to no more, than to believe that the
Pope, defining with a lawful Council, cannot err, what proceeds from this
Authority, we profess to proceed from the Authority of the Church. When the
Church diffused, admits these definitions, her consent is yet more apparent.

You say, you find nothing in it, which here you have not answered. And what
can I find here, but, that you say, Only you force me to say again. Here is
some ingenuitie, that you seem not to love to swell your papers with
repetitions. Therefore prove it once: say it no more. Quid verba audiam, facta
cum non videam? But if I might be so bold, does not your term force refer to
the act say, not to the Adverb again, as if you had no mind to be put upon
expressing where the infalibilitie of the Church lies determinately? I suppose
by your words, if you were let alone, you would express your selves in the
safest way confusely, and in general, that this infalibilitie is in the
Church; whether diffused as you say, or representative, or virtuall. But it is
very wisely determined by my Antagonist, that it is in the Pope, when he
defines with a General Council, that if the Pope be convinced of error, it may
be answered, he did not define with a Council; if a Council be deprehended of
error, it may be said, the Pope did not confirm the decrees of the Council.
And yet the needle does not stand full North; it trembles yet, therefore, in
omnem eventum, it is said; when the Church diffused admits those
definitions, her consent is more apparent.

May some questions be asked here, which may be in answer to this? when you say
(immediately before) what proceeds from this authority we profess to proceed
from the Authority of the Church: Does my Adversary mean that it proceeds from
all the Authority of the Church? The Pope, with a lawful Council, has
Authority in the Church, and what comes from them, comes from the Authority of
the Church objective; because this Authority is for the use of the Church, and
comes from the Authority of the Church subjective, because it comes from them
who have Authority in the Church. But is the Pope and Council the adequate
subject of the Authority of the Church? If not, then infalibilitie must not be
rested in them, without the consent of the Diffused Church. Secondly, If you
mean the Pope and Council agreeing, as you do, what becomes of the Church as
long as they do disagree, as the fifth General Council and Pope Vigilius did?
Yea, that Council obtained against the Pope; and is accounted by the Church
Universal, in the number of the General Councels without the Pope; so that
your opinion of the infalibility of the Church, to consist in a Pope defining
with a Council, is not sound, because, if it be infalible, it may be infalible
without the Pope; since it has vim Consilii without the Pope; yea, maugre the
Pope. Thirdly, If Pope and Council do consent, what if the diffused Church will
not admit these definitions? what then? And I think I have reason to suspect,
that such words are here cast out by my Adversary, as may insinuate as much as
if the Church diffused might dissent. If they may descent, then they may
descent from that which is infalible, or else infalibilitie must also include
their consent. If they may not dissent, then what mean those words, when the
Church diffused admits these definitions, her consent is yet more apparent?
Me thinks somewhat is intimated here to such a purpose, as if the consent of
the Church diffused (besides what is included in the Representative) should
formally concur to the making up of the complement of infalibilitie. So that
the Church diffused, should not conduce to these infalible Decrees, by way of
object, or as a passive principle, but also actively, by its consent, and this
symbolizeth with Alphonsus de Castro, and others of your Church, who do settle
this infalibilitie in the Acceptance of the Church Universal. And by their
opinion, the Church diffused must have a freedom to dissent, or no power.

Par. 9. You say, as for your complaint, that your paper is not fully answered,
I suppose, that if any thing of importance was left unanswered, you will tell
me of it here, that I may here answer it.

Ans. Back reckonings are not wont to be very pleasant. But now it seems too
late to return an account of my Adversaries omissions, if he was my Adversary
who now is under the reverence of the dead, and the protection of the grave.
Otherwise I might say, there needs not be any particular account in an
universal Negative. Materially, little is answered; and formaly, less. But a
Treatise was sent me for an answer; yet in satisfaction to our own cause, and
in respect to this demand, without dis-ingenuitie, I shall, it may be, now and
then note some defects. And if any should think that the fight is over when one
of the parties is dead; and that actio moritur cum persona, I shall only say
this, that this is no personal quarrel, but respects the common cause of truth,
and yet also is it fit that I should return an answer to a reply, as it would
be accounted. And when this is done I have done.

And now comes my Adversary to a vindication of the manner of answering me
before. Concerning my manner of answering you, I must tell you, that St.
Thomas, and the chief School Divines, for claritie and brevitie use to proceed
thus. And then he gave me an account of their method, which is sufficiently
known.

To which I answer, St. Thomas and the Schoolmen do use a very good method in
the way of their discourse, pro and con; but our case is not the same. For my
adversary was not now upon a problem, to dispute upon either part; but upon an
opposition to that which is defended against him. They had not one particular
Adversary against whom they were to direct all they said; but my Antagonist
had. My Antagonist sent me a challenge, which was fastened upon me; I answered in
short: he replied; I rejoined with an answer; and he returned a Treatise in
termino. And therefore this will not serve. How does he apply his positive
Divinity to my oppositive? How is the Treatise applied to my distinctions? Do
his positives fall flat against my denials? This way the Reader, to be sure,
shall know what he says, but not what I said, distinctly; because the Treatise
is not punctually applied to my answer. Had Bellarmin produced his Adversaries
Arguments no more fully than is done in that Treatise, there had not been such
need of being so careful, that in all Italy (as Sir Edwin Sandys notes) we
should not find a Bellarmin's Controversies, for fear any should peruse them,
and not find his Adversaries Arguments satisfactorily answered by him.

Therefore we may have leave to admire those words which come from the Treater,
that your intention in rejoining by a Treatise was to have the most important
matter, distinctly, orderly, and fully put down. And by having done so, I find
this great commodity, that your Answer becomes more methodicall, and my reply
to your Answer more clear and perspicuous, and the Reader sees still how
orderly the Combat is.

I wonder much how this can be said (...) Could a Reply to my answer be more
methodicall than in following me (...), as I followed the opponent? Or could my
Answer again be more methodicall than in following a Reply, had it been proper
and formal and pat? could the most important matter in debate betwixt us have
been more distinctly, orderly and fully put down, than to have shown from place
to place, where I had not answered directly to the state of the question, or
had hit the question, but did not sufficiently take off the Argument? And could
his Reply be by this manner more clear and perspicuous, when it cannot appear
plainly how he took off my Answers, or answered to the matter or form of my
occasional Arguments? If this be an orderly Combat, then let us beat the
air, and that will be sufficient to beat an Adversary. Thus much of the first
Chapter; which is no hard Chapter.

The Answer to the second Chapter. No necessity of a Judge in all Controversies
to whom all should be bound simply to submit their assent.
Number. 1.
MY Adversary says here, that I go about to persuade him, that he is most
likely to take up his Religion by prejudice

Ans. It seems he is pleased to forbear any Answer to my retortion of his
similitude, but he takes notice of my returning to him the greater probability
of prejudice in point of Religion, to be on their part. And he argues the
contrary, because, being Recusants, upon this account are liable to lose two
parts of their Estates, and what else we are, or shall be pleased to take from
them, be it goods, liberty or life.

Ans. The prejudice on their part, was as I said, upon the opinion of the
infalibilitie of their Church: so that I spoke upon account of a religious
interesse; and he answers me upon a civil account rather. This is (...). And
therefore this answer is not pertinent. And whereas he would seem to have good
ground in Conscience for his Religion, for which he suffers so much; if he
intends to vye with us in that kind, others of our Religion have suffered more
from them. Surely he forgets the Marian days, wherein we dropped more blood
than they have done.

And whereas he says to me, -- and what else you are or shall be pleased to
take from us.

As to this much might be said also without passion in the same kind. No man
can take away more from us than our lives, one would think. Yes, Roman
Catholics would take away from us Heaven too. They had almost destroyed me
upon earth, says the Psalmist: But these will destroy us in heaven also.
Secondly. If he who was mine Adversary was a Native of England, he was as much
included in the order of his deprivation as I. Thirdly, I will say more yet,
that some of his Religion have had more favor than we. Yea, yet more than
this; one (whom I think he knows well) has lost more in proportional quantity
(as Aquinas distinguishes) than, any of them has lost, who has lost but two
parts of three, and for Conscience too. Therefore that character which I gave
the Romanist, he is to keep still until he can prove it does belong more to
us. Certainly this is not proved not to belong to them, because they have
suffered so much for their Religion; for we have suffered more and therefore it
does not belong to us, but them rather. But this suffering de se is easily
known not to make an Argument: for unless our cause be good before we suffer,
we have no cause to suffer at all. The saying is common, Causa non passio facit
Martyrem. Fourthly. As for the present sufferings of the Papists, they are
neither rightly charged either upon our Church, or upon our Kingdom; for there
is not yet proved any legal consent of either to what they or others have
suffered. Nay, fifthly, At the day of Judgment we shall see whether they are
not more like to answer for what we have suffered, than we for what they have
suffered in these times. So that while they do not see what is true against
them, they will seem to see what is not true against us. As Tertullian said.
But let us come to the matter.

To examine then your grounds in the second number.

Number. 2.
That God has made man to a supernatural end, and to be attained by
supernatural means, we grant as Aquinas in the beginning of of his sums. Take
men indefinitely and confusely, without exclusion of Infants dying before
Baptism from Salvation possible; and those who are not compotes mentis; and we
grant it.

And also that amongst those means, the first is true faith, and that
according to his merciful providence he has provided us some way to this
faith so easy, that all, if they pleased, might be brought to the knowledge of
it; namely, exceptis excipiendis. And that the greater part of men are
ignorant; yea, all naturally ignorant of the way to this supernatural end, as
Aquinas, because it is supernatural; these things we yield to you. And that
because the far greater part were ignorant, it beseemed his goodness (who is
the lover of souls) to provide us such a way as that ignorant men should not
be able (unless by wilful carelessness) to err by it.

These things we do willingly yield. But we demurre upon your assumption, that
this way should be the Church, as you interpret that of Isaiah the 35, where
you say, the Prophet speaks of a path and a way which shall be so direct that
fools cannot err by it. Here we must stand a while and inquire what is the
sense of this way.

And first I must note that you do not rightly render the words according to
the Hebrew verity. You say, and it shall be unto you a direct way, so that
fools cannot err. But it is not so in the text. But thus. [He shall be to them
or with them walking the way, and fools shall not err.] How is your Church
like to be this way, when either you err in not following it, or it does err
in not right following the text. And you make it to be in the text a direct
way, and so that fools cannot err. Whereas it is rather [shall not err,]
which does note so much infalibilitie as preservation from error. Now a
negative of the act does not prove a negative of the power; for then the
Argument would be good, a non esse ad non posse. Therefore could my Adversary
have proved, that the Church of Rome never erred, (which will never be proved)
yet all is not yet whole; because infalibilitie is not yet proved by the not
erring, but by an impossibility of erring. And if you may err by
carelessness, as before, then when were any sure of being right; for who can be
sure he has been as careful as he should be? and therefore if this be the
condition of not being deceived, yea, of infalibilitie, it is at least morally
impossible, that any should be assured in their faith; because they may be
wanting in their diligence; and so also may demerit a deprivation of Divine
light.

My Adversary goes on. To elude this text you say, sure we may be, that the
letter does respect the Jewish Church after their redemption from Captivity.
Ans. And I see no reason to the contrary, if we consider several expressions in
that place, which carry that scope; and also if we consider, that ordinarily at
least when any thing is prophesied mystically of the Church Christian in the
old Instrument, it is yet true in the letter of the Jews. And also thirdly, If
we will take notice of the Septuagint, who render it, (...). Those that are
dispersed shall walk amongst them and not err. And if you take this version
to be the Septuagints, you may know they knew the text as well as the Latin
Church.

Therefore this you would suppose and argue upon it. If he did direct the
Jewish Church by a way so direct; that fools could not err by it, there can be
no good reason why he should be less careful to direct the ignorant of the
Church of Christ.

Ans. My Adversary did not consider, that if it be understood of the Jewish
Nation, it is not presently to be understood of the Jewish Church under that
formality. It may be intended of them in the civil sense, and not in their
Ecclesiastical respect: and then we cannot argue from a temporal promise made
to the Jew, to a Spiritual promise made to the Christian; though men are bold
to make such accommodations. For then might we, of our own power, make a
mystical sense of Scripture, wherein one thing should by Divine intention
signify another thing, this we cannot do; for then mystical Divinity should
be Argumentative, which is denied even by the Pontificians.

Yet he goes on. Yet I think it is sure that this is not the true
Interpretation. For when did the blind see, the deaf hear, when did then God
come himself and save us? Ans. It may be understood in the letter, and yet some
expressions be hyperbolical; Yea, those expressions may be understood in the
letter without any hyperbolicalnesse; as that those who never thought to see or
hear of such a Redemption actual, should see and hear of it, should not only
hear of it, but see it. Secondly, When do we hear of vengance and recompense
spoken of, ver 4. And dry ground and pools and habitation of Dragons and a
place for reeds and rushes, spoken of, ver. the 7. to be in the Church
Christian in a spiritual sense? Put one to the other: and which of them has
more moment? And to the other question, when did then God come himself and save
us? We answer, this makes no Scruple of such an Interpretation of it to the
Jew; neither because it is said he will come, nor because it is said he will
save. Not the first nor the second, for the first is as ordinary, as the term
save is usual in the old Instrument for the temporal sense. Wherefore had
Joshua his name from the same root? was he to be a spiritual Savior? It is
true he was typical of Christ Jesus, but he was typical by a temporal
deliverance, yea, even the Greek word is sometimes used for a temporal
salvation, in the new Testament, as Mat. 8.25. (...), Master save us, we
perish, yea, the word (...), which commonly is rendered Savior, when applied
to Christ, is sometimes applied to God in the new Testament in a temporal
sense, as is noted rationally by some Critics; and particulary in that text
some give an instance thereof. 1 Ep. to Tim. 4.10. Who is the Savior of all,
(...), especially of those that believe. He is the Savior of all in a
temporal sense, specially of those who believe. And thus Estius upon the text
would carry it, for which exposition he names Chrysostom, Oecumenius,
Ambrosianus, Anselme. And he said positively, constat autem ex aliis Scripturae
locis, etc. it is manifest also out of other places of Scripture, that the term
of salvation is understood of the good things of the temporal life. So he upon
the place.

He proceeds. And if you will have our Savior himself to be this way, as he
said, I am the truth and the way; this self same Savior said, I (who am this
way) am with you to the consummation of the world; to wit, directing my Church
the right way to Salvation: of which direction the Church now has no less
need than then. Ans. He supposes that which is not granted, nor yet does he go
about to prove it, that it is to be understood by Divine intention of the
Christian Church objective, This is not to be allowed, unless mystical
Divinity were in the nature of it argumentative. And my second answer to this
text, wherein I referred it to the time of Christ in way of supposition, (if it
were at all to be referred to the time of the Christian Church according to
Isider, Clarius and St. Jerome.) he cannot well deny; but will argue from it,
that the Church has no less need of direction now than then. Ans. This Reply
has no strength of reason in it, for the foundation of Christianity was then
to be laid; which foundation personal was Christ, then it was to be built upon
the foundation ministerial, the Apostles also, as St. Paul speaks, Ephesians. 2.20.
The new Testament was not then written, the propagation of the Gospel was not
then made, Christian Doctrine was not universally received. And therefore then
was there more need of infalible direction by Christ and his Apostles than now.
And this really answers your supposition, that such an infalible direction
which by our Savior was promised to the Church by the Apostles should always
continue in the Church; whereas it is not so necessary by necessity of mean
or end. And therefore, can we not make a demonstration of it a causa finali,
because it is not necessary for the end of Salvation. Deus nec deficit in
necessariis, nec abundat in superfluis, as he said: he is neither wanting in
necessaries, nor is abundant in superfluities.

But this passage must be made good by them, or all is lost; therefore he goes
on. And as we could not securely have put a limitation to those words of Joel
(namely, concerning the pouring out of the spirit) if St. Peter had not secured
us of the true sense: so cannot you limit these words, not having the like
warrant for it. Ans. So then first, Are those words of Joel limited? Yes, he
confesses it, and it is so plain by St. Peter in the second of the Acts, that
it cannot be denied. Upon this confession we dispute. If those words of St.
Peter be limited, then also the other text [ Mat. 28. last. I am with you to
the end of the world] is also limited. The consequence is, it may be, demanded.
It is given thus. If the gifts of the Holy Ghost are not now to be expected as
then, then can we not now pretend infalibilitie as then, because this is a
special gift of the Holy Ghost. Therefore have we no such need of an infalible
limitation of that text by some other passages of Scripture; for
interpretative, as we may speak, it is here done by St. Peter in a text of the
same kind; so that although it does not follow, that because one text is
limited by Scripture, therefore we may limit another text; yet if the text in
question be of the same kind, we do not limit it, but show, that it is
consequently limited. For secondly, All other extroardinary dispensations of
the Holy Ghost are terminated in the event: no more Apostles, no more Prophets,
no more Evangelists, no more gift of tongues; and why then should the gift of
infalibilitie be held up? And why had not those (whom some of yours have spoke
of) who were sent to preach the Gospel to the Heathens, the gift of tongues
miraculously bestowed upon them, which might have been an argument and credit
to their infalible Doctrine?

Yet he would continue power of miracles too: to this purpose he urges the
text, those that believe shall do greater works than these. John. 14.12.

Ans. The subject of that proposition [those that believe] is considerable in
the supposition, and in the opposition. In the supposition it is to be
considered, how many it extends to; in the opposition, to what sort of men,
whether Clergy or Laity: consider it in the supposition, and we say, If it be
extended to the present Church, we deny it: If it be not extended, it
concludes nothing. Consider it in the opposition, as to what sort of men it
belongs; then, if you take it inclusively to the Laity, then by your Argument,
infalibility should be in them. For so your discourse must run, those that do
greater miracles than Christ, they may be infalible: then I assume, If you take
it inclusively of the Laity, the Laity may do greater works than Christ, then
they are infalible. And then how, or why do you state infalibilitie in the Pope
and a Council, which are two things that do not easily come together? And so
the subject of the proposition must be taken, for it bears no respect to holy
Orders, secundum rationem specialem; it is said, those that believe, not those
of the Clergy which believe. So it has it self indifferently to all sorts of
men that do believe: and if my Adversary took it as of the Clergy, let me pay
him in his own coin, in telling him, we may not limit it without a warrant;
since, if all their Clergy did work miracles; yet all that do work miracles
are not Clergy men.

Secondly, The Text is not ingenuously applied; for, it should not be applied
to miracles, as he does; but to works, (...) there refers to (...). Now all
works are not miracles, though all miracles are said to be works. All Christ's
works were not miracles: and Christ did not always at all times work miracles.
And therefore does your Ferus upon the place note, that it is not said, semper
and omni loco signa faciet, he shall always and in all places do signs, nay,
upon the same place, whereas some understand it of signs, he says, this were
hard, that no man should be a Believer, but he should do signs, quandoquidem
nullus nostrum hoc tempore signum facit. Therefore he says, some understand it
not of works of miracles, but of works of virtues.

And therefore the following words needed not to have been added, If then this
text was verified after our Saviors time, you cannot say it is only spoken of
his time, and that he did take away a way so necessary for us, his gifts being
without repentance.

Ans. This is nothing to the purpose, though we grant, it did continue sometime
after Christ, unless it be drawn down to the times of the present Church it is
inconsequent to your use: Yea, those words of Christ [I am with you unto the
end of the world,] may be verified without any infalibilitie in the Church
resident in men; much more without infalibilitie in a particular Church: It is
a plain falacie of consequent, his being with them infalibly is a way of being
with them; therefore every way of being with them is a way of infalibilitie.
And this is sufficient to destroy the hopes which the Pontificians have of this
Text. Besides that, if infalibilitie were by this Text continually promised to
the Church universal, the Romanist cannot come in for any more than a part; for
this is said by Christ, and at his ascension too to all the Apostles in
communi; and therefore from this Text they can challenge no privilege of
succession to S. Peter. or Vicariate to Christ, because this is spoken to them
all, which is also expressed in the Syriack. So that your discourse hereupon
goes upon a double error in the Rule thereof: first, because you argue a
genere ad speciem affirmative, for thus you must reason, he will be with them
to the end of the world, therefore as he was with the Apostles, infalibly.
Secondly, Because you argue a toto ut sic ad partem; because he will be with
the Church universal, therefore with you who are but a part. And also, what if
the Apostles did greater miracles than Christ? what is this to your purpose? Or
if other believers should afterward do greater miracles, your Representative
Church would be less necessary, for they that could work miracles would not
need your infalible direction. Or if they did, then cannot you conclude from
supposed continuance of miracles, continuance of infalibility.

Put then your reason into a form and it will be an Enthymem, his gifts are
without repentance, therefore he has not taken away a way so necessary: and
what then? There might have been taken away a way so necessary to show
Sophistry. To the antecedent therefore we say, there is an equivocation in the
word gifts. The word sometimes signifies grace of gifts, sometimes gifts of
grace. If you take it here of the former, it were more pertinent to your scope;
but so it is not true to the text. If of the latter, it is true to the meaning
of the place; but it is not pertinent to your purpose: and because he knew the
text [ Romans 11.29.] not to be understood of the grace of gifts; wisely is there
left out that which might hinder such appearance, namely, the calling, for so
it runs, the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

And that which follows in his reply is also captious. For he did not find in
my words, that I applied the text to the Jews in the spiritual kind, as of
infalibility, and therefore he ought not to think it strange, that this gift
should not in full dimensions be always extended to the Church: unless we
might from the litterall sense to the Jew conclude a mystical, to the
Christian proportionably to the letter; which cannot rationally be done.

He goes on. I cannot believe you trust your other Argument, if this way be
promised to the Church, ergo, the Church is not this way. Suppose God had
promised the Kingdom of France a Monarchy: Ergo, the Kingdom of France (say
you) is no Monarchy. The true consequence is, the Kingdom of France is this
Monarchy. Ans. I am not displeased with mine own Argument, if there can be no
more said against it than is here. I know no difference betwixt a King and a
Monarch sufficient to ground a distinction, and in the new Testament the greek
word which signifies a King is usually applied to the expressing of Emperors.
And therefore if God had promised the Kingdom of France a Monarchy, he should
have promised it it self. And so if God had promised the Church to be this way,
he should have promised it it self. I had thought, that as the object of the
thing in humane speculation is before the act speculative; so the object of
person had been considered before acts practick, otherwise the object of the
person and the object of the thing do not differ. Thus, if the promise of this
way to the Church, be the promise of the Church its being this way, then the
terminus rei and the terminus personae is all one. Therefore must this way be
distinguished from the Church: otherwise the Church has nothing promised. And
how can this way be predicated of the Church in such a proposition [the Church
is this way] when according to your principles, the Church must have its
existence by this way, before it can be this way. And so must have its being
before its cause, which amounts to a contradiction, that it should be and not
be; for it must be before it is. Yea; if the Church is to be supposed before it
be the way, and yet is to have its consistence by this way, this is to make
that which is to be, which also makes that which is not to be, because it must
not be before it be.

Yet he goes on. The Church is this way which God promised it should be. But to
whom did he promise it? To singulars before they are aggregated in the unity of
a Church? Then the singulars yet must be a Church before they be a Church,
because this way was promised, you say, to the Church. If the diffused Church
be the object of the promise to whom it is made; then again, how were the
Christians without faith? Or how had they faith without a Representative, which
is the way promised, as he supposes?

Yet again, and it is so by the sure guidance of him who is the way, and is
with his Church ruling it until the consummation of the world. And so Christ is
regula regulans, and the Church regula regulata.

So th^n at length my Adversary is come to my distinction; only, he will not
apply it as I did. I said the Scripture is regula regulans, the Church is
regula regulata: he says now, that Christ is regula regulans, the Church is
regula regulata. So that in part he is come over to us, in that he says, the
Church is the rule ruled: and he or any other could hardly overcome us in the
other, that Christ should be the rule ruling, and not by the Scripture. Christ
does not now rule us immediately, but by the Spirit; and therefore is he said
to be the Spirit of Christ. neither does the Spirit rule us immediately, but by
the word which the Spirit of Christ did inspire the Penmen of Scripture in to
this purpose. So it remains, that the Scripture is the word of Christ by his
Spirit. And by this word which was first delivered by his Spirit is Christ the
way. He is the way of merit by his death. He is the way of example by his life.
He is the way of precept and direction by his word. If he divides the word from
the Spirit he makes it not the word of God: if he divides the Spirit from the
word, so that the Spirit should direct beside the word, he runs into
Enthusiasmes. The Spirit has it self to the word as the Dictator; the
Apostles have themselves and the Prophets to the word as the Penmen. The word
has it self to us as the rule, which from God through Christ by his Spirit in
the Penmen of Scripture is to direct us unto our Supernatural end. Therefore
says St. Paul, let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom,
Colos. 3.16. To conclude then this Answer, since Christ is now confessed to be
the rule ruling, he is the rule ruling, either by his Church or by his word. If
by his Church, as my Adversary, how is this Church to be ruled, since this is
the rule ruled? By his Spirit they will say; well, but how? In a Council, they
will say, confirmed by the Pope. But for the first three hundred years their
was no Council; nor Pope in their sense, for more. How then? Then by his
Spirit, causally, in the word; according to which the Archbishop of Collen
resolved to reform his Church: for which he was cited before the Emperor: and
excomunicated afterward by the Pope, in the year 1546.

But, being ruled by him there is not the least danger that it will swerve from
the word of God, and you may well follow such a Guide with blind obedience.

So my Antagonist goes on upon the Church. Ans. To this passage much may be
said. First, that the former words are wisely put together: si non cast, tamen
caute. For there is a reserve of sense in which they are true; namely, in sensu
composito, whilst it is ruled by Christ, there is not the least danger of
swerving from the word of God, but it is yet to be proved, that it will always
be ruled by Christ. Make this sure and we have done. But if it had always been
ruled by Christ, it would not have violated his institution of Communion under
both kinds. Put this then into a form of discourse: that which is ruled by
Christ does not swerve from his word; the Church of Rome is ruled by Christ
therefore: and we limit the major, so far as it is ruled by Christ it does not
swerve from the word; it is not true, that it never swerves, unless it be
true, that it is always ruled by Christ; but then we deny the Assumption, for
it is not always ruled by Christ. 2. We note here, that the rule Christ rules
us by, is his word, for so it is said here, being ruled by Christ it will not
swerve from his word. So then by his own words, Christ's adequate rule is his
word; otherwise we might be ruled by him and yet swerve from his word. And also
consequently if we follow his word, we follow him. And those that do not follow
his word do not follow him. Thirdly, we must differ with him upon the point of
blind obedience, therefore whereas he says you may well follow such a Guide
with blind obedience, we say absolutely, blind obedience is not rational, it
is not (...) in any sense, and then we say again, this obedience he speaks of,
would be rational obedience; and therefore not blind. For, to follow such a
Guide which is always ruled by Christ, and therefore never swerves from his
word (if this can be made good to me, that any Church does, and cannot do
other) is very rational and not blind obedience. If the saying and definition
of the Church be assured by Christ and his word, to be according to Christ and
his word, it is necessary to be obedient to it, as to what I find in Scripure;
though I do not comprehend the reason of it, as the Scripture does bind to
faith without dispute: so would the Church, were I assured by the Scripture,
that the Church could not swerve from it. But here are two things wanting; one
is of a proof, that the Church has not swerved. And a second, that it cannot
swerve from the word of God. For my faith must build it self immediately not
upon the former; because the power of swerving is not sufficiently secured by
the negative; but it must be built upon the impossibility, and this should be
demonstrated.

And still I must mind you, that I speak of the Universal Church convented in
a General Council confirmed by the Supreme Pastor.

Ans. And I still say, that the Universal Church so constituted, is not free
from the least danger of swerving from the word of God. And this in gross were
enough, until it were made good by sound Argument. Yet also particularly.
First, he means the Universal Church representatively; (for otherwise, all
cannot come together) but then let us have an account why there could not be
admitted to the titles of the Trent Council, that which the ^rench so much
urged, namely [representing the Universal Church?] If it did represent the
Universal Church, why might it not be said in the title? If it did not, how
does he say the Universal Church convented in a General Council? 2. A Supreme
Pastor in your sense should be proved and not supposed. For we acknowledge no
Supreme Pastor but Christ, which can give life or law to all the Church. He the
Pastor and Bishop of our souls. 1 Pet. 2.25. He the chief Pastor. 1 Pet. 5.4.
And all Bishops under him do equally participate a Vicarial care of the Church.
But thirdly, the Trent Council, according to you, was general and confirmed by
the Supreme Pastor; and Vigilius was the Tutilarie Saint of the valley of
Trent; and yet the Trent Council swerved grossly from the word of God, and
particularly in the matter of half communion; as in the twenty first session,
notwithstanding Christ his institution and the several interpretations of the
Doctors and Fathers acknowledged against them in the first chap. of that
session; and although from the beginning of Christian Religion the use under
both kinds was not unfrequent, as is confessed in the second chapter Fourthly, if
the Church so constituted cannot swerve from the word of God, why did the Trent
Council fear to determine what is the nature of original sin, which Viga
urged them to, upon good reasons? And why did they not determine whether the
blessed Virgin was exempted from original infection, whereof the Franciscans so
much urged the affirmative to be defined; the Dominicans the negative? And yet
in saying, non esse suae intentionis, it was not of their intention to
comprehend in this Decree, wherein original sin is handled, the blessed and
immaculate Virgin, they do interpretatively exempt her, though St. Paul and
all holy Doct^^^ did not exempt her, as the Dominicans urged; and so they do in
effect contradict their universal proposition, wherein it is said, Propagatione
non imitatione transfusum omnibus: at least it makes that definition uncertain,
as the German Protestants noted.

Therefore that which follows in his Paper does not follow in reason: This
Church, guiding by her infalible Doctrine, is this way, the Church diffusive
(guided now by this doctrine) was promised this direct way. Such a way we were
promised, a way so direct represented, that fools cannot err by it.

Ans. These words might have been all spared, for they are all as Ciphers till
one thing be proved, and that is, the infalible Doctrine as a property
inseparable to the Church. If the Church goes this way to prove her self the
way, she is not the way, because she goes out of the way, or else Christ was
out of the way, and the Primitive Church was not the Church, when for so many
years it is confessed, that there was no General Council: and is not proved
that there was a Pope in their sense, as indeed there was none. So then the
Church universal is not the way universally, so direct that fools cannot err:
for, in all times there was not the universal Church so represented; nor the
Decrees of the represented Church so confirmed, because there was no Pope. And
therefore if yet the Church had another way then; we have more reason to go
that way than the way which leads to Rome; and from Rome we know not whither
but to darkness: and those that follow this way are not wiser by following it;
for, they are not wise in following it. (...), as Hierocles said well. Both
these things are good, to know that we do not know, and to know what we do not
know. And surely, if we should go their blind way, we should neither know what
wise men know, nor know neither that we are ignorant. Therefore Catarinus and
Marinarus took another way to assert certainty of Grace, namely, by Scripture;
as we have it in the History of the Trent Council, wherein they shaked the
Adversaries of the opinion, and brought them to some moderation.

And this example of theirs in following the Scriptures might (if we were
doubtful of our cause) yet encourage us to give check to that which follows.
The Scripture, as some may conceive, (for you dare not defend it) is not this
way.

Ans. All conceive that it is the way but your Church. Yea, all your Church are
not for this Church way. Besides those named the Archbishops of Collen,
Catarinus, Marinarus, how many even in the face of the Trent Council have
urged Scripture against all other Arguments. The ancient Fathers made the
Scripture their way and rule, and therefore their authorities are not answered
to by my Antagonist; for that they are unanswerable. Therefore we dare, and do
defend it; for it will defend us in the doing of it. But this Campian bragged
of our diffidence. We return as he did who was to be put to death, as Tacitus
relates it, when the Executioner bad him bear it bravely; he replied, Vtinam
tu tam fortiter feries. So I would my Adversary had as strongly opposed, as we
are in hope to answer. But it were better for them to have either less
confidence, or to add more strength. As Archidamus said to his son after an
unsuccesse, (...). So let them give stronger Arguments, or quit the cause.

Let us see his reason. For we see with our eyes, not only fools, but also
most learned men to err grossly, and to follow most contradictorie opinions,
whilst they profess from their hearts to follow Scripture as near as they can.

Ans. This is (...). First, because men do err, therefore is not that the way?
The error is by them, because they go from the way: not by the way, because
they go in it. It concludes as much, as if the way to Rome were not the way,
because, some men do not find it. Secondly, they profess from their hearts,
as they say, to follow Scripture as near ^s they can: but do they from their
hearts profess it? Thirdly, if most learned men do err grossly and follow
most contradictorie opinions, etc. it seems then some most learned men think
this is the way. Fourthly, if they follow most contradictorie opinions and yet
follow Scripture, the fault must be in them; for you dare not say there is any
contradiction in Scripture. Fifthly, they may be in way of Salvation, though
some do err in the sense of Scripture, as it is drawn down in application to
some points of question. Sixthly, there should have been considered here a
possibility of recrimination with more advantage against the Adversary. For
how many of them do err in following the Church, and are more prone to err,
because the Church is more variable, and their traditions (which, they say, are
part of the rule) are not written? In particular, how many of them passionately
differ from one another about the subject of Ecclesiastic power, about
temporal power, whether the Pope has any? then whether direct or indirect?
How many of them hotly maintained contrary opinions in the Council of Trent?
And yet I hope they followed the Church. For if they held Scripture the rule,
they were Adversaries to my Adversary. Seventhly. Therefore since men may find
your way, and yet err by it; and not find Scripture and yet err by it (for
the Church may, for ought is proved, teach error, the Scripture not) let fools
go that way, and most learned men go the way of Scripture. My Argument then is
yet good. That way which the Church goes we must go. And this they will not
deny. But the Church goes the way of Scripture, and this they cannot deny. Nor
is there any direct Answer made thereunto. Therefore,

Neither is my fourth Answer answered. Therefore may we conclude
contradictorily to his conclusion of this number, the visible Church is not
this Judge, by submission to the judgment whereof we are secured from all
error.

Number. 3. S. 2.
Whence what you say against my third Number is easily answered. For all
Religions agreeing, that there must be one Judge of all controversies, which
either be or may be in Religion, they must all give infallibility to their
Judge.

Ans. And from what was said before, all that you reply to my answer is easily
answered, for no Religion but yours does say, that there must be a formal,
visible Judge of all controversies, infallible. And as for us, we say, there is
no need of such a Judge: and our principles do conclude negatively to such a
Judge. For whereas we say, God's written word has plainly set down all things
necessary to salvation, as you do relate it, we also by consequence infer,
that there is no need of controversy in things necessary, because, the
Scripture has plainly determined those points which are necessary, already,
which how true it is we shall show in answer to your third Chapter.

All other Sectaries agreeing with you in that point, I understand not how you
could say, that none but we hold an infallible Judge.

Ans. If you include us here amongst the Sectaries, as you seem to do, we deny
the charge. And we say, we are no more Sectaries than the Catholic was before
Papacy had head or foot in the world. We say, as he, my name is Christian; my
surname is Catholic. We have made no such change of Doctrine, as to be
accounted Heretics, as you call us; nor of Discipline, as to be accounted
Schismatics: but we should not appear so innocent, unless Romans should first
accuse us. And secondly, there are no Sectaries but you that do maintain the
contrary: unless they be Anabaptists and Enthusiasts, which make themselves
infallible Judges, as your single Church makes it self an infallible Judge.
For, Thirdly, those who hold the Scripture to set down plainly all things
necessary, are not in this Sectaries, as seems to be intimated in the former
words. Nor, fourthly, by holding the Scripture to have plainly set down things
necessary, do they infer, that there is a necessity of an infallible Judge to
decide all controversies which may spring up; For their opinion includes the
contrary. And therefore upon the whole matter, the former words are not so
rationally delivered.

And what he says afterward, that without an infallible Guide every man might
proceed, as if your faith were fallible, and so give an infallible assent to
nothing, is indeed gratis dictum. For if this discourse be resolved, as it must
be, into this proposition, Without an infallible Guide, our faith is fallible,
and we can give infallible assent to nothing, it will appear to be salse,
because the proposition is false, as it is taken universally. For though in
points of question I cannot give an assent infallibly to a Judge, unless I do
give an assent infallible to this Judge's being infallible; yet we hope, we may
give an infallible assent to those things which are plain in Scripture, and not
questioned. Yea, secondly, I may give an infallible assent to that which is in
question, without an infallible Judge external; because, by his agitation of
it, I may see it plainly resolved into the sense of Scripture: which indeed is
the formal rational end of all Councils, that by the conference of learned
men the meaning of Scripture as to the case may be cleared. The former
discourse therefore is plainly fallacious, a dicto secundum quid, or a
particulari; as if because we cannot have an infallible faith of things
disputed without an infallible Judge, we could have no faith in any thing but
fallible. Yea, it is false in those particulars debated; for we may have a
faith infallible of them by Scripture, though the Judge ministerial be not
infallible. The faith objective is infallible in the Scripture, and the faith
may he infallible subjective, by the rule of Scripture, and yet the Judge
fallible, because we may make use of the Fathers of the Church as Consuls, not
as Dictators.

In the next words he would vindicate himself from saying, that without such a
Judge we should be free to follow (without any fault) our private Judgment, in
holding what we will, as you insinuate. But I said otherwise, every man might
be free to believe what he judged best; and so we should have as many Religions
as there be private, and different judgments, etc.

Ans. He does me wrong in saying, that I put in such words as I knew how to
answer, and leaved out his true words: I altered no words, but expounded him in
them, as I had reason. For if every one might be left free (without such a
Judge) to what he judged best, this freedom would be simple or moral. If
simple, then it would be without a fault: and if moral, it would be without a
fault; but now he denies that he meant a moral freedom. Yet is it best for
him to understand such a freedom, according to his principles: for if we have
not a moral freedom (without a fault) to believe what we judge best, then
have we less reason of giving undisputed assent to an external Judge, since
we are awed and commanded, under peril of a fault, to take heed what we do
believe. And therefore cannot we believe this Judge with blind obedience,
because it seems now, we may not believe what we will, but we must see good
reason for what we do believe: And good reason it is, that good reason should
exclude blind obedience. And indeed his consequence is false in terminis, for
we have not a simple freedom to believe what we will, as I said; because the
understanding naturally assents to truth apparent. But this he takes no notice
of, as if I had said no such thing. How much of my words he takes away
privatively, which must infer a variation of my sense, may be gathered by
compare of my copy with his rehersall: and it appears, that negatively he has
taken away a great part of my words; for he says to them (...). And so his
argument is null: and his vindication nullified. Only I must also note, that
he did not well weigh his own consequence [if every man were left free to hold
what he judged best, we should have as many Religions as private judgements]
for in principles of Religion we are not like to differ, if we believe the
Scripture: and particular Controversies (which you direct your discourse to, if
you speak ad idem; if not, you are more to be blamed) do not make different
Religions; because then you must have different Religions amongst your selves.

In the beginning of this number my Adversary would feign take me tripping or
enterfearing upon my own words by a consequence: Number. 4.
because (as he thinks) I take away all means of regulating our judgment, and
yet say, we should not follow our own judgment of discretion, without means
of regulating our judgment.

Ans. His reason may well be put into this form; he that takes away all
infallible means, takes away all means able to produce an infallible assent:
but I take away all infallible means. Then I deny his assumption. I do not deny
all infallible means. I do not deny all means, because I deny some to be
infallible, and I do not deny all infallible means, because I deny some that he
thinks infallible; in both he would impose upon me the fallacy (...), or a
particulari. All means are not infallible; and there may be, and is other
infallible means besides those which he supposes and I deny. The Scripture is
an infallible mean, to hold to this, I deny the infallibility of Councils. And
then again secondly, I deny a necessity of infallible assent to all points of
question: either part of the contradiction may consist with salvation.

For corroboration of his opinion about the infallibility of Councils, he
brings in afterward St. Gregory the Great's saying. I do profess my self to
reverence the first four Councils as I reverence the four books of the Gospel.
And in like manner I do receive the fifth Council; whosoever is of another
mind, let him be an Anathema.

Ans. First, we do not think the judgment of St. Gregory to be greater than
the judgment of the four Councils: if we do not think them infallible, we have
no cause or reason to be urged with one Gregory. Secondly, we also reverence
the learning of that Gregory, as he reverenceth the books of the Gospel, if
the as be taken in similitude, not proportion; in the quality not equality.
Thirdly, if the opinion of St. Gregory should prevail with me, why does not
the Authority of the Fathers whom I produced for our cause, and the answers I
gave to his Authorities, before, prevail with him. Testem quem quis inducit
pro se tenetur recipere contra se. Fourthly, let us mark his own words. And I
also receive the fifth Council in like manner. Now the fifth Council was that
of Constantinople, wherein Vigilius was condemned in his defense of the three
Chapters: And the Council proceeded without his consent, yea, and against his
mind. So that if St. Gregory's authority were authentic the cause were
spoiled; for so infallibility should not be stated in a Council with the Popes
confirmation. Fifthly, oppose and confront Gregory with Gregory, Nazianzen with
the Roman; and which of them shall we believe for Councils? Neither does the
whole machin of our Religion tople and tumble to the ground upon my former
principle, as he imagined, though he would press me more strongly to show upon
what Authority I take Scripture by an infallible assent to be the word of God?
This by the way should not have been brought into question with us, since we
give more reverence to the Scriptures than they do; and therefore are like to
have a firmer faith in it to be the word of God than they. The main design of
my Adversary at first, I suppose, was, to debate the faith of particular
points, the Scripture being supposed to be the word of God; although not
supposed by him to be the only rule. But therefore let me return his own
words changing the tables, that the whole machin of his Religion does tople and
tumble to the ground upon his ground, by pressing him to show by what authority
he takes Scripture by an infallible assent to be the word of God, before he
has proved the infallibility of the Church.

His reason follows, because there cannot be a more groundless ground upon
which you, by rejecting the infallible authority of the Church, are forced to
build your whole religion; to wit, that you by mere reading of Scripture can by
its light (as you discover the sun by its light) discover it so manifestly to
be the undoubted word of God, that this discovery suffices to ground your
infallible assent to that verity.

Ans. First he is not surely right in this, that I am forced, by rejecting his
way of believing Scripture, to this way. If he be, then I am right in the
choice of my principle upon my refusal of his: but Mr. Chillingworth (whom he
blames me for differing from in this point) does find (as it may seem, and as
he himself professes) a middle way of grounding faith in the Scripture to be
the word of God, namely, by the authority of universal Tradition: which as
any can distinguish from this way, so he does distinguish from the Pontifician
way, as is known: but this we shall have fuller occasion to speak of
hereafter. Secondly, whereas he says, that I say by mere reading of Scripture,
etc. he supposes that which is not so. For I do not deny the use of other
means to further us toward our assent, intrinsecall arguments from Scripture,
extrinsecall of the Church: but that which privately we resolve our faith of
Scripture to be the word of God in, is the autopistie of Scripture, which God
by faith infused shows unto us. And by Catarinus his reasoning in the Trent
Council about subjective certitude of grace, private faith is not inferior to
the Catholic faith in point of certainty, but only in universalitie.
Thirdly, the Church, according to my Adversary has its power of binding to
faith by a General Council with the Popes confirmation of the Decrees: then
let us know by what Council all the parts of Scripture were confirmed by a
General Council with the Popes consent for the first six hundred years;
somewhat might be put in as toward the use of some parts of the Apocryphal
books: but it does not appear that they were canonized as to faith; nor any of
the Canonical books declared by them, as quo ad nos, authentic. For they were
wont to meddle with little but emergent questions; whereas of those parts of
Scripture which were generally received, there was no question whether they
were the word of God. And being not received by the authority of a Council
establishing them, what ground have those who differ from us, to receive them;
since they say, the infallible Authority is in the Church Representative with
the Popes confirmation.

He goes on. And it must be a far surer discovery than that by which we
discover the Sun by his light, for this discovery can only ground a natural
certainty: the other must ground a supernatural, not certainty, but
infallibility.

Ans. The supernatural habit of faith has it felf more to intelligence than
to science. Intelligence is known to be that natural habit, whereby the
understanding is disposed to assent to the truth of principles, when the terms
of those principles are known. And faith does bear more proportion to this, as
being the supernatural habit (in regard of cause) whereby we are disposed to
believe supernatural verities; whereof the first is, by our opinion, that the
Scripture is the word of God; taking the Scripture materially. Now as the
principles natural are seen through their own light by the natural habit of
intelligence: so are the supernatural principles seen through their own light
by the supernatural habit of faith. And as certainly as I see the Sun by its
light with mine eye; so certainly do I see the truth of natural principles by
the natural habit of intelligence: and as certainly as I see the verity of
natural principles by intelligence, so do I see supernatural verities by the
supernatural habit of faith; yet not so evidently as I see the Sun by its
light, or natural principles through their light. But it seems by my
Adversary, that this will not serve, for he urges not only for a certainty
but infallibility. To this we answer, first, Take certainty properly, and I
think there is no fundamentum in re for this distinction.

It may be, because we are wont to use the term of infallibility to points of
faith, we think that whatsoever is certain is not infallible: and it is true,
in regard of the manner or mean of certainty, so that whatsoever is certain
is not infallible; for so certainty seems to be more general: but certainly,
whatsoever is to us certain is also infallible, as we take it in a general
sense. But secondly, if there be any degree of infallibility above certainty,
we have it by this way of Divine faith infused by the Spirit of God: because we
are most sure of this principle, that God cannot deceive, nor be deceived:
therefore what we take upon his word we are most certain of, and more than by
our own discourse and reason; for that is in the nature of it more imperfect.
Thirdly, this is not so wisely considered, to strain our faith to the highest
peg of utmost infallibility, as they determine the ground of it, namely, the
Authority of the Church: because the Authority of it, as it is
contradistinguished to the Spirit and word, is but humane, and as it is
resolved into the word by the Spirit, so it comes into a coincidence with us.
Fourthly, whereas he sometimes upbraided us with an essential defect of faith,
because we take it not by their way of the Church; it appears yet, that some
of our Church have in case of martyrdom held the faith of Scripture, and of
points taken from thence, as infallibly as they have held Scripture upon tenure
of the Church. And it seems ours did not hold the Scripture, or the points upon
the authority of the Church; for they differed from the Ponteficians unto the
death, about the Church and about points of Doctrine, which the Papist urged,
they denied; notwithstanding they were Doctrines of their Church. Now,
according to the Pontifician argument, if they had received the Scripture by
the Authority of the Church, they must upon the same reason have received
every Doctrine proposed by the Church. And therefore, it seems, they had a
faith of Scripture infallible without the Roman infallibility. Secondly, the
Spirit of God speaking in the Church is to them the efficient of faith. But the
Spirit of God speaks also in the Scripture. If not, how do they prove, that the
Spirit of God speaks in the Church? if it does, then may we believe him at
first word and immediately, as to the Church.

As to what he says, secondly that he has showed in his last chap. second
Number. that a review of the definitions of a Council until they be resolved into
the rule of Scripture, does open a wide gap to heresy, I need say no more than
what has been said in answer thereunto. His mere saying so does not surely
make it so: nor is it probable, for it does not open a gap to heresy
material; because Scripture is the rule of truth: nor yet to heresy formal,
because it may be done without opposition to the Councils. For simple dissent
does not include formal opposition.

But yet further he says. And for your importance of the matter I will here
further declare in an example which hereafter will stand me in much use. Let us
take an Arrian Cobbler to this man. This your Doctrine gives the final review
of the Council of Nice.

Ans. Yes, (I must interpose in the several passages of his story of the
case) it does, but how? It does not give a review by way of authority to
others: but he is to take his own liberty for his own satisfaction in point of
faith. Otherwise he believes he knows not what, and so in proportion he comes
under the censure of Christ, upon the Samaritan woman, in the 4. of St. John
the 22. Ye worship ye know not what. If the woman was not to be ruled by the
judgment of the Samaritans, why is a Cobbler to be ruled by the authority of
others; since, simply, the authority of the Samaritans was as good as the
authority of others: and therefore our faith must be resolved into some higher
ground than the authority of men.

He goes on in his case. And you give him leave after he has perused the
definitions of this Council (defining God the Son to be of the self same
individual substance with his Father) to examine them until he find them
resolved into the infallible rule of Scripture.

Ans. Yes, we say he may take his own liberty to do so. But also we say, he
ought to confer with those who are learned, that he may more easily find the
sense of Scripture, the advice he takes from others does not determine his
assent: but disposes it. It does point him to it, but he must see it with his
own sight.

He does examine them and chiefly how they do agree with that text, St. John
the 10. chap. 30. verse.
I and my Father are one, on which text you afterward confess the
infallibility of this definition to be chiefly grounded.

Ans. So did St. Athanasius profess, as I told him in my last rejoinder, and
he does not say any thing in denial. But as to the point as being clear in
Scripture, there are other texts plain enough, as in the first Epistle of St.
John the fifth chap. the twentieth verse, in his son Jesus Christ, this is the
true God. Indeed the whole verse is for our purpose. And we know that the Son
of God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we should know him
that is true. And we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This is
the true God. He has given us a mind that we should know. Here is faith
infused, whereby we know him, and therefore is not this faith an effect of the
authority of the Church. And this son is here said to be the true God, not
only God nuncupatively, as the Arrians and Socinians: but the true God. So
Bartholomeus Petrus, who makes the Supplement to Estius's Comment upon the
Epistles, and subjects all to the holy Roman Church; Et nihil ominus etiam
Filius ab Apostolo verbis expressis nominatur verus Deus part hujus versus
quarta quae sequitur, hic est verus Deus. So he. And notwithstanding also the
Son is named by the Apostle in express words the true God in the fourth part
of this verse, this is the true God.

Now in the examen of the conformity of this definition with this text, the
Arrian Cobbler by his poor understanding is easily able to see (that which a
wiser man would yet see sooner) that he is put upon a necessity to inquire how
God the Son and his Father are one; whether it be by affection only, as
Arrians hold, or one in the self same individual Substance, as the Council
defines.

Well. (...); what then? This is no other than that which stands with our duty
of obedience to that precept in the first Ep. to the These. 5.21. Prove all
things; hold fast that which is good. And secondly, were we to rest in the
definition of Councils, yet should we be put upon inquiry into the sense of
their words which would make a trouble and a difference, as the words of the
Trent Council did to Soto and Viga. And therefore if he could prejudice our
cause with perplexities of ambiguities; neither are they certain, by their own
Councils, which sense to stand to, since these learned men so eagerly combated
upon different senses of the words of the Council upon the Decrees about
Free Will and Predestination: and though they had their interesse in the
Council for learning and estimation; yet, it seems, did not know the only
sense and true scope of the Synod, as is said of them in the History of the
Trent Council. p. 216.

My Adversary goes on. And inquiring this he calls to mind that other text, John
the 17.21. Where Christ prays, all his Disciples may be one thing, as thou
Father in me and I in thee. So then let him proceed with the caution of this
rule, res non est subject a sermoni, sed sermo rei. The thing is not
serviceable to the speech, but the speech to the thing.

Here will the Cobbler say (because he has been often instructed by his own
Doctors) Christ who said, I and my Father are one thing, demands that his
Disciples may be one thing as he and his Father are one thing; but he does not
demand, that his Disciples may be all one thing in the self same individual
substance, therefore (he concludes) Christ is not one thing in the self same
individual substance with his Father, but one thing in affection only, as his
Disciples might come to be one thing.

Ans. But this Cobbler if he had more mind to find truth in Scripture than his
own opinion, might go on and see, that the Jews (who were like to understand
the words of Christ, as observing what was said by him to them) understood
Christ not to speak that they were one by way of affection. For because of this
speech they took up stones to cast at him, because he being a man made himself
God, as it is in the 33 ver. of the 10. chapter of St. John. Which interpretation
of his words our Savior did not in the following verses deny; although he
seemed to wave that sense; and yet also in effect brought it in by an (...) in
the 38 ver. Secondly, although, if there had been no other text concerning
Christ's Divinity, there would not have been so clear a conclusion from the
text, of the Divinity of Christ: yet if we compare it with other passages of
the Scriptures, we may well believe that sense, and also if the text does not
afford that sense, how shall we believe a Council, when the Council of Nice
(as Athanasius said) urged this text thrice against the Arrians? And therefore
this exception against the sufficient clearness of Scripture in this point
must be withdrawn, or else they must condemn themselves, because the Council
of Nice determined the point not by their authority, but by the text. And
therefore cannot the Cobbler say (as my Adversary prompts him) false therefore
is this definition of the Council which cannot be resolved into the infallible
word of God, in which all things necessary to Salvation (as this point is) are
plainly set down, as this place is not. My Adversary first might have spoken
more moderately; not false is it therefore which the Council has defined, but,
not necessary, because the sense of the words may be such when they are spoken
betwixt God or him and his Disciples, therefore they are such between his
Father and him, this is no rational inference. Duo cum idem dicunt, non est
idem. When two say the same thing, it is not the same thing said. So when one
says the same thing in diverse respects, it is not the same in sense presently,
because in words. And if it be said, this is the question, whether it be said
in diverse respects? we answer, that we do not here speak of diverse respects
formal, but objective, for even according to the Principles of the Arrian,
Christ is not an ordinary man, as appears by their position, (...), there was
a time when he was not, and therefore there is no reason to expound the words
in the same sense when they are applied to God and Christ, as when they are
applied to God, or Christ and the Disciples. Secondly, the definition of the
Council is not false, if this point cannot be resolved into the infallible word
of God; but my opinion is false; unless he thinks my opinion is the same with
the definition of the Council: and if so, then the Council holds, that all
things necessary are resolvable into plain Scripture; and if so, then by his
opinion he should stand to this definition; and if so, he should yield the
cause. Thirdly, the Pontificians have no such cause to stand so punctually for
the necessary belief of the Divinity of the Son of God, because according to
their Champion, Bellarmin in his fifth b. de Mediatore, he holds, that Christ
is not a Mediator according to both natures, but only in regard of the humane
nature, ratione formalis principii, for though he says, Christ be a Mediator
according to both natures, ratione suppositi, and as Principium quod; yet is
not his Divinity so necessary as by being Mediator in regard of his Divine
nature, as the formal principle, and as a principium quo: because thus the
Divine nature is more necessary per se. But thirdly, either the definition of
the Council is true or false; if true, then is it for us; if false, then how
shall we trust any?

He goes on. For this is the plainest place. And yet conferring it with the
other, I find it not evidently agreeing with the definition of the Council,
but rather evidently against it; by which I conclude (in this my Review) the
definition of the Council to be false.

Ans. Whether this be the plainest place is a question; since there are other
texts, unto which this ambiguitie is not incident, as, besides that named
before, St. Mat. 28.19. Baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son
and of the Holy Ghost; where the three Divine Persons have one name, namely,
one authority and therefore essence, and this text does not a little puzzle
the Socinian. And yet secondly, if the sense of the text were, that Christ and
his Father were one in affection, it does not follow therefore, that it is
evidently rather against the definition of the Council: because they may be
said to be one in affection, since they are one in nature, that which affirms
so much does not always exclude more; therefore unless it were said they were
one in affection only, it would not be evidently against the Council. But if
the text, by compare with the other, did make this sense of being one in
affection, it would not import exclusively, that they are one in affection
only. Therefore though the text did not infer the Councils meaning; yet,
upon the supposition, the Arrian Cobbler could not conclude the definition of
the Council to be absolutely false, since the text does not conclude a falsitie
of that position: because to be one in affection, and to be one in essence, it
does not imply; for if they be one in essence, they are one in affection. So
then, if my Adversary makes the Cobbler to conclude the definition of the
Council false, as to the matter, that the son of God is coessentiall with the
Father, it is inconsequent: if respectively to the text, whereby they prove it,
then it is indeed consequent, that the definition of the Council was false, but
then we make a certain Conclusion of it for our use, that the definition of the
Council of Nice was not infallible. And if so, my Adversary is undone.

And now also I take leave to be even with my Adversary. He takes the Arrian
Cobbler for his example. I take the Popish Collier. To this man the Roman
Doctors (as my Adversary thinks) give no final resolution of his faith, but in
the Church. They give him no leave to peep into Scripture for the settling his
belief. Or if his Doctors do very tenderly let fall to him any intimation of
Scripture so far as to confirm by it the infallibility of his Church, then
surely that which seems to speak most for their turn, and is in the mouth of
all of them, namely, St. Mat. 16.18. I say unto thee thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock will I build my Church, etc. through the nineteenth v. Well, but will
his Dctors give him leave to examine this Interpretation of the text with any
other? Dare they? Very hardly. They tell him, he may securely rest his faith
and soul in the Authority of the Church. But here is the question, whether the
Church does rightly interpret the text on their own behalf. If they say, it is
plain that that is the sense; we reply, then may other texts be plain also for
us. Yea, it is not plain: for the ancient Fathers of the Church have differed
from them upon the exposition, therefore the Popish Collier should have leave
for once from the inquisition, by a dispensation of the Pope, to inquire, as
well as the Arrian Cobbler, into the sense of the text, and therefore by his
poor understanding (which yet a wiser man would see sooner) he does discern,
by comparing it with the twentieth of John. 21, 22, 23. ver. That it is not
reasonable to expound the former text of such an authority to be given to St
Peter, which was not in the latter given to the rest of the Apostles; specially
since Bellarmin is wisely careful, that the Princedome of the Church should
not be given to St. Peter, till after his Resurrection, lest St. Peter's
Successors should not be delivered from danger of succeeding him in the denial
of his Master. Now then, if equal authority be given to all the Apostles, (as
St. Cyprian plainly also in his Tract at. de simplicitate Praelatorum, hoc
erant utique et caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti et
honoris et potestatis; and a little before says that Christ gave all the
Apostles, after his Resurrection, parem potestatem, equal authority) how shall
he collect from the other, that to be the Prince of the Apostles, and to be
ordinary Pastor of the whole Church was given to St. Peter? Now then is this
Collier at a plunge, he does not see it in the former text by conferring it
with the latter; and therefore he concludes (according to my Adversary for the
Cobbler) that this does not agree with the definition of the Doctors, but rather
is evidently against it, by which he concludes (in this his review) the
definition of the Roman Doctors to be false.

And yet this is the plainest text for them. And therefore let the Popish
Collier be convinced by some clearer Argument out of Scripture, to believe as
the Church believes: or else, to the eternal good of misled souls, confess,
that if you give not private men leave finally to resolve themselves in
Scripture, the Roman can find no means upon earth to put an end unto the main
controversies, the Church not sufficing for this end: unless we should take
the Church as commending us to Scripture for our direction, under pain of being
accounted not Christians. For how are we bound, upon pain of Damnation, to
believe that Jesus is the Christ without that which is written in Scripture?

But it will be said, that the Popish Collier should not have leave given him
to examine the Scripture's sense, no more than the Arrian Cobbler should have
leave to examine the Councils definition: but both should absolutely rest in
the definition of a Council. To this we answer several things. First, it is a
mighty prejudice to the Roman cause, that they account blind obedience to the
Church, a duty. This dark lantern, that none should see them but their own
men, breeds great suspicion. The Roman cannot persuade the Arrian to rest in a
Council, and therefore a Council will not make an end with all of all
controversies. Thirdly; if the Arrian were to rest in a Council, he would say
the Council of Ariminum were as considerable to him as the Council of Nice to
the Homorsiasts. Fourthly, General Councils, for the purest times of the
Church, were not celebrated: and therefore this is not the universal way of
satisfaction and absolute determinative of faith. Fifthly, we have no prejudice
against the four General Councils; we embrace them, and they make no prejudice
against us, therefore if we hold, as they hold, points of faith, we are as
saveable as they. Sixthly, the plainest Council they have for them is the
Council of Trent, and yet the Popish Collier cannot acquiesce in that: because
(although they say it was) yet he may doubt whether it was a free General
Council. And I hope, since my Adversary says we must take infallibility from
the General Council, we may have leave to examine whether that was a free
General Council. And here we must contradistinguish the Church unto the
Council, and we must not believe the Council for the Church; for then the
infallibility would lie in the Church, not in the Council. Well, and must we
take the Council to be right and good from it self? suppose we were to receive
undisputedly the Decrees of faith in a General Council; yet we must be assured
first, that this was a General free Council, then it is left us to examine the
Council, though not the definitions: for if the Scripture cannot prove it self,
as they suppose, then the Council cannot, and therefore the Popish Collier may
examine the Council. And how shall he content himself about the Council in the
generality of it, since there was so few persons in it, sometimes but forty
three, Legates and Abbots being put in: and some titular Bishops only,
sometimes forty eight; for a good while not above sixty; the Prelates of other
Nations not there; not a Bishop or Divine of all Germany there; in the year
1546 no French Bishop could be there, and therefore no General Council. As the
French King said, page 314. and by reason of the paucitie of the persons then
there, forty eight Bishops and five Cardinals; and not one of the Prelates
remarkable for learning; and some of them Lawyers, and some Courtiers, the
Decrees of the Council about Apocryphal books and making authentical a
translation differing from the Original, did displease in Germany; as it is
set down in the History of the Trent Council, p. 163. * And for the freeness
of it, the Collier might deny that by several passages: for absolute authority
was given to the Legates of the Pope to procreed without consent of Council, p.
113. Derogations from the liberty of the Council noted, p. 232. the Bishop of
Fiesole complained of to the Pope for reasonable freedom, p. 167, 8. Amongst
the three things the Pope admonished his Legates, one was, to take beed that by
no means the Popes authority be disputed on, p. 164, And yet this is the point
which formally denominates the Popish Religion. And his being Head of the
universal Church, as he presumes, is the point which denominates their Church
the Roman Catholic. Yea, it was protested against by the French King; which
was of force against it, according to some prohibentis conditio potior, as p.
320. And therefore cannot the Popish Collier finally resolve his faith in a
Council upon its own conciliarie authority. And assuredly, if the Arrian Cobbler
and the Popish Collier were both to dispute the same point; one by the
Scripture, the other by the Council, the Cobbler would sooner convince the
Collier by Scripture, which he does acknowledge as certain, than the Collier
the Cobbler by the Council, which he does not acknowledge so: yea, if the
Collier and the Cobbler were equally disposed to find truth indifferently to
their opinions, the Cobbler might sooner settle his mind in Scripture, than the
Collier in a Council; for the Cobbler has no more to do than to find out the
sense of Scripture, and then he is satisfied: but the Collier, when he has
found out the sense of the Council, is not satisfied; because, if he were
assured that a free and general Council was infallible, he might yet doubt of
the hypothesis, whether this Council were so. But it is false in these, that a
general Council, though free, is infallible, and that we are bound to believe
so; for why then would not the Pope put the main question* out of question?
Either he did suspect the point himself, or did suspect his own Subjects in the
Council, or did suspect, that it did not bind unto necessary belief, or else he
was deceived in point of prudence, (which is most unlikely) to have that waved.

Number. 5.
He proceeds. This your Doctrine makes the definitions of true Councils, and
their final determinations, to be indeed no definitions nor final
determinations at all.

Ans. This, in reasoning, would prove a Schism, a dicto secundum quid. Because
I deny them to be final in your sense, therefore I deny them to be final in
all sense, is not consequent. It does not follow from the denial of one
species to the denial of all. Final definitions, as to humane Tribunals, I
acknowledge them: but final so, as to exclude the examination of them by
Scripture, I deny. Final, as to peace, and not to be refractary, I grant: but
final, as to necessary assent upon the Councils account, I deny. That we may
find truth by them, I yield; because so many abilities united with Gods
blessing, may be like to pitch upon that true sense of Scripture which may
determine the judgment unto certain assent. As by the conflict of hard things
sparks of fire do break out: so by the industrious discussion of opinions,
truth may appear eminently. But we cannot conclude the definitions,
intuitively, and ipso facto, infallible. And why should we be obliged to stand
to their declaration of truth, as if they did also make it to be truth? And why
should we stand to their Conclusions, when their discourse is fallible, unless
they go by Scripture? And if they by Scripture examine opinions, why should not
we by Scripture examine their definitions, as to our selves? Which should be
last in the determination, Council, or Scripture, when Councils begin by it,
and determine with it? Therefore I do not make them in no sense final; or
none. That which follows, Now surely it is clear. etc. unto the end of the
number, how little strength of reason has it? This, in effect, was answered
immediately before. My Adversary does us right in confessing our
acknowledgement of the first four General Councils. And also may we confess,
that we think they thought they had all plenitude of power and authority from
God to define, and finally to determine those Controversies; but what then? 1.
What if they thought so? We have liberty by our principles to think that
inconcludent, because we hold them not infallible in their judgment. Not
because they thought they had such power, therefore they had it; unless we
should hold them infallible, as we do not. Neither is this thought of ours,
that they might think amiss of such power to be in them, any prejudice to our
acknowledgement of those first four General Councils; because this opinion of
theirs is no part of their determinations. Secondly, we distinguish: All
plenitude of power is taken either reduplicatively, or specificatively for all
that power which belongs to the whole Church; the former, if their opinion of
themselves were infallible, would serve his turn: but we deny that they
thought they had all power so; and if they did think so, we think they did not
think right: the latter power they might think they had and not think amiss,
but this serves not the turn; for all authority of the Church does not bind us
to receive the definitions thereof so as to sink all examination of the truth
thereof by Scripture. Have not other courts a plenitude of power to hear and
determine causes; and yet are sometimes defective in point of law? Their
fallibility does not proceed from want of power or authority, but from want of
judgment or will to give a right sentence. And yet their censures also
proceed. And therefore the excommunications (which my Adversary objects to me)
may neither import their faith of their infallibility, nor yet wrong to all
such as should gainsay what they had defined and determined, if error and
falsitie and contradiction to Scripture could be found in their definitions and
determinations; for first it is not fallibilitie of sentence that does the
wrong, but falsity, either by ignorance, (and so ignorantia in Judice reputatur
pro dolo) or else by wilfulness, (which formally makes the injury, because
intended.) Secondly, the excommunications proceed against the person for an
outward act of obstinacy, and not for a dissent of judgment (for cogitationis
poenam in nostro foro nemo luit) so then there is no wrong to him that gainsays
by excommunication; for that simply he might keep his judgment. And also
thirdly, the Judge though he judges not well, yet may do well, if he judges
with competent knowledge and due integrity, and therefore is it no injury if he
does his best, since God has not thought fit on the behalf of public peace,
to disannull humane Judicatures for humane infirmities.

His Answer to my instance of the Bereans (who searched the Scripture daily to
see whether that which St. Paul said was true) my Adversary does refer to
another Chapter. We stay his leisure.

Whereas you add fourthly, Number. 6.
that the decisions of the Church though unprovided of infallibility, do yet
oblige unto peace, though their judgment cannot claim an undisputed assent,
yet the power they have from Christ does require an undisturbance in the
difference, you teach by words what the deed of your glorious Reformers have
notoriously gainsaid.

To this it is readily answered, that Reformers may be glorious as to the
general effect, though it is possible for them to be extravagant in modo. Sober
businesses may be managed with too much heat. Secondly, whereas he supposes
that our glorious Reformers did notoriously gainsay the whole Church, I deny
it; and if they did not gainesay the whole Church, it does not come home to his
purpose: for he is upon the authority of the whole Church. They did gainsay the
Roman Church, but not the whole Church. That which St. Jerome said in his
Epistle to Evagrius, is yet for our use; si authoritas queritur, orbis major
est urbe, if authority be looked after, the world is greater than a City, which
was also spoken in application to Rome. And put case there were no sort of
Christians that did not profess obedience to the Roman Church, when those
glorious Reformers did first appear, yet it cannot be rationally said by the
Romanist, that they did gainsay the whole Church, because the Romanist does
take the root of his Church from the primitive times; which those Reformers did
not gainsay. So then as we deny to them that they were all the whole Church,
when the Reformers did begin: so if they had, it would be nothing as to the
gainsaying of the whole Church, because the whole Church in their sense does
include all times, and specially the primitive; which they did not contradict.
And surely if the Romanist proves his Church by conformity to the Primitive,
(otherwise he has the less reason for himself) then must he interpretatively
grant, that there is more authority of the Primitive Church, than of that
present Roman. And so then if the Reformers gainsaid not the primitive, they
gainsaid not the Catholic in the best part of it for time; and that also which
the present Roman does most, as they say, depend upon. Thirdly, therefore we do
not take our Religion from those Reformers as being worn into their words; and
therefore we do not impropriate Christianity by any singular persons: we might
take hints from them to consider those Doctrines which they preached, and
conferring them with Antiquity and Scripture, we believe them to be
Apostolical; and so is our Church, by Tertullian's rule in his book of
Prescriptions, chapter 32. In eadem fide conspirantes non minus Apostolicae
deputantur pro consanguinitate Doctrinae, those Churches that conspire in the
faith are not less accounted Apostolical for the consanguinity of Doctrine.
Fourthly, those Reformers, even according to my Adversaries Principles, did not
oppose themselves to the authority of the whole Church: because, according to
him, the authority of the Church is only binding in a Council with the Popes
consent; and no General Council can be found which did establish the points of
Doctrine and Discipline wherein we differ, before those Reformers did show
themselves: for the Trent Council (which also is not a general Council) was
after their beginning, as is known, and it was called upon their occasion.
Fifthly, as for our Reformation in England from the encroachments of the Court
of Rome, it was first made by men of the Roman faith. So then my Adversary gets
naught by this exception. And if the Romanists object to us reformation in
Doctrine against the Church, as in the time of King Edward the sixth, we reply,
as before, that we did not oppose the Church Catholic, we left the Roman as
they left the Catholic Church. The whole is greater than the part, and
therefore had we reason to leave them. Omne reducitur ad principium, which is a
rule of Aquinas. We are in Doctrine as the Church was in the times of the
Apostles. Our defense is in Tertullian in his book of Praesor. 35. chapter
Posterior nostra res non est; imo omnibus prior est, etc. Our cause is not more
modern, but more ancient than all. This shall be the Testimony of truth every
where, obtaining the superiority. Ab Apostolis utique non damnatur, imo
defenditur; it is not condemned by the Apostles, nay, it is defended. This
shall be the indication of propriety: for those who do not condemn it who have
condemned whatsoever is extraneous, do show it to be theirs, and therefore do
defend it.

The second inconvenience, which he urges, of my Principles, to draw me to
his, is none. Secondly, seeing that a General Council (as you in your first
paper confess) is the highest Court on earth to hear and determine
controversies, etc. What then? unless, all were bound to confirm and
subscribe to erroneous definitions, and all Preachers were silenced, and
obliged not to open their mouths against their errors.

This he attributes to me, as if I said it, or my opinion did infer it;
whereas neither is true. Nay, nor did he find in my papers, that erroneous
definitions of a General Council (though the highest Court) are to be accepted
peaceably, reverently, and without disturbance; namely, so as to accept them in
assent as true; for that would be impossible: they may be accepted, and
reverently, and without disturbance, as to peace in not opposing; though not as
to faith in submission of Judgment: and because they may thus be accepted,
will it therefore follow, that we are therefore bound to confirm and subscribe
to erroneous definitions? By no means. I do not remember that I used the term
of accepting; and yet if I did, it might be construed in sensu commodo, so as
not to disturb the peace of the Church, and quietly to endure the censure. But
there is a vast difference betwixt not opposing and conforming or subscribing.
For not to oppose, is negative: to conform, or subscribe, is a positive act.
Not to oppose, respects the definition as a public act; to conform, or
subscribe, respects it as true, which I cannot do, supposing it erroneous. Not
to oppose, regards the Judgment of the Church as authoritative: to conform or
subscribe, regards the judgment of the Church, as at least, not erring in the
definition.

And as for that he says, that by my confession, all Preachers are silenced
and obliged not to open their mouths against these errors. I answer first, by
distinguishing of the matter of the error. If the matter of the error be not
great, as not destroying an article of faith, it might be better quietly to
tolerate it, than publicly to speak against it: if the matter of the error be
repugnant to an article of faith, then we distinguish of the manner of speaking
against it; and we say we may soberly refer it to another general Council, if
any be in view. If not, we may speak the truth positively without opposition to
the authority of the Church, so as to vilify or contemn it. Yea, further, if
the Council be free and general, it being so qualified, it is not like to err
in any decree repugnant to a main article of faith: and therefore the question
about speaking against it, is in this case well taken away. And yet further,
admitting, and not granting, that such a Council should err in defining that
which is contrary to an article of faith; yet must my Adversary have supposed
by his principles that the truth contrary to this error has been established
by some other general Council; or else, according to him, the Church has not
sufficiently provided how to settle us infallibly in matters of faith; since,
according to him, we must resolve our faith ultimately in the Decrees of
General Councils, and then Council will contradict Council, and therefore will
not a Council be a ground of faith, because one may contradict another, and
also we may speak by virtue of the former Council against the error of the
latter. And therefore the whole Church of God is not in a pitiful case by any
thing of what I said in reverence to Councils without absolute obedience. But
to be sure the Church would be in a pitiful case, if indeed we were bound to
receive intuitively all definitions of Councils in whatsoever matters; for then
should we be bound to submit our conscience to a Council against our
conscience, since it is not yet proved infallible, and this makes for the
inward act a contradiction; for the outward, hypocrisy. And surely, if that
which is most hard is most easily broken, (as was said by one in the Trent
Council) then that he urges is easily answered: for there is, to be sure,
less danger in not speaking against that which is false, as he would have me
say; than in yielding to all as infallibly true, as he would have me believe.

And therefore that which follows returns with more force upon my Adversary,
mutatis mutandis. A pitiful thing it would be, if the Church were bound to
believe all definitions of a Council, which are not yet proved, nor ever will
be, not to be fallible; and consequently some that may be false, which being by
command from the highest authority upon earth preached by so many, and not so
much as to be consiwered by one, would needs increase to a wonderful height.
Would any wise Lawmakers proceed thus, if they could help it as well as Christ
could by continuing in his word written that infallibility, which my Adversary
has confessed, or must, that it always had and shall have.

As for the infallibility of the Church for two thousand years before
Scripture was written, and that which this Church of Christ had before all the
whole canon of the new Testament was finished, which was for the first forty
years of the Church.

This we have spoken to sufficiently before. And this does at most infer
(upon a supposition, that the Church was for that time infallible, which yet we
grant not) a possibility of it to be infallible still. It does not infer an
actual infallibility still. Because God did so then, therefore he did so
after the word was written, is as good an Argument as this; because God made an
extroardinary light for the time before the Sun was created, therefore we must
not now be directed by the light of the Sun. As if because God did sufficiently
rule his Church without general Councils for the first three hundred years,
therefore we should not make use of Councils now. And then we say, secondly, we
must not compare the two thousand years before any word was written but only
with the time of the Church when the Gospel was not written (as for forty
years after Christ until the Canon was finished) and so it bears some
proportion: but it is not to be compared with the other times of the Church
after the finishing of the Canon. For then the word was to be the ordinary
standing rule, without Prophets or Apostles. Thirdly, was there any thing
necessary consigned by tradition to the Church which was not put into writing?
This cannot be said; because then God should have provided for his Church worse
afterward by writing. And if it be said that the writing of the word does not
exclude the word not written, which is tradition, let them tell me why, when
all was in tradition before, somewhat was put into writing, and somewhat left
in the way of tradition. And then also let them tell me how that of our Savior
should be true, St. John the fifth. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them you
think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me., if any
thing necessary were left in tradition, how could they have eternal life in
the Scriptures? So then, since all that was necessary was committed to writing;
why then was not that whereby the Church was ruled for forty years before the
Canon was finished written also as well as before? and then your tradition
(which you contradistinguish to Scripture) is evacuated. Or let me know why we
may not as well deny the Roman traditions in point of faith after the finishing
of the Canon, as our Savior did the traditions of the Pharisees after their
Canon was finished? And why then should we not apply to them that of our
Savior to the Jews. St. Mat. 15.9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for
Doctrine the traditions of men. Might not the Pharisees as well have put their
traditions into their Mishna, which (as the tradition is) was delivered by word
of mouth from God to Moses, from Moses to Joshuah, from Joshuah to the
seventie, from them to the Church? And fourthly, my Adversary speaks this in
favor of General Councils; does he not? If he does not, his discourse does
not well cohere, if he does, he does not consider, that for the two thousand
years there was no general Council, nor for the first forty of the Christian
Church. Nor much for the first three hundred years. And what consequence can be
then drawn from his words against me for my denial of being obliged absolutely
to Councils? If the Church were infallible, even without Councils, it would
contradict me, who say, that the Church is not infallible, even by Councils:
but since he says, now the Church is infallible by Councils, if it were
infallible without Councils, it would contradict him, who says, it is
infallible in and by Councils: because he places the infallibility in
Councils, so as that he will not stand to any infallibility of the Church
without them.

Number. 7.
In the seventh Number he does endeavor to free me from the fear of hypocrisy
in differing by an outward act from our inward act of belief. But his endeavor
is not sufficient. To differ by my outward act of subscribing from my inward
act of belief, is hypocrisy: but if I subscribe to that which I do not assent
unto as true, I must differ by my outward act from my inward act: and therefore
will it be hypocrisy. To the assumption he would now give me satisfaction, by
persuading me that my inward act of assent may well go along with my outward
act of subscribing. His reason is this, for any wise man may inwardly persuade
himself, that although I, by my force of wit, cannot see how such a point
defined by a whole General Council should be true; yet, if I have wit, I cannot
but persuade my self, even according to humane wisdom, that so grave a
judgment of a whole Council is far more likely to see the truth, than my
private judgment, and therefore rather to be interiourly embraced.

Ans. And is this all he can say to move me to change my opinion? First he
seems to suppose that we cannot see sufficient reason in all the determinations
of a Council; and so far he speaks ingenuously, because it is a prejudice
against himself. Secondly, there are so many doubts of a free general Council
about the moral existence of it, that I had need of some Divine faith to
believe, that such or such is a free General Council. And that there may be
such scruples of such a Council he himself afterward gives me intimation of.
Thirdly, all this I can give you the free use of; for it will do me no harm.
The discourse is peccant upon the ignorance of the Elench, for this is in terms
reconcilable to our cause; yea, and also almost all that follows to the end of
the number; for they do not prove a captivating of the soul into the obedience
of faith, as the Apostle speaks; but at most but a disposing of the mind of
the person against opposition. As you do conclude, you conclude above your
premises: as you should conclude from your premises before, you can conclude
nothing against me. For fourthly, all that is said there makes no more than a
probability of that to be right which is defined by the Council. For, put case
it seems so to all in a generality, or to most, or to the wisest, and of them
to all, or most of the wiser of them, this is but probable, according to
Aristotle's account. And then I will deny it, that every Council is so
qualified. If it were, this probability makes but a strong opinion, but not
faith. And therefore the Romanist does unadvisedly urge necessity of faith upon
grounds infallible, before they can give us grounds infallible. And therefore
fifthly, as for his Dilemma, it will not take. It is this: Either the places
against the definitions of the Council are clear, or not: if not, they are more
likely to hit upon the truth than I am: if clear and evident, then it is an
evident and clear folly in me to think, that so wise an Assembly should have
so universal a blindness, as that none of them should be able to discover
that which is clear and evident even to my short sight; alas, how far comes
this short of infallible satisfaction? And besides, how many may dissemble what
they see? Who so blind as he that will not see? If the Chinites say, they
only themselves see with both eyes; those of Europe with one eye; and the rest
of the world with neither; surely those of Europe who will not see are blind
of both eyes. The Council of Trent, according to them an Oecumenicall Council,
if they could see better things not clear, why did they not in all points
declare, first what was to be held, and then what was to be anathametized? And
if they were more like to see what is clear, how came they to abandon the use
of the cup? Nay, how came they to establish a transubstantiation, seeing our
Savior after consecration said plainly, St. Mark the 14. the 25. I will drink
no more of the fruit of the Vine? Was his blood the fruit of the Vine? But
sixthly, to make use of his disjunction, places are either clear or not,
namely, places of Scripture; if not clear, no absosolute necessity of a
general Council, so as no salvation to be had without clearing the difficulty;
if clear, what need then of a Council? we may be saved without some knowledge:
we cannot believe without infallibility. Seventhly, let them reconcile this
necessity of a Council to the sayings of Paul the fourth, who said he had
absolute authority; that for himself he had no need of instruction, because he
knew Christ did command; that he had no need of a Council, for he himself was
above all; that he could remedy all inconveniences by his own authority; as is
said of him in the History of Trent, the fifth book. And therefore my Adversary
or the Pope is out. All he says here also for Councils makes no more than a
moral assurance; which how much it is less than the certainty of faith, Mr.
Knot will tell.

Indeed he says, Again, I may, and ought to know, that the Holy Ghost has
promised an assistance to his Church sufficient to secure it from bringing in
any error, as I shall show, chap. 4. Yes surely; if this could be proved, there
were no more to be said: this principle will beat down to the ground all
opposition, which an humble soul can make. We confess it, when it is proved.
But surely this is as much in question as any thing else. Until the
supposition be grown into a proof, we have then yet but prudentiall Arguments
to faith. And yet we say, secondly, if he would have been so wise as to have
stated it with a judicious moderation thus, that we may and ought to know that
the Holy Ghost has promised an assistance to his Church sufficient to secure
it from bringing in any error, namely, as to destroy the foundation, that might
have been better endured; but he has granted that this will not serve his
purpose, as Mr. Knot notes, he must have the Church secure from any error.
These Catholics (as they call themselves) cannot speak under the form of
universality; which is more easily contradicted. And we suspend our assent
until the demonstration comes. We may not, nor ought to know this. We ought
not, for we cannot. We cannot but by Scripture. For if they say we may know it
by the Church, it is the question.

Neither does he prove our opposition of Councils in their most fundamental
ground upon which all Councils hitherto have still supposed themselves to sit
as Judges, etc. Number. 8.


For first, it does not appear, that all Councils have supposed themselves to
sit as Judges, with full commission to determine securely all controversies, if
the term [security] be taken securely from all error. And if they have not so
defined it, that they do so sit as Judges, or sit as Judges so, how shall we,
according to my Adversaries principles, believe it, since we are to fetch all
truth from the Church in a Council? And secondly, if all Councils did establish
it a Principle, we yet expect a reason hereof; since neither Pope nor Council
have absolute authority, nor both to together to bind our belief. Yea, thirdly,
the Council of Nice did sit upon as good ground as any other Council: but the
Council of Nice did examine all things by Scripture; so in the History of the
Nicene Council prefixed in a Vatican Edition, it is said, Rebus itaque in
utriusque partem jactatis, et ad certam Divinarum Scripturarum normam perpensis
communi omnium suffragio Arrius et Eusebius damnantur. Things being discussed
on both sides, and weighed and examined according to the certain rule of Divine
Scriptures, by common consent Arrius and Eusebius are condemned. Therefore are
not we to look for a Dictatorian sentence; but a rational determination out of
Scripture: and if we find this, this does oblige all Christians to conform to
their definitions. But fourthly, we deny, that we are so obliged by such
censures as were still held to be ratified in Heaven. We are not obliged by
them neither in themselves, nor because they were so held; nay, also we deny
that they were so held to be ratified in Heaven, unless with this limitation,
clave non errante. Yea again, these do not oblige us to conform our judgment,
their power respects the outward act. Yea again, if so. Honorius was rightly
condemned in the sixth General Council, therefore was an Heretic; yea, and
Pope Vigelius was an errant Heretic for defending the three chap. against the
fifth Council. And the Romanists are bound to think the Condemnation just, or
the Council to be null. And yet that Council thought it self sufficient in
authority without and against the Pope; and therefore they all differed from my
Adversary, who says the Council does not bind without the Popes confirmation.

He says further, others will tell you diverse other opinions you have with
Councils. But if he would have had me answer for my self, he must have told me
the particulars. Generalia non pungunt, and they make no action. To distinguish
infallibility from their authority, is no opposition, until infallibility be
infallibly made good.

And even in this place you tell all how little you credit Councils, when you
charge them with speaking contradictions.

Ans. First, cred^t may be given in sensu diviso, to those that may possibly
speak contradictions; if we mean by credit, a moral respect of humane faith:
but if he means credit of faith Divine, I then grant it, that such credit is
not to be given to them which may speak contradictions; for how are they then
infallible, as they must be by my Adversary, if they ground faith? As was said
of the Milisians, Non sunt stulti, sed possunt stulta facere; they are not
fools, and yet can do foolish things: so a Council may be wise, and yet may
speak foolish things: and I may give some credit to them in general for their
wisdom; though it be possible for them to say that which includes a
contradiction. Secondly, I may charge Councils with contradictions to one
another, though not to themselves. For thirdly, I can charge the Council of
Trent with contradictions to it self: and the Trent Council was a general
Council, in the opinion of my Adversary; therefore that grace is voluntarily
received, is their opinion; and that yet we cannot know whether we are in state
of grace, includes a contradiction; as if we did not know our own will, what it
does. This absurdity was urged by Catharinus in the Trent Council. Again (not
to speak of some of them who had voted the Edition vulgar to be authentic, and
yet did except against the interpretation of the word (...), for sin pardoned,
in the History of the Council. p. 207) there is a contradiction noted by the
German Divines in the sixth session, the seventh chapter Where it is said of
justice, which every one receives according to his measure, quam Spiritus
Sanctus partitur singulis prout vult, et secundum propriam cujusque
dispositionem et cooperationem: Which the Holy Ghost does impart as he will,
and according to every ones disposition and cooperation.

If according to his will, then not according to our disposition; for then it
is not, as he will. And so in the thirteenth session, in the first chapter it is
said of the manner of Christ's existence in the Sacrament, quam etsi verbis
exprimere vix possumus; which although we can scarce express in words, and yet
in the fourth chapter it is called of the Holy Catholic Church, Transubstantiation
convenienter et proprie, appositly and properly. And in the second Canon of the
same session, it says of Transubstantiation, quam quidem conversionem
Catholica Ecclesia aptissime Transubstantiationem apellat; which the Catholic
Church calls most fitly Transubstantiation. Was the Council of Trent infallibly
assisted, or assisted with infallibility in these contradictions? and yet it
may be these not all.

Number. 9.
But number the ninth will make an end of our cause, if a Rodomontado of my
Adversary could do the deed. Thus, And when you ask again, why you are charged
as if you were opposed to the true Catholic Church? I answer, Christ had in
all ages a true Catholic Church, and consequently he had such a Church when
your Reformation, as you call it, began. But at this your Reformation you did
oppose in very many and important points of Doctrine not only the Roman, but
all other Churches upon earth. Therefore without doubt you opposed the truly
Catholic Church in very many and important points. And in plain English I tell
you, this Argument which is in lawful form is unanswerable.

Ans. So then. But is this Achilles? Is this (...)? Alas, if we come near him,
it is but bombast. First, we deny it in the lawfulness of the form, which he
asserts; for it is concluding in the second figure affirmatively, and in this
regard only it is unanswerable: for it is not to be answered, for want of
form. But yet secondly, lest they should think it is unanswerable in the
matter, we answer to the major first, by distinguishing; if he takes the true
Catholic Church, as in the Apostles Creed, he commits an equivocation; for so
it cannot be taken in the minor; because we have in the minor the Roman Church
and other Churches, now the Roman is a visible Church, he means, and so he
means the other Churches to be visible; for we cannot properly oppose, he will
think, any but visible Churches: but in the Creed is meant the Church
invisible, which is the object of faith. If he takes it for the true Catholic
Church visible, as always perspicuous and flourishing in visibility in all the
parts of it, it is denied that the Church Catholic is so visible, and
therefore we deny the major; and need not say any thing to the minor; and yet
also we deny the minor, because, if it were not so visible, we could not be
said to oppose it. And he cannot prove that we opposed all other Churches;
because they were not in his sense, visible, and therefore how can he say, that
we opposed all other Churches, since, if they were visible in the parts to some
that were Neighbors, yet not visible to the world generally? Was the Church
less the Church in the Primitive times, when it wanted candles to be seen in
the night? or the seven thousand, which Elijah did not know of, less belonging
to the Church of the Jews, because they did not openly profess the true
Religion? How then can it be said rationally, that we opposed all Churches; for
how could he or any one man under Heaven know all the Churches of the world
then? Yea, thirdly, in how many and important points did the Reformers oppose
the Greek Church; and the Waldenses, who as the Author of the History of the
Trent Council says, had forsaken the Church of Rome then four hundred years
before, in his fifth book. Yea, fourthly, the major proposition supposes for
all times and places: does it not? for so the Catholic Church is properly
taken, as including all times and places: and so we deny the minor: we did not
oppose all Churches of all times. Dato non concesso, that we did at the
Reformation oppose not only the Roman, but all other Churches, yet did we not
oppose all Churches, or the Roman of the Primitive times: and therefore did we
not oppose the Catholic Church. Yea, yet fifthly, we distinguish dissent from
opposition. Although opposition includes a difference, yet every difference
does not include an opposition, for then St. Cyprian had opposed the Church in
differing from it upon the point of Rebaptization. And if it be said that the
point of Rebaptization was not then defined by the Church: we say, that yet
this consideration does not make every difference to have in it the nature of
opposition; for then, though St. Cyprian had not opposed the authority of a
Church in a Council, yet had he opposed the authority of the Church; which
then did bind him more than the Trent Council does us. And that St. Cyprian did
so oppose the Church, was not then held by the Church Catholic. Sixthly, to
return the Argument upon them. Christ had in all ages a true Catholic Church,
and consequently, he had such a Church when their deformation went on in the
Trent Council, but they then in very many and important points of Doctrine did
oppose all true Catholics; therefore without doubt they opposed the truly
Catholic Church in very many and important points; as in communion under one
kind; in Transubstantiation; in Purgatory; in the merit of works; in seven
Sacraments of proper name; in invocation and religious worship of the Saints;
in Images. Yea, the Roman Church has more formally opposed the whole Church;
because in the Trent Council it would have the Roman Church to be the
Catholic; which supposes that all Christians must strike sail to them, or
else they are sunk. Seventhly, we tell him wherein the Romanist has divided
from the whole Church; but he does not tell us particularly in what points we
have divided from all Churches. Indeed it is the safest way not to come to
particulars, for fear of discovery. In generalibus latet tot^s.

But let us come up closely to him. Either the Fathers of the Primitive Church
are on my Adversary's side in the points of difference, or our's; or have not
expressed themselves sufficiently on either part: but the Fathers of the
Primitive times are not on my Adversary's side. For there was none of those
points which we have named held by them: and my Adversary did know that some of
ours have confronted Campion's challenge about the Fathers, with another
challenge to the Romanists, to show so much as one Father, one Doctor in the
Primitive times that has expressed himself for them in the points of
difference. Then if they have expressed themselves, (and if not, we have not
opposed them) they are on our side; because we are upon contradictions. Thus we
see what is become of his unanswerable Argument. We see that we can differ from
them without opposition to the Catholic Church, better than they can differ
from us without opposition to the Catholic Church: because we in our
difference from them have kept the Catholic faith, which they have warped
from. And so that which is left behind in the number, will never come up to
fight us to any purpose. For as for the Reformers opposing the Church, because
they censured that which was proposed by the Papists, as opposite to the word
of God, we take our Reformation from Scripture; and also we say, it is not
necessary in points of difference to conclude, that what is by them urged, is
opposite to the word of God. For it is enough to us to differ upon the negative
to the word of God; since our principle is, that the Scripture is a sufficient
rule of faith and practice. And therefore though a point proposed does not
oppose Scripture, as not being contradictory; yet we reject it from being any
Article of faith, because it is not contained in Scripture: And thus, the
negative authority of Scripture does sufficiently conclude against any other
article of faith than what is in it.

And as for our not naming in this whole age, one age in this last thousand
years, wherein Christ had a truly Catholic Church, agreeing with you in those
many and most important points, wherein your Reformers taxed us to have opposed
the Scriptures; This in effect has been answered before; and has not any
thing materially new. But first, this is always an unreasonable demand; which
goes upon a certain presumption of the Romanist, that the true Church must be
always conspicuously visible; which is to be denied, and therefore it does not
follow, that because we cannot name any Church agreeing with us, therefore
there was none. Secondly, if he means by a truly Catholic Church, one
particular Church of the Catholic, those whom we have named did not agree with
them in the most important points of difference, (as not in point of
Discipline) nay, they have differed from them, and therefore have agreed with
us in the questions betwixt us. And besides, if they mean a truly Catholic
Church in this sense, as a part of the whole; then a particular Church it seems
may be a Catholic, and a truly Catholic Church: and therefore have they no
reason to vaunt of the title of Catholic given by the Ancients to the Church
or Bishop of Rome; because other Churches may also be Catholic: and why then
should the Pope usurp the title of universal Bishop over a particular Church?
And if he means by a truly Catholic Church, the Catholic Church properly,
then he does imply a contradiction, that the Catholic Church, which includes
all ages, should be limited to a thousand years. But thirdly, he did wisely
stint the question for this thousand years, since he could not well go
further, for the six hundred years before do show no disagreement to us in the
most important points of difference. And let them assure themselves, that our
agreement with the six hundred of the Primitive Church is more available for
our defense, than the supposed disagreement with the thousand years after is
available to the accusation. Fourthly, suppose no one Church could be named
corresponding with us in most important points, for this thousand years; yet
even in every age of the thousand years there might be (and some have) named
several persons which have held the material points of difference betwixt us;
and several of the Roman Communion have bore testimony to the truth; yea, even
in the Trent Council; in so much that they have been complained of for bending
to Protest^ntisme; as may be seen through the History of that Council. Fifthly,
what Tyranny is this, to stifle and smother by their domination all other
Churches, as much as they could, which were not of their faith, and then
challenge us to show what Church agreed with us? Sixthly, Omne reducitur ad
principium, as Aquinas's rule is, then we are to take a true Church from trial
of Scripture: and we put it to this issue; All Catholic Churches agree with
Scripture in the most important points of difference: we agree with Scripture,
or Scripture with us in these points; therefore we agree with all Catholic
Churches in these points; because we agree in tertio. Therefore if the
Romanists differ, let them look to it. We differ from none but them in those
points: and that we differ from them is their fault, and our security. If they
had not left the Catholic, to be a singular Plenipotentiarie; we had not left
Communion with them as a part of the whole; or rather they had not left our
Communion. Delictum ambulat cum Capite.

And as for that he says, And as for external division, you cannot name the
Church upon earth from which you did not divide your selves at your
Reformation. We return it with the necessary changes; nor can they at their
Deformation name the Church upon earth from which they did not divide
themselves. And I challenge them to tell me, if they can, to what Church on
earth then visible they did join themselves, or who acknowledged to be of
their Communion?

But first, as for external Communion, we say moreover, first, we divided not
first Communion, but the Pope, when, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, he sent a
Bill to prohibit his Subjects Communion with us. 2. We divided not from their
Church simply, but so as corrupted and engaging us, upon communion with them to
error and bad practice. We left the house as infected, with a mind of returning
when it shall be clear and safe for us. Thirdly as before, we divided not from
the Primitive times in point of Doctrine or Discipline: now then, suppose there
was not at the Reformation any other Church unto which we might join; which is
more agreeable to the duty and honor of a Church, to join with a corrupt Church
in Doctrine and practice, or to leave their communion external and to follow
the Primitive? If the person be to be esteemed by the Doctrine, not the
Doctrine by the person, as Tertullian's rule is in his Praescrip. Then we may
leave fellowship of persons for affinity with better Doctrine, if by the
communion with the persons, we must also espouse the errors. Fourthly, as they
have sunk their Patriarcate, and have arrogated an universallity of domination
(and so have divided from all the world, that they might reign over all) so we
have resumed our ancient liberty of the British Church to subsist
independently from them. Yea, this was acknowledged in effect by Urban, when he
called for Anselme in the Council at a plunge, Includamus hunc in orb nostro
tanquam alterius orbis Papam. And therefore, as to Communion upon subjections
we are not bound; and as to fraternall Communion we are ready in mind, with any
who are, or when they shall be found; since all the separation which was made
by us, (if any made) was in our own defense. Fifthly, if Spalatensis and
Erasmus were able to judge, many would have been of our Communion, durst they
have been like those whom St. Cyprian speaks of, who were unconquerable;
because they did not fear to die. And therefore, as Justin Martyr said of
Plato, that he would as plainly have spoken for one God as Socrates, but that
he was afraid of Socrates's death; so that he obscured his passages of
Divinity, with other passages which did differ: so would many (besides those in
the Trent Council) have spoken more freely for the Protestants, but for the
Inquisition: and this has made them blende good passages for us with some
appearances against us. So then since we communicate with the first four
General Councils in Doctrine, and with the Primitive times also in Discipline,
this external division from you makes the quarrel; but as the case stood, no
guilt; and therefore no danger. The Catholic Church has the greatest
promises; the Roman Church is not the Catholic Church. So then we may do well
without their Communion, if we pray for them.

Number. 10.
In the tenth number, he would wind himself off from the inconveniency of his
own principle in the fourth page of the Treatise, True it is to submit
exteriourly to temporal judges, they being able, and only to judge of the
exterior man; but God who searches the reins and the heart, and who looks
most upon the mind (which is the seat of true or false belief) does chiefly
exact that those of his Church be of one faith interiourly, or else they are
not of one faith: for faith essentially consists in the interior judgment,
etc. Upon which words I did argue thus: We are bound to submit our judgment
only to those who can judge of the inward act. But God only can judge our
internal acts; therefore we must submit our assents only to him; and
therefore to others no further than they speak according to him: so that we
cannot absolutely adhere to whatsoever is said in Councils, which have erred,
Jewish and Christian too.

And now he says, I never said any such thing. He means, namely, that Councils
cannot judge of the interior act. Nor do I say, that he did say so. But I took
his principle, That God only searches the heart and reins, and looks upon
the mind, and exacteth that those of his Church be of one judgment
interiourly, for my discourse. The Argument is out of its own position. And
now, (if there had been need of his confession) he has acknowledged the
Assumption, that God only can judge of the internal act: for he denies this
ability to Councils. And therefore it does appear, that he is snarled: and that
Councils cannot bind the internal act, because they cannot judge thereof.

But now therefore he would evade thus. But God (in whose name the Church
teaches and commands all which she teaches and commands) searches the
heart and the reins. What then? Because they teach and command in God's name,
therefore have they God's omniscience? If the Divine nature of Christ did not
transfuse by communication of Ideoms a real property to the humane nature, of
the Divine; shall they think to makes God's Court, which immediately obliges
in Conscience, to be theirs? They make God and the Council all one. As they
have given to the Pope Christ's Chair: so they will give to the Council God's
Tribunal. Whatsoever is taught in Gods name has not always for it, sic dicit
Dominus, God's word pierces the heart, as before, but every thing which is
taught under God's name is not according to his word, as traditions. This is
just such an Argument as that of the Pontificians to prove, that the Saints in
Heaven see all things, because they see him who sees all things: Yes, and he
that searches the hearts gives them his authority, therefore they can bind
in the intetiour act. Has he given them this authority? Has he given them
this power? if they affirm it, it is high Blasphemy. If they deny it, the
Argument of my Adversary to excuse himself, is a nullitie. And my Argument is
yet good against them, since his is no better than if I should say, because
they see one who sees nothing, they see nothing. And therefore this did fully
absolve the substance of the fourth page, or dissolve it; the Council may be
assisted and yet not with omniscience, nor infallibility.

Number. 11.
And therefore has he no cause to say to me, but you skip to my admiration of
your Doctrine. Let the judicious Reader judge which have skipped most; he that
answers punctually, or he that gives a treatise for an answer. I urged him
pressely; and he answered me not so much as coldly, not at all. This was one
skip for all.

And then he goes on with repetitions of our Doctrine, and of his refutations
of it before with references to the fourth chap. And then he tells me what shall
be done in the next. But I should not hear of it until it be done. Laudari non
potest nisi peractum, (...). this might have been skipped.

Then he comes to say somewhat of St. Athanasius. As for St. Athanasius, did
ever he oppose his judgment against the definitions of a lawful General
Council? Nay, did it not appear by the Council of Nice, standing for his
Doctrine, that he might well know, the true Church, lawfully assembled under
the lawful Pastor, confirming their acts, would teach as he did.

Ans. First, the whole argument is drawn but a singulari, and this will not
conclude, if he did not oppose. Secondly, if it did conclude, it would not be
contradictory; for we do not maintain opposition. Thirdly, though he did not
oppose the Synod of Nice, yet does it not follow presently, that he did not
oppose it by reason of an infallibility, but because it was not deceived, as
ruling it self by the word of God. Fourthly, St. Athanasius had the same
opinion against the multitude, which the Nicene Council had, before the Council
or after. If before also, then we see that one man is not to be controlled by a
multitude; and therefore why are we upbraided in our Religion with the paucity
of the Professors? If after, then we see that a Council is not an effectual
means to put an end to all Controversies. Fifthly, he does not advisedly put
in these words, the lawful Pastor confirming their Acts. This is not
discreetly applied to the Council of Nice; for, as to this, he was first
deceived, in thinking we would swallow his supposition of the lawful Pastor in
his sense of universality and singularity. We deny the Pope to be the lawful
Pastor. Secondly, Liberius did subscribe S. Athanasius's banishment: and how
shall we then take the confirmation of a Council from a Pope, when he
subscribes against it? Thirdly, the Nicene Council was not confirmed by the
Bishop of Rome more than by some other Bishop. Yea, as it was called By the
Emperor Constantine, so was it confirmed by him. And therefore by my
Adversaries principles, The authority of the Nicene Council should be but
humane, because it had not its esse formale by the Pope. Yea, sixthly, neither
is it necessary, that after the Nicene Council he should oppose a greater
humane authority upon the authority of the Council, as if it had been more than
humane: for he opposed the greater part before. Seventhly, he did not well
consider what he said; for if he might oppose (upon his supposition) a greater
humane authority; then, until they prove the authority of a Council to be
Divine, so as infallibly assisted with infallibility, there may be a greater
authority than of the Nicene Council; which is not true notwithstanding. And if
he meant so, he opppsed a General Council more than I.

In the following words of this number, I was glad to find him so soberly
defending the title of Roman Catholics. He says, To avoid this very strife,
impertinent now to our purpose, I used that very name by which no others are
excluded.

This is ingeniously said, but he knew that the Romanists are wont to usurp
this title. And I had good reason to take good notice of it, lest my silence
should be mis-interpreted. For some are wont to take advantage at what is said,
and also at what is not said. But indeed does he give up the title to the use
of others also as not exclusive to them, neither in comprehension, (which would
make a contradiction) nor in jurisdiction; then why do men contend so much for
the Roman Church, as Mother and Mistrisse of all Churches? Why is added in
their Creed to the Catholic Church the Roman? Why in the Trent Council was
none accounted Catholics but them? Indeed also this is the wisest course, if
the knot cannot be untied, to cut it off: so he, to avoid the proof of the
appropriation of the title to them, has denied the appropriation. But this
confession I suppose the Priests of Rome would not well accept; for in very
deed it goes near to the ruining of the cause. And this plainly contradicts
himself in his own principles, thus; the Catholic Church is infallible: so he
says still. The Roman Church is only infallible. So he said in the end of the
former Treatise; then the Roman Church is only Catholic. Now he says he did
not exclude other Churches: and yet no Church Catholic but the Roman.

And in this impertinent strife you say many things, of which you prove not
one. If such a put-off might be allowed to me, I might soon have done. I need
not say much to what is said, because so little is said to any purpose. But he
knew he was pinched by mention of the falsification of the Nicene Council about
the superiority of the Bishop of Rome, and several other particulars, which
needed no proof to an intelligent man, let the world judge, whether if any
thing could be excepted against what I said solidly, my Adversary would have
forborne the offering of it to consideration. And also to my former vindication
of our Doctrine about the authority of Councils, which had four answers, he
replies nothing but that of Athanasius, which might more happily have been left
out.

In the twelfth number he would refute me by noting a dangerous consequence
flowing from the premises of our Doctrine, Number. 12.
his discourse is resolved into this Syllogism, Texts of Scripture are not
able to decide all necessary controversies (unless as they send us to the
Church) by themselves, as I shall show in my next chapter But I hold texts of
Scripture only infallible. Therefore we shall never have an end of
Controversies, unless we understand the texts of Scripture (which speak of
Christ's promises to the Church) of assistance infallible: as St. Math. 28.
ult. and others which we shall have an account of in the next chapter This is the
sum of his ratiocination.

Ans. We shall show the civility not to prevent the use and business of the
next chapter but this reasoning will be valid no where; it will not grow stronger
by the next age. Therefore we say (not to repeat repetitions) that, as to the
major proposition, we deny it upon our account of all necessary Controversies,
although not upon his account. All things plainly necessary are so laid down in
Scripture, as there needs be no controversy thereabouts. In things of question
simple error does not damn. But those who make no difference of belief by
respect to object or use, but do take all upon the proposal of the Church, are
apt to enlarge the number of things necessary, because, all upon that account
are with equal necessity to be received. And yet, as has been noted, they
have no reason to multiply the number of necessary Controversies; for with them
there is no necessity of believing any thing but this, that the Church is
infallible. But then secondly, as to the major, if he mean by themselves so as
the Scriptures should formally decide Controversies, he fights with his own
shadow: for it does not contradict, when we do not affirm: we say not that
formally any Controversy is decided by texts of Scripture, but that in things
plain there is no necessity of any such decision; and in many Controversies the
Scripture does as well in the principles decide it, as the Law does differences
civil. If he means by themselves therefore so, as that they do not decide them
without sending us to the Church; we answer by distinguishing, that first in
things plain there is no need of the judgment of the Church. In things of
Controversy there is need of the Church; but not need of infallible
determination. There is an ending of Controversies speculatively, when the
judgment is resolved by infallible Scripture: there is an ending of
Controversies practically, by authority of the Church, so as to bind the
person against disturbance. Now the question betwixt us is of the former ending
of Controversies which cannot be performed by the Church. And dare any man that
soberly reads all the History of the Council of Trent, and observes so long
deliberations, so many interposals, so hot disputes, such changes, so many
notable Contradictions of many of them, say, that all Controversies were there
infallibly ended? As Tertullian to the Heathens, appello Conscientiam vestram;
I appeal unto their Consciences when they are preparing for death, whether
Cardinal, or Canonist, or Pope dare affirm it. This for the major.

As to the assumption, I also may distinguish, if he takes texts of Scripture
as principles in order to Conclusions, I hold them only infallible. If he
takes texts of Scripture, as in terms, exclusively to Conclusions immediate, so
I do not hold them only infallible, but also the Conclusions which do
naturally descend by prime resultance from them. Now a Council may apply
principles of Scripture which may resolve a question unto faith; but this is
not done always and absolutely: and when it is done, it is done by virtue of
Scripture. They do not determine things by Divine inspiration, but by humane
disquisition, as was distinguished in the Trent Council; and therefore may they
miss possibly in their discourse. Yea, to the assumption I also say, though I
hold texts of Scripture only infallible; yet I only do not hold them so; but
the Fathers, as before; the Nicene Doctors, as before; yea, and some in the
Trent Council too, as we have noted. And again, if any thing else be
infallible, then a Council; if a Council, then according to them, the Council
of Trent; if the Council of Trent, why did they not determine of Bishops
whether they were jure Divino or not? and why did they not determine of
Residence, whether jure Divino or not? If they could not, how were they
infallible? If they would not, how were they faithful? Again, If you be
necessitated, as you say, to extend the texts of Christ's assistance to his
Church unto infallibility, for the ending of controversies, otherwise we shall
remain disputing without end, or possibility of end, and only for this, as he
seems to mean, then there is no necessity at all. And the consequence is
clear (without his absurdity) upon the former distinction; because plain
things need not come into question; and points of question need not an
infallible decision.

Number. 13.
In the thirteenth number I have two things chiefly to consider; first, his
charge of impertinency in my declaring the difficulty of assent by the
unanimous consent of all the Fathers of all ages every where. Secondly, I am to
consider his Apology for waving the authority of the Fathers in this debate. He
asks me as to the first What connection has the perusal of every judgment of
every Father of every age every where with that obligation which I put of
following these Canons of Councils, which make to the decision of those most
known Controversies about which we contend.

Ans. First, there is a connection of this discourse with the ground of that
about which we are conversant, namely, the authority of the Church. For what
authority can they produce for the distinction of the Church from no Church in
any profession, or from a false Church, but the unanimous consent of the
Fathers of the Church? What Council did make themselves by their own authority
to be indeed Christians? the first Councils were not antecedent to
Christianity, but Christianity to them. So then either the Church is
distinguished by the consent of the Fathers, or by Scripture. If by Scripture,
then is it the first principle and the last: and a primo ad ultimum, we have no
more dependence upon the Church than from Scripture. If by the consent of the
Fathers, then I spoke before to good purpose, though my Adversary said, it was
nothing to our purpose. For the Councils we must be ruled by absolutely, as he
supposes, are the Councils of the Church, are they not? well then, if the
Church be distinguished by the unanimous consent of the Fathers, (which I
suppose they will not deny) then the discourse about the consent of the Fathers
was not eccentricall to the point in hand. Let them remember the rule of
Aquinas, Omne reducitur ad principium. Secondly, it bears connection with the
question about Councils per modum regulae, as the rule by which they go in
their definitions. Either they went by Scripture, or by the consent of the
Fathers. If they went by Scripture, then by my Adversaries opinion we must go
that way: because we are to be infallibly directed by them. If by the joint
consent of the Fathers, then surely our discourse was very proper and
pertinent: or if they will not have the Fathers consent to be considered so
much as contradistinguished unto Scripture (because as the Legates and
Presidents of the Trent Council said, the holy Fathers have no other grounds
but Scripture) yet the consent of the Fathers is distinguished from the object
upon which their consent is terminated. So then, as for the sense of Scripture,
either the Councils went by the rule of the Father's joint interpretation or
not: if by it, then we have our purpose of defending the reasonableness of our
speech about the Fathers. If not, then by the common rules of understanding the
sense of Scripture, and then why should we not go that way for our resolution
which they go.

So that my Adversary needed not to have given me an admonition of holding
close to the matter. And yet I take that admonition very kindly, that my
Adversaries might be obedient to their own law.

That which he says, Is the judgment of every Father of every age the
judgment of a General Council? is nothing. For though it be not the judgment
of the Council in recto; yet I hope, it was in causa; not that they were
determined by the judgment of one separately from the rest, but because it is
supposed by my Adversaries, that they all agreed. If they say they did not,
then let my Adversaries agree it as well as they can with the rest of their
Church, who stand as much for our obedience to them, as to any other authority
of the Church. And whether they hold the Fathers as Judges or as witnesses, it
is all one to me; because I speak of their authority in general. So then, if
the judgment of every Father of every age disjunctively or distributively be
not the judgment of a general Council (which my Antagonists think
unreasonable) yet conjunctively and complexively, I hope it is, or should be,
according to their common principles. And if they lie at catch upon the
ambiguity of the terms of every Father of every age, they commit a plain
fallacy, in distribution and also are peccant in the ignorance of the Elench,
for if they mean every Father of every age distributively, it does not
contradict me who speak of them in consent.

And now shall I come to the second task, to hunt out the reason why he would
not deal with me in this Controversy by the authority of the Fathers. He
says thus.

Since you bring the authority of Councils to a little more than nothing, and
again the authority of the Fathers to a little less than nothing; in order to
the ending of Controversies, this your violence against any provocation to
antiquity and consent to Fathers will give me leave to make this Treatise much
shorter than at the beginning appeared possible; for it is evident out of your
own words, that it is to no end to deal with you out of Fathers: and I am
resolved to deal with no body but to some end. I will therefore humor you in
this: and I will lay aside all that might hereafter be said concerning the
opinion of Fathers.

Ans. Nimia perfectio parit suspicionem. My Adversary is so curious in this
apology of his, that he is to be suspected. I gave no such occasion, but he
takes it against the use of the Fathers in this point. I am not guilty, in any
sober man's judgment, of any privative disrepect unto them. I do not bring the
authority of the Fathers to a little less than nothing: what is due justly
either to Councils or to Fathers I do willingly give. But because infallibility
is not granted, therefore am I charged with disrespect. This is a fallacy
(...). He that denies them this does not deny unto them such reverence as is
equal. And for the Fathers, I have not waved any testimony which has been
produced against our cause; I have not said, as he, (...). Yea, I have used the
same Argument against my Adversaries in triumphum. Again, (...), as he in his
Rhetoric: but I have said nothing which is not conformable to the word of God,
to the consent of the Fathers and of the Doctors of the Church: but because I
will not make the word of the Fathers and of the Doctors equal to the
infallible word of God, therefore am I not reasonably accused of slighting the
Fathers and Doctors of the ancient Church. But this was necessary for my
Adversary, to color his refusal of answering to those Fathers I brought
against him, and to the answers which I gave to the testimonies of the Fathers
which he brought against me. So difficulty is sometimes by Sophisters construed
for impertinency. By this Argument I must say nothing proper but what may be
easily answered. But it had been more ingenuous, first, to have exhibited solid
authorities out of the Fathers of the Primitive antiquity; or at least to have
given a sufficient answer to my refutation of what use he made of those he
quoted against me; and then to have laid aside the urging of the Fathers upon
my account of Refusal of them only as infallible Judges. To gather up then my
exceptions against this part of his apology; I say first, I do not either in
terms, or by consequence, bring Councils to a little more than nothing, nor the
authority of the Fathers to little less than nothing, in order to the ending
of Controversies. I allow them to be of great use in his terms, in order to the
ending of Controversies. There may be an ordinability of them toward, or in
order, to this end, without infallibility in them: they may find out and give
us the infallible sense of Scripture; but we cannot take it so upon their word:
their authority is moving but not cogent of our assent. Secondly, I except
against those words wherein he imputes to me a violence against any provocation
to antiquity and consent to Fathers.

This I deny. Neither in terms nor by discourse can they find such words or
sense from me. I have used their own weapon against them. I have answered their
objections from them. I renew the provocation and challenge which Bishop Jewel
and others of our Divines have made to them, to show, if they can, any notable
part, yea, any two, yea, any one of the ancient Fathers that clearly and
constantly has professed the points wherein we differ from them. And if the
Fathers had been for them, why did they corrupt some passages of the Fathers
which spoke against them; which they have not yet cleared themselves of? Yea,
thirdly, whereas he says my refusal of the Fathers will give him leave to make
this Treatise much shorter than at the beginning; I say (not insisting here
upon the impropriety of a Treatise, if it be no more as to my satisfaction: or
of the term, if it be more) that there had been rome enough for all the
Fathers authorities he could produce for himself, and also for all that he
could say to my answers about their testimonies, without Theremaking his
Treatise so long, if he had left out impertinences, and references, and
repetitions.

Therefore has my Adversary taken more liberty than I afforded him in his
refusal of dealing with the Fathers: yet not more liberty than was necessary
for him, lest he should be in necessity to answer what answers I made to his
former testimonies of them; and also to what testimonies I have produced
against him.

And I find him wary lest I should make this advantage of his resolution to
wave the Fathers. He would make it to be no design but a rational purpose,
therefore he goes on.

But do not think that I do this, as if what you here said against the
authority of the Fathers found any credit with me, or as if what you say were
in the least degree hard to be answered, for you yourself cannot be ignorant
that we allege plenty of the Fathers against you, as are confessed by your
selves to have been the prime Doctors of the Primitive Church.

Ans. The rule is good, (...) And surely he is not damned that does not
believe, that all which is said by men on their own behalf is true. But
secondly, they do not produce many testimonies of the prime Doctors of the
Primitive Church; namely, not of the first 300 years; nay, nor of the first 600
years: others are Postnates and have not the honor of Primitive Antiquity: Yea,
some they name as testimonies for them were not Fathers. And some works they
cite for them which are falsely ascribed to true Fathers, as several of our
Writers have demonstrated, even with the Confession of some of their Church.
Thirdly, whereas he says [Do not think that I do this as if what you have said
against the authority of the Fathers found any credit with me] he wrongs me
with a fallacy (...), if he would have men believe that I spoke against the
authority of the Fathers simply, because I spoke against their authority as
absolutely convictive of the understanding in point of truth. And also, whereas
he says it did not find credit with him, I am of his opinion: for certainly
little is like to be believed by the Pontificians that is against them. But
after this manner his Treatise might soon be answered; it finds not credit with
me. One blot would serve for all the Treatise. Fourthly, what reason may this
be called, the Pontificians use plenty of the Fathers against us; therefore he
will not answer to my testimonies from them, nor to my answers to his
testimonies against us. Do any of those Pontificians fully answer my
testimonies, and do they sufficiently take off my answers? If they do, he
should have told me which, and where. But were I as apt to brag as the Romans
are I might not be far from crying victoria, that I should stand to answer the
Fathers and bring them to stand for us (though my Adversary says, I bring them
to less than nothing) and yet he that makes so much of them in show, should
detrect this way of plea by them.

Whereas their small errors used presently to be discovered and cried down.
This is not altogether true. For how many of their errors continued long: yea,
great errors also, as the Millenarie opinion? And Infant Communion was not
presently decreed neither. Therefore yet it remains to be proved, that any of
the points of difference betwixt the Papists and us was a standing opinion of
the Primitive times, which my Adversary would insinuate: (...).

And it would make a learned man amazed to ask as you do, how few of them have
touched upon our differences.

Ans. There is no such cause of Amazement. Learned men in general wonder
less, and learned men cannot wonder particularly at this, as knowing the
reason, which was added by me, having not occasion by Adversaries: and
therefore does my Adversary wisely pass by any mention of the reason, as not
being pertinent for his use. But also was that I said well guarded, first, how
few, I did not say none. Secondly, I said touched, namely, as to handle, and
this is necessary to be believed; because indeed there were few of them
Argumentative: then though some of them might put out occasionally some
expressions relating to our differences, yet is not this to touch
argumentatively our differences; for, aliud agentis parva autoritas, as the
rule is. And then thirdly, if many of them at least did not touch, so as to
handle discursively all our differences, there is no cause of admiring my
speech; for if they had handled some, not all, how should we have been directed
in those which they had not handled? Now then let all be considered; then upon
the whole matter let me say this, that if any Pontifician can prove, that many
of them did handle argumentatively all the points of debate betwixt us, then I
shall give leave for the amazement of my expression.

Therefore as to the Authors he produces of his side, who give account of the
Fathers in our diff^rences, as Coccius, Gualterus, the Author of the Progeny of
the Catholics and Protestants, or any other named by any other; I say this,
that he should have told me particulary where each of them does produce any
Father and in what point, and also should have showed in them, that many
Fathers have all conjunctively spoken of the several points; and also that
they have spoken of them directly on purpose where the seat of the matter was;
and also, that no where they contradict what in one place they said, or at
least, did not elsewhere speak doubtingly: otherwise he concludes not any thing
of weight against me. And then secondly, I can return my Adversary number for
number and weight for weight of our own, who have answered all the testimonies
of the Fathers, which their learned Champions have produced, as Bishop Jewel,
Dr. Whitaker, Dr. Reynolds, (besides Chamier of France) who have refuted the
instances of the Fathers. Yea, the challenge of the first of them was never yet
well answered as to the testimony of the Fathers. And thirdly, either the
Fathers cannot be brought in with their suffrages for them, or they can: if
they cannot, why does Campian and others crack and brag of the Fathers? and
then also my Adversaries Authors are disannulled. If they can, then either the
Fathers speak contradictions, since we produce them as well for us, (and
therefore cannot we be ruled by them) or else my Adversary needed not to have
shifted the answering to them, but might have found other passages out of them
to have commodiously reconciled the seeming variance. Yea, then either my
Adversary had not such cause to rest infallibity in a Council, if all the
Fathers of all ages agreed; or the consent of the Fathers might be a rule to
the Council; and then my discourse of the Fathers had good conjunction with the
Controversy about Councils.

As for the Author of the Progeny of Catholics and Protestants, whom he brings
in here, as handling a part all our main differences, and does in all these
points give us the very words of our own chief Doctors clearly acknowledging a
great number of holy Fathers directly opposite to us in each one of these points.

To this I answer, that it is possible some of our Church may not meet with
right editions of the Fathers; might not discern their true works; might
mistake the sense and application of some words, or not being able dexterously
to reconcile their expressions to some other passages of the Fathers and to our
opinions, might conclude them as opposite. If this Argument were good, then are
they also bound to conclude the Fathers to be on our side, because Bellarmin
produces in his Disputations testimonies of the Fathers for us. Indeed he
endeavors to answer those testimonies: but I dare affirm, that several of
those testimonies which the Author has produced from our own side of the
Fathers, may as well be answered as some of those which Bellarmin answers.
Thirdly, my Adversaries might have known also, that there is a book written by
none of ours which is a Confutation of Papists by Papists: So then, if they
will set our Divines against us, we can set their Divines against them; yea,
also in several points were the testimonies of the Primitive Church urged
against some of their points in the Trent Council by some of their Church.
Fourthly, I have read Breerley through (it being commended to me by one who
thought, I think, thereby to convince me in the case) and I can give no other
account than as Mr. Chillingworth does, that he has not dealt exactly with the
Confessions of those of our Church, as in the instance of some passages out of
Mr. Hooker, as may be seen in Mr. Chillingworth, page 62. As also in a passage
of Luther, as may be seen in Mr. Chilling. If the pages 79 and 92 be compared.
And therefore have we no reason to be concluded against upon his word; yea,
some of the authorities he brings do not respect the main points betwixt us:
and as I remember, some authorities are not contradictory to our cause, and
therefore was I rather confirmed by reading of that book. And therefore
groundless is my Adversaries excuse for not meddling with the holy Fathers in
this Controversy betwixt us. Though they did not professedly discuss and
determine our questions (and therefore cannot their authority so much sway us)
yet their expressions for us might weigh with our Adversaries; who so much
boast of them at least, they might say somewhat to what answers have been made
to their quotations of them. And if we must not make use of them, because we
cannot account them infallible, then my Adversaries discourse might have been
also well spared, for I am sure his discourse is not infallible.

He having then dismissed the hearing of the Fathers sine die; he comes upon us
thus. And indeed your Doctors would feign dispute out of Scripture only.

Ans. If only be taken in order to the ultimate resolution of faith, we would
indeed dispute out of Scripture only; because the Principles of Scripture are
only to us infallible, but if only be taken exclusively to all use of the
Fathers, we deny it. To show that our Doctrine is truly Divine, we prove it
out of Scripture: to show that it is not new, we compare it with the sayings of
the Fathers; yea, the judgment of the Fathers has it self to faith as a
rational dispositive; but not as an inerrable determinative, this Privilege
we reserve to Scripture, which is to us the formal object and ground of Divine
faith. And if they can show us sic dicit Dominus, for absolute credence to the
Church, we have done.

But he gives us his Crisis why we would feign dispute out of Scripture only.
Because they find it to be true, that the Scriptures alone cannot decide many
Controversies but by some Interpretation or other, they think themselves able
to elude the force of Arguments drawn from Scripture only: the sayings which
are not in Scripture are in no case receivable by them.

Ans. Well guessed. Surely we have here a mere Cavil by a non causa: do not
our Adversaries think that they are as cunning at interpretations as we? They
are wont to brag of the brave Education and Learning: therefore likely they can
tell how to elude an Interpretation as well as others, and there were those
that told them they did do so in the Trent Council. -- Catilina, Cethegum. And
would not our Adversaries have all the dispute referred to the Church which
they can order as they please as a Lesbian rule, either corrupting the style or
adultering the sense, as Tertullian said of the Heretics then, or prohibiting
Authors against them to be read? Yea, what debates were there about the sense
of the Decrees of the Council of Trent? Yea, some decrees were purposely put
into such terms of ambiguitie, that so the mind of the Council might be drawn
into different senses according to the pleasure of the Litigants, as the Author
of the History relates. Secondly, herein then appears our ingenuity, in that we
dispute with you by that which is capable of other senses: whereas they would
have us to be referred to the sense of the Church, which they think cannot be
accommodated for us. Thirdly, we do not say, that no saying is receivable in
any case by us but out of Scripture, but receivable equally upon necessity to
salvation we still deny every saying: we receive sufficiently what is said by
the Church in point of Discipline: and what is said in point of faith we
receive with due reverence; not with absolute faith.

And certainly we seem to give more respect to the Church than they do to
Scripture, if all of them be like my Adversary; for so he goes on. Whereas
indeed there is no good got by disputing of texts of Scripture, but either to
make men sick or mad, as our Adversaries may daily see by their fruitless
Scripture-Combates with the Anabaptists, the Sabbatharians, and other upstart
Sectaries.

Ans. Omne mendacium, quod de Deo dicunt, quodammodo genus est Idololatriae, as
he said in his Prescriptions: and this which is falsely said of the word of
God, is for the Idol of the Roman Church. The Scripture has it self to the
Church as the Emperor to the Pope in the Roman account: and as the Moon has it
self to the Sun, so has the Emperor himself to the Pope; the Moon depends upon
the Sun for light, the Emperor upon the Pope for authority; and the Scripture
upon the Church for light and authority. But first, he argues from the denial
of the act to the denial of the power; yea, from the denial of the effect to
the denial of the power; because there is no good got by disputing of texts of
Scripture, therefore, but our obligation to Scripture does not follow from the
effect, but from the institution. Secondly, as for those points which are
necessary there needs be no disputing upon the texts. Thirdly, the unsuccesse
follows from the perverseness of those who will (...), and have more mind to
victory than verity. Fourthly, why had they then in the Trent Council the Bible
in the midst of them? Why did the Divines urge Scripture? Yea, why did the
Nicene Fathers determine the consubstantiality of the Son by Scripture? Yea,
why did Tertullian combat with Marcion out of Scripture in his de carne
Christi, chapter 6. Si non probant quia nec scriptum est: and again, sed nihil de
eo constat, quia Scriptura non exhibet: and again, chapter 7. Non recipio quod
extra Scripturam de tuo infers. And why did he proceed against Hermogenes by
Scripture, in his 22. chapter against him, Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem: and
again, Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis officina. But fifthly, if we should send
the Sectaries to your Church for satisfaction, would this make an end of the
differences? For the first question would be, how your Church was proved to be
the infallible Church? The Scripture, all that do dispute out of it, do
acknowledge to be the word of God: but all do not acknowledge your Church.
Sixthly, if the Church could end so well all differences, why are so many
questions undetermined, as about the Pope in relation to temporals, in relation
to Councils: about predeterminations, about Immaculate Conception of the
Virgin? Why are not these made an end of? Nay, seventhly, Heretics have
combated with the authority of the Church, and many were not satisfied with the
determinations of Trent. Therefore let them not prejudice Scripture by the
obstinacy of Sectaries. Had not the Sectaries been set on and armed with their
principles they might sooner have been over come: and if nothing should be made
use of for our necessary direction but that which is convictive of all, my
Adversary might in reason have sat still, or brought better Arguments.
Sectaries are not apt to be ruled by the means of Scripture: but his mediums
are not apt to rule me without it.

But the Church of God is the Kings High way by which a man is ever to travel
to truth.

Ans. I could smile at it, that Pontificians should use this expression, that
the Church is the King's High way; when as some principles of some of the chief
of them do dispose them as they think fit, to take Kings out of the way. But
this by the way. Indeed their Church will lead us to Rome but not to truth. The
universal Church will lead us sooner to truth than to Rome. But what way have
we to lead us to this way? If the Church were the Kings high way, how shall we
know how to get into the road? If we had a mind to go (...), in the Fathers
sense, the middle way; we should make use of the universal Church to find that
which is held to be Scripture; and then go in the way of Scripture, which is
Gods High way. And surely the Royal law is like to be the Royal way. And
which is more reasonable, that the Scripture should be only a directory to the
Church, or the Church a directory to Scripture: if the former, then when we
know the Church, we may leave the direction of Scripture and bid it go back;
for now we know the way: and so the Scripture should not be necessary, which
yet is held by the Papists generally, and elsewhere acknowledged b^ my
Adversary: if the latter, then is the Scripture the high way to truth. And
therefore in the debate of truth the appeal lies from the Church to Scripture;
not contrariwise. And so it must, for a distinct and perfect knowledge of the
Church we must have from the Scripture, as before. So that that which is the
rule of the rule must be the rule of that which is ruled, even in that wherein
it is a rule. So then in the search of truth we must make the Scripture to be
the way of our resolution, because by it we must know distinctly the Church.
And not only so, in the search of this truth, which is the true Church: but in
other truths too which are necessary; unless the Scripture should refer us to
the Church absolutely for truth: which is not yet demonstrated. Therefore as to
humane persuasion, we plead the Church; as to faith, we plead the Scripture. By
the Church we come to know what goes for truth in it: but by Scripture we come
to know, whether that which goes for truth be so indeed. In things of question
and of discipline we are not stoicall to the Church; but in business of faith
we must be Scepticks notwithstanding; were there any need in such things to
say, (...). Things of faith may prevent questions on either side; things of
question require no faith by necessity of matter on either side.

That he adds, since by that means (of Scripture only) either neither side
will be victorious, or it is a hazard whether; is not necessary to be answered,
since we have formerly showed the necessity of appealing to Scriptures and
disputing out of them only (as to faith in things of faith) which my Adversary
would deny me upon this ground, because this debate out of Scripture would not
afford a certain and clear victory. And as for victory, we hope they intend it
not. No body is to get the victory in these disputes: for they are undertaken
for truth. And for what is necessary to be believed, we have in Scripture the
plain truth, and what is not necessary, one may have that victory and not the
truth; and so one may have the truth and not the victory. Let them show us
truth and they shall not stay for the victory.

That which follows in this Sexion is conveniently retorted, and more to my
Adversary. These things he might have learned from the antientest Fathers, as
before, if he had regarded their Doctrine. Yet since their authority has so
low a place in his esteem in order to the finding out of truth, which is
against them, he does not lay aside all that might be said out of the Fathers
to humor me, as he says, but upon some other good reason: methinks he should
not so far spare his Adversary, if he did see him not to be well guarded on
that part, But, it is like, the truth is, when they produce the Fathers for
them, then we must be their Children absolutely, which is more than they would
have us do: but when we produce the Fathers for us, then they will not be
their children at all. They must have the Fathers come all the way to them:
otherwise they have nothing to say to them. Surely we had more reason to refuse
any dealing with the Fathers, because we cannot recognize them as infallible,
than my Adversaries, who acknowledge them, when they please them, to be such.
And if the consent of the Fathers be part of their principles they brag of,
they are to stand to their own principles, when we dispute with them out of
them; or else they betray them. We are not bound to stand to their principles,
but they are bound by their own Laws, to answer to them.

Therefore this declining of any return to what I say out of the Fathers, or to
my answers to what he said, because I will not own them as unerrable, must be
set down a (...).

Par. 14.
So the beginning of the fourteenth Par. wherein you say, I cut them off (by
your own consent) all you say concerning St. Cyprian, and the Crisis of St.
Austin concerning St. Cyprian, might have been spared. I have cut it off. I see
he was ready to take all things for his advantage. If I had wholly refused to
give any account to the testimonies of the Fathers brought against me, then
though I had not given him a formal consent, it might have been thought on
interpretative consent: but falsum prius. And therefore this is plain Sophistry
in him.

Yet I have a great mind, (ex abundanti) to tell you that St. Austin expressed
exceedingly well, that Humility and Charity be those virtues which made St.
Cyprian (and ought to make us submit to general Councils, as a prime point of
our bounden duty.

Ans. I take leave to say, that he has skipped all my answers to the instance
of St. Cyprian, but only this. And then I say, that I have also a great mind
to differ from him as little as may be. If he tak^s to submit to General
Councils, as controlling turbulent opposition, or in points of outward
administration of the Church, I grant it: but if he takes it by an
infallibility engaging faith, then I deny it. Those virtues are of use to the
former submission, not to the latter. In the first sense of Submission Humility
is dispositive; but not the actus Imperans, as he says of most submissive
obedience. The actus Imperans of this external submission is an act of
internal obedience to God, as commanding such obedience to the orders of those
whom under pain of damnation we are bound to obey, but in things lawful and
honest only. And no further are we obliged to obedience. Therefore whereas he
speaks as if under pain of damnation we are bound to obey them universally it
is not so. And it will not be Humility to obey them in all things
reduplicatively, but Pride against God. Therefore the Apostles, who understand
their duty, said, Acts 4, 19. Whether it be just to obey God or you, judge ye.

But it may be a general Council cannot command any thing unlawful; so they
say. No? They cannot de jure; but surely it is possible: were not the Apostles
then commanded, after the Council had consulted, not to preach in the name of
Jesus? And if they say the Council erred not in faith herein, but in point of
action, we answer, first, they erred in the faith of a practical point: that
practical dictamen, that such a command might be laid upon them, was
erroneous. Secondly, they erred, ex consequenti, in this most fundamental
point, that Jesus is the Christ. And therefore thirdly, they erred so far, as
by their error they destroyed Christian Religion. Therefore infallibility does
not univocably belong to Councils: therefore may they err: therefore are we
not absolutely to obey them: therefore Humility does not dispose simply to an
obedience of faith; such Humility is voluntary humility, and not a virtue.

And the Devils Rebellion he speaks of, for want of Humility, is not much to
his purpose, though true: will this consequence be weighty, the Divill by Pride
rebelled against God, therefore we by Humility would believe a Council in
whatsoever they say? we are disputing now upon the obedience of belief, as he
would have it: now the Divill did not rebel against God in point of disbelief,
which respects the understanding; but in point of independency, which respects
the will. The Devils Rebellion was against God, as the Summum Bonum, not as the
Summum Verum. For as to belief simple, if there were a proper obedience in it,
they seem to believe still, and therefore to be obedient, if this were an
obedience: because they are said to believe and tremble. And their Rebellion
was a sin of malice; and this speaks a most free opposition of the will: but
our unbelief of some things decreed in Councils, is necessary to the
understanding as not seeing reason of assent; and therefore is it not to be
charged upon want of Humillity.

Whereas then he says Pride is styled the Mother of Heresy, it is easily
distinguished, that in Heresy there are two parts, the material part, which
is, the holding of that which is contrary to an Article of faith; and the
formal part, which is the obstinate opposing the Church in it. Pride is the
Mother of the latter: but it is not absolutely the Mother of the former. For
the Apostles did not disbelieve at first the Resurrection of Christ upon pride.
And then St. Paul could not have excused himself in the persecution of the
Church, that he did it by ignorance, and so there could be no simple error. So
that what he says is not here pertinent: for we are now in dispute about the
obedience of faith, in his sense; not about the obedience of peace. His
argument concludes the latter rather than the former.

And this he prompts me to in his next words, Now as Humility brings with her
this necessary submission in the interior: so Charity is the virtue which will
be sure to see that peace and unity be kept exteriourly in the Church.

Ans. The former part is sufficiently evacuated, Humility and faith are not of
the same Conjugation: faith historical (which we speak of) or dogmatical, is
subjected in the understanding; Humility is a moral virtue. And a moral
virtue cannot be a speculative principle. Neither are they always of a
combination. For he that is humble is not always in the right opinion; and he
that is proud is not always in the wrong opinion. And if Pride were but
symptomaticall to error, it would be ill for Rome. But for the latter part,
that Charity will endeavor to keep peace and unity, is not like to be denied,
yet we must see that our Charity and Unity be regular, we must not for Charity
lose Truth; though in pursuance of Truth we must not lose Charity. We hold our
own, and give good words of others. We would be one in judgment, and that is
of Charity: but not by conforming to any in error; so we should forsake truth.
However we will not differ in love; for we can love those that differ, and pray
for them: and be ready to join with them when they will leave their error, or
not injoin it to us.

Indeed the use of Councils is more respective to the formal part of heresy:
and therefore we do formally satisfy them in reverence and peace; duly
weighing what they decree, and decreeing to hold what is due. Grant no other
submission; and urge no other submission to any Councils, and we have done.

Here the first five lines do beg the question which we have been disputing of,
Par. 15.
and if they did of themselves prove any thing, would prove more than that he
speaks of, exterior unity. For if the Church did unerrably lead us into truth,
as the Kings High way, then we should have one judgment and persuasion, which
would make interior unity. But though exterior unity, as he speaks, is not
sufficient to his dispute, yet is it enough for the demand of the Church
visible. The Church invisible (which, as such, has a necessary connection with
salvation) consists of those who do agree as one in points proposed by God,
because they are to be believed; and are ready to believe what is to be
believed because proposed, when the proposal is clear. But the Church visible
is contented with his exterior unity, which is not broken by private
suspension of assent, for this exterior unity is sufficiently conserved,
negatively, by a non opposition. Exterior unity is contradistinguished to
interior, he provides for exterior unity, then he provides for that which is
contradistinguished to faith. What then is become of the application of all his
discourse to faith in Councils?

But to let this pass. I see he does not like my Syllogism for him. I put his
matter in as good a form as it would bear in short and categorically: but he is
not pleased with it; and therefore without further answer to it, he says, he
will do it yet more clearly for himself in this manner: under pain of damnation
all are bound to agree in this, that every one interiourly gives an infallible
assent to all such points as are necessary to be believed for salvation: but
all can never be brought to agree in giving enteriourly this infallible assent
to all such points, without they submit their assent to some living Judge
endued with infallibility. Therefore all can never be brought to agree in that
in which they are bound to agree under pain of damnation, without they all
submit their interior assent to some living Judge endued with infallibility.

This is his Syllogism. And an answer is expected to it, although he would give
no answer to mine, which gave him a distinction able enough to save the text,
he seems to build upon, from his impropriation of it. Yet we will give answer
to his own form.

And as to his major, we grant it, that whatsoever is necessary to salvation is
so far necessary to be believed as it is injoined unto salvation. And that
proposition of his is clearer than his proof; for his reason does not infer it,
namely, because all are obliged to please God, and to have that faith without
which it is impossible to please God. Ebr.
For let the reason be put into form of an argument, and then let any one see
whether it will be cogent thus: all are obliged to please God and to have that
faith without which it is impossible to please God; therefore his major is
true, under pain of damnation all are bound to agree, etc. No, one and the
other are true, but one is not proved to be true by the other: that axiom in
the scope of it speaks of a faith as to that place only in this particular,
that there is a God. And therefore does not this text aptly prove a necessity
of interior assent to all points necessary to be believed for salvation. It
seems by the compendiousnesse of that text, that very few principles are
necessary to be believed unto salvation, because (according to my Adversary) we
may please God with the belief according to this text, which intends but that
one main Principle, that there is a God, and that he is a rewarder of them that
dilligently seek him. And so this will abate the plea of Mr. Cressy and of my
Adversary, who contend, that there is a great number of things which are
necessary to be believed under pain of damnation. And if he would extend that
text virtually to a necessity of particular persuasion, that whatsoever we do
is lawful (as if it should have the same sense with that of the Apostle,
whatsover is not of faith is sin) First, that is not the meaning of the text.
And then secondly, so it would exceed his purpose, which is for points of
faith: for so it would also have reference to things indifferent; unto which
the other text is properly applied.

Well, let us see his minor proved. He proves it thus, An infallible assent
cannot be built but upon submission to an infallible authority, and no other
infallible authority sufficient to breed this agreement in their interior
assent to all points necessary can be assigned but the authority of the Church.
Well, the major of this Syllogism we grant: but first, how proves he the minor?
(And yet we might also except against the form of it; for it should be thus for
the minor, but there is no infallible authority but the Church; and yet so the
form is not right neither; for the medium is not duly placed) But how proves he
the minor? For this is yet to us the question: out of question he may prove
what he will, if he can make the question proof. And therefore lest his minor
should appear to be grossly false, (for he by and by acknowledges the
Scriptures authority to be infallible) and lest that minor, as it should be
formed, should not fully infer the minor of his prosyllogism, he shuffles in in
the minor of his last, more than should be.

And let me now make use of his principles. Without faith it is impossible to
please God. In all definitions of the Church I cannot have faith. Therefore in
all definitions of the Church I cannot please God. The first proposition is
Scripture, and a principle which he also uses. My second proposition I prove
by his proof of his, thus. An infallible assent cannot be built but upon
submission to an infallible authority. The Church is not yet proved to have
infallible authority; therefore cannot we have infallible assent in the
definitions of the Church, and by consequent, not faith; for faith is in the
nature of it an infallible assent.

Then toward the confirmation of his last minor, he comes over with the
denial of this property to Scripture, The authority of Scripture, though
infallible, does not give us clear texts to ground our infallible assent upon
them in all points necessary to salvation, as I shall show in the next chap.
This is begging of the question in the second chap. not in the third, if it be
there proved, but here he affords me then that which is a positive minor to my
last Syllogism against him; and completely it is made by his own principles
now, infallible assent is not built but upon submission to an infallible
authority. The Authority of Scripture is infallible. Therefore, Both his own
propositions. Only the form of the discourse follows his.

But notwithstanding its infallible authority, he says, It does not give clear
texts to ground our infallible assent upon them in all points necessary to
salvation. So that now all the question seems to be reduced to the debate about
the clearness of the texts. He seems not to deny the texts in the subject, but
denies them in the adjunct of clearness. Ans. First, if there be texts for all
points necessary materially, then is that main opinion of the Papists about
traditions sunk: for since they are said to come in upon way of supply of what
is not set down at all in Scripture, and yet is necessary to be believed, then
if all be set down in Scripture, but some things not clearly, then have we no
need of any new matter of traditions, but only of traditive Interpretations,
which what they are, and where they are, who can tell? Secondly, if he
supposes more points necessary to salvation than indeed are necessary, (as
they are wont to do) then indeed the Scripture does not afford clear texts for
all things necessary in their opinion; yea, none at all for some of their
opinions: but as to those things which are really necessary, so we deny it. The
Scripture has sufficient clearness for all things necessary upon due account.
Thirdly, The Councils do give us no other sense of those texts which are not
clear in themselves, than they are capable of: do they? No, he will say; for
then they should not declare the sense of Scripture, but make it; which their
greatest Doctors, when they are in their sober minds, do deny, then are we
determined in the Controversies by those texts, and not by the authority of the
Councils. The Councils do but rub the glass that we may see more clearly the
sense, but it is the sense which decides the point. They do not make the way of
truth, but show it, and therefore the Church is not the High way, but the
Scripture. If they by their discussion and discourse add one degree of
claritude to those texts, must the causality formal of the assent be attributed
to their authority? They do but make clear the object; the assent of faith is
not to the degree of clearness, but to the object cleared. Fourthly, what if
some of the greatest Doctors do give all this power of explication of ambiguous
Scripture to the Pope, and he constitutes the sense imperially, not expounds it
rationally; and makes his authority antecedent to the sense, and not the sense
antecedent to their definition; but ipso facto this must be the meaning
thereof, because he says so? Is this a clearing of the Scripture? Fifthly, it
must be clear to me that the Councils have cleared the difficulty: otherwise I
should deny my assent to the text, because it is not clear in the construction,
and yet should give my assent to the Councils determination, and yet this not
clear to me neither. Now then, if they will have us judge of the definition of
the Council, that so we may determine our assent, (for we must by judgment
conclude the Council clearly to determine the sense in question, or else we
cannot give any due assent) why will they not allow us to judge also of the
sense of Scripture, that so rationally we may believe it? Sixthly, as the
clarity is wanting, (as I suppose he means) but to some texts, so also but to
some persons; and therefore is there not an absolute need to all of this
infallible Judge. Yea, how many took liberty to suspend their assents to the
determinations of the Council of Trent: and yet they would have a Council to be
binding to others? Seventhly, is the defect of the degree of claritude negative
or privative? not privative; for that will charge God. And so that of Nilus
will be true to be sure, he that accuses the Scripture accuses God: but if
negative, it is no other than God thought fit for his word. And do we think
that God would require, under pain of damnation, belief to his word, and yet
not give unto it competent clearness respectively to the points of faith
necessary to be believed? Eighthly, what then must we think, as toward their
salvation, of all those ancient Christians for some centuries, wherein they had
not a General Council? were they all lost? Or had they faith without a
General Council? If the former, how do they say the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against the Church? And why do they also not dis-acknowledge those
times of the Church to have been the purest? And were so many of them Martyrs
and yet lost? But if the latter, then also may we have faith without a General
Council sufficiently to salvation. Ninthly, the senses of Scripture as to
particular points were clear to the Fathers in the Council severally before
they gave their suffrages on either part; were they not? If not, how came they
to vote for that sense which was right? If so, then the product of the Councils
definition is not it which clears the sense of the Scripture to them, and
consequently not to us. Tenthly and lastly, if the Scripture does not give us
clear texts for all points necessary, and therefore we must stand to the
authority of the Church; then also the Church shall not be it upon which we
rely as a competent Judge; because the Church, even in a Council, does not
deliver the sense of Scripture so clearly as to end all controversies. And
this manifestly appears by perusal of the Trent History, wherein it frequently
occurs, that the Decrees and Canons were so framed as to give a liberty of
diverse senses for more satisfaction, and satisfaction to more.

And this last account in this last particular does make sufficient reply to
what he speaks in the ten next following lines; wherein he objects to me the
difference of those amongst us to proceed from our acknowledgement of Scripture
to be the trial of faith. Surely he did not the same day consider the
differences at home. It is not proper to object that which is common, we can
retort it mutatis mutandis, And we see with our eyes those who submit to the
authority of the Church as infallible, to disagree mainly in these very points,
which the Synod has spoken of: for one thinks in his Conscience the Church
is to be understood one way, another thinks in his Conscience it is to be
understood another way; and this other is licensed (interpretatively by the
Synod) to differ even from the greatest authority upon earth, as the other
thinks; because he thinks the Synod has defined for him. And then he may
easily have license to differ from another private man, and that other private
man has as good ground to differ from the other. So our Adversaries incussion
of our differences amongst us is patly repercussed upon them; and with more
weight and edge too; because secondly, we holding a difference of points by the
matter, are capable of more excuse for our disagreements in things not
fundamental; than they, who holding all equally upon the proposal of the
Church, must needs differ in that which is equally fundamental; because all
that is defined by the Church is equally so. Yea, also he that errs in one
point with the Papists, according to Mr. Knot's argument, has faith in none.
And one of them that differ about the sense of the Council must needs err,
though it is undetermined which. And therefore thirdly, would not my
Adversaries have been pleased with such an argument from me, The Pontificians
do disagree, therefore their opinion is the cause thereof, and if that should
be the cause, we should all disagree, and in all. Neither fourthly, do we
license any to differ, but they take their natural liberty to suspend assent
till they see the word of God, as well as upon good reasons you move men to
choose your Religion. And therefore, as to necessaries, Scripture is the
possible means of Union in the interior man, in which faith only does consist.

And this Union we are to consider in order to Salvation; not the exterior
union, which is not so necessary, though simply desirable. As far as truth will
go, it must go with it, but not further. And yet this is now and then mingled
in the discourse of my Adversary: and very politickly; because the Church has
more conjunction with an exterior union of peace, than an interior of faith.

What you add of God his sufficiently providing for his Church by Scripture
only is in this sense true, that in Scripture we read that we are to hear the
Church, etc.

Ans. Surely I do not owe, in ingenuity, any thanks to any Adversary of mine
for this, that they seem thus to please themselves in a study how to make our
opinion tolerable. If I do, I will soon be out of debt, as soon as I can say,
that their opinion, about the Church to be the High way to truth, is so far
true; because it was wont to send us to the Scripture for our rule of faith and
manners; as has been showed. Secondly, what Council ever determined the sense
of that precept, go tell the Church to be understood of a Council as to bind
absolutely to the belief of all that they propound? And if a Council had not
defined this the sense, then how shall we know it to be the sense, by my
Adversary; because he says, we must resolve our faith in the authority of a
Council? and if it has defined that the sense, how came they to have authority
to define this to be the sense of the place? If not clear to this purpose, how
came they to divine infallibly this sense? for the Scripture according to them
did not appear to have this sense without a Council; then, who gave authority
to the first Council to give this infallibly to be the sense? If clear, then
have we no such necessity of an infallible Judge for umpiring of litigant
senses, Thirdly, Tell it to the Church, ex vi authoritatis, as to teach: not ex
vi infallibilitatis, in teaching: in regard of authority as to persons: not
infallibility, as to truth. Representatively, in the office; not absolutely, in
the matter. We are to hear them as authorized to teach: but not simply to
believe them, as if they were assisted not to err. He that is appointed by
Christ, and does say that which is false, is not to be believed; because, if he
says that which is true, it is not to be accounted true, because he says so,
but he is to be accounted as to speak true, because it is so: yea, they may
know that that text was applied by Christ as to censure in points of trespass,
not to obedience in points of faith.

Not that Scripture alone by her self ends all our differences, etc.

Ans. Who ever said so? Who is his Adversary? It were easy to have the victory
without an Adversary, if possible. No; Nor the Church alone by her self. But we
say also, the Scripture does not formally end any, as they would have a living
Judge; and yet is not deficient in necessaries; for by proposing plainly what
is necessary, it concludes necessarily against the necessity of a living Judge
infallible. What is necessary more than to believe that which is necessary? And
therefore no need of traditions: and what more plain than that there is no need
of an infallible Judge, as to salvation; since what is necessary is plainly
delivered in Scripture? It is sufficient in the matter for necessaries: and it
is clear enough in the manner, as to points of faith understood signanter. And
would we be ruled by Scripture, there would be fewer Controversies in the
Church, and of the Church. And were not their Church a party for it self, it
would give all to Scripture. The interess of the Church has brought in
traditions, not for salvation, but for its authority. And the Scripture must
not clearly have delivered all points necessary, because then what reputation
would be given to the authority and magnificence of the Church?

But we are invited much to the third chap. and expectation is raised, wherein
he says, when I shall have fully set down the state of the question, you shall
find all that you add in this place presently answered.

Ans. This, he says, should be done before it be said. If he will prove, that
we must err in point of salvation without obedience to their judge. If he will
prove, that all error is damnative: and if he can prove, that their Church, or
the Church has not erred, yea, cannot err; then we will excuse him for
repetitions in the third chap. for he cannot come off handsomely with answering
in a third chap. what was said in a former, more fully, unless he says much
more to what is said, than what he has yet said. But we do not prejudice his
Judge.

CHAP. III Showing that since Scripture alone does sufficiently propose all
things necessary to salvation, there is no need of a living Judge infallible.
HEre he says at first, Number. 1.
You deliver your opinion in your answer to my third Number. p. 12. thus. And then
he tells me my opinion; of which he says, no proof was given by you until you
came to this present place. For proof he has had as much as could reasonably
be required, and more, I suppose, than he desired. But I was to follow him: and
therefore he was not to accuse me. And he might then have begun with the proof,
if he would have made short work.

He then prepares himself to reinforce the combat. And therefore he says, And
first, I will take leave to state this question a little more fully and
distinctly.

Ans. He uses his own right, if he will state the question more fully and
distinctly; and it is right to do so. All good discourse begins with a
definition: and all regular disputes with the state of the question. And it
will be a favor to me, if he does it well; for we shall have done the sooner.
And so he ends his first number.

Your assertion then is, Number. 2.
that all things necessary to salvation are plainly set down in Scripture.

Ans. Yes, this is my assertion. And I am not ashamed of it yet: for it is not
mine alone; but the Scriptur's; and St. Austin's, and others, as he has heard
before.

In this assertion there be two things which needful, and distinct
declaration; the first is to declare these words [necessary to salvation] the
second to declare those words [plainly set down.]

Ans. Content, let him be as good as his word, only let him take care he does
not, as some he knew, confound that which is to be distinguished, and
distinguish that which is to be confounded. So let him turn his answering to
what I said against his assertion into an opposition of mine.

And first, concerning those words necessary to salvation, they must of
necessity be understood so, that all things are plainly set down in Scripture,
which are necessary, first, to the universal Church, as it is a Community.
Secondly, all things necessary to all states and degrees that must needs be in
this Community. Thirdly, all things necessary to every person bound to be of
this Community.

Ans. This way he thought to destroy my assertion, as Mr. Cressy does, to
destroy the assertion of Mr. Chillingworth: but it will not do. For here is he
faulty, in confounding that which is to be distinguished. He should have
distinguished betwixt necessaries to salvation, and necessaries to the
universal Church, as it is a Community: though all that is necessary to
salvation is necessary to the Church taken confusely of the persons: yet
whatsoever is necessary to the universal Church as a Community, is not
necessary to salvation; for then before there was a competent aggregation in a
Community, there was no possibility of salvation. And that Community is to be
saved by the holding of things necessary, is it not? Yes, he would say, then
this Community does not come in to integrate things necessary to salvation: and
if not, then those things which are necessary to this Community, does not come
in neither. Then he should have done well, secondly, to have distinguished
betwixt a Church in its being, and in its well being. All things are not
necessary to the being of a Church, which are requisite to the been esse of it.
Now salvation may be had in a Church which has not its due well being. And
thirdly, he might have distinguished betwixt necessity absolute and necessity
of Convenience, with the Schoolmen. All things are not necessary in the first
kind, which are necessary in the latter. Now we are upon necessaries in the
first kind. And as to these, fewer things there are of this order. These things
are confounded for their advantage. But also he seems to distinguish what is to
be confounded; for he seems to make some things necessary for the universal
Church, as a Community. Whereas more is not necessary to the universal Church
upon the formality of a Community. This was touched before; but herein he does
distinguish where he should not distinguish.

And thus by distinguishing what is not to be distinguished, and by confounding
what is to be distinguished, he would confound me in the change of the state of
the question. But this vain and captious. For the state of the question
respects men in communi, not in a Community. Then secondly, suppose that the
Scripture had not given us general directions concerning the constitution of
the Church, and the Officers of it, and the power of those Officers, and
obedience to that power in things of free observation in themselves, yet our
assertion would be sound and good, that the Scripture does set down plainly all
things necessary to salvation. Some were saved before such a Community: some
may be saved who are wrongfully put out of such a Community; and some may be
saved after such a Community is obscured, and in the dark, as they confess
the Church shall be in the time of Antichrist. But then thirdly, the Scripture
has sufficiently provided, and as much as is necessary to be sure, how the
Church is to be provided in all times and places of lawful Pastors. And also
what power the Pastors should have in respect of one another, or in respect to
their particular flocks. And how those laws they make should bind without
appointing how many should be assembled to this effect. And also who should
call this Assembly, who preside in it, when there are Christian Magistrates; at
least negatively, not the Pope, (who has nothing to show for himself in
Scripture) nor the Ancient Church. And also when it is to be accounted lawful,
when unlawful. This is sufficiently determinable in Scripture by analogy to
the Jewish Kings, and to the Assembly spoken of in the fifteenth of the Acts.
As for the outward administration of these Assemblies will they say, it is de
jure Divino? And as for the question, whether the Precepts of this Assembly
oblige under pain of damnation, to the keeping of Feasts, or Fasts, or Eaves,
we say first, it does appear in Scripture, that obedience to lawful authority
is due indefinitely and in general; when there is no real exception against
the matter. And therefore by the Command of God are we bound in obedience to
them, injoyning nothing but that which is lawful. But though they do bind
under pain of damnation; yet is not this a point necessary to be known under
pain of damnation. The question with us is not whether they do thus bind, but
whether we cannot be saved without the knowledge whether they do thus bind. And
if we may be saved without this knowledge, then is it not necessary to
Salvation, that this should be determined. For though it be necessary for us to
know that all sin is damnative (and this is sufficiently laid down in
Scripture, as Romans 6. last:) yet is it not necessary under pain of damnation
that we should know every sin that is damnative; for then we should have no
pardon for secret sins by general Repentance; and then who could be saved? And
therefore though to every one that knows that this is a true proposition, that
Precepts of the Assembly do bind under pain of damnation, it is necessary to
exercise actual particular Repentance for those transgressions which he knows;
yet to him that knows not the truth of this proposition it is not. And this is
known to be a school question. And though they bind more than in case of
scandal and of contempt, yet must their obligation mediate be understood to be
qualified after the manner of the ceremonial law, not the moral; and
therefore in competition with morals their binding is relaxed. Again, if it
were necessary that those observations should be general, why did not the
first Councils establish them? Yea, it seems, it was not necessary that all
such observations should be universally practiced: For then how came the
Eastern and British Churches to differ from the Roman observation of Easter,
notwithstanding their pretenses of preeminence? Yea, one of the Ancients in
application to the observing of Easther, which for the time he thought was
free, gave this sentence, in Eusebius. (...); the difference of fast commends
the agreement of faith. And therefore my Adversary does, amongst his
Festivities he mentions, wisely conceal the mention of Easter, because he knew
the differences from the Roman Church in that particular.

And for the same form of public service, which ought to be imposed on all,
and when all are bound to be present at it; would any one say, that considers
what he says, that this is necessary to be, and to be known unto salvation? If
he means to be imposed upon all, in the Catholic Church, what Scripture, or
what Father, or what Council has he for it? Indeed Ignatius in one of his
Epistles, says, (...) but this was spoken as to a particular Church. And some
cannot come to Church; and may not they be saved? and some particular nations
must have some particular passages which are common to all the parts of that
nation and not to other nations. And do Canonical hours so bind, as, not to
be where they are, or not to assist always, upon moral necessity, excludes de
se from Heaven? When the time of Antichrist comes, according to them, surely
their Canonical hours will not be in season; and yet they will say, salvation
may be had in the Church. Whereas necessaries to salvation do not fall under a
necessity to be dispensed with. And therefore if such observances are excusable
by accidents, it is sure that they are not in our sense necessary. These are
only juris positivi, as they distinguished in the Trent Council: but to be
sure that which is necessary to salvation is juris Divini.

But what Sacraments are to be administered the Scripture tells us expressly.
For time, it is not necessary to have it determined, nor how often; but for the
essential form it is set down: the external manner is not simply necessary.
Here he confounds cunningly, and mixeth somewhat necessary with somewhat not
necessary. Neither does he distinguish betwixt necessity of precept and
necessity of mean, somewhat is necessary in the former way which is not
necessary in the latter. And this latter is it with which we have to debate
upon, in the right state of the question.

All these things, he says, are necessary to a Church as a Community. To follow
him again, we say, first, that we deny that all these things are absolutely
necessary to a Church as a community: for several Churches have differed from
one another in some of them; as in Fasts, and in the keeping of Easter, and in
forms of Prayer: for as for the Liturgies they talk of, they are filii populi.
Secondly, though necessary to a Church, yet not simply necessary to salvation.
Thirdly, some of them may be necessary to a Church visible, not necessary to
the Church as invisible: but he tampers about the change of the state of the
question, to make what is necessary to salvation to be necessary to a Church as
visible; and whatsoever is necessary to a Church as visible; to be necessary to
salvation; which cannot be true. For as for that, that there is no salvation to
be had out of the Church, (according to that of St. Cyprian, in his Tract. de
simplicitate Prelatorum, Habere non potest Deum Patrem qui Ecclesiam non habet
Matrem) yet this is to be understood of those that are desertors of the Church,
as is to be seen there by the comparation of antecedents and consequents and
the whole scope of the Tract. And therefore simply what is necessary to a
Church visible is not necessary to salvation; because, without contradiction to
the Father, it may be possible to have salvation without the Church. And
therefore may I conclude that my Adversary did not well comply with his promise
of stating this question a little more fully and distinctly.

And yet there is not one of all these things plainly set down in Scripture,
whence very many and very important differences be amongst Christians.

Ans. All he says is not true. For the Sacraments are plainly enough set down
in Scripture; for all that is therein essential and necessary. Then secondly,
the Argument is not concluding, these things are not plainly set down in
Scripture, therefore very many and very important differences amongst
Christians. For first the unplainesse of them in Scripture is no efficient
cause thereof; for they might in those things give every one their liberty in
their particular Churches; as St. Cyprian does plainly show us in his second B.
first Ep. where having spoken of some who did hold those things which they did
once take up, he speaks notwithstanding -- sed, salvo inter Collegas pacis et
Concordiae vinculo, quaedam propria quae apud se semel sunt usurpata, retinere;
quae in re nec nos cuiquam facimus, aut legem damus, cum habeat in Ecclesiae
administrationis voluntatis suae arbitrium liberum unusquisquae praepositus,
rationem actus sui Domino redituras. So he: Therefore may they not all practice
the same thing, and yet there be no moral difference: if negative differences,
not positive contentions: if some, yet not many: if many, yet not important, in
point of salvation, because each Bishop in his Church has free power to
establish what he thinks fit. And what General Council has bound the
universal Church in all these particularities? Yea, again, the unplainess of
these things in Scripture is not the causa sine quae non of these differences:
for there are differences with the Roman Church against others, even in some
things which are plainly set down in Scripture: as in point of justification,
against Images to be worshipped: against half Communion; and generally the
differences betwixt us. And indeed what is there so plain about which some have
not differed? And then again, how is this mended by a Council? Not by their
Council of Trent; because in their Decrees the sense is not plain. Therefore
let them find better provision than God has made directly in Scripture, before
they find fault with Gods direction as to those things which are important unto
salvation: for otherwise the term is (...), it is beside the state of the
question.

Nextly, he objects the differences amongst us about Bishops with such and such
a power and authority, and that without them you can have no true Priests or
Deacons, and without these no true Sacraments, things so necessary to the
salvation of all men.

Ans. This is a question belonging rather to the Church than to salvation: and
therefore we need not say any more to it. Yet secondly, the differences amongst
us are for the most part stirred upon the occasion of the Bishop of Rome: and
therefore the Pontificians have no cause to impute to us as a fault the
disagreement of Protestants in this point; because it arises in great part
from the domination of the Bishop of Rome. They thought by an (...), that they
could never sufficiently gainsay the Roman Bishop but by cashiering the whole
genus; and therefore to make all sure, they denied all Bishops; since the
Argument is good a negatione generis ad negationem speciei; if no Bishop, then
not universal. Indeed here they erred, if they thought that the position of
Bishops did infer the universal: for it does not follow a positione generis
ad positionem speciei determinatae: and therefore they might have Bishops, and
not him. Yea, the holding of Bishops by Divine right is as like a mean to
destroy the Pope's authority as any other. And to this purpose was it so holty
disputed in the Trent Council: and some lost their favor with the Pope for
being eager in the affirmative. And in the promotion of Cardinals at the end of
the Synod, the Pope professed he would pass by those who had stood for
Residence and Bishops to be jure Divino. For this institution of them by Divine
right made them not to depend upon the Pope, which would weaken his authority.

And therefore as to the Controversy about Bishops, whether we derive them and
their authority from Scripture, my Adversary might have done well to have said
nothing: since if it be necessary to be determined clearly, then the Trent
Council is to be blamed for not determining it. If it be not necessary, then
why does he put it in amongst necessary questions. To this therefore we say no
more than thus, Had there not been Bishops there would not have been a Pope;
(and therefore is this an argument that there were Bishops in the Ancient
Church, for how otherwise could there have been a Bishop universal) so also
had there not been a Pope, there would have been less contention about
Bishops: as appears by this, that if Petrus Balma, who was the last Bishop of
Geneva, would have turned Protestant, he might have continued Bishop.

As for no true Sacraments without Priests and Deacons, we say, if he takes
Priests in a proper sense, we deny that there is now any such to be; because
there is now no real external sacrifice. If he takes it in the Analogicall
sense, we have no reason to doubt of true Priests; being rightly ordained. And
for those who have not Bishops, some of them would have them, if it were in
their power; as Bogerman said, in the Council of Dort, when that Government was
commended to him, Domine nos non sumus adeo felices. And as for those who are
ordained without Bishops (were this our case) we may be as sure they are true
Ministers, as the Papists can assure themselves that they have true Priests; in
respect of the uncertainties they are under of the due intention of the Priest
in Baptism, and of the Bishop in Ordination.

As to Deacons; they might have been left out of the rank with Priests as to
true Sacraments, for it will not appear that Deacons are appointed jure Divino
to assist the Ministers in the Sacraments; and if so, yet not to be necessary
to true Sacraments, that they do assist, otherwise no true Sacraments. What
shall this also with the Romans go into the account of articles of faith? And
shall this be as necessary to be believed as that Jesus is the Christ?

Sacraments, things so necessary to the salvation of all men. This we have
spoken to before: and it comes in here under a simple diction, and not
positively (as it may be interpteted) affirmed; or if [so necessary] be to be
taken signanter, then is it more easily denied, as to all men. Our former
distinction is yet good, necessary by necessity of precept, not by necessity of
mean. Neither is the other Sacrament so necessary as that: and yet are they put
together upon equal necessity. The Sacraments bind us, not God, to work only
by them. And also are they administered as duly with us as elsewhere.

Then he brings in a Syllogism against us out of my own words, What is not
plainly delivered in Scripture is thereby signified not to be necessary: but it
is not plainly delivered in Scripture that the Church should be governed by
Bishops with such and such authority.

Thus he would bring in some of those who differ from them, and us in this
point, disputing against Bishops. But how would he conclude? Therefore not
necessary to salvation? unless he concludes thus, it does not contradict us in
our debate. And if he does conclude so, he concludes beside their intention:
for they would conclude no more than that they are not necessary to the
Government of the Church: because it is not held by others, that this
Government with such and such authority is simply necessary to salvation.

But to the assumption, we say, dato, that the Government of the Church by
Bishops with such and such power is not plainly set down in Scripture; yet let
them show as much out of Scripture with the practice of the Church for the
Bishop of Rome his being universal Bishop, as we can show out of Scripture for
Bishops with some authority superior to Presbyters; and I shall think better of
their cause. And therefore let them remember, Parvi sunt foris Arma nisi est
Consilium domi. Let them make sure at home before they combat us with our own
contentions. For secondly, as for such and such authority, if he takes it for
the Mathematical point and indivisible degree, which the Bishop must have, of
authority over the rest of the Clergy; who is there that so contends it, but
the Roman? Some superiority in the latitude may be able to conserve the form:
and this is more easily proveable out of Scripture with the practice of the
Church.

But thirdly, since he has brought the Antepiscoparians upon the stage to make
sport for them; what will the Pontificians say, if this argument be in earnest
brought against them, whatsoever is necessary is plainly set down in Scripture?
Government by Bishops with such and such authority is not plainly set down in
Scripture, therefore not necessary. The major proposition is yet true and good
against all his batteries. The minor is to have their advice, whether they will
affirm it or deny it; let them speak categorically: is it plainly set down or
not? If it be plainly set down, then this instance is against them, if it be
not plainly set down, then they have nothing plainly set down for the Bishop of
Rome upon the former rule: if there be no Bishop plainly set down, then not the
Bishop of Rome. This he gets by our contentions.

As for the form of ordaining Priests or Presbyters, it is sufficiently set
down, and we have it practiced with us without the Patin and the Chalice: and
that none but those who are Priests formally or eminently, as being more,
should bless the bread and consecrate the Sacrament; this is clearly enough
set down; and what kind of bread for the Sacrament, as much as is necessary, is
set down. The Pontifician has no reason, if he considers himself, to urge all
particularities about the Sacraments, since he accounts them so necessary:
would God pinch that which is necessary under so many contingences, which he
does not ordinarily provide against? Therefore either they are not necessary;
and then why are they insisted in? Or if necessary; yet not in all the several
circumstances: for then under how many accidentalities should salvation be
included?

He says then, he could add many more particulars to the former kind no less
necessary to be decided. If no more necessary, it is not like to trouble us. Or
if necessary, they should be decidable by plain Scripture. Yes, if necessary to
salvation. And then your Doctors could not jarr about them. This I deny, and he
had better have taken our grant, that those of this sort are not plainly set
down in Scripture, unless he had proved it more strongely than by our
differences. It is possible to differ in plain things: but we need not. (...),
St. Mark the 6. 53. And again this is retorted. Many things might be named
which were in the opinion of some Pontificians no less necessary to be
decided, than the point of original sin, the immaculate conception of the
Virgin, the point of Residence and of Bishops whether by Divine right; and yet
are they not determined in the Trent Council: no nor those neither positively.
But it may be they are not necessary: for if necessary they should be decidable
by plain Decree of Council: and then the Doctors could not jarr about them. But
to give a further check to this unreasonable exacting of such particularities
to be plainly decided by Scripture: let them consider generally how little was
affirmatively defined and clearly in the Council of Trent. Yea, for further
instance, are these severals which he has pointed at more necessary to be
decided than the point of Indulgences, which was the main point which
occasioned the divisions of the Council consequently? And yet was not this
sufficiently handled: yea, as the Author of the History says, the Protestants
complained that the Synod had passed it over without clearing any doubt or
deciding any Controversy. If they could not or would not, how shall we be
bound under pain of damnation to take our infallible and certain guidance from
them.

But ecce iterum Crispinus -- some of you will hove no words at all necessary
to the administration of Baptism, some will have such kinds of words, and
others, words very different from them in substance. He makes our differences
not only by occasion, but for ought I see by fiction also: for I know none
that would have no words, or different in substance, or if they would; let them
answer for themselves. The essential form of words as to Baptism is as plainly
set down as can be by words in Scripture, in the 28 of St. Mat. 19. Baptizing
them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. And if any
differ from this form then my Adversaries argument was naught, whereby he would
prove things not to be plainly set down; because there were differences about
them; for what can be more plainly set down than the form of Baptism? and yet
he talks of differences thereabout. In the third and fourth Paragr. he
prosecutes the same impertinencies to the question in hand. And until he
proves all the points he does instance in to be such as are necessary to
salvation in the same punctualities, I have nothing to do but to deny them to
be such as without which in formalitatibus, there is no salvation. Vbi eadem
ratio eadem lex. According to the proportion of their use is the proportion of
their appointment in Scripture.

As for such things as are of strict necessity to certain men of certain states
and degrees in the Church. It goes upon a false supposition, that what is of
strict necessity to certain men of certain states and degrees in the Church,
should be of strict necessity to salvation: nothing is of strict necessity to
salvation but that which is necessary to all unto salvation. Now it is not
necessary to all unto salvation, to know what is of strict necessity to some
certain men of certain states and degree. And secondly, little in reason can be
said to be of strict necessity to some certain men of certain degrees and
states in the Church; first, because many nations have diversified these
usages, and secondly, because no general Council have descended to the binding
of all absolutely thereunto, nay, indeed not to the proposing of them.

And as for the form of ordaining Bishops in words or actions, the way in our
Church is as full according to proportion in Scripture as any other, and our
Bishops have been also Canonically ordained by three Bishops, notwithstanding
the slanders against it: and let them prove, that what is in this case
appointed in Councils is more necessary than what is done in our consecration,
or else they do nothing.

They must also know whether they can lawfully permit women to baptize at all,
or baptize in necessity only, and not out of it.

Ans. First, it is plain in Scripture that no women did baptize. Secondly, that
baptizing and teaching are committed to the same persons, as before, St. Mat.
28.19, 20. Now women are forbidden to teach by St Paul, therefore may they not
baptize. Thirdly, how can man's authority allow that which God has restrained,
so as to make it necessary to salvation that this allowance should be made, and
also that all should know it? And fourthly, it is yet to be proved whether
there be such absolute necessity of baptism, as to dispense herein in case of
necessity, since St. Thomas was of opinion, as was urged in the Trent Council,
that before Christ, children were saved by the faith of the Parents, and
without the Sacrament; as it must be there meant, p. 239. of the History. I
know some speak favorably in this point, not allowing it should so be done, but
as not annulling it when done: but my Adversary should first have made the
Substratum sound and good, namely, the absolute necessity to salvation. For if
we should be ruled by St. Austin in this matter, then we should be ruled by him
in all points: which they themselves will not stand to; for they withstand him
in more particulars than we, as has been noted by Mr. Chillingworth. And
besides, his authority we might confront with Tertullian's.

And whether they may permit women or Laymen to bless the bread and
distribute the Sacrament, seeing that Christ said, do this all, not plainly
expressing how far these his words extended themselves. Surely my Adversary
intended me rather good measure, than good weight in such argumentations. St.
Paul does, one would think, determine this question, if any, in the first Ep.
to the Cor. 4.1. Where he says of Ministers in general, that they are the
Dispensers of the Mysteries of God. And then is this their blessing or
distributing, if it might be allowed, necessary to salvation? And for his
argument, it is improperly produced; for it is spoken to them not as Officers
of the Church in administering, but as members of the Church in receiving: and
this might he have taken notice of if he would have quoted the text entirely:
for it is said, Do this in remembrance of me, St. Luke. 22.19. This belongs to
every one in the act of participation. And then again, as he leaves out
fomething not for him, so he adds somewhat which should be for him, for he
reads it do this all, whereas all is not in the Evangelists; nor in the first
Ep. to the Cor. 11. Again, if it be uncertain whether our Savior meant this for
women and Laiques, do this all, then since by these words they would urge
Christ's institution of the Sacrifice, Laymen and women should have the highest,
or might have (if the Church pleased) the highest dignity in their account in
the Church; and that is conficere corpus Christi. And then the story of Pope
Joan should be accounted of by them as more tolerable. If she might do the
office of a Priest, she might also do the office of a Pope.

Whether lawful mission of Priests can be granted by Laymen or no. What? And
must all we upon necessity of salvation know infallibly this, whether this
Priest was sent by a Layman? though a Layman has not, nor can have, any
authority to send, and the Roman in this gives more liberty to Laymen than the
Scripture or our Churches, yet is it necessary for every one to salvation to
know whether such an one which does the offices of a Minister is legally sent
or not? Must every Layman examine his Commission? And our Saviors institution
herein is our rule, who gave power to others by that authority which he had
received from his Father, as St. Mat. 28.18. Authoritate mihi commissa, all
authority is given me in Heaven and on earth, go ye therefore. Now Laymen have
no authority, and therefore they cannot give any authority, according to the
rule also.

And what kind of ordination is necessary for their function, and what
commission is necessary for their lawful missions, and also what power to make
(that is to consecrate) and administer Sacraments; these are plainly enough set
down in Scripture, if the Roman Church had not disturbed the clear waters for
the chief Fisher; and if not, the Church by positive law cannot appoint that
which is absolutely necessary to salvation. All things that are of Divine right
are not simply necessary to salvation: to be sure then what is not of Divine
but positive right, as the Romans have also distinguished, is not simply
necessary.

And therefore whereas he says, there are endless Controversies about them, I am
of his opinion in my sense of the words; for they are to no end amongst those
who have a sober mind to be directed in them by Scripture; at least they are to
no end, as in order to our dispute; because they come not within compass of
absolute necessity to salvation. It may be necessary to know how these are to
be ordered, that they may be ordered rightly: but this is not absolutely
necessary to salvation: yea again, if these things were left to the Church, we
must take the order before the Councils: otherwise the Church before the time
of Councils had wanted that which was necessary: and therefore indeed are they
not necessary: or else God had been wanting to them in necessaries.

A third sort of things necessary not plainly set down, as he thinks, we have
in his fourth number. Number 4.
All being obliged to serve God in a true Church, etc. This is ambiguously
delivered: either as in sensu composito, being in a true Church they are
obliged to serve God in it; or are bound to find out the true Church, and then
to serve God in it. Now though both belong to our duty, yet both are not
equally necessary: because it is possible in that which is not a true Church
(if so many things be necessary to a true Church as they would have) salvation
may be had by simple ignorance and gerall repentance. And I hope some were
saved before a Church, with all the integrants of a true Church, was framed.
But in a true Church no man can be saved without serving of God. The Church of
the Donatists was not accounted, by St. Austin nor my Adversary, a true Church,
yet St. Austin did not deny but some might be saved in it. Now this is
understood by my Adversary in the latter way, namely that every one is bound to
find out the true Church and to serve God in it, for so it follows.

Having a lawful succession of true Pastors truly ordained themselves, and
truly ordaining the Priests, who must be known to administer true Sacraments
in their true matter and form, Preaching also the word of God by lawful
mission.

Ans. Now me thinks the Romans with their mountains should have relation to
Montanus who fansied that the Paraclet did by privilege come into him, to make
up what was wanting to salvation, by inspiration. For we must have infallible
notes of a Church, which the word of God in Scripture has not appointed to us.
And we must have things necessary to salvation, which the Scripture has not
made necessary: yet they must be necessary to salvation, for their use.
Certainly as he gives well the cognizance of a good man, so may we also make
use of it for a good Christian, (...), we ought not to judge honest men by
their performances but by their purpose: so we ought to esteem good Christians
not by their happiness to find, but by their purpose to find out the true
Church; which cannot reasonably be done by a lawful sucession. First, because
this is accidental, not as to salvation only, but as to a true Church: and
therefore can be no certain and universal rule: for how came the first Church,
which was original to the Descendants, to be a true Church? yea secondly, how
will the true Church be a true Church, according to their principles in the
time of Antichrist, when there is not like to be, according to their
profession, almost any face of a Church? How shall it then be discerned by a
lawful succession of Pastors. Thirdly, this cannot be characteristicall of the
Roman Church (which they would have to be the only true Church) because the
Greek Church may challenge this privilege also. Yea, fourthly, it is possible
that a false Church may so fairly plead a lawful succession (as the Church of
the Donatists who had also Bishops) as to those who should come a long while
after them, that it could not be easily discerned by common people: and
therefore this is not the way so plain and direct as that fools cannot err.
Yea, fifthly, we are not to discern true Doctrine by the persons, but the
persons by the Doctrine, according to Tertullian, as before: and therefore if
true Doctrine be not proved by succession (as it cannot be, because then it
should be measured by the person) we cannot conclude a true Church by the
succession; since all sober men will rather argue thus; that is a true Church
which professes true Doctrine, than that Church professes true Doctrine,
because it has a true succession of Pastors. Yea, sixthly, did my Adversary
mean what he said of a particular Church, or of the universal Church? Not of a
particular Church sure; for that cannot be the way and Judge of all Christians,
as he intended: But then of the universal Catholic Church. Well then, he must
mean that that is the true Catholic Church which has a lawful succession of
Pastors, namely, of Bishops of Rome, who is by them called signantly the Pastor
of the Church: This must be his meaning in reason, because the lawful
succession of Pastors in particular Churches is, by my Adversary, necessary for
themselves; but not for the Catholic Church, which can consist without those
parts which are not true (and therefore no parts.) And this is like to be his
meaning by his opinion. So then the Roman Church he would have here by the
premises to be the true Church, as being supposed to have a lawful succession
of Pastors, namely, Bishops of Rome. But how shall we give up our selves in
absolute obedience to the guidance of the Roman Church, if this were an
infallible and constitutive mark of the true Church, that it has a lawful
succession of Pastors? For no man can have so much as a moral certitude that
there has been in Rome from St. Peter an interrupted lawful succession of
Pastors, much less can he have a Divine persuasion thereof. For first, it can
never be proved by Scripture that St. Peter was at Rome. I do not deny it that
he was ever there; but it is no object of faith. And the Romanists are shrewdly
put to it for a proof, when, to prove it, they would interpret Babylon, from
which St. Peter writes, to be Rome. But then Secondly, St. Peter should rather
have derived the Privilege of universal jurisdiction and infallible direction
to Antioch, as is abserved, where he sat first seven years, as Caranza sets it
down, and where Christians had their name. Thirdly, it is a great question upon
the supposition, who succeeded St. Peter in the sea of Rome, and Carranza
cannot determine it. Fourthly, St. Peter was appointed rather for the Jews than
for the Gentiles: and therefore the Trent Council in their comminations do very
well to put St. Paul with St. Peter; for indeed St Paul was the Doctor of the
Gentiles. Yea, fifthly, for six hundred years together there was no Pastors at
Rome in their sense, not Pastor of the universal Church, as appears by
Gregory's protestation against John of Constantinople, who would arrogate and
usurp universal jurisdiction.

And therefore there was not alwyes in the Church, in my Adversaries sense, a
lawful succession of Pastors; because there was not Pastors in his sense: and
so by his argument, there should not have been a Catholic Church for that
time. Yea, Sixthly and lastly, how can we be ascertained, by certitude of
faith, that there was ever a lawful succession of Bishops in Rome; because we
are not certain, in that kind of certainty to be sure, nor indeed in any other,
that the Popes were true Bishops or true Priests, or true Christians, because
their principles bring it into question by the uncertainty of the
qualifications of those who were to make them Christians by Baptism, or Priests
by orders, or Bishops by consecration? And also secondly, because some, as it
is known by History, have got into the sea by Simonie; which makes it
disputable even amongst themselves whether it did not ex vi Criminis make them
no Bishops. And the thirtieth Canon of the Apostles (which they acknowledge as
binding too) injoins, that such as get their dignity by money should be put
out. Yea, thirdly, when there were Antipapes how could the Common people by
assurance of faith know which was the right? For though they say, that he is to
be accounted the right whom the Council does accept; yet is it a question
whether they can infallibly judge in the case; otherwise no certainty of faith.
And then there is not always a Council; and how can the Council be called
without a true Pope? If they may, then is not the Pope essential to the
infallibility of the Church.

This is answer enough to what he says about his lawful succession of true
Pastors; that which appends hereunto is collaterally answered here; more
particularly before.

He goes on, It is necessary to the salvation of every man to believe and do
some things, and not to do some other things not plainly set down in Scripture.

Ans. Not so necessary as it is not to beg the question so often. This
proposition does indeed plainly contradict our proposition, but does not prove
it to be false, unless it by it self did evidently appear to be true.
Therefore it is enough for me to deny it, being the Respondent. But we see by
the way, that those who make the Church its infallibility their first
principle, are apt to make all it says to be as clear as the first principles
of Sciences. He that believes, and does according to Scripture, is surer of
salvation than all the Church can make him. (...), as Ignatius's phrase is, He
that goes by the rule is safe; he that goes by Scripture in faith and obedience
goes by the rule. Therefore, Now God has proposed the Scripture as our rule,
by Bellarmin's confession in the beginning of his Controversies, as before. And
if it be not a complete rule, then indeed is it not a rule; for it comes short
of a rule; and this will not serve Bellarmin's use; because then they whom he
disputes against might have urged their revelations beside the rule, though not
against it, as the Pontificians are pleased to distinguish. And as for point of
faith, we have (besides what testimonies out of the Fathers for this I have
given before) the plain authority of St. Cyrill of Jerusalem in his 4 Cat. p.
85. Edit. Gr. Lat. (...). Concerning things Divine and the holy Mysteries of
faith, there ought not to be delivered any thing without the Divine Scriptures.
And therefore in another place he understands by traditions the sum of those
things that were taken out of Scripture, as in the 5. Cat. p. 117. And so
Tertullian in his Praes. cap. 13. His Regula fidei, is a sum of main points of
Doctrine taken out of Scripture. And concerning this rule he says, Adversus
Regulam nihil scire, omnia scire est. And so Irenaeus also means tradition
(...), in several places.

Indeed Tertullian, and Irenaeus, and Cyprian, and Basil, and Austin, are
quoted by the Pontificians in the Trent Council, for holding that the Christian
faith is contained partly in the Scriptures and partly in traditions. But for
these Fathers (if their consent did ground infallible assent) are either
mis-understood or else are contradictory to themselves? and therefore we cannot
rely upon them; because one part of the contradiction must be false. As for St.
Austin, I have formerly quoted him for holding, that all things necessary to
faith and manners are amongst those things which are plainly contained in
Scripture. And St. Basil I have produced too. And as for Cyprian, we will
quote him for the other part, namely, of action (though we might also name him
for Scripture to be the rule in things of faith; for he makes his proofs from
Scripture.) In his second B. of Epistles, third Epistle, he has these words,
Quare si solus Christus audiendus est, non debemus attendere quid aliquis ante
nos faciendum putaverit, sed quid qui ante omnes est Christus prior fecerit.
Neque enim hominis Consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed Dei veritatem. Wherein he
opposes the truth of God to whatsoever custom. And the truth of God he
understands to be of the word written; for there he proves all about the Cup in
the Sacrament to be mingled with Wine and Water, out of Scripture, which proves
however he took Scripture to be our rule in Agents.

Yea, also this point was agitated by Marinarus in the Trent Council: where he
delivered his opinion, P. 151. z.
that the Fathers did not make Tradition to be equal to Scripture; and
therefore was he reprehended in the Council by Cardinal Poole for not
allowing, that Articles of faith are divided into two kinds: some published by
writing: others commanded to be communicated by voice. And can any sober man
imagine that God should by his spirit give order for the writing of the Mystery
of the Gospel, and yet should also give order by his Spirit that somewhat
should not be written, but kept in Mystery for orall tradition, and yet should
be as much necessary as that which is written? -- credat Judaeus.

Every one is to believe some things distinctly. Now which these things be, or
how many, Scriptures express not.

Ans. Let this be taken for an antecedent: will it be concluced from hence,
that therefore all things necessary are not plainly set down in Scripture? For
though we have not the formal and material number of things distinctly to be
believed: yet all that is distinctly to be believed may be plainly set down
there. And therefore if we believe them, we believe sufficiently. Therefore if
he takes the term, [distinctly] in this sense, that we must necessarily know,
that this is one of the points necessary to be believed, we deny it, of every
point that is necessary: although we may say so of some, as that Jesus is the
Christ; because in Scripture salvation is denied any other way, as, Acts. 4.12.
If he takes the term as signifying that some things are actually and explicitly
to be believed, we grant it; but the consequence so is not valid. Secondly,
this returns upon them, and therefore should they not have moved this stone.
For where have they set down a list of all those things which by every of them
are necessary to be believed distinctly in contradistinction to their implicit
faith? And if they say, that they are ready distinctly to believe whatsoever is
proposed by the Church: so we say, that we are also ready to believe whatsoever
shall be sufficiently proposed out of Scripture. And sure we have as good cause
for an implicit faith as to Scripture; as they have as to the Church. And if
Mr. Knot's judgment be the sense of the Roman Church, there is but one
fundamental point, of them actually and distinctly to be believed, in which
are comprised all points by us taught to be necessary to salvation, in these
words, we are obliged under pain of damnation to believe whatsoever the
Catholic visible Church of Christ proposes as revealed by Almighty God. If
any be of another mind, all Catholics denounce him to be no Catholic. So he.
And therefore why do they urge a particular and Inventory of all points
distinctly to be believed, when they content themselves with one General? If
the Church must be proved by Scripture, as formerly we have showed, and
according to St. Austin, then one general comprehensive point might more
reasonably be sufficient for us, and that is this, we are obliged under pain of
damnation to believe whatsoever plainly appears to be revealed by Almighty God
in Scripture. But yet we do not content our selves thus; for we say all points
necessary are distinctly to be believed; and they may distinctly be believed,
because they are plainly delivered; more plainly than the Decrees of Councils,
at least the Trent Council. And he that says he is bound to believe all that is
contained in Scripture, when clearly proposed to him as such, by consequent is
ready to embrace all points necessary, because they are plainly delivered.
Therefore indeed is our opinion more agreeable to a distinct account of what is
to be expressly believed than theirs, because we make a distinction in point
of credibility by the matter; saying, that some things are plainly proposed,
because necessary to be believed, though all things are necessary to be
believed when plainly proposed. The former sort whereof requires absolute
belief; the latter conditionate to the competent appearance of them to be such
as God has showed to come from him by revelation.

He proceeds. Every one is bound not to work upon the Sunday. Every one is
bound not to have two Wives at one time. Not also to marry within such or such
a degree of Consanguinitie. Where are all these things plainly set down in
Scripture?

Ans. Some things are neither de fide, nor de verbo fidei; as that the Bishop
of Rome is the universal Bishop of the Church. Some things are de verbo fidei,
yet not de fide, in propriety of phrase, as necessary in the matter; as namely
historical truths, as that Jesus rode to Jerusalem. Some things are de verbo
fidei and de fide also, as that Jesus is the Christ, that whosoever believes
shall be saved. The question now betwixt us is of the last kind, whether
Scripture with sufficient clearness sets down all those things which are de
fide in this sense. So that my Adversary was to prove that these particulars
are so necessary to be believed, that no man who does not believe them
distinctly can be saved. And while he says so, that they are such, and does
not prove them, we need say no more than that he does not prove them.
Asserentis est probare. And I am not to answer unto words but Arguments. Yet
secondly, these are sufficiently knowable by Scripture, the first by the equity
of the fourth Commandment, and the intimations thereof in the new Testament.
The second by God's own institution in state of innocence, and by the first Ep.
to the Cor. 7.2. But for fornication, let every man have his own wife, (...).
And yet if they will hold that this is one of the practick credibles in the
foresaid necessity, they do endanger the condition of those Jews who had more
wives. And also they will incur the danger of being engaged to answer for
that Pope, who as before, gave liberty to take another wife. And for the third
it is sufficiently declared, as to the necessity of knowledge and practice in
Levit. 18. And if to the knowledge what is to be done in these we are so
strictly obliged by the law of God, as that if we miss a degree we are damned,
it must also be made as clear as whatsoever is necessary, that the law of God
has given unto the Pope a faculty and power of dispensing as to Marriages,
within those degrees. If the law of God has not made these cases of Marriage as
plain as is necessary for those who are not so studious to know the utmost of
their liberty, as to resolve a negative of practice upon any appearance to the
contrary, then the law of God must as clearly, as to exclude doubt, show unto
us that infallible directory, whereby we may come exactly to the knowledge of
what is to be done herein. And if this can be made to appear, why is it not?

Number. 5.
Other endless difficulties be superadded by those other words [plainly set
down.] and first to prove a point plainly set down in Scripture, so that I
infallibly know the undoubted true sense of it, I must first know such a book
to be the true and undoubted word of God, which as I shall show number. 20. cannot
be known by Scripture. This we have taken away before so far as it concerns the
present dispute: and we are like to meet with it again, it seems; and no sober
Christian before he had proved an infallible Propounder of every truth to be
believed, would have raised this scruple. But intellectus currit cum praxi, as
the Romanist said, religion must be accommodated for their use. To this more
upon the place.

It cannot be known, at least by those who can truly swear that they are no
more able by the reading of the book of Numbers, for example, to discover in it
any Divine light showing it to be true Scripture, more than they discover in
the books of Judith and Tobit, showing them to be true Scripture.

Ans. My Adversary here was very bold, to bring into equal compare the books
of Judith and Tobit with the book of Numbers, one book of the Pentateuch, as to
the Autopisty thereof. But the Jews who say that every letter of Scripture
makes a mountain of sense, could see more in the book of Numbers than in those
Apocryphal books. Therefore if we would resolve the acceptance of one and the
refusal of the other into a reason of both, and ask why the Jew acknowledged
the book of Numbers, not the other, we must find that the acceptance of the one
and the disacceptance of the other cannot fall into the account of the Jewish
Church its authority; because the question will rebound why the Jewish Church
did authorize one and not the other. And therefore my Adversary gets nothing by
this objection: for the Church cannot be the reason of the approbation of the
one and the preterition of the other; because this difference made by the
Church must be determined by a judicious act upon good cause. For do they dream
that the Church has an arbitrary power to receive one book, and to expunge
another out of the Canon? Did they not exercise in it a judgment of
discretion? Now he that discernes sees betwixt two, and sees cause why one
should be taken the other left. Every elective act casts the balance upon more
weight. And therefore must we not take the recension of books canonical from
the power of the Church. And then again secondly, this availes not the Roman
Church; because, if the discerning of books canonical did autocratorically
depend upon the Church its declaration, yet as it is noted, not upon a
particular Church, (...) the universal Church for time and place. (...) the
books of Tobit and Judith are (...) numbered as Canonical amongst the rest by
the Canon of the Apostles, as Caranza sets them out. And therefore, they saw
nothing in them for their reception, and yet did in others. And if it belongs
to the Church authoritatively to declare what books are Canonical; yet cannot
the Church have authority to declare more than the Apostles constituted; if
they take those Canons to be Canons of the Apostles: for otherwise they must
challenge a power to the Church not only of declaring what is Canonical, but
also of making it such; which is more than their great Doctors dare affirm. And
if they will still plead those books Canonical, let them answer it to St.
Jerome, and St. Cyrill of Jerusalem, and to the rest, whom they think not to
have differed from the Church, and yet have differed from them in this. But
those who will swear no difference, we may say, are not willing to see it.

Secondly, they must infallibly show that this very verse in which I find this
point is not thrust in amongst other true parts of Scripture, or some word
changing the sense either thrust in or left out in this verse, and this they
must know infallibly.

Ans. Again I must say, that we are upon the supposall of Scripture; and
therefore this should not be called into question, which is the subject, but
this for more tediousness must be brought in upon all occasions, or none. But
for the uncorruptednes of the text, if they will not believe me, let them
believe Bellarmin, as before, who denies any substantial corruption: but then
again, we are as sure as they, for we have for it, all the authority the Church
has, if it be infallible, we have it. Again, the Scripture is corrupted, or
not? If so, then by the Roman Church or by some other. Not by the Roman Church,
they will say: then by some other is it corrupted? If by any other, then first,
how well have they been keepers of Canonical truth? and how then shall we
trust them? Secondly, if corrupted, then how do they know that those texts
which are produced for them are not corrupted? If by the Church they know them
not to be corrupted, this is the question, which is to be proved, and therefore
cannot yet prove it. For as they say we cannot know the Scripture to be
infallible by the Scripture: so neither can we know infallibly the Church to be
infallible by the Church. Though it were infallible, yet this must be also
known infallibly, according to my Adversaries argument. Indeed; if the word of
God did leave witness to its infallibility, then we are satisfied: but, if the
texts of Scripture be corrupted, how shall I be sure whether those they make
use of be not corrupted? Therefore had they best for ever close their mouths
against any corruption of Scripture; until they can sufficiently prove that
the authority of the Church is principium primo primum in Divinity. For the
testimony of the Church cannot exceed, of it self, its genus. It can make no
more than an high opinion; which comes short of, and is too low for infallible
assurance. But then moreover, this objection is retorted upon them. How can we
be infallibly assured, that in the Decrees and Canons of Council there should
be no corruption, that one thing is not thrust in, or somewhat left out; since
we know that there was a falsification of the Nicene Council, as before? Since
they have corrupted passages of the Fathers, as before? Since some words of the
Decrees of the Council of Trent were changed after the vote, as appear in the
History? So then in this respect, as in others, we may conclude, they have no
reason to accuse our way of uncertaintie: for we may be sure of this, that no
way is so full of uncertainties as theirs. If the Scripture be true, they may
be a Church; if false, they may be Heathens. What he says. Thirdly, after all
this, etc. has in it no such difficulty, as they imagine; for the words
themselves (incorrupted) do show their own sense, as being for the things
necessary, spoken in a plain and common acception. And also their Decrees and
Canons, as before, are to be sure, more obnoxious to diversity of sense,
because they were framed, at least some of them, for such a capacity. Neither;
if some things be expressed figuratively, does any such perplexity arise;
because the figurative expression does not oppose the literal sense so much as
it does sometimes illustrate it. And this kind of speech as to Sacraments, in
regard of the relation betwixt the sign and the thing signified, is indeed
natural and proper. Though the manner of speech be not proper simply; yet
quoad hoc, as to Sacraments, it is proper. And my Adversary might have taken
notice that St. Austin has noted, as before, that things darkly set down in
one place, are to be compared with other places where they are delivered more
clearly.

And therefore that which follows about the ambiguity in what sense we must
take the words, if we go by Scripture only, might very well have been spared.
For, as we do not argue in Divinity from texts mystically delivered, unless
the mysticalnesse be rendered in Scripture: so we do not account those texts,
which are ambiguous, to be such as to contain points necessary to salvation.
Therefore is my Adversary very wide in this discourse, because it goes upon a
supposition, that every text is necessarily to be understood and infallibly in
the sense thereof. This can be denied freely without any detrement to our cause.

Might we not therefore smile at that which follows, as if we were bound
infallibly to know the secret free will of God, for which we must have a
revelation, or else our cause should be lost? What is this to the contradiction
of us, unless we were either obliged to know infallibly all senses of all
texts, or unless those texts, which contain points necessary were so doubtful
in the sense thereof. We deny both. The Scripture is in the sense. And as to
points necessary, the revelation is in the words? no need of a revelation of
the sense after the revelation of the words, because the sense is revealed in
the words. As if when our Savior says, This is eternal life to know thee the
only true God, and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, we must yet have an
eternal labor to find out distinctly in what sense we must take plain
necessary truths. As if when our Savior commands us to repent and believe, we
had need of another revelation or an infallible Judge to tell us in what sense
we must take the words. As if when our Savior says, that he has revealed
these things to babes, we must go to the Holy Father of Rome, and the Fathers
of a Council for an uncontrolable exposition of these things. If then by the
secret free will of God, Gods purposes of binding us in our obedience; that, as
to things necessary, is revealed in the terms. His voluntas signi, as they
speak, as to these things necessary, is plainly delivered; and otherwise the
expression were not good, if we needed another revelation of the sense. Indeed
the voluntas been placiti, as to his actions, that needs a revelation; but what
is this to our purpose? The former will, how he would express himself, was
free to him before he did reveal himself in such writings: but afterward it
was determined by the plain signification of the words, as to those matters of
faith. And where do they find this revelation in Scripture, that we must go to
the Church for a revelation of the sense of difficult texts? Yea, of those
texts which concern the Church? How shall we know whether those texts be
rightly interpreted, and know it infallibly? Not by the Church: For the
question is of the Church. Not by a revelation made to particular persons: for
then we might have a revelation of other texts in the sense of them. Therefore
must they say they are plain. And if so, then so may other texts be, especially
such as respect necessity to salvation.

Therefore when we have tried all ways, as to faith we must center in
Scripture. And let them think upon that of Christ to St. Paul, (...).

What he says Fourthly, I have little to say to. The authorites of Sanctius and
Sharpius, which he produces, are more for my advantage than his. For my
Adversary confesses, that learned Sanctius confesses, that holy Scripture in
those things which are necessary, is clear. Secondly, as for the nineteen rules
which he gives, as necessary to the knowledge thereof; this may respect other
texts of Scripture which do not contemn necessary points. Thirdly, if those
rules be intended as to the knowledge of what is necessary to salvation, (and
not to the knowledge of Scripture in general) yet the difficulty must not be
great even by those rules: for how then can Scripture be clear, as to things
necessary? Yea, also St. Austin gives rules for the understanding of Scripture,
and yet holds, that Scripture, as to faith and manners, plainly delivers things
necessary, as before. Neither is it necessary for our cause to exclude the use
of means for the understanding of Scripture even in things necessary. It is
sufficient to us, that by the use of means, those texts are so plain as that we
have no need of an external infallible Judge. But we can admit with Sharpius
the means he names, to know original Languages, to discuss the words, Phrases
and Ebraisms, to confer the places which are like and unlike to one another; as
to the understanding of Scripture, de communi; and they are necessary: but he
cannot mean these rules to be necessary for the understanding of every truth in
Scripture. And therefore, if his authority were sufficient, yet cannot this he
says be effectual to prove a necessity of all these means, as to the finding
out of the sense of those texts wherein necessary truths are laid down. That
Jesus is the Christ; that whosoever believes shall be saved; that there is a
necessity of good works, are truths so plain, as he that cannot use those
means, may plainly discern: and therefore need we not the help of those rules,
as to produce infallibility. To be even then with my Adversary for these
authorities we may also urge as the Arch Bishop of Collen, who as before
reformed his Church by the rule of Scripture, so also the Cardinal of
Rochester, who in the Trent Council said, It was better to take for our ground
the Scripture, whence true Theology is taken; than the subtilties of Philosophy
which the Schools have used. Hist. Trent Counc. Page 197. 8. And add hereunto
the uncertainties of the sense of a Council, as appears by contest of Soto and
Viga, Hist. Tr. Counc. 216.

As for the saying of that so much esteemed Chillingworth, which he adds,
fifthly, namely, no more certain sign that a point is not evident, than when
honest and understanding and indifferent men, and such as give themselves
liberty of judgment after mature consideration of the matter, do differ about.
Unto which he subsumes, About how many points do you and your Brethren differ,
which I have in this chap. showed to be points mainly necessary to salvation,
which according to this rule of knowing what is evident, what not, are
evidently not set down plainly in Scripture? What comes this to, but a
confusion? For Mr. Chillingworth gives us the Maxim, and my Adversary makes the
assumption upon presumption, that he has proved many things to be differed
about which he says he has showed to be necessary to salvation. By Mr.
Chillingworth's rule those points should not be necessary, because we differ
about them. But my Adversary would fain prove, it may be, that Mr.
Chillingworth's rule is false. If it be false, how can he use it against me? If
it be not false, then it concludes more against him, however, till he proves
our differences to be about necessaries, his discourse has neither form; nor
truth, upon his part.

Some twelve lines of this number he imploys in repetitions, and references to
the fourth chap. His repetitions have been answered in the matter, his
References are referred to their place.

Number. 6.
That which follows concerning texts which he thinks are for him, that the very
reading of them shows them to be no less plain and clear to this purpose
than those places which you cry out to be evident for the proof of every point
which is necessary to salvation, me thinks does somewhat enterfair upon what he
had said before, that we could not understand God's free will how to mean his
own words without a revelation. For now those texts, which they fancy for
them, by the very reading of them, show themselves to be as clear as those
which we cry out to be so evident; we say so plain. So then some degree of
clearness there may be in words without a revelation of the sense; since God
has no mental reservation. And if they grant some clearness, as it is
necessary they must for those texts which concern the Church, then surely there
may be more than they grant. Secondly, will they say, that those texts, they
urge for the Church, are as clear for the Roman Church in point of
infallibility, as this proposition is, whosoever believes shall be saved? Dare
they say it (...)? We can prove the contrary by their own argument; that about
which there is more difference is not so clear: there is more difference about
the texts for the Church; therefore those not so clear. Therefore also let them
no more object our differences: for our differences from them prove well that
their way is not plain, and their differences amongst themselves prove better
that their way is not plain. And our differences amongst our selves do prove
only that those points wherein we differ are not plain; but do not prove that
those points that are necessary are not plain; because in them we do not or
need not to differ. Thirdly, are those texts for them no more plain than our
texts for things necessary to salvation? If not, then where is the ground of
their infallibility. For the texts are not clear for it: are they? If they be,
then our texts for necessaries to salvation are, I hope, as clear, then what
need of a Judge infallible? And why then do they not as well believe the points
necessary to salvation upon account of Scripture as they do the point of
infallibility? Well, but our texts being not clear sufficiently of themselves,
the authority of the Church adds clearness: does it? Yea, but this is more
improperly affirmed, if they do say so, than they think of: for the judgment
of the Church is more influxive into the clearness of it as to us, than their
authority. They first see the sense of the texts, before they do declare it by
their authority. For if this be the sense because they declare it so, and they
do not declare it to be the sense, because they see it discussively to be the
sense; then God, inspiring the Penmen of Scripture intended but the words of
Scripture, and that the Church should give us the soul, the sense, the Kernel
of Scripture. And why then did the Trent Council make Scriptures the chief
rule, as they say, of their proceedings, if they did not determine of points
and actions by their discerning the mind of God in the Scripture, as to those
particulars? So then also, if their discerning of the sense of Scripture was
substrated to their definitions, then the Scripture is discernible in the sense
to us also. Fourthly, if those texts, he names, be no clearer than those we say
which are necessary to salvation; then let them never endeavor by Scripture to
persuade any to their Religion. For if the texts be no clearer for the Church,
than points in Scripture are, as to necessity of salvation, then surely the
Argument is equal on both sides; and then there is by Scripture no necessity
clear of an infallible Judge.

But he prefers his texts in clearness to ours in the following words. And I
am sure you can bring no such evident texts for all, yea, or for any of these
points which I have already said in this chapter not to be evidently set down in
Scripture though they be of prime necessity, as others also which I will by and
by add. The use of this to me is this, to say that the same was said before,
yet also we can note that he should have preferred the clearness of those
texts for the Church before the clearness of those points which we confess to
be necessary to salvation; but he prefers it before those which we either deny
or question to be necessary. If any one should say this were a Sophisters
trick, I could not tell how to deny it. And yet also further we say, if those
texts which are for the Church are so plain, then a fortiori, those texts which
are for points necessary must be more plain; and my reason is this, because
these are necessary for the being of a Member of the Church invisible, those
for the Church, only necessary for the being of a Member of the Church
visible. Now there is a greater necessity of the former than there is of the
latter: for as before, it is possible to be saved without the finding of a
regular visible Church; but it is not possible for any to be saved who is not a
Member of the invisible. Yea, again he does not speak according to the mind of
Mr. Knot, in saying texts for the Church are so evident, for one of the
qualities of the object of faith, should be, Chapter 6. against Dr. Pots.
according to him, that it is obscure; that so it may be capable of the
obedience of faith. But to end this, we only note more the slavery of the
Romanist; in that he is bound to be so dis-ingenuous as to hold the texts of
Scripture to be so clear only for the Church, which they interpret the Roman.
But also herein they do not differ from all other sects, which they so much
upbraid, that texts for them are clear, if any other. And we have the benefit
of it (whom he takes to be a Sect) till he shows the Contrary. But the
Scripture does far more clearly set down a Command to go to the Church for our
full instruction. So St. Paul was taught all things necessary for his knowledge
by those few words. (Acts the 9.6.) Go into the City, and it shall be told
thee what thou must do.

Ans. And have they no better Arguments, St. Paul was commanded to go into the
City, and there it should be told him what he must do; therefore we must go to
the City of Rome and there we shall know all things necessary to salvation. So
then. As the Cardinal Richlieu was flattered by a great servant of his, that
God needed not to have extended his Providence to the lower world; but he might
have left that to the Governance of the Cardinal: so God needed not to have
indicted by his Spirit any more of Scripture than only to lead us infallibly to
the Church. Go to the City of Rome, and there it will be told us what must be
done, in order to life everlasting. Christ might have laid aside the care of
his Church; and might have devolved that to his Vicar. If we would say any
thing to such a reasoning, we might say, first, he should have showed us as
fair a warrant for going to the City of Rome, as St. Paul had to go to the
City. Secondly, he was sent into the City to know what was to be done; not
known: for St. Paul denies to have had his Doctrine from man. Gal. 1.11, 12.
Thirdly, this direction he was to have from Ananias, was rather in order to his
Function than to his salvation. Fourthly, Ananias was extroardinarily inspired
and endued with a power of Miracles for the restitution of his sight. But is
the Pope thus? Can he give the Holy Ghost, as Ananias did; Indeed he may
ordain; but can he give the Holy Ghost as Ananias did? At least, can he give
sight? he can sooner take it away. If we being blind should take the guidance
of such a Prophet, he would lead us into Samaria, and not set bread before us.

Indeed Pope Anacletus (according to Carranza) tells us in the end of his first
Epistle, that the Apostles did establish this by the Command of our Lord and
Savior, that greater and more difficult questions should be referred to the
Apostolic sea, upon which Christ did build his universal Church (universam
Ecclesiam) when he said tu es Petrus, etc. But when these Epistles are proved
genuine; and then binding in his own cause, and when the Pope (who has the
same power) shall have determined the difficult question (which Carranza puts
off) betwixt St. Jerome and others, whether Anacletus was predecessor to
Clement; and when it shall be made good that Christ gave to St. Peter
universal power over the universal Church, and not only power over every
Church, as to the rest of the Apostles (as it was distinguished in the Trent
Council) and when they shall have answered St. Cyprian, who says the Church was
founded, not super Petrum, but super Petram, voce Domini; in the 8. Ep. of the
1. b. then we may be in greater necessity to say more to this instance

That all might see this City of the Church, he placed it on a mountain, whence
all necessary points are delivered from a living Oracle speaking so distinctly,
that no doubt can remain of the true sense; or, if there be made any doubt of
any thing of importance, this doubt will presently be cleared by some new
declaration authentically notified unto us by our Pastors and Doctors, which
God gave us (as the Scripture says) that we should not be children wawavering
and carried about with the wind of false Doctrine with circumvention of error,
We have put all in for weight: we shall answer now distinctly. First, as to the
mountain; we must know what mountain this is upon which the City of the Church
was built. Whether the mount Gerezzin, or whether is mount Eball, how shall we
know? And which are the Samaritans and which the Hierosolymitans, how shall we
discern? We must yet wander upon the Mountains to know which mountain is the
right. Each will claim the Privilege of a living Oracle. Therefore if we were
to take our resolves of all necessary points from the Church, we were yet to
seek which is the true Church. And so the prime necessary would be uncertain,
namely, which should be our infallible Propounder and Resolver of all necessary
points. How shall we resolve this capital and cardinal Controversy which is
the right Church, the Mother and Mistrisse of all Churches? Yea, the question
is yet to be agitated and determined infallibly whether there is to be any
such, it is not yet proved, but my Adversary here seems to suppose it. Well;
give it, not grant it in the thesis, that there is such a Church. How shall it
be made beyond all question, that this or this is the Church for the
Hypothesis? Whether Jerusalem, or Antioch, or Allexandria, or Constantinople,
or Rome is the City of that Church how shall we be ascertained infallibly? Must
the City be built upon a hill in the letter? Then indeed there might be some
discovery: and yet more Cities are so built, and therefore no certainty. And
Rome has too many hills to be a topicall argument that it is the seat of
Christ: seven hills are rather topicall for Antichrist, as in the revelation.
Secondly, if the Church be as fast to a place as the Heathen gods to their
Temples, must the Church by virtue of the place always have the same
privileges in the zenith? So then if the Roman Church was so faithful, as
that for a time, they did flow to it for direction in doubtful cases; must it
always be as the Oracular Virgin? Will Cassander believe it that Cassandra was
always so clear in her Oracles? What says Lycophron?

-- (...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
And thirdly, may we not as well take Gods direction, to go to the Scripture?
Is not the word of God an Oracle? Let him speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet.
4.11. Were not the Scriptures of the old Testament the Oracles of God, Romans
3.2.? To them were committed the Oracles of God. Have we not a general
command, to the Law and to the Testimony? If they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them, Es. 8.20. There is light in the
Law and the Testimony always: but there is not always light in them that would
direct without or beside them. But the word they will say is not a living
Oracle, But the word is an Oracle, and it is a living word, as before in the
Hebrews. And the living God speaks to us in this written Oracle. And therefore
until we see in this written Oracle, that we have and are bound to a living
Oracle, my Adversary says nothing. Thirdly, we deny, that his living Oracle
supposed speaks so distinctly; that no doubt can remain of the true sense. This
is sufficiently declared before in the Ambiguous decrees of the Council of
Trent. So that indeed their living Oracle speaks after the old sort of the
Heathen Oracles, as Loxias did, so as to preserve truth in one sense or other.
Each party thought that the Oracle spoke for him. As he to Ulysses -- Aut erit
aut non they are within one of a true prophecy, yea, these Roman Oracles have a
true sense in them, but we know not which. Well then also; as for necessary
points we say fourthly, as before, that we have no need of a living Oracle,
because the Scripture speaks so plainly and so distinctly, that no doubt can
justly remain of the true sense. And what needs more, as to salvation? Yea also
it speaks plainly, and so distinctly unto many other profitable points, as that
no doubt can remain of the true sense. And fifthly, whereas they say, or if
there be made any doubt of any thing of importance, etc. this new piece takes
off from the old, and makes the rent worse: for if the living Oracle speaks so
distinctly, that no doubt can remain of the true sense, then what need of any
further provision for doubts emergents, as if they durst not trust their own
principles. And again, if they can assoile all doubts that shall arise; why do
they not? why, since the Trent Council, has there been no other to explain the
sense of the former in several particulars? that which was never done and yet
would be of such use is morally reputed for an impossibility; as St. Jerome
disputed against the Pelagians. This would prove wilful ignorance in the
Church Representative. And therefore cannot we be obliged to follow it
absolutely: for it seems sometimes it will not lead us. And if they say that we
may well be saved without the infallible dejudication of the sense of perplexed
terms; why do they then include in the case a thing of importance? Yea, and
also we can then by their allowance say, we may be safely ignorant of some
points which are not of importance to salvation: and therefore are in a
capacity good enough to give the negative to a Judge infallible.

Nay, sixthly, neither can the doubt be presently cleared by some new
Declaration authentically notified unto us by our Pastors and Doctors. Not
presently, first, because a Council must be called which the Roman Church will
be well advi- of before, and if it costs them as much time to consider of it
and to dispatch it as the Trent Council, this presently will not come within
forty years, and more. And if he says the present Pope can presently deliver
the sense, and notify it authentically; then why says he it may be done by
Pastors and Doctors? Why does he speak in the number of plurality to the
prejudice of the one Authoritative Pastor? Well, it may be, he means Pastors
and Doctors, in common, can authentically notify us the sense; then private
Doctors may be authentic, which spoils all; and is contrary to Jesuit and
Roman Catholics (as they call themselves) in general: and to his own opinion,
who places all authority and infallibility in a Council confirmed by the Pope.
For we are bound they say, to the sense of the Decrees: then if private Doctors
and Pastors can authentically notify us the sense, then are we bound to them.
Yea, and also why may not then our private Pastors and Doctors declare to us
the sense of doubtful texts, as well as theirs; and then why an infallible
Judge? Yea, can private Pastors and Doctors authentically notify us the sense;
and not the infallible Judge? If he can, why does he not? If he will not, how
shall we take him for our Guide? They have determined the words of their
definitions, but have either not determined or determined not to determine the
acception and sense: but that must be left for Pastors and Doctors.

And therefore seventhly and lastly, he had better have not have produced these
passages in reference to those texts. For God gave us Pastors and Doctors; then
not only one Pastor of the Church, as the high Romanist accounts; who makes
all others to be as his Curates in all the universal Church. Why then does one
arrogate that which in common is assigned to more? Calvin in his Comment upon
the Epistle to Titus, thinks it unreasonable, that the name of Bishop, which is
common to many, should be appropriated to one, though he denies not there the
superiority of one to the rest of the Clergy: and my Adversary would have the
action of a Pastor authentical to be common to many, whereas the title others
would have proper to one, and to be given to the rest but analogically. This
text then by my Adversaries exposition derogates from the ordinary and
universal Pastor, because it allows his privilege to many. But then again,
he commits a fallacy of division, in attributing the end to a part which is
applied to the whole: for it is said there, And he gave some Apostles; some
Prophets; some Evangelists; some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of
the Saints, the work of the Ministry. They are all given complexively for that
end, and he takes it distributively and of the last. As if all faith were to be
resolved into the dictates of Pastors and Teachers whereas the Church is built
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief Corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20. Yea, and again, there is to be made a
difference between the Pastors and Doctors then and now, there having been then
better gifts given to them than now, and they having been then nearer the
fountain of Evangelicall truth than now: and therefore though the office is
continued, it is not necessary, that when the Christian Church has been so
long settled, there should be such perfection in the successors. Distingue
tempora, as the rule is.

His seventh number might well have been spared: Number. 7.
for he seems to charge me with not doing what in the eight number he says I go
about to do. Only whereas he says for me, that the Scriptures taken by
themselves all alone do teach us with infallibility all things necessary to
salvation: the terms may admit a distinction. If he takes the terms all alone
so as to be understood contradistinctly to an infallible Judge, so we stand to
them, if he takes them so as to exclude all use of Pastors and Doctors, so are
not we bound to them, we can in our opinion exclude the infallible Judge
without exclusion to the direction of Pastors and Teachers; which although not
exempted from possibility of error, yet may also be consulted even in texts
sufficiently plain. Besides, as he states the point for us, that the Scriptures
taken by themselves all alone do teach us with infallibility all things
necessary to salvation, we can easily subscribe unto, upon another distinction,
which we, have in metaphysick about the (...), that the unapprehensivenesse of
them does more proceed from the weakness of the faculty, than the nature of
the things themselves: so the Scriptures by themselves alone do teach us with
infallibility all things necessary; although we were not able to perceive
infallibly the sense of them. All things necessary yet are infallibly taught
there; and therefore this serves to the evacuation of their verbum non
scriptum; because that this is not pretented for the clearing of Scripture, but
for the supply of matter defective.

Number. 8.
To come now to the discussion of the texts. And first, you press the second
time that of St. Paul to Tim. 2.15, 16. And here he says, Take for my first
Answer that which I gave you when you first alleged this place, chapter 1. number.
13. And you must pardon me if I say that which he had said before. But how can
I take it for full satisfaction, that before, I am referred to the third chap.
and here we are sent back again to the place from whence he came, This, if we
might say so, is plain bo peep. He has my answer there which is yet good. The
Scriptures thus Profaned and by such interpretations truly discanoned (as I
may say) are rather subject to that effect which St. Paul's Epistles (according
to St. Peter) had with some men, i. e. they are subject to be depraved by them
to the perdition of their Interpreters.

But what is this to us? And yet will they say, because men are subject to
deprave the Scripture, therefore is Scripture subject to be depraved? And after
the same manner that the Scriptures may be discanoned by such interpretations,
so may also the Decrees of the Councils, if men have a greater reverence of the
Decrees and Canons of Councils than of the Holy Scriptures. And if Scripture be
discanoned by a false sense, then Scripture is canoned by a true; and so then
by giving a true sense of Scripture, the Church should make Scripture; which
yet is denied by the learned Pontificians. And also if we must put upon
Scripture the corruptions of men, as he does by a fallacy of accident, then
have we less reason to esteem of Scripture by the authority of men.

Whereby the way you are again to take notice, etc. unto it was then true. To
that which he says here we answer again, (since he will have it so) that the
act of wresting Scripture is damnative, not by the error of the understanding,
but by the perverseness of the will; whatsoever the matter of that Scripture
be, whether necessary or not. And he does well to conclude for us, Consequently
these places did not (according to your Doctrine) contain points necessary to
salvation, namely, because they were hard. It is right, yet not because they
were wrested they did not contain points necessary: for points necessary may
possibly also be wrested: but rather because they were hard to be understood.
Points hard to be understood are more like to be wrested, than points wrested
hard to be understood. And the perdition follows not upon the ignorance of the
things not necessary, but upon the depravation of the texts. And therefore our
allowance of some liberty of Interpretations even in hard points, may not
easily prove damnable. First, the liberty is not so much allowed as necessary.
Secondly, the liberty is not damnable, but the abuse. Thirdly, the allowance is
not so much to hard points, but things plain, where the Lamb may wade.
Fourthly, it is necessary that the people should know that which is necessary
to be known: it is accidental that they should mis-interpret the text which
does not contain that which is necessary. Now shall he be deprived of that
which is necessary, upon a contingent inconvenience; which also, if he has a
sober mind, cannot betide him? Felix periculum in necessariis. Sapiens non
curat de accidentalibus.

It was then true which I told you in another place, that though the Scripture
be a most right rule. yet it is very commonly so crookedly applied, that we
stand in need of a better security of the Interpretation of it (in which the
very kernel of the letter does consist) than we have of the Interpretation
(finally stood unto) made by the private judgment of our own discretion.

Ans. My Adversary, by his fallacy of accident, is falling upon another
question, namely, this, whether it be not dangerous to let men have the free
use of Scripture: which although it seems to conclude for him, yet does not
punctually conclude against me in the particular point of Controversy, namely,
whether the Srcipture does plainly deliver things necessary. As it is said by
some, that some Hares when they are hotly hunted will squart before another
hare, to put the Hunters upon a new chase: so he would start as it were another
question to put me off from the prosecution of the right question. But
secondly, we will follow this also: and we say that he here grants as much as
which extensively concludes against him. For if the Scripture be a most right
rule, as he confesses, then are we to be ruled by it. Let me ask, why did God
give us this most right rule? what, to be laid aside, because by some it is
crookedly aplied? Is this a good consequence? Because the authority of the
Church has been urged by Heretics; therefore we should not urge the Authority
of the Church. Because the Gospel does harm to some by their corruption,
therefore we should not have it preached. Because Dudithius, the Bishop of five
Churches, said of the Trent Council, that the Holy Ghost had nothing to do with
the Council, and that he was carried in a Carriers Portmantle to Trent, and
that the Spirit of God which moved upon the waters could not come to Trent,
because the waters were up; therefore we must not make use of Councils for the
ending of Controversies. Such consequences his argumentation affords; let them
own these, or retract their reasoning. Thirdly, where shall we have a better
security of the Interpretation of it? Let them first secure a better security
of the Interpretation of it. It is true, if the Interpretation of a Council be
compared with the Interpretation of a private judgment, it is probable that
the Interpretation of a Council should be better, but the question is, whether
we can have security for faith by the Interpretation of a Council. This we
deny, since Councils may possibly err in the Interpretations of some texts;
and particularly the Trent Council did err in some Interpretations, as some of
the Divines therein have signified. And then fourthly, he does freely or
inconsiderately mistake our cause in the allowances we give to the private
judgment of discretion: for we do not say that we should finally stand to our
private Interpretation, either as to determine others thereby, or to prefer our
own Interpretation before that public judgment of a Council; but this we say,
that the sense of Scripture cannot be obtruded to us as to believe it upon
their account, unless we see good reason out of Scripture for it. The private
judgment of discretion has not it self in this case, as in a contrary
competition to the Council; but has it self negatively, and is upon the
suspense, till it sees Gods word for it.

But he knew my answer, as it seems. I know your answer is, that it is
accidental to this rule to be misapplied, and this cannot infringe the
authority of Scripture. Yes, this was in substance my answer before. But now it
will not serve, as my Adversary would persuade me by his distinction. It does
not indeed infringe the authority of Scripture uses as God would have it used
with due submission to the public Interpretation of the Church. Otherwise,
etc. unto neither.

Ans. He means private judgment of discretion does not infringe the authority
of the Scripture used as God would have it used: but the misapplication of it
(which he should have spoken to) does infringe the authority of the Scripture
so used. So we see he did not discourse properly. But secondly, he seems here
to make nothing almost of Scripture unless used with due submission to the
public Interpretation of the Church. And this also in effect begs the
question, whether we cannot make use of Scripture well, as unto necessaries,
without submission to the public Interpretation of the Church; and also again
it begs the question, whether we are bound to stand to no sense of Scripture
without submission to the public Interpretation of the Church. Yea, thirdly,
we may also crookedly apply the determinations of the Church, as has been
showed de facto; and therefore why does he argue against the use of Scripture
as the rule because it may yet be crookedly applied? This argument is to us
common with them: we can use it against the Church, as they use it against
Scripture and therefore this cannot determine our particular Controversy. Yea,
fourthly, the Scripture which is acknowledged by my Adversary a most right
rule, is a rule to the Church too, is it not? If not, then have they no Divine
authority to show for the authority of the Church: if so, then we can make use
of Scripture without the authority of the Church, because we make use of
Scripture for the authority of the Church. Omne per accidens reducitur ad
aliquid per se. So we may make use of Scripture by it self; and therefore the
authority of Scripture may be infringed without respect to the authority of the
Church. And therefore all he says comes to nothing, unless he proves two
points. First, that Scripture needs an infallible Interpreter for things
necessary: The second this, that God does provide us of an infallible
Interpreter with infallible knowledge who it is.

Neither is this to speak more irreverently of Scripture than St. Peter spoke
of St. Paul's Epistles. He says, the Scripture is a most right rule: good. He
says, it is infallible: good. He says he speaks no more irreverently of it,
than St. Peter spoke of St. Paul's Epistles: good. Good words. and we give good
words for his good words. But does St. Peter put in the authority of the
public Interpretation of the Church to be necessary to the right applying of
St. Paul's Epistles? This did not St. Peter. Did he say that St. Paul's
Epistles does not plainly contain any thing necessary to salvation? this did
not St. Peter. Did he say, that St. Paul says in his Epistles, that the Church
is our infallible Guide, and the way so plain that fools^ (...) err? This did
not St. Peter. Did he sa^ (...) were so hard to be understood in St. Paul's
Epistles? This did not St. Peter. If they will believe him without the
attestation of his successor, let them consider what he says in his 2. Ep. 1.
chapter 19, 20, 21. ver. We have also a more firm word of Prophecy. More firm, or
most firm; as sometimes the Comparative for the Superlative. More firm surely
than the Church (which in part, is built upon it, as St. Paul) Whereunto ye do
well that ye take heed as to a light shining in a dark place, etc. And if a
light shining in a dark place, then it has not such need of an infallible
Interpreter: we see light by itself. It is not so dark and obscure as my
Adversary would have it: for it is a light shining in a dark place. And
certainly if that a light and shining in a dark place, then the whole new
Testament is a light so clear and sufficient as that we need not the help of an
infallible Judge either to this light; or in this light. And can it be well
immagined that Scripture, being not of private exhibition or delivery, because
Prophecy came not of old time by the will of man, but holy men spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost; can it be imagined that this should be by the
Holy Ghost so obscurely or ambiguously proposed, as that we must have necessity
of a living Judge to make the sense of it sufficiently plain to salvation? If
the Holy Ghost can clearly give us the sense as speaking by his Church, could
he not as plainly give us the sense as when he spoke by the Prophets? Have we
need of another Prophecy and Revelation of the sense? But it seems by them God
must accomodate the style of Scripture for the use of the Roman Church, and
must invelope it in cloudy difficulties, that we must go to Rome to see the Sun
of Righteousness shining there, as in Delos, without a cloud.

And this also is enough to answer what follows, which is so much out of the
way, because we cannot find our question in it, whether things necessary are
plainly contained in Scripture. For what is this to it, that nothing more clear
than that the words of Scripture are capable of several senses? If he means in
all Texts, he is as easily contradicted, nothing more clear than that some
words of Scripture are not capable of several senses. If he means of some:
what is this to the Elench? We can say some words are capable of several
senses consistently to this, that things necessary are plain. And as to his
question, how shall we infallibly know Gods secret intention (in which sense,
or whether in both he intended them) but by an Interpreter having infallible
assistance from the same Holy Spirit, who assisted those who did write the
Scriptures? We answer, first, as before, it touches not the question unless
it be applied to words which speak of necessaries to salvation: and then we
deny it, that such texts are so perplexed. Secondly, some texts we may take in
diverse senses not contrary. Thirdly, as he has not proved to us an infallible
Judge: so here he does not prove a need of an infallible Interpreter; unless
he could prove that it is necessary to salvation, that we should know the
intended sense of every doubtful passage in Scripture. Neither again fourthly,
(for they shall have it toties quoties) the definitions of the Councils are,
some of them, ex composito, so framed, as that we do not clearly see the
intention of the Council in what sense or whether in both the words should be
taken. And must we not then, according to my Adversary, have another infallible
Interpreter of them? And if they deliver not the thing clear, then another
infallible Interpreter of them? and if they deliver not the thing clear, then
another infallible Interpreter of them: and so in infinitum. And if they say,
it is not necessary in points of question indubitably to decide in plain terms
which part is to be held, then we ask why they do not allow a latitude to us:
since the Council by them is intended for a remedy. And therefore need we not
again say, that we do not give so much scope to such poor creatures as ignorant
men are. They have but their rational liberty to find the way of Salvation in
the Scripture, unto which it was appointed, in things doubtful, we say they
should consult with learned men. We do not invest them with so ample a faculty
to interpret it without any interior submission to the Church. They take their
own freedom and right to see reason why they should submit to the Church,
either as clearing the sense, or proving its infallibility. They are bound to
see good reason why they differ from the Church; but they are not simply bound
to believe upon whatsoever reason the Church gives or none. Neither do we say,
that he may stand out in his judgment against the Interpretations of whole
General Councils; not stand out in an heady opposition, but yet may say, Salvo
meliori judicio, that he must see how, what they define be correspondent to
Scripture, in points of belief. Secondly, how shall poor ignorant creatures
know what several General Councils have agreed in, since some have differed
from others, as has been seen? They must know by infallibility that the
Councils have defined this; and then that they have defined it infallibly. And
so they put poor ignorant men upon greater difficulties. And if it be said that
the ignorant men should believe the Church, that such a point is defined by the
Councils: it is answered, no: we are to believe, according to my Adversary, the
Church only as it is infallible; and that is in Councils confirmed by the
Pope. Thirdly, if the Church be the way for poor ignorant creatures, because of
the difficulty (pretended) of Scripture; yet as to learned men, it seems it is
not necessary that it should be the way to them, because to them, being so
learned, the Scripture is not so difficult: and therefore upon the matter, we
may conclude, that it is more reasonable, that ignorant men should go the way
which learned men should go in, than that learned men should go the way which
fools and ignorant men go in.

So then that which my Adversary says after, immediately, needs not be
traduced, And yet this very self same man is wisely by you sent to the
Minister. Any Minister of the Gospel, say you (but) I must not say any
General Council is able competently through the Scripture to direct the people
to their happiness. This, and more of this kind he has with some undue
reflection upon his Adversary with an Ironie; but if all be weighed, and the
reflection not weighed, all will come to not much. For, first, I never gave him
occasion to think that I preferred the judgment of a single Minister before
the judgment of a general Council. But that which I said, if he would have
taken notice of it, does infer a great deal of respect to the faculty of a
general Council. For if I say that a single Minister may competently inform us
of so much as is necessary; then much more a general Council. And this is
employed in the words of him that does give a due respect to Councils. Secondly,
he might also have remembered that this use of a Minister of the Gospel was
spoken upon occasion of the text, or may be grounded thereupon, that the
Scriptures were able to make wise unto salvation; therefore upon the place it
is to be restrained to things necessary to salvation, which do not need so
judicious a debate of a General Council; because there is no such difficulty
in the sense of them. If I say that my Adversary could have told us, that the
authority of the Church is in the Pope and a Council, do I prefer my Adversary
before a Pope and a Council, or a Council and a Pope; (for it is a mighty
question which is superior, since they have no mind to be ruled by the Council
of Constance?) And if I say, my Adversary could have satisfied such a scruple
about the number of Orders, do I say that my Adversary could have assoyled all
doubts in Theology as well as a general Council? I did not speak of a Minister
exclusively to a Council in their judgment and authority; but exclusively
rather to a Council in the necessity thereof. And this sets the accent upon the
Council, ex abundanti. Therefore he does not drive the compare ad idem: for I
spoke of the ability of a Minister as to things necessary, which are
sufficiently plain of themselves: he brings me in speaking of a Minister, as to
things of question which are not necessary: and this therefore is not logically
done; for comparation must be in the same kind. Now surely a Minister of the
Gospel may as well inform us as to things necessary which are sufficiently
plain, as a General Council in things of Controversy, which are not necessary
to be believed on either part. For suppose the judgment of the Church were not
divided from the word of God, but we take the word from the Church, as
Stapleton says in his Epistle dedicatory of his Doctrinall principles (and yet
herein he seems to beg the question, whether the Scripture was intended only
to bear that sense which the Church gives of it) yet as to things sufficiently
plain, there is no need of consulting the judgment of the Church; because they
are such, then, as they will say, that the definitions of a Council are so
plain, that any Priest of theirs may instruct the people in the rignt sense: so
the Scriptures are so plainly delivered as to things necessary, that any
Minister of the Gospel may make a man wise unto salvation by them. And we may
well say that the Scriptures were inspired for this purpose.

And therefore have I yielded him what he desired; yet it being so ingenuous, I
shall also rehearse it, Do but allow me this to the Church, that it can
competently through the Scripture direct the people to their happiness, and we
will not contend with you, whether this competent direction shall be called an
infallible direction or not.

Ans. I could be content to stand to such an issue, and to compromise the
dispute unto such terms. For we can freely allow unto him all this, even
pendente lite. And we have formerly allowed as much: therefore have they either
no mind to accept of our respect to the Church; or my Adversary of his own
accord is coming to move moderation, that which he says here has three
importments: first, an authority and faculty of the Church; which we have
granted. Secondly, that this authority, in the exercise of its faculty is
directive through the Scriptures. Thirdly, that this direction to the people is
competent to their happiness. Only let it be provided, that the Church its
direction of the people by the Scriptures does not derogate from the peoples
use of the Scripture; thus we can afford all this: for this is no way
contradictory to our proposition, that the Scripture does contain plainly all
things necessary to salvation: or not this also, that a Minister of the Gospel
may competently inform the people in the necessaries to salvation. And if a
Minister can do it, surely the Church. But the stresse of the discourse lies in
this, whether what the Church can do may not sufficiently be done without the
Church: And then secondly, if not without the Church, whether it may not be
done without the Church its infallibility. Now to this last my Adversary speaks
thus, that he stands not upon this, whether this competent direction should be
called an infallible direction or not. No? does he not? Then he seems to
yield that which he has so much contended for, the infallibility of the
Church; that that is not necessary. He has formerly urged the infallibility of
the Church to ground faith; now he either grants, that we may be saved without
faith; or, that faith may be grounded without infallibility: which indeed in my
opinion does yield the cause. But then also they will give us leave to note
that the cause betwixt the Romanist and us, as to verbum non Scriptum, is also
yielded hereby: for if he will sit down with this postulate, that the Church
may competently direct us to happiness through the Scriptures, then the word
not written is secluded from a competent direction to salvation. For the word
not written is absolutely contradistinguished to Scriptures. And therefore I
see no reason we should go further in this work. which is not so hard, as
tedious.

But that he calls us back with an Epanorthosis, Though we think it most
certain that no fallible direction can competently direct the people to
happiness. Well, will they stand to this? Where shall we have them? If it can,
then as before. If it cannot upon their second thoughts; then we say, absolute
loquendo, we grant it; thus, that the Church not proposing any infallible
direction cannot competently direct us; and therefore until they prove the
Church infallible in their traditions infallible too: or as to the interpreting
of Scripture, they have no cause by their own argument to obtrude so often the
authority of the Church; because it is no competent direction to happiness,
unless it be infallible, as they now think. But take the Church as proposing
Scripture, which we have hitherto made plain sufficiently as to things
necessary; so, though the Church be not infallible in its own direction, yet
being considered, as bringing Scripture which is infallible, it may competently
direct unto happiness. And so these great magnifiers of the Church, upon due
account, have left us in the field to defend the Church when they have left it.
We can make use of its competent direction, with the Scripture, which is
certain and infallible. They cannot make use of the Church without
infallibility. So then, as the Catholic Moderator says of the reformed
religion, that it cannot be blamed in the point of justification, since it lays
hold upon that which can certainly save us, namely, the righteousness of
Christ: so also to be sure, here we are on the surer hand, because we make use
of that which is certainly infallible, the Scripture; and also of that which
gives us some competent direction, the Church; specially taking the Church
universally for place and time. It is no question that the present Church
cannot end the present controversies.

Now because, by the way, I did say our Church could not err in damnative
errors, you conceive me to grant that it may err in points not damnative.

Ans. This is well put in [by the way I did say] he spoke it more than once;
and it appeared also to be spoken provisionally, that there might be some
refuge for the Church, if it should be convicted of some error; yet not
damnative. And surely it were better for them to lie close under the buckler of
this distinction unless they had better arguments to prove universal
infallibility. But since, it may be, Mr. Knot's inconveniences of that
distinction have been found prevalent, and so it is quitted.

He expounds himself thus, When I said these words I did only take and subsume
that which you your selves most commonly grant unto the Church, that it cannot
err in damnative matters.

Ans. This but one degree from a (...). He says he meant it as we. If he meant
it as we, how does he conclude against us? We hold it distinctively, upon the
case of the whole Catholic Church; though a particular Church may err in
points damnative. So then he, meaning it as we, leaves the way plain to infer
that he held that the Church might err in points not damnative. If he did take
it as we, we are agreed: and then by Mr. Knot's argument infallibility is
extinguished. He used it formerly in way of distinction, and specificatively or
not. If not, then the use of it formerly is none: if so, then he is lost. And
they may very easily persuade themselves that we can allow unto them this
privilege of the Church, that it has a main advantage over any Minister, or
private Interpreter. This we can afford unto them without absolute
infallibility of the Church. If they will be contented with such a privilege
to the Church as no Minister or private Interpreter can have, they need not
exceed the distinction of the Church's not erring in damnatives, specifically
taken. For a private Minister or Interpreter may err in damnatives. Yea, also
this exemption from errors damnative (in this sense) gives a demonstrative
reason why we should not follow our own interpretations, without apparent
cause, because the Church (universal) cannot err in damnatives, therefore we
should prefer that, when we see not plain cause to the contrary: and because it
may err in other things, therefore cannot we absolutely yield the Church
obedience of faith for its own sake. And our differences from the Church in
interpretations are not therefore damnative simply because we differ from the
Church, but if we contemn the Church which has authority and more faculty, and
if we wrest hard texts, as some men did in St. Paul's Epistles to their own
perdition, as St. Peter says. Interpretations may be flatly contrary and not
damnative. till the Church be proved without possibility of error, to be
without possibility of error: let them then hold the former distinction until
they can make good these two points: first, that the Church cannot err at all:
the second, that all error is damnative. These are two hard propositions; and
therefore, if that which is most hard is most easily broken, as the rule is in
the Trent History, they should do well to break them. When the Church shall
show her Commission for her infallibility, she may (...) Commission for our
obedience intuiti^^.

Number. 9.
Here he begins, I will press again your text and give a second answer. Namely,
the second Ep. to Tim. 3.16. So then now we shall contend (...). He says we
render the word for correction; so your Bible reads it. And why does he note
this? Because it is right? Will he correct the Magnificate? This is ad verbum
to the Text (...); Yea, he cannot find fault with our translation in this
without condemnation of the Rhemish: for so they, to correct.

From hence he says, You should conclude thus, All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God. But all Doctrine given by inspiration from God contains
plainly all things necessary to salvation; Therefore all Scripture contains
plainly all things necessary to salvation.

Ans. I am easily brought to St. Basil's rule, (...), to teach without envy, to
learn without shame. But I need not learn from my Adversary how to order my
discourse in this particular. The forenamed text, which I used in my second
rejoinder, was produced patly against his assertion, that, If God had not left
us the infallible direction of his Church, he had not well provided for the
salvation of men. To this I opposed the text in the 15, and 16. v. that the
Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation: And by consequent, God has
well provided for salvation of men in general. Then I urged the particulars,
in which it is able to make us wise unto salvation, in the 16. ver. And now,
because I did not conclude punctually against the terms he has in this paper,
(and yet, nemo temetur divinare) he tells me, that I and ours have a notable
talent in not concluding contradictorily. As he said in Tacitus, Vtinam tu tam
fortiter feries. To the business then, we say, first, that my Adversary did,
or might know, that in a discourse every Syllogism, or proof, or answer, does
not formally, and in terminis conclude against the main question. It is
sufficient if it concludes against the last instance: for if that be rightly
made, the virtue thereof will rebound ultimately to the principal question. And
secondly, as to his Syllogism, which he thinks concludes absurdly upon our
opinion, we say it is unanswerable, because it has neither mode nor figure. He
had better have put it into an Enthymem; or a full Syllogism thus: Whatsoever
is inspired by God contains plainly all things necessary to salvation. All
Scripture is inspired by God, therefore all Scripture. Now he had the wit not
to put it thus, because we should, so, easily have denied the major, as it is
to be taken in the note of universality, [whatsoever] distributively; yea, also
and because whatsoever so is inspired does not contain any thing necessary to
salvation: for every thing in Scripture does not contain any necessary point.
And therefore like a Sophister he wraps it up in an obscure form; yea, none,
that it might not be discovered. Thirdly, if All in the propositions be taken
collectively or complexively, so we own the matter of the propositions, and the
Conclusion has nothing in it but sound Doctrine without his consequences of
teaching submission and obedience to the Church, and by her all things
necessary to salvation. And fourthly, he should discreetly have taken all
Scripture complexively: for if it were to be understood distributively, then,
if every part of Scripture were profitable to all those ends, what would become
of their additions of verbum non scriptum? If every part could make the man of
God perfect, what use of the merchandise of traditions, as of necessity to
salvation? And yet fifthly, it is like he would have swallowed his own
discourse for the Church thus, All definitions of the Church are inspired by
God. All Doctrine of the Church inspired by God contains all things necessary
to salvation; therefore all definitions of the Church contain all things
necessary to salvation. This would have pleased him well, since he says the
Scripture teaches all things necessary to salvation, eo ipso, by this one
article, because it teaches us submission to the Church and by her all things
necessary to salvation. Therefore sixthly, he mistakes me simply, or worse, if
he thought that I meant to conclude contradictorily by every particular unto
which the Scripture is profitable. He commits herein a fallacy of division,
making that to be concluded severally which is to be concluded jointly. And
seventhly, we will now join issue with our Adversary upon the text, and first,
upon the 15. ver. thus, That which is able to make us wise unto salvation
contains plainly all things necessary to salvation: but the holy Scriptures are
able to make us wise unto salvation. Therefore the Scripture contains plainly
all things necessary to salvation. And if there be exceptions made as to the
major, that Timothy was not an ordinary man, and therefore though they might
have that effect upon Timothy, yet not upon every one; we say as before, that
it follows ex abundanti. If there were enough to make him wise, then a majori,
others; because he, as a Minister, needed more direction, as my adversary
affirmed with Mr. Cressy. And I hope they will not say, that they were able to
make him wise unto salvation, because he had learned them from his youth; for
then if they would learn them from their youth they might make them also wise
unto salvation: and therefore they should also learn them from their youth, as
the saying of the Jews was, a boy of five years old is to be applied to the
Bible. Again, a fortiori, if the old Testament was able to make him wise unto
salvation, then surely the old and the new together: but the old was able to
make him wise unto salvation; the new not being yet for a great part written,
as the Rhemists note. And when they can find as much reason for the addition of
their word not-written to the new Testament, as there was for the addition of
the new Testament to the old, then let them say that this text does not exclude
Traditions. If they did say, it did not exclude Traditive interpretations, it
would be more reasonable; because the new is added to illustrate and declare
the old: but it excludes traditions of new matter; because the new adds no new
matter to the old. And yet again, as to the manner of delivery of things
necessary in Scripture; if the old Testament, which was more obscure, was yet
able to make Timothy wise (as to point of knowledge) unto salvation: then
certainly in the new Testament is there sufficiency of plainness, because the
new is the old revealed, as St. Paul speaks, 2. Ep. to the Cor. 3.18. But we
all with open face beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same Image from glory to glory as by the Spirit of the Lord.

And now we will put into the argument all the ends unto which the Scripture is
profitable. That which is profitable to all those ends spoken of in the 16.
ver. to Doctrine, in things to be known; to redargution of errors; to
correction of manners; to instruction, in Righteousness, that the man of God
might be perfect, furnished for every good work, does sufficiently provide all
unto salvation, because Timothy, as before; and also with sufficient
plainness, since the old Testament could do it before the new was consigned:
but the Scripture taken in complexo does so. Therefore this text is
sufficiently full and clear against them.

And his argument out of this text against me, wherein he says he has a
contradictory conclusion against me, we will now hear: this it is. That which
in this text is said only to be profitable for these ends, is not thereby said
to be sufficient to these ends; and yet much less sufficient to end all
Controversies necessary to salvation by it self alone: but the Scripture in
this text is said only to be profitable to these ends here expressed: Ergo.

Ans. The Answer unto this of his may maintains the major of my last Syllogism.
For thus Estius and my Adversary distinguish upon the major, that the Scripture
may be profitable and not necessary for these ends; and so in effect, the
Rhemists upon the text, that the reading of the Holy Scripture is a great
defense and help of the faithful, especially of a Bishop. And this is the
ground of his Argument. We answer therefore, first; if he means his major thus,
that what is not said in terms to be so, is not said so by consequence neither,
his minor is not true. And if he mean it otherwise, it is peccant in the
ignorance of the Elench; for we can acknowledge his Conclusion without
prejudice to our cause: for though it be not said so in terms, yet by
equivalence, and interpretative it is. Secondly, to the minor we say, though it
be only said to be profitable: yet since it is not said that it is only
profitable, it does not exclude sufficiency: that which affirms so much simply
does not simply deny more: for then we could no way reconcile diverse
historical passages of the Evangelists. But that it does include sufficiency,
Bellarmin and my Adversary do deny; Bellarmin to Chemnitius; my Adversary to
me. Yet Bellarmin stands not so much against the term, as if it could not be
understood sufficient; but contends that the Scripture is not sufficient alone:
as meat, though it be profitable to nutrition, yet it is not sufficient alone.
For if natural heat be wanting or any other Instrument of the body necessary
to nutrition, it will not nourish, in his fourth B. de verbo Dei non scripto,
cap. 10. But what is this to the purpose? For we do not maintain the Scripture
to be sufficient to salvation, alone; for there must be faith and repentance
and obedience. And therefore St. Paul adds upon the place, through faith that
is in Christ Jesus; but we say it is sufficient in suo genere, as to direction
of us: this satisfies our cause. If this be confessed, we have done. As meat is
sufficient as to the matter which should nourish: so the word of God is
sufficient, as to the matter of things necessary to be known; yea, for our
comfort too, as Isid. Clarius upon the text: and therefore he says when St.
Paul had used many consolations, he uses here the greatest. For surely it is
the most strong consolation to have the Scripture sent from Heaven, quae et
tantis in tenebris lumen praeferat, et gravissima quaeque efficiat ut fiant
levia. And these comforts (he says) he did seasonably give him when he was to
tell him of the sad news of his departure. And as for the word there, (...), if
we would take aim of the sense by the Syriack (since the Greek intimates the
Hebrew in the new Testament, and the Syriack is called the Hebrew in the new
Testament) it seems to be so profitable as is sufficient; because the word for
[profitable] in the Syriack is taken from a word which signifies to abound and
exceed. Thirdly, although all that is profitable is not sufficient (though all
that is sufficient is profitable) yet that which is profitable ut sic, as to
perfection, seems very sufficient. That which helps him to perfection helps him
sufficiently: quoad hoc, as to point of knowledge. And if it extends not to
sufficencie in the expression: the reason may be, because other things also are
profitable practically. And therefore is sufficient to end all Controversies
necessary to salvation by it self alone. Because there need not be any
controversies necessary to salvation: yea, rather necessary it is that there
should be no Controversies about things necessary to salvation: because
possibility of error in those things is so dangerous. And therefore he
supposes that which is not to be supposed. For the man of God may be perfect
by Scripture; ready furnished to every good work. The man of God; to wit, the
Minister. So St. Paul of Timothy according to proportion to the Jewish Title,
but thou man of God fly these things. And this we strengthen with St.
Crysostom's note upon the text, (...) not simply partaking, but with
accuratenesse furnished: and again before, (...) Instead of me thou have the
Scriptures (not traditions) if you will learn any thing from thence you may, so
that the Fathers comment imports the Scripture to be sufficient, as to
learning. If any thing else could be pretended as equally profitable, then
either St. Paul's teaching him: but he was to depart; and in stead of him he
was to have the Scriptures; or traditions: but he says not, thou have the word
not written; but thou have the Scriptures; and that the man of God by the
Scripture may be with accuratenesse furnished. Therefore until they can find
any thing sufficient without Scripture, or any thing necessarily conducing to
the sufficiency of Scripture, we rest contented with our cause upon account of
this text; wherein also, as usually, by a (...), less is said: more is
understood. If the Pontificians had such a text for their cause; this
profitable text would have been made sufficient.

As for the third answer, that St. Paul does not so much as speak of the whole
Canon of Scripture; whence he is most weakly cited to prove that the whole
Canon contains clearly all things necessary to salvation; We may not say that
this is weakly urged. For the argument proceeds a fortiori, as before. If part
of the Canon; if the old Testament be sufficient, then the whole much more. And
if Traditions were necessary to be added to the old Testament, as happily they
will say, why did God give us the new Testament? And to be even with them
again; when they speak of the Roman Church, we might also say, this is weakly
urged, to prove the opinion of the whole Church; because they do not speak of
the whole Church.

Again, when this is proved, it is manifest that part of the whole Canon is
lost. How then know you the same necessary points not delivered in other parts
of Scripture were not delivered in these parts of Scripture which are perished,
and so are come not to be extant in writing?

Ans. The former is, I suppose proved more than they desire. And to this we
answer, first, if it be manifest that some part of Scripture is perished, he
might have told us, which: otherwise it seems it is not manifest. No certain
and manifest knowledge of the general but by some particulars. Secondly, If
any part be lost, it is either of the old, or of the new Testament: if of the
old, the new has the same matter, as to sufficiency, with clearness. If of
the new; the old was able to make Timothy wise unto salvation. And my Adversary
might have known, that not only Mr. Chillingworth affirms that there is enough
in one Gospel precisely necessary to salvation: but also that their Bellarmin
in the former B. and Chapter says that all the utilities of Scripture which here
are rehearsed, are found in the second Ep. of St. John. If any book then be
lost, (which we are not certain of, nor they neither, because, for ought we
know, not defined by the Church) yet by nis opinion (namely, Bellarmins) that
which remains may be profitable, (yea, sufficient) for those uses without an
infallible Judge. And again, if any book of either Testament or any of both be
lost, this will redound to the prejudice of the Roman; because they account
that they only are the Church, and that the Church is the keeper of Divine
truth; then they have not faithfully preserved the truth of God; and therefore,
if they were infallible in what they do propose how should we trust them, that
what is delivered as truth, they would keep; since through their negligence
they have let some book or books of Scripture perish? Quis custodiet ipsos
custodes? But it may be they have kept traditions more faithfully. Then surely
the books of Scripture were lost with good discretion, that it might reflect
honor to the integrity of Traditions.

O sanctas Gentes quibus haec nascuntur in hortis Numina! Your second Text to
prove this is Heb. 4.12. Here is the text; Number. 10.
but where is the contradictory conclusion in terminis, and that evidently?
that it is plainly set down in Scripture that the Scripture by it self alone is
sufficient to decide all necessary Controversies, etc.

Ans. Omne reducitur ad principium, as Aquinas's rule is. The occasion of this
began thus. I was to dispute against the Judges authority to bind upon his own
account; as he might have noted, had he pleased. My argument was this, the
Judge determins by Scripture or not. If not, then he makes a new law; and the
authority of the Church in proposing Divine truths is immediate by the
assistance of the Holy Ghost, and not by disquisition; (which Stapleton denies
in the beginning of his sixth general Controversy) if by Scripture, then does
his determination bind by authority of Scripture, whereof he is but a Minister.
This my Adversary says not a word unto. Then ex abundanti; I put this text to
him to give him a check in the course of his exceptions against Scripture. We
do not say that the Scripture is formally a Judge: but yet by this text we have
so much said as amounts in effect, to be a Judge internal by mediation of
conscience; which is more than their Judge infallible can pretend to.

And therefore as to the demand of a Contradictory Conclusion from hence, I
say, this text was pertinently produced to that purpose I intended of it; which
was not that it should be a directory weapon against my Adversary, but that it
should be of use to cut off their Pleas against Scripture, as that it is a dead
letter, not a living Judge; it is living, quick: that it can do nothing; it is
active (...), that it cannot decide controversies; it is sharper than any two
edged Sword. As the law decides cases of right, so it decides Controversies of
faith. And those points of faith (pretended) which are not contained therein,
it does cut off. If they say, it cannot reach the Conscience: What then can? It
is piercing to the dividing of soul and spirit, joints and marrow. If they say
it cannot judge, it is here (...), critical, exactly judicative of the
thoughts and notions of the heart.

But, to come to the point, he would have me show that this sharpness is in
order not only to decide Controversies, but also all necessary Controversies,
and to do this by it self alone. And if not, where is then your Contradictory
Conclusion?

Ans. It may decide Controversies, and not necessary Controversies; but if it
decide necessary Controversies, then, to be sure, it does decide Controversies.
Our question is whether it determins necessary Controversies. Yea, neither are
we bound to dispute the question, because we said it not, nor are we bound to
make it good in their sense. In our sense yet it does sufficiently decide all
necessary Controversies; because it does so plainly deliver things of necessary
faith, that there needs not be any decision of them by any inerrable Judge. And
then also secondly, because, if there be any question about necessary points,
the Scripture is the rule according to which it is to be determined. And
thirdly, it does in effect examine and judge in the inward man cases of opinion
and of action, which an external Judge does not, as such: because they are not
known to him. And in this regard, I conceive, that the heretic is said as
before, to be (...) because the law of God, or of the Spirit of God in the law,
does by his own Conscience condemn him in holding a material error against his
own light. Yea, let them answer to their own Estius, who upon the place says,
that the Scripture has the properties of God attributed to it; and because God
speaks to us by Scripture: and therefore he says, Vt Gladius penetrat et
laedit: ita sermo Dei intuetur et punit: Itaque significatur cognitio non nuda
sed qualis est Judicis examinantis et cognoscentis ut puniat: As the sword
pierces and wounds: so does the word of God take notice and punish;
therefore is signified not a naked knowledge, but such as is of a Judge,
examining and taking cognizance, that it may punish. Now because that which is
not intended sometimes proves better than that which was intended (as the rule
is, Melius est aliquando id quod est per accidens quam id quod est per se)
therefore may we draw an argument in form from hence, thus; That which judges,
and infallibly, is an infallible Judge. The Scripture judges; so the text: and
Estius upon it: and infallibly; as they will confess; then the Scripture is an
infallible Judge. Now if it be an infallible Judge, it is very reasonable that
it should be an infallible Judge as to points necessary: and then (...), there
is no necessity of an external infallible Judge as to determine faith; for
that is done by it: there may be need of a Judge external, as to peace; but
for this there is no need of a Judge infallible. If any thing would content
them but a spiritual Monarchy, this might: yea, neither, it may be, if such a
Monarchy were necessary, were this infallibility necessary; because
Ministerial authority does not essentially include such an infallibility.

But he goes on, and uses an argument against me. The word of God according to
your own Doctrine was not sufficient to decide all necessary Controversies
before the whole Canon of Scripture was completely finished: but St. Paul said
this of the word of God before the Canon of the Scripture was completely
finished. Therefore St. Paul said this of the word of God before the word of
God was of it self alone sufficient to decide all Controversies. Therefore then
it had been false to say the word of God had been sufficient to this end.
Therefore St. Paul did not then say so.

Ans. Besides what I said before concerning the use which I made of this text;
and to say nothing of what is here supposed, that St. Paul was the Author of
this Epistle to the Hebrews; I answer to the major, that that part of Scripture
was then sufficient, before the whole Canon was completely finished, in our
sense to decide all necessary Controversies as well as the old Testament was
sufficient to make Timothy wise unto salvation. and for those uses which are
there spoken of in that text to Timothy: therefore he mistakes us if he thinks
we hold that that part which was then written, was not sufficient. And yet more
might be added by God though not by man; for the Canon then did not restrain
God but man. Therefore we answer also to the assumption, that if he takes
completely finished, simply; then indeed St. Paul said it before the Canon was
completely finished; but if he takes the words so as that part which was
written was not sufficient in our sense, we deny it. For then God had not
sufficiently provided for the Church of those times; neither had the Scripture
been able to make Timothy wise unto salvation. So the terms in the former sense
do not conclude: in the latter they are concluding, but not true. So this
specious argument is at an end without its end. Only, we will now make use of
the argument against him, turning the mouth of the Canon, as we may speak, and
it is thus; St. Paul said this of the Scripture before the Canon was completely
finished; therefore now much rather after it is thus completely finished, is it
sufficient. Or more fully thus, The word of God according to his Doctrine is
not sufficient after the Canon is completely finished: St. Paul said this of
the word of God before the Canon was completely finished: therefore his
Doctrine is contradictory to St. Paul's, ex abundanti, for St. Paul says the
word was sufficient before the Canon was completed: and he says it is not
sufficient after it is completed.

Again those words speak not of the word of God blunted with those
interpretations which your opinion licenseth.

Ans. This is a plain cavil, or a slander: we license not any blunting of the
edge of Scripture by any mis-interpretations. We do not deny the use of
Scripture, as the Romanists do to the people. Neither is it fit for them to
complain of blunting the edge, who take away the Sword of the Spirit. We only
allow the people to be persuaded in their own mind concerning the sense of
Scripture: and if the Pontifician authority or arguments be able, ex vi fua, to
persuade them, that what sense they give is authentic, let them be persuaded.
But it is very usual for them to quarrel first who are most guilty, that so
they may least be discovered. But who blunt Scripture so much as they who say
the Scripture is like a nose of wax, which may be turned any way? Let him that
is without sin in this kind cast the first stone at us. How they have
adulterated Scripture is known to all the world.

But of the word of God applied according to the Divinely-spirited
interpretation of the Church, in whose hands, hands guided by the Holy Ghost,
this word of God is managed for the decision of Controversies, that it is
sharper than any two edged Sword.

Ans. How often must we be forced to tell them that we exclude not the use of
the Church in a due Representative toward composing of differences: and also
that the Church is not now infallibly guided by the Holy Ghost. And therefore
that their decision is not the last resolutive of faith: and that there is no
need of any such infallible Judge for necessary Controversies, since there is
no necessity of Controversies about things necessary. And also that, if there
were such a Judge infallible, we must know it, and who it is, infallibly. And
also then hereby are excluded the (...) of traditions: for if the Scripture
interpreted by the Church be to decide all Controversies, then what need to
have recourse to the word not written, as to that which equally binds in things
of faith? And so then they destroy themselves. And therefore whereas they say
frequently that Scripture alone does not decide all necessary Controversies, we
can easily distinguish, that alone has respect either to the Church or to
traditions; as it opposes traditions, so alone; and it does exclude them: and
as it does respect the Church, so, though it does not exclude the use of a
Judge, yet it does exclude the necessity of a Judge infalble.

His other lines unto the eleventh number. might have been spared. Si non verum
prius nec posterius. And they have also been answered.

And here wisely he joins to the examination of my former texts, Number. 11.
another text which I produce against him in answer to the fourteenth number,
that he might handsomely decline an answer to that, which, if he would have
dealt punctually, I should have been answered in its place, but we follow him
at the running leap. The text is, that of Christ, Search the Scriptures. St.
John. 5.39.

His exception is this, To prove this to be understood in the Imperative mood
evidently is impossible, therefore, evidently they do not contain a Command,
This is the sum of that discourse.

Ans. First, evident proof they had not best urge: for then what will become of
all their faith and all their discourse; which does not amount to so much as
probability? Secondly, if it be more probable to be understood in the
Imperative, it is sufficient to weaken their cause; since I am to be
considered, as proposing the text by way of a respondent, not as an opponent.
Therefore if I name a text which is but probable against them, it is enough for
me against them, specially in the cause of infallibility; for a probable
contradiction undoes infallibility. Thirdly, it is in the Syriack in the
Imperative mood: and this interpretation, if any other should weigh with us.
Yea, also, so do the Rhemish Translators read it, in the Imperative. Are they
also decived? then how shall we be ascertained of the sense of Scripture by
Rhemish Interpreters? So Ferus also upon the place expounds it to be a
direction to the Jews of searching the Scriptures out of a greediness to know
the truth. And again, upon the latter words, They are they which bear witness
of me, he says, that Christ cites no place, but speaks in general, tam ut ad
quaerendum incitet, both that he might incite them to seek. And so also
Stapleton reads it in his Principia Doctrinalia, in the Imperative. And also
besides, not so often do we find a verb of the Indicative mood to begin a
sentence. But then also fourthly, the reason concludes it a duty: and the duty
concludes a command. It concludes a duty thus, that which bears witness of
Christ, being in doubt we are bound to search: and they bear witness of
Christ, and were then in doubt; therefore for that our Savior should not
affirm it but upon their opinion (in that he says for in them ye think to have
eternal life) is no material scruple, because the verb (...) as in other
Authors, so in Scripture is used by way of elegancie: and then our Savior says
himself that they bear witness of him, and therefore we have in them eternal
life Doctrinally. And so St. Austin in his 45. sermon. de verbis Domini, says, as
expounding the place, queritis me et non invenietis: quare? quia non scrutamini
Scripturas quae testimonium perhibent de me, ye seek me but shall not find me:
why? because you do not search the Scriptures, which bear witness of me.
Therefore may we conclude ((...)) that it is to be taken in the Imperative.

And therefore his exception, that it follows not, because they testify
clearly this one point whereof he spoke, therefore the Scriptures testify
clearly all that is necessary to be believed in any point of Controversy
necessary to salvation, that exception falls down before my argument, as Dagon
before the Ark; because it is not only grounded upon this, that the Scriptures
bear witness of him, but also in that [you think to have in them eternal
life.] And this proposition, if there were need, we might prove by what was
said before, that which is able to make us wise unto salvation has in it
eternal life: the Scriptures (of the old Testament) were able to make wise
unto salvation, therefore, they have in them eternal life; and by consequent,
they contain all things necessary to salvation. And therefore though this
excluded not the hearing of John or Christ's Miracles, as he would infer, as
upon duty; yet it excludes them as upon simple necessity to salvation.
Otherwise those who dyed before Christ and John could not have been saved. The
force of his ratiocination comes to as much as this, as if because one had a
great estate, he could not live of less; or as if, because he can live of
less he ought not to follow his calling, whereby he may get more. This is not
the question, whether we ought to hear whatsoever God says: for this we affirm;
but this is the question, whether it be said because it is necessary, or
necessary to be heard because it was said: the former we deny. The necessity
was not antecedent to the diction: but hearing has it self to the diction, as
a necessary consequent. So this text is yet good against him.

Only he urges me with St. Cyrill's opinion of the mood, and also Beza's. I
had thought he would have made no mention any more of any Father of the Church,
because he says, I do not allow infallibility to their testimony. It seems
their authority must yet be good against us, though not for us.

To Beza's judgment we will oppose, quoad hominem, the interpretation of the
Rhemists and Ferus, as before. To St. Cyrill's authority we say, we can
confront it with St. Chrysostom's: and yet we do not build upon the mood; for
the reason binds us. Yet because he seems to have his mind turned in better
affection to the Fathers, it will be reasonable to set down St. Crysostom's
words hereupon: (...), he sends them to the Scriptures. And again also, (...);
And we therefore, when we are to fight with Heretics and are armed against
them, are strengthened from henee: namely, from the Scriptures; for so it
follows in him as a reason, for all Scripture is given by inspiration, etc.

Number. 12.
Your fourth text is, You err not knowing the Scriptures. And from hence he
demands a Contradictory Conclusion: shall it be this? Therefore all things
necessary to salvation are plainly set down in Scripture? Or rather this,
Therefore all things necessary to salvation are not plainly set down in
Scripture? For this is the far stronger consequence.

Ans. Indeed he seemed to love rather to baffle his Adversary than to answer
him. For here again he dislocates my answer, that where it was proper it might
not be answered, and where it is not formally contradictory, it may not seem
opposite. Does this become men that would lead us the right way by truth to
happiness?

The citation of this text comes in to give him satisfaction unto his argument,
that if Christ had intended this book for our sole Judge in all Controversies,
he would undoubtedly in some part of this book have told us so clearly; this
importing so exceedingly, as it does, and yet he has not done so. To this I
said, we answer, Christ has disertly declared his will to oblige us unto
Scripture in that he binds us to search the Scriptures; in that he says, ye
err not knowing the Scriptures; and also adding the other text to Timothy: All
Scripture is given by inspiration; and also 2. Ep. Pet. 1.19. We have a more
sure word of Prophecy: thus I said: and also allowed him the use of external
Judges without necessity of infallibility; and also I retorted his argument, If
Christ had intended the Church should have been the infallible Judge, it
importing so exceedingly, he would have told us so clearly, which he has not
done, etc. Now if all my texts be able to give a full account of our being
obliged to Scripture in point of faith, and not to an infallible Judge
external, it is enough for me, and my purpose, to which I used them: but he
cunningly draws that text from the proper use, and shows it here not to be fit
for a contradiction to that which formally is another question than that to
which it was applied, but let these tricks go.

I will now take the texts together, and from thence conclude contradictorily
to the present question, Whether all things necessary to salvation be plainly
set down in Scripture, thus;

If we be referred to Scripture in point of faith and not to an infallible
Judge, then the Scripture does plainly set down things necessary to salvation.
But we are referred to Scripture (as appears by those texts) and not to an
infallible Judge, (for ought appears clear by my Adversary) therefore the
Scripture plainly sets down all things necessary to salvation, the consequence
is plain as denying the reason of an infallible Judge; which should be, because
we are not sufficiently furnished in Scripture unto things of faith: then if we
be referred to Scripture in point of faith: as there is no need of tradition to
supply our faith in the matter; so neither is there an infallible Judge
necessary, to supply the want of the Scriptures manner of expression. For all
the Controversy betwixt us, in point of Scripture, must be reduced to these
two: either that all which is to be believed, is not contained in Scripture:
and this brings in tradition with them; or, that which is in Scripture is not
plainly enough set down; and this brings in the question of the infallible
Judge. So then, if we be referred to Scripture in point of faith, we need no
infallible Church, either for object or infallible resolution of faith. Now as
for the minor, that we are referred to Scripture, those texts prove
sufficiently, and he cannot deny it: that we are referred to an infallible
Judge, he has not yet proved: and I deny it.

Yea, what will they say, if the last text only proves an Elench; Thus. If the
cause of error be not knowing the Scriptures, then the Scriptures do plainly
contain all things necessary: but the cause of erring assigned here by Christ,
St. Mark 12.24.28. is the not knowing of the Scriptures. The minor is
Scripture, the consequence also would be able to maintain it self, but that
they think that we cannot draw a consequent universal from an antecedent
particular: for the text there is applied to a particular point of the
Resurrection. To this we answer, first, simply, we cannot argue an universal
conclusion from particular premises, because the genus contains, potentially,
more than one species: but they know that the resurrection is a main point and
comprehensive of more: so that Aquinas might well conclude him to be an
Heretic that denied the immortallity of the Soul, because (...) he denied the
Resurrection. It includes also the Resurrection of Christ, 1. Ep. Cor. 15.13.
If there be no Resurrection from the dead, then Christ is not risen. So then,
if by the Scripture we may be right in the knowledge of our Resurrection, and
consequently in the knowledge of Christ's Resurrection, which supposes his
death, that his Incarnation, his Incarnation God the Father, (as he speaks, if
ye had known me ye had known my Father also (then it does plainly enough set
down that which supposes as much as was necessary for those in the time of the
Law: because they had enough to bring them into the hope of the Resurrection:
unless we say with the Socinians, that they had no hope of the Resurrection.
And secondly, if the Resurrection was sufficiently declared in the old
Testament, it being so fundamental a point, what reason can be given why other
points which are also necessary should not likewise be plainly delivered? And
thirdly, if that and other points were competently enough revealed in the old
Testament, that the cause of erring was the not knowing of the Scriptures (not
the not knowing of the Church) then surely the new Testament, which is the old
revealed, does set down that and other points with sufficient plainness unto
salvation. And this is sufficient to our purpose.

As for the consequence then from the former Text, which he thinks more
probable, that because they did err, therefore all things necessary to
salvation are not plainly set down in Scripture, I answer, first, he argues ab
esse ad probabile, which is not rational: ab esse ad posse, is good: But we
cannot argue, that because such a thing is come to pass, that therefore it was
probable it should: for then because Adam did sin, we must say it was probable
he should sin; and so he had not been created with a posse peccare and a posse
non peccare in equal freedom: for probability must arise from an inclination.
And if they say that the case is different from the fall of man: and therefore
depravation by the fall does non incline the power of erring to an actual
error, as the power of sinning unto an actual sin; we answer, first, that they
had not best enlarge the corruption of nature by the fall, lest they bring the
Trent Council as to this point in danger of error: and secondly, we say that if
they exclude not the grace of God from taking direction by the Church, so
neither do we exclude the grace of God from taking direction by the Scripture:
and if they say men cannot err, if with grace, or by it, they take the guidance
of the Church: then surely with grace, or by grace, it may be as probable not
to err through the knowledge of the Scripture; and therefore his consequence of
more probability that the Scriptures are not plain because they did err, is
vain. Secondly, if those who erred were but a part and sect of the Jews, and
those that did not err might be the greater number, (if not the soberer,) then
it will follow by his own argument, that this was plainly enough set down in
Scripture. Thirdly, he supposes that which is not to be supposed, if he thinks
that we hold things so plainly delivered in Scripture, as that we cannot err
whether we will keep the way or not: for Scripture does directly work upon the
understanding, grace upon the will. It is therefore sufficient to us to say,
that things necessary are so clearly proposed in Scripture, as that if we be
dilligent to know and follow Scripture, we need no infallibility of the Church.
Fourthly, he might have been advised that this discourse of his will return
upon him to the prejudice of their Church: for it should seem then, as has
been often noted, things are not so plainly defined by their Church, since
there are such differences amongst them; even in grand points. Fifthly, we
distinguish betwixt knowledge in habitu, and knowledge in actu; their habitual
knowledge of the Resurrection in Scripture might be good, and it might be
plainly enough exhibited: but they were defective in the actual knowledge, in
not considering those principles of Scripture which might have concluded it,
according as our Savior does upon the place. And surely, as the not
considering is the moral cause of most of our evil actions (according to that
of the Philosopher (...), and therefore also says David, I have considered my
ways and turned my feet into thy Testimonies) so also is the not considering
Scripture, the cause of all, or most, of our errors: at least the cause of the
danger in the errors we have: and if they would study the Scripture
affectionately they could not err as they do. The Principles of Scripture are
sufficient unto habitual knowledge; and yet error may come by want of actual
knowledge: either negatively, by not applying them; or worse, by misapplying
them, they take such opinions first as are of use to them, then will draw
Scripture to them, as is observed: but they should apply their opinion to
Scripture; not Scripture to their opinion. Sixthly, and lastly, he did not
consider how near he came to Blasphemy by coming so near to a contradiction of
Christ: for Christ says to them Ye err not knowing the Scriptures; and his
consequence says by consequence, that they might err though they did know the
text, because it does not plainly set down the Resurrection, whereby he makes
either our Savior to affirm that they could not know the Scripture which our
Savior plainly supposes; or else that the cause of not erring is not to know
the Scriptures, as to that point: which how he will answer at that great day, I
know not.

And so his Syllogism comes to nothing, or worse than nothing. For if all
things had been plainly set down, they should not have erred: but they erred:
therefore all things are not plainly set down. His major is false. If he takes
should not have erred, ex part officii, it is true; but not to his purpose: if
he takes it ex part event us, it is to his purpose, but not true. It is not
false, that they might not have erred: but that they could not err, it is
false: A posse ad non posse non non valet. Means are not always used; or not as
they should be. We know our duty plainly in many things, yet we do not do it.
This argument is good against him; men have erred about the sense of the Trent
Definitions, as has been said; therefore all things are not plainly set down
by the Church: but this Argument is not good against us, because we do not
allow the form or rule of the argumentation.

His other answer is as uneffectuall, that they might err in the knowledge of
the Scriptures, because in the reading of them they did follow their own
private Interpretation, which is the most ready way to err, specially when men
oppose the public interpretation of the Church.

Ans. And does this conclude contradictorily to this proposition, that they
might not err if they attended to Scripture? Secondly, they might err if they
attended to the Church; because, (for ought is yet confirmed) the Church may
err: and therefore the surer way is to attend to Scripture, which they confess
is infallible. Thirdly, if he speaks of opposing the public interpretation of
the whole Church, we allow more reverence to the universal Church than to
theirs. Fourthly, is it necessary that every one who cannot submit intuitively
to all the definitions of the Church in points of question, should oppose the
public interpretation of the whole Church in plain points of faith? Fifthly,
Maledict a glossa quae corrumpit textum, This gloss corrupts the text: for
there is here a limitation of Christ's words (which else where he accuses us
of) without any color from the words of the Text. The Text disertly represents
the cause of erring in this matter of the resurrection to be the not knowing of
the Scriptures, without any mention of the Church: He will not afford it right,
unless we take in also obedience to the interpretation of the Church; and his
Church too (for otherwise he is (...)) which was not then surely invested with
the privilege of infallibility; which was not invested upon them, as some of
their most learned affirm, til after the resurrection of Christ. And therefore
if this were true, it were not pertinent. Sixthly, upon this whole matter, it
comes to this, that it is with them better to believe the Church without the
Scripture even in plain points, than the Scripture without the Church: for
otherwise he comes not up to the state of our question. And how good this
Divinity is, let those learned ones of their Church judge, who will thus
distinguish of the Scripture, that it is necessary but not sufficient: which
also in my opinion is by them intended on the behalf of the Church indeed; but
not to bring in a new necessity of an infallible Judge in matters of Scripture
expressed, but to bring in necessity of Traditions in matters of Faith not
expressed.

Number. 13.
Your fifth text is 2. Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy
whereunto you do well, that you take heed as unto a light that shines in a
dark place, until the day dawn and the day star arise in your hearts.

His exceptions against the validity of this text are two. One, that all
things necessary to salvation are not there set down, when S. Peter spoke those
words, because the Canon was not finished. This we have fully taken away
before. The other is thus, how will you prove that all things necessary to
salvation are plainly set down in Scripture, because one thing is plainly set
down?

Ans. To this first, take that which was said before about the concluding all
points necessary to be plainly set down because that of the Resurrection is so,
with the reason thereof: and the reason is good here also, because he seems to
confess that that one point of Jesus's being the Son of God and the Messiah,
might clearly be found in Scripture. This me thinks then we have gained, that
one point is clearly set down in Scripture. And this it may be conceived he
might grant me, because I could draw no consequence from thence against him,
for so he insists, how will you infer ergo all things necessary to salvation
are plainly set down in Scripture? We make use of it thus. If this point be
plainly set down in Scripture, then other points also necessarily concerning
his being the Messiah must also clearly be set down: so then here is a wheel in
a wheel, yea, many inclusively in one: and those also clear: but verum prius;
as it seems by his own confession. Secondly, if I should serve them with a
quare impedit; why do they not as well admit other points to be clearly set
down in Scripture? what will they say? surely they will say that this point is
plainly set down, because it is so necessary. Well then, we reply. If there be
degrees of necessaries, then we may be saved in any degree of necessaries. Or,
if this be set down only as necessary; why not all necessaries? For the rule
is good, A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia: If that clearly set down as
necessary, then all things necessary are clearly set down. The same reason is
the principle of universality; surely with God; who does all things in number,
weight and measure. For although that Axiom, Idem quae idem semper facit idem,
does not always follow as in finite Agents, because they may be defective in
their power, and there may be want of disposition in the matter they work upon;
but it cannot be said that God wanted ability to set down other points as
plainly: and there is no repugnance ex natura rei, that other points should be
as plainly set down as that; therefore if God in his wisdom and goodness,
caused by his Spirit that verity to be clearly delivered for our salvation; how
can we believe that he did not also direct the Penmen of the Spirit of God to
deliver all other points necessary to salvation with necessary plainness?
Again thirdly, if the word of the Prophets was a more firm word than the
Testimomonies of the Apostles (as Estius upon the place) as to the Jews for
the faith in the Messiah, then where we have that and the writings of the
Apostles in the new, why should we not account this a more sure word than the
word of the Church in this point, or any other contained in Scripture? Why may
not we as likely doubt of the Church, specially a particular Church, as well as
the Jews might doubt of the Apostles? And is not the Doctrine of the old and
new Testament more sure than the Doctrine of the Church? To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this, it is because there is no light
in them; as the Prophet speaks: then the Scripture is the rule of their
Doctrine, and therefore more sure: that which gives credit to others must be
more credible. Yea, and until they prove that something new in substance was
added to the new Testament above what was contained in the old, that text
availes also for Christians, against any thing not written. Neither can the
Romanist say, that that word of Prophecy shines in a dark place by the hand of
man in the Church: for it is spoken of the word as written: and the Prophets
who then wrote the word were dead. If the Prophets had been then living, it had
been reasonable for the Jews to have taken their direction from their mouth, as
it might be reasonable for us to take the word of God from the mouth of the
Apostles, were they now living: but the Prophets are dead, and the Apostles are
dead; by whom we know God spoke: but that God speaks now by the Church as he
did by them, we are yet to deny until it be better proved; or these texts
better answered. But we have one more.

Your sixth and last text is Acts the 17. where it is said of the Beroeans,
Number. 14.
they received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scripture
daily whether those things were so.

Against the proceedings of this Text he brings several Pleas: some common to
former Texts, as at the latter end of the number: these are answered already:
those that are new we shall here examine. And first he calls for one evident
clear syllable which says the Beroeans did search the Scripture before they
believed St. Paul. Nay, is it not first said, they received the word with all
readiness of mind?

Ans. First he says that which is to be proved, that those words, they received
the word with all readiness of mind, do infer rather that they did believe
St. Paul before they did search the Scriptures: For though St. Paul was
infallible in his Doctrine, and therefore might be believed, and ought, yet it
does not appear that they were persuaded of him: and therefore it is not said
they recieved St. Paul with all readiness of mind, but they received the word:
and they might receive it with all cheerfulness as good, though they did
search it, whether true. Secondly, they might receive it with all readiness
upon appearance of probability, although they did not believe it, until by
search they found it agreeable to the Scriptures. Yea, somewhat may be received
without probability, and with all readiness of mind too, as an Adversaries
paper: And that they did not believe it until they had compared it with the
writings of the Apostles appears more probable by the following words, that
they did daily search the Scriptures, if these things were so: their search was
an sit; (...). If they did believe, why did they still search and daily search?
Do we search for that which infallibly we believe? Then where is certainty,
which Mr. Knot makes necessary to faith? But he himself will ingenuously
confess as much as seems requisite for our cause, in these words, upon those
motives which St. Paul proposed to them before they searched the Scriptures,
and being by those motives and Instructions well enlightened to understand the
Scriptures, they for their further comfort and confirmation, searched the
Scriptures daily, to see whether they testified the same point, and this one
point of our Saviors coming being clearly in Scripture, perhaps St. Paul
might bid them search in such and such texts for it.

These words we must take great notice of: what motives they were he does not
express; but such it seems, as upon which many thousands did recieve it (whose
proceedings you can never prove less laudable than the Beroeans) But this his
parenthesis does (...). He might have left it out better. For why then are
these Beroeans commended? If there was not in them somewhat of excellent
ingenuity, why are they commended for this, that they received the word with
all cheerfulness, searching the Scriptures daily? Does not this belong also to
their commendation, that they searched the Scriptures daily? Nay, it may be,
further, if we may have leave to be critical, their receiving of the word with
all cheerfulness was concurrent with the searching of the Scriptures daily:
and so the participle [(...)] is to be taken per modum medii; whereby they came
to embrace the word: the use of Participles is not, it may be, infrequent in
this sense. However, it is not comely for him, when the Scripture does give a
reputation and honor to these Beroeans, to equalize many thousands to them.

But we must a little more reflect upon his words. Motives these Beroeans had
proposed by St. Paul before they searched the Scriptures. But what motives?
That is not expressed by St. Paul, nor indeed that they had any: Well, but we
give it, that they had motives. And if the authority of the Church had been one
of those motives, my Adversary would not have omitted it. And yet also we can
grant motives before the resolution of faith: So that those Beroeans might have
motives, and yet not believe before the searching of the Scriptures.

But this how loath is he to come to, that they did search the Scriptures, as
in order to believing: Therefore he does substitute other ends of their
searching of the Scriptures; namely. for their comfort and confirmation. What?
For their comfort and confirmation, and not for their faith? But if the
searhing of the Scriptures be of use to our comfort and confirmation, then also
to our faith: but not to beget it, it may be. No? As in naturalls so in
spirituals, we may be said to be nourished by that by which we consist,
Therefore it is said, Rom 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God. And if it be said that it comes by the word of God spoken: It is
answered, the word of God spoken is to be measured now by the word of God
written, unless we had as good reason to believe those that now speak in the
Church, as the Jews had to believe the Prophets, or the first Christians the
Apostles. But secondly, if the searching of the Scriptures was of use for the
comfort and confirmation of them, then this brings more honor upon the
Scriptures, because this is more to be comforted and confirmed by them: for
comfort at least, respects the application of the Gospel to us; and if the
searching of the Scripture be of use hereunto, as in the way of a particular
faith: then surely to a general faith much more. Thirdly, therefore if he
means by comfort particular assurance, then he turns Protestant in this
opinion: if not, he will be little differing from faith. But fourthly, these
Beroeans were here commended for searching the Scriptures, whether to comfort
and confirmation, or to faith: and therefore surely we cannot be discommended
hereafter for allowing the use of the Bible to the people.

But this he occurrs to: Neither hence is it made evident, that the old
Testament was thrust into every man's hand of the Beroeans, but that they
deputed their chief Doctors to make this search, and that for this point only:
namely, our Saviors coming, which, he even now said, is clearly in Scripture:
Well, as we have noted, we have here the main and denominative point of
Christians, by his confession, clearly in Scripture: but the old Testament was
not thrust into the hands of every man of the Beroeans, no, not to search them
as to this one point: Oh, how tender they are here in this matter! Si non cast
tamen caute. But was it put into the hands of any of the Beroeans? if so, why
not into the hands of all? If not, shall the Beroeans in the text suppose only
for the Doctors, and for none of the People? But some it may be would have
abused the Scripture: and would none of the Doctors? no, will he say, not in a
clear point: but would the Doctors then in a controverted point? If so, how
should we be ruled by them? Yea, neither the people would have abused the
Scriptures in a clear point, by his own Argument: because they erred, therefore
it is not plainly set down. So then if this point, about our Saviors coming, be
plainly in Scripture, as he cannot but acknowledge; it seems then the people
could not err in it. But then again secondly, it is not like to be meant of the
Doctors, because it being a plain point in Scripture, there was no need for
them to search the Scriptures daily: Therefore most certainly it is meant of
the people: for the Doctors also are not wont to be spoken of in a common
notion of the nation. Thirdly, it is to be understood of these Beroeas in
opposition to the Thessalonians, as appears by the text, these were more noble
(or more ingenuous) than those of Thessalonica: now these in Thessalonica were
not of the Doctors: for it is meant of the Synagogue there, as appears by
compare of the first verse of the chapter and the fifth with the rest. And so also
those who are spoken of in Beroea, were also of the Synagogue of the Jews
there, as appears by the tenth verse: now the Synagogue was not a Congregation
of Doctors, but of the people, with a Master. And so it was a rule with the
Jew, ten make a people: and where there is a people, there is to be a
Synagogue: and where a Synagogue, there a Master. So then this being spoken of
them of the Synagogue per so, it is most like to be understood, de communi, of
the people. And fourthly, if it were to be understood of the Doctors, I hope
the people should have believed them upon their own word, without the Doctors
searching the Scriptures daily. For if the Doctors be not to be believed
without their searching of the Scriptures daily, then, for ought I see, we have
done; and the Controversy betwixt us is at an end: because it is to no
purpose, that their searching of the Scriptures should be a condition of the
peoples belief, unless also the people be allowed to give their belief
conditionately to the search: and how can this be done by them, unless they
compare what is said by the Doctors with the Scriptures. For how shall we
believe the Doctors upon their bare word that they have searched the
Scriptures? so then, in effect, upon this account, the main principle and last
resolutive of the peoples faith must be the Doctors mere word: and why then
should they discourse fallibly, and conclude infallibly, as Stapleton would
have it?

To conclude then the debate of this text; we may have, I suppose, clearly,
these two corollaries from it. First, that it is not only lawful, but
commendable, whatsoever the Church says, to search the Scriptures whether those
things be so: for the Church cannot have greater authority upon us than St.
Paul: (no, nor so much neither, till they prove it better) and yet these
Beroeans were commended for it. And if in a point clearly set down in
Scripture, (as this was by his own acknowledgement) then in other points much
rather, because (by his own argument also) in such the Doctors may be more
mistaken: Yea, because also, according to our principles, positive faith in
such points is not so necessary to salvation until we see it plainly proposed.
Yea also, when a point controverted appears plain, the disbelief is not
damnative by the nature of the verity; but because it destroys Gods veracity;
which is the prime tenure of all truth. Secondly, we have also this Corollary,
that faith comes by searching of the Scriptures: for so it follows (which my
Adversary had no mind to take notice of) in the very next verse, the twelfth,
many of them therefore believed. Therefore; namely, upon searching of the
Scriptures: so that they did not believe blindely, and then searched the
Scriptures; but searched the Scriptures first, and then rationally, upon
principles of Scripture, believed. And these two propositions are sufficient to
unhinge the Pope and all his Cardinals, and all their Religion, as differing.

So that now the texts (whereunto he would wisely have answered out of due
place) being vindicated from his batteries, and standing against him in their
full strength and force, we may now, after this reinforcement of them, make
shorter work: having already given him more than he brings.

And therefore as for his Argument in this Par. Number. 15.
That this is not plainly set down in Scripture, [that all things necessary to
salvation are plainly set down in Scripture] and therefore not all things, is
answered by our denial of the Antecedent; and the proof of the contrary. For
the moment of those texts defended does sufficiently confirm the Scriptures
sufficiency in matter and manner to this end of salvation. We do not say, that
all things necessary to decide all Controversies are plainly set down in it:
that is not our assertion, nor the state of the question betwixt us. Our
position may be true, and yet this false: for all things necessary to salvation
may be plainly set down in Scripture, and yet not all things necessary to
decide all Controversies. Neither can they maintain this of their Church, which
they think more fit to decide Controversies than Scripture, for then why did
not the Trent Council clearly determine on which part many questions should be
held? But the plainness of things necessary is in Scripture sufficient against
the necessity of any Controversy; as the fullness is sufficient against the
necessity of Tradition, which is their word unwritten. And therefore are not we
bound by any necessity of our cause to find any Text wherein we are obliged to
take the Scripture for our only Judge of Controversies: for the texts before
maintained are good to prove us obliged to Scripture for salvation; whereunto
things necessary are plainly set down. If he might have made the state of the
question for his own turn; my discourse should have been impertinent. A
ruffling Adversary would have said that he had shifted and shuffled in the
change of the question, as if we had held, that the Scripture did contain all
things necessary to decide all Controversies. All prime Controversies necessary
to salvation, if there need be any, it does: and that is sufficient for us
against them.

But he thought he had devised a way how this opinion might be made good, that
the Scripture does suffice for the deciding of all Controversies; thus; Yet the
Scripture wants not that glory of being sufficient to decide all imaginable
Controversies, because she teaches us that Christ has erected a Church built
upon a rock, the pillar and ground of truth, having the Spirit of truth abiding
with her to teach her all truth. O excellent provision for the honor of
Scripture! One in the Trent Council, as I remember, did not like references;
but would have all done uniformely by the same hand: but we must from Scripture
referr to the Church. And as it is said of Cardinal Bellarmin, that being
asked a question too difficult, said, he could not tell how to answer it, but
he would show the party one that could; and then showed him the picture of an
excellent Divine: so the Scripture cannot answer all Controversies: but it has
reputation in this, that it can show, and does, an infallible Judge of all
imaginable Controversies, the Church. To this, first, methinks then, if it were
but for this use, the Scripture should be more common to the Laity: because it
shows so clearly this Judge. Secondly, let them show unto us where the
Scriptture does plainly show unto us this Judge; that they may no longer beg
the question. And Thirdly, let them tell us why the Church does not determine
all Controversies, as we have said before; not imaginable only, but real
Controversies; as concerning the Popes power in compare with a Council, and
concerning his temporal power: and concerning the right of Bishops: concerning
original sin: concerning the conception of the Virgin: were these determined
with satisfaction to all the Members of the Council? Fourthly, does the
Scripture give the denomination of this Church, which is the pillar and ground
of all truth, that should be the infallible Judge? Fifthly, if they think the
Spirit of truth does abide with the Church, to decide all Controversies by way
of an habitual gift, then must this Church have more privilege than the
Apostles had; for they had the Spirit by way of a transient gift, and therefore
some particular questions they did not decide by the gift of the Spirit: but
the Church must have a standing faculty to decide all imaginable Controversies.
Sixthly, may not we as well say, this is for the glory of the Church for
necessaries to salvation, that it sends us to the Scripture which is
infallible, and clear enough in things of necessary faith? This honor the
Fathers, before the universal Bishop, gave to the Scriptures: the Romanists now
would arrogate it to the Church. If they must be brought to a Competition;
which, in ingenuity, should carry the honor, the Scripture according to the
Fathers, or the Church according to the Romanists?

But he thinks, according to his principles, he is not engaged to find a
plain Text, where this is set down, that the Church should decide, with
infallible authority, all our Controversies; because, according to them, all
points necessary to salvation be not plainly set down.

Answ. Then first, according to our principles, we are not bound to believe it:
and we must account it no necessary to salvation, because it is not plainly set
down. And how then shall we know it? what by its own light? or may we know the
Church by Scripture, and not the infallibility, which is the privilege?
Secondly, How then could he say by Scripture, that God has provided a way so
direct that fools cannot err? Thirdly, if he confess that there is not a
clear text which shows this privilege of, and our duty to the Church, then
the disputation is at an end: for he will not dispute with me from the
testimony of the Fathers, for causes best known to himself. And if he says, we
must be judged by the Church; it is the question. Fourthly, therefore are we in
this agreed, which is the main point of the question; namely, that the
Scripture does not plainly set it down, that the Church is to decide, with
infallible authority, all our Controversies. For, if it were plainly set down,
we also should be bound to believe it, as being plainly set down, though it
would not therefore be necessary to salvation, simply because it is plainly
delivered. All necessaries are plainly set down, according to our opinion: but
all that is plainly set down is not necessary to salvation, ex natura
principii. And then fifthly, if he doubts of this point, as to be plainly set
down in Scripture, then his principles are less capable of certainty than ours:
for he has no ground certain of his faith, upon the account of the Church;
because, if the Church did ground her infallibility upon her own authority
contradistinctly to Scripture, she could not, by her own authority,
contradistinctly to Scripture, prove that she is (...) and yet neither has the
Church, or their Church, (for ought I have read) in any of their Councils,
determined it self by Scripture, or otherwise, infallible to the decision of
all imaginable Controversies. Nay, neither do Bellarmin or Stapleton, if I be
not mistaken, assert the infallibility of the Church in this extent; therefore
my Adversary in this walks alone.

Yet he says the texts he will produce hereafter are an hundred times more
clear, that the Church is to decide all our Controversies, than that the
Scripture by it self alone is to decide them.

Ans. This comes not home to the point. For first, we go not upon degrees of
claritude, but upon infallibility. Can they tell us how many degrees of
claritude will make infallibility? Secondly, All our Controversies are not so
much as all imaginable Controversies: there are other Controversies imaginable
besides ours. Thirdly, he supposes that of us which is not true of us, that we
affirm the Scripture to decide our Controversies formally: which we say not: we
say again, that for things necessary to be believed there is no need of
Controversy, because they are plainly delivered: for other Controversies there
is no need, as to salvation, that they should be decided, because they are not
necessarily to be believed. And also for some of their opinions, they are in
effect decided, namely, in a negative manner, because they are not mentioned in
Scripture: and therefore percutit Dei gladius, as the Father speaks; the sword
of God strikes them off. Fourthly, he is brought to a pinch: he would fain have
the authority of the Scripture for the infallible decision or the Church: yet
because the point is not so clear as to amount to our infallibility of their
infallibility, he puts it upon degrees of claritude.

But if it comes to degrees of claritude betwixt the Scripture for the Church,
or the Scripture for it self, who shall compare and judge? the Church? this is
the question, and it is a party. And persons are partial* the Law not. And
would not they have men determine for the Church? Yes verily: and he thinks
with good reason, then he allows them, as is observed by Mr. Chillingworth, a
judgment of private discretion for the Church out of Scripture, but not for
the Scripture out of Scripture. Fifthly, he differs from his own party in this,
for they think it demonstrable out of Scripture, that the Church is with
infallible authority to decide all Controversies. And how else can [the Roman]
in their Trent Confession, be added to the Catholic and Apostolic Church? And
how did they by their Authority determine that the Latin Bible, which came out
first by Sextus Quintus, afterward corrected by Clement the eighth, (though
the former by them infallible) should be the Judge and Decider of all
Controversies? So that, by the way, although the Scripture in the original be
not a Decider of Controversies, yet in Latin it may.

-- sed te.
Nos facimus [Romana] Deam coeloque locamus.
His texts of more claritude for the Church come in afterward, as he says, n.
58, etc.

To pass by here that which is not material, Number. 16.
and also that which is spoken of here to be managed by him hereafter in other
numbers of this chapter (which might give us an Alarm, when they come nearer us.)
He says here, he might have added to other points necessary not plainly decided
by Scripture, that great point, whether it be necessary to rebaptize those who
are baptized by Heretics. And this we will not here pass by unsaluted,
because we give reverence to St. Austins testimony produced by him upon the
point. We therefore answer, but with some expostulation, why does this come in
here? was the latter written before the former? There is some mystery in it:
but we pass it. We must answer therefore, first, that he mistakes the question
which he is upon: it is not this, whether the Scripture does plainly decide
whether such a thing be necessary or not, but whether it does decide plainly
that which is necessary. Now here he lays it down as a question undecided by
Scripture, Whether it be necessary to rebaptize those who are baptized by
Heretics. To determine a thing which is necessary, and to determine whether the
thing be necessary, are surely two things; the former respects the thing as in
it self which part is true: the latter respects the thing in modo, and in order
to the end, either of obedience or salvation. Therefore secondly, we
distinguish of [necessary,] it has relation either to duty, or to salvation:
the former is the necessity of the precept: the latter of the mean. The former
(if supposed) does not infer the necessity of the knowledge of this point:
because we may be saved without the knowledge of every thing which is commanded
by God, by general Repentance. Otherwise no man could be saved: for no man
living knows every thing which is commanded, therefore invincible ignorance
must excuse actual repentance. Now the second necessity does infer a neeessity
of knowledge; because, without the knowledge of necessary means, we cannot
obtain our end. He is therefore to prove it necessary to salvation to know
which part of the Contradiction is right, to rebaptize or not; which he cannot
do, because the practice on either part is not necessary by necessity of mean.
And the practice on either part is not necessary by necessity of mean; because
then either those Churches which differed from St. Cyprian, or those that held
with him, were in extreme peril of damnation; which I think they will not say.
Wherefore, if either part be necessary to be believed, the necessity is not ex
vi materiae, but ex vi proponendi; upon the clearness of the proposing it. Now
that which is necessary to be believed in the latter kind, does not belong to
our question: for the question is of those things which are to be believed
necessarily in order to salvation, not necessarily to be believed in order to
the proposal; but this clear proposal is not necessary, because the practice
on either part is not necessary to salvation; and therefore this is no
necessary question. And this distinction is sufficient to destroy at least the
most of all his instances of this kind. And thirdly, my Adversary needed not,
as to himself, to have made this a question, by reason of the practice of their
Church: for they account us Heretics; and yet when we come over to them, they
do not rebaptize us. And if they say, it is now determined by the Church in the
negative; we answer, it is not yet determined by the Church whether it was
necessary to be determined by the Church in order to salvation: for then it was
necessary to salvation not to be rebaptized; and it was necessary to salvation
to know it: the former puts St. Cyprian in danger for the evil practice: the
latter puts him in danger for want of necessary knowledge. And therefore the
former part of St. Austin's testimony hereunto is not appositly produced: for
the question now is not whether it be openly or evidently read in Scripture;
because we confess it is not: but the question is of the necessity of it to be
known. Let then the moment of this discourse be resolved into form, thus: This
is necessary to be known, on which part the truth stands: this is not known by
Scripture; therefore somewhat not known by Scripture is necesry to be known; we
answer, first, we deny the syllogism, because it is not an Elench, a
contradictory syllogism: for it should conclude something necessary to
salvation which is not known in Scripture: And if this be put into the major
proposition, that it is necessary to salvation to be known, we utterly deny it
until it be well proved; which we think will never be.

And to that which follows of St. Austin's testimony in the nineteenth chapter (not
the twenty second) de Unit. Ecclesiae, we, consequently, can easily make
answer, even by saying as he, that, If there were any wise man of whom our
Savior had given testimony that he should be consulted in this question, we
would make no doubt to perform that he should say, lest we should seem not to
gainsay him so much as to gainsay Christ, by whose testimony he was
recommended, now Christ bears witness to his Church: therefore. But what
then? What is this to our purpose? For first, this informs us what should be
done, but not upon what necessity, whether to salvation or not. In things of
question we deny not all due respect to the Church: but we are upon things
necessary to salvation; and amongst such, this point is out of question no
question. But secondly, those that should be consulted with, should be believed
in proportion to Scripture; should they not? yes, surely because Christ has
given testimony to his Church, in Scripture; and if we are to take the
testimony of the Church from Scripture, then are we to give credence to what is
said in analogy to Scripture: Now though it be not openly and evidently read
in Scripture, as he says: yet there may be some seeds as it were, in Scripture,
of it, whereupon the Conclusion might rise. And therefore where Scripture has
the principle, we give belief to the Conclusion in respect thereunto. Yea, the
prime and formal reason of believing the Church must come from Scripture, by
which there in that book, St. Austin does prove the Catholic Church: so that
if the Church be credible by the Scripture, then the Scripture is more
credible. But thirdly, this is said by the Father of the Catholic Church, not
of a part of it: and therefore they cannot conclude from hence to the Roman
Church. For it being understood of the whole Church, as such; a part as a part
has no part in it, but as it agrees to the whole. Neither is it said of the
Catholic Church for place then, but also the Catholic for time: and yet if
for the Catholic then, we cannot equally draw it to the Catholic for place
now; for the Catholic morally was more credible then than now. And fourthly,
as he has excepted against the concluding unto all points from the Scriptures
concluding one: so we, ad hominem, deny that he can conclude from the Church
unto all points, because St. Austin uses it for one point against the
Donatists. And as he argued from the Catholic against the Donatists a perverse
part which would have salvation only within their circuit in Africa: so may we
argue from the Catholic Church against the Roman, which will have all subject
to their Communion, or damnation.

And then also may we limit that which follows, Whosoever refuses to follow
the practice of the Church does resist our Savior himself, who by his
testimony commends the Church. This, respecting things of Discipline against
Schism, may be good: but what is this to universal and absolute assent in
point of faith? And it concerns the Catholic Church, as before; not the
Roman: or, if it did concern the Church of Rome then; yet dato, non concesso:
it does not at all avail to the Church of Rome now.

As for his distinction of using this Testimony, Not for the authority of S.
Austin, (with whom I am so little satisfied) but for the convincing reason. We
answer, that this is but a flourish, yet wisely made, lest he should be as well
engaged to answer the testimonies of the Fathers against them: I say then, that
we give more respect to the Fathers than indeed they do when they differ from
them: and we give as much as the Fathers desire for themselves. And why have
they themselves then left some practices of the Church: as unction with
Baptism; standing up in prayer betwixt Easter and Whitsontide; Infant
Communion, and others? But I shall conclude this Number with S. Austin's
Reason, mutatis mutandis, Whosoever refuses to follow the Doctrine of
Scripture in things necessary, resists our Savior himself, who by his
testimony commends, and commands to us the Scripture. Let him think of this who
is an Impugner of the sufficiency of Scripture.

To pass by his suppositions of his proof, Number. 17.
which are already nulled by me: he does here take notice of my charging him
with a contradiction in adjecto, for saying, we should submit to the infallible
Judge, whatsoever Reasons we have to the contrary: But this he does not
ingenuously deliver, as it was delivered by me; and yet, in effect, says
nothing to it, but that I do ill suppose any solid Reasons grounded in
Scripture against such a Judge. And this is all he would say to make out my
charge against him of a Contradiction in adjecto; leaving out those words of
mine, for it is impossible for us in our judgments to assent to that for which
we see reasons of Scripture to the contrary, etc.

May I not say, that this was not fair dealing? but to let this pass: if he can
yet prove, or any for him, such a Judge to be the Pillar and Ground of Truth,
whose tongue is directed by the same Spirit who directed the Pen of those who
writ the Scripture, then indeed I should suppose that which could not be: but
this I deny to be proveable by all the wit of Rome; and therefore I still hold
my supposition: and yet if this could be made good, I should yield my
supposition; yet I could not reverse my charge against him of the contradiction
in adjecto, which lies not in the supposition of Reasons out of Scripture
against such a Judge; but in this, that we must submit to such a Judge,
whatsoever Reasons we have out of Scripture to the contrary: For if there could
be any such Judge proved, there could not be Reasons out of Scripture to the
contrary. And Reason out of Scripture will bind belief against any proof. It
would not only put a demurr against proof, but prevail against it: and if the
proof were out of Scripture, then there should be a contradiction in
Scripture: for there should be reason for such a Judge, and reason against it;
and so the Scripture should not be infallible: which they confess.

Number. 18.
But this not right dealing with what I wrote shall not answer for the misusage
of Bellarmin, that he here accuses me of; because I said, If we are by duty to
go the way of absolute obedience to the dictates of the Judge, we must then, if
he says vices are virtues, say so too, as your Cardinal Bellarmin determins.

This he makes a calumny; because he thinks it as impossible for the Pope to
say that vices are virtues, as if God the Father should say, such a thing was a
virtue, and Christ should preach such a thing was a vice.

Ans. It would do well, as he said, to use soft words and hard arguments;
waving therefore his reflections, we say, first, the calumny is not in saying
of him what he says not: but in the mis-interpretation how he speaks it. And
to this we say; it is not necessary to be a calumny, for, it may be spoken of
him, as it was spoken by him, in way of supposition, and may be spoken of him
to be spoken by him. And therefore if it was no calumny in the Cardinal to say
so, it may be no calumny in me to say of the Cardinal, that he said so. They
will think a notionall supposition makes no slander, whosoever be the subject,
and whatsoever the predicate; and therefore if he thinks that I must speak it
of Bellarmin slanderously, he must also think that Bellarmin might speak it so
too.

Secondly, if it were as impossible to suppose any such thing of the Pope, as
that God should say such a thing is a virtue, and Christ should preach it to be
a vice; Then why has the Pope such a Council to assist him? It is well put
into more hands for fear of a defectibilitie in one. And if it be said, that
this was spoken of the Pope only hypothetically to his saying so, as being
assisted with a Council; it is easily answered, that this is not the Jesuits
opinion, that the Pope is infallible only with a Council. And by the way, if a
Pope be infallible only with a Council, why did Pope Clement say, that a
Council was always good, but when it meddled with the Popes authority? Is there
any point more considerable than the Popes authority? And is he only
infallible in a Council? and yet is he afraid that this point should be meddled
with in a Council? Then he must suspect his own cause in their opinion.

Well, and can God err, or can Christ err in precepts, and particular
judgments, as Bellarmin confesses in the same chap.? it is not absurd that
the Pope should err. And can God or Christ err in commanding any thing
unprofitable, or under too heavy a punishment? It is not absurd to say this of
the Pope, although it belongs not to subjects to doubt of this, but simply to
obey, as he says in the same chap.

Nay, if to speak so of the Pope, as Bellarmin says, in way of supposition,
were a slander, then Bellarmin slanders the Pope also in his second b. de Romans
Pontif. cap. 29. Itaque sicut licet resistere Pontifici, etc. Therefore, as it
is lawful to resist the Pope invading our body, so is it lawful to resist him
invading souls, and troubling a Commonwealth; and much rather, Si Ecclesiam
destruere niteretur, if he should endeavor to destroy the Church. Thus he.
Then he shall defend me: therefore may I be clear of slander against Bellarmin;
or he guilty of slander against the Pope.

But then thirdly, put case I account it no slander against the Pope to affirm
a possibility in him to say that vice is virtue. The Consequence, I hope, is
good ab esse ad posse, he has done so, therefore is it possible. To command
disobedience to Christ, under color of obedience to him, is to say really that
vice is virtue: and this the Pope has done in the injunction of his
dimi-Communion; as before. And let them, before they press this slander any
further, first, help Bellarmin to purge the Pope of all those errors in faith,
and determinations affirmative against Gods precepts negative in point of
practice. And when they have done this, then we shall be afraid to suppose a
possibility, if we cannot find further instances of fact. And therefore they
shall not scare us with a charge of calumny, until they have strongly
asserted such an impossibility. Indeed impossibilis conditio facit negativam:
we cannot err in obedience if we cannot err in commanding; but that he cannot
err in commands, is yet sub judice, and not himself.

All Protestants do say (as I noted) that the Scripture, Number. 19.
and only the Scripture is left us by Christ for our Judge to end all
Controversies.

Ans. This is no genuine account of our opinion. They do not assert the
Scripture to be a Judge in formalities. They say there is no need of such a
Judge, as Papists would have; since all necessaries unto faith and hope and
charity, are sufficiently delivered in matter and form, without any exigence of
such a Judge. And in this they agree with all right Catholics; not with
Heretics, as he would have it. And Heretics, he may know, as before, have
urged the Church for them: and St. Austin has dealt with Heretics by
Scripture, and therefore if Heretics use the Scripture, must we not? since
Heretics urge the Church, by his argument, they must not, they know the rule,
Duo cum idem faciunt non est idem.

It is one thing to use Scripture for the proof of some points, and another
thing to say Scripture, and only Scripture, must be the Judge for all
Controversies: To what end then is all you say against me as against one
misliking the use of Scripture?

Ans. This is all I have from him in account to five or six answers I gave him
to the charge against me, for using Scripture as Heretics do. Thus easily he
puts me off. Well, to this put-off, we say, first, that this distinction of his
imports a confession of his to use Scripture in some points; then is not the
proposal of the Church necessary to all points? and this is some abatement of
his former universality. Secondly, those points he allows the use of Scripture
in are necessary, as was intimated before, since Bellarmin does own the
Scripture for a rule also. And if Scripture does deliver some points necessary,
quatenus taeles; then all necessaries, as before, neither need these
necessaries be many, as Mr. Chillingworth has observed: and Tertullian also in
effect, Certa sunt in paucis. The rule of faith used by the Fathers was not
numerous in particulars. Thirdly, we say, not that the Scripture is a proper
Judge, much less for all Controversies. And therefore if they will stand to
what is here said by them, and withdraw that which is not duly said of us, let
them take the Counters and cast up the difference betwixt us. They allow the
Scripture in some points: we allow the Church in some points: they allow the
Scripture, I suppose in some points necessary, we allow the Church much in
points not necessary. If they would extend some points necessary, to all points
necessary (which are not many; we, not upon condition, but freely would give
the Church due reverence in points of question, and thus there would be soon an
end of the Controversies betwixt us, and in all the world also. For all
differences do arise either in Doctrine or Discipline; (if we take Doctrine as
extendible not only to points of simple faith, but also to points of
practice.) For then the Scripture should rule us in points of Doctrine: and the
Church in point of Discipline, unto peace.

But his fair terms will not grow into a composition. For he argues, that the
Scripture cannot be the Judge of Heretics, thus. All Offenders against the Law
will never be so much their own Condemnors as to choose, on their own accord, a
Judge by whom they know they shall clearly be condemned: therefore when we see
all Offenders against God's Law in point of Heresy, choose on their own accord
to be judged by Scriptures, it is a manifest sign that they know they shall
never be condemned clearly by Scripture.

Ans. This discourse in form seems an Enthymem, but in effect is a Syllogism,
if we take a minor out of the consequent. To the major therefore we say, we are
not here to examine what an Offender would do to save his life, but what we
should do to save our souls. The question is of duty, which we should be
judged by. Nay, secondly, the Offender ought morally to refer himself to his
right Judge notwithstanding his danger: and in heresy we offend against the
fundamental Law of God in Scripture. For though there be a respect to the
Church in the common definition of heresy; yet this opposition to the Church
does not constitute heresy, but rather schism. Heresy has in it more of the
matter about which the error is. Schism has more of the form in opposition to
the Church, because it is neither in things clearly commanded, ordinarily: nor
in things necessary. And so his argument from a manifest sign seems to be such
a sign that he had no better; but besides, the minor, which is couched wisely
in the Consequent or Conclusion, is also in part false: for Heretics have also
pleaded the authority of the Church for themselves, as has been said: and by
his argument, this is a manifest sign that they cannot clearly be condemned by
the Church. And then again secondly, to the minor, he supposes heretics
rational men, because they do wisely decline, as he thinks, such a Judge as
would clearly condemn them. Well then, they may desire to be judged by
Scripture, not because they cannot be clearly condemned thereby; but because
they know that that is the standard whereby their opinions are to be authorized
and made good, and because they are to deal with those who know there is no
other way of solid reviction for the matter of heresy, but by Scripture.
Thirdly, the Adversaries might have known, that as they have appealed to
Scripture, so also to the Scripture they have been sent by the Church: so St.
Austin dealt with Maximinus: so St. Athanasius said the Nicene Fathers
determined against the Arrians by Scripture, as before has been said. If
therefore they, who in his opinion should have judged them, judged them by
authority of Scripture, then Scripture is the Law by which they are to be
judged. And then the whole argument will be returned upon them, mutatis
mutandis, thus, All Offenders against the Law of God of their own accord would
not choose such a Judge by whom they know they shall clearly be condemned;
Therefore my Adversaries who are Offenders against the Law of God in Scripture,
of their own accord have no mind to be judged by Scripture: and therefore they
choose to be judged by the Church, which they interpret to be themselves: thus,
as Heretics, of their own accord, would be their own Judges: so would our
Adversaries with all their hearts; then they agree with Heretics. And so it
would pose him to find any one Heretic; as it would pose me to find how my
Adversaries Church should be condemned.

And as for the false glosses and interpretations whereby he thinks Heretics
may evade; why should we again say, that notwithstanding they were dealt with
by Law of Scripture, but also, so there are false glosses and interpretations
of former Councils and later too; else how could some definitions be so set
down as should please different parties? And why so many differences still? But
is this an argument for Theology? they may use false glosses and
interpretations, therefore they are not to be judged by Scripture: as good an
argument will starve him, for fear of poison in his meat.

And as for our giving of scope to these kind of glosses and Interpretations,
it is not so, In maxima Liberate minima licentia. Regular permission to search
the Scriptures is no giving of scope to such glosses and interpretations; then,
if so, in stead of the Beroeans commendation for searching the Scriptures, we
must read condemnation. For if Ministers may not give this liberty, the people
ought not to take it.

Neither do I against any Council firmly believe my own particular
interpretation to be true, but by consequent: because that which is so
interpreted by me according to lawful rules, I may judge to be true. And he
may allow me a power of discourse upon the propositions of Councils; because
he, as others, may hold Councils to be fallible in their discourse, but not in
the Conclusion. And is not this very disputable? Can I be as much assured of it
as that Jesus is the Christ? And may not I consent to the ancient Fathers
against the Fathers of Trent? Trent Hist.
And did not some Divines in the Trent Council complain that some
determinations crossed the minds of the Ancient Fathers?

And now, if they will consider that the Arrians upheld an opinion, which they
know condemned in a lawful General Council, namely, the first Nicene; and
also that the Arrians knew, and that others ought to know, that nothing, in
point of faith, could authentickly be urged but out of Scripture, they may
think they have satisfaction enough to this Paragraph.

And may what Christ and his Apostles have expressed, for the use of the Cup in
the Holy Communion, be extruded; and what the Trent Council determined for the
omission not doubted of? Call they not this presumption? Was ever any before
these days so presumptuous?

Number. 20.
Here my Adversary would maintain a supposition of his, that they do only
believe the Scriptures, not we.

Ans. This varies from the state of the present question: and therefore, when
he goes from the question, we need not follow him, for the (...) with us is
this, whether the Scriptures do plainly contain all things necessary to
salvation: yet, as he said, Non sum piger, usque sequor. His argument is this,
No body can believe this with Divine faith, who does not ground his assent to
this truth upon Divine revelation: but our Adversaries do not ground their
assent to this truth upon Divine Revelation.

Ans. Some of our Divines have been charged with too much charity: but we are
now charged with a total want of faith, and consequently hope too. Yet we may
hope to make his charge naught, and our faith good, but we need not say any
more than what has been said, whereunto he has said as much as comes to
little: yet now he diverts hither.

We must say therefore again, that this should not be a question betwixt us,
how we believe the Scriptures to be the word of God: for this is supposed
betwixt us as the subject of the question. And we say, that the sense of this
argumentation is to as much purpose as if, when we are at London we must go
back again, because we did not go the new way. As to the Assumption then, we
deny it. We do ground our assent to this truth upon Divine Revelation, Yea,
moreover we return him his argument in terms, and therefore they have no Divine
faith, so natural it is for those to speak most who have a mind to cover their
own defects. They cannot ground their assent to this truth upon Divine
Revelation, because they ground it upon the authority of the Church: for they
must either have an immediate revelation that the Church is infallible; or else
they must ground it upon the general sum of revealed truth; and that is the
Scripture: for as for Tradition, that which is of a particular Church is of no
weight, as to this business: and universal Tradition must go upon account of
the Church: now then, if they say that they have a Revelation immediate, that
the Church is infallible in proposing those books to be Canonical, they make
that to be of use to them which they deny to us, who have as good reason to
say, that we may as well have an immediate revelation that the Scripture is the
word of God: but if they ground their faith upon some texts of Scripture which
concern the Church, then they must believe the Scripture for it self. So then
either they must come to us, or else indeed they have no Divine faith.

And therefore had he no cause to be offended with that I said, that the
Canonical books are worthy to be believed for themselves as we assent to prime
principles in the habit of Intelligence. To this he says in a parenthesis, And
so is the book of Toby and Judith as well as these.

But does he say, this (...)? and does he not then find fault with the ancient
Church, who did not, as has been shown, give equal reverence to these, as to
the books Canonical? If they be as worthy to be believed as the books
Canonical, then they erred in not receiving them with equal belief: And if
they erred, then our Adversaries are lost.

And now as for our assent to the Canonical books in the manner of assent to
prime principles, by the help of the Spirit of God; they are not like to
prosper in the abuse of it. First, it is to be noted, that we are not now to
deal with one that denies the Scripture to be the word of God: for to an
unbeliever hereof we should use other arguments rationally to induce him to a
good opinion hereof, but when we are demanded by a Christian what is it that
grounds our faith of Scripture, one would think we might say, that we are
resolved to a Divine faith hereof by the Spirit of God, disposing our assent to
them as of themselves worthy to be believed, which is the reason of assent to
prime principles. And therefore secondly, we do not say, that our assent to the
Canonical books is by a natural light, as our assent to prime principles; but
that our assent is made to them by way of Intelligence, through the Spirit: the
light of the Spirit, as to show us the Scripture to be worthy of belief for it
self, is supernatural: but when that comes, we believe it, as we do prime
principles; not by discourse, but because it is credible of it self. Faith
herein bears more proportion to intelligence than to science: because we do not
in faith use a reason to the act, as we do in science: And this is intimated in
the common reading of that text of the Prophet, Si non crediderint, non
intelligent: if they will not believe they shall not understand; so then, since
faith is a supernatural habit, as the Schoolmen, the Spirit of God does
infuse it into us, as being an habit infused, as they speak: and this does
dispose us to believe the Scripture to be the word of God, as by him indicted,
And one would think that it is a better ground to believe it to be the word of
God, because he says so, than to believe it because the Church says so: and
it is more about, because I cannot believe it upon the account of the Church,
but because God gives testimony of the Church, and why cannot we then believe
God, test seipso. So all the assent we give to them is made upon the veracity
of God, which is the center in which all lines of Scripture do meet and
terminate.

Therefore might he have spared that which follows, Have you brought all the
infallibility of Christian Religion unto this last ground to be trampled by the
Socinians?

Ans. First, I do not see what reason we have to lay the foundation of Religion
so as to please the Socinian. One who maintained the Protestant cause was
prejudiced by suspicion of being inclined to Socinianism: and I am now found
fault with for not providing for their satisfaction in our principles. Well,
but secondly, I do not find that Socinians do abhor this tenure of Scripture.
And thirdly, they, to be sure, do trample upon the authority of their Church,
as infallible. And therefore this is to be returned home to the Romanist.

And also upon the former grounds might he have omitted what follows from [doe
you expect, unto all that you believe;] for although the object is to be
believed for it self, as a prime principle; yet is there not a natural light
for it: that comes supernaturally; and therefore faith is a supernatural habit.
But if they would be accounted such rational men in the faith of Scripture,
they do deserve from the Socinian a negative reverence by a positive favor to
them. But again, how far is that which I have said different from the
determination of Ratisbon in their fourth session, Scripturae dicuntur
perfectae quoad perfectionem eredibilitatis et exactissimae veritatis; The
Scriptures are said perfect, as in respect of the perfection of credibility,
and most exact truth. And the perfection of credibility belongs to the first
principles, which are indemonstrable. And as those principles have themselves
immobiliter unto Sciences, as Aquinas: so the Scriptures have themselves unto
Divinity. Here we must rest. And if every one does not believe them to be the
word of God upon this account, this does not derogate from the credibility of
the object, thus we say, that the Scriptures are the infallible word of God, is
evident of its own self, needing no further proof for the requiring an
infallible assent no more than the first principles, which are the object of
intelligence.

And also therefore upon the premises, that which concludes the number might
have been forborne, Indeed you have brought your whole Religion to as pitiful a
case as your Adversaries could wish it.

These braving words do not hurt a solid cause, they are to be returned to the
place from whence they came, who has brought Religion to so pitiful a case as
the Pontifician, who must have religion made accomodable to their pride and
covetuousness? No case of Religion so pitiful as uncertainty: no such
uncertainty of Religion as with them. For if they ground their Religion upon
the determination of Councils, wherein only Bishops have their vote, and the
Bishop of Rome his confirmation thereof; no man can, according to their
principles, be certain whether there be a true Pope, or true Bishop; as has
been said. Moreover, we can make use of intrinsecall arguments for the truth of
Scripture to be the word of God, as well as they. We can make use of
extrinsecall arguments better; for we make use of the authority of the whole
Church, and do give it, in this point, as much reverence as is due thereunto.
But therefore, till that which is here said for the settling of our faith, be
disproved; and also till it be proved, that we do not make use of these
arguments toward our faith of Scripture, because we do not pitch our final
resolution in them, our ground of faith and of Religion is as good and sound as
theirs; yea, in respect of our own subjective faith, more. Yea, the Romanist
might know, that he has been told, that Estius does differ from them upon this
point? and says, that it is not necessary to faith to be begotten by the
proposal of the Church, in the third B. of senten. 23 did. Yea, also
Stapleton in his Triplication against Whitaker says, p. 103. Ego igitur
quicquid in haec causa Spiritui sancto tribuendum est, plenissime assignavi,
etc. I have most fully assigned what is to be attributed to the Holy Ghost in
this cause, asserting these two things; both that by faith infused alone, or by
the testimony of the Holy Spirit alone, all faith may be begotten, when it
pleases the Spirit of God to teach any extraordinarily immediately; and also,
although ordinarily a thing is delivered by the testimony and authority of the
Church, yet no faith does efficaciously follow, without the gift of faith
infused by God, or without the internal testimony of the Spirit of God.

And again the same in the next page, to the same purpose, to clear himself of
the suspicion of giving no more to the Holy Ghost in this point than those who
put the last reason of believing in the testimony of the Church, he says
disertly, Ego enim, etc. For I have denied and do deny, that the last reason of
believing is to be put in the testimony of the Church; not only upon that
head, that that last proposition or resolution [I believe the Church to be
governed by the Holy Ghost.] is not had without the inward gift of faith, or
that he who believes this, believes this by a gift of faith and not by humane
faith or acquisit; but especially upon that head, that without any
testification of the Church or notice of the Church or of the knowledge of that
proposition [That the Church is governed by the Spirit of God] by the only
Magisterie of the Spirit of God, one may believe all that is to be believed, as
the Prophets and Apostles being taught by the Spirit of God alone, did believe
many things, for from hence it follows invincibly against Durandus and others,
since there can be but one formal reason of our faith, and some believe
without the testimony of the Church, but none can believe without the testimony
of the Spirit, that the proper and formal reason of faith is not the voice of
the Church, but must be the testimony, the Doctrine, the Magistery of the
Spirit of God. So he. And therefore there is less between Stapleton and me;
than betwixt my Adversary and me. When all is done therefore, we must come to
this of the Father, Cathedram habet in coelis qui corda docet in terris: He
has his Chair in Heaven that teaches hearts on earth; and with the heart man
believes unto salvation. Rom 10.10.

Number. 21.
Therefore in the following number he needed not to take notice of my differing
from others of our own Church in this point: let them agree with their own men.
Let Bannes and Stapleton agree with Durand. or if they cannot be reconciled,
let them never hereafter make any difference amongst our selves a prejudice to
the cause. It is then no more reproach to me to differ from others, than for
some of them.

As for the three then, whom he says, I differ from, Mr. Chillingworth, Dr.
Cowell, and Mr. Hooker; if they do not agree it, it is no infallible argument
against me even in the opinion of those three, But also, as to the first, I
say, and my Adversaries might have known, that he held not faith in the high
notion of a Divine assent, as they do: But that a moral assurance was
sufficient to it, and sufficiently influxive into necessary practice. And
therefore having this opinion of faith, he conceived no such need of an
infallible ground hereof, but took therefore a common principle for his motive
hereof, namely, universal tradition. Secondly, if he takes not his grounds from
my Adversaries, what do they get by him? For in his sixty sixth page, he says,
that it is altogether as (...) to him that the Gospel of St. Matthew is the
word of God, as that all that the Roman Church says is true. Yea, moreover the
same p. 135. does fairly show that the Spirit of God may give assurance hereof,
which he says indeed, is not rational and discursive, but supernatural and
infused. An assurance it may be to himself, but not to any other: and again, p.
211. that the Doctrine it self is very fit and worthy to be thought to come
from God, Nec vox hominem sonat. And is not then in his opinion the Scripture
(...); If then he had raised faith to that height of a Divine assent, as my
Adversaries do, it is very like he would have thought better of this assurance
by the Spirit to be more ordinary; since universal tradition, if it has any
weight, must rest in Scripture, as it is the tradition of the universal Church,
(which also he contradistinguisheth not only to the Roman Church for place,
but to the present universal Church for time) because we cannot prove the
Church but by Scripture.

And as for the other two whose judgments he opposes to my opinion, I think
they may receive convenient satisfaction by what is said to the former: that
they did not deny this assurance by the Spirit of God, but that it is not
argumentative to others. And therefore as to the question about the sufficiency
of Scripture, Mr. Hooker says, that this is to be supposed, that the Scriptures
are the word of God. And notwithstanding he thinks this is not to be proved by
it self, yet in his first book. 34. p. he speaks enough, in that he says, the
Scriptures do sufficiently direct us to salvation. And he quotes for it Sotus
in the margent. And if it sufficiently directs us to salvation, then must it be
sufficiently clear of it self that it is the word of God: for otherwise, the
principal point unto salvation must be known otherwise. And if they think to
argue well, that we must have all faith from the authority of the Church,
because we have the faith of the Scriptures from the Authority of the Church,
we may as well conclude, that since we have sufficient direction to salvation
from the Scripture, we are also sufficiently directed to this main point of
faith from the Scripture, that the Scripture is the word of God. Yea more; the
Scripture does give better evidence of it self to be the word of God, than the
Church can give testimony, of it self, to be infallible: because the Church as
such, in religion, is a non ens without Scripture in the substance of it. But
to make an end of this exception against me in varying from others; this is the
common Protestant principle; or else Stapleton was decieved, who makes account
that every one of us ad unum do hold the Scripture to be known per se et sua
quadam luce propria. In Analsiy principionem.
Therefore if the question be how we are privately assured ultimately that the
Scripture is the word of God, we say, with Stapleton, that we are assured
hereof by the testimony of the Spirit: if the question be how we prove it to
others to be the word of God, we can, for extrinsecall proof, make use with Mr.
Chillingworth of universal tradition.

His exception then against our private assurance of the Scripture to be the
word of God, in his following words, comes to nothing: for we need not, from
what we have said, say, that the assent of faith is evident, as to an object of
sense: but yet the assent may be more firm and certain. The formal object of
faith is inevident: yet may we more fastly hold to what we believe than to what
we see, because what we see depends upon our fallible sense: but what we
believe, has an infallible ground, namely, the word of God, that this is his
word. For this ultimately must settle our personal faith: or else we have no
faith, of proper name which is infallibly grounded: All believe that what God
says is true: but if to the question, whether God says this, God cannot bring
his own testimony, there can be no authentic ground of Religion in subjecto.
And those therefore who would not have died to bear witness to a thing of
sense, have died to bear testimony to the Christian Religion: and also have
died for it, assuredly, ex vi habitus, by the power of the habit of faith, not
ex vi traditionis, by the credibility of the Church.

And as to that, which he takes ^^^tice of, that I acknowledge a greater
necessity of such a Church to declare by infallible authority which books be
the true word of God, which not, than to declare any other point: I answer,
that it is not very ingenuously taken here by him, what I said; for I spoke by
way of supposition, that it would not follow, if the Church were infallible as
to propose, or tax and consign Canonical books, (as Stapleton speaks) yet that
we had need of the Church infallibly to propose every other point of faith. He,
it seems, took positively, what was spoken upon supposition. Every thing which
is given in discourse is not granted to him: but this he refers to number. 43.

For the ending then of this Paragraph, and sufficiently for the Controversy,
upon the whole matter, it remains, that the Scripture must be credible for it
self, or else the Church. Not the Church, that must be known by the Scriptures,
as before, therefore those texts by which the Church is proved in the truth and
infallibility, must be worthy to be believed for themselves, or not: if so,
then why not other parts of Scripture; and so we have our purpose? if not, then
are we in a circle; and must beg the question and never be satisfied.

Number. 22.
Here another argument is drawn against me from the effect negatively; which, in
the kind of it, does not conclude, A non esse ad non posse non valet. And we
may as well argue, that some have this way attained faith; therefore this is
the way: however, the possibility proceeds from the effect to (...), but it
does not proceed against a possibility from the denial of it to some. Because
Pighius and Hermannus have not found assurance this way, therefore this is not
the way for final assurance, is inconsequent. Secondly, the cause of
non-assurance thus, does not arise from the defect in Scripture, (which
Stapleton says, and some others is true and holy and authentic) but God does
not give by his Spirit faith to all. All men have not faith; as the Apostle, as
commonly we expound it, and though they are said to believe in the sense of the
Church because they profess the Christian Religion: yet by an internal act of
faith many not. Thirdly, neither are we bound to maintain this proposition of
theirs, Facienti quod in se est datur gratia ex congruo; and therefore, if upon
the use of means, they have not this Divine faith infused, it is no prejudice
to our cause: for not only gifts are gratiae gratis datae, but also the
gratiae gratum facientes are also freely given: and therefore is their
distinction, by the way, faulty. And therefore, if there be many millions
(which is yet more than he could know) who can truly and sincerely protest
before God, and take it upon their salvation, that they are wholly unable by
the reading these books to come to an infallible assurance that this is Gods
word; This inferrs nothing of moment against us, because, although we have not
ordinarily the effect without the means, yet because we use the means
therefore necessarily we shall have the effect, does not follow, if the graces
of God be free. Yea, fourthly, those millions he means are of their Church, we
may suppose: and they, we may think, are instructed to find no resolution but
in their own way, by the proposal of the Church: So that as St. Paul says,
Romans 10.3. of the Jews, that they going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God: so
also may we say of these, that they going about to establish the authority of
the Church in this point, have not submitted themselves to the authority of
God. Yea, fifthly and lastly, (to be even with him in kind) it is said in
Eusebius, that for some time in the Church, some books were doubted of: now let
me ask how came the Christians afterward to be assured of those books to be
also Canonical? Not by the former Church; for they doubted thereof: not by the
latter Church; that was impossible. How then came the Christians first to be
persuaded of those books to be also authentic? If it be said by the present
Church; we suppose a time before the Church then was thereof assured. Yea, if
it be said, that private Christians were therein resolved by a Council, we say
that some were assured of books, before doubted of, before there was any
General Council: Yea, how came those of the Council (upon the supposition) to
be so determined of them? It will be said by them, that they were assured by
the Spirit of God; then, as Stapleton's argument is, since there is one formal
reason of faith, the last resolution must be by the Spirit.

Number. 24.
In the twenty fourth number he argues against me thus, that if my opinion were
true, then let but an Heathen or Turk or Jew read the Gospel, he must by
reading of it see it as clearly to be Gods word, as he might see the Sun by his
light.

Ans. If they must be answered toties quoties, we say, they suppose that which
is not to be supposed, that we say the Scripture may be seen by its own light
naturally. We say not so. Supernatural objects are not seen by natural
faculty: for then what needed the testimony of their Church? The object is
fair; were the faculty fit. The Spirit of God does not relate to the object
directly, but to the faculty enlightening it. (...), as Aristotle in his
Metaphysics: and much more therefore is our mind unable to look up upon that
which is not only removed from sense, but also from reason: therefore is the
apprehensive power raised by the Spirit of God to make a proportion betwixt the
faculty and the object: and the difficulty of apprehension is more from the
weakness of the faculty than the sublimity of the object: therefore if an
Heathen or Turk or Jew were by the Spirit of God enlightened, he would by
reading of the Scripture have such an eye as might discern the Scriptures to be
the word of God. And also neither can any one by reading of the determinations
of Councils see that they are the word of God. Has God provided better for
their clear conversion by the voice of the Church than by his written word?
Does the Turk and Jew run to the Church of Rome as naturally as the Lamb to the
dam? Does the Jew think he has reason to recieve the Scripture from the Roman,
as to the old Testament? Or does he not think that the Roman should take the
Bible from him? and therefore, in course, the Jew is said to offer it the Pope,
as he goes to his Palace.

If this were true, it is impossible thousands should not be yearly converted
by this means.

Ans. No, if the Roman could help it: for he would not suffer them to have the
common use of the Bible, yea also may we say the same, if they could not but
believe by the knowledge of the Church at first sight. Yea, surely the reason
why so few of them do believe, is not because they are not disposed to believe
by reading of the Scripture, but because they are not disposed to read them.

This effect indeed he vaunts is to be performed by the Preachers of the
Church: who have found the concurrence of Gods grace to the conversion of
millions.

Ans. It is well that they have so good reason to magnify preaching: and yet
this action is not by their great ones so highly esteemed; and this practice I
think they took from their Adversaries, who had the first fruits of this
office: and therefore if it be so; the argument is available as well to them.
But secondly, the conversion was not, it seems, ex vi ministerii; but by the
concurrence of Gods grace: and surely the concurrence of Gods grace is
sufficient to conversion by reading. But thirdly, if the Preachers of their
Church (as Xavier) with the concurrence of Gods grace did convert millions,
then I hope infallibility may be even in private Doctors; or else we have no
need of infallibility in order to conversion.

But he supposes that reading of the Scriptures alone did never find the
concurrence of Gods grace to convert any single man (that we could hear of.)

Ans. More may be done than they know: and more may they say of their Preachers
than was done. Secondly, were their Preachers Preachers of the Church
objective? If so, then they had other denominations than did become them who
had a mind to follow the Apostles, who rather commended Christ to the Church,
than the Church to Christians. Yea; if St. Paul, 2 Cor. 4, 5. says, We preach
not our selves, but Jesus Christ the Lord, and our selves your servants for
Jesus sake; how could they preach themselves or the Roman Doctors to be the
Masters of their faith, and the Roman Church not only to be the Mother, but
Mistrisse of the Christian world? Thirdly, if any did believe by them, they did
not believe for them, and therefore was not their authority the ground of their
faith: nay, not the authority of the Roman Church; for that can have no greater
authority than St. Paul had: and what said he of himself, 1 Ep. Cor. 3.5. For
what is Paul, and what is Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye believed; (...).
And fourthly, is not reading of the word an ordinance of God? and therefore was
the Law read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day, and is there any ordinance of
God with which he does not at all concur? though he is not bound to it: yet he
does it graciously. Yea, fifthly, was not Junius converted to the Christian
faith by reading of the first Chapter of St. John, with the concurrence of
God's grace?

N. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. In all these he prosecutes the same discourse,
against the clearness of the Scripture to be the word of God by its own light.
And all the arguments therein do, in effect, hang upon one string; which is a
supposition, that we should hold this principle, of the Scripture's being the
word of God, to be as clearly assented to by a natural faculty, as a principle
of Science. Only in the 29. number he does dispute against the help of the
Spirit to see the Scripture to be credible for it self.

That supposition we have already taken away: and so the string being broken;
all those arguments must fall, yet what in them is new and of moment I shall
touch and remove.

As to the want of suffrages from the Ancients for my opinion in this point,
which he charge it with in his twenty fourth Par. I say no more than that I
have said more than he had any mind to make any answer to; the reason whereof I
have given before.

And as to his imagination, that if the Fathers had persuaded the Heathens to
believe the Scripture by its own light, they would have scoffed at them, we
have answered before, that we use not such an argument to persuade others: but
this we have for our private assurance, as we cannot assent to Christian
Doctrine but by the Spirit (for no man can say Jesus is the Lord but by the
Spirit;) so no man can give a Divine assent to the books of Scripture, but by
the Spirit, as Stapleton has affirmed: therefore though we cannot argue to
others the reception of these books as Canonical by that inward testimony of
the Spirit, which we cannot make known to others infallibly; yet surely we may
be able to prove to the Pontificians, at least, that there is such a testimony
of the Spirit of God in thesi: they will not argue from the denial of it in
Hypothesi to private Christians, to the denial of it in universali: for they
say that the Church which is to commend these books to private men (if they
think they are to be commended to them) is assured, that they are books Divine
and Canonical, by the testimony of the Spirit: so that, upon the point, we
agree for the kind of assurance, and they come to us for the last assurance:
only they will have us to have this assurance mediately, by the Church. So the
whole ratio and account of a Papist is, (...), delivered by Stapleton, Dei
verbum per os Ecclesiae intelligimus; both the faith of the Scripture, and
faith out of the Scripture we must have it from the Church. And yet the Church
Representative must have it severally from the Spirit immediately too: and so
there is less difference. And yet there was no Council or Pope surely for the
first three hundred years; in which time notwithstanding men did believe the
Scriptures to be the word of God; and then no difference betwixt them and us in
the persuasion of Canonical Scripture. Secondly, Dato non concesso, that there
had been nothing said by the Fathers touching this point (which yet, as before,
is not so) yet cannot we argue from them negatively as we do from Scripture;
because even the chief of their Doctors will say, that the Scripture is a rule
of faith, and the principal one too, some: but so is not the consent of the
Fathers with the Papists in communi, (for they will differ from them as they
did in the Trent Council) and specially with my Adversary who has, before,
contradistinguished the Fathers to the authority of the Church. So then, as we
cannot solidly reason from their use of arguing from the Church, that there is
no better assurance absolutely; so neither could we from the silence of the
testimony of the Spirit, argue, that we must only depend upon the Church. But
thirdly, he might have observed in St. Austin the reason why they urged the
authority of the Church for the confirmation of Scripture, in lib. de utilitate
credendi cap. 5. Scripturae populariter accusari possunt, non possunt
populariter defendi, namely, otherwise than by the Church: yet he also does
suffragate for us in his book against the Epistle of the Manich. Non jam
hominibus sed ipso Deo intrinsecus mentem nostram firmante atque illuminante;
not men now, but God himself confirming and inlightning our mind within. And
for triumph, Canisius and Hosius (besides Stapleton) of the Romanists are
brought in with their testimonies to the same purpose, that we have a greater
testimony of the Scriptures than the Church, Dr. Whit. De Eccles. p. 254.
namely, that of the Spirit of God.

As for that which follows, Really I think if the Doctors of the Primitive
Church had told the Heathens, etc. to the end of the Paragraph, how little does
it weigh with us. Really we may think that they think any thing will serve to
make up weight. We can use, to such, the same argument with the Fathers without
any derogation to our cause. And secondly, they did not plead the Church upon
the Roman account: and therefore, if they will have all, they have no share.
But to serve them in kind: Did the Doctors of the primitive Church tell the
Heathens of our ordinary Pastor, which should be the Plenipotentiarie of the
whole Church? Did they tell them of Transubstantiation? And had they told them
that these things were as credible by the authority of the Church as by a light
as evident as the Sun, the Heathens surely would have scoffed at them for
saying them to be so visible. And again he argues from the visibility to the
actual sight, not considering what is requisite in the subject, namely,
faculty and will.

This number is (...). Number. 25.
the argument is this, there are as many rays observable in the book of Toby
or Judith, as in so many chapters of the book of Numbers.

Ans. Would any one have expected so bold an assertion? But then why were these
accounted amongst the rest Deuterocanonical? why were they not accounted by
Jerome, by Eusebius, by Cyril of Jerusalem (as before) equal to the books
Canonical, as to confirmation of faith? Why rejected by so many learned men, as
Doctor White in his Defense of the true way does cite, p. 32? Well. And how
came the first Christian to distinguish them? Not by the authority of the
Church: then by some difference in the books by the Divine illumination. For
secondly, the Church has not, as to the Canonicallnesse of books, vim
operativam, but vim declarativam, as at most, even according to their greatest
Doctors: and therefore this they do not (...), but ex officio: then either they
were not declared in the primitive times, or were declared by some
discrimination from the books: if they were not declared, there is no necessity
now neither that they should be declared; if they were declared upon reason of
the difference, then there are not such rays in the books Apocryphal.
Thirdly, if these books were allways to be received as Canonical, then the
Church in the Primitive times erred in not receiving them. If they be not to be
received as Canonical, as they were not received so, then the Roman Church
erreth in the receiving them for such. And this Dilemma is destructive of their
infallibility.

Number. 26.
A sixth argument is drawn from a possibility of some omission of some words in
Scripture, as the little word [not,] to an impossibility of my discerning this
omission only by the reading of Scripture.

Ans. The Scripture is either corrupted or not. If the former, how can we trust
the Church of Rome, which pretends it self the Keeper: if not, the argument is
void, and Bellarmin holds the latter. Secondly, Conditio impossibilis facit
negativam: if it were false it could not be the word of God: therefore since we
both acknowledge it to be the word of God, we cannot, ut sic, suppose such an
omission. Thirdly, if there were a [not] left out, how should the Church have
power to put it in? For then the Church would have power to contradict the old
reading, and so to make Scripture: if the Church had not power, then it would
be as uncertain as we. Fourthly, if there were a [not] left out in things
substantial and necessary, it would likely make a contradiction to other texts
where the same matter is delivered (for it would be very hard to find any point
necessary to be one of those which are (...)) now since we both conclude no
Contradiction in Scripture (for then it would not be true and infallible) we do
(...) conclude that there is no such omission. Fifthly, if we may he persuaded
by the Spirit of God, that the Scripture is the word of God, then consequently
we are assured that there is not such an omission: but verum prius, ergo
posterius.

Here we have a seventh argument, Number. 27.
Luther who had the Spirit as well as I, if not in a larger measure,
contradicts me in the Canonicallnesse of the Epistle of St. James and in ths
book of the Revelation; therefore this ground of believing Canonical books is
fallible: since in a Contradiction one part must be false. And thus he thought
to pay me in kind for my disputing the error of Councils by a Contradiction;
which, he says, If you could prove, you should prove, that Councils are
fallible.

Ans. As for the Metaphysicall Law in Contradictions, that one part must be
false, if we hold any thing certainly true, we differ not.

And concerning the proof of Councils to be fallible by ones contradicting
another, it comes in here but collaterally; this is not seeds materiae: and
therefore as he brings it in we may pass it with a light foot.

In point of fact they will confess they may as well contradict one another,
as err.: and therefore we will not now insist upon the contradiction of the
Council of Chalcedon and the second of Nice about the Epistle of Ibas. But did
not the Council of Francford contradict the second Council of Nice in point of
worship of Images? But also to give them exemplum utile; the Council of
Laodicea rejected the Apocryphal books, as not Canonical: the Council of Trent
receives them for such, Ses. 4. So one contradicts another. And if it be said
that the Council of Laodicea was not General; we answer, that it was as
General as the Council of Carthage, which he urges below for he book of
Maccabees: for this was but provincial, by Carranza's confession. But then
secondly, we say, though it was but provincial, yet was it established by the
sixth General Council, as Carranza also confesses; and then consequently, the
sixth General Council and the Council of Trent do contradict.

And now as to the contradiction betwixt Luther and me upon the case, I say
first, that the argument is not yet valid to his purpose; the objects have
themselves equally to all: but all have themselves not equally to objects: and
yet, though Luther had a greater measure of the Spirit than I, it does not
follow nevertheless, that this book could not be seen to be Divine by the
Divine illumination; no more than it does follow, that because St. Peter had a
greater measure of the grace of God's Spirit, he could not deny his Master. As
a larger measure of grace does not exclude all possibility of sin; so neither
does a larger measure of the Spirit exclude all possibility of error. Secondly,
was not the Church of Christ as quick-sighted, by the help of the Spirit,
before the Council of Carthage, as then? And yet it seems by my Adversary, that
the Church did not clearly propose the book of Maccabees to be Canonical
before that time: and therefore non-acknowledgement in some does not prove
against possibility of certain knowledge. And thus, if Luther's exceptions
against those books were always continued in the height of terms (which yet is
denied) he gains nothing against us, since also, Thirdly, we return the
Adversary his own argument, if the determinations of the Church be so clear,
how do they contradict one another?

Next follows the instance he puts of those two prime Doctors of the Church,
St. Jerome and St. Austin, about the book of Maccabees. St. Austin, as he would
have us think, held it for Canonical: St. Jerome not. So then, here is Father
against Father: and therefore consent of Fathers in all points is scarce a
possible argument. But the cause, he says, of this difference was not our
ground, (this we have spoken to) but because it was not clearly proposed in St.
Jerome's time by the Church, But the third Council of Carthage (in which St
Austin was present) declared these books to be God's word, and so St. Austin
held these books infallibly to be God's word, etc.

Ans. Not to pass it, that St. Austin might be more likely to swallow the
account of these books, because he had not skill in the Hebrew Canon, as the
Greek he learned late. And not to pass it, that my Adversary names not the
place where St. Austin held these books to be God's word, and infallibly too:
it may be he held them so as the book of Wisdom, of which before: but my
Adversary speaks one word here ingenuously, that the third Council of Carthage
did but declare: well, and the Council of Laodicea did before declare the
contrary. This was before St. Jerome's time, being celebrated in the year 364.
as Carranza reckons: and the reason then, why St. Jerome refused that book, was
not because he had not seen this Council of Carthage, as my Adversary says, but
because he had read the Canons of the Council of Laodicea: for this was of
equal authority to that of Carthage; being both provincial; and both
confirmed by the sixth General Council, as the former Author observes: and if
so, then, by the way, the same General Council was guilty of a Contradiction,
as establishing the Canons of those Councils, which in this point about the
books of the Maccabees, are repugnant one to other. Again, if the authority of
the Council of Carthage did bind St. Austin (who subscribed it) as to the
acknowledgement of these books for Canonical; then the twenty sixth Canon of
the same Council does equally bind, That the Bishop of the first sea should not
be called the Prince of the Priests, or the supreme Priest, or any such thing,
but only the Bishop of the first sea. Therefore let the Roman either not urge
this Council against us, or receive it against himself. Nay, lastly, we can
better answer the Canon against us than Carranza answers the Canon against
Rome's Supremacy. For, the reason which my Adversary gives out of the Canon for
reception of those books, does not oblige to receive them equally to Canonical
books, namely, because we have received from our Fathers, that they were read
in the Church. The strength of this reasoning is resolved into this
proposition, Whatsoever is read in the Church is to be taken for Canonical: and
this proposition is false by the practice of the Church of England, by St.
Jerome's distinction: yea, also by the Canon it self, for it says, Liceat etiam
legi passiones Martyrum, cum anniversarii dies eorum celebrantur: Itmay be
lawful also to read the passions of the Martyrs, when their anniversary days
are celebrated. And also if that reason did bind the Fathers in the Council of
Carthage to establish them as Canonical, why did it not as well bind St. Jerome
in whose time the books also were read, if they were universally read? And if
the Church of God was sufficiently instructed in point of faith without them
till St. Austin's time (which was above four hundred years after Christ, as
Bellarmin confesses) why may not the Church be well enough without them still?
For either there must be nothing in them material or expositionall, which is
simply necessary for Gods Church: or else the Church of God for the purest and
best times must be unprovided thereof, as Canonically to ground faith. If they
confess the former, we have what we would: if the latter, besides other
consequences, they destroy the rule of faith to Councils themselves; or as some
now will say, by succession of tradition. Therefore by this instance he gets
nothing, it is neither proof nor disproof.

Number. 28.
Here he triumphs before the victory, he does here put a new face upon an old
argument. If you say that we must have a special Spirit (that is new eyes) to
see it, then you who have this Spirit are all Prophets, discovering, by private
Revelation made to your selves, that which all mankind besides could not and
cannot discover.

This argument prophylactical preserves them little: A special Spirit is
considerable two ways; either in ordine ad subjectum, or in ordine ad objectum:
it may be special in the first sense; and not in the latter: Now it is the
special Spirit in the latter sense which makes the Prophet; when some new
thing is revealed: thus we deny any special Spirit; which rather belongs to
them who will not have all things for necessary faith and manners revealed in
Scripture, that so they may find in the Church, by tradition, the points of
their Religion which they cannot find in Scripture; as is noted. But also the
special faith in the first sense may be subdistinguished; it is considerable
either as oppositly to those who have not faith; or respectively to those who
have faith: in the first way, we say it is special; for all men have not
faith, as the Apostle speaks. 2 These. 3.2. but if it be taken respectively to
those who have faith, we say it is not special; but common: for there is no
true dogmaticall faith but such; as Stapleton and their Schoolmen confess.
Yea, this argument may be returned to them too, if they say they are enlightened
by the Spirit to see all truth infallibly to be delivered by the Church, they
have the new eyes; and they are all Prophets, discerning by private revelation
made to them selves that which all mankind besides could not discover. So then
the other old argument, which here he incrustates, that if the evidence of
Scripture to be the word of God were such as of a prime principle, as this [It
is impossible that any thing should be and not be in the self same
circumstances] then all should assent to it, as they do to this principle, is
again slighted: for first, every one has not that supernatural light or eye
to see the truth of that first principle, that the Scripture is the word of
God; which we have said before: but then secondly, the prime principle in
Metaphysics are not so clear as to exclude all necessity of means of knowledge
of them, though they do naturally persuade assent: so there are means of
knowing the Scripture, which do not prejudice their autopisty through the
Spirit of God: and therefore there may be a failing of belief. Yea, thirdly,
the Spirit blows where it lists, John 3.8. Yea, fourthly, many truths are
assented to (...), as he said, which are not prophorically acknowledged. And
yet some of their own men have confessed this truth, being overcome by the
sovereignty of it. Fifthly, it is retorted, if the authority of the Church were
the prime principle for the evidence of faith, then all would assent to it: but
all do not assent to it: therefore by his own argument, the Church's authority
is not the prime principle.

But the assistance of the Spirit he then pleads a fortiori for the Church, the
Church having far more proof of her assistance than every private Protestant.

Ans. First, we have no to need be put upon the compare with the Church. If the
Church have infallible assistance herein: yet private Christians may have it
too; and that would be sufficient for us in this point. But secondly, the
Church is no otherwise infallibly certain hereof than we: for this is assured
to every one that votes it in the Council, the same way; if indeed they do
give their suffrage upon a ground infallible. Thirdly, the private Christian is
assured hereof by the Spirit for himself: therefore the Council needs not be
infallible herein as to teach it, because we are thus taught of God. If the
compare were thus, if the private Christian were thus assisted to teach others,
much more the Council, this would be somewhat like: but the private Christian
does not undertake this: and yet does it not follow that this infallibility
does attend the Council which does undertake to teach others: because there is
use of its teaching without infallibility: and no need of its teaching
infallibly this point, which we are infallibly persuaded of by the Spirit of
God. And fourthly, we deny that there is any points of as much consequence,
wherein the Church should be assisted with infallibility, as this, that the
Scripture is the word of God: because, if we be assured of this, we need not
depend upon any infallibility in the Church for other points, since all things
necessary are with sufficient plainness set down in the Scripture. Fifthly, as
before, the Christians were assured hereof before Pope or Council, in which he
places the authority infallible of the Church. And again, if the universal
Church had this privilege they speak of, they are to prove themselves to be
first a true part: and then also, that the part has the property of the whole:
and when they have done these, we can say as much, yea, more for our own
Church. And lastly, they are yet to show their clearer proofs of assistance to
the Church, than a private Christian has for the hardest of all points:
namely, that the Scripture is the word of God: which indeed, if it be compared
with the points of Controversy in Divinity, is not the hardest point: and is
therefore assured us by the Spirit, not because it is the hardest point, but
because it is the ground of all faith. Perhaps, because our Divines often call
the Scriptures, an undoubted principle, the first principle, you think they
hold this principle like the first principles in Sciences, which are therefore
indemonstrable because they are of themselves as evident as any reason you can
bring to make them more evident.

Ans. No, I had better reason for it than the expressions of their own Divines,
although we need no more, if they in effect confess as much as will serve us
in the dispute. But it is impossible for them or any other to fix a foot in
Divinity but upon this ground: or else we shall have no other assurance for the
last resolution of faith, than what we have in kind for Virgil's or Cicero's
works. Yea, moreover their own Divines give this character of the Scripture,
because it is true of it: it is not true, because they say it: and yet if it
were true, because they say it: we make use of the Conclusion. Or if it be an
unquestioned principle, because it is already granted to be God's word by all
parties, then why does my Adversary call this into question, which is the
subject of the question, and by all parties granted? And also this makes it to
be a common principle, that it is granted by all parties. And therefore are we
to be tried by it, as by a common principle: and not by the Church, which is
not granted by all parties to be that we should be tried by; specially, if it
be assumed that the Roman Church is the only Church: for then there will be a
double Controversy; one in thesi, whether all faith is ultimately to be
resolved by the Church; and then another in hypothesi whether the Roman be the
Church.

But we now put together that which he distinguishes, the Scripture is an
undoubted principle and the first principle, but not as the principle of
Sciences which are therefore indemonstrable, etc. We discourse thus, That which
is indemonstrable is as the principle of Sciences: but that which is as evident
as any reason can be brought for it to make it more evident, is indemonstrable;
therefore is it as a principle of Sciences. The proposition is with my
Adversary the property of the first principles in Sciences. The Assumption is
with my Adversary the very ratio formalis indemonstrabilitatis: so then, if the
Scripture to be the word of God be as evident as any reason that can be brought
for it to make it more evident, then we have what we now contend for: Now then
if the Scripture cannot be demonstrated to be the word of God by the Church a
priori; then is it as evident as any reason can be brought for it: but verum
prius: for the Church must be demonstrated by the Scriptures, as we have often
proved. And if the Scripture were demonstrated by the Church a priori, then
were the Church the cause of Scripture; which they themselves do not say: and
therefore may we give a reason of the Church by the Scripture, and not
infallibly of the Scripture by the Church; and therefore is it as a prime
principle in Sciences, indemonstrable.

And yet my Adversary would circumvent me in the next number, and bring me into
a circle, thinking that I am bound to give another proof by the Spirit why by
the Spirit I do believe that the Scripture is the word of God: but we stop him
at first before he goes his rounds, for he supposes that which is not to be
supposed, that the testimony of the Spirit is not sufficient to make it self
good to us of it self, and that therefore we need another revelation secure
from all illusion, to ascertain me the former.

Ans. This is little less than trifling: for first, we say, not this internal
testimony is proveable to others: faith objective is proveable by Scripture;
but faith subjective is not proved: but somewhat showed by a good life: for
faith works by love, as St. Paul. And optimus Syllogismus bona vita, as he
said, the best argument, to others, we have of faith, is a good life. But
secondly, we are as secure of the not being deceived in the testimony of the
Spirit, as the Apostles were in the kind. Yea, if we cannot be ascertained by
the same testimony, then how can the Council be assured that they are
infallibly assisted by the Spirit. Yea, thirdly, we are upon the higher ground
for the assecuration of our faith, because we resolve it into that which is
antecedent to the Church: and therefore have they less cause to put us upon
intergatories why we believe the Scriptures: for if we do not believe it for it
self, we have no reason to believe the Church.

To his Dilemma then, Either I try the Spirit whether it be of God or no; if I
do not, how am I then secure? If I do, by what infallible means? If I say by
the Scripture, you must needs laugh, because you speak of the first act of
belief, etc.

Ans. We say first, that he misapplieth the text of the Apostle, Try the
Spirits: 1 John 4.1.
it is not meant of the Spirit of God I hope he thinks, but of the Spirits of
men; which is our argument against them: and therefore can we not sit down with
absolute belief to what is proposed by man till we see it centered upon the
word of God, which we believe infallibly came from God. Secondly, the trial of
the Spirits there injoined is by examining the matter whether proportionable to
the word of faith: but here he draws it to the trial of Scripture it self,
which is the rule of trial. Thirdly, though we do not try the testimony of the
Spirit attesting to us the truth of Scripture, yet the matter of Scripture may
we compare with universal tradition; which serves us for our use in the
ministry of the Church; not for our faith in the causality thereof.

Fourthly, to be even with my Adversaries: we return them their Dilemma; they
say we must believe the Scripture to be the word of God by the testimony of the
Church, which, they say, is infallible, but we must infallibly know that this
testimony of the Church is infallible by the Spirit of truth, which leads us
into all truth. And this cannot be infallibly known but by a Revelation secure
from all illusion. And how come they by this revelation? Either they try the
Spirit or not: if not, how can they be secure? If they do; by what infallible
means? If they say by the Church, we must needs laugh, because we speak of the
first act of belief, by which we first begin to believe the Church to be
infallible. Therefore all his agains are sent back again: and the issue of all
will come to this; either this faith of the Scripture to be the word of God
must be resolved into the testimony of the Spirit, or of the Church: not of the
Church, because the testimony thereof is resolved into Scripture, of which the
question is, yea, if the testimony of the Church were infallible, it must be
infallibly proved by the Scripture; and also that it is our rule of faith. But
thus we see the importunity of the Pontifician for their cause: if we should
say we resolve our faith of the Scriptures into the testimony of the Church,
they would never ask us a reason of our faith: but when we say we resolve it
into the internal testimony of the Spirit for our own private assurance, they
will not let us sit down with that, but will demand a proof thereof; although
the testimony of the Church, if it were the formal reason of our faith must be
infallibly made good to us by the internal testimony of the Spirit, but that
which they would have us rest in for the Church, we may not rest in for the
Scripture. And yet also have we other arguments from Scripture it self which
have more moment in them unto the belief of Scripture, than the mere testimony
of the Church, as Dr. White notes in the twenty sixth p. of the way to the true
Church which is worthy to be perused also upon this account, that there are
several testimonies collected even of Papists for the belief of Scripture
without dependence upon the Church: as of Canisius, Bellarmin, Biet, Gregory
of Valence, Stapleton; some whereof we have quoted already. So then by my
Adversaries own argument, if we need not depend upon the Church for belief of
Scripture; then not for other points of faith.

The thirtieth Article has nothing in it considerable but for us, first, that
he says it to be that most fundamental Article, that such and such books be
infallibly God's word. So then if it be the most fundamental article, then it
is also fundamental to the Church: otherwise it is not that most fundamental
article, but the Church must be the most fundamental article. And if it be
fundamental to the Church, then we resolve our faith in the highest principle,
and that which is primo primum: and the Papists resolve themselves into that
which is at best but secundo primum. Our faith then being rooted in Scripture,
we can give a check to their vaunting of the privilege of the Church, as St.
Paul did to the Jew; but if thou boastest, thou do not bear the root, but the
root thee: so the Church does not bear the Scripture, but the Scripture it.

And secondly, we note in his thirtieth number what he says, Take the Church
without any infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost and their authority is but
humane; We assume: this infallible assistance is not yet proved; and till it be
proved, the authority is but humane: and yet do we not scoff at the authority
of the Church, as he charge us: but do make good use of it without
infallibility.

And thirdly, we might note that if some other had the answering of these
papers he might tell them that they are mendicants of the question: for first,
here they say, that they ground this point upon the authority of the Church as
being infallible. And then again, she has an infallible authority, which we
account a fancy: and yet again, this infallibility alone must be that which
groundeth not this persuasion but this infallible assent. And yet again, take
the Church -- without any infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost and their
authority is but humane. These things so nearly belonging and essentially to
the question are to be proved, not supposed: yet all must be supposed by them,
that so they might not seem to run at the ring and hit it, as we may speak,
only the last has a truth in it, but also it supposes in the drift a
supposition for their use.

But at the last we have an appearance of an argument, We have no other
infallible ground left us but the authority of the Church assisted by the Holy
Ghost since the Scripture has no where revealed which books be Scripture,
which not.

Ans. To this we say three things: first, that the argument is no way cogent,
because there is no necessity of either, if we can be assured by the Holy Ghost
that these books be Canonical. And if we cannot how did the Church at first
assure it self that they were Canonical? So then Omne reducitur ad principium,
as Aquinas's rule is. Secondly, unless they prove the authority of the Church
better, they had better have left this out; for otherwise there is no ground of
faith, unless our ground be admitted, if this be a true Dis-junctive
proposition, that either the Scripture must set down which books be Canonical,
which not, or else the Church in the proposal must be infallible. And yet if
the Scripture should have set down which books were Canonical, it must be
resolved whether that book, wherein they were set down was Canonical, by the
Holy Ghost also. Then thirdly, if the disjunctive be not true, then his
discourse is false: if it be true in the proposition, then we assume against
them that the Scripture has no where revealed whether the Church is
infallible; and therefore there is no other way to know it to be infallible but
by it self: So then it must prove the testimony of the H. G. by it self: and
if it can, then may we prove the testimony of the Holy Ghost concerning
Scripture by it self: if not, where will they set up?

In the 31. Number. he would squat, Number. 31.
and deceive the chase by a distinction, which will not stay him from running
round in the proving of Scripture by the Church, and the Church by Scripture.
He says, No Sir, you never heard me give this reason, unless it were when I
spoke to one who independently of the Church do profess himself to believe the
Scripture to be God's word, as you do. And this is the effect of this Number
for his defense, and of those Divines, who do not deal thus in proving the
Church by the Scripture with all those who have not admitted the Scripture as
infallible: for they first prove the authority of the Church (and that
independently of the Scripture) to be infallible.

Answ. This covering is too short, and indeed not sound; for I am not bound to
take notice how they prove it to others, but how they prove it to me. If they
prove it thus to me, then, by their own confession, they are included in a
circle. And they prove it thus to me, because I hold the Scripture to be God's
word independently of the Church; and so he says of me, [as you do.] Secondly,
whereas he says, If I be a Scholar, I may know that their Divines do not
answer so when they are put upon the question, Why do you believe the Church? I
do answer, that for my part I never pretended to be a Scholar, as they do,
signanter. I have neither head, nor heart, nor body, nor books for the
Controversies: but yet this I know, that de officio, this is the way of
constituting, and so of distinguishing the Church: and de facto, this is the
way that S. Austin, and also some of their own Divines do prove the Church by:
yea, this is the way which my Adversaries must take and do. And thirdly,
neither do we say, that we believe the Scripture to be the word of God by the
testimony of the Spirit, but to those who do profess the belief of the
Scripture to be the word of God. And therefore are we even with them in this
kind: for as they deal with Heathens as to the proof of Scripture by the
Church: so do we also, as the Fathers were wont by the Church universal. And I
can use the authority of the Church as an inducement unto the Heathen, although
the Pontificians cannot use the authority of the Chnrch to me as the
determinative of faith. So then if they can prove the authority of the Church
infallibly to be infallible without dependence upon the Scripture, they shall
indeed speak to the purpose: Otherwise they are shut up in a circle, out of
which they can never move their foot.

The thirty second number has in it much and little -- longae, Number. 32.


Ambages: sed summa sequor fastigia rerum.

The intendment of it is to fix the wheel, by assuring the Church to be
infallible without running to the Scripture.

In the beginning of it it would prove their faith good, because they believed
those, who delivered it, had Commission from God. But this satisfies not,
because the question rebounds upon them, why they believed that those, who
delivered it had Commission from God. If they say they had assurance thereof by
the Spirit, then they come to our kind of assurance.

Therefore they determine this belief upon two motives; one coming from the
Doctrine in order to God, change of life; the other from God in order to the
Doctrine, in miracles, and there he amplifies in two leaves, which might have
been dispatched in three words. Indeed the first he says not much of; for it is
no concluding argument. For first, it does not distinguish Doctrines: for thus
the Jew, the Arrian, the Socinian, the Sectary might prove his Doctrine
infallible. Secondly, the good life, if it were a result of Doctrine, yet not
from the points of difference, but the general fundamentalls of Christian
faith, wherein the Controversies lie not. Yea, thirdly, if this new life did
proceed by way of emanation or absolute connection from the points of
difference, we might join issue with them and have the better. Yea, fourthly,
Judas had a right Commission and yet no good life. Yea, fifthly, the manners
are rather to be proved good by the practical Doctrine, than speculative
Doctrine (if any Doctrine ultimately be such) proved good by manners. Therefore
good life is no (...) of Divine Doctrine; nor yet of a Divine Commission. Yea,
sixthly, Dato non concesso, that we mighr know the Church, and Doctrine of it
to be infallible by good life; yet this is not conformable to their postulate,
that God should teach us all verity by the mouth of the Church, as Stapleton
speaks.

Then as to the other motive of faith in the true Church, namely, miracles, we
can say several things; first in thesi, miracles are no certain distinctive of
a Divine Commission, because the man of sin may deceive by lying wonders, as
St. Paul speaks 2 These. 2.9. And also Moses, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2. Then this is no
infallible motive for the believing of a Commission from God, because we may be
deceived in it. And although upon supposition of a true miracle we might
conclude a Commission from God, yet this is not the way infallible because we
may be deceived in the truth of the miracle, whether it be such or not: since
the miracle cannot fidem facere de se, as the testimony of the Spirit can.
Secondly, the gift of miracles was a gift common to those who were not all
Prophets as to penning of the Scripture; and also not common, for ought we
know, to some who did, as St. Mark and S. Luke, therefore this is not
sufficient to resolve our faith in their Commission, because not given Omni nor
soli: for whatsoever does distinguish must have it self per modum differentiae.
Thirdly, therefore since we must have faith to believe the miracles to be true,
we ask how we come to this faith: if by the operation of the Spirit; then faith
ultimately is fixed upon our foundation, namely, the testimony of the Spirit,
by which we may as well be assured that the Scripture is the true word of God,
as that miracles are true. Fourthly, the gift of miracles was temporary and
accomodated for that season of the Church. And therefore cannot we prove by
miracles new Doctrines, as Invocation of Saints, worshipping of Images,
Communion in one kind, Transubstantiation, Supremacy of the Roman Bishop:
therefore if miracles did infallibly ascertain the divine Commission of the
Prophets and Apostles to speak and write: yet are not we satisfied by them in
the question of new Doctrines, which the Scripture gives us no account of; but
therefore he comes to Oral tradition. For, as for his reasoning in form thus,
in hypothesi, The Preachers preached the Doctrine of our Church; God confirmed
their Doctrine by miracles: therefore the Doctrine of our Church was confirmed
by miracles, it is (...). For first (not to carp at the form of his syllogism)
we say to the proposition, that if they preached the Doctrine of the Roman
Church as differently from the whole Church, they preached what they ought not
to preach; and so the minor proposition is false. If they did preach the same
doctrine which the whole Church received in Scripture from the Apostles, then
we grant the minor and the conclusion too, as much as doctrine can be confirmed
by miracles; but we distinguish of the time when the miracles were wrought;
namely in the time of the Apostles, and by them. For, as for miracles done by
S. Austin to confirm the same faith which we abolished in our reformation; we
say that Bid and Gregory and Brierly, whom he quotes for testimony hereof, are
not to us surely of sufficient authority in their own cause. Nay secondly, they
had best not add the testimony of the learned Magdeburgians, lest they be
ashamed to slight them in other matters; but also chiefly upon this
consideration; because, if the points of difference were confirmed by many
miracles, (which he refers us to Brierly in his Index for) then by the Argument
before, those points of difference were new: for as miracles have themselves to
faith; so new miracles to new faith. And if it was a new faith, then it was not
received by oral tradition from the Apostles successively: and then they are
undone. Therefore let them speak no more to us of the miracles of S. Austin the
Monk, who showed nothing so much wonderful as his pride in obtruding upon old
Christians, ancienter than Tertullian's Prescriptions; therefore it is too much
courtesy to take any notice of what he says about the faith brought into
England by S. Austin: and yet we can make use of it too: for if it be so as he
says, that the faith brought into England by St. Austin was the same faith
which was abolished by our reformation then we have abolished none but the
Roman faith: and the Christian faith in the general principles of it we had
before. And this might be enough for the virtue of miracles: but that he says
miracles are called a testimony greater than John the Baptist. Are they so?
then we take leave to show what his words in two places will come to, even in
the same page 72. before in the same p. he had said that a miracle does not
make a thing so prudently credible as universal tradition; here he says that a
miracle is a greater testimony than John the Baptist: whence we argue thus;
That which is greater than that which is greater is greater than that which is
less: miracles are here said to be greater testimony than John the Baptist; and
John the Baptist's testimony was greater than of Universal Tradition; then
miracles are a greater testimony than of universal Tradition. But let this pass.

And now we shall touch upon what he says about Tradition: saving that we must
smile at what he says about the truth of their miracles, that there is as
little to be said against them, as against the miracles of the Prophets and
Apostles. This is not to be answered until the miracles of the Maid of Kent may
be compared with those of Elijah and S. Peter, and until their Doctrine, which
they would have confirmed by their miracles, be found as good and authentic as
that of the Apostles, which was confirmed by their miracles. But to Tradition
we come. Thus was the first age assured of God's word by the oral tradition of
the first Pastors of the Church, who had received it in the name of God from
the Apostles, who gave their Writings to them.

Ans. This is not much to their purpose. For first, unless oral tradition did
exclude the divine testimony of Gods Spirit, they cannot say that the first Age
was assured by this and not by that. And this testimony is not excluded neither
by oral tradition nor by miracles simply: for Gods Spirit might assure them of
the truth of each: and then the last ground of faith is the testimony of the
Spirit. Secondly, let orall tradition be restrained as to object of thing: or
let it equally be proved of the new points forementioned, otherwise they have
not by orall tradition sufficient benefit. Thirdly, notwithstanding the
Apostles own preachings, which were more than oral tradition, and
notwithstanding all miracles done by the Apostles, which both equally had
themselves to al then hearers of the one or spectators of the other yet as many
as were ordained to eternal life believed Acts 13.48. So that the belief did
effectually follow upon the efficacy of the Spirit of God applying the means of
faith home to their Consciences. It is not said as many as did believe were
ordained to eternal life, as if the belief foreseen had it self antecedenter
to the ordination; but as many as were ordained to eternal life believed.
Fourthly, as for the Jews and Proselytes they had also, who lived in the time
of Christ, for the means of their assurance, Moses and the Prophets; who had
prophesied of Christ and Christian Doctrine.

And as for that which follows, that the first Pastors (besides their oral
tradition) did assure them that the Spirit of God would abide with the Church,
teaching her all truth, etc. We answer, first, if the first Pastors did teach
any thing, they could teach nothing but what they received from the Apostles
who gave their writings to them, as before: and why then may not we take it
better from the writings of the Apostles than from their teaching? for primum
in suo genere est mensura reliquorum. But secondly, where have they sufficient
inducement of belief either by orall tradition, or miracles, or whatsoever
prudential motives, that this respects the Church under the formality of a
Representative? Yea, thirdly therefore, if so, how was it made true to the
Church in those Centuries wherein there was no formal Representative; namely,
for 200 years and more wherein they had nothing but tradition to make them give
an infallible assent to their Church, as himself says in this Paragraph?
Fourthly, if this promise attended the Church under the account of a
Representative, yet of the whole Church: and what is this to the Roman Church
which is but a part even in St. Jeroms judgment in his Epistle to Evagrius?
Yea, also fifthly, that promise was not spoken by the Apostles to the Church,
but by Christ to the Apostles, and therefore can it not be drawn down in a
parallel line to all the ages of the Church: and therefore that which follows
in the 71 p. is without any foundation. Debile fundamentum fallit opus.

But he reinforceth the power of universal tradition. Now there is nothing
which can make any thing more prudently credible than universal tradition, and
so he prefers it to a miracle.

Ans. And have they vouched universal tradition? by universal tradition they
may be cast: for they cannot find universal tradition for their supernumerary
points: and there was universal tradition for some points which they have cast
off, as before; namely, the millenary point, and infant baptism. So then, by
their own argument, they are unprovided of such a proof than which nothing can
make a thing more prudently credible. Secondly, if he means by the terms
[prudently credible] precisely such, then he derogates from infallibility: and
so all this discourse comes short of the state of the question, which respects
infallible assurance. If he means it subordinatly to that which makes
infallible assurance, then why does he insist upon this as the primum mobile of
all faith? and then let them tell us what that is which does absolutely fix
belief, and determines doubting. And surely the terms he uses per se do seem
to be termini diminuentes, that which is urged as prudently credible abstracts
necessarily from that which is infallibly credible: for they are sub diverso
genere. And so when all comes to all, upon the whole matter, and at the foot of
the account, all faith goes no higher than a prudentiall assent. Then thirdly,
therefore as to the force of the Argument, he has no Adversary; for we can say
so to, Nothing can make any thing more prudently credible than universal
tradition: and we can make use of this motive as well as the Roman, yea,
somewhat better, because he will shrink the whole Church into one City of Rome.
But fourthly, suppose nothing in the kind of that which is prudently credible,
as such, were above universal tradition: yet this concludes not rightly that
absolutely, or in an higher kind nothing is more credible: for this testimony
of the Spirit, which is not yet disproved, makes a thing not only prudently
credible, but necessarily and in the way of Divine faith. And that which is
prudently credible does not include this: but this eminently includes that
which is prudentiall credibility.

Yet he goes on. Yet here I entreat you to mark how they resolved their faith
then, etc. namely, in the space of the 200 years and more wherein they had
nothing but tradition to make them give an infallible assent to their Church.

Ans. This I have marked and not precariously. But what shall I see in it that
will give a sober man any satisfaction? For first, what if they did believe the
soul to be immortal, because God said it by the Church; and the Church,
because it said that it had Commission from God, is authorized with
infallibility; and did also believe this because the Church said so; and why
so, because they would do so? what of all this? therefore we are not infallibly
assured that the Scripture is the word of God by the testimony of the Spirit?
If they did believe indeed in way of a Divine faith, then the Spirit of God did
assure them by tradition. For otherwise they forsake the ancient Theological
account of faith; and they must either say, that faith is not an habit infused;
or that it may be an habit infused without the Spirit of God, but if they
believed improperly, or in the way of humane faith, (as we do believe there
are seven hills at Rome, without universal tradition or a miracle) then this
is not to the purpose; for the discourse is peccant in the ignorance of the
Elench: we can say as much without contradiction to our cause. Secondly, they
cannot surely expect that we should gratify them so much as to say there is as
much reason to believe tradition now as then, because now they themselves will
say, that we have the benefit of what assurance the general Councils can make.
And also 3. we must here note out of their own words, for the use of our cause,
that for the space of 200 years and more they had nothing but tradition to make
them give an infallible assent to their Church: So then for the same space they
had not the coroboration of general Councils: and therefore these do not make
the reason of belief simply as they would have it, because the Church was so
long without them. 4. Though the universal comprehends particulars, yet a
particular does not comprehend an universal: therefore whatsoever assent is due
to tradition universal is not due to tradition particular of Rome. This is
their trick to build all upon the common ground of the whole Church: and then
to enclose the universal Church within the walls of Rome. This we must enter
our plea against upon all occasions. 5. We see they are come off unto some
latitude in their conception of faith, because the last resolution in this
quest of faith they make to be thus, and they would do so because they would do
so, and again, because it had been more folly not to accept of this Church's
Commission to teach them infallibly all truths: So that now the acquiscence of
the soul in the deep mystery of faith must be terminated and determined upon
the variable point and principle of prudence; and that which must eternaly
setle our mind in the first and last ground of infallibility, must be this; we
do so because we will do so, or because it were folly not to believe. So then,
since, currente rota, the discourse is come to this; let us have our liberty to
believe as we do believe, because we see it to be folly (for ought can be seen
by them) to accept the Church's Commission to teach infallibly all truths.
Sixthly, if they say all truths, then they seem to be fallen from their former
Concession, and also Stapleton's, that some truths may be believed without
necessity of the Church. Seventhly, as for the immortality of the soul, which
they insist in to have been believed, because God said it by the Church, we say
easily, that this might with less difficulty be received from the Church,
because it is surely probable, and some will say demonstrable, by reason: and
therefore is not only asserted by Plato, who might have it from the Jews by
redundance in Egypt, (whither he and Pythagoras and some others traveled for
wisdom, as Justin Martyr witnesses) but also in effect, as I think, by
Aristotle. And also here certainly they must be put to distinguish betwixt the
Church of Rome and the whole Church; or else his words are not true; or else
Pope John the 22. did not belong to the Church; for he did not commend to
others the Faith of the Immortality of the Soul.

And yet he goes on. Which Commission, to teach them infallibly all truth they
knew by tradition to have been ever accepted as Divine by all good people. This
reason, if I may say so, is surely full of it self, but not solid, for it does
in effect run round again; and the Faith of the Church is proved by the Church:
for they make all good people to be convertible with the Church: and therefore
they make the holy Catholic Church to be the visible. But how then is the
Church Regula regulata, the Rule ruled, as has been confessed before?
Secondly, must we content our selves with this in the grand concernment of
faith, because the Church did accept this Commission as Divine, which we know
by Tradition? but how shall we know this Tradition to be of the Church, before
we know the Church? Are they advised of this? then must we come to be assured
of the Doctrine before we be assured of the Church. And this Doctrine we must
be assured of independently of the Church, because we cannot know the Church
but by the Doctrine; and by the Doctrine of the Scripture too, as S. Austin
discourses against the Donatists. Thirdly, if all good people know by
tradition this Commission to be divine, then my Adversary needed not to have
pinched the last resolution of faith so as to have said, they believed, because
they would do so, or because it had been mere folly not to accept this
commission: for though universal Tradition cannot transcend its sphere unto a
causality of proper faith divine; yet has it more reason in it than to make a
general belief arbitrary, or to preserve the act of it from folly in the
negative. A Divine assurance will not be compared with a negative prudence: but
universal tradition does surpass it. We had best then compound the difference
betwixt himself by a kind of division thus, negative prudence was suitable to
his former proof (Aqua ascendit quantum descendit) but Divine assurance (which
I suppose he urges by tradition) is necessary for the question. For the
certainty of faith is such as cui non potest subesse falsum, in which there can
be no falsity: and therefore probability cannot make faith; and negative
prudence can amount no higher than probability. Fourthly, if we must now set
the basis and the foundation of all Divine faith in universal tradition, then
Mr. Chillingworth carries the victory clearly from the Romanist: for this he
disputed for in opposition to the Roman. Fifthly, All good people cannot make a
demonstration or faith of a Conclusion. And we have cause to note this as
invalid, because if goodness of manners were simply probative of true faith,
then we should be all naught in the Roman opinion, because we differ with them
in faith: for if we had been all good people, we should have accepted their
grounds; and hence we see their pretended reason of uncharitableness to us;
wherein they communicate with Sects or Sects with them. But if goodness of life
be so profitable for proof of truth, then my Adversary with the rest of the
Pontificians do not so wisely distinguish betwixt morality and infallibility in
their Popes: For surely then Gregory the seventh had been no good head of the
Church; nor Alexander the sixth, who surely laughed* in his sleeve when he said
to an Ambassador, Quantum lucri nobis peperitilla fabula de Christo, I had
thought goodness had not belonged to a professor of Divinity, as such. Indeed
it becoms all Scholars to be very good: but this is one of the first times that
I heard of this argument. Let them therefore put in some formal principle of
discerning truth, as goodness is not; unless the will can prescribe to the
judgment, as the judgment to the will, and if it can, they have the worse
cause. Therefore may we conclude this long Paragraph with a sober denial of
what he concludes it with: the ground upon which you believe Scripture to be
the word of God, is thought to be Chimaerical by some of your best Writers. It
is proved otherwise, and that it is not accounted foolish or Chimerical by some
of the best of our Writers, we have seen before; neither Mr. Hooker nor Mr.
Chillingworth: nay, nor by some of their best Writers neither, as Stapleton;
besides some others quoted by Dr. White, as before. But if he would stand to
St. Austin, he might have spared this dispute about Scripture; for we are not
to dispute the truth of Scripture, he says, as of other writings. To conclude
then this number in kind, we might as well take the boldness to say, that
their ground upon which they stand in the maintenance of their faith as
different from us, is, (...).

A Lion before, a Dragon behind, and a Chimera in the middle.

In this number he urges unsecurity of our grounding faith, as to the
ignorant, in translations: Number. 34.
but this has been by him pressed before, and by me answered: and nothing is
here replied by him: but somewhat more is promised, chapter 4. n. 9. And therefore
might we skip it, but it may be he would interpret our omission to his
advantage. He says then. How unsecurely the greater part of your Religion did
ground their faith, because they must trust the translations of private men,
and believe them rather and use them rather than the translations used by the
Church in General Councils.

Ecce iterum Crispinus -- but we answer, in this he would have three
propositions granted him; one, that General Councils did use their Latin
translation. Secondly, that our translations are the offspring of private men.
Thirdly, that most of us must ground their faith in the trust of private men's
translations. To these we answer in three words, and in general, denying all
of them. As to the first, we say that the General Councils which were
celebrated in Greece did not surely make use of the Latin translation. Nay,
secondly, their Latin translation, which they would have to be Jerome's for
antiquity, was not at first received in the Church, but denied by St. Austin.
Yea, thirdly, their Latin translation, which now they use cannot be St.
Jerome's: for I hope it was mended by Sixtus Quintus, and again refined by
Clement the eighth and surely though it was Canonized by the Trent Council
before it was made; yet surely it was not made current in the Church for use
before it was born. And if they say, there is no real and material difference
betwixt their Latin as now and in ancient times, we say first, absolutely,
that Isider Clarius, who came after Clement, will then find fault with both in
several thousand places: But then also we say in compare, neither are there
any real and material differences in our English from the original. But
fourthly, did the General Councils use the Latin translation for their Judge
in Scripture, then are not the General Councils infallible, because that
translation was not infallibly made; nor made infallible by the Church even in
the Trent Council, as some of their own have intimated, as before.

To the second proposition, we give also a denial. Our English translation is
not to be accounted the translation of private men; because it is authorized by
our Church, although at first made by private men: And what if they yet made
good to hinder as great an assistance of the spirit of God to the establishment
of this Translation, as they find for their Remish Testament. That which is
made by private men is made more than private by authority of the Church. And
if they deny this distinction, they undo all their Councils. And if they say
our Church has it self, as a private part, to the whole: so we say does the
Roman, (...).

Thirdly, As to the third proposition, we deny it also: the most do not trust
in the Translations: nay, none do trust in Translations, simply; because they
are not Scripture, as per se; but analogically to the Scripture in the
original. So that ultimately they are assured, that the translation is in the
matter agreeable to Scripture, as they are assured that the Scripture is the
word of God, namely, through faith infused by the Spirit of God. So they do not
believe the Translation, but that which is translated. The Translation formally
is no mean to assure their Faith; but is a mean of conveyance of it to their
knowledge. And surely our people may as well believe that the Translation is as
free from all damnative error; as their people may believe what their Church
proposes to be free from damnative error: first, because they rely upon a
Translation that teach, and a Translation not so good, Secondly, because our
people can consult the Translation: so cannot their people understand the
Vulgar Latin: and therefore if those who translated it were not deceived, yet
those who propose it may deceive the people: and thirdly, because the authority
of their Translation were far greater, yet was it made by those Priests of
theirs deeply interessed in this cause; as well as he says our might be by
private Ministers deeply interessed in this cause: and also because yet is not
their Translation infallible, as has been proved: and therefore cannot the
people believe the Church. And the Argument is thus: If the Church of Rome were
infallible then in the Translation of the Bible; and the reason of the
consequence is demonstrated from the end of it appointed in the fourth session
of the Trent Council, Vt in publicis lectionibus, disputationibus,
praedicationibus et expositionibus pro authentica habeatur: this the end of the
institution of it, that in all readings, disputations, preachings and
expositions, it should be held for authentic; and therefore if ever they would
put out all their power of infallibility, then surely in this translation; but
now falsum posterius; this translation is not infallible, as has been proved
and confessed by some of their learned men; as also might be instanced in the
reading of ipsa for ipsum, attributing that to the Virgin which all the
translation, (with the Hebrew) in our great Bible attribute to the Seed,
namely, to Christ, Genesis 3.15. Therefore may we surely as well believe our
translations as they their Church. Therefore let them hereafter not send us
such arguments as will be returnable with use.

This thirty fifth Paragraph he might also have forborne, wherein he thought to
pinch me with uncertainty of true copies of the original. For this will fall
upon them in the full weight, for we have as good Copies of the Originals as
the Romans; If we had ours from them, then I hope we have as good* if not, then
we depended not, at first, of them. Whether we believe the Copies we have to be
true by the Church, this question has it self accidentally to the truth of the
Copies, because if we have not the true Copies, the Church cannot make that
which is not true to be true, as the Papists themselves confess, and if we be
led by that faith which is certain, though we are not so assured of it to be
so, we may attain Salvation, may we not? If not, then have the Papists no such
reason to pick a quarrel with us about certainty of Salvation in the Subject.

To speak then more punctually, we can use the Roman Copies if we had none
other, without their infalibility: Utile per inutile non vitiatur, and if we
have any others, as it should seem we have upon the true account of the
antiquity of the British Churches, then we comparing them with theirs, can find
that ours are true Originals; if theirs be. For as for the knowledge of them to
be undoubtedly true Originals by the credit of the best Churches, this cannot
rationally do it, because (if there be a doubt of the true Originals) we must
first know which is the best Church by the true Original. Therefore let them
tell us which Church is best to be trusted in this case, they will say, the
best; but the question returns, which is the best? This we must know by the
true Original, and this is it which is in question, so that we must be
primarily assured some other way either of the Church or of the true Original:
and what way can that be but by the testimony of the Spirit, by whom all Faith
is ingenerated? and then they come about again to us in genere: either to be
assured by the Holy Ghost that this is the best Church, or that this is the
true Original. If the latter, then by this we are assured of Scripture, if the
former, then however the last resolution is by the Spirit of God.

This in general concerning the true Originals, He descends to the original of
the Old Testament, as for the Hebrew all must know that the ancient Hebrew
Copies were all written without points that is in substance, without vowels.

Answ. If the Romans could determine all controversies by supposition as they
do this, they then indeed might pretend to be Judges of all controversies: he
might have considered that this has been a mighty question as appears by the
discourse about it on each part of the contradiction.

And as to this, they are wrapped into as great difficulty as we, until they
can prove two points, First that their Church put the Points or Vowells, Puncta
vocalia, to the words. Secondly, that their Church did it infallibly, for
though the Church did it, yet if theirs be not the Church, they are never the
whit the nearer; and if theirs be the Church, and they did it not infallibly,
they are not yet Masters of their end. Secondly, we except against his
presumption of all Copies to be written without points; there is not the same
probability as some learned men will think: because though ordinarily the words
were not pointed with Vowels in every Copy, yet the Kings Copy had Points to
it. And thirdly, Do they think that the Moral Law was written by the Finger of
God without Points? If not, then they knew commonly what Vowels should be put
without the Church: for the Church did not put the points thereunto as the
Pontificians think, and if the Decalogue had Points put to it by the Finger of
God, then All not without Points, and why not the rest of the old Testament
with points? Fourthly, Let any of my Adversaries say Shibboleth, and if he does
pronounce it right, let him tell me how he knows he does pronounce right, he
will say by tradition; well then yet he does not know it by the credit of a
particular Church: but let him tell me how, at first, this came to be
pronounced by the Gileadite, and not Sibboleth, as by the Ephramite, Judges the
12? If then they knew that the Punctum samin was right, why did not the Jews
know a pari the other points? Fifthly, Though the points were put to the
Consonants afterward, yet is it not necessary that the Epach hereof should be
476 years after Christ at the well of Tilerias, as Bellarmin would have it: For
he himself says, That some thinks the Points were put to (the Pentateuch) by
Moses or by some excellent Doctor of the Law before the time of Christ, it may
be Ezra, as some may think. Sixthly, If the Jewish Rabbis did fit vowels to the
Hebrew Letters, yet surely did they not put false Points to corrupt the Text,
because then surely they would have corrupted the Text in those places which
speak of the Messiah to be such as Jesus was: which being not done, Bellarmin
takes it to be an Argument that they did not corrupt the Scripture in his 2. b.
de verbo dei 2. chap. And therefore, as for that famous Text in this kind Psalm.
22. (...) for (...) Bellarmine says, That it is evidently inferred that it was
an error of the Scribe in the same Chapter, because St. Jerome, who did profess
that he did render the Hebrew strictly, renders it foderunt. Therefore however
the controversy goes betwixt Buxtorfiui and Capellus, what can from hence be
concluded which concerns us in specie? Let Bll be Bill, or Bell, or Ball, or
Bull, yet is there nothing in Hebrew for the Pope or his Bull, whether then the
perfidious Jews had honesty enough to deliver to us true Copies, with true
Points, and Vowels, Let their Bellarmin be judge in the former Chap. And yet
moreover, surely it is more probable, that if the Points were first put by the
Jews, to the Consonants, at the well of Tilerias, yet they were not put by the
perfidious Jews, if he took it for the unbelieving Jews, but by the believing
Jews.

But yet my Adversary must needs object an expression of the most Reverend, and
Learned Archbishop of Armah, (...), concerning the variety of Sections in the
New Testament, which Cressy also takes notice of. But as to this, upon
supposition, this concerns Christians, Secundum rationem generalem, and
therefore one would think that we should not be bound to give an account of it
as to an Heathen. But so the Roman adversaries must order their attains, that
either there must be no Christian Faith but theirs only. Secondly, those
various Sections, do they make any substantial change in the matter of sense,
or any contrariety to the Analogy of other Texts, or not? If not, what can be
the consequence from hence to the Church? If so, then how can the right reading
be restored by the Church but through the Holy Ghost? Well then, in a Council
also or not, if in a Council, how was the Church herein assured for the first
three hundred years? if without a Council, then why is infallibility tied to a
Council confirmed by a Pope, as my Adversary says? Thirdly, we have no reason
to depend upon the Roman Church for our security, in such variety of readings,
since we have the more variety for them; and in Manuscripts too, as Dr. James
asserts in his corruption of Fathers, Councils and Scriptures, so this comes to
the Proverb, Ovem lupo commisisti. But fourthly, they make a very ill Argument
for themselves, for if it be so uncertain, which is, not only a true
Transla^ion, but also which is the true Original, then how shall we be certain
whether the Church be infallible since the An sit of this point must finally be
determined by Scripture? Fifthly, we may be certainly as certain as they; for we
have the true Original from them, or not; if we have, then we are as well as
they: if not any Original from them, then how do we depend upon them for the
Christian Faith as they? If we had the Original Language from them and not the
true, then they deceived us by ignorance or worse. And how should we be bound
to believe in them then, as our infallible Guides? Sixthly, That admirable
Prelate did me the Honor himself to tell me upon an application to him, that
as for the variety of Sections, they were observed by him to be of diverse
sorts, and some inconsiderable: and those of any moment not so many as there
will be such danger to have them appear, for they are intended to be Printed
with the great Bible.

A touch we have also in this number of St. Matthews Gospel, but this has been
agitated before. But yet I cannot but observe how confidently these Romanists
speak, As for the new Testament, St. Matthews Gospel was originally written in
Hebrew, and that original is quite lost* as if it were as sure as Gospel that
it was written originally in Hebrew not preached only, but written in Hebrew,
and also that it was quite lost, if lost, we may, or may we not think upon the
rule in the Trent History, he is to be suspected to be Author of a mischief who
has the interest in it?

So then, we see nothing to the contrary, but that yet the term infallibility
is an unfortunate term, for it loses at all turns.

Neither will they be able to get off clearly from all inextricable
difficulties, whatsoever they say of us. N. 36.
For first, they suppose that they receive the vulgar translation upon as good
authority, as those who received the first Original copies. And have they no
better certainty for the first original copies? Then they take a course to make
Christianity ridiculous, but this they will say for the honor of their Church,
Ridente turca nec dolente judaeo, let Christianity crack so Rome stands. So
then, by this principle of theirs, if the vulgar Latin has no certain
credibility, neither the original copies, as if the original copies had came
only from Rome, as the vulgar latin, but for this latin Bible we are referred
to the fourth Chap. Yet here he gives me a perstriction for objecting to them
Isidor Clarius, correcting of it in so many places. If Isidor Clarius in any
one title importing Faith and Manners, differs from what we receive upon this
infallible authority, we have nothing to do with him. And is this all?

But first, he needs not make an if of it, for if he will peruse but his
Preface, he shall find him to profess that he used a great deal of moderation
lest offense should be taken, and that it might not seem to be a new
Translation; and yet he says, Loca tamen ad octo millia annotata, atque a
nobis emendata sunt, eight thousand places have been marked and mended by me.
And do none of them, think you, respect faith and manners?

Secondly, Me thinks they are warping and coming off again to the former
distinction, that the Church could not be proposer of any damnative error,
importing Faith and Manners. And this in Mr. Knot's opinion, as before, spoils
all. So then the Church might err, in this translation, from the Originals,
but not in things importing Faith or Manners.

Thirdly, Do they then think there was any fault at all in the Original Copies
which the first Church received* If so, then there must be faults in Original
Scripture: If not, now can they receive the vulgar Translation with an equal
Faith of infalibility, as they do the Original Copies? Let Cardinal Bellarmin
rebate somewhat that high Conceit of the Authentiknesse of the vulgar Latin
(which they know was but a product of a Council) in his 26. de Author. Council.
the 12. chapter Let them, from thence, consider whether the Scriptures are not to
be preferred before the Decrees of Councels in many regards, where he will tell
them, at the latter end of the Chap. that that of Gregory, reverencing the four
Councils General, as the four Gospels is to be qualified, illud [sicut] sonare
similitudinem non aequalitatem that that [As] does signify similitude not
equality, indeed, as Justin Martyr says of Plato, That what he had said well
in things Divine, he does mingle and confound with contrariety, for fear of
Mars- hill, lest he should suffer for it, as Socrates; so this the Cardinal
does seem to retract in the following words, (for fear of the seven hills) as
to equality of infalibility, but yet in Iudiciis particularibus, and in
judiciis morum, quae non toti Ecclesiae sell uni tantum aut alteri populo
proponuntur, in particular judgments, and in precepts of manners which are not
proposed to the whole Church, but to one or another people, he says they may
err in the same Chap. but so may not Scripture, therefore can they not receive
the vulgar edition absolutely, as the first Church did receive the Original
Copies, so that either my Adversary has overshot, or the Cardinal under; and
if they will have nothing to do with him, that in any title importing Faith or
Manners differ from them, then they have many to excommunicate on Monday
Thursday, though they absolve them again on Good Friday, as they do the King of
Spain for detaining part of St. Peter's Patrimony.

And as for the other exception I made against the vulgar, by the varieties of
the Edition of Sixtus 5tus and clement the 8th. he refers me to a Famous Book,
called Charity maintained, written against Dr. Potter, See it Part 2. c. b. n.
3. as I take it in his Copy, but he saves me the labor, in telling me the
effect of it thus, That, by Authentical testimonies of persons beyond all
exception, is showed (there) that the decree of Sixtus 5tus about his Edition
was never promulgated, and that he had declared diverse things to have crept in,
which needed a second revew, and that the whole work should be re-examined
though he could not do it, being prevented by death.

Ans. according to their principles, no Authentic testimony but of a Council
confirmed by the Pope, let them show such: And then we say, Secondly, what if
the decree of Sixtus 5tus was not promulg'd? was not this Sixtus 5tus's
Edition? And it seems there was a decree for it, but not promulg'd, and the
promulgation makes it but legible, the decree, I hope, makes it credible; the
promulgation attends the binding of it in, actu exercito, but the decree
attends the constitution of it, in actu signato. And was there no error in it
because it was not promulgated? Or rather was not it therefore not promulgated
because there was error in it?

Thirdly, the Authority of the Trent Council was engaged, rather for this than
for that of Clement the 8th* for the Trent Council, (as they know) speaks of it
as in verbis de presenti, haec ipsa vetus and vulgata editio, quae longo tot
saeculorum usu, in ipsa ecclesia probata est, this very same old and vulgar
edition, which by long use of so many ages is approved in the very Church, as
if it had been so long before born, and now when it was of age, should be only
Christened.

Fourthly, How did diverse things creep in which needed a second review? what,
while the Church slept? then how can we believe the Church, in tradition and
purity of Copies, for she may sleep while they are stolen or corrupted.
Therefore have they no cause to triumph that Mr. Chillingworth has said
nothing to this point, in defense of Docter Potter, as they say, in the
following words. For if the Citation be right [Part 2.] Mr. Chillingworth did
not publish, for ought I knew, what he had against the second part. And he
gives an account thereof, why he did not, in the latter end of his Answer to
the 1 part p. 390. And therefore they did not ingenuously charge him with this
omission, since it was forborne in the whole, upon ingenious reasons. And if
they think to save themselves because Sixtus his decree was not published:
surely Mr. Chillingworth may be excused, because the second Part of his Answer
was not published, However he had said enough against the perfection of the
Vulgar translation in his answer to the first part 77. Even upon the opinion of
their own men, Lyranus, Cajetan, Pagini^, Arias, Erasmus, Valla, Steuchus, who
in many places have rejected it, and differed from it. And to these he adds the
judgment of Vega (who was present at the Council and was instructed therein by
the President of the Council, the Cardinal S. Cruce, as he says) and of Dredo,
and Mariana, who had the opinion of Laines in it, the General then of the
society, and in a sort of Bellarmine also. But also if they might boast of not
being answered in one point, then some body might boast that they have given
Treaties for Answers. Lastly, will they be confident that the decree was not
published for the authority of the vulgar edition? why then does it go under
the name of Sixtus 5us's Bible? yea also Dr. James, who has written Bellum
Papale to such a purpose, in his third part, 36. p. has asserted that all the
shifts they have made herein will not serve; For both Bull and Bibles are in
many men's hands, whatsoever Gretser says to the Contrary.

This Paragraph might have been spared, N. 37.
and I might be excused surely for sparing it; it gives me a former reason why
my two places out of St. Austin are not answered, he tells me that I have given
him leave to have no more to do with the Fathers. This is his reason, and my
reason is, because he will have more to do than he can do to answer them. We
deny not a trial by the Fathers though their Judgment be not infallible: and
since we produce the Fathers for us, we are bound to answer them against us; as
contrarily, if they produce them against us, they are bound to answer them
against themselves, and this is a rule of Reason, Testem quem quis adducit pro
se tenetur recipere contra se, the witness which one brings for himself, he is
bound to receive against himself. And therefore whatsoever Coccius says ad
faciendum populum; we may, I think say well as Nilus did in his first book of
Ecclesiastical dissentions, (...). It is altogether absurd that those who have
not the Fathers for their examples, should of themselves discern that which is
better; and that we who have the Fathers should not so neither understand. So
he, of the Romans also, so that my Adversary should not have stopped this gap,
with an exception against my opposing of the Council of Ariminum to the Nicene
Council toward proving the contradiction, and consequently the fallibility of
Councils, but this he has nothing new to say against; and therefore I have
nothing to answer more then formerly, only he chides me because I proposed the
Council of Ariminum, as if it had been a lawful Council, and so would deceive
the people which knows not which councils be lawful, which not, No? This
spoils all, infallibility is in Councils, the people do not know which are
right councils, and those that are not right are not, and where then shall the
people find their infallibility? where the way so plain that Fools cannot err,
as they have told us? It is better to be without a guide than to have one we
cannot trust. So we bid the Roman people good night, and take our leaves of
this number.

N. 38.
But this also makes number, it comes in in form of a transition, and so let it
pass.

N. 39.
In this he begins to resume his discourse of such particulars which are
necessary to Salvation, and yet not plainly set down in Scripture. And the
first instance is about the necessity of the not working upon the Sunday
without any necessity. But to this and to the other instances of this kind, it
would be sufficient again to settle the state of the question; and it is thus,
whether any thing necessary to salvation by necessity of mean, without the
knowledge and belief whereof, in points of Faith, or without the knowledge and
practice of in things of action we cannot come to salvation; is not with
sufficient plainness set down in Scripture: This is the state of the question
which very few if any of his instances come near to; there may be as errors, so
sins, which are not clearly forbidden in Scripture: and therefore the
ignorance of them will not damn where there is general repentance. And to hold
and do any of these against our belief of the Truth therein, or duty, is
acknowledged to be damnative without particular repentance; but this comes not
up to the question, whether there is no possibility of salvation without the
belief of the truths and the practice of the duties, for so neither of us could
be saved, unless there be any of us who knows all truths reduplicatively, and
do all duties also.

And this might have satisfied my Adversaries* for this and other examples; if
it had became men pretending infalibility to receive any satisfaction but in
victory.

But in particular, You dare not say that he shall be saved who does weekly
work, and resolves to work upon the Sunday without any necessity. And what
then? First let it be returned home, they dare not say that he shall be saved
who resolves to be absent from high Mass without necessity. The point betwixt
us is, whether necessarily he must be damned who does work upon the Sunday, not
knowing whether it be such a sin; when they determine this, then we may
determine by Scripture which part is to be held, whether it is destructive of
Salvation or not. But Secondly, as to the necessity toward Salvation, the
intimations of honor which are put upon the first day of the week and the
practice of the Apostles is sufficient to incline our practice on the safer
hand, to wit, in the Negative; and if in contempt hereunto any should resolve
to work without necessity, his case would be more dangerous: but the question
concerns not sins in subjecto with all the circumstances, but in specie.
Thirdly, as to the clear Text of the fourth Commandment, the determination of
the day to the Jew was positive and Ceremonial, and therefore with other Jewish
Ceremonies never to cease, or if that also was moral, why do we not hear of
it by their infallibility and practice? And if this had been intended for a
case reserved to make work for the authority of the Church, why was it not
absolutely determined in some general Council? The Laodicean Council give not
absolute order, but under a condition, (...). Fourthly, Therefore to conclude
this Number, whereas he says I bring my own Discourses in stead of clear
Texts, let him bring either clear Text or clear discourse for these two
Propositions, 1. That this Point is absolutely necessary to be known: And 2.
That it is not clearly set down in Scripture, then we shall leave him in the
field for this time: but if he will not answer to my Discourses, because they
are fallible, he gives me leave to think more, and to say no more to his
Discourses upon the same account.

N. 40.
In this Number he seems to be courteous, in receiving some satisfaction to my
Answer about things strangled. But it may be he thought himself bound to it
upon the general supposition of the Romanist, that the Scripture was written
but for particular occasions, and to particular persons: and therefore that
Precept of the Apostles in the 15 of the Acts concerning the case, should not
upon their intention be always binding. And yet I shall have nothing from him
but I must pay for it: for he says, Though we seek for Texts and not Reasons.
But reason upon Principles of Scripture binds by virtue of the Principles. If
not, how many of their Superstructions must they discount. But let them give us
Texts or Reasons; and until they do so, we may have done with them.

N. 41.
Shall we have either in the next, Whether the King be Head of the Church: This
has been sufficiently spoken to before? what is new I shall touch upon. He
says, This controversy must highly import that all the Members may have an
assured knowledge of the Head by whom they are to be governed. To this we
answer, Whatsoever is necessary in our sense, highly imports: but, whatsoever
highly imports, is not necessary in our sense. Therefore, whereas he says
afterward, Is not this a necessary point? we deny it necessary in our sense;
for then God should tie salvation to accidentals. It could not be necessary
when and where there is no King, and this is to be numbered amongst accidentals:
but those things which are absolutely necessary, do not vary their nature upon
contingencies.

But then as to the other Proposition, which it is necessary for them to prove,
namely, that this is not clearly enough delivered in Scripture, he says,
reflecting upon our difference from our selves, as he supposes, this point was
before evident Scripture, now it is no longer evident Scripture. To this he
brings in my Answer. Your Answer is first, What is infallibly decided by
Scripture, will ever be so, although we do not always find it. To this he
returns, If you mean what is infallibly decided by Scripture evident, is not
always to be found, it is manifestly false, etc. Answ. If it be decided
infallibly by Scripture evident in terms, that which he says is true: but who
holds this point so evidently decided? If he means it infallibly decided by
evident Scripture in way of consequence, that which he says is manifestly
false, is pertinent, but manifestly false. For how then could some Divines in
the Trent Council assert many things to be decided by Principles of Scripture,
which the adverse party there could not find? And why do they hold, that the
Determinations of Councils are Prophetical, that so they may be infallible; if
what is discoursed out of Principles could always appear to all to be
infallible? And why does Bellarmin say in his 1. b. de Baptismo, cap. 9. ad
lit. B. that the Baptism of Infants, satis aperte colligitur ex Scripturis, ut
supra ostendimus, the Baptism of Infants is clearly enough gathered out of
Scriptures, as we have showed before: although if my Adversaries were upon the
Jury for this controversy they would bring in an Ignoramus.

Then he comes to my second Answer. You add secondly, That you do not say
every point is infallibly decided by Scripture, because it is not at all
decided. Well, and what to this? Sir, is not this a necessary point? Answ. And
is not this, in another man's expression, to be a beggar of the question? Let
them prove it to be necessary: but it seems rather by them, that it is not
necessary. For since the Scripture does not clearly decide it, as they suppose,
therefore the Church should, because otherwise it will be wanting in things
necessary where the Scripture does not determine. Now if the Church has
determined for the last three of the first six hundred years. it has
determined against the Pope for Kings (not as we take them to be Heads of the
Church, as they take the Pope to be Head, but) as Supreme Governors circa
Sacra. And so the Church for that space, which is most considerable in this
business, is against the Popes being Head of the Church, and the Scripture does
not declare it for him, as my Adversaries confess; for then it should declare
by consequent negatively against Kings (as I have said before) and therefore,
upon the whole matter, they have nothing for the Popes being Head. And then
again, if the Scripture has not declared for the Pope, it must be declarative
sufficiently for the King; because no other pretends to be competitor; and this
is their own argumentation. The Church must be infallible, no other Church
pretends to infallibility but theirs; therefore so Government of the Church
must be. The Scripture speaks of Government; they dare not say that the
Scripture declares for the Pope; therefore, it must declare for Kings. Or,
since all agreement is resolved into common Principles, let this difference be
mediated by these four Propositions.

1. Government of the Church is necessary.

2. This Government must be in the Pope or the King.

3. The Scripture does not declare for the Pope.

4. The Scripture declares all Points necessary; therefore it declares for the
King. The three first Propositions they consent to. And the fourth is not yet
disproved; therefore

This Paragraph is a supernumerary. N. 42.
To make short work, we have no need of repetitions. But he will urge again S.
Matthews Gospel, and again tax me for holding it no point of necessity to
believe that it was S. Matthews. This, he says my learned Brethren in Ratisbon
durst not say. Plato's rule is good, (...), not so much who speaks, as what;
yet this is necessary for us to believe, that it was written by one inspired,
indefinitely. But it is not equally necessary for me to believe by whom: for
then I cannot believe the Epistle to the Hebrews, because I cannot certainly
believe it was written by Saint Paul. Again, my learned Brethren dared not deny
it to be an Article of Faith. But first an Article of Faith may be taken
largely for whatsoever is to be believed. Now though all Articles of Faith in a
special sense are to be believed: yet all that is to be believed, is not in the
sense of the question, an Article of Faith. But then secondly, Not to dare to
deny it, is not to affirm it. One is a negative act: the other a positive. But
a pari, if I must be bound to their opinion, why is not my Adversary bound to
his learned Brethren in Ratisbon, who did not state infallibilities as my
Adversaries do, with the necessity of a Council? And why do my Adversaries
differ from Bellarmin, and others of their Brethren, who will be scandalized by
them, because they dispute the Popes being Head of the Church from Scripture?
for they would be loath to want the Authority of the Scripture for so capital a
point, which concerns not many millions only (as the other, and therefore it
seems not absolutely necessary, because then it would concern absolutely all)
but even all: for in Bellarmin's opinion, as in his Catechism, a Christian is
defined by union to the Church under the Pope, as Head thereof.

As for his provoking me to believe the Gospel of Saint Matthew upon account of
the Church, in this number also, by the Authority of S. Austin; I say only, he
might have been so modest as to have left this out until he had answered me in
what I have said to that Testimony of Saint Austin at large before.

N. 43.
Here he runs mightily upon a mistake, for what I spoke by way of supposition,
he construes Categorically. I said, we might suppose more assistance (not
assurance) to the Church in commending Books Canonical, than in other cases. He
takes me to have spoken positively, as if God had given infallibility to the
Church in this matter, though in none other; and therefore we are obliged to
believe the Church in this absolutely. Whereas what I said comes to no more
than what is usually said upon such cases, dato non concesso. And do not the
Schoolmen dispute upon hypothetical questions? As if I should say, If the Pope
were infallible in person, what need would there be of a Council? Or, if my
Adversaries had a mind to be contented with common Principles of Christianity,
we should soon have done. These Consequences are upon mere suppositions. So, if
we were bound to receive the Canonical Books from the Church, we might suppose
more assistance as to this than to other Points. Does this affirm that the
Church had infallible Assistance herein, and that we were to take the Books
ultimately upon the Authority of the Church? Again, if we were to take the
Books upon the account of the Church, what is this to the Roman Church? Is not
the Universal Church of all times and places more credible than the Roman? The
whole bears them, not they the whole. Nay, when he had abused my Supposition in
p. 86. he does acknowledge that I do not make belief of Scripture to depend
upon the Authority of the Church.

So then my Adversary needs not to triumph and say, This spoils all, your only
shift, etc. He runs away with the line, but he will be hooked as well. My
Adversary has granted me, that the Scripture may be said to contain all things
necessary, because it sends us to the Church, where we may have them. And may
not I as well say to this, that this spoils all? may I not return him the fruit
of his Discourse, mutatis mutandis? Will he grant that we have direction to the
Church from Scripture? Then the only shift they have to avoid our Position of
the Scriptures containing all things necessary, is still to say that the
Scripture sends us to the Church. And will they now suppose this most necessary
point of all points, which is not clearly set down in Scripture to be admitted
with infallible assent, upon the only Authority of the Scripture? That we are
universally to hear the Scripture, in things necessary to salvation, we have
many pregnant places in Scripture, as has been showed: but that we are to
learn this one point, and none but this, from the infallible Authority of
Scripture, has no color or shadow of Scripture, or any thing like Scripture.
You must therefore ground your faith not upon Scripture but upon Reason. Now
the reason upon which you reject the Scripture, is, because you have a
necessity of an external infallible Judge ever since the whole Canon was
finished. And for this only reason (without any Text,) you put the Scriptures
sufficiency to expire and give up the ghost even after the finishing of the
Canon. Now if the reason for which you discard the Scriptures sufficiency, be
this, because all points are not sufficiently cleared by Scripture, then there
can be no other prudent reason for which you in this one point may suppose the
Scripture to be sufficient than this, that that one point (namely, that we are
to repair to the Church for all things necessary to salvation) cannot be
infallibly ascertained by the Church. And therefore there is a greater necessity
to have recourse to the sufficiency of Scripture undoubtedly infallible in all
points, which does not causally bring forth their opinion of the Church. Let me
put them to it. Does the Scripture bring forth their opinion of the Church, or
does it not. If it does not: what hold have they for the Church? And why do
they make use of the Scripture to give Letters of Credence to the Church? If it
does, then there is an end of this Controversy.

Now the two inferences he would have me mark as clearly deduced from my
principles, are grounded but upon a supposition: and therefore not to be
marked, but returned upon his concession; First, That all points necessary are
plainly set down in Scripture: for no point more necessary than this, without
which there is no coming to the belief of any thing in the Church: and yet this
point is not plainly set down in Scripture; nor that the Church is infallible,
obscurely. Yea, whereas he says the Scripture sends us to the Church: the
Universal Church does send us to the infallible Scripture for our necessary
direction. And this would give them satisfaction, if it could serve their turn.

Moreover, the second thing which he would have me mark, halts upon the same
unequal ground, of supposing me to affirm what was but supposed. Yet also we
can send it home again: and I can say that their former concession, spoken of
before, does overthrow that principle which is the groundwork of their faith.
For if there be a greater necessity to acknowledge the direction of Scripture
in things necessary for as much as concerns this one point of the Church,
because this one point in particular is less clear of it self, that grand
principle of theirs (which is or must be their principle) evidently appears
false; namely that the Testimony of the Church is evidently seen by its own
light; which must be, or else they are all undone. And again, how is it
possible that there should be a greater necessity on the one side to have
recourse to the Scripture for the infallible direction of the Church, because
it cannot be proved infallible by it self; and yet on the other side, this
point of all other points has this particular privilege to be so manifest,
that it bears witness of it self, that it carries its own light with it. So
they may see what they get by taking a supposition for an Affirmation.
Tacitus's rule is good; let nothing be thought prosperous which is not
ingenuous. Some other lines he has in this Section, to tell me what he has
done before; and I have undone.

But as to a passage which I used out of Bellarmine to confirm a Dilemma (which
he tells me here that he has broken before, lest the contrary should have been
better discerned upon the place) he referred me to Bellarmin, l. 1. c. 1. In
fine, as much as I can read the hand, I made use of Bellarmin against new
Revelations beside Scripture: and therefore we cannot believe the Church for it
self; because we cannot believe it but by a Revelation, and no Revelation
beside Scripture, as he disputes against the Anabaptists. For my answer he puts
me off to the former place, I think, in the end. And there is little to the
business. He says indeed in the end, That we do receive the Prophetical and
Apostolical Books according to the mind of the Catholic Church, as of old it
is laid out in the Council of Carthage and the Council of Trent, to be the Word
of God, Et certam ac stabilem regulam fidei, and the certain and stable rule of
faith. Now I hope these latter words are for us. For if these words be taken in
their just and full sense, then the cause is ours. If the Scripture be the
certain and stable rule of faith, then it must be clear, otherwise how is it a
certain rule? and therefore no need of an infallible Judge. And it must be
sufficient always; otherwise how is it a stable rule? and so it excludes
Traditions.

But sure that is not the Chapter, because my Adversary says, in that place
where he speaks of the Maccabees in particular, which he does not speak of in
the first. That Chapter where he particularly speaks of the Maccabees is the
fifteenth: but there is nothing to the purpose neither. Thus he puts me to the
hunt lest he should be at a loss. Well but (...), it is surely in the tenth
Chapter, where at the end, he answers, as my Adversary does, to S. Ieroms
Authority against the Book of Maccabees: But this is besides the Butt. For
that which I looked for to be answered out of Bellarmin, was the other point of
no revelation beside Scripture. It is true that I did in the same place name
Bellarmine as relating S. Ieroms differing from my Adversary about the Book of
the Maccabees: But why should I expect an answer to Bellarmine in this
testimony, when he produces it only that he might refute it? that which I
should have had satisfaction in out of Bellarmine was spoken by him out of his
own judgment. But again, why did not my Adversary save me the labor of
looking up and down for the passage by giving me the entire words of the
Cardinal there? I might have thought my Adversary would have been (...), and he
proves rather (...). For he thought it was not requisite that I should find
the place because there are some adjacent words which I can improve: He says
Jerome was of that opinion, quia nondum Generale Concilium de his libris
aliquid statuerat, excepto Libro Judith, quem etiam Hieronymus postea recepit.
Mark the words; Because the General Council had not yet determined any thing of
those Books, except the Book of Judith, which also afterward S. Jerome
received. So then it seems a General Council had before taken these Books into
consideration (namely that of Toby and Judith, and of the Maccabees) and
determined nothing but for Judith. Then one of the Councils must err: either
that which established Judith and not the rest: or that which established
Judith and the rest, namely that of Carthage, wihch my Adversary says S.
Jerome had not seen. One thought them not fit to be declared Canonical: another
thought them to be fit. And is not this a contradiction of Council to Council.
Again Bellarmine says that S. Jerome did afterward receive the Book of
Judith. Now I desire to know how much time that [after] does suppose for. If S.
Jerome had received it presently, we should have heard of it; if much time
after, as it might be by the words, then the Authority of the Church seemed not
to S. Jerome so intuitively to oblige, as the Antagonists suppose. Had he
thought the Church infallible, would he have stuck at it? Do not the Romanists
know the rule in Tacitus, Qui de liberant desciverunt, They which deliberate
have already revolted.

What he would have me note by the way, that the Fathers of the Council of
Carthage did acknowledge the Maccabees for true Scripture, it is no difficult
matter to give account to. For first, he goes upon a false Principle, that if
those Fathers were of our Religion, then we must make them agree with us in
this prime Principle upon which we receive all Scripture as Gods infallible
Word. This is not so: for my living Adversaries may know that one who has
defended our Religion has been quoted to me as differing from me in this
point; and that is Mr. Chillingworth. Though all that are of this opinion are
like to be of our Religion: yet all of our Religion, it seems, are not of this
opinion. For indeed the Protestant Religion supposes the Scripture to be the
Word of God, as a common Principle: and therefore also there should not have
been any contestation about this point, if our Adversaries had not been
resolved to question all Religion which is not properly theirs. Secondly,
Therefore they might have received Scripture upon the Authority of Universal
Tradition; which also abstracts from the Roman Impropriation. Thirdly, Since
they had not Universal Tradition for those Apochryphal Books, as it seems by
S. Ierom, we cannot neither upon that account be engaged to receive them as
Canonical. Fourthly, Since they did not receive them by Universal Tradition, as
appears also by Cyril of Jerusalem, as before; and since they are not to be
discerned by their own light, as my Adversaries will confess, nor by the
conditions of the matter, what reason shall we have to receive them? For if
they say, the Council was assisted by the Holy Ghost: we ask, what? was it
assisted as a Council, or as such a Council? if as a Council, why had not the
other the same Assistance? if as such a Council, how shall we discern which
Council the Holy Ghost will assist unto infallibility?

-- Et solos credit habendos
Esse Deos quos ipse colit --
N. 45.
In this he is pleased to move again the same stone, which will in the end
return upon himself again. For how came one Council to acknowledge the
Maccabees, and another not? were not the former Council as well irradiated as
the latter? Yes, they were more in all account but of my Adversary, who is not
in so good a capacity to grant that the Argument from Authority of the Church
graduates its strength by the greater nearness to the Primitive. For, he holds
an equal assistance of the Spirit to the Church at all times. But the old
saying was, Quo antiquius eo melius. And the rule is good, Ut se habet
simpliciter ad simpliciter, ita magis ad magis and maxim ad maxim, if it be
good as ancient, then the more ancient the more good. And this at other times
is the advantage which the Romanists would take, in claiming the credit of the
Original Church to them. And besides, he might have considered that he had no
reason to bring this about again, because the reason of their reception, as was
said before, is expressed to depend upon the custom of their being read in the
Church: which does not make them or declare them to be Canonical unles in S.
Ieroms distinction, for the edifying of the people in manners, not for
confirmation of faith. Well then, if one Council might see what another did not
without prejudice to the object, then S. Jerome might not see, or Luther, what
S. Austin did, without prejudice to the credibility of Scripture. Yea, it is
not yet proved that S. Austin accounted the Book of Maccabees as Canonical as
other Books. But this is actum agere. And again he repeats what he has not
done. Let them not trouble us, for they have lost their strength.

And yet again S. Matthews Gospel. N. 46.
He had better have solidly proved, which he slightly puts off the proof of,
in the end of the last section, that they do not prove the infallibility of the
Church first by Scripture. I assure them this is a Fort-royal: and therefore
this should be made good at all hands.

Well but let us see his Argument in the face, about S. Matthews Gospel: which
he says he has forced a passage to. Surely he had no such reason to rally and
obtrude this Argument again, and to be so confident of it, as to say boldly
that it cannot possibly by our Principles ever come to be believed with an
infallible assent to be Gods true uncorrupted word. Why not? Nay here is all of
this, no proof. We looked for a Spear like a Weavers Beam, or else some new
Sword, whereby the Philistin thought to have slain David: but here is none yet.
Yea S^apleton shall sufficiently answer him with a contradiction, as before,
who says, It is not absolutely necessary to Faith that it should be produced
by the Authority of the Church; but it may be caused immediately by the Spirit
of God. So then it is possible by our Principles to believe it with an
infallible assent to be the Word of God. And before a Church was formed, how
did the material Members believe any point of Faith? then it is possible.

But then he slides to another way, as he thought, of urging hi^ Argument; and
that is, the Marcionites, the Cerdonists, and the Manichaeans do deny (and
others may come to deny) the Gospel of S. Matthew to be Gods true Word. Yea,
but this is another question. It is one thing to believe it to be Gods Word;
and another to prove it to him that denies it to be Gods Word. Now the question
in hand is how we believe it to be Gods Word. And therefore we say, as to such,
we deal with them as we deal with others who deny any part of Scripture, not by
the Authority of the Roman Church (and therefore the Romanists get nothing by
this Argument) but by Universal Tradition, as a common Argument; which rather
makes a Scholastical Faith, than a Faith Divine, of proper name. So that also
he cannot reasonably put me in mind again that I cannot credit it to be the
Word of God by virtue of the Translation: since according to my opinion,
Translations are only so far Gods Word as they agree with the Originals: but
we have only Translations of S. Matthews Gospel, no Original at all. This we
have in places before spoken to. But suppose no Original Copy of Saint
Matthews Gospel: yet this makes no impossibility of belief in Stapletons
judgment, because we may believe immediately without the interposal of the
Church. And the Translation is considerable as an Instrument to represent the
Object, not to help the Effect: it has more relation to the fides quae, than
the fides qua, to the Faith objective rather than the Faith subjective. So that
I do not believe the sense to be true for the Translation: but I beleve the
Translation true because it agrees with the Sense. And he that made the
Original can Supply it. Again, they belive the Gospel of St Matthew. Do they
not? how do they believe it? by the authority of the Church. Well, but what
authority had the Church either operative or declarative, to make or declare
that to be Scripture which was not Scripture? they say then, the Church can
make translations, and particularly the vulgar latin to be authentic, but the
vulgar is not absolutely authentic by confession of their own men. And
besides the best reason which could be, had it been true of the vulgar, was
this, that that should be authentic, because it was made by the original
copies before they were corrupted. Yea, but my adversaries say, there was no
original copy of St. Matthews Gospel: or if there was they are worthy to die,
as David said of Abner because they have kept their Master no better. Are they
now the Church unto which perfidia non potest habere accessum, no
unfaithfulness can have access? Again, if there was not an original copy or no
copy of the original, how shall we believe their Church to be infallible,
since the chief place of strength for their Church is found in that Gospel, 16.
Chapter 18. as Perron would think. Suppose the question then be made how they prove
their infallibility by Scripture: answer is made, by the 16. of St. Matt. the
18. Well but we must know it first to be the word of God before they prove
their Church infallible by it. Now they are at as great a loss as we, for they
cannot prove that Text to be the word of God by the infallibility of the
Church, because the infallibility of the Church is in question, if that be not
before hand assured to us that it is the word of God. If then at length they
have a mind to rest themselves in common argumentative principles, and resolve
their persuasion of it to be the word of God upon the credit of universal
tradition; so do we, as to this kind of persuasion.

Whereas then they say, It is uncertain who the Translator was, and of what
skill and honesty, we answer, this makes more against them. For if a Divine
Faith be necessary, as they mightily assert, then it is reason that we should
less rely upon humane arguments, which make but humane faith: and therefore
for our private assurance, should believe it upon Gods own authority.

To that they say, If there were one Hebrew Copy, then (in St. Ierom's time)
what is that to our purpose now? I answer first, that this may abate their
confidence of an absolute negative. 2. If those of Beraea did gratify St.
Ierom with the use of that Hebrew Copy, it is very probable that as the former
Beraeans were diligent in searching the Scriptures whether those things spoken
by St. Paul were true, so those would take care to consign it ^o posterity, if
there was but that one copy thereof. 3. If he had the liberty by the
Nazaraeans to describe it (as before) then surely of that Autograph, St. Jerome
would have made an Apograph, he would have made another copy. And 4. If the
translation they so much brag of were his, they know what skill and honesty the
Translator was of. So then they are brought to this either to take my answer,
or to deny their translation, which they will. And all their shifts will not
help them.

N. 47.
Here he would put me out of my shifts, as he calls them. I asked them, how they
were sure of their latin interpretation to be authentic: they say now by
tradition of former ages. Well, but we are satisfied thus also by way of
argument concerning the Scriptures and in particular concerning the Gospel of
St. Matthew. We say also that we are infallibly satisfied herein by the Spirit
of God. And this way of faith I hope we may assert. we may believe what we
cannot prove; as they believe that Roman Faith which they cannot prove.

But he says we are incapacitated to make use of tradition, This tradition
does not cert^fie you, because you hold it fallible. So then: Creed quod habes
and habes, Is this a sufficient argumentation? And so consequently, it is
infallible to you, because you hold it infallible. So it must it seems be. You
do not hold it because it is infallible: but it is infallible because you hold
it. And thus infallibility shall not make faith: but opinion shall make
infallibility. I had thought before, that verity had been fundamentally in
things, and that things had not been true because we conceive them so, but our
conceits had been true because things are so. Surely it is a better argument
that the Roman Faith cannot be certified to them, because their principles are
uncertain, as has been showed, then that tradition cannot certify us, because
we hold it fallible. If it be infallible, we are as sure as they, in the
certitude of the object; though because we think it fallible, we are not
certain certitudine subjecti, in the certitude of the subject, valeat quantum
valere potest. And why would they have us sure of our faith in the certainty of
the subject, and yet scarce allow a certainty of salvation in the certitude of
the object? But then 2. They are sure by the tradition of former ages, namely
universal tradition they mean, do they not? if so universal traditition
includes all places, then how comes infallibility to be the prerogative of
their Church, when they are to prove their faith by universal tradition. 3. It
seems they do not hold tradition to be infallible (and therefore by their own
argument, it cannot certify them) since that which was held in the Church
universally for the first ages, they do not now hold, as they have been told,
namely the millenary opinion, infant communion, standing up in prayer from
Easter to Whitsuntide. Yea why do they not stand up altogether at prayer as was
appointed by a Council? (...). 4. If they mean the term [certifie] as
infallibly, we grant it: if they mean it morally, we deny it: and therefore if
they have no more certainty then of tradition for their faith, they have no
faith of proper name. 5. We are upon the surer ground to trust upon the
Scripture, because the Church must be subordinate to it, then they, because
they trust to the Church for the truth of Scripture. For if this were right
then the Church might have that privilege, which St. Paul could not claim to
himself, namely to be mistress of our faith: whereas St. Paul denies it 2. Ep.
Cor. 1.24. Not as Masters of your Faith, but helpers of your joy. And we have
Estius also of our opinion, as before, that all faith has not the authority of
the Church for the formal reason thereof, this is enough against his first
shift, the second shift is, this Gospel might possibly at the first be written
in Greek, and here he asks me whether possibilities grounded upon conjectures
be sufficient to ground an infallible assent. We answer, no, but exceptions of
a possibility of error are sufficient to contradict infallibility. They say
they have an infallible faith; we say there is a possibility of error herein:
and this is enough for us against them. And then 2. This weapon we use against
you, Possibilities grounded upon conjectures are not sufficient to ground an
infallible assent: This it seems is their own position, now they have nothing
but possibilities for them; therefore they have no infallible assent. This
assumption has been proved before upon their own principles. We have nothing
but possibilities grounded upon conjectures, that they have a right Pope,
legitimate in his Baptism and priesthood; and so of other Priests, there might
be want of due matter, due form, due intention; which with them make the act
null.

But then he compares the inevidence of St. Matthews Gospel to be the
uncorrupted word of God, with the evidence of St. Lukes Gospel to be such by
its own light, and would have me think as much reason to believe the inevidence
of the latter, as I do of the former, but 1. he does not rightly to compare
the evidence of St. Lukes Gospel with the inevidence of St. Matthew's as he
would have me grant. As if because I supposed an inevidence which was the
original, I also granted an inevidence of the Gospel, and yet faith does not
exclude a negative inevidence, there may be certitude of assent without
evidence of the object, therefore we say 2. We are rather assured of the
language by the Scripture, then of the Scripture by the language, otherwise the
ignorant people could have no faith of Scripture. 3. We can give, upon our own
principles, as much credit to the Church (as to the point of the original
language) as the Church can require or they prove. 4. How did the Church first
accept it to be the word of God, whether the Greek was the original or not. By
the internal testimony of the spirit, it must be said. For if it should be
said we receive now by tradition of former ages, this is forecluded, because we
ask the question how the first Church accepted it, if not by the spirit of God
internally assuring them, then let them tell us how they came to the faith
thereof, not opinion: if so, then why may we not receive it so too. And
moreover, it does not follow that if the Gospel of St. Matthew were originally
greek, therefore we should see it to be so as well as St. Luke? A posse ad esse
non valet. Multa videntur quae non sunt: multa sunt quae non videntur. Many
things seem which are not: many things are which are not seen. Every irradiated
understanding of theirs does not see all points which belong to their Church.
Some do see the Monarchy of the Church to be as Bellarmin: some do not see the
Monarchy of the Church, as Spalatensis notes. Again, how came it to pass that
the former Churches did not see the Apocryphal books to be Gods true and
uncorrupted word: and yet some Church of later times has seen them? such
answers of mine would be repetitions; were they not answers to his repetitions.

Nextly he comes to my argument (which I did not make much of, but he less)
that the Gospel of St. Matt. was written in Greek, because the Greek copy does
interpret the word Immanuel, which if it were written in Hebrew, needed not any
interpretation. But my Adversary might have added, if he had pleased, that
which follows in my Paper [since the letters of the word put together without
any variation do make that signification] And this we called not a
demonstration, nor a probability, but rather a possibility by that reason. And
therefore unless he did make all things invincible by infallibility, he needed
not to have called it a pitiful weak conjecture. Well, but what said he? (...).

He answers then, it is manifest that translations of Scripture usually tell us
the Hebrew word first, and then the translation of it, so Genesis By. 48. Galaad
id est tumulus testis. Not to take any notice of the Scribe; he puts here that
in the way of interpretation, which is there delivered in way of a cause, and
reason of the term. Ver. 47. but Jacob called it Galeed; then 48. for Laban
said this heap is witness between me and thee this day, therefore he called the
name of it Galeed. And before the name which Laban gave it in Chaldee, Segar
Sahudatha, is not there interpreted, although there be a little difference
between that and the name which Jacob gave it in Hebrew: for Galeed signifies
the heap of witness, the other heap his witness. Therefore whereas he would make
[Galaad, id est tumulus testis] to be in terms Scripture, it is not so. No m
re is that of Exodus 12. Phas^ id est transitus. It is not said so there, but
there is a reason given why they should ^at it in haste, for it is the Lords
Passover, ver. 11. the reason is given before, which is contrary to what he
says, that it is usual to put the Hebrew words first, and then the translation
of it: but here is the reason before, and no formal interpretation. Ratio
nominis, I hope, is different from an interpretation. Another instance (and
indeed in order before the last) is Genesis 35.18. Benoni i.e. filius doloris mei,
Benjamin id filius dextrae. But here also he presumptuously supposes his
vulgar latin to be Scripture, which is to suppose that which is not to be
supposed; and indeed a sophism in begging that which is in question: none of
all languages which the great Bible set out with us has, does put in these
words in form of an exposition. The Syria^k and the Arabic and the Greek do
express the matter of the interpretation; but then they leave out the name
Benoni: but all keep Benjamin without any interpretation. Another instance of
his is Exodus 16.15, 31. Manna quod sign ficat quid est hoc. And here again he
takes the vulgar Latin for good Scripture: for none give the term and
afterward the signification but the Latin: but the name Manna they do not
name. And whether that be the signification of Manna deserves a criticism. Some
think that it may come from the Hebrew (...); and so it should signify a
portion; neither is Bethel interpreted upon the place, Genesis 35.15.

So then, upon the whole matter, that which he confidently says being not so
in his own Instances and more, my conjecture is yet true and good; unless they
can make the Latin Translation to be as Catholic Scripture as they would
have the Pope to be universal Bishop. And surely if a Translator of Scripture
does translate words of Scripture (where the words are not interpreted in
Scripture) he is not a Translator of Scripture, quoad hoc, formally, but
materially of that which is Scripture. And this is not to render Scripture so
much as to make it. And moreover they may know this to be the usage of the
Evangelists besides (which are acknowledged to have written originally in
Greek) to give the Interpretation of the Hebrew or Syriack words. My conjecture
then is well recovered of its weakness.

But then he falls upon me for giving a contradiction to S. Ierom. Though he
says he did see a copy of the Hebrew Original with his own eyes: you reject
him though all the Fathers Writings extant stand on his side.

Answ. A conjecture of a possibility of the contrary makes no such
contradiction which stands betwixt affirmation and negation categorically. 2.
S. Ierom then has rather contradicted them, if a conjecture be sufficient to a
contradiction. For can we conceive that there is not room enough for a
conjecture, that either that Copy which S. Ierom had use of, or that which he
described (which may be as certain as some other) may now be extant in the
world; which contradicts my Adversary. 3. If there were an Hebrew Copy, it is
more than a conjecture, it is more than probable that he who translated it into
Greek, did exactly compare it with the Hebrew, whose faithfulness, in those
times, we might better trust than some Romans now. And also they know that the
Pope may be deceived in point of fact. Neither did all the Fathers, I suppose,
see the Hebrew Copy. And it would have been enough, that none of the Fathers
are against it: but it is a greater adventure to say, all the Fathers stand on
that side. And also they may know what Father did profess that he did see the
remainers of those cells, in which the Seventy did translate the Old Testament,
and who contemns that testimony. I think I bear as much respect to the Fathers,
as some of the Romanists do, or more: but yet if I should hold with the Romans
against the Fathers that the Bishop of Rome was the universal Bishop, I should
not be blamed for contradicting the Fathers.

But to his Argument, This Copy translateth, ergo, it is a translation. Answ.
The Antecedent begs the question, whether it does translate or not. Whatsoever
does interpret does not translate. And therefore here is an Argument for me, It
does not translate, ergo, it is not a Translation. And it does not translate:
for then the Interpretation must be in the Hebrew, which is denied to have been
the use of the Hebrews, as before; especially in the same case, where the name
is given in the same letters which signify the interpretation. Therefore the
Latin does not translate, when it gives the Interpretation, as in the former
examples. And the other Evangelists are not Translators, when they interpret
Hebrew or Syriack words. So his Argument is for me. And so my cause is not
lost, as to this point: since also S. Austin professed in that of his against
the Epistle of the Manichean, that he would hear Reason against Antiquity: at
least surely he might do so in matter of fact.

Your third shift is in place of giving answer to make an objection, asking why
our Latin Translation was made authentic, if the Church had made the Greek
authentic. Answ. Shall I say that my Adversary does not seem here to know
well what shift to make: since he carps at my answering by way of question? But
then they should be better advised than to make such Arguments as they will not
be willing to answer an intergatory about in the same matter. But he says
(passing by some other words which seem too hot for him) I know of no body who
told you that the Greek Translation was made authentic by the Church. I
return upon him. Was the Greek Translation made authentic or not? He is not
willing to say it was nor it was not. But I press them. Was it? or was it not?
If it was not, then their Translation was not of authentic Scripture: and so,
again, they do not translate but make Scripture. If it was made authentic by
the Church, then what need of two authentic Translations? Again, if it were
not made authentic by the Church, then the Church could be without the
authentic Gospel of Saint Matthew, and yet have enough for salvation: and
therefore can we be as well without Traditions of the Church, because I presume
they profess so much reverence to the Gospel of S. Matthew, that they will not
say that Traditions are more necessary than the Gospel of S. Matthew. And if it
were made authentic absolutely by the Church: we can better believe it by the
virtue of Universal Tradition, than they can believe their Latin by the
authority of the Roman Church. And if it be necessary, as it is, that
Translations, as such, should agree with Originals, and the question be which
is the Original, or where the Original is to be found, they are in as great
difficulty as we: for then they have no certainty of an Original, as to this
Gospel, to make use of for their Translation. And if their Latin, as to this,
was a Translation of a Translation: we have the better cause in this, because
we trust rather to the first Translation. And if some part of the Church made
use of the Septuagints Translation in stead of the Hebrew, and the Penmen of
the New Testament made so much use of it also, as is confessed by learned men;
then may we rather make use of the Gospel of Saint Matthew in Greek than they
in Latin.

Your fourth shift is to pretend to this knowledge by the harmony with other
Gospels. Ans. A great deal he says to this, which I might spare the refutation
of upon these reasons. First, because I compare the harmony of this Gospel to
the other Gospels, with the credit of the Church, therefore do I not make this
to be an Argument absolute. 2. Because I spoke of the harmony betwixt this and
other Gospels, and not betwixt this Gospel and other parts of scripture: and
therefore he plays the Sophister, the discourse is (...). whereas then he does
deny my Argument by compare of it with other Gospels, he does not contradict me
in my conclusion, which was comparative to the credit of the Church. And where
he compares the harmony of this Cospel with other parts of Scripture, he does
not conclude contradictorily to me, who only instituted the compare of it with
other Gospels. It is necessary therefore to set down my words, which were these.
Again the harmony of it with other Gospels has more in it to persuade faith
than the credit of the Church. So that all his disputation as to this is
peccant in the ignorance of the Elench, because it comes not up to a
contradiction to my terms. And besides, if the difficulties about the
agreement, were so great, their infallibility pretended should have cleared
them. Either we might have saving health notwithstanding those breaches, or
else the plaster was defective, or else there is want of care in the
Physician. Or it may be as he said, Plus periculi a medico qua^ a morbo, but
let them take my own terms in their ordinary sense, and then his assaults will
lose their force before they come home to the point. For what if one who
intended a supposititious Gospel would take care not to contradict the others?
Is not therefore the harmony of this Gospel with others a better persuasive
than the credit of the Church? For the Argument from the Church is more
extrinsical, and such Arguments are in kind less rational. And if they say the
Church has an infallible assistance, it beggs the question.

And what infringement of the harmony is it, if there be many things related by
St. Matthew, and not related at all by many others? For so, they would not find
an harmony of the other Gospels: and this according to Mr. Cressy would make
this Gospel more credible, because more things are here expressed, and it may
be some material. But surely to relate circumstances and not to relate
circumstances, namely the same, makes no contradiction in diverse subjects, if
one did say these circumstances were, and another did say these circumstances
were not, this would contradict: but not to say, is not to say not. For not to
say is negative ex part actus: but to say not, is negative ex part objecti,
which makes the contradiction in diverse subjects. Again what if there seem to
be any variety betwixt the Gospel of St. Matthew and other parts of Scripture
(he should have said and other Gospels, if he would have spoken ad idem) in the
History of the generations, must Faustus the Manichaean be gratified in honor
to the Roman Church. If there be any such variety, the Roman will have the
worst of it: for his foundation lies principally in that Gospel. And this
cannot be salved by the Church, because the Church is in question.

But he will not spare the Gospel of St. Matthew (as if the Roman Church needed
it not) and therefore he tells us of a disagreement in the first chap. of St.
Matthew's Gospel with the 2. b. of the Kings the 8th. chapter about Ioram's
begetting Ozias, Ioram begat Ozias, etc. Well, if the Roman calls children
Nephews, more reasonably may the Hebrews call real Nephews children, which are
as minor sons, as he said. And so Ioram might be said to beg^t Ozias, who was
his Abnepos. Or will not Salmerons conceit please them* that this was so
ordered in an allegory, to typifie that as 3 Kings are excluded in the History,
so those that deny the doctrine of the Trinity, and deprive themselves of the
three Theological virtues do deserve to be excluded salvation. But since, it
seems it was the spirit of Gods purpose to put the account in tessarodecades,
it was necessary that in one of them, three should be left out. And convenient
it was that the omission should be in the second, that so that curse upon Ahabs
family should be here exemplified, those three Kings being of his posterity:
somewhat as Dan in the seventh of the Revel. is not numbered; because that Tribe
did go away from God in Idolatry, and did mingle with the Gentiles, as is
observed.

Another difficulty he urges about the number of the Generations, wherein one
seems to be wanting, you shall find them to be only forty one; which by the
account of thrice fourteen Generations should make forty two. Ans. Our
question is about the harmony of the Gospel in the point of doctrine chiefly,
this concerns history of fact, 2. We have no reason to think that because we
cannot comprehend all the mysteries in scripture and the ways of the jewish
acount, there should be any falsitie herein. Tertullians' rule is good, Cedat
Curiositas fidei. 3. Stapulensis, it seems, said that in old copies it is found
thus, Josias genuit Ioaechim; Ioaechim genuit Iechoniam and these two are
comprehended under one name. Since Iechonias is called Iehoiachin 4o Regum chapter
24 ver. 6. whose father Iehoiachin was; the father and the son are confounded
by the similitude of the names in the greek, as some note,

Another difficulty he urges about the 27 of St. Matthew ver. 9. Then was
fulfilled that which was said by the prophet Jeremy; whereas the Prophet
Jeremy has no such matter in him. What harmony appears here? indeed in the
Prophet Zechary: there is in substance what St. Matthew said. Ans. An error of
the scribe cannot discanonize the book in a point of circumstance, if it were
so as it might be, if the Gospel was first written in Hebrew? for then (...)
might easily be read for (...) by Ier in short and for Jeremy for by the hand,
namely of the Prophet, which is the usual form of expression in this kind. And
also the Syriack expresses it in the same manner (...) by the hand of the
Prophet. Or it may be 2. As some note, they were wont to put several books
together, and to name all by the first. So Jeremy being first all were
reckoned by him: and so that which is said by Zecharie is attributed to Jeremy
too being the first. And so we know that in the old Testament books are called
by the first words (...) And 3. However this agrees with the Scripture in
general, though not particularly in terms with Jeremy. His other exceptions
are about the difference of St. Peter's denying his master, which compared with
other Evangelists, seems to differ in very many Circumstances; and then also
in the last chap. He says there are some Circumstances about the resurrection,
which St. Matthew differs from the rest in: Ans. These are spoken by him in
general, and Generalia non agunt as it is said, neither do they make an
action. And then 2. Somewhat may be diverse which is not adverse. And what one
says another does not deny. If another omission did make a contradiction to
what one affirms, then, if St. Ierom had called the Bishop of Rome the
universal Bishop, (which yet he does not) then St. Austin, not calling him so,
had contradicted him. But then the supposed differences are about
Circumstances, by his own confession. What is this to matter of faith in
necessary doctrine; which is the center point of the question, unto which all
the lines should be referred, and therefore he had done nothing, if he had done
more in this kind. And I think we are as sure of the right in such varieties
as they. And also he might have remembered that rule of Saint Cyrill of
Jerusalem (...) let things of curiosity not be spoken of in the Church.

But the sense of them is, that we must be Papists or no Christians. But if
they were Turks we might say more. And where nothing is necessary, any thing
is abundant.

He comes next to my last shift, as he calls it, that the people do fix
their faith upon that which is interpreted, not upon the interpretation. To
this he objects thus, you may fix your faith upon a lie, for how know you
whether the thing delivered you by the interpreter, be Gods word or the
interpreters own word, specially when we know not who this interpreter was, how
skilful, how faithful, how true a copy he used. Ans. To the confirmation of
what he here objects against, were added distinct reasons or reasonable
distinctions. These he says nothing to, but what cavil he can make against the
conclusion; he is willing to, without answer to my reasons, 2. We believe that
our people can better believe the word of God in a translation, than their
people without a translation, for the people must believe their Church without
the knowledge of any translation. Let them make their faith good without a
translation: and we shall make our faith as good in a translation. And I think
our people may as well credit the Authority of our Church in a translation as
their people may credit the Authority of their Church without a translation. 3.
By their own Argument they are more in the dark: for if the persuasive of our
faith be the certainty, who this interpreter was, how skilful, how faithful,
how true a copy he used: because they do not know who the interpreter of St.
Matthews Gospel was into Greek, how skilful, how faithful, how true a copy he
used, how can they believe it? And therefore we return him his own words, how
know you that this translation does not conveigh their own fancies in the place
of Gods word. Do they know it because their fancy (of their Church) tells them
that this is Gods word? Thus then they may have a double fantastical assurance
and nothing else. This they are forced to hold sufficient. Yet how does this
agree with their own acknowledgements, that the vulgar latin as to this is also
a translation: and yet, (as they must confess) that it is so far a true
translation as it does agree with the original. They cannot resolve their faith
into the original never proposed to them. Into the translation they say they do
resolve it. And this must be the written word. What written word is that which
is neither translation nor original? For the Greek is neither their translation
nor their original. And yet surely the Greek is more like to be the original
than the latin: for if there was no Hebrew copy extant, as they say, then was
the Latin a translation out of the Greek. And if they say the Greek was not the
original then the Latin is a translation without an original, which is
oppositum in apposito. So then, when all comes to all, we are as well settled in
the tenure of our assurance, as to the Gospel of St. Matthew, as they, or more;
because we stand to that which they have but a translation of. And they have
but the Latin Church for their Latin: we have the universal Church for the
Greek. But forsooth, they believe their Church to be infallible: we do not
believe the Church to be infallible. But what then? if the authority of the
Church were crescent according to the opinion of the recipient, then the
Scripture had not been the word of God unless men had thought so. And then
opinion would make faith: because it would make infallibility. As then they
must say that their Church was assured by the Holy Ghost (for so the terms of
their Synod run, Haec sacrosancta Oecumenica and generalis Synodus in spiritu
sancto legitime congregata) that their Latin translation i^, if it be at all,
authentic: so may we ultimately believe the Gospel of St. Matthew to be in
the matter of it, authentic. For if there be not sufficient assistance of the
spirit of God to Christians severally, as to necessity of Salvation, how did
the Christians do before there was ever a general Council?

What is added hereabouts might have been spoken without Sarcasmes, or might
have been left out. We can know which of those so many Greek Copies is the
only true one as well as they. And a clown will be as able to understand which
is the best English Translation (as if there were such difference) as well as
with them he can understand which is a right General Council, or which was in
the right as to the varieties in the Latin, Sixtus Quintus or Clement the
eighth. And though they cannot confer the Translation with the Original; No
more can the Roman People compare their Translation with the Originals: and yet
Bellarmine, as before, says in some cases, we must have recourse to the
Originals. But did not Xavier convert the Infidels? yes, they will say. So
then. And did he not preach that which is in the Bible? Yes, they will say. And
did not they believe? Yes, they will say. Now then how was this Faith wrought
in them? By the Spirit of God, they will say, or they must say. For they could
not compare that which was said by him with the Originals or with the Doctrine
of the Church. So then our people can believe without conferring a Translation
with the Originals, as well as theirs. And they know who said, Si fides in
doctos selos caderet, nihil esset pauperius Deo. And again, Surgunt indocti and
rapiunt coelum, etc. as the Father. The very neck then of this point may be
thus resolved. In the order of credibles their first Proposition is, The Church
is infallible. Our first Proposition is, The Scripture is the Word of God. Now
their Proposition is grounded in Authority: or else is believed by its own
light. Not by its own light; for then the Scripture may be believed so, which
they deny. Then it is grounded in Authority. That, either Humane or Divine.
Humane Authority cannot make Faith. No Divine Authority, but either that of
Scripture; or internal, by the Holy Ghost. Not by Scripture, then that
Proposition of theirs is not the first. Then by the Holy Ghost: and then by the
same way we believe the Scripture to be the Word of God, as they believe the
Church to be infallible. And so they must at length rest in our Principles.

In this number. (beside somewhat in the beginning, N. 48.
answered before) he would very fain repair the credit of the vulgar Latin,
which I had broken by an instance of Genesis 3.15. where it reads ipsa for ipsum;
referring to the Mother what belongs to the Son. To this he says, It is clear
some Hebrew copies may most exactly be translated ipsum. How know you the
Church followed the false Hebrew copy? Satis caute. Some copies. Not all. May
be. Not are. Most exactly be translated, not some most exact copies. Well. Are
not these copies the greater number? And indeed are they not the most exact?
yea can they truly be translated otherwise? and how know they that their Church
followed the true Hebrew copy? If it did not follow it infallibly; or if they
cannot know infallibly that it did follow it infallibly, infallibly they are
undone; because they are upon terms of an infallible faith in an infallible
Church. Therefore though we can shake their foundation by our question; they
cannot settle their foundation by their question. And yet we have another
question. He asks again, How many most grave and most ancient Fathers have also
read ipsa? Surely he does well to ask how many, because he does not know how
few. Their names may they not be written in a nut shel? and Bellarmin, upon the
place, has not many for it. And some of them surely not most grave and also
most ancient Fathers. But as for St. Austin, Bellarmin, might as well or better
have left him out of the Catalogue. For though he renders it, ipsa, in his 11.
de Genesis ad literam c. 36. and in another place; yet he does not expound it, as
they of the Virgin, for he makes it to be mystically understood. Significatur
semine diaboli perversa, semine autem mulieris fructus boni operis: and illa
observat caput ejus ut eum in ipso initio malae suasionis excludat. He might
also have omitted St. Ambrose, in his 2. b. de fuga saeculi cap. 7. for there
he interprets it morally, not referring it to the Virgin. And both of them also
differ from the Hebrew and their vulgar in the other words, and follow the
Septuagint. For they translate it, ipsa servabit caput tuum, which does not
agree with the Hebrew, with which the vulgar, in this, does agree. But
Bellarmine also names St. Chrysostom in his 17. homily upon Genesis But then they
must have some other edition of him if they will make use of his testimony for
them. For in three places of this homily, he renders it (...), according to the
septuagint, (...). That which he would think, it may be, to be for this use, is
this, (...). And not her alone (the woman) but I will make her seed to be a
perpetual enemy to thy seed. Yet upon this he does immediately subjoyne the
text, as before. (...). Thus Bellarmin does not yet bring (...). indeed all
they can do is much too little to cure this breach. For S. Ierom is more
considerable in this criticism than all the Fathers named. And he says, melius
in Hebraeo, ipse conteret caput tuum. Nay Bellarmin in the place quoted by him,
says he had seen one copy (he speaks of no more, as he would surely if he had
could) and yet does not tell us where. So that, to speak at least de communi
and (...), this reading ipsa; is not agreeable to the Hebrew copies. Nay
Bellarmin does sweat at it; and therefore says some copies of the vulgar Latin
do interpret it ipse, in the former Chap. And this makes a new difficulty on
their part to reconcile the contrariety to the infallibility of the Church in
both. The Church was deceived in one, and where then is their infallibility
they speak of? This is their modesty then, against the gender in the Hebrew,
against the Samaritan, Syriack, Arabic, translations, which refer it to the
seed, against all Hebrew copies which Bellarmin had seen but one, against some
of their own copies of the vulgar Latin, to make that Scripture for the
Creature, which belongs to the Son of God.

And also whether the Fathers most grave and most ancient are for their
interpretation, we have examined and therefore he needed not be so plain as to
say it was a loud lie of Chemnitius to say the contrary: And will they say so
to Lucas Brugensis, who says as much as Chemnitius in this point, almost all
the Fathers do read ipse, as is noted. Let me then say, it would become them
here to give glory to Christ immediately, and to confess this fault.

And yet neither does he competently answer to the question made to him, why
the Greek was not made infallibly the Church as well as the Latin. That we have
his declaration that the Latin vulgar is authentic and not deficient in any
point concerning faith or manners, this he says: but this will not serve, as
may appear thus. A translation of that which is not authentic cannot be
authentic; now let them determine whether it was made authentic or not. If
not made authentic, being a translation (as they say) then how can the Latin
be so declared an authentic translation? for then the Church must have vim
operativam too, not only declaratory: and the effect shall exceed the material
cause. Or if it was declared authentic, what of an infallible translation. 2.
Whereas he says therefore it is not deficient in any point necessary to faith
and manners. To wit the Latin translation, we take notice of it that these
words have a sense in them intended for their use; namely not to be understood
absolutely, as if there were no error at all therein: but restrictively,
specificatively, no such error but that it may be sufficient to direct us in
faith and manners. So then, when he has made use of his own words for his own
turn, we will make use of them for our purpose, and we will not squeese them
neither.

The first corollarie then from these words of his, is this, that he dares not
stand to an absolute infallibility of the Church in every point whatsoever:
and therefore by Mr. Knott's argument he must abate of his former postulate of
it is being the ground and cause of faith. 2. Thus much we may as well or better
say for our translation that it is not deficient in any point necessary to
faith and manners. 3. It semes then salvation is not in danger by some errors:
otherwise their translation should be deficent in points necessary to faith
and manners; and therefore we need not, upon danger of salvation, have an
infallible Judge to decide all points emergent. 4. Things necessary to faith
and manners are sufficiently set down in scripture, for otherwise the Latin
translation must be deficient; or else it must have more then the orignal; and
then, as to this, it is not a translation yet 5. Then necessity of traditions
is excluded, for then it could not be truly said that the Latin Bible is not
deficient in any point necessary to faith and manners. 6. Exceptions against
St. Matthew's Gospel, which are not in points necessary to faith and manners,
do not hinder the authentickness of the Greek; because the Latin is authentic
as not being deficient in points necessary to faith and manners. 7. We may
infer from hence thus, those errors in the Latin Bible, though not material to
faith or manners, might have been saved by the Church or not: if they might
have been saved, then the Church may deceive our trust, if they could not then
it may be deceived: and so we have but a fallible ground for our assent to any
of her definitions and in particular, for the Gospel of St. Matthew. So that
all his shifts fail him in this important point. Surely this whole point about
the belief of Scripture to be the word of God, was a great shift of his: for
the subject should have been supposed in the dispute of the attributes. The
point in question was whether the Scripture does clearly propound things
necessary to Faith and manners. And he has blotted how much Paper to debate
our tenure of the Scripture. Yet it may be, he has gotten nothing by it, nor
by the Holy Fathers, whom he has somewhat to say to only for himself.

The greatest part of this Paragraph comes too late. And all that would seem to
take away my former Answers, is taken away. My Answer to his Exception, that
Luther did not see the Apocalypse and the Epistle of Saint James to be
canonical, is yet sufficient; that the negative Argument does not conclude. He
replies, in our case it is a strong proof. I again deny the Consequence. The
objects have themselves equally to all: but they are not equally seen; surely
not in this case, because the Spirit of God is a free Agent. Yea Saint Luke the
24.16. their eyes were holden that they could not see him. Gods actings upon
objects, and in degrees, are at his own pleasure. And secondly, The sense of
the definitions of the Church is visible, is it not? If not, how are we guided?
If so, yet every one does not see them. And thirdly, If Luther had such an
irradiated understanding, why did he not yet see, and Spalatensis also, the
Monarchy of the Church to be of Divine Right? if he had not, why does he say
so? The light is the same, the Proposition is the same: his eyes or
understanding no better nor more assisted, why then did not they see what he
sees?

As to his Answer to my second Answer [you see we do not follow him (Luther)
blindly] we need not return any thing but this, that he mistakes me in the
term [blindly] he supposes me to speak as in relation to this point about the
Books denied or doubted of by him: but I spoke it in general, that we do not
follow him with blind obedience as the Jesuits do their General.

And though the Apocalypse and other Books were doubted of, this does not
prejudice us, no more than it does them for the visibility of the Church, and
the reception of the Books Apocryphal, These Books were received by them
because they were worthy to be received or not; but arbitrarily. If the former,
why did not those before see them to be such? If the latter, then infallibility
proceeds by the will: and so infallibility may be on either part of the
contradiction. And so we have no reason to say any more, if whatsoever they
will say, is infallible.

Further he charge us with obtruding a Canon of our own coining for Judge of
controversies. Here is two things false, First, That we obtrude a new Canon.
This not so, we have the same Canon which the ancient Fathers had before the
Council of Carthage. But they have made a new Canon, by taking in the
Apocryphal: and by canonizing the vulgar Latin. And the other is false; for we
do not obtrude the Scripture, as Judge of controversies in any formal sense.

And again he would mar the Canon, all agreeing that diverse Books of the true
Canon be quite lost. How often comes this in? But first, He must go less: not
diverse Books, which may import many. One or two are not in common account
diverse. If then he means by [divers] many Books, so all do not agree. If he
means one or two, so not diverse. Secondly, He takes the terms [the true Canon]
either respectively to those Divine Books which were inspired, and yet never
put into the Canon, as it was reveiwed by S. John, as learned men suppose: or
after they were put in and acknowledged: If the former, he cannot say that we
have not a true and just Canon as to that which is necessary. And if he denies
it, he is a friend to Celaeus, Porphyrie and Julian. But if the latter, then
who lost them? Surely those who had the mind to keep the reputation of the
necessary use of Traditions upon this account. But if Traditions be but as
necessary (as the Trent Council intends in those terms pari pietatis affectu)
why may we not think that some of these may be lost also? and then where shall
we find the Judge, who is to determine of points by the tenure of Traditions;
or else some of their most acute and learned men have lost their insight into
ground of truth?

Amongst us (after the Church's declaration was notified concerning any book
for canonical) you will never find it to be doubted of by any true Catholic.
Ans. This argument concludes (if true) unity, but not truth. Things of Divinity
are not to be measured by such a Lesbian rule.

And this agreement cannot prove their Canon good, for unles the Canon was
good, the agreement was not good. 2. If we should bring things of debate to no
other test, we should never have any determination. for what is there which is
not questioned by some of them? Now it is all one to the Romanists, whether the
Canon be questioned or any thing else which the Church proposes, since they
are bound to believe all alike: but to the point in question. Gregory was a
true Catholic. Gregory did not hold the Book of Machabees to be canonical,
after declaration by the Council of Carthage; therefore that which he says is
false. The major was commended to them before the assumption, they may see in
the 19. of his Morals the 15. Chapter Therefore they had best hold the Book of
Machabees to be Canonical only so as to be read in Churches. And if so only
(as Saint. Ierom also held) then this book is not simply canonical: if
otherwise, that which he says is not true; and Gregory was not of their
opinion. So then we have -- Pares Aquilas and pila minantia pilis,

Pope against Pope; infallibility against infallibility. And since we know
which is right, we must deny both.

N. 50.
Here he tells us of an argument in the 14 number. of the former treatise, with
infallible faith, this is the (...) and therefore he beggs the question. And if
they cannot prove the cause to be theirs with out our free grant, they are not
like to have it. And therefore, this being denied him, as before, all that he
would build thereupon must fall. to wit, therefore we must be assisted in this
infallible knowledge by some other infallible means and no other infallible
means can with any shadow of probability, be said given to us but the
infallible authority of the Church; therefore her athority must be infallible,
as shall at large be showed in the next chap. and then in the next after that,
that this infallible Church is the Roman and none but the Roman. This is all
wast and lost, unles they could maintain it to be necessary charity in us to
preserve their cause from starving by granting that which it ought not to
have. And 2. Dato non concesto, suppose there must be some other means of
infallible deciding doubtful sense of Scripture, I can make it a question
whether they can plead the next right, as if they came vacuam possessionem, for
the place may be full by universal tradition; which surely is not the same with
the Roman Church: for the whole surely is greater then the part, and then also
when you prove the Roman faith by universal tradition, you would prove the
Roman faith by the Roman, and this is idem per idem. And as for the 3. thing,
that this infallible Church is the Roman and none but the Roman, which he says
he will prove in the last chapter; surely, if I may speak it without offense,
he does very well to refer it to the last: for he may do any thing before it:
But also since his supposition, that we cannot be certain by the Scriptures
(infallibly) of their own true sense in points necessary to salvation with
infallible faith, must fall without a better support, we may be at our last
already, for if this be not good, the other chapters make number.

And this number makes no weight. He does nothing in it but tell us that he
has done so and so; which we interpret nothing. Infallibility should not need
many words.

In this, N. 52.
he would wipe off the suspicion of disrespect to Scipture in those terms he
used; and would lay a blame upon me for my censure of his words to this
purpose. His words were these, if he would have given us a book for Judge he
would never have given us for our Judge such a book as Scripture is which very
often speaks obscurely, sometimes so prophetically that most would think it
spoke of the present time, when it speaks of the time to come; that it
speaks of one person, for example of David, when it speaks of another; for
example of Christ. And much more I added to this effect; that I might be
rightly understood when I said that God would never have given us such a book
for our judge. To what of this he said in his former treatise, I said Sir, Let
me have leave to speak affectionately to you. Do not you see what disrespects
of Scripture (if not blasphemies) your opinion does miserably betray you to, if
you follow it. Would any sober man let fall such words, as if God had intended
the Scripture for our judge, such a book as Scripture is. So you. This I said.

And now he examins these words strictly, and says. My adversary, to avoid
this argument, so mangleth the sense that he may-make my words sound of a
blasphemous disrespect, reporting them as if I should have said, if God had
intended Scripture for our Judge, he would not have given us such a book as
Scripture. Ans. Surely this is a false charge that I have mangled his words,
for I have given the full sense of them. And this may be demonstrated by
denying of the end, which he makes to be, to avoid the argument. For I do not
see any such difficulty in the argument, that I should decline it and fall upon
the person. This is not my mind or manner. But I could find fault with his
dealing with me even here: for he puts together that which I did not put
together. For he says I accused him of a blasphemous disrespect, whereas I
said [disrespect [if not blasphemies] and also the terms [if not blasphemies]
without a grain of charity might have been construed without an affirmation.
Nether does he right me or clear himself in the prosecution of his defense. For
my words in all reason, do represent as much as if I had added what he said I
should have added. These words, [if God had intended a book for our Judge, he
would not have given us such a book as Scripture] must connotate this sense,
that he would not have given us such a book as Scripture for our Judge. And
therefore he needed not to quarrel upon the omission as if I had not dealt
fairly with him, consider, it in the form of an hypothetical proposition [if
God had intended a book for our Judge, he would not have given us such a book
as Scripture is] what need be added [for our Iudge] when it is understood of
course. They know the rule Quod necessario subintelligitur, nunquam deest. That
which is necessarily understood is never wanting. And therefore have I not done
his words any injury by mangling them: nor yet by interpretation of them still
they seem to sound such an imperfect book as Scripture: and must do so, if they
have full sense in them. But also if we might say what S. Austin said of the
Heretics words, Been haec acciperentur nisi ab eo dicerentur cujus sensus
notus est; so here, these words might be better construed if they were not
spoken by such whose sense was known. For unless the Scripture be a book
imperfect in regard of matter, what need of tradition? unless the Scripture
were imperfect in regard of cleareness, what needed an infallible judge to
decide controversies about the sense.

Therefore he cannot get clearly off. Aqua haeret. And surely he does not
help himself or his cause by a like case he puts, if God had intended the
Scripture for sole Judge in Law controversies, he would never have given us
such a book as Scripture is for our Judge. Does this pass any handsome and
respective reflection upon Scripture. As if it were no fitter to decide
controversies in Divinity then in the Law? And do they not think that we may
have more reason to be bold with them than they with Scripture? if God had
intended that we should have been absolutely determined in matters of faith by
General Council, would he have given us such a packed Council as the Council of
Trent was? And yet moreover all he says is besides the mark. For this we do
not contend for that the scripture is the sole Judge intended by God: for we do
not say that it is fomally any Judge. But we say that the Scripture does so
fully and so plainly set down things necessary so fully and so plainly that
there is no necessity of tradition for more matter, or of infallible Judge for
more clear proposal of things necessary, so that this which he says is peccant
in the ignorance of the Elench.

He says yet, is it not manifest that the Scripture may be a book as perfect
as can be for the intent for which God made it? This we may take for his
proposition. Then Bellarmin, as before acknowledges it to be our rule, against
the Aanbaptists: and therefore it is a perfect rule. But elsewhere Bellarmin
will have it to be but our commonitory then why does he dispute it to be a rule
against the Aanbaptists?

Whereas then my adversary would return the disgrace to Scripture upon me, he
does not or will not understand me, for we do not say, nor are bound to say
that all necessary controversies are plainly decided by Scripture alone, and,
that God intended the Scripture for the plain decision of them: and therefore
we deny his consequences, that since, when it comes to the trial we are not
able to show any text of Scripture deciding many and most important
controversies, this in effect were to say God performed very insufficiently
what he intended to do by Scripture. first we do not say that all necessary
controversies are plainly decided by Scripture: for we say no controversies are
necessary in point of necessary faith. He puts in [necessary controversies] for
necessary truths, we say the Scripture plainly proposes all necessary truths:
and he would bring us in saying, that the Scripture plainly decides all
necessary contoversies, and therefore how can he say that we say God intended
the Scripture for the plain decision of them? 2. Therefore we deny those points
to be simply necessary to salvation which are not clearly proposed in
Scripture. 3. Whereas they say that the Scripture does propose upon Gods
intention the Church to be the infallible Judge in matters of faith, and yet
cannot show any text wherein this is clearly delivered, they do dishonor God
and Scripture and they dishonor God by accusing of Scripture; as Nilus before.

In this number he holds the conclusion, that expressions of Scripture are
obscure in way of prophecy or type, and that there is no certain mean of
direction to the sense; and then that therefore there must be an infallible
Judge. But nothing is answered to my answers about it. And did he think that
the Jews did not understand the manner of expressions of the prophets in their
own language, or that David did not bear the type of Christ? How else were
they saved in the time before Christ? And was the exact sense of every
expression or type necessary? such exceptions do not weigh. And then again, if
there had been need in the time of the law of an infallible Judge for an
infallible Illumination of dark expressions then; if so, dato non concesso,
what is this to the necessity of an infallible Judge in the times of the Gospel
which is the old Testament revealed.

N 54.
To pass by any slips in the former number by the scribe or otherwise, we come
to this paragr. wherein he is not pleased to say any thing to what was replied
about the several senses of Scripture. But he would here corroborate his
argument with Dr. Tailer's Judgment in his discourse of the liberty of
prophesying. And he says he thinks me not to be so much esteemed amongst our
own Clergy or Laity, as he. I confess it Neque de me quisquam vilius sentit
quam ipse, as one said. But though this is very true that my authority is not
comparable to his, yet it was not rational for my adversary to diminish me
because it makes a prejudice to his cause that so weak a man can oppose it, and
therefore I can spare him in this kind. Let my adversary be the Champion of his
cause. And yet it may be the Reverend and learned Author he names is not
allwaies pleased with whatsoever he said in that book. And yet also we can
grant what is said by the Doctor who does not say that no Arguments can be
drawn from Scripture, but from those Scriptures which have many senses, neither
does he say that those texts which have many senses do contain points necessary
to salvation, nor does he say, that if they did contain points necessary they
are not elsewhere explained by more clear texts, or may be explained: for so he
should disagree from St. Austin, as before.

But to say no more, let the Doctor have the honor with all my heart of the
umpirage of the controversy in the example, which my adversary has put, Take
for an example those four words, This is my body.

Indeed some there are which would have five words, hoc est (enim) corpus meum.
And also it may be said that he may exceed in his number of interpretations of
these words, unless he takes in their own many differences hereabouts in the
manner and time of the conversion, they will hardly come up to two hundred
diverse interpretations. And whereas he says that we say that they are spoken
in a figurative sense and not in their natural sense, we can answer that we do
deny the literal sense; and do not deny that the figurative sense may be said
in a good sort natural to the Sacramental use by reason of the (...) there is
betwixt the sign and the thing Signified. And much more might be said herein,
but let this point be compromised to the doctor in that excellent book which
he has lately written on purpose. He says all that I can say and more.

Here he would make good another Argument of his [the Scripture uses the
imperative mood as well when it counsels as when it commands] He asks now, what
infallible means we have to know what is recommended to us as a counsel, or as
a precept to be kept under pain of damnation. We answer, first, supposing the
doctrine of counsels to be right and sound, yet are they in no great danger by
the uncertainty whether such a thing is proposed by way of counsels or precept;
since they hold it to be a thing of greater perfection to perform a counsel.
Therefore if they take a thing of counsel for a thing of command there is no
danger surely in doing more then they are simply commanded to. So then if this
were all, it would be no such difficulty as to practice, because if they do
whatsoever is proposed pro imperio in the imperative mood, there is no danger
if it be commanded, it was necessary if counseled, there is greater perfection
and an accidental reward above the essential. God can distinguish which is
which, though they cannot; and surely will if their opinion be true, reward
them accordingly. And if there be any merit, it would be more meritorious to do
that which is more meritorious without knowledge of it to be such, because then
they do it more free from intention of more merit 2. If the distinction of a
command be simply difficult, as to the negative, whether it be a command or
not; the omission of it is not, without all hope, damnative where there is
general repentance.

And now to the counsels he says, in clearing this my teeth bite St. Paul, who
expressly supposes with me that there is counsels of perfection above things of
command. And he names the 1 Ep. to the Cor. 7.25. and 38. And then he says How
does this agree with your strange Divinity? We answer, very well with our
Divinity which is not so strange as true. First they are too forward in the
catching at the word Counsel, [I give my counsel] it is (...). now surely,
there is no great criticism in the difference betwixt (...) and (...). The
former is a grave and wise opinion or sentence, not a council in the Roman
sense. Or if it were taken for an advice; every advise of the Apostle was not a
pontifician counsel. For this advice he might give them not out of any command
from God, but upon his private judgment: and therefore it does not ground the
doctrine of perfection in the observation of Counsels above the Law. Secondly,
as it is noted, this is not delivered to all promiscuously as the counsels are,
but to those who had the gift of continency as ver. 7. which gift is not given
to every one as Faith Hope and Charity, because this gift of continency is not
necessary to salvation, in the confession of our adversaries, as the other
graces are, but to perfection of state or state of perfection. Thirdly this is
not given absolutely for time, but with restriction of time, as, in the 26.
ver. (...),, for the present necessity in the times of persecution, and he
says here (...), I suppose: so that he spoke not this by inspiration, it
seems. Fourthly, the matter of counsel is more difficult than that of ordinary
obedience. Yes they will say, for otherwise how should they thereby
supererogate and make the state of perfection? and yet to serve God then in
those times in the married condition was more difficult, as being under more
temptations for their family. Fifthly as to the 38. ver. it is not necessary to
construe well and better, de bono morali, but de bono commodo, in respect to
those times. As goodness is grounded in convenience, so it was more good, not
to give in marriage, for those times. And here is all that Text can afford him.
As for his Syllogism therefore, there is no great force in it. According to
you he is bound to do all that he can do: but he could do better in not giving
her in marriage, therefore according to you was he bound not to give her under
pain of damnation. Ans. As for the Major, it is not any other than the
proposition of Christ, but my adversary should have put in here what he puts in
the conclusion, namely [under pain of damnation] and then it might have been
denied: for God accepts that which is done in sincerity and true charity,
though it be not all that we can do, let him or rhem then put those words into
the Major proposition and we can then deny it: if not, there is more in the
conclusion than in the premises. Then to the minor we say, first better is not
necessary to be taken absolutely but with respect to those ends which are
spoken of in the Chapter and therefore is it to be understood, as is observed, not
comparatively to the performance of commands, but comparatively to the
opposite, to marriage; As Gerson is quoted, cum consilia dicuntur esse de
meliort bono, non fit comparatio eorum ad praecepta, sed ad sua contraria. And
let me put them a case upon this point, one in state of virginity is supposed
to abound more with lustful desires (which are opposite to internal chastity)
then one married: Now which of these, think they, in this particular, more
perfect, in the judgment of God: that party which does not profess external
chastity, yet is in the mind more chaste, or that party which does profess
external chastity and is internally less chaste? what will they say to this? for
this is casus dabilis, they must say that the party professing virginity is
more perfect: but then it is not better to marry than to burn: and then they
contradict St. Paul in the former chapter v. 9.

Then with the former Text he confronts that of our Savior, which I produced
against him, St. Luke the 17.10. So likewise when you have done all those
things that are commanded you, say we are unprofitable servants, we have done
what we ought to do. And here my adversary puts in by way of distinction, he
says not, which are only commanded by way of Counsel. And again he puts in,
what we ought to do to wit by an express precept obliging under damnation. And
then he applies the former Text, In one sense this man who has not married his
daughter may truly say I have done what I ought to do not out of strict
obligation binding under pain of hell (for I might have done well in doing the
contrary) but what I ought to do out of most perfect charity. Ans. Passing by
what we said to the former Text simply, we say to it as compared with this of
Christ, that this Text of Christ does not well bear his distinction, because
the terms speak altogether in contradistinction unto counsels: it speaks of
doing all that was commanded: it speaks of their being unprofitable servants:
it speaks of doing what they ought to do upon strict obligation: for so (...)
there bears due correspondence with (...): and this word signifies a strict
command. Secondly compare this Text with the scope of it in the (...); which we
have in the 7, 8, 9. verses. And as the servant attends the Master in necessary
services; so also in the tenth verse which is the (...), the creature is
related to God in necessary services of strict obedience: and therefore he
cannot here distinguish of what we ought to do, upon strict obligation, and
what we ought to do out of most perfect charity. Thirdly this distinction of
theirs will destroy their doctrine of counsels: because, if counsels be
grounded in a duty of most perfect charity, then nothing can be counseled
which is not commanded, because most perfect charity is under a command. If
most perfect charity were under a counsel, then there might indeed be more said
for counsels: but since most perfect charity is under a command, what ground is
there for counsels when the root of them namely most perfect charity is under a
command, and express precept St. Matthew. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul and with all thy mind. And this
cannot be molded into the notion of a counsel; for thus Christ answers to the
question in the ver. before, what is the great Commandment of the Law. And
also in the ver. after he says, this is the first and great Commandment. Now
to do thus is most perfect charity: and therefore what we can do is
comprehended under all that is commanded, yea, if the law requires more then we
can do (according to ordinary measure of grace) then we cannot do more than the
law requires, now this the law requires and not only semper but ad semper as to
the internal duty of love. And who is there in all the world that loves the
Lord always with all his heart, with all his soul, with all his mind? And
therefore Gods law is not to be cut short that it may be made even with our
ability present.

Neither does the text named by him out of St. John prove obedience to the law
possible to us in the way: we may keep Gods commandments in generale, though
not all as we ought: as we are said to keep the way, though sometimes we
transgress. We may keep the commandments as a man keeps a Castle against the
enemies he keeps it till he be beat out of it, he keeps it against forsaking
it: but he does not keep it so as not to be overcome; he keeps them as to the
purpose of his mind; he does not keep them absolutely as to all acts negative in
commands, negative and positive acts in affirmative commands. He keeps them
not, as keeping contradicts all offending, for in many things we offend all, as
St. James speaks. And therefore can we not fulfill the law, because the same
Apostle says 2 chapter 10. He that keeps the whole law, and offend in one shall be
guilty of all. And therefore this argument is peccant in the ignorance of the
Elench, for we can say that we may keep the commandments and yet not fulfill
them, according to the power we had in Adam, and according to the measure of
the obligation, which is not adequated to our strength now, but to Gods law as
an express of his holiness, and as commensurable to man's ability in state of
Original righteousness. Nay it is observable also that the word in St. James,
which is rendered shall offend, is as diminutive a word in the kind as I think
any other, for it is (...) lest Hindan and the rest of that sort should think
that venial sins do but cast a little dust upon a Christians life; no
defilement. And therefore to conclude upon the whole matter, if the Scripture
needs an infallible interpreter to distinguish betwixt counsels and precepts
both given in the mood of command, this makes no difficulty until counsels find
better proof. If they will take our counsel let them keep their counsel to
themselves.

This we may say as little to as he says in it of new discourse. N. 56.
He speaks here again of the loss of Divine books. This we have spoken to
before more then once upon his provocation. And this pincheth them: for why may
not they then fail of some traditions and how then can we depend upon the
Church, when the Church should have kept them, since the Church, as the learned
of them say, is to depend upon them. But own thing here he would urge, that
according to us, we must pick out points necessary, one out of one Book another
out of another. Ans. Surely this is no strong plea, for first, ought not the
word of God dwell plentifully in us, as the Apostle speaks? 2. Cannot any own
easily discern historical books from doctrinal? 3. Can they not take special
notice of those heads of doctrine or practice unto which salvation is
expressly annexed. 4. This argument concludes more heavily against them for
depending upon the Church. Who can compare all their books from age to age for
their doctrine? who can compare who has been most learned and most faithful to
derive a successional sum of things to be believed and to be done? nay who in
the compare of Churches can prefer the best but by the best doctrine? and yet
according to them we must take the doctrine from the Churches: who can measure
the vast latitude of the universal Church by those rules of Vincentius? is it
not easier to receive necessaries from Scripture then to boult them out of so
many volumes of ages? And how should we be sure of keeping received traditions,
when some traditions which were received are not yet kept by the Roman Church?
5. In Scripture though we pick for necessaries, yet we have nothing false: but
we have false traditions; have we not? yea this is a false tradition that
traditions are equal to Scripture, Yea 6. If any books be lost they were lost
before Christ's time; and yet those which remained in St. Paul's time were able
to make Timothy wise unto salvation. And toward the reading of the Apocryphal
books that so we may read over the whole Canon, it is a supposition in stead
of proof. The reading of them in the Church does not infer their
canonicalness of proper name, and this is made good to them they know lately by
the Reverend and Learned Dr. Cosins, in a book on purpose.

And as for accurate noting all places and conferring with other places. What
then? multa non experimur quia difficilia: multa difficilia quia non experimur.
Is not this possible? is not Salvation worth the pains? must every one amongst
them know the distinct exact sense of all their definitions? no, they will say:
but the people should seek the law at the Priests mouths. Well then, so is it
not necessary to Salvation that the people with us should be able exactly to
confer all places: and as for those places which contain necessaries, there
is not such obscurity. And yet surely some hardness, according to their
principles, does belong to faith; for how otherwise should it be supernatural
and meritorious? therefore if their way of belief be so easy, it does not
bear proportion to the qualities of faith assigned by Mr. Knott.

And as for Translations to agree with the Originals, this we have canvased
before. And our people can do it as well as theirs and better too, because they
have liberty of translations. And to the truth of originals we must come in
several causes, as Bellarmin before. Omne reducitur ad principiun, is good here
too. And then the consectary of these difficulties he would make to be negative
to us; namely that God did not intend this book to be our only guide. And he
would persuade us thus. Gods wisdom directs him to the best means to compass
his intention. And then he would frame a minor with advantage thus, even our
ordinary wisdom (if we had an intention to set forth a writing to end all
necessary controversies) would direct us to set down plainly and clearly in one
place all those (few as you say) points necessary to be believed. So then, this
must be a good argument, man in such a case, in ordinary wisdom, would do so,
therefore God has done so. Surely these Romanists speak from the top of the
Capital; and will not only teach men, but God. One found fault blasphemously
with Gods creation, thinking and saying that he could have made it better. So.
But the Schoolmen might have told my adversaries that though God could have
made several things in their accidentals, better: yet they could not but say
that he could not make them in a better manner, Meliori modo. So then, also, if
they believe that God did make the Scripture, they may believe that he could
not make it in a better and more wise manner. Let them satisfy then St. Paul's
question, who has been his Counceller? And then the argument from man to God
will bind. And yet 2. Turn the tables, and this discourse is returned to them;
if God had intended the Church for our infallible guide he would clearly (since
his wisdom directs him to the best means for the compassing of his intention)
have told us so in one place or other; as well as man tells us plainly who is
our judge in point of law, this they should have demonstrated, but no more need
be said of this, since the question is de facto.

Yet another argument of this kind he has against us, God has set down the
cermeonies in Leviticus fully, particularly and clearly: points of faith
necessary to salvation import incomparably more then points of mere ceremony.
If then God had intended a book by which only he was resolved to deliver unto
us all points necessary to salvation, these points, as you say, being few, he
would in some one part of these books have clearly set down those few points a
thousand times more importing than points of ceremony. Ans. Surely he has
better arguments or a bad cause, because he in the time of the law appointed a
Sanedrin as a standing Assembly to judge all causes and the high priest too, in
some case: therefore he must have appointed such an Assembly now, which should
consist of many of the laity, to judge all causes, and the Pope too. God is not
moved by any thing to act all ways in the same manner. Deus vult hoc propter
hoc, sed non propter hoc vult. God orders this to this but by this is not
moved. But 2. His substratum here is false; for he supposes here that all the
ceremonies are set down together in one place, otherwise how can he upon
compare say, much more the sum of points necessary should have been set down
in some one part of these books, now the ceremonies are not all set down
together; and now and then some morality is mingled with them. And so also
points necessary may be here and there mingled with other points without any
disparagement of Gods wisdom, 3. If he has particularly clearly and fully
set down points of ceremony in Scripture, then how much more points necessary
to salvation, a thousand times more importing then points of ceremony. But
verum prius; for it is theirs, then the latter also, upon the same account. And
so they may see how little they get by such arguments. And therefore surely
Christ is not obliged to his Church for credibility, but his Church to his word
and spirit. Let them think upon that of Christ St. John the 7.17. if any one
will do my will he shall know of my doctrine whether it be of God or whether I
speak of my self.

And yet another proof you bring in that many hold that the Epistles of St.
John were written after the Apocalypse etc. And what then. Is it therefore
true, because many hold so? I trow not, for then rather it should not be so,
because more hold the contrary, but what would he make of it, if they had been
written after the Apocalypse? this. Upon this supposition the Epistles of St.
John are the last part of the canon, now in this last part of the last part of
the Canon Saint John says, I have many things to write, but I will not with
ink and pen write them but, I trust we shall see thee shortly and speak
face to face. Upon this, the broken matter of his discourse might for more
cleareness be put into this form, many things were written which are not set
down in the canon: no man can say that those many things were unnecessary.
Therefore no man can say that many things not unnecessary are not set down in
the canon. Ans. We need not answer it. The ground of the major is rotten, and
is to be made firm, if it could by him, that is not the order of the books. And
it is not the order in the Latin; therefore this binds them to believe the
contrary. And therefore the minor, which must suppose that supposition must
fall with it. And yet also how he minceth it, no man can say etc. What is this
to settle us in infallibility. He might also have said better for himself, some
things not unnecessary might be amongst those which St. John intended to speak
to them; and this would have served his turn against us. But let them speak
and prove categorically that the Epistles were written after the Apocalypse,
and that many things which he would speak unto them were necessary. Otherwise
no man can say that this argumentation concludes ought. And besides the terms
unnecessary, might have a distinction, if it sounds as useful it is not to the
point of the question: if as much as necessary: yet what he should speak to
them, he should speak by the spirit of God, and let them give us such assurance
for what they would add to Scripture: then they will say somewhat. And yet
again they should not surely be necessary, because many: for surely some things
which were necessary were written; and yet those things which are certain are
few, as Tertullian said, Certa sunt in paucis. Again should those many things
have been adverse to what he had written or diverse, or the same in substance?
not adverse they will say, because they say their traditions are praeter
Evangelium, not contra, beside the Gospel, not contrary: if diverse, then
surely they did not contein things in substance necessary. For would Saint John
have written several things not necessary, and have left to word of mouth
things necessary when Ebion and Cerinthus vaunted so much of their Apostolical
traditions. And if they were the same in substance, then what addition? Again
if they were necessary how can this be reconciled to that of St. John the
20.31. whereupon St. Austin and St. Cyrill and St. Chrysostom, it seems, do
conclude that there was enough written which was sufficient to faith: my third
answer about this argument, that humane judicatories have their use without
infalliblity, he touches not.

My fourth he touches in the next paragr.

Par. 57.
In this number he seems, if I may think so to be a little hooked, and with more
line to be more snarled. There must stick upon the Church Roman a censure
either of fallibility or unfaithfulness. Thus it is, they say the Scripture is
not our guide sufficiently because it does not decide controversies, we return
it to them, that upon the same account the Church Roman is not, because it does
not decide whatsoever is necessary to be believed, by a full Catholic in
their sense. And for instance; whether the Pope has a temporal power or not?
if temporal, whether directly as the Canonists, or propter bonum spirituale, as
others: then whether the Pope be superior to a Council in things
Ecclesiastical. To these he gives me no positive account: and yet are these
points Cardines mundi and ecclesiae; the main points upon which the Church and
world with them must turn. Do they tell us that it is a necessary point know
whether the king be head of the Church; and is it not as necessary for them to
know whether the Pope be head of the Church? But we must consider his apology.
Our doctrine is that the Church can decide any point formerly revealed, when
any necessity shall require it, or the declaration of this point concern
salvation. Ans. what work would some adversary have made him for such a
return? The charge against Scripture was that it cannot end all necessary
controversies. I recriminate, neither does their Church. They reply, the Church
can. I reioyn, first, here they vary. I said their Church, they say, the
Church; as if they would not own the Church of Rome in its catholickness. 2.
They say it can. But if it can and will not, I am yet to seek for my trust. and
as St. Ierom said to the Pelagians about the possibility of the law, how shall
we think that possible which was never done? if it cannot, how is it infallible
in all points? if it will not, how is it faithful? if it can, let it do so:
and then let them object our differences to us, and the inability of Scripture
to end them. 3. He says the Church can decide any point formerly revealed,
what means he by this? if formerly revealed, then what need of a judge for it?
and then the most they can do is to declare; and so may another Church and that
not necessary neither, if it were formerly revealed. Well then. Are these
points revealed or not? if they be not revealed, then by their own confession,
they cannot decide them. And if they be formerly revealed, what need to be
decided but* but 4. When any necessity shall require etc. But let me know why,
when such a thing is proposed by the Church it is a fundamental and a necessary
point to be believed, and yet somewhat is necessary to be believed and yet not
decided by the Church. As for instance, it is necessary to be believed that the
Pope is head of the Church: for so Bellarmin defines a Christian with
subjection to the Pope as head of the Church, in his Catechism. And yet it
seems this is not decided by the Church; because then it is decided whether he
be supreme in Ecclesiasticals. So then the definition of the Church cannot be
the adaequate reason of our faith, because somewhat is necessary to be believed
which is not decided; and yet again, if somewhat be necessary to be believed,
then by my adversaries confession, it ought to be declared, because it does
concern our salvation. And since the Church is to act not ex arbitrio, but ex
officio, how can it else clear it self of the blood of all men, as St. Paul
does Acts 20.27. when it does not declare (...), the whole counsel of God. And
if they take [counsel] here in their sense; we can make use of it to them thus,
that if he declared all counsels then much more necessary doctrine, because
counsels, according to them, are not simply necessary, but yet it cannot be
taken in their sense, because he discharges himself hereby of the blood of
all men? and therefore must it be meant of what was necessary to their
salvation simply; as counsels, they say are not.

So then he thinks it the best way to pitch upon the negative, and to say,
Salvation has very securely been had without the decision of these points you
speak of. If Circumstances happen that salvation cannot be had without their
decision, they will then be decided. Ans. first then, let there be a
defalcation and discounting of one point from the number of those which are
accounted by them to us necessary, which the Scripture has not decided, and
that is whether the King be head of the Church, for surely there is as much
reason of necessity to salvation for them to know whether the Pope be head of
the Church, as for us to know whether the King be head; and more too since
infallibility is annexed to their head. 2. If Salvation may be had without an
assurance in those points, then how shall we be bound to the Trent Council in
belief of the Roman Church to be the Apostolic Church, without which no
salvation, when yet we need not know who is supreme in that Church? Take it in
this form, subjection to the universal Church is necessary to salvation, the
Roman Church is not universal unles he be head, therefore unles he be head of
the Church, subjection to the Roman Church is not necessary to salvation. And
then Conclamatum est. And if Circumstances, according to him, can bring these
points under a necessity of decision, then it seems they are but indifferent ex
natura rei, for circumstances are only considerable in case of indifferency.
And then by the virtue of the former discourse, it is indifferent to salvation
whether we be subject to the Roman Church or not. And so might we end the
business.

But he goes on, if you acknowledge a real necessity to be at all times of the
infallible knowledge of these points. Ans. He does not take notice that I
dispute with him upon his own principles, by which he he is bound to show that
the Church has defined these points; since he says the Scripture has not
decided all necessary points: but has referred us to the Church for their
decision. Now then since these points are not necessary to us, but to them who
have that opinion of the Roman Church, it belongs to them to show the Church's
decision of these points. And therefore if they believe all Scripture, and
therefore these, (if they be determined there) this will not serve them, though
it is enough for us; because what the Scripture does not clearly define, they
say the Church by Scripture is deputed to. And if the Church has not done it,
though they know the way to Rome, they do not know the way to heaven, and so
all his arguments fall of themselves.

That which he says he adds that our whole Church teaches the definitions of
Councils confirmed to be infallible, how little has it in it: their whole
Church if they take it for the universal Church, it is but a part, either in
quantity or dominion. If they mean it not as the universal Church, then we may
say as well our whole Church teaches that they are not infallible, nay nor did
the former Councils themselves account themselves infallible. But 2. [Councils
confirmed] by whom confirmed? why do they not here speak out? for in other
places, where this is not actually contested, they will say that they are to be
confirmed by the Pope. But why then are they so loath to end the controversy
upon which side the superiority should be cast upon the council or upon the
Pope? for if the councils are to be confirmed by the Pope, then they have their
esse Constitutivum* from him, and then (...) he must have the superiority;
notwithstanding what the Council of Basil and Constance determined. But I can
demonstrate that no Circumstances will ever be sufficient to give occasion to
this decision. All points are to be decided by Councils confirmed, now the
councils will never vote the superiority of the Pope, nor the Pope confirm the
superiority of the Council. Therefore it will never be decided. Let them
therefore submit to Scripture, which their Church obliges them to believe. And
let them hereafter think better of the Scriptures sufficiency, since in such
points the Church Roman cannot or will not or dare not supply its supposed
defects. And they shall find it not to leave them ignorant of what is necessary
for them to know: to cavil at it, they will pretend that to be necessary which
they will say the next moment not to be necessary. They call for a decision by
Scripture of the question whether a King be head of the Church, as of a
necessary point, and now they deny the question to be necessary of the Pope.

N. 58.
Herein he would reinforce his argument to prove us contrary to Scripture in not
receiving extreme unction, as a Sacrament upon the command of St. James, 5.13,
14, 15. ver. first he declaimes upon our denial of their interpretation. And
then would urge it upon compare of the claritude of this next for them with the
clearenes of other texts produced for us. Let them answer our texts as we
answer theirs, and not only say that one is as clear as the other.

Well, but he says now, How clear this place is, appears by the very letter,
in which we have all we can desire to make a Sacrament; a visible sign of an
invisible grace. Ans. every Sacrament of proper name is a visible sign of an
invisible grace: but every visible sign of an invisible grace is not a
Sacrament of proper name, unles it has Christ's institution. And therefore must
we refer it to the use of healing, spoken of St. Mark the 6, 13, which it
seems, continued some time, 1 Ep. Cor. 12.^9. And "30, gifts of healing.

Yet he supposes that the Scripture has decided this point for them.
Hereupon, we came upon him, if, the Scripture has decided this point, then the
Scripture can judge and end controversies. To this he replies by asking,
whether it therefore follows that it can end all necessary controversies,
because it can end this one controversy. We reioyne, that it does not follow
ex vi formae, that because it can do one, it can do all. But yet it may follow
ex vi materiae, thus; if it can decide this which is a necessary matter, why
not all such? since especially they confess this Sacrament is not so necessary,
as some other, because it is but a casual Sacrament. And the Sacrament of
penance may supply the use of it. But 2. The use which we make of his former
concession as it seems, that the Scripture had decided this point, is in order
to the act more then the object. For hereby we see that the Scripture can
decide a point, which by them is wont to be allowed only to a living judge:
now it is true ex part actus, if it can decide one, it can decide another; for
the chief incapacity of the Scriptures not deciding controversies is urged in
reference to the act: and therefore a living judge is by them substituted for
this capacity.

But he says, again is this controversy by this text ended? do you not still
stand out in the contrary opinion. Ans. This does not hinder the controversy
to be ended, because we are not convinced. It is possible for them to be
convinced of some points which they will not profess. It is possible for some
points to be clear, which they are not convinced of; conviction therefore is
not the measure of decision. For by this argument the Trent Council had with us
and the French ended no controversies: because we are not convinced thereby.
And therefore we are not to be guided by them, because they cannot end our
controversies. And if they say the Council is furnished with sufficient
assistance of the spirit, which may be apt to convince: surely we can say that
the Scripture is more apt to convince, because there is no question made of its
being written by inspiration. So then we cannot say, that the point of extreme
unction is not decided, because we are not convinced: but we can say that we
are not convinced, because it is not decided. But also we must note to them
from hence that it seems we must be persuaded in matters of belief by the Holy
Ghost, since texts which they suppose so clear, do not convince. Moreover he
says, your second answer is flatly against the Text, for you say those words
do only relate to the gift of healing in those days; and the Scripture says
they have also a relation to the healing of the soul. "If he has committed
sins they shall be forgiven him. Ans. Qui ad pauca respicit de facili
pronunciat. He does not take notice that the healing of the soul has relation
to the prayer of Faith; unless Esti^ and the Rhemists can indeed prove that the
Prayer of Faith is the form of the Sacrament. Secondly, whereas he blames me
for referring this to the gift of healing, let him retract that blame for the
Council of Trents sake; which in the 14 session, for want likely of other Texts
to prove Christ's institution of this Sacrament, will have it insinuated by St.
Mark; which surely can be only in the 6. chapter where it refers to the gift of
healing. And there they may see that the Elders did cure by anointing with
oil: which he demands a Text for. And they did it commonly in respect of
frequency, though not commonly, quod modum effectus. Therefore may we see by
this, that the Trent Council could err (and if that, other Councils, they may
think) in its peremptory determination of this point, Si quis dixerit extremam
unctionem non esse vere and proprie sacramentum, and a beato Iacolo Apostolo
promulgatum; sed ritum tantum acceptum a patribus, aut figmentum humanum,
Anathema sit. If any one shall say that extreme unction is not truly and
properly a Sacrament promulged by the blessed Apostle St. James, but a rite
taken from the fathers, or to be in humane ^igment, let him be Anathema.
Neither did Christ institute it nor (...) ^es promulge it; nor did the fathers,
it seems, ^ake it ^or a sacrament. So, as it was said of Origin, Ingenium s^^m
facit ecclesiae Sacramenta: so do these men ou^ of their own wit make
sacraments of the Church. Only Origin made mysteries of the Church, as the word
is taken largely: these make Sacraments, as the word is taken strictly. And
surely they are hard put to it to attribute what there to the Sacrament, which
is atttributed to prayer, which is therefore so much Commended by the Apostle
in the following verses.

To take notice here of that which is new, N. 59.
He here confronts the clearness of that Text [this is my body] with the
clearness of those Texts I produced for the Sunday and Baptism of Infants.

He says, they are words expressed by four several writers of the Scripture
without any intimation of their being spoken figuratively. Ans. We have
produced some Texts for the observation of the Lords day and for Baptism of
Infants, without any figure: therefore our Texts may, upon this account be as
clear. Secondly, If the sense of this Text be so clear, why did not the Ages of
the Church urge it before the Lateran Council? were they all also blind? as
they must be, if the Text was so clear in their sense. And Thirdly, If the Text
so clear of it self, what need to conferr it with the sixth of St. John, and if
they would conferr Texts they might find more against them in the points of
difference. But what will they say if the sixth of St. John speaks not of
Sacramental eating? For if so, how can the 53. ver. be understood: for then
Infants (unless they are to have the Communion, as anciently) and the Thief
upon the Cros^, and all in time of Persecution which died without the
Sacrament, are damned, but as they know, they are not all of a mind in this;
for Cressy thinks the Chap. is not to be taken of the Sacrament, and Bellarmine
will find us more of this persuasion; as Gabriel, and Cusan^, and Cajetan, and
Tapperus, and Hesselius, and Iansenius, in his 4th. b. de Sacrament^ Euch. Cap.
5. and they have good reason to exempt this Chap. from this use, because it
speaks as strictly of the Cup.

Therefore let them consider what has been said before upon this point, and
then let them refer the issue to a compare betwixt the clearness of texts for
them in points of difference, and of texts for us as to things necessary. for
this should have been the state of the question.

The contradiction he makes by the shift is not yet well answered. He said in
the former paper that the words are clear in this Sacrament: and yet also that
the Scripture does not decide this point. Upon this I said, how far is this
from a contradiction. He says now, that this does arise out of my speaking
according to your principles. Ans. He was much mistaken, if he thought I could
be thus deceived with a supposal, of his own consequence for one of my
principles. He would cavil thus, this text which he brings is more clear for
him then those I bring are clear for me. Then if my texts less clear for me do
prove my points* those texts more clear for him do prove his texts. But we say
the texts he brings are not so clear for him as they are clear against him: and
therefore how can he proceed upon our principles.

And yet again he says, and again you say on the other side by these our texts
(clearer then yours) this controversy is not clearly decided, therefore I must
consequently say that according to you this controversy the Scripture does not
decide. Ans. Some are blamed for charging upon opinions remote consequences but
he charge me with a consequence of his opinion that because he thinks his
texts more clear for him then mine for me, I must needs also say so, to free
him from inconvenience; surely we can hold our principles better then he would
make them. And yet once more he will play the Sophister it is according to your
principles that these texts must be clear because they be clearer then those
which you are forced to affirm clear. And again you must say that they are not
clear for fear you should confess them to decide against you. Ans. This harpes
upon the same string, he supposes me a Captive to his consequences upon his
own opinion. My principle is good, that points necessary are clearly set down
in Scripture: but his assumption is not right that his texts are more clear
then mine. this I demand the proof of. If I were bound by my principles or his
discourse to confess that his texts were clearer then mine; he would say
somewhat: but falsum prius. And yet this is fairly returnable to him, he is
bound by the condition of their principles to say that their texts are clear
for him (and yet they are not so clear for him as they are against him) because
they have neither reason nor Antiquity for their sense: and yet must say again
that the text has not decided this point, for fear it should be able to
decide controversies.

And now he draws up again, now if these two places be denied to be clear with
clarity sufficient to put an end to the controversy, then according to my
principles, scarce any controversy will be decided by any text. Ans. He has
seen the reasons why those texts must be denied to bear his sense and whether
he has as well cleared my texts for things necessary to be contained plainly
in Scripture, let those judge, whose interess it is not, to be Judges. To such
I say, (...) 2. He does very ill to argue from his conceit to an impossibility
in the thing; as if, if these texts did not clearly speak this his sense, no
controversy could be determined by any text. A non esse ad non posse non
valet. He might have known that the Nicene Fathers determined the
Coessentiality of the Son of God by Scripture and that Bellarmin concludes
against the Anabaptists by Scripture. And that the Trent Council, I hope,
concluded extreme unction by Scripture: so that it lay in Scripture clearly
determined, as in actu signato: the Council did but call it out and show it to
the people. 3. He should have said [ according to his purpose] scarce any
controversy can then be determined by Scripture: for speculative principles
may yield more then engagements. Persons will ever plead dissatisfaction,
though the Judgment within be convinced. And 3. Others of his religion are not
in this of his persuasion: for they will not so lightly give over the
determinability of other points by Scripture. And yet I commend also his
modesty in that he says not absolutely no controversy, but scarce any
controversy. So that it is not repugnant to a controversy Ex natura rei to be
determined by Scripture. And then there is no such necessity of a living Judge,
surely the living Judge is more necessary for the state of Rome than for our
salvation.

Then he takes exceptions at my discourse about the nature of a sacrament. He
tells me, you do not do it as you should have been done to the present purpose;
to wit by alleging more clear texts to prove that Christ's true body is not
really in the Sacrament, then I allege to prove that it was really in it.
Ans. But first they may think that we do understand our selves sufficiently in
this case, not to be bound to give any texts for the negative. And therefore
since they affirm they should prove so strongly that nothing can be answered:
and since they challenge, they should make clear work as they go; we
sufficiently discharge our parts in the taking away their arguments, which
concludes to us and might to them the negative, and since the signal texts for
their cause in this point, are answered we have no more to do. 2. Such a demand
will return upon him; I have reason to doubt of his Interpretation of the text
of St. James lately agitated. I say also, give me a clearer text against my
sense which I make of it, namely as relating to the gift of healing. Is not
this as equal a demand, since especially the council could not, it seems,
fetch their sense from tradition? 3. If Christ's being really in the Sacrament
would satisfy them without determination of the manner, this controversy
would be at an end: for we say as anciently, Praesentiam agnoscimus, modum
nescimus, but, forsooth, they must appoint the manner of presence, and yet
cannot agree about the manner of conversion of the Element into the body. 4.
What need of any texts against their sense, when the sense imports that which
cannot be? although the Canonists do flatter the Pope with all kind of power:
yet one said well of him, Papa non potest facere de quadrato rotundum. Nay, as
Aquinas determins handsomely concerning those things which are in question
whether God can do, it should rather be said that they cannot be done, then
that God cannot do them. So this cannot be. For it implies a contradiction, yea
many, as it is noted. It implies the body not to be when it is. If the body be
to be made then it is not: for the term of motion cannot be existent before
the motion be accomplished. So then it is, namely in Heaven: and yet must not
be, because it is to be made on Earth by the Priest. And yet fifthly. If he
would not make an ill use of a courtesy, we might gratify this humor a
little; and tell him that there is a Text in the 1 Ep. to the Cor. 11.26. which
concludes clearly against his sense, for it is said, "you show the Lords death
till he come. If it be done in remembrance, how is he corporally present? And
now me thinks then they should be obliged to answer my Texts for my sense
against their sense: since indeed their sense is nonsense.

Here he comes over again (to make the work more tedious) with some passages of
the Athanasian Creed, N. 60.
which he thinks every one is bound explicitly to believe (though they think an
implicit faith sufficient to them) and yet they are not clearly set down in
Scripture, To this I answered that the matter of them in the generality is
found according to equivalence in Scripture although it be not found in terms.
Only they are desired to consider that this answer was made to the other
passages of the Athanasian Creed, and not to the consubstantiality of the Son
of God: for this is more expressly spoken of as I have told them; but because he
would not be urged to a necessity of answering what I said distinctly about
this point, he includes it amongst other passages of the Creed: it may be upon
these accounts: that it might seem to be under no more necessity of actual
belief than the other; and Secondly, might lose the use of a proper answer, and
he might have less to do by answering it in common, but we are not ignorant of
his devices.

My answer therefore to the properties of the divine persons in the H. Trinity
is yet in full vigor and force, that the matter of them is as well found in
Scripture, (though not in terms, yet according to equivalence) as their
transubstantiation.

To this he says now, To be as clearly set down as Transubstantiation, in
Scripture, is (according to your own principles) not to be clearly set down at
all. Ans. Again he plays the Sophister in taking that to be spoken ad rem,
which was spoken ad hominem. Therefore cannot be conclude that there is an
equal independency of both on Scripture to be inferred from my words. They
hold transubstantiation so upon Scripture; I not. But I make use of their
distinction, as to this point, against them, for those passages in the
Athanasian Creed.

Neither is it any boot for him to say, It is not more satisfactorie, if you
mean to argue out of our own principles; for according to us, all points
necessary, (and this point in particular) are not clearly set down in
Scripture, and to prove this I have labored all the Chap. So then, thus we
know Ulysses. They will make the best proof of their points they can by
Scripture: but they make a better use of Scriptures by their obscurity; that so
causes might necessarily fall into the hands of the Romans. First then, this
(...) we have by them, that they dare not stand to Scripture for the
determination of their points, and they may know who those were which were
Lucifugae Scripturarum. Therefore I hope, we shall have leave to make the
shorter work by abatement of discourse out of Scripture. For when you produce
Scripture for your cause, we can retort your own confession, this point is not
clear in Scripture. Having then beaten them out of the hold of the Fathers, and
now out of the hold of the Scriptures, we may have done enough. But secondly,
to give them a little more chase, though they will not make Scripture a
Principle; yet since they will make it a proof for their auctorament, we can
say as well as they can prove this point by Scriptures; so is the Athanasian
Creed as provable by Scripture, as to those passages about the properties of
the divine persons. And now might I name Boucher, who in his Mir veilles de
Deiu, has the same distinction in the point of transubstantiation, that though
it be not found in Scripture in the term, yet according to equivalence. But
what says Bellarmin in his 3. b. de sacr. Euch. cap. 23. Etiamsi Scriptura
quam supra adduximus videatur nobis tam clara ut possit cogere hominem, non
protervum, tamen an ita fit, merito dubitari potest. So then the Scripture
seems to him to be in this point so clear that it might compel a man not
pertinacious. Yet he must needs spill the milk he gives, lest we should come no
more to the Roman Cow. But if a Scripture may be so clear to them in a point of
controversy: why not to us, in points necessary? Yea the Trent Counsel goes
further in their 13 Sess. They say the words do carry before them that proper
and most open signification, propiam illam and apertissimam significationem
prae se ferunt. And I hope they carried a plain and most open signification did
they not? if they did not, then here is a falsity to the Councils Declaration,
if they did; so may Scripture have a plain and most open signification in
points of faith. Again if the Sacrament of extreme unction was determined by
the Trent Counsel with respect to Scripture, as before, why should we not stand
to Scripture in other points?

And this may be sufficient out of their own principles. And as for our own
principles, as to the question about the properties of the Divine Persons, we
need not labor therein. For if we hold that all things necessary are plainly
set down in Scripture: then it is consequent hereunto, that the truth of those
properties is no more necessary to be believed than according to what clearness
they are delivered in by Scripture. And then Secondly, to answer to the point
it self, those opposite relations, as Aquinas calls them, whereby the H.
persons are distinguished in their personalities, do connotate themselves
sufficiently. For the Father being the first Person, must be of himself; the
Son, as such, must be begotten. The H. Ghost, since there is but one only Son,
as is plain in Scripture, must not be begotten: but proceeds; which is the
expression of Scrip-there. Indeed there is a question whether the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father and the Son. But as to this we need not consult the
ancient reading of the Athanasian Creed; if the Mr. of the sentences may be
believed, who thinks there is not so vast a difference, as that either part did
destroy salvation. And if it be absolutely necessary to believe as the Roman
Church in this point, why could not Pope Urban see the truth hereof in the
dispute with the Greeks about it, as well as our Anselm? Why did he bring him
into the Lists with this Preface, Includamus hunc in orb nostro tanquam
alterius orbis papam? And surely it seems to be as possible for the unlearned
people to be saved without a positive faith herein, as it was for the learned
Greeks in a positive difference: unless our adversaries will damn them all who
hold not with them herein. He goes on, your second answer is destroyed by the
former. Answ. Yes surely if our adversaries are to be our judges, we need not
hold our articles which we hold necessary, upon the authority of the Church,
but upon clear Texts; and clearer Texts too, than they have for their
transubstantiation or authority of the Church.

But to the main matter of my answer he makes no return. I said, although we
believe what is said in (Athanasius) his creed, yet therefore we are not bound
to believe it upon the Authority of the Church, since he would have believed it
though the Church had not; as he did sometimes differ from the common
profession of the Church in the consubstantiality of the son of God. And what
says he to this? nothing. And besides the Authority of the Church has not it
self equally to the passages in the Creed and to transubstantiation. And
therefore Scotus said that this transubstantiation was no dogma fidei before
the Lateran Council, as Bellarmin says in his 3. b. de sacram. Euch. 23. chapter
For as for the consent of the Fathers (which he says he did non read) surely
Scotus did very well know what it was; since the consent of the Fathers is by
the Schoolmen laid for the foundation of School Divinity. It remains
therefore that both my answers may be good according to both principles.

Another instance of things necessary not clearly taught by Scripture, he does
here re-urge, N. 61.
namely Baptism of Infants. And here he names my answer, that it is not
necessary for the Salvation of the Children to be baptized. But here I
distinguished of a necessity of praecept and a necessity of mean, the former we
granted: the latter we denied, "so as that if it be not baptized, it is
undoubtedly damned. These words do make my sense to be understood against an
absolute necessity, without which no possibility of Salvation. To prove this, I
brought the Text St. Mark the 16.6. He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved: but he that believeteh not shall be damned. now, this Text, he says,
speaks nothing of Children. And this gloss he gives upon the latter part of
that Text He that believes not, and consequently would positively not be
baptized shall be damned. Ans. He trifles. I acknowledge that the Text speaks
not of Infants: for the drift of my discourse upon this Text was otherwise,
namely upon the case of those of age. And my argument did run upon advantage,
thus; if the H. Gh. Did not reduplicate damnation upon defect of baptism to
those of age, then much less reason is there to exclude Infants from Salvation,
who may have baptism in re but in voto not, as they speak. This was the effect
of my discourse let the point come to the pinch. Though they do believe yet
should they have the seal of faith: but if they do not believe, damnation here
proceeds not upon defect of baptism, but upon defect of faith, which if
Bellarmin had considered, he would not have annexed Salvation imediately to
baptism in his 2. b. de of. sacr. c. 3. And not to faith but as a disposition
to baptism. 2. All positive refusal of baptism makes a defect of baptism: but
all defect of baptism does not make even in those of age a refusal thereof. Now
it is casus dabilis, that one of age may believe, and yet may not have baptism,
as the necessity may fall out. Shall this man be damned though he has faith,
because he has not baptism, which he could not have? and this was the case
which the Martyr that on a sudden, when one of the forty shrunk, stepped in
and made up the number, as St. Basil relates it, he believed and was not
Baptized. What was he damned? no, they will say he had baptism in voto, and the
baptism of blood. Well, but if there were an absolute necessity of baptism as
there is of faith he must have been damned notwithstanding, absolute necessity
knows no dispensations.

But therefore he produces a Text for absolute necessity, St. John the 3.5.
Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of heaven. Ans. If we compare this verse with the third, we need not
make any other construction then of a necessity of being born from above.
Neither is it likely that Christ would have spoken no otherwise to Nicodemus of
baptism, had he meant it so. And Ferus, though he speaks of this sense ad
literam; yet has he other senses thereof. And if it be compared with the other
Text St. Matthew 3.11. you shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire;
as that Text is to be understood by an (...) so may this also, notwithstanding
the order of the words. But 2. Dato, non concesso, that it is to be understood
of Baptismal water, yet the Rhemists upon the place do confess that in two
cases Baptismal water is not necessary. Namely in the case of martyrdom; and
if they have a desire of it, but are prevented necessarily by death. And the
reason thereof is sufficient, because God has not bound his grace in respect
of his own freedom, to the Sacraments. and so Ferus upon the place, Deus enim
non alligavit potentiam suam Sacramentis etc. God has not tied his own power
to the Sacraments. By his ordinate will indeed he gives grace by the
Sacraments: But nevertheles he can give it without the Sacrament. Let them then
tell me why Infants may not have rem Sacramenti, without the seal: as if God
should have no favor for Infants, because they cannot be qualified for the
privilege. Let then the Rhemists and Ferus be compurgators for the pernicious
doctrine of mine as he calls it. And now whatsoever testimony he produces of
the necessity of baptism; (unles St. Austin's, as to Infants) they will stand
very well with my terms in their ordinary sense; which does not contradict an
ordinary necessity of it to Infants: but again that all the Fathers were of
this opinion I can deny. I except Tertullian. And St. Austin for those of age,
holds but an ordinary necessity; as appears in his 4. b. De Bapt. Contra
Donat. 23. chapter This ordinary necessity I stand for. He himself intends no more
by his testimonies, Dr. Tayler's and others, and therefore he absolves me
himself: but I cannot absolve him from ignorance in the Elench. This does not
contradict me, who do dispute now against an absolute necessity: which he must
maintain; or else in this he comes short of his design. And also that that
allowance of baptism of Infants (after it be done) does not infer an absolute
necessity of their being damned (in the judgment of the Fathers) if they were
not Baptized; if they will take Mr. Hookers opinion for all, let them consult
him in his 5. b. 33. p. where he says I know there are many sentences found in
the books and writings of the ancient Fathers to prove both Ecclessiastical and
Moral defects in the Ministers of Baptism a bar to the heavenly benefit
thereof. Now in Laymen, I trow, there are Ecclesiastical defects: for there is
a defect in not being Ecclesiastical. And therefore whether others mistake the
Fathers, either in the point of fact, or in the reason of that allowance, (...).

But he gives me a Syllogism, which we will not neglect, because it is very
rare with him. He disputes upon my distinction of necessity, thus; This precept
is necessarily to be fulfilled, this precept is not plainly set down in
Scripture: therefore all necessary points are not plainly set down in
Scripture. This has the face but not the form of a Syllogism. But to pass
that, we answer therefore that this Syllogism does not conclude contradictorily
to the state of the question, which is whether all things necessary to
salvation are plainly set down in Scripture. Now all that is necessary to be
done is larger then all that is necessary to be done unto Salvation. Though all
things necessary to be done unto Salvation, are necessary to be done: yet all
that is necessary to be done, is not necessary to be done unto Salvation. The
former are necessary necessitate medii: the latter necessitate praecepti. Now
the knowledge of the former is simply necessary: the knowledge of the latter is
not so necessary. Whatsoever is known to be praecepted is to be necessarily
done: but whatsoever is praecepted, is not necessary to be known. So that also
his Syllogism was peccant in the fallacy of the consequent.

He follows me then, your Answer will not help you out here, whatsoever is
necessarily inferred from the Scriptures is binding in the virtue of the
principles, why so? because he says, because you cannot show that this precept
given to the parents is necessarily inferred out of Scripture. So now he is
upon the minor of the former Syllogism: he would then prove it by a negative
Induction. Not out of the Institution of our Savior; for he also instituted
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, not necessary for Infants. Ans. first this is
no argument; it does not follow from the denial of one species to another:
because he did not institute the Eucharist as necessary for infants; threfore
he did not institute the Sacrament of baptism as necessary for Infants. 2. they
know there is not the same reason for the Institution of the Eucharist for
Infants as for the Institution of baptism. For this is administered to the child
without its own faith; the other is administered upon faith to confirmation. 3.
If they will be ruled by tradition and the authority of the Church; the
Eucharist was accounted also as necessary for Infants. Now that tradition came
from Christ as his institution or not, if it did, then there is some reason for
baptism to Infants: if not, how shall we believe tradition or the authority of
the Church.

He proceeds, not out of substitution to Circumcision: for so it should not be
necessary to women. To be even with them, The high Priest was only of males:
the Pope succeeds the high Priest: therefore the Popedom was not competible to
Ioane: some of them would fain have somewhat for woman to be proportionable to
Circumcision of males toward the taking away of original sin, which should
be an object of tradition; But as the unmarried was included in the parent; so
the woman included under her husband, as to this.

Yet such another argument we have, then it should be necessary only for those
of the Jewish nation. As if Circumcision was enjoined to the Jew upon the
quatenus of the nation, and not as they were members of the Church, under the
same Covenant with Christians, as to the substance thereof: and therefore
Eusebius says of some of those under the law, that they were (...) though not
(...) they were real Christians, or in effect Christans, though not in
denomination. That which follows was cast in by me ex abundanti, and not as
such a decretory argument, namely, besides what may be supposed by the baptism
of whole families. And therefore he needed not to have said, it is no evident
consequence. It was never intended for such. Valeat quantum valere potest. And
yet if it be as probable or more that in all those families complexively there
were some at least, if but one or two Infants, this consequence, I think I may
say, is better then any they have given us to prove their infallibility.

At the end of this number he says, I insist not upon the authorities I
alleged out of St. Austin, St. Chrysostom. because I deal with one who little
regards authority confessed to be the Fathers. Ans. He might first have
answered what I said to his citation of St. Austin. but it seems by his neglect
either that the Fathers are not for him or he not for the Fathers; or indeed
both; and the latter because the former. He is not for the Fathers because they
are not for him. And let them consider that of St. Austin in his 4. b. de Bap.
contra Don. 28. chapter Tamen veraciter conjicere possumus quid valeat in parvulis
baptismi Sacramentum ex circumcisione carnis quam prior populus accepit.
Notwithstanding we may truly guess what the Sacrament of Baptism does avail in
infants out of the circumcision of the flesh, which the former people received.
And Bellarmin must think Scripture good against Anabaptists, but not for us
against them, who make better use of it as a tradition.

N. 62.
And now to make an end of his long Chap. as he says himself (and I say so too,
but it might have been made shorter by him by half) he says he concludes, as
I would have him, namely that these points were and ought to be determined by
the Church upon necessity of Salvation. He says now, This I prove by this
argument, This point and all the former are necessary to be believed with an
infallible assent, but we cannot believe any point with an infallible assent
unless it be determined by infallible authority. And the authority of the
Scripture has not determined these points; then since no other infallible
authority can be found on Earth, if we deny the authority of the Church to be
infallible, her authority must needs be infallible. Ans. after a long chap. to
make his word good, he makes as long an argument which might have been put into
two lines. But part of his book was to be length. But we answer in short first
to the major proposition; if he means when they are believed they are to be
believed with an infallible assent, we grant it; or when they are clearly
proposed, are so to be believed, we grant it: but if he means it thus, that
this point and all the former are necessary to be believed with an infallible
assent, upon necessity of Salvation, it is denied. And he has not nor can
prove it: 2. As to his assuming that the authority of the Scriptures has not
determined these points; we say first that so far as they are necessary, they
are determined in Scripture. And 2. they are not so clearly determined in
Scripture, because they are not so necessary. And yet we may say as St. Austin
in such a case about intellectual vision lib. 12 de gen ad literam cap. 25,
Aliud est errare in his quae videt, aliud errare quia non videt. We do not err
in seeing them in Scriptures, but we do err because we do not see them. To end
then, Scotus proposes this question, As Mr. Hooker notes.
utrum cognitio supernaturalis necessaria, viatori sit sufficienter tradita in
Sacra Scriptura; whether supernatural knowledge necessary to a Travailler be
sufficiently delivered in the Holy Scripture, and he concludes affirmatively.
And so may we. 3. And for overplus, if these points were necessary to be
referred to the determination of the Church, we could easily (dato non
concesso) remove them from the Roman Court; and try them by the universal
Church of all places and times; with which universal Church the Roman is not
converted, and by which it is not like to be converted

CHAP. IV. The Church is not an infallible Judge. The first Number is a Preface
depending upon hopes of the former discourse: But to this we say nothing, save
only that they shall never be rewarded for such hope, unless they can prove
their word to be the Word of God.
FIrst those words Matthew 16.19. spoken to St. Peter, upon this rock I will
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, allow the
Church a security from ever admitting any doctrine so pernicious, that the
gates of hell may prevail against her. Ans. first though these words were
spoken to St. Peter, yet it does not hence follow that they were spoken of St.
Peter exclusively to the rest. And then the Fathers, as before, understood it
of his faith, not of his person: and of his faith objectively, not
subjectively. And then 3. this respects not only the Church repraesentative,
but the Church formal, against which principally the gates of hell do not
prevail; and so the words run handsomely for the Church, that the words allow
the Church security from ever admitting any doctrine so pernicious, that the
gates of hell may prevail against her. And therefore upon these
considerations, we flatly deny to him the following words, that this promise
made to the Church is that which mainely makes for my purpose, and surely that
which follows makes for us, and may be a fourth answer to the former words;
whether the Church be built upon St. Peter and his successors, or upon the
faith of St. Peter, is not the thing I chiefly aim at: my aim is to find a
Church built on a rock so strong that no error shall ever overthrow it. So
then if we assume that the invisible Church is such, we are agreed. Only my
adversary seems to have more mind to retreat then to retract. But my adversary
will have it to be understood of the representative Church, because he says;
he is now assured the Church shall never be a nest of errors, idolatrous,
superstitious; wickedly assuming the authority of an infallible Tribunal
without sufficient warrant: all or any of those things would bring her to the
gates of hell; they being all damnable impieties. Ans. Now we shall see that
this makes not for him. He was for the Roman Church; was he not? And yet will
not here meddle how this concerns the Roman Church. then how does this make for
him? In the former treatise of his, this Text was meant of St. Peter and his
successors: and now he will not meddle with what concerns St. Peter or his
successors. Will these things here be reconciled till Tishby comes? 2. This
makes for me; not only that he is not willing, as it seems, to stand his ground
(which Bellarmin, and Peron and the Rhemists stand upon) but also because the
promise is made to the Catholic Church. Thus then, their Church is not the
Catholic Church: the promise is made to the Catholic Church, therefore not
to them. The Roman Church may be a nest of errors, idolatrous, superstitious,
wickedly assuming the authority of an infallible Tribunal without sufficient
authority; though the Catholic Church be not such, nor does assume such
authority; as the errors of a particular Church are not charged duly upon the
universal Church; so the privileges of the universal Church are not infeoffed
upon a particular.

Well, but now we will do as he bids us and be patient till he show in the next
chapter, how this concerns the Roman Church. But shall I have my five answers
answered then; for he says here that I begin to say nothing against him until
I begin to say sixthly. So then I must be thought to say nothing against him,
because he has nothing to say to what I said in those five answers.

The sixth answer then he takes notice of, and it came in thus; he had asserted
the Church secure from all damnative error. I took upon advantage this, as
taking those words distinctively; that though it was not free from all error
yet from error damnative. And I gave him good reason why he should take those
words so, because, otherwise they are not like to be the Church, unto which
that privilege is granted. Upon this I argued against their infallibility,
according to the opinion also of Mr. Knot. Therefore he now waves this debate,
and says he argued ad hominem; but we will hunt him out of this refuge too.
They cannot argue thus out of our principles, because we say this of the
universal Church; not of a particular Church. No Church of one denomination is
secure from damnative error, therefore cannot they ultimately improve, what we
grant to the universal Church, for their use. But 2. He could not yet from
hence conclude that no body shall be damned for following the guidance of the
Church. For not to say again that this is not appliable to the Roman Church,
which is not the Catholic Church: yet may we not follow the universal Church
absolutely, because it is not in all points infallible. For so consequently, we
might be bound to follow error. Yea 3. Since according to our principles it is
not exempted from all error; according to Mr. Knot's principles it cannot be
our guide. Yea 4. To Follow the Church in an error, may be damnative though
the error may not be damnative: because another not knowing it to be an error
may hold it without damnation: but if I knew it to be an error and yet follow
it, I incur damnation, because I resist a known truth. And 5. Since the
universal Church cannot show its charter of being exempted from all error, it
is not necessary for her always to have such a visible existence as is
necessary to afford a guidance. So then, whereas he asks me, by what Logique
do you infer, that because the Church is secured from all damnative error,
therefore according to my doctrine she is not secured from other errors; I
answer, it is very true, simpliciter loquendo, that the affirmation of one
species does not allwaies include a negation of the other; namely when that
which is affirmed is not a constitutive difference thereof. But considering his
words (...) and giving him good reason why he should mean them so, I could not
be blamed for guessing that he meant them so.

Yea the words which he has used in this chapter for expressing the privilege
of the Church, are yet so put togeher that they may seem suspiciously to bear
such a construction. Neither does he here positively deny, as would become his
confidence, this distinction. To put it then to an issue; I shall put them to
their choice, how those words shall be understood, whether distinctively, or by
way of epithet. If distinctively, then my consequences stand good upon that
ground. If not, then have they such a task upon them which all the Roman wit
and industry will never thoroughly perform; for first then must they say that
either all error is damnative (which indeed should have been proved upon
former urging as much reason for all sins to be mortal as all errors to be
damnative; and more too; since sin has the guilt of the will, simple error
has not) or else there may be errors not damnative (which makes for us
against the necessity of an infallible judge as to all points) or that the
Church cannot err at all. And then here will be a double labor to prove (and
indeed a double error to say) First, that it has not erred. 2. that it cannot
err. If the latter, then to be sure the former indeed: but if the fonmer, then
not presently the latter. Yea if they will then stand to it, that the Church is
secure from all error whatsoever; then their Church is not the Church. And the
consequence is good and strong, for that Church can err because it has erred
in the Latin Bible; in the supernumerary Canon of Scripture; in the point of
Transubstantiation: in Communion under one kind: In their Counsails; as has
been showed already; and in the point of merit Ex condigno, if the 30. Canon of
the 6. Sess. of the Trent Council be compared with Romans 8.18. The Canon of the
Council speaks an Anathema to him that shall say, that the good works of a
justified man do not vere mareri, truly merit increase of grace, consecution of
eternal life, if they shall die in grace, and also increase of glory. The Canon
of the Scripture says, I account that the sufferings of this life are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed: (...), do not
weigh with. Now whether Scripture be our rule of faith or not, this must be an
error; since they acknowledge the Scripture to be true and infallible, For,
whatsoever is contradictory to truth is false, this is contradictory to
Scripture which is true. In this they have erred from the Latin Fathers in the
sense of the word; from the Greek Fathers in the matter; and from the
Scripture, which is our rule, and was the rule of the Church until a Church
rose up which would not be ruled. And let them take notice too that sufferings
are the best part of our obedience: and if they are not worthy, how should good
actions merit. More errors of their Church might be named, but one error with
them is enough to contradict infallibility, and to discharge us of following
their Church.

He says then I quarrel with one of the Cardinal virtues even Prudence
herself. Ans. I think I may quarrel with one of the Cardinal virtues. Prudence
is one of the Cardinal virtues, in Morality: and one of the Cardinal virtues in
Divinity. Prudence is the politic virtue; and so is their Religion a
politic Religion. And if a man may proceed prudently in the choice of his
Religion, then he does not believe first, and then understand; as yet the
vulgar Latin reads that text; but we must understand first, and then believe.
Prudence is a Moderatress of actions; not a mistress of Faith. And how does
Prudence consist with implicit Faith, which believes what it does not know?
Prudence is a virtue of reason, which is contradistinguished to Faith. And if
we may proceed prudently in the choosing of our Religion, then we may well
exercise the judgment of discretion in matters of Faith, and therefore are not
simply bound to take upon trust whatsoever their Church obtrudes.

He goes on, Then you conclude all the force my former Argument has, it has
from Scripture. Is not my Argument the better for this. Yes, If the Argument
were grounded in Scripture, it were better upon that ground, than upon any
other, but this Argument is not good, because it is not taken from Scripture.
Scripture is the best Argument in Thesi; but in Hypothesi, it is not well
applied. We like it well that he goes about to prove the Church by Scripture,
which is the highest principle: But let them not give us such a sense of
Scripture which belongs not to their cause, unless against it.

In the next number which he names the fourth (but then it seems the third is
lost by the way) he says I stumble again at the senses of damnable errors.
Ans. No, N. 4.
For I discourse of it by a Dilemma, or disjunctive, which will take in either
sense: but he is not willing to move this stone again; therefore he stumbles at
it.

Another Text he builds upon St. Matthew 18.17. N. 5.
If he will not hear the Church let him be to thee as a publican, or a Heathen.
Upon this he ^^mes an argument, God Commands us to hear the Church and obey
her: but no kind of error little or great can be incurred by following Gods
command. Ans. I am glad he has any such form of discourse, which would more
clearly and handsomely shorten the debate, we therefore answer to it; passing
by all discepiation about the sense of the Church there, or the quality of the
cause. We say then, if he understands the major so as that God absolutely,
universally commands us to hear and obey the Church then the conclusion were
good, and we could not err in following the Church. But so the minor is
denied. God has not absolutely and universaly commanded us so to hear and
obey the Church. If he understands the major specificatively and in things
lawful, then we can grant the minor; but then the conclusion will not be
universal, will be peccant (...) and so not conclude contradictorily to us,
who do not dispute here against all obedience to the Church, negatively, as if
we would have none; but against all obedience affirmatively, as being not bound
in faith to all commands.

And therefore need he not come in with a relief, to succor his discourse, by
saying from me, it is impossible to be obliged to assent to an error though it
be not damnable. This true, but not well applied to me unles he can prove Gods
command for absolute obedience in whatsoever the Church proposes. But as this
is true, so it is pertinent for me against him, that though the universal
Church cannot err in points necessary, where error would be damnative, yet
could we not be bound universally to follow upon that account; because no man
can be bound to assent to an error though not damnative.

Neither does it follow from the Text therefore merely and purely for not
hearing the Church a man is to be held a publican or a Heathen, Unles he
understands by not hearing, not submitting, if he does not understand it so, it
does not follow: if he does understand it so, this is not to his purpose:
because though we may be bound to submit to the Church, yet we may not be bound
to believe the Church: these are two things which he should have distinguished.
Therefore cannot he prove from hence that the Church cannot err. He is to be
accounted an Heathen or publican upon not submiting to the Church in regard of
authority; not upon not assenting, because of infallibility. And therefore
though we be all bound simply to avoid excommunication: yet if the case were
put that we must assent to an error or else be excommunicated: we take the
censure, and leave the error; and if they will not have proviso with a clave
non errante, for the censures of the Church, then what condition was Pope
Honorius in, who was excommunicated, as before; If God binds against error,
and the Church, as we suppose, bind to it, we can say presently, that the
Church cannot absolve without God, but God can absolve without the Church. And
this answers the next verse in the Gospel, as he produces it.

But the former Answer he would take off in the next words by an argument. To
swerve from Gods word is to err. But this Text proves that the (the Church)
cannot err. Ans. The major is indeed true: but the Text does not prove the
minor; therefore it is false; because he says the text proves it.

And indeed if she could, the merely not hearing her could not deserve that a
man should deserve to be accounted according to Gods judgment a publican and
heathen. Ans. This is denied. Refractorines exposes thereunto, without
acknowledgment of infallibility. And yet am I still of this opinion, that that
Text concerns not matters of faith; but of trespass between Brother and
Brother, and therefore that Text is not to his purpose. This and more he says
nothing to here.

But yet I followed him, and said that a man is not bound to believe the
censure is just unles it apeare to be so. To this he says, this last assertion
of yours is very extravagant doctrine. For the unanimous opinion of Learned men
is, that a man is bound to hold his superiors censure or command to be just
unles the contrary appears evident. Ans, first then this determination of the
case by Learned men supposes that a thing may appear evident against the
superiors censure or command. So that by consequence they have the unanimous
opinion of Leanred men against them in two points, first that a thing may be
evident without the proposal of the Church: for it may be evident against it.
2. Then that the Church may make an injust censure or command. But for his
opinion he names three Learned men, Chillingworth, Hooker, Laud. So he: as to
the first, Mr. Chillingworth; he has nothing for him in his 108 nu. For he
makes use of this rule, [In cases of uncertainty we are not to leave our
superior, nor cast off his obedience nor publicly oppose his decrees [But
how is this applied to our case? Indeed it was his best course not to apply it.
Let them then note that this he speaks is in cases of uncertainty, namely
about things of question: but we are ultimately upon points necessary. And then
2. He speaks against casting off obedience: but we are upon assent of judgment.
And then 3. The rule he uses speaks that we should not publicly oppose his
decrees; but we are upon the negative only, whether he may not suspend his
opinion. And hence the Author discourses, that we may leave them, we may cast
them off, and oppose them, when we are certain, as protestants were that what
they command God does countermand. And for the second, as he names him; I
think, all things considered, he has little from him for his use. As the
scribe at least mistook the quotation: so the Author I think mistook the man.
In the places quoted [ page 310. 311. n. 110.] there is nothing like. It is
true that excellent Author had great cause to urge convenent obedience to
humane laws: but he denies intuitive obedience to any law but of God. And
therefore if he and Mr. Chillingworth be joined in the testimony, that which
answered one may answer the other. And further, if they will take p. 110. And
so on for n. 110. They may find enough to satisfy them of his opinion, that
he held Scripture a sufficient rule in matters necessary; and therefore the
obedience he urges must be in things of order; which is extrinsecall to our
debate and not blind neither, as p. 110.

The third Authority is rightly quoted but not rightly applied out of that
excellent book; for it speaks expressly of external obedience: we are upon
internal. He speaks for peace: my adversary should apply it to faith. He
speaks it as to private persons: my adversary should vltimately apply it to the
Church national. That which follows is a cavil, that then the private man,
when all comes to all, is the last judge; to whose sentence finally all comes
to be referred. Ans. The private man is no judge authoritative to whose
sentence finally all comes to be referred, but exercises for himself the
judgment of discretion; "as being to be persuaded in his own mind as the
Apostle speaks. And thus much must be allowed by my adversary who lately
asserted prudence to be of use in choosing Religion. Yea if Prudence be
tolerated in things of Faith: Sapience is to be commended, which refers to the
highest principles; and those are of Scripture. And though it be some ingenuous
prudence to prefer the judgment of a General Council or the Church, as to the
suspension of my opinion against them: yet surely will it be sapience to rest
my faith in principles of faith. Therefore this and much more of this discourse
comes not home to the question, whether God has bound me to give absolute
assent to the definitions of the Church; and to believe their commands to be
just, eo ipso, because theirs: (...).

Neither is it impossible that a General Council should not see it. There is a
double impossiblity, simple and Physical: and then Moral. The Simple
impossiblity would make Faith; but such is denied. The Moral, If it were
granted could not make such a Faith as they stand for, namely an infallible
assent. But the Moral impossibility which is no more than a great difficulty,
is not to be yielded neither, since the Trent Council. They might as well not
see that which was Evident, as they did see that which was not Evident:
Communion under both kinds was Evident in Scripture, and the practice of the
Church: yet notwithstanding they would see what was not Evident,
Communion-under one kind. And therefore least Communion under both kinds
should seem more Evident, Bellarmin prudently informs that some of their
learned men would not construe the 2. of St. John of Sacramental participation.

And the ground he goes upon is sandy, that which is truly Evident will of it
self appear to be so, or at least to the most judicious, upright, and best
instructed Prelates of the Church. Ans. This may appear to them, de facto not
so. Were not the Trent Fathers so? And yet they did not see what was Evident in
the point of the Communion, and in some other points too, as some of their own
Religion did think, as we have it in the History of the Trent Council. 2. What
a case should the poor people be in, since populus non distinguit, and yet they
must compare the most judicious, and most upright, and best instructed Prelates.
Thirdly, Take the Fathers of all ages and places; and then their Doctrines will
not abide the test, as has been made good to them by Bishop Jewel. And
therefore their Doctrines are not Evident by their own Principle, because not
Evident to them. And then fourthly, somewhat Evident to them the Romans have
cashiered, Infant Communion, the Millenary opinion, trine immersion, standing
up in prayer, therefore they had best betake themselves to more than humane
assistance, namely, from the Holy Ghost.

His debate afterward about the consideration of the cause of the Censure,
will come to little, if it be considered that the act of not hearing the
Church, is ambiguous; and may relate either to the non-assent, or to the
contempt. The former does not simply expose him to the Censure in Heaven: the
latter may. And if he understood his own terms, he must rather take them of the
latter, because he speaks of an act of not hearing. For the non-assent is
negative to an act; and so is the Greek considerable (...) this is it which
makes him truly guilty of not hearing the Church.

That which follows in way of concession, is destructive of his building; for
he grants an errability of the key, in which case the Censure is not ratified
in Heaven. So then, how shall we know whether any be truly guilty. For as the
Church cannot be infallible to us at all, to believe it, if not infallible in
all, as Mr. Knot argues; and my Adversary too, if he denies the distinction of
damnative errors: so it cannot bind infallibly in any, if not in all, though
there be a distance betwixt Faith and fact, the proportion is the same. And yet
again, if they will divide here by affirming infallibility in Faith,
fallibility in Fact; why do they urge this Text, which respects the latter?

And therefore that which follows. And so the Church cannot err in denouncing
excommunication against such a person, in dependence upon the premises, is as
much as to say, the Church cannot err, when the key does not err. Yet it
might have erred in sensu divis^, which is sufficient for our purpose, because
our dispute is upon the point of possibility (...), as Aristotle said: It is
necessary that that it be while it be; yet was it not therefore necessary to be
before it was: for that destroys the distinction of things contingent from
things necessary. And therefore what follows hereupon, if I should answer he
would account necessary to be answered, when it is not.

At the end of this Section he says, You highly wrong St. Athanasius to say he
did not hear the Church. Ans. I should be very loath to be truly guilty of
this: and surely, if he grants that the Church may be mistaken in the fact, he
may be mistaken in this Censure; which he should have proceeded in secundum
allegata et probata. I said this, St. Athanasius did differ from the rest of
the Church, when the whole world did groan under Arrianisme. So he did not hear
the Church, as differing in opinion, though it is not said that he did not hear
the Church, as disobeying the Censure.

Here he supposes that upon the virtue of former Principles he may conclude of
the Church, No, She cannot err in an error not damnable. No? Let that which
was formerly granted be compared with this, and we shall conclude the contrary.
To excommunicate a person who is not to be excommunicated, is to err. The
Church may excommunicate a person not to be excommunicated; Therefore the minor
is as good as confessed by him, because the Church may be mistaken in the fact.
Nay he says it in terms [and so there may be an error in the mistake of the
fact.]

He proceeds, Hence that common Doctrine of Antiquity, that it is not possible
to have a just cause of separating from the Church. Ans. Besides the nullity of
this upon the want of a true ground, as before; he does misreport the axiom; or
else he must distinguish of Separating. There is no just cause of Schism; for,
the proposition has in it (...); because if there be a just cause, it is not
Schism, but though every Schism is a Separation, every Separation is not
Schism. Take then separation in specie for Schism, so it may be true; but a
Separation from a Church imposing errors in Faith, and things unlawful in
practice is not without a just cause; and therefore is it not Schism. It is not
without a just cause by his former confession just now in those words. So men
should be bound to assent unto an error, which is impossible. And again this
is to be understood of Separating from the Catholic Church, or from a
particular Church for that order wherein it agrees with the Catholic. But
this is not our case; for the Roman is but a particular Church; and we
separated upon Catholic Principles, that so we might hold union with the
Catholic Church. And then again there is a difference betwixt a national
reformation, and a private Separation. And therefore yet the distinction is not
disabled, namely of separating from the errors and not from the Church, unless
it were better proved that the Church is secured from all error; which that
text does not prove. Then goes he on to take away somewhat I said to the text
in my first and fifth answer to it. He claps them together, and would make me
to conclude thus, this makes nothing for the Authority of the universal
Church. Ans. Let them remember again (for Aquinas tells us that we cannot
forget natural Principles) that the whole is greater than the part. I allow
much to a particular Church in correspondence with the Universal (therefore
little to their Church.) And if I do reply that this text belongs also to
particular Churches, then this does redound to the honor of the Universal
Church. And that this does belong to particular Prelates to excommunicate, he
himself does confess in this Section. Therefore must he conclude that I
conclude for the Universal Church. And yet moreover, in all this long gloss
upon the text, how little have we had of that upon which all in this discourse
turns, namely whether Authority of excommunication (be it in the Universal or a
particular Church) respects not formally the contempt, not the non-assent. Let
them speak less, or more to the purpose.

And yet again he would drive it on in a loose way, that we have a command from
God to hear the Church absolutely and universally.

To this purpose he says, Those who disobey the judges, disobey the
Commonwealth: so generally speaking, those who disobey the Prelates of the
particular Church, disobey the universal Church, commanding her to proceed
according to her Decrees, Canons, and definitions. Ans. Here is not much, and
for them less. A Commonwealth is a term ambiguous; and may be taken strictly
or largely: strictly in the form; largely as including head and members. And in
this large sense may be considered with more respect to the Body, or to the
Head; in confuso, or in capite. If he takes it in the strict sense; it is not
to any purpose; because there is a different reason of laws in the
Commonwealth and in the Church: For in a Commonwealth so, Laws proceed from
them as the efficient thereof: but in the Church, truths and duties do come
from God; and therefore in such cases the disobedience reflects upon God. Now
the case we dispute upon is in necessary truths and duties. If he understand a
Commonwealth largely, and then with more particular repute to the people, the
disobedience to the judges does not reflect upon them, unless objectively and
consequently, because though they are not their Judges by way of Authority, yet
they are their Judges, in way of End, for their good. If it be taken with more
relation to the head, whose judges they are by authoritative commission it is
true that the disobedience to the Judge does redound upon him: but here is
difference betwixt them, for particular Prelates do not depend upon the
universal Church, as Judges do upon the Head of a Commonwealth; because
Bishops have their Authority by divine right, which was contended for hotly in
the Trent Council, and had proceeded affirmatively had not the Roman Court
bandied against it. And then also the matter of disobedience we speak of is
from God, not the universal Church: but the matter of Civil disobedience to the
Judge is from the Head. And then again we do not speak of disobedience positive
(which my Adversary does instance in) but in obedience, which is negative. And
then again particular Prelates are not so bound in things of particular order,
as the people are bound to the Laws of a particular Nation. And also then this
will redound to the Adversaries prejudice; for the particular Prelates of their
Church have not proceeded according to the Canons, Decrees, and definitions of
the universal Church, as has been showed. And also this is against them,
because then my Adversary confesses that this text under debate is competible
fairly to particular Churches; and therefore they have no reason to appropriate
it to themselves. And so upon the whole matter we can say as much in a due
respect to the Catholic Church, as they do here, and yet hold our own. So
then he does not contradict here. And yet again he is importunate to prove that
disobedience to the Church at last redounds to Christ and God, out of the 16.
of Sam. 8. they have not rejected thee but me. Ans. Surely they had better have
supposed this truth than proved it. First, and again, we are not upon
disobedience but inobedience: not upon rejecting Authority which God had vested
in Samuel, but upon suspending assent to a truth proposed. And then 2. In the
time of Samuel it was a plain (...) and the people had Laws and Ordinances
given them by divine immediate direction: but it is yet to be proved, whether
what Churches do enjoin do come from God immediately to the Prelates. And
therefore since that case had contempt in it, the discourse suits not our
question.

And Christ to his disciples (the first Prelates of the Church) he that
despises you despises me. Ans. Those Disciples were not in his sense Prelates;
for the Apostles were the Prelates, but these whom Christ here spoke to, were
the seventy two Disciples or Elders. Therefore he mistakes in the quality of
the persons. Secondly this was by Christ applied to ministerial acts of
preaching; these other Prelates seldom do; yet if they did, here were a mistake
in the quallity of the matter, which with us is in point of jurisdiction.

The main Text, then is, St. Matt. 23.2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
Chair, all whatsoever therefore they say unto you, to keep and do. He says
here, Mark these most ample words, all therefore whatsoever. Ans. we have
marked them; and yet cannot this Text be understood reduplicatively and without
exception, because the Pharisees did teach errors. He says then, many of them
publicly did teach errors though not by public authority. Ans, So then
they did teach errors, and publicly. This which is affirmative is enough for
us: let them prove the negative for them. But this is strange, that they should
teach and teach publicly, and not by public authority. If they did teach,
they did teach upon authority, though not with that authority as Christ. If
they did teach publicly, then they had public authority. And does not he
seem to profess that authority was vested in them by a lawful succession of
Moses? And did my adversary think that they could sit in Mose's chair, and
yet not have public authority? He calls them the lawful successors of Moses.
But it may be they were not in the chair, when they did teach errors, no?
How then is it said, the Scribes and Pharisees set in Moses chair? And how then
did they teach publicly? But they were not in the chair of Moses, when they
did teach errors. Will they say so? But in their sense they were in the chair
of Moses, because they understand thereby authority: if they do not, they are
taken; for then they must understand it of teaching the doctrine of Moses, and
then by consequent, all whatsoever must be understood as symbolical thereunto.
And if they would understand it thus, we would also subscribe this proposition,
that when they did teach errors they were not in the chair of Moses. As namely
when they did teach for doctrines the traditions of men. Alas if this should be
applied to the Pope in his chair, how should the people be able to distinguish
betwixt teaching errors publicly (which my adversary does acknowledge) and
teaching them publicly with public authority, which he denies? They who
formerly have told us that it is so easy a way to find by the Church to
Heaven, do now say that which shows it is an hard matter to find the Church
teaching by public authority. One being imperfect in sight asked his servant,
whether there was not such a thing in the window: and the Servant asked the
Master whether there were such a window: they tell us that there is in the
Church infallibility taught by public authority: and others ask the question
where is that Church, and when shall we know when it teaches so.

He tells us that they cannot do any thing against Scripture, when they proceed
by way of defining with public authority. Yea, but we must have another
infallibility to assure us that they do now thus define. Let them infallibly
define when the Church does infallibly define, since all good discourse begins
with a definition. And then let them tell us by what method we may come to the
knowledge of this proposition, that the Rulers of the Jews condemned Christ by
private authority.

Neither is that to be swallowed, Acts. 3.17.
that the Church to the full has now as much reason to be heard as the old
jewish Church then. For if he takes the Church here for the Church universal,
it were more likely indeed what he says: but how is that possible to make an
address to them upon all occasions, unles there were a standing Representative.
But if he takes the Church here for a particular Church by way of an Individuum
vagum, or determinately, of the Roman, it were indeed possible to make with
more expedition address to such: but then it would be showed to be likely that
any particular Church of any one denomination should have such privileges
annexed to it, as the old Jewish Church had; especially if we take in into the
account of the old Jewish Church those extraordinary revelations of God
immediately made to Moses, and the Priests and the Prophets, whereof Malachi
was the last. Indeed such an infallibility only will serve their turn, but till
they prove it, (...). And as the Synagogues authority was not limited so as to
be obeyed and heard only in points of trespass betwixt Brother and Brother, but
was to be extended to all whatsoever they should order: so you cannot (without
depressing the authority of Christ's Church who had a better covenant
established upon better promises, Hebr. 8.6.) hinder her power from being
extended to all whatsoever she shall order. Ans. This und^es all. I take the
(...) of my adversary for my major proposition: then I assume, what proportion
the Synagogue had to the whole Jewish Church a particular Church has to the
universal Church: therefore every particular Church is not limited in
authority, but, as he says of the Synagogue, that its authority was not
limited so as to be obeyed and heard etc. And then what need of an universal
Church, and Bishop and Council? Indeed such a power would be requisite for the
Roman Church because they cannot stretch it beyond a particular Church. But
this spoils all his discourse in his four first Chapters which he says he
intended as for the universal Church. But what use of this when a particular
may sooner and more easily decide all, having all authority to command and to
be obeyed in all things which she shall order? Thus not only the five
Patriarchates were independent of any one, and had all Jurisdiction within
their own divisions; but other Churches national, might be independent; and
independents might be Churches. And since ten men with the Jew made a people,
and a people made a capacity of a Synagogue, why may not the Church of England
have an Authority not limited, etc. And what need then of running to another
Church for more authority?

But neither is his Text in the Hebrews well understood or else not well
aplied in his (...). For the establishment of a better Covenant upon better
promises is not certainly intended to have respect to the visible Church for
discipline: but to the invisible Church for salvation. It respects Christ as
the Great High Priest to save his Church by the sacrificing of himself once
upon the Cross for us; not as King of his Church by way of an external policy,
as if the Government of his Church were part of his Kingdom, and of his
Gospel. If so they give the right hand of fellowship to the other
Disciplinarian.

But also he takes it ill that the text should be limited to case of trespass
betwixt Brother and Brother; and he thinks rather it should belong to the cases
of heresy which is a trespass committed by one Brother against all his
Brothers and their dearest Mother the Church, yea St. Thomas calls Schism of
which heresy is always guilty, the highest crime aagainst the whole
Community. Ans. It is one thing to say what the text intends; another to say
what it may be by discourse accommodated to. The direct respect of the text in
the ordinary sense of the letter, is clearly carried to case of trespass
betwixt Brother and Brother. And the Pontifician by his principles and use, is
engaged to the sense of the letter prinipally. But 2. dato non concesso, that
it should also respect case of Heresy, notwithstanding also that the terms
[let him be to thee a Heathen or a Publican we rather refer to the Jewish
Church than the Christian] yet cannot he have from hence what he would, namely
the Churches infallibility of Censure in points of Faith. For though the Church
did infallibly know on which side the truth did stand in every point of Faith,
and therefore what was opposite thereunto (for (...), as he said) and therefore
that such a doctrine was to be condemned as Heretical; yet since, though the
Church do proceed secundum allegata et probata, it may be mistaken in the fact,
(as he confesses) it may err in the Censure as to a particular person; and
how then is such a person bound to subscribe to such a Censure as just? because
he cannot be bound to assent to that which is false, as he also lately
confessed. It is true in civil causes though the sentence be injust, I may and
must pay the amercement, there being no Law against the course of Law; and so
also in Ecclesiastical cases, he that is in justly excommunicated must abide
the Censure; but all the Authority under Heaven can never make a man believe in
his Conscience that it is a just Censure, when he knows himself not to be
guilty of the fact, namely publishing of an heretical Doctrine; and therefore
all that can be exacted by man in this case (...) passive obedience; which the
Person may yield, though the Conscience does not yield that it is a just
Censure. So that the text is yet preserved in its integrity against binding the
Conscience to believe whatsoever is done by the Church to be right and just.

After this, he would wind himself off gradually from supposing any
infallibility of particular Churches, that so all at length might be ascribed
to their Church in solidum; for (...), as he said. And the Authority he would
have to fall upon the Pope and a Council: yet he expresses one Head of the
Church and the supreme Prelat of the Church. So then; Before, when there was a
professed occasion to dispute the point whether the Pope were Head of the
Church, he was shie and cautious and uncategorical: now by the by, and under
the wind he can assert it so that he may not be bound to prove it. We see then
what reason they have to afford Prudence a good place in Religion, Nullum numen
ab est si sit prudentiarum.

And the main exercise of Ecclesiastical authority, the key is laid upon his
shoulder, He is bound to use the fullness of his power to suppress the arising
heresy.

Now surely they are bound ingenuously to speak out whether they mean this
fullness of his Authority, of all the Authority he has, or of all Authority
that the Church has. There is a fullness of the Fountain, there is a fullness of
the Vessel. Do they allow him the fullness of the Vessel? So indeed the Trent
Council seemed rather in a good part thereof to incline, when they urged so
much to have the title of the Council to be established The Representative of
the whole Church: for had this proceeded, his power had been sunk in their
power. But if he be the Head of the Church, my Adversary must allow him the
fullness of the Fountain; then the controversy is determined betwixt the
Jesuits, and the Sorbonists; and the latter are cast in the suit. But then,
what need of a Council toward infallibility, when he has all the Authority in
himself, as being the (...)? And then my Adversary has not pleased the Court
and the Jesuit in joining the Council as partners in the Authority. Nor do the
words ensuing bear good respect to the Pope, as Head of the Church, namely,
that he may forbid (if he fears danger in the Doctrine) that no such Doctrine
may be published until the Church shall think it fit. Are not these diminuent
terms of the Head (indeed almost comminuent, if we may say so) as if the Head
of the universal Church, the ordinary Pastor, and Vicar of Christ, Successor
of St. Peter, could not presently see that there was danger in heretical
Doctrine, or could not see whether it were heretical doctrine until the Church
shall think it fit. I had thought the Pope had been an Independent; and should
not have depended upon the Church for a final resolution at a point heretical.
And if the Church must meet in a Council to consider of it, and all Popes be as
disaffected to a Council, as some were to the Trent Council, what shall become
of the people in this danger of heresy? I had thought a Council had been but
the vicar of Christ His Counsel, and though he did condescend so far to make
use of their Counsel, yet he could do all alone by his own Authority. We heard
before that particular Prelates had Authority not limited: and must my
Adversaries Supreme Prelat be bound to wait for a General Council?

And then all must be as St. Paul says, Heb. 13.17. Obey their Prelates; So he,
Ans. This he means of Prelates not in confuso, but in conventu. And to these
infallibility should be annexed. So then, Those Prelates who are here meant are
infallible. Particular Prelates are here meant: therefore they are infallible;
and so there will be no need either of a Supreme Prelat, or of a Council. And
that particular Prelates are here meant, we need not prove to the Pontificians
who take too much notice that there Epistles were written but upon particular
occasions, and for particular times. And therefore this being written to the
Hebrews should not by that account concern us Yea if it were written with an
intention for Prelates in a Council, it must be written for them per saltum, not
for the present times; but for above 300. years after. 2. This relates to those
who did watch for their Souls, which being put per se is to be understood of
those that teach the Word; and so it corresponds to the 7. ver. where those
that are set over them are specified by teaching the Word. The obedience then
there enjoined respects those as teaching the the Word, not formally as
exercising authority of Jurisdiction. And therefore that Text is not here well
applied.

Thus far the power of the Supreme Prelat is extended by the consent of the
whole Church. Ans. We see then their own differences to be such as that they
may be ashamed to upbraid us with our differences, and we not ashamed to be
upbraided. Can my Adversaries exactly point out the maximum quod sic of the
power of the Supreme Prelat of the universal Church? Must he that is by them
acknowledged to be the Pillar of the Church have his Pillars set him, beyond
which he must not budge? Tell it not to the Canonists, and the Courtiers of
Rome. As Cyril of Jerusalem notes that the Sea where it stints in the flote
makes in a similitude a Line, which God has set it that it should not pass: So
have my Adversaries set a Line to the Roman Sea; hitherto it may go, by the
consent of the whole Church. So then the members may appoint the Head what
operations and how far it shall perform, and the Head shall not be only
influxive upon them, but they rather upon it. This opinion will make Popes shie
of Councils, if he has his power extended by their consent. For they do not
mean the consent of the whole Church to be of the confusaneous multitude; do
they? if they do, then the Church in this sense shall be the first subject of
Ecclesiastical power. Yea, If they also mean it of the Church in a Council, how
is the Pope successor of St. Peter, when the Pope must be limited by the
Church; St. Peter. as they say, was Prince of the Apostles immediately from
Christ. And surely according to this reckning Bellarmins distinction will come
to naught, who says the power of Kings is not by divine right, but by the
consent of the people: but the Popes power is, for it comes not from the
Church, but Christ, as in his 3. b. de verb. Dei cap. 9. And then he is not the
Rock and foundation of the Church; but the Church of him, and so the spiritual
Monarchy must be slighted. How far is this from that Italian who presented a
book to Paulus the fifth with this inscription, PaULo Vto. Vice Deo, out of
which one picked the number of the beast, 666.

But therefore my Adversary goes at the Spanish rate, very suspensively, in
omnem eventum; as being disposed to a pause betwixt the affirmative and the
negative; and he says, Now though the Supreme Head of the Church be as
infallible as St. Peter was, and so on in a long speech. Well, but does this
affirm? or is it a mere supposition, which does ponere nihil? He has carried
the Pope up to the clouds, and there he stays: but let them come out of the
clouds, and tell us plainly, whether we must take a cloud for Juno. Such
irresolution does not become infallibility. He seems to make him as infallible
as St. Peter, because he should be Supreme Head of the Church; (and yet St.
Peter was not Supreme Head of the Church, if the rest of the Apostles be
included in the term [Church] as members) and yet he must not be as infallible
as St. Peter; because cases of difficulty must be referred to the Council. It
follows, yet if he sees this newly vented doctrine fit to be declared heresy,
if it be so; or to be embraced, if it be fitting, and proposed to all
Christendom; then is the true time of calling a General Council, and not to
let the people contend by allegations of Scripture. We are now step by step
soberly mounted to the Sovereign Authority of the Church in a Representative.
Ans. 1. What needs all this trouble if he be as infallible as St. Peter? and
why do they say that St. Paul went to St. Peter to confirm his Doctrine by St.
Peter's Authority, should there not have been a Council called then as well?
According to them St. Peter's infallibility confirmed St. Paul's Doctrine: the
Pope according to them is Successor of St. Peter in his infallibility to all
effects and purposes as Ruler of the Church, therefore he may do it, and
frustra fit per plures also. 2. Note we here that it is to be the true time of
calling a Council upon debate of a point heretical, which respects Articles of
Faith: but we have been often told by our Adversaries that we are to have an
infallible Judge to decide all controversies emergent. Now if there be not a
Council to be called but for decision of Articles of Faith; as to their's we
have less need, since he that is an Heretic is (...) as the Apostle speaks.
And therefore he needed not to foreclude the peoples contending in allegations
of Scriptures; for surely Scripture may be alleged without contention, and if
it happens, sapiens non curat de accidentalibus. And so also the Council may
contend in allegation of Scripture; and therefore they should not allege
Scripture. Yea also we may soberly contend that in articles of Faith there
needs not be any other contention, since they are more plainly delivered in
Scripture, than that we must stay for a General Council to be established in
the belief of them. Blessed be God, we are better provided for in articles of
Faith, than to stand in such necessity of a General Council; which when such
will be, and how we shall know it is such (according to them) we must know by
another General Council, and that by another, and so in infinitum: since we
know nothing infallibly but by the infallible authority of the Church; and that
in a General Council. We will then take that for our Law, whereby the Council
must Judge, since the matters are plain which are great: and about other things
small, the Judges will not meet. Lex non curat de minimis. Let Hiero conclude
for himself, from hence forward whatsoever Archimedes says, it must be
believed.

But it seems it is a book case: and example we have hereof by the practice of
the Apostles in the 15. of the Acts; Though the Apostles were all infallible in
their doctrine, yet they could not determine that grave question without calling
a Council. Ans. first, if those terms [could not] attend an absolute negation
of power, they are denied. For they that were infallible in their doctrine
could have severally determined that controversy, as we take power absolutely,
as well as St. Peter confirmed St. Paul's doctrine, according to them. But he
seems to mean it in a qualified sense after the manner of Aquinas distinction
of necessity: therefore thus he, for this is necessary for the better
conviction of heretics; fuller satisfaction of the weaker sort, and further
comfort of the whole Church. This end of calling a Council upon such a
necessity, I suppose he reflects to the Council of the Apostles; as if the
sense should be they could not conveniently and upon the supposition of such
ends, determine that grave question without calling a Council: but then we are
not under an absolute necessity of a Council. And until this be proved, my
adversaries have done nothing: for a necessity of convenience of a Council will
not serve their purpose because we can grant it. But 2. we say this example is
not for his turn; because this Council was called upon a question about things
in their nature not necessary: but we are upon the debate of the absolute
necessity of councils in and for things necessary, not things of scandal only,
and yet again; 3. As it is commonly noted they in their Councils cannot
conclude their determinations as in that Council of the Apostles (it has
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to u^) because those Apostles were infallible
in their discourse as well a in their conclusions; but those who are now
members of Councils, are confessed by stapleton to be fallible in their
discourse and how then shall we be sure that they are infallible in the
conclusion, unles they can prove that though the discourse be not rational,
the conclusion will yet be prophetical. And yet 4. The Apostles themselves
proceeded to the determination of this question by principles of Scripture:
therefore Scripture is the highest principle to raise faith even in things of
controversy. And this concludes against them who make the Church in businesses
of faith to be the highest principle. And therefore also whatsoever binds the
Christian faith has its obligation by virtue of Scripture. So then nothing he
says does sufficiently render that sense or use he makes of that Text, Dic
ecclesiae. And yet he has not then found (though he does Thrasonically say so)
a Judge in matters of faith, a living Judge, an infallible Judge excluding all
possibility of error. We can help them to find Judges dicendo pluraliter:
but such a Judge as he speaks of here, he has no more hope to find then need
to seek. And yet such a Judge he must have for the justification of Christ's
law in the former Text, otherwise Christ could not possibly have declared it to
be so heinous a crime not to hear the Church being that it might have been no
crime at all: he obliged all to obey and hear her, therefore she cannot lead us
into an error. Ans. I think we should not have had so many words about such
assent if they had not more need thereof then the Text, or Christ of their
defense; they have more necessity of Christ's justification then he of theirs.
His words above have two forms, one in an hypotheticall way, the other in way
of an Enthymem; I deny the consequence in both; and to them both I suppose one
proposition, and that is this, Christ's command to obey does not infer
impossibility of error in the Church. Simply it is therefore false what he
would have to be consequentiall. To hear the Church therefore has two things
in it; one act which is internal, and that is to give assent to what the
Church shall order; the other an external act of submission, the former may be
denied, and therefore she may err, the latter may be due and therefore not to
be denied.

And consequently his infallibility of knowledge of this point is not so great
as of those points which are delivered by Scripture, namely not understanding
it de facto; because his knowledge of points delivered by Scripture is, de
industria, small; but de posse, his knowledge of points of faith delivered by
Scripture may be greater then his knowledge of this, because it is not delivered
by Scripture.

So that for his Creed, I say as the Frenchmen proverbially are wont, il ne
point damn qui ne le coit, he is not damned that does not believe it* there is
difference betwixt standing up to what is proposed, and standing out against
the Church, in contempt. Absolute belief will then be rational, when moral
assurance, which yet is not always to be had, makes Faith.

And when he has proved the assumption, that the church of Rome is only this
Church, and by manifest consequence: then the Pope shall be no usurper; and yet
not infallible neither. We deny the Postulate with a contradiction because we
can deny the Church's definition without a contradiction.

Then in the seventh and eight numbers he uses plain-evasions. In the seventh
he tells me that he does not use that method which I tell him he should have
used, in some favor to me, when I come to use this very method, I do foresee
that it will so galde you, and he says, I would have the burden shifted off
to the other shoulder to avoid present trouble. Ans. these are his
Rhodomontadoes. Is not the method a priori more rational? If he can prove the
Church infallible, and absolute authority to belong to it, our obedience must
follow* but since obedience is ambiguous and distinguishable, though obedience
in some respect be due yet not on that part which inferres infallibility; but
on that part, which respects authority, as we take authority for power. 2.
There was nothing said by him formerly which I have not fully answered; and now
the reinforcements, but it became him to say so, who was more pinched. And how
will he quits himself in this method we are to see in the ^2. numb. And in the
eight numb* here he tells me the reason why he says nothing to St. Austins
authority produced by me, namely lest he should lose his labor, but I know a
better reason because he will find too much labor to answer it.

And as quick dispatch the ninth Paragr. deserves. For he does not offer any
answer to any reason in mine, but here snaps in order to a vindication of the
Text Matt. 20.7. for his cause. He took exceptions at our translation should
keep knowledge, he renders it shall keep. I defended the translation by the
possibility of that sense in the Hebrew because it has no formal subjunctive:
By the scope of the Text, because they are blamed for their default. He
persists against our translation, because all originals (he means all copies;
or indeed all translations he should mean, because of what follows) speak
clearly in the future as the Hebrew does: and also the Greek and the Latin,
which two want not the Subjunctive Mood. Ans. But first he supposes that which
is in question that the Hebrew is to be understood as in the future. Secondly
other translations with him are fallible, save only the Latin; therefore the
other conclude not. Thirdly the translations may be understood in compliance
with the Hebrew, which is frequent also in the New Testament, with the Greek:
and therefore if the Hebrew may be so construed, so may the others by an
Hebraism. Therefore if our English translation were faulty herein, yet must it
be otherwise convinced of a fault in this: Especially since Fourthly, We give
good reason why it should thus be construed, namely by the Scope; Intelligentia
dicti sumitur ex scopo loquendi. And therefore may we well with Iunius and
Tremellius hold our English, which in general, whatsoever he says of it from
some of our own, has not so many faults in it, as Isidor Clarius found in
their Latin, 8000.

I asked him, is this Text meant of the Priests of Rome. He says, I told you
it was not. But why then should the other Text about the Scribes and Pharisees
by proportion prove their infallibility? and not this, since we have here the
Priest in a singularity, if not signanter? Well then by his own consent, this
Text is not sufficient for him: for it concerns private Priests; and they are
as fallible as translations. Only the private Priests may know the sense of
the Church better, then the sense of Scripture by the translations, as he
speaks in more words to no more purpose. Ans. First when we have the sense of
the Church, are we sure that that sense is true? though it be the true sense of
the Church, is the sense of the Church true? this is yet in question. There is
no question but the sense of Scripture is true, whether the sense of the Church
is true is (...). Secondly, Let the plain places of Scripture in things
necessary be compared with the difficulties in the Interpretation of the
Trental Definitions; and then let them judge whether we had not better stand to
Translations, which are made by a Nation or approved, or else to the opinion of
private Priests, for though her Doctrine be so carefully published amongst all
intelligent men: yet this is to be understood materially in the words, not
formally in the sense. And so the Scripture is published amongst all
intelligent men, in the former way, And if the people be not intelligent men
too, how shall they know whether the true sense of the Doctrine of the Church
be communicated to them by learned men?

But the Priests of the old Law were to direct the people, which were not to be
directed by their own reading the Scriptures. And the Priests of the new Law
doubtless excel those of the old Law. This in the substance of it we have had
before, and have taken away the grounds thereof. And besides it is false that
the people were not to be directed by their own reading the Scriptures. What
says St. Luke of the Bereans? If they examined by the Scriptures what Doctrine
St. Paul taught, were not they to be directed by their own readings of the
Scripture. And why did the Jews apply their children to the Law from five years
of age? And why did St. Paul take notice of Timothy to be trained up in the
Scriptures from his childhood? and why is the man said to be blessed, who
amongst other things, meditates in the Law day and night? Is this to be
understood only of the Priests. 2. Therefore though they went to the Priests
in doubtful cases; yet not for ordinary knowledge in things necessary; therefore
this is not compared ad idem to our case. Thirdly, the Priests were bound to
direct the people by the Law, were they not? To the Law and to the Testimonies.
And not by Tradition. So are the Priests of the new Law, (as he calls them) to
direct the people by the Scripture, not by Tradition, or determinations of the
Church, unless according to Scripture.

Therefore his question of the case in a matter of doubt, which he compares his
proceeding in with the old way of the Jews, Numb. 6. comes not home to our
business, and therefore we may send it home again; and yet not for fear of not
being able to answer what he is not willing to urge, that when in the upshot,
the question should be drawn up to the High Priest, he who would not hear him
was deservedly put to death, Deuteronomy. 17. He leaves this for us to take down our
selves; he will not apply it, and herein he does discreetly fearing it may be,
least it should be said that that which he would seem to have referred to the
High Priest for final judgment, should indeed be referred to the Judge
contradistinctly spoken of; and by the Syriack disjunctively to the Priests and
Levits. And 2. I hope the High Priest at Rome does not undertake a sentence in
causes of blood. And thirdly in that case there was contempt, thou shall take
away the evil, it is not said error, and analogum per se positum stat pro
famosiori analogato, and also ver. 12. this is intimated, that man that will do
presumptuously. Fourthly, Suppose it had been referred to the High Priest for
sentence final; this might be extraordinary in a Typical respect to Christ. And
they know the rule, Extraordinaria non trahuntur in regulam: We cannot make a
rule of extraordinaries. And yet also was not the High Priest, quatenus talis,
Infallible; as appears in the condemnation of Christ, as I told them.

Now he would distinguish by saying, The Jewish Church erred not. The true High
Priest (without whom there is no true representative Church) erred not:
Cajaphas was not the true High Priest, the other true High Priest was Christ.
Pretty sport. So the Roman Church never erreth, because Christ is the true Head:
but then the Pope should not be true High Priest, nor true Head: for so
Caiaphas and he must be compared, in relation to Christ. May we not almost
think that our Adversary is within a little put to his shifts? For Christ was
in being, I hope, and had declared himself the true Messiah, and yet he said,
"the Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair; then we are bound to do all
whatsoever is said to us, without a true High Priest. 2. How many Popes were
not true Popes, and so not true High Priests: and then when shall we be certain
whether we have a true High Priest, and consequently a true Church, and
consequently that it cannot err? For as absolute infallibility has it self to
particular Faith in any point, according to Mr. Knot: So absolute certainty of
a true Pope has it self to our knowledge whether it cannot err. Well, but he
has told us that he is the true Pope whom the Church shall accept: So before,
but then Caiaphas was the true High Priest, because he was accepted by the
Jews. 2. Without a true Pope the Church might err; and so err in the choice
of a true Pope: and then we are never a whit the nearer. And then, Thirdly,
Christ was not the true High Priest, because he was not accepted by the Jews,
but condemned. And then again, as well the Council might be infallible without
a true High Priest, as a General Council, since without any Pope or Head
thereof: but the four General Councils they will say are infallible: and yet we
say there was no Pope then in their sense. Therefore the Council of Arimnium,
which he speaks of here was not fallible upon that account, namely, because it
was not confirmed by the Pope; for the other Councils were not confirmed by a
Pope neither; there being then none. And if the Council of Ariminum did
themselves choose a Pope, then he was accepted by them; and so he was the true
Pope, as before.

He says then, This true High Priest (namely Christ) erred not: the true Head
of the Church not erring, the Church cannot be said to err. -- iterum
Crispinus. This is (...). Was Christ an external Head in the policy of the
Church? If so, my Adversary and the Disciplinarians might join Principles for
their Government. And upon this account the Pope should not be styled only the
Vicar of Christ, and Successor of St. Peter, but also the Successor of Christ,
the Sea being void by Christ's promotion. 2. If Christ be the true Head of the
Church, then the Pope is the false Head; unless the Pope and Christ be all one;
or let them distinguish that Christ is a true Head in one sense, namely the
vital and spiritual Head, the Pope only the Ministerial Head; and if they thus
distinguish, then though the vital Head does not err, the Ministerial Head may
err. Thirdly, Christ as the true Head of his Church has relation to the
Church invisible: but we have now to do with the Church as visible, and upon
this consideration the promises which are made in Christ and by Christ to the
Church as St. Math. 16. and elsewhere, should not be made to the Church
virtual, or to the Church Representative, but invisible unto which properly he
has relation, as Head. And thus we acknowledge the promises made to the Church
against error, are true; namely against error damnative. Fourthly, If they
closely intend this which is said in service to the Roman Church so far, that
it cannot err, because Christ is the Head; then what Christ does the Pope must
do, and what the Pope does Christ must do: but surely Christ did whip the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple, so does not the Pope do: and Christ
instituted his Supper in both kinds, so does not the Pope: and then if what the
Pope does, the same, Christ should be said to do, Christ should contradict
himself; for by himself he instituted it in both kinds, by the Pope in one,
and also Christ in Pope Liberius did subscribe against his own divinity. Lastly
there might have been another true Head Ministerial in the Church without
prejudice to the former; might there not? If not, farewell Pope and Monarchy;
If so, then his answer is none, that Christ was then the true Head of the
Church: for so neither Caiaphas nor any other should have been High Priest.

That of St. Athanasius was touched even now, and it is good still, if Councils
be infallible; since the reason, why that of Ariminum should not be good, is
not good; and therefore that might be as infallible with eight hundred Bishops,
as the Council of Nice with fewer; since also according to my Adversary, Christ
is the true Head of his Church, and therefore no matter whether there was any
Ministerial Head or not, to confirm it.

And as for exceptions against our English Translation again from some of our
own, we need say no more; for we did not hold the Translation infallible. As he
said of a Christian that he is mundu^ and mundandus, clear and yet to be
cleansed; so may it be said of the Translation; it was good and yet might be
mended; and has since, since their exceptions. But 2. If they will argue from
imperfection in one place to a corruption in the whole, it is a fallacy, a
dicto secundum quid: but simply it will redound, if they might so argue, to the
undoing of the infallibility of the Latin, and purity too. And then if he takes
aim against our English by the Interpretation of that of Malachi, or the
Translation rather, they bespeak a falsity in the charge, for there was good
reason by the connection for that Reddition.

Here we have little but a rhapsody of repetitions of former grounds, which
being showed to be rotten, he can solidly build nothing.

His first and principal ground here is that the Church cannot err; and this
yet is the main question: And therefore his compare betwixt the Priests
declaring the Law of the Church, and our Ministers declaring the Law of
Scriptures by the Originals is not well grounded. First, Because that ground is
not made good. Secondly, because we do not urge infallibility by the Ministers,
as they must. And thirdly, because though their Priests should infallibly
conveigh the Doctrine of the Church; yet the Doctrine of the Church may be
fallible: so is not Scripture in the Original. And what he says concerning
most corrupted Translations has been formerly answered in compare with their
Latin; which they pretend infallible and is not, and therefore their Church is
not infallible: but we pretend not translations infallible, though better then,
theirs is now. That we are not assured of true Scripture and if so, yet not of
the true sense, has been answered; as to things necessary: and more assured
then they by their Church. That many necessary controversies are not contained
in Scripture, has been refelled and returned to them with use. We have showed
that they have no reason to take away from the people the use of Scripture.
That Chaos of Corruptions in our English is more easily denied then proved; and
the recrimination to Latin is more easiely proved then denied

And as for the taking of the law from the mouth of the Priest to be as secure,
as to take the Signification of a word in Scripture from the public consent
of all men, they may know, if they have no more for faith, they have no faith
Divine; as the effect cannot exceed the cause, so the assent cannot exceed the
ground thereof. Aqua tantum ascendit quantum descendit.

Their permission of Scripture is in that language which the people does not
understand, and this is not then to permit them Scripture, which is, as he
says, known to most and bred men in Learning.

And he has no reason surely to speak of vulgar Translations; for surely
theirs is the vulgar Latin; though Christened by the Trent Council; and never a
whit the better for that.

And I hope his local Praelats will not allow the use of Translations but to
them whom they are secure of not to change their Religion, which is as much
much as to blind them, and then to give them leave to see. Further use of
Scripture is not an abuse, unles the Ancient Fathers exhorted the people in the
reading of Scriptures to an abuse; and he was much mistaken in the saying that
we see the sad effects of it, it is a fallacy of accident.

Our Ministers are as rightly ordained and canonically licenced to Preach, as
their Priests to say Mass; and more too, unless they could prove that office
better. And yet a simple contradiction is also better than a simple negative:

Upon our word the people may rely as well as their people upon the Priests,
and somewhat more upon the former considerations of an impossibility of Faith
in the truth of their being Priests. And yet our Ministers are not masters of
their Faith, but helpers of their joy; as the Apostle says of himself also,
the people do not simply rely upon them, but believe by them.

And then he comes to the occasion of this debate betwixt us, namely because
that Noble Person carped at our blind obeying our Priests, and believing them,
whereas all of our Religion could go to the fountain. Ans. Whether the words of
that Noble Person were such as he expresses them I cannot say, but taking the
Translation to be so far Scripture, as that it agrees with the Original, so far
are they the Fountain, not in language, but insense. And so they go to the
Fountain oppositely to the Doctrine of the Church, though not as oppositly to
Translations. And as for that which was said by that Noble Person of blind
obeying, is not here denied* and we know that this blind obedience is commended
by the Jesuit for the right and Christian obedience. And their implicit Faith
must be blind obedience upon two accounts, First because they ought not to
examine whether what the Priests say to them does agree with the Doctrine of the
Church; and secondly, they cannot examine it.

But he excepts against that Fountain, but alas! when that fountain which they
conceive themselves to drink to their eternal health, is so poisoned, as I
showed in my last Chapter that millions of millions (as your own Broughton says)
run to hell flames by occasion of this corruption. Good words. He could not
certainly say so unless he has it from a Pope and Council. And does he take a
passionate Hugh to be as credible with him as Cardinal Hugh. And I think also
the main thing for which Hugh Broughton was offended with our Translations, was
about the descent into Hell; which by the Trent Council should seem not to be
so necessary: for they make no mention of it in their Creed. And also if the
sentence proceeds sufficiently upon Hughs words, then their Latin is poisoned
more, as it should seem more by Isidor Clarius, one of theirs. And my Adversary
might have remembered that we might as well slight Hugh Broughton in a
singularity; as he did Isidor Clarius. And it seems, the danger by Translations
is not so great, because he says, I may most truly say that far more perish by
misunderstanding (whilst they follow their Ministers and their own private
judgment of discretion) that which is truly Translated, then perish by the
corruption of that which is falsely Translated. Ans. This comes loosely from
him also. If it were obscure, the Translation might miss, if not, how could
they be in danger of perishing? If they follow their Ministers or their own
judgment without weighing the Scriptures, they may err as the Romanist does
by blind obedience: But if they compare the Doctrine of the Ministers with that
of Scripture by their judgment of discretion, as the Bereans did that which was
spoken by St Paul (and as he would have them compare the Doctrine of our
Ministers with the Authority of their Church by their judgment of discretion)
they are in no such peril of damnation. That which is not known without great
difficulty may be unknown without great danger. Otherwise we make God, they may
think, an hard Master.

Thus they perish for not hearing that Church which their own Scripture bids
them hear, whereas in doing that which God bids, there can be no danger of
error great or small Ans. My Adversary is very importunate, without new
Arguments. If he means that the Scripture bids us hear the Church universally,
as to Faith, he begs the question. If to hear, as in point of trespass, or so
as not to contemn, he fights with his own shadow, as being ignorant of the
Elench. And so of the other clause, if he means it so that God bids us
absolutely do as the Church bids us, there is the same fault in the discourse.
Better may we return it to them. They perish because they will not hear the
Scripture, which the Scripture and the ancient Church bids them hear, whereas
in following Scripture there can be no danger of error great or small: and
since also the Church can have no credible Authority but from the Scripture:
(neither has he proved the contrary whatsoever he says) and therefore he does
well now to tell us that the Scripture bids us hear the Church.

He says, the doctrine of the Church is Gods Law. Ans. This is a kind of
cryptical proposition. I am sure Gods Law should be the doctrine of the Church:
but he means it for his use, whatsoever the Church reaches is Gods Law. What?
is Gods Law in recto. He speaks as boldly, as if being but yet a private man he
could not speak under infallibility. So then we need not look any further for
Gods Law, and the Scripture then will not only be insufficient for our
direction to heaven, as they say; but not necessary, which sometimes they will
grant. It will not be necessary neither as a rule, as Bellarmin sometimes; nor
as a commonitory. And we may wonder, why amongst their Counsails they did not
reckon this for one, namely to use Scripture; since upon this account we are
not bound to it under peril of damnation; but only they will not allow it such
perfection, as to Counsails. But then if the Church bids us not, to read
Scripture; or bids us, not to read Scripture, it is not Gods Law, and it is
Gods Law, but it is Gods Law that we should look into Scripture. To the Law and
to the Testimony. Search the Scriptures says Christ. If the Church teaches
that we must worship Images or buy Images, it must be Gods Law against Gods Law
of the second Commandment. If the Church bids us communicate under one kind,
it must be Christ's Law against Christ's Law. And so God must contradict himself:
and Scripture must follow the sense of the Church; as one of them is said to
have said, what a cause have they which has need of so desperate propositions?

And private Priests are far more likely to teach them Gods Law, by teaching
them what the universal Church holds to be Gods Law, than by teaching them what
they themselves conceive to be Gods law, as you would have them do. Ans. This
does not contradict: If they say it is more likely, we can say it. But what is
this to Faith? And upon this condition they are undone. For which of their
private Priests are able to say positively that this is the doctrine of the
whole Church for all ages and places since the Apostles? The Church otherwise
considered has no considerable Authority: and so we mean the universal Church.
Secondly, Although thus the Church is not the regula regulans, but the regula
regulata; yet they cannot bring the consent of the universal Church for the
points of difference.

Ad number. 11. 12. 13. 14. Herein he gives me many words toward asserting
Tradition to be a sufficient bottom of faith; but in all these how little he
takes away of my answer, any one may say better then I.

In the beginning of the eleventh, he goes upon a false supposition, that in
the times before Moses the traditions were received by the Church upon the
infallibility of the Church. They were received by the Church, not infallibly
by the Church. The Church had it self herein as a mean of proposal, not as the
last motive of faith. Their faith was terminated by the spirit of God in the
matter of tradition; was not determined by the Church's Authoritative delivery:
the objectum quod of their faith was not the Churches proposal. Then 2.
supposing what we do not grant, yet there is not now the same reason for the
Church: because they had more appearances t^en of God to and in the Church,
then now there is or has been since the Apostles times. And therefore the rule
is good, Distingue tempora. 3. This will make a circle. How were they assured
infallibly of tradition by the Church? How were they infallibly assured of the
Church by tradition? then the resolution of their faith was not into the credit
of the Church as infallible. Therefore does my Antagonist in vain say to me,
show the ground they had there to hold the Church infallible. Nay the proof
hereof must come from the affirmer: Asserentis est probare. They are to make
good here two things first, that they did hold their Church infallible;
otherwise how could any of the people hold it to be infallible; unles the
Church did so determine of i^ self? and then that though they did hold it to be
infallible, yet that it was so and must be so, otherwise they could not believe
anything.

Afterward he makes a per^triction of my distinction, that the word in
substance of it was before the Church, which was begotten by it: and then he
tells me what I add thereunto, that when there is as much need, and as great a
certainty of tradition as formerly, then he may urge the argument. Here he
shifts and shuffles. He tell me that I must understand it of the unwritten word
and to be only in orall ^radition. Right I understand it so. But what is this
to (...) question; whether the manner of conveyance by the (...) in way of
orall tradition was infallible; and then whether we are bound to take all or
part of necessary doctrine from the Church this way. And can they now conclude
the Church infallible in the matter of tradition bes^ide the word written, by
their tradition of the word unwritten? And can they show that the Jews were
equally bound to any Tradition before the word written, which was not agreeable
to the word afterward written? Otherwise how can they supply this to their
purpose in urging Traditions differing from Scripture in matter equally to
Scripture; as the Trent Council defines, as before? Let them come to the point;
and satisfy demands.

In his discourse following I can grant him all until he come to this, they
only had Gods word revealed by tradition. This we must debate upon as being
ambiguously delivered: for [only] may relate to the subject [they] and so the
sense is, the Jews only had Gods word revealed by Tradition, but this is
concerned here; or [only] may have relation to [Gods word] as to the matter
which was revealed, and so the sense is, that they had only that word which was
revealed by tradition; and this comes not to the point neither, or only may
relate to the manner of revealing by tradition, and thus indeed it is proper
for the debate, but thus it is denied; if we take it thus, that the word of God
was no otherwise assured to them than by tradition, though they only being
Jews had only that word of God which was revealed by tradition, to believe;
yet had they not only tradition, by which they did believe. And therefore his
conclusion must be naught; and all he says to that purpose, even to the end of
his Paragraph.

In the twelfth he deals about the need of tradition, and he says that the
need or necessity of Tradition which you conceive to have been greater then
than now, does not make the Traditions more Credible. Ans. True it is, that
simply the need of them does not make them to be more credible, if they be to
be believed: but there is the question whether there is now any to be believed
necessarily, in point of faith, when there is not such need of them. Scripture
is as credible when we are heaven, in regard of it self; yet there we have no
need of it: but as since we have no need of it there, we have reason to believe
that there it will not take place; so neither should Traditions, when there is
not that need of them. My answer then did bear it self upon this, that if there
were that necessity of Tradition now as then, he might urge the argument,
because God have would provided sufficiently for security of tradition now as
then: falsum prius. And we may take his own similitude, those that have read
many credible books of France, have they any need of orall Tradition, to
believe that there is such a Kingdom as France? he says no: yet these last
are as certain, he says. Well then, no more need have we of tradition for the
doctrine of Christ which we sufficiently read in Scripture. So then, although
he concludes Traditions hopeful (and superflua non nocent) yet can he not
conclude them as necessary; which should have been demonstrated.

But this he would do in following words, even now when we have Scriptures and
Traditions, we have ever had with them a perpetual succession of horrible
Divisions opening still wider and wider. Again odd reflections upon Scripture:
but it is well he jopnes Traditions with it to take part of the consequence, as
he thinks: and yet it may be he does not think so; but that the cause of the
Divisions is only Scripture: and had we had no Scriptures, we should have had
fewer Divisions. Does he think so? Then how is Scripture necessary, as they
generally confess, when it had been convenient that there had been no
Scripture, upon this consideration? And how should they prove the Authority of
the Church without Scripture? Well, but take his words in their ordinary sense,
and what kind of argument will this be. Even now when we have Scripture and
Traditions; therefore now Traditions are now as necessary or more then when
there was no Scripture? Nay they will seem to be less necessary, when
notwithstanding them, we have more divisions. How then shall these divisions be
remedied? It may be by more traditions. What? New traditions? oppositum in
apposito.

But in the next words he speaks out All (divisions) commonly caused by
misinterpretation of the Scriptures, to which inconvenience they were not
subject, before all Scripture was written. And therefore in this respect there
is now after the writing of the Scriptures, a greater necessity then ever of
Traditions. Ans. So then, he has now commented upon the former words, and his
sense is plain that had we not had Scripture we should have had less need of
Traditions. First, we had thought the Learned men of their Church had devised
Traditions, not because we had Scripture, but because Scripture was wanting in
the matter of necessary doctrine. And so he himself tells us presently after,
that since part of the Canon is lost, we must say there is use of Traditions.
And yet now we have more need of Traditions, because Scripture is written. But,
it may be, he will say there is more need of Traditions to clear the
interpretations of Scripture. Yea, but then he should mean by Traditions
Traditive interpretations of Scripture, as they are called. But are not these
lost too? For who is there can give us any account of them? And as for other
Traditions we are never a whit the better he has told us before; since
notwithstanding we have them, we have a perpetual succession of horrible
divisions opening still wider and wider. Let them remember that of N^lus, to
accuse Scripture is to accuse God. 2. Are the divisions necessary in points
necessary? If he means so, it is flatly denied. If in other points, it is not
to the question principal. 3. A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia: if we be
bound to Tradition, as such; we are bound to all; and yet all Traditions they
have not kept. 4. Traditions do not lessen divisions about interpretation of
Scripture: for one division is whether Traditions have any ground in Scripture.
And he may know that he has named Texts to this purpose, and because there are
differences about Traditions, therefore, by his argument, we should not be
ruled by them; as indeed they do not order themselves by them. They keep
Tradition in the controversy for the use of the Church; not in practice, as he
said, Antiquitatem semper crepant, novi indies vivunt: and we must let go the
Scripture in controversy and practice for the use of Tradition and the Church,
they and their Fathers have troubled the waters of Scripture for the chief
Fisher. Let them let their Traditions alone: and they will see their discourse
is a non causa.

Then he repeats importunately the uses of Traditions, but not my refutation.
And he speaks of Traditions of such matter as we have in Scripture: which is
beside the mark, we are about Traditions in their sense of that matter which is
not in Scripture equally to be believed to Scripture, which should prove the
insufficiency of Scripture, and the necessity of them. This is (...). And
therefore much he says to this purpose is like the drift of snow, which makes
an heap, but will not bear one up from sinking in it, Yet I must note his wit
in that he says, that God must purposely by a miracle have infringed the
course of nature, if the former Traditions of the Church should grow then to
lose their sufficiency in order to the same effect, when they were strengthened
by so great an Authority as that of the sacred writers was. How little in this
is there of a sober soul; As if the matter of Tradition was written by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost to confirm the authority of delivering it by
orall Tradition. Does it not appear in Eccles. History that the matter of the
New Testament, was written that it might be more certain and firm in the minds
of men? It seems then that the looser way by Tradition was not so sure and
standing -- litera scripta manet. Secondly, If there be so great an Authority
of the sacred writers, surely we may make more use of what they wrote to
confirm Traditions. Adeone pudorem cum pudicitia perdiderunt; as he said, that
the Authority of the sacred writers should be employed as it were only to
serve Tradition. Thirdly, The Authority of the sacred Writers did rather
confirm the truth of them than the use, for why were they written, if
Traditions were necessary after they were written, as such? Therefore fourthly,
He concludes but sufficiency of them in order to the effect: but this is not
effectual to his purpose. If he did conclude necessity of them after the
writing, this would be somewhat: but then there would be more in the conclusion
than is in the premises, and yet surely all were nothing to the state of the
question; because we make no question of such Traditions. Again he pleads
loss of the Canon, upon which he thinks, Tradition should revive. Ans. That we
have spoken of sufficiently before; that the supposal does not infer
insufficiency of the Canon, and therefore does not infer necessity of
Traditional matter beside what is written. And also, is there yet
(notwithstanding the loss of some part of Scripture) enough remaining to
confirm Traditions? yes, they will say. Then God it seems has taken more care
for Traditions than Salvation: there is enough for Traditions yet in Scripture;
not for Salvation. Well but again, there is enough in Scripture to confirm all
Traditions, is there not? If there be, then there is enough for Salvation, or
else there was not enough in Traditions: Because they will say Scripture has
confirmed all Traditions; to the Jew namely. And then, if there was enough to
the Jew for Salvation in the Old Testament, which was adaequate to Tradition;
then much more have we enough for Salvation by the New Testament: and therefore
is there no need of any Tradition beside the Canon.

Then he returns to an enarration of the use of Traditions even after writing;
which is of no use to them, but to us; because here he produces several Texts
for Traditions in the same notion; as 2. These. 2. Gal. 1.8. Tim. 2.2, 2. and
herein he prevaricates in his own cause: For if these Texts be meant of such
Traditions which were afterward written in the matter of them, they are so
understood as we would have them to be understood; and they are not pertinent
to the question about Traditions beside Scripture, in the matter of them.
Secondly, Whereas he speaks that these Texts confirm the certainty of
Traditions; we grant it; namely of those Traditions which were afterward
written: but how do these Texts confirm the certain necessity of those that are
not written And therefore thirdly, He is mightily disappointed if he conceives
those Texts should bind us to stand upon Traditions now more than ever; for the
formality of Tradition was there sunk in the writing; and the matter of
Tradition was the same with that which was writtten, in his own confession,
unless he drives the Texts Heterogeneously to his own words.

And he impingeth upon the same stone again, What wise man would put ^ut one
light, costing him nothing, because it will be shining of its own nature
(unless you will needs have i^ hidden) because he has now another light, but
so, that even with both those lights many of his household will still remain i^
darkness. Ans. He supposes a light added to a light. It is well then that
Scripture is assured to be one light, but his Tradition should be compared to a
light when there is no other light, namely when the Scripture is defective.
Secondly, If he thinks Tradition is a light costing us nothing, he may be
deceived; for it will cost a great deal of Scrutiny, since we cannot see it
shining of its own nature infallibly. And thirdly, If some be still in darknese
with both those lights, then surely they may be more in darkness with but one,
and that is Tradition; therefore they should allow the people the light of the
Scripture, since both too little, as he says, to some. But fourthly, What if
one light put out the other in the true state of the question; namely Scripture
Tradition superadded in matter? And what wise man will light a straw candle, in
the Fathers expression, when the Sun shines? the Sun-light of Scripture puts
out the straw-light of Traditions, condemning those who teach for Doctrines
Traditions of men; which the Romanist does in some proportion. And fifthly,
what wise man would have such a light which serves his turn best when it shines
least: for Traditions, if we believe our Adversaries, are a covered dish,
dainties, to be kept private for those who are fit to receive them; the more
wise and perfect men which may teach them to others. The mystery of Salvation,
that is made common by writing: but the mystery of Tradition is put under a
bushel. The mystery of the Trinity is delivered in Scripture; but the mystery
of the Trent Traditions must not be familiarly known. So then, say they what
they will or can, we shall sooner find an extinguisher for the light of the
rush candle, than they for the light of the Sun.

But if you say that if Scripture had not been given us, we should have had a
more certain Tradition given us. So he delivers my words; which were not so,
but thus, If Scripture had not been left to us, we should have had Tradition
more certainly conveyed to us, as the Gospel was before it was written. Now
some difference there is betwixt given us, and left us; for that which is left
to us is intended for our constant use, which that which is given does not
connotate. So some Pontificians will say, the Scripture was given upon
particular occasion: but was not left to the Church as a fixed universal rule.
But there is yet more betwixt us about my words, we should have had Tradition
more certainly conveyed to us; so I said: he reports me thus, we should have
had a more certain Tradition given unto us. A more certain Tradition given, and
a Tradition more certainly conveyed, are not altogether the same, the former
supposes the matter of Tradition as not certain; and this we can deny as to
those times when there was no Scripture, as written; the other speaks de modo
tradendi, which comes closer to our question. For we can persuade our selves
that God who is graciously provident for his Church, wherein he has placed his
Name, would have taken care that if there had not been a certain direction in
writing, the matter of necessary Doctrine and practice should have been more
certainly communicated to us.

So then he thrives very little by compare of the Christian Church with the
Jewish, although the Christian Church be more noble. For first the compare must
be of the Jewish with the whole Christian Church, because the Jewish Church
(Proselyts being included therein, namely Proselyts of the Covenant, as they
were distinguished) was all the Church there was. And secondly, Because no part
of the whole Church can compare with the Jewish Church as to privileges: and
then by this reckoning how little of Nobility will fall to their share?
Thirdly, As the Tradition (which was it whereby the matter of Scripture was
proposed) was for the time necessary before the matter of Scripture was
written: so also must the Tradition of the Christian Church be considered as in
relation to the time before which the matter of the New Testament was written,
therefore he should have pleaded, if he would have it done patly, that there
was any Tradition of Faith after the Old Law was written, beside what was
written, which was to be believed unto Salvation equally to what was written;
and then have drawn down a parallel Line of proportion of the same (though he
would have more nobility) for the Christian Church. Thirdly, If the nobleness
of a Church be antecedent to more certain Tradition, as he thinks, then how
happened it that there was so little a time betwixt the preaching of the Gospel
and the writing of it? It seems then, if God provides for Churches according to
the nobleness of them, that the better provision for the Church is by
Scripture. The Christian then has a more certain way of Faith than by
Tradition.

And as for means of securing Tradition in the Christian Church, which he
compares with the Jewish in, he has no cause to bragg. For first, they cannot
say or prove that they have all Traditions in number formal and material.
Secondly, They do not practice all. How many are there which St. Basil speaks
of in his Tract. de Sp. Sanct. which they observe not. Thirdly, The safety of
them is in the whole Church; and yet forsooth every one must not know them.
Fourthly, If so, then have they reason to blush that they have been more
careful to keep Tradition than Scripture, and particularly of the Hebrew Copy
of St. Matthew, and is this for their credit? Fifthly. Are the Scriptures
preserved incorrupt or not? If not, how have they been faithful, as before. If
so, then why do their learned men obtrude the Authentiqueness of their Latin
upon this account, that when this Edition was made, the Scriptures were pure
and uncorrupted, but corrupted since?

Again the Tradition of Christ's Primitive Church before the Scripture was
written and sufficiently promulged, was to be believed upon her sole Authority.
Ans. If he takes that Tradition inclusively to the Apostles who preached that
which they did write afterward, and take Tradition for the matter of what was
written, we grant it; if but he takes tradition of the primitive Church to be
that which was derived to after times, and was not written, we deny it to be
believed upon her sole Authority. In the former sense it is true, but not
pertinent; in the latter, pertinent, but not true. And indeed this was the
notion of Traditions for the first times, namely to be that s^^^^e of doctrine
which did comprehend the materials of faith, (...) to be any thing different
from Scripture, or diverse ((...) first of the Gal. 8. does not signify contra
but prae^^^) from Scripture. So he will find Irenaeus to mean it. And so St.
Cyrill of Jerusalem in his 5. Cat. 117. p, of the gr. last Ed. makes it to be
upon account no other than (...), the System out of the Holy Scriptures about
every of those things contained. And again, (...), for things of faith were not
composed as it pleased men, but the most pertinent things being gathered out of
all Scripture do make up the doctrine of faith. And again as the seed of
mustard in a little grain does contein many branches: so faith it self in few
words does comprehend the knowledge of piety that is in the old and new
Testament. And what follows but that text which he (my adversary named) (...),
see therefore Brethren and hold the Traditions. So then if he takes Tradition
in the first sense, the Church was infallible therein, by the Apostles: if in
the second, the Tradition was infallibly Scripture: and the Church believed it
upon that account. And that Traditions did not bind either in their own virtue,
or without Scripture, they may see in St. Basil, who yet speaks much for them.
So in the seventh chapter of the Holy Ghost, where speaking of the controversy
whethre they were to say of the Son of God with whom or by whom, he has
these words, (...), etc. this is not sufficient to us that it is a Tradition of
the Fathers: for even they did follow the will of Scripture, having taken
principles out of testimonies, which a little before we proposed to you out of
Scripture. God therefore said by his Apostles that the Traditions then were
infallible, (being in matter the same with what they wrote) for their
Authority. Now if God said this, shall we upon his fallible discourse (for even
Councils are fallible in their discourse) come to say the Church's Traditions
are further infallible then agreeable to his word, though God never said so,
and never yet expressed any such infallibility of the Church? And thus I return
him his own words mutatis mutandis: And so my Argument out of Irenaeus is not
yet refuted.

Neither does he take away my use of Irenaeus testimony in the next paragr. For
as to my Argument what he says is not appliable. It was thus out of his
Authority, If the Scripture had not been left to us, we should have had
Tradition more certainly conveyed to us as the Gospel was before it was
written; but the Scripture is now left to us; therefore no need of certain
conveighance of tradition to us.

This Syllogism he makes no offer of answer to: for that which he says in a
Parenthesis, (though you cannot invent the means, by which Tradition should
have been conveyed more certainly, supposing there had been no Scripture) I
can receive without prejudice to my Argument: for whatsoever Hypothetically
should have been done, had not there been Scripture; yet now, since we have
Scripture, we have no such need of; we now dispute upon the fact, not against
the supposition. Therefore from the dint of the ratiocination he digresseth to
an observation of disrespect in me to St. Irenaeus, because I said, Neither can
we believe that those barbarous Nations did rely only upon Tradition. Ans. He
is in this deceived. To assent to Tradition in the matter of it, and not to
assent to the matter upon the sole Authority of Tradition, are not such
opposites as he imagines; for they may well agree. Therefore though the Father
said, they did assent to Tradition as to the matter; yet not by Tradition, as
the manner. Tradition was the objectum materiale, not the objectum formale of
their Faith. And the next words as he also perhibits the Fathers words, do
defend my answer, having Salvation written in their hearts by the Holy Ghost.
So then they were assured of the Doctrine of Salvation by the Holy Ghost: then
they did not believe that Tradition upon the sole Authority of the Church. So
this contradicts my Adversary, and makes for me; not only by consequence
because it is against him; but directly: for then we can as well be assured of
Scripture by the Holy Ghost; and have no such need then of the authority of the
Church, as to salvation, though the church were infallible, which is one of the
things to be proved, and cannot. And yet besides, this tradition in the sense
of the Father, was in the matter of it, Scripture; and therefore has no
consanguinity with the true state of the question. So then we may conclude in
the negative, they did not rely upon, or believe upon the sole account of that
very tradition, and yet, if they had, it would not conclude against our cause,
because that tradition is not the same with what belongs to the question.

To be civil to an Adversary in this number, N. 14.
all the sense of it may be resolved into this discourse, If the radition of
the Church testifying her own infallibility in proposing for Gods Word, that
which she delivers for Gods word, be to be believed, then she is to be
believed as proposing that to be Gods Word, which is not written. Ans. This
has been abundantly agitated before, with our indemnity to the Plaintiff: but
since he repeats, I do not. And we answer, First, the consequence is not clear,
especially if we extend it to that which is not grounded in Scripture, if he
understands it of that which is grounded in Scripture, it is not proper to the
question. As to that which is not grounded in Scripture, we may still deny the
major. Tradition (universal) of the Church may be worthy of assent as to the
truth of Scripture to be the Word of God, and not so of that which is delivered
beside Scripture: which also is held by others against them, and the reason is
not yet disproved; because there was more necessity of the Faith of Scripture
than that which is delivered beside Scripture, and therefore may we well
suppose a greater assistance to the proposing of Scripture than any thing
diverse. Deus non deficit in necessariis. Why do they assert infallible
assistance to General Councils, not to private Doctors, or to a National
Council? Namely, because others are to be directed by the General Councils;
well then the Church universal might be more assisted for the proposing of
Scripture than for any thing else. But then I deny the minor, the Tradition of
the Church testifying her own infallibility is not worthy of an infallible
assent: It may be worthy of the highest degree of moral assurance, yet not of
an i^fal ible assent. No Authority can write, as to Conscience, what a king
writes as to civil credit, test me ipso, but that which is immediately divine.
And why then do the Pontificians prove the Authority of the Church by
Scripture. The Church without Scripture is not yet Christened, if we take
Scripture for the substance of the matter, it will be but the highest form of
Heathens. And therefore the Scripture is to be believed antecedently to the
Church. And how little his examples have proved the minor, we have seen: even
as much as he had cause to conclude against me out of my own words thus,
Tradition in matters of Faith unwritten is of equal Authority to Scripture. The
Traditions we stand upon be matters of Faith truly once delivered by our
Savior or his Apostles, though the Revelation were not written by them,
therefore this is of equal Authority to Scripture even according to your own
words. Surely it is easier to answer this than to forbear the Person. The
proposition was not my words, I hope, categorically spoken, but as being the
state of the question; if those Traditions be in the matter beside Scripture.
And now he takes this to be my affirmation simply. And then we deny his minor
too, because that which they stand upon is not matter of Faith, as being not
revealed by our Savior or his Apostles, or truly delivered by either; for they
are uncertain by which. And if they will urge that Text St. John the 16.22. as
Bellarmin does, they may think that many things might be written afterward, or
were not points of Faith. And this Text heretics have urged: and therefore by
my Adversaries Logique, he should not. And did St. Austin think that any could
soberly say that the points of difference were of that number? Or did any of
the Saints in Heaven see what they were, in speculo Trinitatis, and did send
down word thereof?

As for his defense of the exception which he took against the Scriptures being
a sufficient rule to us, N. 15.
because neither the Apostles nor their Successors took any care to have the
Scripture communicated to all Nations in such Languages as all or the greater
part of them could understand; my answer is yet good, the care was taken, in
that the new Testament was written in Greek, which was a common language then.
And this I gave an Argument of, in that the Grecian is contradistinguished to
the Jew in the New Testament. And therefore the Greek must be the greatest and
most famous part; and therefore the language common: this proof he is not
pleased to meddle with at all. Another proof that that was the common Language
was that of Tully for Archias the Poet, Graeca per totum orbem leguntur. This
he takes notice of. And he says, and so is Virgil in Latin. But this does not
contradict me; yea, he gives me a corroboration of my Argument: for whom did
Virgil imitate? Theocritus in his Eglogues, Hesiod in his Georgicks, Homer in
his Aeneids. Yea Horace had read the Greeks, it seems by his Grecisms. Yea
Terence was so conversant in Menander that he was called Menander dimidiatus.

But he says, This is to be understood thus, that the most learned sort of men
every where read Greek and Virgil. Ans. This (supposed) is not exclusive to the
Greeks, being the common Language; as to others; since he will think the Latin
was common to the people then, and yet the most learned read Virgil. And did
not all those Nations whom St. Paul wrote his Epistles to, understand Greek?
Did he write only to the most learned? In what Language was the Epistle to the
Romans, and the Epistle to the Hebrews (for the Roman Church confesses that
this Epistle also was written by St. Paul) written? were they not both written
in Greek? yea the Jews that used the Septuagint Translation, were many. So
Philo the Jew; and Marcus Antonius, the Roman, wrote in Greek. And therefore
that which was spoken by the Orator was spoken without any such Hyperbole.

He says yet further, either this must be spoken in way of a notable
amplification, or Scripture must be denied, because even between the two Cities
of Antioch and Constantinople, the Greek tongue was not the vulgar Language of
Pontus, Cappadocia, Asia minor, Phrygia, Pamphilia; all which Nations the
Scripture (Act. 2.) testifies to have had different Languages. Ans. Though the
Scripture speaks of them as distinguished in speech, yet not in Language, but
dialect; and so it is expressed ver. 6.8. And so (...) may be restrained as to
those who had several dialects: therefore whereas he says the Greek tongue was
not the vulgar Language of Pontus etc. If he means that the common Dialect of
the Greek was not used by them all, this is not much to be stood upon, because
it is not reasonable to say that those who spoke several Dialects did not
understand the common Greek; for take them all, Attique, Jonique, Dorique,
Aeolique, and Baeotique, they differ ordinarily but in terminations or
pronunciation from the common.

Within that compass is also Galatia which St. Jerome testifies to have had a
language somewhat like those of Trevers. An. It is as far from Thebes to
Athens as from Athens to Thebes is it not? Then that of Trevers must be as near
that of greek as that of the Galatians which was greek, in St. Paul's time. If
afterward the language altered or was corrupted, this does not contradict us
because we must distinguish times. And therefore yet it remains good, that the
greek was understood of the greater part of the world; and therefore the
Apostles took care to have the knowledge of the Gospel to be commonly
understood. And if they had not, God did miraculously by the gift of the Holy
Ghost, sub forma visibili in the second of the Acts, in the gift of tongues.
And this concludes against their Latin service: as also St. Paul discourses
and concludes against it in the first Ep. Cor. 14. And though we cannot tell
the time, when the Scripture can first be showed to have been thus communicated
to the people of several languages, what is this to the purpose? If it had not
been done afterward, it is enough to us that the Apostles did write in the
most common language for those times. And if it had not been done, it should
have been done. But that it was done, appears seasonably in the great Bible.
Neither can they tell us, or will, when the vulgar Latin began first to be
Authentic; whether under Sixtus Quintus, or Clement the eighth.

In the beginning he tells me that I moved a question how the people should
clearly know the true Tradition from the false. Ans. I did move this question:
but somewhat else was annexed, which he says nothing to. Well to this he now
answers, first, they could know this better then know true Scripture from
false, for they could not do that but by knowing first the true Tradition,
recommending the true Scripture, from the false tradition recommending the
false. Ans. First this has been often denied him that the ultimate resolution
of faith in the true Scripture: is not Tradition: this may lead us to the gate
of the Temple, but this does not open the door of faith. 2. That Tradition
which makes an inducement is of the universal, not Roman Church. 3. How shall
we know true tradition but by the true Church? How shall we know the true
Church but by Scripture; therefore we must know the true tradition from the
false by the Scripture; which contradicts his method.

And he says, they (could do this as well (or better) than their Forefathers
for many hundred of years, yea for two thousand, yea for twice two thousand
years together. Answ. First they see then their error in defining Faith so
strictly to be an infallible assent: since they here stand upon a comparative
certainty (if so) which amounts not to the consistence of faith. Secondly. He
supposes that which is not to be supposed, that their forefathers were
determined in their faith of the word of God by Tradition. Even now, or a little
before, he said Tradition was estalished to the Jew by Scripture: Now Tradition
is that which must discern and consequently stablish Scripture. 3. It appears
that as Scripture is more perfect then Tradition; because otherwise God had
gone the worst way, namely from that which is more perfect to that which is
less perfect, namely from Tradition to the writing of his word, but that which
is less pefect cannot establish that which is more perfect. Therefore neither
then, nor now could Scripture receive the blessing of establishment from that
which is inferior 4. In the times of the law there was no other Church to vie
with the Jews about Traditions: And therefore they might be more certain of
true Traditions: But now there are several national Churches, which may pretend
superiority of tradition, or tradition of superiority as the Roman does: and
therefore it is not so sure a way to fix our last foot upon Tradition. 5.
Universal Tradition of all times and places (which only weighs in this cause)
is not in other things for them, nor in that canon supernumerary of theirs; and
therefore let them either retract the argument, or take it. Yet he will be
confident of two Traditions, whereof the efficacy is commended with perpetual
profession and answerable practice daily occurring, Baptism of Infants, and
prayer for the faithful eparted. The first of these we have abundantly
examined before: and he does here most insist upon the latter, assigning also
his reason of more practice of this last. Because they baptize Infants but
once, but they pray ^ften for the same man who is dead. And then being more
practiced, it is more confirmed; which Cressie also urges. Ans. As for
Paedobaptism here, he does not prove it to be a Tradition, unless this be a
true proposition, that whatsoever is commended with perpetual profession and
answerable practice daly accurring, is only delivered by Tradition. Tradition
is such: but all that is such, is not Tradition. Therefore that proposition
denied. And for what he says toward both before, that the Apostles did only
by unwritten Tradition clearly and undeniably teach the baptizing of Children,
and prayer for the faithful departed: it is not clear that it is undeniable;
and therefore clearly and undeniably it is denied. Baptism of Infants has not
yet lost sufficient ground in Scripture to keep it from a necessity of being
named Tradition, as he should have showed. And as to the other, prayer for the
dead, we answer, first, it seems then it is but a Tradition, and they will
pradon us if we speak thus diminutively of it. And whether this will please all
the Roman Doctors, that it should have no footing in Scripture, let it be none
of our care 2. For the object of persons whom they prayed for, question would
be made, what morally, they were, who were to be prayed for; but this he tells
us; he says they were the faithful. Well, but all the faithful, I suppose.
It may be they will say, yes. If not; let them give us a reason of their
distinction, according to Tradition. If so, then prayer for the dead does not
infer purgatory, which they intend in the prayer for the dead. And the reason
of the consequence is proved, because prayer was made for all the faithful;
and some of them went up to Heaven per saltum, as they will also confess,
namely Apostles and Martyrs; and yet these were also prayed for in order to a
joyful resurection. And indeed the ancient prayers for the dead did respect
their bodies in the grave to be raised up at the resurrection, not their souls
to be raised out of Purgatory after a plenary satisfaction. And what means St.
Austin in Tract. In Iohannem 49. unus quisque cum causa sua dormiet, and cum
causa sua resurget. And some of their own have lately in this differed from
them. Neither had the Roman Church with their infallibility persuaded the Greek
Church hereof, in Nilus's time, who has a learned discourse against it. And
thirdly, as for Inscriptions upon the Graves (whereby he would make a
prescription for the tradition) we say two things. First that we must have them
to be showed to be so ancient as to have been universally used in the Primitive
times, and then secondly, that they were used upon the Roman account. And as
for Aerius, who (only) as he says denied praying for the dead, to be
accounted for this his opinion an Heretic by St. Austin and St. Epiphanius,
they must somewhat excuse us: for this absolutely is not right for their turn,
if true. First not right for their use, because he might deny prayers and
oblations for the dead in the former respect, namely for a joyful resurrection;
and this comes not up to the state of the point wherein we differ, namely
whether prayer for the dead was a tradition in their sense, as inferring
Purgatory. But 2. Neither is it absolutely true that Aerius was accounted an
Heretic for this opinion, exclusively to other opinions of his, as my
Adversaries words import. However he meant them, I will pinch it, Either he
means for this opinion only, or for this opinion with other opinions. If for
this opinion concurrently with others, this derogates from the common sense of
his words and from his use too: because if he was accounted an heretic for
several opinions, it may be some of them were not heretical opinions; and then
it cannot be said that he was for every of them accounted an heretic; unless
we could make some to be heresies, which are not heresies; and this would be a
contradiction. Well then, I take him to mean that Aerius was accounted an
heretic for this his opinion exclusively to other opinions in a negative
precision; and then I say it is not true. And to bring it to the test, one of
his Authors shall be mine, St. Austin in his Catalogue of heresies N. 53. He
tells us of Philaster that he had made an enumeration of heresies; and after
him, more perfectly Epiphanius: and he came after them, and he gives us an
account of the Arrians from Aerius: and several things he does say of him, that
he was sorry that he was not a Bishop; and that having fallen in Arrianorum
heresin (into the heresy of the Arrians) he added also some proper opinions,
saying that we "ought not to pray or offer oblations for the dead; and that set
fasts were not solemnly to be observed; and also that a Presbyter ought not to
be by any difference distinguished from a Bishop. And some said of him that
they were also Eneratites, and Apotactites. So then, the result hereof is this;
if he could not say Aerius was accounted an heretic, only, for this. Nay St.
Austin does contradistinguish here heresy to proper opinions. So he might be
an heretic and not for proper opinions, because he had fallen into the heresy
of the Arrians; yea and some account him an heretic for not distinguishing
betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter; therefore though his proper opinions were in
the judgment of St. Austin, heretical, yet can it not be said that he was
accounted an heretic only for denying prayers for the dead: which was to be
showed by me. And if for this opinion disjunctively, yet not for denying prayer
for the dead in his sense; which was to be showed by him. And therefore upon
the whole matter, we cannot submit to Tradition as infallible: because this
Tradition, in the Roman sense, bears false witness of its self: nor to the
Church, if it fallibly pretends infallible Tradition. Neither can prudent
reason make infallible assent; unless the conclusions could be better than
their premises. Prudent reason were more apt to make Science; which they have
no cause to be inclinable to neither: because it is more opposite to their
implicit Faith.

And he has no cause therefore to say, How many true Believers commended in
Scripture cannot give so prudent a reason for what they believed? Ans. All the
reason of Faith which can be given, if we take Faith in the acception of an
infallible assent, must be grounded upon infallible principles: if any believed
upon other account, it was not properly Faith; and therefore it cannot be said
in propriety of the notion (which the Romanist also stands upon) that they
believed. Secondly, If he takes Faith in a looser sense for an assent upon
humane Authority, this is not to the question; and we can allow Tradition its
influence hereunto. Thirdly, If he means that they could not give a more
prudent reason for what they believed, as to others that should ask them a
reason of their Faith; this we can yield as to universal Tradition, that by the
inartificial Argument of Authority we can give no more prudent reason than by
Tradition. But this does not hit the question, whether the testimony private of
the Spirit of God makes not a better assurance of Faith to our selves, though
this is not demonstrable to others, that we have this assurance by the Spirit
of God. Therefore fourthly, This will not do the business, unless what he
says, he proves from Scripture. We have urged the contrary in the example of
the Beraeans and the term [believing] in Scripture is not seldom taken not of
an internal act of Faith subjective, but an external profession of faith
objective. And so Simon Magus is said to have believed. Here he gives us
occasion to wish he had done so before as he does here, in putting his sense
into some form, thus; Faith being an infallible assent, controversies
concerning Faith cannot be determined so as to end them effectually, but by an
infallible living judge who can hear you and me, and be heard by you and me: but
no other than the Church can (with any ground) be held to be this living Judge,
therefore she must be held to be the Judge. Ans. First to the major, and we say
that it begs the question in two Suppositions; First, That there is a necessity
of controversies in points of Salvation. And secondly that it is necessary to
Salvation, that all controversies (though not in points of Salvation) should
infallibly be determined: When these two suppositions are sufficiently made
good, we shall grant him the major; and yet then also that infallible Judge is
yet bound to judge by law of Scripture, (...). And then as to the minor: we say
secondly, This speaks for the Church universal; which then, according to my
Adversaries Principles, should always have a true Pope and a true standing
General Council; or else we should think God had not provided for his Church ad
semper. Now if it be said some controversies may arise which are not so
necessary to be decided in order to Salvation, then he destroys his major,
which goes in part upon that Supposition; and so in this he is one of us.
Therefore thirdly, We can retort his Argument, mutatis mutandis; Faith being an
infallible assent requires an infallible Authority. But the Church is not yet
proved to have an infallible Authority; therefore it must be the Scripture.
Fifthly, If he means his infallible Living Judge of the Roman Church, we deny
that this Judge will explicate all doubts: for how has it ended all
controversies in the Trent Council? Indeed that Council has made more, about
the sense of ambiguous definitions: and therefore though his major proposition
were true de posse (which yet we deny upon the former considerations) yet we
were to seek de velle: and then should we be never a whit the nearer.

And as touching that Text (whereby he would prove that the Bible cannot end
all controversies, because it cannot end the controversy about it with the
Arrians) these three are one. We say first, in ingenuity, he needed not to have
taken notice of it. Secondly, We should not by right have disputed the subject
of the question, whether this or that be Scripture or not: Our dispute is about
the predicates of scripture. Thirdly, the Arrians were sufficiently condemned
by another Text, as before: and therefore there is no such necessity of the
question. Fourthly, We rather believe the Church than the Arrian herein: But
let it be put to the pinch; and there were more Faith required in it than the
matter afforded; can the Church determine it by her own Authority infallibly? It
not, why does he raise the dust? If it can, why is it not formally done?
Therefore either this Text has not given necessary occasion to an infallible
Judge: or the infallible Judge has deceived us in not taking the occasion.

And therefore to put his other discourse into a shorter and better form;
thus, whatsoever requires infallible assent must have an infallible Authority.
Diverss points not proposed clearly in Scripture, the Church requires an
infallible assent to, therefore she must have infallible Authority; we answer,
granting the major; (which yet they have no reason to urge unless they had more
firm Principles) that the assumption may be true de facto, but not de jure. And
then again, It is yet denied that ever the Church Universal did ever exact
this. As to the right hereof, she must prove her infallibility and Authority
too hereunto; as to the fact, it must be proved by our Adversaries. Therefore
since I am respondent, I may conclude thus, Things necessary to Salvation are
plainly set down in Scripture: those points are not plainly, set down in
Scripture, says he, therefore I conclude, they are not necessary.

Here he makes a return to my Argument against him, N. 18.
that if that must be Judge which can hear him and me, and be heard by him and
me; then Tradition is thus excluded from being the Judge: here he
distinguishes, It is the Church who proposes these Traditions, and not the
Traditions, which are our judge. Ans. This is easily taken away, for according
to their Principles, Tradition must be Judge of the Church: If their former
Argument be good that we must not ultimately be assured in point of Faith by
the Scripture, because we do not know what is Scripture but by the Church; so
also we cannot ultimately be assured in point of Faith by the Church, because
we cannot tell which is the Church but by Tradition. And if it be Judge of the
Scripture in the Canon of it, as they must say, then surely it may be Judge of
the Church, because (as before) by the Fathers opinion the Church must be
proved by Scripture. Again by Tradition was the Faith of Christian Doctrine
bred in the minds of the Barbarian Nations as we have it said before, by my
Adversary: therefore Tradition must be the infallible Judge, or else they had
not the same Faith which the Roman contends for, by an infallible Judge; or if
they had, then there are more infallible Judges: or Faith may be had without an
infallible Judge; or Traditions and the Church are all one; and then the
distinction is none. And yet also this answer of his I did provide for before
in these words, but you say the Church does determine hereby (by Tradition)
then may it determine by Scripture more securely and more universally. And to
this he replies nothing: but holds the conclusion.

From hence he skips to answer me about that which I opposed to his Judge
exclusively to any other, I urged that of St. Paul that an heretic is
condemned by himself: namely, (as I discoursed) by the Law of God within him by
virtue of Conscience, which can and does, and should apply the truths of God to
the censure and condemnation of error in us etc. To this he says, he is not
an heretic but an infidel, who is told by his own Conscience that he
gain-saith the Scripture. Ans. First, Then the Scriptures are so clearly the
Word of God that an Infidel may be told thereof by his own Conscience. If not
so, then his words have no sense: If so, then may we see the Scripture to be
the Word of God by its own light, as the Heathens did the Law of nature; and
then he contradicts his own former discourse. Secondly, Saint Paul speaks not
of an Infidel, but (in terminis terminantibus) of an heretic, who supposes
the Scriptures to be the Word of God; though by consequence he denies it in
Hypothesie, as to the point of heresy. So that the Text cannot be so put off.
And though every Christian is readier to die than to disbelieve any one saying
of the Scripture; yet the heretic who supposes the Scripture in Thesi and in
general, may yet deny it in the application against him; and for this he is to
be rejected, because he goes against his own Principles of Scripture, which do
condemn his heresy in his own conscience, though outwardly he opposes. And he
helps his cause no better with another shift, When St. Paul wrote those words,
the whole Canon of the Scripture was not written; and until the whole Canon was
written, your own Doctors grant the Church to have been the infallible judge of
controversies. Ans. If he takes [whole] so as to be understood in order to the
Canon, I grant that the whole Canon was not then written: but if he takes it in
opposition to a sufficient direction by what was then written, I deny it; there
was then as much written as was simply necessary to Salvation: for how could
St. Paul otherwise say to Tim. That the Scriptures then were able to make him
wise unto Salvation? thus I distinguish of the former part: but then 2. the
latter I do deny, that our awn Doctors do say that the Church was the
infallible Judge of controversies, until the whole Canon of the Scriptures was
written: for then the (...) of the Pharisees had been infallible. No; the word
of God was infallible when it was not written, but not the Church. Therefore he
mistakes the purport of finishing the Canon, which was not ever held by us to
cease the infallibility of the Church, but to accomplish the matter of
Scripture; and so it does exclude verbum non Scriptum. Infallibility of the
Church was never held: but the Canon of Scripture was allwaies sufficient,
providing allwaies that the Church in this consideration be meant
contradistinctly to the writers of Scripture.

Neither needs he to wonder at my saying that the Church then was not
sufficiently formed thereunto; namely to a definition of what was to be held
therein. To this he says, the Church was formed before St Paul's conversion,
and before his conversion the number of Desciples was multiplied. Ans. The
term [Church] is very ambiguous. He takes it here of the Church vertual, or of
the Church representative, or of the Church diffusive. The Church vertual,
which the Jesuits say is the Pope, was not yet formed. The Church
Representative as they say in a Council confirmed by the Pope, was not yet
formed. There was no council General till after three hundred years; nor Pope
so soon, in their sense. A Church diffusive there was: but this serves not his
turn: for we must speak of such a Church formed so, that the heretic should
be condemned for contradicting the definition of the Church. Now the definition
of the Church according to my Adversary, is by the Church Representative, and
this was not then formed Then again, to take his own words; either the Church
was not then formed most completely with all things necessary to infallible
direction to the true faith; or it was. Let them now say which they will. Then
no necessity of Pope and Council, yea no necessity of Pope or Council. If it
was not completely formed, then my former answer obtains. And besides if he had
been condemned by himself because by the Church, then had he been condemned by
himself extrinsecally to himself; or he and the Church must have been all one:
therefore whether he had the doctrine from the Church, or immediately from any
one of the Apostles; yet was he condemned by that doctrine as being impressed
upon his own Conscience. So that I have as much as I can desire by this
discourse, namely that, is possible for us to be Judged and condemned within
our selves of Heresy, without an external Judge: which then was not fully and
exactly I am sure constituted according to the mind of our Adversaries;
although, in purity of doctrine, the Church was better then, then ever she was
since that time.

N. 19
In this he begins more solemnly to tell us what he means by the name of the
Church, and wherein consists the power of infallibility in a Decree or
definition of the Church. And first he tells us who are to be excluded from a
decisive voice, Children and women and laymen and inferior Clergy, thus he
proceeds first by exclusions, as they do in the choice of a Pope. And then he
goes on by way of a (...) and so he makes the subject of the power of this
Decree to be the prime pastors and Praelats of the Church, assembled together
in a lawful General Council with their Chief Pastor and Head the Bishop of
Rome. This the progress of this Paragraph. Well, but our question is of the
praedicate, whether the Church thus constituted is infallible in its Decrees,
and therefore since he here has no argument, he has bound us not to have an
answer. And yet may we note, that if he means the formation of a Church to be
thus, we can more clearly contradict him in what he said formerly, that the
Church was formed before St. Paul's conversion. It was not so formed. And yet 2.
We may as well dispute here the subject of the question [whether the Church
thus formed is infallible in its decrees] as he disputes the an sit of
Scripture, when we were upon the praedicate whether the Scripture be sufficient
to Salvation. And surely I may do this legally, because I am a respondent; and
I may do it also more boldly, because I know they cannot make good the
praedicate, that this Church is (thus formed) infallible in its Decres. And as
to his exclusions then we could confront him with the opinion of Alphonsus de
Castro, who would have had a chapter against him for his exclusions: since he
maks the acceptance of the diffused Church to be necessary to inerrability.
And as to the Chief Pastor and Head, he speaks it cum privilegio surely, as
if not only what the Pope said was not to be questioned, but also what is said
of him. They will never prove that there ever was to be any such Chief Pastor
and Head of the Church universal, dejure nor can they ever prove that there was
de facto, any one so called, till Boniface the third; who had the Title granted
him by Phocas. But non fuit sic ab initio. And the rule is good, Errores ad sua
principia reducere est refellere. And therefore either the Church was not
allwaies infallible, or was infallible without Councils, because for above
three hundred years was no General Council; and therefore why does he urge the
necessity of Councils unto infallibility? And when there was Councils
afterward till Trent Council inclusively either the Councils were fallible
with a Pope, or might be infallible without him; because till Boniface the
third there was no such Pope as Head, or Head as Pope. And therefore why do
they urge the necessity of a Pope for their infallibility? This he did (...) in
before: and now should have been proved; since he knew that this is not granted
on both sides, as the Scripture is to be the Word of God.

And he that is a seeker of his religion will never find the Pope to be in the
Church, as a King in his kingdom; who is no part of the representative
properly. And if he would have the Pope no more than part of the
Representative, he should be no more Head of the Church than as a Speaker in an
Assembly. And how should he be then the Church virtual, as the high Romanists
does speak of him? And therefore the Pope in the time of the Trent Council
would not suffer that title of the Council to proceed, that it should be called
the Representative, because though he and his Courtiers esteemed him the Head
of the Church (and so should have been superior to the body of the Church) yet
he conceived that they intended to take him in confusely in the Representative,
and so to exclude his Head-ship. But secondly, He then allows a man to be a
seeker of his Religion: then he does allow him that liberty (which he sometimes
has disputed against) namely to exercise his judgment of discretion in
matters of Religion; for he would have him most prudently judge himself bound
to to join her (the Church) in Faith, being convinced that she directed most
securely in Faith. So this is the^r sense: they allow discretion to join with
them; but not to differ. Thirdly, Should he be bound to join himself to the
whole Church, or not? If to the whole, then to that part locally which most
agrees with the whole in Doctrine, and discipline, and practice. But then can
he not most prudently join himself to the Roman Church, because that has gone
away from the Catholic in all those particulars. And therefore we may
conclude it to be our wisdom to find our direction in Faith most securely in
the Scripture.

N. 20.
This number he spends in the power of Councils: To such power I made
exceptions, he would here remove them. The first about the uncertainty of the
irregularity of the Pope. To this he says, he to whom the Church submits in
calling the Council, and whom the Church admits as her lawful Head, to
preside, he is right; these acts do supply all defects in the election. But
first, Suppose he be not a Priest. Can the Churches submission or admission of
him make him a regular Pope? And this, That he is a Priest, they cannot be sure
of by certainty of Faith, according to their Principles, unless they had an
omniscience to know the intention of the Ordainer; and whether he was a right
Bishop or not. Secondly, If so, then Cajaphas was a right High Priest, as
before: and yet he erred with the Council. Therefore a Pope with the Council
may err. Caiaphas was submitted to, was admitted by the assembly of the Jews:
but this before.

And as to that he says, put the case of a Pope defining with a lawful
Council, and then prove him fallible, if you can. We answer, First it seems
then he would not stand to the maintaining of a Popes infallibility without a
Council. And so then he and the Jesuits must differ in the point of infallible
direction. Secondly, If the Pope be not infallible without a Council, then is
it not infallible in a Council. What will they here say, Is he infallible
without a Council, as the Jesuits say; or with a Council only. If not without,
then not with. My reason is this: because without the infallibility of the
Pope, we are not sure of the legality of the Council. For though we suppose an
assistance of the Spirit of God to Councils: yet can we not be assured whether
to such a Council in particular; this is yet a question; because we cannot tell
whether it be a right General Council or not; not by certainty of Faith surely,
unless the Pope be infallible in determining this to be a right General
Council. Thirdly, Take the former proposition of his, He to whom the Church
submits in calling the Council, and whom the Church admits as her lawful
Head, so as to preside, he is right. Thus he in effect and terms most what; and
then we make an assumption to it. This was in the four General Councils; The
Christian Emperor, he did call them; he did preside in them, therefore where
is his conclusion? Fourthly, General Councils are fallible though they do not
err: It is possible that they may err, and therefore are they fallible. Well
but more, The Trent Council did err, the Trent Council was a General Council,
according to them; therefore the major is proved already: they erred in the
Latin Bible: they erred in half Communion: they erred in point of merit; which
is not spoken exclusively to more.

As for the 3. exception he refers me to Bellarmin lib. 2. de council. cap. 19.
that although a Council without a Pope cannot define any article of Faith, yet
in time of Schism, it can judge which is true Pope. Ans. first, How could he
say that the Church is so direct a way that fools could not err; (as before)
when yet he will suppose such a time of Schism and Bellarmin too, quando
nescitur quis fit verus Papa, when it is not known who is the true Pope. Well
then during the time of the Schism who shall determine emergent controversies?
Neither is the Council called; and what a tedious debate amongst them may there
be to determine who should be next to Christ, and if the Council should be as
long in calling, and as long in being as the Trent Council was (forty three
years in both as some account) how many might be damned in their direct way? or
else it was not so perilous for some controversies to be undetermined
infallibly. Yea, but if so, then why do they so much press a necessity of a
living Judge for deciding all controversies? According to the vehemence of
their plea, and the necessities of the Church, the Living Judge should not only
be always infallible: but this infallible Judge should be always living. But
secondly, During the time of the Schism, how shall we do for the Calling of a
true Council? To this he says, for this the Prelates of the Church might and
ought to meet upon their own authority and assemble themselves. Ans: Then the
power of calling Councils is not absolutely in the Pope; but in actu primo, it
is radicated in the Prelates, though bound from the second act by use of their
Church unless in falling. Then a supreme Ecclesiastic Authority is not by
divine institution subjected in the Successor of St. Peter. And then what
becomes of their Monarchy: It seems then that Fabric is not built upon Gods
ground, because no practice can hold good against a divine institution. And
thus the Head of the Church must shake: at least the Jesuits will shake their
heads at this Doctrine. If there be an absolute necessity of a true Pope to
call Councils, then that which he says is not good; if but of convenience,
then we may end the controversy, because either all controversies are not
necessary to be ended, or may possibly be ended without their Head of the
Church.

In the next place he touches then upon my exception against infallibility
quoad nos of General Councils, by reason of doubtfulness of their lawfulness
upon the calling of them; since in the old time Emperors called them, not
Popes. His answer now is, Your Church which never had nor shall have General
Councils, is to seek in all things belonging to them, our Church in every age
since Constantine, has been visibly assembled in General Councils, etc.

Urbem quam dicunt Romam, Melibe putavi,
Stultus ego huic similem nostrae. --
Therefore he does well to give us a kind check for our presumption of thinking
our Church comparable with theirs. First, We do not arrogate to our selves a
power of calling General Councils: yet we may know what belongs to General
Councils as well as another particular Church. And time was when Anselm had by
Urban some comparable respect in the honor of being called as Pope of the
other world. And secondly, As for their Church to have been visibly assembled
almost in every age since Constantines time; if he understands it as called by
the Roman Authority, it is denied. And therefore what makes this for them,
since their Church was not visibly assembled, as comprehending the whole, but
pro rata part, as another particular Church, In the Nicene Council their
Church had no real superiority, though it had a titular priority (...), as
Nilus speaks, because that was at first the Imperial City. Thirdly, How was
their Church visibly assembled in the fifth General Council, when their Head
would not come to the Council upon the debate of the tria Capitula? and yet the
Council is to be accounted good without the Pope, yea against him; or else the
number of Councils must fail.

What he says about Emperors is inconsiderable, It is out of Scripture
evident that there is no divine institutitution by which, either Emperors be
assured to be still found in the world; or that when they have that dignity,
they be by divine Institution invested with a power to call Councils. Ans.
First, We may then prove a negative out of Scripture, by his first words; and
to be evident too; which yet were not good, if verbum non scriptum were good.
Secondly, We by the same law prove a negative to Popes in the same tenor.
Thirdly. As for Emperors, we have more for them in the proportion of Kings:
for we have a promise for them that they should be nursing Fathers, and Queens
nursing mothers; which surely was accomplished by the first Christian Emperor.
Yea the term of Kings was then common for Emperors. Yea had not the Kings of
the Jewish Church Divine Authority in matters of Relion; Circa sacra? They had
not only (...) to defend it: but (...) to rule it, they were not only
Protectours of the Church, as they are called in the Trent histories, but
governors, and by these were the four General Councils called; namely by the
Emperors without any contradiction of Councils. Did the Nicene Council
question Constantines authority to call Councils, whether it was Divine or not?
How many humble expressions and actions of respect and subjection did come from
the Councils and the Fathers, which are not indeed suitable to the deportment
of that Pope who trod upon the neck of Frederick the Emperor; or of him that
threw the Duke of Venice under his table with the dogs? The competition then
betwixt Emperors and Popes in point of Ecclesiastique authority, as to the
outward part of Religion, will come to this. No institution of Popes, in their
sense, by Scripture. There is under an Evangelicall promise an apopintment of
kings to be nursing Fathers and of Queens to be nursing Mothers. And in
triumphum, we might compare them as to the practice of the primitive times;
there was calling of General Councils by Emperors; none by Popes till they
usurped. Therefore Ocham to the King may end it, Tu me defend gladio, ego te
defendam verbo, do you defend me with the Sword? I will defeind you with the
word. This to his first answer.

Secondly as for the Praelates of the Church we can show Divine institution,
Acts 20.28. Bishops placed by the Holy Ghost over all the flock; to feed or
govern the Church of God. And Ephesians. 4. Not lay Magistrates but only
Ecclesiastical are said to be given us by Christ for the work of the ministry
etc. Ans. First I think that the adversaries living would go near to starve if
they would eat nothing before they proved that feeding there should be
understood of governing; as it must be, unless he spoke in a proper
disjunctiveness, when he said [feed or govern] and if so he gives us leave to
take it not for him, who must get out of it the sense of governing, this indeed
is labored by Bellarmin specially; and he contests much for it with Luther in
his first b. de Romans Pontif. 15. chapter Upon that which is said to St. Peter by
Christ, feed my sheep. His argument is from the term (...) which sometimes
signifies to rule: right; but it does not follow that it should therefore
signify so there upon the 21. of St. John. we may therefore confront him with
a stronger argument. (...) is twice used there, (...) but once. Now (...) does
not signify to rule; therefore we should rather expound the other word by
these, then by it self. And as for his instance out of the second Ps. 9. ver.
where he would have the Hebrew to bear the same sense, he is mistaken or worse
(as I think I have noted before) for the Hebrew word there does not at all
signify to feed, but to break, it is not (...) but (...) as in Ben Isreal's
edition. And by others though it be not read with a Vau, yet there is a cholem;
and Montanus renders it [conteres] thou shall break. So then as to the former
Text, Acts 20.28. It can no way be proved that (...), there is to be construed
to rule, which is only to their purpose. Yea Montanus, and the Translation of
the Syriack, and of the Arabic, and of the Aethiopick, render it not by regere
but by pascere. Yea 2. Suppose that the word therefore does signify to govern,
yet does it not therefore follow that the Text should be understood of Bishops
of proper name; but may be understood of simple Presbyters and without any
derogation to Episcopal government; because they have a power under the Bishops
to rule their particular Churches; namely their particular flocks, although
they have no power over the other pastors as the Bishops have, who succeedeb
the Apostles in the point of government as St. Ierom speaks in his Epistle to
Evagrius. 3. Suppose the verb be to be understood of ruling, and suppose that
Text to mean, as some, proper Bishops (taking (...) in an higer notion) yet my
Adversaries will be yet disappointed of their end by that Text, because we have
found Divine institution of Kings and we cannot find in this Text an
institution of Bishops to be above them in calling of Councils, and ordering
the outward part of the Church. Yea 4. if that Text does intend a power in
them, by the Holy Ghost, of calling Councils, then for ought I see, the power
must be primarily subjected in them and not in the Pope; and therefore he must
not be the chief pastor and Head of the Church; which contradicts them: if
then they intend by the Text a proof of such a Divine institution of Praelates
to govern the Church as to call Councils thereby, this derogates from the Pope:
And if they intend not such a power to be given to the Praelates as to call
Councils; how does this prove that the Pope is to call Councils, from this
Text? Yea how do they prove that Kings or Emperors are not to call Councils:
for though Praelats are to govern the Church, Yet Kings or Emperors might call
Councils, these are not opposits but agreeable; because the Praelats may govern
in sacris, the Kings or Emperors circa sacra. The speculative decision is to
be by the Praelats: the outward administration by the Emperors. The potestas
in actu signato in them; in actu exercito, in the Emperors.

And as for the other Text Ephesians. 4. We need say nothing; or only this, that the
not naming of Lay Magistrates there, does not exclude them else where. Does it?
If it does not, where is their argument? If it does, then by the same law of
consequence there are no Praelats to have any Divine Authority for the good of
the Church, because where it is said, Kings shall be the nursing Fathers and
Queens the nursing Mothers, there is no mention of Ecclesiastical Praelats. So
then let them speak no more of the Fathers of the Church. And then 2. This
comes not to the point of the question, that Lay Magistrates are not here
spoken of but only Ecclesiastical are said to be given us by Christ for the
work of the Ministry; for to the work of the ministry no man asserts the power
of a Lay magistrate, but external government is contradistiguished to the work
of the ministry; which consists in ministerial acts. Yea 3. Is that Text to be
understood of government of the Church? If it be not, then it is impertinently
produced. If it be, then by his former argument, the Pope is excluded, because
here is no mention of any appointment of him sub ratione singulritatis and in
way of eminency, nay not of any priority: and therefore he by this account in
all his Pontificalaibus is but an human Creature. Therefore upon the account of
the Text we will stand our ground, and not be carried about with every wind of
doctrine.

Thirdly the Emperor is not by Divine institution Lord of the Christian world,
the power of the chief Pastor of the universal Church is coextended to the
universal Church. Ans. First Dato, suppose there were by Divine institution
(which will never be proved) a chief pastor of the universal Church, yet the
Emperor might be Lord of the Christian world too in his external faculty. And
therefore this concludes not. 2. this Language was not known till Boniface the
third, in the seventh century. The Roman Bishop had the honor to be called the
Bishop of the first Sea or seat. And yet not the first Bishop in way of
jurisdiction, 3. The Emperor may be as much Lord of the Christian world by
Divine institution, as well as the Pope: for both are by election, the Pope is
to be chosen by Cardinals, which cannot show a Divine institution. But then
also he allows Political proceeding from a temporal power: yet he will not
have it to be an Ecclesiastical calling, such an one as the Pope called them by
at the same time. Ans. Not Ecclesiastical subjective, but Ecclesiastical
objective it was. And yet also Rex est mixta persona cum Sacerdote. And
therefore it may be the Hebrew word Cohen signifies both Magistrate and
Priest. Order, and freedom, and time and place belong to the Magistrates
administration. And as for the Pope (in their sense) his giving an
Ecclesiastical call at the same time it is utterly denied; unless he could give
a call before he was borne. And as for the Bishop of Rome, he met at Councils
upon the same order with the rest. Such things he should have proved rather
then said. And therefore that was falsely spoken by him that the Political
proceeding was subservient to the Ecclesiastical. Ans. Non entis nulla
accidentia. There was no such Ecclesiastical call by a Pope: for there was no
such Pope. And 2. Though the Emperors calling was serviceable to
Ecclesiastical affairs, yet the Ecclesiastical persons that met were servants
to him therein. And Bishops of Rome have not abhorred such acknowledgements
herein. And whereas some Romanists have compared the Pope to the Sun, and the
Emperor to the Moon; though some Popes since have eclipsed the Emperor: yet
some Emperors before have not only Eclipsed the Pope, but have put him out.

Therefore had he good cause to say, Peradventure sometimes Emperors might
adventure to call dependently of the ratification of the supreme Pastor. Ans.
surely there is more due when Adversaries will give so much. Nimia perfectio
parit suspicionem. But this will not content us, there was no real entity of
such a Supreme Pastor. Nor was he so much as then Ens rationis. No; the four
General Councils, a primo ad ultimum, were menaged in the call and
ratification by the Emperors. They gave them not only countenance and a vote
in point of belief, but also their external establishment. They began and ended
them. Idem est principium destitutionis and constitutionis. So the Nicene
Council was called by Constantine the Great. The Council of Constantinople was
called by Theodosius the elder. The Council of Ephesus by Theodosius the
younger. The Council of Chalcedon by Martianus, and by them they had their
confirmation. And so Councils are to be called, as our Church in the 21.
Article.

The fourth answer he passes here.

As to the fifth answer, he says; these Elections do appear by authenticated
testimonies, and confirmation. Ans. But their Election may not appear free
thereby. That which may appear in the fact, may not appear in the qualities.
And therefore if it were not free, it were as well no Election, as if the
Council be known notoriously to use such proceedings we are not to acknowledge
it for a lawful Council. And this puzzles and disturbs our assent more.
Infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost in Councils is necessary to infallible
Decrees: this they suppose. In Councils unlawful there is no infallible
assistance of the Holy Ghost: this they must grant; and in effect here he does,
otherwise how can we disacknowledge any Council, or not acknowledge it for a
lawful Council? Now then since a Council may by such proceedings notoriously
known nullify it self, how shall we be certain whether a Council does not
morally forfeit its assistance? Although imdem est non apparere et non esse, as
to outward censures: yet this is not enough for an infallible assent of the
Decrees to have a charitative opinion of lawful proceedings. If I be deceived
in my charitative opinion, no ill consequence: but if I be deceived in my
opinion of the Council, I wrong my self in misgrounding my Faith. In point of
charity no man is bound to infallibility; but in we point of Faith we are, and
therefore I do not well see can ever be ascertained of the infallibility of a
Council, how unless we be ascertained of an impossibility in the Council to
lose the infallible assistance. For as we cannot believe the Church's
infallibility in one point, unless it be infallible in all according to Mr.
Knot and my adversaries late Principles; so we cannot be assured of the
lawfulness of any one Council by the certainty of Faith, unless we can be
assured of the lawfulness of all. Now then if they can infallibly inform us
that every Council shall have infallible assistance, we will not discuss at all
that which cannot be, namely whether it has forfeited the privileges by such
proceedings: but though it has not forfeited its moral being by such
proceedings, we yet want a proof infallible whether so or not; and then if not,
whether it shall have infallible assistance. For ought I know the Holy Ghost
may be said to preside there and yet not rule; as Bellarmin in his 1. B. de
con. cap. 18. says that the Pope in a Council may be considered as President
or as Prince: as President, so he is to follow the major part; as Prince, so he
can rescinde all. Now which has the Holy Ghost following the major part, or
the Pope; Is the Holy Ghost tied to the Council, as the Heathens fastened their
Gods to their Cities? No they will say: not to all, but lawful Councils. But
let us then know by the Holy Ghost which Councils shall be lawful. Otherwise,
though infallible direction will never deceive us, we may be deceived in
infallible direction; since there is acknowledged by him a possibility of
humane malice and weakness, and factions, and bandyings, and domineering
self-interest. Unless they can prove an extrinsecal overruling providence
promised by God against humane malice, etc. to all Councils, I shall never be
sure whether they are not in any one. And therefore that general Text, the
gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church, will not infer
infallibility in a Council, unless it could infer infallibility of the
lawfulness according to them; and yet not so neither according to us, that Text
is made good to every member of the Church invisible: and is that therefore
infallible? If it be, why then is infallibility arrogated to the Church visible
as the only subject? if it be not, then the Text does not prove absolute
infallibility; but only security against damning errors or practice. Not that
the Church visible is not a mean of that security; but therefore not a mean
universally infallible, but with specification. Sixthly you ask, how shall
ignorant people be divinely persuaded that the Council is General. To this he
answers by giving us the means or signs of this knowledge; First public
Summons. Secondly, public appearance of Prelates made upon these summons from
all parts of the world. Thirdly, public setting, public subscribing, public
divulging their Decrees and Definitions acknowledged truly to be theirs by all
present, denied by no man to be theirs with the least show of probability, no
more than such an Act is denied to be the Act of such a Parliament. Ans. Is
here all? The question was how shall ignorant people be divinely persuaded that
the Council is general. And now we must be answered with a probability. If that
which may be known probably be known divinely, eo ipso, upon that account, then
a probable Argument may make an infallible conclusion. And why then do they
urge infallibility of the Church for point of Faith, which they can never
prove? It less would have made Faith, they should not in prudence have combated
for infallibility. But as long as the conclusion follows the worse part; and
the effect does not exceed the cause; and the assent cannot be higher than the
ground of it, this answer of his is too short for the question. Secondly, were
not all these necessary conditions of a General Council belonging to the Trent
Council? And why then was not the French Church persuaded to take it for a
General Council? Why does the French Church say, transeat concilium Tridentinum.

Therefore that which he says is not so, that all these motives make it
evidently credible to the ignorant and to the learned that this is the true
definition of the church. It is evidently credible to neither. So that though
the Definition of the Church were infallible in it self, as they say Scriprure
is; yet is it not infallible to us, as they say Scripture is not without the
Church. Therefore though the Definition were infallible yet cannot they thereby
prove the Council infallible: but they are first to prove the Council
infallible, then that which is a true definition of the church, will be
infallibly true, because truly infallible.

So that he needs not tell us that if we believe all her Definitions to be
true, we will also believe this Definition to be true; since a particular is
included in an universal. But before we believe all her Definitions to be true,
we must demand some infallible assurance that such a Council is truly
universal; and that an universal Council, is truly infallible. Otherwise we may
believe one Definition, (...) to be true: and yet because not proposed
infallibly, we cannot believe all her Definitions to be true. And therefore
has he not extricated himself out of insuperable difficulties.

As for the Hypothesis of the Trent Council, which, I said, was contradicted by
the French Catholics, he says their Definitions concerning Faith were never
opposed by France. Ans. Opposition is formally indeed in contradiction. But if
they were denied only, it were sufficient to us. Do my Adversaries think they
may be saved, notwithstanding this denial? This surely they deny not. Well
then, if they may be saved notwithstanding their denial, then we may be saved
also, though we do not subscribe some definitions of a Church. Then we are not
bound absolutely under danger of damnation to believe all definitions of the
Church. Then the Church has not infallible authority. But 2. their withdrawing
of their assent must draw in one of these two things, either that it was not a
General Council (and this interpretativi makes a contradiction) or that General
Councils are not infallible: and this in effect makes a contradiction too. Yea
3. Did not the King of France write to the Trent Council under the name of a
Conventus; which they construed in derogation to a General Council? As appears
in the Trent History. And 4. As for the distinction of the definitions
concerning faith, as if they were not so disliked, but some things ordained for
practice seemed less suitable to the particular state of that Kingdom, This
runs out as it comes in. For those things toward practice were ordained by
the same Divine authority: were they not? Or did not the Holy Ghost assist them
as to things of practice? If not, then proper obedience is not due to Councils,
because proper obedience respects things of practice: but indeed the whole
Council was rejected in gross; and therefore when Cardinal Ossat mediated for
the King of France with the Pope, and the Cardinal urged the peace for him
without the condition of accepting the Trent Council, he wrote to the King what
the Pope said one morning to him, because he would not receive the Council,
that he had no more rest that night then a damned soul in Ossat's Letters

And as to the seventh answer concerning some in the Trent Council who had
Titles of Bishops; Bishop Jewel affirms it in his Apol. Par. 6. P. 62.5. and
he names St. Robert of Scotland, and Mr. Pates of England, And the former is
named in the Trent History to have been a Bishop of the post, if we may say so
of him for his ability in riding post so well. And if forty Bishops do all
agree in the same point of faith (as for a good while there were not many more)
what can be be concluded against a possibility that they might be all sworn
servants of the Pope? And he that will read the Trent History will find
sufficient cause not to suspect but to believe that Council not to have had due
moralities, much less infallibility. His best way then to secure a Council
against irregularities, is, by the assistance of the Holy Ghost, that nothing
shall happen destructive of secure direction Ans. this is not sufficient that
nothing be destructive of secure direction against damnation (if he means it
now so) but against all error, for, this he is engaged to make good, by former
denying of that distinction of error damnative and error not damnative. Yet
here he seems to warpe in this point. 2. The morality of the Synod is
antecedent to its infallible assistance. Then we must have all defects of
legality and proceeding removed, before we can be persuaded of its
infallibility. 3. why did he except against Cajaphas for not being the true
High Priest, if now Cajaphas may Prophecy, not knowing what he does, before
the spirit of truth, sent to teach the Church all truth, shall fail in his
duty. So then notwithstanding there be not a legal High Priest, the spirit of
God shall infallibly act the Council, as he did the Apostles. But here is a
double duty for them, first that the spirit of God does now infallibly teach
the Church in all definitions. And then a second, that it is his duty to do so.
Let them learn their duty not to tell God his duty. Did the Holy Ghost do his
duty when Cajaphas and the Assembly condemned Christ? And why did not the Holy
Ghost make eight hundred Bishops in Ariminum as infallible without a Pope, as
the forty Bishops in the Trent Council, whereof some might be made Bishops, not
because they did not differ from the rest, but that they might not differ in
the Roman Faith, though against the Catholic faith? And if they put the
difference in this compare upon a Pope in Trent Council, none in Ariminum
(though that answer will not serve as before) since Praelats have a also a
power of calling Councils (as my Adversary before) in some cases, why should
not the Holy Ghost rather assist eight hundred Praelats without a Pope, then
forty with?

As to the eighth answer, he confesses the substance of it, that for the first
three hundred years there was no General Council, and tells us the cause; for
persecution no Council could be gathered, But this satisfies not, God is not
wanting in necessaries, nor abundant in superfluities, as one of theirs says.
If councils had been allwaies necessary, he could have provided against
persecutions, or for a Council notwithstanding. And why not in time of
persecutions, as well as in the times of the Apostles? Were not those times of
persecution?

Neither is that a sufficient reason because all this time the former doctrine
of the Apostles remained so fresh, and so notoriously; the Tradition of the
Church diffused, and there remained also so universal a respect and obedience
to the Chief Bishop of the Church. Ans. these three causes will not make one
sound one. For by the first he means the known doctrine of the Apostles as
delivered in writing or not; if so, then why may not we by the same cause
sufficiently be directed by the word written. And as to the second, if he joins
Tradition of the Church as notoriously diffused, as a social mean of the
direction, it may be denied upon this account only here, for that other
Traditions of Heretics were then mingled in the Church with pretense of
coming from the Apostles. And therefore the Traditions of the Church was
notoriously not distinguished. And as to the third, it is notoriously false
that then there was a chief Bishop in their sense in those times. For how then
could equal (...) be appointed in the Nicene Council, if the Bishop of Rome had
been Chief before? how could St. Cyprian have said that all the Apostles were
equal, pari consortio praediti honoris and potestatis? How could the African
Council have then cut off appeals to Rome. Then had there been no need of the
feigning of a Canon to this purpose in the Nicene Council. How could St. Ierom
have said that the Bishops succeeded the Apostles in communi, in his Epistle to
Evagrious? Neither was there such obedience then performed by them to the
Praelats in all places, as may appear by the Epistle of Clement to the
Corinthians; where he speaks of great Schisms. And also by Ignatius his earnest
exhortations of submission to them.

Whence the Quartodecim any although they opposed nothing clearly set down in
Scripture were judged Heretics for opposing the doctrine of the first Church,
made evidently known by fresh Tradition. Ans. First if they will believe their
Alphonsus de castro, they were not sententially declared Heretics, because
they were excommunicated. Indeed Victor would have excommunicated then, and
fecisset, nisi Irenaeus illum ob hoc redarguisset; he would have done it, if
Irenaeus had not chid him for this. By the way then was this also obedience to
the chief Bishop, to chide him? So Alphons. in his 12. b. de haer. In verbo
pascha. Yea 2. They may know that Eusebius does give an account of the Asian
observation to come from as good Tradition, as the the other. And surely the
Asian Church was therefore the western; and therefore was it not the doctrine of
the first Church. Yea also by the way how was Tradition of the Church
notoriously diffused when there was Tradition against Tradition? And herein
also did the British Churches (which Tertullian speaks of) differ, from the
western, following the Eastern Church. 3. Heresy is some times largely taken
and does then respect Schism of proper name: and so in a large sense it might
by some be called Heresy, although the matter of difference was no doctrine of
faith. Ex verbis male prolatis oritur Haeresis. So Heretics in a propriety of
speech they could not be. 14. Alphonsus does distinguish here upon in the same
place, and says they were accounted Heretics not because they did simply
observe it then, sed quia ita esse necessario faciendum credebant. And this
then alters the case. And he explains himself further, because this did include
a necessity of observeing Judaical ceremonies even after Christ's his coming.
And so then this was contrary to the word written. And then this was not a
Tradition. 5. They here show the pride of Rome, to offer to cut off from her
comunion all those who were of the other persuasion (who were not few, as may
be seen in Eusebius's 5. B. 24.5. Ch.) for a thing simply of free observation;
wherein difference makes no, variance, a^ Irenaeus sent word to their Victor.
chapter 6. (...) the difference of a fast (and so of a feast) does commend the
agreement of faith. He goes on, now as the Church could want Councils for so
many years, so it could want Councils for the short space of schism. Right. But
then so can it want Councils still: and therefore God has not bound us over to
the Church for our absolute direction upon necessity of Salvation. Councils are
necessary to infallible direction; so my Adversaries hold: The Church for three
hundred years and in time of a Schism can want Councils, as my Adversary here:
so then there is no absolute necessity of their infallibility. And indeed there
was much need of Councils in that space of the first three hundred years, in
regard of Divisions, as since; and then if God provided sufficiently for his
Church without them, he can and will do so still. And this is confirmed by my
Adversary by these words of his, for the neccessity of new declarations is not
so frequent at least in any high degree of necessity, calling for instant
remedy, and remedy of this nature only. And he may go on and say it not upon
my opinion, but for himself, and ex animo, that Scripture alone will remedy
this necessity. He needed not to put in you say. And as to that which he says,
that there remained many definitions often former councils, and Traditions of the
Church which alone served Gods church, these we have spoken to sufficiently
before. Either the Definitions were concluded out of principles of Scripture;
and Traditions were agreeable to the substance of Scripture, or not: if so,
then they hold their virtue by Scripture: If not, they remain under debate
whether they were infallible. Neither is Tradition before Scripture to be
confounded with traditions after Scripture. We can grant more to the former
than we can to the latter; both in the substance of the matter, and in the
manner of certification.

And for the time after the old Testament was written, he does well to say that
it remained almost solely and alone to the Jews. For what was Job? and why
might not others of the learned Gentiles travail for divine knowledge, as well
as Pythagoras and Plato and Orpheus into Egypt as Justin Martyr says of them.

Ninthly he answers to the cause put of a Pope's differing from the Council
upon a question; he says, nothing shall be deferred; and yet no peril. For if
it were necessary to have a present definition, the Holy Ghost would not forget
to inspire the parties requisite to do their duties. Ans. Again, What necessity
then of every controversy to be ended? Secondly, How should the people know
whether the business required a present definition. Surely they may know by
this, that it did not require a present definition, because if so, the Holy
Ghost would not have forgot to have inspired the parties requisite to do their
duties. Well then also we can say, that we may be as confident that what is not
clearly delivered in Scripture does not require a full definition, because if
it had, the Holy Ghost would not have forgot to inspire the Penmen of
Scripture to do their duties.

In the tenth answer he is very suspensive how to declare himself in the point
of Ecclesiastical Monarchy. He says, a Monarch in some Nations could not do
all things without a Parliament. But he thinks himself on the surer side, that
he is sufficiently assisted when he defines with a Council. Ans. First, why do
they not speak out and tell us which is which? The Church can end all
controversies, as they say, but not that capital controversy about the Church.
That whereby all things are to be made manifest, is that not to be made
manifest? We must see all things by the light, but the light must be private.
Do they declaim against private Spirits; and will not let us publicly know
the power of the Pope comparately to a Council, and yet they together must be
the subject of public Authority? And why do they tell us that the Scripture
cannot prove it self, and therefore we must not resolve our Faith in that: and
yet we must resolve our selves in the Authority of the Church, and yet the
Church cannot tell us where this Authority Supreme is, or will not? And it is
all one to us, for we are in the dark as well by their want of will to show us
light, as of power. But since it seems we may be saved in the opinion of the
Jesuit, or in the opinion of the Sorbonist, we draw this advantage from it,
that notwithstanding we know not infallibly which part of the contradiction to
hold in points of question, we may yet be secured against damnation, pendenti
lite. And what controversy is of such moment for an infallible Judge, as who
it is? Secondly, Infallibility may be in one as well as in many; since it comes
by the assistance of the Holy Ghost, then if they think God has provided
absolutely the most plain and expedite way for the direction of his Church,
this must be placed in the Pope without a Council. I hope, the Holy Ghost needs
no Council; which cannot soon and easily be made in all the essentials. And
therefore he should not have compared the Pope with a Monarch; but he should
have compared upon this reckoning, a Monarch with the Holy Ghost. Then though a
Monarch could not do all things without a Parliament, yet a Pope might do all
without a Council: because the Pope should be infallibly assisted by the Holy
Ghost, as the Apostles were; but they do not think so of a Monarch. Again they
think that the Pope is of divine institution; and that a King is merely a
creature of the peoples, and therefore he that has a divine institution must
needs have more divine assistance. Again when he defines with a Council, he
defines not so much as Head of the Church, but as a Bishop in communi with the
rest; as indeed anciently the custom was; and this derogates from the Monarchy
of the Church. And if he had a priority of order, this does not infer a
priority of Jurisdiction over all the Church; which Pelagius and Gregory
Bishops of Rome abhorred.

Eleventhly he says not one Council have been opposite to another. Ans. This
proposition in terms is not true. The Council of Constantinople under Leo the
Emperor decreed against Images. The second Council of Nice decreed for them.
And what do they think of Pope Vigilius his judgment betwixt the Council of
Chalcedon and the fifth Council of Constantinople about the Epistle of Ibas
whether it contained heresy or not? And is not the African Council against
Appeals opposite to the Trent Council, which adds to the Catholic Apostolic
Church the Roman, as making the Roman to be omnium Ecclesiarum matrem and
magistram; of all Churches the mother and mistress. But this has been touched
before.

He goes on. In the Nicene he, (the Pope) erred not, as you will grant, nor in
the three next General Councils, as the Church of England grants. Ans. He says
well, He erred not in the first Nicene. But this antecedent will not make a
conclusion or consequent, that therefore he has not or cannot err in others.
It follows not from a negative surely of one act to a negative of the power;
they are to prove that he cannot err, which is infallibility. But secondly, We
say also that he could not err in the other General Councils neither as Head
of the Church, because he was not Head of the Church. He might have erred as a
Bishop of Rome; but as Head of the Church he could not err; not that we do
assert him to have been Head of the Church; but because we say he was not Head
of the Church; and therefore could not err as such.

He goes on, He subscribed not in the Council of Ariminum, how then did he err
in it. Yea because he subscribed not, that Council is never accounted lawful by
any but Arrians. Ans. He seems now to come to terms more moderate. Before he
speaks of Councils to be confirmed by the Pope: Subscription is less; and more
general. Every confirmation includes eminently a subscription; but every
subscription makes not a confirmation. For they will not deny that other
Bishops were wont to subscribe. Secondly, they may know that the 5. council of
Constantinople went for good without his Subscription; nay notwithstanding what
he published for the tria Capitula, which were condemned in the foresaid
Council. Therefore if they have no better answer (the other Council being held
good without his royal assent, yea notwithstanding his opposition) there will
be another instance of a Council opposing a Council: namely the Council of
Ariminum opposing the Council of the first Nicene. But thirdly, As to his
reason why it was not acknowledged a lawful Council, because he subscribed not;
I deny it upon Sozomen his account in his* 16. B. 23. chapter if he takes his not
subscribing, as he seems to do, for the only cause. For he (Sozomen) says
there (...), because neither the Bishop of the Romans, nor others did consent
to them, and because many did dislike those things which were decreed by them.
Had they then in the council of Ariminum decreed according to the Nicene
Fathers, the council of Ariminum might have passed with St. Austin
(notwithstanding the Bishop of Rome's not subscribing it) though not
comparatively to the proof of Scripture: but we see here in this testimony
three particulars against them. First, That he is here called the Bishop of the
Romans: Not the Bishop signanter, nor the universal Bishop, nor the Bishop of
the Church. He has but his share with the rest, and limited by local
Jurisdiction. Then how can they say that the Bishop of Rome, is the chief
Bishop and Head of the Church? Secondly, We see here, that the Consent of
others concurs toward the making of a Council lawful. And therefore the
consent of the Bishop of Rome is not that which is the form informant of the
Council, nor that which legitimates it. And thirdly, We see the reason, in part
at least, to be, because they disliked those things which were decreed in the
Council of Ariminum. And therefore if it had been a full meeting and consented
to, yet had been exceptable against in regard of the matter, for surely the
presence of all and their Subscription would not have made that matter to be
good which was naught. For then they had declared that to be good which was
not; and this had been an error. Therefore though we receive the four General
Councils, we are not bound to receive the Decrees of every Council, because we
do not receive the Council simply, but do receive the Council for the Doctrine,
not the Doctrine for the Council. Therefore upon the whole matter he had no
great reason to admire my instancing in the Council of Ariminum.

Neither does it follow that because one Council has erred, therefore every
one. Therefore that which he says may be falsely reported, that some tax the
councils of all ages of errors against Scripture. Every one may err without
any impossibility. Some have showed a possibility by error. But any ones
possibility does not infer any ones act, much less of all. And if any one
should have said so, they are acquainted well with their own answer, they are
but private men that say so.

And why does he tell us of Mechanics, that speak disrespectively of all
Councils? Let them first answer for some body of their black coat who said the
Scripture was as a Nose of Wax. They make to us a need of the phrase, (...).

As to the twelfth answer, We have had the substance of it also before. The
incustation of it makes it not solid. It does no way follow that because their
first Council Acts 15. said, It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us;
Therefore every Council even lawful should say so. This is to be proved, not
propounded. And let Ferus their own give them the reason upon the fifteenth of
the Acts. Let them either make it good that every assistance is infallible, or
that every Council had that assistance which is infallible.

And their postulate, that Anathemas should conclude infallibility in their
Councils, is denied them. Secondly, They bind more unto peace than Faith. And
so their form in the Trent Council is, Si quis haec attentare presumpserit etc.
If any shall presume to attempt tnese things, etc. Thirdly, Neither is there
such danger by them, unless every one were bound to submit his assent. Yea me
thinks the Trent Council does speak in their beginnings somewhat more modestly
of their Synod, in Spiritu Sancto legitime congregata, lawfully gathered
together in the Holy Ghost. Every meeting infallible is lawful, but every
lawful meeting is not infallible.

As for his thirteenth Answer; he takes into a consideartion that of Nazianzen
touching Councils: And he would distinguish, that he did not speak of a lawful
free General council called and directed by the chief Pastor of the church
prefiding in it. So then: He does despise all Councils but such, does he not?
Yes they will say presently. Then he despised all Councils; for there were none
so called, so directed, so presided in his time or before; nor presently after.
The fifth Council of Constantinople (which was about 553. under Justinian the
Emperor) did sit and determine without and against Vigilius the Bishop of Rome.
And secondly, As to that he says, that Nazianzen's speech did respect the
times of the Arrian troubles, which St. Basil takes notice of, we say suppose
it: yet this also makes a prejudice to all Councils in the time of the Arrian
heresy, because it is very like that several close Arrians might in Council
mingle with the Orthodox. And thirdly, It is (...), if he concludes from a
respect to Councils in the other Fathers unto an asserting of their
infallibility. A genere ad speciem non sequitur affirmative; because they gave
them some respect, therefore such as imported their infallibility, it does no
way follow. Fourthly, Neither does Nazianzen's respect to the Nicene Council
contradict him here: For although that might proceed well in his opinion, yet
speaking de communi, and (...) he might say as he said. Neither does it appear
that he embraced it upon its own authority intuitively, but because he approved
the Doctrines, otherwise why should not eight hundred Bishops in Ariminum be as
credible, as not half so many in Nice? But it may be that the conclusions in
the Nicene Council were Prophetical; and the discourse of those of Ariminum was
fallible. Yea, but they will say that the Discourse in the Nicene Council was
fallible, though the conclusions Prophetical. Let this be proved and we have
done. But the Nicene Fathers as before, professed that they proceeded by
principles of Scripture in their determinations. And so Bellarmin is driven to
confess in his 12. l. de council. Sed ex verbo Dei per ratiocinationem deducunt
conclusiones, they deduce their conclusions from the Word of God by discourse.
Let Bellarmin then answer Stapleton.

At the latter end of this Section, He takes me up for a saying of the Bishop
of Bitonto in the Council of Trent. And he is confident that that account of
him has no credible ground. Ans. Surely as good ground as Brierly had for
several passages which he produces out of our Authors. And if some of theirs
have professed to take testimonies upon his credit, because they had not Books
by them; I may be easily excused for asking the question whether the Bishop of
Bitonto did not say so and so in the Council of Trent. He that asks a question
seems to be wary of asserting. And if the opinion of one able Doctor be
sufficient to make a point probable, as some of them have lately said, this
point of fact is not altogether unprovided of some hope of probability. My
Author is Bishop Jewel, who speaks it more than once in his Apology.

Neither have they cause to brag that their Church have been the men, who
were still employed in the upholding the Authority of Councils. Surely my
Adversaries did pass by Cajetan, and Bellarmin, and Valentia; and did not take
notice of what they have said toward fallibility of Councils even lawful, that
so infallibility and Monarchy might be necessarily devolved from heaven, as a
(...) into the Pope's lap. All that make perstriction of the Authority of
Councils are not heretics, it seems, because some that are good Roman
Catholics do speak of their fallibility, so, that this infallibility should be
intailed upon the Bishop universal. And so they differ from my Adversaries
platform of infallible direction: In this he shows himself highly displeased
for offering to compare the Determinations of Trent with the word of God. He
thinks it fine doctrine that determinations of Councils should be examined by
such as I and he is. Ans. it is half an argument for us that they are angry at
this: But first we do not speak of an Authoritative examination, which is
forensical, but a rational inquiry which is for private satisfaction. 2. If the
Decrees of that Council be indeed infallible, they will abide the test: if not,
how can we believe them; Do they think, 3. That we are more bound to believe
the council of Trent, then the Beraeans were bound to believe what was said by
St. Paul, without discussing; since specially they are pleased in the Trent
Council sometimes to join St. Paul as partner with St. Peter in the honor of
their Church? 3. We may surely find more cause to examine the Trent Council
then some others; since it has not yet obtained in the Christian world the
reputation of a lawful General Council: therefore though we do not examine
others yet this we may. 4. would they not have us prefer the doctrine of Trent
before any differing from it? yes surely; then we must inquire into it, and
privately judge it: otherwise we make a blind choice. Fifthly, If the consent
of the major part, which is most immediately considerable in a Council, should
morally bind, why should we not as well believe the Council of Ariminum; since
what else he has pretended against it, is not cogent? Sixthly, If they think
that one cannot think well of a lawful General Council, unless he believes
their infallibility, that proposition is easily denied. They may be fallible,
and yet not faulted by me in piety or prudence. Infallible conclusions do not
follow upon moral principles. The one makes them careful, the other faithful:
but though they do not deceive me, they may be deceived themselves. And if
their infallibility did depend upon their piety and prudence, how are we
infallibly certain of that upon which their infallibility should be grounded?

Nor does my consideration of a Council betray in me a want of charity or
humility, as he supposes: they have themselves as Disparates to Theological
Faith; and are not of the same Conjugation. Humility disposes me to think of
my self meanly; Charity disposes me to think better of others, because I know
my own imperfections and do not know another perfections, as Aquinas notes:
But if these were dispositive unto Faith, yet not causal: If causal of Faith,
yet of Faith humane, not divine; unless I did see Gods Word for believing men.
This is the (...); if they can prove this, we have no more to say. Until then I
can love my Adversaries, and think humbly of my self: And yet cannot be
persuaded that my Adversaries are infallible. And if they were infallible in
the dispute, how should infallibility be the prerogative of the Council
confirmed by the Pope? So then as long as I can give reverence to a Council
without present Faith, I am not posed, but they who must beg the question.

In this he charge me with shifting, because I said now, let us not see the
opinions by infallibility: but the infallibility by your determinations,
whereas else where I say, you should go a priori and show that your Church is
infallible, and therefore her definitions to be admitted. This in effect he
supposes to be my shift to evade his pressure of me. Ans. No such matter. Good
cause for both distinguish reasons and respects. First, I hope they think it
lawful to urge both ways in a different kind of discourse, we demonstrate the
effect by the cause; we know the cause by the effect. Secondly, The way a
Priori is more distinct, and therefore this would presently make an end of the
controversy, if it could be effected; because it satisfies us in the cause.
Prove the infallibility, and then we fall down or rise up to the definitions.
They are then to be taken ipso facto; and they produce Faith ex opere operato,
as we may speak. This the way of nature: But when they cannot make this good,
then the other way, and quoad nos is to show us their infallibility by their
determinations; and an easy way it is to us to show them the unlikeliness of
infallibility by their determinations. For it is sufficient to the negative of
infallibility, to find one error in any of their definitions; but it is not
sufficient to them for the affirmative of infallibility, to prove that the
Church has not erred in some particular definitions. The latitude of the power
is not discharged by some acts.

Quem saepe transit casus aliquando invent. If it has erred but once, we are
sure it can err, then infallibility is destroyed; if it has not erred in
some, yet it does not follow that it has not erred in others. Yea, if it has
erred in none, we cannot ex vi formae conclude infallibility, unless it be
proved that the power of erring is bound in the Church Representative, as the
Schoolmen say the power of sinning is bound in the Church Triumphant. Thirdly,
We are now upon the Hypothesis incidently; and so it is very reasonable for us
to go this way with them; because a particular Church has not the privileges
of the universal Church. It is generally supposed that the universal Church
cannot err in things necessary; but this is not granted to any Church of one
denomination. Now the Trent Council belongs to a particular Church, and
therefore as to that, our way of proceeding is not irrational. And therefore
all that he says upon this argument comes to nothing. If all the strength of
Rome can sufficiently reinforce the former Texts against us for the Church
universal, and then for them, reducant nos; if they cannot, redeant ad nos, as
the Father said.

N. 23.
This Section is in good part made up of repetitions toward the reurging on
their be half 1. Ep. to Tim. 3.15. How much Paper is taken up with petitions
and repetitions; petitions of the principle, and repetitions of what was said
before. Upon this I distinguished of a double Pillar; the Principal, Scripture;
a subordinate one, the Church. And now he says pleasantly, this double dealing
in distinguishing helps you not. The Church must still be a true Pillar and
ground of truth. Ans. Distinguishing is plain dealing; double dealing makes
confusion. Therefore we distinguish again; the Church may be a true Pillar and
ground or establishment of truth, ex officio, and subordinately; yet not
infallible. That which is infallible is such; all that is such is not
infallible. Dic aliquid contra ut simus duo. He should have contradicted or
said nothing. The people believed God and Moses says the Scripture; right: But
the copulative does not always equally reduplicate the act to diverse objects.
In the Proverbs it is said, Fear God and the King: yet the King is not to be
feared equally with God. So they believed God and Moses, in the curt fashion of
Hebrew speech: But they did not believe Moses as they did God. God for himself
upon his own veracity; Moses for God. Now let them prove that God speaks by the
Church, as he spoke by Moses, and we have done. God spoke to Moses face to
face. Did he speak so to the Church? He spoke then to Moses immediately: does he
speak so to the Church. He spoke to and by Moses who was King in Iesuron. Aaron
was formally the High Priest: Does he speak so now to and by civil Magistrates?
If he does, where are the privileges of the Church, which they vaunt of? If
not, why do they urge that Text? It is true, Rex est mixta persona cum
Sacerdote; but this maxim is not for them: Their maxim is inverted, Sacerdos
est mixta persona cum Rege. Moses morally wrought miracles; so does not now the
Church. If Xaries could indeed have wrought miracles in the Indies, why did he
corrupt the Gospel? In short, when they can prove, that the Church speaks all
they speak by Revelation from God, as the Jews believed, that what Moses spoke,
he spoke from God, then they may apply that Text to God, and the Church, which
is applied to God and, Moses. The sense of their believing Moses was, that they
believed, what he said, to be spoken from God; this is now the question of the
Church, therefore they should not have compared Moses, and the Church, but
Moses, and an Apostle. This had been more Symbolical; but this would not have
been serviceable. Well then; if they would have been contented with this, that
the Church should have been subordinate to Scripture, the quarrel would soon be
ended. What then? Would they have the Scripture subordinate to the Church?
Adieone pudorem cum pudicitia perdiderunt?

So he says, The Church was by St. Paul called the pillar, and ground of
truth, without subordination to Scripture, as then not written. Ans. Will they
hold themselves to this, that what is not said in Scripture in terms, is not to
be construed as the sense of the Scripture? If they will, then what will become
of their points of difference, as to Scripture? If they will not, then this
distinction is not to be rejected upon that account, because it is not said so
there. But secondly, His reason, because Scripture then was not written, is to
be examined. If he understands it absolutely, it is false. Was not the Old
Testament then written? And if the Romanist fetches his Monarchy of the Church
from the Anaology to the Jewish High Priest, why should not the Old Scripture
be sufficient to subordinate the Church. And if the Scripture was then
sufficient, as St. Paul says, to make wise unto Salvation before the Canon was
finished; was it not able to bear the Churches dependence upon it? And is it
not as able now, when the Canon is completed? As to the times of the Church
before any part of Scripture was written, we have several times spoken before.
Put it into a Syllogism, thus; That which God speaks we are bound to believe
upon account of his veracity. That which the Church speaks to us, God speaks;
therefore. Now as to the major, whosoever denies it is interpretative an
Atheist. The assumption then is that we stick at, though the Roman accounts us,
for this, not Christians: The times of the Church before any part of Scripture
was written, were chiefly those, wherein that proposition was consented to; and
yet not by all that knew the doctrine of the Church. Therefore those who then
did believe, had not only a Faith disposing them to believe that what God says
is true: For this is said by Aristotle in effect (...) this is a proposition of
reason, that what God says is true, but they had a divine Faith habituating
them to the belief that that which was spoken by the Church was truly
communicated to the Church from God. Now here the hinge turns, whether their
Faith terminated upon the Church, as the subjectum quo, or upon the matter
delivered by the Church, as the subjectum quod. We deny the former, because
divine Faith cannot rise upon humane testimony; and therefore Faith could not
be caused by such a testimony which is humane, without a Revelation from God
that what the Church did speak, it did speak from God. Therefore the church had
it self then toward Faith, as proposing the matter, not as resolving the
assurance. And can we not then as well be now assured that what the Scripture
does propose is the Word of God, as what the Church proposed then was the Word
of God? And so Faith must at length not only cause us to believe that what God
says is true, but also to believe that God has said this, therefore.

He likes not then my reason for the subordination of the Church to Scripture,
not for the reason against which other reasons will soon be found. Ans. This
will require a very good intention, but thus he is pleased to put off my
discourse. Bellarmin proves his propositions by Scripture, by reason, by
Fathers. Therefore he makes his heads of proof, and holds of Faith. And another
would say that my Adversaries were beaten out of all their holds. He says to
my reason here, against it other reasons will soon be found, when they are
found we shall find answers. Let them tell me from whom the Church has its
authority: They will say from Christ, Well he is supposed the Author: But where
is the Instrument and Patent for our knowledge that Christ has passed such a
grant? The Church says it, they will say. But first. The Church Universal does
not say it. Secondly, who of them has proved that the Church is (...) they
bear witness of themselves, therefore their testimony is not true; not in modo,
if it were true in materia. Thirdly, What the Church can say amounts but to a
prudential motive, or congruous inducement: but what is it which grounds Faith,
and binds Faith, and makes it a divine belief, if not what is said in
Scripture? Without this what is the Church but a company of men in naturalibus.
The Roman does not so much believe this or that because God says it; but they
believe God says it, because the Church says it. But the Church virtual, in
the Pope; Representative, in a Council; diffusive in the people, signifies
nothing without religion. The question then is, what religion makes the Church,
which we are to believe. Not reason satisfies us in this, because some
principles of Religion do transcend reason; and because reason cannot by its
principles produce Faith of proper name: then we must have somewhat, which is
supposed as a common principle, whereby true Religion is discerned. Not the
Church: For the question is, which is the Church. What then, but Scripture? Let
them then think upon the former Texts for sufficiency of Scripture, which if
they were acknowledged, would save us this dispute. And let them think upon
that Text, Esa. the 8. the 20. To the Law and to the Testimony: If they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. That,
which is referred to another for direction, is subordinate thereunto; The
Church is referred to the Law, and to the Testimony: therefore it is
subordinate. If they speak not according to this word as written; it is because
there is no light in them.

Another Text may be named; 1. Epist. of St. Peter, the 1. chapter 23. ver. Being
born again, not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible; by the Word of God,
which lives, and abides for ever. So the Apostle, from whence we thus argue:
That, which is begotten of the Word, is subordinate to it; the Church is
begotten by the Word. Therefore their argument is retorted by the contrary; For
the Word in the substance of it, must be before the Church; because the Church
is begotten by the Word; therefore the Church must depend upon the Word, which
lives, and abides for ever: and this better suits the standing charracter of
Scripture, than the loose, and fluent, or fluxive way of Tradition. And how
comes Tradition into the world? By the first Church, they will say. Well, and
how came the first Church to be such? What did they join together in the
profession of Religion, (...), as some say the world came together by the
casual concurrence of Atoms? The first Church viritim was begottten by the Word
through the Spirit; so in the ver. before, seeing you have purified your souls
in obeying the truth through the Spirit. Then all is to be resolved into the
Word: quod est primum in generatione, est ultimum resolutione. So Aquinas, Omne
reducitur ad principium. All is to be reduced to the first principles.
Therefore they will never reconcile St. Paul, and Irenaeus, unless they admit
my distinction of the Church: Then that which Frenaeus says will well agree
with that of St. Paul. St. Paul says, as we commonly read it, the Church is
the Pillar, and ground of truth: St. Irenaeus says, the Scripture is the
Pillar of truth. Both agree, for subordinata non pugnant. Subordinates make no
war.

Let them not therefore tell me, that what God tells me by his Church I am to
admit; this we admit: But let them tell me how I shall infallibly know, that he
tells me so by the Church. And let them tell me how I shall know the Church,
but by letters of credence, namely in Scripture. How can I divine whether there
is to be a Chureh, and which is the true Church, and which the true Religion,
without Scripture? And Nemo tenetur derinare, as the saying. So that that,
which he says, that the Church is first believed independently on Scripture,
depend^ neither upon Scripture, nor Catholic Church, nor reason. Take
Scripture in the matter of it, and that which he says has no consistency. In
saving Religion there is nothing before it, not only in signo rationis, but
also in time; because the Church is begotten of the word of God. We deny not,
that the Church is made use of to dispose us to faith of Scripture; but this
does not resolve us; because it self, of it self, resolvs but into a moral
capacity, which makes not faith properly called, not faith Divine, therefore in
Genere Credibilium, the first proposition to the Church is, that the Scripture
is the word of God; and without its testimonies of the Church, it cannot be
said to be credible in the sense of divine faith. Therefore if he means that
the Church is first believed independently on Scripture, namely upon the
account of humane faith, we may grant it of the universal Church: but what is
this to our purpose, since we are disputing about faith divine? If he takes it
of divine faith; this would be to purpose; but that it is not true.

Yet he proceeds, So he that begins to be a Christian cannot admit of Scripture
as men admit of the first principles of sciences. Ans. Nor do we say so.
Ordinarily he begins with prudential motives, from without he uses arguments
drawn from out of Scripture; but the question is whether these motives are
productive of Faith in him. And he seems to say as much as de^^ses it, because
he says, in respect of us the Church is first believed independently of
Scripture. So then, the way by the Church is imperfect, as the way of knowledge
by those things which are more known quoad nos. But in the way of Faith, which
makes the assent more firm and certain, we must begin with Scripture upon which
the Church depends. To join issue then, We at first lead men to the Faith of
Scripture by the way of the Church, as the Samaritans were led to Christ by the
voice of the woman. But Faith does not rest here; because they who deny the
Scripture may deny the Church, and may question its credibility. Therefore
since the Authority of the Church does de se terminate its self in the
Testimony of men, we would have our Faith by such a way as is proportionable to
it, which if it be Faith divine, must rely upon some divine Authority. And this
way the Scripture must be more known than the Church, because by the Scripture
we know the Church, in a distinct knowledge. And without it can be no more than
an Individuum vagum. Surely it is Scripture which makes Individuum
demonstrativum. And they are wont to prove it determinatum, as in Petrus, by
the Scripture.

And as for the Criticism in the forenamed Text of Scripture to Timothy about
the Church; all he says is nothing against so much use of it as I made. For I
do not argue so, because there are such Ebraisms, therefore this is to be so
expounded; we say it follows not as to an actual necessity of such an
interpretation: No; but thus it will follow, there are such Hebrew forms of
prefacing; therefore this may be so interpreted. Now the possibility of such an
exposition is sufficient to my purpose: For possibility of the Contrary stops
the mouth of infallibility, If this or that be infallible, it is not possible
to be any other way, but the sense may be otherwise; therefore this is not the
infallible sense. so we agree with Dr. Tailor, whom he quotes; because the
Doctor may deny the argumentation as quoad esse; we intend it sufficiently
quoad posse. It may be otherwise expounded than they say; therefore cannot we
hereby infallibly know this infallibility of the Church. Suppose the Church
were infallible; yet if we did not infallibly know so much, we cannot make the
Church our ground of Faith. Nor could there be any consistence of their
implicit Faith, if they did not know infallibly that whatsoever the Church
propounds is infallible.

And an exception against this interpretation is, that it is new, unheard of to
all Antiquity and unto all men unto this age, Ans. This exception would have
come better from some other, since my adversary had no mind to answer me to
some Authority of the Ancient. It were worth the while to quit the Criticism
upon condition they would hold to antiquity. But whose saying was that, Omnes
Patres sic, ego autem non sic? And yet neither is this a sufficient answer,
unless the consent of the Fathers could make a conclusion to be of faith. So
then, as the Florentine said of virtue, that the show of it is profitable, but
the practice not; so also may it be said of the Italians, that the show of
antiquity is of use to them, but the thing not, but also it will be too hard
for every one of them to prove a negative, neither were many of the Fathers
Learned in the Hebrew tongue.

He goes on, whether this infallibility be equal to that of the Apostles, or
not, makes not to our purpose. Ans. Surely infallibility never took any
degrees with their Doctors. It is not receptive of magis, and minus, therefore
if he asserts not an equal infallibility, he asserts none: less in
infallibility is less then infallibility. So then their Church now is not such
as to rely upon, equally to the Authority of the Apostles; therefore it must be
subordinate to Apostolical authority: which indeed was in effect confessed
before in that he granted, that the Church was regula regulata. And this is as
much, as the cause is worth

He says, I note him in a Parenthesis, for a French Catholic, for allowing
infallibility to the Pope defining with a Council. Ans. No. He, or his scribe
is much mistaken. I asked him, whether he had a mind to the opinion of the
French Catholic, because he in one place spoke of the infallible assistance of
the Church without any mention of the Pope. Now if he did on purpose leave out
the Pope in his account of infallibility, then he is like to be a French
Catholic: And, although all Roman Catholics allow infallibility to a Pope
defining with a Council, cumulative; yet all Roman Catholics do not allow
infallibility to the Pope, only then when he defines with a Council. As some
Catholics do allow full Authority to a Council without a Pope: so some
Catholics allow infallible Authority to a Pope without a Council. And this is
more then I needed to have said to him that sales in this paragraph so little
to me

Yet he will charge me with charging him with an opinion which brings him
within peril of blasphemy, His opinion was this, God gives as much infallible
assistance to the Church in a Council, as he gave to him who did deliver his
word in Scripture. My reason was this, for herein it appears that now there is
no need of Scripture, since God speaks as infallibly by his Church as in his
word. He denies the inference. I maintain the charge more pressely thus. He
that inferres no need of Scripture comes within peril of blasphemy. He that
says such words as before infers no need of Scripture, Therefore, To the major
in effect he has said nothing, his discourse is bent against the matter of the
minor; and he would deny it by several instances, which come not up to the
case in hand. First because he speaks infallibly by the Church of the Law of
nature for two thousand years. And why more blasphemy now? To this in the
matter of it we have spoken before. As applied here, we shall answer to it now.
First he did not then speak infallibly by his Church, if the terms [by his
Church] be meant reduplicatively to whatsoever was said by his Church: if it be
understood thus, that whatsoever truth was proposed by God was proposed by the
Church; it may be more easily granted. In the former sense the reason were good
if it were true, in the latter it may be supposed true, yet it is not
sufficient to his use, who urges that nothing is proposed by the Church but
that which is true and from God. Yea 2. it cannot be absolutely granted in the
second sense, if we take the Church to have spoken from God in any way of a
Council: for much truth of what was proposed, came to some, of them by way of
prophecy. 3. The terms [God speak infallibly by his Church] may relate more
strictly to the Agent or to the Instrument, God spoke infallibly whatsoever he
spoke by them: but God did not speak infallibly by them whatsoever they said.
Or thus, the words are true hypothetically, if God spoke, he spoke infallibly
by them; for he cannot speak otherwise: but that whatsoever they said was
spoken to them infallibly by God, is a question. Yea 4. Will they think that
there is as much reason for infallible speaking by the Church when the
Scripture Canon is completed, as when there was none? As to Gods speaking by
Moses, we have spoken to it lastly. As to Gods speaking to some Gentiles by the
Church; that was not ordinary; and therefore it fits not our case, neither can
they prove that the faith of the Gentiles was not wrought in them by the
efficiencie of the spirit of God, notwithstanding they had the object of their
faith from the Church. Neither is it now the same case of teaching us
infallibly by the Church as at the time when the Apostles did write; because
the Christian Church was then to be settled upon the foundation of the Apostles
as St. Paul speaks: and now the building can stand upon that foundation,
therefore were they extraordinary officers and lasted but for a time. And yet
if they, can prove that their Church-doctrine is no other then that which was
Apostolical, or that those who bring new doctrine are as well inspired as the
Apostles, the Roman Church shall now be Apostolical. And if there were now as
great a necessity of the infallible direction of the Church as there was in the
times of the Apostles by them, then why should not the Apostolical office have
continued in the number of twelve, and so all the Apostles should have had
successors? which they must not say who maintain the Monarchy of the Church

Neither does that instance of John the Baptist, teaching the Me^^as which also
the Scripture teaches, come up to the case. First, Because John the Baptist
was but a singular person; but the Church now is considered under a promise of
continual succession, and as is pretended by them, with the perpetual gift of
infallibility; therefore though there was Scripture then besides John's
Testimony, yet what need of it now, if there be a constant infallibility in the
Church? Secondly, There is a difference in the case ex part Scripturae, in
regard o^ Scripture, which was not then completed; therefore there might be
more necessity of St. John's Testimony, and of the voice from heaven, and of the
Testimony of miracles: But now the Canon is consigned, what need of the
infallible direction of the Church; and if there be an infallible direction
standing in the Church, what need of a standing rule? it may serve for a
commonitorium, as the Cardinal. So the Scripture shall give us but an
application of the Churches doctrine. The Scripture that must not be a
su^ficient rule; the Church that is the direct and plain way that fools cannot
err. They may err by the Scripture; they cannot err by the Church. Therefore
in effect, not only will there be no need of Scripture, but there would be need
of none. But more closely, That which is not of use without the Church, and
that which the Church may be without, is not necessary. The Scripture is of no
use without the Church; and the Church may be without Scripture: Therefore,
according to their premises, the Scripture should not be necessary; and how
far is it from blasphemy, to say that the Scripture is not necessary? If to
accuse Scripture be to accuse God, as Nilus before, Then to say there was no
need of Scripture, is to accuse God of inspiring so many Penmen, for no
necessary purpose. For although after all means of Faith still millions do not
believe, as he says; yet since, according to their doctrine, no sense of
Scripture in point of Faith is to be believed, but as taken from the Church;
since the Word not written takes up so much of necessary matter; since the
p^tfecter and the wiser are to be sublimated by Traditions; since the common
people are not to be conversant in Scripture in a known tongue, what necessary
purpose does the Scripture serve to? It is true, superflua non nocent, as the
rule is; and Utile per inutile non vitiatur; true: But yet (...) according to
their principles, the Scripture will be superfluous. For that which is more
than is necessary is not necessary; that which is not necessary what is it?
Therefore if any of their men should be found to be traditores Bibliorum, as
some were of old, the Roman Donatists would never make a separation from them.

He goes on, The Church is not more Enthusiastical now than she was for four
thousand years, before she had all the promises, which Christ made her of an
assistance, which should be at least as speacill and full as she ever had
before; Ans. This is positively no answer, but somewhat by compare, we press
it. The Church in that time did not de communi, challenge immediate
inspiration: therefore that Church which does so now is more Enthusiastical.
Secondly, It is a begging of the question since there is not now that need
after the Canon is completed. Thirdly, We return them their argument, what
assistance the Church had formerly, it has now; the Church formerly had not de
communi, in fallible assistance: therefore not now. For the Prophets and the
Apostles and the writers of the Scripture are not rationally to be included in
the common account of the Church, in our case. Let them choose which they will
stand to. If they put them into the promiscuous account of the Church, let them
now show us such a Church: If they account them extraordinary, let them show
ordinarily such.

And he confounds himself in what follows. Before she delivered only what she
had received by tradition and by Scripture. She has received Scripture by
Tradition too; has she not? Why does he then divide Scripture from Tradition
in the way of its coming to us? For the chief reckoning they make to us of
Scripture is upon the credit of Tradition. But he means Tradition ex part
materiae, it may be; because they think Tradition conteins other matter than
Scripture equally to be believed. But this is (...). In Interpreting which
(according to the sense truly intended by the Holy Ghost) the same Holy Ghost
does assist her, so that here is no new Revelation claimed to be made to her,
but an infallible assistance to propose faithfully what was formerly revealed.
Ans. He cannot well clear himself of Enthusiasm upon the account of Tradition.
Any thing beside the word written equally to be believed is matter of
Enthusiasm: But they pretend somewhat beside the word written equally to be
believed; therefore are they in danger of Enthusiasm. And I do not see well how
they can answer it. But now he endeavors to purge himself of this accusation
in point of interpretation of Scripture. They say they do not interpret
Scripture by revelation but by infallible assistance. Well, But how shall we
blind souls be assured infallibly of this infallible assistance? We may not
examine it by the judgment of private discretion; may we? If we may, then this
is gained. Must we believe it? Yes. Why? Because God has it to be his will
that we should absolutely believe the Church. Show me where. By the Church?
that is in question. By the Scriptures? what Texts? Those produced. But the
question is whether they are rightly interpreted according to the true sense.
What will they say now? Nothing but the Church has infallible assistance. And
this they must believe by a revelation without Scripture; and this is an
Enthusiasm. And the Roman church pretending this privilege above other
Church's makes it a private revelation. Again, though there are several ways
of revelation, yet I would ask how many ways there are of infallible
assistance distinguished from revelation: let them tell us or else conclude
against themselves that they must have the sense of Scripture interpreted by
revelation, because by infallible assistance. The penmen of Scripture they had
infallible assistance: but that was by revelation. Let us know what infallible
assistance there is without a revelation: specially since Stapelton and some
others likely will have the definitions of Councils to be prophetical. If they
be concluded by discourse, then are they fallible: if their conclusions be
prophetical, then by revelation.

But also these terms [to propose faithfully what was formerly revealed] are
somewhat obscurely proposed. Does he mean it of the sense of Scripture? Then
where was it formerly revealed? if it was clearly revealed, what need of a
Council to see that which others may see? if not, how was the sense revealed to
them infallibly without a revelation? If he means [what was formerly revealed]
of Traditions; those are beside the word of God: and therefore these do not
belong to interpreting of Scripture. And yet also the Church has not been so
faithful in proposing these; as has been noted before. Or does he mean it of
traditive interpretations, as they are called? but where are these to be found?
who gives us their number formal and material?

Let them then take home to their own Tents those that claim full assurance by
the spirit in any point. We differ from them much; first because we do not
pretend any such necessity of full assurance in every point: but the Roman must;
otherwise what need of an infallible living Judge? 2. We pretend not to any
praerogative above other Churches as to the knowing the sense of Scripture;
they do. Therefore they urge that of St. Cyprian in allusion to what St. Paul
said of the Church of the Romans then, for their Church now, that
perfidiousness cannot have access to them; not considering (besides what has
been said to it before) what Nilus comments upon it, that the Apostle spoke it
of the (...) not of the (...) of the time that was past, not of the future. And
thirdly, we do use means toward the finding out the true sense: but they must
have it by an extraordinary assistance of the Spirit (which needs not means) if
they will have it by infallible assistance in places of controversy. Therefore
Stapleton thinks rationally that conclusions from discourse, cannot be
infallble; and therefore he will have them to be Prophetical: and that will be
by revelation.

This number receives again my reinforcements of my answer to that Text
forenamed about the Church, the pillar and ground of truth, as we ordinarily
read it. I said it respects the office of the Church, according to the rule of
the School-man. He says again, No, it respects the Authority. And here he does
(...) for he offers no reason why it should be taken in his way. For as to that
which he urges here that it is called the ground of truth, it is not solidly
objected; for the term in the Greek is (...); that which is to keep firm and
stable; the prop, the support, and this fairly imports an act ex officio, to
keep up, and uphold the truth.

He says also it suits well with his sense to give order to Timothy to carry
himself well, that the Church might be thought to be infallible, so as not to
make men believe it improbable that God should assist infallibly such a Church.
Ans. The strength of this Argument himself destroies. He is afraid to make good
life an Argument of infallibility; because he says it is a pitiful argument,
since Solomon the Idolaters was assisted with infallibility. Well, But let them
first take my sense with the rule of the Schoolmen, and so compare them with
his reason, which is but a pitiful argument; and then judge whether it be not
best to take my account upon the place. Secondly, If badness of life be a
prejudice to infallibility, then, since they cannot deny that some of their
chief Pastors have been in life scandalous, their infallibility will be
scandalized, and so cannot be such a way as that fools cannot err, as he urged
before? Thirdly, If this satisfies the multitude, that those who are to
instruct them are of unblamable life: yet this though it be enough ad faciendum
populum; yet this is not enough to judicious men, who look for satisfaction
upon solid principles; nor can this make Faith unto the people of their
infallibility, but a better opinion thereof. Fourthly, As for Bishops and
Deacons, which he says should be so qualified (by the order of St Paul, to and
for the credit of such a Church) he does not there find in St. Paul's Epistle
any Cardinal Bishop; or Cardinal Presbyter, or Cardinal Deacon, in whom the
power of infallibility, according to them, should chieflly consist; and
therefore that Text does not positively serve their turn. Fifthly, I had thought
infallibility could have defended it self without the credit of a good life;
since the grace of gifts, and the gift of grace are two things.

I said moreover what need of such instructions which St. Paul gives to
Timothy, if the Church were infallible, since infallible assistance is
immediate. He answers here, this is a strange consequence; the Church is
infallible in defending points in a general Council, Ergo, no man needs
instructions for his private good behavior. Ans. But first, the instructions
he gives to Timothy, were such as respected him in his place for the ordering
of the Church in rebus fidei, in matters of Faith, as appears by the sum of
Christian Doctrine which he gave him, Great is the mystery of godliness, etc.
Secondly. By my Adversaries opinion there was no such need of instructions for
a private life, since it is a pitiful argument to derogate from infallibility
by a bad life. Thirdly, Neither was Timothy I hope in their account, a private
man.

After this he has two questions in the clouds. Was it so for the first two
thousand years before the Scripture was written. Ans. This is imediately
subjoyned to the other before; and therefore should seem to be univocal to it.
And then we say two things, first he supposes that which is to be proved, that
the Church, in that space, was absolutely infallible. 2. much less was it
infallible in Councils, as he now pretends, which then were not, as he now
would have them. Therefore from hence it should follow, that if the Church be
infallible, it may be infallible without Councils; and this is against him.
Another question is this. Or do we perhaps teach this infallible assistance to
be communicated to every one immediately? Ans. He speaks gravely, as ancient
men were wont, with an (...) or (...), as he notes in his Rhetoriques. But why
should he think we think he do? For the Church, by him, might be thought to be
infallible; though Timothy was not; because according to him, infallibility is
in a representative. And though Timothy might have been President of a Council,
yet was he not to be (according to my Adversary) personally infallible, but as
Head of the Council. Yea he could not be Head of a Council then; for this was,
according to my adversaries, reserved for St. Peter. And yet infallible
assistance was communicated to every of the Apostles; was it not? Then nothing
hinders but that it may be communicated to every of the Popes successively;
which yet, it may be, he declines the affirmation of. And if it be not
communicated to every of the Priests how shall the people be secured from
error by them, so as they cannot err?

But if they do say infallible assistance is communicated to any immediately,
then may they see reason for what I said that infallible assistance is
immediate: or if all infallible assistance be not imediate, let them show
another species of infallible assistance. To me this argument is good,
Apostolical assistance was immediate, infallible assistance is Apostolical,
therefore infallible assistance is immediate. No question is made of the
proposition. Nor can they make any doubt of the assumption, because they urge
as much assistance to the Church now as is Apostolical. Therefore had my
Adversary reason to interpret me of such infallible assistance, which needs no
instructions: for I know no infallible assistance that does, as appears by the
argument.

Neither does his following Instance of the Apostolical Council in the
fifteenth of the Acts evince the contrary. Though their determinations were not
immediately inspired in regard of time, or of debate: Yet since this debate was
not to them necessary, how can this make a new species of infallible
assistance? Likely therefore this Council was in this sort managed by them to
be a precedent and example to other Councils, which should not have infallible
assistance, to determine presently and prophetically as soon as the question is
proposed. And if those who have infallible assistance do use discourse; this
does not conclude an infallible assistance, which is not immediate. He that can
prove the creation of the world by principles of Scripture in way of Faith, or
in order to Faith, may prove the same conclusion also by principles of reason
in order to science.

But then it is said in the preface, it has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and
to us. Ans. To this I say, fine praejudicio melioris sententiae, that these
words do not cogently infer an infallible assistance of proper name, actuated,
for they may bear that account in respect to the discourse they made by the
effects of the Holy Ghost, and former declarations. And this may appear by that
of St. Paul, 1. Cor. 17. vlt. she is happier if she so abide according to my
judgment; and I think also that I have the spirit of God. This judgment was not
given by infallible assistance, because by no inspiration: and yet also it does
refer to the spirit of God: And according to this proportion might be said, it
has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us; and yet those conclusions might
not proceed from the Holy Ghost by way of infallible assistance. And so far in
other Councils the definitions may be said to be by the Holy Ghost, as they are
drawn out of principles of Scripture, which the Holy Ghost did inspire the
Penmen of it in. Yea 2. Since the meeting of them in that Council was but upon
convenience in case of Scandal, what such necessity was there for that
infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost? So then let them take it how they
will, either those determinations were not made by them who were infallible by
an infallible assistance; and then is not this instance to their purpose: or if
it was, then are they to prove equal assistance to all General Councils:
otherwise extraordinaries make no species. And I am sure the Trent Council has
not credited such assistance, as Stapleton and Bellarmin would claim from the
Apostolical Council to all General Councils. N. 27.


Here he would make up the breach which was made upon his strong hold for
infallibility in Councils by that place of St. Athanasius, as holding the
consubstantiality of the Son of God to be the word of God upon the Authority of
the Council. This was slighted. He would repair it, but it will not stand. That
Text, upon which the Nicene Council builded their determination, is made good
chapter 2. number 4. In the judgment of the Council it did more then probably determine
the Controversy. And if he thinks otherwise, he does not believe the Council;
and therefore not their infallibility. His discourse is nothing: He cannot
determine it Gods word with relation to a Text probable in Scripture, therefore
he does it with relation to the infallibility of the Councils authority. Well,
is here all? then turn the tables, He cannot determine it Gods will with
relation to the infallibility of the Councils Authority; therefore he did it
with relation to the infallible Authority of Scripture, Does he say that the
Council holds it upon account of their Authority, or of the Scripture? then
which is it more likely it should be held upon? The Church, or the Scripture?
But let them speak thus, when the question is granted.

Another answer of mine he does as good as confess, that St. Athanasius did not
hold it upon the Council; because he held it before. Here he distinguishes
indeed. He held it so in order to himself who was convinced that his
interpretation was conformable to the ancient doctrine of the Church, yet in
order to others etc. Ans. He was not Pope, was he? And yet St. Basil speaks so
highly of him, as if he had spoken so of the Pope, we should have heard of it:
but if he was not Pope, what have we to do to the holding it in order to
others? He was quoted for his own judgment; was he not? Then this distinction
is impertinent. And besides, if he was convinced that his interpretation was
conformable to the ancient doctrine of the Church, he was convinced that their
doctrine was conformable to the true sense of Scripture; if not, why should he
say that the Council urged Scripture to the Arrians? if he was, then he held it
before upon that account.

Then again he touches upon the Council of Ariminum, saying that I contend
that Council as well to be believed for it self as the Council of Nice, and you
think etc. Ans. what I spoke by way of interrogation [why not] is not yet
answered by him in the reason of it. He wonders that I should urge this Council
in way of compare to the contrary: But this gives no satisfaction as to my
reason, that exceptions, it seems, were not so availeable against the Council,
because St. Austin made no mention of them, but referred the point betwixt them
to Scripture. This Council of Ariminum was not so esteemed as the rest: but
what then? from whence did this disesteem proceed? from the illegality? it
seems no; for then St. Austin had had a plea against it without waving the
Authority of the Nicene Council. And surely St. Austin had a very mean esteem
of the Authority even of the Nicene Council, if having a just exception against
the Council of Ariminum he would not plead it, and so bring in the Authority
of the Nicene against the Arrians. But it may be the Arrians did not care for
the Authority of a Council, and therefore St. Austin waved the Nicene Council.
Yea? Then how is the Authority of a Council a Catholic remedy? and then it
seems the Nicene Fathers determined against them, not by their Authority,
which they cared not for, but by the Scripture. So then the disteem of that
Council of Ariminum was upon respect to the matter of the definitions. And so a
Council was not in their opinion, ipso facto infallible. Therefore he procceds
in a fallacy, if he argues thus, it was never by the Fathers, no nor by the
Church of England numbered amongst the four first Councils, therefore it was
rejected, because it was not accounted a lawful Council. Because it was
rejected, therefore for this cause, does not follow: because the genus does
contein potentially more species. It was refused upon dislike of the matter, it
seems, as before. And as for the reason why it was not lawful, he touches not
here; and it was cashiered before.

He goes on, and you might as well think that I might prevail against you by
only citing the Council of Trent etc. Ans. surely the Council of Ariminum in
all respects considerable was as hopeful toward infallibility as the Council
of Trent; it may be more, by a a greater number of Bishops; and this with my
adversary should have borne some weight; who should think that multitude of
Counselors is half an argument of truth; because he would not place
infallibility in a singular person, as the Jesuit, but in a Council with the
Pope. And if he says that there was wanting in the Council of Ariminum the
presence or consent of the Bishop of Rome; we can easily answer, that he then
had but a single suffrage, and there were some hundreds of Bishops more in the
Council of Ariminum then were at the Council of Trent. Yea also, some Decrees
of the Council of Trent proceeded without the Pope's confirmation, as before.
But I think they are both alike, the Council of Ariminum and the Council of
Trent in being deceived. Only I think that St. Austin had less to say against
the illegality of the Council of Ariminum, then we have to say against the
Council of Trent: And therefore we may follow St. Austin; and if he appealed
from the Council of Ariminum to Scripture, we may as well appeal from that of
Trent, if they would urge it. He says St. Austin in vain had insisted upon
the Nicene Council against one who scoffed at it. Ans. Me thinks, if I may say
so, this is not very judiciously spoken; because, if Maximinus urged the
Council of Ariminum, he was bound by equal law to be dealt with by the Nicene
Council. If Maximinus had not urged the Council of Ariminum, it had seemed that
the Arrian had not a persuasion that this Controversy should be otherwise
handled then by Scripture. And if he were well furnished with other arguments
out of Scripture admitted by him, as he it seems supposes that he might be,
what need then of the infallibility of the Church in Councils? And it seems it
is the shorter way and more expedite against Heretics by Scripture, as he
confesses in the words following, that St. Austin intended by them only at
that time to overthrow him and not to meddle with a long contention (fit to fill
a book alone) above the validity of the Council of Nice and invalidity of that
of Ariminum.

Put then these things together; St. Austin it seems might be sufficiently
furnished with arguments out of Scripture against the Arrian; he might by them
only overthrow him; it is a voluminous work to prove the legality of one
Council, and the illegality of another; the Arrian scoffed at the Council of
Nice; therefore the convenient and easy way of proceeding with and against
Heretics is by Scripture, not by the Authority of the Church. And this
interpretative is the yiedling of the cause. And yet, if they will yet think
Councils, as such, to be infallible, let them think upon that Canon of Nice
declaring equal (...) of the Bishop of Alexandria to Rome; and let them think
of the Council of Chalcedon and the Council of Constantinople, that the Bishop
of Constantinople, should be equal in his limits to the Bishop of Rome; The
Council of Ephesus in their Epistle to Nestorius, that Peter and John were of
equal dignity. Let them therefore consider well what they have to do; for, if
Councils be not infallible, they are in an error: if Councils be infallible,
they are not, because they have declared against them. Let them therefore stand
on fall by Scripture. Let them try it so as St. Austin did. N. 29.


His discourse herein is fully put into this form, all errors in or against
things necessary are plainly determined by Scripture, This infallibility of
the Church is not plainly determined against by Scripture, therefore. But
therefore what? That this is no error? Nay, that is not rightly concluded,
but, that it is not an error in things necessary. All errors are not in
things necessary. Therefore if it concludes as it should, it is peccant in the
ignorance of the Elench; for it is enough to us that it be an error, suppose
it were not an error in things necessary. If it concludes that therefore it is
no error, it concludes falsely. 2. Though the proposition be our doctrine, the
assumption supposes that which is not necessary to be granted by us, that this
infallibility of the Church is an error in things necessary* we do not deny it
to be so: but we are not by any arguments constrained to say so. For though we
should not hold it an error in necessaries, yet is it necessary to reject it
as an error, knowing it to be so. And 3. We say to the assumption, that it is
sufficiently enough determined against by Scripture namely as necessary to be
in the Church, because in the Scripture sufficiency to salvation is asserted
without it; as before. And 4. The affirmative should have been proved by them
who assert it; not the negative to be proved by us. And as toward his proof of
the assumption, that the Scripture is not so clear against this as for this, we
have nothing to say, because he has nothing to prove it; Scaurus nega^; it
beggs. And we can say better we have proved the contrary.

N. 29.
Here he resumes a Text for them, St. Matthew 28. vlt. I made answer to it
before, that it does not extend equal assistance to all ages of the Church. He
now urges me to show a Text, wherein the assistance which was infallible in
the first age, should not be for the Second or Third age; he says to me,
against your reasons we have our reasons. Ans. He is here wanting in two
offices, first in proving that that Text does extend equal assistance to all
ages of the Church; for which the respondent is to wait with his buckler, it
is enough to us that he cannot or does not prove it. But then 2. He is wanting
in another thing because he does not produce his reasons against our reasons,
let them draw the Sword and cut the knots if they cannot unty them. Let them
bring forth their strong reasons, as the Prophet speaks. When as then he
says, bring against my illimited Text another Text limiting, we say that the
cause and our office is upon the negative until he brings another Text for his
sense, or gives reason for it, or gives us the consent of all ages of the
Church, we have nothing more to think (besides what has been said) then that
he had reason to say more, then what follows, the necessity of the people
(which was the prime reason why Christ gave this infalliblity) was greater in
ages remoter from Christ. But this was answered to by retortion, that then,
Traditions, it seems, now are not to be accounted equally certain. And he
answers now that which he had better have kept in, He says now, it is harder
to prove now that Christ did such miracles, was crucified, did rise again, then
it was presently after these things happened; yet all these things be as
infallibly true now as they were then, and as infallible: so I say of
traditions; which for all this do not lose a sufficient measure of infallible
certainty. Ans, Traditions then were but equal to Scripture, Traditions now
are not equal to Traditions then. Therefore they are not now equal to
Scripture. And this spoils their Traditions and contradicts the Trent Council,
which determins that they are to be received Pari pietatis affectu. And so has
he lost his hold of Traditions by his own words. Neither will it save him to
say that they are now as infallible as then in themselves but not to us; for so
is the Scripture infallible in it self without the Church, as they confess, but
it does not so appear to us, they say. 2. They are to make good, if they can,
degrees of infallible assistance, by the least degree of infallibility.

But to go on, what if there be no such necessity etc. Ans. He seems to be,
toward a punctum reflexionis here, well, if there be no such necessity of
equal assistance, then my answer to such Texts is the better. And then let
them take the rule, which their own do use, Deus non deficit in necessaris, nec
abundat in superfluis. God does not abound in things superfluous, nor is
wanting in things necessary. But then also if it be not necessary, why have my
adversaries so much pleaded the necessity of an infallible judge? Indeed it
might be, if God had pleased; and yet not necessary by necessity of consequent;
but they are wont to prove it to be, because it is necessary.

He goes on, Did not the Church alone serve to decide all controversies before
the Scripture was written etc. We answer as often before; The Church is not
thence concluded infallible; put it into form, that which decides all
controversies is infallible; the Church, before Scripture was written, did
decide all controversies; Therefore it is infallible? No. We first deny the
proposition. That which decides all controversies decides them infallibly, does
not follow. This cannot be proved; less will not serve them. Then 2. To the
assumption, we can deny it, it did not decide all controversies, put case it
did decide all necessary controversies, yet not all controversies. And we must
have a judge, they say to decide all controversies whatsoever. And 3. If the
Church then before Scripture was written did decide all controversies
whatsoever, then surely there is not that assistance infallible now given to
the Roman Church, because notwithstanding they have the Scripture and
Traditions, yet they cannot decide all controversies. If they can, they are not
faithful, and then that of St. Cyprian is not due to them now, that perfidia
non potest habere accessum. If they cannot, where is the equal assistance? and
then also what was decided by the Church was decided by the Scripture in the
substance of it though not then written: so that he had no cause to
contradistinguish this decision of the controversies to the use of Scripture.

Again he says, did not the old Scripture testify as much as was necessary
that Jesus Christ was the true Messiah? Yes. to what end then was John Baptist
sent to testify this? Ans. First if the old Scripture did sufficiently
testify of the Messiah, then that which I have said concerning the sufficiency
of the whole Canon is surely sufficient: if it did not sufficiently testify,
then his argument is none. 2. There is not par ratio for the adding
infallibility to the Church after the Canon is consigned, as for St. John's
testimony notwithstanding the old Scripture: More might be requisite for the
settling of the Primitive Church then after: because the Church after was to be
grounded in the Primitive.

But he says there is as good reason; In ages after the first when the Church
should grow from a grain of mustard seed etc. This proves nothing unless there
might arise such a controversy which could not upon Salvation be decided
without an infallible Judge. Let them prove this, and they will say something.
If not, this will not be to the purpose, that several controversies in such a
space might arise. And would not the same number of necessary points, material
and formal serve as many more thousands of Christians? And those controversies
which he names, we have spoken to, nay when they have, as they suppose, an
infallible Judge, are all controversies ended? Let them bethink themselves what
differences amongst them are yet dependent as before: We wait therefore for
the proof of such a promise of assistance extended to infallibility for other
ages of the Church. It is not enough for him to say, why might not Christ (for
any thing you know) think this a sufficient reason. A posse in the premises
will not make an actuality in the conclusion. 2. there is a difference betwixt
a reason after the thing is apparent, and a reason to prove the thing to be: if
they can soundly prove to us that there is such an assistance given in promise
to the Church in all ages, then we should sooner be induced to the
acknowledgment of his reason. But there is nothing in the reason till the
reason prove the thing. 3. If words in Scripture were to be taken allwaies
simply according to the terms, what need would there then be of an infallible
Judge of the sense of Scripture? Therefore let them choose which they will do,
whether they will allwaies have Scripture meant according to the uppermost
import of the letter; if so, then the sense of Scripture is plain; which they
have denied; if not, then may they admit a limitation of that assistance spoken
of Matthew 28.3. This form of modality [why might not] should not, one would
think, become the high mode of infallible assistance. This manner of speech
might serve us against their infallibility: but no speech serves infallibility
but (...).

And all those testimonies were given to the Jews as ill as they were
disposed. Ans. he seems to mistake what I said formerly about indisposition to
receive infallibility. For I spoke of it in order to those who should receive
the gift of it for the Church, and he now seems to speak of it in order to the
people. But 2. Suppose there were as good a disposition, the possibility hereof
cannot conclude the same necessity of the same assistance, and some of their
men are named by some of ours for denying any such disposition toward such a
measure of the spirit as formerly was given.

That the Scripture has still the same certainty, he says categorically, is
apparently false; speaking as you speak in order to assure us etc. Ans. All
his reasons are invalid. For as for the first that I confess some books of
Scripture were formerly not acknowledged by all which now are received, this is
of no weight; because it is sufficient to my discourse that they have still the
same certainty from the time of their general reception. And 2. They have in
themselves allwaies the same credibility, as well as his Traditions, as he has
noted before.

And that many and a good many books of Scripture are quite lost, is first, in
those terms at least, a supposition. Whether any be lost is yet work for
Tishbi, specially whether many, much more whether a good many, but it is
obvious to a Romanist that denies the Scripture to be sufficient, to find it
imperfect in the matter. In ingenuity he should have said nothing herein, lest
he should be interpreted for his own ends. As the Socinian, who denies Christ's
satisfaction, to prove his opinion denies Christ's Divinity, that so the
satisfaction should not be sufficient: so the Romanist, lest the Scripture
should be thought to be a sufficient rule, says a good part of it is lost.
Thus with their honesty they have lost their modesty. Secondly, let them again
consider how much prejudice comes to their Church (which they say is the
depositary of Christian Doctrine) upon the loss of a good many books of
Scripture. Thirdly yet dato, non concesso, suppose so, yet that which does
remain is surely as sufficient as the old Scripture without all the new.
Fourthly my words do not engage me in this debate, because they are of a
capacity to be understood of that Scripture which does remain. Fifthly, If any
be lost, me thinks as the Sibills books, the rest should bear a better price.
And as to his other exceptions about the sense of Scripture, about the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, or of Baptism, whether to Infants, or to be a
Priest or a Bishop was to have power to sacrifice or absolve or not, we say
first, that we have said enough already. And we say, that we need not say any
more in these points, till they make good these postulates. First whether the
exact knowledge of these points be necessary to Salvation. Secondly, whether,
if not, they can yet prove an infallible Judge in all points of controversy
appointed to us by God. And as to the last, they are first to prove a real
sacrifice in the time of the Gospel, otherwise there will be no object for a
special act of a Priest, as such. And absolution simply we deny not; their
absolution to be necessary to salvation, and that it can make attrition to be
as good as contrition, are tasks for them to prove who affirm them.

And as for that he says, that then they had the Apostles themselves or the
known Disciples of the Apostles to tell them the meaning of those words. He
does not well consider what he says, if they gave the sense of those places
which are obscure, where are these interpretations? why have we not a tradition
of them? if not, they say nothing? if so, they must derogate from the Church's
fidelity, because it has justly communicated and handed to us traditions of
other matters then are written, and not the sense of those Texts which are
written. 2. We are yet entirely able to hold the buckler in the defense of our
position, that there is no such need of an infallible exposition of those Texts
which contain points necessary for faith or practice. The water where the lamb
might wade was clear enough then; and had been yet clear enough, had not the
great Fisher troubled the waters for better fishing. If the point of the dial
be not fixed, they may vary the shadow, but the sun keeps it regular motion. So
if their gnomon be loose, they may make the time to go for them. but the sun of
righteousness (Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to day and for ever as the
author to the Hebrews speaks) does in an uniforme and regular course shine in
the Scripture: and the doctrine of Christ by the twelve Apostles is equally set
for all times; only the Roman makes the variation, who would have the Scripture
follow the Church, and not the Church the Scripture. We need not then yet their
Oedipus, who has a foot so great that he must wear a slipper.

The following words in this section are somewhat cloudy; and they do need a
clue to show us their right connection. His drift seems in them to be this to
make me destroy my self by two positions, first that the Church is secure from
damnative error, though not from all simple error, the second this, Heresy
consisted in opposition to clear Scripture. Ans. One would have thought that a
bad conclusion could not lawfully be begotten of these two positions; since
specially the second is such as was anciently held by those who do understand
distinctly points of divinity. And also I had thought once that he had granted
the former; though now, pro re na^a, he does think otherwise. I am sure he had
more reason to stand to it, then to abide the peril of the negative. Well, but
what from hence? Whence all those must needs be Heretics, who opposed clear
Scripture. Therefore all those who hold those prime points in which you and we
differ, with us against you, were heretics: for they held these points which
you say, are against clear Scripture Ans. The Church is considerable in the
quantity of it; so it is universal or particular: it is considerable in the
quality, invisible or visible: the Church invisible is distributively secure
from all damnative error: the universal visible may be secure from all
damnative error. This we say still. But by what engine is this drawn into his
conclusion, which he says should proceed partly from this position? But 2.
What if we grant all that those who have been with them against us in the
points of difference were Heretics; it is but like for like, for they
familiarly give us no other name then Heretics. And I think we shall do very
few Learned and sober men any harm, if we should say, that all those who have
differed from us, are Heretics. (...) but we know on which part the Fathers of
the Church stood. We can carry our Fathers through the flames of divisions
safe, I mean the ancient Fathers of the Church. But 3. If they will do us
right, upon occasion for it, we will distinguish, and so do them a favor; but
only then they must be guilty here of a fallacy of consequent: for although
Heresy be opposite to clear Scripture, yet all which is opposite to clear
Scripture, by their leave, is not Heresy. This is a condition of Heresy: but
this is not the essentiative of it. There may be and are plain points of
Scripture which respect circumstances, and yet these are not matters sufficient
to make difference in them to be Heresy. They account indeed all difference to
be Heresy, because they respect not points in order to the matter, but to the
proposal of the Church, which has it self equal to all: but the tenure of our
principles is yet good. And yet this we will grant them, that he who denies any
thing, which he confesses to be plain, he is an Arch-Heretick; but not in
respect to it presently in the matter, which may be a circumstance; but in
respect to it as confessed plain, because thus he should deny Gods veracity.
And yet 4. the difference is not so much in opposition to clear Texts as in
their obtruding matters of faith for which they have no Text.

He proceeds. But by your own confession Christ had no visible Church etc. Ans.
Will he again snarl himself? First it lies on the challengers part to make good
two points, one that these points of difference were held in the Primitive
times; and the second that they were held on their side. They say we have run
away from the ancient Catholic Apostolic Roman faith; this is work for them
to prove. And until this be settled, we have nothing to say to that conclusion,
that Christ was with the opposers of evident Scripture. And yet we can say also
(...) that it is false in the proposition; and false in the conclusion; as
applied to us. And yet somewhat else may be said of it by and by. Thus we
answer them if they intend the words of the primitive times: if they intend
them only of the last ages preceding the reformation, we say first, that we may
be somewhat more bold because their Church in those times was more degenerated.
But 2. We need not deny that Christ was with his ordinances even in those
times, as to lawfulness of baptism; and to the possibility of some's being
converted; who might privately abhor the grosser errors, or simply might
swallow them as the Whale did Jonah undigested. Delictum ambulat cum Capite;
they followed Absalom in the simplicity of their heart. Therefore 3. as to the
opposers of evident Scripture, that either Christ must be with such, according
to our suppositions, or else with none for these last ages; we can easily
distinguish. To be with them, so, as to give them infallible assistance; or to
be with them so, as not to withdraw all administrations of his ordinances, the
former sense we can presently deny Christ's being with them in; for we deny it
to all times after the Apostles: in the latter sense we can grant it; and yet
they can get nothing by it. Yea we can also deny them this; and can answer to
the other part of the disjunction, that if not with them then with none for
those times: this we can answer to, and say that his disjunctive is not yet
immediate because many or at least some might be led to heaven by the Cloud, as
well as in the time of Elijah: and as they will say, in the time of
Antichrist. N. 30.


This makes number; being little else then a syllabus of former Texts. He
thinks in them to prove two things, first that the spirit will be with the
sucessours of the Apostles for ever. And 2. Secure them from error, because it
is said, he will guide you into all truth. Ans. As for the first we need not
stand upon that; for the question is not simply upon Christ's continuance with
the successors; because we deny it not in terms. But the question is upon the
universality of the object [all truth] namely whether it be to be taken
reduplicatively to truth; or specificatively to necessary truth. The latter we
can grant to the Church as invisible, and to the universal visible. The former
we still deny. For first, it respects the Apostles principally, as appears by
the twelth ver. I have many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them
now. This must be spoken unto the Apostles personally; and not as they were
personae supponentes. But this he takes no notice of. And then again, the
opposing of [for ever] by the spirit to a little while of being with them in
body, must referr (as it is noted) to the Apostles, because he was not any time
with the successors, in body. Yea also, this will be true in the time of
Antichrist, will it not? if not, then the promise is not made good; and so
Christ should not be as good as his word. If so, then it is extendible in the
promise to the Church invisible, when the profession is not so visible. Then
why do they arogate it to the Church visible? Again, this equally respects all
the successors of the Apostles* does it not? If it does not; then they should
satisfy themselves with a limitation where none is expressed, which lately
they would not do: If it does, then all Bishops are equal, because they all
succeeded the Apostles as St. Ierom affirms in his epistle to Evagrius. 4. All
truth must be restrained in regard of the kind; for it must be Theological. Yea
also in regard of the specialty; it must be necessary truth, for otherwise how
was this promise made good for the first three hundred years, wherein there
was no General Council by their own confession? Put it then into form, all
infallibillity is in a Council. In that space there was no Council; then in
that space there was not all infallibility; therefore at most only in points
necessary. They cannot deny the major; because they annex infallibility, since
the Apostles, to a Council. The minor they confess. So then, the promise of
Christ, which was made equally to the Apostles and successors; yes, taking it
rightly, equally to all the Apostles amongst themselves; and to all the
successors amongst themselves (not equally to the Apostles and to their
successors comparatively to both) is yet made good according to its own
tenor, in its own sense, with their consequences. Therefore their Romish
Divines do carry it more soberly; for so they say upon the place; and therefore
the Church cannot fall into Apostasy or Heresy, or to nothing, as the
adversaries say, they do not say, it cannot fall into any error: Into
Apostasy, or Heresy, or nothing, it cannot fall: but into error, it may
fall. To be sure, this is the surest way unles they had beter arguments against
every error whatsoever; or better answers for the arguments against them.

Nevertheless, we must attend his Syllogism, all this time all the visible
guides or Praelats of the Church were lead and did lead into opinions contrary
to the texts of your Church, but all this time the spirit of truth did abide
with them, guiding them into all truth, therefore the opinions contrary to your
Church were true and not errors. Well not to trouble them as to strictnes of
form. To the proposition we can say, that if they intend it of all the times
from the Apostles we utterly deny it; if they mean it of the times after the
first six hundred years of the Church, then we grant the proposition, but
utterly deny the assumption, they were not guided by the spirit into such a
Latin Edition, into half communion. And this denies his proof that those
opinions were true, because they were led into them by the Holy Spirit. This is
denied; and is the question. And it is more easily said, that the Holy Spirit
was with us by common assistance unto our opinions, then with them by
infallible assistance unto their opinions. If we are to Judge of their
assistance by the effects; we had need of infallible assistance, if it were
convenient, for the discourse, to conclude for them: but I am sure we have no
need of infallible assistance, to conclude against them.

Neither is it any boot to them that the Spirit leads all into truth; for this
may be limited to saving truth. And this is not sufficient for them, who must
have absolute infallibility, or none. And then [all] may be limited, as that
proposition, [God will have all men to be saved] is limited by Aquinas out of
St. Austin by the like; such a Schoolmaster teaches all in the Town; whereof
the sense is this; not that he teaches every own simply but all that are
taught are taught by him. So the Spirit all leads that are led; but all simply
are not led. The limitation then in regard of the object of the Person, or in
regard of the object of the thing cuts off all their provision from hence. And
when we have sufficiently refuted their points of difference, we have no need
to say any thing, that the Holy Spirit should teach contradictions, if he were
with them and us too; for first, infallible assistance is asserted to neither,
but denied: and common assistance does not exclude all error; and then 2. The
Holy Spirit was not with them infallibly by the effect; for since the same
Spirit does not teach contradictions, he did not infallibly teach them that
which is oposite to Scripture which he did teach.

That which follows in compare of the visibility of their Teachers with ours
or any other Churches, is but a mere flourish. Show me a succession in all ages
of the Guides and lawful Pastors of any Church holding your Tenets in points
differing from ours. Ans. Succession de se, is like number, of no value.
Therefore they must prove their doctrine to be right; otherwise it will be a
succession of error: for as he said, Consuetudo sine veritate est vetustas
erroris. 2. It is accidental to a true particular Church to have succession:
and the Church at first was true antecedently to the succession; and so the
former times must never have been certain of their being right, because a
Persecution might afterward have interrupted their succession. 3. The
Heretics bragged of their sucession too: therefore this is no proper,
special, distinctive argument: 4. Where is their succession of universal
Bishops for the first six hundred years? Then where is their Church? Then
either let them not give or take that argument. 5. Our opinions to them are
negative: then they are to show a positive succession in the doctrine of those
points, which they can never do; unless by their infallibility post-nate
antiquity should be as good as Primitive. For as for the Fathers of the purest
times, tam sunt omnes nostri quam D. Augustinus: I am sure we may better say
so, then Campian. 6. We can show our doctrine by Scripture, let them show
theirs without it. And whatsoever is according to Scripture is true; this they
deny not: our doctrine is yet made good to be according to Scripture: therefore
the Charter of our points we have the Records of in Scripture: and this way is
good enough for us, which is a posteriori. And yet also we can tell them that
if it had not been for their cruelty and domination, we might better have
returned them that which St. Austin said to the Donatists, vos tam pauci, tam
novi, tam turbulenti. And God has left us in all ages, of greeks, and others
who have given us occasion to say, we hold nothing in the points of difference,
but was held before. Therefore this argument does not succeed: so that they
must still labor to find a reason why our doctrine should not be as good as
theirs.

N. 31.
The sense of this Section we have had before. And it falls into such a
Syllogism, whatsoever was Gods end in giving of Pastors is allwaies compassed.
That the Church should be without error, and should not be as Chidren wavering
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, was Gods end Ephesians. 4.12. Ans.
Whatsoever was Gods end is allwaies compassed so far as it was his end, where
the effect depends not also upon moral causes; take it so and we grant the
major, and deny the minor; it was not Gods end that the Church should be
without all error whatsoever; and the effect does depend upon moral causes;
which may hinder the success. The end of the Sacraments in the time of the
Gospel, they will say was to conferr grace ex opere operato; yet they say they
have not that effect Ponentibus obicem. Or thus, whatsoever is Gods end in his
will of purpose that shall surely be compassed: but what is his end in the will
of sign is not allwaies compassed; take it then in the latter sense, so I deny
the major, take it in the former sense, so I deny his minor. For this would be
more unreasonable by their doctrine; for if God should work omnipotently to
secure men from error by means, how should the obedience of faith be brought
under freedom of will? 2. This respects also particular Churches: and
therefore will not serve their turn, who, though they make but a particular
Church, yet are wont to challenge the privileges of the universal. 3. This Text
speaks nothing of the power of Jurisdiction, but of the power of order, now
the duty of our obedience beats respect formally to Authority and Jurisdiction,
or do they like some of Geneva, divide Pastors and Teachers? And then do they
think that the ordinary Pastor is here principally aimed at in their
extraordinary sense? 4. The end of Pastors then was the end of Pastors now;
to be preserved by infallibility of Pastors then was not the end of Pastors
then: therefore not now. The major is true by them, because they apply those
words to these times of the Church, the minor is also true by them, because
there was not, by their own confession, Councils held for the first three
hundred years. The assistance therefore is not such as preserves from all
error. And lastly, if we were to be preserved from error by the unanimous
doctrine of those Doctors and Pastors, we should never be secured from
error, unless in those points wherein we agree. N. 32.


In this number he brings Es. 59.20.1. Compared with the 11. chapter to the Romans
26. ver. Ans. These Texts neither disjunctively nor conjunctively are
sufficient for his intendment. That of Esaias is plainly intended for the last
conversion of the Jew, which is not like to be made by Roman means, as Sr.
Edwin Sandys notes in his Survey of the western Churches.

And as for those words, my words which I have put into thy mouth, are free
from error in all points great and small, yes, we grant it. This does not
contradict us, but they are to prove that whatsoever they say God puts into
their mouth. Again it respects the Church as invisible; and that conceit of his
that it cannot be so taken, because it speaks of the words not departing out of
the mouth, is not solid; for the use of the mouth may be there for confession
of the faith, as Romans 10.10. with the mouth confession is made to God. Now this
respects not the visible Church, as teaching; but the invisible as expressing
the faith of the heart by the confession of the mouth.

But he again, Gods spirit or word is not in a mou^h teaching error. Ans. This
is a Sophism, it is true in sensu composito, and as teaching error: but it is
not true in sensu diviso, Gods spirit may be in one, at one time teaching truth
and in another time not teaching or teaching not truth. He may be in some
directing sufficiently to salvation, not sufficiently against all error, not
that the Spirit of God is in any teaching error, operatively; for whatsoever
it is he is operative to in point of belief, is truth, but in whom he may be
sometimes as teaching truth, he is sometimes not, when they teach error. For
this si yet to be proved by them, that whatsoever is taught in the Church, is
suggested and dictated by the Spirit.

Afterward he taxes me for taxing any of coming near to blasphemy for saying,
God did speak to us and teach us by his Church; which he says here is refuted
" my words shall not depart out of thy mouth. Ans. I said not so. That which I
said, I have answered upon the place, I do not not deny absolutely that God
speaks by his Church; but I deny that he speaks now by his Church absolutely,
God may speak by his Church that which is infallible: and yet not speak by his
Church now infallibly. That which is infallible in the principles of Scripture;
not infallibly in the manner of deduction. If he did speak allwaies, and
allwaies infallibly, there were no more to be said; until that be proved, we
say much is supposed.

N. 33.
If it were lawful, I might smile at his discourse, in this number out of the
next chapter in Esaias, and the next to that. For these chapters do plainly regard
the Church as invisible, in order to salvation, which is properly applied to
the Church, as such: and this is more then truth: for it is possible for a man,
not to have any errrour, and yet not to come to Salvation, and it is I hope,
possible for a man to come to Salvation, and yet to have some errors. But that
this should be said of the Roman Church, and that that should teach all
Nations, I say (...) Was not the Church of Jerusalem; and the Church of Antioch
before them? Nay it will not be easily proved by them that they were
Christians, in a formed Church, before us. We may as well say that the
multitude of the Isles shall be glad thereof; and that all Nations and
Kingdoms which shall not serve thee shall perish, should be meant of the
Church of Rome is as likely as that the Bishop of Rome should be Emperor of
the world, as they pretend him Monarch of the Church. It was never true surely
but then when the Emperors held the Popes stirrup, and the Duke was thrown
under the Table. Or it was then true, when the Pope was the Sun, and Emperor
the Moon. Or it shall then be true when the Sun rises in the west. But it
should not be true of Rome, me thinks, because it is said, the days of thy
mourning shall be ended. And surely they have been, since the prophecy,
sometimes in mourning: and at least shall be, by their own acknowledgment, in
the time of Antichrist.

And that this should be meant of the Church as visible, because it is said "
thou shall be called Sought out, is a slight ratiocination. Rather the
contrary, because God seeks it out, therefore it is not visible. Because it is
called Hephtziba (my delight is in her) therefore visible: Yea rather the
contrary; for Gods delight is with the Church invisible; because when his
delight is with the Church visible, it is in order to the Church invisible.
Because the land shall be called Beulah, Chapter 62 ver. 4
therefore it should be the Church visible; rather the contrary; for the real
union, which is mystical, of Christ with his Church, is to be understood of the
Church invisible. And that she should be to Gods comfort, namely the visible
and the Roman Church; rather the contrary; she is certainly less to his
comfort, because she says so. These promises are made primarily to the Church
as invisible, which should be gathered cheifely out of the Gentiles in general,
therefore let them again remember that of St. Ierom in his Epistle to Evagrius,
Orbis mayor est Urbe.

But he helps us with an argument, If this Church should at any time fall to
teach error, Nations should do well to further their Salvation by forsaking
her erring, as the Protestants say they did. This we take for the mayor: and
we, assume, but this Church has erred, as has been sufficiently showed in the
discourse of others, and competently in this; therefore are we justified by my
adversaries. And amongst the errors, quod loquitur inde est, that she cannot
err.

N. 34.
In this he obtrudes again that of Dan. 2.44. And they must be meant he thinks
of the Church, of the Church visible, of the visible Roman Church certaintly it
was well said by the Poet -- (...) which we may go near to English thus,
modesty is unprofitable to him that beggs the question. That it is meant of the
Kingdom of Christ in his Church, we deny not: but that it is meant of the
visible Roman, we flatly deny; and we use for proof, his own principle; that
Kingdom which shall beat in pieces and consume all those Idolatrous Kingdoms
and shall stand for ever, is the Kingdom meant there. So then. But the Roman
Church is not that Kingdom which shall do so: therefore that is not it which
is meant there. The minor is proved. First they are not agreed amongst
themselves whether the Church be a Kingdom. And if they hold it so they hold
it erroneously, or else the ancient Church erred; for they looked for a Church
in the Commonwealth, not for a Commonwealth in the Church, as he said; and
then sure it did not stand for ever in the quality of a Kingdom. 2. If they
take it in the letter, then it has temporal dominion directly; which I think
they will not say, since every one of them, as before, is not persuaded to hold
a temporal dominion indirectly, and in ordine ad Spiritualia. If they do not
take it in the letter, then it is meant of the mystical Kingdom: and this
properly respects the Church invisible. 3. Have they broken down all Idolatrous
Kingdoms? have they broken down the Turk and Persian? Yea, if they be a
kingdom, there is one Idolatrous Kingdom more, which is not broken down, and
that is theirs. Therefore are they bound by this argument to break down all
their Idols. But they hate Idols, as Cyril of ^^^^salem said Antichrist
should do, (...). Antichrist will hate Idols, that he may fit in the Temple of
God: so they break down all other Idolatrous Kingdoms, that theirs may stand
alone. And 5. Upon this account, we should have had better measure from them,
because I do not read that they have charged us with Idolatry. And yet they
have endeavored to break us down as much or more then any others.

Again, it is meant of such a Church as has not fallen into Heresy; Yea? then
we assume, the Church of Rome has fallen into Heresy by Liberius, by Vigiliu^,
as before. Therefore the Roman Church is not it which it is meant of. Again
that Church which denies the Catholic Church, as such, is heretical. Their
Church denies the Catholic Church, as such: for they restrain the Catholic
Church to the Roman, by annexing the Roman to the Catholic. The proposition is
good, because, to deny the Catholic Church as such, is to deny an Article of
the Apostles Creed. Therefore to check their usurpation, the African Council
cut off appeals to Rome: thus then it is not Daniels Kingdom, but a tyranny,
which is (...), as the Politics say.

Again If the Church should have universally fallen into uncertainty of true
belief, it should no longer have been the standing kingdom of Christ, which
shall stand for ever. We assume, but their Church must fall into uncertainties
of true belief, as we have showed; therefore their Church is not it, and
because there is uncertainty, therefore they have no divine faith, as he
concludes. Again, their Church is not spread over the world in the quality of a
Kingdom, therefore their Church is not that kingdom. How many parts of the
world are there, wherein they cannot exercise a visible jurisdiction? nor do
they break all Idolatrous kingdoms (...) their visible Preachers. What? they
break? rather by the sword than by the word; by the mouth of the sword, not by
the sword of the spirit. Their breaking is indeed the right reading of the
second Psalm thou shall break them with a rod of iron, which Bellarmin would
construe to be feeding in the original, mistaking the root, or deceiving his
Reader.

Yet if the Roman Church be not this Church, find me out a visible Church. Ans.
First suppose we could not, yet this were no argument for infallibility, it
might make somewhat toward probability; if the supposition were first proved,
that there must be such a Church always in a flourishing visibility. Secondly,
we take it yet for the Church as invisible, and therefore his demand is
unreasonable. Thirdly their Church had not, in doctrine and discipline, that
visibility in the first ages of the Church, and therefore there was a Church,
which had the privileges of the Church visible, and yet not theirs, but he
tells us we shall have more of this in its place. So then this is but a
prelusory weapon.

N. 35.
Here again he comes upon me for clear texts to prove the controversy about the
infallibility of the Church, to be decided by Scripture. Ans. This has been
abundantly spoken to before. In respect to what he says now, that I must bring
clearer Texts of Scripture to prove the fallibility of the Church, then he to
prove the infallibility, we add, that if he understands by [clearer Texts] as
by reasonable consequence and deduction, it is done: if he understands them
expressly (...), and in terms, he speaks unreasonably; because he has
brought none such; and therefore he cannot look for clearer; because
comparation is in eodem genere. So that this is not much more then a cavil. For
if the Scripture be sufficiently furnished with necessary direction, why should
it be thought defective in not determining in terms that controversy, which
is ne^dless, i^ that be otherwise sufficient

And as for the Item he gives me, that the Texts I bring, must be for the
Church not for the Synagogue; for he says all his Texts speak of that, not of
the Synagogue, I am very well contented with this law. All that I have produced
looks that way: but his have not. For besides those Texts which he produced out
of the Old Testament, which in the letter, bear respect to the Jew, he urges
that Text of Christ, dic Ecclesiae which by the terms has more respect to the
Synagogue, then any which I formerly made use of.

And you must bring Texts and not discourses, or else you decide not the
Controversy by the sentence of the Judge to which only you appeal. Ans. This
compliance with the Anabaptist requites their Freindship. Is not that Scripture
which is plainly deduced out of Scripture? As the conclusion is potentially
contained in the principles; so that which is in principles of Scripture is
contained in Scripture. So our Saviors, "you err not knowing the Scriptures
and then proves the resurrection by that which is said [I am the God of Abraham
the God of Isaac and the God of Iacob] so then Christ proved the resurrection
not by the Text, in the terms affirming it, but by the Text consequently as
deducing it. 2. they do not consider how little they have in Scripture (...)
for St. Peter's successor; for half communion, merit of works, the Sacrifice
of the Mass; and some others (...) where are they read in Scripture? 3. They
would have Religion with reason and prudential motives, would they not? Then
they cannot dis-accept discourses from Scripture: 4. I do not deny to be judged
by reasoning out of Scripture: no nor by antiquity neither, though it be not an
argument (...) but they have more need to bragg of them, because they are not
theirs. 5. I do not appeal to Scripture as a formal Judge, but as to the law by
which all Judgment is to be made. And again, as the Philosopher, those the best
laws which leave least to the Judge. All things then considered, he has
reason to quit the field unless he has a mind to encamp against the truth.
And if they have so much for them in Scripture, and in ^^sert words as here he
cracks; surely those Romanists who have spoken of Scripture so diminutively
have not been so wise as they might have been. So then this Paragraph we may
end with this account; the Socinian is supposed to plead reason against
Scripture and the Church; The Papist pleads the Church without reason or the
Scripture; The Protestant pleads Scripture with reason and the Church Catholic.

N. 36.
This concerns the reading of a place in St. Austin De utilitate credendi, which
he quoted about the authority of the Church, thus, velut gradu certo
innitentes; I found it in a Froben Edition otherwise, namely thus, velut gradu
incerto nitentes: He says it is in an antienter Froben, as he reads it. And
besides, he thinks the scope might lead me to his reading. Ans. The scope
directs us to think the authority of the Church to be but as moving, not as
determining Faith, as I have showed upon another place of St. Austin, which he
replies nothing to. Moved we are by that authority as an uncertain step to God
by whom we are assured, not to God as the object of worship, but to God as the
author of our faith. And as for his objection, that it is ridiculous to be
helped to certain truth by authority uncertain, it is not of much weight. For
although uncertainty formal is not helpful unto truth, yet that which is
uncertain for us to rely upon may be helpful. As the Catholic Moderator
observes of the Huguenot in point of justification, that he is somewhat nice
because he will not lay hold upon such a bough which peradventure might save
him, yet is he not to be blamed, because he does rely upon the righteousness of
Christ, which is a certain bough, and will surely save him: so it may be we are
thought too scrupulous, because we will not lean and rest our faith upon the
authority of the Church; yet are we not to be blamed, because we rest it upon
God. Yet may we then rely upon a bough uncertain till we come to a ground more
certain. The voice of the woman of Samaria was not certain: yet the people were
moved to come to Christ by what she said; but afterward they found better
satisfaction from himself; and then gave an account of their faith, not by her
voice but because they had seen him.

And as for miracles which were spoken of to be part of St. Austin's authority,
he thinks they were no unassured step; it is easily answered, that however this
does derogate from the application of that Text to the authority only of the
Church, since the authority he speaks of is not only of the Church. But
Secondly, miracles when they are received, are an argument to confirm the
truth: but miracles are not to us an assured step, because we are not certain
of them to be true: Since we hear in Scripture of lying wonders, 2 These. 2.9,
10. So that the doctrine rather proves the miracle than the miracle the
doctrine. The doctrine is to be believed without a miracle, but the miracle is
not to be believed when the doctrine is false, as Deuteronomy. 13. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

But then as to the reading of that place in St. Austin, somewhat more may be
said. It is true that in an edition of Ba sil 529. it is Certo, but yet there
is some mark with it to note a Criticism in a various lection. In two other
editions it is gradu incerto. But also we except against the Latin in the
grammar of it, if it be read his way; for where will they find the verb
[innitor] to govern an ablative? Nitor does; but innitor does not. And in
reading Stapleton's relections I find he uses [innitor] with a Dative.
Therefore may it be probable that our reading is the right: and that the [in]
changed its place; and in stead of gradu incerto nitent^^, it was made gradu
certo innitentes.

N. 37.
In this he resumes the speech upon the authority of the Devil when he says any
thing conformable to Scripture. To this I said more then was necessary. Another
would have sent it back to the place from whence it came. But that which I said
liberally he exagitates disingenuously.

I answered first that we are forbidden to consult with the Devil; but are
enjoined to consult with the Church. To this he rejoyns, this hinders not his
being conformable as long as he speaks conformably to Scripture. Repl. This
was proposed by him to press us to the use of the Church, therefore that which
was said by me properly made a difference betwixt them, because we are to take
direction from one not from the other, even for those things which we know he
knows most certainly. Therefore though there be no difference in the matter of
truth as to both: yet there is as to the immediate Author.

And I granted to them ever that the Church to be consulted with ever, is the
Church as visible. Yet does it not from hence follow, I hope, that it should be
allwaies so visible, as that we can consult with it. The visible Church is ever
to be consulted with: but this visible Church is not ever so visible; visible
at sometimes; not so visible at all times. For there was not allwaies in the
Church a Pope and Council; and if a Pope, not a Council, by their own
confession. And in such cases, they have said before that the Church must
content it self with former determinations. And though that which is infallible
may be orderly consulted with; yet not all that is to be consulted with is not
surely infallible. Every Priest is not infallible I think they will say; and
yet is to be consulted.

My Second answer is of the same kind and that, which he says would be of some
weight, if we granted not such use to be made of the Church, as thereby to
think well of that which is proposed, but the certainty of faith is, cui non
potest subesse falsum this is not to be given to the Church simply.

As for the Third answer, we say easily, there is no comparative in negatives:
neither is the one nor the other infallible; though I am more moved by the one
whom we have reason to respect, the Church, than the other, whom we have reason
to suspect.

So then, that which is apprehended true is considerable either abstractly from
the speaker, or complexely with the speaker; in the former it is considered
with respect to the matter; and so he said well, (...), we are not to look at
so much the author as the matter, in the latter respect it is respective to the
motive; and so I am more induced by the Church, though not determined. And
therefore as to those terms, to whose saying you would give an infallible
assent, when you see that which he says to be conformable to Scripture, we say
that the term^ [saying] is distinguishable into the object purely, or into the
object with the act and author. In the former there is no difference: in the
latter there is, we may believe that which is said, when we do not believe him
that says it. And so may we believe rather the Church, whose office it is to
propose truth, as he confesses it is not the Devils.

Neither did we by these answers smother up any thing which clearly
overthrows our reply, who say we must follow the Church only so far as we
see her follow Scripture. That which he says here does no way weaken our
reply. It has been answered before; and the strength of it broken. For first
though they could not see at all how far the Church followed the Scripture for
the first two thousand years, and the barbarous Nations never having seen the
Scripture did truly believe, does this hinder us from holding now that we are
to believe the Church, in points of faith, no further then we see grounds for
what they said, out of Scripture? take it of faith divine and in things of
faith, it is yet good. And their instances do not evacuate it. Distingue
tempora, distinguish the times, God might in that time and season of immediate
revelation work then a faith immediately; which now is not reasonable to expect
ordinarily, as appears by the first Chap. of the Ep. to the Hebrews the first
ver. Privilegia pauc^rum non faciunt regulam communem. Secondly the Faith of
the barbarous nations was not terminated in the Church, as if they had believed
the Church, and therefore believed that which was said by them: But was
terminated in the matter which was said by the Church: The Church was
instrumental to the knowledge of the matter, and might be instrumental as to
dispose them for faith: But the authority of the Church was not the formal
cause of the act of faith. And Knotts himself is loath to assert it. And this
is that which Tertullian has said, non ex persona fides, sed ex fide persona
aestimanda est. We are not to esteem the doctrine by the person, but the person
by the doctrine. And the tradition which St. Irenaeus speaks of, was the sum of
the Christian Faith, which is in Scripture: So he as before, and so St. Cyril
of Jerusalem understands it, as may appear by that of Cyril in his fourth
Catech. (...). we must not deliver any thing in the divine and holy mysteries
of faith without the divine Scriptures.

This is the Epilogue of the Chap. and is of use only to tell me what he has
done (I think not done) before, N. 38.
and this is all the answer he gives me for taking away what he had said out of
two places of Scripture forementioned, toward infallibility. Before he
referred me for satisfaction to the due place; here he referrs me back again.

And as for any reply to my answer out of the Fathers, or my use of them, he
says to me, you know why I resolve to pass them. Yes, and particularly why he
says nothing more to what I said about St. Austins testimony in his Epistle
against the Manichee. If I may be interpreter, it is thus resolved, he had good
reason to pass them, because they pass him. And so we have made an end of his
long, but not hard Chapter.

CHAP. V. No Church is our Judge infallible, then not the Roman.
This Chapter which concerns the Hypothesis should injustice have been longer,
but he reduces the proof of it to a small pittance, and if all the Churches
which submit not themselves to the Bishop of Rome as their supreme Pastor, be
of no better proportion, it will be Catholic for all that do submit, but not
for all.

But since he is so short in this, we will be even with him; and bring all he
says in this second Treatise (for so some times he calls it) into one
Syllogism; the Church is the Judge infallible appointed in businesses of
Religion. No other but the Roman is this Church; therefore. To the proposition
we have said enough before. He would now make good the assumption (or
praesumption, as we might speak) supposing the proposition to be demonstrated;
(...) and therefore he quarrels with me, because we except against his
supsition of it. It is true had the major been a maxim irrefragable, then there
had been more reason to blame us for exception against it, and for not applying
our selves in present address to the minor; but since we see no cause, nor the
Churches of God, why the proposition should be swallowed, we call upon him to
make good the thesis, that there is a Church appointed as infallible Judge in
businesses of Religion, and therefore we told him that he might as well prove
he had right to Utopia, because he only claims it; whereas he should first
prove the An sit? whether there be such a place. And therefore if he would have
had us say nothing to the questioning of the supposition, he should have made
it stronger first, and then should not have concluded bravingly that therefore
all he had said of the Church, was to be applied to the Roman, no other being
infallible, as in the former treatise, number. 28,

Well, but he must prove his minor, N. 2.
because all other Churches do not lay claim to this infallibility; and are
demonstrated to be fallible; we grant the Antecedent, without any proof, and
his proof was not so good as his proposition. But therefore, it belongs to them
to be infallible; we deny the consequence. We deny the Title upon the claim.
And he is angry, because we make his plea from the claim to be weak. And the
weakness of it appears in that it is weaker grounded upon a true supposition,
nor is it very sound in the proceeding of the consequence, in the first regard,
we say debile fundamentum fallit opus. And therefore since that is one of his
principles, his conclusion must be naught, as before. His consequence he
proves thus, the Protestant Chucrh and all other Churches different from the
Roman do Judge themselves, acknowledge themselves, declare and profess
themselves to be fallible and that according to infallible Scripture. If then
any of these Churches be infallible (in what they Judge and declare for truth
grounded in Scripture) they are infallible in this their Judging and declaring
themselves to be fallible; therefore infallibly they are fallible. Therefore
upon supposition that it has been formerly proved, that some Church is Judge
of controversies, and infallible, and it being by the former argument
demonstratively proved that neither the Protestant Church nor any Church
different from the Roman can be Judge of controversies and infallible; it
evidently follows that the Roman Church is this Judge and infallible, as she
teaches her self to be. This is the whole procedure of his discourse. Herein
he has a supposition that there is some Church which is Judge of controversies
and infallible, this is not yet, nor can ever be proved. And here is also
another supposition that no Church different from the Roman, has claimed this
privilege upon declaring her self infallible: But this may be demurred upon;
for in effect and by way of interpretation, this was done by the Donatists, who
like the Roman separated themselves from their Brethren and taught no salvation
but in part Donati. And therefore his discourse is more weak while we question
his suppositions: but yet supposing his suppositions to be good; first, this
makes them not to be infallible by way of consequent, if by way of consequence.
For that none other Church does claim this infallibility is extrinsical and
accidental to the Roman right; and it does little victory, relate to possession
rather then right. And if truth of right, should right of truth be given primo
occupanti? Veritas est virgo semper, as he said; non dum occupatur. And
therefore the necessity of consequence is left to shift for it self, since all
that can be said for it, comes to pass, in the matter, upon this accidental
negative: for if any Church of the world had been as bold as the Roman in
claiming this infallibility, they had had it before them: but because there
has not been claim laid to it by other Churches, that which they have found
and taken up, must belong to them.

Therefore, what he says that I make him argue thus, the Roman Church claims
infallibility, therefore by claiming it she has right to it, is no great
slander, though the terms might not be the same: for he does little else in
his former treatise, when he says, All other Churches of all other Religions
do say indeed that they are themselves, the only true Churches, but none of
them say themselves to be either the Judges of controversies or to be
infallible; therefore they cannot be either Judges or infallible. And what
sense is this argument resolved into, but this; that the claiming makes the
right, and therefore he might somewhat have spared a reproach which falls upon
him. Neither is it true, that all other Churches of all other Religions do say
indeed that they are the only true Churches. And this I noted before; for which
nothing is said to me now.

But he says, I say nothing to that which he presses and still does press,
that the Church which is appointed by God for infallible Judge of
controversies, cannot possibly be any of those Churches, which teach themselves
not to be this infallible Judge. No? Have I said nothing to it? Yes, I have
said as much, as he could prove, that none of those Churches are such a Church.
And I have also said that his supposition was to be denied; and to this
supposition of his my proposition is contradictory; no Church is appointed by
God to be infallible Judge. But, because he has been a valiant supposer, I
must be accounted a weak disputant. If he includes the supposition in the
argument for one of the propositions, I deny that proposition. And if he will
yet conclude, he makes it a formal Enthymem, but in virtue none. And therefore
I said to him in terms, first then make it out that there is such an
infallibility to be had, before you challenge it, and do not prove the being of
it by the challenging of it, lest the Roman Eagle be said to catch at flies.

Yet he goes on, It had been very easy to understand this right, and not to
make me say that only laying claim to infallibility is a sufficient proof of
infallibility. Ans. I think that I have understood more then my adversaries
have been contented with. And I say yet it is easy to understand here an
argument by a claim. And so they must do, if they will conclude their Church to
be the infallible judge. It is the best plea they have upon the supposition;
and the only plea without it. And I have the less to do, because he denies this
argument to be a sufficient proof, if not that, and the rest may answer
themselves. And I say as he says in this that though a Minister must be a man,
yet it follows not that such an one should be a Minister because be is a man
and not a woman (unless Pope Ioane) because one is more general, and therefore
the proposition is not simply converted; yet if he says against us, the Church
which is infallible judge must be a Church judging and teaching her self to be
infallible, and cannot be a Church which judges and teaches her self
fallible, and if he makes this an argument, then he makes it an argument for
himself, that their Church is the infallible judge, because it teaches her
self to be so. And yet he says, this I said not, but I said that Church that
must be infallible must not want this condition; and therefore no Church
teaching her self (even according to Scripture) to be fallible, can truly be
this infallible judge. Ans. This evasion will do them no good. A condition has
it self by way of an inseparable accident: but this inseparable accident, when
it is denied to any other, is as a property, and therefore bears vim
argumenti, the force of an argument; and I presume they thus intended it. Let
them therefore choose. But if it be one thing to say the Church which is the
infallible judge, must be a Church judging and teaching her self infallible,
and another thing to say that that Church is infallible judge which teaches
her self to be so, then that Church which teaches her self to be infallible
may yet not be the infallible judge; and so there is destroyed (and by himself)
also the necessity of consequence. But secondly, to answer them in kind, the
Church which teaches her self infallible is in this fallible, their Church
teaches her self to be infallible, the assumption is theirs; the proposition
is proved thus, either it is true or the ancient Church was not infallible,
because it did not teach her self to be infallible; which he says is a
necessary condition. Therefore either their consequence is not good, or they
prove thereby the ancient Church not to be the true Church, and so to be
different from theirs. Thirdly, put case some other Church should bethink
themselves as the Greek Church, and pretend to be infallible, the Roman
consequence would hold but pro tempore; for then notwithstanding the
supposition; supposed, the question which Church is the infallible judge, is
yet to be decided by the Word or by the Sword. And therefore, consideratis
considerandis, if he has no other hold for his Hypothesis he has none. And so
Lycurgus the Lawmaker might well die in Crete for his fiction that the laws he
gave the people came from Apollo of Delphos.

As to the charge against their Church about the Millenary opinion, he would
here answer it, N. 3.
that it was not admitted by the supreme pastor of the Church defining with
the Church assembled in a Council. Ans. first If this were a reason, it would
destroy all the traditions for three hundred years, because they were not
admitted by the supreme Pastor defining with the Church in a general Council,
for they say there was no council for the first 300 years. But secondly, was
not tradition then an infallible rule? if it was, that is no answer: if not,
the Scripture; or there was no infallible rule at all, and this contradicts
them in both; for they say there was an infallible rule, and not Scripture.

But he would also say, it was not generally admitted by the Church diffused or
universal. Ans. But I hope the diffused Church adds no authority to a matter of
faith? This was indeed Alphonsus a Castro's opinion; but my adversary was not
of capacity for that conceit, because he annexeth authority to the Pope and a
Council, and if the diffused Church (which includes the people) have any moment
toward; credibility, why is it denied to them to have the Judgment of private
discretion, since their consent also makes a suffrage? And as for the diverse
Fathers not holding it as a Tradition, they may excuse us certainly, unless
they will prove it. He should not surely prove it by Justin; for he is
accounted for it, himself, though many did not acknowledge it. (...) is
sufficient for a Tradition. Is it not* If not, let them show more for other
Traditions which they hold: if so, then that went for one. And then the many
were not Fathers: St. Austin otherwise. Neither does this conclude against
Catholic Tradition in all use; but may in point of faith, till we be as
certain of Tradition. Till that time I am satisfied with the former place of
Cyrill of Jerusalem, and when we shall be as certain of Tradition derived from
the Apostles times through all ages of the Church, in points of Faith, then we
shall not urge this plea, that if this opinion of an Apostolical Tradition was
so current in the Church upon the credit of one Papias at first, how shall we
be ever sure, in the account of Traditions, which is which?

N. 4.
He has learned to speak here high, that he might at least at last go off with
noise. He calls it a demonstration; which yet by his own words is to be held up
by a supposition. Neither upon the supposition supposed will it be very near a
demonstration; for it concludes not per se but by accident: and also it
concludes rather or primarily negatively, that other Churches are not the
infallible Judge. And if the discourse were good, it would come to this, that
other Churches should fare the worst for their modesty, and the Roman should
fare the better for their impudency. And if the ancient Church was infallible,
notwithstanding it did not say that it was infallible (or else they differ from
the ancient Church in an essential praedicate) then their Church is no^
infallible, notwithstanding it says that it is infallible. So then upon the
whole matter, his supposition is not admitted; and therefore, could they well
prove their Church to be fairer for this privilege then any other, the
supposition being admitted; yet since it is not admitted, it proves nothing in
re, nor by their own confession. And yet if it were admitted, his discourse
would not make him to be as good as his word in a demonstration. And yet this
ratiocination of his, instead of an un-answerable argument against us (but is
proved not to be so) may be an unanswerable argument against them, that they
lie at catch, and have need of that which all other Churches have left; and
also it proves that they have no better proof. What I said more to what he said
more by anticipation, he says nothing to. But he ingageth himself in the end
to a better account of the Roman Church. So then I have for the present my
discharge (...). yet his Epiphonema is this.

Petrae durities nulli magis quam ferienti nota.

And, not to be behind hand with him, I return him that of St. Basil, (...).

FINIS.
Errata, which the judicious and can did Reader is desired to observe.
PAge 71 l. 9. r. uncreated p. 84. l. 6. r. Pelagians, p. 115. l. 7. r.
derogates. p. 116. l. 2. r. substrated. p. 121. l. 15. and p. 12^. l. 7. r.
these, p. 148. l. 15. r. destruction, p. 236. l. 14. r. aequivalent, p. 238. l.
20. r. properly, p. 248. l. 31. r. heard, p. 516. l. 5. r. read, p. 518. l. 4,
5. r. dissent [this error is to be mended as likewise there for these or their
as often as it occurs] p. 52^. l. 5. r. recidivation. p. 527. l. 9. (...) p. 528.
l. 28. r. less p. 5^9. l. 5. r. pauperius, p. 534. l. 11. r. Catholica, p. 535.
l. 14. r. Lesbian rule, p. 588. l. 4. 1. Homoufiasts. p. 5^0. l. 23. r.
Sophisme, p. 544. l. 25. dele A. p. 550. l. 3^. r. (...) p. 593. l. 23. r.
quaeritur, p. 594. l. 13. r. sworn, p. 609. l. 28. r. dolus, p. 629. l. 35. r.
(...) p. 662. l. 25. r. qua. ibid. l. 28. unusquisque, p. 680. l. 15. r.
Agends, p. 695. in the margin r. Dr. Potter, p. 726. l. 30. r. (...) p. 730. l.
5. r. decretory weapons, p. 742. l. 15. r. now, p. 744. l. 26. r. a posse non
ad non posse, non valet, p. 200. [which should be p. 930.] l. 28, 9. r.
Cardinal's. p. 946. l. 3. r. (...). ibid. l. 13 r. Prudentia, p. 953. l. 4. r.
qui ne le croit. p. 964. l. 10. r. by images. p. 975. l. 2. r. Greek Latin
Edition. p. 977. l. 19. r. without indemnity. p 980. l. 7. r. Antoninus. p.
985. l. 16. r. Encratites. p. 994. l. 23. r. join with her the Church, p. 1000
l. 21 r. (...) p. 1060. l. 19. r. one, p. 1066. l. 14. r. (...).

The mistakes of the Printer in false pointing, litterals and folio's may be
rectified in reading.


