THE TRAITOR. A TRAGEDY: WITH Alterations, Amendments, and Additions.

As it is now Acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants.

Written by Mr. Rivers.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Parker at the Royal Exchange, and Sam. Briscoe in
Covent Garden, over against Wills Coffee-House. MDCXCII.

TO THE Right Honorable Donnogh Earl of Clancarty, Viscount Muskery, and Baron
Blarney.
May it please your Honor.
TO Pardon my Boldness in Presuming to shelter this Orphan under your Lordships
Protection, I am not ignorant, having never as yet deserved any Favor from
you, that it cannot but meet with a severe Construction, but wholly relying
upon your Clemency* who have always been a favourer of the Muses* I flatter my
self that your* Lordship may, for the Authors sake, vouchsafe to grant it a
favorable acceptance. I will not slander it with my Praise, it is Commendation
enough, to say the Author was Mr. Rivers. I am very well assured, after your
perusal your Honor will esteem it one of the best Tragedies that this Age has
Produced. I humbly beg your Lordship to pardon this Presumption,

Of your Honors most Humble And most Obedient Servant.

The Persons Names.
Duke of Florence. Mr. Hodgson. Lorenzo, His Kinsman and Favorite the Traitor.
Mr. Kynaston. Sciarrha, Brother to Amidea. Mr. Williams. Pisano, Lover to
Oriana. Mr. Cibber. Cosino, His Friend. Mr. Harris. Florio Sciarrhas brother.
Mr. Alexander. Depazzi, A creature of Lorenzos. Mr. Haynes. Frederico, Mr. Mich
Lee. Alonzo, Noblemen. Mr. Bright. Petruchio, Pisanoes Servant. Mr. Freeman.
Rogero, Page to Depazzi, Tommy Ken. Gentlemen, Servants. Amidea, Sciarrhas
Sister. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Oriana, Beloved of Pisano. Mrs. Lassells. Morossa,
Her Mother. Mrs. Cory. Lust, Pleasure. Furies.


THE TRAITOR.
Actus Primus.
Enter Pisano and Petruchio. Pisano. DID bid him come?


Pet. I did.


Pis. Go back again,
And tell him, I am gone abroad.

Pet. He Is here already Sir.


Enter Cosino. Cos. Dear Pisano,
Let me enfold thee thus:
And yet my heart counts this Embrace a distance.

Pis. I was woing Cosmo,
My Man, to tell thee, I was gone abroad
Before thou came.

Cos. How Is this? Your words and looks
Are strange, and teach me to infer I am
Not welcome, that on riper Counsel, you
Do wish my absence.

Pis. What for telling truth?
He thus should have but made the fit to see
Thy friend, thou come with expectation
To hear me talk, as I was wont of State,
Our Friendship or of Women, Cosmo Yes: no such matter.

Cos. This is more wild than usual, your language
Is not so clear as it was wont.

Pis. Right, right Cosmo,
The reason is, I have straggled,
And lost my self I know not where, in what
Part of the World, and would not this be shown
As well in him, to have prepared thee now?

Cos. What humour's this Pisano, I am yet to understand?


Pis. To understand!
Thou can not understand me, yet thou have
A name in Florence, for a ripe young man,
Of nimble apprehension, of a wise
And spreading observation, of whom
Already our old Men do Prophecy
Good, and great things, worthy thy fair dimensions.

Cos. This is an argument above the rest,
Pisano is not well; for being temperate,
He was not wont to flatter, and abuse
His Friend.

Pis. Besides there is another reason,
Thou should discover me at heart, through all
These mists, thou art in Love too, and who cannot,
That feels himself the heat, but shrewdly guess
At every symptom of that wanton Fever,
Oh my Friend!

Cos. What misfortune can approach
Your happy Love in Fairest Amidea.
Let jealous Lovers fear, and feel what it is
To Languish, talk away their Blood, and Strength,
Question their unkind Stars. You have your Game
Before you Sir.

Pis. Before me where? why do
Thou mock me Cosmo? She Is not hero.

Cosmo. It is
No Pilgrimage to travel to her Lip.

Pis. It Is not for you.


Cos. How Sir, for me? y've no
Suspicion, I can be guilty of
A Treason to our Friendship, be so just,
If malice have been busy, with my fame,
To let me know --

Pis. You hastily interpret,
Thy pardon I have only erred, but not
With the least scruple of thy faith, and honor
To me, thou have a noble Soul, and love me
Rather too well, I would thou were my Enemy,
That we had been born in distant climates, and never
Took Cement from our Simpathies in Nature.
Would we had never seen, or known each other,
This may seem strange, from him that loves thee Cosmo,
More precious than his Life.

Cos. Love me, and wish
This separation?

Pis. I will give thee proof;
So well I love thee, nothing in the world
Thy Soul does heartily affect, but I
Do love it too, does it not trouble thy
Belief? I wear not my own heart about me,
But thine exchanged, thy eyes let in my objects,
Thou hear'st for me, talk, kissest, and enjoyest
All my felicities.

Cos. What means this Language?


Pis. But what is all this to thee? Go to Oriana,
And bath thy Lips in Rosy dew of kisses;
And if at thy return thou find'st I have a being
In this vain world, 'Ile tell thee more.

Exit. Cos. But Sir, you must not part so.


Pet. Not with my good will,
I have no great ambition to be Mad.

Cos. Petruchio, let me conjure thee, tell
What weight hangs on thy Masters heart? why does he
Appear so full of Trouble?

Pet. Do You not guess?


Cos. No.


Pet. Why he loves --


Cos. The Beauteous Amidea, I know that.


Pet. Some such thing was, But you are his Friend My L^,
His Soul is now devoted to Oriana.
And he will dye for her, if this Ague hold him.

Cosmo, Ha!
For it is not possible without some cure,
He should live long:
Good Sir, do you go in and Counsel him.
So, so, it works;
This was my Lord Lorenzoes Plot, and I
Have been his Engine in the work, to batter.
His love to Amidea, by praising
Oriana to him, he is here, My Lord.

Exit Cos. Enter Lorenzo. Lor. Petruchio, where is your Lord? how moves the work*


Pet. To your own wish My Lord, he has thrown off
The thought of Amedia, and is mad
For Cosmo's Mistress, whom by your instructions
I have commended so --

Lor. My witty Villain!


Pet. Cosmo is with him, to whom cunningly
I have discovered his disease, and I
Beseech you interrupt 'em not.

Lor. This may
Have Tragical effects Petruchio:
For Cosmo, we shall prune his fortune thus,
Oriana's wealth would swell him in the State,
He grows too fast already, be still ours.

Pet. My Lord, you bought my Life, when you procured
My pardon from the Duke.

Exit Lord and Pet. Enter Pisa. and Cosmo. Pis. O Friend, thou can not be so
merciful,
To give away such happiness, my Love
Is for some sin I have committed, thus
Transplanted, I looked rather thou should kill me,
Then give away this comfort, it is a charity
Will make thee poor, and 'twere a great deal better
That I should languish still, and die.

Cos. Oriana and I were but in Treaty.
If you can find dispensation, to quit
With Amidea, your first Love, be confident
Oriana may be wone, and it were necessary
You did prepare the Mother.

Pis. Each syllable is a blessing.


Cos. Although some complaints have past between
Me and Oriana, I am not warm
Yet in the Mothers fancy, whose power may
Assist you much, but loose no time.

Pis. Thou Miracle of Friendship!


Exeunt. Enter Duke Frederico, Florio, and Alonso. Du. Letters to us? from whom?


Al. Castruchio.


Du. The Exile, whence?


Al. Scienna My good Lord,
It came enclosed within my Letter, which
Imposed my care and duty in the swift Delivery.

Fr. The Duke is pale of the sudden.


Du. A Palsy does possess me, Ha! Lorenzo,
Our Cousin, the Enemy of Our Life and State,
My bosom Kinsman? not too loud, the Traitor*
May hear, and by escape prevent Our Justice.

Flo. What Traitor?


Du. Alonso, come you hither,
What correspondency maintain you with this*
Castruchio?

Al. None My Lord, but I am happy
In his election, to bring the first
Voice to your safety.

Du. Most ungrateful man!
Turn Rebel: I have worn him in my blood.

Al. It Is time to purge the humor.


Du. I will do it.

Our Guard, were he more precious, had he shar'e
Our soul, as he but borrows of our flesh,
This action makes him nothing.
He turn conspirator: Oh the fate of Princes!
But stay, this paper speaks of no particular,
He does not mention what design, what plot.

Al. More Providence is necessary,


Du. Right, right, good Alonso, the art an honest man
And love us well, what is to be done?

Al. It Is best
To make his person sure, by this you may
Discover soonest who are of his faction --

Du. And at our leisure study of his punishment,
Which must exceed death; every common trespass
Is so rewarded, first apply all tortures
To enforce confession, who are his confederates,
And how they meant to murder us, then some rare
Invention to execute the Traitor,
So as he may be half a year a dying,
Will make us famed for Justice.

Enter Lorenzo, Depazzi. Al. He is here,
Shal's apprehend him?

Lo. Happy morning to
My gracious Sovereign.

Du. Can Treason couch it self within that frame?
We have Letters for you.

Lo. Letters, these dread Sir
Have no directions to me, your Highness
Is only named.

Du. They will concern your reading,
Alonso, now observe and watch him Florio,
Depazzi come you hither, does Lorenzo*
Look like a Traitor?

Dep. How sir, a Traitor?


Du. Ay Sir.


Dep. I sir by my Honor not I sir, I defy
Him that speaks it; I am in a fine pickle.

Lor. I have read --


Du. No blush! not tremble: Read again.


Lor. The substance is, that you maintain
A vigilant eye over Lorenzo, who
Has threatened with your death, his Countries liberty
And other things, touching reducing of
A Commonwealth.

Du. I like not that.


Dep. All Is out:
A pox upon him for a Traitor, he
Has hedged me in but 'Ile confess --

Du. What answer
Make you to this Lorenzo?

Lor. This of the sudden.
Sir I must owe the title of a Traitor
To your high favors; Envy first conspired,
And malice now accuses, but what story,
Mentioned his name, that had his Princes bosom,
Without the Peoples hate, it is sin enough
In some men to be great, the throng of stars
The rout, and common People of the sky,
Move still another way then the Sun does,
That guilds the creature, take your honors back,
And if you can that purple of my veins,
Which flows in yours, and you shall leave me in
A state, I sh'anot fear the great ones envy,
Nor common peoples rage, and yet perhaps
You may be credulous against me.

Duk. Ha!


Al. The Duke is cool.


Duk. Alonzo look you prove.
Lorenzo what you say.

Al. I say my Lord?
I have discovered all my knowledge sir:

Dep. Stand to it --


Lor. With license of your highness, what
Can you imagine I should gain by Treason:
Admit I should be impious, as to kill you,
I am your nearest kinsman, and should forfeit
Both name and future title to the State,
By such a hasty, bloody disposition,
The rabble hate me now, how shall I then
Expect a safety? is it reformation:
Of Florence they accuse me of; suggesting
I disaffect a Monarchy, which how
Vain and ridiculous would appear in me,
Your wisdom judge, in you I live and flourish,
What in your death can I expect, to equal
The riches I enjoy under your warm'th?
Should I for the heir, and talk of new government,
And Commonwealth, loose all my certainties?
And you above 'em all, whose favors have
Fallen like the Dew upon me; have I a soul
to think the guilt of such a murder easy,
Were there no other Torments? Or can I
Expect the People will reward your Murderer
With any thing but Death, a Paricide?

Al. So, so, the Duke's already in his circle.


Lor. But I am tame, as if I had no sense,
Nor other argument to vindicate
My Loyalty, thus poisoned by a paper,
In my eternal fame, and by a slave;
Call to my brow, some one that dare accuse me,
Let him have honor, great as mine, to forfeit;
Or since your grace has taken me so near,
Your own height, that may scale, may not expect
Such a proportioned adversary, yet let him
Have name within his Country, and allow him
A Soul, against which, I may engage my more,
Then equal honor, then I Will praise your justice;
But let him not be one condemned already,
A desperate exile -- is it possible
A Treason hatched in Florence, against the Duke
Should have no eyes at home to penetrate,
The growing danger, but at Sienna, one
Must with a perspective discover all:
Ask this good Councellor, or these Gentlemen
Whose faiths are tried, whose cares are always waking
About your Person, how have I appeared
To them, that thus I should be rendered hateful,
To you, and my good Country, they are virtuous,
And dare not blemish a white faith, accuse
My sound heart of dishonor; sir, you must
Pardon my bold defense, my virtue bleeds
By your much easiness, and I am compelled
To break all modest limits, and to waken
Your memory, (if it be not too late
To say you have one,) with the story of
My fair deservings, who, sir, overthrew
(With his designs) your late ambitious brother,
Hippolito, who like a Meteor threatened
A black and fatal omen.

Du. 'Twas Lorenzo.


Lo Be yet as just, and say whose art directed
A countermine to check the pregnant hopes
Of Salviati, who for his Cardinals Cap,
In Rome was potent, and here popular.

Du. None but Lorenzo.


Dep. Admirable Traitor?


Lor. Whose service was commended when the exiles
One of whose tribe accuses me had raised
Commotions in our Florence when the hinge
Of State did faint under the burden, and
The people sweat with their own fears, to think
The Soldier should inhabit their calm dwellings?
Who then rose up your safety, and crushed all
Their plots to air?

Du. Our dear Cousin Lorenzo,


Lor. When he that should reward, forgets the men
That purchased his security, it is virtue
To boast a merit with my services
I have not starved your treasury, the grand
Captain Gonzales accounted to King Ferdinand,
Three hundred thousand crowns, for spies, what bills
Have I brought in for such intelligence:

Dep. I grow hearty.


Du. All thy actions
Stand fresh before us, and confirm, thou art
Our best and dearest friend, thus we assure
Our confidence, they love us not that feed
One jealous thought of our dear Cous. Lorenzo
New welcome to us all, for you Alonzo
Give over your paper kites, learn wit, it is time.
Where shall we meet to night?

Lo. Pardon me sir I am a dangerous man


Du. No more a that
I Will credit my soul with thee, shall we revel
This night with Amidea?

Dep. The Duke courts him,
Well go thy ways, for one of the most excellent
Impudent Traitors --

Du. Yet a murmuring
Of a Traitor? we shall sooner suspect him,
That thinks Lorenzo guilty.

Dep. I my Lord
Dare boldly swear, his honor is as free --
From any treason, as my self,
I did prophecy this issue.

Duk. It Is an age
Till night, I long to fold her in my arms,
Prepare Sciarrah, but be very wise
In the discovery, he is all touchwood.

Lor. I know he is her brother, leave the managing
Of things to me.

Duk. Still when we expect,
Our bliss, time creeps, but when the happier things
Call to enjoy, each saucy hour has wings.

Exeunt. Actus Secundus.
Enter Sciarrah, and Lorenzo. Sciarrah. MY Sister, though he be the Duke, he
dares not,
Patience, patience, if there be such a virtue,
I want it Heaven, my Sister!
It has thrown wildfire in my brain Lorenzo,
A thousand furies revel in my skull,
Has he not sins enough in's Court to damn him.
But my Roof must be guilty of new lusts,
And none but Amidea? these the honors
His presence brings our House?

Lor. Temper your rage.


Sci. Are all the Brothels rifled? No quaint piece
Left him in Florence, that will meet his hot
And valiant Luxury, that we are come
To supply his blood out of our Families?
Diseases gnaw his title off.

Lo. My Lord --


Sci. He is no Prince of mine, he forfeited
His greatness, that black minute he first gave
Consent to my dishonor.

Lo. Then I Am sorry.


Sci. Why should you be sorry sir?
You say it is my Sister he would strumpet,
Mine, Amidea? it is a wound you feel not,
But it strikes through, and through the poor Sciarrah,
I do not think, but all the ashes of
My Ancestors do swell in their dark urnes
At this report, of Amidea's shame:
It is their cause as well as mine, and should
Heaven suffer the Duke's sin to pass unpunished,
Their dust must of necessity conspire,
To make an earthquake in the Temple.

Lo. Sir,
You said you would hear me out.

Sci. Why is there more
Behind?

Lo. And greater, Master, your high blood
Till I conclude Sciarrah, I accuse not
Your noble anger, which I have observed,
Is not on every cheap, and giddy motion
Inflamed, but Sir, be thrifty in your passion,
This is a petty trespass,

Sci. Has mischief any name
Beyond this? will it kill me with the sound?

Lo. My Lord, though the dishonoring your Sister,
Be such a fact, the blood of any other
But Alexander could no less then expiate,
Yet this sin stretches farther, and involves
With hers, your greater stain: did you e're promise him?
Yet why do I make any question?
It were another crime, to think Sciarrah
Could entertain a thought, so far beneath
His birth, you stoop to such a horrid baseness,
Then all the virtue of mankind would sicken,
And soon take leave of earth.

Sci. You torture me.


Lor. What then could the Defind, to give him any
Encouragement you would be guilty of
And act, so fatal unto honor,

Sci. To what?


Lor. Though all the teeming glories of his Dukedom,
Nay Florence State offered it self a bribe,
Yet to imagine, you
Would turn officious pander to his lust,
And interpose the mercenary bawd
To Court your Sister to his sinful coupling:
It Is horrid, affrights nature, I grow stiff
With the imagination.

Sci. Hah!


Lor. Yet this was his command I should impose.


Sci. Lorenzo.
I am not what I was,
My soul is but one flame,
My breath is hot enough
To thaw the Alps.

Lor. Your fancy would
Transport you.

Sci. It Is my rage, but let it cool,
And then we'll talk of something, something sir,
Shall be to purpose.

Lor. Now the flame is mounted,
My Lord, I have given proof, although he be
My Duke and Kinsman, I abhor his vices,
It Is policy in Princes, to create
A Favorite, who must bear all the guilt
Of things ill managed in the State, if any
Design be happy, it is the Princes own.
Heavens knows, how I have covnsell'd this young man,
By virtue to prevent his fate, and govern
With modesty: O the religious days*
Of Commonwealths!
We have outlived that blessing.

Sci. But I have thought a cure for this great state
Impostume.

Lor. What?


Sci. To lance it, is it not ripe?
Let Us draw cuts, whether your hand or mine
Shall do an act for Florence liberty,
And send this Tyrant to another world.

Lo. How, I draw cuts?


Sci. Toy it not thus Lorenzo,
But answer, by the name and birth you are
His Kinsman;
And let me tell you more:
We know, you but disguise your heart, and wish
Florence would change her tile.

Lo. How is this?


Sci. We know you have firm correspondence with*
The banished men, whose desperate fortunes wait
Your call to tumult, in our streets, all this,
Not to feed your ambition with a Dukedom,
By the remove of Alexander* but
To serve your Country, and create their peace,
Who groan under the Tyranny of a proud,
Lascivious Monarch, is it not true Lorenzo?
My phrase is blunt my Lord.

Lo. My Genius
And thine are friends, I see they have conversed
And I applaud the wisdom of my stars,
That made me for his Friendship, who preserves
The same religious fire, let this secret be
An argument, how much I dare repose
Upon Sciarrah's honor,
I Will either live, in your exchange of faith
A Patriot, or die my Countries Martyr.

Sci. Thou have a fire beyond Prometheus.


Lo. Heaven knows I Have no particular design
To leap into a Throne, let me advance
Our liberty, restore the ancient Laws
Of the republic, rescue from the jaws
Of lust, your mothers, wives, your daughters, sisters*

Sci. Sisters!


Lor. From horrid Rape, poor Amidea.


Sci. I am resolved, by all that is blessed, he dies
The roof he would dishonor with his lust
Shall be his tomb, bid him be confident,
Conduct him good Lorenzo, I Will dispose
My house for this great scene of death.

Lo. Be constant.


Exit. Enter Florio, and his Sister Amidea. Flo. Now brother, what news brings
the great Lorenzo?


Sci. Let me have truce vexation for some minutes,
What news? preferments, honors, offices;
Sister, you must to Court?

Am. Who, I to Court?


Sci. Or else the Court will come to you, the Duke
Has sent already for us Amidea: Is she not fair,
Exceeding beautiful, and tempting Florio?
Look on her well, methinks* I could turn Poet,
And make her a more excellent piece then heaven*
Let not fond Men hereafter commend what
They most admire, by fetching from the Stars
Or flowers their glory of similitute;
But from thy self the rule to know all beauty,
These are the Duke's own Raptures, Amidea,
His own Poetic flames, an argument
He loves my Sister.

Ami. Love me?


Sci. Infinitely,
I am in earnest, he employed Lorenzo,
No meaner Person in this Embassy,
You must to Court, Oh happiness!

Ami. For what?


Sci. What do great Ladies do at Court, I pray?
Enjoy the pleasures of the world, dance, kiss
The amorous Lords, and a thousand more
Delights, which private Ladies never think of;
But above all,
The Duke himself shall call thee his,

Ami. You make me wonder,
Pray speak that I may understand.

Sci. Come, come, I find your cunning;
The news does please, the rolling of your eye
Betrays you, and I see a guilty blush
Through this white veil upon your cheek, you would
Have it confirmed, you shall, the Duke himself
Shall swear he loves you.

Am. Love me? why?


Sci. To Court,
And ask him; be not you too peevish now,
And hinder all our fortune; I have promised him
To move you for his arm-ful, as I am
Sciarrah, and your brother, more I ha* sent
Word to him by Lorenzo, that you should
Meet his high flame, in plain Italian*
Love him, and --

Ami. What for heaven, be the Duke's whore?


Sci. No, no, his Mistress, command him, make (...)


Ami. Give up my Virgin*honour to his lust?


Sci. You may give it a better name, but do it*


Ami. I do mistake you brother, do I not?


Sci. No, no, my meaning is so broad, you cannot*


Ami* I would I did then, is it not possible
That this should be a dream? where did you drop
Your virtue Sir? Florio, why move you not?
Why are you slow to tell this man? for sure
It Is not Sciarrah, he has talk so ill,
And so much, that may have the cause to fear,
The Air about's infected.

Flo. Are not you
My brother?

Sci. Be not you a Fool, to move
These empty questions, but join to make her
Supple, and pliant for the Duke.
No matter for the talk of musty people,
Look up to the Reward, thou art young and skilled
In these Court temptings, naturally soft,
And moving, I am rough-hewn, assist, wo't,
With some queint Charm, to win her to this game?

Flo. My Sister?


Sci. Ay, ay.


Ami. Come not near him Florio,
It Is not Sciarrah, sure my brothers Nurse
Played the Impostor, and with some base Issue
Cheated our House.

Sci. Gypsy, use better language,
Or I Will forget your Sex.

Flo. Offer to touch her
With any rudeness, and by all that is virtuous --

Sci. Why how now Boy?


Flor. I do not fear your Sword,
This with my Youth, and Innocence, is more
Defense than all thy armory, what Devil
Has crept into thy Soul?

Sci. You Will not help?


Flor. I Will rather kill thee.


Sci. It Is very well,
Have you considr'd better of the motion?

Ami. Yes.


Sci. And what is your resolve


Ami. To have my name
Stand in the Ivorie Register of Virgins,
When I am dead, before one factious thought
Should lurk within me to betray my Fame,
To such a blot, my hands shall mutiny,
And boldly with a Poniard teach my heart
To weep out a repentance.

Sci. He embraces 'em,
My excellent chaste Sister, Florio
Thou have my soul, I did but try your Virtues,
It Is truth the Duke does love thee, vitiously,
This night he means to revel at our house,
The Tarquin shall be entertained; he shall.

Ent. a Serve. Serve. My Lord, Pisano is come.


Sci. Look up Sister
And shine with thy own smiles, Pisano's come,
Pisano thy contracted, honored Friend.
Enter Pisano, Cosino, Freder. Welcome all,
But you above the rest, my brother shortly, Emb. him.
Sister and Florio entertain your noble
Friends, some few minute, I am absent, we
Must not forget to prepare for the Dukes coming,
I Will soon return.

Exit. Ami. You are not cheerful Sir.

How is it my Lord? you were not wont to look
So sad when you came hither

Pis. I am not well Amidea.


Am, Oh, my heart.


Pis. Be you
Comforted Lady, let all griefs repair
To this, their proper Centur.

Flor. Sir how fare you?


Pis. Altr'd of late a little, I would Sciarra were come back.


Fred. I might have finished ere he went, and not
Delayed his business much, two or three words,
And I had dispatched.

Am. How Sir? your language is
Another then you use to speak, you look not
With the same brow upon me.

Pis. Madam, I am come to render all my interest in your love,
And to demand my self again live happier
In other Choice.

Am. Ha!


Pis. Here Is witness, all is canceled betwixt us,
Nay, and you weep -- Farewell.

Ami. He Is gone.


Flor. I am amazed.


Pis. Now lead me to my blessing.


Exeuni Flor. Shall a long suit and speeding with his love

With the worlds notice, and a general fame
Of Contract too, just in the Instant when
A Marriage is expected, he broke off
With Infamy to our House.

Am. Brother, If ever you loved poor Amidea, let not this
Arrive Sciarrhas Ear; there is danger in
His knowledge of it, this may be a Trial of my Affection.

Flo. A Trial; No, It showed too like a Truth.


Am. My Tears entreat your silence.


Flo. You have Power to command it, dry your Eyes then,
He Is returned.

Enter Sciarrha. Sci. How now, Weeping? Where is Pisano and his Friends?


Flo. They Are gone, Sir.


Sci. Ha!


Am. Guess by my Eyes, you may, something of Sorrow has befaln.
No sooner you were departed, but some strange Distemper
Invaded him; we might discern a change
In's Countenance: And though we prayed him to
Repose with us, he would strait back again;
So with Cosmo he returned.

Flo. The alteration was strange and sudden.


Sci. Alas noble Gentleman, -- but come, clear up
Your Face again, we hope it will not last;
Look bright again, I say, I have given order --

Enter Gentleman. Gent. My Lord the Duke's already come


Sci. Remove, Good Amidea, and reserve thy Person
To Crown his Entertainment, be not seen yet.

Exit Am. Enter Duke Lorenzo, Alonzo, Attendants. Du. Sciarrha, we are come to
be your Guest.


Sci. Your Highness does an Honor to our House.


Du. But, where is thy Sister, she must did us welcome.


Sci. She is your Grace's Handmaid.


Du. For this Night, Let the whole World conspire to our delight. Lorenzo --


Whisper. Lor. Sir be confident -- and perish.


Enter Morosa, and Oriana, in the Garden, and Servant. Mor. Pray give access to
none, -- yet if Pisano
Enqire, direct him to the Garden, Cosino
Exit Servant. Is young, and promising, but while Lorenzo
Lives, must expect no Sunshine.

Enter Pisano, Cosmo, Servant. Pis. There Is for thy pains.
Evit Servant. They are now at opportunity.

Cos. My Lord,
Do you prepare the Mother, and let me close with Oriana.

Pis. What Service can reward thee?


Cos. Take occasion to leave us private, This Hour be
Propitious, win but the Mother to you.

Pis. She is prepared alieady.


Cos. Lose no time, take the other walk.


Exit Pis. and Mor. Ori. My dear Cosmo.


Cos. My best Oriana.


Ori. You have been too much absent, I must chide you.


Cos. You cannot sweet, I would knew which way to make thee.
Angry: Yes, that I might see how well it would become thee.

Ori. You will make me angry.


Cos. But you will love me still, I fear.


Ori. Do You fear it? Is It a misfortune?


Cos. What?


Ori. My Love*


Cos. We may love too well, and that is a fault.


Ori. Not where the Object's good.


Cos. O yes; Always beware of the extremes.


Ori. What mean you? I affect none but my Cosmo, not him with too much Flame.


Cos. If you should Lady, 'twere not nobly done.


Ori. To love another?


Cos. Yes, if there be cause, that may be called a Vertae.


Ori. So we should be inconstant.


Cos. Why not, it our reason be convinced.
Let us examine all the Creatures, read
The Book of Nature through, and we shall find
Nothing does still the same: Why then
Should our Desires, that are so nimble, and
More Subtle than the Spirits in our Blood,
Be such staid Things within us, and not share
Their natural Liberty, shall we admit a change in smaller Things,
And not allow it in what most of all concerns us?

Ori. What?


Cos. Our Loves.


Ori. Have you a suspicion I am changed, and thus would
School me for it, or shall I imagine that you are altered.

Cos. Yes, I am, and therefore proclaim thy Freedom,
I do love thee less, To show I love thee more.

Ori. What riddle's this?


Cos. It Is none. I have found I am not worthy of thee,
Therefore come to make thee satisfaction for my Crime
Of loving thee, by pointing out a way,
And Person, will become thy Affection better.
What do think of brave Pisano, shall his Merit plead
Succession in thy chaste Thoughts?

Ori. I know him.


Cos. Thou can not choose; and I could study none
Worthy thy love, but him.

Ori. It Is very likely you would resign then?


Cos. Ay, to honor thee,
His Service will deserve thee at the best,
And richest value.

Ori. Why it shall be so.


Cos. Nay but be serious, and declare me happy
That I may say, I have made thee just amends.

Ori. Why sir I do love him.


Cos. But do thou love him perfectly, with a
Desire, when sacred rites of marriage
Are past, to meet him in thy bed, and call him
Thy Husband?

Ori. Pray tell me;
But truly, I beseech you, do you wish
Pisano mine indeed? or, are you jealous,
And name him to accuse me?

Cos. Not by goodness;
But if there be a charm beyond thy innocense,
By that I would conjure thee Oriana,
Love him and make three happy, it shall be
My bliss to call you his, let me but own
A servant in your memory.

Ori. Unkind,
And cruel Cosmo, do thou think it possible,
I can love any thy self? thou will
Undo my heart for ever.

Enter Pisano and Morossa. Mor. You shall be
Ever most welcome, if I be her Mother,
She must declare obedience, Oriana --

Cos. Go cheerfully, thy Mother calls,
Alas poor Lady,
I half repent me, since she is so constant:
But a friends life weighs down all other love;
Beside, I thus secure my Fate, Lorenzo
Threatens my spring, he is my enemy.

Ori. You Will not compel assection?


Pis. No, but Court it
With honor, and religion.

Mor. I shall forget the nature of a Parent,
Unless you show more softness, and regard
To what is urged, what promise could you make
To Cosmo, without me? or if you had --

Cos. Here Cosmo does give up all title to it,
I have no part in Oriana now.

Ori. I Have heard too much, do with me what you please,
I am all passive, nothing of my self,
But an Obedience to Unhappiness.

Exit. Cos. Follow her Pisano.


Pis. You Are all Friendship.


Cos. Trace their warm steps, Virgins Resolves are weak.
Leave not her Eyes, until you see Day break.

Exeunt. Actus Tertius.
Enter Depazzi and Rogero. Depazzi. ROgero?


Rogero. My Lord.


Dep. Make fast the Chamber Door, stifle the Keyhole and the Crannies, I must
discourse of secret Matters, do thou smell nothing, Rogero? ha?


To. Smell? not any thing, my Lord, to offend my Nostril.


Dep. Come hither, what do the people talk abroad of me? Answer me justly, and
to the Point, what do they say?


To. Faith, my Lord, they say that you are --


Dep. They lie, I am not; they are a lowsy, impudent multitude; a many-headed,
and many-horned generation, to say that I am --


To. A noble Gentleman, a just and discreet Lord, and one that deserved to have
his Honors without money.


Dep. Oh is that it? I thought the Rabble would have said, I had been a
Traitor, I am half mad certainly e're since I consented to Lorenzo; it is a very
hard condition, that a Man must lose his Head, to recompense the procuring of
his Honors: What if I discover him to the Duke, ten to one, if Lorenzo come
but to speak, his Grace will not have the grace to believe me, and then I run the
hazard to be thrown out of all atother side: it is safest to be a Traitor, hum,
who is that you whispered to?


To. I whisper?


Dep. Marry did you, Sirrah?


To. Not I, good faith, my Lord,


Dep. Sirrah, Sirrah, Sirrah, I smell a Rat behind the Hangings: Here Is no
body, ha? Are there no Trunks to convey secret Voices?


To. Your Lordship has a pair on.


Dep. I do not like that Face in the Arras, a my Conscience he points at me, a
Pox upon this Treason, I have no stomach to it, I do see my self upon a
Scaffold, making a pitiful Speech already, I shall have my head cut off, seven
years ago I laid my head upon a wager, I remember, and lost it; let me see; it
shall be so, it is good policy to be armed, Rogero, imagine I were a Traitor.


Rog. How, Sir?


Dep. I but say imagine, we may put the Case, and that I were apprehended for a
Traitor.


To. Heaven defend.


Dep. Heaven has something else to do, than to defend Traitors: I say, Imagine I
were brought to the Bar.


To. Good my Lord, you brought to the Bar?


Dep. I will beat you, if you will not imagine at my bidding: I say, suppose I now
were at the Bar to answer for my Life.


To. Well, Sir.


Dep. Well, Sir, that is as it happens; you must Imagine I will answer the best I
can for my self: conceive, I prithee, that these Chairs were Judges, most grave
and venerable Beards and Faces at my Arraignment, and that thy self were in the
Name of the Duke and State to accuse me; what could thou say to me?


To. I, accuse your good Honor? for what, I beseech you?


Dep. For High Treason, you Blockhead.


To. I must be acquainted with some Particulars first.


Dep. Mass, thou say right: why imagine, dye hear? you must but imagine, that
some great Man had a Conspiracy against the Duke's person, and that I being an
honest Lord, and one of this great Man's Friends, had been drawn in; for that is
the plain truth on it, 'twas against my will, but that is all one: Well, thou
understandst me, show thy wit Rogero, scratch thy nimble Pericranium, and
thunder out my Accusation ex tempore: Here I stand Signior Depazzi, to answer
the Indictment.


To. Good my Lord, it will not become me, being your humble Servant.


Dep. Humble Coxcomb, is it not for my good? I say, accuse me, bring it home,
jerk me soundly to the quick, Rogero, tickle me, as thou love thy Lord; I do
defy thee, spare me not, and the Devil take thee if thou be not malicious.


To. Why then have at you: First, Signior Depazzi, Thou art Indicted of
High Treason, Hold up thy Hand, Guilty, or not Guilty?


Dep. Very good.


To. Nay, very bad Sir; Answer, I say, Guilty or not Guilty?


Dep. Not Guilty.


To. It Is your best course to say so. Well, Imagine -- I rise up the Duke's most
learned in the Laws, and his nimble tongued Orator, have at your Signior.


Dep. Come, come on Sir, here I stand.


To. I will prove thou lie in thy Throat, if thou deniest thy Treason, and so
I address my self to the most understanding seats of Justice. Most wise, most
honorable, and most incorrupt Judges, sleep not, I beseech you, my Place has
called me to plead in the behalf of my Prince and Country, against this
notable, this pernicious, and impudent Traitor, who has plotted and contrived
such high, heinous and horrible Treasons, as no Age nor History has ever
mentioned the like. Here he stands, whose Birth I will not touch, because its
altogether unknown who begot him. He was brought up among the small Wares in
the City, became Rich by sinister and indirect Practices, married a Merchant's
Wife at adventures, and was soon after advanced to be a Head Officer.


Dep. Why, you Rascal.


To. Peace, Sirrah, peace; nay, your Lordships shall find him very audacious:
This Fellow, not content to have his Branches spread within the City, I speak
it to his Face, let him deny it, was afterward, by the corruption of his
Consederate, and the mere grace of his Highness, raised to Honor, received
infinite Favors from his Prince of blessed memory; yet, like a Wretch, a
Villain, a Viper, a Rat of Nilus, he has practiced Treasons against the sacred
person of the Duke: for which he deserves not only to die, but also to suffer
Tortures, Whips, Racks, Strapadoes, Wheels, and all the fiery brazen Bulls that
can be invented, as I shall make it appear to this honorable and illustrious
Court.


Dep. This Rogue's transported.


To. With all my heart, I obey your Lordships -- Thus then I pass from these
Circumstances, and proceed to the principal Villainies that we have to lay to
his charge. Imprimis, Thou Signior Depazzi did offer to a Groom a 100 Crowns
to poison his Highness hunting Saddle.


Dep. Did I?


To. Do not interrupt me, Varlet, I will prove it, his hunting Saddle, and woe
shall be unto thy breech therefore; and finding this serpentine Treason broken
in the shell, do but lend your reverend Ears to his next designs, I will cut
'em off presently. This Irreligious, nay, Atheistical Traitor, did with his own
hands poison the Duke's Prayer Book, oh Impiety! And had his Highness, as in
former times he accustomed, but prayed once in a month, which by special grace
he omitted, how fatal had it been to Florence? But as by Justice his Excellence
did then, and by his own want of devotion, prevent this Assasinates purpose, so
we hope in his own Discretion, and the Council of his State, he will take heed
how he prays hereafter while he lives, to which every true Subject will say,
Amen.


Dep. May it please your Honors --


To. That impudent, brazen-faced Traitor, will thou deny it? Moreover, and like
your good Lordships, he has for this Fortnight, or Three Weeks before his
Apprehension, walked up and down the Court with a Case of Pistols charged,
wherewith, as he partly confessed, he intended to send the Duke to Heaven with
a powder.


Dep. This Rogue will undo the Devil at Invention, may it please his Honorable
--


To. These are but sprinklings of his Treason.


Dep. Will you justify this? Did I any of these things, you Tadpole?


To. Hold your self contented, my Lord, he that is brought to the Bar in case
of Treason, must look to have more objected than he can answer, or any Man is
able to justify.


Dep. I confess, and please your good Lord ships.


To. Mark, he will confess.


Dep. That Is the way to be sent of an headless Errand; indeed I confess that I
never intended any Treason to his Highness, nor ever sought the Prince's Life:
true it is, that I heard of a Conspiracy.


To. That, that, my Lord, has overthrown him; he says, he never sought the
Prince's Life, Ergo, he sought his Death. Besides, he has heard of Treason,
now he that hears, and discovers not, is equally guilty in Fact: For in
Offenses of this Nature, there are not Accessaries; ergo, he is a Principal,
and being a Principal Traitor, he deserves Condemnation.


Dep. Shall I not speak?


To. No, Traitors must not be suffered to speak, for when they have leave, they
have Liberty, and he that is a Traitor deserves to be close Prisoner.


Dep. All that this Fellow has uttered, is false and forged, abominable Lies.


To. I will speak Truth, and I will be heard, and no man else in this place.


Dep. I never dreamed of a hunting Saddle, nor never had so much as a thought
of any Prayer Book.


To. You sit here to do Justice, I speak for the Duke and the safety of the
Common wealth.


Dep. As for Pistols, it is well known I could never endure the report on 'em, I
defy Powder and Shot, as I do him that accuses me.


To. I defy all the world that will hear a Traitor speak, for himself, it is
against the Law which provides that no Man shall defend treason, and he that
speaks for himself, being a Traitor, does defend his treason, thou art a
Capital obstreperous Malefactor.


Dep. Thou art a Madman.


To. Go to, you have played the fool too much.


Dep. Thou continual motion cease, a pox upon thee hold thy tongue.


To. The pox will not serve your turn.


Dep. Why then this shall.


Beats him. To. Hold, hold, good my Lord, I am sensible I ha done, imagine I ha
done, I but obeyed your Lordship, whose batoon I find stronger than my
imagination, my Lord, you will answer this to strike i'the' Court thus?


Dep. I am as weary -- hark Rogero

Knocks. One knocks, see, see, there is to make thee amendends, see good Rogero,
and say nothing, pray Heaven it be not Pursevant.


Enter Petruchio, with a Letter. To. Petruchio, my Lord, Pisanoes Secretary.


Dep. But Lorenzo's Engine a very knave.


Pet. My very good Lord.


Dep. What Is here? It can be no goodness.

Reads, My Lord, I would not have you go to Bed to night, he will not let me sleep
now, I dreamt as much, something will be done to give Florence liberty: In the
depth of night you may cunningly disperse some rumors in the City, that the
Duke is dead, the people must be distracted, in the common fright be not you
wanting in your Person to assist their fears, and speak well of Lorenzo, speak
well of the Devil: My humble service to your Lord, and say he has power to
command me in all things.


Pet. My Very good Lord.


Dep. No matter and you were both hanged; Rogero, she him the Wine-sellar: Let
me see, I must report the Duke's death, I cannot abide this word Death, yet he
desires me but to report it; hum, if it be false? why so much the better; there
will be the less harm in it; if it should prove true, they will believe me
another time: Well, I will drink my self half drunk, and be fortified.


Exeunt. Enter Duke, Amidea, Lorenzo, Sciarrha, Florio, etc. Du. Sciarrha, you
exceed in Entertainment,
Banquet our Eyes too.

Lo. He will feast all Senses.


Sci. Only a toy, my Lord, I cannot called
A Mask, not worthy of this presence, yet
It speaks the freedom of my Heart, and gratitude
For this great honor.

Du. Amidea must sit near us.


Sci. Lords your places, 't wo' not be
Worth half this Ceremony, let 'em begin.

Enter Lust, richly apparrel'd, the Pleasures attending. Du. Who Is the
Presenter?


Sci. Lust, Sir, pray observe.

Lust. Now let Lust possess the Throne
Of Love, and rule in Hearts alone:
Tou sweet Tempters to my Sin,
Beauty, Smiles, and Kisses win
Upon frail Mortals, let them know
There is no Happiness, but you
Shoot no Arrows tipp'd with Lead,
Each Shaft has his golden head:
Call no Love, delude Men still,
Through the Flesh, the Spirits kill,
Nor spend all your *Art to take
Common Persons, Greatness make
By your potent Charms to be
Subjects unto Hell and* me,
Inflame but Kings with loose desire,
Ye soon set all the World on fire.

Enter a young Man in rich Habit and Crowned. Du. What Is he?


Sci. A wild young Man that follows Lust,
He has too much Blood it seems.

Du. Why looks he back?


Sci. There is a thing called Death that follows him
With a large train of Furies.
Hang his Conscience, it whines too much.

Lo. This is too plain.


Sci. He does not tremble yet,
Aside* By-an-by, Sir, you shall see all* his Tormentors
Join with 'em, there is the sport on it*

Lo. Methinks they
Should have been first for the antimask.

Sci. Oh no!
In Hell they do not stand upon the method,
As we at Court,
Sister you do ill,
To keep the Duke in talk, he cannot see
The Devil for you
The Furies join in the Dance, and in the end, carry the young Man away. How
does your Highness like this dance?


Du. My eyes so feasted here, I did not mind it,
But I presume 'twas handsome.

Sci. Oh the Lethargy
Of Princes! we have kept you, Sir, from bed:
More lights.

Du. Good night to all, to you the best:
Sciarrha bind us ever by performance.

Sci. We are all yours.


Du. And Florence thine, once more --
Brightest of Ladies.

Lo. You are firm.


Sci. Suspect not.


Exeunt all, but Amidea and Florio. Flo. I do not like my Brother's Moral-Mask,
The Duke himself was personated, I
Wonder it did not startle him.

Am. I hope
Sciarrha does not mean so ill as that
Did promise, he is returned, his looks are full
Enter Sciarrha. Of threatening*

Sci. Amidea, go not to bed,
And yet no matter, I can do it alone:
Take both your rest, and in your Prayers commend
The Duke to Heaven, it is Charity, h'as made
His Will already, and bequeathed his Body
To you, Sister, pity his Soul for it, it is now
Within few Minutes of departing.

Am. How?


Sci. Why this way I must help him in his Groans
To bring his flesh a-bed.

Am. You wo'not kill him?


Sci. I am not of your mind.


Am. I know you cannot.


Sci. You are not studied so perfect in
His destiny, I hope, I will endeavor --

Am. To kill your Prince?


Flo. What, here?


Sci. No, in his Chamber.


Am. Shall it be read in Stories of our Florence,
Sciarrha first did stain his Family
With such a Treason?

Flo. Was he not invited?


Sci. Yes, by his Lust.


Flo. And in your crowned Tables,
And Hospitality will you murder him?

Sci. Yes, and the reason wherefore he was murdered,
Shall justify the Deed to all Posterity,
He came to wrong my Sister.

Flo. Wanton heat,
Let youthful Blood excuse him.

Sci. So it must.


Flo. Mistake me not, oh think but who he is,
The Duke, that word must needs awake your piety*

Am. How will good Men in this remembrance
Abhor your Cruelty, that send to hell
One with the weight of all his Sins upon him.

Sci. It is too late to cool with Argument
My incensed Blood; will you go dally with him?
I have gone
So far in promise, if you clasp not with him,
It will be dangerous if he outlive
This night.

Am. I have thought on it, send him to my Bed.


Sci. Ha*


Am. Do not question what I purpose, Heaven
Witness to my chaste thoughts.

Sci. Wo't thou trust him?


Am. I will do much, Sir, to preserve his life*
And your innocence: Be not you suspectful,
At the worst, you can but respite your Revenge.

Sci. Do thou not fear unhappy Lucrece chance,
Or wretched Philomel's dishonor?

Am. No.
Give me his life, and send your Wanton to me*
I Will to my Chamber, fear me not Sciarrha,
Have not one thought so bad, I sha' not prosper*
Virgins in Heaven will suffer with me.

Exit Ami. and Flo. Flo. Trust her.


Sci. It Is but deferring of my Justice.
She wo'not kill him sure: draw on her Soul
The guilt she hates in mine, if she do yield
To the hot encounter: Ha? 'twill be just,
That both their Hearts weep Blood, to purge their Lust.

[Exit. Enter Florio and Amidea. Flo. My Poniard?


Am. I Have no black Intent
To stain't with any Blood.

Flo. Take it, I know, thou art my virtuous Sister.
It were wickedness to doubt thy purpose,
Or the event.

Am. Now leave me.


Flo. Thou have a Guard of Angels.


Am. They are coming.


[Enter Sciarrlia and Duke. Sci. Look, there she is, Sir.


Du. Dearest Sciarrha.


Sci. To your recreation, here
I Will obscure my self, Florio? it is well.

[Withdraws behind the Scenes. Du. Lady, you know me?


Am. Yes, my Prince.


Du. I was so,
Till I saw thee, but I gave up that Title,
A conquest to thy Beauty, which among
Her other Wonders has created me
A Subject and Servant, and I shall
Be happier to be received yours by
One of those Names, than Duke of Tuscany.

Am. Oh! take your self again, use your Greatness
To make the hearts of Florence bow to you,
And pay their Duties thus.

Du. Rise Amidea,
And since you have given my Power back, it will
Become me to command.

Am. And me to obey.


Du. I see thy noble Brother has bin faithful
To my desires, he has prepared thee with
A Story of my Love, which thou reward'st
With too much humbleness: I could dwell ever
Here, and imagine I am in a Temple,
To offer on this Altar of thy Lip,
[Kisses her often. Myriads of flaming Kisses with a Cloud
Of Sighs breathed from from my heart,
Which by the Oblation would increase his Stock,
To make my Pay eternal.

Am. What mean you?


Du. That Question is propounded timely: Had
Not interrupted me, I should have lost
My self upon thy Lips, and quite forgot
There is a Bliss beyond it.
Transform me there to Happiness;
I Will laugh at all the Fables of the Gods,
And teach our Poets, after I know thee,
To write the true Elysium.

Am. Good my Lord:
I understand you not, and yet I fear
You do not mean well, if you have brought with you
A sinful Purpose, which I may suspect.

Du. Why, Madam, what do you imagine I
Came hither for?

Am. I know not.


Du. How! Is It come to that?
Your Brother gave you more
Desirous of the Sport, and brought me hither
Ripe for your Dalliance: Did you not expect me?

Am. Yes.


Du. And to what other purpose?


Am. To tell you that you are not virtuous.


Du. I Am of your mind.


Am. But I am not so wicked,
To be of yours: Oh, think but who you are;
Your Title speaks you nearest Heaven, and points
You out a glorious Reign among the Angels:
Do not depose your self of one, and be
Of the other dis-inherited.

Du. I would
Your Brother heard you: Prithee, do not waste
This tedious Divinity; I am
Resolved to grapple with you.

Am. Keep off.


[Shews the Poniard. Du. Ha!

Turned Amazon!


Am. Prince, come not too near me;
For, By my Honor, since you have lost your own,
Although I bow in Duty to your Person,
I hate your black Thoughts. Tempt not my just Hand
With violent Approach: I dare, and will
Do that will grieve you, if you have a Soul.

Du. Thou dare not kill me.


Am. True: But I dare die.


Du. Be thy own Murderer!


Am. Rather than you should be my Ravisher.


Du. Thou can not be so merciless; it is less Sin
To be unchaste. I am thy Prince, I prithee
Throw by that cruel Weapon; let our War
Be soft Embraces, shooting amorous Smiles;
Kill and restore each other with a Kiss.
I know thou can not be unkind so long:
Then I command thee.

Am. I must not obey
To be your Strumpet: Though my Hand* be unskilful,
I shall soon find my Heart

Du. I Will not believe --


She wounds her Arm Am. Let this deserve your Faith, I dare be just:
This Crimson River issuing from my Arm.

Du. Hold.


Am. Never: It shall flow; and if this Chanel
Yield not enough, I Will strike another Vein;
And after that, another, and not pity
The murmuring Stream, till through a prodigal Wound
I have drained the Fountain. This does weep for you,
And shall extol my Death, if it may teach
You to correct your Blood.

Du. There Is so much gone
From me, I cool apace: This Action
Has shot an Ague through me. Amidea,
Pity thy self.

Am. Not till you swear Repentance:
I do not faint yet, it is somewhat about;
But I can find a nearer way: This does it.

Du. Contain, I am sorry, sorry from my Soul.
Trust me, I do bleed inward, Amidea,
Can answer all thy Drops. Oh, pardon me:
Thou faint'st already; Do not?
Look to thy Wound.

Am. May I believe you, Sir?


Du. I dare not think awry: Again I ask
Forgiveness. In thy Innocence I see
My own Deformity.

Enter Sciarrha, hastily embraces Amidea. Enter Florio. Sci. Now a thousand
Blessings
Reward thy Goodness; thou deserve a Statue,
A tall one. But apply
Betimes unto thy Wound. Florio, assist her.
And now, my Lord --

[ Ex. Am. and Flo. Du. Sciarrha, I Will begin to be thy Lord:
I brought Intentions of Dishonor to thee,
And thy fair Sister; but I am reconciled
To Virtue, and will study how to satisfy
For you and Florence.

Sci. You will be more precious,
Than had you never fallen: I am all Joy
In your Conversion.

Du. Is Lorenzo a-bed?


Sci. Lorenzo! I think he has not said his Prayers yet:
But --

Du. What!


Sci. I cannot tell; may be he does not use it.


Du. How?


Sci. My Lord, you now are lovely;
'Twere better you would forget him, he is not right
At Heart, I fear.

Du. Fear nothing.


Sci. To be plain,
You cherish your Disease in him, and are
Not safe while he is near you.

Du. Do not envy him.


Sci. Then I must tell you, Sir, he is a Traitor,
Within my Knowledge, has conspired your Death.

Du. With whom?


Sci. With me: I should have killed you, Sir,
This Night; and every Minute he expects
To hear you numbered with the Dead: I can
Demonstrate this: Your Pardon: But, in truth,
The Injuries you meant us, were severe;
And he, with as much Violence, did urge 'em
To your Destruction. But your Piety
Has charmed my Purpose, and I look upon you
With new Obedience.

[Enter Florio. Du. Possible!


Sci. We wo' not shift the Scene, till you believe it.
Florio, entreat my Lord Lorenzo hither:
Step but behind the Arras, and your Ear
Shall tell you who is the greatest Traitor living.
Observe but when I tell him, you are slain;
How he will rejoice, and call me Florence great
Preserver; bless my Arm, that in your Blood
Has given our groaning State a Liberty.
Then trust Sciarrha. But, observe; I hear him.

Enter Lorenzo. Lo. Whom talked he to?


Soi. It Is done --


Lo. What? Good Sciarrha?


Soi. The Duke is dead.


Lo. We are not left so miserable,
Heaven is more kind to Florence.

Sci. With this Hand
I made a Passage for his Soul.

Lo. Defend,
Omnipotence! What, murdered! And by noble
Sciarrha! How my Ear abuses me!

Sci. Did not we plot it too?


Lo. How? We* Collect:
I fear you are not well. Pray, tell me why
You talk thus? Where Is the Duke? He has a Guard*
An Army of Heaven about him. Who in Florence
Dares be so black a Devil, to attempt
His Death?

Sci. This is fine Cunning. Why, that Devil is
Lorenzo, if he dares deny it: We are in private,
You need appear no Stranger to that is done
By your Direction.

Lo. I in the Practice!
Then let me creep into the Earth, and rise
A Monster to affright Mankind. Sciarrha,
I must abhor thee for it. Oh, my Prince!
My dearest Kinsman! May thy Hand rot off.
Treason, Treason.

Sci. Then my Sword shall fetch
Another Witness in thy Heart.

As they draw, the Duke interposes. Du. Hold.


Lo. My Royal Lord! Nay, let him kill me now:
I Have so much Joy and Peace about me, 'twere
A Sin to wish my Life beyond this Minute.

Du. Put up, I say.


Sci. My Lord, we are both cozened:
That very Smile's a Traitor.

Du. Come, be calm:
You are too passionate, Sciarrha, and Mistook Lorenzo.

Lo. But I hold him noble:
I see he made this Trial of my Faith,
And I forgive him.

Du. Ye shall be Friends* you shall, I sa


Enter Cosmo and Alonzo Cos. The Duke! --


Alon. Where Is the Duke?


Cos. My Lord, we are blessed to see you safe: Report
Has frighted all the City with your Death:
People forsake their Beds, and seeking how
To be informed, increase the wretched Tumult.

Alon. There Is nothing but Confusion: All Men tremble,
As if some general Fire invaded Florence.

Sci. Have Comfort, Sir.


Du. What Is to be done?


Lo. Depazzi has remembered,
My Lord, there is no Safety for the State,
Unless you personally appease 'em.

Du. How?


Lo. I hope they will tear him: Would he were dead any way.


Alon. He has counseled well.


Cos. Your Presence only has the power to charm 'em.


Du. I fear their Rage: Where is our Guard?
Alonzo, haste before, proclaim Our Pardon,
And that We live to give the Offenders Mercy.
Why are We born to Greatness, mocked with State,
When every Tumult staggers Our proud Fate?

Sci. Our Quarrel is deferred, Sir.


[Exeunt. ACTVS Quartus.
Enter Lorenzo. Lo. MY Plots thrive not, my Engines all deceive me.
Are there
No faithful Villains left in Nature? All
Turned honest! Man nor Spirit aid Lorenzo!
Who has not Patience to expect his Fate,
But must compel it! How Sciarrha played
The Dog-bolt wo' me! And had not I provided
In Wisdom for him, that Distress had ruined me.
His frozen Sister Amidea too
Has half converted him; but I must set
New Wheels in motion, to make him yet
More hateful, and then cut him from his Stalk,
Ripe for my Vengeance: I Will not trust the Rabble.
Confusion on the giddy Multitude,
That but two Minutes ever the Duke came at 'em,
Bellowed out Liberty, shook the City with
Their Throats; no sooner saw him, but they melted
With the hot Apprehension of a Gallows.
Sudden Rot
Consume this base Herd: And the Devil want
Any Cattle for his own Teeth, these are for him.

[Enter a Servant. Ser. Sciarrha, my Lord desires to speak with you.


Lo. Sciarrha! Come near -- you understand; admit him.
[Ex. Se^ Welcome, my noble Lord;
[Enter Sciarrha You were not wont to visit me.

Sci. Nor mean ever to do it again*


Lo. You bring Frowns.

I can be fullen too -- What is your pleasure?


Sc. You have abused me.


Lo. You have injured me.


Sci. In what?


Lo. Betrayed me basely to the Duke.


Sci. You denied then you were a Traitor.


Lo. Yes: I was no Fool, to run my Neck upon
The Axe, and give you such a Cause of Triumph*
Were it again in question --

Sci. You Are a Villain, Sir;
And I must have it certified under your own Hand.
To show the Duke.

Lo. You shall be humbled to
Confess the contrary; nay, subscribe
That I am honest, and desire my Pardon.
Look, I have a Sword, and Arm, and Vigor;
Dare fight with thee, did ride upon a Whirlwind*
Provoke the on a Rock, in Waves, in Fire;
And kill thee without Scruple: Such a Strength
Is Innocence.

Sci. Innocence! Do not fear a Thunderbolt?
I shall be charitable to the World, and I
Cut thee in pieces.
Did not thou rail upon the Duke?

Lo. I grant it.


Sci. Call him a Tyrant?


Lo. More I do confess;
I did exasperate you to kill or murder him;
Give it what Name you please: With Joy I brought him,
Under the color of your Guest, to be
The common Sacrifice. All this I remember.
But is Heaven's Stock of Mercy spent already,
That Sins, though great and horrid, may not be
Forgiven to the Heart that groans with Penitence?
Are the Eternal Fountains quite sealed up?
I was a Villain, Traitor, Murderer,
In my Consenting to his Death; but hope
Those Stains are now washed off*

Sci. Have thou repented?


Lo. Trust me, I have.


Sci. The Devil is turned religious.


Lo. As he was
A lustful Duke, a Tyrant, I had lost him:
In his Return to Piety: He commanded
My Prayers, and fresh Obedience to wait on him.
He Is now my Prince again.

Sci. This is but Cunning, to save your Life.


Enter diverse Gentlemen armed. Lo. My Life! Within there, ha? Welcome.

1. My gracious Lord.

2. Will It please your Honor,

Command my Service?

3. Or me?

4. Or any?

5. Our Swords and Lives are yours.


Sci. Perhaps your Lordship has some Business
With these Gentlemen: I Will take some other time.

Lo. By no means, good Sciarrha:
You visit seldom, those are daily with me;
Men that expect Employment, that wear Swords,
And carry Spirits, both to be engaged,
If I but name a Cause. Gentlemen, Draw.

Sci. My Providence has betrayed me.


Lo. Now, Sciarrha, you that with single Valor dare come home
To affront me thus; Know, but too late, thy Heart
Is at the Mercy of my Breath; these Swords
Can fetch it when I please; and to prevent
Your Boast of this great Daring: I beseech,
As you do love and honor your Lorenzo,
No Hand advance a Weapon; sheath again,
And leave us: I owe Service to your Loves,
But must not so dishonor you.
All Gentl. We obey.


[Exeunt Gentlemen. Sci. They Are gone: This is some Nobleness.


Lo. You see
I do not fear your Sword, alone I have
Too much Advantage; yet you may imagine
How easily I could correct this Rashness:
But in my Fear to offend gracious Heaven
With a new Crime, having so late obtained
My Peace, I give you Freedom.

Sci. Do I dream?


Lo. Pray, chide me still; I will be patient
To hear my Shame.

Sci. Is this to be believed?
Does not Lorenzo counterfeit this Virtue?
He does: It is impossible he should repent.

Lo. Why, tell me, Sciarrha; and let us argue a while
In cooler Blood. Did not you once resolve
To kill the Duke too?

Sci. I confess --


Lo. To give him Death with your own Hand?
Methinks it should be the same Parricide
In you, if not a greater; yet you changed
Your purpose. Why did you not go through,
And murder him?

Sci. He was converted.


Lo. Good: That taught you Mercy, and perhaps Repentance For your Intent.


Sci. It did.


Lo. Why should not, Sir,
The same Conversion of the Duke possess
My Heart with as much Piety to him,
And Sorrow for my self? If I should say,
You are but cunning; is this Shape of Honesty?
And still suspect your Soul to be a Traitor?
Might you not blame my Want of Charity?

Sci. He says but right: We are
Both Men, frail things: It Is not impossible.

Lo. I am reconciled to Heaven already, and the Duke: If you
Be still unsatisfi'd, I am ready, Sir.

Sci. The Circumstance considered, I incline
To think this may be honest.

Lo. Come, Schiarrha,
We are both hasty:
My Nature is corrected at this Minute:
I Am Friends with all the World; but in your Love
Shall number many Blessings.

Sci. I am converted.


Enter Petruchio. Lo. What Is the News?


Pet. My Lord Depazzi prays some Conference
In the next Chamber: We arrived by chance
Together at your Gate: I do not like his Talk, Sir.

Lo. Hang him, Property, let him
Expect; thou art come in the Opportunity:
I could have wished -- Be wise, and second me*

Sci. He waits upon Pisano,
Whose Health I may enquire; I have not seen him
Since he departed sick: A fit Occasion.

Lo. Married to Oriana! Thou mistak'st:
It Is Amidea, Lord Sciarrha's Sister.

Pet. That Contract's broken, and the old Lady
Morrossa is violent to have the Marriage
Finished with her Daughter.

Lo. Sciarrha,
Is It true, Pisano marrries Oriana,
The rich Morrossa's Daughter?

Sci. Ha?


Lo. We did expect to hear your Sister should
Have been his Bride: Has he forsaken Amidea?

Sci. Do not you serve Pisano?


Pet. Yes, my Lord.


Sci. And dare you talk he is to be married
To Oriana?

Pet. If they live 'till to Morrow:
There Is great Provision to my knowledge, and --

Sci. Take that, and learn to speak a Truth hereafter*


Lo. That Blow, shall cost his Life,
It is not possible he dares affront
You thus; the World takes notice of a Contract.

Pet. I am not to give
Account for my Lord's Actions, let him answer
And justify his Honor: But, my Lord,
Since I am provoked, I must declare he has
Called back his Vows to Amidea, given
Her freedom, and does mean to use his own,
And this he dares publish.

Lo. What, disclaimed a Lady of her Birth and glorious Merit!


Sci. Thou Art a Villain.


Lo. My Lord, he is not worth your Anger, he
Declares but what his Master has committed*
It Is none of his Fault.

Pet. It becomes my Duty
To take Correction, my Lord, from you.
I am a Servant, a poor Gentleman.

Sci. Shall I suspect the Circumstance at his departure?


Lo. It is strange you knew not this before.


Sci. I must examine, if he dares --


Lo. Be patient.


Sci. Teach Fools and Children patience,
The dogs eat up Sciarrha,
If Pisano out-lives my Sister's Wrongs.
False Heaven, why should thy Altars save?
It Is just that Hymen light him to his Grave.

Exit. Lo. Farewell* dull passionate Fool,
Kill Pisano, and be lost thy self; or if his Sword
Conclude thy Life, both ways I am revenged.
Petruchio, thou did hit my Instructions rarely,
And I applaud thee: Now send in Depazzi, and visit me anon.

Pet. I shall, my Lord.


Exit. Enter Depazzi and Rogero. Dep. My Lord, I would speak a Word or two in
private*


Lo. You may.


Dep. Is no body within hearing? All clear behind the Arras?


Lo. Make no doubt* Sir.


Dep. My Lord, the truth is, I am very fearful: Is your Lordship sure there are
no Eves-droppers?


Lo. What needs this Circumstance? I pray come to the point.


Dep. It Is not unknown to your Lordship, that you have bin my very good Lord,
neither am I ignorant, that I am your humble Servant; you advanced me, brought
me into the number of the Nobles, and I brought you a reasonable number of
Crowns: I am not the first wise Citizen that has bin converted into a foolish
Courtier: But, my Lord, I beseech you pardon me: It will out.


Lo. What Is the Matter?


Dep. I am ready to burst.


Lo. With what?


Dep. Treason, Treason, now *ts out, and I feel my Body the lighter for it
already: The last Plot did not take, you see, and I would humbly entreat your
Lordship to excuse me, and get some body else hereafter to be your Traitor in
my stead.


Lo. How, Sir?


Dep. If you did but know the tenderness of my Constitution, or feel the Pangs
and Convulsions that I suffer, you would pity me: I fall away, you see, I
cannot sleep for dreaming of an Ax, I have caused my hangings of Holofernes to
be taken down in my Dining Room, because I dare not look upon a Head that is
cut off in it, something of my Complexion: My Wisdom tells me, I am a fool to
be so fearful, but my Conscience tells me, I am a greater fool, if I have not
Wit enough in my Pate* to keep my Head on my Shoulders. I beseech your
Lordship, take me into your consideration, I am but a mortal, though I be a
Lord; every Man has not the like Gift of Impudence, I have a weak Stomach, and
Treason is Physic to me.


Lo. You wo' not betray me?


Dep. But, alas! in such a Case, I may soon bewray my self, and then your
Lordship may soon be smelt out: To prevent therefore some mischief that may
happen, I desire to leave off, while I am well, and that your Lordship may know
I mean plainly* I have brought you all your Letters, I durst not trust any other
place with 'em for fear of State-Rats. I have unript my Bosom to you, and there
they are to a Tittle -- now I may safely swear, I have no hand with your
Lordship.


Lo. This is very strange.


Dep. Mistake not, my good Lord, I am still your Creature, but I have a great
mind to be honest a little while, among the weaker sort of Nobility: Yet thus
much persuade your self, I will never wrong your Lordship in a Syllable; should
you tell me of a thousand Treasons and Stratagems, I will never reveal any, I
scorn that; but your Lordship must pardon me, I will be a Traitor no longer,
that is certain; I will be honest, and the rather, because no Body shall hit me
in the teeth after I am dead, and say, look where Depazzi carries his head very
high; and, my Lord, the more to induce your Lordship to dismiss me -- Rogero.


To. My Lord.


Dep. Give me the Gold. I have brought 1500 Crowns more.


Lo. Wherefore?


Dep. That I may have my Lordships good Will, to leave my Office before it be
taken from me, and preferred to a worse, it is half the price I paid for it. I
love Peace and a little Honesty. I know your Honor will find an able Man for
it, and it is fit I should pay for my Quietas*


Lo. And what do you resolve?


Dep. To return to the Dunghill from whence I came, for though I was born in
the City, I have some Land in the Country, durty Acres and Mansion House, where
I will be the Miracle of a Courtier, and keep good Hospitality, love my
Neighbors, and their Wives, and consequently get their Children, be admired
amongst the Justices, sleep upon every Bench, keep a Chaplain in my own House
to be my Idolater, and furnish me with Jests; and when I have nothing else to
do, I will think of the Court, and how much I have bin obliged to your
Lordship: My Lord, I may do you Service with a leading Voice in the Country,
the Kennel will cry a'my Side; if it come to Election, you or your Friend shall
carry it, against the Commonwealth.


Lo. Well, Sir, since you have expressed your self so freely, I will not
counsel you against your Disposition to stay at Court, you may go when, and
whither you please; and though at parting, I have nothing worth your
Acceptance, I will bestow these Crowns upon your Servant.


Dep. Thou shall give 'em me again.


To. Indeed, my Lord, I love a little Honesty, it is his Lordship's

Bounty, it will be a Stock to set me up, for my self at Court,
when your Lordship is retired into the Country, I humbly thank
your Lordship, and take my leave of yours.

Enter a Servant. Ser. The Duke my Lord.


Exit, Servant. Dep. How the Duke?


Du. Signior Depazzi.


Lo. He has bin earnest with me, and please your Highness,
To be his humble Suitor, he may have
Freedom to leave the Court.

Du. He shall be banished.


Dep. How?


Lo. What time will your Grace allow to provide?


Du. Two hours.


Dep. I had rather lose my Head at home, and save Charges
Of Travail, I beseech your Grace.

Du. Well, it is granted, let him not trouble us.


Lo. Enjoy the Country, and return when the Duke sends for you.


Dep. I humbly thank his Highness, and will pray for your increase of Grace.


Exit. Du. Lorenzo, are we private?


Lo. Yes, my Lord.


Du. I am very melancholy.


Lo. I know the cause, it is Amidea.


Du. Right.


Lo. I do not wish her dead.


Du. It were a Sin.


Lo. Not in Heaven, Sir; yet
There be Ladies, that would think it a promotion.

Du. It were pity she should leave
The World, till she has taught by her Example
The nearest way.

Lo. I am very confident she is yet honest.


Du. Yet, Lorenzo?


Lo. Ay, Sir, but I Am not of Opinion it is
Impossible to know a change.

Du. Take heed.


Lo. I must confess, she has been very valiant,
In making you remove your Siege, and showed
Pretty dexterity at the Poniard,
See her self bleed:
You were startled
To see her strike her Arm, and grew compassionate.

Du. I was not Marble; we break Adamant
With blood* and could I be a Man, and not
Be moved to see that hasty Ebb of Life
For my sake?

Lo. Ascend again*
And fix in your loved Orb, he brings this comfort
That can assure it.

Du. Ha!


Lo. You shall enjoy her.


Du. Enjoy fair Amidea? do not tempt,
Or rather mock my frailty with such a promise.

Lo. Shake off your melancholy slumber, I
Have here decreed you shall possess her.

Du. Is this in nature?


Lo. Thus: Sciarrha's Life
And Fortunes are already growing forfeit,
These brains have Plotted so; your mercy shall
Purchase what you can wish.

Du. Do this,
And I Will repent the folly of my penitence,
And take thee to my Soul, a nearer pledge
Than Blood or Nature gave me: I Am renewed,
I feel my natural warmth return, when, where,
Is this to be expected? I grow Old*
While our Embraces are deferred.

Lo. I go, to hasten your delight,
Sciarrha's Fate is cast
Firmer than Destiny.

Du. Thou art my Prophet, I Will raise thee up an Altar.


Lo. Trust these brains.


Du. Thou make my Spirit caper in my veins.


Exit. Cosmo, and two Gentlemen above. 1 Gent. This way they pass.


Cos. I would not see 'em.


2 Gent. Why?


1 Gent. What melancholy of the sudden? It is now past cure.


Cos. I know it is, and therefore do not
Desire to Witness their Solemnity, should Oriana
See me to day.

2 Gent. What then?


Cos. I fear she would be displeased.


2 Gent. We dispute not those nice formalities.


Enter Alonzo, Piero, Pisano, Oriana, Morossa. 1 Gent. She has spied you
already.


Cos. I am sorry for it.


Oriana faints. Mor. How is it, my Child?


Pis. She faints, what grief is so unmannerly
To interrupt thee now, Oriana?

Mor. Daughter.


Pis. Will Heaven divorce us ever the Priest have made
Our Marriage perfect? She returns.

Oria. Why were you so unkind to call me from
A pleasing slumber? Death has a fine dwelling.

Pie. This shows her heart's not yet consenting; it is
Her Mother's fierce command.

Ori. Something spoke to me from that Window.


Pis. There is nothing.


Ori. Nothing now.


Pis. Set forward.


Alon. I do not like this Interruption; It Is
Ominous.

Enter Amidea. Am. Not for my sake, but your own, go back,
Or take some other way; this leads to death.
My Brother. --

Pis. What of him?


Am. Transported with
The fury of Revenge for my dishonor,
Has vowed to kill you in your Nuptial Glory.
Alas! I fear his haste: Now, good my Lord,
Have mercy on your self; I do not beg
Your pity upon me, I know too well
You cannot love me now.
But again,
I would beseech you, cherish your own life,
Though I be lost for ever.

Alon. It is worth
Your care, my Lord.

Pis. Alas! her Grief has made her wild* poor Lady!
I should not love, Oriana, to go back;
Set forward, Amidea, you may live
To be a happier Bride: Sciarrha is not
So irreligious to profane these Rites.

Am. Will you not then believe me? Pray persuade him,
You are his Friends. Lady, it will concern
You most of all indeed: I fear you will weep
To see him dead as well as I.

Pis. No more,
Go forward.

Am. I have done, pray be not angry,
That still I wish you well, may Heaven divert
All harms that threaten you:
I hope there is no sin in this;
Indeed I cannot choose but pray for you,
This might have been my Wedding Day.

Ori. Good Heaven!
I would it were; my heart can tell, I take
No Joy in being his Bride.
I will resign my Place, and wait on you*
If you will marry him.

Am. Pray do not mock me.


Ori. Dear Amidea, do not think I mock
Your Sorrows; by these Tears, that are not worn
By every Virgin on her Wedding Day;
I am compelled to give away my self:
Your Heart were promised, but he never had mine*
Am not I wretched too?

Enter Sciarrha, Lorenzo, aloof with a Guard. Alon. Sciarrha! then I prophecy
--


Sci. Pisano, where is Pisano?


Pis. Here, Sciarrha.
I should have answered with less Clamor.

Sci. But I would not lose my Voice, I must be heard*
And I must tell you, it is not safe to marry.

Pis. Why*


Sci. 'Twill be fatal; Hymen is gone abroad,
And Venus, Lady of your Nativity,
Is found by wise Astrologers this day
In The House of Death.

Pis. This must not fright me, Sir; set forward.


Sci. One cold Word, you are a Villain;
I do not flatter.

Pis. I am patient:
This day I consecrate to Love, not Anger;
We'll meet some other time.

Sci. Deride my Fury?
Then to thy Heart I send my own revenge
And Amidea's.

Stabs him with a Poniard. Pis. I am murdered.


Mor. Help, murder Gentlemen, Oh my Unhappiness!


Enter Lorenzo with a Guard. Pis. Bloody Sciarrha.


Lo. Hold.


Sci. Come all at once,
Yet let me tell you, my Revenge is perfect,
And I would spare your Blood, if you despise
My Charity --

Lo. No Man attempt his Death;
I Will give you Reasons; this Attempt deserves
An exemplary Justice.

Enter Cosmo. Sci. I am above
Your politic reach, and glory in the wound
That punished our Dishonor: Is he dead?
I would not be so miserable, not to have sped him
For the Empire.

Cos. Oh my Friend, poor Oriana.


Lo. Disarm him:
Return and comfort one another; some
Exeunt all but Lorenzo, Sciar. and Guards. Remove Pisano's Body, while I make
it
My care Sciarrha escape not.

Sci. None of all give me a scratch?


Lo. You have forced him with discretion.


Sci. Now what must I expect?


Lo. You are my Prisoner.


Sci. I am so.


Lo. And be confident to find that favor.


Sci. Favor.


Lo. Be at distance,
My Lord, I am sorry for your great Misfortune,
And if you can but study how I may
Assist you, you shall soon discern my love,
My readiness to serve you.

Sci. Ha, this is honest.


Lo. I will impose no more
Restraint than your own House; you're Honorable:
You have many severe Enemies: The Duke
Looked graciously upon Pisano, but --

Sci. You shall not lose the smallest beam of favor,
To buy a Man so desperate;
I am armed to die, and give Example of that Fortitude
Shall shame the Law's Severity.

Lo. I have thought a way
To recover you, if you incline to it.
Dare you consent?

Sci. To any thing that is noble,
Although I never feared to suffer; I
Am not so foolish to despise a Life.

Lo. There is no difficulty attends it; listen,
The time will not permit much circumstance:
The Duke you know did love your Sister.

Sci. Vitiously.


Lo. Her Virtue did but cool him for the present*
As sprinklings on a flame, he is now more passionate
To enjoy her.

Sci. Ha*


Lo. If she consent to meet
His soft embrace, with his first kiss he seals
Your Pardon.
The Duke may be so taken
With her Return to his Delight, who knows
But he may marry her, and discharge his Duchess
With a quaint Sallet: You do apprehend me.

Sci. And repent more I had one good thought of thee,
Than had I killed a Thousand: Save my life
And prostitute my Sister, though I have
No Weapon, I will look thee dead, or breathe
A damp shall stifle thee.

Lo. I have done,
And praise your Heathen Resolution
Of Death; go practice Immortality,
And ever thy Body has three Days inhabited
A melancholy Chamber in the Earth,
This Sister shall be ravished,
Mauger thy Dust and Heraldry.

Sci. Ha, ravished?
When I am dead, was it not so? Oh my Soul,
I feel it weep within me, and the Tears
Soften my Flesh: Lorenzo, I repent my Fury.

Lo. I advised you the best way my Wisdom could direct.


Sci. I thank you for it:
You have awaked my Reason; I am ashamed
I was no sooner sensible. Does the Duke
Affect my Sister still, say you?

Lo. Most passionately.


Sci. She shall obey him then, upon my Life:
That Is it, my Life; I know she loves me dearly.
I shall have much ado to win her to it,
But she shall come, I Will send her.

Lo. Perform this.


Sci. I wo'not only send her, but prepared
Not to be disobedient to his Highness:
He shall command her any thing.

Lo. Do this,
And be for ever happy; when these have
Only for form but waited on you home:
This disingages 'em.

Sci. My humblest Service
To the Duke, I pray; and tell him, Amidea
This Night shall be at his Dispose, by this.

Lo. I Am confident, farewell; attend Sciarrah.


Sci. Pity the Seaman* that to avoid a shelf,
Must strike upon a Rock to save himself.

Exeunt. ACTUS Quintus.
Enter Sciarrha, and Amidea. Sci. THe doors are fast,
Enough is wept already for Pisano:
There Is something else that must be thought on, and
Of greater consequence: I am yet unsafe,
That for thy sake am guilty of his blood.

Am. Though all my stock of tears were spent already*
Upon Pisano's loss,
Yet the remembrance that you have made
A forfeit of your dear life,
Is able to create a weeping spring
Within my barren head: Oh, my lost Brother!
Thou have a cruel Destiny, my Eyes,
In pity of thy Fate, desire to drown thee.
The Law will only seek thee upon Land*
Hid in my tears, thou shall prevent the stroke
Kills both our Name, and thee.

Sci. I know thou love me,
Poor Girl, I shall desire to cherish life,
If thou lament me thus; so rich a comfort
Will tempt me, wish I might delay my journey
To Heaven.

Am. Good Heaven, that we might go together.


Sci. That must not be.


Am. Then let me go before.


Sci. How?


Am. Make my suit unto the Prince, my blood
May be your ransom; let me dye, Sciarrha.

Sci. How my Honor blushes
To hear thee, Amidea?
Suffer for me! why* thou art innocent:
I have provoked the Punishment, and dare
Obey it manly; if thou could redeem me
With any thing but death, I think I should
Consent to live.

Am. Nothing can be too precious
To save a Brother, such a loving Brother
As you have been.

Sci. Death's a devouring Gamester,
And sweeps up all; what think thou of an Eye?
Could thou spare one, and think the blemish recompensed,
To see me safe with the other; or a hand,
This white hand, that has so often
With admiration trembled on the Lute*
Till we have prayed thee leave the strings a while,
And laid our ears close to thy Ivory fingers,
Suspecting all the Harmony proceeded
From their own motion, without the need
Of any dull or passive Instrument.
No, Amidea, thou shall not bear one scar
To buy my life; the Sickle shall not touch
A Flower that grows so fair upon his stalk:
I would live, and owe my Life to thee,
So 'twere not bought too dear.

Am. Do you believe I should not find
The way to Heaven? Were both mine Eyes thy Ransom,
I shall climb up those high and rugged Cliffs
Without a hand.

Sci. One way there is, if thou
Do love with that tenderness.

Am. Pronounce it,
And let no danger that attends, incline you
To make a pause.

Sci. The Duke thou know did love thee.


Am. Ha!


Sci. Nay, do not start already, nor mistake me;
I do not, as before, make trial of thee,
Whether thou can, laying aside thy Honor,
Meet his lascivious arms; but by this Virtue
I must beseech thee to forgo it all,
And turn a sinful Woman.

Am. Bless me!


Sci. I know the Kingdoms of the World contain not
Riches enough to tempt thee to a fall
That will so much undo thee; but I am
Thy Brother, dying Brother; if thou love
Him therefore, that for thee has done so much;
Died his pale hands in blood to revenge thee,
And in that Murder wounded his own Soul
Almost to death, consent to lose thy innocence*

Am. Oh! never, never*


Sci. What, not to save my Life?


Am. But stain my self for ever*


Sci. Where? In thy face, who shall behold one blemish,
Or one spot more in thy whole frame? Thy Beauty
Will be the very same, thy Speech, thy Person
Wear no deformity.

Am. Oh! do not speak
So like a Rebel to all Modesty,
To all Religion. If these Arguments
Spring from your jealousy, that I am fallen,
After a Proof you did so late applaud --

Sci. I had not killed Pisano then:
Then I but tried thy Virtue:
Now my Condition calls for mercy to thee,
Though to thy self thou appear cruel for it:
Come, We may live both; if you please.

Am. Who has made you afraid to dye? I pity you,
And wish my self in any Noble Cause
Your Leader.

Sci. So Valiant,
I will not interpose another Syllable
To entreat your pity; say your Prayers, and then
You Are ripe to be Translated from the Earth,
To make a Cherubin.

Am. What means my Brother?


Sci. To kill you.


Am. Do not fright me, good Sciarrha.


Sci. And I allow three minutes for your Devotion.


Am. Will you murder me?


Sci. Do You tremble?


Am. Not at the terror of your Sword,
But at the horror will affright thy Soul
For this black deed? I see Pisano's blood
Is texted in thy forehead, and thy hands
Retain too many, too many Crimson Spots already;
Make not thy self, by murdering of thy Sister,
All a Red Letter.

Sci: You shall be the Martyr.


(...) (...) is there no Remedy but Death,


Sci (...) then keep your word, and let me


Am Yet (...)


Sci. I shall relent.
And from your hand (...)

Am. Forgive me Heaven, and witness I have still Kneels
My Virgin Thoughts, it is not to save my (...)
But his Eternal one.
Sciarrha give me leave to vail my Face,
Rises. I dare not look upon you and pronounce,
I am too much a Sister, live, hereafter
I know you will condemn my frailty for it.
I will obey the Duke.

Sci. Dare thou consent.


[Wounds her. [ She unvails. Am. Oh! let me see the Wound.
It Is well, if any other hand had done it:
Some Angel tell my Brother now, I did
But seem consenting.

Sci. Ha, but seem?


Am. You may believe my last breath.


Sci. Why did thou say so?


Am. To gain sometime, in hope you might call in
Your bloody purpose, and prevent the guilt
Of being my Murderer; but Heaven forgive thee.

Sci. Again, again, forgive me, Amidea,
And pray for me; live but a little longer
To hear me speak, Lorenzo has
My Oath to send thee to his Bed: For otherwise
In my denial, Hell and they decree,
When I am dead, to Ravish thee: Mark that,
To Ravish thee: And I confess in Tears,
I did resolve, when I had found thee ripe,
And nearest Heaven, with all thy best desires
To send thee to thy Peace.

Am. With the same heart I beg Heaven for my self, farewell.


Sci. Thou shall not die yet, Amidea, Sister.
Florio knocks. I cannot come:
But one word more: Oh! which way went thy Soul?

Florio breaks open the door. Sci. Look, here is our Sister! so, so, chase her:
She may return; there is some Motion.

Flo. Sister?


Sci. Here Is Florio would fain take his leave; so, so, she comes.


Flo. Amidea, how came this Wound?


Am. I drew the Weapon to it:
Heaven knows, my Brother loved me: Now I hope
The Duke wo'not pursue me with new Flames.
Sciarrha, tell the rest, love one another
The time you live together: I Will pray for you
In Heaven, farewell, kiss me when I am dead;
You else will stay my Journey.

She dies. Sci. Did not hear
An Angel call her? Floria, I have much
To tell thee, take her up: She is not dead,
Let her alone; nay then she is gone indeed.
But hereabouts her Soul must hover still:
Let Us speak to that fair Spirit.

Flo. You talk idly.


Sci. Do you talk wisely then? An excellent Pattern
As she now stands for her own Alablaster.
Cannot thy Tears and mine preserve her, Florio?
But we lose time, I charge thee by thy love
To this pale Relick, be instructed by me,
Not to thy danger; some revenge must be,
And I am lost already; if thou fall,
Who shall survive to give us Funeral?

[Exeunt. Enter Lorenzo and Petruchio. Lo. Petruchio?


Pe. My Lord.


Lo. Thou Art now my Servant.


Pe. I ever was in heart your humblest Vassal.


Lo. Thou Art faithful, I must cherish thy desert,
I shortly shall reward it, very shortly;
Next morning must salute me Duke; the Sun
And I must rise together.

Pe. I shall pray
Your Glory may outshine him in your Florence,
And when he sets, we may enjoy your Sunbeam.

Lo. It Is handsome flattery, and becomes a Courtier.


Pe. I flatter not, my Lord.


Lo. Then thou art a Fool:
No Music to a Great Man Chimes so sweetly:
And Men must thrive; come hither, How many
Have thou killed*

Pe. But one, my Lord.


Lo. But one?


Pe. And I must owe
My Life to your Lordship, I had been hanged else.

Lo. But one? wait at the Door, he is
Not fit to kill a Duke, whose Hand is guilty
But of a single Murder; or at least
Not fit alone to act it: I have been
Practiced already, and though no Man see it,
Nor scace the Eye of Heaven, yet every day
I kill a Prince; appear thou Tragic Witness.
[He discovers the Duke's Picture, a Poniard sticking in it. Which though it
bleed not, I may boast a Murder.
Here first the Duke was painted to the Life:
But with this Pencil to the Death: I love
My Brain for the Invention, and thus
Confirmed, dare trust my Resolution.
I did suspect his Youth, and Beauty might
Win some Compassion when I came to kill him:
Or the Remembrance that he is my Kinsman,
Might thrill my Blood: Or something in his Title,
Might give my Hand Repulse, and startle Nature:
But thus I have armed my self against all pity,
That when I come to strike, my Poniard may
Through all his Charms as confidently wound him,
As thus I stab his Picture, and stare on it.
He smiles, he smiles upon me: I will dig
Thy wanton Eyes out, and supply the dark
And hollow Cells with two pitch burning Tapers:
Then place thee Porter in some Charnel House,
To light the Coffins in.

Enter Petruchio. Pet. My Lord.


Lor. The Duke's not come already.


Pet. Signior Florio desires to speak with you.


Lor. This must retire again into my Closet: Admit him.

Enter Florio. Welcome, how does Sciarrha?


Flo. He commends
His Service to your Lordship, and has sent --

Lor. His Sister?


Flo. Much ado he had to effect it:
He hopes his Grace will quickly sign his Pardon.

Lor. It shall be done.


Flo. I have a suit, my Lord.


Lor. To me?


Flo. My Sister would entreat your Honor
She may be admitted privately, and that
I may have Privilege to prepare her Chamber:
She does retain some modesty, and would not
Trust every Servant with her Shame: Their Eyes
Are apt to instruct their Tongues.

Lor. I wo'not see her my self, command what you desire.


Flo. You Are gracious.


Lor. I Will give directions instantly: Poor Lady,
This is the Duke's hot Blood, but Heaven convert him:
Follow me, good Florio.

Flo. I attend, my Lord.


Lor. Things shall be carried honorably*


Flo. We are all bound to you.

Exeunt. Recorders. [ Amidea discovered in a Bed, prepared by two Gentlewomen.
1. This is a sad Employment.

2. The last we ever shall do my Lady.


Enter Florio. Flo. So, now you may return, it will become
Your modest Duties, not to enquire the Reason*
Of this strange service, nor to publish what
You Have been commanded; let me look upon
Ex. Gentlewomen. My Sister now, still she retains her Beauty.
Death has been kind to leave her all this sweetness.
Thus in a Morning have I often saluted
My Sister in her Chamber, sat upon
Her Bed, and talked of many harmless passages;
But now it is night, and a long night with her,
I never shall see these Curtains drawn again,
Until we meet in Heaven. The Duke already*

Enter Duke and Lorenzo. Du. May I believe?


Lo. Trust me, my Lord, hereafter*


Du. Call me no more thy Lord, but thy Companion,
I will not wear that Honor in my Title,
Shall not be thine. Who Is that?

Lo. Her Brother Florio.


Du. She is a Bed*


Lo. The readier for your pastime.
She means to make a Night on it.

Flo. This shall declare thee to Posterity
The best of Sisters -- What of that? and is not*
A Brother's Life* more precious than a Trifle?
I prithee do not sigh* How many Ladies
Would be ambitious of thy place to night,
And thank his Highness? Yes, and Virgins too.

Du. He pleads for me.


Lo. He will deserve some Office 'bout your Person.


Du. With what words shall I express my joy?


Lo. I leave you, Sir, to action. Florio is soon dismissed.


Exit. Flo. He Is come, good night --


Du. Florio?


Flo. Your Slave.


Du. My Friend, thou shall be near our bosom.


Flo. Pleasures Crown your expectation.


Exit. Du. All perfect, 'till this minute, I could never
Boast I was happy: All this World has not.
A Blessing to exchange; this World! it is Heaven,
And thus I take Possession of my Saint:
A sleep already? 'Twere great pity to
Disturb her Dream; yet if her Soul be not
Tired with the body's weight, it must convey
Into her Slumbers, I wait here, and thus
Seal my Devotion -- What Winter dwells
Kisses. Upon this Lip? 'Twas no warm kiss. I Will try
Again -- the Snow is not so cold, I have
Drank Ice, and felt a numbness spread through
My blood at once -- ha! Let me examine
A little better; Amidea! she is dead, she is dead!
What horror does invade me? Help, Lorenzo;
Murder, where is Lorenzo?

Enter Lorenzo, and Petruchio. Lo. Here, my Lord.


Du. Some Traitor hid within the Chamber, see
My Amidea's dead.

Lo. Dead? It Is impossible;
Yet she has a wound upon her breast.

Du. I prithee kill me.


They wound him* Lo. With all my heart.


Du. Ha! will thou murder me, Lorenzo, Villain?
Oh, spare me to consider; I would live
A little longer; Treason.

Lo. A little longer, say ye?
It was my duty to obey you, Sir.

Pet. Let Us make him sure, my Lord.


Du. Oh spare me, I may live and pardon thee:
Thy Prince begs mercy from thee, that did never
Deny thee any thing; pity my poor Soul,
I have not prayed.

Lo. I could have wished you better prepared,
But let your Soul even take his chance.

Wounds him again* Du. No tear prevail? Oh, whither must I wander?
Thus Caesar fell by Brutus. I shall tell
News to the World I go to, will not be
Believed, Lorenzo killed me.
I Will presently put in security.

Lo. Will it not?


Du. I am coming, Amidea, I am coming:
For thee, inhumane Murderer, expect
My blood shall fly to Heaven, and there inflamed,
Hang a prodigious Meteor all thy life.
Oh I faint! Thou flattering World farewell: Let Princes gathe
My dust into a Glass, and learn to spend
Their hour of State, that is all they have; for when
That Is out, Time never turns the Glass again.

Dies. Lo. So, lay him beside his Mistress.
The Duke dismissed the Train came with him?

Pe. He did, my Lord.


Lo. Run to Sciarrha, pray him come, and speak wo' me;
Secure his passage to this Chamber, haste.
Exit Pet. He Is dead, I Will trust him now, and his Ghost too:
Fools start at shadows, I Am in love with night,
And her Complexion.

Enter Pet. Pe. My Lord, he is come without your Summons.


Lo. Already? leave us.
Enter Sciarrha, and Florio. Welcome, let embraces
Chain us together* Noble Florio welcome:
But I must honor thy Great Soul.

Sci. Where Is the Duke?


Lo. They are a Bed together.


Sci. Ha!


Lo. He Is not stirring yet: Thou kil'dst thy Sister, did not?


Sci. I preserved her.


Lo. So, it was bravely done.


Sci. But where is the wanton Duke?


Lo. Asleep, I tell you.


Sci. And he shall sleep eternally.


Lor. You cannot wake him, look you.


Sci. Is he dead?


Lo* And in his Death we two begin our Life
Of Greatness, and of Empire, nay, he is dead.

Sci. That labor's saved.


Lo. Now I pronounce, Sciarrha,
Thy Pardon, and to recompense thy loss.
The share of Florence, I Will but wear the Title,
The Power we'll divide.

Sci. I like this well:
You told a Tale once of a Commonwealth, and Liberty.

Lo. It was to gain a Faction
With discontented Persons, a fine Trick
To make a Buzz of Reformation.
My ends are compassed, Dam the Ribble Rabble.

Sci. Shall we Sweat for the People? Lose our Breath
To get them fame?

Lo. I Will have it given out
The Duke did kill thy Sister.

Sci. Excellent.


Lo. Having first ravished her, he cannot be
Too hateful; it will dull the Examination
Of his own Death; or if that come to question --

Sci. What if I say, I killed him in Revenge
Of Amidea? They will pity me.
Beside, 'twill be in your power to pardon
Me altogether.

Lo. Most discreetly thought on.


Sci. The Devil wo'not leave us of the sudden.


Lo. Rare wit:
How hastily he climbs the Precipice,
From whence one Fillup topples him to ruin:
We two shall live like Brothers.

Sci. Stay, we two -- now I consider better,
I have no mind to live at all -- and you shall not,
I Will give you proof; if you but make a noise,
You gallop to the Devil.

Lo. I Am betrayed.


Sci. To Death inevitable. Brother be you Spectator only.


Lo. This is somewhat Noble.


Sci. Thank me, not Lorenzo, I Will not engage
His Innocence to blood, thy hands are white,
Preserve 'em, Florio; and unless my arm
Grow feeble, do not interpose thy Sword I charge thee.

Lo. None to assist me? help, Petruchio, help.


Petr. Murder, Murder!


They fight, Enter Petruchio, who offering to run at Sciarrha, is intercepted
by Florio, Petruchio, runs in crying help, Florio makes fast the door. Lo.
Reach thy jaws wider, Villain, cry out Murder,
Treason, any thing; hold -- Oh.

Lo. falls.


Sci. Will you not fall, Colossus?


Flo. Are not you hurt?


Sci. I know not, ha? Yes, he has pricked me somewhere,
But I Will make sure of him* now must I follow:
I Will fight with him in the the other World -- thy hand,
Florio. Farewell.

Dies, Flo. He Is dead too, it is in vain for me to fly*
Within. Break open the doors.

Flo. You shall not need.


Enter Pretruchio, Cosmo, Allonso, Frederico, with Guard. Al. Disarm him.


Cos. Lorenzo, and Sciarrha Slain?


Al. Where is the Duke?


Pet. Look here, my Lords.


Al. What, Traitor?


Fre. See Amidea murdered too.


Cos. I tremble, here is a heap of Tragedies.


Al. We must have an account from Florio.


Flo. He can inform you best that brought you hither.


Al. Lay hands upon Petruchio, disarm him.


Cos. What blood is that upon his Sword? it is fresh*


Pet. I Am caught.


Cos. To Tortures with him.


Pet. Spare your fury, know
'Twas the best blood in Florence, I must quit
Young Florio; Lorenzo, and my self,
Are only guilty of the Prince's Death*

Al. Inhumane Traitors.


Cos. But who killed Amidea?


Flo. The Duke's Lust:
There was no other way to save her Honor.
My Brother has revenged it here, but Fate
Denied him Triumph.

Al. I never heard
Such killing Stories, but it is meet* we first
Settle the State; Cosmo, you are the next
Of Blood, to Challenge Florence.

Cos. Pray deferr
That 'till the Morning, drag that Murderer
To Prison; Florio, you must not expect
Your Liberty, 'till all things be examined.
Lorenzo, now I am above thy malice,
And will make satisfaction to Oriana.
It Is a sad Night, my Lords, by these you see
There is no stay in proud Mortality.

Exeunt. FINIS.

