THE TRUE NEWS OF THE GOOD NEW WORLD (Shortly) to come, [ Heb. 2.5.] for all
such as then shall be found real Saints.

WITH THE SUDDEN END OF ALL THE Enjoyments of this present Evil WORLD, To such
as then shall be found Unsanctified, Tendered to the serious consideration of
all sorts in a Divine Scheme at 6 d. or a little Book with it at 12 d.


To be briefly explained (to all that are willing to hear) in any convenient
Time or Place to be appointed, without just cause of fear or shame [as the
Compiler thereof lately Petitioned the Kings Majesty, and more lately the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen of this City] according to the Word of God, etc.

But such Persons as appear to be indigent, [whose Names may be set down, to
use the said Scheme a Week for 1 d. or the Book for 2 d. until they be
explained,] may have them, returning them unimpair'd: or (happily for nothing).

(...) great benefits of the right knowledge of our Saviors main scope in the
four last Chapters of the Revelation, largely explained in Resur. on Rev. 20.5.
and Restit. on Rev. 21.5. are these, etc.
I. THereby an excellent Guidance it obtained, to understand and distinguish
the meaning and intent of ancient Prophecy, both concerning Christ himself,
and his Saints, before and since his first coming, and what concerns both
himself and them in that state following his second coming [as Introduct. page
14. col. 2.] which to cut off as Unscriptural, is a great and manifold Error,
as is manifest from the whole current of sacred Scriptures and without the
acknowledgment thereof, not only ancient Prophecy of the Old Testament, but
many places in the Gospels, and the Apostles Writings both upon the foundations
of those Prophesies, and tending to Christ's own said Explication of that
following state, are not, yea and they cannot be rightly understood; being the
very subject thereof: which much concerns all Christians now to know and
consider well, etc.

II. Thereby the most full, true Scriptural Explications of these three
following Articles of our usual Creed are now only attainable [except by New
Revelation, which is not to be expected.]

1. That Christ will so come from the Fathers right hand to judge the quick,
viz. his great and lesser Enemies by a temporal destruction of them, Ezekiel.
39.8. Matthew. 13.41. and the dead, viz. the before suffering Saints until then,
viz. with a judgment of reward, Rev. 11.18, 19. and 22.12. who shall upon their
raising then with their spiritual Bodies, enjoy all the covenanted Mercies in
that said state with Christ 1000 years: and the iike judging of the quick
again, viz. of the last Gog and Magog, Rev. 20.9. and of the dead then, viz. of
the wicked to be raised at the last Trump, will be upon the Saints general
momentany change and rapture, 1 Cor. 15. to receive the final sentence of them
both, etc.

2. That the Resurrection of the just, or first said Resurrection, Rev. 20.5.
will be at Christ's second coming or appearance in the Clouds, 1000 years before
the said Resurrection of the wicked, which he teaches expressly, v. 5. saying,
The rest of the dead lived not again (bodily as the Sants did 1000 years
before) until those 1000 years were finished.

3. That such a great and excellent part of that holy Communion of the Saints
appointed (upon many Scriptural accounts) for the said time and state: when the
Nations of them that are saved, Rev. 21.24. suitable to Esa. 60.3. shall walk
in the light of the New Jerusalem then come down [with Christ] from God out of
Heaven, to be then the Bride, the Lambs Wife, v. 9, 10. See Saints Resur. and 6
Conclusions, page 17, 18. of Restitut.

III. Thereby also the chiefest and highest scope of the three first Petitions
of our Lords most divine and comprehensive Prayer is both made known, and to be
eminently attainable, viz. in that World to come, Heb. 2.5. both which follow
from the former Assertions: And this is grounded upon the same Scripture
foundations for our Faith to rest upon, Viz. 1. Hallowed be thy Name 2. Thy
Kingdom come 3. Thy Will be done
and all three will be in Earth (then) as it is (now) in Heaven.

As also [This Day] seems to be annexed to the other three Petitions, to teach
us they ought to be daily sought for by Prayer to God.

Viz. 1. This Days Bread. 2. This Days pardon of sin, with our pardoning
others. 3. This Days preservation or deliverance from the Evil one, etc.


All which will most largely be granted in that time and state, as the holy
Scriptures also teach, as in Irenic. etc.

That these very excellent benefits are warranted from the most Divine
Authority of Jesus Christ himself, is most apparent by the right understanding
of our Divine Scheme, and very apt Revelation Key, and by our whole work.

The Scheme of Gods Eternal Great Design in the World for Christ and his Elect
Saints, given to him by the Father upon the Performance of his Great Work of
Mediatorship, as is manifest from his Word in these Four Great Things ensuing:
which are all by our Saviors Revelation Key Applied to the Seventh Millennium.
1. By his Eternal appointing of Christ to be Heir of all things at the end of
6000. Years, Heb. 1.2. and Heb. 3 and 4 chapter when the Saints shall be Heirs, and
Joynt-heirs with him, Rev. 21.7. Rom, 8.17, 18, 19, 20. 2. By making an Eternal
Covenant with Christ, to give the Elect to him upon his fulfilling of his great
work of Redemption of Men and Creatures, as Isa. 62.6. and Isa. 59. ult. to be
in that time and state his Bride the Lambs Wife, Rev. 21.2, 9. 3. By his
Declared Purpose to Create the World for Christ and his said Saints to Inherit
then, when he will put all things under his Feet, and make all things New for
him and them, Rev. 21.5, 7. this Decree proved from Ps. 8.4. expounded by Heb.
2. v. 6, 7, 8. 4. By his declared Decree that after all opposition in the said
6000 years Enmity notwithstanding; yet, says he, then, in the Seventh
Millennium, I will set my King [Christ] upon my Holy Hill of Sion, and his
Saints shall Reign with him, Rev. 20.4, 6.
2. God by Christ Created the World in six days, in a state fit to carry on
his said Eternal Designs in the said four Par^iculars, and Rested the seventh
day, as foreseeing Adams Fall (if he upheld him not in that state by his own
Almighty Arm, which he was not pleased then to do, etc. as in our Divine
Theses, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. in our Irenic.) And to Type out Christ's work of
Redemption in 6000 years before the great Sabbatisme of Rest be obtained for
himself and his said Bride the Lambs Wife in the seventh, Rev. 21.2, 9.

3. Upon the Fall of Man in reference to his said Eternal Designs he makes his
General Declaration of his purposed Grace by Christ, the Promised Seed of the
Woman, and being only of the Woman, (employed he should also be the Son of God:)
and then likewise put Enmity between the Serpent and the Woman, and his Seed
and her Seed, Genesis 3 15. which said Promised Seed should in due time be
manifest indeed to be the Son of God, Mighty to Save; who should both break the
Serpents Head of Policy, and Power, in the said 6000 years, and then obtain
the lost Dominion of the World and Creatures by Man's Fall, for himself and his
said Saints or Spiritual Seed at the end thereof, Heb. 2.6, 7. Heb. 2.5, 8.
Rev. 21.5.

4. Christ upon the said Declared Grace of the Father, through himself
undertakes (as the Goel or Redeemer) to carry on that work in 6000 years, until
his Sabbatisme of Rest for himself and his Saints then should come, 2 These.
1.7. Hebrews 4.9.

[N. B.] This most comprehensive Divinity, being grounded upon Holy Scripture,
must needs be the best Divinity: 1. As being suitable to Gods said Decrees. 2.
Revealed and Promised to the Fathers, 3. Confirmed and Explained by all the
Holy Prophets. 4. Witnessed to by Christ in the Gospels, and the Apostles in
all their Writings. 5. Divinely Unlocked by Christ's Revelation; and all this
Taught all along in the said 6000 Years by the same Glorious Spirit of the
Infinitely Wise God; and so far also now carried on by Christ almost to the
Seventh Millennium: Therefore, Let all sorts of Persons, without a Divine
Warrant, beware of Cutting Christ's said Work of Redemption shorter than Gods
Word has made it, and does declare it to be, etc. (But more of some of these
afterward.)

1. That these said times of Gods said Eternal Designs to be carried on by
Christ, are manifest by his Word to be done in 6000 Years, in reference to his
own, and his Saints Enjoyments in the Seventh, which may fitly be called Gods
and Christ's Divine Millenniarisme. And this may be Manifest, 1. From the
Explication of the Lord the Spirit in his own sacred Word, who does himself
make such a resemblance of the times of Christ's said Redemption, to the days
of the Worlds Creation, Heb. 3, and 4, chapter and of the Typical Rest in Canaan
under Joshua's conduct to Christ's said Divine Rest: of which see page 3. of
Introduct. 2. The holy Scripture as the ground of that Resemblance, Testified
by Moses, Psalm. 90.4. That 10 0 years with God or Christ was but as yesterday,
in the Old Testament; and St. Peter in the New, urges it as a great point to
be known by all Christians, 2 Pet. 3.8. And Christ very exactly determines the
said Sabbatism suitable to such other days to be 1000 years, Rev. 20. six
times over, etc. see much more, p. 3, 4, etc. 3. By Gods frequent expression of
Mercy to be showed to 1000 Generations, which appears to be meant in the 7000
years of the Worlds continuance, as three Lives are reckoned to be 21 years,
taking in the Promised Mercies of the seventh as in our Key is explained, in
respect of the middle (...), or state of things, page 3. 4. By Moses his
Chronology revealed for times past 2400 years or more, and until Solomon's
Temple built 3000, and at the Captivity of Babylon, says Bishop Usher, 3450
years; then Daniels great Calender of 2300 years until Christ's 1000 years, make
up in all 6750 years to the little space of Satan loosed. Also that apt
Computation of Bucolcerus to like purpose, page 3. 5. From Christ first
Revealed, Gen 3.15. to be necessarily in the fullness of time God manifest in
the Flesh in 4000 years, (as says Bishop Usher) and his Session, and
Intercession in Heaven until the end of the sixth Millen. and his glorious
Reign on Earth 1000 years, which makes up the same Account 'till Satan's
loosing, etc. page 3. 6. From the Resemblances of David's and Solomon's Kingdom
and Temple about 3000 years Typifying Christ's Kingdom, and himself the
Antitype in all respects at 6000 years, when the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb
will be the Temple of the City, for twice so long continuance as their
Kingdoms or the Temple remained before in the World. Also their Tribe and
People being carried Captive for sin, about the middle of 7000 years of the
worlds continuance points out the different state of them; when God, according
to his Covenant, shall take away their sin, Romans 11. when the Devil, and the
worlds last Gog and Magog shall not reach them, but themselves shall perish by
that attempt, chapter 20. 8, 9. page 4. 7. In the Golden Rings of all Sabbath
Circulations: The seventh Millenium is the Diamond, viz. of Annual, Monthly
and Daily Sabbaths, (which last and longest) chiefly points it out, as Heb. 3
and 4. but the Jubelie after the seven times seven seems to relate to Eternity,
after the seventh Millennium shall be completed.


And whereas it may be Objected, that the sixth Millennium will so want above
200 years.

Answ. 1. Christ speaks of shortning evil times for the Elects sake; he may
specially mean it of that time.

2. The first Ages may be in some part unknown to Men, though Moses set down
the Ages of the first Fathers, he does not assert that to be a perfect
Chronicle; and for Cainans age there is difficulty, Luke 3. which is not
mentioned Mat. 3. nor Genesis 10.24. Also the end of the world is set forth by an
indeffinite little space of Satan loosed; but since the Spirit of God resembles
the first 6000 years to the six days of the Creation, he knows how to make up
the Account, though Men cannot: and Christ has strongly asserted the
Sabbatisme of 1000 years, which is suitable to the six before it, page 3.

3. The shortness of the sixth Millen. may seem so to be more suitable to the
sixth day; in the end whereof Satan seduced Eve, and she her Husband: God in
the cool of the day Summons, Arraigns, and Sentenceth all the three Offenders,
and casts Adam and Eve out of Paradise (as is most probable) (which would
require some considerable time.) [see more to this purpose in p 4, etc.] and we
know not but the little said space being a like evil time, may be allotted to
make up the 6000 year, page 3.

4. Of all considerable Computations of Times in Holy Scripture, I find none so
exact and certain as that 2300 years, Daniel 8, given by Palmoni the secret
Numberer. [See our many Reasons for it in our Summary on Daniel upon that said
Number:] which is the complete measure of the four Gentile Monarchies and Jews
Bondage (now both almost expired) from the Captivity of Babylon to Christ's
appearance; by which both Daniels other Numbers are measured.

1. That of his 70 Weeks, or 490 Years from the twentieth year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, Anno Mundi 3550* reaching to the end of the half Week, after
Christ by his D ath had finished Transgression; and by his Resurrection had
brought in everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. at his Ascension beginning the
Kingdom of the Stone, Dan. 2.44. for its 1666 years to break the Iron Roman
Kingdom, with the remaining parts of all the former at last, and it self
become a Mountain filling the whole Earth, Dan. 2.35, 45. And also it is the
measure of his last Number, Dan. 12.12 or 13 5 years after Sacrifice should
ultimately be taken away, many hundred years after that mark was given, which
fell out about Anno Domini 365. in Julian the Apostate Emperors time; to which
1335 years being added, reach to the blessed times he speaks of, in all which
the Divine exactness of Daniel and Revelation in connection one with another is
very admirable.

Fot the carrying on of which said Design in the time of Christ's Mediatorship,
and to make good his own right, he does 4 things 1. He makes the (...), or
several States or Providential Disposals of things; 1. In the Old World. 2. In
this present evil World from the Flood. 3. In the world to come in the 1000
years of Christ's Reign, p 4. 2. He upholds all things by the Word of his Power,
for those said (...), or Worlds continuance suitable to what he will accomplish
in them; and when the last state is fulfilled, he will dissolve the Created
World, Rev. 20.11. page 4. 3. He Purges the Sins of his said Elect Saints
through all the said States; 1. By his Word or Revealed Will. 2. By his Blood
to be shed, or actually shed. 3. By his Spirit making both the other effectual
by all his own Means or Ordinances, Heb. 1.3. Isa. 59. ult. page 4. 4. He
carries on his work of Redemption in the first 6000 years, as the work the
Father gave him to do therein; namely, in the Execution of his three great
Offices, of the great Prophet, Priest, and King, for the good of his Universal
true Church in the three great Periods of the World. The First, Under the Old
Testament, in 4000 years. The Second, Under the New, in the next 2000 years.
And the Third, In the World to come, in the last thousand years: as largely
proved in our Treat. on Genesis 3.15.


I. Millennium. II. Millen. III. Millen. IV. Millen. V. Millen. VI. Millen.
VII. Millen.
This his Work of Redemption has two Parts; 1. By removing of Evil, or
breaking the Serpents Head. 2. By procuring all Promised Good. The first he
does, 1. By his breaking the Serpents head both of Power and Policy. 1. Of his
Power, which is to be done in his great day of Judgment; which was first more
generlly Revealed to Enoch, Jude 13.14. in the Old World. 2. By the first act
of his Judgment, when his Foes shall be made his footstool, Psalm. 110.1. which
was more especially seen by Daniel in Vision in the New World, chapter 7. when he
will do it eminently at the Beasts Destruction: The last act is revealed only
by Christ, to be the total breaking of it, after the 1000 years. 2. By
destroying his works of Policy by all his wicked Instruments, more generally or
more particularly; as first, for their height of sin, then drowning the Old
World, and then saved Noah and his Family; and after bringing all Satan's three
Babels to confusion in the several times of the New World, affording
successively helps against the mischief of them, as in Irenic. c. 5. and lastly
restoring the good by him impaired thereby at the end of 6000 years; viz. for
Confusion of Tongues, Oneness of Speech: for oppressive Tyranny, good and
peaceable Government: for Mystical Babylons Delusions, pure and untainted
Truth. 3. By more ordinary, and particular disappointments of his Designs by
his Angels, Servants, Creatures ordinarily, besides what he does
extraordinarily more publicly or privately in the 6000 years, which he is
doing in all that time of the 6000 years of actual Enmity betwixt the Seed of
the Serpent, and the Seed of the Woman, in one place or other, or many; in one
time, manner, means or other, as seems best unto him. 4. By showing himself as
Lord of Hosts, and the grand Captain of his Israel, as Josh. 5. through all the
said Spiritual Warfare to manage his own Hosts (yea and his Enemies too, as
often as he pleases) against the Hosts and Legions of the Enemies, Men or
Devils, or inferior Creatures; and at the end of the 6000 years, defeating,
destroying, or imprisoning all his Churches greatest Enemies; viz. Ezekiels Gog
and Magog, with other lesser Enemies; and binding Satan for 1000 years, and
giving rest to his Saints at that his appearance, 2 These. 1.7. and Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. 5. By his Triumphant and Victorious laughing them all to Scorn, (as
often, and by what contemptible means he pleases) of which variety man is not
able to recount or conceive, so mighty is he to break them all in the said time.


2. He Redeemeth by procuring, and carrying on all Promised Good;

1. Through Christ all following Promises of Good by Covenants made with the
Fathers after the first said General one, Genesis 3.15. are procured by him, and
the good of them carried on for them and their said Spiritual Seed in the same
6000 years to be enjoyed in the seventh.

1. To Noah, in respect of whom three things are observable in the 2d. Millen.

1. In that by his Type of the Ark he saved his own House, foreshewing how
Christ will be the safe Arc of his true Church from the Fires of Wrath on the
Wicked at the beginning and end of the 1000 years, page 8.

2. God made with him a Covenant, confirmed by the Rainbow, Genesis 8. to preserve
Man and Beast, and to Accommodate both, by sufficient Fruitfulness all the 6000
years, ordinarily; and promised after the greatest Fruitfulness in the seventh
Millenium, page 8

3. Then also God by his Prophecy, Genesis 9. showed that the Elect till Christ's
second comeing should (mostly) descend from his two Sons, Shem and Japhet; viz.
Jews and Gentiles in their times; yet others (happily) Proselites: First then
Shems Race, the Jews, had the then present Mercy, until they had killed the
Lord of Life, But then Japhets Race were persuaded to dwell in the Tents of
Shem, (as Acts 13.) viz to be of the True Church of G d; and both of them will
be so together in the 1000 years; as was foretold in that Song for Posterity,
Deuteronomy. 32.43. and is applied by the Apostle, Romans 15. page 8.

Also in the Second Millennium God made Covenants with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

1. With Abraham in seven Gradations, as page 7, 8, 9. of our Key: first that
in him and his Seed all Nations should be blessed; namely, in that his own
Divine Seed Christ, Gal. 3 through whom the blessing of Abraham came upon the
Gentiles, (as says the Apostle) after the Jews were cast off, and will come
again upon both jointly, at the end of 6000 years, and throughout the seventh
Millennium. Also unto Abraham and his Seed, Canaan, with the Holy City in its
time was promised; but for him, Isaac and Jacob, the chief intent was in the
Renewed State thereof, in which sense the Apostle says, he was Heir of the
World by Faith, Romans 4.13. which he with his Spiritual Seed shall then have;
[even that Great, Holy, and Beloved Jerusalem comeing (then) down from God out
of Heaven, having Foundations whose Maker and Builder is God, Heb. 11.10, 16,
40.] after 6000 years: But the Typical Canaan Conditionally given to his
Naturrl Race, was to them a polluted Rest by their Sin; and therefore it cast
them out with a sore Destruction, Mic. 2.10.

2. To Isaac the like Covenants were renewed for the same, to him and his
Spiritual Seed, which will be also made good at the end of the sixth
Millennium, and throughout all the seventh, page 9, of our Key, page 9. of
Introduct.

3. To Jacob and his Spiritual Seed the like was again ratified: whence God is
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, through all Generations; which is his
Memorial until all their Covenants be completed to the end of the seventh
Millennium, page 9. of our Key.

In the 3d Millen. God made his Covenant with David for his sure Mercies
respecting Christ's Kingdom in the 1000 years after his Natural Race's long
Bondage for Sin.

Yet first David and his Natural Race enjoyed the Typical Canaan, and their
Jerusalem about 450 years, until that by their increased Provocations there was
no remedy, but they must go Captive to Babylon, as the Ten Tribes of Israel
went many years before into Assyria: Both which Captivities were to continue,
as God then Revealed by Daniel, chapter 8. all the 2300 years of the four Mettle
Kingdoms, chapter 2. at the end whereof the Spiritual Seed of David with himself
(through that his one Divine Seed Christ) shall possess David's Kingdom, with
the Holy City which Ahraham looked for, and both in the Renewed state of them;
and though David's Tabernacle fell at Babylons Captivity, yet then it shall be
rai ed again, Amos 9. at Christ's appearance and Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. Acts
15.16. page 9, etc. of our Key.

Moreover, God was pleased to show Mercy to David's People, after 70 years to
reduce them by Cyrus, to fulfill in due time, Jacobs Prophecy of the comeing of
Shilo, Genesis 49. by sending (then) the great Messiah, toward the end of Daniels
70 Weeks, or 490 Years, by his first comeing in Humility to suffer and perform
all Gods Wills, putting an end to Transgression by his Death, and bringing in
everlasting Righteousness by his Resurrection; and forty days after by his
Ascension to improve that his great Work of Reconciliation by his Death, and by
his Intercession ever since, at Gods right hand on his Fathers Throne, during
Gods Kingdom of the Stone for its 1666 years, Divinely in that time destroying
the last Roman Iron Kingdom, with the Remainders of the former, Dan. 2.35.
when he comes from thence to sit on his own Throne, Rev. 3.21. page 9.

This Sovereign Antidote against Atheism, Profaneness, and all Error contrary
hereunto; and also as an excellent means to promote all contrary good (if God
shall set it home) is conscienciously to be applied by all Christians for
themselves and others: for which purpose let us all Pray that God would give
his blessing and good success thereunto. Amen.

The Composer of the Divine Scheme (explained by that very apt decyphering of
Christ's most precious Key of the same Divine Grace) earnestly seeking the good
and satisfaction of all men, by such now seasonable great and gracious
Discoveries thereby evidently manifest, (that all such branches as are not
really transplanted into the true Vine, may earnestly and speedily labor to
get into that estate; and such as are transplanted already may bring forth
their due fruit therein, and that he may the better set home all other
Scriptural Considerations, does now thereunto farther add many Convincing
Evidences (than what he set down Assert. 7. of his Key, and in many other parts
formerly) of these two things; viz. 1. Of the Personality of Christ's appearance
and Reign at the beginning of his great day of Judgment. 2. Of the now near
approach thereof; which he purposes (if God will) to annex as an Appendix
thereunto: The Summarie of both here follows.
AS to the first, their Personality is strongly proved so by many heads of
Arguments drawn from the drift of the whole Divine Scheme, carrying on Gods
Design of Christ's Mediatory Kingdom in the Ishue, as God-man, and the Son of
David: And 2. In the four particulars explained by Christ's Revelation
respecting that happy time and state: And 3. from the particular Covenants and
Promises gradually carrying on the same, being also explained by the Prophets,
Gospels, Apostles Writings; and especially by the Revelation, showing the true
meaning of all the other.

4. By many apt and evident expressions and proofs in the Old and New Testament
of his said personal appearance and Kingdom.

5. From many Divine Evidences that the great day of Judgment (or Matutinum
Judicium thereof) then begins; as Jewish Rabbis also understood that first
Session of the Judgment at the Beasts Ruin, Dan. 7. which is farther proved by
all the four marks of the day of Judgment, and by both parts thereof, in
judging the quick and dead, bad and good; the last with rewards, whose lot fell
out to be under the suffering times and state of the Church both of Jews and
Gentiles, and of all Saints until Christ's second comeing: [the like marks and
parts will be of the Vesper. Judicium, set forth by by Christ Rev. 20.11, etc.]

6. From the many great things then peculiarly to be done by Christ and none
else: As 1. To bring all the said Saints with him, Zach. 14.5. 1 These. 3. ult.
2. From his raising (then) their spiritual Bodies. 3. From his commanding his
Enemies then to be brought and slain before him. Luke 19. 4. From his being
seen then with the eyes of Jews and Gentiles through the Clouds, Rev. 1.7. 5.
From his feet's standing on Mount Olivet, Zach. 14. Upon his descending (then
probably) to convert the Jews, by means of his wonderful cleaving that
mountain, shakings of the Earth, Isa. 2.19, 21. and destruction of the enemies
then, Ezekiel. 39.8. with his eminent pouring his Spirit upon them, Joel 2. Zach.
12.10.

7. His receiving then his Universal and perpetual Kingdom, Dan. 7.13, 14, 27.

8. His sitting on the Throne of his Father David, Luke 1.32. In all which and
the like actings, he must necessarily then be personally present. And

9. In his whole Reign, by his executing Righteousness and Judgment in the
Earth.

The last Head of Arguments is from the many Relations he will then stand in to
them: 1. As their then visibly glorious Head, and they his visible Members. 2.
As their Divine Bridegroom, and the said Saints his visible Bride. 3. He the
Husband to dwell with them, Rev. 21. and they the Lambs Wife, verse 9. 4 He as
the Heir of all things, and they joynt-heirs with him, Rev. 21.7. as the Wife's
Dowry. 5. As the Kingdoms of the world become then actually his, Rev. 11.15. so
they shall then Reign with him personally, chap. 20.4, 6. 6. He as the great
God brings his rewards with him at his glorious appearance, Rev. 22.12. They as
the persons then brought to be rewarded, which by their Resurrection become
capable to receive all the happiness promised in that glorious state.

2. Why he believes the times thereof will be about 20 years hence from An.
76. or by loss of 4 years 80 in a latitude. 1. Because all Prophecy until that
time and state appears to be almost fulfilled. 1. Daniels great Calender of the
Jews Captivity, and the Gentile four Monarchies of 2300 years will about that
time be expired. 2. The three Overturnings of David's Kingdom until Christ's be
given to him, Ezekiel. 21.26, 27. appears almost fulfilled. 3. The 600 years from
the fourth of Jehojakim begun, and first of Nebuchadnezzar to Christ's Birth at
4000, and from thence 1700 years of Revelation Prophecy to Christ's second
comeing (as the two integral parts thereof) clearly make up the 2300 years;
both which are many ways proved. 4. Both Daniels other Numbers of the 70
weeks, Dan. 9. and the taking away Sacrifice, chapter 12.12. when from 365 of
Christ, Daniels ^335 should reach to the said blessed times and state of the
Jews, both which (in connection with Revelation Numbers) end at the same period
of Christ's appearance, with the said 2300 years, Dan. 8.

5. The Jews seeking their Land 45 years before from 1290. Dan. 12.11. to the
said 1335 of the blessed times, of which a book was formerly remarkably
written, etc.

6. From the Beasts treading the true Church under foot 42 months, with the
Witnesses, and the said Woman's Wilderness state, all almost out.

7. From the Turks 396 years, Rev 9.11, etc. from about 1300 to end with the
Beasts last Ruin, Ezekiel. 39.8. at Christ's appearance, Dan. 11.45. and 12.1, 2.

8. From the probable proceedings of the Vials under the sixth Trumpet to the
sixth Vial, etc. in the end of the which will be the Armageddon Battle, and
Beasts Ruin, Rev. 19.11, etc.

9. From the Table of the bad times, Rev. 11.1. to 15. 1. As applicab^e to the
Saints sufferings under the four first Seals, and the Ruin of the Roman Civil
State thereupon, by the blasts of the six first Trumpets. 2. As applicable to
the Ecclesiastical state, both as to the Regular times measured, v. 1. and the
Beasts 42 months cast out, which the Vials under the sixth Trumpet consume by
degrees, until his last Ruin at Christ's second comeing, soon after the burning
of the Whore of Babylon (as appears from Rev. 18, and 19, ch.) besides many
other signs of these last times, more ordinarily now observable in sundry
particulars, to be expressed in the said Appendix; As Iniquity abounding,
Charity co^d, St. Peter's Atheistical Scoffers at Religion, open Profaneness, and
the unclean Spirits Prevalency so to carry on his twofold Antichristianism,
formerly in Doctrinals, (...), in the latt^r times, 1 Timothy 4.1, etc. more
lately in Formalities; (...), in the last days, 2 Timothy 3.1. to verse. 10.

CHRIST'S Divine Revelation Key in the four last Chapters may aptly be
Decyphered in these four Respects; Viz.

1. In the Handle of it, setting forth his Mercy [then] to Jews and Gentiles at
his 2d Comeing; for, says the Spirit,

Behold he Comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and they also which
Pierced him; and all Kindreds of the Earth shall Wail because of him; Even so,
Amen. Rev. 1.7.

The Seven Asian Churches have their several Promises to be Fulfilled to every
Overcomer at the first Resurrection: 1. For Ephesus, to Eat of the Tree of Life
in the amidst of the Paradise of God, Chap. 2. verse. 5. 2. Smyrna, for she
shall not be hurt of the Second Death, v. 11. 3. ^ergamus shall Eat of the
hidden Manna, verse. 17. 4. Thyatira shall have Power over the Nations, v. 26.
and give him the Morning Star, verse 28. 5. Sardis shall be clothed in white,
and I will confess his name before my Father, c. 3. 5. 6. Philadelphia, I will
make him a Pillar in the House of God, and he shall have a new Name, v. 12 7.
Laodicea, shall sit with Christ on his Throne, v. 21.


2. The long Stail thereof passes through 1700. Years of Suffering Times, by
Promises and Encouragements, to chapter 20.

In the Seal-Prophesie, ch 6.

1. The 144000 Sealed in the East, chapter 7. and innumerable others, all to he
rewarded in the 1000 years, v. 15, 16, 17.

2. Those killed under the Dragon, until 320 years ended, with their Brethren
and fellow Servants after to be killed under the Beast in his 42 Months until
the said 1000 years; but both to be rewarded together at the first
Resurrection, Resur. p. 36. c. 20. v. 4, 6.

In the Book-Prophesie, chapter 10.

1. Quickly after the Rising and Ascending of the two last finishing Witnesses,
the 7th Angel sounds, when the Kingdoms of the World become Christ's actually,
Rev 11.15.

2. In the time of the Vials chapter 15. the Victors over the Beast stand on a Sea
of Glass and sing the Song of Moses in Triumph over their Enemies v. 2, 3. and
all such Overcomers shall rejoice at the Whores Desolation, c. 18.20. All sorts
of Saints shall then sing aloud their many Halelujah's, and shall soon after
the ruin of the Beast, c. 19.1, 2, 3, 4, and v. 11, 20. Reign with Christ, chapter
20.4. at the end of 1700 Years. See Arg. 7.

3. The Substance of the same Key in 8 Particulars, wherein Predictions and
Revelations fitly suit each to other.

1. Judgment against Enemies. 2. A Paradise for Saints. 3. Fruitfulness proper
to that time. 4. Lines of Holy Seed, or the New Jerusalem State. 5. Nations
saved walk in her Light. 6. New Heavens and New Earth for both. 7. Christ's
Kingdom for both of them in their own states. 8. The first are raised for it;
the second obtain by Promise.
Such Mercies Couched before in Gods Word, Christ has thus Divinely displayed.
See the Picture of our Key, page 63. of Resur.

Behold, I come quickly, etc. v. 22

Surely I come quickly, even so come L. Jesus, c. 22. 20.

Behold, I come quickly, etc. v. 12

4. The Curious Work in the said Key, may be seen in these 3 things; viz. 1.
The Spirit of God chapter 19. 9. speaking of the Beasts Ruin, as fore told, Daniel
7. says only these are the true sayings of God; but of Promises and Covenants,
chapter 2. 5. and 22. 6. he says wice, these Sayings are Faithful and True. 2. He
marks out the time [when] by the great Voice from the Throne, s^ying, It is
done chapter 20. 5. and by a like Voice, saying, It is done chap. 16. 17. denoting
the Coincidence in time, of Satan's Binding, and Gods Renovation of all things;
which is fully explained, p. 61, 62. of Restit. 3. The Time [how long] is
exactly Resolved by Christ, to be 1000. years six times over, three times
Absolutely, and three times Relatively, as is Explained on several Accounts,
page 14. of Introduction.


The INTIMATION.
These Gracious Discoveries of untainted Divine Truths of the Gospel being the
Testimony of Jesus, and the Spirit of Prophecy, Rev. 19.10. are therefore the
best Foundations of the best Divinity, affording the best Guidance for the
understanding of all Prophetic Scripture, both for removing of evil, as to the
breaking of the Serpents head, and obtaining of good, according to the promised
Mercies and Covenants to and with the Fathers, etc. as Introduct. p. 13, 14,
15. and in other parts; but consequently do not afford any just grounds of
Satan's ancienter or modern affixed Errors and Scandals, which by sound
judgment fall to the Dunghill, like the dried Scabs which he had maliciously
wrought upon Jobs Body when God healed him; as Asser. 2, 3, 4 of our Key. And
we need not marvel at Satan's malice against these sacred Doctrines, because
they manifest his long Imprisonment in the bottomless Pit is nigh, and that
shortly after will follow (by his strong Chain of Darkness) his casting into
the Fiery Lake for ever: wherefore they are indeed very useful, especially in
these last days, as the Spirit of Christ by his Word has been (in Mercy)
pleased so to open them, to be now duly improved by all men; and let all sorts
duly consider Christ's terrible Threat, Rev. 22.18, 19, etc. Wherefore as I
judged it my duty (and was preparing) to tender them first to our King's
Majesty, jointly with his Parliament, had they sitten a week longer; so now I
shall offer them (as God may afford me opportunity) to any considerable
Companies, Assemblies, or Persons, etc.

This Intimation was presented, since the Parliament, etc. to the KING'S
Majesty alone, with the whole Work, by an Address, December 4. 1675.

Let men now labor most earnestly for true saying Fruit-bearing Faith, and
secure it to themselves and others, by their improving all their Lords Talents
until he comes, like Wi^e Virgins, with Oil in their Vessels, and their Lamps
burning, Mat. 25. for all living persons Talents must shortly be accounted for
without exception or exemption of any, by reason of their present
distinguishing worldly Circumstances.

A brief, but weighty, Appendix to our Scheme, for the farther needful
satisfaction of all persons in these two now needful things to be considered.
First, That Christ's now neer-approaching Appearance and Reign will very
evidently be personal at the destruction of the Beast, Rev. 19, and 20 chapter

Secondly, We shall give a farther account of our many Divine Reasons why we
really believe that Christ's said personal appearance or comeing in the Clouds
will be about 20 years hence in a latitude; from 76. which by the loss of 4
years is to be reckoned 1680. as page 55, 56, 57. of Restitution.

AS for the former, we have already briefly set down very much evidence
thereof, both of our own former proofs thereof, and of others, in Assert. 7. of
our Key; and in other parts, unto which we shall here also add many other
weighty Considerations; [and the rather, by reason we find all the said former
proofs are so little hitherto duly weighed by most men, etc.] as namely these
ensuing.

1. That in the drift of our whole Divine Scheme, being explained according to
Christ's Revelation, [the best Resolver in the whole world] which manifests that
the said personal appearance and Reign of Christ in his Davidical Kingdom in
the world are carried on all along as the greatest thing to be accomplished
therein, and the drift of all the other promised Mercies in the 1000 years: And
that first, as Gods eternal Design before all time witnessed to in his Word in
4 things. Secondly, in time, as carried on by Predictions, Covenants and
Promises, etc.

1. As Gods eternal Design for Christ, and those which he had given him in the
world, upon his fulfilling of his great work of Redemption for them in the
first 6000 years, etc. And therein first, as Christ was eternally appointed to
be heir of all things, Heb. 1. in the seventh Millennium, so Christ assures the
said Saints that they also shall then inherit all things, Rev. 21.7. or be then
heirs, and joint heirs with him also, Romans 8.20, 21. which requires his and
their joint personal presence, together with that Inheritance, etc

2. As God by an eternal Covenant had given them to him upon the fulfilling of
his said great work of Redemption in the 6000 years before, then to be his
bride the Lambs Wife, Rev. 21.9 and so they shall have then the Wife's interest
with him in the world in all good things, together with his personal presence,
as we doubt not afterward to manifest, etc.

3. As God will put all things under Christ [in subjection to him] then [for we
do not yet see it, says the Apostle, Heb. 2.8. viz. in the present state of
things] So the Restitution of all things shall then be effected, for the
personal enjoyment thereof both by him and them in that same state, Rev. 21.5.

4. As God eternally decreed to set his King [Christ] then as the Son of David
God-man upon his holy Hill of Sion, wherein and whereby the excellency of all
the former shall be completed in the world, [notwithstanding all the vain
things which the Gentiles and Kings of the Earth have, or do, or shall imagine
to the contrary until that time, Psalm. 2.1, 2, etc.] So the suffering Saints
shall then rise and reign with him 1000 years, Rev. 20.4, 6. and also the
Heathen shall then be given to him for his Inheritance, and the uttermost parts
of the Earth for his Possession (as follows in that second Psalm.)

2. Because all the promised Mercies and Covenants (particularly made in time
(successively) unto the Fathers, and unto their spiritual seed do refer to that
state of the personal Reign of Christ the said 1000 years [as his own most
Divine Revelation explains them] as to the main and principal matter or thing
to be carried on (then) for Christ and his said Saints in that world shortly to
come, wherein all other are contained, etc. which by the ensuing particulars
(with sundry others) may appear.

1. That Prediction of breaking the Serpents head [for the removing of evil] in
Gods first and most comprehensively gracious Declaration, Genesis 3.15. to be
eminently then performed by Christ when comeing from the right hand of the
Father, his Foes shall be made his footstool, as Psalm. 110.1. according to
Enochs Vision of Christ's great day of Judgment in the Old World; and Daniels of
the same in the New world, to whom the time thereof was more explicitly
revealed, viz. when he comes in the Clouds of Heaven, all foreshewing the same
time and comeing, with Rev. 1.7. foreshown again to be executed in its order,
Rev. ^9.11. when he will not only destroy the Beasts but also the Turk with
him, Ezekiel. 39.8. Dan. 11.45. and 12 and will also bind Satan, and shut him up
in the bottomless pit for 1000 years, taking away out of Christ's Kingdom the
evils brought into the world by sin, viz. the Curse, the Enmity, Bondage and
Corruption, with all that offends, Mat. 13.41. at the making of the New
Heavens, and the New Earth, for his Saints and Angels (then) at those times of
Restitution of all things, Rev. 21.5. as is manifest by Scripture to be done
then for Christ personally with his Saints, as in our Restit. largly is
manifest; for Christ might as easily have put down Satan from being any longer
the God of this present evil world, and Prince (by Usurpation) of the power of
the Air when he wrought his spiritual conquest over him, and all the powers of
Darkness, Col. 2.15. at his first comeing, as soon as he had reconciled the
Saints to God by the blood of his Cross, had not the Father most wisely and
holily for his own great glory, and his Sons and his said Saints great glory
and happiness in that world (wherein they had suffered before) set down the
order and time for the carrying on of that his great Design in the world for
the said Reign of Christ with his Saints, as the greatest thing (as was said)
then to be obtained and enjoyed in that world to come by Christ and all his
said suffering Saints together, who having before there suffered with him,
should also then reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. as he set forth in that book with
7 Seals given so gloriously to the Lamb, Rev. 5. to open and execute (as the
Fathers Commissioner) in their due order and time, until about the end of 1700
years from Christ's Birth: But that then he should be his King upon his holy
Hill of Sion, sitting on the Throne of his Father David (as he had promised;
and not until that time, etc. But,

2. The Spirit of God manifests that in his first said gracious Declaration,
Genesis 3.15. was also contained the restoring of the Dominion over the Creatures,
which includes the Kingdom of Christ, Rev. 20. and all that belongs to it in
the two following chap. as being the positive end and purpose of Christ's first
undertaking of that his said great work of Redemption, to be fulfilled at the
time of the Restitution of all things; and then to be personally enjoyed by
himself and his Saints, when God will wonderfully make all things new for them,
Rev. 21.5. when the suffering Saints fullness shall be then come in, and that
same Lambs Wife has made her self ready, as Rev. 19.7. And in that sense he
evidently explains, Psalm. 4.6, 7. by Heb. 2.6, 7, 8. showing the Son of Man
there, (unto whom all things shall be surely at last subjected) to be Christ
the second Adam, [not the first Adam, who was not the Son of any man, but only
the Son of God by Creation, Luke 3. ult.] and teaches, that under the feet of
Christ, the second Adam, all things were to be put in subjection again at the
said time) as was by God fore-determined and appointed; though we do not yet
see all things subject to him; viz. in the present state of things, (as the
Apostle speaks, v. 8.) although for the suffering of Death God had before
Crowned him with glory, and honor upon his becomeing lower than the Angels for
a little time, whilst he by his death had wrought reconciliation for his said
Saints: But as to the restoring of the said lost Dominion by the first Adams
Fall, which is also still usurped by Satan's continuing the Prince of the power
of the Air, and by his wicked retinue of evil men and Devils, and that will not
be fulfilled, until the beginning of Christ's great day of Judgment, when all
his said Foes will be made his footstool, and when the Kingdoms of the world
shall actually become the Kingdoms of God, and of his Christ, and when he shall
personally possess them, as being then given to him for his actual possession
of them, Ps. 2 8.

2. The first Mercy to Shems Race the Jews, Genesis 9.26. [having then present
interest in Gods favour] tended (as Baalam prophetically spoke) to point out
the lineage of Christ, who when he had reconciled his Saints by the blood of
his Cross at his first comeing, should at his second comeing be such Gods King
at that same time, whose Scepter was to arise out of Israel, as Numb. 24.17.
which v 19. is particularly applied to Christ (then) [out of Jacob (said he)
shall come he that shall have Dominion] mainly, that in the said 1000 year,
carried on after by all the Prophets, Gospels, and all the Apostles Writings,
and most Divinely so explained by Christ in the Revelation Hence also says the
Prophet Isa. chapter 55.3. That the spiritual Seed of that Divine Seed of the Woman
[Christ] shall with him have those sure mercies of David; that is by all the
said Scripture explication etc. they all most certainly shall then reign with
him personally in his said Kingdom, which is the very meaning of Gods making
David a sure House; so that his House, Throne and Kingdom shall continue for
ever, to the worlds end, 2 Samuel 7. viz. [in Christ his Divine Seed] as also in
many other Scriptures, though in respect of David's natural Race it was not so,
(as he speaks) 2 Samuel 23.5. yet as a type for a long time his natural Race also
prospered into a Kingdom, as Ezekiel 16.13.

4. As all Promises to Abraham and his whole Seed were chiefly to and by that
his one Divine Seed Christ, as Gal. 3. so also more especially to all his
spiritual Seed then. [See their many distinctions Resurrect. p. 10, 11.] and
likewise to Isaac, Jacob and David, and to all their Spiritual Seed at the same
time; and though the natural race of them all had for a time in Canaan a
Typical, Conditional, Temporal, Changable interest, (which by sin they all
successively lost, Mich. 2.10.) yet Abraham, Isaac and Jacob looked for that
City and heavenly Country a far off, viz. [of a heavenly nature] whose Maker
and Builder is God, Heb. 11.16.40. for themselves and all their spiritual Seed,
at the first Resurrection, (as by our paper of the Jews Conversion, is largely
evident, page 5, 6.) Jacob also Prophesied of Judah's Dominion, Genesis 49. which
was the Type of Christ's, who was to descend from Judah, who is therefore in
that state styled the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Rev. 5. which Dominion of his
and his Saints shall not be forfeited, nor pass to other people, (as Daniel
speaks) when he shall cease to sit on his Fathers Throne, and come to sit on
his own Throne in the said 1000 years with his Saints, Rev. 3.21. as the Son of
David for ever, viz. while the world remains, 2 Samuel 7. When will really be the
sure Mercies of David (as was said) for himself and all his spiritual Seed,
which are so many ways distinguished from the natural, (as ought to be well
observed.) The Design of God in all the promised mercies to all those Fathers,
was, that their Race and State should grow up or prosper into a Kingdom, as was
hinted before, Ezekiel 16.13. which their natural Race had only as a Type for a
time conditionally; but it was surely confirmed to Christ in the renewed state
to come, when all the said spiritual Seed shall rise and reign with him, as is
confirmed by all the Prophets, witnessed to in the Gospels and Apostles
Writings, and carried on by Christ himself from the beginning of the Revelation
to the end thereof. And,

3. Hence also observe, that that personal comeing in the Clouds is so often
spoken of in that most Divine Book, as chap 1.7. Behold he comes with Clouds;
the same comeing in time, with Daniel, 7.13, 14. to be fulfilled Rev 19 11. to
the end, when the Lord God Omnipotent is said to Reign, v. 6. and when the said
Saints shall also reign with him, Rev. 20.4, 6. Again, to Philodelphia, chapter
3.11. is another, [Behold I come quickly,] again after the Revelation was
given, and John commanded to leave it open, chap. 22.10 then, v. 12. he adjoyns
another [Behold I come quickly,] and my reward is with me, even the same
reward, chapter 11.19. of which the Spirit and the Bride also say, Come: which
Christ again ascertaineth, v. 20. saying, Surely I come quickly; and it is
there once more implored by the Spirit in the Saints, even so come Lord Jesus,
v. 21. What man can then with reason, or shall dare, against so much evident
Scripture, (without good Reason) to deny any of these, much more all of these
so often repeated Texts respecting his said comeing in the Clouds. Hence says
Jeremie of that time, chapter 3.17. Jerusalem shall be called the Throne of the
Lord, when also the Prophet Isa. witnesse^h, chapter 24.23. The Moon shall be
confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount
Sion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients gloriously: And Ezekiel styles
that City from that time it shall be set up, Jehovah Shamma, The Lord is there,
chapter ult. v. ult. So Zachery, twice, chapter 2.10, 11. he will dwell in the midst
of Sion; and Zephany, ch 3.13, 14. the King of Israel is in the midst of
thee, etc. with much illustration there observable, etc. And Daniel shows
punctually the beginning then of Christ's said universal and perpetual Kingdom,
chapter 7. viz. when the Body of the Beast shall be given to the burning flame; of
which state speak also all the rest of the Prophets; (as in our Iren. chapter 5, 6,
7, 8.) and our 12 Foundations from Genesis 3.15. to the end of the Revelation,
[besides what more was proved in Assert. 7. of our Key, and in other parts.]

3. Now as from the drift of all the said Covenants, Promises and Prophesies,
and all the said parts of holy Scripture, his said personal comeing, appearance
and Kingdom, is evidently intended, (as is from them all manifest.)

So the third head of Argumenrs do prove all the same to be personal will be
from the Consideration that at the said comeing he will begin his great day of
Judgment, styled (...), the Judgment of the great day, Jude 6. when will be the
Matutinum Judicium, or the first Session thereof, which the Jews from Dan. 7.
used to style or, the day of Judgment, or the great day of Judgment: Hence the
Spirit of God ascribes thereto all the peculiar marks and parts of a day of
Judgment; as 1. The Judgment is set, Dan. 7.10. 2. The Books are opened, 3. The
Quick. And 4. The Dead are Judged, 2 Timothy 4.1. and that at his appearance and
Kingdom, or which is the same, Rev. 11.19. when his Enemies are destroyed, and
his Saints rewarded, and all the like marks and parts of that Judgment will be
again at the Vespertinum Judicium, above 1000 years after, as is distinctly
manifest, Rev. 20.11. to the end, etc. Hence the destruction of Babylon is
styled the beginning of Revenges, Deuteronomy. 32.42. in Moses hi^ song for Posterity,
upon which follows Daniels Matutinum Judicium, when the Body of the Beast shall
be given to the burning flame: upon which the Prophetical song brings in the
joyful union of Jews and Gentiles, as then to take place, viz. upon that
execution of Vengeance, when Gods hand takes hold on Judgment, and makes his
Arrows drunk in blood, when that enemy Antichrist shall be dispatched out of
the world, v. 40, 41.42. and the frequent expression of Gods judging the Whore
(then) suits thereunto, as chapter 19 2. upon the great Hallelujah then sung for
the same, v. 1. the like often in chapter 18. v. 8. strong is the Lord that judges
her, and v. 10. in one hour is thy judgment come: again, v. 19. in one hour is
she made desolate: so v. 20 God has avenged you of her, ye holy Apostles and
Prophets, with much more to the end: and this Revenge is greatly encouraged,
Reward her as she has rewarded you, and double her double, etc. v. 6, etc. But
as for the Beasts ruin the Judgment is set, and the Books were opened, says
Daniel, chapter 7.10. and that was because of the great words the Horn spoke, v.
11. and the issue was the Body of the Beast is given to the burning flame at
that time, when the Son of man comes in the Clouds of Heaven, v. 13, 14. and
receives his said Kingdom also, both those parts, [of the morning Judgment] as
Psalm. 49. are explained by Judgment, Rev. 11.19. God is praised for then
judging his Saints with reward, as well as judging his Enemies with
destruction: the manner of Execution is set forth at the Armageddon Battle,
Rev. 19.11 so Gog and Magog both to be destroyed upon that Gods great day of
Vengeance or Recompenses, Ezekiel. 39.8. which in special is often in Scripture so
called and described, as Isa. 66. in many particulars, where also the
Conversion and Deliverance of the Jews are joined in that Prophecy with the
destruction of the same Enemies at the great day of God Almighty (as it is
called) Rev. 16.14, 16. as was said before, from Deuteronomy. 32.41, 42, 43. Now when
Christ comes to that Judgment in the morning of that great day, he will come
personally, and all the time he will be in rewarding his Saints at the first
bodily Resurrection in his Kingdom, and reign then, and in the New Jerusalem
state then in the world he will be personally with them, and they shall then
and there behold his glory which his Father has given him as Mediator, God
man, Joh. 17.24. all the time he is raising of them to enjoy the happiness of
that state (which Mr. Mede conceives will be in doing a great part of the 1000
years) who shall then enjoy the Vision of his Person with them, who shall then
be their happiness and their glory: But the evidence of such personal Judgment
then will be farther confirmed from the particulars under the next head of
Arguments drawn from the many actions or great things the Scripture speaks of
to be then done peculiarly by himself, and at that time.

4. Therefore to proceed to those acts peculiar to Christ then to be done by
him: The first is, he will bring his Saints with him then, as Zach. 14.5. [he
will come and all the Saints with him] confirmed by St. Paul, he will come at
his appearance with all his Saints, 1 Thessalonians. 3. ult. and 4.14 them also that
sleep in Jesus will, God then bring with him, and therefore the Bride the Lambs
Wife is ready when the Halelujahs are sung, Rev. 19 7. which is expounded, Rev.
21.9.10. to be the New Jerusalem (then) come down from God out of Heaven, [or
the spirits of just men before made perfect, Heb. 12. coming with Christ to
receive their spiritual bodies in their order] whereby they are made capable of
the happy Vision of Christ's Person, and of the many parts of the happiness of
that Jerusalem state, the Mansion for that time which Christ went to prepare
for them in special, Joh. 14.1, 2. (as his own Revelation resolves us) but
whether it will after be translated with them, when the created Heavens and
Earth shall be dissolved, Rev. 20.11. we find nothing to resolve us: but that
an infinite and eternal happiness will follow the end of that great day of
Judgment, upon their final sentence of Absolution and Approbation is there, and
in many other Scriptures manifest; where God has prepared it for them for
ever, etc. And as he will then bring all his suffering Saints from Abel, to
that time he comes to that Judgment, with him.

So, 2. He will raise their Bodies to make them capable of the happiness of
that state, as one great end of his bringing them (then) with him; and being
such a Mercy as is founded upon all the Covenants and promised Mercies we spoke
of before, belonging to the Father and their spiritual Seed, in the renewed
state of the world, appointed by the Father for him and them together, as was
showed before, whence farther evidences of his personal presence with them, are
very evident, and cogent from Scripture, if God work that Faith in men to
believe them upon such Scripture grounds; and it is only Christ's peculiar
personal work then to raise the Saints departed, etc.

3. When he comes in the Clouds then, and converts the Jews, they shall
personally see him through the Clouds, [without which, mortal eyes could not
behold the brightness of his Glory at his appearance] therefore often so
called, (...), and (...), his appearance, and the appearance of his presence,
who will then be manifest to be the only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, as the Apostle Paul divinely and fully teaches, 1 Timothy 6.14, 15, 16.
and as Christ also in due order reveals largely, Rev. 19. with many wonderful
expressions of his Excellency then to be manifest; but that the Jews that
pierced him, and every eye [then capable] shall see him, the Clouds shall then
wait upon him, Rev. 1.7. it is set forth as a great wonder, Behold; he comes
[with Clouds] as the Holy Spirit therefore speaks, and with an addition of
[even so Amen,] as being the time of fulfilling of promised Mercies to Jews and
faithful Gentiles, the spiritual Children of Abraham by Faith, (as the Apostle
speaks, Gal. 3.29.) yea and they are said to be Christ's seed too, which he
shall then see upon such prolonging of his days in the world then, Isa. 53. now
when all those shall with their Eyes see him, he must then necessarily be
personally present: and this is according to the main intent of Zach. 12.10. to
the end; of the Jews great Conversion; [for all Revelations from the sounding
of the seventh Trumpet at Christ's coming in the Clouds refer us to the
Prophesies of the Old Testament] who have this Key given to open all that
follows there to the end: [that the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of
Prophecy, Rev. 19 10. for he there witnesses nothing but what his own holy
Spirit had taught in some measure before by his Prophets: So Zach. 3.9 their
iniquity shall be taken away in one day, and Isa. 6 8, 9. etc. that Nation
shall be born in one day, etc which their Elias to be sent, (some time before,
as Mal. 4.1.) to guide them in seeking their promised land then, seems to
prepare for toward the end of Daniels 1335 years, c. 11, 12.

And 4. Likewise the fulfilling of that Prophecy, Zach. 14. when his feet
shall stand on Mount Olivet, from whence he ascended; upon which, it is very
probable, he will again then descend [with Clouds] wonderfully causing it then
to cleave asunder, and cause the Valley to Azal; suitable to what those two
Angels said to the Apostles when he ascended, Acts 1.11. and there is much in
that whole Chapter of Zach. 1. to many of these purposes, but we must in this
business in hand briefly only point at many things of such nature: and such
wonderful works of Christ seem to prepare that so long hardened people the Jews
for the wonder of Christ's mercy to be then magnified toward them, according to
many great Prophesies, as Ezekiel. 36, and 37. chapter and as in our said Paper of
their Conversion, etc. and his standing on Mount Olivet, and its cleaving then,
also clearly prove him present.

5. His Command to bring his great Enemies, and slay them before him, Luke 19.
proves his presence when it shall be done; and that will be at the Judgment of
the Beast, Dan. 7. and upon or at the destruction of Gog, the Turk, Dan. 11.45.
for chapter 10.1. at that time stands up Michael, the Prince of Daniels people,
when he tells him his people shall be delivered, and when these Enemies perish
[(...), it is done] at the last Vial, Rev. 16.16, 17. which fulfils that great
Prophecy of Gogs and Magogs destruction, Ezekiel. 39.8. at that great day which
the Lord God there spoke of, as page 61, 62. of Restit.

6. The binding of Satan then, and sealing him up in the bottomless pit, Rev.
20. when he eminently breaks the Serpents head, as Genesis 3.15. at the end of his
sitting on his Fathers right hand, when he will make his temporal or corporal
enemies, together with his spiritual (eminently) his footstool, which is also
an act suitable only to Christ's Sovereignty then which he will exercise (as the
Father set down in the Book with 7 Seals) for 1000 years; and in the little
space afterward, when also upon Satan's last most wicked attempt of Rebellion
against his Divine Sovereign Authority, he and all his shall perish for ever,
etc.

7. His dispensing of his Rewards to his Saints then will be his peculiar
personal act (as he speaks expressly) at his said personal comeing, Rev.
22.12. Behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with me; and so he judges his
Saints with Reward, chapter 11.19. and this he will be doing all the 1000 years for
them.

8. His sitting on the Throne of his Father David, Luke 1.32. Isa. 9. not as he
sits now on God the Fathers Throne, but as distinct from it, Rev 3.21. when he
comes from his Fathers right hand to sit on his own Throne in the world, as the
Son of David, and be manifest therein to be the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, and all his manifold actings in righteousness and Judgment in the Earth:
of which are many and great Prophesies (then) upon his said Morning Judgment in
all the 1^00 years, also prove his personal presence, as the Branch, or one out
of the root of Jesse; and yet though so the Son, yet as God he was the root of
David, Rev. 5. But [N. B.] not as some mistake of his and his Saints being
(then) as other Kings and men in the world, but comeing as the great God, Tit.
2.13. in his own, and his Fathers, and his Angels glory, etc. and in that
Christalline, Transparent Golden, Wonderful, Holy and Beloved New Jerusalem,
Rev. 21. 1500 miles high, as well as 1500 miles long and broad, a perfect Cube,
without allegorising of it, or many other matters then and there [for Gods
Spirit has not said it will be of such height in vain] who best knows, (and
being likewise the Maker and Builder of that City for the Fathers, and all his
Saints, as Heb. 11.16.40.) is able to make it both capacious enough, and
suitably glorious to the blessed holy raised Saints condition, therein to
behold Christ's glory, Joh. 17.24. their blessed Redeemer, Head and Husband; and
when men begin to wait upon God more duly to seek to know these things from his
Word (as they are there held out) in humility and uprightness, he will
doubtless give them a suitable Faith to believe more of such Divine Truths,
which is now a great duty (though the Old Seducer labors by all means possible
to persuade men to the contrary) otherwise, like Thomas, they may not (happily)
know them until they see them; and (happily) for wilful neglect may then obtain a
smaler portion in them, etc. But all the said promised mercies expounded by
Christ (as is manifest in our Scheme) do refer to that time and state, and will
then have their due accomplishments (though multitudes now shut their eyes
against such light) as by our six Conclusions is sufficiently evident, page 17,
18. of Restitut.) such glorious Revelations left by the Father to be made known
by his Son alone, after all, ought earnestly to be sought into by all good
means, and highly prized when they are found: The transparent matter of those
Celestial Spheres wherein those glorious lights above us shine unto the world
is not by men discoverable what it is; so neither is the matter of that
glorious City prepared by God himself for that King of glory and his said
Saints in that blessed state, farther known then, as we are informed from the
holy Scriptures concerning the same: and though the raised Saints, and those
then in the natural life, will then be of one Communion, yet their states
otherwise, seem to be pointed out much to differ, [as by Ezekiels New
Jerusalem, and St. John's may appear, the one for the Converred Jews with the
Gentiles to walk in the light of the other, Rev. 21.24. the other peculiar to
the raised Saints. And,

9. From the Apostle Paul's expressions to the Thessalonians, 2 Epist. 1.10.
there will be at Christ's said comeing (as he there tells them) much occasion of
glorifying him by his Saints, and of his being admired then by all that
believe, as well for his Personal Excellencies, as for all his said actions in
those times, which without his Personal Presence, they would not have
opportunity and occasion then to do.

The last Head of Arguments for such Christ's Personal Presence then, will be
from the Relation he then stands in to his said Saints: First, he will be then
the Saints visible Head, and they his visible Members, both to be present. 2.
At the Marriage of the Lamb, he will be the Bridegroom, and the Saints his
visible Bride, Rev. 21.9. now that Relation imports his personal appearance as
well as hers.

3. As the Husband he will long continue in that state with them, and dwell
with them the said 1000 years: therefore upon the comeing of the said New
Jerusalem, [viz. the Inhabitants metanimically] down with him from God out of
Heaven (there) the Holy Spirit declares, That the Tabernacle of God, viz. the
body which he Tabernacled in before for a little time, then will be with men;
so as to dwell with them that long season, and therefore personally present.

4. The joint interest that Christ and his said Saints will have in the
happiness of that state, as heirs and joint-heirs with him thereof; which also
prove his personal presence, Rev. 21 7.

5. More especially their Reigning with him on earth then, as the most
comprehensive Mercy of all the rest, which all the other tend to make up, [as
the prospering into a Kingdom was to the Natural Race in the Type, Ezekiel.
16.13.] and hence this Kingdom and Reign of the Saints with Christ is so often
mentioned in the Revelation: For then the Kings Daughter that is all glorious
within, wh se Garments are said to be of wrought Gold, shall enter into the
Kings Palace, Psalm. 45. who shall make of her Children Princes in all Lands:
some (as Christ said) over two, or five, or ten Cities, Luke 19. and all such
offices and Relations speak his personal presence in that state, when once
these everlasting Gates shall begin to stand open for the King of Glory to
enter in, Psalm. 24.

And thus much at present briefly of Christ's said personal Comeing and Reign in
the 1000 years, as proved abundantly from all the fore named Considerations.

Now the Second thing, viz. That they shall be about 20 years hence from this
76, or rather 80, which we desire to give farther satisfaction in according to
what we find in the Word of God, and from such Divine Grounds as are according
thereunto; upon which our Belief thereof is founded, are these ensuing.

1. In general we find all Prophetic Scripture is almost fulfilled near to
Christ's appearance, as in particulars may hereafter appear.

2. More especially, because Daniel's 2300 years given by Palmoni, or the
secret Numberer, chapter 8. which many ways are manifest; 1. To be the most certain
Number or Measure of the years of the Jews Bondage, and of the Gentiles
Dominion, through all their four Monarchies And, 2. The Measure of both his
other Numbers in connection with the Revelation Numbers jointly; which admirably
terminate in the same Period with it, at Christ's said appearance, when in all
those respects that Number will be fulfilled, as follows.

For the First, That it is the Measure of the Jews Bondage, and of the Gentiles
Dominion, is proved largely from the Context of chapter 8. and by many other
reasons in our Summary of Daniel, p. 6, 7.

2. Because the experience of that threefold Overturning of David's Kingdom,
Ezekiel. 21.26, 27. until he come whose right it is, and which God has there
promised to give him (then) are almost completed, by experimental fulfilling,
as we showed, Introduction page 9, 10. which (very probably) will be fulfilled
at the same period.

3. It consists of two evident parts, very admirably concurring with the joint
times of Daniel and the Revelation, viz. Of the first part of 600 years from
the Captivity of Babylon, in the beginning of the fourth year of Jehojakim, and
the first of Nebuchadnezzar, Anno Mundi 3398. about three years before 3400.
which therefore will be out so much before Christ's Birth at 4000. as Bishop
Usher Computes it, (when 37 years more ended Daniels Weeks) from whence also
are reckoned 1700 years of Revelation Prophecy to Christ's said appearance, at
the Destruction of the last, or Roman Monarchy, Rev. 17.10. of both Ezekiels
Gog and Magog at the same time, chapter 39.6, 7, 8. which two numbers make up the
2300. Dan. 8. [of the latter number more afterward.]

2. Again it is also manifest to be the measure of both the other mystical
numbers in Dan. 9. and Dan. 12.12. in connection with the Revelation Numbers
reaching to the same period; all being the dictates of the Eternal,
All-knowing, and All-working Lord the Spirit: whose Epochaes being many hundred
years distant, yet exactly agree in the same Period, the same glorious Divine
evidence of Truth being carried on by them all, both of the Jews deliverance,
and the Enemies said Ruin, at Christ's appearance, as was said.

1. Of the 70 Weeks, Dan. 9. or 490 years from the 20th of Artaxerxes
Longiomanus, Neh. 2.1. An. Mund. 3550. at the execution of the Decree for
Building the City Jerusalem until the three years and an half ending Daniels
last Week, An Dom. 37. after Christ's Birth, in the middle of which last Week
Christ hy his Death put an end to Transgression, etc. and by his Resurrection
brought in everlasting Righteousness; and at his Ascension triumphed gloriously
over the spiritual Principalities and Powers, Coll. 2.15. when also began the
Kingdom of the Stone, Dan. 2.44. for that 1666* years to his Descending again,
in that interim to break and consume the Dragon and the Beast, until about the
end of 1700 years from Christ's Birth, when it will become the Kingdom of the
Mountain, filling the whole Earth at Christ's second comeing.

And, 2. For that Divine Mark or Discovery of taking away Sacrifice,
(ultimately) given to Daniel by the same Lord the Spirit, above 800 years
before it came to pass, when his 1335 years, chapter 12 12. should reach to the
said blessed times, which was eventually manifest, by Gods Wonder-working
Providence and Power, about An. Dom. 365. against the provoking Abominations of
Julian the Apostate Emperor, who not only in opposition to Jesus Christ set up
many Heathen Idolatries, but encouraged the Jews to build their Temple for
Sacrifice, granting allowance for the same out of the public Treasury: But
when they had laid Foundations for the Temple, and multitudes came to see the
Workmens proceedings (as many Historians relate) Gods wrath was manifest
against them by Fire and Earthquakes, and the like terrible appearances
thereof, killing many Workmen, Amianus Marcel. Socrat. Zozamen. Theodoret, etc.
with such as came to see the same; burned their very Tools, or melted them,
and cast out the very stones laid in the ground for Foundations, occasioning
Cyrill, then Bishop there, to say Now is fulfilled our Saviors Prediction, One
stone shall not be left upon another that shall not be thrown down, etc. From
which time we read no more of the Jews public Sacrificing: and that time
wonderfully fits the said Mark; for 1335. being added to 365. make up likewise
1300. to the said blessed time, etc. Whereunto,

4. We may annex those 45 years of the Jews last troublous times, Dan. 12.1.
from the 1290. years in v. 11. unto 1335. in v 12. (when the blessed times
begin) the former said 365. years till Julian, being added to them, which so
together make up as was said) 1700 years from Christ's Birth to his second
comeing, which we observed in our late Address to the Kings Majesty, to be now
a special Alarm to this World: In these words, [Of the near approach of whose
said comeing (I conceive) the world of late years has been sufficiently
alarmed, by the Jews attempt (in that season) to seek their promised Land, 45
years before that his second comeing, (as appears from Dan. 12.11, 12.) and (as
is very observable) in that type thereof Joshua, chapter 14, 7.10. in that so very
apt decyphering of our Jesus now; which (whatever others think of it) I have
much pondered since in my heart, from Gods former like mysterious proce dings,
when he is about to do great things in the world, and of which I now understand
an useful book is written, etc.]

5. The Beasts Date of 42 months, with the Sackcloth Witnesses 1260. years,
and the Woman's time, times and half a time [being all contemporaries] now ready
almost to expire, as in Restit. p. 57, 58. and p. 74, 75. not long before the
Whores Burning, Rev 18. which must precede the utter destruction of the man of
Sin at Christ's said appearance, 2 These. 2.8. at Gods sure number of 1666.
counted (as appears) by his own Divine wisdom of Daniels said numbers, and St.
Paul's Doctrine from Christ's ascending, to his descending with Clouds about 20
years hence, as before.

6. The Turks day, hour, month and year, viz. 396. years, Rev. 9.11. being the
sixth Trumpet, or second VVoe beginning about An. Dom. 1300. or little after,
in the Ottaman Family, whose said 396 years will be completed about the same
time, as in Restit. page 74.

7. The probable proceedings of the Vials under the said sixth Trumpet to
prepare for the ruin of the Beast about the end of the sixth Vial, when
Ezekiels said Gog and Magog, viz. Turk and Pope are like to perish near in time
together.

8. The Table of the bad times, Rev. 11. to verse 15. [referring to both
Revelation Schemes of the Civil and Ecclesiastical state of Rome] (as in our
short Scheme of the whole Revelation is manifest) for about 1700 years from
Christ's Birth, or three years before, etc.

1. Of the Civil state to the Red Dragons casting down to the earth by
Constantine the great, about An. Dom. 320. and that other, viz. the Christian
Emperors, for a short space, Rev. 17.10. for about 100 years after, and then
the Inroades of the Barbarous Nations upon the VVestern Empire in the four
first Trumpets breaking the Empire, [to prepare for the ten Kings to follow,
who should give their power to the Beast, Rev. 17.1^.] dissolving the Senate,
sacking and burning the City, and plucking the last Emperor Augustulus (as it
is storyed) out of his Throne, which were so many milder blasts of Gods wrath,
for the Dragons (or Heathen Emperors) Persecutions of the Saints before (as is
very probable) for about 200 years to about An. Dom. 600. or after; from which
time the two following more terrible VVoe-Trumpets of the Saracens and Turks,
chapter 9. have for above 1000. years more proceeded to execute the more terrible
wrath of God upon the Eastern Roman Empire, until at the end of the second
VVoe, or at the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, or third VVoe, the whole
Empire, according to Balaams Prophecy, Numb. 24.24. shall perish for ever, or
as St. John expresses the same thing, Rev. 17.12. shall go into perdition then.

So, 2. For the true Churches regular state measured, Rev. 11.1. until the
Beasts time, when she was said to have the Moon under her feet; and in respect
of her suffering state until then, and for that little time under Constantine
and Theodosius reigns, etc. after which by Heresies her sufferings returned, as
by the Dragons flood, etc. until about 420. or more, when it appears the said
Beasts 42. months for his treading under foot the holy City began, with the
said two Sackcloth VVitnesses, 1260. days of years, and the said VVomans
Wilderness state, all to end before the Whore of Babylons burning, and a
little (as appears) before the said Beasts last destruction, at the Armageddon
Battle, Rev. 16. said to be the great day of God Almighty, from Ezekiel. 39.8. and
to be executed, as Rev. 18. and 19 chapter And do not these mystical discoveries
now also concur with those more noted marks of our Savior, that iniquity
should abound, and the love of many should wax cold? and do not St Peter's
Atheistical scoffers at true Religion in these times plainly show themselves?
and does not the prevalency of Profaneness, and of the abominable wickedness of
the soul and unclean spirit also sadly appear in these days, and openly and
shamelessly manifest themselves, whose great endeavor has been (...), in the
latter times, 1 Timothy 4.1. to set up the name of Christ against the Doctrine of
Christ, as respecting the judgment: So (...), in these last days, 2 Timothy 3.1.
by a form of his Religion to obstruct the power thereof in the VVitnesses of
it, as respecting the affections, and by such a tw^-fold Antichristianisme to
promote by degrees any, even the worst of evils, Rev. 13.17. Esa. 66.5: from
all which evidences and the like, all serious and judicious persons may easily
(upon due consideration) discern that our said belief of the near approach of
Christ's said appearance has many Divine Foundations, laid by the Spirit of
God, in holy Scripture, to rest it self upon: in all such ways of Discovery as
the most wise and gracious God has been pleased in some latitude, to make
known to us although neither the day nor hour, [nor yet the month or year] can
by man be determined. I might have added want of Faith of these things, as in
Assert. 10. of our Key.

Hence let all vain, Worldly, Profane, and Unregenerate Persons be admonished
speedily to seek the Lords Face, by true Conversion unto him by Faith and
Repentance, before that little space be spent, etc.

2. Let all real Saints act first more earnestly, in studying Unity in all that
is truly good, avoiding unnecessary Dividing Principles and Practices.

3. Be much in the exercise of sincere piety in the sight of the heart
searching God, and labor to promote it in others, etc.

4. Be more earnestly exercised in Charitable works, 1. For the good of the
souls; 2. For the good of the bodies and persons of all sorts and condit ons of
men. And,

5. Labor to exercise very great moderation in all worldly and temporal now
fading things.

And, Lastly, Let all men be admonished not to deceive themselves or others
with a groundless expectation of such an excellent and happy spiritual
Church State and times before that world to come at Christ's said appearance
(save what may (sometime) be upon the finishing the Ascension of the slain
Witnesses) But until that new state begin we spoke of, the obstinacy of the
Jews, and profane Apostasy of the Gentiles are like in the general to obstruct
such said Expectations, until at Christ's second comeing they be powerfully and
graciously removed, according to the many ancient Promises and Prophesies.

But all judicious persons may hence observe upon many evident Foundations laid
down briefly in our Introduct. with this Appendix to it, how all the said
Curious work in Christ's Divine Key does admirably inform us in these three
things, viz. in the quo, the quando, the quandiu; all respecting that time and
state: the first the [quo] two ways; 1. As to the predictions of what is then
to take place privatively for the removing of evils: And, 2. Positively, as to
the performance of promised mercies to the Fathers, etc. 2. For the [quando]
when they shall begin (as by this Appendix is many ways manifest) namely, at
the Beasts and Gogs last ruin, Ezekiel. 39.8. and at the last Vial; for then
[(...)] it is done; when Satan is to be bound and Christ will begin to reign
with his Saints at the Renovation of all things Rev. 21.5. in his Mediatory or
Davidical Kingdom for that 1000. years, of which largly, Restit. p. 61, 62.
And, 3. For the [quandiu] especially observe, how Divinely, and wonderfully
exact Christ's Determination thereof is, (as was showed) for 1000. years most
plainly: [for years in Scripture are always literally taken, though months,
and weeks, and days were in this book before used often Prophetically] and the
whole number of 1000. is never used but for it self (as Pareus observes) and
both of them are here three times applied both positively and relatively:
First, positively, to Satan's binding, (...), a thousand years; and then
Relatively, (...), those thousand years, v. 2, 3. 2. So to the suffering Saints
Resurrection they reigned with Christ 1000 years, but the rest of the dead
lived not until those thousand years were ended, v. 4, 5. 3. So again to
illustrate the happiness of that their estate for that long time; 1. They are
said to be Blessed. 2. Holy. 3. Secured. 4. Highly honored to be Priests to
God and Christ. 5. Invested with Sovereign Authority, and that with Christ all
that while Satan is bound; v: 6, 7. These Scripture Truths are so wonderfully
illustrated and Authorized by God the Father, Christ and the Holy Spirit, as no
other part of the Gospel is; and how men will henceforward, to whom these
things are represented, be able to answer their not owning of them with the
Truths annexed to them, (as in our six Conclusions, Restit. p. 17, 18, 19.) I
know not: God grant they may duly weigh the same aforehand, and render the due
glory to Christ for these Divine Truths respecting the Gospel of his said
Kingdom, and the glorious excellencies and happiness thereof for his said
suffering Saints shortly to take place. Amen.

HEnce two of his Majesty's very considerable Questions may strongly be
resolved; namely, 1. That the Roman Monarchy, viz. the Feet and Toes thereof in
the twofold Beast [the Papacy] will end about 20 years hence, at Christ's
Appearance, etc. And,

2. That it appears from Daniels Numbers; That at the end of his 70 Weeks, chapter
9. the Kingdom of the Stone begins, about Christ's Ascension, (when he Triumphed
Spiritually) to continue 1666. years to the same period, with the said 2300.
Dan. 8. and with diverse others said Numbers, when Christ's visible and glorious
Triumph will be in the world over all his great Enemies therein by making them
his footstool.

To the third material Question we shall add, That all the time from Christ's
first comeing to his second, is set forth by the last times in sacred
Scripture, not only as was then said in reference to that usual expresion in
the Old Testament - in the latter, or postremity of days; as Jacobs applying it
to Shiloe's coming, Gen 49. and Jeremies to the Jews Conversion at his second
comeing; c. 30. ult. and so often also to many things in the interim betwixt
both: and the like is observable of Daniels in the time of the end, which is
the same with the times of the Gospel, as Dan. 11.36, 37, 38, 39, 40. and Dan.
12.4, 9. which times Christ in the Revelation divides into these three of the
Dragon or Heathen Emperors. 2. Of the twofold Beast or Papacy; and 3. Of his
own Kingdom in the World the 1000 years, etc.

In page 16. line 4. of Introduct. read Priestly, not Prophetical.

FINIS.

